Promotion of Talents
====================

Islamic teachings show that the sacred school of Islam has paid equal
attention to all dimensions of man, whether they are physical,
spiritual, material, moral, intellectual or emotional. It has paid deep
attention to all these dimensions, whether they are individual or
collective, and has not overlooked any aspect of them. It has paid
special attention to the promotion and development of all of them in
accordance with certain well-laid down principles. Here we give a brief
account of them one by one:

**Development of Body**

Islam is severely opposed to paying too much attention to body in the
sense of indulgence in licentiousness and lewdness. But it considers it
to be a duty of man to keep his body healthy and sound and regards every
action that is injurious to body as unlawful. If on any occasion an
obligatory act (such as fasting) is judged to be injurious to health, it
not only loses its imperativeness, but may be prohibited.

Every unhealthy practice is unlawful in the eyes of Islam, and many
rules of conduct have been prescribed for the sake of ensuring physical
health from hygienic point of view.

Some people may not differentiate between looking after the body, which
is a question of health, and indulgence in bodily pleasure, which is a
moral question. They may think that as Islam is against bodily
indulgence, it is also against looking after physical health. They may
even hold that the actions injurious to health are moral actions from
the viewpoint of Islam. This kind of thinking is generally wrong and
dangerous. There is a vast difference between looking after health and
sensual enjoyment.

Islam is against licentiousness and leading a sensual life. Sensual
enjoyment hampers spiritual development. It is not only harmful to
spiritual health, but is also injurious to the healthy development of
body. It may ruin physical health, for it leads to excess which
basically disturbs all bodily systems.


**Development of Soul**

Islam has paid great attention to the development of mental faculties
and acquisition of independent thinking. It combats all that is opposed
to the independence of reason, such as the blind imitation of the
ancestors or some prominent people and following the majority heedlessly
and without examination. The promotion of will-power, acquisition of
self-control and freedom from the absolute control of impulses is the
basis of many articles of Islamic worship and other Islamic teachings.
Islam pays particular attention to the promotion of the sense of seeking
truth, acquisition of knowledge and the development of aesthetic sense
and a taste for worship.

**Man's Effective Role in Building His Future**

There are two kinds of things existing in the world: organic and
inorganic. The inorganic things such as water, fire, stone and dust are
lifeless and have no role in forming or perfecting themselves. They are
formed purely under the impact of external factors and occasionally
acquire perfection under the impact of the same factors. We do not find
these things making any effort to build or develop themselves.

On the contrary we see that the living things like plants, animals and
men make continuous efforts to protect themselves against any injury or
mishap. They assimilate some other matter and to procreate the like. The
plants have a number of natural faculties effective in the making of
their future. They have power by means of which they absorb and
assimilate matter from the earth or the air. They further have power
which helps them from within to grow and develop. Similarly they have
power which makes it possible for them to procreate.

In the animals all these natural powers exist in addition to a number
of other conscious powers such as the senses of sight, learning and
touch and the urges, impulses and inclinations mentioned earlier. An
animal by means of these powers and faculties, on the one hand protects
itself against any mishap and on the other takes the necessary measures
to ensure its individual growth and the survival of its species.

In man there exist all the natural and conscious powers and faculties
which exist in animals and plants. In addition, he has a number of
additional impulses and drives as explained earlier. Further, he is
equipped with reason and will which put his destiny to a great extent in
his own hand and enable him to determine his future himself.

It is clear from what has been said that a certain part of the existing
things, namely the inorganic matter, has no role in making its future.
There are some other things which have a role in making their future,
but their role is neither conscious nor free. Nature directs their inner
powers in such a way that they unconsciously protect themselves and make
their future. This is the case with the plants.

Still some other things have a greater role. Their role is conscious,
though not free. They endeavor to ensure their survival with a sort of
self-consciousness and some knowledge of their environment. That is the
case with the animals.

But man has a more active, more effective and more extensive role in
making his future. His role is conscious as well as free. He is
conscious of himself as well as of his environment. By means of his will
and power of reasoning he can choose his future as he likes.
Incidentally man's role is far more extensive and vaster than that of an
animal. The extensiveness of the sphere of man's role in regard to his
future originates from three characteristics peculiar to him:

**(i) Extensiveness of the range of his information:**

Man by means of his knowledge extends the range of his information from
the superficialities to the depth of nature. He knows the laws of nature
and by using them can mould nature to be in a harmony with the
requirements of his life.

**(ii) Extensiveness of the range of his desires:**

We have mentioned this characteristic of man earlier under the
following two headings: Man and Animal, and man as a multidimensional
being.

(iii) Man has a special self-making ability:

No other being can be compared to him in this respect. Though in
certain other living organisms also like plants and animals certain
changes can be brought about by means of special training factors, none
of them can make these changes independently. It is man who introduces
required changes in them. Moreover, as compared to man, their
changeability is very limited.

In regard to his qualities and habits man is only a potential being
that is he is born devoid of any qualities and faculties. In contrast,
each animal is born with a number of its special qualities. As man lacks
any sort of quality and habit and at the same time he is capable of
acquiring a lot of them. Acquiring them gradually he secures for himself
a number of 'secondary dimensions' in addition to his inborn
dimensions.

Man is the only being to whom the law of creation has provided with a
painting brush to paint his features as he likes. Contrary to the
formation of his physical organs, which is completed while he is still
in his mother's womb, the formation of his psychological organs known as
his qualities, habits and moral character, is mostly completed after he
has been born.

That is the reason why every being, including the animals, is only what
it has been made. Only man can be whatever he wants to be. It is also
for this reason that all the individual animals belonging to one species
have the same psychological characteristics and qualities in the same
way as they have the same physical limbs and organs. All cats have one
set of habits; all dogs another; and all ants still another. If there is
any difference between the individuals, that is insignificant. But the
difference in the habits and moral character between individual human
beings has no limit. As such man is the only being which himself can
choose what he should be.

The Islamic traditions say that on the Day of Resurrection men will be
raised in a form appropriate to their acquired spiritual qualities and
not in the physical form of their body. In other words men will be
raised in the shape of the animals nearest to them from the viewpoint of
their acquired moral qualities. Only those individuals will be raised in
the human shape whose moral qualities and secondary spiritual dimensions
conform with the dignity and eminence of human beings; in other words,
whose morals and manners are human.

By dint of his knowledge man subdues nature and employs it to meet his
own needs. Having the power of self-making he makes himself as he likes
and thus becomes the master of his future destiny.

All educational institutions, moral schools and religious teachings are
meant to guide man as to how he should make his future. Straight path is
the way that leads man to future prosperity, and devious way is that
which leads him to future ruin and misery. In the Holy Qur'an Allah
says: "We showed man (who is the free agent) the way so that he may
choose, of his own accord either the way We showed him and be grateful
or go the other way, that is the way of ingratitude and disbelief."
(Surah ad-Dahr, 76:3)

From the foregoing discussion we have come to know that out of
knowledge and faith each of them has a separate role in making the
future of man. The role of knowledge is to show the way of making his
future. Knowledge enables him to make his future as he likes. Faith
tells him how to make it in such a way that it may be beneficial to him
and society. Faith prevents man from making his future on a material and
individualistic basis. It gives direction to his desires and makes them
embrace spiritualities instead of being confined to what is
materialistic.

Knowledge serves as a tool for the achievement of man's desires. It
help him turn nature as he wants. But knowledge is not concerned how
nature is molded and whether one uses it for the benefit of society or
for advancing the interests of some particular individuals only that
depends on what kind of men are those at whose disposal knowledge is.
But faith works as a checking power.

It controls man's impulses and directs them to the course of truth and
morality. Faith makes man, and man builds the world with the power of
his knowledge. Where faith and knowledge are combined, both man and the
world are brought to the desired state.


