Man's Will and Range of His Freedom
===================================

Though man has enough freedom to be able to develop his psychological
organs, to bring his natural environment to the desired state and to
make his future, obviously he has many limitations and his freedom is
only relative. In other words the range of his freedom is limited and
only within that range he can choose his good or bad future.

There are several aspects of man's limitations:

**(i) Heredity:**

Man comes to this world with human nature. His parents being human
being, he also has to be willy-nilly a human being. From his parents he
inherits a number of hereditary traits like the colour of his skin and
eyes and some other features of his body which often continue to be
transmitted for several generations. Man cannot choose them for himself.
They are forcibly transmitted to him by inheritance.

**(ii) Natural and Geographical Environment:**

Man's natural and geographical environment and the region in which he
is brought up, invariably produce a number of effects on his body and
spirit. Each of the hot, cold and temperate regions has certain
inevitable effects on the spirit and morals of the inhabitants of that
region. The same is true of the mountainous and the desert areas also.

**(iii) Social Atmosphere:**

Social atmosphere of man is an important factor in the formation of his
spiritual and moral characteristics. Language, social etiquette, customs
and religion are the things which are mostly imposed on man by social
atmosphere.

**(iv) History and Time Factors:**

From the viewpoint of social environment man is influenced not only by
the present time, but the past events also play a considerable role in
molding his character. On the whole, there is a definite link between
the present and the past of every existing being. The past and the
future of a being are not like two points totally separate from each
other, but are like two pieces of a continuous process. The past is the
seed and the nucleus of the future.


**Man's Revolt Against Limitations**

Though man cannot totally sever his relation with his heredity, natural
environment, social atmosphere and the factors of history and time, yet
he can revolt against the limitations imposed by them and to a great
extent can free him from the way of these factors. Man by dint of his
knowledge and intellect on the one hand, and his will and faith on the
other, can bring about changes in these factors as he wishes, and can
become the master of his destiny.

**Man and Divine Fate**

Generally it is believed that Divine fate is the main factor that
imposes limitation on man, but we did not mention it while recounting
the factors that limit man's freedom. Why?

Does Divine fate not exist, or is it not a limiting factor? There is no
doubt about the existence of Divine fate, but it imposes no restriction
on man. Divine fate has two parts known as 'qaza' and 'qadar'. Divine
qaza means a Divine decree in respect of the occurrences and events, and
Divine qadar means estimation of the phenomena and the events.

From the viewpoint of divinity it is indisputable that Divine fate does
not apply to any event direct. It necessitates its occurrence only
through its causes. Divine qaza requires that the world order should be
based on the system of causation. Whatsoever freedom man may have on
account of his intellect and will and whatsoever limitations he may have
because of the hereditary, environmental and historical factors, he has
been made by decree of Allah subject to a definite system of causes and
effects in the world.

Therefore Divine qaza is not considered to be a factor imposing any
restriction on man. Whatever restrictions it imposes are the result of
man's heredity, environmental and historical conditions and nothing
else. Similarly whatever freedom he has, that also has been decreed by
Allah. He has decreed that man should have intellect and will, and
within a limited sphere of his natural and social conditions, should to
a large extent, be independent of these conditions, and thus be able to
take his destiny and future in his own hands.

**Man and Obligations**

One of the principal characteristics of man is that he has the
capability of being obligated to observe religious precepts. He alone
can live within the framework of the laws enunciated for him. No other
being can follow a law other than the natural compulsory laws. For
example, it is not possible to lay down law for the stones and timber or
for the trees and flowers or for the horses, the cows and the sheep.
They cannot be obligated to abide by any laws framed for them and in
their interest. If any action is required to safeguard their interests,
that action has to be imposed on them.

Man is the only being which has the distinction of being able to
conduct himself within the framework of a series of contractual laws. As
these laws are framed by a competent authority and then imposed on man,
they naturally involve a sort of hardship for him. That is why they have
been given the name of 'obligation'.

In order to bind man to carry out a certain obligation, the law-giver
has to observe certain conditions. In other words only a man fulfilling
certain conditions shoulders the responsibility of carrying out the
obligations. The conditions which must be fulfilled in case of every
obligation are as under:

**(i) Puberty:**

When man reaches a certain stage of his life there appear some sudden
changes in his body, his feelings and his thoughts. The appearance of
these changes is called puberty. It is a natural stage attained by
everyone. It is not possible to determine an exact time when one attains
puberty. Some individuals reach this stage earlier than others. That
largely depends on the personal characteristics of the individuals as
well as their regional and environmental conditions.

What is certain is that women reach the stage of natural puberty
earlier than men. From legal point of view it is necessary to fix a
definite age of majority in order to achieve uniformity. It may be
either the average age of puberty or the minimum age of it (in addition
to another condition of maturity which is understanding as described in
Islamic jurisprudence).

On this basis an individual may reach the age of natural puberty, but
may not be considered to have attained legal majority. In accordance
with the view held by the majority of the Shi'ah Ulema the legal
majority of man from the point of view of age has been fixed at his
completing 15 years and entering the 16th year and that of a woman at
her completing nine years and entering the 10th year.

Legal majority is one of the conditions of the legal capacity for the
implementation of obligations. In other words, a person who has not
reached this stage, the law is not addressed to him; unless it is proved
that he has attained natural puberty before reaching the age of legal
majority.

**(ii) Sanity:**

Another condition of the liability for the discharge of obligations is
sanity. A lunatic lacking the power of understanding has no obligations,
his case being similar to that of a minor during the period of his
minority. Even on attaining majority a person is not obligated to
perform acts which he missed when he was a minor. For example an adult
is not obligated to complete the prayers which he did not offer during
his infancy, for at that time the law was not addressed to him. A
lunatic during his lunacy is also not obligated.

Hence if he later regains his senses, he will not be obligated to
perform the prayers and the fasts which he missed during the period of
his lunacy. He will be obligated only to carry them out subsequent to
his recovery. Same is the case of the religious taxes like, Zakat and
Khums, which may become due on the property of a minor or a lunatic. A
minor or a lunatic is liable to pay them only after reaching the stage
of being obligated, if not already paid by his legal guardian.

**(iii) Knowledge and Awareness:**

Obviously a man can discharge an obligation only if he is aware of its
existence. In other words, a man must have been informed of his
obligation before he is expected to discharge it. Suppose the law-giver
lays down a law but he does not convey it to the person who has to act
according to it. In this case that person will not be obliged, or rather
will not be able to put that law into effect.

If he violates that law, the law-giver cannot justifiably punish him.
To punish a person who is not aware of his obligation and his ignorance
of law is not due to any fault of his, is bad and such a punishment is
unsound. This case is known as 'abominableness of punishment without
exposition of law'.

The Holy Qur'an has repeatedly mentioned this truth and has stated that
no people are to be punished for the violation of law unless they have
been duly warned and the provisions of law have been conveyed to them.

Of course the condition of the awareness of law as a prerequisite of
its application does not imply that anybody can keep himself
intentionally ignorant of the law and then can put forward his ignorance
as an excuse. It is the bounden duty of every man fit for the
application of law to acquire knowledge of it and act accordingly. A
hadith says that on the Day of Judgement some sinners will be produced
in the Divine Court of Justice and will be questioned about their
failure to discharge some of their responsibilities. They will be asked
why they did not do their duty. They will say: "We did not know". It
will be said to them: "Why did you not know and why did you not try to
become aware of the law?"

Hence when we say that awareness is a condition of the applicability of
a law, we mean that if an obligation has not been conveyed to the person
to whom it is applicable and he could not become aware of it in spite of
his making due effort to acquire necessary knowledge, such a person is
excusable in the sight of Allah.

**(iv) Ability and Power:**

A man can be obligated to do only what he can perform. An act which he
cannot perform, can never become his obligation. There is no doubt that
man's ability is limited. Hence obligations should be imposed on him
only within that limit. For example, man has the capacity of acquiring
knowledge, but the scope of his acquiring it, is limited from the
viewpoint of time and the amount of information. Howsoever an individual
may be a genius; he must cross the different stages of knowledge
gradually and over a length of time.

To force a man to complete within a short period an academic course,
which normally takes several years, means to force him to do a task
which is beyond his power and capacity. Similarly to force a man to
undertake the study of all the sciences of the world mean asking him to
do something totally impossible. Such an obligation will never be
imposed by a just and judicious source. In the Holy Qur'an Allah says:

"Allah does not take a soul beyond its scope." (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:286)

In other words Allah does not impose an obligation on anyone beyond his
capacity. If somebody is drowning and we can rescue him, it is incumbent
on us to do so. But if, for example, an aircraft is crashing and we are
absolutely unable to do anything to save it, we have no obligation in
this respect. Allah will not punish us for not preventing the crash.

Here there is a point to be noted. The fact that obligation is
conditional on awareness, does not mean that it is not our duty to gain
knowledge, similarly the fact that obligation is conditional on ability
does not imply that we are not required to gain the necessary power and
ability. In certain cases it is indeed incumbent upon us to gain such
power.

Suppose we are confronted with a mighty and powerful enemy who wants to
encroach on our rights or intends to commit an aggression against the
territory of Islam. In this case if we know that we are unable to fight
him and to a make any such attempt simply means the loss of our forces
without there being any present or future prospect of achieving a
result, obviously we are not obliged to take action and resist the
aggressor. But it has always been and still is our duty to acquire
enough power so that in similar circumstances we may not be helpless
spectators. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Make ready for them all you can of force and of horses tethered so
that thereby you may dismay the enemy of Allah and your enemy." (Surah
al-Anfal, 8:60)

Just as an individual or a society that neglects to acquire enough
knowledge is liable to be Divinely blamed and his or its ignorance is
not to be accepted as an excuse, similarly a weak individual or a weak
society that has neglected to gain enough power is to be Divinely blamed
and punished. Weakness cannot be an excuse.

**(v) Power of Choice and free-Will:**

Another pre-requisite condition of an obligation is free-will. In other
words, man is obligated to perform a duty only when no coercion or
compulsion by force of circumstances is involved in the act. No act can
be obligatory if coercion or compulsion by force of circumstances is
involved in it. The following examples illustrate the cases of coercion:
If a person is forced by someone not to keep a fast and is threatened
that his life will be in danger if he ignores the threat, obviously
fasting will not be obligatory for him. The same will be the position of
a man who has the means to go on pilgrimage, but is threatened by a
tyrant with dire consequences to himself or his dependents if he goes.
The Holy Prophet has declared:

"There is no obligation if there is any coercion."

In the case of force of circumstances the individual concerned is not
threatened by any other being. He himself takes the decision. But his
choice is the result of harsh circumstances which he faces. For example,
a man is left helpless and hungry in a desert. Except carrion he has no
food to allay his hunger and keep himself alive. In these circumstances
the rule about the prohibition of carrion is naturally waved. The
difference between coercion and compulsion by the force of circumstances
is that in the case of coercion some person is threatened with dire
consequences by a tyrant force, and in order to save himself and avert
an expected danger he is compelled to act contrary to his normal duty.

But there is no such threat in the case of compulsion by force of
circumstances. In this case the circumstances on the whole develop in
such a way that they impose an undesirable situation on the man
concerned. He in order to get out of the situation that already exists,
is compelled to act contrary to his normal duty. Hence there is a
two-fold difference between coercion and compulsion by force of
circumstances:


i. In coercion there is a threat by some human being but there is no
such threat in compulsion by force of circumstances.

ii. In the case of coercion the man concerned takes an action to keep
off an undesirable situation, but in the case of compulsion by force of
circumstances he takes an action to alleviate an existing situation.

Anyway, there is no general rule with regard to the effect of coercion
and compulsion by force of circumstances on an obligation. Their effect
depends on two things: first, on the extent of harm or injury, that is
to be warded off or alleviated; and secondly on the gravity of the act
to be performed as a result of coercion or compulsion by force of
circumstances. Obviously no action endangering the life of others,
causing damage to society or harming religion can ever be allowed to be
taken under any pretext. Of course there are certain obligations, which
must be discharged even at any loss or damage.


