Conditions of Validity
======================

So far we have spoken about the conditions prerequisite to the
applicability of the law to the obliged. In the absence of these
conditions no one is bound to carry out an obligation or duty. There are
also some other conditions known as the conditions of the validity of an
act.

As we know all juristic articles of acts, whether they are acts of
worship or transactions, must fulfill certain conditions and have
certain qualities so that they may be regarded as valid and sound. Hence
a condition of validity is that without which a man will not be
considered to have discharged his obligation correctly. An act performed
in the absence of any of these conditions is invalid and void.

Like the conditions of the applicability of law, the conditions of the
validity of acts are also numerous. They are divided into two broad
categories of general and special. The special conditions are those
which are peculiar to a particular act and are learnt while learning how
to perform that act. Besides them, there exist several general
conditions which we propose to mention here.

There are some conditions which are the conditions of applicability and
validity both and there are some other conditions which are the
conditions of either applicability only or of validity only.

The conditions of validity are again of three kinds. Some of them are
the conditions of the validity of both the acts of worship and
transactions; some of the validity of the acts of worship only and some
of the validity of transactions only.

Mental soundness is a condition prerequisite to applicability and
validity both. An insane person is neither fit for the application of
law nor is his acts, whether they are acts of worship or transactions,
valid.

For example, if a lunatic performs pilgrimage on behalf of somebody
else, his pilgrimage will not be in order. Similarly he cannot offer
prayers or fast on behalf of anyone else, nor can he be an intermediary
between the imam (one who leads the prayers) and the mamums (followers)
or between the various sections of the mamums in a congregational
prayer.

Ability like sanity is the condition of the applicability of law as
well as that of the validity of acts. Same is the case with
non-coercion. The obligation of a man forcibly constrained is waived. If
a person under duress carries out a transaction or enters into a
marriage contract, his action will be void and invalid.

Puberty is the condition of the applicability of law but not that of
the validity of an act. A minor is not himself obligated to observe the
precepts of religion, but if he is possessed of enough understanding and
can perform a religious act correctly like an adult, his act will be
valid. As such in a congregational prayer a child can be an intermediary
between the imam and the mamums or between the various sections of the
mamums.

He can also perform acts of worship on behalf of others. The fact that
puberty is not a condition of the validity of the acts of worship is
indisputable. But what about transactions? Some Ulema are of the view
that puberty is the condition of the validity of transactions also, and
as such even a boy possessed of full understanding cannot independently
carry out a transaction, neither for himself nor on behalf of anyone
else. For example, a minor cannot sell, purchase or let anything nor can
he pronounce the marriage formula.

Some other Ulema hold that a boy possessed of understanding cannot
carry out a transaction independently for himself, but he can serve as
an agent of others.

Knowledge and awareness and similarly non-compulsion by the force of
circumstances are the conditions of the applicability of law but not
that of validity. As such, if a person unconsciously performs an act,
whether it is an act of worship or it is a transaction, it will be valid
if it is by chance perfect in all other respects.

Similarly if a man is compelled by force of circumstances to carry out
a transaction or a marriage contract, it will be valid. For an example,
there is a man who owns a house which he likes very much and is not
interested at all in selling it. But all of a sudden for some reason or
other he gets badly in need of money and is forced to sell it. In this
case his transaction is valid.

Take another example. A man or a woman is not in any way inclined to
marry. But a disease so develops that the physician advises that man or
woman to marry immediately and thus he or she is forced to do so. This
marriage is also valid. This shows that from the viewpoint of validity
there is a difference between a transaction carried out under duress and
a transaction forced by circumstances. The former is not valid, but the
latter is.

Here it appears to be necessary to explain why a transaction entered
into under duress is not valid and a transaction forced by circumstances
is valid. It may be claimed that the real consent of the doer of the act
is lacking in both the cases. Just as a person who sells his house or
business under a threat, is not actually willing to do so in his heart
of hearts, similarly a person who is forced by circumstances (for
example, has to meet the expenses of the treatment of a disease) to sell
his house or business, is also not willing in his heart of hearts.

A man, who is forced to sell his house because he has to pay for the
treatment of his ailing son, cannot be happy with this transaction. He
must be deeply grieved. As far as the willingness is concerned, the
position is not changed by the fact that the man under threat wants to
ward off a danger and the man pressed by the circumstances wants to
fulfil a pressing need. It also makes no substantial difference that in
the case of coercion some human hand is directly involved in the form of
some tyrant, and in the case of compulsion by force of circumstances,
human hand is involved only indirectly in the shape of exploitation,
colonialism etc.

The fact is that the reason why Islam makes a difference between a man
under duress and a man pressed by circumstances and regards the acts of
the former as invalid and of the latter as valid lies somewhere else.
Both the man under duress and the man pressed by circumstances have an
urgent need. The need of the man under duress is to avert the mischief
of the tyrant which is possible only by taking the action required by
him. Here Islamic law comes to the aid of the man under duress and
declares that the action imposed on him is illegal and void.

On the contrary the man pressed by circumstances is in direct need of
money which he tries to obtain through a desperate transaction. Here
again the law comes to the aid of the afflicted person and declares the
transaction legal and valid. If it had declared it illegal, the result
would have, been to the disadvantage of the afflicted person.

Suppose in the above instance the sale of the house is declared void.
The result will be that neither the buyer will become the owner of the
house, nor the seller will become the owner of the money which he badly
needs for the treatment of his son. That is why the jurists say that to
declare a transaction carried out under duress as illegal is a favour to
the man coerced. But to declare a desperate transaction as illegal not
being to the advantage of the man hard-pressed by circumstances, will
not be a favour to him.

Here arises another question. Is it allowed that other people take
advantage of the desperate need of a man in distress and purchase his
goods at a price much less than the fair price and regard action as
legal? Of course, not! Now a further question arises. Is this
transaction, though forbidden, still valid, and if valid, will the
exploiter be asked to make up the loss and pay the actual market price?
All these points require further discussion.

Mature understanding (rushd) is a prerequisite condition of validity,
but not that of the applicability of law. Under Islamic law, it is
necessary that anybody, who wants to undertake any act affecting
society, for example, entering into a marriage contract or into such
independent transactions at the disposal of his personal property, must
possess discretion and judgement, that is enough understanding and
intelligence necessary to carry out properly the act which he intends to
undertake, besides satisfying other general conditions such as puberty,
sanity, ability and free-will.

Under Islamic law to be able to marry or to dispose of one's property
it is not enough to be sane, to have attained the age of majority and to
be entering into a transaction of one's free will. The marriage of a boy
or a girl will be operative only if he or she possesses enough
intelligence to be able to know what is meant by marriage, what for it
is contracted, what responsibilities it entails and how it affects the
destiny of an individual. No boy or girl should blindly embark upon an
act of such a great importance.

Similarly a boy or a girl having personal property received through
inheritance or otherwise cannot take possession of his or her wealth
simply on reaching the age of majority. It is essential that such boys
and girls should be tested to see if they possess enough understanding
and judgement to keep and utilize their property and wealth. If they
have not developed sufficient judgement and discretion, their property
will continue to be administered by their legal guardians. The Holy
Qur'an says:

"Put orphans under observation till they are of marriageable age. Then
if you find them capable of sound judgement, hand over to them their
property." (Surah an-Nisa, 4:6)


