Conditions of Validity Chapter 2: Human Knowledge
=================================================

Man is self-conscious as well as world-conscious. He wants to have more
and more knowledge of himself and the world. His evolution, progress and
happiness depend on these two kinds of knowledge. Which of these two
kinds of knowledge is of greater importance and which of lesser? It is
not so simple to answer this question. Some attach more importance to
the knowledge of oneself and others to the knowledge of the world.

One reason of the difference in the answer to this question may be a
difference in the way of thinking of the East and the West. Another
reason may be the difference in the outlook of science and faith.
Science is the means of knowing the world whereas faith is the outcome
of self-consciousness.

Anyway, science tries to make man aware of himself in the same way as
it tries to make him aware of the world. Various branches of psychology
bear this responsibility. But the self-consciousness given by science is
dull and lifeless. It does not enliven the spirit of man nor does it
awaken his dormant faculties. In contrast, the self-consciousness
provided by religion makes man aware of his reality, removes his apathy,
fires his soul and makes him compassionate and sympathetic.

That task cannot be undertaken by any science or philosophy. Not only
that, science and philosophy sometimes even add to man's insensitiveness
and make him oblivious of himself. That is why many scientists and
philosophers are insensitive and selfish like the proverbial dog in the
manger. They are unconscious of their selves while many an uneducated
man is self-conscious.

Religion calls for self-consciousness. The headlines of its teachings
are: Know yourself so that you may know your Lord. Do not forget your
Lord so that you may not forget yourself. The Holy Qur'an says:

"Do not be like those who forget Allah, and so He caused them to forget
themselves. Such are really the wicked." (Surah al-Hashr, 59:19) The
Holy Prophet said:

"He who knows himself, knows his Lord," Imam Ali said:

"The most useful of all knowledge is the knowledge of oneself". He has
also said:

"I wonder how a man, who looks for the things lost by him, does not
look for himself".

The basic criticism leveled by the knowledgeable circles of the world
against the Western culture is that this is the culture of knowing the
world and forgetting oneself. Here lies the real secret of the fall of
humanity in the West. If a man, in the words of the Holy Qur'an, loses
himself, what is the use of his gaining the world? As far as we know, it
is Mahatma Gandhi, the late leader of India who from this point of view
has most aptly criticized the Western culture. He says:

"The Western man can accomplish great feats which according to other
nations can be accomplished only by God. But he cannot do one thing. He
cannot look into his inner self. This fact alone is enough to prove the
worthlessness of the false glitter of modern culture".

"If Western culture has led the Europeans to indulging in wine and sex,
it is because they are bent upon forgetting and wasting their 'self'
instead of seeking it. Most of their great and heroic achievements and
even their good deeds are the outcome of their forgetting themselves.
The practical ability of the Western man to make discoveries, inventions
and provision of war equipment, originates from his escape from 'self'
and not from his extraordinary self-control. If man loses his soul, what
is the use of his conquering the world?"

Gandhi further says:

"There exists only one truth in the world and that is the knowledge of
self. He who knows himself, knows God and all others. He who does not
know himself, does not know anything. In this world there exist one
force, one freedom and one justice, and that force is that of ruling
over oneself. In this world there exists only one virtue, and that is
the virtue of liking others as much as one likes oneself. In other
words, we should look upon others as we look upon ourselves. All other
questions are imaginary and non-existing". (Introduction to My Religion,
1959)

Whether we attach more importance to the knowledge of self or to the
knowledge of the world or we attach equal importance to both of them, it
is certain that expansion of knowledge means expansion of human life.
Life is tantamount to knowledge and knowledge is tantamount to life. He
who has more knowledge of himself and the world has more life.

It is obvious that in this context the knowledge of self does not mean.
the knowledge of the contents of one's identity card, which include
one's name, names of the parents, place of birth, place of residence
etc. Nor does it mean the knowledge of one's biology which can be
summarized in the knowledge of an animal higher than the bear and the
monkey. To make clear what is intended, we refer briefly to the various
kinds of self-consciousness. We skip over the figurative and unreal
self-consciousness as that of identity card. We have several kinds of
real self-consciousness:


**I. Innate Self-Consciousness:**

Man is self-conscious innately. It is in his nature to be
self-conscious. It is not so that first man's ego is formed and
thereafter he becomes conscious of it. The birth of ego is tantamount to
the birth of self-consciousness. At that stage the knower, the knowing
and the known are one and the same. Ego is a reality which in itself is
the knowledge of self.

In later stages when man more or less becomes aware of other things he
knows himself also in the same way as he knows other things. In other
words, he forms a picture of himself in his mind. Technically speaking,
he becomes aware of himself through acquired knowledge. But before
knowing himself in this way and even before knowing anything else, he
knows himself through innate and ever-present self-consciousness.

The psychologists who usually discuss the question of
self-consciousness, take into consideration only the second phase of it,
that is the acquired mental knowledge, but the philosophers mostly
concentrate on the first phase, that is the stage of non-mental innate
knowledge. This kind of awareness is the same which in philosophy is
described as one of the convincing proofs of the abstraction of ego.

In the case of this kind of knowledge there is no question of any doubt
or such questions as: "Am I or am I not? If I am, who am I?" Doubt
arises only in the case of acquired knowledge that is in that case in
which the knowledge of a thing is different from its actual existence.
But where the knowledge, the knower and the known are one and the same,
and the knowledge is of ever-present kind, the existence of doubt cannot
be imagined. In other words the existence of any doubt in such a case is
impossible.

It is here that Descartes made a basic mistake. He did not realize that
'I am' cannot entertain any doubt, and hence there is no need to remove
it by saying: "I think, therefore I am".

Though innate self-consciousness is real, it is not a thing to be
acquired. Like the existence of ego it is a basic human characteristic.
Hence this inborn self-consciousness is not that self-consciousness
which man has been called upon to acquire. Mentioning the various stages
of the development of a fetus in the womb, the Holy Qur'an describes the
last stage by saying: "Thereafter we made it a different creation".

This verse refers to this very innate self-consciousness which develops
as a result of the change of non-conscious matter into a self-conscious
spiritual substance.

A philosopher wants to know the real nature of self-conscious ego. Is
it a substance or a form? Is it a matter or an abstraction? What
relation does it bear to the body? Did it exist before the existence of
the body; or did it come into existence alone with it; or has it sprung
out of the body? And so on.

At this stage of self-consciousness the main question is: What is the
nature and the class of ego? If a philosopher claims to be having
self-consciousness, that means that he claims to know the nature, the
class and the substance of ego.


