Iii. Universal Self-consciousness
=================================

It means the knowledge of self in its relation to the world - the
knowledge of the answer to such questions as: Where have I come from?
Where am I going to? In this kind of self-consciousness man discovers
that he is a part of a whole called the world. He also discovers that he
is not an independent being, but he is dependent on some other being. He
has not come on his own; does not live on his own; will not go on his
own. At this stage man tries to determine his position in this whole
known as the world.

These significant words of Imam Ali visualize this sort of
self-consciousness:

"May Allah bless the man who knows wherefrom he has come; where he is
and where he will go".

This kind of self-consciousness creates in man the highest and the most
subtle kind of longing for truth which does not exist in animals or in
any other being. It is this self-consciousness which makes man
inquisitive, and persuades him to look for satisfaction and conviction.
It inflames him with the fire of doubt and denial and makes him waver
from one course to another.

It is the same fire which impassions the souls of the "Gazalis", makes
them so restless that they can neither sleep nor eat, brings them down
from the seat of the head of the Nizamiyah, and makes them wander about
in the deserts and pass many restless years of their lives away from
their hearth and home. It is the same fire which makes the 'Inwan
Basris' run after truth from house to house, from street to street and
from town to town. It is this self-consciousness that draws the
attention of man to the idea of destiny.

**IV. Class Self-consciousness:**

Class self-consciousness is a form of social self-consciousness. It
means a consciousness of one's relation to the class to which he
belongs. In a class-dominated society from the point of view of the
style of life and its blessings and miseries everyone has to belong to a
particular stratum or class self-consciousness is the realization of
one's class position and class responsibilities.

According to certain theories man has no ego beyond his class. The ego
of everyone is the sum-total of his psychic forces that is the sum-total
of his feelings, thoughts, intentions and desires. These all take shape
within the framework of a particular class. The proponents of this
theory are of the view that man as a mere human being does not exist.
His existence as such is only conceptual, not real.

What actually exist are the aristocrats and the masses. Man as such
could exist only in a classless society, had there been any. Hence in a
class-dominated society social self-consciousness is identical with
class self-consciousness.

According to this theory class self-consciousness is equivalent to the
consciousness of one's own interests, for its philosophy is based on the
view that the personality of every individual is governed by his
material interests. In any social structure the most important factor is
its economic basis. It is common material life and common material
interests which give the individuals belonging to a particular class,
common conscience, common taste and common judgement.

Class life begets class out-look and class out-look makes a man look at
the world and society from a particular angle and interpret them as the
class interest demands. Accordingly his efforts and social out-look are
always class-oriented. Marxism believes in this kind of
self-consciousness, which may be termed as Marxist self-consciousness.


**V. National Self-consciousness**

It means the consciousness of one's relation to the people with whom
one has national and racial ties. Man as a result of passing a common
life with a group of people having a common law, a common way of life, a
common history, common historical successes and failures, a common
language and literature and finally a common culture, develops a sort of
fellow feeling and a sense of oneness with that group. As an individual
has an ego, similarly a nation also by virtue of its having a common
culture develops a national ego.

A common culture resulting from belonging to a common race brings about
similarity and unity among human individuals. Nationhood backed by a
common culture turn 'I's' into 'We' for the sake of which people often
make sacrifices. They take pride in its successes and feel ashamed of
its failures.

National self-consciousness means the consciousness of national
culture, national personality and national ego. Basically there exists
no world culture. Various cultures exist simultaneously, and each one of
them has its own basic characteristics and distinguishing features.
Therefore the idea of one single world culture is absurd.

Nationalism which was popular in the nineteenth century and is still
more or less being preached is based on this very philosophy. In this
kind of self-consciousness everything, that is evaluation, decision
making and orientation, has a national aspect and moves along a national
orbit, whereas in class self-consciousness everything has a class
aspect.

Though national self-consciousness does not fall within the category of
the consciousness of self-interest, yet it belongs to the family of
selfishness. It suffers from all the maladies and defects of
selfishness, such as prejudice, partiality, over-looking one's own
faults, conceit and vanity. As such, like class self-consciousness it
also has no moral side.

**VI. Human Self-consciousness:**

It means consciousness of one's relation to all other human beings.
Human self-consciousness is based on the philosophy that all human
beings taken together form one single unit and are endowed with a
'common human conscience'. A sense of love of humanity and
fellow-feeling exists in all men. Sa'di, the world famous Persian poet
says:

"All men are like the organs of one body. A man who has no sympathy
with others, does not deserve to be called a human being". That is the
idea which is entertained by those who like Auguste Comte have been and
are still in search of a religion of humanity. That is also the
fundamental principle of humanism which is more or less a prevailing
philosophy subscribed by most of the broadminded people of our times.

Humanism looks at all men as one single unit irrespective of their
classes, nationalities, cultures, religious affiliations and races. It
rejects every kind of discrimination and distinction. The charters of
human rights issued in the world from time to time are also based on
this philosophy. They too preach such a kind of human
self-consciousness.

If this kind of self-consciousness is developed by an individual, his
feelings and desires become human, his efforts are oriented towards
humanity and his friendships and hostilities take a human colour. He
begins to like knowledge, culture, healthy activities, human welfare,
freedom, justice and kindness, and to dislike ignorance, poverty,
cruelty, disease, feeling of suffocation and discrimination. If
developed, this kind of self-consciousness, in contrast with national
self-consciousness and class self-consciousness, will have a moral
significance.

Though this kind of self-consciousness is more logical than any other
kind of 'it and though there has been much fanfare about it, but in
actual practice it is something which is comparatively rare. Why? The
secret lies in the actuality of man. The nature of his actuality is
different from that of all other existing things, whether they be any
kind of inorganic matter, or a plant or an animal. Everything in this
world other than man is actually what it has been created.

Its nature, its actuality and its characteristics are fixed by the
factors of creation. But as far as man is concerned, the stage of what
he will be and how he will be, begins after his creation. Man is not
what he has been created. He is what he wants to be. He is what he is
made by the factors of up-bringing, which include his own will and
choice.

In other words, with regard to its nature and quality everything else
is actually what it has already been created, but man from this point of
view has been created only potentially. There exists the seed of
humanity in him in the form of his potentialities. If it remains
unaffected by any pests, this seed shoots up gradually from the
existence of man and develops into man's instincts and later into his
human and natural conscience. Contrary to the inorganic matter, the
plants and the animals, man has a person and a personality.

The person of man that is the sum total of his physical systems comes
to the world in an actually existing form. From the point of view of his
physical systems man is as 'actual' as other animals are. But in view of
the later development of his human personality he is spiritually only a
potential being. Human values are present in his existence, ready to
develop and mature.15

The spiritual and moral formation of man is one stage subsequent to his
physical formation. His body is formed in the womb by the creation
factors. But his spiritual and moral systems and the components of his
personality have to be developed later. As such every man is the builder
and the engineer of his own personality. The brush which paints the
personality of man, has been given in his own hand.

Separation between anything other than man and its nature is
unimaginable. A stone cannot be separated from its stoniness. The same
is true of a tree, of a dog and of a cat. Man is the only existing being
in the case of which there is a difference between himself and his
nature that is between man and his humanity. There are many men who have
not been able to attain humanity and like some barbarians and nomads
have stayed in the state of animality.

There are many others who have been dehumanized, as is the case with
most of the quasi-cultured people. As regard to the question how the
nature of a thing can be separated from the thing itself when its nature
is essential for the existence of everything, it may be said that if the
existence of a thing is actual, its nature also will consequently be
actual, but if a thing exists only potentially, it will naturally be
lacking a suitable nature.

That is the only correct philosophical explanation of the
existentialist theory maintaining that existence is basic and that it is
man who chooses his nature. The Muslim philosophers, especially Mulla
Sadra, have laid ample stress on this point. It is with this view in
mind that Mulla Sadra says:

"Man does not belong to one single species, but is a multi-species
being. In fact an individual may one day belong to one species and
another day to a different species".

From here it becomes clear that the biological man is not the real
human being. Biological man only provides the ground where the real man
can exist, and in the words of the philosophers, has the susceptibility
of having humanity, but does not possess it actually. Evidently it is
meaningless to talk of humanity without accepting the basic role of
soul.

After going through this preliminary discussion we are now in a better
position to understand the meaning of human self-consciousness. As we
have already pointed out, human self-consciousness is based on the
conception that all men collectively form one unit and are equipped with
a common human conscience transcending their religious, national, racial
and class conscience.

Now it needs to be explained what kind of men collectively have one ego
and are governed by one spirit and who are the people among whom human
consciousness develops and creates fellow-feeling? Does it grow and
develop only in the men who have actually attained humanity and human
values, or in those who have not yet crossed the stage of potentiality
or in those who have been transformed into worst animals, or in all of
these together? It is obvious that the question of mutual sympathy and
fellow-feeling arises in the case of only those, who are compassionate
and feel that all men are the organs of one body.

Naturally all cannot have this feeling. A wild man who is still in the
stage of childhood; whose human nature is still dormant, cannot have a
feeling of active sympathy. He cannot be governed by a common spirit.
The case of the dehumanized is too obvious to admit any comments. It is
only the men who have attained humanity and whose human nature has fully
developed, those actually are the organs of one body and are actually
governed by a common spirit. Only the faithful can be the men in whom
all natural values may develop, for it is faith which is the basic and
the most important human value.

It is a common faith, not a common race, a common country or
blood-relationship that actually turns people into 'we' and infuses a
common spirit in them. This miracle is brought about by faith only.

A Moses can have no sympathy with a Pharaoh, or an Abuzar with a
Mu'awiyah.

What is an actual fact as well as an ideal is the unity of those real
men who have attained humanity and acquired virtues. That is why the
Holy Prophet instead of making a general statement to the effect that
all men are the organs of one body, has said:

"The faithful are the organs of one body. When one organ is afflicted
with pain, fever or sleeplessness, other organs automatically sympathize
with it"

There is no doubt that a man who has attained humanity, shows kindness
to all human beings or rather to all things, even to the dehumanized men
whose nature has been deformed. That is why Allah has described His
Prophet as a blessing to the whole universe. Those who have attained
humanity, show kindness even to those who are hostile to them. Imam Ali
in respect of Ibn Muljam Muradi said:

"I like him to live although he likes me to be killed". Only in a
society of the faithful it is possible to talk of mutual love and mutual
sympathy."

Evidently love of mankind does not mean total peace, lack of
responsibility and indifference to what the wicked do. On the contrary
real fellow-feeling imposes heavy responsibilities in this field.

In our times Bertrand Russell, the outstanding English thinker and
mathematician and Jean-Paul Sartre, the well-known French existentialist
thinker, are the two figures best known for their humanism. Incidentally
Russell has based his moral philosophy on a principle which is contrary
to his humanism in two ways: His philosophy is based on pragmatism in
personal gains that is in ensuring optimum personal gain while abiding
by the moral principles. He does not believe in any other moral
philosophy. Hence his humanism emanates from giving importance to
personal interests only.

That enthusiastic bourgeois, who conquered the past and unfurled the
banner of nationalism, has no longer anything to think of except
thoughtlessness. The young generation of Europe is standing at the point
of absurdity. Today the West is receiving back what it once exported.
Social confusion, despair, bewilderment, nihilism are the things which
it used to impose on other nations and cultures..... The nihilist thinks
that if a thing is not mine; let it not be of anybody else also.... That
is why he tends to self-destruction.

We see another reaction to this situation is the emergence of Romantic
Movement, a sort of pro-human philosophy that has engaged the attention
of the Western people on various levels. At one end of it is Russell
with his simple and practical views and at the other end is Sartre with
his complex and restless philosophy. In the middle there are many
broad-minded politicians and economists who try to find a practical
solution of the problems facing them and others.

As for Sartre, he, with his free outlook and complex theory of
responsibility, is another manifestation of Western spirit which with
some sense of guilt wants to make amends for the past mistakes. Like the
stoics, Sartre believes in the brotherhood and equality of mankind as
well as in the world government and in freedom and virtue being the
highest good.

He today represents that tendency of the broad-minded people of the
West who try to overcome their mental uneasiness caused by the
hollowness of the Western culture by throwing themselves on the lap of
abstract humanity and replacing religion by humanism. They seek for
themselves and the entire West the forgiveness of humanity as a whole
which, according to them, has replaced the idea of God.

A glaring outcome of Sartre's humanism is that every now and then he
sheds crocodile tears for the alleged injustice done to Isra'il and for
the so-called tyranny of the Arabs, especially the Palestinian refugees.
The world has seen and continues to see the practical demonstrations of
the humanism of Western humanists, who have signed high-sounding
charters of human rights. These demonstrations need no comments.

Social self-consciousness, whether it is national, human or class
consciousness has come to be known in our times as the liberal-minded
consciousness.

A liberal-minded is he who has got some variety of social
consciousnesses, is interested in the national, human or class problems
and makes efforts to uplift and liberate his class, his nation or the
whole mankind. He tries to transfer his consciousness to others and make
them work for social emancipation.


