The Government and Environmental Protection
===========================================

Islam terms government as a political power responsible for the
protection of its citizen’s welfare, as well as planning and executing
their affairs.

This guidance or protection is comprised of all their different
endeavors, politically, financially, socially and health wise…etc., in
order to preserve the system of life, which includes wealth,
personality, mind and body.

The Islamic scholars summarized this concept as a major component in the
Islamic social system, and it has a more extensive and universal
principle, which is this: Islam came in order to protect man’s interests
and repel corruption on earth. Likewise, these principles work towards
organizing natural laws, the law of*“la dharara wa la dhirara”,* which
is a Prophetic text that works in man’s legislative life.

Therefore, there are intellectual, as well as legislative rules or
principles which empower the government, on one hand, and on the other
hand, oblige it toward environmental protection, and these are:

“La dharara wa la dhirara”

Islam came in order to protect man’s interests and repel corruption from
the earth.

The Islamic government is responsible for the protection of its
citizen’s welfare and their general interests, as the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said,

“The leader is a sheperd and is responsible for his flock.”

According to these principles, a government, in the Islamic point of
view, is responsible for preserving the environment, as well as
protecting nature, because the preservation of man’s environment and
likewise, the animal, plant and natural environment is the most clear
aspect of man’s material life.

Thus, these intellectual and legislative rules empower the Islamic
government to prohibit the cutting of forests, or destroying fruit
trees, or hunting animals where their number is less, so as to preserve
their existence…etc.

It is also responsible for preventing or prohibiting any act which is
harmful to the environment, like using poisonous and toxic substances,
or which carry dangerous and contagious microbes, or like building
industries which cause pollution inside the city and deposit human and
animal waste products near human habitations and communities.

Because all these are harmful and destructive to the life system and
spread corruption on the earth after it was well-planned and built, the
Holy Qur’an prohibits this, in this statement:

***“And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order…”***

Holy Qur’an (A’raf 7:56)

Praise be to Allah, the lord of the Worlds


