Definition of Environment
=========================

“Environment is the complex of physical, chemical and biotic factors (as
climate, soil, and living things) that act upon an organism or an
ecological community and ultimately determine its form and survival; the
aggregate of social and cultural conditions that influence the life of
an individual or community.”

The environment is the natural condition and circumstances in which
people, animals and plants live, and in turn, they are referred to as
the natural environment, social environment and political environment.
Therefore, environment means those conditions and circumstances, which
surround a particular thing.

The natural environment is a natural surrounding, and it refers to the
natural conditions, atmosphere and circumstances which relate to man,
and this includes plants, forests, water, air, sea, animals and other
living things, the nature of the earth and what it contains, like
mountains, rivers, swamps, deserts, and also includes hot and cold
weather, rain and clouds, rays of the sun… etc.

All creatures and entities are interrelated and have reciprocal effects,
some having an effect on the conditions of others, and it has its
positive, as well as negative effects on the life of man, especially in
our present day after industrial advancement and the increase of man’s
interference in the natural condition and changing its direction.

Other scientific sources have defined environment as “the condition in
which man lives and obtains the components of his life, like food,
shelter and medicine and conducts his relations with his fellow human
beings in it.”1

So, this is the definition of environment considering man a pivotal
point in it.


