Man and the Natural Environment
===============================

Man is part of the natural world in his formation, growth and the
continuity of his existence on this earth; interacting with the natural
components and their environmental conditions, continuously.

The Holy Qur’an, in many instances, has referred to man’s relationship
with nature and the environment. Here, we quote some of the verses:

*** “And Allah has made you grow out of the earth as a growth.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nuh 71:17)

*** “…and We have made of water everything living…”***

Holy Qur’an (Anbiya 21:30)

*** “And to Samood (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my people!
Serve Allah, you have no god other than He; He brought you into being
from the earth, and made you dwell in it, therefore ask forgiveness of
Him, then turn to Him, surely my Lord is Nigh, Answering.”***

Holy Qur’an (Hud 11:61)

*** “He created the heavens without pillars as you see them, and put
mountains upon earth lest it might convulse with you, and he spread in
it animals of every kind; and We sent down water from the cloud, then
caused to grow therein (vegetation) of every noble kind.”***

Holy Qur’an (Luqman 31:10)

*** “Do you not see that Allah has made what is in the heavens and what
is in the earth subservient to you, and made complete to you His favour
outwardly and inwardly? And among men is he who disputes in respect of
Allah though having no knowledge, nor guidance, nor a book giving
light.”***

Holy Qur’an (Luqman 31:20)

*** “…and sent down upon you water from the cloud that He might thereby
purify you, and take away from you the uncleanness of Satan…”***

Holy Qur’an (Anfal 8:11)

*** “…and We send down pure water from the cloud.”***

Holy Qur’an (Furqan 25:48)

*** “…and He has made the ships subservient to you, that they might run
their course in the sea by His command…”***

Holy Qur’an (Ibrahim 14:32)

***“And He it is Who has made the sea subservient that you may eat fresh
flesh from it…”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:14)

***“From it We created you and into it We shall send you back and from
it will We raise you a second time.”***

Holy Qur’an (Taha 16:14)

***“And when he turns back, he runs along in the land that he may cause
mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock…”***

Holy Qur’an (Baqarah 2:205)

The above Qur’anic verses speak about man as a part of the natural
environment he interacts with; gaining from it and likewise, giving to
it. He is also responsible for its growth as well as preventing vices
and corruption in it.

Man, this living creature, represents a part of the natural system,
which activates its components toward understanding and the coordination
between each other. Thus, the natural world can be defined as the
balance and the accurate, scientific, calculated equilibrium from the
most learned and knowledgeable being.

The amount of hard water, the salinity of sea, the sweetness of river,
the ratio of oxygen, the grade of light rays, the degree of heat and the
quantity of rain, fish, animals, plants…etc., all this is well
calculated without the least error.

The earth and its gravitational force, rate of movement, and power of
absorption has an affect on the life of man, animals and plants, and its
continuous existence in this universe shows that the knowledgeable
Creator has arranged it accurately.

Consequently, the above-quoted verses have discussed the reality in the
life of man, naturally and environmentally, viz:

Man was created from the earth and he grows from it, that water is a
fundamental of life, and that the Almighty Allah has colonized man in
this world, i.e., He entrusted him with the building of it by using its
natural resources and its good environmental conditions, so as to
understand the power of the Almighty Allah and His blessings to him.

And that the natural environment of this world, like mountains, is meant
for protecting the equilibrium of the earth and its living creatures, by
production and consumption, which live under the system of life’s
equilibrium.

Thus, the rains which fall, the plants which grow, all this is a proof
of Allah’s greatness, His power, knowledge and wisdom, and any action of
the Wise Knower must be accurately calculated without the least
contradiction, and even if it is abused it will act in accordance with
the natural system and protect the environmental equilibrium, which, in
one way or the other, is evidence of the greatness of the Creator and
His wisdom.

Everything in this world and its natural surroundings, such as, water,
animals, forest and plants, the aquatic living creatures, solar rays,
heat, rain, the salinity of the sea and the sweetness of the rivers, was
created for man, in order to make his life better.

In view of this fact, the Holy Qur’an enjoins man to reflect on the
blessings of Allah to him and calls him toward monotheism, thanksgiving
and worshipping Him alone. This is how the Holy Qur’an places man in the
natural environment as part and parcel of it.

However, after explaining this relationship between life, intellect and
nature, the Holy Qur’an discusses the activities, responsibilities and
social systems, which protect the well being of the environment, as well
as protecting the divine will of the world of existence under the power
of Shari‘ah.


