The Environment and Destructive Practices
=========================================

A survey and a close look at the natural world and its components, and
the relationship, balance and changes that occur in it, will show the
wisdom, accuracy and perfection that surrounds it, because, there is
nothing created uselessly or to hurt anyone, and even if it harms human
beings, it is rather a relative harm, due to the fact that the human
being was prohibited from practicing it in the first place.

And often this harmful element is changed by natural processes to be
useful to the plants, earth and even to man, himself. Surely, if the
natural laws are left to work as they are created by their Creator, they
will protect the healthy, natural and environmental beauty and good life
for all.

The distribution of water, mountains and forests, and the nature of
weather, climate and earth, and the ratio of gases, light rays…etc.,
works under a well-equipped, interrelated system, as bacteria and dead
bodies of animals and plants enter the natural chemical processes in
order to be well acquainted with the environmental interests, as well
as, ensuring the welfare of the surroundings.

But, when humans, due to ignorance and destructive activities, interrupt
and enter the environment system they cause a great damage to this very
system.

The Holy Qur’an, while elaborating on the environmental, as well as the
natural perfection, and likewise, the destructive role of man, says:

***“When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle…”***

Holy Qur’an (Baqarah 2:205)

*** “And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order,
but call on Him with fear and longing (in your hearts): For the Mercy of
Allah is (always) near to those who do good.”***

Holy Qur’an (A‘raf 7:56)

The Holy Qur’an emphasizes that the earth and all its natural and life
components are perfect and healthy; it is man who plays with its
perfection and destroys it. In view of this, we see this scenario
elaborating on man, in the suitability of the earth in its natural form,
as the destructive element to the earth; destroying plants and killing
animals and human beings.

Surely, our present world has witnessed the most dreadful kind of
corruption on earth and environment, as well as natural destruction
which man was enjoined to protect and take care of.

Allah creates man from earth as one of its components and commands him
to protect it, the Almighty Allah, with emphasis on this responsibility,
through Prophet Salih says:

***“To the Thamud people (We sent) Salih, one of their own brethren. He
said: ‘O my People! Worship Allah: You have no other god but Him. It is
He Who has produced you from the earth and settled you therein: Then ask
forgiveness of Him, and turn to Him (in repentance): for my Lord is
(always) near, ready to answer.”***

Holy Qur’an (Hud 11:61)

So, this is the Qur’anic warning of the corruption on earth and
environmental destruction, as well as the call for building up and
protection of its balanced laws. The dreadful, environmental,
destructive work of man is manifested in the manufacturing of chemical,
nuclear and biological weapons, which cause great damage to the world,
as also his destruction of nature is manifested in cutting down trees
and polluting the atmosphere with burning and waste products.

Scientific studies and statistics conducted by archaeologists, show that
man’s interference in the natural laws by destroying the environment and
life, and even those that he thinks are beneficial to him, like using
chemical fertilizers and other poisonous substances used to kill large
number of insects and plants; all cause great damage to the environment
balance and life stability in the world.

The most obvious problem of our present era is pollution, which is
caused by domestic industries, as well as wars. Thus, pollution, through
the use of carbon and carbon dioxide, and the destruction of the ozone
layer or chemical pollution caused by poisonous and harmful chemical
substances, or the nuclear rays pollution, or water pollution by crude
oil or man’s waste products, or pollution by the use of agricultural
fertilizers, like phosphate compounds, nitrate compounds…etc., are all
clear proofs and meaning to what the Almighty Allah prohibits in His
saying:

***“And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order…”***

Holy Qur’an (A‘raf 7:56)

However, everything in the natural world acts according to the system of
purity, perfection and balance. Hence, the natural ration of carbon is
fixed and balanced, so plants absorb a large amount of natural carbon
dioxide for their growth.

The scientific studies confirm that the average amount of carbon in the
natural world is approximately 300 parts in every 10,000 parts of air,
but the ratio has increased in 1984 to 345 parts in every 10,000 parts.
And this ratio will double its present rate by year 2020 if combustion
and burning of forests continues.8

(We mention, here, that there is great increase in the ratio of Carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, and this is due to the atmospheric heat of
the sun, which can be sensed, as well as bring a great damage in the
near future. And this will cause great harm to man and his inventions,
forever.)9

In its report on natural destructive practices to the Conference of
Earth’s Climax and Human Rights, the Arab League for Human Rights wrote:
“Statistics show that 160 thousand poisonous gases are endangering the
atmospheric layer in U.S.A. alone. For instance, the U.S. is using 350
million tons of Hydro-floro carbons, which are used in the manufacturing
of Air-solate, i.e., the average of 25% of the world’s usage which
reaches 1400 million tons. This act, alone, will cause the weakness of
the ozone layer.

And at the same time, the developed countries alone, produce 800
thousand tons of toxic waste, which is approximately 30% of the world’s
waste products, and later they dispose it off in the Sahara and rivers
of underdeveloped countries.”

The League continues in its report that 600 million people live below
the poverty line, 100 million Africans are dying from hunger, and 43
million acres of forest are destroyed annually. As also 80% of the
world’s population will face disability and difficulties in terms of
earth, food or water in the next century.

But, upon this painful reality, the general line of earth’s climax put
the blame and burden of this natural atmospheric and ozone layer
destruction to the poor countries.

In addition to what was mentioned before, the conference shows that the
Third world countries import goods from northern countries, which causes
environmental pollution. And at the same time, it emphasizes that
foreign hands undertake this project in those countries in view of their
need for industrial work, lower wages and taxes, crude resources and
free, as well as easy laws, where no one will be questioned or forced to
protect the environment or face hard penalties for abusing it.

What can these poor countries do to face this drastic problem, in view
of their poverty, underdevelopment and day-to-day problems, and hunger,
which inflicts its citizens? Can they overcome their problems alone?

In order to face this dreadful danger, the sum of approximately 600
billion dollars was presumed to be able to cure this problem, but most
of the industrial countries refuse to comply with the U.N.’s proposal,
which states that the rich countries should sacrifice 7% of their annual
income until the year 2000, so as to help the poor countries in their
development projects.

But, the organization became more concerned when the American government
not only refused to sign the said agreement, rather it also declined to
commit itself to decrease carbon dioxide gas products in the environment
at the end of this century. And in fact, it emphasizes that these
products may increase in the range of 1.7 – 6% in eight years to come.

Surely, the human activities presently are the causative factors that
produce approximately 7.5 million tons of carbon dioxide into the
environment, which, without any doubt, is the main factor in the
changing of the world’s climate and causes air pollution.

Although the protection of the environment and its safeguarding were
regarded as the major and basic factors in the process of economic, as
well as social development, human activities, which include
deforestation, marine pollution, chemical farming and other modern
inventions, turn this biological source, plants, animals and other
natural phenomenon to a dangerous stage, which may threaten their very
existence.

However, man is alleged to be responsible for the crime of polluting the
air, water, and the atmosphere, in general, but, who is this man? Is it
the man of Somalia, India, Sudan and Yemen, or that man that is living
in America, Canada and Japan?

A closer look and thought on the statistics conducted will throw more
light on the importance of the Qur’anic injunction regarding
environmental destruction and pollution. And it will also give us a good
understanding of the difference between Islamic civilization and Western
(material) civilization which threatens environment and human existence,
uncovering Islamic legislative tendency and its accurate solution to the
social and cultural matters and its concern to man’s, as well as the
environmental issues.


