How to Protect the Human Environment?
=====================================

Protecting the natural and social environment are among the most
important Islamic goals of existence, and explaining the sign of its
care and concern with human welfare and natural protection, as well as
its adherence to the life system, the man’s well-being and his
continuous existence. This is because the well-being of human species
and the living and nonliving things around him, like earth, water and
air depends on its protection from pollution and destruction.

Islam has chosen some steps for protecting health and the environment.
Some of which are as follows:

1. Enlightening and educating man on how to take care of health and
nature, as well as protecting the living creatures on this earth. And
this is based on the principle that whatever the Almighty Lord creates
is perfect, accurate and is meant for reformation, and there is nothing
created in vain and for amusement. Surely, the Qur’an has elaborated on
this point, when it says:

***“…the handiwork of Allah Who has made everything in perfect
order…”***

Holy Qur’an (Naml 27:88)

However, when man becomes egoistic and aggressive, these acts will
influence him to destroy the environment and pollute the natural
surroundings. In this regard, the Holy Qur’an holds man responsible for
environmental pollution, by saying:

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought…”***

Holy Qur’an (Rum 30:41)

And, also, it addresses man and encourages him to protect nature and
lead the healthiest of lives, when it says:

***“And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order…”***

Holy Qur’an (A‘raf 7:56)

***“When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle…”***

Holy Qur’an (Baqarah 2:205)

2. Exhortation on Purity: The most clear process of protecting the human
environment is Islamic guidance toward educating man on purity,
cleanliness and the call for purifying the body, clothes, utensils,
etc.; the Almighty Lord says:

***“And your garments keep from stain!”***

Holy Qur’an (Muddathir 74:4)

***“…and if you are under an obligation to perform a total ablution,
then wash (yourselves)…”***

Holy Qur’an (Maida 5:6)

***“…Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty, but He wishes
to purify you that He may complete His favour on you so that you may be
grateful.”***

Holy Qur’an (Maida 5:6)

From this, purity and the protecting of the environment against
pollution is regarded as Allah’s blessing, and which must be
appreciated. From here, we will understand that blessings, for instance,
the blessing of health, good life and wealth, etc., are incomplete
without the cleanliness of the environment and its protection against
pollution and destruction, because, if not, it will continue to be under
the danger and threat of destruction and cessation.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) speaking on heath protection,
environmental sanitation and the purity of man’s surroundings, says,

“Surely, your body has a right over you.”10

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s) also says, while elaborating on the
importance of protecting nature,

“Sweep your courtyard, and don’t be like the Jews.”11

Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (a.s.) while talking on purity and
cleanliness says,

“Purification is among the morals of the prophets.”12

Jabir ibn Abdullah Ansari (companion of Holy Prophet) reported the
saying of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) on uncleanliness, and says: “One
day the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) came to us and he saw a man in a shaggy
state; his hair uncombed. He (s.a.w.s.) said,

“Does not this one have what his hair needs?”13

And it was also reported from him (s.a.w.s.) this saying when he saw
another man with dirty clothes,

“Does not this one have water to wash his clothes?”14

Surely, the Islamic thought and civilization is far above others, when
it emphasizes that the Almighty Allah wants for His servant a pleasant
life and purity, and environment which is not polluted. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) elaborated on this point saying,

“Surely Allah is good and He likes goodness; He is Pure and He likes
purity.”15

And while talking about Islam’s purity and cleanliness and its call
toward environmental sanitation, Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) says,

“Surely, Islam is pure, therefore be pure, because he can never enter
Paradise who is not pure.”16

3. Prohibiting environmental pollution: As Islam exhorts it followers
toward purification, likewise, it prohibits environmental pollution and
destruction. On this matter, it was reported from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) that he prohibited spitting on the earth, because of its
harmful effects on the health, and its contradiction to human nature.

However, as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) prohibits spitting, he also
prohibits and warns against defecating under a fruit tree and urinating
in stationary or flowing water and also, on the road, so as to protect
the environment from pollution and, also, as a protection to health and
purity.

We can outline the importance of this advice if we understand the danger
of human waste products to our health and to the environment, especially
the role which these contaminates of water play in spreading diseases to
the community through drinking, bathing and the fruits which are watered
by this water.

It was reported from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) that,

“The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) prohibited defecation on the edge of a
well, river or under a fruit tree.”17

And it was also reported from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that,

“It is prohibited for man to urinate in stationary water…”18

And he (a.s.) also quoted the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that he said:
“Surely, the Almighty Allah warns you, oh, my (followers) Ummah!,
against twenty four things and prohibits you from them,” and he recited
them until he said , “He warns against urinating on the edge of a
running river.”19

4. Prohibition on staying in a state with***“najasah”*** (unclean
things) and their purification: When we read the philosophy of Islamic
laws, we will be able to detect the concern and care of these laws
toward man’s protection.

The Jurists*(Fuqaha)* have summarized the philosophy of Islamic laws and
analyzed them in a simple formula, i.e., “attracting to the best
interest*(masalih)* and repelling evil (corruption)*(mafasid).”*

Hence,*“masalaha”* and*“mafasada”* are the two criteria of a particular
law and the cause of its legislation. And, of course, at the time of
practicing this legislative principle on things which Islamic laws
prescribe, like the impurity of some things, and the prohibition of
eating and selling them and the necessity of purifying them before
praying, one will then understand the value and worth against evil which
is harmful to the health.

It is in view of this that the Islamic Shari‘a terms the following
things as*“najis”* and necessitates its purification before praying and
circumambulation*(Tawaf,* ritual circling of the Ka‘ba) and they are:

Human urine and feces, and likewise, the urine and feces of those
animals forbidden for us to eat.

The dead body of humans, and animals whose blood gushes out when
slaughtered.

Human sperm, as well as that of animals whose blood gushes out when
slaughtered.

Human blood, as well as that of animals whose blood gushes out when
slaughtered.

Alcoholic liquors.

Terrestrial dogs and pigs.

Undoubtedly, the present man’s problem, especially in big cities, is how
to get rid of human and animal waste products, as well as their dead
bodies. This is because they are the most clear and wide range source of
microbes and other dangerous diseases, which afflict man.

However, as the aforementioned*“najasah”* were outlined and their role
in polluting the environment mentioned, man was also commanded to be
free from them, as Almighty Allah says:

***“…Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty, but He wishes
to purify you that He may complete His favour on you so that you may be
grateful.”***

Holy Qur’an (Maida 5:6)

Indeed, whoever makes a close examination and contemplation of these
purification laws, will understand that the Islamic purification method
is the most perfect system of purification, health and protecting the
environment from dirty things and*“najasah”.* It terms water, earth and
sun as natural products, dead bodies, blood and semen and some animal
waste products. It also regards transformation*(istihala)* from a
particular state to another, like the transformation of a dead animal to
ashes after burning, as among the purifiers.

In addition, the purification method in Islam is composed of different
steps, which are among the most perfect processes and environmental
protection practices; they are:

A. Islam, after regarding the dead body, blood, semen and waste products
of man and some other animals as*“najis’,* being confirmed by scientific
researches that they are the sources of some diseases and environmental
pollution, it commands that their purification and removal from the
human’s body and other things like clothes, utensils, carpets, etc., by
using water or other purifiers is mandatory.

It also legislates the purification of some*“mutanajjisat”* (things
which become impure through contacting*“najis”)* by earth and the rays
of the sun, which has been proven, scientifically, to be a power in
killing microbes. Through this step, Islam strives towards the
purification of the environment and protecting it from the dangers of
pollution.

B. Burying a dead body: Islam has made the burying of a human dead body
compulsory, which is among the most important steps in getting rid of
microbes and diseases, as well as, protecting the human environment
against pollution.

C. Bathing: Islam has legislated different types of bathing*(ghusl)* for
cleaning man and protecting his body from dirty things and other sources
of diseases, thereby, making some compulsory*(wajib) “ghusl”* and others
recommended*(mustahab).* The compulsory ones are:

*1. Ghusl al-Janabah:* It is obligatory*(wajib)* on a*“junub”* (a person
who has*janabah* -in a state of ritual impurity due to sexual
intercourse or ejaculation) to clean himself from it through ritual
bathing to ready the self for prayer*(salat)* and to be in a state of
impurity to have a valid fast*(sawm).* [^1] Islam has made it*“makruh”*
(undesirable) for a*“junub”* to sleep without performing*ghusl* , and
likewise, eating and drinking without*ghusl* in this state.

Ghusl al-Haidh[^2]

Ghusl al-Istihadhah[^3]

Ghusl-e-Mass-e-Mayyit[^4]

Ghusl an-Nifas[^5]

The “*mustahab ghusl”,* which Islam exhorts people to perform, are many,
but the most important one is: The Friday*“ghusl”,* which is the
weekly*“ghusl”* for safeguarding the purity of the body.

D. Ablution***(wudhu):*** Ablution, in the Islamic perspective, is the
most clear method of actualizing man’s daily purification. Islam has
made five daily prayers incumbent upon all Muslims, (starting from 9
years for girls and 15 for boys) and those prayers cannot be said unless
in a state of ablution, thus, one has to clean himself every day five
times or at least three times daily, because prayer, whether compulsory
or recommended, will not become valid without ablution. Consequently,
ablution is regarded as purification because it considers washing the
face and hands compulsory and rinsing the mouth and drawing water into
nostrils as recommended acts.

As Islam legislates the compulsory ablution, likewise, it exhorts on
being in a state of purity when performing some recommended acts of
worship like reading the Holy Qur’an, and it also recommends performing
ablution before sleeping.

E. Cleaning furniture and other household appliances: Islam’s concern
and care for environment, its cleanliness and its protection can be seen
through its command of prohibiting the eating and drinking of*“najis”*
and*“mutanajjis”* things.

Therefore, it becomes compulsory on one who wants to eat or drink from a
plate or cup that has become*“najis”* to purify it with water or, in
some instances water with earth, before using it.

Surely, the jurisprudence books have discussed how to purify these items
when they come in contact with “*najis”* (for details, please refer to
books regarding this subject).

5. Prohibiting some foods and drinks and some other practices, like
eating dead animals, drinking blood, liquor and using unlawful drugs,
which serve as destructive elements to the health, as well as, polluting
the well being of the society.

6. Prohibiting illegal sexual relations; like adultery, homosexuality,
lesbianism, masturbation, etc…

7. Creating the concepts of “no injury and no malicious damage”*(la
dharara wa la dhirara)*

With this great legal concept or principle which gives the right of
freezing and blocking any act or practice which has any harmful result,
we can say that Islam has prohibited everything which is harmful to the
environment. So, it is left for the experts and religious scholars or in
other words, it is their responsibility to specify those harmful acts,
items and practices. Afterwards, it may become the responsibility of the
government to prohibit the use of those harmful items and activities, so
as to protect the well being and peaceful coexistence of their citizens.

8. The responsibility of “enjoining the good and prohibiting
evil”***(al-Amru bil ma‘rufi wan Nahayi anil Munkar):*** the injuction
of*“Amru bil ma‘rufi wan Nahayi anil Munkar”* and, likewise, the right
and jurisdiction given to a ruler by Islam for the smooth discharging of
his duties, forms a good reformative atmosphere in the Islamic society.
And comprises all the necessary requirements which can guarantee the
protection of the environment and its development for the interest of
man.

Thus, the Islamic laws are based on this formula: “Attracting interests
and repelling corruption”.

And that the principle of***“and help one another in goodness and piety,
and do not help one another in sin and aggression”*** is a broad
foundation of environmental protection and preserving the natural
system. Because the verse prohibits aggression on nature and life and
also calls for a collective relationship toward good and reformation.


