The Plant Environment
=====================

***“It is He Who sends down rain from the sky: From it ye drink, and out
of it (grows) the vegetation on which ye feed your cattle. With it He
produces for you corn, olives, date-palms, grapes, and every kind of
fruit: Verily in this is a sign for those who give thought.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:10-11)

In our previous discussion, we have offered the opinions and outlooks of
some experts and researchers in the field of plants and forests, and the
plant’s relationship with the environmental balance and well being.
Likewise, we have shown the role played by plants in man’s and the
animal’s lives, not in the realm of clothes, medicine or food, rather in
organizing the natural environment and its balance. The importance of
arranging the ratio of oxygen and carbon dioxide, as well as, fighting
and stopping floods and rectifying the atmosphere and renewing the
fertility of the soil, have, also been pointed out. Plants are the third
living creature in this world and the first living, producing creature,
therefore, plants are man’s and animal’s companions. In this regard, the
Holy Qur’an in different places talks about plants, crops, trees and
arable land, as well as, plant’s environment and the relationship
between man and plants.

The Islamic message encourages the act of farming and planting trees and
prohibits the cutting and removing of trees during war, as some
aggressive rulers practiced in their time, due to their aggressive
behavior. So, Islam calls for protecting the plant’s environment and
encourages the planting of trees and farming, so as to preserve the
environmental sanity of the society.

Rather, Islam regards the act of planting trees and preserving the earth
as an act of worship and a charity for the doer as an act that conforms
with the companionship of man and animals with the plants. Allah has
made it clear, saying:

***“He brought you into being from the earth, and made you dwell in
it.”***

Holy Qur’an (Hud 11:16)

Also, in the Prophetic Hadith, it is narrated from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) that,

“No Muslim will grow a plant or sow a crop, that birds, animals or man
eat from it, unless he has a reward for it.”[^6]

“No man will grow a plant unless Allah writes a reward for him, as much
as the fruit that grows from it.”[^7]

Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) further emphasizes on farming or
planting when he says,

“If one of you has a palm seedling and can sow it before he rises up on
the Day of Judgement, then, he should do so.”[^8]

And, it was reported from Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that,

“A Muslim will not grow a plant and man or animal or bird eat of it,
unless he has a reward for that.”[^9]

Ibn Umar says; “We were in the presence of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
when a date pit was brought, then, Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said,

*‘Indeed, among the trees, there is a tree which is like a Muslim’,* and
I wanted to say it is a palm tree, but when I looked around I found that
I was the youngest among the people there. Then, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) said,

‘It is a date palm tree.’”[^10]

So, this is how the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) made farming and concern for
the protection of the farming environment for the benefit of man and
animals as an act of worship, as well as, a charity*(sadaqah),* and on
the other hand, compares a date palm tree to a Muslim who serves a great
benefit to the community.

While discussing the issue of crime and aggression against life, the
Holy Qur’an condemns the destroyers of the animal’s, plant’s and man’s
environment, and rather, terms the aggression an aggression against
humanity, because, aggression against the sources of man’s life is an
aggression against his person. Concerning this the Holy Qur’an says,

***“When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle…”***

Holy Qur’an (Baqarah 2:205)

In this verse, the Holy Qur’an compares the destruction of plants and
animals with corruption in the earth, and regards it as an aggression
against the system of life, as well as an evil which must be wiped out.
So, from here, we can see how the principles of Islamic law and its
ideologies correspond with the natural laws and life’s balanced system.
These two points will show Allah’s wisdom and will in His legislation
and creation.


