Protecting the Animal Environment
=================================

***“Behold! In the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the
alternation of the Night and the Day; in the sailing of the ships
through the Ocean for the profit of mankind; in the rain which Allah
sends down from the skies, and the life which He gives therewith to an
earth that is dead; in the beasts of all kinds that He scatters through
the earth; in the change of the winds, and the clouds which they trail
like their slaves between the sky and the earth; (here) indeed are signs
for a people that are wise.”***

Holy Qur’an (Baqarah 2:164)

***“There is not an animal (that lives) on the earth nor a being that
flies on its wings, but (forms part of) communities like you. Nothing
have we omitted from the Book, and they (all) shall be gathered to their
Lord in the end.”***

Holy Qur’an (An‘am 6:38)

***“There is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance depends on
Allah: He knows the time and place of its definite abode and its
temporary deposit: All is in a clear Record.”***

Holy Qur’an (Hud 11:6)

***“See you not that to Allah bow down in worship all things that are in
the heavens and on earth,--the sun, the moon, the stars; the hills, the
trees, the animals; and a great number among mankind?”***

Holy Qur’an (Hajj 22:18)

***“See you not that it is Allah whose praises all beings in the heavens
and on the earth do celebrate, and the birds (of the air) with wings
outspread? Each one knows its own (mode of) prayer and praise.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nur 24:41)

***“…There is not a thing but celebrates His praise; and yet you
understand not how they declare His glory!”***

Holy Qur’an (Isra‘ 17:44)

***“And cattle He has created for you (men): From them you derive
warmth, and numerous benefits, and of their (meat) you eat. And you have
a sense of pride and beauty in them as you drive them home in the
evening, and as you lead them forth to pasture in the morning.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:5-6)

***“And (He has created) horses, mules, and donkeys, for you to ride and
use for show; and he has created (other) things of which ye have no
knowledge.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:8)

***“It is He Who sends down rain from the sky: From it ye drink, and out
of it (grows) the vegetation on which ye feed your cattle. With it He
produces for you corn, olives, date-palms, grapes, and every kind of
fruit: Verily in this is a sign for those who give thought.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:10-11)

***“And He has set up on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it
should shake with you; and rivers and roads; that you may guide
yourselves;”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:15)

***“And the things on this earth which He has multiplied in varying
colors (and qualities): Verily in this is a Sign for men who celebrate
the praises of Allah (in gratitude).”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:13)

***“It is He Who has made the sea subject, that you may eat thereof
flesh that is fresh and tender, and that you may extract therefrom
ornaments to wear; and you see the ships therein that plough the waves,
that you may seek (thus) of the bounty of Allah and that you may be
grateful.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:14)

***“If you would count up the favours of Allah, never would you be able
to number them: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nahl 16:18)

In this collection of verses, the Holy Qur’an describes the environment
in a marvelous way, and joins its different components; viz., man,
earth, air, atmosphere, rivers, seas, rain, clouds, plants, animals,
birds, fishes, etc., in one circumstance and a perfect, as well as,
complex formation serving a particular and interrelated purpose. Hence,
all this is meant for the interest and welfare of man, and for the
protection of the environment.

In this connection, the Holy Qur’an warns and cautions those who destroy
and pollute the environment, thus:

***“And do no mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order…”***

Holy Qur’an (A’raf 7:56)

In another instance, the Holy Qur’an describes those who spread
corruption on the earth and play with the life system on land, as well
as in the sea, as wicked and evil people; the Holy Qur’an states:

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought…”***

Holy Qur’an (Rum 30:41)

***“When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief
through the earth and destroy crops and cattle…”***

Holy Qur’an (Baqarah 2:205)

Indeed, from these above verses, we will be able to understand Islam’s
concern towards the animal world, as well as for all the living
environment. It addresses man and presents him with major formula on how
to live with the other creatures who live in the same environment as
himself in order to be able to put them at his service and disposal;
however, by Allah’s permission. The Holy Qur’an describes this issue by
saying,

***“In order that you may sit firm and square on their backs, and when
so seated, you may celebrate the (kind) favour of your Lord, and say,
‘Glory to Him Who has subjected these to our (use), for we could never
have accomplished this (by ourselves).’”***

Holy Qur’an (Zukhruf 43:13)

In the same light, though, the Holy Qur’an describes the animal world as
an independent world, which has its own system, laws, social formations
and relationship between its subject, as well as its Lord, as its also
has its system of relation with man, plants and the material world. The
Holy Qur’an describes this by saying,

***“There is not an animal (that lives) on the earth, nor a being that
flies on its wings, but (forms part of) communities like you.”***

Holy Qur’an (An‘am 6:38)

Therefore, animals are also creatures like us, which have their own
special animalistic systems and of which, until now, man has been unable
to discover from them but only a little knowledge.

The Holy Qur’an portrays animals as creatures who know their Lord, go
toward Him and have their own prayers,*tasbeeh* , and prostration that
correspond with their existence, although man has been unable, for the
most part, to detect this.

And like man, animals have their own wealth in the natural world, which
is only meant for them by the Almighty Allah.

In addition, Allah, through His grace and blessings, has created animals
for the service of man, where he gets food from their meat and
by-products, uses their hair and waste products (for clothing and
agricultural purposes) and uses them for riding, transportation and
cultivation of land and also keeps them as a source of beauty,
decoration and wealth for himself.

Thus, the Holy Qur’an places the animal world side by side with the
human world, so as to live with this creature as a part of his
environment, but he is responsible for its protection and care. This is
why Islam prohibits aggression and wickedness toward animals needlessly,
except at the time of need. This is because the right and superiority
given to man over animals is so that he should use them with kindness
and leniency.

Hence, the Islamic laws warn against harming and hurting animals or
their environment, such as destroying their grazing land or killing
them; with the exception of those that are harmful to man, where, when
necessary, killing them will serve as a saving of one’s health and self,
for instance, snakes, scorpions, etc.

It is narrated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) warns against the
killing of bees and the eating of wild donkeys. It was said that the
prohibition of eating wild donkeys was to prevent their extinction.

In another tradition, it prohibits catching birds from their nests at
night or taking them before they are fully grown and have not learnt to
fly.

This is because the Islamic principles respect the law of environmental
balance between man and animals, thus, the animals have the right to
depend on and protect themselves from any intruder by running or flying
away, but in the above-mentioned condition they cannot depend on
themselves as expected.

Consequently, the law which we have mentioned earlier, i.e., the law
of*“la dharara wa la dhirara”* has an overwhelming effect in the field
of protecting and preserving the animal environment. Like the
prohibition of hunting birds, animals and fishes in their reproductive
season, or the prohibition of throwing poisonous substances into the
rivers so as to kill aquatic animals, or the prohibition of destroying
trees and crops, as well as the prohibition of causing or spreading
corruption in the earth.

From this Qur’anic description, we can detect Islamic views and opinions
towards animals and our responsibility toward this universe and how we
should live with it. We have already seen this Prophetic Tradition which
states,

“No Muslim will grow a plant or sow a crop, that birds, animals, or man
eat from it, unless he has a reward (sadaqa) for it.”

So, this means that man is rewarded for whatever good deed he performs,
like protecting another man, or any other animal.

This shows the Islamic concern and encouragement toward protection and
preservation of animals, in that the animals, also, have their own
rights and wealth, as these verses clearly state,

***“Eat (for yourselves) and pasture your cattle: Verily, in this are
signs for men endued with understanding.”***

Holy Qur’an (Taha 20:54)

***“And fruits and fodder, for use and convenience for you and your
cattle.”***

Holy Qur’an (Abasa 80:31-32)

***“There is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance depends on
Allah.”***

Holy Qur’an (Hud 11:6)

Thus, in the Islamic point of view (shari‘ah) of protecting animals and
feeding them, it is a charity*(sadaqa)* and killing animals cruelly and
hurting them is a prohibited action (which has its own severe
punishment).

On the other hand, the Islamic laws have prohibited the mutilation of
animal’s bodies and changing their shape, like cutting off their ears,
castrating them, etc., whether done by hand or by the use of modern
equipment and instruments.

Allah has cursed the devil who deceives man, prompting him to carry out
this aggressive act, and Almighty Allah, while narrating Satan’s wiles
against man, says,

***“I will order them to slit the ears of cattle, and to deface the
(fair) nature created by Allah. Whoever, forsaking Allah, takes Satan
for a friend, hath surely suffered a loss that is manifest.”***

Holy Qur’an (Nisa‘ 4:119)

Indeed, through these texts, laws and concepts we are able to understand
the Islamic principles which call for the protection of animals and
their environment.


