Glossary
========

   
**Ali Abu Talib, Imam:** *(600‑661* AD) The cousin and son‑in‑law of the
Prophet, he was the fourth rightly‑guided caliph and first pure Imam.
The *imamate* (leadership) orginates with him and he and eleven of his
descendants are representatives of both the exoteric and esoteric
dimension of Islam. According to the Shi'ites, he was selected at a
place outside of Makkah called Ghadir Khumm by the Prophet as his
'entrusted' (wasi) and successor just after the Fare­well Pilgrimage of
the Prophet.  
    
*Age of Ignorance*: The period of multitheism, *kufr* and idolatry
before the appearance of Islam and the revival of monotheism.  
** **  
**Ali Rida, Imam:** *(765‑818* AD) The eighth pure Imam who was chosen
as the successor to the caliphate by the Abbasid al‑Ma'mun but due to
his immense popularity among the people, he was martyred by the caliph.
He is buried in Mashhad which is a center of pilgrimage in Iran.  
    
*dhimmah:* People of the Book who live in Muslim lands and are accorded
hospitality and protection by Islam on condition of ac­knowledging
Islamic political domination and paying the *jizyah* tax.  
 Hasan Askari, Imam: *(846‑874* AD) He was the eleventh pure Imam who
lived in extreme secrecy in Samarra because of the continuous
surveillance of the caliph's security forces. He married the daughter of
the Byzantine Emperor, Nargis Khatun, who had embraced Islam and sold
herself into slavery in order to enter the household of the Imam. From
this marriage the twelfth Imam was born.  
    
**Hasan ibn Ali, Imam:** (625‑670 AD) The second pure Imam who was
caliph for a short period of time before the caliphate was usurped by
Mu'awiyah, the founder of the Umayyid dynasty.  
    
**Ja'far Sadiq, Imam**: (702‑765 AD) The sixth pure Imam who contin­ued
the propagation of Shi'ite sceinces to the extent that Shi'ite law is
named after him. He taught over 4000 students including Abu Hanifah, the
founder of one of the four Sunni schools of law.  
    
**Malik Ashtar**: The governor of Egypt during the caliphate of Ali,
peace be upon him, who wrote him a famous letter about how to rule
people in a fair and just way.  
    
*minbar.* The place within a mosque from which a sermon is deliv­ered,
it is most often made of wood and consists of stairs leading to a flat
seat upon which the speaker sits.  
    
**Muhammad Baqir, Imam**: (676‑733 AD) The fifth pure Imam who was a
well‑known teacher of the religious sciences.  
    
*mujtahid:* A person who engages in strenous endeavor to reason a
religious issue *(ijtihad).*  
** **  
**Musa ibn ja'far, Imam:** (746‑799 AD) The seventh pure Imam who faced
extreme hardship due to the renewed opposition of the Abbasid caliphate
against the Shi'ites.  
    
**Sunnah**: The customs, behavior and traditions of the Prophet of
Islam.


