Removing Doubt About The Rulings Relevant To Backbiting
=======================================================

We have been informed by the happy and righteous mentor Noor ad-Din Ali
ibn Abd al-Ali al-Maysi, may the Almighty sanctify him and fill his
grave with light, through permission from his mentor, the late forgiven
Shams ad-Dīn Muhammad son of the caller to prayer al-Jazeeni who quotes
the mentor Diyā ad-Dīn Ali son of the happy imām, scholar and critic
Shams ad-Dīn Abū Abdullāh, the martyred Muhammad ibn Makki, who quotes
his afore-mentioned father quoting the master Amīd ad-Dīn Abdul-Muttalib
and the mentor Fakhr ad-Dīn son of the mentor and virtuous imām, the
scholar who brought the creed to life, Jamal ad-Dīn al-Hassan ibn Yousuf
ibn al-Mutahhar who quotes his afore-mentioned father quoting his happy
grandfather, the one whose creed is sound, namely Yousuf ibn Ali ibn
al-Mutahhar.

Who quotes the mentor/critic Najm ad-Dīn Ja\`far ibn al-Hassan ibn Sa'īd
al-Hilli quoting Sayyid Muhyi ad-Dīn Abū Hāmid Muhammad ibn Abdullāh ibn
Ali ibn Zuhrah al-Hilli quoting the honorable *faqīh* Izz ad-Dīn Abū
al-Harth Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Husaini al-Baghdadi quoting the
mentor Qutb ad-Dīn Abul-Hussain ibn Sa\`īd ibn Hibatullah al-Rawandūzi
quoting the mentor Abū Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Muhsin al-Halabi
quoting the mentor *faqīh* Abul-Fath Muhammad ibn Ali al-Karajki.  
 Saying that Abū Abdullāh al-Hussain ibn Muhammad ibn al-Sairafi
al-Baghdadi has said that Judge Abū Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Ji'ābi has said
that Abū Muhammad al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far, one of the offspring
of Omer ibn Ali, peace be with him, has said that his father quotes his
father citing his forefathers quoting Imām Ali (ع) as saying that the
Messenger of Allāh (ص) said, "A believer has three rights which his
brother owes him and from which he has no way out except by carrying
them out or be exempted from them (or any of them): He must forgive him
when he slips away, have mercy on him when he sees him in tears, covers
up his defect, straighten him when he stumbles, accepts his excuse when
he seeks it, visits him when he returns from absence, continues to
provide him with advice, safeguards his friendship.  
 Protects his trust, visits him during his sickness, be present when he
dies, responds to his call, accepts his gift, rewards him for keeping in
touch with him, thanks him when he bestows a blessing upon him, supports
him very well, safeguards his lawful possessions, performs his errands,
responds to his request, seeks Allāh's mercy for him when he sneezes,
guides him when he strays, responds to his greeting, finds his speech to
be good, expresses appreciation for his bounties, believes him when he
swears, befriends him and not antagonize him, supports him when he is an
oppressor or when he oppresses:

As regarding supporting him when oppresses, he keeps him away from
oppressing. As regarding supporting him when he is oppressed, he helps
him take what belongs to him. He does not hand him over [to his enemy],
nor does he betray him; he loves for him the same goodness which he
loves for himself, and he hates the same evil to afflict him as he hates
it for himself" (*Kanz al-Fawāid*, Vol. 1, p. 306). Then the Imām (ع)
said, "I have heard the Messenger of Allāh (ص) saying, 'Some of you
leaves out something which he owes his brother, and on the Day of
Judgment, he will be tried on its account'" (*Kanz al-Fawāid*, Vol. 1,
p. 307).

Atonement For Backbiting
------------------------

Be informed that it is mandatory on the backbiter to repent, regret and
feel sorry for what he has done so he may get himself out of Allāh
Almighty exacting on him what he deserves. After that, he must seek
forgiveness of the person whom he had backbitten, perhaps he will
forgive him and get him out of his wrongdoing. He ought to seek his
forgiveness while he is sorrowful, regretful about what he had done, for
a pretentious person may seek forgiveness just to feign piety while
inwardly he is not regretful at all, thus he adds another sin. There are
two traditions regarding its atonement:

**One** is this tradition by the Prophet (ص): "The atonement for the one
whom you had backbitten is that you seek Allāh's forgiveness for him"
(*Ihyā al-Ulūm*, Vol. 3, p. 145; also see *Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 357 and
p. 172 of *Al-A\`māli* by Sheikh al-Mufīd).

**Another** is his (ص) statement: "If one owes his [Muslim or human]
brother for having wronged him, whether it may be with regard to his
honor or wealth, he must seek his forgiveness for it before a Day comes
when there is neither a dinar nor a dirham. It will be taken out of his
good deeds. But if he has no good deeds, his fellow's bad deeds are
transferred to him, adding to those of his own" (*Ihyā al-Ulūm*, Vol. 3,
p. 145). One may combine seeking forgiveness for the one whom he backbit
with seeking the Almighty's forgiveness especially if the backbitten
person may not have come to know about the person who had backbitten
him.

There is the possibility that if one goes to someone and seeks his
forgiveness, this will further cause bad feelings and grudge. Such
combination may also be applied in case one cannot meet the person whom
he had backbitten because that person is now dead. It is commendable
that one should go and seek forgiveness of one who knew that he had been
backbitten by him, and it is commendable for the latter to accept the
backbiter's excuse according to the verse by the Almighty that says, "…
Hold to forgiveness; command what is right…" (Qur'ān, 7:199). The
Messenger of Allāh (ص) asked Gabriel: "What is this forgiveness?"
Gabriel said, "Allāh orders you to forgive whoever wronged you, to stay
in touch with whoever severed his ties with you, and to give whoever
deprived you" (*Ihyā al-Ulūm*, Vol. 3, p. 146).

According to another report, when humans are brought before Allāh
Almighty on the Judgment Day, they will be addressed thus: "Let anyone
who had sought rewards from Allāh stand", whereupon only those who had
forgiven others would then stand" (*Ihyā al-Ulūm*, Vol. 3, p. 146).

It has been reported about someone that a man said to him, "So-and-so
has backbitten you." He, therefore, sent him a platter of fresh dates
and said to him, "It has come to my knowledge that you have given me by
way of present some of your own good deeds; therefore, I wanted to
reward you for them, but please excuse me because I can not reward you
enough" (*Ihyā al-Ulūm*, Vol. 3, p. 146).

One route which the apologetic person can take is to exaggerate in
praising the man whom he had backbitten and seek to be close to his
heart and continue to do so till he wins his heart. But if he does not
win his heart, his own apology and attempt to be close to that person
will be regarded as good deeds counted for him, and they may suffice to
wipe out the backbiting sin on the Judgment Day.

There is no difference between backbiting a young or an old person, a
living or a dead one, a male or a female. Let seeking Allāh's
forgiveness and supplicating for the person whom one had backbitten be
done in a proper way that suits the person whom he had backbitten. He
may supplicate the Almighty to grant a young person guidance, a dead
person mercy and forgiveness, and so on.

The obligation is not dropped if one grants his honor to people because
it is granting what should not be granted. Jurists have said that one
who permits others to charge him doest not rescind his right for
compensation. It has been narrated that the Prophet (ص) has said, "Can
you at all be unable to do what Abū Damdam does? Whenever he leaves
home, he says, 'Lord! I have offered my honor by way of charity to
people'?" (*Ihyā al-Ulūm*, Vol. 3, p. 146).

It means: "I do not demand on the Judgment Day retribution from one who
has wronged me [by backbiting me], and I do not complain about him." It
does not mean that backbiting him had thus become permissible; rather,
forgiveness must be sought for it as is the case with all other
atonements, and surely Allāh is the One Who grants success.

What one can conclude is this: Be informed, may Allāh Almighty grant you
and our own selves success, the ultimate goal of the most Exalted One
with regard to His creation, and the first objective behind sending His
prophets and messengers with divine books and legislated codes, is to
attract the creation towards the One, Praise to Him, and to cure them of
the ailment of ignorance. Their attention is to be directed towards the
final abode, the rejection and safeguarding of this abode, lest one
should perish if doing so is perilous, and they should be attracted to
something which no eyes had ever seen, nor ear had ever heard, nor a
human mind had ever imagined.

Attention is also drawn, thereafter, to managing the physical
life-preserving needs and all means for preserving humankind. This
depends on people getting together, cooperating and solidifying their
ranks with each other through learning and teaching, reminding the men
of reason, of knowledge and understanding, urging everyone to be of
benefit to others in attaining what benefits him, too. By nature, man
cannot be independent as he seeks his livelihood, nor can he alone meet
all his needs such as food and other necessities.

There is no harm when the objective of the most Wise One, the most
Great, focuses on people's togetherness, on hearts being in harmony, in
love, when they are present or absent. Therefore, reports and legacies
have all agreed to urge people to love each other, to abandon their
disputes. The Almighty has increased the rights which His servants owe
to each other, warning them against denying goodness and against being
ingrates, promising them generous rewards when they care about each
other and have affection for each other, warning them against abandoning
such ethics with a great deal of punishment and retribution as you, by
the will of Allāh, will come to know in the reports which we will cite
about the Prophet (ص).

Let us state what suits this message twelve traditions so we may be
brief. If one seeks the ultimate end, let him read the categorized books
in this regard such as *Al-Ikhwān* book by al-Sadūq ibn Babawayh, the
chapter on belief, the chapter on fellowship and other chapters in
*Al-Kāfi* by al-Kulaini, may Allāh sanctify him, for there is in them
sufficient wisdom for those who seek admonishment and a healing medicine
for those who have vision.

Tradition 1
-----------

Tradition 2
-----------

Through the above-stated *isnād* tracked back to Sayyid Muhyi ad-Dīn
Zuhrah, the latter says that he was told by Abul-Hassan Ahmad ibn Wahab
ibn Sulaymān "… through my recitation to him in the month of Sha\`bān in
the year 591 A.H. (August of 1195 A.D.), he said that he was told by
Judge Fakhrud-Dīn Abul-Rida ibn Sa\`īd Abdullāh ibn al-Qasam
al-Sahrawardi on Friday, 574 A.H. (September 22, 1178 A.D.) in Mosul
saying that he was told by the *hāfiz* mentor Abū Bakr Wajeeh Tāhir
al-Shahami in his recitation on a Wednesday, the fifth of the month of
Ramadān of 539 A.H. (March 1, 1145 A.D.) saying that he was told by the
kind mentor Abū Hāmid Ahmad ibn al-Hassan al-Azhari saying that he was
told by the mentor Abū Muhammad al-Hassan ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Hassan ibn Ali Mukhallad al-Mukhalladi al-Adl who recited the
tradition to him and who acknowledged it. The latter said that he was
told by al-Abbās Muhammad ibn Ishāq ibn Ibrahīm al-Thaqafi al-Sarraj
with regard to his recitation to him in 312 A.H. (924 A.D.) which he
acknowledged, saying that he was told by Qutaibah ibn Sa\`īd who said
that he had heard the tradition from al-Laith who quoted Aqīl quoting
al-Zuhri quoting Sālim quoting his father saying that the Messenger of
Allāh (ص) said, 'A Muslims is the brother of a Muslim; he does not wrong
him or taunt him. When one is in need of his brother, Allāh will be
behind him with regard to his need, and if one eases the distress of a
Muslim, Allāh will reward him for it by easing one of his causes of
distress on the Judgment Day. And if one covers the fault of another
Muslim, Allāh will cover him on the Judgment Day'" (*Al-\`Awāli*, Vol.
1, p. 128).

Tradition 3
-----------

Through the previous *isnād* traced back to Sayyid Muhyi ad-Dīn saying
that he was informed by the judge and Islam's mentor "Abul-Mahāsin"
Yousuf ibn Rāfi\` ibn Tamīm "… According to my recitation to him on the
14th of Jumada II in the year 618 A.H. (August 5, 1221 A.D.), he said
that the imām/judge Fakhd ad-Dīn "Abū al-Rida" Sa\`īd ibn al-Qasam
al-Sahrūdi who was heard in Jumāda II of the year 574 (November of 1178
A.D.) saying that he was told by the imām/mentor "Abul-Fath" Muhammad
ibn Abdul-Rahmān, the Kashmahini orator, according to my recitation to
him on a Saturday, the 17th of Shawwāl of 541 A.H. (March 22, 1147 A.D.)
saying that he was informed by Sheikh "Abul-Qāsim" Hibatullah ibn
Abdul-Wārith ibn Ali ibn Ahmad al-Shirāzi, or he may have written it in
person, in the month of Rabi\` I in 486 A.H. (April of 1093 A.D.) saying
that he was told by "Abū Nasr" Ahmad ibn Abdul-Baqi ibn al-Hassan ibn
Tawq al-Mu\`addal saying the he was told by "Abul-Qāsim" Nasr ibn Ahmad
ibn Muhammad, the jurist, saying the he was told by "Abū Ya\`li" Ahmad
ibn Ali ibn al-Muthanna, of Mosul, of Tamīm, saying that Habatullah and
"Abul-Qāsim" Abdul-Azīz Ali ibn Ahmad al-Sukkari saying that he was told
by "Abū Tahir" Muhammad ibn Abdul-Rahmān ibn al-Abbās al-Mukhallas
saying that he was told by "Abul-Qāsim" Abdullāh ibn Muhammad ibn
Abdul-Azīz al-Baghawi saying that he was informed by Abd al-A\`la\` ibn
Hammād, the Tunisian, saying that he was informed by Hammād ibn Salāmah
who quoted "Abū Rāfi\`" quoting Abū Huraira saying that the Messenger of
Allāh (ص) said, "A man visited his brother in another village, so Allāh
placed an angel on his pathway. When he came to the angel, the latter
asked him, 'Where are you going?' The man said, 'I am going to visit a
brother of mine in such-and-such village.' The angel said to him, 'Has
he bestowed upon you a blessing which you would like to see?' The man
said, 'No, but I love him for the sake of Allāh.' The angel said, 'I am
a messenger sent to you by Allāh to tell you that Allāh has loved you
just as you have loved him'" (Muslim, *Sahīh*, Vol. 4, p. 1988,
tradition 2567).

Tradition 4
-----------

Through the previous *isnād* tracked to Judge Fakhr ad-Dīn
al-Sahrawardi, the latter said that he was told by the *hāfiz*/sheikh
Thiqatud-Dīn "Abul-Qāsim" Zāhir ibn Tāhir ibn Muhammad al-Shahham by way
of recitation to him as the judge was listening on the 29th of Shawwl of
525 A.H. (September 24, 1131 A.D.) saying that he was told by Sheikh
"Abū Nasr" Abdul-Rahman ibn Ali ibn Mousa saying that he was informed by
"Abul-Hassan" Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Mousa ibn al-Salt al-Qazwini in
Baghdad saying that he heard the tradition from "Abū Ishaq" Ibrahim ibn
Abdul-Samad al-Hashimi by way of dictation saying that he was informed
by "Abū Mus\`ab" Ahmad ibn "Abū Bakr" al-Zuhri quoting Mālik ibn Anas
quoting "Abū Shihab" quoting Anas ibn Mālik saying that the Messenger of
Allāh (ص) said, "Do not hate each other; do not envy each other; do not
turn your backs to each other, and be, servants of Allāh, brothers. It
is not permissible for a Muslim to shun his brother for more than three
nights" (Muslim, *Sahih*, Vol. 4, p. 1983, tradition 2559).

Tradition 5
-----------

Through the past *isnād* tracked back to al-Shahami, the latter said
that he was told by Sheikh "Abū Sa\`īd" Muhammad ibn Abdul-Aziz
al-Saffar who said he was informed by Sheikh "Abū Abdul-Rahman" Muhammad
ibn al-Hassan al-Salami who said he was i nformed by "Abdul-Rahman" ibn
Muhammad ibn Mahboob who said he was informed by Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Yahya who said he was informed by Muhammad ibn al-Azhari who said he was
informed by Muhammad ibn Abdullāh al-Basri who said he was informed by
Ya\`li ibn Maymoon who said he was informed by Yazid al-Raqashi citing
Anas ibn Mālik saying that the Messenger of Allāh (ص) said, "If someone
pleases a believer or carries out an errand for this world or for the
hereafter, whether small or big, Allāh will surely appoint a servant for
him to serve him on the Judgment Day" (see *Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 206).

Tradition 6
-----------

Through the past *isnād* tracked to al-Salami, the latter said that he
was informed by Abdul-Azīz ibn Ja\`far ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hirāni in
Baghdad saying he was informed by Muhammad ibn Harūn ibn Bariyya who
said he was informed by \`Īsa ibn Mahrān who said he was informed by
al-Hassan ibn al-Hussain who said he was informed by al-Hussain ibn Zaid
saying that he said to [Imām] Ja\`far ibn Muhammad, "May I be your
sacrifice! Was there any jesting in the speech of the Prophet (ص)?" He
said, "Allāh described him as having the greatest moral code in jesting.
Allāh sent His prophets and there was rigidness in them, and He sent
Muhammad to be affectionate and merciful. One of the manifestations of
his affection towards his nation is that he teased them so that none
among them would glorify him to the extent that he cannot look at him in
the eyes." Then he said, "I was told by my father, Muhammad, who quotes
his father Ali (ع) quoting his father al-Hussain (ع) quoting his father
Ali (ع) saying, 'The Messenger of Allāh (ص) used to entertain with
jesting a man from among his companions whom he saw to be depressed. And
he (ص) used to say, 'Allāh dislikes one who frowns in the face of his
brothers'" (*Makārim al-Akhlāq*, p. 21).

Tradition 7
-----------

Through the previously stated *isnād* tracked to the sect's mentor, the
man who brought life back into it, and its critic, Jamal ad-Dīn
al-Hassan ibn Yousuf ibn al-Mutahhar, who quotes his happy father, the
man whose creed was sound, namely Yousuf ibn al-Mutahhar, saying that he
was informed by the *\`allama* genealogist Fakhar ibn al-Ma\`add
al-Mousawi from the *faqīh* "Sadīd ad-Dīn" (the one whose creed is
sound), namely Shadhān ibn Jibra'eel al-Qummi, from Imād ad-Dīn
al-Tabari from the mentor "Abū Ali" al-Hassan son of the mentor "Abū
Ja\`far" Muhammad ibn al-Hassan al-Tūsi from his father, the mentor, may
Allāh sanctify his soul, from Sheikh al-Mufīd Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Nu\`mān from Sheikh al-Sadūq Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Hussain ibn
Babawayh al-Qummi from Sheikh "Abū Abdullāh" Ja\`far ibn Qawlawayh from
the mentor "Abū Abdullāh" Muhammad ibn Ya\`qūb al-Kulaini from Muhammad
ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn \`Īisa from Ali ibn al-Hakam from
Abdullāh ibn Bakr from Mu\`alli ibn Khanīs from "Abū Abdullāh", namely
Imām Ja\`far ibn Muhammad al-Sādiq (ع), whom I asked, "What obligation
does a Muslim bear towards another Muslim?"

He said, "They are seven rights and obligations. Each of their rights is
an obligation. If any of them is lost, he will get out of obedience of
Allāh and His mastership, and there will be no share in him for Allāh."
I said to him, "May I be your sacrifice! What are they?!" He said, "O
Mu\`alli! I worry about you. I am concerned you may lose track and not
remember, and you may learn but not act upon your knowledge." The man
said, "There is neither power nor might except in Allāh." The Imām (ع)
went on to say, "The easiest of them is that you should love for him
what you love for yourself and hate for him what you hate for yourself.
The second right is that you avoid making him angry. You seek to please
him and obey his command. The third right is that you help him with your
own self, wealth, tongue, hand and leg.

The fourth right is that you are his eyes, his mirror and his guide. The
fifth right is that you must not be satisfied while he is hungry, or
quench your thirst while he is thirsty, or be clothed while he is
without clothes. The sixth right is that you must not have a servant
while your brother has no servant; you are obligated to send him your
servant to wash his clothes, cook for him and makes his bed. The seventh
right is that you accept his oath, respond to his call, visit him when
he is sick, be present during his funeral, and if you know that he has a
need, you must take the initiative to take care of it before you
obligate him to request you in its regard. Rather, you must be the one
who takes the initiative. If you do this, you will have connected your
friendship with his, and you will have connected his friendship with
yours" (*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 169).

Tradition 8
-----------

Through *isnād* tracked to Muhammad ibn Ya\`qūb al-Kulaini from Muhammad
ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn \`Īsa from Ali ibn al-Hakam from
Muhammad ibn Marwān from Imām Abū Abdullāh (ع) who has said, "If a man
goes to take care of an errand for his believing brother, ten good deeds
will be written down for him, ten bad deeds will be wiped out from his
record and he will be raised ten degrees." Al-Kulaini goes on to add, "I
think he also said, 'And his deed will be equivalent to setting free ten
slaves and is better than one month of *i\`tikaf* at the Haram Mosque'"
(*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 196).

Tradition 9
-----------

Through *isnād* tracked back to al-Kulaini, may Allāh have mercy on his
soul, from Ali ibn Ibrahīm ibn al-Hāshim al-Qummi, may Allāh have mercy
on his soul, from his father from Muhammad ibn Abū \`Umaid from Hussain
ibn Abū Na\`īm from Masma\` ibn Abū Sayar saying that he heard Imām Abū
Abdullāh (ع) saying, "One who eases the depression of a believe, Allāh
will ease from him one cause of depression on the Judgment Day, and he
will come out of his grave with an ice-cool heart. And if one feeds him,
Allāh will feed him from the fruits of Paradise. If one gives him a
drink, Allāh will give him of the sealed nectar" (the sealed nectar is a
brand of wine in Paradise) (*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 200).

Tradition 10
------------

We have narrated this tradition through many *isnāds* one of which is
cited in Tradition 7 above tracked back to Sheikh Abul-Qasim Ja\`far ibn
Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh from his father from Sa\`d ibn Abdullāh from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn \`Īsa from his father Muhammad ibn \`Īsa
al-Ash\`ari from Abdullāh ibn Sulaymān al-Nawfali. The latter said that
he was once in the company of Imām Ja\`far ibn Muhammad al-Sādiq (ع)
when a slave of Abdullāh al-Najashi came to him, greeted him and
delivered his master's letter to him. The Imām (ع) opened the letter.

The first line in it read: "In the Name of Allāh, the most Gracious, the
most Merciful. May Allāh Almighty prolong the life of my master and
consider me as his sacrifice against any ill, prevents me from seeing
anything bad happening to him; surely He is the Master of all of this
and is Able to do it. My master! Please be informed that I have been
tested by becoming the *wali* (provincial governor) of the Ahwaz (in
Iran). If my master sees to draw a line for me in this regard or strike
an example for me so I may find guidance in it in a way that brings me
closer to Allāh, the most Exalted, the most Great, and to His Messenger
(ص), and summarizes in his letter what he sees I should do, what I
should change or replace, where I should place my *zakat*, who should
receive it, with whom I should feel comfortable, whom I should trust, to
whom I should refer in order to confide my secret…, perhaps Allāh will
grant me salvation through your guidance and instruction, for you are
the Proof of Allāh against His creation and His trust in His land, and
may His blessing on you remain so."

Abdullāh ibn Sulaymān says that Imām Abū Abdullāh (ع) answered him
saying, "In the Name of Allāh, the most Gracious, the most Merciful. May
Allāh include you in His kindness and mercy and look after you through
His care, for surely He is the Master of all of this. Your messenger
brought me your letter. I read it and understood its contents, all what
you stated and about which you inquired, claiming you have been tested
by becoming the *wali* of al-Ahwaz. This pleased me and displeased me. I
shall inform you about what has displeased me and what has pleased me by
the will of Allāh Almighty. As regarding my pleasure with your becoming
the *wali*, I have thought that perhaps Allāh will enable you to help
one of the followers of the Prophet's Progeny who is in dire need for
help, guide you to raise the status of those whose status has been
lowered, enable you to clothe those who have no clothes to wear,
strengthen through you the weak from among them and through you puts out
the fire of those who disagree with this Progeny. As regarding what has
displeased me, the least about which I have concerns for you is that you
may stumble on one of our followers [and be unfair to him], and this
will deprive you of inhaling the presence of the Holy One.

"I am going to summarize for you all what you have asked about. If you
act upon it and not overlook it, I hope, by the will of Allāh, you will
be safe. I have been told, O servant of Allāh, by my father who has been
told by his forefathers back to Ali ibn Abū Talib (ع) who quotes the
messenger of Allāh (ص) saying that if one is sought for counsel by his
believing brother and did not grant him his pursuit, Allāh will take
wisdom away from him (see *Bihār al-Anwār*, Vol. 72, p. 104, Tradition
No. 36).

Be informed that I am going to suggest something for you which, if you
implement, you will be ridden of your concerns. And be informed that
your salvation lies in preventing bloodshed, stopping those who harm the
servants of Allāh, being kind to the subjects, not being hasty, being a
good companion, lenient without being weak, tough without being
arrogant. You should tolerate your superior and whoever brings you his
messages. Mend the cracks among your subjects by showing them what
agrees with righteousness and justice by the will of Allāh Almighty.
Beware of busy-buddies and those who disseminate calumny, and you should
not keep company with any of them, and Allāh should not see you during
your day or night accepting their own judgment about who is right and
who is wrong and thus Allāh becomes angry with you and reveals your
covering. Beware of the trickery of the Ahwaz Bedouins, for my father
has informed me that his forefathers, up to the Commander of the
Faithful (ع), say that the Imām (ع) said, 'Conviction never remains firm
in the heart of a Jew or a [Bedouin] from Khuzistan" (*Kitāb
al-Arba\`een* [manuscript]).

"As regarding who you should keep company with, feel at ease and resort
regarding your affairs, it is a man with an insight, a trustworthy man,
one who agrees with you when you adhere to your creed. Compare your
assistance, try both sides; if you see that there is someone there who
can provide you with guidance, you ought to choose him as such. Beware
of giving one *dirham* or taking off one garment or loading a beast of
burden for a poet or entertainer without paying the same in the way of
Allāh.

Let your rewards, gifts, outfits be for the commanders, messengers,
grandchildren, letter carriers, police commanders and those who levy the
*khums*. Let whatever you wish to spend be on acts of righteousness in
order to achieve success, to set someone free, by way of charity, for
performing the pilgrimage, quenching someone's thirst and for the attire
in which you perform your prayers and visit others wearing it, and the
gift which you present to Allāh Almighty and His Messenger (ص)… be all
from the best of what you earn.

"O servant of Allāh! Exert your effort so you may hoard neither gold nor
silver so you may be included in this verse: Allāh Almighty has said: '…
And there are those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend in
God’s way: Announce a most grievous penalty to them' (Qur'ān, 9:34). Do
not underestimate anything sweet or food leftovers with which you fill
empty stomachs; such deeds puts out the fire of wrath of Allāh, the most
Praised One, the most High.

"Be informed that I heard my father quoting his forefathers quoting the
Commander of the Faithful (ع) saying that he heard the Prophet (ص) say
this to his companions one day: 'Nobody is counted among those who
believe in Allāh and the Last Day if he spends his night satisfied while
his neighbor is hungry.' The companions said to him, 'O Messenger of
Allāh! Now we all have perished!' The Prophet (ص) said, 'Do so from the
leftovers of your food, of your dates, of your sustenance, of the
clothes which you do not want whereby you put out the fire of the Lord's
Wrath' (*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 668).

"And I shall inform you of when life becomes so unwanted, so low, in the
sight of the predecessors and the *tabi\`īn*: I have been informed by
Muhammad ibn [Imām] Ali ibn al-Hussain (ع) saying that when al-Hussain
(ع) prepared to depart to Kūfa, [Abdullāh] Ibn Abbās came to him and
pleaded to him in the Name of Allāh and of kinship to be the one who
will be killed in the Battle of Taff instead. The Imām said, 'When I am
killed instead of yourself, the only difference will be that I will
simply part with this life. Shall I tell you, O son of Abbās, what the
Commander of the Faithful (ع) had said about this life?!' Ibn Abbās
said, 'O yes, indeed, by my life, I would love that you narrate it to
me.'

The Imām (ع) said, 'Ali bin al-Hussain (ع) said that he had heard his
father Abū Abdullāh (ع) saying, 'The Commander of the Faithful (ع) said
to me once, 'I was in Fadak once at one of its walls when it was
inherited by Fātima (ع). A woman suddenly forced her way towards me. I
had a spade in my hand with which I was working. When I looked at her,
my heart flew from its place due to her beauty; she was so beautiful,
she looked like Buthaina daughter of \`Āmir al-Jamhi, the most beautiful
woman in Quraish. She said to me, 'O son of Abū Talib! Would you like to
marry me so you will no longer have to work with this spade, and I shall
lead you to the treasures of the earth and to possessions that will be
yours and your offspring's after you?' Ali (ع) said to her, 'Who are you
so I may approach your family and seek your hand?' She said, 'I am
life.' He said to her, 'Get back right now and seek another husband.'
The Imām (ع) went on to say that he returned to his spade and composed
these verses of poetry:

"Disappointed will be whoever is tempted by a covetous life,  
 Even if it tempts for centuries, it shall never last forever.  
 She came to us outfitted like the dear one Buthaina,  
 With ornaments similar to her decorations,  
 So I said to her to tempt someone else because  
 I have no desire for life, and I am not ignorant.  
 What shall I do with life since Muhammad's life  
 Has been snatched away in the midst of heroes?  
 Suppose she brings me means to access treasures  
 And the wealth of Qarun and the domains of the tribes,  
 Will fate not render them all to naught?  
 And its treasures are sought with tribulations; so,  
 Tempt someone else for I am not willing to have  
 All what you offer: possessions, prominence and pursuits.  
 I have satisfied myself with what has been destined for me,

So, do what you will, O Life, with those who are easy to lure,  
 For I fear Allāh on the Day I shall meet Him for sure,  
 And I fear a torment that  
 Stays and will never depart'  
 (see *Manāqib Al Abi Tālib*, Vol. 2, p. 102).

"He left this world without owing anything to anyone till he met Allāh
praised, having no blame on him, nor was he spoken ill of. Then the
Imāms (ع) after him followed in his footsteps as has reached you. They
were not stained with any of this life's filth, peace and blessings be
with them all, and may Allāh reward them with the very best. I have
informed you of the best of this life and of the Hereafter, and I have
cited for you what the truthful one, the one who is believed by Allāh,
the Messenger of Allāh (ص), has said; so, if you act upon my advice to
you in this letter of mine, and if your sins weigh as heavily as the
mountains and count as many as the sea waves, I will wish Allāh to
overlook them all, the most Exalted One, the most Sublime, in His own
Power.

"O servant of Allāh! Beware of scaring a believer, for my father, [Imām]
Muhammad ibn Ali (ع) , has quoted his father citing his grandfather Imām
Ali ibn Abū Talib (ع) saying, 'One who casts a look at a believer in
order to scare him, Allāh will scare him on the Day when there is no
shade except His, and Allāh will resurrect him in the form of particles,
his flesh, body and all his parts, till he is lodged in his final abode'
(*Jami\` al-Akhbār*, p. 154 in a chapter dealing with harming a
believer; see also *Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 368).

"My father has quoted his forefathers quoting [Imām] Ali (ع) citing the
Messenger of Allāh (ص) saying, 'One who relieves the distress of one of
the believers, Allāh will remove his distress on the Day when there is
no shade but His and will grant him security on the Day of the greatest
fear and protect him from an evil reverting. And if one meets the need
of his believing brother, Allāh will meet many of his needs one of which
is Paradise. If one clothes his believing brother, Allāh will clothe him
of the silk of Paradise, its shiny silk, and he will wade in the
Pleasure of Allāh as long as he is outfitted in it.

If one feeds his brother to satisfy his hunger, Allāh will feed him of
the good things of Paradise, and if he gives him a drink to quench his
thirst, Allāh will let him drink of his Lord's sealed nectar. If one
serves his brother, Allāh will let the immortalized youths be his
servants and lodge him in the company of His pure friends. If one
transports his believing brother on his conveyance, Allāh will let the
conveyances of Paradise convey him and brag about him before the angels
who are close to Him on the Judgment Day. If one marries off his
believing brother to a women with whom he feels comforted, who
strengthens him and with whom he feels restful, Allāh will marry him to
the *huris* with large lovely eyes' (see *Thawāb al-A\`māl*, p. 177).

"'And if one visits his believing brother without seeking his brother to
do something for him, Allāh will record him among the guests of Allāh,
and it will be binding upon Allāh to be generous to His guest' (*Jāmi\`
al-Akhbār*, p. 90 in a chapter about pleasing a believer; see also
*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 176).

"O servant of Allāh! My father has also narrated to me quoting his
forefathers quoting Imām Ali (ع) saying that he had heard the Messenger
of Allāh (ص) saying one day to his companions, 'O folks! One is not
counted as a believer who just believes with his tongue but not with his
heart; so, do not track the faults of the believers, for if one tracks
the faults of a believer, Allāh will track his faults on the Judgment
Day and expose him even in the depth of his own home'" (see *Al-Kāfi*,
Vol. 2, p. 355).

"And my father has also narrated to me that his forefathers quote Imām
Ali (ع) saying that Allāh took the covenant of a believer to be truthful
when he speaks and not to seek revenge against his foe, that he should
not satisfy his anger by exposing his own self. A believer is gagged for
a short-lived goal followed by a lengthy rest. Allāh has taken upon the
believer a covenant about many things the easiest of which is that a
believer makes his statement, so he finds him truthful yet he envies
him; Satan tempts and prevents him, while the ruler tracks his steps and
counts his faults. One proves his disbelief if he sees the shedding of
the blood of another believer as a way of life and violates his honor as
a gain; so, what is the value of a believer's life after all of this?'
(see *Bihār al-Anwār*, Vol. 75, p. 276 where an Appendix disclosing
benefits in the book titled *Al-Ghāba* is quoted).

"O servant of Allāh! My father (ع) has also quoted his forefathers
citing Imām Ali (ع) citing the Prophet (ص) saying, 'Gabriel (ع)
descended once and said, 'O Muhammad (ص)! Allāh greets you and says: I
have derived for the believer an attribute from one of My own Names and
called him a *mu'min*; for a believer is of Me and I am of him, and
anyone who takes a believer lightly starts a fight with Me'" (*Ibid*.)

"O servant of Allāh! My father (ع) has also quoted the Prophet (ص)
saying, 'The lowest degree of apostasy is when a man hears a statement
by his brother which he memorizes so that he may later expose him by it.
Such people have no manners' (see *Bihār al-Anwār*, Vol. 75, p. 276; see
also *Al-Mahāsin*, Vol. 1, p. 104, tradition No. 83).

"O servant of Allāh! My father (ع) has quoted his forefathers citing
Imām Ali (ع) saying, 'If a believer says about a Muslim what he had seen
with his own eyes and heard with his own ears things that shame him and
undermine his dignity, he will be included by Allāh, the most Great, the
most High, in this verse: '… Those who love (to see) scandal publicized
widely among the believers will have a grievous penalty in this life and
in the hereafter' (Qur'ān, 24:19) (*Jāmi\` al-Akhbār*, p. 154 in a
chapter about harming a believer; see also *Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 357).

"O servant of Allāh! My father has narrated to me citing his forefathers
citing Imām Ali (ع) saying, 'If one narrates an incident about his
believing brother with which he wants to defame him or scandalize him,
Allāh Almighty will penalize him for his sin continuously till he gets
out of what he had said, and he will never find an exit for it. If one
brings happiness to his believing brother, he will be as though he made
Ahl al-Bayt (ع) happy. And if one makes the Ahl al-Bayt (ع) happy, he
will have made the Messenger of Allāh (ص) happy. And if one makes the
Messenger of Allāh (ص) happy, he will have pleased Allāh, and if one
pleases Allāh, it will be incumbent upon Allāh to permit him into
Paradise' (*Jāmi\` al-Akhbār*, p. 90 in a chapter about pleasing a
believer; see also *\`Iqāb al-A\`māl*, p. 286 in a chapter about the
penalty of one who narrates an incident about a believer; see *Al-Kāfi*,
Vol. 2, p. 192).

"I further admonish you to fear Allāh and prefer to obey Him and hold on
to His rope, for if one holds on to the rope of Allāh, he will be guided
to the Straight Path. So, fear Allāh and do not prefer anyone over
pleasing Him and doing what He likes, for this is the admonishment of
Allāh, the most High, the most Sublime, to His servants; He does not
accept from them anything else, and He does not deem as great anything
else. And be informed that the beings have never been held responsible
for anything greater than piety, for it is our admonishment, we members
of Ahl al-Bayt (ع). If you are able not to obtain of this life something
about which you will tomorrow be questioned, do just that."

Abdullāh ibn Sulaymān says that when the letter of Imām al-Sādiq (ع)
reached al-Nejashi, he looked into it and said, "Surely Allāh, there is
no God but He, has said the truth, and my master [al-Sādiq], too, has
said the truth. Anyone who acts upon the contents of this letter will
surely achieve salvation." Abdullāh kept acting upon it during his
life's days (*Al-Arba\`īn*, p. 97, a manuscript; the entire tradition is
quoted on p. 271, Tradition No. 112, Vol. 75 of *Bihār al-Anwār* as a
citation from the chapter on backbiting appended to the book titled
*Kashf al-Fawāid*, p. 264.

Tradition 11
------------

Through *isnād* tracked back to al-Kulaini from Muhammad ibn Yahya from
Ali ibn al-Nu\`mān from Ibn Maskan from Khaythamah saying that he went
once to visit Imām Abū Ja\`far (ع) to bid him farewell. The Imām (ع)
said to Khaythamah, "Convey our greeting to those whom you will see and
who follow our leadership, and admonish them to fear Allāh, the Great,
and that the rich among them should visit the poor and their strong ones
should visit the weaklings. The living should be present during the
funeral of their dead. Let them meet at their homes, for when some of
them meet each other, they will bring to life our causes; may Allāh have
mercy on a servant who keeps our causes alive. O Khaythamah! Notify our
followers that only those who do deeds of righteousness have a status
with Allāh. They will never earn the honor of our mastership except
through piety, and the one who sighs the most on the Judgment Day is one
who describes justice yet shrinks from it to doing the opposite"
(*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 175).

Tradition 12
------------

Through *isnād* to the same man, may Allāh have mercy on his soul, from
Muhammad ibn Yahya from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn \`Īsa from Muhammad ibn
Sinān ibn al-Alā ibn al-Mufaddal who quotes Imām Abū Abdullāh (ع) saying
that Abū Ja\`far, blessings of Allāh be with him, used to say, "Think
highly of your fellows. Look at them with awe, and do not charge each
other, nor should you oppose or envy each other. Beware of miserliness,
and be sincere servants of Allāh " (*Al-Kāfi*, Vol. 2, p. 637).

Thus do we come to the conclusion of the dissertation. We plead to Him,
the most Exalted One, through the medium of His overwhelming grace and
tremendous honor, and through the medium of Muhammad and his progeny,
the best of blessings and salutations be with them, to grant us the
honor of acting upon the perfection towards which the message directs
one, and not to let our portion of it be merely narrating, to reform us
for the sake of our own selves and our brethren and to reform them for
us; He surely is the most Merciful of those who are merciful and the
most Generous when it comes to giving. All praise is due to Allāh, Lord
of the worlds, and may His blessings be with the master of His
messengers and the best of His creation, Muhammad, and with his pure
Progeny.

This text has been sorted out in distant places by the one who badly
needs Allāh Almighty, Zayn ad-Dīn son of Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Ali ibn Jamal ad-Dīn ibn Taqi ibn Sālih ibn Ashraf al-\`Āmili Takharizi,
may Allāh Almighty overlook his sins and enable him to please Him. He
completed it on a Thursday, the 13th of the month of Safar, the month
sealed with goodness and success, of the year 949 A.H. (May 29, 1542
A.D.), praising Him, praying to Him, surrendering to Him, seeking His
forgiveness. Blessings of Allāh be with Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad, the pure, the righteous.


