The Number Of The Army
======================

The number of the army that was in Kufa in the middle years of the first
century, A.H. was forty thousand fighters. Every year ten thousand
fighters of it made a campaign (against the enemies of Islam). (This is
what the reliable books have mentioned).

We have known that the Commander of the faithful (Imam 'Ali), peace be
on him, prepared forty thousand or fifty thousand fighters according to
two different reports- to attack the Syrians. However, he had died
before he made an attack with them. We think that al-Hasan's army was a
group of the army which the Commander of the faithful prepared to fight
against Mu'awiya.

Then we know nothing about the attitude of these armies towards al-Hasan
b. 'Ali, peace be on them, when he summoned them to jihad (armed
struggle). Besides we have known, from more than one reference book,
that the vanguard which al-Hasan sent to meet Mu'awiya at Maskan was
estimated at twelve thousand fighters. The acceptable idea is that this
vanguard was from the groups of the army which the Commander of the
faithful formed before he died. So some of these groups supported
al-Hasan while the rest refused that.

Then, from another reference, we have known that the. Kufans became
excited on the day of al-Hasan, so they called up other four thousand
fighters.[^1]

Thus these are sixteen thousand fighters whom the unquestionable text
have shown.

There also are other figures concerning the number of the army.

The historians have mentioned them, and the important declarations have
included them. However, their correctness is liable to test and
discussion.

The following are some texts about these different figures. First we
will mention these figures as they are. Then we will check them
properly.

1. In his book (Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 110), he (i.e., Muhammad
Baqir al-Majlisi) said: "Then he (i.e., al-Hasan) dispatched to him
(i.e., Mu'awiya) a leader with four thousand (fighters). He (the leader)
was from Kinda. He (al-Hasan) ordered him (the leader) to camp in
Anbar[^2] and not to do anything till his (al-Hasan's) order came to
him. When he (the leader) headed for Anbar and stopped there, Mu'awiya
knew of that.

Thus he sent messengers to him, and wrote to him: \`Indeed, if you came
to me, I would appoint you as a ruler over some districts of Sham
(Syria) and of the Island (al-jazirah), and the like.' He (Mu'awiya)
sent him (the leader) five hundred thousand dirhams. So al-Kindi took
the money. He deserted al-Hasan. He went to Mu'awiya with two hundred
men from his notables and the member of his family. Al-Hasan heard of
that. So he rose and delivered a sermon:

\`Al-Kindi went to Mu'awiya. He deserted me and you. I told you a time
after a time (that) you have no faithfulness. You are the slaves of this
world. I am going to send another man to replace him. I know that he
(the man) will do towards you and me as your friend (i.e., al-Kindi)
did. He will never fear Allah concerning me and you.' So he (al-Hasan)
sent him (Mu'awiya) a man from (the tribe of) Murad with four thousand
(fighters).

He (al-Hasan) came toward him (the man) before the very eyes of the
people, confirmed him, and told him that he (the man) would desert as
al-Kindi did. So he (the man) took a solemn oath before him (al-Hasan)
that he (the man) would not do that. So al-Hasan said: \`He will
desert.' When he (the man) headed for AnbaI, Mu'awiya sent him
messengers. He wrote to him as he (Mu'awiya) wrote to his (the man's)
companion. He sent him five thousand (maybe he, the reporter, meant five
hundred thousand) dirhams. He made him desire for any district he liked
from the districts of Sham and of the Island. So he (the man) deserted
al-Hasan, went to Mu'awiya, and did not keep his word."

After this text, al-Majlisi mentioned that al-Hasan took al-Nukhayla as
a camp for him, and that al-Hasan went there.

2. In his book (Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 14), b. Abu al-Hadid
said: "The people went out. They became active for going out. Then
al-Hasan went out to the camp. He had appointed al-Mughira b. Noufal b.
al-Harth b. \`Abd al-Muttalib as a successor over Kufa. He ordered him
to urge and dispatch the people to him. So he (i.e., al-Mughira) began
urging and dispatching them to the extent that the camp was full (of
people). Then al-Hasan went with a great army and good equipment till he
stopped at Dir \`Abd al-Rahman. He stayed there for three (days) till
the people gathered. Then he summoned \`Ubayd Allah b. al-'Abbas b.
\`Abd al-Muttalib, and said to him: \`Cousin, I am going to send with
you twelve thousand (men) from the horsemen of the Arabs and (the Qur'an
readers) of the city.'"

3. Al-Tabari (vol. 6, p. 94.) reported on the authority of al-Zuhri, who
said: "When Mu'awiya got rid of \`Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas and al Hasan,
peace be on him, he came to plot against a man who was the most
important of the people in plotting against him (Mu'awiya). There were
forty thousand (fighters) with him. Mu'awiya, \`Amru, and the Syrians
met them."

4. In his book (Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 6), b. Abu al Hadid
has mentioned the following on the authority of al-Mada'ini[^3] on the
authority of al-Musayyab b. Nujayya, who said to al-Hasan when he blamed
him for his Peace Treaty with Mu'awiya \`My astonishment at you does not
end. You have made peace with Mu'awiya, (while) you have forty thousand
(fighters). Or he (al Musayyab) said: \`You have pledged allegiance to
(Mu'awiya)', due to different reporters."

5. In his book (al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 61), Ibn al-Athir
said: "Forty thousand fighters pledged allegiance to the Commander of
the faithful ('Ali). They were ready to die for him when he told them
about something concerning Sham (Syria) and they appeared. While he was
getting ready to advance towards (Syria), he was killed. If Allah wills
a thing, no one is able to repulse it (the thing). When he was killed,
the people pledged allegiance to his son, al-Hasan. He (al Hasan) heard
of the advance of Mu'awiya and the Syrians towards him. So he (al-Hasan)
and the army that had pledged allegiance to 'Ali got ready and left Kufa
to meet Mu'awiya, who had stopped at Maskan. So al-Hasan arrived in
al-Mada'in. There he appointed Qays b. \`Abbada al-Ansari over his
vanguard with twelve thousand (fighters). It was said that al-Hasan
appointed \`Abd Allah[^4] b. \`Abbas over his (al-Hasan's) vanguard. So
he (al-Hasan) appointed \`Abd Allah b. \`Abbas over his vanguard in the
advance guards of Qays b. Sa'd b. \`Abbada."

I (the author) say: Ibn Kathir followed such a tradition. Apparently he
has taken it letter by letter from the book \`al-Kamil.'

6. Al-Mada'ini[^5] has reported the words of al-Hasan, peace be on him,
in response to the man who said to him: "Were you right in what you have
done?" So al-Hasan said: "Yes, but I am afraid that seventy thousand or
eight thousand (fighters) will come on the Day of Resurrection. Their
jugular veins will bleed. So they will ask Allah why their blood had
been shed."

7. In his book (al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, p. 151), b. Qutayba al-Dinawari
has reported: "They mentioned that the people pledged allegiance to
Mu'awiya. Then he (Mu'awiya) came back to Sham (Syria). Afterwards
Sulayman b. Sirt al-Khaza'i, who was absent from Kufa and was the master
and chief of the Iraqis, came to al Hasan and said to him: \`You who
have humiliated the believers, al salamu \`alayka' !

Al-Hasan said: \`wa \`alayka al-salam, sit down, may Allah have mercy on
your father.' He (b. Qutayba) said: Sulayman sat down and said: \`Now
then, our astonishment at you does not end because of your pledge of
allegiance to Mu'awiya. You have one hundred Iraqi fighters who receive
salaries. You have a similar number to them from their sons and friends.
Moreover, you have followers (Shi'a) in Basrah and Hijaz."

I (the author) say: In his book (Tanzih al-Anbiya') al-Murtada, in his
book (al-Manaqib) Ibn Shahrashub, and in his book (al-Bihar) al Majlisi
have reported the complete text of what happened between Sulayman b.
Sirt and his companions and al-Hasan, peace be on him. No one of them
(the authors) have narrated on the authority of Sulayman and his
companions that the number of the army was more than forty thousand
(fighters).

So only b. Qutayba has reported on the authority of Sulayman that the
number of the army was one hundred (fighters). Also only he used the
word \`pledge of allegiance' (al-bay'a) instead of the word \`Peace'
(Sulh).

8. Ziyad b. Abih, who was the governor of al-Hasan over Persia, said the
following in response to Mu'awiya's threat: "Indeed, the son of she who
ate the livers (i.e., Hind), of the shelter of hypocrisy, and of the
rest of the allies (ahzab) has written to me to threaten me. Between me
and him are the two grandsons of the Apostle of Allah. They have ninety
thousand (fighters) {according to a report seventy thousand (fighters)},
who have put the hilts of their swords under their chins. No one of them
turns till he dies. Indeed, by Allah, if he (i.e., Mu'awiya) came to me,
he would find me stronger (than him) in hitting with the sword."[^6]

Discussion
----------

In this manner, these texts with various forms have suggested different
figures about the number of the army. The large figures in these texts
are forty thousand, eighty thousand, and one hundred thousand
(fighters).

Indeed, all these three figures are liable to doubt and check, even the
smallest of them. Now, you read the following explanations:

1. The largest figure is one hundred thousand or ninety thousand
(fighters). Ziyad b. Abih referred to this figure. Only al-Dinawari has
attributed it to Sulayman b. Sirt al-Khaza'i. This figure is
unacceptable for several reasons:

The most important ones of these reasons are:

A. Both leaders (i.e., Sulayman and Ziyad) did not attend the pledge of
allegiance to al-Hasan. They did not take part in the jihad of al-Hasan.
They were not present during the succession of al-Hasan in Kufa.
Generally speaking, they left their homeland in Iraq for two years.[^7]

Thus they did not attend the situation that prevailed Kufa at that time.
Namely, they did not witness the strong formation of the parties and the
ignoble tardiness that spread all over Kufa, and with which the Kufans
faced their Imam to whom they pledged allegiance. Therefore the figures
they have mentioned are worthless.

When Sulayman and Ziyad mentioned these figures of the fighters, they
compared the present period of Kufa with its past.. They thought that
the Kufans mobilized fighters during the time of al-Hasan as they did
during the time of his father, the Commander of the faithful, in the
years 37 and 38 A.H.

B. The attitude of both men (i.e., Sulayman and Ziyad) at the emotional
moment when they mentioned these figures indicate that they inclined to
exaggeration. This exaggeration about the number of the army resulted
from Sulayman's strong anger. Thus he censured Imam al-Hasan, peace be
on him, for making peace with Mu'awiya. Also it resulted from the threat
Ziyad made in response to Mu'awiya's threat.

Therefore there is nothing correct in these two figures. Thus we must
not rely on them to determine the number of the army.

Besides we have known that Sulayman was the friend of al-Musayyab b.
Nujayya. In other words Sulayman had ties with al-Musayyab other than
the personal friendship. In text no. 4, you have read that al-Musayyab
admonished al-Hasan for making peace with Mu'awiya:" You have forty
thousand (fighters)." It is undeniable that these two friends did not
differ over the affairs of the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt) peace
be on them, as they differed over these figures.

Accordingly, the reason for these unusual figures of Sulayman b. Sirt is
that al-Dinawari, only, who reported such reports about the matter of
al-Hasan, did not check them out.

Fate had decided to punish these two leaders (Sulayman and Ziyad) before
they left the life in this world. For they recklessly blamed Imam Abu
Muhammad (i.e., al-Hasan), peace be on him, for making peace with
Mu'awiya.

So in the year 65 A.H., eighteen thousand people pledged allegiance to
Sulayman and Ziyad to avenge the blood of al-Husayn, peace be on him.
When the Battle of \`Ayn al-Warda took place, most people deserted them.
Thus suffered from the desertion of the people.

Such kind of desertion reminded them of the attitude of the people
towards the matters of the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be
on them.

Then Sulayman and al-Musayyab, who were the leaders of the Movement of
the Repentant, were killed at the Battle of \`Ayn al-Warda. Also most of
their followers were killed on that day.

2. As for the number eighty thousand or seventy thousand fighters, it
was mentioned by al-Hasan when he answered the man who asked him: "Were
you right in what you have done."

The words of al-Hasan, in fact, indicate that he had not more than
twenty thousand fighters according to the greatest assessment. That is
because when al-Hasan mentioned those "whose jugular veins will bleed on
the Day of Judgment," he ranged their number from seventy thousand to
eighty thousand persons. By this number, he did not mean his soldiers in
particular. Rather he meant the total number of the two fighting armies.
Moreover, we have known that the number of the Syrians during their
advance against al-Hasan was sixty thousand fighters. So the rest was
the number of al-Hasan's private army.

Al-Hasan's hesitation in determining the number is clear in what we have
mentioned. That is because if he had meant his army with the exception
of the army of the others, he would have mentioned its number without
hesitation. For he was the most knowledgeable of the people in the
number of his army.

3. As for the number forty thousand fighters, it has been mentioned more
than one historian. Also al-Musayyab b. Nujayya has mentioned it. We
have nothing concerning this number but two ideas:

A. This number disagrees with al-Hasan's words with which he referred to
the number of the army. You have known that his words do not mean more
than twenty thousand fighters according to the greatest estimation. Also
this number disagrees with his other words with which he described the
attitude of the people towards him. Namely, he described their attitude
as: "Sluggishness in fighting."[^8] Thus if al-Hasan had forty thousand
fighters, the people would not have been sluggish in fighting alongside
him. So the number is still liable to doubt.

B. The doubt imposed the number on those who believed in it. So they
thought that the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, prepared
forty thousand fighters for his final campaign against Sham (Syria).
Then his holy life had ended before he advanced against Sham with this
army. So they thought that the soldiers of the father (i.e., Imam 'Ali)
were added to the soldiers of the son (i.e., al-Hasan). However, they
forgot to mention the number of the people who deserted the new
Successor in Kufa.

Therefore, the figure based on these errors is worthless.

Al-Zuhri's report is very unusual. For it denotes that there were forty
thousand fighters with Qays b. Sa'd b. \`Abbada al-Ansari. They belonged
to the army of al-Hasan. Namely, they were with Qays who became the
commander of the vanguard in Maskan when \`Ubayd Allah and his followers
had escaped. This means that only the vanguard of al-Hasan had forty-
eight thousand fighters before the events of escaping.

Thus this idea is incorrect in history.

The reports of al-Zuhri concerning the matters of the members of the
house (Ahl al-Bayt) are the weakest of all reports, and the most
confused of them all in subjects. The author of the book (Dirasat fi
al-Islam) regarded al-Zuhri as a mercenary for the Umayyads. This is
enough evidence for the weakness of his reports.

Al-Zuhri said: "Mu'awiya, \`Amru, and the Syrians stopped at them." Now,
we want to act freely with this narration of his. We want to correct
this intentional confusion as follows: the above-mentioned words contain
a pronoun that is \`them.' If we attribute the pronoun to Mu'awiya's
army and exclude Qays' army, then the number will concern Mu'awiya's
soldiers with whom he met Qays. The concerned ones of them were those
who received salaries. The concerned ones of the Syrians were the
volunteers other than those who received salaries. In this way there
will be coherence between this narration of his and the other narration
that has added the soldiers of Mu'awiya to the vanguard of al-Hasan.

4. Ibn Abu al-Hadid has used the phrase \`the great army' to describe
the movement of al-Hasan from al-Nukhayla to Dir \`Abd al-Rahman on his
way to his camps. These words, as you see, are brief. They agree with
the number that we have already mentioned. Indeed, sixteen thousand
fighters were a great army. If you refuse that; then they were twenty
thousand fighters.

5. The narration in the book \`Bihar al-Anwar' is the best of all
reports which we have mentioned to understand what has been reported
about this matter. There is an order in the frequent events of this
narration so that such an order imposes doubt on it.

When this narration shows the same events, it ignores the names of the
two leaders (i.e., al-Kindi and al-Muradi). For this narration indicates
that they met Mu'awiya before \`Ubayd Allah. Also they deserted al-Hasan
before him. In the history of such an event, the people do not know that
ignoring the names of two leaders during two events is among the ugliest
events of man in history.

Apart from ignoring the names of the two leaders, this narration which
is in Bihar al-Anwar underlines that the Imam (al-Hasan) insisted on
accusing the two leaders (of desertion) before he dispatched them.
Moreover, this narration underlines that the Imam sent them to meet
Mu'awiya though he was aware of their desertion.

Some of this (explanation) is enough so that we will not go on
discussing this narration, for it is very easy to understand.

I (the author) say In spite of this discussion, we have not gotten any
result about the matter which we have mentioned under the topic: The
Number of the Army. These texts, though many, are some examples about
the fabrications from which the matter of al-Hasan suffered. No wonder
when we mention this fact (matter), repeat it, regard its danger as
great, condemn it, and draw the attention of people to its results.
These are eight texts. Not one of them is able to resist the discussion,
so we cannot use them as historical proofs.

Then we have nothing except the number of the army of the vanguard, that
was twelve thousand fighters, and the number of the volunteers in Kufa
that was four thousand fighters. Then we have to mention the groups of
the people who came to al-Hasan at Dir \`Abd al-Rahman when he stayed
there for three days. They were about twenty thousand fighters. All
these groups of people were the army of al-Hasan when he headed for his
two camps at Maskan and al-Mada'in.

As for the fighters from al-Mada'in itself, they did not tarry from the
battlefields headed by 'Ali, peace be on him. We have already mentioned
that, so it was impossible for them to desert his son (al-Hasan) when he
camped among them.

This is what makes us believe that the number of the army at both camps
was twenty thousand fighters or little over.

This number was \`the great army' which b. Abu al-Hadid meant. Also it
is the number that agrees with the foregoing words of al Hasan, peace be
on him. There is no proof better than al-Hasan's words concerning his
matters.

Then we do not know whether al-Hasan, peace be on him, received any help
from any party when he was in al-Mada'in.

[^1]: Al-Rawandi, al-Kharaij wa al-Jaraih, p. 228.

[^2]: A city was on the bank of the Euphrates (west of Baghdad). Anbar
was ten leagues far from Baghdad. It was called so, for the stores
(\`anabir) of wheat and barley were gathered together in it during the
days of the Persians. Abu al-\`Abbas al-Saffih al-\`Abbasi resided in it
till he died. He rebuilt palaces and house in it, but they have become
extinct.

[^3]: He was Abu al-Hasan b. Muhammad b. Abu Sayf al-Basri. He lived in
al-Mada'in, then moved to Baghdad, and died there in the year 215 A.H.
Ibn Abu al-Hadid reported many traditions on his authority. He, may
Allah have mercy on him, has about two hundred books on various matters.

[^4]: He was \`Ubayd Allah, neither \`Abd Allah nor Qays. We have
already mentioned the reasons for the error in mentioning each of them.

[^5]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 7. Ibn Kathir,
al Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh vol. 8, p. 42.

[^6]: Al-Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, p. 194. Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi
al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 166. The former has narrated that the number of
the army was ninety' thousand fighters, while the latter has mentioned
that it was seventy thousand fighters.

[^7]: Ibn Qutayba (in al-Imama wa al-Siyasa), and al-Murtada (in Tanzih
al Anbiya') have mentioned that Sulayman was not in Kufa for two years.
As for Ziyad, he was the governor of Basrah. Then \`Abd Allah b. \`Abbas
dispatched him to Persia, to be a governor over it in the year 39 A.H.
In the events of the year 39 A.H, al-Tabari mentioned that Ziyad was in
Basrah before the year 39.

[^8]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 113.


