The Members Of The Army
=======================

In his book \`al-Irshad p. 169, al-Mufid said: "Al-Hasan sent Hujr b.
\`Adi to order the leaders (Ummal) to set out and to call the people
together for war (jihad). They were slow to (answer) him and then they
came forward. (Al-Hasan) had a mixed band of men: some of them belonged
to his Shi'a and to his father's; some of them were members of the
Muhakkima (i.e., Kharijites) who were influenced by (the desires of)
fighting Mu\`awiya with every means (possible); some of them were men
who loved discords and were anxious for booty; some of them were
doubters; others were tribal supporters who followed the leaders of
their tribes without reference to religion." [^1]

I (the author) say: From what we have just said, we have known that the
number of al-Hasan's army was about twenty thousand fighters or little
more. However, we do not know in detail the way used to form this army.
However, I think it was the primitive way which was not based on the
succeeding, acquired improvements. It was the way which the Muslim
communities followed during the first centuries A.H. It was the way that
did not stipulate any qualities necessary for accepting the soldier or
the fighter (mujahid).

It did not stipulate personal abilities and age, nor did it stipulate
compulsory military service as it is in the present time. For the Muslim
person who was able to carry the weapon had a religious motive. Thus he
took part in jihad willingly when he heard the summons to it in the way
of Allah. This motive made him feel his religious obligation. So he was
ready to sacrifice his life in the way of Allah. Otherwise, he was
unable to carry out his religious duty. For the worldly desires would
suppress this feeling in him. Moreover, they would have deprived him of
his share of the reward and booty if Allah had predetermined victory and
booty for that war.

Modern military laws force people to carry out military service, summon
them in certain years, and examine their limited abilities. These laws
were not known at that time. Besides they disagree with the Islamic law
that is general and tolerant.

Islam is certain correct facts so that the people obey it. In other
words the laws of this religion do not force anyone to carry out any
obligation. For Islam has showed people two ways (i.e., the way of good
and the way of evil). Moreover, it has helped them to choose the way of
good through guidance***:***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And (as for) those who strive hard for us, We will most certainly
guide them to Our ways."*** (Qur'an 29:69).

In this way Islam enjoins people to do good and forbids them from doing
evil. Also Muslim leaders have used the same way to enjoin people to do
well and to prevent them from doing evil. When they decide to wage war
(against their enemies), they follow an excellent way to urge people to
take part in jihad (holy war) through convincing them to carry the
weapon.

Among these ways are: They increase the salaries of fighters, order
their governors to encourage people to take part in jihad, and spread
their orators and prominent figures to urge people to volunteer to
strive in the way of Allah, the Great and Almighty.

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, followed all these ways from the day when he
assumed the succession in Kufa. Also he used them when he declared
jihad. Among his measures, as we have said earlier, were: He increased
the salaries of the fighters to 100%. He sent Hujr b. \`Adi to his
rulers to summon them to jihad.

His notable companions, who were orators, helped him with his task.
Among them were \`Adi b. Hatam, Ma'qal b. Qays al-Riyahi, Ziyad b.
Sa'sa'a al-Tamimi, and Qays b. Sa'd al-Ansari. They criticized the
people[^2] for their slowness and urged them to take part in jihad for
Allah. Then they themselves competed with each other for their places in
the general camp, and they competed with the people for that.

They spread the standards of jihad all over Kufa. They summoned the
people (to obey) Allah, the Great and Almighty, and the family of
Muhammad, peace be on them.

Thus new awareness arose in the slow city. Namely, the Kufans felt their
obligations, and became ready to carry them out.

The slowness in the war happened because either the people inclined to
worldly pleasures or the Syrians changed their religious beliefs. This
slowness included some of the people in Kufa and the regions around it.

As for this new awareness which the eloquent orators made, it soon
created motivation in many of the slow people. The wish stirred up an
activity. So enthusiasm resulted from the activity. To some extent, the
summons of the Shi'a to jihad was successful in making the majority
eager for war in spite of the ignoble attitudes of the oppressors in
Kufa at that time. "The people became active for going out to their
camp." [^3]

Moreover, the summons of the Shi'a to jihad was successful, to a great
extent, in winning the public opinion in Kufa, its sevenths (asba ), its
tribes, and the neighboring outskirts whose dwellers used to come to
markets and official offices.

The orators of al-Hasan were so skillful that they exploited the
appropriate mind of the people. So they spared no effort to summon them
to support the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt) under the pretext of
the summons to jihad.

The throats of the companions became hoarse because they mentioned many
laudable qualities of the family of Muhammad. In the meantime they
showed the defects of their enemies. They resisted the different clubs
of Kufa, its districts, and its public places. They drew the attention
of the people to the excellent position which no one of the Muslims
occupied but the two lords of the youth of Paradise (i.e., al-Hasan and
al-Husayn), peace be on them. They indicated the religious firmness
inherited by the members of the House of Inspiration. They spread the
distinguished qualities of this tribe such as knowledge, purity,
religious devotion, sacrifice for Allah, and reforming acts. They
indicated their obligatory love on the believers.

Then they (the orators of al-Hasan) mentioned the pledge of allegiance
to al-Hasan. They reminded the people that Allah would ask them about
obedience of these rulers and the obligatory pledge of allegiance to
them.

They (the orators) mentioned the lineage in their enthusiastic sermons.
Suddenly, this lineage was very nice, very truthful, and very effective.
They bewildered the people and filled them with admiration.

The orators mentioned al-Hasan and Mu'awiya. They said: "What a great
difference is between b. 'Ali and b. Sakhr! What a great difference is
between b. Fatima and b. Hind! What a great difference is between his
(i.e., al-Hasan's) grandfather the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, and his (i.e., Mu'awiya's) grandfather! What a great
difference is between his (al-Hasan's) grandmother Khadija and his
(i.e., Mu'awiya's) grandmother!"

They cursed the more unknown one of the two persons (i.e., al-Hasan and
Mu'awiya). Also they cursed the more ignoble one of them in lineage, the
more evil one of them in the past and the present time, and the older
one of them in unbelief and hypocrisy. So the people shouted and said:
\`Amen!' Then the generations came after them (the people). When a
Muslim person reads this nice comparison, he will record a new amen
against Mu'awiya.

These wise ways and enthusiastic eloquent orations played an important
role in moving the people. So they were ready to desert Sham (Syria) and
to support Kufa.

In Kufa, the new powerful city, there were mixed bands of people. They
belonged to Arab and non- Arab communities. They adopted Islam, but they
were displeased with it. In other words they embraced Islam and used it
as means to achieve their immediate interests. So they understood the
summons to jihad as means for interests and booty. When these mixed
bands became satisfied with the success of that war, they joined the
army of al-Hasan, peace be on him, to achieve their interests and to
take their shares of booty. So why did they not join those who were the
first to take part in jihad?

You may agree with me on discovering the motives that drove these rabble
mixed groups to join the army of al-Hasan, peace be on him. Suddenly,
the men of discords, the men of booty, the men of tribalism, the
doubters, and the like became volunteers in the army of al-Hasan.

As we have previously said, the regulations of the Islamic mobilization
at that time did not prevent the above mentioned groups from joining the
army as fighters or mujhahidin. That is because these regulations
stipulated only one condition that was the ability to carry the weapon.

Concerning the reason that urged the Kharijites to join the army of
al-Hasan, Shaykh al-Mufid, my Allah have mercy on him, said: "They chose
to fight Mu\`awiya with every means (possible)."

However, we (i.e., the author) do not believe in this reason though
brief, and we do not deny it because it has some meanings What al Mufid
said might be part of their aim, and their aim might be a thing other
than this.

The relations between al-Hasan, peace be on him, and the Kharijites do
not encourage us to have a good opinion about them. Besides, if we study
the events (of the Battle) of al-Nahrwan, our doubt in them will double.
Suppose that they were right when they summoned al-Hasan to fight
against Mu'awiya, and that they had no ill-intention towards him, then
where were they during the lifetime of Mu'awiya? Why didn't they band
together against him as they did against 'Ali, peace be on him?
Moreover, hasn't history kept their revolt against the latter?

The enmity and malice of the Kharijites, and the way of their abominable
summons move us to mistrust their purpose when they wanted to go out
with: al-Hasan, peace be on him.

We have known the conditions of the Kharijites before their going out
for that war. Namely, they cajoled the people. Meanwhile they
complimented al-Hasan after their unbelieving fighting against the late
Imam (i.e., 'Ali), peace be on him. Through that, they tried to avoid
the general abhorrence that prevailed them after that great tragedy.

Do you not think that the Kharijites followed cunning ways? Didn't their
timely pressing conditions make them pretend to be loyal soldiers,
volunteers in the army of al-Hasan? Without doubt they had hidden their
purposes under this pretense. So they became soldiers to achieve their
hidden principles which no one has known since then.

The idea of the Kharijites represented an evil beginning that resulted
from the matter of the arbitration (al-tahkim) at the Battle of Siffin.
For this reason, they were call al-muhakkim. The roots of this idea were
fixed in themselves as a firm thought. In the course of time, their idea
spread here and there. Thus many people followed it. Therefore it
created various kinds of disasters and hardships.

Although the Kharijites were intense in the matter of the religion, they
did cunning very well.

So the Kharijites seized the opportunities of the war that took place
between the two great enemies. They joined this army that moved from
Kufa to Maskan and al-Mada'in.

Through these explanations, I do not want to deny the enmity of the
Kharijites towards Mu'awiya. Moreover, I do not deny their choice to
fight against him with every means (possible), as Shaykh al-Mufid, May
Allah have mercy on him, has said. However, I think that the Kharijites
intended to achieve two purposes through their plan.

They had no purpose through their revolts and plots but to destroy the
great Islamic figures in Iraq, Egypt, and Syria. The purposes of these
people were secret assassinations. These purposes prevailed their other
plans. For this reason, they went with al-Hasan to make discords. They
followed the way of jihad to make corruption. For example, they achieved
a traitorous act at Mazlam Sabat.[^4] The act harmed al-Hasan very much.
It was the second dangerous part of the series of the crimes which this
evil band committed against the great, Prophetic family.

Both those two crimes resulted from the active, secret plots which the
foolish Kharijites mastered on various occasions.

Ibn. Sinan al-Asadi [^5]stabbed al-Hasan. Also Ibn. Muljim al-Muradi,
Sinan's friend, stabbed the Commander of the faithful, al-Hasan's
father, peace be on him. Through His favor, Allah wanted these two stabs
to be different from each other.

This mean plot represented the ugliest estrangement towards the Apostle
of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. For, through this stab, b.
Sinan tried to kill his eldest grandson, and to render a rare service to
Mu'awiya. This stab belonged to the people (i.e., the Kharijites) about
whom it was said: "They went out with al-Hasan because they chose to
fight against Mu'awiya with every means (possible)."

In this way, al-Hasan became certain of the intentions of the muhakkima
(i.e., the Kharijites) in spite of their false flatter for him. From the
beginning, al-Hasan was very cautious of them. Still he treated them
kindly in spite of their hidden spites.

There is no one more dangerous than the enemy who pretends friendship.
Such an enemy shows you friendship openly, but he fights against you
secretly. So the most dangerous enemy is he who fights against you with
hatred, malice, and tribalism, as the Kharijites did against al-Hasan.

In this way, the army of al-Hasan, peace be on him, was full of those
mixed bands who discouraged it from winning the battles. It was also
afflicted by the plots of both internal and external enemies, namely in
Iraq and Syria (Sham).

It was natural for such an army to be liable to internal discords and
mutiny against its commanders.

The holy war (jihad) was not some means for material greed, nor was it a
field for dangerous plots, nor was it an aspect for trivial, ignorant
tribalism, nor was it an arena for the experiences of the doubters.

So "the insight of al-Hasan increased when the people (i.e., the mixed
bands) deserted him.[^6]

Many words have been reported on the authority of al-Hasan. They
indicate that he had low confidence in his army.

Al-Hasan said very eloquent words when he addressed his army in
al-Mada'in. These words are appropriate for the subject of this chapter.
Thus we will mention them here: "During your movement towards Siffin,
your religion was before your life in this world. Anyhow today, your
life in this world is before your religion. So you are between two
killed persons: one was killed at (the Battle of) Siffin and you weep
over him. The other was killed at (the Battle of) Nahrawan[^7] and you
avenge his blood. As for the rest, they are betrayers. As for the
weepers, they are revolutionaries."

This is the only oration of al-Hasan, in which he refers to the
inclinations and desires of the mixed bands in his army during the
battles.

As for the revolutionary weepers, al-Hasan refers to the large number
from his companions and his bosom ones. As for those who wanted to
avenge the blood, he refers to the Kharijites who were in his army.
Namely, they wanted to avenge the blood of their companions on al-Hasan.
As for the betrayers, he refers to the other groups from the men of the
discords, the followers of the ambitions, and the worshippers of
desires.

Go over the pages of history. You will find gloomy bloody lines in them.
That was because of what the captivated prominent figures from those
mixed bands followed. Also it was because of their terrible deeds with
which they corrupted the field of the holy war (jihad). Some of their
deeds were treason, discords, breaking pledges, plots, forgetting the
religion, and the like. So the rest of the family of Muhammad, may Allah
bless him and his family, were liable to their attacks. We will mention
some of these tragic pictures in their appropriate places in this book.

Conclusion
----------

Here, we have to listen to what sounds in the mind of people when they
study this sorrowful presentation about the bands of the army of
al-Hasan, peace be on him. They ask: "Why did al-Hasan permit these
mixed bands to join his army? After their joining his army, why was he
slow in purifying his army from them? Why did he not use the methods
that commanders of armies use to purify their armies such as dismissing
corrupt members, censuring them, and banishing them?

These questions are the secret of the matter of al-Hasan. In response to
these questions, we say:

1. Islam has abolished classes in jihad as it has abolished them in
society through its laws and regulations. So it is unfair for the rulers
to differentiate among the classes of Muslims who want to be soldiers.
That is because such soldiers believe in Islam and are able to carry
weapons. As for those mixed bands who followed al-Hasan, they believed
in Islam and were able to carry weapons. Thus it was incumbent on the
Imam to accept them according to the Islamic law.

2. The Prophet himself, may Allah bless him and his family, and such
groups afflicted the Commander of the faithful during their battles. It
is reported on their authority that they permitted such soldiers to
enter their armies though they suffered from their disturbances at
battlefields.

Concerning the Battle of Hunayn, the historians said: "Some Muslims saw
the large number of their army, so they admired it. Then they said that
the small army of their enemy would not overcome. However, the army of
the Muslims was mixed. Among them (the Muslims) were many of those who
came for booty."

The events of the returning of the Muslims from the campaign against the
Banu al-Mustalaq indicates the existence of such mixed bands in the army
of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

Also concerning the army of 'Ali, peace be on him, the historians said:
"The army of 'Ali at (the Battle of) Siffin had mixed bands. They
belonged to various tribes and communities. They were disobedient and
opposing. They did not yield to any command, nor did they take any
advice."

In his book (al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi'), al-Bayhaqi has narrated the
following on the authority of Mu'awiya, who said: "He (i.e., 'Ali),
peace be on him, was among the most wicked army and the most one of them
in disagreement. I (i.e., Mu'awiya) was among the most obedient army and
the least of them in disagreement."

I (the author) say: So al-Hasan had to follow the Sunna (practice) of
his grandfather and that of his father. For it was enough for him to
follow their example.

Al-Hasan conformed to Islam and fear of Allah in every movement and
silence. Still the opponents of al-Hasan did not conform to these
Islamic manners. Were it not for that (i.e., al-Hasan's fear of Allah
and his conforming to Islam), you would find that the history of that
period would be written in a way different from what you read today.

3. Nevertheless, al-Hasan refused to treat the situation through these
ways. The commanders of armies use ways to purify their armies from
corrupt persons. For example, they kill them, remove them from office,
scold them, and the like. For he did not want to hasten the disaster
before its time, as we have mentioned in chapter four. Besides he did
want to be the direct reason for stirring up discords, declaring
disagreement, and raising the banner of disobedience, at least, in half
of his army. This means that al-Hasan intentionally wanted to light the
fire of the revolt in the core of his army. Also this means that the
holy war (Jihad) would turn into violent internal war. If al-Hasan had
taken such steps, he would have achieved Mu'awiya's hopes. For the
latter did his best to sow division between al-Hasan and his companions.
Thus al-Hasan was very careful of Mu'awiya's tricks.

Moreover, al-Hasan, peace be on him, had no opportunity to reform those
mixed bands of people and to unify their ideas, for his time was short
and was full of various disasters. In other words, no one, except Allah
(the Great and Almighty), was able to reform that situation at that
time. That is because the manners, the religion, and the inherited
backgrounds of the community were in need of reform during that short
time. Moreover, the opposing trends that brought about various kinds of
temptation to that generation prevented al Hasan from reforming the
members of his army and unifying their ideas. Thus al-Hasan had to treat
the situation through the ambitions themselves. This means that he had
to cure the illness through the illness. However, he was not ready to
follow such a way, for he took the fear of Allah into consideration.

[^1]: Also see: Al-Arbali, Kashif al-Ghumma, p. 161. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al Anwar, vol. 10, p. 110.

[^2]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 14.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: In Arabic, Sabat means a shelter between two houses through which
there is an open way. Sabat was a village in al-Mada'in. Near Sabat
there was an arch over the river of the King (nahr al-malik). Maybe it
was called so because there was a rare shelter among the shelters
(Sawabit) in it. We think that this rare shelter was Mazlam Sabat.

[^5]: In his book (al-Dawla al-Amawiya fi al-Sham wa al-Andalus, p. 50,
chapter 4.), Hasan Murad made a mistake when he attributed the stab of
al Hasan, peace be on him, with the dagger to the followers of the
Umayyads, excluding the Kharijites. In chapter, the Secret of the
Attitude, you will read the texts of the event which the old historians
reported, and which the modern historians should understand.

[^6]: Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 170.

[^7]: In his book [al-Malahim wa al-Fitan, p. 142, (Najaf, 1368)], Ibn
Tawus has narrated: "And the other was killed at (the Battle of) Nahrwan
and you avenge his blood on us."


