The Motives Of The Two Parties For Making Peace
===============================================

No wonder Mu'awiya was the first to ask al-Hasan for making peace.[^1]
So he accepted al-Hasan's conditions to take one thing from him, that
was government.

Mu'awiya made this plan of his when the two parties were getting ready
to wage war against each other. He paid attention to carry out this
plan. more than he paid attention to organizing his armies and managing
war affairs. He thought that it was better for him to be the first to
ask al-Hasan for making peace with him. If al-Hasan accepted his
request, it would be okay; other wise he would force him to do that
without meeting him at a battle.

First of all, to pave the way for his purpose, Mu'awiya did his best to
create an appropriate atmosphere through drawing the attention of his
opponents to recall peace making.

From here Mu'awiya sent his men to pass false rumors through the camps
of al-Hasan, peace be on him. He bribed some military commanders. For
example, he bribed one of them with one million dirhams, as we have
already mentioned when we talked about \`Ubayd Allah b. \`Abbas.
Moreover, he tempted some leaders through making promises such as
supreme command, authority over a certain country,and arranging
marriages between them and the Umayyad princesses.

Mu'awiya used all his abilities, all his talents, and all his
experiences to fulfill this idea. Many of those who sold their
consciences, and who showed apparent friendship towards al-Hasan
responded to him. So they became Mu'awiya's secret spies, his working
fingers, and his hirelings who spared no effort to carry out his aims.

Besides, Mu'awiya used other ways to urge al-Hasan to make peace with
him such as sending armies and weapons to the camps, logistic movements,
and the like. However, he did not want to be the first to attack Iraq
with these armies and weapons. In other words he did not want to meet
al-Hasan, peace be on him, at a battle except when all his ways went in
vain. Worth mentioning, Mu'awiya's ways were quite different from that
of the people and the religion.

It is an act of truthfulness to say: Indeed, in this field, Mu'awiya's
ways were well- woven. He was very successful in preparing special
atmospheres to make his enemy accept reconciliation.

The commander of the Iraqi front and his close associates sold their
consciences to Mu'awiya for false promises.

The two camps in al-Mada'in and Maskan were full of false rumors that
filled the soldiers with fear.

Al-Hasan himself was unable to impose his orders on his army because of
the false rumors -that passed through them.

He was unable to appear before many of his soldiers because they would
kill him. Accordingly, was there a way other than reconciliation?

It was difficult to reform the condition because the people were corrupt
during it. So no one is able to blame al-Hasan when the people became
corrupt during that time. That is because they were deviated from the
truth by nature. Thus even Islam was unable to reform them.

Al-Hasan lost his first battle because of the treason of his soldiers or
because of the skillful discords his enemy used. So he had to face his
second battle which the treason of the soldiers did not affect, the
deviation of their natures did not harm, and the tricks of the enemy and
his skillful discords did not increase but steadfastness, influence, and
victory in the course of days.

This was the way which al-Hasan used in an excellent manner to exploit
Mu'awiya though the latter was very careful of the former.

Al-Hasan responded to Mu'awiya's request for making peace. However, he
made him bind himself by conditions which he would break one by one. So
if Mu'awiya did that, the people would declare their wrath and protest
against him. Thus peacemaking was the beginning of the wrath that has
lasted for generations. Also this wrath was the beginning of the
revolutions that happened successively to remove that usurping regime
from history.

This was the political plan through which al-Hasan accepted making peace
with Mu'awiya. Also this was the way through which he exploited
Mu'awiya. Accordingly, this plan and this way were among the meanings of
the oppressed genius of the oppressed Imam.

Therefore, no one is able to blame al-Hasan, peace be on him, for making
peace with Mu'awiya. That is because al-Hasan made peace with him
according to a drawn plan.

The critical situation at the camps and the expected results encouraged
al-Hasan to make peace with Mu'awiya. For example, this act would reform
the community, prevent bloodshed, preserve the holy places, achieve the
Islamic viewpoint, and so on.

Those months were not as equal as the ten forgers, but they were full of
disasters and hardships as many as the stars. They were a period of time
that filled the heart with love and admiration. The manners of the
Prophet and the qualities of the truthful Imams appeared during them.
They (the months) showed many facts about the people in both sides.
During them the best reformatory acts were concluded. On their virtuous
end, the interest of the world was connected with the interest of the
sky.

Suddenly, al-Hasan b. 'Ali became a great reformer. He embodied the good
news his grandfather the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, gave in the tradition which we have mentioned before: "Indeed
this (grand) son of mine is a lord, and Allah will make peace between
two great groups from the Muslims through him."

Allah, the Exalted, has preserved the high honor of the members of this
House in all fields: victory, holy martyrdom in the way of Allah and
history, and peacemaking.

Enough for honor is peacemaking. Enough for victory is immortal honor.
Immortal honor guarantees the lasting fame. The fame is a continuous
motive that develops life and sovereignty.

Now, it is easy for us to understand the motives that urged al-Hasan,
peace be on him, to make peace with Mu'awiya.

As for the motives that urged Mu'awiya to ask al-Hasan to make peace
with him, they were quite different from those of al-Hasan. They do not
indicate that Mu'awiya was unable to fight against al Hasan, nor do they
indicate that he had a religious viewpoint concerning reconciliation and
preventing bloodshed. So neither peace nor preventing bloodshed were the
motives of Mu'awiya. He vas indifferent to them. He wanted to achieve
his ambitions through conquering the Muslim countries. The proofs for
that are his attacks against Medina, Mecca, and the Yemen. Besides he
adopted impudent attitudes at the Battle of Siffin. Therefore the pure
opportunist ambitions urged him to make his fable- like history through
making peace with al-Hasan.

Al-Hasan abdicated his right to authority before the public opinion.
Thus Mu'awiya thought that he would abdicate his right to the
succession. According to this idea he thought that he would be the legal
successor over the Muslims![^2]

Government was the sweet dream for which Mu'awiya sacrificed every dear
thing. He did not know that Islam refused unlawful ways and did not hand
over government to the freed prisoners and their children.

Moreover, we think that Mu'awiya had other motives. Thus he stretched
out his hand for reconciliation. Then he took an oath, and underlined
the covenants. However, when we consider carefully his other motives, we
will understand that the sweet dream (i.e., supreme authority) is the
greatest of them all.

The following occasions indicate some of the motives that urged Mu'awiya
to make peace with al-Hasan, peace be on him:

1. Mu'awiya thought that al-Hasan, peace be on him, had the right to
assume power. So the former had no way to take the reins of government
but through making al-Hasan keep silent even if apparently, and he had
no way to make him keep silent but through reconciliation.

As for Mu'awiya's idea concerning al-Hasan's right to authority, it is
clear in the letter which the former sent to the latter before their
movement to fight each other at Maskan. In his letter, he said: "You are
worthier of authority than me." Also it is clear in what Mu'awiya said
to his son Yazid when he mentioned the members of the House (Ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them: "My son, indeed authority is their
right."[^3] Also it is clear in what Mu'awiya wrote to Ziyad b. Abih
when he mentioned al-Hasan, peace be on him: "As for that al-Hasan has
gained power over you, he has the right to do that."[^4]

Also we have seen that Mu'awiya asked the religious opinion of al Hasan
when he faced difficulties. It is as if that he recognized his
Imamate.[^5]

Also Mu'awiya recognized that al-Hasan was "the Lord of Muslims."[^6]
Wouldn't the Lord of Muslims be their Imam?

2. Mu'awiya, in spite of his many obedient men, was very afraid of the
results of his fighting against al-Hasan. This can be clearly understood
from the words which he said concerning his Iraqi opponents: "By Allah,
when I remember their eyes under the armors (al-maghafir) at the Battle
of Siffin, my reason become confused."[^7] Also concerning them, he
said: "May Allah make them angry with evil. Their hearts are like the
heart of one man."[^8] So he thought that making peace with al-Hasan
would be better than fighting those whose eyes were under the armors
(al-maghafir).

3. Mu'awiya was afraid of the social position of al-Hasan, the (grand)
son of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. Also he
was afraid of his unique spiritual position in the Islamic faith so that
he wanted to avoid these two positions through making peace with him.

Mu'awiya thought that it was possible for Allah to send someone to the
Syrian Camp to draw the attention of the people to the true authority of
al-Hasan and to their ugly attitude towards him so that they would
revolt against him (i.e., Mu'awiya).

While Mu'awiya was advancing against al-Hasan, he remembered the words
which al-Nu'man b. Jibllah al-Tanwakhi said to him at the Battle of
Siffin. It's worth mentioning that al-Nu'man was among the commanders of
the fighting soldiers of Mu'awiya. The former talked openly to the
latter in the manner which no Syrian had done before or after him, and
mocked at him to the extent that no subject mocked at him. For this
reason Mu'awiya thought that the people would someday have the same
feelings which the helpless al-Tanwakhi had.

Among the words al-Tanwakhi said to Mu'awiya at the Battle of Siffin
are: "By Allah, I was sincere to you. I preferred your authority to my
religion. I left right guidance for your desire, while I knew that. I
deviated from the truth, while I understood that. I have not been
granted success since I fought against the cousin of the Apostle of
Allah (i.e., Imam 'Ali), may Allah bless him and his family, who was the
first to believe in him, and then emigrated (to Mecca to join) him
(there). If we had given him what we have given you, he would have been
more kinder (than you) to the people and given (them) more than (you
do). However, we have given you the authority, and it is necessary to
complete it whether it is right or wrong. Far be it to be right! We will
fight for the fig of al-Ghouta and its olives if we are deprived of the
fruit of the garden and its rivers."'[^9]

Among the political acts of Mu'awiya was that he prevented the Syrians
from knowing the Muslim great figures outside Sham (Syria) lest they
should refuse him or mutiny against him. For this reason we do not know
how this Syrian man (i.e., al-Nu'man b. Jibllah al Tanwakhi) was able to
have knowledge of the cousin of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, his priority to believe in him, his kindness to the
people, his generosity in giving, and his right to authority.

Mu\`awiya went on making the Syrians ignorant of the great Muslim
figures till the end of his lifetime. This policy of his was the means
which he used to gather large groups of people and dispatch them to
fight against Imam 'Ali at Siffin, and then to fight against al Hasan at
Maskan.

You can easily understand the policy of ignorance when you read the
following words which Mu'awiya said, though they indicate his weak
character, to \`Amr b. al-\`As: "By Allah, you want nothing but to
disgrace me, for the Syrians thought that there was no one like me till
they heard from al-Hasan what they have heard."'[^10]

4. Among the political acts which Mu'awiya used to achieve his selfish
ambitions was that he summoned al-Hasan, peace be on him, to make peace
with him. In the meantime he summoned many people from Iraq and Sham
(Syria) and other Muslim countries to bear witness for that. From this
summons he wanted nothing but to pave the way to achieve his future
objectives through the war between him and al-Hasan.

There were two possible facets: either Sham (Syria) would be ruled by
Kufa or the war would destroy al-Hasan, al Husayn, their family, and
their Shi'a (followers). Then Mu'awiya would place the responsibility on
al-Hasan himself and said to the people: "Indeed I had summoned al-Hasan
to peacemaking. However, al-Hasan refused (everything) except the war. I
wanted life for him. However, he wanted death for me. I wanted to
prevent blood from shedding. However, he wanted to destroy the people
between me and him."

Through this excellent act, Mu'awiya would fulfill his aims. In other
words he would destroy the family of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and
his family. Meanwhile, he would pretend justice. Moreover, the people
whom he summoned to attend peacemaking would confirm his justice.

As for al-Hasan, peace be on him, he was aware of this political plan.
Thus he was cleverer and more skillful than his enemy in making use of
the conditions and seizing the opportunities to please Allah and to
achieve the interests of the Muslims. Accordingly, the critical
situations and the evil intentions of Mu'awiya forced him, peace be on
him, to accept the idea of making peace with the former.

Al-Hasan intended to destroy Mu'awiya's plans and to prevent him from
putting them into effect. Rather he made a wise plan to destroy his
opponents in the name of reconciliation. In the chapters that follow, we
will mention some explanations appropriate for this subject.

In history there are many stories that indicate that the Syrians had no
knowledge of the great figures of Islam. Some of them are: A Syrian
asked one of this leaders: "Who is Abu Turab (i.e., Imam 'Ali) whom the
Imam (i.e., Mu'awiya) curse on the pulpit?" "I think he is among the
thieves of the discords," replied the leader" Also a Syrian asked a
friend of his when he heard him mentioning Muhammad: "What do you think
of this Muhammad? Is he our Lord?"

When \`Abd Allah b. 'Ali conquered Sham (Syria), he sent some Syrian old
men from the rich leading people to Abu al-\`Abbas al-Saffah. The old
men swore by Allah before al-Saff-ah to denote that they did not know
that the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, had
relatives nor members of a House to inherit him except the banu (sons)
of Umayya till you have taken the reins of government." See al-Mas'udi,
Muruj al-Dhahab, pp. 107-9.

I (i.e., the author) say: This indicates that all the Umayyad kings
followed this policy to make the people ignorant of their great figures,
especially the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, and
to prevent their names from entering Sham. Also this indicates that the
Syrians took care of their Islam very much. We think that Sham (Syria)
during the Umayyad dynasty was still full of the non- Muslim majority
that belonged to Rome and Armenia.

[^1]: This is the right idea which al-Hasan's speech indicates when he
asked the advice of his companions in al-Mada'in: "Indeed Mu'awiya has
summoned us to an affair in which there is neither dignity nor justice."
Other references indicate that, too.

[^2]: In this connection, al-Hasan al-Basri said good words. You will
read them in chapter 17, \`Mu'awiya and the Succession’. Ahmad (in his
book called 'al-Musnad'), Abu Ya\`la, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Hayyan, Abu
Dauwwd, and al-Hakim have narrated the following tradition on the
authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
who said: "The succession (Khilafa) after me will last for thirty
(years), then a king (will come) after that." Abu Nu'aym (in his book
called \`al-Fitan'), and al-Bayhaqi (in his book called 'al-Dala'il)
have narrated this tradition in this way: "Then a biting king (will
come) after that." The Sunni traditionists have regarded the tradition
authentic according to their condition. One of them commented on the
tradition: "The thirty years after the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, ended when al-Hasan b. 'Ali, peace be on them,
became a successor." Abu Said reported on the authority of \`Abd
al-Rahman b. Abzi on the authority of \`Umar, who said: "This matter is
concerning the people (who took part at the Battle of) Badr. No one of
them has remained (alive). Then it concerns the people (who took part at
the Battle of) Uhud. No one of them has remained (alive). Then it
concerns so and so. It (the tradition) does not concern the freed
prisoner, nor the son of the freed prisoner, nor those who became Muslim
after the Conquest (of Mecca)." I (i.e., the author) say: As for the
pledge of allegiance which Mu'awiya imposed on the people with his known
ways, it made the unlawful lawful.

[^3]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, pp., 4 and 5 and
13 and 74.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Al-Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, pp. 201- 2. Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa
al Nahaya, vol. 8, p. 40. Al-Majlisi, Biharal-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 98.

[^6]: Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, pp. 159- 60.

[^7]: Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol. 6, p. 67.

[^8]: Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh, vol. 6, p. 3.

[^9]: Al-Mas'udi, Hashim b. al-Athir, vol. 5, p. 216.

[^10]: Al-Bayhaqi, al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi', vol. 1, p. 64.


