Prominent Texts In The Peace Treaty
===================================

The form of the Peace Treaty, whose objective elements are religiously
and politically important, is a new proof for the success which al-Hasan
achieved. In the meantime it indicates that he had a high politico-
religious viewpoint.

In the light of what has been narrated on the authority of al-Hasan such
as arrangements and laws that were the best of the political acts during
his time, it is an act of truthfulness to admit that al-Hasan had
excellent political abilities. If he had been allowed to put his
outstanding political abilities into effect, he would have been the most
brilliant Muslim politician. Moreover, deprivation of authority and
failure in a certain field due to certain conditions are not proofs for
showing weakness or criticism. For there are many undoubtful and
unquestionable proofs that indicate that al-Hasan had careful
consideration, strong arrangements, and high opinions.

Personal abilities play an important role in the practical field even
though they are exposed to deprivation and failure. This great man
(i.e., al-Hasan) was full of these abilities. Thus he was able to
preserve the life of all the community in present and future times. That
is because these abilities helped him, peace be on him, to make a plan
with conditions in an excellent manner to face his opponents.

From the eloquence of the Peace Treaty and its five items, you
understand that al-Hasan did not treat his matter at random, nor did he
deal with it part-by-part or section-by-section. Rather he put an idea
with coherent parts and regular dimensions. Also you understand that
al-Hasan did his best to find the most practical conditions as
precautionary steps to maintain his legal right to authority and to
preserve his position and the position of his brother, and to facilitate
the affairs of his family.

In the Peace Treaty, al-Hasan asked Mu'awiya to give security to his
Shi'a (followers) and the Shi'a of his father. Also he asked him to
spend one million dirhams on the orphans who belonged to his Shi'a. With
this sum of money, al-Hasan wanted to reward them for their
steadfastness with him and their loyalty to his father. He wanted to
keep them as trustees for his doctrine and as loyal supporters to
strengthen his position and the position of his brother on the day when
the situation would return to normal.

Through the Peace Treaty, al-Hasan handed authority to Mu'awiya provided
that the latter should act according to the Book of Allah, the Sunna
(practices) of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and the
Sira (practices) of the Orthodox Caliphs. In this way, al-Hasan was able
to reduce the authority of his enemy. In other words he reduced the
violations of his enemy through the foregoing conditions. That is
because the violations of Mu'awiya cannot be counted and were severe in
punishment. This indicates that al-Hasan was the most knowledgeable of
all people in Mu'awiya and his moral abilities towards these conditions.

Moreover, the Peace Treaty was the document which the two parties (i.e.,
al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) signed to conform to the conditions where in.
Accordingly, the Peace Treaty was at most the matter of limited material
things which one of the two parties (i.e., Mu'awiya) wanted to get. In
the meantime it was the matter of limitless spiritual things which the
second party (i.e., al-Hasan) obtained.

Through his reconciliation with al-Hasan, peace be on him, Mu'awiya did
not intend to get anything but to take the reins of government. However,
when al-Hasan handed over authority to Mu'awiya, he intended to
safeguard his doctrine from distortion and his Shi'a from destruction,
and to underline that the usurped right (to authority) should be
returned on the day when Mu'awiya would die.

It is an act of correctness that we do not understand the meaning of the
Peace Treaty but through this facet.

To understand clearly the aims of the two parties, we have to analyze
their words on the day when they made peace with each other.

1. The Declarations of the two Parties

It is enough for us to mention the words which Mu'awiya said concerning
the Peace Treaty with al-Hasan, peace be on him. Many historians have
narrated these words on his authority. Among them is b. Kathir, who has
reported these words of Mu'awiya: "We are satisfied with it (i.e., the
Peace Treaty) (to take the reins of) government.[^1]

When Mu'awiya exchanged letters with al-Hasan to pave the way to the
Peace Treaty, he said: "It is for you that you are not ruled with wrong,
the affairs are not executed without you, and you are not disobeyed in
any affair."[^2]

It is enough for us to mention the declarations which al-Hasan said to
make his Shi'a understand the backgrounds of his reconciliation with
Mu'awiya: "You do not know what I have done. By Allah, what I have done
for my Shi'a is better than what the sun rises over." Also what he said
one day to Bashir al-Hamadani who was among the chiefs of his Shi'a in
Kufa: "With my reconciliation I wanted nothing but to drive killing away
from you.[^3]Also what he said in his speech after peacemaking: "Men,
Allah has guided you (to belief) with the foremost one of us, and
prevented your blood from shedding with the last one of us. I have made
peace with Mu'awiya while I know that it may be a tribulation and a
provision till a time."[^4]

These declarations and the many ones similar to them, whether they
belonged to a1- Hasan, peace be on him, or to Mu'awiya help us
understand the document signed by the two parties. The two parties
intended to achieve the aims which we have already mentioned: Mu'awiya
intended to achieve his ambition through assuming power, while al-Hasan
made a plan to save his Shi'a from killing, to preserve

his religious doctrines that were better than what the sun rose over,
and to make peace with Mu'awiya for a fixed time.

Now, there is no wonder when we mention the truth as it is and refer to
the deviation (from the truth) of many historians who distorted the aims
of the two parties and misunderstood their words. You may find that the
Peace Treaty itself and the declarations of the two parties have never
mentioned a pledge of allegiance, nor Imamate, nor caliphate
(succession). So why have some historians claimed that? For example, b.
Qutayba al-Dinawari said that al-Hasan pledged allegiance to Mu'awiya
for the Imamate.

Before we discuss this matter or those who believe in it, it is better
for us to shed light upon the Islamic caliphate which was attributed to
Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan and the Islamic Law that prevented the people
from pledging allegiance to those who were like him. In this connection,
we say:

Mu'awiya and the Succession
---------------------------

We have already mentioned that the succession in Islam after the Apostle
of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, should be for those who
were similar to him in all his outstanding qualities and that neither
the freed prisoner, nor his son, nor those who became Muslims after the
Conquest of Mecca had the right to succeed the Prophet as \`Umar b.
al-Khattab said. Also we have previously said that the caliphate
(succession) after the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
would last for thirty years, and then a biting king would take it. (The
Sunnis have a corrected tradition).

We have also said that the Imamate was concluded through the textual
nomination (as the Shi'a and the Mu'tazilites believe) and that the
victory and force made the unlawful thing lawful. Therefore it is not
correct to take the Caliphate by force. Also it is not correct to impose
it on the Muslims by force.

Besides the person who succeeded the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, had no right to oppose his (the Prophet's) rules openly and
secretly, while Mu'awiya had violated them openly and secretly when he
committed ugly deeds such as adding the adulterer to his lineage,
performing Friday prayer on Wednesday, and breaking the pledge he made
with Allah.

Moreover, from the time of Mu'awiya till this time, the learned people
in the Islamic community have not regarded Mu'awiya's authority over the
Muslims as succession, in the full sense of the word. They have not
regarded him as successor after the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family. Noteworthy the Umayyad nominal successors and their
followers volunteered to propagate that for one thousand months. That
was the period of their dynasty in Islam. During this period of time,
they spent bribes generously, and fabricated traditions and stories
according to their plans and desires. Still Mu'awiya was a mere worldly
king and nominal caliph.

After Mu'awiya had taken the reins of government, Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas
came to him and said: "oh King, as- salamu \`alayka!" Mu'awiya smiled at
him and said: "Abu Ishaq, what prevent you from saying: \`Commander of
the faithfulâ€™?" Sa'd said: "Do you say this cheerfully? By Allah, I
dislike to call you the Commander of the faithful as I called him (i.e.,
'Ali) with it."[^5]

In a long speech, b. \`Abbas said to Abu Musa al Ash'ari: "Mu'awiya has
no quality to be a successor."[^6]

To oppose Mu'awiya's succession, Abu Hurayra has narrated the following
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, "The successor (Khilafa) is in Medina and the king is in Syria
(Sham)."[^7]

Ibn Abu Shayba has narrated: "Sufayna, the servant of the Apostle of
Allah (may Allah bless him and his family), was asked about the
worthiness of the banu (sons) of \`Umayya of the succession (Khilafa),
so he said: \`The banu of al-Zarqa' (i.e., the Umayyads) have told lies.

Rather they are kings from the evil kings. Mu'awiya is the first of
them.'"[^8]

\`A'isha was astonished to hear that Mu'awiya claimed that he was the
successor (Khalifa). He heard of that, so he said: "How wonderful!
\`A'isha claims that I am inappropriate for the Caliphate. May Allah
forgive her. Why does she oppose that?"[^9]

Abu Bakra (Ziyad's half brother, on his mother's side) attended the
meeting of Mu'awiya. The latter said to him: "Abu Bakra, tell us." Abu
Bakra (as b. Sa'd narrated) said: "I heard the Apostle of Allah, may
Allah bless him and his family saying: \`The succession (Khilafa) will
(last for) thirty (years), then the king (will come).'" \`Abd al-Rahman
b. Abu Bakra said: "I was with my father, so Mu'awiya ordered us to be
pushed in the back till we were taken out."[^10]

Mu'awiya asked Sa'sa'a b. Sawhan al-\`Abdi: "Which of the caliphs do you
regard me?"

Sa'sa'a said: "What do you think of the caliph who have ruled the people
by force, subjugated them with haughtiness, and assumed power through
false ways (such as) telling lies and cunning? Indeed, by Allah, you had
neither a sword nor a spear at (the Battle of) Badr. You and your father
were in the war and the trade. You were from those who provoked (the
people) against the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family. Indeed, you are a freed prisoner and the son of a freed
prisoner. The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
released you. So is the succession to authority appropriate for the
freed prisoner?"[^11]

Al-Mughira b. Shu'ba came to Mu'awiya, then he left him and said to his
son: "I have come from the most evil of all people."[^12]

Mu'awiya's governor Samra cursed him on the day when he removed him from
the authority of Basrah. He (Samra) said: "My Allah curse Mu'awiya, by
Allah, if I had obeyed Allah as I obeyed him (Mu'awiya), He (Allah)
would have never tortured me." [^13]

Al-Hasan al-Basri said: "Mu'awiya had four qualities. If he had only one
of them, it would have been a grave sin: he controlled this community
with the foolish, so he assumed power without asking its advise, while
among it was the rest of the Companions (of the Prophet) and the
virtuous. He appointed his son as successor, while he was drunkard, wore
silk, played on the mandolins. He claimed that Ziyad was (his brother),
while the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, said:
"The child is for bed and the prostitute is stoned."'[^14] Moreover, he
killed Hujr, woe unto him from Hujr and the Companions of Hujr!"

After the Peace Treaty, the Mu'tazilites refused to pledge allegiance to
Mu'awiya. They isolated themselves from both al-Hasan and Mu'awiya. For
this reason they called themselves the Mu'tazilites.[^15]

Then the days of Mu'awiya passed, so the jurists of the Four Schools
have regarded him as an example of the oppressive ruler.[^16]

Also he became the aggressor against whom fighting was obligatory
according to the idea of Abu Hanifa al-Nu'man b. Thabit.[^17]

So I (i.e., the author) wonder: where is the succession (Khilafa)?

Al-Mu'tazid al-\`Abbasi came (to power). He propagated again the deeds
of Mu'awiya, his great disasters, what was said concerning him, and what
was narrated regarding him. He summoned the Muslims to curse him through
the royal decree which was announced to the people in the year 284
A.H.[^18]

Having mentioned the succession of al-Hasan b. 'Ali, peace be on them,
al-Ghazali said: "The Caliphate reached the people who assumed it
without worthiness.[^19]

The most wonderful words said concerning Mu'awiya in the sixth century
A.H., were those of the chief of Basrah: "Mu'awiya was like the false
dirham."[^20]

Ibn Kathir declared that Mu'awiya was not the successor according to the
previous tradition (of the Prophet): "We have already mentioned that the
succession after him (i.e., the Prophets peace be on him, would (last)
for thirty years, then a king (would come). Surely, the thirty years
were over in (the beginning) of the succession of al Hasan b. 'Ali, so
the days of Mu'awiya were the beginning (of the authority) of the
king."[^21]

After al-Dimyari (died 808 A.H.) had mentioned the period of the
succession of al-Hasan, peace be on him, he said: "It (i.e., the period
of the succession of al-Hasan) was the end of what the Apostle of Allah,
may Allah bless him and his family, said concerning the period of the
succession, then it (the Caliphate) would be (assumed by) a biting king,
then it would be tyranny and corruption in the earth, that occurred as
the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his. family, said."[^22]

At last, Muhammad b. \`Aqil wrote his valuable book \`al-Nasa'ih
al-Kafiya liman yatawalld Mu'awiya.' Indeed, the book is the decisive
idea concerning the matter of Mu'awiya. The book was printed twice.
Please, see the book.

The Islamic Law refuses such a kind of succession. Mu'awiya clearly
disobeyed the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. The learned
people blamed him for that. Therefore we think that there is no need to
go on discussing the subject: Mu'awiya and the Succession.

Like the other Muslim leaders, al-Hasan himself, after he had handed
over the authority to Mu'awiya, was clear in denying Mu'awiya's
succession. In his speech on the day when he held a meeting in Kufa,
al-Hasan said: "Mu'awiya has claimed that I have seen him worthy of the
succession, and I have not seen myself worthy of it. Mu'awiya has told
lies. We are the worthiest of all people of the Book of Allah, the Great
and Almighty, as His Apostle said." (We will mention his speech in
chapter 18.)

In another speech, after the Peace Treaty, al-Hasan said in the presence
of Mu'awiya: "The caliph is not he who believes in oppression, stops the
laws, and regards the life in this world as father and mother. However,
that is a king who obtains supreme authority to enjoy it, hastens
towards its pleasure, and pays no attention to its final consequence. So
he is as Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: \`And I do not know of
this may be a trial for you and a provision till a time.' "[^23]

2. Ideas on the Pledge of Allegiance

In his book \`Usul al-Kafi, p. 61', Muhammad b. Ya'qub al Kulayni, may
Allah have mercy on him, has narrated: "Indeed al Hasan stipulated that
he should not call Mu'awiya Commander of the faithful (Amir
al-mu'minin)."

In his book \` \`Ilal al-Shard' p. 81', Muhammad b. 'Ali b. Babawayh
said: "Indeed al-Hasan stipulated that he should not testify that he
called Mu'awiya the Commander of the faithful."

These two reports are cautious of recognizing the correctness of the
succession of Mu'awiya and of the pledge of allegiance to him. Therefore
al-Hasan handed over government to Mu'awiya, not the succession to
authority.

As for the words of al-Dinawari in his book \`al-Imama wa al Siyasa'
that al-Hasan pledged allegiance to Mu'awiya for the Imamate, they
oppose, first of all, Mu'awiya's abilities which we have already
mentioned to show the relationship between him and the succession and
the competence of the pledge of allegiance over the Muslims. Also these
words oppose the declarations of al-Hasan who refused the succession of
Mu'awiya, whether in his previous sermons or in his clear reservations
in these two reports.

Concerning the matters of al-Hasan and Mu'awiya, al-Dinawari indicates
plain partiality that was inappropriate for such a historian who lived
in the third century when there was neither Mu'awiya nor his bribes nor
his claims. However, these words resulted from the emotional motives
that urged most of our historians. So al-Dinawari said again: "Neither
al-Hasan nor al-Husayn saw evil or misfortune throughout Mu'awiya's
lifetime." I (i.e., the author) say: Which evil is more horrible than
usurping the throne unjustly? Again I wonder: are these the criteria of
al-Dinawari?

If we want to look for an excuse for those who hastened to mention the
pledge of allegiance (to Mu'awiya), we will say that they were affected
by the propagation which was still heard. In the history of Islam there
is no matter more prominent than transferring authority from the
grandson of the Prophet to a freed prisoner from the freed prisoners who
were known for their near history. For this reason, love controlled
those who denied the Peace Treaty to the extent that they elaborated its
annotations and footnotes. So they distorted what happened and forged
that which did not happen. They used their imagination to give ideas of
the pledge of allegiance to Mu'awiya.

Through these fabricated ideas, the Umayyads were able to take the reins
of government after the event of peacemaking.

That is because the Peace Treaty was the pillar on which their claims
for the worthiness of the claimed succession was based. For this reason
the Muslims thought that Umayyads were not worthy of the succession nor
was the succession appropriate for them.

Concerning that the Muslims depend on the words of Sufayna the servant
of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family: "The banu
(sons) of al-Zarqa' have told lies. Rather they are kings. Mu'awiya is
the first of them."

Then the superficial knowledge of our Muslim historians of the history
of Islam played an important role in this respect. So they regarded this
made- up story as an actual fact. Very few of them refrained from
curiosity in speech. Moreover, some of them exceeded the fact, so they
mixed the ideas to the extent that they said that al Hasan recognized
openly the pledge of allegiance to Mu'awiya. These mixed ideas made some
of them go into fabrication and loss that are inappropriate for the
manhood of the Muslim person who writes about a grandson of his great
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Besides these mixed ideas
endangered historical honesty. Accordingly, some of such kinds of
historians have claimed that al Hasan sold the succession to authority
for money.

Now, we are in no need to answer the claims of the liars.

If we want to understand the reconciliation which the two parties (i.e.,
al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) accepted, first we must depend on the meaning of
the pledge of allegiance and the meaning of the Imamate as they are, and
then we must depend on the reports of the event and the declarations of
those who are specialists in the matter.

There are many proofs for this fact, so it leaves no room for doubt.

In the past the people resorted to the sayings of the old historians to
understand the past events, namely they resorted to the historians who
were contemporary with those events or came after them in a short period
of time. This way led the later generations to different ideas and
various parties. That happened in Muslim society and religion.

That is because the authorities of this history were under the influence
of the ideas and the parties which they were unable to avoid during
their times. At that time it was difficult for a certain author to
avoid, in what he wrote, the emotional effects that took part in forming
his literary works and in managing his social acts and interests. From
here the sorrowful sensible worry appeared in many matters of Islamic
history.

It is an act of truthfulness to say that the story of the pledge of
allegiance with which the matter of al-Hasan was defamed was the result
of that influence under which the historians had written their ideas. So
they were either partial in writing down this story as a real truth to
gain an immediate interest or they were ignorant of the reality.

Thus they thought that the declaration of handing over the authority in
the text of the Peace of Treaty would permit them or help them enlarge
the claim of the yielding to the pledge of allegiance. However, the
historians did not know that the succession, as a Divine office, was not
liable to any bargaining or handing over. Also the times could not
change it through peacemaking or arbitration.

To understand clearly \`handing over the authority' which has been
mentioned in the first item in the Peace Treaty, we must depend on our
method to conclude seriousness from the joking of the historians. So we
must study this brief explanation through the two parties themselves.

3. Handing over the Authority

From what we have already mentioned, we have understood that Mu'awiya
said to his son Yazid concerning the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them: "Indeed the right is their right."

Also we have known that Mu'awiya wrote to al-Hasan to pave the way to
peacemaking: "The matters are not settled without you, and you are not
disobeyed in a certain matter."

Also we have understood that Mu'awiya said after the Peace Treaty: "We
have accepted it for authority."

Also we have known that Mu'awiya addressed the people from the pulpit of
Kufa on the day when he arrived in it: "I have not fought against you to
make you pray, nor to fastâ€ž nor to make the pilgrimage, nor to pay Zakat
(alms). Rather I have fought against you so that I might have power over
you."

Also we have understood that al-Hasan b. 'Ali denied the succession to
authority before Mu'awiya, so the latter kept silent and did not answer
the former.

Therefore we must know that when Mu'awiya accepted the Peace Treaty for
authority, he denied it to be succession for himself. That was when he
said: "I have not fought against you to make you pray, nor to pay Zakat
(alms)." Here Mu'awiya indicated that he was not the successor of
religion. However, he was a king in the life in this world. He was
indifferent to performing prayers and paying Zakat.

Rather he intended to plot against the people. Mu'awiya said to al-Hasan
"The matters are not settled without you." Also he said to his son
Yazid: "The right is their right." Thus he recognized the high position
of al-Hasan and his authority which was not disobeyed in a certain
matter. That was the position of the succession to authority. At that
time it was necessary for Mu'awiya to keep silent when al-Hasan denied
his succession clearly and accused him of lying when he claimed it for
himself without worthiness.

Accordingly, where is the handing over of the succession to authority
which the historians claimed?

There is another thing that indicates clearly that Mu'awiya was not the
successor. That was when he smiled at Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas on the day when
the latter came to the former and said to him: "King, Assalamu
\`alayka!," and did not say: "Commander of the faithful." The deep
meaning of this phrase indicates clearly that Mu'awiya wanted to admit
his error when he wanted to take the authority as war booty, not as
means between the Muslims and their Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family.

For this reason Mu'awiya was worthy of the words of Sa'd, whom Mu'awiya
was unable to trick, when he said to him: "By Allah, I dislike to call
Mu'awiya the Commander of the faithful as I called him (i.e., 'Ali) with
that." He meant that Mu'awiya was inappropriate for this title that grew
on the prohibited blood, the black discords, and the corrupt times.

In accordance with this explanation, Sa'd understood that al-Hasan
handed government to Mu'awiya and nothing else. This should be
understood according to the language of the Qur'an (i.e., the Arabic
language) on the succession or the language of the two contracting
parties (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) in the Peace Treaty. When the
great Muslim researcher, Sayyid Amir 'Ali al-Hindi, may Allah have mercy
on him, studied the Peace Treaty, he called it \`the abdication from
authority.'[^24]

Some of what al-Hasan, peace be on him, said to those who blamed him for
making peace with Mu'awiya is: "Abu \`Amir, don't say that I have
humiliated the believers. Rather I had hated to kill them for the
authority."[^25]

Also al-Hasan said to another companion of his: "I have made these (the
Umayyads) quarrel with each other over the authority of the world, of
which I am in no need."'[^26]

In this way we see that the two parties (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya)
agreed on that the battle for which they advanced against each other
with their two armies was for the authority. This means that the peace
which they concluded in their treaty was for the authority. For they
made peace today with each other for what they differed over yesterday.
In the viewpoint that was standing between the two parties, through
these declarations or on the day when they made peace with each other,
there is no mentioning of the succession to authority whether concerning
handing it over or receiving it.

Then, in these declarations, we find them (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya)
agreed on preferring one of them to the other for the position without
which the matters would not be decided. It was the position that
permitted al-Hasan to say the following words concerning Mu'awiya,
namely, it was as if that al-Hasan appointed Mu'awiya to an office while
the latter was at that time present at the meeting of the former: "He
(i.e., Mu'awiya) is more knowledgeable in his affair and more thankful
(to us) for appointing him to this matter."[^27] He meant the matter of
the authority.

I (i.e., the author) wonder: Do you see the great difference between
this position of al-Hasan and what the pedantic ones imagined when they
explained handing over the authority as handing over the succession to
authority (Khilafa)?

We think that this idea was a mistake which an author made with
intention. Then the authors learned it from him without intention. In
such a way many mistakes have been made in history. These mistakes have
distorted the facts of history, changed some of its splendor, and
doubled the efforts of the researchers. Then if you take care of your
subject through checking its references, you will find that it belongs
to one origin, and then if you check the origin, you will find it
belongs to one origin.

As for the nominal succession, we don't oppose it even it was taken by
Mu'awiya and those who claimed it for themselves or took it by weapon or
inherited it from those who claimed and took it.

If it is true that the community permitted Mu'awiya to derive the
succession to authority from the claim and the power of the weapon, then
there will be no doubt in the term.

According to this idea, no wonder when Mu'awiya was the successor of the
influence and authority, and al-Hasan b. 'Ali was the successor of the
Prophet and the partner of the Qur'an.

No wonder when what has been mentioned in some texts, if we suppose that
the narration is correct and safe from distortion, is the practical
usage of the word (al-Khilafa) in its new meaning!

4. The Fate of the Succession to Authority after Mu'awiya

Mu'awiya sent letters to al-Hasan to pave the way to make peace with
him. In these letters the fate of the Succession to authority was
clearly limited. For example, Mu'awiya asked al-Hasan to hand over the
authority for his lifetime. Thus he said: "The authority will be for you
after me."[^28] "You are the worthiest of all people of it."

In this way the text has been mentioned in the Peace Treaty.

In such a way the people understood the reconciliation, namely, they
understood it as taking the authority by force throughout the lifetime
of Mu'awiya who was about thirty years older than al-Hasan. It was
expected that Mu'awiya would die before al-Hasan. In this way the truth
would return to its proper place. It is noteworthy that al-Hasan was
still at the beginning of his middle age or at the end of his youth.

However, the evil plans had certain considerations that did not depend
on the criteria. The plain item concerning the worthiness of al-Hasan of
the succession to authority after Mu'awiya was the most prominent of all
items of the Peace Treaty. The people knew that for ten years. However,
the hostile propagation covered it. Besides the historians distorted it.
Thus some of them said: "Mu'awiya had no right to appoint anyone (to the
succession to authority)." The others were so kind that they formed it
according to their own ideas when they said: "The succession to
authority after Mu'awiya would be a Muslim consultative committee."

As for the truthful historians, they have narrated it (the Peace Treaty)
as it is. The professional historians have forgotten that distorting the
fact in the text does not avail them in changing the reality during the
practical stage. That is because it was impossible for the Muslims,
whether through the consultative committee or the like, to ignore the
grandson of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. Of
course, that would have happened if al-Hasan had remained alive on the
day when Mu'awiya died and the Muslims had been free to elect the
successor or to exchange views freely. Accordingly, the authentic
narration and the distorted one, rather the three claimed forms of the
one narration would have been practically limited if al-Hasan had
remained alive.

Therefore to evade the historical honesty was for nothing but for the
cooperation with the ruling authority to pave the way to pledge
allegiance to Yazid.

The skillful historian has abolished the textual nomination of al Hasan
and changed it into the consultative committee. He had adopted the best
way of fabrication and distortion. However, he forgot that he added
nothing to the aims which he wished for his friend (i.e., Mu'awiya) who
abolished them both. That is because the consultative committee which
the historian meant does not concern the election of the successor to
authority, rather it concerns the affairs which the caliph or the head
of the Muslims manages. Such was the first legislation of the
consultative committee on the day when Allah, the Glorified, said: "And
take counsel with them in the affair." For this reason Allah praised the
Muslims when He said: "And their rule is to take counsel among
themselves."

The verse is clear in negating leadership which the people made or
rather it does not impose it on the people.

This historian and the other historians used their imagination when they
thought that the matter of election depended on the Book (i.e., the
Qur'an). For this reason \`A'isha, the Prophet's wife, summoned the
people to the consultative committee she did not attribute it to Allah,
the Great and Almighty. Rather she attributed it to \`Umar b. al
Khattab. Besides if she had found a way to ascribe it to Allah, she
would have followed it, for that would have supported her proof very
much. So when she entered Basrah, she said: "I think that you should
look for those who had killed \`Uthman to kill them as they had killed
him."[^29]

At last many definite contexts do not accept this text (i.e., the
subject of the study) but the authentic narration which we have
mentioned in the second item in the form of the Peace Treaty. That is
because:

1. The letters of Mu'awiya to al-Hasan, peace be on him, have indicated
that as we have said before.

2. It is appropriate for the conditions which al-Hasan himself had made
as we have mentioned in the Blank Page.

3. It is the most famous report, for it has been narrated many times.

4. The second item with the clear text was very famous throughout the
lifetime of al-Hasan, peace be on him, to the extent that it became the
proof in many sermons and speeches.

For example, Sulayman b. Sirt referred to it in what he had mentioned to
al-Hasan after the Peace Treaty. Jariya b. Qaddama had mentioned it to
Mu'awiya to denote that it was a well- known decree concerning the right
of al-Hasan to the authority after him. Al-Ahnaf b. Qays had mentioned
it as an axiomatic thing when he delivered a speech to refute the pledge
of allegiance to Yazid. At that time, through this speech, he addressed
Mu'awiya himself before a large gathering.

He (i.e., al-Ahnaf b. Qays) said: "You have known that you had not
conquered Iraq by force, nor had you overcome it. However, you have made
pledges with al-Hasan b. 'Ali before Allah to hand over the authority to
him after you. So if you fulfill (your pledges), then you are
appropriate for fulfillment. If you break (your pledges), then you will
do wrong to (al-Hasan). By Allah, behind al-Hasan there are quick
horses, strong arms, and sharp swords. Indeed if you approach him in a
single span of perfidy, you will find behind him a span of the
outstretched arms of victory. You know that the Iraqis have not loved
you since they hated you."[^30] There are many examples similar to this
one.

5. The Rest of the Items

You may see, till now, that our study on the prominent points in the
items of the Peace Treaty have not exceed two items, namely the first
and the second items.

As for the third item, in chapter 14, we discussed with Mu'awiya about
its subject. So see that chapter. Also we have discussed the Blank Page
which Mu'awiya had sent to al-Hasan, peace be on him to write on it
whatever he wanted of conditions. In chapter 16, the speech about this
Page is the context that indicates that the reports of the Peace Treaty
are in the interest of al-Hasan more than they are in the interest of
his opponents.

In accordance with this, the third item means nothing but that it
prevents Mu'awiya absolutely from cursing the Commander of the faithful
(i.e., Imam 'Ali), peace be on him, whether al-Hasan is present or
absent. What some historians added to it, such as that the Commander of
the faithful should not be cursed when al Hasan was present or heard
that,[^31] is not taken into consideration, nor is it appropriate for
the essence of the Peace Treaty. That is because the two parties (i.e.,
al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) were making real peace and permanent mutual
understanding.

As for the fourth item, it was, in fact, a connected exception of the
material things which should be handed to Mu'awiya according to the
Peace Treaty. This means that the Peace Treaty gave Mu'awiya whatever he
wanted of property with the exception of the sums of money which have
been mentioned in this item. Al-Hasan chose to take these sums of money
for himself, his brother, and his Shi'a (followers). These sums of money
were from his rights. He disposed them according to the authorization of
Allah, the Most High. He chose these sums of money from the legal land
taxes, namely from the land taxes of Dar Abjard.[^32] For he did not
want to subject himself to suspicions.

I (i.e., the author) say: This explanation is different from that of
those who unjustly treated the position of al-Hasan b. 'Ali, peace be on
them, when they misunderstood the reality of these sums of money. So
they regarded them as a cost of the succession to authority, al Hasan as
a seller, and Mu'awiya as a buyer. It is better for such narrow- minded
people not to discuss the matters that show the reader their
narrow-mindedness, so they wrong themselves before they wrong their
subjects.

We have already mentioned the meaning of the succession to authority and
Mu'awiya's abilities. Thus it is enough for us to say that this prattle
is impossible. So there is no need to repeat it again.

As for the fifth item, it will be explained in the chapters that follow.

[^1]: Ibn Kathir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 6, p. 220.

[^2]: Ibn Abd al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 13.

[^3]: Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, p. 203.

[^4]: Al-Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, p. 192.

[^5]: Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 163. Muhammad b.
\`Aqil, al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiya, p. 158.

[^6]: Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol. 6, p. 7.

[^7]: Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 6, p. 321.

[^8]: Muhammad b. \`Aqil, al-Nasa' ih al-Kafiya (Iran), p. 153.

[^9]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 5.

[^10]: Muhammad b. \`Aqil, al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiya, p. 159.

[^11]: Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol. 6, p. 7.

[^12]: Al-Mas'udi, Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 342. Ibn Abu al-Hadid,
Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2. p. 357.

[^13]: Muhammad b. \`Aqil, al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiya, p. 9.

[^14]: Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh, vol. b, p. 157.

[^15]: Muhammad b. Ahmad (died 377 A.H.), al-Tanbih wa al-Radd 'ala Ahl
al-Ahwa' wa al-Buda', p. 28.

[^16]: That is because they have agreed on that it is permitted for the
oppressive ruler to assume judgeship according to the act of the
Companions who permitted Mu'awiya assume judgeship.

[^17]: Abu Hanifa said: "Do you know why the Syrians hate us?" "No,"
they answered. He said: "That is because we think that if we had joined
the Camp of 'Ali b. Abu Talib may Allah honor him, we would have help
him against Mu'awiya and fought the latter for the former. For this
reason they hate us." See, Muhammad b. \`Aqil, al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiya, p.
36, in what he has narrated on the authority of Abu Shaker in his book
\`al-Tamhid fi Bayan al Tawhid.

[^18]: Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh, vol. 11, p. 355.

[^19]: Farid Wajdi, Da'irat Ma'arif al-Qarn al-\`Ishrin, vol. 3, p. 231.

[^20]: Dr. Mustafa Jawad, Abu Ja\`far al-Naqib (Baghdad), p. 41.

[^21]: Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 19.

[^22]: Al-Dimyari, Hayht al-Hayawan al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 58.

[^23]: Al-Bayhaqi, al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi', vol. 2, p. 63. Other
authors have mentioned this speech.

[^24]: Amir 'Ali al-Hindi, Mukhtasar Ta'rikh al-'Arab wa al-Tamaddin
al-Islami, p. 61.

[^25]: Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 19. ' Sayyid
Muhsin al-Amin al-'Amili, A'yan al-Shi'a, vol. 4, p. 52. Al Hakim,
al-Mustadrak.

[^26]: Ahmad Shahab al-Din al-'Asqalani, al-Isaba fi Tamyiz al-Shahaba,
vol. 2, p. 12.

[^27]: Al-Bayhaqi, al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi', vol. 1, p. 64.

[^28]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 13.

[^29]: Farid Wajdi, Da'irat Ma'arif al-Qarn al-\`Ishrin, vol.4, p.535.

[^30]: You find all this sermon and the references concerning it in
chapter 20 when we will mention the way that facilitated the pledge of
allegiance to Yazid.

[^31]: Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 162. After that
he said: "Then he (i.e., Mu'awiya) did not fulfill it, either."

[^32]: In his book (al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 162), Ibn
al-Athir said: "As for the land taxes of Dar Abjard, the people of
Basrah stopped them." They said: "These land taxes are ours. We do not
give them to anyone." Also he said: "They stopped them according to
Mu'awiya's order."


