Meeting In Kufa
===============

The two Parties (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) had adopted the idea of
peacemaking. Thus it was natural for them to appoint a certain place to
declare the Peace Treaty. In other words the two sides wanted to hold
their meeting at one place to be a practical way of the peacemaking
which history witnessed, and to admit before the people the conditions
which they had to fulfill. So they had chosen Kufa and went there. Large
groups of people went with them. So the great capital (i.e., Kufa) was
full of them. They were- at most- the soldiers of the two parties, who
left their camps and hurried to witness that historical day when Kufa
was expected to witness willingly or unwillingly.

For the first time, the Iraqi capital was full of thousands of red
Syrian soldiers, who were Muslims and Christians. These two camps (i.e.,
Kufa and Syria) suffered from a series of historical enmities and bloody
battles beginning from the events of Salman al Bahili and Habib b.
Muslima al-Fahri, during the lifetime of \`Uthman b. \`Affan, to this
day of peacemaking. Then what do you think about the loyal Kufan soldier
who was expected to lay down his arms during the great wave of noise
which the Syrian soldiers made in al-Masjid al-Jami\` which was founded
on piety from Allah?

The deadly disaster hit the loyal group from the supporters of the
members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. Also it hit those
supporters who ignored the aims of al-Hasan through making peace with
Mu'awiya or ignored the real motives that forced the former to make
peace with the latter. As for the traitorous majority. They clearly
showed their treason. Groups of the Kufans were seen among the masses of
the Syrians. They wanted to take part in the cheated happiness of the
Syrians during their cold festivals and to take part in their overcome
victory.

The people were summoned to al-Masjid al-Jami' to listen to the two
orators (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) who had signed the Peace Treaty.

It was necessary for Mu'awiya to compete with al-Hasan for the pulpit,
so the former got ahead of the latter and went up on it.[^1] Then
Mu'awiya addressed the people with his long speech which the references
have not narrated except some prominent paragraphs.

Among them, as al-Ya'qubi has narrated, is: "Now then, indeed, if a
community differs in opinion after its prophet, its falsehood will
overcome its truth." He (i.e., al-Ya'qubi) said: "Then Mu'awiya paid
attention to what he had said, so he said: \`Except what this community
has done.[^2]

Also among them is what al-Mada'ni has narrated: "Kufans, do you think
that I have fought against you to make you pray and fast and pay zakat
and perform the pilgrimage? Indeed I know that you pray, pay zakat, and
perform the pilgrimage. However, I have fought against you to have power
over you and to twist your necks and Allah has given that to me while
you are reluctant (to that).

Indeed every blood which has been shed in this discord is postponed and
every condition I have given to al-Hasan is under these two feet of
mine. Nothing reforms the people but three (things): taking out the
giving at its proper time, returning the soldiers at their suitable
time, and attacking the enemy in his homeland. Indeed if you do not
attack them, they will attack you."

On the authority of Habib b. Abu Thabit, Abu al-Faraj al Isfahani has
narrated that Mu'awiya mentioned 'Ali in this oration and defamed him,
then he defamed al-Hasan.[^3]

Abu Ishaq al-Subay'i[^4] has added the following words to what he has
narrated of Mu'awiya's oration: "Indeed everything which I have given to
al-Hasan b. 'Ali is under these two feet of mine. I will not fulfill
it."

Abu Ishaq said: "By Allah, he (i.e., Mu'awiya) was traitorous."

Then the people looked forward to al-Hasan. Suddenly, they saw the
grandson of the Apostle of Allah, who was the most similar of them all
to him in form, manners, dignity, and correctness, coming from the
direction of the mihrab (prayer niche) of his father in the great mosque
to go up on his pulpit. The mobs were fond of curiosity. They were eager
to conclude the obscure things from the affairs of the great figures. So
they remembered the stammering Mu'awiya made in his speech. They
understood the plentiful self- possession of al-Hasan when he went up on
the pulpit and began looking at the large gatherings of people who
crowded in the wide mosque. They were eager to hear al-Hasan's answer to
Mu'awiya who refused the conditions of the Peace Treaty, broke the
covenants, shed blood, and attacked the innocent. Al-Hasan b. 'Ali,
peace be on them, was a clever orator. He made a speech during that
critical situation. His long eloquent speech was a wonderful document.

Through this speech, al Hasan was able to explain the situation standing
between the people and the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be
on them, after the death of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family. At the beginning of the speech, al-Hasan preached and
advised the Muslims. Then he summoned them to conform to love,
satisfaction, and unity. In the middle of the speech, he reminded them
of the attitudes of his family, rather the attitudes of prophets. At the
end of the speech, he answered Mu'awiya without any abusing or cursing.
However, through his eloquent style, he was the most painful curser and
abuser.

In his speech, al-Hasan said: "Praise belongs to Allah whenever a man
praises Him. I testify that there is no god but Allah whenever a man
testifies Him. I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His apostle
whom He sent with the truth and whom He entrusted with revelation, may
Allah bless him and his family.

Now then, by Allah, I hope that I shall always be with Allah's praise
and kindness. I am the sincerest of Allah's creatures in giving advice
to them. I do not bear malice to any Muslim, nor do I wish evil
misfortune for him. Indeed unity (jama \`a) is better than division. I
take care of you more than you take care of yourselves. Therefore do not
oppose my commands and do not reject my judgment. My Allah forgive both
me and you. May He guide me and you to that in which there is love and
satisfaction. [^5]

"Men, indeed, Allah has guided you through the foremost one of us and
spared your blood through the last one of us. Indeed there is a period
of time for this authority, and the world changes. Allah, the Great and
Almighty, said to his Apostle: \`I do not know whether what you are
threatened with is near or far. Surely He knows what is spoken openly
and He knows what you hide. And I do not know if this may be a trial for
you and a provision till a time.'[^6]

"Indeed Mu'awiya has told you that I see him appropriate for the
succession to authority, and I do not see myself appropriate for it. So
Mu'awiya has told you lie. We are worthier of the succession to
authority than the people in the Book of Allah, the Great and Almighty,
and on the tongue of His prophet. We, the members of the House (Ahl
al-Bayt), have been oppressed since Allah made His prophet to die.

So Allah is between him and us, who oppressed us, controlled us,
provoked the people against us, deprived us of our share of booty, and
deprived our mother of what the Apostle of Allah had allotted to her. I
swear by Allah, if the people had pledged allegiance to my father when
the Apostle of Allah left them, the sky would have given them its rain
and the earth its boon, and you, Mu'awiya, would have not wished for it
(the authority). When it (i.e., the authority) came out of its origin,
Quraysh differed over it. So the freed prisoners and their sons, you and
your friends, wished for it. Indeed the Apostle of Allah said: \`If a
community appoints a man over its authority and among it there is the
one who is more knowledgeable than him (i.e., the man), their authority
will come to nothing till they return to him whom they have left.'
Indeed the children of Israel had left Harun (Aaron) while they knew
that he was the successor of Musa (Moses) and they followed al-Samiri
(Samaritan). This community had left my father while it certainly heard
the Apostle of Allah say: \`You are in the same position with respect to
me as Harun (Aaron) to Musa (Moses) except prophethood.'

Indeed they (the community) saw the Apostle of Allah appointing my
father on the day of Ghadir Khum and ordered the present to convey his
order to the absent. The Apostle of Allah left his people while he was
summoning them to (believe) in Allah so that he entered the Cave. If he
had found supporters, he would have not left them. My father sufficed
him (the Prophet) when he summoned and called them for help, but he was
not helped. So Allah made Aaron at ease when they considered him weak
and were about to kill him. Allah made the Prophet at ease when he
entered the Cave and found no helpers. Also my father (was) and I am at
ease from Allah when this community has deserted us. Indeed the (Divine)
laws and the examples follow each other.[^7]

"By Him Who sent Muhammad with the truth, if someone decreases our
right, we the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), Allah will decrease
his act. When oppression befalls us, the final result will be for us,
surely you will know its news after a time."[^8]

Then al-Hasan turned to Mu'awiya again to refute the defamation which
Mu'awiya ascribed to his father. So he said wonderful words: "O you who
mention 'Ali, I am al-Hasan and 'Ali was my father. You are Mu'awiya and
your father was Sakhr (Abu Sufyan).

My mother was Fatima and your mother was Hind. My grandfather was the
Apostle of Allah and your grandfather was Harb. My grandmother was
Khadija and your grandmother was Futayla. May Allah curse him who tries
to reduce our reputation and to diminish our nobility, who does evil
against our antiquity and yet who has been ahead of us in unbelief and
hypocrisy."

The narrator said: "Groups of the people in the mosque shouted out:
\`Amen, Amen!' "Al-Fadl b. al-Hasan said: Yahya b. Main said: "I say:
Amen!" Abu al-Faraj said: Abu \`Ubayd said: Al-Fadl said: "I say: Amen!"
'Ali b. al-Husayn al-Isfahani (i.e., Abu alFaraj) said: Ibn Abu al-Hadid
said: "Amen!" I said: \`Abd al-Hamid b. Abu al-Hadid, the author of this
book, (i.e., Sharh Nahj al Balagha) said: "Amen!"'[^9]

I (i.e., the author) say: Also we say: "Amen!"

In the history of world speeches, this is the only speech that finds
favor with generations throughout history.

Such is the true speech. It ascends and nothing ascends over it!

After that, al-Hasan got ready to go to Medina.

The leaders of the Shi'a came to al-Hasan to see him off. Among them
were al-Musayyab b. Nujayya al-Fazari and Zabyan b. \`Ammara al Tamimi.
So al-Hasan said: "Praise belongs to Allah Who overcomes His affair. If
all creatures came together to prevent something from occurring, they
would be unable to do that." Then al-Musayyab talked and showed his
loyalty to the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. So
al-Hasan, peace be on him, said to him: "Musayyab, we know that you love
us."

Also al-Hasan, peace be on him, said: "I have heard my father say: I
have heard the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
say: Whoever loves ( a group of) people is with them." Then al-Musayyab
and Zabyan asked him to return with them. So he said: "There is no way
for that." Early in the morning, he left Kufa. The people saw him off
while they were weeping. After the Peace Treaty, he stayed in Kufa for
some days.

When al-Hasan arrived at Dir Hind[^10] (al-Hira), he looked at Kufa and
said:

I have left the house of my folks not because of hate

It is they who defended my possessions and my family.[^11]

I (i.e., the author) say: How wonderful this angelic self is! Though
al-Hasan suffered from the disobedience and disasters of this city
(i.e., Kufa), he left it reciting this line of poetry. He remembered
nothing of the long history of Kufa but the loyalty of the loyal who
defended his possessions and his family, who protected him from those
who attacked him at al-Mada'in, and who obeyed him when he faced
hardships at Maskan. So they were sincere companions and good supporters
though they were few in number.

Then the great caravan moved carrying the rest of the servants of Allah
in the earth and the heritage of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, in Islam. They were unable to bear the situation in
Kufa so that they headed for their homeland to seek protection in the
grave of their grandfather against the adversities of the traitorous
time.

After Muhammad's household had left Kufa, Allah punished the Kufans with
plague. It was their immediate punishment because of their attitude
towards these righteous ones. Al-Mughira b. Shu'ba, the Umayyad governor
of Kufa, fled Kufa because he was afraid of plague. Then he returned to
it, but was infected with plague and died.[^12]

[^1]: Jabir b. Sammra said: "I have not seen the Apostle of Allah
delivering a speech but he was standing. So whoever tells you that he
delivered a speech and he was sitting, then accuses him of lying."
Al-Jaza'iri has narrated this tradition in his book \`Ayat al-Ahkam', p.
75.

[^2]: Al-Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, p. 192.

[^3]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 16.

[^4]: He was \`Amr b. \`Abd Allah al-Hamadani al-Tabi'i. Concerning him,
it is said that he performed the noon prayer with the darkness ablution
(Wudu' al-\`Atama) for forty years. He ended the Qur'an in every night.
No one worshipped Allah more than he did, and no one was more reliable
than him in the tradition.

[^5]: Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Irshad (Iran), p. 169.

[^6]: Al-Mas'udi, Ilamish b. al-Athir, vol. 6, p. 61- 2. Ibn Kathir,
al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p. 18. Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh, vol. 6, p.
93.

[^7]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 114.

[^8]: Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol. b, pp. 61- 2.

[^9]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 6.

[^10]: Hind was the daughter of al-Nu'man b. al-Mundhir. She was a nun
in this abbey of her in al-Hira

[^11]: Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 6.

[^12]: Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol. 6, p. 97.


