A Word From the Persian Translator
==================================

The history of Islam and knowledge of its famous and important
personalities serve as a necessary starting point of departure for an
understanding of the main text of Islam. We may even venture to claim
that without a proper and exact understanding of the history of Islam,
one cannot get a true feeling of the facts and realities of this faith.
For, on the one hand, knowledge of the great and well- known Islamic
personalities and their ideas, conducts and deeds which form a part of
the text of religion and which are translated into the term "tradition",
is not possible without a knowledge of the time, place, customs, habits
and morals of their contemporaries, and on the other hand an
understanding of the characters opposing Islam reveals the perspicacity
Islam, and shows the manner of the combats and strivings of Islam and
leaders against the wicked and wickedness.

In view of the importance of this principal fact we see what the role
of a true history and its worth and position are in the religious life
of the Muslims. We realize to what extent knowledge of historical facts
helps us in our clear understanding of the realities of our religion,
and after being alien for many centuries from the rise of the bright sun
of Islam, to what extent we are capable of noticing this brilliant light
and how close we are getting to these fountain virtues.

In the coming pages we shall see how the history and tradition of Islam
have become subject to the plots of sensualists, and how far falsehood
and alterations have found their way into them.1 History and texts of
traditions were greatly altered and misinterpreted by the hands of these
plotters who were supported by the Umayyad rulers, particularly by
Mu'awiyah himself.

Every day that went by in the life of Islam, fresh lies were added to
the enormous collection of falsehoods, to such an extent that the
brilliant sun of God's religion seemed, little by little, to have become
obscured under so many lies and forgeries. It is here that the constancy
and self-sacrifices of the Imams of the Prophet's household act as
savior of Islam, and these noble personalities and their devoted Shi'ah
followers rise to protect Islam, and engage in their perpetual and
bloody combat with forgers and their supporters.

On the other hand the sentinels of paganism, namely the Umayyad and
Abbasid caliphs, endeavor to preserve the falsehoods which have been
fabricated especially in the time of Mu'awiyah, and even to spread them
more widely every moment, since the foundation of their caliphate is
nothing but dishonesty. In the battlefield of right and wrong, this
combat between the party of God and Satan's never ends, and no period is
free from it.

In our own time, a keen-eyed scholar has with his penetrating
insightfulness taken a great step to draw a line between truth and
falsehood, and he has obliterated from the scene of history hundreds of
falsehoods and alteration. Forty years of continual research in
first-hand texts of history and tradition has led the scholar Sayyid
Murtada 'Askari to certain facts, which are published in a series of
research volumes entitled "Dirasat fi al.hadith wa at.tarikh". His daily
scrutiny, reflection and labor have enabled him to unearth from thick
layers of forgeries many true facts of Islam, and to place them at the
disposal of seekers of truth in the world.

Indeed now the big idols and high barriers in the way of a proper
understanding of the history of Islam have been broken, and such early
and well-known texts as the at.Tabari history, a pioneer of historians,
can no longer be relied on without reference to their research values.
Thus Mahmud Abu Rayh, the famous and free-minded Egyptian scholar,
rightly says: "Everyone who longs to be acquainted with the facts of the
history of Islam since the time of its advent until the period of
allegiance to Yazid must study the two valuable research books of 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba' and Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah." 2

1. What are meant here are such books as al-Bukhari, Muslim, History of
at-Tabari and Ibn al- Athir.

2. You can see the full text of Abu Rayh in the preface of " 'A'ishah
in the time of Imam 'Ali". The author of this book, scholar Sayyid
Murtada 'Askari, is of Iranian origin, whose ancestors have for many
centuries acted as religious and missionary authorities in the cities of
Sabzevar and then Saveh. He was born in city of Samarra', and was
brought up in a genuinely clerical family. His grandfather, Ayatollah
Mirza Muhammad Samarra'i, a great and virtuous theologian, had a great
role in his education.

Scholar 'Askari received his preliminary religious instructions and
parts of his higher theological training in Samarra'. Then he travelled
to Qom where he was engaged for five years the acquisition of higher
knowledge in the theological center of that city. After that he returned
once more to Iraq as a pilgrim to the holy shrines of his exalted
ancestors. The last stages of his studies were covered in the religious
cities of Iraq, and since then he has been fully active, devoting his
whole life to scientific research and educational, social and missionary
activities, so that fifteen Shi'ah institutes including primary and high
schools, colleges, hospitals, and welfare organizations are memorials of
the social activities of scholar 'Askari. The scientific works of
Professor 'Askari have certain characteristics, which enhance the
possibility of discovery of truth in his investigations, and allow the
views expressed in these works to posses precision, weight and
dignity.

The first quality that we observe in all his books and writing is his
remoteness from prejudice and partiality. As we shall see in this book,
in his care to preserve truth, beside his analysis of the weak points in
the character of the personality concerned, namely 'A'ishah, he has
devoted a separate chapter to a description of her good qualities.

The second characteristic of his works is his reliance on important
sources and first-hand texts, so that in the primary plan of his
discussion he does not rely on the books written in the fifth century
onward as the only reliable sources, and even in his use of first-hand
texts he resorts to such books which are fully acceptable by the people.
For instance, owing to the doubt expressed by some modern scholars
concerning some historical books, he does not rely on the book of 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba' as the only available source. Dr. Hafni, professor of
the faculty of literature of Egypt, writes in an article printed in
Iraqi journals on the occasion of the publication of the book of 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba': "This scholar and expert of comparative history
collects his highly scientific facts form many works and books, and he
has stepped on every scene of history in order to discover forgotten
truths. This master investigator tries to prove his points by basing
them on the arguments presented in the writings of anti-Shi'ah scholars.
In this way he chooses the shortest route to vanquish the enemies of
Shi'ism through their own arguments." 3

The third distinct quality of scholar 'Askari's works is the
multiplicity of the sources on which he relies. For example for the
first chapter of this book 114 sources and references have been
mentioned, whereas in Persian there are no

3. The school of Shi'ism, fourth Year, 1341, page 307 (1962).

more than forty pages and in the Arabic text no more than twenty pages.
This quality is more noticeable in the first volume of 'Abd Allah ibn
Saba', and the Arabic text of the present book, so that sometimes half
of the page or more is devoted to footnotes and mention of the source.

Lastly the most significant characteristic which is not seen so much in
the works of eastern and western scholars is a non-reliance on old and
first-hand texts as a perfectly unquestionable and reliable source. In
the researchers of scholar 'Askari neither at-Tabari, nor Ibn Hisham,
nor Ibn al-Athir, nor anyone else is accepted without care and
calculation, however famous they might be and however reliable they may
have been regarded by others. As a first step, the documents related to
the historical topics and narrations are subjected to an analysis and
evaluation, and if necessary, each narrator is subjected to a careful
scrutiny, and then the related text is compared with other historical
narrations in order to distinguish the correct from the incorrect.

It should be mentioned that western investigators usually and mostly
pay attention to the texts and try to estimate the truth and falsehood
of the events through those texts without paying attention to the
narrators of the texts. Modern eastern scholars, too, who have studied
in European and western schools, mostly follow the method of their
masters, and if they present any work of research, it is not beyond the
method of European historical research. On the other hand, those groups
of earlier eastern scholars who have written historical books rely
mostly on the reliability of an author with the result that sometimes
they quote the idlest matters on the strength of the fame and credit of
the author concerned.

But the tradition scholars of Islam have chosen the exactest possibly
way by mingling the two above methods, and after a careful evaluation of
the narrators, they deal with the evaluation of the related text, and
compare it with other available sources and evidence, and eventually
offer their conclusions. The main research works of scholar 'Askari are
based on the adoption of such a method, and his novel views concerning
the historical events and matters of Islam are derived in this manner.
Those who have studied the two books of "'Abd Allah ibn Saba'" and
"Khamsun wa mi'ata sahabi mukhtalaq" (One Hundred and Fifty False
Companions) confirm our statement.

Professor James Robson of Glasgow University in a letter written to
him, confirms his point and says: "The method of your discussion in the
survey of the topics narrated by Sayf 4, is very interesting in this way
that you have firs surveyed Sayf's narrations and then you have compared
them with other narrations. This careful comparison has been carried out
both on the topic of Sayf's narrations and on their source and
evidence.

This shows that Sayf has often quoted from unknown individuals, namely
fictitious narrators. Then the 4. A history writer who has been quoted
by such famous historians as at-Tabari, Ibn al-Athir and Ibn Khaldun.
question arises why other writers have not quoted anything from any of
those narrators. Therefore one concludes that Sayf himself has
fabricated those narrators. This charge levelled to Sayf is a serious
accusation and a logical conclusion derived from the comparison of
Sayf's narrations with the narrations of others. I am very glad and
grateful to have had the opportunity of spending much time on the study
of these topics which are perfectly convincing to me, and I feel sure
that all those who study this book with a clear and broad mind, will
praise the strength of argumentation." 5 Now we will mention the
scientific and research works and writings of scholar 'Askari:

1-" 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' wa asatir al-ukhra", printed in 1375 AH in an-
Najaf, 1381 AH in Cairo, 1388 AH in Beirut, and 1393 AH in Tehran. This
book has been translated into Persian, Turkish and English. The second
volume of this book was published in 1392 AH. in Tehran with the efforts
of the Great Islamic Library. The third volume is not yet ready for
publication.

2-"Khamsun wa mi'ata sahabi mukhtalaq", first edition in Beirut, second
edition in 1389 AH in Manshurat kuliyat al-usul ad-Din, Baghdad. The
second volume of this book is printed in Beirut and is ready for
publication. The third volume is being prepared. These three volumes try
to prove the fictitious identity of 150 so-called companions of the
Prophet. The first volume begins with a preliminary discussion and then
deals with 23 companions who exist only in the world of imagination, and
proves them to be fictitious individuals.

3-"Ahadith Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah, adwar min hayatiha" (Traditions of
'A'ishah and periods of her life), printed in Tehran in 1381. This book
is translated into Persian in three volumes, and the present book is its
third volume. The Urdu translation of the whole book has been published
some years ago in Pakistan. The second volume of the book, which deals
with the most significant narrations of 'A'ishah has not yet been
printed and is being prepared.

4-"Ruwat mukhtaliqun" is a survey of false narrators in whose names
fictitious historical events have been recorded in reliable books of
history. Logically this book is a supplement to the three volumes of
"One Hundred a Fifty False Companions".

5-"Min tarikh al-hadith" (On the history of Tradition) is the most
precise book concerning the fate found in history by tradition as the
second basis for understanding Islam. This book is in 300 pages, and
still requires further research and completion.

6-"as-Saqifah is an elaborate research on the most significant phases
of the 5. Professor James Robson is chief of the research group of
Arabic at Glasgow University and secretary of the Orientalists Society
of that university, and professor of the Arabic chair of Manchester
University. His books are "A comparison of the Islamic culture with
other religions", "An Introduction to the field of Tradition"
"Translation and commentary on Mishkat al-masabih" four volume etc.
etc.

history of Islam. It is about 300 pages and requires further
elaboration. 7-"Mustalahat Islamiyah is an interesting project for a
more exact understanding of Islam, on the basis of the Qur'an and
tradition. It is a treatise of 300 pages about the special terminology
used in the text of Islam. This survey is based on the comparison of the
verses with the aid of the traditions of the Prophet and impeccable
Imams, and serves to expand methodical revision in the Islamic attitude
of the present time. If this book is completed and published, it can
uproot all the alterations, which have been produced in the meaning of a
number of religious and Islamic terms.

8-"Ma'a ad-Duktur al-Wirdi fi kitabihi Wu'az as-salatin", is a
scientifically critical study of the book of "Wu'az as-salatin" by Dr.
'Ali al-Wirdi, in 300 pages.

9-"Kayfa ta'lam ad-din", in two volume, on the topics to be learnt by
children in religious matters.

10-An Introduction to "Mir'at al-'uqul", which is a great research book
by the exalted scholar, Mulla Muhammad Baqir Majlisi on the great book
of al- Kafi. The new edition of this great work is to be published with
an elaborated introduction by scholar 'Askari. This introduction is an
independent and exceedingly useful book in about 250 pages comprising
the newest historical and narrational researches, and it may be regarded
as one of the most useful works of scholar 'Askari. This book is about
to be completed and printed.

11-Introduction to the book of "'Ali wa as-sunnah" ('Ali and tradition)
by Sayyid Hashim al-Bahrani, the great scholar of the eleventh century
of the Hijrah.

12-An Introduction and Survey for the book of "Tibb ar-Rida" by Dr.
Sahib Ziyni. The last part of the book gives a brief account of the life
of this great Imam.

13-An Introduction to the book of "al-Ijazat al-'ilmiyah 'ind
al-Muslimin" by Dr. 'Abd Allah Fayyad, professor of the education
college of Baghdad and History of Islam on the principles of religion,
printed in Baghdad in 1967.

14-An introduction to the book of "Asl ash-Shi'ah wa usuliha" (The
Origin of Shi'ism and its principles) by Ayatollah scholar Kashif
al-Ghita'. Its latest edition was printed in Tehran.

15-An introduction to the book of "A Survey of Sahihayn" by Muhammad
Sadiq Najmi, published in Iran in 1972. An elaboration of this
introduction and translation of the introduction to "Asl ash-Shi'ah" is
to be published as a separate treatise entitled "A Glance at the story
of Tradition".

There are also many articles by scholar 'Askari printed in such Arabic
scientific journals as "Risalat al-Islam", and "al-Mujtama' al-Islami"
in Baghdad, "al-Adwa'" and "al-Iman" in an-Najaf, and "al-'Irfan" in
Beirut. Moreover, this scholar has had a share in founding the two
scientific journals of "Risalat al-Islam" and "al-Mujtama' al-Islami".

The present book is a translation of the last part of the book of
"Ahadith of Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah, adwar min hayatiha" entitled "Ma'a
Mu'awiyah". The two preceding parts have already been published under
the titles of "The Role of 'A'ishah in Islam" and "'A'ishah in the Time
of Imam 'Ali".

As the text of the book has been written for Arabic-speaking scholars,
and thus in some cases brief references are made to certain topics, we
have been compelled in our Persian translation to offer additional
explanations. But as the Persian translation has been effected wholly
under the supervision of the exalted author, it is naturally devoid of
the particular viewpoint of the translator, and may thus be regarded as
a fresh book of his. Moreover, in some cases the author has added new
pages wherever necessary, the example of which are the addendum and the
subject of the arbitrators, which are re-written by the translator to
bring them into harmony with the rest of the book. In this way this book
takes the form of both compilation and translation, and thus the reader
of the Arabic text can also benefit from the Persian translation. In
conclusion I must express my thanks to the scholarly friends who have
read the manuscript and made useful suggestions in removing errors
made.

I am also grateful to the great scholar Mr. Nur ad-Din 'Askari by whose
endeavour the indices of the sources and bibliography have been
prepared, and also to other friends who have assisted me in matters of
print and proof- reading. In conclusion I request dear readers to make
me indebted and thankful to themselves by informing me of any errors or
shortcoming which they have appeared in this book.


**Preface**

**Aim of this survey and discussion**

The period in which Mu'awiyah ruled as compared with other eras and
centuries in the life of Islam, has possessed a special distinction from
the viewpoint of an overall interpolation brought about in the basic
principles of Islam. For, the Umayyad government used all its massive
power for the fabrication of traditions and forging of narrations, and
started the large factory of tradition-making with the aid of its
hirelings including some companions of the Prophet and its own agents.

The number of false traditions produced in this period is so great that
they almost cover every subject of the all-inclusive religion of Islam
and have found their way into the Islamic books, including official
Islam, and the Islamic school of the caliphs and the powerful. This has
left a deep and lasting influence on the intellectual and ideological as
well as practical aspect of the school of Islam to the extent of
replacing the basic pillars of thought in this school with the passage
of time.

For this reason we are obliged to adopt an analytical method of survey
in studying this period and its distinguished rulers and personalities
in order to pave the way for the correct evaluation of the traditions
fabricated in this period, and perhaps be able to discern the
collaborative role of 'A'ishah in the production of these
interpolations.

We begin the discussion with an investigation about Mu'awiyah; his
lineage and a brief account of the life history of his family. Then the
discussion is drawn to the period of his rule and caliphate and many
other matters which are connected with it. It is then that we will be
able to distinguish the bond which exists between 'A'ishah, Mu'awiyah
and other rulers of the time. Finally we will make a careful survey of
the life of 'A'ishah which ends in this same period.

It should be mentioned that in this course we were forced to speak of
the disgraceful and impure deeds which have occurred in Mu'awiyah's
lineage, thus making his character clearer to us. For an understanding
of the psychic complexes of Mu'awiyah which incited him towards enmity
with the good and virtuous and roused him to combat with their
reputation of purity, there was no other way but a survey of those
events.

Indeed with an understanding of the character of Mu'awiyah and his
motives and complexes, one can trace the traditions which were
fabricated during his time for the satisfaction of his personal motives,
and in this way the thick and dark screens which he hung, by means of
those false traditions, over the brilliant visage of Islam and Muslims,
may be drawn aside to reveal Islam and Muslims as they really were.
Consequently, we unwillingly accepted this necessity of introducing
Mu'awiyah and his lineage as they were, and bring this discussion to an
end for God's satisfaction and with the motive of propagation of
knowledge.


Sayyid Murtada 'Askari


