The Shi'ah in Torture and Molestation
=====================================

Do not remove the chain from my hands, and do wash away blood from my
body, for, I wish to face Mu'awiyah in this condition in the presence of
Divine Justice.

Hujr ibn 'Adi We have already said that Mu'awiyah, in his order to the
governors of the land under his rule, the example of which was his
recommendations to al- Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah, had insisted that torture
and molestation should be implemented towards the supporters of Imam
'Ali and their beloved Imam and leader should be openly abused and
cursed. This order was carried out and in its execution the whole
administration of the caliphate was busy at work. Al-Mughayrah ibn
Shu'bah, who was the governor of a large and flourishing province, never
neglected this wicked policy, and during the whole period of his office
he persisted in his abuse, falsehood and calumny towards Imam 'Ali. Of
course Hujr ibn 'Adi, a great Shi'ah devotee, on these occasions rose
courageously and confronted him. After al-Mughayrah's death, Ziyad ibn
Abihi was appointed as governor of Kufah, and he continued the same evil
conduct according to the same pre-arranged plan, and Hujr continued
bravely to answer his abuses.

Historians say: One day the sermon of Ziyad ibn Abihi became very
lengthy. Hujr, fearing that the time for prayer could pass, cried out:
"Prayer time!" But Ziyad paid no attention and went on with his speech.
Hujr rose once more and reminded Ziyad of the time of prayer. Ziyad
ignored the reminder again. This incident was repeated for the third
time, but it produced no result. At last Hujr took a handful of pebbles
and threw it at Ziyad, and stood up himself for prayer. The people, too,
followed his example and stood up. Thus Ziyad was compelled to abandon
speaking and to join the people for prayer. When the prayer was over,
Ziyad ordered the guards to bring Hujr to him, but the relatives of Hujr
(of the Kanda tribe) defended and concealed him, and thus Ziyad's agents
were unable to find him.

Ziyad then resorted to a trick, and in his talks with the chiefs of the
Kindah tribe, he declared that he would give asylum to Hujr and send him
to Mu'awiyah to reach a decision about him. They agreed, and then Ziyad
imprisoned Hujr and eleven of his friends. Then he arranged to prepare a
written testimony signed by some well-known and self-sold men of the
city to the effect that Hujr and his friends had abused the caliph
Mu'awiyah, and have invited the people to fight him and expel his
appointed governor. Among the signatures under his attestation could be
seen the name of Shurayh ibn Hani', judge of the city, too.

Ziyad then sent Hujr and the others to Mu'awiyah. When Shurayh learnt
that his signature had been forged under the letter, he left the city
and caught up with the guarded group, and wrote a letter to Mu'awiyah
and sent it with them to him. When Hujr and his friends were brought to
Mu'awiyah, he read the testimony as well as Shurayh's letter in which he
had written: "I have been told that Ziyad has recorded my testimony
under his letter. My real testimony is as follow: Hujr performed his
prayer, pay his tithe, and perform his pilgrimage every year. He enjoins
unto good and forbids wrongdoing. He is a man that violation to whose
life and property must be forbidden to others. Now, you are free to
punish him or let him free."

Mu'awiyah, after reading Shurayh's letter, said: "This man has retired
from the group who has given testimony in your letter." Then he ordered
to imprison all those five and virtue men in Maraj 'Adhra', a spot near
Damascus. The imprisonment of Hujr's friends was not long, and some of
Mu'awiyah's courtiers on the intercession of others took steps to set
some of them free. But Mu'awiyah made a decision about the rest of them,
namely to give them the choice of death or cursing Imam 'Ali and
declaring their immunity from him.

These remaining people were divided into two groups; those who were
steadfast in their friendship to the Imam and feared God, said: "No! We
will never submit to such a disgrace!" The agents of Mu'awiyah dug
graves in their presence and prepared shrouds for them. But Hujr and his
friend without any sign of agitation stood up and spend their whole life
in the name and remembrance of God Whom they regard ad their greatest
beloved and their first and last Worshipped One.

In the morning they were brought out to face death. Hujr said to
Mu'awiyah officials: "Give me time to perform ablution and prayer; for,
I have never performed ablution without following it by prayer." They
allowed him to do so, and his prayer did not take long. Then he stood up
and said: "By God! I have never during my whole life performed a briefer
and lighter prayer than this. If it was not for your wrong assumption
that I may fear death, my prayer would undoubtedly have lasted longer!"
Then he spent a few moment of convocation with God, saying: "O God! I
complain to you of the Muslims ummah! I swear to God that if you killed
me in this land, you would be killing the first Muslim who has uttered
words of testimony to the Uniqueness of God and the first Muslims
warrior who has stepped on this land!" Then the executioner approached
him with drawn sword, and Hujr trembled slightly. The man said: "You
thought that you did not fear death. Declare your immunity from your
friend, and thereby save your life!"

Hujr said: "Why should I fear death? A grave is dug, a shroud is
prepared, and I see a drawn sword before me! But even if I were to fear
death, I would never utter a word that might rouse the wrath of my God!"
They killed that steadfast and Godly man and six of his friends. But two
of them asked the official to take them back to Mu'awiyah and said: "We
are of the same opinion as Mu'awiyah about this man (meaning Imam
'Ali)." They were taken back to Mu'awiyah who said to one of them: "Do
you declare your immunity from the religion in which 'Ali worshipped
God?" The man remained silent, and some of his relatives interceded for
him. Mu'awiyah set him free and ordered to exile him to the city of
Mosul (in the north of Iraq). Then he addressed the other man and said:
"O brother Rabi'i!217 What do you say about 'Ali?" The man said: "Let me
be, and forego this question since it will be to your interest!"
Mu'awiyah said: "By God! I won't let you be!" The Kufi man said
courageously: "I testify that 'Ali was a man who always remembered God.
He enjoined right and did justice, and showed indulgence towards
people's blunders."

Mu'awiyah said: "What do you say about 'Uthman?" The man said: "He was
the first man to open the doors of oppression and block the ways of
right." Mu'awiyah said: "So you are killing yourself." The brave man of
Kufah said: "No! I have killed you!" Then he added: "In this land there
are none of the Rabi'ah tribe to come to my aid."

Mu'awiyah ordered to send the man back to Ziyad ibn Abihi, telling him
to kill the man in the worst possible manner. The mean and cruel
governor obeyed the order, and on the charge of loving and supporting
Imam 'Ali, he buried him alive. 218 May God bless the soul of these
devotees!

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr writes in his famous book of al-Isti'ab: Hujr said to
his kinsmen who were present at his execution: "Do not remove these
chains from my hands and do not wash away the blood from my body and
wounds so that I may face Mu'awiyah by the heavenly bridge and plead for
justice at the Divine 217. It means "a man of the Rabi'ah tribe".

218. at-Tabari 6/155-160 briefly on the events of the year 51 of the
Hijrah, and Ibn al-Athir 3/202- 209, and al-Aghani 16/10: and Ibn
'Asakir 2/379.

219. al-Isti'ab biography 547, and Usd al-ghabah 11385-386. This man
was a great companion. He went to the Prophet to embrace Islam in the
last years of the Prophet's life. He took part in the
Presence."219,220

Mu'awiyah put to death many of the Imam's friends and supporters like
Hujr and his followers, on the one hand owing to the rancor he felt
towards them, and on the other hand because he wanted to reinforce the
basis of his rule, since they were likely to rebel soon against the
paganism which was being revived, thus creating a serious danger for his
government. So we see that Mu'awiyah was not averse to any forbidden act
in order to strengthen the pillars of his rule, since the basis of his
thought were pagan ideas and values. Where paganism is a supreme ruler,
there exists nothing to bind people, and no true principle has any
worth, and no human virtue and no quality win respect.

He spent the first part of his twenty years of caliphate in the firm
establishment of his rule, and the last part of it in making it
hereditary for his sons. You will read more about this subject in the
forthcoming chapters. Government becomes hereditary (imperial)

I tore up the affair of this ummah to such an extent that it can never
be repaired. Al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah Their religion has indeed been
worthless in their mind. Mu'awiyah When the rule of Mu'awiyah was
established and its pillars became firm, and no danger threatened his
position any more, he had a new idea. Perhaps it would be more correct
to say that this idea had always existed in his mind, since, as we have
already seen, this was a part of the counsels given to him by his
father, Abu Sufyan. This idea was nothing but making the Umayyad
government hereditary. So he started making his idea an actual fact. In
this task he made use of every existing factor in the country, and
employed every trick and scheme and crime that is possible.

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, well known Andalusian writer, says: Mu'awiyah spent
seven successive years trying to pave the way for the people's
allegiance to Yazid. He consulted crafty politicians, and deceived those
around him with money, and brought near him those who were more remote
by means of all battle of al-Qadisiyah, and was nicknamed Hujr
al-Khayr.

220. The story of Hujr and his friends has been told in detail in
Volume Two of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba'.

kinds of tricks.221 In this connection, too, he adopted the same method
he had used in strengthening his own rule, using money, position etc.,
and when he found these weapons weak or ineffective, he had no fear of
even killing his uncom- promising enemies. He knew no bounds in his
cunning and unmanly deeds. A group of historians depict the origin of
the idea of making the government hereditary in a special way. Ibn
al-Athir writes: The first move for securing allegiance to Yazid was
made by al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah. Mu'awiyah had intended to dismiss him
as governor of Kufah and replace him by Sa'id ibn al- 'As who was of the
Umayyads.

When crafty al-Mughayrah learnt of this, he departed for ash-Sham with
a group of his friends. When he reached Damascus, he said to his
supporters: "If I do not succeed in this visit to consolidate my
position as governor, a success from which you, too, will benefit, then
I shall never be able to get such a chance."

Then he proceeded to meet Yazid, and said to him: "All the great
friends and companions of the Prophet and the chiefs and elders of the
Quraysh have departed this life. Only their descendants are left, of
whom you are more superior and enlightened and better familiar with the
Prophet's tradition and the manner of ruling. I do not know what
obstacle exists in the way of Amir al- Mu'minin (Mu'awiyah) that he does
not take a step in securing allegiance to you from all people."

Yazid said: "Do you think this matter will eventually be settled
success- fully?" al-Mughayrah answered in the affirmative. The meeting
came to an end and the conversation was reported by Yazid to Mu'awiyah.
Mu'awiyah summoned al-Mughayrah and made inquiries about the subject.
Cunning al- Mughayrah said: "You yourself have witnessed all those wars
and bloodsheds which occurred after 'Uthman about the question of
government. Yazid is competent to succeed you. Why delay it, then?
Secure allegiance for him, so that if anything happens to you, there
will be your successor and people's support to prevent bloodshed and
mischief."

Mu'awiyah asked: "Who can undertake this task?" al-Mughayrah answered:
"I accept the responsibility for Kufah, and Ziyad can for Basra, and
next to these two cities there is no one left to oppose you." Mu'awiyah
said: "You had better return to your own seat and consult your trusty
friends until we see what course the events take."

Al-Mughayrah returned to his friends and said to them: "I have placed
Mu'awiyah's feet in a stirrup where his drilling- ground over the ummah
is far and wide, and I have torn up the affair of this ummah in such a
way that it can

221. al-'Iqd al-farid 3/129 on the life of the caliphs, published by
Jamaliyah. never be repaired."

Then al-Mughayrah returned to Kufah and prepared ten of the supporters
of the Umayyads together with his own son, Musa, to depart for a journey
to ash- Sham. He divided three hundred thousand dinars among them to go
to Mu'awiyah and give the question of the allegiance a new gloss and
attraction. In his meeting with this group, Mu'awiyah said: "Do not be
hasty in this matter, and of course you should not forget your view,
either." Then he secretly summoned Musa, son of al-Mughayrah, and asked
him: "At what price has your father bought these men's religion?"

Musa said: "For three hundred thousand dinars!" Mu'awiyah said: "How
trifling their religion seems to be to them!"222 Allegiance to Yazid in
Basra Yazid is a dog fancier; a monkey-fancier and a wine- bibber! How
can I invite people to allegiance to him?

Ziyad ibn Abihi At the time that al-Mughayrah was preparing the people
of Kufah for allegiance to Yazid, Mu'awiyah wrote a letter to Ziyad ibn
Abihi, governor of Basra, as follows:

"Al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah has invited the people of Kufah for
allegiance to Yazid and his succession as caliph. Without a doubt in
connection with the son of your brother, al-Mughayrah is not worthier
than you. Therefore, on receiving my letter, invite the people of your
city to the same thing that al- Mughayrah has invited the people of
Kufah, and receive allegiance from them for Yazid." Ziyad received the
letter and, on learning of its content, summoned one of his friends
whose wit and intelligence he trusted and said to him: "I want to
entrust you with a secret; for, one cannot be sure that letters and
written things can keep it. Go to Mu'awiyah and say to him: O commander
of the faithful! I have received your letter. What will the people say
when I invite them for allegiance to Yazid, while he is a dog fancier
and a monkey-fancier? He wears a garment of a different color every day,
and is always drunk with wine. He does not abstain from music. Opposite
him there are such men as al-Husayn ibn 'Ali, 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas,
'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar. There is only one
alternative left, namely that you order him for a year or two to conduct
him in the manner of his rivals and adopt their behaviour. It is then
that we might succeed in deceiving people."

222. Ibn al-Athir 3/214-215 on the events of the year 56 of the Hijrah,
and at-Tabari 6/169-170. The messenger went to Mu'awiyah and delivered
his message. Mu'awiyah said: "Woe upon the son of 'Ubayd! By God! I have
heard that a minstrel has composed this line for him: 'After me Ziyad
will be Emir!' By God I will send him back in his lineage to mother
Sumayyah and his slave father, 'Ubayd!"223 At-Tabari and Ibn al-Athir
narrates this story at a greater length but with a slight difference.
They say: Ziyad's envoy said to Ziyad: "My opinion is that you do not
charge Mu'awiyah's view with error in such a way, and do not rouse his
anger against his son. I will go to Yazid and inform him that the caliph
has consulted Ziyad about the question of allegiance to him, and Ziyad
fears people's opposition, since they have observed unseemly deeds from
Yazid. Ziyad's opinion is that Yazid should abandon his improper conduct
in order to make allegiance and caliphate possible for himself."

Ziyad agreed to his envoy's suggestion. The envoy left Basra and
reached ash-Sham, and on meeting Yazid, informed him of Ziyad's view.
Yazid, on his part, accepted that suggestion and thenceforth temporarily
gave up some of his unworthy deeds. Then the envoy delivered Ziyad's
letter to Mu'awiyah.

In this letter Ziyad had dissuaded Mu'awiyah from haste in this matter,
and Mu'awiyah, on reading the letter, approved of his suggestion. But
when Ziyad died, Mu'awiyah became more determined to follow up the
question of allegiance to Yazid, and at first sent one hundred thousand
drachmas to 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar who was a so-called devout ascetic.
'Umar accepted the money, and then Mu'awiyah's messenger brought up the
question of allegiance to Yazid.

'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar said: "So this is what Mu'awiyah wants! If I were
to show allegiance in return for this money, it would be clear that I
consider my religion as trifling and worthless." 224,225

**Allegiance to Yazid in ash-Sham**

Mu'awiyah ordered his Jewish physician to poison and kill 'Abd
ar-Rahman ibn Khalid. Ibn 'Abd al-Barr Ibn 'Abd al-Barr, the great
biographer, writes: When Mu'awiyah became 223. al-Ya'qubi 2/161-162,
printed Europe. 224. at-Tabari 6/169-170, and Ibn al-Athir 3/214-215,
and Ibn Kathir 9/5 quoting 'Abd Allah's acceptance, and Hilyat
al-awliya' 1/296. The writer does not mention the time of sending the
money. 225. Of course he was too ready to sell his religion than to show
resistance against one hundred thousand drachmas. But in this case as he
was a candidate for the caliphate, he could hardly meet the wish of
Mu'awiyah. The money, which was offered, was in fact the price of his
retirement from his candidacy and his probable election.

determined to win allegiance for Yazid, he delivered a sermon to the
people of ash-Sham, saying: "I have lived too long and my death is near.
I wish to secure allegiance for a man, but as I am one of you, I wish to
hear your view without which no decision will be taken!"

The people unanimously said: "We approve of the caliphate of 'Abd ar--
Rahman ibn Khalid." But this view was not pleasing to Mu'awiyah, for, he
supposed that they would surely nominate Yazid for this position. He saw
now that they had paid no attention to Yazid, and were bringing up the
name of 'Abd ar-Rahman, son of Khalid ibn al-Walid. He was greatly
enraged, but he could not reveal it. The people of ash-Sham were the
same people who had tolerated his rule for forty years and had supported
him in all the dangerous events of the time. So he had to control his
anger, and secretly take steps for the removal of this obstacle.

Some time passed and 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Khalid, fell ill. Mu'awiyah
sent his personal physician, who was a Jew, to visit and treat him. This
man was a trusty secret keeper of Mu'awiyah, so he was ordered to poison
'Abd ar- Rahman in any way he knew. This dishonest and self-sold
physician carried out Mu'awiyah's order to the letter, poisoning his
innocent patient, and the poison was so strong that it split 'Abd
ar-Rahman's belly and he died very quickly. 226

at-Tabari and Ibn al-Athir narrate this story in a different way, and
say: Mu'awiyah ordered his personal physician who was a Christian named
Ibn Athal to kill 'Abd ar-Rahman by any trick that he considered
efficacious, and in return for this service he would be exempted from
the payment of tribute all his life, and would be appointed as a
collector of taxes for the town of Hims, as a reward. The wicked
physician poisoned 'Abd ar-Rahman and carried out the evil order of
Mu'awiyah. In return for this service, Mu'awiyah fulfilled his
promise.227

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr adds: After the death of 'Abd ar-Rahman, his brother,
Muhajir, secretly travelled to Damascus and in the company of his slave
waited in ambush for the Jewish physician. One night when the physician
was returning from Mu'awiyah's house, they attacked him and after
putting his companions to flight, they killed him.

After quoting the above incident, Ibn 'Abd al-Barr writes: This story
is rumored by scholars.

226. al-Isti'ab 2/396 biography No. 1697, and Usd al-ghabah 3/289. Ibn
'Abd al-Barr gives an account of 'Abd ar-Rahman.

227. at-Tabari 6/128, and Ibn al-Athir 3/195, and al- Mughtalun min
al-ashraf 47: and Ibn Kathir 8/31, and al-Aghani 14/13 and Ibn Shahnah
11/133 on Ibn al-Athir.

**Allegiance to Yazid in Medina**

O Mu'awiyah! Your relatives refuse to carry out your order concerning
the allegiance to Yazid. Marwan ibn al-Hakam It is reported in the book
of al-Imamah wa as-siyasah of Ibn Qutaybah: Mu'awiyah wrote a letter to
Marwan who was his governor at Medina, asking him to propose the
allegiance to Yazid to the people of that city. This was an unpleasant
task for Marwan, and also the Quraysh chiefs of Medina were by no means
willing to show allegiance to Yazid. So Marwan wrote to Mu'awiyah,
saying: "Your relatives refuse to carry out your order concerning the
allegiance to Yazid. Write your view to me."

Mu'awiyah was annoyed at the conduct of Marwan and at his negative
answer, and dismissed him from the governorship of Medina, replacing him
by Sa'id ibn al-'As. Marwan departed for ash-Sham with a group of the
Umayyads, being full of rage the whole time.

He visited Mu'awiyah and spoke harshly in his presence. But cunning
Mu'awiyah did not think it expedient to be sharp then. So he treated him
calmly and mildly, and after increasing his salary, he sent him back to
Medina.228 After this incident he thought of a new plan. He thought that
the best way of carrying out the question of Yazid's succession, was to
create a division among the chiefs of his own tribe, the Umayyads.
Consequently he wrote a decree and sent it to Sa'id ibn al-'As, governor
of Medina, ordering him to demolish the house of Marwan ibn al-Hakam,
and confiscate all his property including Fadak.

Ibn al-Athir writes: In the year 54 of the Hijrah, Mu'awiyah dismissed
Sa'id ibn al-'As as governor of Medina and replaced him by Marwan. The
reason for his dismissal was that Mu'awiyah had written to Sa'id during
his governor-ship ordering him to demolish Marwan's house and confiscate
all his property and even Fadak which he had granted to him in the past.
But Sa'id had ignored his order and had failed to act upon it.

Mu'awiyah sent Sa'id another letter reminding him of this order, but
again Sa'id disregarded it and only kept the two letters. After
dismissing him and replacing him by Marwan, Mu'awiyah wrote to Marwan,
ordering him to demolish Sa'id's house and confiscate his property.
Marwan, accompanied by several officials went to Sa'id's house to carry
out the order. Sa'id came out and said: "O 'Abd al-Malik! Do you intend
to demolish my house?" Marwan answered: "Yes, the caliph has written a
letter ordering me to demolish your

228. al-Imamah wa as-siyasah 1/144-146, and al-Mas'udi 3/37 briefly and
with a slight change, published by Muhammad Muhyi ad-Din 'Abd
al-Hamid.

house. If you were given such an order to demolish mine, you would
carry it out immediately!" Sa'id said: "But I would not do so!" Marwan
said: "By God! You would have done so!" Sa'id said again: "No! I would
never do so!" Then he showed Marwan the two letters of Mu'awiyah and
said: "Mu'awiyah intends to create division and differences between
us.

When Marwan saw the contents of the letters and observed Sa'id's
reaction to Mu'awiyah's order, he said: "By God! You are better than
me!" Then he desisted from demolishing Sa'id's house and returned.
Following this incident Sa'id wrote a letter to Mu'awiyah, saying: "How
strange is the conduct of the caliph! And how incompatible it is with
kinship! He has decided to create enmity and rancor between us and
divide us into hostile groups! The caliph, with all his tolerance and
fortitude, despite his disapproval of hastiness and anger, and with all
his inclination to indulgence and forgive-ness, tries to produce enmity
and separation between his kins, so that their descendants would inherit
these rancours. Even if we did not share the same father with the caliph
and did not possess such a close bond, it would have been proper for the
caliph Mu'awiyah to have a consideration for our right, in view of the
goal for which he gathered us together, making us claim vengeance for
the innocent and martyred caliph, 'Uthman's blood!"

Mu'awiyah was greatly vexed that this plan bad failed, but he wrote to
Sa'id pretending to apologize for his treatment.229

**Allegiance to Yazid demands victims**

For the matter of allegiance to Yazid, Mu'awiyah secretly killed Imam
al- Hasan al-Mujtaba and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas.

The question of Yazid's caliphate had occupied the mind of Mu'awiyah
and he saw certain obstacles in it which he could not overcome. But he
used all his efforts to remove the last obstacles. On the one hand there
was Imam al- Mujtaba, the grandson of the Prophet who was the greatest
social and spiritual personality of the day, and on the other hand there
was Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, a great general and a member of the council of
six appointed by 'Umar, and popular with a number of Muslims.

Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, famous historian, writes: "Mu'awiyah desired
people's allegiance for his son, Yazid. But in this course no obstacles
were greater than al-Hasan ibn 'Ali, and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas. In order
to remove these two great obstacles, he secretly poisoned them both, and
they died."230 The reason why Imam al-Hasan and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas were
at that time 229. Ibn al-Athir 3/212-213, and at-Tabari 6/164-165.

230. Maqatil at-Talibiyin 43, and Ansab al-ashraf 1/404, and Ibn Abi
al-Hadid 4/11 and 17.

regarded as obstacles in the way of Mu'awiyah's objective, was that
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas was the last remaining member of the council of six
appointed by 'Umar to decide the choice of the successor to him as
caliph.231 Later on these six men gained such a high reputation that
each of them was considered worthy of being chosen as caliph. But Imam
al-Hasan, in addition to his particularly great virtue and fine
qualities, had stipulated in his truce with Mu'awiyah that after the
latter's death he should be caliph,232 and Mu'awiyah was not allowed to
nominate any other successor for himself.233

Historians have not described how Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas was killed. They
only state that his death was due to poisoning. But in connection with
the martyrdom of Imam al-Hasan, there exists several pieces of evidence,
which clarify this tragic matter.

Al-Mas'udi writes: Ju'dah, daughter of al-Ash'ath ibn Qays al-Kindi
poisoned Imam al-Hasan with a poison sent secretly to her by Mu'awiyah.
He had sent her a message that if she could kill Imam al-Hasan through
an effective plan, he would reward her with one hundred thousand
drachmas, and would wed her to his son, Yazid. Thus Ju'dah was persuaded
to commit that criminal act.

When the Imam died, Mu'awiyah fulfilled that part of his promise about
the money, and sent it to her, but concerning the question of marriage
with Yazid, he sent a message to her, saying: "We love our son's life,
and if it were not 50, we would fulfill our second promise, namely your
marriage with him, too!" He meant that as she had poisoned her husband,
the grandson of the Prophet for the sake of promises, she was also
capable of repeating it in the case of his son. Therefore he abstains
from fulfilling his second promise.234 Mu'awiyah's plot removed Imam
al-Hasan and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, to open the way for the caliphate of
Yazid. As Mu'awiyah had already killed 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Khalid, he is
also likely to have killed 'Abd ar-Rahman, son of Abu Bakr. We will deal
with this subject in future chapters.

231. Refer to 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' 1/118-126 on the story of the
council.

232. Ibn Kathir 8/41: as-Suyuti in the History of the Caliphs 138, and
al-Isabah on the life of Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba, and Ibn Qutaybah 150,
and Ibn Abi al-Hadid 4/13.

233. Ibn Abi al-Hadid 4/8 quoted from al-Mada'ini and as-Sawa'iq
al-muhriqah 81.

234. Muruj adh-dhahab 6/55 on Ibn al-Athir, and Maqatil at-Talibiyin
73, and al-Ya'qubi 2/225, and Ibn 'Asakir 4/226, and Asma' al-mughtalin
44, and al-Isti'ab on the life of Imam al-Hasan al- Mujtaba and
Tadhkirat al-khawas on the same subject, and Ibn al-Athir 2/197, and Ibn
Shahnah 11/132 on Ibn al-Athir, and Ibn Kathir 8/43: and Ibn Abi
al-Hadid 4/4, al-Ya'qubi and Ibn al-Athir do not mention the principal
agent of poisoning.

**Ceremonies of allegiance to Yazid**

Rise and in the Name of God show allegiance to Yazid. Mu'awiyah
Mu'awiyah was engaged in a great attempt, and was inviting great men of
influence to Damascus from every part of the country, and persuading
them to show allegiance to Yazid. He threatened those who opposed the
plan, and satisfied those who agreed by granting them huge sums of
money,235 and sometimes by giving them high positions and ranks.236

Several years passed in this way and many parts of the country were
brought under the Umayyad yoke. But Hejaz, with its two great cities of
Mecca and Medina, still refused to submit to allegiance to Yazid.
Mu'awiyah decided to visit Hejaz and those cities, and departed with a
number of sup-porters to secure allegiance from the people of Mecca and
Medina, who owing to their greater familiarity with Islam, and also
because of the influence of such personalities as Imam al-Husayn, 'Abd
Allah ibn az-Zubayr, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar and 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi
Bakr, refused to agree to that allegiance for Yazid.

Ibn al-Athir writes: To carry out his wishes, Mu'awiyah made use of
enormous gifts granted to his intimates, mildness with those who stayed
away, and kindness to chiefs of tribes. He was so successful in this
scheme that the people began to trust him and showed allegiance to
Yazid. When the allegiance of the people of ash-Sham and Iraq was
carried out, he left for Hejaz with one thousand horsemen, and in Medina
Imam al-Husayn was the first person to meet him.

Ibn al-Athir then describes this meeting at length and quotes the words
exchanged between Imam al-Husayn and three other dignitaries of the city
and Mu'awiyah, and the rude and sharp answers given by Mu'awiyah. He
adds that Mu'awiyah refused to meet these four persons in Medina, and
then went to visit 'A'ishah. As he had heard that she had spoken of Imam
al-Husayn and those men, he said to her: "If they do not show
allegiance, I will kill them." He complained of them to 'A'ishah and she
gave him advice and counsel. Ibn al-Athir describes Mu'awiyah's travel
to Mecca as follows: In that city the people went out to welcome him,
and those four persons were among the Muslims there. He treated them
gently and then brought up the subject of allegiance. The son of
az-Zubayr said to him: "You may accept one of our three proposals,
either act in the manner of the Prophet who did not choose anyone as
235. Refer to al-'Iqd al-farid 3/129-130, and Ibn al-Athir 3/216.
236.Like Sa'id ibn 'Uthman who was sent to Khurasan. Refer to Tahdhib of
Ibn 'Asakir 6/155 and at-Tabari 6/171, and Ibn al-Athir 3/218, and Ibn
Kathir 8/79-80.

his successor,237 and the people themselves showed allegiance to Abu
Bakr, or act in the manner of Abu Bakr who nominated a man of the
Quraysh as caliph, and did not allow any of his house to assume this
position, or act in the manner of 'Umar who entrusted the choice of the
caliph to a council of six, to which his son did not belong.

Mu'awiyah said: "Have you any other proposal or suggestion?" They said:
"No."

Mu'awiyah said: "I have given you a warning, and he who warns others of
their fate, is excusable. Now, it is my turn to speak, and I swear to
God that if any of you here says something contrary to my words, he will
lose his head before he concludes his words. Therefore every person
should think of his own life and try to preserve it." Then he ordered to
place two men with drawn; swords by each of those objectors so that if
they uttered a word of protest, they would be beheaded without delay.

Then he proceeded with these men to the mosque of al-Haram climbed the
pulpit and, after praising God, he said: "These are the leaders and
dignitaries of Islam, and the best of them, and no one should perform a
task without consulting them. They have voluntarily shown allegiance to
Yazid! Now you people rise and in the Name of God, show allegiance."

The people on every side rose and showed allegiance, and when the
ceremony was concluded, he ordered to prepare the mounts and then
proceeded towards Medina. He seized allegiance from the people of this
city in the same way he had done with the people of Mecca, and then he
returned to ash-Sham. As for the allegiance falsely attributed to Imam
al-Husayn and those few men, the matter did not remain hidden, and after
the departure of Mu'awiyah the people said to those four men:

"How did you, who had no intention of ever showing allegiance, submit
so easily and voluntarily to this allegiance to Yazid?" In answer they
described the unmanly and cunning plan of Mu'awiyah and the danger that
threatened their lives.238 \*\*\* We have made a deep inquiry into the
events of Mu'awiyah's life, since 237. From Abu Bakr's time it had
become customary to propagate this view that (God forbid) the Prophet
had acted unwisely in not appointing a successor for himself. This is
quoted from 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr who was Abu Bakr's grandson and was
known to be very hostile to the Prophet's household (Vol. Two, Arabic
source, pages 285-292) on the same basis as the above custom. For
further information on this subject refer to the book of 'Abd Allah ibn
Saba', Volume One, by the author of this book.

238. Ibn al-Athir 3/216-218, and al-'Iqd al-farid 3/130-131 there was
no other alternative for discovering the reasons and factors for the
fabrication of traditions in the time of Mu'awiyah, we wished to
re-discover his complex personality in order to find out the nature of
his connection with and interest in Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah in this
particular field. This is a subject, which will be dealt with in the
forthcoming pages.


