Part Four : 'a'ishah and Mu'awiyah
==================================

**The factors of friendship between 'A'ishah and the Umayyads**

O 'A'ishah! To combat with the Prophet's household, one day you ride a
mule and the next day a camel! We have already seen to what extent
Mu'awiyah went in his hostility to Imam 'Ali, so that during the rule of
the Imam be fought him in every possible way. After the Imam was
martyred in the mosque of Kufah, Mu'awiyah's combat took the form of
cold war and he never ceased in his propagation against the Imam and his
abuse and curse to him. We saw also that 'A'ishah, fought the Imam with
her utmost ability during her life, and when he was killed by Ibn Muljam
and departed this world, on being informed of his death, she was so
overjoyed that she prostrated herself in thankfulness to God,239 and
began singing the following lines:

"'Ali has died and there is no return for him.
With his death lam as overjoyed as the family
Of a dear traveler returning from his journey!
'Ali's death illuminated my eyes!"

'A'ishah's flame of enmity with the Alawite house was so strong, that
she even veiled herself from his two sons who were her husband's
grandsons, and abstained from meeting them.240 When we read what
al-Ya'qubi and Abu al- Faraj al-Isfahani have narrated about the events
of those days, we will see that her intense hostility continued so long
that it could be regarded as a reason for the attachment between her and
the Umayyads in general, and with Mu'awiyah in particular.

Al-Ya'qubi writes: Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba had reached the last
painful moments of his life, and wished to announce his will to his dear
brother Imam al-Husayn. He said: "When I die, bury me by the side of my
exalted grandfather the holy Prophet; for, no one deserves more than me
to be buried by his side, unless they prevent this burial and do not let
my last wish to be fulfilled. If this happens, then of course do your
best in preventing even the 239 at-Tabari 6/155-160 the events of the
year 51, and Ibn al-Athir 3/202-209, and al-Aghani 16/10, and Ibn
'Asakir 2/379.

240. Tabaqat al-kubra 8/73.

smallest bloodshed?" When the Imam departed this mortal life and
reached eternity, preparations were made for his burial. His body was
carried by his relatives towards the tomb of the holy Prophet.

According to Maqatil at-Talibiyin, 'A'ishah, as a so-called kind mother
of all believers, rode a mule in the company of the Umayyads, having the
guilt of rousing them on her neck, and came in front of the procession
and prevented them from proceeding to the Prophet's tomb. The following
lines have been composed for her unworthy act on that occasion:

"One day your ride a mule, And the next day a camel!" 241 Al-Ya'qubi
writes: Marwan ibn al-Hakam and Sa'id ibn al-'As rode on and prevented
the burial of the Prophet's grandson by his tomb. 'A'ishah, too, riding
a mule, shouted in front of the mourners: "This is my house, and I allow
no one to be buried here!"

Al-Qasim, grandson of Abu Baker, came forward and said: "O aunt! We
have not yet washed off our heads the blood of the day of the battle of
al-Jamal. Do you intend that in future they call this day the day of
mule?" The Alawite supporters did not, naturally, remain passive. A
number gathered round Imam al-Husayn and said: "Allow us to deal with
those men. By God! They are no more than a bite for us!" The Imam said:
"My brother has willed that at his burial not even one drop of blood be
shed."

Then the body of Imam al-Hasan was taken to the al-Baqi'cemetery and
buried by the side of his grandmother, Fatimah, daughter of Asad and
mother of Imam 'Ali.242 These activities of 'A'ishah, which showed her
old-standing rancor and hostility towards the Prophet's household, had
created a close and firm friendship between 'A'ishah and Umayyads,
especially with Mu'awiyah, for which reason they showed a great respect
to her and offered her many gifts.

**Gifts of Mu'awiyah**

Once Mu'awiyah sent 'A'ishah one hundred thousand drachmas. Historians
When a critical scholar searches reliable historical texts, he finds
strange signs of 'A'ishah's attachment to the government of the
Umayyads. These two, despite their past differences and their combats in
the assassination of 'Uthman, 241. al-Ya'qubi 2/200, and Maqatil
at-Talibiyin 75, and Tadhkirat al-khawas al-ummah 122, and Rawdat
al-awa'il 11/133 on Ibn al-Athir.

242. al-Ya'qubi 2/200 onward.

now found it expedient to sit alongside each other and form a single
front. The financial considerations of the Umayyad government towards
'A'ishah are a clear evidence of the said attachment. Again and again
many gifts and sums of money were sent for her by Mu'awiyah and other
Umayyad rulers. Here we cite some examples of this treatment, which we
have collected from reliable historical texts.

Abu Nu'aym al-Isfahani, well-known writer of Hilyat al-awliya', quoting
'Abd ar-Rahman ibn al-Qasim, says that once Mu'awiyah sent some gifts
for 'A'ishah which included money, clothes and precious objects.243 He
also quotes 'Urwah ibn az-Zubayr, saying that on another occasion
Mu'awiyah sent 'A'ishah one hundred thousand drachmas.244 Ibn Kathir,
the famous historian of the 8th century, quotes 'Ata', saying that
Mu'awiyah sent a valuable necklace for 'A'ishah in Mecca, the price of
which was about one hundred thousand drachmas, and she accepted it.245
The reliable book of Tabaqat al-kubra reports that Munkadir ibn 'Abd
Allah visited 'A'ishah, and after some preliminary talks, she asked him:
"Have you an offspring?" He said: "No!" 'A'ishah said: "If I had ten
thousand drachmas, I would give it to you to buy a slave-girl and have
an offspring by her." This meeting came to end, and on the same day
Mu'awiyah sent 'A'ishah a huge sum of money. 'A'ishah said: "How soon we
are entangled!" and then sent Munkadir ten thousand dinars, with which
he bought a slave-girl.246

Ibn Kathir quotes another incident from Sa'd ibn al-'Aziz, saying that
Mu'awiyah once repaid a debt of 'A'ishah for a sum of eighteen thousand
drachmas. These debts were incurred by her owing to the gifts of money
given by her to the people.247

These were some examples of the financial considerations of Mu'awiyah
for 'A'ishah. Such a treatment was not confined to Mu'awiyah. Other
Umayyad rulers, too, acted in a similar manner, and from time to time
they sent her various gifts. One of these men was 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amir,
governor of Basra, 243. Hilyat al-awliya' 2/48.

244. Hilyat al-awliya' 2/47: and Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala' 2/131,and
Ibn Kathir 7/136-137: and alMustadrak4/13.

245. Ibn Kathir 7/137, and Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala' 2/131: It adds at
the end of the tradition that he divided this money among the Prophet's
wives.

246. Tabaqat al-kubra 5/18 on the life of Munkadir.

247. Ibn Kathir 81136, and Siyar al-a'lam 2/131 estimating the amount
of debt at twelve thousand drachmas.

who once sent her money and clothes.248 Despite the time that separates
us from 'A'ishah and the Umayyad period, we see that the instances and
evidence of such financial considerations by the Umayyad government
towards 'A'ishah are so numerous that we are compelled to conclude that
the actual instances are much more numerous than what have reached us,
and that history has buried most of them within itself.

In view of this point, we can realize the degree of the respect shown
to 'A'ishah by the Umayyad rulers on account of their own worldly
considerations and expediency as well as the reciprocal consideration
and expediency that 'A'ishah felt towards them, and thus we discover the
extent of the connection and attachment of those two strong fronts of
the time. Thus we can henceforth have a better and clearer understanding
of the evil results of the close connection of these two poles for the
Muslims and Islam.

**The influence of 'A'ishah in the rule of the Umayyads**

Ziyad ibn Abihi said proudly: This is the letter of 'A'ishah Umm
al-Mu'minin to me! If the reader has paid sufficient attention to what
has already been said about the life of 'A'ishah and her political and
social activities, he will have distinguished the extraordinary
political genius of this woman. From the viewpoint of social and
political understanding, and the power of imposing her views and many
other qualities, which are necessary for a politician, she has an
evident superiority over most men and women of her own time. This point
will be illustrated in many ways in the forthcoming pages.

One aspect of this woman's genius is the influence of her words. We
read in the book of Tabaqat al-kubra: Murrah ibn Abi 'Uthman was the
freed slave of 'Abd ar-Rahman son of Abu Bakr. One day he went to 'Abd
ar-Rahman and requested him to write a letter to Ziyad, asking him to
meet his need. 'Abd ar- Rahman wrote the letter but addressed Ziyad as
the son of his real father 'Ubayd, not as Abu Sufyan's son. Murrah ibn
Abi 'Uthman said: "I won't take such a letter to Ziyad, for instead of
securing a benefit, I shall receive some harm."

Then he went to 'A'ishah and repeated the same request. 'A'ishah wrote:
"This is a letter from 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin to Ziyad, son of Abu
Sufyan." The man took the letter to Ziyad who said to him after reading
it: "Go now and come back to me to-morrow so that I fulfill your wish."
Next day when he went to Ziyad while he was surrounded by people, Ziyad
told him to 248. Musnad of Ahmad 6/77 and 259. This 'Abd Allah is a
cousin of 'Uthman. You can refer to Volume One of the translation of
this book about him.

read the letter. He read this sentence which was written in it and
nothing more: "This is a letter from 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin to Ziyad,
son of Abu Sufyan." Then Ziyad complied with the man's request.249 Yaqut
al-Hamawi narrates this story in the section on "Nahr Murrah" of his
geographical encyclopedia, and writes: Ziyad was very pleased with
'A'ishah's letter and treated the man very kindly, and then turned to
the people and said proudly: "This is a letter of Umm al-Mu'minin to
me!"

Then he ordered to give Murrah one hundred acres of land by the river
al- Ubulah as his fief, and dig a special canal to irrigate his land,
and this river is thus called "Nahr Murrah".250 What is interesting in
this incident is the use made by Ziyad of the effect of 'A'ishah's
written words for his own benefit. He felt so pleased at being addressed
by 'A'ishah as Abu Sufyan's son, and being accepted by her as such. So
he wished that the so-called letter be read publicly, so that the people
would see that his noble lineage is recognized by 'A'ishah, the great
personality of the time, considering him as the son of Abu Sufyan,
former chief of the Quraysh, and brother of the present caliph!

Another time 'A'ishah wrote a letter to Ziyad in which he recommended a
man. Ziyad wrote at the bottom of the letter: 'He lives with his
parents', meaning that Ziyad will treat the man so well that he will
feel as if he lives with his parents.251

**'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah in reciprocal contention**

I swear to God that Hujr and his friends were the leaders and selected
ones of the Arabs. 'A'ishah Although the hostility with Imam 'Ali had
produced a deep friendship between 'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah, yet later on
a number of factor caused a break in this relationship, and it led to
coolness and enmity. We will deal with these factors in several
different sections. Mu'awiyah's constant efforts enabled him to seize
the rein of all affairs, but he was not content with this and wished to
make his rule hereditary. What is significant is that at first even some
groups of his friends did not approve of this project, and at this time
the son of Abu Sufyan revealed the savage and violent, and cruel 249.
Tabaqat 7/99.

250. Futuh al-buldan 360-361, and al-Ma'arif and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir
5/411, and Mu'jam al- buldan 5/323.

251. al-'Iqd al-farid 4/217.

side of his character. It was then that 'A'ishah joined the group of
his opponents, and severed her last bond of connection with Mu'awiyah.
The first disagreement which arose between 'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah,
appeared in the unpleasant event of the death of Hujr ibn 'Adi, the
brave warrior of Kufah and chaste Shi'ah follower of Imam 'Ali. Abu
al-Faraj al-Isfahani writes: 'A'ishah sent an envoy named 'Abd ar-
Rahman ibn al-Harath to ash-Sham to intercede on her behalf to Mu'awiyah
for Hujr and his friends. This man reached Damascus at a time when
Mu'awiyah had already killed them. 'A'ishah's envoy returned in
disappointment and reported the event to her. 'A'ishah said in vexation:
"If it had not been for the fact that whenever we start a revolt and
change the conditions, the situation becomes more complicated, and
unpleasant events occur, we would have started another revolt, and would
not have left Hujr's death without vengeance, since I swear to God that
he was a true Muslim and striver in the way of God."252 What 'A'ishah
meant by her statement about revolt was that the popular movement
started by her against 'Uthman, had produced many difficulties as a
result of which Imam 'Ali had assumed the position of caliph. This
matter was so insupportable for 'A'ishah that she longed and prayed for
the annihilation of the heaven and earth and its people if the caliphate
became a definitely established fact for the Imam.

But her hopes were in vain since Imam 'Ali assumed that position as a
fact. Therefore, she used all her efforts to change the course of
events, and deprive the Imam of his position as caliph, and thus she
started the battle of al-Jamal which caused so much bloodshed and
massacre253, but without any avail, except that her cousin Talhah, her
son Muhammad and her sister's husband lost their lives, and she was
brought much pain and suffering!

Now she was afraid that if she started a revolt against Mu'awiyah, a
step which was possible for her owing to her social power and influence,
more bitter and unpleasant events would ensue which might affect her
future, and condi- tions would become worse.

Therefore, she was compelled to suppress her anger, and try to forget
this failure which damaged her social prestige. Thus she controlled her
rage and remained silent against Mu'awiyah's action. Another point is
mentioned in historical texts concerning the execution of Hujr, which
shows 'A'ishah's deep political understanding. She had declared: "By
God, if Mu'awiyah had recognized the heroic spirit, zeal and power of
the people of Kufah, he would never have dared to arrest and kill Hujr
and his 252. al-Aghani 16/10 and at-Tabari 4/192, and Ibn al-Athir
3/209. 253. It is estimated that the number of people killed in the
battle of al-Jamal was more than thirty thousand. (al-Ya'qubi 2/159
printed an-Najaf). Also refer to Volume Two of the translation of this
book pages 251-254 published by Mihr Ustuwar, Qom.

friends. But the son of the liver-eater woman254 knows that fervent men
of the Arabs no longer exist in this world-; I swear to God that Hujr
and his friends possessed a high rank in their clear-sightedness,
heroism and courage." The poet Lubayd has finely composed the following
lines about this matter:

"Those under whose auspices one could live,
Have departed this life, and lam left alone,
Amidst those who are as worthless as leprous skins!
They afford neither a benefit,
Nor is there any hope of their charity,
Their spokesman is cavilled at,
Even if he has caused no mischief." 255

**The death of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr**

O Mu'awiyah! Did you not fear God in killing Hujr and his friends?
'A'ishah The second factor of 'A'ishah's disagreement with Mu'awiyah,
was the tragic event of the killing of her brother, Muhammad ibn Abi
Bakr. Ibn 'Abd al-Barr and Ibn al-Athir narrate: In the year that
Mu'awiyah had gone on a pilgrimage to Mecca, he went to Medina
presumably to visit the tomb of the Prophet of God. During his stay in
Medina, one day he went to visit 'A'ishah. Her first words with him were
related to the execution of Hujr, about which she said many things. The
last answer of Mu'awiyah was: "Leave Hujr and me alone to meet at the
threshold of our God."256

Some historians give greater details about this story and say: After
Mu'awiyah was permitted by 'A'ishah to enter her house and sit down, she
said to him: "Mu'awiyah! How could you so confidently enter my house
without fearing my retaliation for the death of my brother Muhammad?"
Mu'awiyah said: "Because I have entered this asylum." 'A'ishah said: "O
Mu'awiyah! Did you not fear God in killing Hujr and his friends?"
Mu'awiyah said: "They were in fact killed by those who have given
testimony about them."257

254. This refers to the tragic crime of Hind in the battle of Uhud when
she pulled out the liver of martyred Hamzah and bit it. (part one, p.
29) 255. Lubayd is one of the Mukhdarm poets, namely those who have
lived in both the pagan and Islamic periods. He was over one hundred of
age, and died in the time of 'Uthman or Mu'awiyah, al-Aghani 14/211 and
Usd al-ghabah 4/261. In this book, too, mention is made of his poem
quoted by 'A'ishah. 256. Usd al-ghabah and al-Isti'ab on the life of
Hujr. 257. Refer to al-Isti'ab on Hujr, and Ibn Kathir.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal writes in his book of Musnad that Mu'awiyah gave the
following answer to 'A'ishah's questions: "You would never commit such
an act since I am in this asylum, and I have heard the Prophet say that
a faith in God checks the act of killing a person." Then he asked her:
"What do you think of my treatment of you and meeting your needs?"
'A'ishah said: "It is excellent." Then Mu'awiyah said: "In that case
leave us to others until we meet at the threshold of our God."258

As history was reported, Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, 'A'ishah's brother was
killed in the year 37 of the Hijrah, and Hujr ibn 'Adi in the year 50.
Therefore the question arises as to why and how 'A'ishah remained silent
all those years without saying a word about avenging her brother's blood
until Hujr and his friends were killed, and then she remembered her
brother's death? We believe that the reason for these changes were the
events that took place at the beginning. We have already seen that
'A'ishah sent an envoy named 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn al-Harath from Medina to
ash-Sham to intercede for Hujr and his friends. The report of this
mission spread to all parts of the Islamic realm, and the people who
were aware of 'A'ishah's history and influence with the caliph's
government, sincerely hoped that her request would be complied with, and
Mu'awiyah would not disappoint her. But not more than a few days later
her envoy returned in disappointment and for the first time announced
'A'ishah's failure.

Such a thing had been almost unprecedented in the past. 'A'ishah had
somehow or other secured a great influence in the time of the caliphs,
and the government organization with the exception of the Alawite
government had respectfully accepted her views,259 and this was the
first time that her demand was not agreed to.

With the spirit that we know of 'A'ishah, it was very hard for her to
bear this failure, and it created a deep rage and rancor in her. Was it
not this same factor that caused her to speak harshly with Mu'awiyah
after so many years of friendship and attachment for him and despite all
his material considerations and kindness to her, and remind him of his
wrong deeds, and bring up the subject of the unjust death of her brother
after fifteen years? Sly and states manlike Mu'awiyah preferred to show
calmness and moderation against 'A'ishah's rage and dissatisfactions and
remind her of his past friendship and his gifts and his generosity
towards her. Of course 'A'ishah, as a strong woman that we have got to
know in the 258.Musnad of Ahmad 4/92.

259. Refer to Volume One of the translation of the present book
entitled "The Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam".

pages of this book, would not so easily calm down from her state of
boiling rage, and would not quickly forget her rancor and enmity,
especially as Mu'awiyah had at that time inflicted another fresh wound
upon her, namely by putting to death another brother of hers in the
question of the allegiance to Yazid. Naturally the disagreement between
'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah became more intensified at the sudden death of
her own brother, 'Abd ar-Rahman, and she was filled with boiling rage.

'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr is poisoned Marwan is a piece of God's
damnation. 'A'ishah The third factor of the disagreement between
'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah was the question of the mysterious death of her
brother, 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr. We have already seen that at the
time when Mu'awiyah was preparing the Muslim people to show allegiance
to Yazid, Marwan ibn al-Hakam governed Medina. One day during his sermon
he spoke of Yazid and of his nomination as caliph to succeed his father.
'Abd ar-Rahman rose and spoke in opposition to Marwan, and Marwan
ordered to arrest him.

But 'Abd ar-Rahman fled out of the mosque and went to the house of
'A'ishah and Marwan's men had no power to seize him. At this time Marwan
said in reproach and scorn of him: "This is the man about whom the
Qur'an has said: 'And he who says to his parents: Fie on you! Do you
threaten me?' "260 At this time 'A'ishah cried out from behind the
screen: "God has not descended any verse about our house except where He
declares my innocence in the incident of Ifk."261

Ibn al-Athir, the famous historian, narrates this story as follows: In
the question of allegiance for Yazid, Mu'awiyah wrote a letter to his
governor, Marwan, and on receiving this letter, Marwan rose and
declared: "Amir al- Mu'minin Mu'awiyah has nominated a successor to the
caliphate for you, and has shown good-will in this matter by choosing
his son Yazid for this position." 'Abd ar-Rahman rose and said: "Both
you and Mu'awiyah have lied! You have not taken into consideration
people's interest and welfare. Your intention is to transform the
caliphate into an empire and adopt the ways of Kasras and Caesars, so
that when an emperor dies, another emperor takes his place!" Marwan
addressed the people and said: "This is the man about whom the 260. The
Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Ahqaf, Verse 17.

261. Sahih of al-Bukhari 3/126 in the commentary on the Quranic Chapter
of al-Ahqaf.

Qur'an says: 'He who says to his parents: Fie on you! Do you threaten
me?' " 'A'ishah, hearing his words from behind the screen, stood up and
shouted: "O Marwan! O Marwan!"

The people became silent, and Marwan turned his face in that direction.
'A'ishah said after a brief pause: "'Are you the man who said to 'Abd
ar- Rahman that a verse has descended in the Qur'an reproaching him? You
are lying! I swear to God that he is not the man about whom the verse
has descended, it must be another person, but you are a piece of God's
damnation!"262 According to another narration, she said: "He is lying.
By God, 'Abd ar- Rahman is not the man he spoke of. But God damned the
father of Marwan when Marwan was still in his loins; so Marwan is a
piece of God's damnation!" Thus Marwan found no chance to secure
allegiance for Yazid. Therefore this important task was left for
Mu'awiyah himself to accomplish. After sometime Mu'awiyah travelled to
Hejaz, seemingly for pilgrimage to Mecca, and then visited Medina. We
have already described some of the incidents, which occurred in Medina,
and now we will narrate some others.

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr writes in his book of al-Isti'ab: Mu'awiyah sat on the
pulpit of the Prophet's mosque and called upon the people to show
allegiance to Yazid. But Imam al-Husayn, 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr and
'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr protested against it, and many angry words
were exchanged. The son of Abu Bakr said: "O Mu'awiyah! Has the
caliphate been transformed into an empire so that if an emperor died,
another emperor would take his place without taking people's approval
and allegiance into consideration? We can never agree to this matter."

That night Mu'awiyah sent him one hundred thousand drachmas to win his
approval for the allegiance. But 'Abd ar-Rahman refused to accept the
bribe and said: "Do you suppose that I would sell my religion for the
world? Never!" Then he departed from Medina and went to Mecca. But soon
afterwards he died before the allegiance for Yazid was accomplished and
accepted generally.263

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr adds: 'Abd ar-Rahman died of a sudden death in the
vicinity of Mecca. The spot where he died was called al-Hubshi within
ten miles of Mecca, and he was buried in the same place. It is said that
he died in his sleep. When the news of his death was reported to
'A'ishah, she hastily left 262. Ibn al-Athir 3/199 on the events of the
year 56. An account of this story is found in the following books: al-
Aghani 16/90-91: and al-Mustadrak 4/481 and Ibn Kathir 8/89 and
al-Ijabah 141, and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 4/226 in the translation of
'Abd ar-Rahman and on the life of al-Hakam ibn Abi al-'As in al-Isti'ab,
Usd al- ghabah and al-Isabah.

263. al-Isti'ab 2/373, and Usd al-ghabah 3/306, and al-Isabah 2/400,
and Shadharat adh-dhahab on the events of the year 53.

Medina for Mecca, and after arriving there, she stood for some time by
his grave and wept for the loss of her own brother, and recited the
following lamentation for him:

"For a long time we two were
Like two companions of Judhaymah, king of Hira,
Who were so attached to each other?
Like two inseparable companions,
So that it was said that they would never be apart.
But when we separated with the death of my brother; Malik,
It seemed as if we had not even spent one night

Together; despite all those attachments and companionships."264,265
Then she added with poignant grief: "I swear to God that if I were
present at your death, I would have buried you in the spot where you
died, and would not have shed tears for you in that condition."

Thus the disagreement between 'A'ishah and the Umayyads became more
intensified and its flame soared higher. 'A'ishah had unexpectedly lost
her brother who had died suddenly and mysteriously. But there was really
no mystery, and a close scrutiny will reveal its cause, since he died of
poisoning on the way to Mecca in the same way that Malik al-Ashtar died
on his way to Egypt.266

Undoubtedly his death like the deaths of 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Khalid,
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba could not have been
without a sinister cause. All these great men of the time were killed in
order to open the way for securing allegiance for Yazid. Thus the fire
of dispute and division between 'A'ishah and the Umayyads rose high
after she lost her dear brother, but now there was no one to help her to
start a combat with the Umayyads, since now neither az-Zubayr nor Talhah
were alive, nor 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr, nor anyone else on whom she
264. al-Isti'ab 2/373.

265. This elegy had been composed originally by Mutammam in lamentation
for his brother Malik ibn Nuwayrah when Khalid ibn al-Walid took him
prisoner after prayer in the land of al-Batah and beheaded him, and
slept with his wife in the same night. Here Mutammam has compared the
intimacy between himself and his brother Malik to the close friendship
of two companions of Judhaymah ibn al-Abrash who was a king of Hira,
whose attachment had become proverbial.

'A'ishah recites the poem of Mutammam in mourning for the sudden death
of her brother. 266. Malik al-Ashtar ibn al-Harath an-Nakha'i was the
chief of his own people and had had the advantage of living in the
Prophet's time. His eye was damaged in the battle of al-Yarmuk and he
was thus nicknamed al-Ashtar (meaning: "With torn-eyelid"). He exhibited
much valor and self- sacrifice in the battles of al-Jamal and Siffin. He
was appointed governor of Egypt in the year 38 of the Hijrah, but owing
to a plot of Mu'awiyah, he was killed by a peasant on his way, at
'Uraysh, a city in ash-Sham. (Muruj adh-dhahab 2/139, al-Ya'qubi 2/170:
Description of Nahj 2/29: at- Tabari, events of the year 38 and 39,
Mu'jam al-buldan 1/454).

could rely. Thus she recited the following lines which eloquently
expressed her present condition:

"Those under whose protection I could live,
Have gone and left me alone now
Amidst those who are as worthless
As leprous skins, who offer no benefit,
Nor is there any hope for their goodness."

Besides, 'A'ishah's age was now such that she could not sit on a mount
and cover deserts and mountains and start a war with the Umayyads.
Therefore, she showed her rancor and hostility in a different way, and
as we saw the Umayyad emir of Medina became the target of her revenge,
and 'A'ishah quoted the words of the Prophet concerning his reproach and
damnation of him and his father and said that he was a piece of God's
damnation.

Thenceforth that was the way she chose for future. We think that in
this period she did not confine her activity only to quoting the
traditions which were related to the reproach of the Umayyads, but she
also quoted what she had heard the Prophet state concerning the virtue
of his household and of Imam 'Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. For,
in those times nothing was harder for the Umayyads to tolerate than
hearing words of praise about the Prophet's household. It meant
condemning and humiliating the Umayyads, and made Imam al-Husayn who was
the last member of that house and the noblest Muslim of that day, most
loved by the people. Therefore the traditions which are found in books
of tradition in which the names of Imam 'Ali, Siddiqah (Fatimah) and her
noble mother Khadijah are mentioned, must have belonged to this period
even though their number is not great.

We think it probable that her expressions of penitence about the battle
of al- Jamal, too, have their beginning in this period and have
continued to the end of her life. Now we deal with this subject at
length in the next section.

**'A'ishah is penitent about the battle of al-Jamal**

Oh! The battle of Jamal is stuck in my throat like a bone! 'A'ishah Abu
Jundab, a man of Kufah, narrates the story of his meeting with 'A'ishah
as follows: When I went to the house of Umm al-Mu'minin and met her, she
asked me who I was. I said: "I am a man of the al-Azd tribe, living in
Kufah." She asked me: "Did you take part in the battle of al-Jamal?" I
said: "Yes". She asked: "Were you fighting for us or against us?" I told
her that I was fighting against her.

She asked: "Do you know the person who declared in his slogan: 'O dear
mother! O the best mother that we know?' " I said: "Yes, he was my
cousin." Then she began to weep so profusely that I thought she would
never calm down.267

Ibn al-Athir writes: One day in 'A'ishah's presence the conversation
led to a mention of the battle of al-Jamal. She asked: "Do the people
still remember it?" They said: "Yes". She said: "I wish I had not taken
part in that battle and had sat down in my house like the other wives of
the Prophet. Keeping to my house like them would have been worthier for
me than having by him ten noble children as 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr and
'Abd ar-Rahman ibn al-Harath ibn Hisham."268

Historians and commentators quoted a man named Masruq, saying: When
'A'ishah was reciting this verse of the Qur'an which orders the wives of
the Prophet to stay at home,269 she wept so much that her head cover was
wet with tears.270


