Anecdotes in the Life of 'a'ishah
=================================

May God bless 'Ali who was always with God. 'A'ishah Although 'A'ishah
was in her life always involved with various events and difficulties,
yet she was not heedless of wit and humor in view of her delicate mind
and subtlety. Some incidents are narrated about her in this connection
in books of history.

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih writes in his famous book of al-'Iqd al-farid: One day
Imam al-Hasan ibn 'Ali visited Mu'awiyah when 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr
and Abu Sa'id, son of 'Aqil, were present there. When Imam al-Hasan sat
down, Mu'awiyah asked: "Abu Muhammad! Which of them was senior, 'Ali or
az-Zubayr?" The Imam said: "They were both almost of the same age, but
'Ali was regarded as az-Zubayr's senior."

'Abd Allah, son of az-Zubayr, began to speak and said: "And May God
blesses az-Zubayr!"317 Imam al-Hasan only smiled, since he was above
such superficialities and was aware of Mu'awiyah's mischievous
intention. But Abu Sa'id, son of 'Aqil, could not control his anger, and
said: "Stop speaking about 'Ali and az-Zubayr. 'Ali invited the people
to something in which he was a leader and Imam, whereas az-Zubayr
invited the people to something the leadership of which was held by a
woman! Then the two sides faced each other and the flame of war of
kindled, and both groups prepared themselves for combat. But az-Zubayr
took to his heels and fled from the field of battle before the victory
of right and before his submission to right and before wrong was
vanquished and before he could abandon it. Then a man seized him, who
was much shorter than az-Zubayr, and cut off his head and carries away
his clothes, and brought his severed head to the Imam as a souvenir.

But Imam 'Ali, as usual served under the Prophet of God and was the
vanguard of the army on that day. Therefore, may God bless 'Ali, not
az-

317. With this remark 'Abd Allah implied that 'Ali would not be blessed
by God! Zubayr?" 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr said: "By God! If anyone else
but you had uttered such words, I would have known what to do with him!"
The son of 'Aqil said: "The person towards whom you committed this
insolence, nobly turned away from you and your words, and thus I was
compelled to speak for him."

This incident was reported to 'A'ishah. One day when Abu Sa'id was
passing by her house, she shouted to him and said: "You squint-eyed
devil! Are you the man who spoke their biting words to my sister's son?"
Abu Sa'id looked round and saw no one. So he shouted: "The devil sees
you, but you cannot see him." 'A'ishah laughed on hearing these words
and said: "May God bless your father! How sharp and biting your tongue
is!"318 The above incident shows that Mu'awiyah's intention was to
produce a clash between Imam al-Hasan and 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr and
cause hostility. This was a policy he constantly adopted towards the
Quraysh chiefs, and roused one group against another.

In the above incident 'Abd Allah was unconsciously caught in the webs
of Mu'awiyah cunning and followed the course envisaged by Mu'awiyah,
while Imam al-Hasan, who was acquainted well with the character of
Mu'awiyah, safely escaped from his trap. The role of 'A'ishah, too, in
this incident was in accordance with what she did all her life, namely
to support her kith and kin, and oppose their enemies. Another anecdote
in her life is a story narrated by Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his book of
Musnad. He writes: 'Ammar ibn Yasir accompanied by Malik al- Ashtar went
to 'A'ishah's house and asked for admission. When they entered, 'Ammar
said: "O mother!" 'A'ishah said: "But I am not your mother!" 'Ammar
said: "But you are, even though you dislike it."319 'A'ishah asked: "Who
is the man with you?"

'Ammar said: "al-Ashtar." 'A'ishah turned to him and said: "Was it you
who wanted to kill my sister's son?" al-Ashtar said: "Yes, he wanted to
kill me, and so I desired his death." 'A'ishah said: "If you had killed
him you would never have received salvation; for, I have heard the
Prophet say: 'Killing a Muslim is not permissible except in one of the
three following cases: if he has killed someone, and he is killed, or a
married man who commits adultery, or a man becomes an apostate after
embracing Islam.' "320 Here 'A'ishah should have been asked: "O mother
of the faithful! Why did 318. al-'Iqd al-farid 4/14-15, and Description
of Nahj 3/7.

319. Even if the narration is true, it means that Muslim men cannot
marry 'A'ishah!

320.Musnad of Ahmad 6/205.

you not remind your sister's son, 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr, of the
Prophet's words? Was he not eager to kill such a Muslim as al-Ashtar?
Was the consideration about the death of a Muslim confined only to the
person of 'Abd Allah, and was the verdict not applicable to thousands of
Muslims who had innocently been killed in that fearful battle in the way
of whim and fancy? Had their blood no worth in the eye of God and
Islam?" Another anecdote mentioned in history about 'A'ishah's life is a
story narrated by Ibn 'Abd Rabbih in al-'Iqd al-farid. He says: After
the battle of al- Jamal, one day Umm Ufa al-'Abdiyah of the 'Abd al-Qays
tribe many hundred famous men of which such as Hakim ibn Jabalah had
been killed by 'A'ishah's army, visited 'A'ishah and said to her: "O
mother of the faithful! What do you say about a mother who kills her
small offspring?" 'A'ishah said: "She must receive the fire of hell."
Umm Ufa asked: "What do say about a mother who kills twenty thousand
grown-up sons of hers?" 'A'ishah shouted: "Throw out this enemy of
God!"321

How hard was this reproach for 'A'ishah to hear! The event of the
battle of al-Jamal and its greatness and fearfulness weighed like a
heavy mountain on her mind, and during the rest of her life it had not
lost its effect.

We have already mentioned her deep regret and penitence about
participating in that war, and our subsequent reference to this matter
may depict the same kind of repentance. Ibn 'Abd Rabbih quotes a remark
of 'A'ishah about this matter in his book of al-'Iqd al-farid. She has
said: "A spindle in the hand of women is better and nobler than a spear
in the hand of fighters in the way of God."322 The effect of the battle
of al-Jamal on the mind and spirit of 'A'ishah was as painful as it was
exhilarating for the Umayyad party, so that they spoke of it every day
and gloried in mentioning its details.

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih writes: "Yazid ibn Munyah went to Mu'awiyah from Basra
to ash-Sham. He was a brother of Ya'la ibn Munayh, a chief of Basra and
a commander in the battle of al-Jamal, and the original owner of
'A'ishah's camel. She rode it and directed the combat from there. Ya'la
also had some kinship with Mu'awiyah, for his daughter was the wife of
'Utbah ibn Abi Sufyan, brother of Mu'awiyah. When Yazid ibn Munayh set
by Mu'awiyah, he began complaining of his debts, and requested Mu'awiyah
to help him out of his difficulties. Mu'awiyah said to Ka'b: "Give him
thirty thousand dinars!" When he rose to go out, Mu'awiyah said again:
"Add to it another thirty 321. al-'Iqd al-farid on the termination of
the battle of al-Jamal, and 'Uyun al-akhbar 1/202.

322. al-'Iqd al-farid 2/455.

thousand for the sake of the day of al-Jamal."323 One day 'Amr ibn
al-'As in his conversation with 'A'ishah said: "I wish you were killed
on the day of al-Jamal?" 'A'ishah said: "Why, you old villain?" 'Amr ibn
al-'As answered: "Then you would have died fittingly and gone to heaven,
and we could have used your death as the best excuse for pounding the
Alawite front."324

Books of history narrate another encounter of 'Amr ibn al-'As with
'A'ishah, namely that, one day in 'A'ishah's presence the talk led to
the death of Dhu ath-Thadiyah at the hand of Imam 'Ali. The narrator
says: 'A'ishah said to me: "If you visit Kufah bring me a letter of
testimony from the people who have witnessed this scene." I went to
Kufah and I chose ten people from each group and collected their
testimony in a letter and took it to Medina for 'A'ishah. When she saw
it, she said: "May God damn 'Amr ibn al-'As! He claimed that I have
killed Dhu ath-Thadiyah in Egypt."325

After narrating this story, Ibn Kathir adds: Then 'A'ishah bent her
head and wept bitterly. After she stopped crying and calmed down, she
said: "May God bless 'Ali! He was always with God. What occurred between
me and him, was what often occurs between women and their husbands'
family."326 But as to why 'Amr ibn al-'As had made such a false claim
and intended to attribute the death of Dhu ath-Thadiyah to himself, a
reference to the narrations of the Prophet clarifies the matter: Writers
of tradition and historians have quoted narrations from the Prophet in
reproach of Dhu ath-Thadiyah and in praise of his killer. In this way
'Amr ibn al-'As intended to show the conformity of his own praise with
that of the Prophet.

Here the survey of 'A'ishah's life comes to an end, and we return to
the life of Mu'awiyah in order to discover the motives for and factors
of the fabrication of traditions and narrations of that period, and find
out the great role of 'A'ishah in this process. For, all our discussions
and efforts are intended to recognize the traditions, which are falsely
attributed to the Prophet in order to invert Islam. Therefore, without
such an analysis those lies cannot be distinguished and criticized.

323. al-'Iqd al-farid 1/299 and 2/68 second edition, Egypt.

324. al-Kamil of al-Mubarrad 151, printed Leaden.

325. al-Mustadrak 4/13, and Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala' 2/141, and Ibn
Kathir 8/303.

326. The reader who has patiently read the whole of this book may ask:
How can we account so easily for all the hostility of 'A'ishah towards
the Prophet's household and Imam 'Ali? Is it reasonable to consider the
death of twenty thousand Muslims due to family differences? Is such an
explanation adequate for such acts as her prostration before God
thanking Him for 'Ali's tragic martyrdom, her avoidance of his sons, her
co-operation with the enemies of God and the Prophet and the Qur'an,
(meaning with the Umayyads) and her fabrication of traditions in their
favour? Never!

**Part Six : Fabrication of tradition and tradition-makers A brief
glance at the life of Mu'awiyah**

**A summary of previous discussions**

In pagan times the Umayyads showed envy to the Banu Hashim. During the
pagan times Umayyah and his descendants were deeply envious of the
greatness and headship of Hashim and his descendants, and this jealousy
produced many unpleasant results. But before the advent of Islam the
opposi- tion and hostility of the Umayyads were not so hard and acute.
Time passed and the grandson of 'Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim brought
Islam, the great religion of God, as souvenir to the world of humanity.
It was at this time that Abu Sufyan, grandson of Umayyah assumed the
leadership of Quraysh combat against Islam, and directed most of the
anti-Islamic combats of the Meccan infidels. During the whole time of
the apparent weakness of Islam, Abu Sufyan imposed severe and deadly
tortures upon the weak and impotent followers of this new religion and
did his worst to molest them.

Naturally the conditions could not remain such forever, and eventually
God Almighty helped His prophet and opened the gates of Mecca for him
and Muslim combatants and brought them success and victory. Thenceforth
the Quraysh no longer dominated Arab tribes, and they were given the
epithet of "freed ones" and a stain of disgrace on their character. Abu
Sufyan was vanquished in the same way that Arab idols had been smashed
and destroyed, and those same weak and rejected individuals of pagan
times such as 'Ammar, Abu Dharr and Bilal, were now greatly respected
and had rightfully become the heirs of all the political and social
power of the time. Abu Sufyan passed by them and they said regretfully:
"The swords of God did not cut the head of this enemy of God in the way
he deserved."

Abu Sufyan lived long enough to see the caliphate of Abu Bakr. At this
time one day the caliph treated him so harshly that Quhafah, Abu Bakr's
father, was worried. Abu Bakr gave the following explanation to his
father: "God has granted greatness and glory to your house for the sake
of Islam, and lowered his house from the height of mastery."

Abu Sufyan also lived long enough to be compelled by 'Umar one day to
carry stones on his back in Mecca, the seat of his former domination.
Another day, too, he dealt Abu Sufyan strokes of the lash His wife,
Hind, who was greatly vexed at this incident, spoke sharply to 'Umar and
said: "By God! There was a time that if you dared to beat him, the land
of Mecca would have trembled under your feet!" 'Umar answered: "You are
right, but God has elevated some and abased others for the sake of
Islam!" Time passed and 'Uthman became caliph, and once more the
Umayyads assumed power, and like children who pass a ball to one
another, the Umayyads transferred ranks and positions to each other. In
each province one member of the Umayyad house assumed the seat of
governorship and was greatly proud of his position. It was at this
period that the darlings of the Prophet's time, namely the chaste
devouts, had become inferiors and weakened individuals like 'Ammar who
were harshly treated, or like Abu Dharr and Malik al-Ashtar who were
exiled to arid deserts!

Now the Qurayshis had once more regained their former pride and
haughtiness, and one of the Umayyads exclaimed: "The green lands of Iraq
are one of the gardens of the Quraysh." All this conceit, haughtiness
and injustice led the Islamic realm towards a revolt, and this revolt
and riot were so wide and deep that they culminated in the assassination
of the caliph, and even then in his own house!

After this bitter experience, the Muslims joined hands, and despite the
Umayyads' wish, they brought the camel of caliphate to the door of the
Banu Hashim. Now began the just rule of the Alawites and once more in
Medina the Umayyads lost their power and glory, and the Quraysh
guardians of paganism were humbled. But they could not keep quiet, and
every day they opposed the Alawite government in one way or another,
since they cherished in their hearts the hope of recovering domination
and rule from the time of 'Uthman onward. Gradually they paved the way
for a war against the Imam's rule, which caused much bloodshed in Basra,
but they gained no profit from it.

During the whole of this period Mu'awiyah had governed ash-Sham since
the time of 'Umar, and now he wanted to make the foundation of his rule
stronger at every opportunity. Consequently he wrote to the Imam
demanding the governorship of Egypt and ash-Sham, but as the Imam
refused to comply with his demand, he gathered together thousands of
supporters in Siffin in the name of avenging 'Uthman's blood, and
started a cruel and bloody battle! But the battle did not settle the
question, and the matter of arbitration was brought up, and Mu'awiyah
returned to ash-Sham after consolidating his position. Then he began
dispatching successive groups of plunderers to the Islamic lands of Iraq
and Hejaz to seize innocent Muslim women as captives and kill the young
and old, burn, massacre, pillage and demolish. The result of the wicked
raids of one group of plunderers was the death of thirty thousand
Muslims who were caught innocently in the clutches of the unjust and
bloodthirsty raiders of Mu'awiyah.

After the martyrdom of Imam 'Ali, Mu'awiyah again refused to show
allegiance to Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba, and with a large army invaded
Iraq. At the same time Mu'awiyah tried to buy off the guards and
companions of Imam al-Hasan with money and position in order to kill the
Imam. As the Imam did not succeed in persuading his supporters to engage
in war with Mu'awiyah and was also badly wounded, he concluded a truce
with him, and stipulated heavy conditions in this pact, none of which
was fulfilled by Mu'awiyah.

After his arrival in Kufah, Mu'awiyah declared: "I swear to God that I
have not fought you for the sake of fast and prayer. You can please
yourselves in performing these acts. My only reason for this combat has
been to rule you, and so I trample upon every condition that I have made
in my pact with al-Hasan." In his first days and years of his rule,
Mu'awiyah was compelled to follow a policy of caution and moderation. He
made peace with the emperor of Rome, and even paid tributes to him. He
sent bags of money from Damascus to all parts of the country. He
deceived the chiefs and dignitaries of tribes and crafty Arabs with
money, position and ties of kinship until his rule was consolidated on
the basis of materialism and tyranny. It was then that he revealed his
real visage and nature. He revived the customs of the tyrannical
emperors of the world. Gold and silver from one side, and property,
gardens and springs from another side were brought under his bloody
hands from all parts of the great Islamic realm. He issued the order,
like Iranian kings, that on the New Year and Mehrgan festivals gifts
should be offered to him, an act which was the heritage of the two great
neighboring empires, namely Iran and Rome.

**Tradition making and its motives in the time of Mu'awiyah**

Many loads of wine were carried for Mu'awiyah. Historians With the
commencement of the rule of Mu'awiyah, the friends and companions of the
Prophet who had gathered round Imam 'Ali during the Alawite rule, were
scattered in different parts of the Islamic realm. After the truce of
Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba with Mu'awiyah, as this group had lost their
strong support and were now a weakened party, they were dispersed in
various lands of Islam. If we have used the phrase 'the friends round
the Imam' it is because reliable historians have spoken of a large group
of the Prophet's companions as supporters of Imam 'Ali in the battles of
al-Jamal and Siffin, whereas they mention the names of only three
companions in Mu'awiyah's army who had the honour of association with
the Prophet.

Adh-Dhahabi writes in his book of "History of Islam": On the day of the
battle of al-Jamal there were present in 'Ali's army eight hundred of
the Ansar and seven hundred of those who had participated in the
ar-Ridwan allegiance and also one hundred and thirty of the men who had
fought in the battle of Badr under the Prophet.327 Ibn Khayyat writes in
his history: "Eight hundred of those who had shown allegiance until
death with the Prophet at ar-Ridwan328 accompanied Imam 'Ali in the
battle of Siffin."329 Nasr ibn Muzahim writes in his book of the event
of Siffin: Qays ibn Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah, the valiant and devoted friend of
the Imam in the event of Siffin, one day said to an-Nu'man ibn Bashir
who accompanied Mu'awiyah together with Muslamah ibn Mukhallad: "O
an-Nu'man! Do you see anyone with Mu'awiyah but a freed-slave or an
ignorant desert Arab or a deceived Yemeni? Look carefully! Where are the
Emigrants and Ansar and devout followers with whom God is satisfied?
Then look again! Who else is with Mu'awiyah but you and your two
friends, whereas you are neither among the combatants of Badr, nor among
the allegiants of 'Aqabah, nor among the warriors of the battle of Uhud,
nor have you a record in Islam and religion, nor has a verse of the
Qur'an descended in your praise? Upon my life, if you are fighting us
and causing mischief to day, your father, too, had acted in the same way
in the past!"330

What Qays meant by the allies of 'Aqabah were men of Ansar who
concluded a pact with the Prophet at 'Aqabah331 and embraced Islam, and
what he meant by the opposition and combat of an-Nu'man's father, was
his taking the lead in as-Saqifah for allegiance to Abu Bakr. This
action of an-Nu'man's father helped to consolidate the caliphate of Abu
Bakr.

In the statements that we have quoted from old and reliable historians,
you have noted that the devout and true supporters of the Prophet who
were trained by Islam, served under the banner of the Alawite
government, whereas Mu'awiyah had only two of the Prophet's companions
with him neither of whom had a record in Islam, nor had they shown any
self- sacrifice, nor did 327. adh-Dhahabi's History of Islam 2/149.

328.Related to the sixth year of the Hijrah before al-Hudaybiyah. The
number of the participation in this allegiance is said to have been
fourteen hundred. (al-Ya'qubi 2/40-41, and Ibn Hisham 2/315-316, and
at-Tabari 2/620-644.)

329. Khalifah ibn Khayyat in his history 1/180, published by al-Adab of
an-Najaf 1386.

330. Nasr ibn Muzahim on the Event of Siffin 449.

331. 'Aqabah is a land in Mina on the way to Mecca between Waqisah and
Qa'. (Mu'jam al-buldan 4/134)

they possess a good reputation. Now after the martyrdom of Imam 'Ali
ibn Abi Talib, all those friends were scattered in various lands of
Islam. Of course wherever these men went, loyal Muslims gathered around
them, and heard and sometimes wrote down the traditions that these
companions quoted from the Prophet, and thus they became familiar with
the teachings of their faith.

It can, of course, be easily imagined that the hot topics of those days
were related to the battles of Siffin and al-Jamal, the revolt of
'Uthman's time and such events, in all of which reference was made to
the defects, treason's and black deeds of the Umayyads. Sometimes, too,
they talked of the time of the first two caliphs and the victories
gained in that period when no virtue or excellence could be attributed
to the Umayyad house. Similarly there was an occasional talk of the
Prophet's time and the wars and battles of that period and of the
tortures inflicted upon devout Muslims by the Quraysh, impressing the
hearts with the greatness and glory of the time, and rousing a feeling
of humility in the listeners. Obviously in these conversations there was
always a mention of the virtue and fine qualities of the Banu Hashim,
and the reproach and berating the conduct and deeds of the Umayyads.

They narrated the story of Badr for interested Muslims and showed how
Mu'awiyah's grandfather, uncle, brother and other members of his house
were killed, and how seventy or more of the Quraysh and kins and friends
of the Umayyads were taken captive. They narrated the story of the
battle of Uhud when Abu Sufyan, father of Mu'awiyah, directed the
combat, and his liver eater mother, Hind, ripped open the body of
Hamzah, the Prophet's noble and valiant uncle, and bit his liver with
her teeth. They narrated how on that day Abu Sufyan cried out: 'Long
live Hubal!' (The idol), and then how the men recited a poem of al-Hasan
composed in reproach of Hind in which reference was made to the
illegitimate birth of Mu'awiyah!

One day they talked of the capture of Mecca and the apparent conversion
of Abu Sufyan and his offsprings to Islam, and explained why Abu Sufyan
had no sincerity towards Islam and took nothing into consideration but
the expediency of the time.

Then they narrated how the holy Prophet sent Mu'awiyah and his sons
much of the spoils of war as a consolation and softening of their hearts
towards Islam, but the efforts of the Prophet to win them over truly to
Islam proved to be of no avail. After embracing Islam, Abu Sufyan had
declared: "I wish I could mobilize warlike groups against this man!" On
the day of battle when in the first hours of combat the Muslims
retreated, Abu Sufyan said to his friends: "The rout and flight of these
men will continue as far as the shores of the Red Sea!" On the day of
the battle of al-Yarmuk after the Prophet's decease, when he observed
the retreat of the Muslims, he cried out: "Long live the Romans!" and
when the Romans retreated, he cried out: "Woe upon you!" and at the same
time here regretfully recited these lines:

"Of the noble Romans and emperors of Rome No single member seems to
have remained." All these talks went on during the tyrannical rule of
Mu'awiyah, whereas for the Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula nothing was so
worthy and noble as the memory of their fathers and ancestors and the
story of their glory, greatness and courageous deeds. Arabs loved this,
and did their utmost for its sake. Despite all the combats of true Islam
against this attitude, it had not lost its force and had not been
vanquished. The number of those, who truly followed Islamic verdicts and
injunctions and had forgotten those pagan and super- stitious ideas and
customs, was very small.

It is quite clear that Mu'awiyah belonged to this group of notorious
Muslims. During the short period of his association with the Prophet and
his stay among the Muslims in Medina, no change of attitude had taken
place in him. We discover this fact well from his conduct during his
rule in ash-Sham he engaged in usury, and stored skins full of wine in
his house; he gave away Muslims' public fund for his own whims and
fancies as if they were his own property. The orators of the city sang
his praises to his face. He arranged parties similar to those of pagan
times for a narration of futile and imaginary stories of pride and
greatness, and proudly and pompously said to those present: "All the
Quraysh know that Abu Sufyan is the greatest man of them and the son of
the noblest of them, of course, with the exception of the Prophet who
was chosen and exalted by God. In my opinion, if all people were to be
considered the descendants of Abu Sufyan, they would all have been
farsighted and discerning individuals."332

Is there any self-conceit greater than this claim of Mu'awiyah that if
his father had been the father of all human beings, then no one but wise
and discerning creatures would have existed in the world? He imagined
that his father was the noblest man of the Quraysh, with the exception
of the Prophet. Could anyone make a higher claim in that time than
speaking of himself? Well, during his rule Mu'awiyah showed this degree
conceit and haughtiness to others!

Freed persons and the caliphate or the judgment of the great about
Mu'awiyah and his house Mu'awiyah and his father were leaders of the
wars against Islam.

332. History of Ibn Jarir at-Tabari 5/89 on the events of the year 33,
and Ibn al-Athir in al-Kamil 3/59.

During his caliphate Mu'awiyah became more conceited, pompous and
haughty than ever. On these days he did not think only of the glory and
greatness of his tribe and of its propagation, but his mind was also
occupied with another important matter. He was constantly endeavoring to
consolidate the basis of his rule as an emperor, and how he could
accomplish this purpose. Among the Muslims, Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhan, the
loyal friend of the Imam, speaks of it bravely to Mu'awiyah's face and
says: "You and your father belonged to that group of fighters who went
to combat the Prophet of God, and you are the freed son of another freed
man who were indebted to the Prophet for granting you your freedom. How
could the caliphate be right for a freed captive?" 333

Similarly 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Ghanam al-Ash'ari said to Abu Hurayrah and
Abu ad-Darda' at the time they were sent to the Imam on a mission by
Mu'awiyah: "How can after all Mu'awiyah enter the caliphate's council
while he is one of those who is not qualified to be elected caliph? He
and his father have been among the leaders of the groups fighting
against Islam."334 How could the caliphate be consolidated for him when
'Umar had said during his own rule: "In the question of caliphate there
is no share for a freed captive or the son of a freed captive or for
other Muslims of Mecca after its capture'? Such persons are not allowed
to assume that position."335 The people also remembered the declaration
of Imam 'Ali who had said:

"Mu'awiyah is a man for whom God has prescribed no precedence in
religion, and he has no backing of chastity and honesty this faith. He
is the freed son of another freed captive who has taken part in all the
wars against Islam. He and his father have always been hostile to God,
His Prophet and Islam, so much so that they unwillingly embraced Islam
and abstained from proclaiming it."336 Another time the Imam said to
Mu'awiyah: "Remember that you are one of those freed captives who are
never allowed to become caliph, and do not merit the crown of
allegiance, and have not the right of entry into the Muslims'
council."337,338

'Abd Allah ibn Badil, a commander of the Alawite army in the battle of
333. Muruj adh-dhahab of al-Mas'udi 3/50, published by as-Sa'adah
1377.

334. Refer to his biography in al-Isti'ab 2/417, and Usd al-ghabah
3/318.

335. Ibn al-Athir in Usd al-ghabah 4/387, and Tabaqat 3/248, printed
Leaden.

336. The Event of Siffin 227 and at-Tabari 6/4, and Ibn al-Athir
3/125.

337. Ibn 'Abd Rabbih in al-'Iqd al-farid 2/284, and Nahj al-balaghah
2/5, and Description of Nahj 1/248 and 3/300.

338. In these declarations the Imam is speaking about matters which are
basically acceptable for the enemy, in the sense that on the basis of
what the enemy has accepted, his claim for the caliphate is wrong and in
doing so he is fighting rightful people. From the time of Abu Bakr and
'Umar onward this idea was inculcated in the Islamic society that only
the first Emigrants could be chosen as caliphs and could be members of
the council which chose the caliph. Consequently they had either
forgotten that this was a divine matter, or that it was not to their
interest.

Siffin, said about Mu'awiyah: "Mu'awiyah is claiming something which
does not belong to him, and combats someone to whom the caliphate
belongs and has no similarity to Mu'awiyah. Fight this oppressive group
who are combating a person who has the merit of being caliph, while they
themselves have no merit for it. I have fought them in the company of
the Prophet, and today they are the same creatures who are no better nor
chaster individuals than those days. (Meaning in fighting the Imam they
are no better than the days when they fought the Prophet). They are the
enemy of God and you. Rise up and may God bless you!"339

'Ammar ibn Yasir, a true Muslim and a devoted supporter of the Imam,
cried out in the battle of Siffin about Mu'awiyah: "O Muslims! Do you
wish to have a look at the enemy of God and His prophet, and a man
fighting them and oppressor of Muslims and an accomplice of infidels? A
man who came to the Prophet embraced Islam when God Almighty willed that
His religion should be victorious and His prophet be aided, whereas God
knew that he has turned to this direction for fear, not owing to ardor
and willingness! Moreover, at the time the Prophet of God departed this
world, we knew him to be an enemy of the Muslims and a friend of the
wicked. Know that that creature is this same Mu'awiyah! Curse him, for,
may God damn him! Fight him since he is one of those who is intent on
extinguishing the light of God, and collaborates with the enemies of
God."340

al-Aswad ibn Yazid said to 'A'ishah about this matter: "Are you not
amazed at a man who is a freed captive and fights for seizing the
caliphate against the true friends of the Prophet?" 'A'ishah answered:
"No! There is no question of amazement in this matter; for, this is a
position, which God may grant to a good or bad individual! The pharaoh
who claimed divinity, ruled Egypt many long years, and others, too, have
assumed such a position."341 Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba wrote to Mu'awiyah
in a letter: "It is very surprising, O Mu'awiyah, that to-day you have
encroached upon a position for which you have no merit at all; for, you
possess neither an excellence in religion, nor a good precedence in
Islam, since you are the son of one of high leaders of anti-Islamic
wars, and the most hostile creature towards the Qur'an and Prophet of
God."342

339. Siffin 263, and at-Tabari 6/9, and Ibn al-Athir 3/128, and
al-Isti'ab 1/340: and Description of Nahj 1/483.

340. Siffin 240, and at-Tabari 6/7, and Ibn al-Athir 3/126.

341. as-Suyuti in ad-Durr al-manthur 6/19, and Ibn Kathir in al-Bidayah
wa an-nihayah 8/131.

342. Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani in Maqatil at-Talibiyin 22, and
Description of Nahj 4/12.

Shu'bah ibn Ghurayd said to Mu'awiyah: "You have been a destroyer of
right in both pagan and Islamic times. In pagan times you continued to
combat the Prophet and divine revelation so long that God nullified your
plots with the victory of Islam. Now in the Islamic period, too, you
prevent the son of the Prophet of God from assuming the position of
caliph! What business have you in this matter as a freed son of a freed
captive?"343

With all that disgrace and lack of purity, nobility and virtue, how
could the rule of a man like Mu'awiyah remain stable? The above remarks
had been uttered about him by exalted men of Islam and clear-sighted
contemporaries. His record was so black that when 'A'ishah wanted to
defend him, she said: "God may grant the rule to a good or bad
person!"344

Indeed, how could the garment of Islamic rule fit the unseemly body of
Mu'awiyah, and then enable him to make it hereditary for his
descendants, while he was judged in the above manner by the worthy
leaders and influential men of Islamic society, whereas there existed in
that community such personalities as Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn,
who were the heirs of all the glory and greatness of the Banu Hashim,
and descendants of the holy Prophet, and loved so deeply by the
Muslims?

Therefore, in order to preserve his position as a ruler and consolidate
its foundation on the one hand, and to make it hereditary in his house
on the other hand, Mu'awiyah was compelled to disperse the people by
every possible means from around the Prophet's and 'Ali's household, and
turn their hearts away from them, in order to attract them towards
himself and his own house! For this reason he started such a war against
that household and their devoted followers that children were aged with
fear, and the whole land was colored with Muslim blood, and Muslim women
were sold in the slave markets!

To this end Mu'awiyah employed everything which was at his disposal,
such as money, power, plot, cunning and political genius. Moreover, as
he possessed a very black record in the history of Islam, he resorted to
every pretext in the attainment of his goal, to capture the simple
hearts of the people and dominate their immature minds, such as the
claims for avenging the blood of 'Uthman, whom he called an innocent and
martyred caliph!

343. al-Aghani 3/25, published by Dar al-fikr in the account of Shu'bah
ibn Ghurayd, and al- Isabah 2/41 No. 3245.

344. ad-Durr al-manthur 6/19, and Ibn Kathir 8/131.


