A Group of People Refuses To Curse
==================================

O Mu'awiyah! In cursing 'Ali you are cursing God and the Prophet from
the pulpit. Umm Salamah The governors and administrators of the Umayyad
caliphate's organization did not confine themselves to this step. They
also ordered the Prophet's friends, who, in addition to their superior
knowledge of Islam, had a deeper attachment to it, to follow the ways of
these innovators.

Sahl ibn Sa'd says: A man of Marwan's house373 ruled Medina. One day he
summoned me and ordered me to abuse. 'Ali, but I refused. He said: "Now
that you refuse to Abuse 'Ali, at least say: May God curse Abu Turab." I
said: "Imam 'Ali could not have chosen a better name than Abu Turab for
himself, and when they addressed him by that name, he was very pleased."
The governor said: "Tell us the story of this name and the reason for
his gladness." I said: "One day the great Prophet of Islam went to visit
his daughter, Fatimah, and did not find 'Ali there. He said to his noble
daughter: 'Where is your cousin?' She said: 'Something has occurred
between us that made both of us uneasy. So he left the house without
taking his afternoon nap.'374

The Prophet asked a man to go and search for 'Ali. The man returned
after some time and reported that 'Ali was asleep in the mosque. The
Prophet went to the mosque and saw 'Ali asleep on his side while his
robe, which covered him, had slipped away and his body was on the earth.
The Prophet with utmost kindness and affection wiped the dust from
'Ali's body and said: 'Get up, O Abu Turab! Get up, O Abu Turab!' "375
(Turab means "earth" and Abu Turab' means A friend of the earth! The
Umayyads supposed that this nickname was humiliating for 'Ali, whereas
it was a proof of the Prophet's utmost affection for 'Ali. Thus the
Umayyads ordered the people to curse Abu Turab!) 'Amir, son of Sa'd ibn
Abi Waqqas who was a witness of the following incident says: One day
Mu'awiyah summoned my father, Sa'd, and asked:

"Why do you abstain from reproaching and abusing Abu Turab?" Sa'd
answered: "As long as I remember three remarks of the Prophet about
'Ali, I 373. Meaning Marwan ibn al-Hakam.

374. In accordance with our method, we have quoted this tradition on
the basis of reliable Sunni evidences, which considers the exit of Imam
'Ali from his house due to a slight estrangement between him and chaste
Fatimah az-Zahra'. This view is not, of course, acceptable and correct
Shi'ah narration interprets the incident differently. (A'lam-al-wara
160, and Safinat al-bihar 1/l21).

375. Muslim in al-Jami' as-sahih 7/124, and al-Bukhari with a slight
alteration in the book of as- Salat 2/199, and Irshad as-sari 6/112, and
Sunan of al-Bayhaqi 2/446.

shall never abuse him, since those words of the Prophet are more
precious to me than the best property of the Arab people, namely;
red-haired camels! When the Prophet decided not to let 'Ali accompany
him in one of the wars (battle of Tabuk), and left him in charge of the
city of Medina against the malicious deeds of hypocrites, 'Ali came to
the Prophet with tearful eyes and said: 'O Prophet of God! Are you
leaving me amidst women and children, and depriving me of keeping your
company in this war?' I heard the Prophet say to him: 'Are you not glad
that your relation to me is like the relation of Aaron to Moses, except
that there will come no Prophet after me?'

Another time I heard the Prophet say on the day of the battle of
Khaybar: 'I will entrust this banner to a man who loves God and His
Prophet, and is loved by God and his Prophet.' We all stretched our
necks and looked eagerly at the Prophet to see who is meant. The Prophet
said: 'Bring 'Ali to me.' They found and brought him to the Prophet,
while he was suffering from a painful eye- ache. The Prophet touched his
painful eye with the saliva of his own mouth. Then he handed him the
banner, with the result that God granted us victory on that day.

I remember also that at this time the following verse descended: 'Then
say: Come let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and your
women and our near people and your near people...' 376 The Prophet
summoned 'Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and said: 'This is my
household!' "377

al-Mas'udi quotes the story of this meeting from at-Tabari as follows:
When Mu'awiyah had come on pilgrimage to Mecca, he went with Sa'd ibn
Abi Waqqas to circumambulate the House of God, and after that ceremony
he visited Dar an-Nudwah, the gathering place of the Quraysh dignitaries
in Pagan times, and let Sa'd sit by him. Then he began to insult and
abuse the Imam. Sa'd was greatly vexed at this conduct of Mu'awiyah and
stood-up, saying: "You are seating me in your place and engage in
abusing such a man as 'Ali? I swear to God that if I possessed only one
of his virtues and fine qualities, it would be more precious to me than
anything else."

After quoting the above remark, al-Mas'udi narrates the story with a
slight difference from what we said, and then concludes by quoting the
following words of Sa'd: "By God! I shall never enter your house as long
as lam alive!" Then he rose and left Mu'awiyah's gathering.378 Ibn 'Abd
Rabbih al-Andulisi quotes the following story from his book in his
account of Mu'awiyah: When Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba departed this world,
Mu'awiyah came on pilgrimage as a caliph, and then visited Medina. He
376. The Qur'an, Chapter Al 'Imran, Verse 61.

377. Muslim 7/120, and at-Tirmidhi 13/171, and al-Mustadrak 3/108-109:
and al-Isabah 2/509, and al-Khasa'is of an-Nisa'i 15. 378. Muruj
adh-dhahab 3/24 the time of Mu'awiyah.

intended in this journey to curse the Imam from the Prophet's pulpit in
Medina. His companions said to him: "In this town there is Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas, the victor of Iran and an old influential companion of the
Prophet. He will not approve of your action. You had better summon him
and ask his view." Mu'awiyah sent for Sa'd and informed him of his
intention. Sa'd said: "If you do so, I will leave the mosque and will
not return there." (Meaning that he refuses to go to a mosque where 'Ali
has been cursed. The significance of this remark becomes clear when we
remember that the mosque referred to, have been the mosque of the
Prophet.)

Mu'awiyah who was apprehensive of Sa'd's great influence, abandoned his
intention, and waited until Sa'd died.379 It was then that Mu'awiyah was
able to curse the Imam of the chaste from the Prophet's pulpit in
Medina. It was also in these times that he wrote to all his agents to
abuse the Imam from pulpits. After some time a letter was sent by Umm
Salamah to Mu'awiyah, saying: "O Mu'awiyah! In cursing 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib and his friends, you are cursing God and His Prophet from your
pulpits! I take God to witness that God and His Prophet love him."

But the letter of Umm Salamah had no effect on Mu'awiyah, and he did
not pay the least attention to it.380

**The ultimate goal of Mu'awiyah**

No! By God, I shall not rest until! Bury the name of the Prophet!
Mu'awiyah suffered from irremediable complexes which were formed within
him owing both to the lineage which had been attributed to him and also
to the defects heaped on him and his family concerning their resistance
and opposition to Islam. These complexes became more intense when he saw
that Islam had humbled him and his house that had possessed a high rank
and material opulence in Pagan times, and the Prophet had placed him,
his father and brother in the rank of freed captives.

Against the low name of himself and his house in Islam, he saw the
popular and immortal names of their rivals, namely the Banu Hashim. So
these inferiority complexes were a very heavy burden on his back to
bear, and he fervently sought a way to emerge from them. As we have
already seen in past events and in his encounters with the Prophet's
companions, he was not able to reveal these internal rancours and
hostilities on every occasion and in every place, since they were not
harmonious with the personality he had somehow 379. As we have already
seen, Sa'd's death was caused by Mu'awiyah.

380. al-'Iqd al-farid 3/127.

acquired and exposed his life and position to danger. But in private
sessions with al-Mughayrah, whom he considered as one of the guardians
of Paganism381 and as both of them had collaborated with each other for
many long years in wicked deeds, these complexes came to the surface and
revealed his real beliefs and nature.

Az-Zubayr ibn Bakkar quotes the son of al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah in his
book of "al-Muwaffaqiyat", as follows:

I had accompanied my father al-Mughayrah on his travel to ash-Sham to
see Mu'awiyah. My father went to him every day and talked with him for a
long time. Whenever he returned home he spoke of the amazing
intelligence and shrewdness of Mu'awiyah and of what he had seen. But
one night when he returned, he refused to eat anything and he was very
despondent. I waited for some time thinking that his despondency was due
either to some actions of ours or to some hitch in our affairs. When I
asked him why he was so dejected, he said: "My boy, I have come back
from the presence of the wickedest and most infidels of all people!" I
asked: "How and who?" He said: "It was a private session with Mu'awiyah
I said to him: O Amir al-Mu'minin, You have attained your wish. Now it
would be fitting if in your old age you act justly and treat others
kindly: If you favour your kith and kin of Banu Hashim and observe your
bonds of kinship with them, you will leave a good name behind. I swear
to God that today they have nothing left to frighten you with (meaning
that they are remote from assuming the position of caliph)."

Mu'awiyah answered: "What you say is quite remote. Abu Bakr became
caliph and acted justly, and bore so much trouble. By God, when he died,
his name, too, died with him unless someone may one-day call: 'Abu
Bakr!' Then 'Umar assumed the rule, and endeavored much and suffered
many pains for ten years. But a few days after his death, nothing of him
remained except an occasional word of someone, saying: ''Umar!' Then our
brother 'Uthman became caliph, a man whose lineage nobody could rival,
and he acted as he did, and was treated as we know. But by God, as soon
as he was killed, his name, too, died, and his deeds were forgotten!

But you see that this Hashimi man's (The Prophet) name is spoken loudly
and respectfully five times a day in the whole of the Islamic realm
(referring to the Muslim prayer and the call for it). What deed, do you
think, will leave a memory and what good name can last long? By God! I
shall never rest until I bury that name!"382,383

381. The story of al-Mughayrah's adultery during his governorship of
Kufah and 'Umar's favour to him in this matter, prove the above claim.
Refer to 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' 1/127 to 133, Second edition, Egypt. by
the author of this book.

382. Muruj adh-dhahab on Ibn al-Athir 9/49 in the events of they ear
212: and Description of Nahj 1/463 and al-Akhbar al-Muwaffaqiyat by
az-Zubayr ibn Bakkar, printed Iraq.

383. It is said that the above remark and some other profane words were
uttered by Mu'awiyah.

Mu'awiyah's breast was burning with a flame of rancor and envy at the
popular name of the Prophet who had destroyed his brother, uncle and
grandfather and other relatives of his in the battle of Badr. He longed
to bury that name. To attain that goal he had two plans: His first
scheme could be summoned up in this sentence: "Not even one member of
Banu Hashim should remain alive." This is not only our understanding of
it. Imam 'Ali himself says explicitly: "I swear to God that Mu'awiyah
desires that not even one of the Banu Hashim should survive. He wishes
to extinguish the light of God in this way, but God will not allow this
light to be extinguished even if infidels are not pleased with His
wish."384

The second plan of Mu'awiyah was to dispatch their names to oblivion.
To attain this end he created the large organization of forging
tradition, biography and history to defame those chaste personalities,
and remove the signs of defects and shortcomings from the Umayyads.
Consequently opposite the traditions, which existed from the Prophet
damning Mu'awiyah and his father and Umayyad household and such
creatures as al-Hakam ibn Abi al-'As, similar but false traditions were
offered to the people as quotations from the Prophet, saying: "O God! I
am only a human being exposed to error, oblivion and anger! If I have
cursed or reproached a Muslim on account of my anger, consider that
curse and abuse as expiation for his sins so that he may be cleansed of
them."385

This forged tradition and similar ones were like a double-edged sword
serving the interests of Mu'awiyah. On the one hand they cleansed him
and his household from all the things that the Prophet had rightly said
about them, and on the other hand they presented the prophets as
ordinary men subject to human failings and in most cases unable to
control their rage with the result that they may utter futile and unjust
words, whereas we know that God has praised the Prophet and his
character in the best possible way as the worthiest human being, saying
in this verse:

"And most surely you conform yourself to sublime morality." 386, and in
this verse:

"Thus it is due to mercy from Allah that you deal them gently, and had
you been rough and hard-hearted, they would certainly have dispersed
from around you." 387

He says also that all his utterances have their source in revelation,
as in the following verse:

"Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is

384. Muruj adh-dhahab 3/28 on the time of Mu'awiyah, research by
Muhammad Muhyi ad-Din.
385. This tradition and similar ones, which are found in reliable Sunni
books of tradition, will be investigated in the second volume of the
present book.
386. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Qalam, Verse 4.
387. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter Al 'Imran, Verse 159.

revealed." 388 Not many people understand this evil plan of Mu'awiyah,
and thus many simple-minded Muslims ignorantly followed and collaborated
with him, and spread the traditions which had been fabricated by his
hirelings. Although Mu'awiyah was unable to publicly reveal all his
rancor and hostility towards the Prophet, yet in other extensive fields
he succeeded in fulfilling his wishes. Indeed he was successful in the
question of defending 'Uthman and his policy, and also in pounding 'Ali,
his household, his friends and supporters. We have already mentioned
these points and seen how Mu'awiyah treated those who did not
collaborate with him in these wicked deeds. Imam 'Ali's friends gained
nothing by supporting the Imam but torture, imprisonment, or death by
hanging or being buried alive.

'A'ishah, as the main personality under our discussion, at the moment
when human feelings were dead, and human beings's share was nothing but
torture, imprisonment and execution, was greatly respected by him, and
the caliph's organization showed the greatest possible considerations to
her especially at the beginning, and these two co-operated closely in
the overall combat with the Imam.

In order to see the role and task of 'A'ishah in Mu'awiyah's policy of
forging traditions, we may speak of two incidents: A Muslim man named
Sa'd ibn Hisham asked another Muslim named Hakim ibn Aflah to visit
'A'ishah. Hakim said: "I refuse to go to her. I had warned her against
speaking of these two groups (the supporters of 'Ali and followers of
'Uthman), but she paid no attention to my counsel, and went her own
way."389

What was the manner of 'A'ishah's talk about the Alawite party and
'Uthman's group? As we have already seen and will also see, at this time
'A'ishah spoke well of 'Uthman's party and quoted some traditions from
the Prophet in favour of that party, and thus she resorted also to other
traditions in reproach of the Alawite party. These two matters are what
Hakim had warned her against, and to which she had paid no attention.

**A tradition from 'A'ishah**

'A'ishah! Had you forgotten this tradition?

Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his book of Musnad quotes an-Nu'man ibn Bashir,
saying: Mu'awiyah wrote a letter to 'A'ishah. I went with the letter to
her in Medina and delivered it. After she took it, she said: "My son!
Should I not 388. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter an-Najm, Verses 3 and 4.

389. Musnad of Ahmad 6/53-54, and Tahdhib at-tahdhib 2/444.

narrate for you something that I have heard from the Prophet?" I said:
"Yes, of course!" She said: "Hafsah and I were with the Prophet one day
and he said to us: 'How nice it would have been to have a man with us to
talk to!' I said: 'Should I send for Abu Bakr?' He remained silent and
said again: 'How fine it would have been to have a man with us to talk
to.' This time Hafsah said: 'Couldn't we send for 'Umar?' He did not
answer, and then called a man and whispered something to him. The man
went out and after some moments. 'Uthman arrived. The Prophet began to
speak eagerly with him, and I heard these words: 'O 'Uthman! Let us hope
that God will adorn you with the garment of caliphate and greatness, and
if they tried to remove it from your body, never submit to it', and he
repeated this sentence three times." An-Nu'man ibn Bashir says: I said
to her: "O Umm al-Mu'minin! Had you forgotten this tradition when you
combatted so much with 'Uthman, and wanted to depose him, and even
incited the people to kill him?"390 'A'ishah said: "My son! I had
forgotten this tradition. So thoroughly as if I had never heard
it."391

The incident took place in the following way: A letter arrived for
'A'ishah from the caliph Mu'awiyah, and the messenger was waiting for an
answer. At this moment 'A'ishah remembered a tradition of the Prophet
and quoted it for the caliph's messenger, stating that the Prophet had
predicted that 'Uthman would in future assume the position of caliph392
and in such a case he should never abdicate.

What is the connection of this letter with the tradition? Had Mu'awiyah
asked her in his letter to defend 'Uthman? Or did 'A'ishah intend that
an- Nu'man, Mu'awiyah's messenger, on his return to him, should quote
the tradition for his master? Or was there some other reason for it?

Is it possible at all that 'A'ishah had really forgotten this tradition
and similar ones which she had quoted for different people during
Mu'awiyah's rule, all the time that she combatted against 'Uthman and
incited the people to rise against him?

Whatever the reason may be, this tradition and similar ones which we
will quote in the tradition section of this book, as well as the
traditions that 'A'ishah has narrated in praise of the excellence of her
father Abu Bakr, and 'Umar, and 390. At that time 'A'ishah had compared
'Uthman with a Jew named Na'thal, and said: "Kill that Na'thal! He is an
infidel!"

391. Musnad of Ahmad 6/149.

392. 'A'ishah had narrated a similar tradition for Abu Sahlah saying:
One day the Prophet asked us to summon one of his companions. I
mentioned Abu Bakr, and he said no. I mentioned his cousin 'Ali, but he
said no. I mentioned 'Uthman and he agreed. When 'Uthman arrived the
Prophet told me to go away. Then they talked privately each other for
some time, and I noticed that 'Uthman's face kept on changing color
every moment. When 'Uthman was besieged in his house, we said: "O
Commander of the faithful! Why do you not fight them?" He answered: "The
exalted Prophet has made a pact with me, and I must keep my promise with
all my heart and soul." (Refer to Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir on the life of
'Uthman, and Ansab al-ashraf 5/11.)

her cousin Talhah and others, place her in the rank of the most
superior individuals who did their utmost in pleasing Mu'awiyah in
connection with his special policy of fabricating traditions. Naturally
his greater endeavors were directed towards the propagation of the
virtue and excellence of his own kith and kin and of their supporters;
for, as the proverb says: Blood is thicker than water.

In our discussion we have no intention of propagating the excellence of
some, or cavilling at others. What we are investigating are the
traditions, which we will mention in the last part of this book. Our
task is to survey the traditions which are narrated from the Prophet,
and that is why we have stepped in this course.

**Conclusion and Purpose**

'A'ishah made use of the life of the Prophet in quoting traditions for
the promotion of her own goals. The Conclusion of previous
discussions:

In previous chapters we made a careful survey of the life of 'A'ishah
in order to become familiar with her social and political personality
and with her ideas and objectives, and discover her particular mental
and social motives which roused her to quote so many traditions.

Our conclusion is briefly that 'A'ishah was a very intelligent woman, a
fine orator familiar with the way of speech making and oration, and
fully aware of the effect of words in capturing the hearts and
influencing the minds of people. She was a statesman well acquainted
with the political and governmental affairs of the time. She was able to
lead and command a large and powerful army. She possessed a great social
personality and such a wide influence among the Muslims that she could
with a small effort rouse the people against the government of the time
and overthrows it. 'A'ishah was a domineering and ambitious woman who
did not halt or remain idles anywhere, and sought the highest point in
every course and purpose, and spared no effort and action, and no factor
could check her from following her objective.

She was filled with a deep emotional attachment for her kith and kin,
so much so that she showed a high degree of devotion and self-sacrifice
in their favour and interest. She was at the same time violently
vindictive towards those who opposed her and her household, and strict
and hard and hostile to the point of desiring their death and
destruction. She was a woman the like of whom has rarely been witnessed
or even known by history. Sometimes she uttered brief remarks in defense
of her relatives and supporters that they were then frequently repeated
by people, as a lasting phrase in history. She created such a bright
spot in their lives that later on it helped to win them a name, a
reputation and popularity. Sometimes she spoke so smashingly against her
opponents that its effect remained long on their character like a stain
on the pages of history.

Her words, whether in favour or against a person, passed from mouth to
mouth, and were handed on as a souvenir from one city to another, and
were then transferred to books, left for future generations for many
centuries as her traditions. This was the greatest evidence of
'A'ishah's personality in the Islamic world of those days.

Thus we have observed 'A'ishah from the angle of the true facts of
history, and depicted her as she really was. But those who have desired
to build up a different greatness and personality for her, seem to have
wished to introduce her as an offspring of the Prophet; a matter which
is wholly wrong and untrue. We should neither introduce the
personalities of the early period of Islamic period according to our
fancy, since such a picture would be illusory and fanciful, nor depict a
true personality and his life differently from what he has actually
been.

The purpose of the survey of 'A'ishah's life:

As we have repeatedly said, we point out in conclusion, too that
'A'ishah skilfully made use of two things in order to attain her end:
1-In all her adventurous life she emphasized her being the Prophet's
consort and mother of the faithful, and used this advantage as an
effective weapon against her opponents and as a means of encouraging her
supporters. 2-Whenever she found it necessary, she quoted a tradition
from the Prophet and his life, and made use of her overflowing talent in
referring to that tradition to promote her goal.

The number of such cases when 'A'ishah used her position as the
Prophet's consort is so large that it is beyond the scope of this book.
But the following incident illustrates the above point. We read in the
story of the battle of al- Jamal that 'A'ishah wrote a letter to Zayd
ibn Sawhan asking his aid, and to rouse his ardor, she began her letter
with this phrase: "From 'A'ishah Umm al- Mu'minin daughter of Abu Bakr
and consort of the prophet of God."393 We have repeatedly seen in our
discussions how 'A'ishah made use of the title "Umm al-Mu'minin" and
"The Prophet's consort" in order to produce great events on that basis
and impress people. Even up to now it is still used as an effective
weapon in the hands of her supporters and in her defense. As for the
cases when 'A'ishah relied on the details of the Prophet's life to
attain her purpose and forge a tradition, there are many of them, some
of which 393. Refer to "'A'ishah in 'Ali's time" Page 55.

394. Shoulder blade and other bones were probably used at that time to
write on, but in most cases skin was used. In the Prophet's biography no
mention is made of the use of bones by him to write a letter or a pact
on.

are as follows:

1-Muslim narrates in his book of Sahih: 'A'ishah said: "When the
Prophet was in his deathbed, he said to me: Call your father and brother
to write down my will, for, I fear that a claimer may claim that he has
a greater merit to be caliph, whereas God and believers accept none but
Abu Bakr as caliph." 2-al-Bukhari says in his book of Sahih that
'A'ishah said: When the Prophet fell seriously ill, he said to 'Abd
ar-Rahman son of Abu Bakr: "Fetch a shoulder blade394 or a tablet to
write a letter to Abu Bakr so that no one opposes his caliphate." When
'Abd ar-Rahman rose to bring writing materials, the Prophet said: "O Abu
Bakr! God and believers do not wish any disagreement to arise about your
right."395

As you see, 'A'ishah has made use of the Prophet's illness and
concurrent incidents to create these two traditions for the purpose of
consolidating her father's position as caliph.

3-At a time when 'A'ishah's relation with 'Uthman was friendly and co-
operative, she made a similar use of forged traditions in his favour on
the basis of the Prophet's private and family life. Muslim quotes
'A'ishah in his book of Sahih, saying: 'The Prophet and I were lying
down under the same cloak when Abu Bakr arrived and asked leave to
enter. The Prophet gave him permission, and when he left, 'Umar asked
leave to enter and he was allowed to see us in that condition. When
'Umar left, 'Uthman asked leave to meet the Prophet. This time the
Prophet rose and arranged his clothes and then admitted 'Uthman to his
presence. After 'Uthman left, I said to the Prophet: "You allowed Abu
Bakr and 'Umar to see you in your former state of lying down, whereas in
admitting 'Uthman, you rose and arranged your clothes. There must be a
mystery in this behaviour." The Prophet said: "As 'Uthman is a shy and
modest person, I was afraid he would not divulge his request on seeing
me in that condition."

4-In his book of Sahih, Muslim narrates this story differently, and
says: One day the Prophet was lying down in his bed and had spread
'A'ishah's robe on himself. When 'Uthman arrived, the Prophet ordered
'A'ishah to cover herself.

'A'ishah said: "O Prophet! When Abu Bakr and 'Umar came to see you, you
made no change in your state, whereas you were at a loss to what to do
when 395. Refer to "The Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam" Vol.
1, Chapter on 'A'ishah's traditions concerning the matter of caliphate.
In narrating these two traditions 'A'ishah intended to nullify the story
that 'Umar wanted to prevent the writing of the Prophet's will in which
the Prophet wished to speak of 'Ali, and she wished to show there that
the will was to be written about her father, and not about 'Ali. The
reason why the Prophet did not write the will, was not 'Umar's
prevention of it, but because the Prophet thought it unnecessary to
write it, since Abu Bakr's caliphate was so certain that no opposition
was expected to it on the side of God and believers so as to require a
written will and testimony. Refer to 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', chapter on
written evidence, volume one.

'Umar arrived and you re-arranged your garment!" 5-We read in another
narration of Muslim in his Sahih that 'A'ishah says: When I asked the
Prophet this question, he said: "Why should I not be coy of 'Uthman, and
show no respect, whereas I swear to God that God's angels are shy and
respectful towards 'Uthman?"396 The same 'A'ishah who makes so much use
of the Prophet's private life to support the caliphate of 'Uthman, very
soon uses the same weapon to vanquish 'Uthman. When a leaf of history
was turned over and the relation of 'A'ishah with 'Uthman was darkened,
'A'ishah held up the shirt of the Prophet and to rouse the people
against 'Uthman, she addressed the Muslims, saying: "O Muslims! This is
the Prophet's shirt, which is not worn-out yet, but 'Uthman has so soon
altered the Prophet's ways and tradition, and has made his religion old
and worn-out."

Another time, too, she showed the Prophet's slippers to the people in
the mosque, and third time a hair of the Prophet, in support of her
accusation. Thus we see her making use of the tangible things of the
Prophet to incite the people against 'Uthman.397 For, at this time
'A'ishah is pursuing other motives and goals, which necessitate a change
in the use of the means! With the assassination of 'Uthman another leaf
history is turned over, and now 'A'ishah forgets the past and once more
she begins to eulogise 'Uthman, and again she employes the details of
the Prophet's life in support and praise of 'Uthman and because of fresh
goals and motives!

6-At a time when Mu'awiyah had made it obligatory for all the people to
sing the praises of 'Uthman, and by his order the machinery for
fabricating traditions about 'Uthman's personality was functioning,
'A'ishah quoted in amazing tradition about 'Uthman in the presence of
the deputy of Mu'awiyah's court, saying: Hafsah and I were in the
Prophet's presence, when he said: "I wish someone were here to talk with
me!" I suggested my father Abu Bakr as a talking companion, and Hafsah
proposed her father 'Umar, but he remained silent about our suggestions.
Then he summoned a man and whispered something to him. Very soon 'Uthman
arrived and the Prophet was greatly pleased and began talking with him.
I heard him with my own ears, saying: "O 'Uthman! God will adorn you
with the garment of caliphate, and if they try to remove this garment
from you, you must resist and not take off with your own hands the
garment with which God has adorned you!"398

7-'A'ishah had her own particular view about sucking and said that
five

396. These three narrations are quoted from 'A'ishah by Muslim in his
Sahih, and are discussed in the book of "The Role of 'A'ishah in the
History of Islam" Vol. 1.

397. The Role of 'A'ishah in the History of Islam Vol. 1, chapter on
'A'ishah's instigations against 'Uthman, 122.

398. This point was discussed in previous pages.

times sucking of a stranger creates a legitimate intimacy as a
relative. She advised her own sisters and kith and kin to follow her
example. In issuing this verdict, her intention was to create intimacy
with those whose aid she needed socially, so that no one could protest
against this relationship. But the other wives of the Prophet rejected
this view and said that this sucking must be related to early babyhood
and be repeated ten times, not five times.399 'A'ishah claimed against
this protests saying: "In a verse descendent to the Prophet it is stated
that the creation of legitimate intimacy by sucking adult boys is
possible with ten times' sucking, and this verdict was written on a
piece of paper placed under my bed, but during the Prophet's illness
when I was busy nursing him, a domestic animal came in and ate the paper
on which this subject was written!"400

In another narration of Muslim in his book of Sahih, 'A'ishah says that
there was a verse declaring legitimate intimacy with ten definite
sucking, and then the number was reduced to five times' sucking, thus
abrogating the previous verse. Then 'A'ishah adds: When the Prophet died
the verse related to five times' sucking existed in the Qur'an and it
was even recited.401 She meant that the above number of sucking was
adequate for creating legitimate intimacy, since such a Quranic verse
confirmed it in the Prophet's time but it has been forgotten now!402

The above traditions were examples of the kinds of things fabricated
and presented to the Islamic society by this lady on the basis of the
Prophet's life. In future discussions where 'A'ishah's traditions will
be surveyed and evaluated independently, we shall see that no one has
spoken so abundantly about the Prophet's life as 'A'ishah has, and in
her descriptions of him she has depicted an astonishing picture to the
extent of lowering him even below the level of an ordinary human
being!

What is even more important is that since the time of 'A'ishah's
influence in the Islamic society till today, all the Muslims except the
followers of the Prophet's household seek the true character and real
life of the Prophet in 'A'ishah's narrations. The result is that the
real character of the Prophet has remained unknown even for the Muslims,
since they have relied only on 399. The Shi'ah jurisprudence, which is
based on the narrations of the Prophet's household, considers fifteen
times' sucking valid for legitimate intimacy.

400. Musnad of Ahmad 269, Sunan of Ibn Majah, book of marriage,
tradition 1944.

401. Sahih by Muslim, book of sucking, chapter on legitimacy through
five times' suckings 1075, and al-Muwatta' of Malik book of sucking,
Volume Two, 608.

402. It is strange that 'A'ishah, mother of the faithful, states that
the verse related to ten times' sucking has been eaten by a domestic
animal, hut she fails to say why the verse about five times' sucking has
diappeared! Has it been eaten by a domestic animal, took, or has other
calamity befallen it?

'A'ishah's narrations in this matter, and have shown the same way to
others to pursue, whereas these traditions have misrepresented and
wholly reversed the true personality of the Prophet.

The conclusion is therefore that to know the real character of the
Prophet we should make a careful study and investigation of 'A'ishah's
traditions in order to remove all obscurities and alterations in it.
Moreover, to have a proper understanding of Islam, too, depends on a
real recognition of the Prophet's true visage.

Therefore in this book, which is translated into three volumes, we have
made a survey of 'A'ishah's life from the viewpoint of reliable history,
and will continue this survey by investigating her traditions, too. In
this course and this survey we apologize to those who are attached to
'A'ishah, and we hope for their forgiveness. We have stepped on a very
hard and painful route in our search for the true character of the
Prophet and his faith, and have honestly tried to render a service in
presenting the true facts of Islam and real visage of Islamic
personalities.

The above point has been our goal and purpose, which took the form of
the study of 'A'ishah's life in the first part, and will continue to
deal with her traditions in the second part. May we succeed in winning
God's satisfaction in following this objective! May God be a witness to
what we have narrated! Addendum The effort made by the Sunnis in
correcting and explaining a tradition Here in bringing our discussion to
an end, it would be fitting to pause for a while and make a survey of
the tradition quoted in previous pages, and evaluate the efforts made by
Sunni scholars in explaining and interpreting it and comparing it with
true facts.

It is narrated in Muslim's book of Sahih that the Prophet said: "My
sanctity is in Medina in the land situated between the mountains of
Thawr and 'Ayr or 'A'ir."403

The narrators of this quotation have intended to create boundaries of
sanctity for Medina, as it has been done for Mecca. But they have erred
in choosing Thawr Mountain as a boundary since this mountain is situated
in Mecca. It is the spot where the Prophet went into hiding in a cave on
his emigration from Mecca to Medina,404 and Medina does not possess a
mountain named Thawr, as it is testified by the following great
scholars.

1-Mus'ab az-Zubayri of Medina, who is a great scholar of that city and
died in 236 of the Hijrah, says about this tradition: "Thawr mountain is
not in Medina."405

2-Famous scholar Abu 'Ubayd al-Qasim ibn Salam, who died in 224 of the
Hijrah, writes: "This is an Iraqi narration. The people of Medina know
of no mountain in Medina called Thawr. This mountain is in Mecca. My
belief is that the tradition was related to the mountain of Uhud, which
was mistaken for Thawr."406 What Abu 'Ubayd means is that the said
narration has been quoted by the people of Iraq who had no knowledge of
Medina and was not aware that Thawr is not a Medinan mountain.

3-Qadi 'Ayyad, who died in 544 of the Hijrah, author of Description of
Muslim's book of Sahih.

403. Sahih of Muslim 995, Tradition 467, Research by Muhammad Fu'ad
'Abd al-Baqi. 404. at-Tabari 20/378, published by Dar al-ma'arif, and
Ibn Hisham 1/485 second edition Mustafa as-Saqqa' and others, and Ansab
al-ashraf 1/260, published by Muhammad Hamid Allah and Ibn al-Athir
2/73, published by Dar al-kitab.

405. Fath al-bari 4/453 on the sanctity of Medina from al-Bukhari's
book of Sahih. 406. Fath al-bari 4/453.

4-Bakri, a geographer who died in 478 of the Hijrah, in the book of
Mu'jam ma ista'jam.

5-Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Musa Hazimi, memorizer of the Qur'an and
tradition scholar who died in the year 548 of the Hijrah.407

6-Great scholar Ibn al-Athir Jaziri, who died in 606 of the Hijrah, in
the book of an-Nihayat al-lughah, on the word "Thawr".408

7-Yaqut al-Hamawi, who died in 626 of the Hijrah, a geographer and
writer of the geographical encyclopedia of Mu'jam al-buldan, in the same
book on the word "Thawr".409

All the above scholars assert that no such mountain named Thawr exists
in Medina. Therefore to correct and compensate this error, Sunni
tradition scholars have made the following efforts:

The leader of their tradition scholars, al-Bukhari, who died in 256 of
the Hijrah, abstain from mentioning the name of Thawr mountain in his
book of Sahih, and says in one place: "Medina is a sanctity from the
mountain of 'Ayr to so-and-so mountain"410, while in Muslim's book of
Sahih the word Thawr is mentioned in the place of so-and-so.

Beside al-Bukhari other scholars, too, have in one way or other spoken
of the incorrectness of this tradition. One of them says: "Maybe the
holy Prophet himself has given names to two mountains of Medina."
Another scholar says: Maybe the Prophet intended to fix the limits of
the sanctity of Medina, and he has compared its boundaries to the space
which lies between the two mountains of Mecca, since Thawr is in Mecca,
not in Medina. A third scholar writes: The narrator mistakenly uses the
name of Thawr Mountain, and he should have said "Uhud", since Uhud is in
Medina, not Thawr.

A fourth writer has left a blank space for the name of the mountain in
the narration so as to avoid probable difficulties. Still others make
different suggestions as a way of correcting the above tradition.411

These successive efforts, some of which we have mentioned, continued
until the first half of the 7th century, until 'Abd as-Salam ibn
Muhammad ibn Mazru', a Hanbalite tradition scholar of Basra, who died in
669 of the Hijrah, ably corrected the above error with his constructive
hand in the second half of 407. Refer to Description of an-Nawawi on
Muslim's Sahih 9/143, Chapter of "Fadl al-Madinah". Refer to an account
of Hazimi in al-A'lam 7/339.

408. Nihayat al-lughah 1/229, Research by Tahir Ahmad az-Zawi and
Mahmud at-Tabahi. 409. Mu'jam al-buldan 2/86, printed Beirut.

410. Sahih of al-Bukhari book of Hajj, chapter sanctity of Medina 411.
Refer to Fath al-bari for this traditions and Description of an-Nawawi
on Muslim, and Wafa' al-wafa' 1/92 and Mu'jam al-buldan and Nihayat
al-lughah on the word Thawr.

the same century, and created a mountain named Throw next to Uhud
mountain, and to prevent the negation of his claim by others, he stated
that the people of Medina are familiar with this mountain! Next to him
'Abd Allah Matri, who died in 765 of the Hijrah, quotes the same point
from his late father Muhammad Matri, and adds: "The people of Medina
have for many generations been familiar with a mountain called Thawr
alongside Uhud mountain. It is a small and red mountain!"

Thus Ibn Mazru' was the first person to discover this mountain, and
after him 'Abd Allah Matri used his particular method confirm that
discovery! But the great memorizer of the Qur'an and tradition scholar
Yahya an-Nawawi, who died in 676 of the Hijrah, has made no reference to
this great discovery in his famous description of Muslim's book of
Sahih. But he describes the efforts of great scholars of the past for
correcting and explaining the tradition, which subject we have already
mentioned. After him scholar Ibn Manzur, a great philologist who died in
711 of the Hijrah, in discussing the word Thawr in his book of "Lisan
al-'Arab", confirms the non-existence of such a mountain in Medina. Thus
these two great experts of tradition and philology have either been
ignorant of the above so-called great geographical discovery, or they
have mistrusted it, even though they lived at a time after Ibn Mazru'.
But the following scholars have made a reference to it:

1) Muhibb ad-Din at-Tabari, who died in 694, in his book of al-Ahkam.
2) al-Firuzabadi, who died in 817 of the Hijrah, in his book of
al-Qamus on the word Thawr.

3) Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani, who died in 852 of the Hijrah, in his
description of the said tradition in the book of Fath al-bari.

4) az-Zabidi, who died in 1205 of the Hijrah in his book of Taj
al-'arus on the word Thawr.

But the order of our contemporary scholars has been greater in this
field, and they have even registered the mountain of Thawr on the
geographical map of Medina! For example Professor 'Abd al-Quddus, author
of "The Monuments of Medina" on page 139 of his book draws the map of
the mountain, and Dr. Muhammad Hassanein Heikal produces this map on
page 512 of the book of "Manzil al-wahy", and on page 440 he says that
he has used the former book as a reference.412

Thus the mountain of Thawr was first discovered in the second half of
the 7th century, and then after another seven centuries, namely in the
14th century, it was registered on a geographical map! 412. The efforts
made in this period for explaining this tradition are based on
Description of Muslim's Sahih by Muhammad Fu'ad 'Abd al-Baqi, printed
Lebanon 995-998.


