Abu Sufyan in the Time of Two Caliphs
=====================================

May God kill them for not abandoning their rancor against the Muslims.
Az-Zubayr Ibn 'Asakir, the great historian of Damascus, writes: One day
Abu Bakr, during the period of his rule, spoke harshly to Abu Sufyan.
His father, Abu Quhafah, said: "O Abu Bakr! Why did you speak in such a
tone to Abu Sufyan?" Abu Bakr answered: "O father! For the sake of
Islam, God has granted eminence to some families and abased others. My
house is one of those which found eminence, and his is one with
debasement!"

At the time when 'Umar ibn al-Khattab had visited Mecca on pilgrimage,
he was informed that Abu Sufyan was building a house, and the stones he
had heaped for it on the water-course had exposed the city to the danger
of a torrent. 'Umar accompanied the complainants to Abu Sufyan's house
and ordered him himself to carry the stones back to where they belonged.
Then he raised his arms heavenward and said: "O God! I praise you for
enabling me to issue a command to Abu Sufyan, chief of the Quraysh in
the middle of the city of Mecca, and making him obeys me!"

Historians have written: One day 'Umar, as caliph, was passing along
one of the streets of Mecca, and noticed that it was filthy. He ordered
the people to clean the front part of their houses. A few days later
again he found the streets dirty. He picked up his whip in anger, and
hit Abu Sufyan on the head. The incident of the whipping of Abu Sufyan,
chief of the Quraysh, was reported to his wife, Hind. This heiress of
pagan times, remembering the time of material power and magnificence,
said: "O 'Umar! By God, if you were to whip him in former times, the
city of Mecca would have trembled under your feet!" 'Umar answered: "You
are right. But for the sake of Islam God has given dignity to one group
and has abased another." 64 We saw how Islam had given eminence to one
group and abjectness to Abu Sufyan. Consequently in his heart much
rancor and hostility were nested towards Islam and the Muslims; a rancor
which revealed itself in his words from time to time.

'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr says: "I was present with my father in the
battle of al-Yarmuk, but I was too small to fight. During the battle I
noticed a group on a hill not participating in the combat. I went
towards them and saw Abu Sufyan and some Quraysh chiefs assembled here.
They were the men who had embraced Islam after the capture of Mecca.
When I reached them they were in 64. Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 6/406-407 on
Abu Sufyan.

the middle of their conversation. As they looked upon me as a child,
they did not think I would understand their words. So they continued
their talk and spoke as openly as possible. The moment the Muslims
happened to make a slight retreat giving the Romans a slight advantage,
this group shouted gladly: "Oh! Long live the Romans!" But as soon as
the Romans were driven back and the Islamic army gained the advantage,
they cried with a great regret: "O, pity for you Romans!" 65

When the battle ended and the Muslims defeated the Romans, I told the
story to my father az-Zubayr. He laughed and said: "May God destroy
them, for not abandoning their rancor! For, we are better than the
Romans for them."66 The above incident is narrated differently
elsewhere, namely: Whenever the Romans drove back the Muslims, Abu
Sufyan shouted: "Long live the Romans!" But when the Muslims gained some
advantage, Abu Sufyan cried out: "It seems that no living personality
has remained from the Roman nobility." When the warriors of Islam won
the final victory, and I told my father the story, he held my hand and
took me among various groups of Muslims, saying to each group: "My son!
Repeat the story for them!" I repeated all I had heard, and they were
amazed at all that hypocrisy and hostility to Islam.67

**Abu Sufyan in the time of 'Uthman**

By God! There exists neither a heaven, nor a hell! Abu Sufyan Time
passed and with the assassination of 'Umar, 'Uthman became caliph, and
Abu Sufyan, owing to his kinship with 'Uthman, found new respect, and he
was no longer humiliated. One day when he went to 'Uthman's presence and
said: "O sons of Umayyah! Since the time the caliphate had fallen into
the hands of the men of the Taym and 'Adi tribes (meaning Abu Bakr and
'Umar) I coveted that position. Now that it has fallen into your hands,
you should take turns in seizing it, in the same way that children pass
a ball to one another. I swear to God that there exists neither a heaven
nor a hell!"68,69

Another narration says that Abu Sufyan declared: "O Banu Umayyah! Pass
65. at-Tabari 4/137, Ibn al-Athir 2/159, al-Isabah 2/172.

66. at-Tabari 4/137 printed Egypt First, and Ibn al-Athir 2/284, and
al-Isabah 2/172, account No. 4046, and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 5/356 and
6/406.

67. al-Aghani 6/354-355, and al-Isti'ab 689 account No. 321, and Usd
al-ghabah 5/216.

68. al-Aghani 6/355-356, and al-Isti'ab 690.

69. And an-Niza' wa at-takhasum 20.

the caliphate like a ball to each other. I swear in the name of him to
whom Abu Sufyan takes an oath that I have been hoping for a long time to
see the caliphate in your hands. Now you should let your children
inherit it." 'Uthman rebuked him for this remark and was very
displeased.70 Another narration says: In his old age and when he had
lost his eyesight, Abu Sufyan went to 'Uthman's presence and after
settling down, he said: "Is there no stranger present who might report
our words to others?" 'Uthman said: "No, no one." Abu Sufyan said: "This
matter of caliphate is a worldly one, and this government is of the same
kind as that of pagan times. Therefore, it is up to you to make our
tribe of Banu Umayyah the administrators of the wide realm of Islam." 71
72

It was in the same period that Abu Sufyan one day passing by the tomb
of Hamzah, the martyr of Islam, started kicking the tomb, and said: "Abu
'Amarah, the thing for which we drew our swords yesterday, has fallen
into the hands of our children today, and they are playing with it now."
73 Thus we see that Abu Sufyan secured his evil wishes with the
caliphate of 'Uthman, such wishes for the fulfillment of which he had
made so much effort, and for which many leaders of the Quraysh had been
killed, without producing any success, owing to the valor of the
Muslims. But now in 'Uthman's time and after his death, the rule of the
Umayyads fulfilled all those wishes. Abu Sufyan died in 'Uthman's time
in one of the years between 31 and 34 of the Hijrah, and according to
various reports he was between 80 and 90 years of age. But his wife,
Hind, had died before him during 'Umar's caliphate.74

70. Muruj adh-dhahab on Ibn al-Athir 5/465-166.

71. al-Aghani 6/355, and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 6/407.

72. In our perusal of the caliphate of 'Uthman and the Umayyads we see
that the evil suggestions and Islam-destroying ideas of Abu Sufyan have
been carried out word for word by the Umayyads, and governing was made
hereditary for the first time by Mu'awiyah, and in Uthman's time the
whole realm of Islam was given to the Umayyad house to govern.

73. Description of Nahj al-balaghah 4/51 printed first Egypt.

74. Refer to his account in Usd al-ghabah 5/563.


