Part Two : Role of Mu'awiyah in the History of Islam
====================================================

Mu'awiyah in the time of the Prophet Truly these two, Mu'awiyah and
'Amr ibn al-'As, never turn to goodness and honesty.

The Prophet Mu'awiyah did not for a moment stay away from the leaders
of infidelity at the point of the clash between paganism and Islam. Even
on the day when he saw his father apparently embracing Islam, he
addressed him with reproaching verses saying: "Oh Sakhr! Do not accept
Islam since you will bring us disgrace, After the death of the dear ones
who were torn to pieces in the battle of Badr, Both my uncles and my
mother's uncle, who was the third of those, killed; And Hanzalah, my
good brother, were those who turned our dawn's sleep into wakefulness.
Do not even for a moment incline to Islam, since it will burden us with
disgrace.

I swear to the camels, which go dancing on the way of Mecca, That death
is easier than the reproach of enemies, Who may say, Abu Sufyan, son of
Harb, turned away for fear of the idol al- 'Uzza." 75 After the capture
of Mecca, among those who embraced Islam, Mu'awiyah appeared to turn to
this religion, and he received his share of the spoils of the battle of
Hunayn, given to the newly converted to incline them more to Islam, a
share which consisted of a hundred camels and a large sum of silver. 76
It was in the last years of the Prophet's life that he generously
appointed Mu'awiyah as one of his numerous scribes. 77 78

75. Quoted by az-Zubayr ibn Bakkar in the book of al-Mufakhirat. Refer
to the description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/102, and Tadhkirat al-khawas
115 and Jamharat of al-Khatib 2/12.

76. This type of share was given to the shallow-minded who only
appeared to be Muslims, but had not really shown a true belief and
conviction. This share was intended to soften their hearts to God's
religion.

77. al-Mas'udi in at-Tanbih wa al-ishraf 282-283 printed Beirut 1965,
published by Maktabat Khayyat.

78. Abu Sufyan had requested the Prophet to give him and his son some
suitable positions in order to win the affection of the Muslims
gradually, and thereby improve their social status. The Prophet who
never refused a legitimate means of reform, and also because he had no
wish to refuse a request on the basis of Islamic ethical standards the
acceptance of which would be proper, agreed, and granted Mu'awiyah the
honour of acting as his scribe occasionally. Abu Sufyan too was
sometimes commissioned to collect alms.

One day the Prophet sent Ibn 'Abbas to fetch Mu'awiyah to write a
letter and carry out an order for him. Ibn 'Abbas found him at his meal,
so he returned and reported it to the Prophet. Once again Ibn 'Abbas was
asked to go to fetch Mu'awiyah. After he found him still at his meal,
and Mu'awiyah refused to come. This incident occurred for the third
time, and when Ibn 'Abbas was unable to fetch him to carry out the
Prophet, the Prophet cursed Mu'awiyah with these words: "May God never
satisfy his belly!" 79

Later on Mu'awiyah stated: "The Prophet's curse was fulfilled in my
case", for, he partook of several meals a day, and an enormous quantity
of food 80 and still he felt hungry, so that his gluttony had become
proverbial, and the people said of a gluttonous person: "It seems as if
Mu'awiyah is in his belly!" Irrespective of the position of scribe which
was not so significant owing to the multiplicity of the Prophet's
scribes, Mu'awiyah was not regarded as an important personality even
though he was the son of the former chief of the Quraysh and top person
of Mecca, since the position of Abu Sufyan as a chief no longer existed
with the overthrow of the domination of the Quraysh. There were also
other reasons for this indifference: firstly he did not possess such
qualities as chastity and knowledge which inspire true respect.
Secondly, now he was not financially so rich as to dazzle the
shallow-minded with his wealth. One day female Emigrant consulted the
Prophet about her marriage with Mu'awiyah or one of the two other
Muslims. The Prophet said: "Mu'awiyah is an indigent man who has no
wealth."81,82

The future black deeds of Mu'awiyah could not be hidden from the
discerning and divinely penetrating eyes of the Prophet of Islam.
Therefore on various occasions he warned the Muslims about Mu'awiyah and
his associates. We see many examples of this in historical incidents,
such as the following: One day when the Prophet was leaving Medina in a
journey, he heard two people singing, and each one repeated the
following line after the other:

"The bones of our friends are still exposed,
The war has prevented their burial and concealment,
The Prophet said: 'find out who they are!'
They said: 'They are Mu'awiyah and 'Amr ibn al-'As!'
The Prophet raised his arms in prayer and said:

'O God! Throw these two in mischief
79. Ansab al-ashraf 1/532: and Sahih Muslim 8/27 Chapter on the
Prophet's curse: and description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/365, and Musnad
at-Tayalasi, Tradition 2746, and Ibn Kathir 8/119.
80. Ansab al-ashraf 1/532.
81. Sahih Muslim 4/195 Chapter on Divorce and Alimony in the book of
Talaq (Divorce), and Musnad at-Tayalasi 228, Tradition 1645, and Sunan
of Abu Dawud 307-308 Book of Marriage, and Sunan of Ibn Majah, Book of
Marriage, Tradition 1869.
82. We shall see how this indigent man gained much wealth from Muslims'
property, and built a green palace.

And scorch them in the fire.' " 83 In another tradition it is said that
in the battle of Tabuk the Prophet noticed these two were walking while
talking together. The Prophet turned to his friends and said: "Whenever
you see these two together, separate them, for they never get together
for any good purpose." 84 In a third narration it is stated that the
Prophet saw these two together and looked sharply at them. This
encounter was repeated on the second and third days, and on each
occasion he stared at them for several moments. On the third occasion he
said to his friends: "Whenever you see Mu'awiyah and 'Amr ibn al-'As
together, you should keep them apart since their getting together is for
no good purpose." 85

One day Abu Sufyan was riding a horse and his two sons, Yazid and
Mu'awiyah accompanied him on foot, one of them holding the bridle and
the other driving the horse from behind. When the Prophet saw this
scene, he said: "O God let your damnation descend on this rider and his
guide and driver, and denythemyour 86 blessing." Many such words have
remained from the Prophet which can be found in the books of history and
tradition, all of which give a true picture of the personality of
Mu'awiyah from the viewpoint of the Prophet, and the true opinion of
Islam about them.87

**Mu'awiyah in the time of the caliphs**

We quote the words of the Prophet even if Mu'awiyah be displeased.
'Ubadah ibn as-Samit After the Prophet's death when Abu Bakr became
caliph, at first Abu Sufyan showed opposition to him; for, he was loath
to see as a ruler, a member of the lowest of the Quraysh tribes, whereas
there existed members of the higher Quraysh tribes such as Banu Hashim
and Banu Umayyah, both of them of the

83. Musnad Ahmad 4/421: and Siffin of Nasr ibn Muzahim 246: In this
source the names of Mu'awiyah and 'Amr ibn al-'As have been explicitly
mentioned, and an-Nasayih al-kafiyah 9, al- La'ali' al-masnu'ah chapter
of Manaqib sayir as-Sahabah 1/427.

84. al-'Iqd al-farid 3/345. Mu'awiyah summoned 'Ubadah and asked for
his aid in the war with Imam 'Ali. When 'Ubadah came to Mu'awiyah's
presence, he sat between him and 'Amr and quoted this tradition for
them.

85. Siffin 245-246.

86. Siffin 248, and at-Tabari 11/357, az-Zubayr ibn Bakkar too, has
used the same phrases in Mufakhirat, and description of Nahj al-balaghah
2/103, and Tadhkirat al-khawas of Ibn al-Jawzi 115.

87. For example we may refer to reliable sources for an account of
al-Hakam ibn Abi al-'As 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt and other members of this
house, to realize their religious weaknesses. branch of 'Abd Manaf and
each other's cousins, who had received no share of such high positions
despite their merit. Therefore, for the first time he came to Imam 'Ali
and said: "O Abu al- Hasan! Offer your hand so that I may show
allegiance to you!" He was willing to do anything to attain his purpose,
and declared: "I see a mist in the space, which cannot be cleared by
anything except by blood."88 The conspirators of as-Saqifah were fully
aware of the character of Abu Sufyan and his power. So they made an
effort to keep him quiet and satisfied. 'Umar said to Abu Bakr: "Let him
keep the alms he has collected in the Prophet's time so that we may be
free from his evil." 89 This was done and Abu Sufyan showed allegiance
to Abu Bakr and accepted their rule; for, on the one hand he had no hope
of becoming a ruler since no one would submit to him, and on the other
hand Imam 'Ali would not and could not support him. Therefore, he chose
the third alternative, namely to collaborate with the authorities of the
time. Thus Abu Sufyan joined the party of the administrators of
as-Saqifah, and he and his household were placed in their rank.

As a reward for Abu Sufyan's silence and collaboration, Abu Bakr
appointed Yazid, Abu Sufyan's son, as commander of a large army of
Islamic warriors for the conquest of the ash-Sham region. This event
occurred in the year 13 of the Hijrah, and Mu'awiyah took part in this
campaign under his brother's command. After the conquest of ash-Sham, by
the order of Abu Bakr, Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan was granted the governorship
of Damascus as well as the command of the army there.

During 'Umar's caliphate when Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan was stricken with
plague, he nominated his brother Mu'awiyah as the ruler of ash-Sham and
commander of the army in his own place, and 'Umar, the second caliph,
accepted the nomination, and entrusted those positions to Mu'awiyah90 It
was thence that the foundation of the rule and caliphate of the Umayyads
was laid. During the rule of Mu'awiyah over ash-Sham, 'Umar made a visit
to that province on his way to Egypt. On entering Damascus, Mu'awiyah
went out with a magnificent retinue and received him with a ceremonious
welcoming. When 'Umar noticed all that pomp and ostentation of
Mu'awiyah, he exclaimed: "This man is an Arab Kasra!" When Mu'awiyah
approached him, 'Umar asked: "Is all this magnificent retinue yours?"
Mu'awiyah answered: "Yes, O commander of the faithful!"

'Umar said: "I am told that the needy turn to your court and stand at
your 88. at-Tabari 2/449.
89. al-'Iqd al-farid 3/62, and at-Tabari 2/449.
90. at-Tabari 4/202 printed Egypt, and Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala'
1/237-238.

door for long hours!"

Mu'awiyah said: "Yes, what you have heard is true." 'Umar asked: "Why
do you act in this way?" Mu'awiyah answered: "You see, we are living in
a land where there are many enemy spies (Romans) and it is necessary to
frighten them with our pomp and glory." 91,92 The time of 'Umar passed,
and 'Uthman became caliph, and on his assumption of power he granted
Mu'awiyah the rule over the whole region of ash-Sham of that day 93 in
addition to the governorship of Damascus, and allowed him perfect
liberty to act as he wished. Mu'awiyah, too, continued his habitual
selfish conduct and created a wholly aristocratic and pagan system, and
nothing could hinder him from carrying out his evil fancies or desires.
Among the examples of these selfish acts are the incidents which
occurred between him and 'Ubadah ibn as-Samit Khazraji, a noble
companion of the Prophet. 'Ubadah was one of the twelve men of Medina
who took part in the allegiance of 'Aqabah, and who were given the
honorable title of "Sheriffs". They were the first group of Muslims of
Medina. 'Ubadah was one of the few who compiled the Qur'an in the time
of the Prophet.94

'Umar ibn al-Khattab had sent this learned companion to ash-Sham during
the rule of Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan to teach people the Holy Qur'an. He
stayed in the town of Hims until Yazid's death, and then with the
assumption of power by Mu'awiyah, he joined the Islamic army which was
fighting at the Roman frontiers. Muslim, the great Sunni scholar and a
famous traditionist, and author of the book "Sahih", narrates that
Mu'awiyah and 'Ubadah had both taken part in one of the Islamic wars in
which they were victorious and seized some spoils, including silver
vessels, which were by the order of Mu'awiyah offered for sale so that
the price of them would be divided among the fighters. The people
crowded to buy these silver vessels, and each vessel was sold at double
its weight in silver. When 'Ubadah heard this matter, he rose and
exclaimed: "I have heard the Prophet forbidding the exchange of gold for
gold and silver for silver except on an equal basis, and thus anyone who
takes in excess of this amount, will have committed usury."

On hearing this verdict, the people who had paid more claimed back the
extra sum. When Mu'awiyah heard of this matter, in great vexation he
said: "How is it that people quote verdicts from the Prophet, whereas we
who have 91. al-Isti'ab 1/253 and al-Isabah 3/143, and Ibn Kathir 8/120.
92. Was 'Umar so lenient to other agents of his? Did he not confiscate
all their properties at the conclusion of their rule? Why, then, did he
show so much kindness and indulgence to Mu'awiyah? There must have been
a secret in all this policy!

93. The region given by 'Uthman to Mu'awiyah, today includes Syria,
Palestine, Jordan and Lebanon.

94. 'Ubadah accompanied the Prophet in all the wars and was alive until
the year 34 of the Hijrah. He died eventually in ar-Ramalah or Jerusalem
(Bayt al-muqaddas), and was buried there. al-Isti'ab 412 and Usd
al-ghabah 3/106, and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 7/206-214, and al- Isabah
2/240: and Siyar al-a'lam 2/1-5.

been his close companions have never heard him utter such words?"
'Ubadah rose and repeated his former words and added: "We will quote the
words of the Prophet even if Mu'awiyah be displeased." According to
another narration, he had said: "Despite Mu'awiyah, I don't care even if
he does not admit me one night in his army!"95 According to Ahmad ibn
Hanbal and an-Nisa'i, 'Ubadah had said: "I swear to God that it does not
matter at all if I do not spend one night in a land where Mu'awiyah
lives!"96

In Usd al-ghabah and Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala' which give an account of
'Ubadah, it is stated that he criticized some acts of Mu'awiyah and
declared them to be contrary to the explicit injunctions of Islam, and
then added: "I will not stay in the same land with you." Then he left
ash-Sham for Medina. 'Umar who was still caliph, asked him why had come
to Medina. 'Ubadah narrated the improper acts of Mu'awiyah for him.
'Umar said: "Go back to your former place. May God bring shame on that
land in which you and others like you do not live! He can never have
domination over you."97

Adh-Dhahabi adds in Siyar al-a'lam: One day 'Ubadah ibn as-Samit was in
the mosque with Mu'awiyah. The Muezzin called for prayer, and then a
preacher climbed the pulpit and in his sermon he praised Mu'awiyah.
'Ubadah rose and threw a handful of dust at the preacher's mouth.
Mu'awiyah became very angry. 'Ubadah turned to him and said: "You were
not with us on the day in the land of 'Aqabah.98 Before the emigration
when we made a pact with the Prophet to uphold the truth wherever we
were. We have promised not to fear any reproacher wherever we are. Then
Prophet said: Whenever you see a person praising another to his face,
throw dust at him."99,100 Another day Mu'awiyah spoke in the sermon he
was giving about escaping from plague. 'Ubadah interrupted him by
saying: "Your mother, Hind, was wiser than you!"

Mu'awiyah ended his sermon and performed the prayer. Then he returned
to his palace and sent for 'Ubadah. Several of the Ansar of ash-Sham
accompanied 'Ubadah, but government officials refused to admit them, so
'Ubadah alone was taken to Mu'awiyah's presence. Mu'awiyah said to him:
"Have you no fear of God, and do you not feel respectful in the presence
of your Imam?"101

'Ubadah answered: "Do you not know that in the night of 'Aqabah I made
a

95. Sahih of Muslim 5/46, and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 7/212.
96. Musnad of Ahmad 5/319, and Sunan an-Nisa'i 2/222.
97. Usd al-ghabah 3/106, and Siyar al-a'lam 2/2.
98. 'Aqabah is a land near the great Jamarah in Mina where the first
pact of the Prophet with the people of Medina was concluded.
99. Religious scholars have said that praise is blamable which is
false, otherwise the Qur'an says that Joseph praised his sincere friend
for being trustworthy.
100. Siyar al-a'lam 2/2, and Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir.
101. What he meant by Imam was his own person.

pact with the Prophet not to fear any reproach in the way of God."
Later that day Mu'awiyah went to the mosque for the afternoon prayers,
and then on the pulpit he addressed the people, saying: "I quoted a
tradition for you earlier today. Then I realized that what 'Ubadah had
said was true. Follow him, for, he is wiser than me!"102 These events
which show a greater degree of mildness occurred during 'Umar's rule,
who, owing to his coarseness, did not allow anyone to go to excess.

**Mu'awiyah and 'Uthman**

They brought wine for us and Mu'awiyah kept on drinking it heedlessly.
'Abd Allah ibn Buraydah - a companion of the Prophet Mu'awiyah's
position in the time of 'Uthman was different from his state in the time
of the first two caliphs. In 'Uthman's time he was given a free hand
which enabled him to loosen all the ties of law and morality, and his
power and wealth had made him wholly oblivious of all Islamic and human
matters, and dragged him to the point of winebibbing.

Ibn 'Asakir and adh-Dhahabi, two greater historians, narrate: One day
'Ubadah ibn as-Samit was walking along one of the streets of Damascus.
He noticed a caravan of camels carrying loads. He asked: "What is the
load? Is it olive oil?" Someone said: "No, it is wine; they take it to
Mu'awiyah who has ordered them." 'Ubadah at once found a knife and
ripped open all the skins of wine. Abu Hurayrah lived in ash-Sham at
this time. During the Prophet's time he was not considered of any
account, but after him, owing to the favour shown to him by the
caliphate, he was greatly respected. So Mu'awiyah sent someone to him
with this message: "Why don't you check your brother in his deeds? He
goes to the market every morning and hinders tributaries from their
transactions, and sits in the mosque at doing nothing but blemishing our
honour and prestige."

At Mu'awiyah's request Abu Hurayrah went to 'Ubadah and said to him:
"What is your business with Mu'awiyah? Leave him alone and do not molest
him." 'Ubadah said: "Abu Hurayrah! You were not with us on the day we
made a pact with the Prophet of God to obey his orders to the effect to
do our best in enjoining good and forbidding evil, and have no fear of
any reproach, for the sake of Allah." Abu Hurayrah had no answer to give
but to remain silent. So Mu'awiyah 102. Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir
7/210-211.

wrote to 'Uthman: "'Ubadah has ruined and corrupted ash-Sham and its
inhabitants. Summon him and either prevent him from such deeds, or allow
me to hand over ash-Sham to him." 'Uthman wrote in answer: "Expel
'Ubadah from the city and send him back to his house in Medina."
Historians write: "When 'Ubadah returned to Medina, he went to see
'Uthman. 'Uthman was sitting in his house and on looking up, he saw
'Ubadah in front of him. So he said: "What is your business with us? Why
do you interfere in our affairs?" 'Ubadah arose from amidst the people
said: "I heard the Prophet state: After me such people govern you who
accustom you to forbidden things and pollution's with their actions, and
at the same time they will criticize the good deeds with which you are
familiar. Therefore it is not right to obey the rebellious. Take care
not to be diverted from the way of your God." According to Ibn 'Asakir,
'Ubadah continued by saying: "I swear in the Name of Him in Whose
Capable Hand lies the life of 'Ubadah, that Mu'awiyah belongs to this
group of people. 'Uthman said nothing in answer and did not protest at
all."103

The story of Mu'awiyah's excess in drinking and his involvement's and
attitude towards the remaining friends of the Prophet is not the only
incident related to him and 'Ubadah. Historians have written that 'Abd
ar-Rahman, son of Sahl ibn Zayd al-Ansari, had during 'Uthman's time,
gone to ash-Sham and Damascus to take part in the frontier's holy war,
and as we know, at this time Mu'awiyah was governor of ash-Sham. One day
on passing in the street he noticed several skins of wine being carried.
He had a spear in his hand and rushed upon them and ripped them open.
The servants who were in charge of the skins fell upon him. When the
matter was reported to Mu'awiyah he told his men to leave him alone
since he had gone crazy. Mu'awiyah's remark was reported to 'Abd
ar-Rahman who said: "By God! I have not gone crazy, but the Prophet had
ordered us never to bring wine into our houses, and I swear that if I
stay in this land and notice Mu'awiyah doing what the Prophet has
forbidden, I will either rip his belly or lose my life for it."104

Ahmad ibn Hanbal writes in his book of Musnad quoting 'Abd Allah ibn
Buraydah, narrating: I went to see Mu'awiyah with my father. He told us
to sit down on the floor covered with carpets and ordered to bring us
food. We partook of it. Then they brought wine. He drank some then
offered my father a 103. Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 8/211-212, and
an-Nubala' 2/3-4, and Musnad of Ahmad 5/325. 104. al-Isabah 2/394, In
al-Isti'ab too and Usd al-ghabah some parts are omitted, and in Tahdhib
at-tahdhib 6/192 some references are made to this story.

cupful. My father refused it, saying: "Since the day the Prophet has
forbidden wine, I have abstained from it."105 Other stories, too, have
been told about Mu'awiyah's excesses in drinking wine, and Ibn 'Asakir
106 mentions them in his history books. Those who are interested can
refer to that reliable source. Abu Dharr facing Mu'awiyah The blue sky
has never thrown its shadow over anyone more honest than Abu Dharr! The
Prophet In 'Uthman's time, Mu'awiyah had some violent encounters with
Abu Dharr, the well-known companion of the Prophet and the great upright
Muslim, an account of which is too lengthy, so we will describe them
briefly here. Historians say: Abu Dharr, that devout Muslim and true
believer of Islam, believed in God even in pagan times, and was wholly
averse towards the worship of idols.107 When he heard the news of the
rise of a prophet in Mecca, he traveled to that city, and was the fourth
or fifth person to embrace Islam.108 The day after embracing Islam he
went to the mosque of al-Haram and loudly declared his faith amidst
Qurayshi infidels. They rushed upon him from every side and beat him so
badly that his whole body was covered with blood, and as a result he
fell down unconscious. Had not al-'Abbas, the Prophet's uncle come to
his aid; he might have died under the cruel assaults of the Quraysh. An
hour later, he rose with a stiff and injured body and went to a corner
to wash his wounds and rest his battered body.

Next day he went to the mosque again and loudly exclaimed: "There is no
god but Allah, and Muhammad is His Prophet." For, he was never afraid of
anything in the way of truth. Once more the people rushed upon him and
beat him almost to death, leaving him unconscious again. The following
day he emigrated from Mecca to his tribe by the order of the Prophet to
invite them to Islam, and stay with them until they were converted. Abu
Dharr returned to his tribe of Ghifar, and made many efforts to convert
105. Musnad of Ahmad 5/347.

106. There is also another story which has happened in Antersouss
between Mu'awiyah and 'Ubadah. There is also a third incident between
Mu'awiyah and 'Abd Allah ibn al-Harith ibn Umayyah. Refer to Tahdhib of
Ibn 'Asakir 7/213 and 348, and al-Isabah 2/282. 107. Tabaqat al-kubra
4/222-223, and Siyar al-a'lam 2/38, and Usd al-ghabah 1/301. It is
stipulated in Sahih of Muslim 7/153-155, and Tabaqat 4/222 onwards, and
Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 7/218, and Hilyat al-awliya' 1/157, and Sifat
as-safwah 1/238, and Siyar al-a'lam 2/38 that he performed his prayer
two or three or four years before embracing Islam. 108. Refer to former
books on the life of Abu Dharr.

them to Islam. Many years passed until he heard the news of the
Prophet's arrival in Medina and his rise to power and glory. So he set
off from his home to stay with his beloved Prophet and feel at peace in
his association with him. His emigration to Medina took place after the
battle of al-Khandaq. Thenceforth he never left the Prophet's side, and
benefited greatly from his infinite store of knowledge and spirituality,
and showed great loyalty and self- sacrifice, and engaged in so many
religious acts of devotion and reflection that he became one of the
dearest friends of the Prophet. He has been praised greatly in many
genuine traditions by the Prophet. Such as the following:

1-"The blue sky has never thrown its shadow over anyone more honest
than Abu Dharr."109

2-In the battle of Tabuk, when his old and weak camel could not keep
pace with others Abu Dharr was left behind. He had to abandon the camel.
Then he carried his load on his own back and proceeded to march towards
the Prophet's army. The hot desert and scorching sands made this march
very difficult, but his true faith made it easy to bear all the
hardships. He made a great effort until he finally reached the army.
When the Prophet noticed the lonely figure of him approaching the
warriors of Islam, he said: "May God bless Abu Dharr; he walks alone,
dies alone and will be resurrected alone."110

From the time 'Uthman became caliph until the days he made innovations
for the enhancing the influence of his kith and kin, several years
passed. Therefore at the beginning of his caliphate when he followed the
ways of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, the Quraysh chiefs were satisfied with him.
But when some of the Umayyads began to influence him, and other Quraysh
leaders such as Talhah, az-Zubayr, 'A'ishah, 'Amr ibn al-'As and their
supporters were treated with indifference, displeasure and difference
arose. He offered an enormous gift to his son-in-law, Marwan, namely the
taxes of a large region like Africa;111 three hundred thousand drachmas
to his cousin, al- Harith ibn al-Hakam; one hundred thousand drachmas to
his supporter, Zayd ibn Thabit al-Ansari.

When Abu Dharr saw that Muslims' public fund was being squandered and
the Islamic government, as Abu Sufyan said, was changed into a pagan
one, he felt it his duty to revive the forgotten injunctions of the
Qur'an and deliver the Muslims from their negligence towards the Qur'an
and Prophet's household. It was owing to this feeling that Abu Dharr
adopted this smashing verse of the 109. All the former sources as well
as at-Tirmidhi in the Chapter of Manaqib Abu Dharr and Musnad of Ahmad
2/163,175 and 223 and 5/197, and 6/442. In some of these sources we read
the following: "Whoever wishes to see the examples of the morality and
asceticism of Jesus son of Mary, should look at Abu Dharr."

110. Sirah of Ibn Hisham 4/179, and at-Tabari 3/45, also refer to
Tabaqat al-kubra and al-Isti'ab and Usd al-ghabah, and al-Isabah for an
account of Abu Dharr.

111. Ansab al-ashraf 5/25.

Qur'an as his slogan:

"Those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend in Allah's way,
warn them of a painful chastisement." 112 This verse was addressed to
the Umayyads who regarded other people's property and public funds as
their own and easily made use of them. They gave them away, built
palaces, and spent them extravagantly. Consequently the caliph's
administrators took umbrage at Abu Dharr's words, and sharp altercations
between Abu Dharr and 'Uthman took place. 'Uthman was aware that no
compromise was possible with that true and God-fearing warrior of Islam,
and Abu Dharr showed no mercy with the pagan customs, which were being
revived under the cover of Islam, and he did not allow them a formal
recognition. So 'Uthman ordered him to go to ash-Sham and to the border
where the Muslims were fighting the Romans, hoping that Abu Dharr would
be involved with these wars, and leave the caliph's organization alone.
But who was governing ash-Sham except the Mu'awiyah a man of the
Umayyads, and an heir of black paganism, and a hypocrite in the garb of
Islam? Therefore in ash-Sham, too, Abu Dharr could not abandon his duty
of enjoining good and forbidding evil. As we have already stated,
Mu'awiyah acted as a great pillar of paganism which with the aid of
'Uthman, was now governing the wide realm of Islam. Consequently there
occurred clashes since Abu Dharr reminded Mu'awiyah of his deeds which
lacked the hue of Islam and were nothing but infidelity and selfishness,
and forbade him from engaging in them.

One day Mu'awiyah sent him three hundred dinars. When Abu Dharr saw
Mu'awiyah's messenger and the gold dinars, he said: "If this money is my
annual salary from the public fund of which you deprived me last year, I
will accept it, but if it is meant to be a gift, I have no need of it."
When Mu'awiyah began the construction of his palace, a big palace of
green stones which was unrivaled in the world at that time and was a
symbol of paganism and sensuality in the land of Islam, Abu Dharr
protested loudly to Mu'awiyah: "If you are building this palace with
public funds and God's property, your action is treachery, since such
funds should be spent on the amelioration of the conditions of the
Muslims and Islam and they do not belong to any particular person. But
if it is built out of your own wealth, then it would be a sign of
extravagance; for, how many things does a single person need for his
daily life?"

Mu'awiyah had nothing to say, and Abu Dharr as usual emerged victorious
in this argument with his power of reasoning. Abu Dharr had often said
to him: "I swear to God, you have committed such acts the examples of
which we do not remember in our Islamic customs, and know nothing like
them. By God! Such deeds are mentioned neither in the Book of God, nor
in the ways and 112. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter at-Tawbah, Verse 34.

traditions of His prophet. I am witnessing the right being suppressed
and the wrong coming into surface. Truth is negated, and the incompetent
and unabstemious are exalted, and a noble and pious person like Imam
'Ali is forced to retire to his house."113 The people gathered round
this old man who was full of love for God and sympathy for people, to
hear the sincere words which he uttered in defense of Unity, truth and
Islam. But unfortunately the pestilential organization of Mu'awiyah
would not tolerate him, and his soldiers shouted: "O people! No one
should associate with Abu Dharr!" 114 He was one of the few true Muslims
who still lived in that land, and as Islam could not tolerate paganism,
paganism, too, could not tolerate Islam.

A historian writes: One night Mu'awiyah sent Abu Dharr one thousand
dinars, and he in turn immediately divided that money among the needy
people since Islamic training and ascetic spirit had no liking for
collecting worldly treasures. In the morning when Mu'awiyah came for
prayer, he summoned the previous night's messenger and told him to go to
Abu Dharr and say to him: "Save me from Mu'awiyah's punishment. The
money, which I brought to you, was a mistake. Please give it back to me
to deliver it to its original place, and be thus immune from Mu'awiyah's
punishment." When the messenger delivered his message, Abu Dharr said to
him: "My son, tell Mu'awiyah that Abu Dharr says: I swear to God that at
this dawn not a single dinar remains with me. Give me three days'
respite to take the money back from the needy."

Mu'awiyah realized that Abu Dharr is not merely a man of talk, but
engages in action at the first opportunity, and thus he proves his
words. So Mu'awiyah felt apprehensive of him, and an old man like Abu
Dharr with his Islamic belief and deeds posed a threat to him making his
backspin shiver with fear. At this time he took refuge with his master,
'Uthman, and wrote to him: "If you have authority over ash-Sham and its
people, summon Abu Dharr since he fills people's minds with
rancor."115

According to al-Baladhuri, 'Uthman wrote to Mu'awiyah in answer: "Make
Abu Dharr mount a rough and uneasy ride and send him back to Medina."
Consequently they made him ride an unruly camel and proceed non-stop to
Medina. It was a long and exhausting journey in a dry and sandy desert,
led by cruel and inhuman guards.116 al-Ya'qubi gives further details and
says: 'Uthman wrote to Mu'awiyah: "Put him on a saddleless camel and
send him to us." 'Uthman's strict order was carried out about this man
of God, and as a result when he reached Medina he 113. Ansab al-ashraf
of al-Baladhuri 5/53.

114. Tabaqat al-Kubra 4/229.

115. Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala' 2/50.

116. Ansab al-ashraf 5/53.

had lost much of the flesh of his legs.117 Al-Mas'udi says: They made
him mount a camel, which had only a dry niece of wood on its back, and
he was guarded by five coarse men of as-Saqalabah118 who forced him to
move swiftly. This went on until they reached Medina. His thighs were
badly sore and showed raw flesh. In short, during those few days he had
suffered so much that he was almost on the point of death.119 But this
brave and valiant man was not so weak as to be vanquished by such
treatments, nor had he forgotten his duties towards the Qur'an and the
Prophet's household as to come to terms with 'Uthman. He was like a
steadfast mountain that could not be moved by any event. Consequently
the moment he reached Medina, he cried out vigorously and rose once more
to fight the 'Uthmanic paganism. He said protestingly: "They appoint
children as administrators and arrange fiefs and feuds for themselves.
They raise and exalt the offsprings of the men freed after the capture
of Mecca and bestow on them rank and dignity."

It was the reward and lot of this godly man to be exiled to
ar-Rabadhah, a very dry and waterless desert in which Abu Dharr had
stayed before Islam and which he disliked immensely. Thenceforth the
rest of Abu Dharr's life was spent in ar-Rabadhah, that terribly dry and
lifeless desert. It was in the same place, too, that he lost his wife
and children, and he himself died of hunger and illness. Only one of his
daughters stayed alive to live. According to historians, Abu Dharr spent
one year in ash-Sham where he had been exiled in the year 29 of the
Hijrah. In the year 30 Mu'awiyah complained of him to 'Uthman, following
which he was summoned to Medina in the sorry conditions described
before. Then in the same year he was exiled to ar-Rabadhah, where he
died in the year 31 or 32 of the Hijrah.

**A fable in the history of Islam**

Many things have been said about the reason for Abu Dharr's exile which
I feel disgusted to mention. At-Tabari What we have described in the
proceeding pages concerning Abu Dharr's life, and his exiles from Medina
to ash-Sham, from ash-Sham to Medina and from Medina to ar-Rabadhah, was
only a brief account derived from the reliable researches of historians.
But what has been narrated about this subject by at- 117. al-Ya'qubi
2/120-122.

118. These were the inhabitants of a land near Khazar. (Mu'jam
al-buldan 3/416 printed Beirut). 119. Muruj adh-dhahab on Ibn al-Athir
5/161-163.

Tabari and his followers, namely Ibn al-Athir, Ibn Kathir, Ibn Khaldun
and Abu al-Fida' are a series of lies and forgeries all of which were
originally fabricated by Sayf ibn 'Umar, the great Kufi interpolator and
forger of history. At-Tabari and succeeding historians have adopted the
historical events of those years from the fables invented in the
imagination of Sayf and have thus filled their books and history of
Islam with these lies and fables. At-Tabari writes in his history: In
this year, namely the year 30 of the Hijrah, the incident of Abu Dharr
has taken place, namely his expulsion from ash- Sham to Medina by
Mu'awiyah. Narrators have said much about this hideous exile which I
have no inclination to quote. But those who offer an excuse for
Mu'awiyah in this incident, have quoted a story narrated by Sayf from
Yazid al-Faq'asi. He says: When Ibn as-Sawda' arrived in ash-Sham, he
met Abu Dharr and said to him: Abu Dharr, are you not surprised at
Mu'awiyah who says: 'Wealth belongs to God', whereas everything belongs
to God? Then he adds: Mu'awiyah intends to swallow the whole of the
public funds and revenue, and deprive the Muslims of it."120 Here
at-Tabari is quoting the story of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', the fabulous
hero of the history of Islam, with the title of Ibn as-Sawda', and we
have shown in the book of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', two volumes of which
have been published, that it is full of lies and fables, and interested
readers can refer to them.

All the historians who have succeeded at-Tabari have more or less
followed his example in quoting the said story. For example, Ibn
al-Athir, the great historian of the 7th century, writes in his history
book: 'In that year (30th of the Hijrah) the incident of Abu Dharr's
exile from ash-Sham to Medina by Mu'awiyah took place. Many things have
been said about the motive and cause of this matter including
Mu'awiyah's abuses and threats to Abu Dharr and his expulsion on a bare
camel, his exile to Medina in that tragic state, which should be left,
unsaid. If it is true, it would be fitting to offer an excuse for
'Uthman about this matter such as the claim that a ruler and imam can
chastise his subject and so on, and not make use of such incidents as a
basis of irony and criticism towards 'Uthman. These narrations contain
matters, which I do not like to quote. But Mu'awiyah's apologists have
offered some excuses in this connection. They write..."121

Then he narrates the story of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', the imaginary and
untrue hero of the stories of Sayf ibn 'Umar from at-Tabari and this is
exactly what Ibn Kathir, Ibn Khaldun and others have done. But when we
refer to at-Tabari's words, we see that he does not disregard the
numerous calamities, which have befallen Abu Dharr owing to their being
false and forged, but he merely does not like to quote them, since he
does not wish to blemish such Prophet's 120. at-Tabari 5/66.

121. Ibn al-Athir in al-Kamil fi at-tarikh 3/43.

companions as 'Uthman and Mu'awiyah. Then he speaks of apologists and
excuse-makers and fills his great book with their false and fabulous
reports, such reports which he himself calls "fibs". Thus he closes the
door of truth seeking upon future investigators, and throws the chaste
visage of such a great man as Abu Dharr into the depth of obscurity.

The conduct of Ibn al-Athir, the great historian of the middle
centuries of the history of Islam, is similar. He, too, collaborates
with at-Tabari in this great crime and truth-destroying history, and
after referring to a number of issues, despite the fact that the sources
do not weaken his statements, he avoids going into details, since he
thinks that such matters should not be described fully for, such a
description would be detrimental to the powerful Umayyads and caliphs.
But to-day we neither intend to cavil anyone, nor to find baseless
excuses for him. We are only trying to find the truth of historical
events for the sake of doing service to the sacred field of knowledge.
We will not, of course, forgive these great scholars for their
connivance at the facts of the history of Islam; for, their purpose has
been nothing but to please the powerful and the ruling caliphs by their
works.

\*\*\* As we saw, at-Tabari quotes the story of Abu Dharr from Sayf,
and other historians have either borrowed it directly from Sayf or
through at-Tabari. This story is part of the fable of 'Abd Allah ibn
Saba', which is fabricated by Sayf ibn 'Umar. We have dealt with it in
the second volume of this book in connection with the fable of 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba' and its origin and source. Here we add that the story of
Abu Dharr and most of the fables of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' have been
quoted solely by Sayf from a person named Yazid al- Faq'asi.

Now we should see who this Yazid al-Faq'asi is and what his narration
is to discover the identity of this man, we have referred to all the
available sources about personalities, traditions, history, biography,
genealogy and Islamic and Arab literature, and have not found the
slightest trace of his name or mention of him, except in the narrations
quoted from Sayf by at-Tabari and adh-Dhahabi. Such narrations are no
more than six in number, five of which are seen in at- Tabari, and one
in adh-Dhahabi's "History of Islam".122

In these narrations Sayf has quoted the story of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba'
from Yazid al-Faq'asi, and one of them is related to the story of Abu
Dharr. In this one Sayf has lowered Abu Dharr, that great companion and
secret-keeper of the Prophet, to a point where he, under the influence
of an unknown Jew, namely 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', engages in riot and
uprising against Mu'awiyah and other Umayyad rulers, and thus causes
mischief in an Islamic environment.

122. The Narrations of Sayf by Yazid al-Faq'asi can be seen in
at-Tabari, printed in Europe, following pages 1/2849, 2858, 2895, 2922
and 2952. Also in The History of Islam 2/122. This narration concludes
that in all these riots the Umayyads, namely 'Uthman, Mu'awiyah and
others have not been guilty at all and that their son-in-law been a
perfectly virtuous man!

After a long and careful investigation about the source of the story of
Abu Dharr and 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', we came to the conclusion that all
these fables are borrowed from Sayf ibn 'Umar by all writers of history,
and Sayf, the forger and fabricator of events, in order to give validity
to a story and narration, invents a narrator named Yazid al-Faq'asi, and
this fictitious narrator is artificially related to the house of
al-Faq'asi which is a branch of the Asad tribe.123 But in none of these
narrations does Sayf mention him, as if he considered him to be
fatherless!

In fact the real father of this narrator and all those fabricated
companions and narrators who are the heroes of Sayf's stories, and the
father of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', the greatest hero of his fables, is Sayf
ibn 'Umar at-Tamimi himself who is the first producer of all these lies,
and no one else has been his partner.

Unfortunately most great writers of history such as at-Tabari, Ibn
al-Athir, Ibn 'Asakir, Ibn Khaldun, Ibn 'Abd al-Barr, Ibn Hajar and many
others have filled their books with the fabrications of that great liar
and atheistic forger named Sayf ibn 'Umar. Consequently the views of
most Muslims about the friends of the Prophet are based to day on those
fables, and they tend to know Islam through them.

Will they allow us after twelve centuries to pull these fables out of
the traditions and history of Islam and throw them away in order to open
the way for a true understanding of Islam for all people?


