Jariyah Ibn Qudamah a Man of the Alawite Front
==============================================

Do not fight a person who does not fight you, and do not oppress the
Jews and Christians who have made a pact with the Muslims.

Imam 'Ali Now we should see what Imam 'Ali did against these unmanly
raids and bloody assaults of Busr, the commander of Mu'awiyah's army. As
usual he stood up against wrong and injustice and asked the people's aid
to remove these agents of tyranny and oppression. The Kufans as usual
received his order coldly, as if they had no wish to defend their realm,
which was exposed to destruction; as if the dust of death was scattered
over their city. The painful 173. al-Aghani 15/45 published by Sasi.

174. al-Isti'ab 1/65-66, and Usd al-ghabah 1/180.

175. Description of Nahj 2/15 research by Muhammad Abu al-Fadl.

outcries of Imam 'Ali echoed in the mosque and city of Kufah, but it
could not awaken the motionless and dead spirits of the Kufans. Some
time passed until one of the remaining heirs of Islam's warriors, named
Jariyah ibn Qudamah, rose and responded positively to the call of the
Imam. According to al-Ya'qubi, the Imam issued the following order on
dispatching him on this mission: "Never fight a person who does not
fight you. Never kill a wounded person. Even if you and your men are
forced to go on foot, never seize people's horses forcefully. In
inhabited places and springs never take the lead over the owners of
water, and consume only their extra supply of water, even then, with
their approval. Never abuse or reproach a Muslim, since in such a case
it would be necessary for others to admonish you. Never oppress the
followers of divine books who have made pacts with the Muslims."

Another part of this order states: "Do not shed anyone's blood except
where you are ordered by God, in the same way that your duty is to
protect people's blood for the sake of God."176

In the book of al-Gharat we read the following about the defensive
battles of Jariyah: Jariyah left Kufah and at first he went to Basra,
and from there he went towards Hejaz, and advanced until he reached
Yemen. At this time Busr learnt of the move made by Jariyah. So he
changed his route and went to al- Yamamah. Jariyah increased his speed
and did not stand long at any town or the amp they set up. He was in
pursuit of Busr everywhere, while Busr cont- inued to flee in different
directions, until he crossed over the border of the Imam's realm. When
the people saw him in flight, they attacked him from every side, since
they had been much oppressed by him. The number of those killed in
Busr's savage raids was estimated at thirty thousand. He even threw
number into the fire and burnt them. An Arab poet describes these
painful and savage events in his poem, a part of which we will quote for
you: "As far as he could lead his army,

He caused as much massacre and indecency as he could." 177

Two opposite policies Do not shed the least blood in the land unjustly.
Order of Imam 'Ali Do not spare the lives of even women and children.
Order of Mu'awiyah 176. al-Ya'qubi 2/143 printed Beirut.

177. al-Aghani 17/51-72 an account of Yazid ibn al-Mifragh, for his
lineage refer to Jamharat Mu'awiyah also sent other sabotage and
plundering groups to the realm of Imam 'Ali, the stories of which we
have not narrated here. Those who are interested can refer to elaborate
texts of history.178

But his armies always avoided facing the soldiers of the Imam and
fighting them. They only raided those parts, which were remote, or were
weak in garrison and military equipment. Whenever an army was sent from
Kufah to face them, they fled, since they were only sabotage groups and
bloodthirsty plunderers in the true sense of the word.

Among the destructive groups which came into conflict with the army of
the Imam, was an army sent by Mu'awiyah to Mesopotamia. The commander,
who had been appointed by the Imam for those parts, asked Kumayl ibn
Ziyad, the governor of the city of Hit, for reinforcement. Kumayl
hastened to his aid with six hundred warriors. They engaged in fighting,
but the ash-Shamis as usual decided to flee leaving many of their dead
behind.

Kumayl ordered not to kill the wounded, and not to pursue the
fugitives. In this conflict only two of Kumayl's soldiers were killed.
In another encounter, one of Imam 'Ali's commanders chased a group of
Mu'awiyah's saboteurs and plunderers, but they fled, and he pursued them
across the Euphrates and scattered his army in various parts of ash-Sham
to engage in plunder, and advanced as far as ar-Riqqah, and left no
horses, arms and quadrupeds for the supporters of 'Uthman. Mu'awiyah
sent a troop to confront him, but they were unable to catch him since he
had returned safely to his headquarters at Nisibis.179 This commander on
his return to his own quarter wrote a letter to the Imam and reported
his activities.

His report shows that he did not consider any of his acts to be
unlawful, since he regarded them as a slight vengeance for the violent
and inhuman deeds of Mu'awiyah's plundering troops. He may even have
expected some big reward or word of encouragement. But the Imam did not
only refuse to praise him, but also reproached him for having acted
contrary to his order instructing him to abstain from such acts, while
it was permissible to seize the enemy's property only in case of a war
and the enemy's use of arms. Such spoils, too, were to be confined to
the clothes, weapons, mounts and military equipment of the enemy.180

Thus we see that in those periods two opposite policies were adopted in
the 178. These plunderers preceded Busr, Ibn al-Athir 3/153.

179. It is a large and flourishing town on the trade route of Mosul to
ash-Sham, within six days' journey to Mosul. (Mu'jam al-buldan
5/288-289).

180. Ibn al-Athir in al-Kamil fi at-tarikh 3/152-153.

world of Islam.

**A) Policy of Imam 'Ali**

"Fight with warmongers only. Do not usurp people's quadrupeds, even if
you be compelled to go on foot. Do not consume the waters of springs and
wells in various inhabited places unless their people agree; even then
consume what remains above their demand, and never to excess. Do not
abuse a Muslim, and do not oppress allies, even if they are not Muslims.
You can shed a person's blood only according to what is right and
lawful. You cannot seize the property of enemy fighters except what they
have brought with them for fighting, such as horses and weapons."181

**B) Policy of Mu'awiyah**

"Kill anyone who does not hold your opinion or belief. Destroy all the
inhabited places and plunder their property. Forcefully seize the
property of everyone who is rich and does not obey us. Do not abstain
from molesting people. Kill 'Ali's supporters, and even spare no woman
or child."182

**An Analysis of the above policies**

Of the above two policies, obviously the policy which orders the
plunder of property must vanquish the policy which enjoins a respect for
people's property; for, naturally it seems easier to win a war in which
no recognition of laws and regulations are observed because they would
resort to every mean act to gain victory. But for those binds by the
laws of Islam, who recognize virtue and humanness there exists
limitations. This is not, of course, a true victory, but an apparent and
transient victory which the first group obtain in attaining their goal
because they abstain from no action however wrong it may be, whereas the
second group are bound by humane laws which forbid certain actions.

The army of the Imam showed negligence towards the limitations which
existed in the Islamic Alawite front, and did not respond positively to
the divine and right-seeking call of the Imam, since in the war which
was ahead of them they had no expectation but death. If they became
victorious, they were not allowed to seize the property of the
conquered, and they could not kill freely; or take women and children
captive. In that case why should they fight? They had no material
profits to expect, whereas they were faced with a constant threat of
death. Therefore without a divine motive or a human virtue it would 181.
al-Ya'qubi 2/143.

182. Description of Nahj 213-14, and al-Ya'qubi 2/141.

be useless to go to war. But the people of ash-Sham could give a quick
and positive answer to the call of Mu'awiyah, since in the forthcoming
war all their animal instincts would be satisfied. They could kill
freely; they could seize as captive and slave anyone they wished; and
they could obtain much profit by plundering people's property. In that
case, why should they not obey Mu'awiyah's order, and carry out his
wishes? This was true especially as the people of ash-Sham were totally
ignorant of an Islamic education, and next to the emperor of Rome they
were ruled by a man like Mu'awiyah!

Naturally if on the basis of an impossible supposition the Imam could
give up his way of seeking right and truth, and, God forbid, if he
could, in the way of Mu'awiyah forget God and Islam, and if he could, in
the way of Mu'awiyah, give an absolutely free hand to his army, then all
the wicked and cunning plots and fraudulent conduct of Mu'awiyah would
have become null and void. But the Imam was not a man to adopt such a
way. He said to the people of Kufah: "I swear to God, I am aware of
everything that can reform you, but I see my own depravity in the bad
action of the wicked."183

Indeed the Imam could buy the people off with money. He could by means
of dissimulation and disregard of divine injunctions, win over the
powerful elders of the tribes. He was in a position to meet the wishes
of the people, and thereby organize a huge army, but he saw in all these
acts his own depravity and corruption of his own faith and his
hereafter. He never contaminated himself with such deeds since he had
tasted virtue and piety with all its depth and strength.

Mu'awiyah waged a war against the Imam in the name of 'Uthman and under
the pretext of avenging his blood. But had these remote Muslim
settlements throughout Iraq and Hejaz or even Yemen been guilty of
taking part in 'Uthman's assassination? Were tens of thousands of those
people guilty who had been killed by the ash-Shami plunderers in revenge
for the blood of 'Uthman who was one victim anyhow? Were the captive
Muslim women, and murdered small children guilty of shedding 'Uthman's
blood? No, never! But Mu'awiyah, in accordance with his father's will
and for the sake of satisfying his ambitions, was seeking domination as
a ruler. He wished to govern the whole wide realm of Islam, and he
regarded the employment of every possible means legitimate for the
attainment of his objective. He did not shun any wickedness and meanness
in this course. In fact the claim for avenging 'Uthman's blood was only
a cover to attain that goal. That was a small picture of Mu'awiyah's
evil role during Imam 'Ali's rule. 183. al-Ya'qubi 2/142.

**Mu'awiyah in the time of Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba**

I did not fight you for religion's sake but only to govern you.
Mu'awiyah When Imam 'Ali was martyred with the sword of Ibn Muljam, one
of the wickedest men of all ages and eras, and for the second time in
their history the Muslims chose a ruler for themselves through a free
allegiance and Imam al- Hasan al-Mujtaba succeeded his father as caliph,
he wrote a letter to Mu'awiyah asking for his allegiance; for, on the
one hand he was a rightful Imam, and on the other hand he was freely
elected as a ruler by the people with their open allegiance. But
Mu'awiyah, as we know him, would not submit to the right, and as he had
always been accustomed to reject the right and the truth, now he refused
to obey the Imam's demand, and proceeded towards Iraq with a large army
to fight the Imam.

Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba, too, left Kufah with his army to confront
that guardian of paganism and infidelity, and as a preliminary step he
dispatched his cousin, 'Ubayd Allah ibn al-'Abbas with twelve thousand
of the finest warriors of Iraq and Kufah, and let Qays ibn Sa'id ibn
'Ubadah, his loyal, valiant and devout companion, to accompany him.
'Ubayd Allah was ordered not to disregard the views of ibn Sa'id and to
benefit from them in all matters. The two armies camped facing each
other for several days during which some small clashes took place. But
Mu'awiyah preferred to resort to cunning rather than to the sword.
Therefore he pulled a trick which caused some disruption in the Imam's
army.

One night Mu'awiyah's envoy secretly visited 'Ubayd Allah, delivering
this message of Mu'awiyah: "al-Hasan has sent me a letter for peace. If
now, before it is too late, you obey us, you will gain high position and
command, but if you hesitate and come to us after the question of peace
is settled, you cannot obtain any position as others may do, and nothing
will be left for you but inferiority and obedience. If you come to us
now, you will be paid one million drachmas, half of which you will
receive now, and the other half on the entry of our army to Kufah."

'Ubayd Allah was caught in the webs of Mu'awiyah's trickery which was
so attractive. He thought: If the reasoning of Mu'awiyah is correct, now
that the Imam is seeking peace, I have only two alternatives: "Either I
obtain money, position and respect if I join Mu'awiyah or I may lose my
life and suffer the dangers of the war if I maintain this position and
show resistance. In that case, why should I lose my life or bear the
hardship of war?" In this way the materialistic attitude and inner
temptation of 'Ubayd Allah had their effect, and during the night he
fled to the Umayyad front with his family and a group of his army, and
left the main army without a commander.184 Another strategy which
Mu'awiyah adopted during those days was to send secret envoys to 'Amr
ibn-Harith, al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, al-Hajjar ibn Abjar and Shabath ibn
Rub'i. These men were influential chiefs of the tribes but they lacked
loyalty and personality and cherished rancor towards the Prophet's
household.

The spy of Mu'awiyah delivered the message of Mu'awiyah as follows: "If
you kill al-Hasan ibn 'Ali, you will receive one hundred thousand
drachmas in cash as well as the command of one of the armies of ash-Sham
and governorship of a city, and possess one of my daughters as reward!"
This secret plot was reported to Imam al-Hasan, and so thenceforth he
wore a chain mail under his garment, to be secure against the sudden
attacks of these unmanly creatures. He even went to prayer dressed in
the same manner without removing the chain mail. It was a proper idea
and precaution since on one occasion one of those self-sold men shot an
arrow at the Imam while he was in prayer, but as he had his chain mail
on, no injury was caused and he was saved from death.185

al-Ya'qubi writes: Mu'awiyah secretly sent a group amidst the army of
the Imam to propagate this idea among the soldiers that Gheyss
ibn-Sa'ed, too, who had taken the command of the army after 'Ubayd
Allah, had made a peace agreement with Mu'awiyah and had reached terms
with him. On the other hand he sent another group amidst Qays's army to
spread the rumor that Imam al- Hasan had made peace with Mu'awiyah. His
purpose was to disrupt the solidarity and discipline of both armies and
cause dispersion between all their units.

Another plot of Mu'awiyah was to send an official group to the Imam
consisting of al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amir and 'Abd
ar- Rahman ibn al-Hakam. They visited Imam al-Hasan in the city of
Madain, which was the headquarters of his military columns. They talked
for some time in the Imam's tent, and then emerged pretending to be glad
and satisfied and said loudly within the hearing of other people: "God
has preserved people's blood through the son of the Prophet and has
quelled riot and mischief by establishing peace."

When the soldiers heard this, they became full of anxiety especially as
a large number of the Imam's army consisted of the Khawarij (outsiders)
who thought of war only, and had joined the Imam only because he was
going to fight Mu'awiyah. They felt no special devotion and sanctity
towards the Imam, and did not unquestionably regard him as a leader. It
seemed that the soldiers allowed no doubt about the words of such men as
al-Mughayrah who, in addition to their own wickedness and black record,
represented a tyrannical and 184. Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani in Maqatil
at-Talibiyin 50-65, a brief accounts.

185. Bihar al-anwar 10/107 quoted from 'Ilal ash-Sharayi' of
as-Saduq.

mischievous man as Mu'awiyah. Thus they were roused to such a great
protest that they rushed to the commanders' tent and plundered
everything which was there.

The Imam aiming to deliver himself from un-Islamic rioters mounted a
horse and proceeded towards the center of the city of Madain and the
governor's building. In the darkness of Sabat, a place near Madain, a
villainous creature named Jarrah ibn Sanan al-Asadi who was of the
Khawarij, lay an ambush in order to make an attempt on the life of the
Imam and kill him. As the Imam was passing by, this man jumped and
rushed upon the Imam and delivered a severe blow with his dagger causing
a mortal injury. But the people, who were around, prevented the man from
making any more move, and killed him on the spot. As the Imam was badly
wounded, he was carried to the governor's palace in Madain and was
treated. He was very weak owing to the loss of much blood, and it took
him long time to recuperate. Meanwhile his army, which was left without
a commander and without a plan of action and also owing to their lack of
steadfastness, soon dispersed in various directions. 186

At-Tabari describes these events as follows: After the people showed
allegiance to the Imam, they accompanied him to fight against Mu'awiyah.
He departed Kufah towards Madain where he set up his camp. As he was
trying to mobilize an army there, a voice among the army declared:
"Listen! Qays ibn Sa'id is killed! Run away everybody!"

Much confusion followed and opportunist rioters plundered the Imam's
tent, and the even forcefully pulled out the carpet on the Imam sat and
pillaged it away.187 According to another narration they even seized the
anklet-rings of his slave-girls and plundered them.188 At-Tabari adds:
Not many days had passed since they had shown allegiance to the Imam
when they made an attempt on his life and wounded him severely.

Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, the well-known historian and a man of
letters, writes: Mu'awiyah sent an envoy to the Imam to ask for a truce
pact, and in his letter he promised to stick certain conditions, namely
that he would not molest anyone for their past actions, and also to
leave alone the supporters of the Imam, and lastly to speak well of the
Imam in future.

When owing to the cunning and unmanly plots of Mu'awiyah on the one
hand, and the perfidy of the Kufah people and their lack of devotion in
the way of right on the other hand, the truce was concluded, Mu'awiyah
entered as a powerful Umayyad statesman to the city of Kufah, the
capital of the Alawite caliphate, and delivered a public oration in
which he said: "I swear to God that I did not fight you because you pray
and observe fast 186. al-Ya'qubi 2/156.

187. at-Tabari 6/69.

188. Bihar al-anwar 10/116 quoted from Ibn Abi al-Hadid.

nor because you go on pilgrimage and pay tithes. These tasks are your
own duties. But my only purpose was to rule and govern you! God has
granted me my wish, whereas you are not pleased with it."189 Then he
added shamelessly: "Remember that I will trample upon what al- Hasan has
stipulated with me and I have concluded with him." 190

**Motives for peace**

Mu'awiyah would have taken me captive and them set me free, and this
would have been a mark of disgrace on the brow of the Banu Hashim until
the day of resurrection. Imam al-Hasan In the question of Imam
al-Hasan's peace, namely in his truce with Mu'awiyah, many significant
consequences can be observed which, similar to the uprising of Imam
al-Husayn, have been effective in the survival of the foundation of
religion and Islamic principles. For the sake of the brevity which we
have observed throughout the discussions of this book, we will deal only
with three reasons about the necessity of abandoning the combat, while a
survey of all the aspects and reasons requires an independent book which
is beyond the scope of this topic.

Here are the three reasons:

1-We have already seen how Mu'awiyah was able, by means of relying on
the bloody shirt of 'Uthman and his skillful scene-making, to accuse the
chaste and sacred person of Imam 'Ali of the assassination of 'Uthman,
and mobilize a large number of the people of ash-Sham under the pretext
of avenging the blood of the so-called innocent and martyred caliph, and
bring them to the field of battle at Siffin. His lies, cunning and plots
which formed the basis of all his acts, was enough to deceive the
simple-minded people of almost the whole of the Islamic realm, or at
least expose them to doubt and hesitation. Even the personality of such
a man as 'Ammar ibn Yasir who, was in those days regarded as the
embodiment of the rightfulness of the Alawite front, and was many a
times praised by the Prophet, had been unable to influence the people
fully owing to their credulity and Mu'awiyah's cunning and trickery.
Therefore another plan was required to bring Mu'awiyah out of his
deceptive shell and reveal his evil and wicked identity.

One of the main results of Imam al-Hasan's truce was the above point.
The oration of Mu'awiyah, quoted above, was a clear evidence of his
wicked

189. Maqatil at-Talibiyin 70, and Ibn Kathir 8/131, and Ibn Abi
al-Hadid 4/16.

190. Maqatil 69, and Ibn Abi al-Hadid 4/16.

thoughts and evil deeds. It showed that all the bloodshed's and
plunders carried out in the name of avenging 'Uthman's blood were in
fact for the sake of his ambition and desire to rule, and for his
material greed, and the story of claiming 'Uthman's blood was nothing
but a lie and a plot.

This went on, and as it was gradually proved, those people who ran away
from the justice and equality of the Alawite government and took refuge
in ash- Sham, now heartily desired justice and every day in some corner
or other they rose against the Umayyads under the leadership of a
descendant of 'Ali.191 In fact Mu'awiyah and his successors had during
their rule committed so many crimes and evil deeds that even slothful
and right-repelling people, too, began to feel that the Alawite
government with all its justice and equality had been the only
government, which could bring them true happiness.192 2-Another
important reason for the truce was the weakness of the people of Kufah
and their mental and practical dispersion. As we saw, this spirit was so
dominant among the men of the said army that a chaos reigned over an
army of several thousands at the smallest incident and destroyed all
order and discipline. Even the killing of the son of the Prophet and
Imam and leader of the people, was received as a very simple matter, and
if it had not been checked and had been carried out, all the plots of
the guardians of paganism would have been accomplished.

In view of the above point, it is quite clear that Mu'awiyah could, by
buying off some of the army commanders, as we saw in the incident of
arrow shooting, arrest of the Imam with the complicity of his own
soldiers and after gaining complete victory claim that as a great favour
he would grant pardon to the Imam and set him free. Thus this disgrace
would have always remained for the Imams of the Prophet's household and
for the leaders of human and Islamic societies, to be considered as the
freed captives of the symbols of infidelity and hypocrisy, and to be
indebted for their lives to the Umayyads who were the descendants of
their captive grandfathers who were freed by the Prophet on the capture
of Mecca.193

3-In the battle of Siffin, as we shall see, a large number of the
Prophet's companions accompanied Imam 'Ali whose number was said to be
more than two thousand, including seventy warriors of the battle of Badr
who were the oldest friends of the Prophet, and 700 or 800 of those who
had taken part in the ar-Ridwan allegiance whom God has p raised in the
Holy Qur'an, and about 191. Refer to Maqatil at-Talibiyin 51-117 printed
an-Najaf, and Maqalat al-Islamiyin 2/150-166 printed Egypt.

192. The repeated uprisings, which occurred under the Alawites, were a
proof to this fact.

193. Refer to the reasons given by Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba himself the
truce with Mu'awiyah, Bihar al-anwar 44/25-29, compare with al-Akhbar
at-tiwal 220-221.

194. al-Ya'qubi 2/164, and History of Ibn Khayyat 1/180.

1400 men of the Emigrants and Ansar.194

All these men had the honour of association with the Prophet, and were
present in the time of the descent of the Holy Qur'an, and had felt
authentic Islam in the person of the Prophet himself. Consequently they
were intimately familiar with the Holy Qur'an and the Prophet's
tradition. After-wards, too, they had for many years been associated
with Imam 'Ali who was an incarnation of Islam and parallel with the
Qur'an. All these conditions enabled the said group to be acquainted
with various aspects of Islam and propagate it properly whenever it was
necessary and possible.

But Mu'awiyah had only a few of the Emigrants and Ansar of polluted and
evil nature with him195 and with the aid of these wicked hirelings he
was able later on to prepare the scheme of a new perverted Islam in
harmony with his whim and fancies, since he had no liking for an
authentic Islam and cherished in his heart nothing but envy and rancor
towards it!

With the aid of Abu Hurayrah, Anas ibn Malik, al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah,
'Amr ibn al-'As, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar and especially 'A'ishah he
succeeded in creating a major resource for the fabrication of
traditions. Each of these wicked creatures was able during Mu'awiyah's
rule to contaminate some aspect of the beautiful visage of genuine
Islam. If it had not been for the persistent and devoted endeavors of
the Imams of the Prophet's household, the numerous traditions which were
quoted from Abu Hurayrah and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar about various matters,
might have transformed Islam altogether, and fulfilled the evil wishes
and desires of the guardians of paganism and infidelity.

The first step to confront with Mu'awiyah's scheme (being the transform
of genuine Islam) was the truce of Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba, since he
was thus able to save from certain death a number of true Muslims and
friends of the Prophet and of Imam 'Ali, since it was this same devoted
and steadfast group who were his true friends, and if he had persisted
in his combat, all of them would have been killed either in the war, or
at its conclusion they would have been annihilated by Mu'awiyah in the
name of avenging 'Uthman's blood. In that case Mu'awiyah could in all
tranquility of mind carry on his assault upon the heart of the truth of
Islam, without meeting the smallest obstacle and check in this course.

These points show that the only way of preserving true Islam from the
danger of alteration was a truce with Mu'awiyah, and this was the way
adopted by Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba and he went ahead with it. 194.
al-Ya'qubi 2/164, and History of Ibn Khayyat 1/180.


