Part Three : the Rule of Mu'awiyah and Allegiance For Yazid Cautious Treatment of Enemies
=========================================================================================

Mu'awiyah adopted the policy of compromise. Mu'awiyah managed by all
possible means to assume the position of the ruler of the Islamic realm.
With the martyrdom of Imam 'Ali and the truce of Imam al-Hasan
al-Mujtaba, all the major resistance against his influence and
domination were removed. But there existed another problem for him for
the solution of which he felt it necessary to carry out a new plan. The
whole of the Islamic realm was shaken by the savage onslaughts and
plunders of ash-Shami raiders who had been mobilized by his order, and
people's hearts were palpitat- ing with rancor and enmity since
Mu'awiyah had killed thousands of Muslims in Siffin to be followed by
other massacres in the name of avenging 'Uthman's blood, bereaving many
families, mourning for their fathers, brothers and sons. In these
conditions Mu'awiyah adopted a new policy which could be summed up in a
brief phrase, namely "lenient and cautious treatment even towards the
enemies." For, this danger was always present that the extensive Muslim
lands of Iraq and Hejaz might start a revolt and thus nullify all the
constant efforts of Mu'awiyah and the Umayyad party which had been made
for assuming the reign of affairs.

al-Ya'qubi, the great history writer, writes: In the year 41 of the
Hijrah, Mu'awiyah returned to ash-Sham and there he heard an unpleasant
news. A large unit of Roman army was proceeding towards the Islamic
lands, and a great danger threatened the government of Damascus. What
should he do in the face of this danger, in view of the difficulties
with which he was involved and the dangers, which threatened him from
within? He chose the simplest way Out of this difficulty by sending an
envoy as representative of the caliph of the Muslims to the emperor of
Rome offering one hundred thousand dinars of gold as a tribute to
persuade him to recall his army from the frontiers of Islamic lands.196
What a shame and disgrace!

A similar policy of caution and mildness formed the basis of
Mu'awiyah's method of dealing with internal affairs, by which means he
intended to reinforce the pillars of his newly- established
government.197 196. History of al-Ya'qubi 2/217, and "Wellhausen" "Arab
government" 86, Commentary from al- Buldan, at-Tabari, ad-Dinawari and
al-Mas'udi.

197. Ibn Kathir in al-Bidayah 7/131.

As for the story of 'Uthman's innocence, which had shaped the cover of
his early activities, it was sent down to oblivion after his assumption
of power, as if no such matter had ever existed in his life. Ibn 'Abd
Rabbih, the great Andalusian scholar, writes: After his assumption of
rule, Mu'awiyah came to Medina, and visited 'Uthman's house. 'Uthman's
daughter, named 'A'ishah, on seeing Mu'awiyah and remembering her
father's assassination began to weep and cried out: Alas for 'Uthman!',
hoping that in this way she might remind Mu'awiyah of his claim of
avenging her father's blood.

But against all the emotion and fervor, Mu'awiyah remained cool and
said: "O daughter of my brother! The people have entrusted us with the
rein of affairs, and we have given them asylum. On the one hand we have
concealed our rage under a cover of fortitude, and on the other hand
they have hidden their rancor under a veil of abjectness. Each person
has a sword with him and knows many friends and supporters. If we break
our promise and change our conduct, they, too, will face us in a
different manner. In such a case we would not know what our fate would
be, and whether the riot and disobedience of the people would end in our
favour, or in our loss. I think if our rule remains established and you
are treated as the caliph's cousin, it would be better than our losing
the government, in which case you would be regarded as an ordinary
woman."198

Crafty Arabs in the snare of Mu'awiyah I have bought from these people
their religion.

Mu'awiyah The second plan which Mu'awiyah adopted to reinforce the
foundation of his government, was to get hold of crafty men from every
corner of various cities, and buy them with money, rank and position or
any other way possible, and engage them in a work in favour of his own
rule. It was in accordance with this policy that Mu'awiyah tipped the
treasures of public fund into the pockets of chiefs of tribes and
dignitaries of cities to make them forget old rancours, and under a
change of heart, since he knew of the people's love of money and worldly
goods.

At-Tabari says: A number of tribal chiefs including Hattat ibn Yazid
Mujashi'i visited Mu'awiyah, who offered each of them one hundred
thousand dinars, whereas he gave Hattat only seven thousand dinars. When
these men left ash-Sham, each one declared the sum given to him by
Mu'awiyah. Hattat 198. al-'Iqd al-farid 3/126, printed Egypt 1331, and
Ibn Kathir 8/132 with a slight change of description, al-Bayan wa
at-tabyin 2/182.

was so vexed at being given a smaller sum that he returned from there
to Damascus and went straight to Mu'awiyah and said in reproach: "What
was your reason for offering me less than others? Why were you so
parsimonious to me?" Mu'awiyah said: "Yes, I bought their religion from
them, and that is why I gave them that sum. But I left you to yourself
because I know you are a true supporter of 'Uthman." The mean Hattat
retorted: "Buy my religion from me, too."199 So Mu'awiyah ordered to pay
him the remainder.200

Among those who fell into the golden snare of Mu'awiyah and worked for
the newly established Umayyad government, were al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah
and 'Amr ibn al-'As. Mu'awiyah appointed al-Mughayrah who was one of the
most notorious crafty Arabs, as governor of Kufah, and 'Amr ibn al-'As
as governor of Egypt. He agreed also to leave him the governorship of
that large and rich province for life and grant him the whole taxes of
it.

Meanwhile there was left another clever and crafty man who had escaped
the clutches of Mu'awiyah and showed no liking to him. He could be a
potential danger for the newly risen Umayyads, and thus Mu'awiyah could
not disregard him. This man was Ziyad who must be brought under
Mu'awiyah's banner by every possible means, to benefit from his cunning
and craftiness in the interest of his rule. Therefore, without bothering
about religion and its injunctions and without fearing the alteration of
divine verdicts, he tried to find a solution. In all aspects of his life
what were predominant were worldly matters, deceits and transient joys
of the world, and so in this course, too, no alternative remained for
him but worldly methods.

Ziyad ibn Abihi had been the son of a slave named 'Ubayd who had
married a notorious prostitute named Sumayyah. Thus from a family
viewpoint, Ziyad had no worth in the Arab society. His father was
regarded as a low creature according to the Arab custom and tradition.
He was a slave lacking Arab blood. Therefore he was scorned for having a
slave father and for his own non-Arab blood. This was naturally
intolerably painful for Ziyad who was gradually gaining a position for
himself, and he longed to be delivered from these fetters. Mu'awiyah was
aware of all these conditions. So he resorted to a plan from which there
was no escape for Ziyad. What he did was to place his finger on his
Achilles heel, and by proposing to call him his brother, he won his
agreement to submit to the Umayyad rule and abstain from disobedience.

On his own part, Ziyad realized that from the viewpoint of lineage in
being introduced as Mu'awiyah's brother, he was joining the most famous
and strongest Arab tribe, and his father was no longer a slave named
'Ubayd, but it was Abu Sufyan, chief of the Quraysh and father of his
brother Mu'awiyah.

Until yesterday he was regarded as an ordinary man of an ordinary
descent, but

199. Meaning: "I do not act according to a belief, either. I desire
money, and so you can treat me like the others."

200. at-Tabari 6/135 briefly, and Ibn al-Athir 3/201.

now he had become the brother of the caliph of the time.201 Al-Mas'udi
and Ibn al-Athir and other famous historians report this grafting of
Ziyad with the Umayyad house as follows: Sumayyah, Ziyad's mother, was a
slave-girl of al-Harath ibn Kaldah ath-Thaqafi, a well-known Arab
physician. This woman was one of the most notorious prostitutes who
lived in the town of at-Ta'if in the prostitutes' quarter where a red
flag was hoisted indicating the residence of such women. As she was a
slave of al-Harath, she had to hand over to him a part of her income as
was the pagan customs, and al-Harath wedded her to his Roman slave,
'Ubayd.

During pagan times Abu Sufyan visited at-Ta'if and stayed in the house
of a wine-seller named Abu Maryam as-Saluli, and told him of his lustful
desire, asking him to get a prostitute for him. Abu Maryam suggested
Sumayyah, and Abu Sufyan agreed.

Abu Maryam brought Sumayyah to Abu Sufyan and went out himself.
Sumayyah became pregnant, and Ziyad was born in the first year of the
Hijrah. Later on when Imam 'Ali became caliph, he appointed Ziyad as the
governor of the vast province of Fars owing to his efficiency in
governmental affairs, and his oratory and courage. Ziyad administered
that province efficiently and effectively. Mu'awiyah was greatly vexed
at this matter, and he had repeatedly written threatening or promising
letters to him in which he had even reminded him of his kinship with Abu
Sufyan. But so long as the Alawite rule lasted, Ziyad showed resistance
to Mu'awiyah and paid no attention to his threat or allurement.

But Imam 'Ali was martyred and Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba was compelled
by various painful factors to accept truce, as a result of which most of
the Islamic lands came under the control of Mu'awiyah, and the only
remaining part was Fars which was impenetrable under Ziyad and did not
submit to the Umayyad rule.

Consequently Mu'awiyah summoned al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah who had been
friendly with Ziyad in the past202 and said to him: "Ziyad is an
intelligent and powerful man. He is now the ruler of Fars and with his
great wealth he had closed the gate of his strong forts to our
influence. I do not feel immune at all

201. Blood, race or color value is of no account at all in a true
Islamic society. The only criterion for superiority is the possession of
knowledge, chastity and good deeds, and even this superiority is in
relation to God's attitude. But as after the decease of the Prophet, the
people continued to be removed from the ways of Islam, gradually such
pagan ideas flourished again in seemingly Islamic communities. Ziyad's
thought proceeded in the same direction, and eventually this anti-
Islamic attitude dragged him towards a hell of rebellion and sin, and to
the abyss of inhuman oppression.

202. Their friendship started on the day when Ziyad, following the wish
of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, did not explicitly testify to the adultery of
al-Mughayrah, and the caliph exempted al-Mughayrah from the punishment
of adultery, and punished the other three witnesses except Ziyad. Refer
to the chapter concerned about this subject in 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' Vol.
One.

since he may show allegiance to someone of the Prophet's household and
thus pave the way for fresh wars and difficulties for us." Then he
divulged his plan to al-Mughayrah for trapping Ziyad and sent him to
meet Ziyad. After learning of Mu'awiyah's cunning plot, al-Mughayrah
departed to visit his old friend. After these two met and sat down to
talk, al-Mughayrah said to Ziyad: "Conditions are now changed in the
world of Islam as compared with the past. The only man who can now
stretch his arm towards the position of caliphate, is al-Hasan ibn 'Ali,
but he has concluded a truce with Mu'awiyah. Before, any danger lifts
its head; you had better obtain a safe asylum for yourself."

Ziyad said: "Tell me your view. What do you think I should do?"
Al-Mughayrah said: "I think it would be wise if you join your lineage
with the Umayyad house, and create a kinship between yourself and
Mu'awiyah." Ziyad said: "Are your suggesting that I should place a
branch in a spot other than its original home?"

The conversation of these two friends ended here, but Ziyad did not
feel easy in his mind, thinking of Arab blood and the value, which the
Arabs attached to blood and racial nobility. One can imagine the intense
dilemma, which was stirred up in his heart and conscience by the words
of his friend, especially as the question of the loss of position as
well as life had been brought up. At last Ziyad felt vanquished and
decided to accept the proposal of al-Mughayrah. Consequently he left his
headquarters and proceeded towards Damascus. His long journey came to an
end and he arrived at the Umayyad capital. On his arrival, Juwayriyah,
Mu'awiyah's sister, by the order of her brother, sent for him and when
they met she bared her head in his presence (thus considering him a
member of the family), and said at once: "You are my brother. Therefore
there is no need for me to cover my head in your presence. I have heard
this fact from Abu Maryam Saluli."

The planned meeting of Juwayriyah with Ziyad left its effects on
Ziyad's mind and heart. Following this meeting Mu'awiyah ordered to form
a gathering in the Jami' mosque of Damascus which Ziyad should attend.
It was also arranged for witnesses to be present, one of whom was Abu
Maryam Saluli. Mu'awiyah turned to Abu Maryam and asked: "What is your
testimony." Abu Maryam rose and said: "I testify that in pagan times
when I was a wine- seller, one day Abu Sufyan came to at-Ta'if and asked
me to provide him with a prostitute. I told him I knew only of Sumayyah
the slave-girl of al-Harath ibn Kaldah. Abu Sufyan said: 'All right,
bring her though she is dirty and evil smelling!' "

Ziyad became angry on hearing these words and said: "Be quiet, Abu
Maryam! You have come here to testify, not to abuse!"

Abu Maryam said: "lam not pleased with acting as a witness, and I would
be glad if you exempt me from this task. I have only repeated what I
have seen and heard. Abu Sufyan got hold of Sumayyah's sleeve and took
her to a private room and shut the door. I sat outside, and soon after
Abu Sufyan came out, his forehead covered with sweat. I asked him how he
found the woman. He answered: 'I have not seen a woman like her,
though...' " Ziyad stood up and turning to the people, he said: "This
man has given his testimony. I know nothing of the truth or falsehood of
it, but what I know is that if 'Ubayd was my father, he was a good
father, and if he was my teacher and guardian and not my real father, he
was a good teacher. I am indebted to him. Of course witnesses are more
aware of the truth of the matter."

Yunus ibn 'Ubayd ath-Thaqafi, whose sister was the lady mistress of
Sumayyah, rose and said: "O Mu'awiyah! The verdict of the Prophet of God
is that the bond between a father and son is due to a legitimate
marriage, and the punishment for adultery is stoning. But despite such a
law you issue a verdict on the testimony of Abu Maryam about the
adultery of Abu Sufyan to make his illegitimate child related to him,
and instead of stoning, you make an offspring a legitimate child of
marriage, whereas such a verdict is quite contrary to the Book of God
and the Prophet's tradition!"

Mu'awiyah, realizing the danger of such an argument, contrary to his
usual policy, began to speak threateningly and said: "O Yunus! Shut your
mouth, otherwise I shall throw you up so high that it will take you
sometime to fall down!"203

Yunus said: "In that case, would I go towards anyone but God?" Then he
sat down and realizing the truth of Mu'awiyah's threat, he said: "Yes! I
beg God to forgive me." This incident caused much noise in the world of
Islam and filled Arab literature with sharp satires, one of which is a
poem composed by 'Abd ar- Rahman ibn-Hakam as follows:

"Say from me as a man of Yemen
To Mu'awiyah, the son of Harb,
Would you be angry if they say:
Your father is virtuous and chaste? 204
Your father has committed adultery?
I testify that your kinship with Ziyad
Is like the kinship of an elephant with a foal." 205
Ibn al-Athir, the well-known scholar and historian writes: The story of
203. This is an Arabic proverb, meaning: "I will smash you if you do not
keep quiet." 204. Meaning: "With Sumayyah. mother of Ziyad."

205. This story about Ziyad is given in al-Isti'ab, Ibn 'Asakir 5/409,
and Usd al-ghabah and al- Isabah on the life of Ziyad, and Muruj
adh-dhahab 2/54, and al-Ya'qubi 2/195, and Ibn Kathir 8/28, and Abu
al-Fida' 194, and Ibn al-Athir 3/l92 events of the year 44 AH, and
at-Tabari 3/259 briefly, and al-Aghani 17/51-73 briefly.

grafting Ziyad to Abu Sufyan was the first verdict issued openly
contrary to the sacred canon law of Islam. The holy Prophet has
declared: "An offspring is related to a legitimate and lawful bed, while
the punishment of an adulterer is stoning to death."206

**Heavy taxes**

Mu'awiyah ordered his governors to collect gold and silver for me.
Historians As we have already seen, Mu'awiyah bought the favour of
crafty men of his own time by every possible trick. He deceived some
with the offer of rank and position, others with money and property, and
a third group under the pretext of kinship, and joined them to the
Umayyad party who were guardians of paganism and infidelity. On the
other hand he persuaded to cooperation and friendship or at least to
silence such individuals as the chief of tribes and men of power and
even the enemies by means of moderation, cajolery, offers of wealth,
pretending toleration, and conniving at their hostilities. He tried in
every possible way to make them act in harmony with his government.

This sly and un-Islamic policy had, of course, been adopted since the
beginning of his rule. But when his power was established and
strengthened, he revealed his inner rancor and envy, and then showed his
true self from behind his calm appearance. This was followed by the
issue of a decree by the caliph for the collection of revenue from every
part of the wide Islamic land. Now gold and silver were no longer
divided among chiefs of tribes and powerful individuals.207

Mu'awiyah's greed knew no bounds, and every day he found a fresh excuse
to seize people's property. One day he ordered to confiscate the crown
properties of the Sasanid kings around Kufah. Then these domains were
placed among his personal property. The revenue from these lands
amounted to five million drachmas a year. Another day, a new decree
added Basra and the flourishing lands around it to his own possessions,
and 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr was appointed to execute his wishes.

A third decree of Mu'awiyah was related to another matter. From that
day onward the gifts, which were offered by Iranian subjects to their
kings on 206. We have briefly quoted this event in Volume One from Muruj
adh-dhahab on Mu'awiyah, and from Ibn al-Athir on the events of the year
44 of the Hijrah, and from Ansab al-ashraf. For a more detailed account
refer to Volume One of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' written by Murtada
'Askari.

207. In the account on al-Hakam ibn 'Amr al-Ghifari in Tabaqat al-kubra
7/28, and al-Isti'ab 1/117, and at-Tabari 6/141, and Ibn al-Athir 3/202,
and Siyar al-a'lam an-nubala' 2/340.

festival days of the New Year and Mehrgan, were to be delivered to the
caliph's organization. In this way Mu'awiyah had modelled himself on the
kings and emperors of pre-Islamic periods and pagan times. He had
completely fulfilled the will of his father, Abu Sufyan, who had told
him to change the caliphate into a monarchy. The worth of the gifts,
which the people of Iran and Iraq were to offer on those festival days,
amounted to millions of drachmas.208,209

The usurpation of the flourishing Islamic lands was not confined to
Kufah and Basra alone. Mu'awiyah also encroached on the domains of
Yemen, ash- Sham and Mesopotamia, and took possession of all the lands
which had formerly been fiefs and public domains. In this way most of
the wealth of the world of Islam was concentrated in the hands of the
Umayyad house, namely Mu'awiyah and his kith and kin. He was the first
man in the world of Islam to take possession of so much land. His
impudence reached such a point that he did not even spare the holy
cities of Mecca and Medina, and every year a large amount of date and
wheat were brought for him from these two cities.210 It was at this
time, too, that Fadak211 was given by Mu'awiyah as a fief to Marwan ibn
al-Hakam.212

With the establishment of the Umayyads' rule, the policy of Mu'awiyah
underwent a change. Hitherto he had treated his enemies with toleration,
a policy which he attributed to Abu Sufyan. But now that he had tamed
the unruly with money and rank, and had brought the cities and other
parts of the country under his complete control, he could reveal his old
hostility and rancor. So when he visited Medina and the Banu Hashim came
to him to speak of their affairs, he said to them: "What are you saying
and what your expectations are? Is it not enough for you that I respect
your blood even though you have shed 'Uthman's blood? By God, shedding
your blood is more legitimate than anyone else's!"

He continued to speak more sharply and rudely, as if he had forgotten
his own open and secret crimes, and had thrown into oblivion his own
negligence 208. al-Ya'qubi 2/218, published by Dar Bayrut.

209. Imagine the worth of millions of drachmas in those days!

210. al-Ya'qubi 2/234, published by Dar Bayrut.

211. Fadak was a large flourishing settlement, which was transferred to
the Prophet by the Jews.

Then he transferred its ownership to his daughter Fatimah. But this
property was seized from her during the caliphate of Abu Bakr and
remained in the possession of the caliphs until the rule of Mu'awiyah.

212. al-Ya'qubi 2/305, published by Dar Bayrut.

in the story of 'Uthman. He went so far in his onslaught, that Ibn
'Abbas, the spokesman of the ummah and pupil of Imam 'Ali, rose to
speak, and said: "O Mu'awiyah! What you said and what you attributed to
us show nothing but your inner maliciousness and wickedness. I swear to
God that you deserve those charges more than anyone else! It was you who
carried the guilt of 'Uthman's blood on your neck, and yet you pretend
that you are endeavoring to avenge 'Uthman's blood!"

He spoke so long that Mu'awiyah felt vanquished. Then the Ansar began
to speak, but Mu'awiyah answered them rudely and sharply, and in
reproaching them he said: "What has happened to your water-drawing
camels?" 213 The Ansar answered angrily: "We lost them on the day of the
Battle of Badr when we were engaged in killing your father, brother and
grandfather! To your face we are resolved to act upon what God and His
Prophet have commanded us." Mu'awiyah asked: "What are those commands?"
They said: "We have been advised to show patience and fortitude."
Mu'awiyah said: "Then keep on being patient!"214

Then Mu'awiyah returned from Medina to ash-Sham without meeting any of
their lawful demands.215 At this time Mu'awiyah ordered to carry the
Prophet's pulpit from Medina to ash-Sham, declaring that the Prophet's
pulpit and stick should not remain in Medina whose people are 'Uthman's
assassins. So his men went round in search of the Prophet's stick, while
another group removed the pulpit from its place. Historians say that
with the removal of the pulpit, there occurred the eclipse of the sun
and a great uproar rose from the people, so carrying it away was
abandoned. Some other historians say that the remaining friends of the
Prophet prevented its removal,216 and thus the plan of Mu'awiyah was not
carried Out.

In this period when Mu'awiyah had altered his policy and revealed his
true desires, the Shi'ah and friends of Imam 'Ali suffered discomfort
and pressure more than any other groups since Mu'awiyah had ordered the
governors of various cities to curse the Imam in speaking on their
pulpits. Consequently there were two alternatives left for the
supporters of the Imam to choose; either 213. He said this because the
Ansar possessed palm groves and used their camels for drawing water from
the wells for their groves instead of using them, like other Arab
tribes, for riding in war with others. The response of the Ansar to
Mu'awiyah was, therefore, a proper and smashing answer.

214. This remark was meant to be a sarcasm to them and to their belief
in the words of the Prophet.

215. al-Ya'qubi 2/223, published by Dar Bayrut.

216. Ibn al-Athir 3/199, and Muruj adh-dhahab 3/35 published by
Sa'adat.

to resort to combat and retaliation which would mean imprisonment,
torture, exile or even death, or keep silent and bear the whole of that
deep suffering. When al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah was departing as governor
of Kufah, Mu'awiyah said to him: "I intended to speak to you about
various matters, but I abstained from it since I trust your intelligence
and understanding. But I must mention one point, namely that I
commission you not to forget abusing 'Ali at all times, and not to
abandon begging God's grace and blessing for 'Uthman. In addition to
these two matters, remember to find fault at all moments with 'Ali's
friends, and treat them very harshly, while you must show favor to
supporters of 'Uthman and bring them close to yourself."

This evil order of Mu'awiyah produced many blood-spilling events in the
history of Islam, the examples of which you will read in the coming
chapters.


