Introduction
============

The younger generations possess pure hearts and spirits which are full
of sensations, emotions and enthusiasms. They are passing through the
most sensitive and critical period of their lives and require guidances,
supports and sympathies. A young person is like a nascent sapling
requiring the loving protection of sincere, experienced and wise
gardner, against the diseases and accidents. The famous persian poet
Sheikh Sa'di said:

A young man is like an arrow; rigid, hard and straight.

But it requires a flexible and bending bow (which is like a wise
oldman) for the arrow to bit the target.

The cultural maturity of a society, especially the Isalmic one, is
proportional to the importance to attaches towards the guidance,
training, and continuous endeavours towards its younger generations.
Notwithstanding, with the opinion of some people, in general training is
a very difficult task, especially the training of younger generations,
which is complicated and contains various delicate points. The famous
German philosopher Kant has defined the training of younger generation
and the government of a country as the most difficult tasks in the
world.

Unfortunately, in todays industrial societies parents, because of being
surrounded by numerous mental involvements do not have the opportunity
to think or ponder about the aim and days pass by speedily. Very often
the days pass into nights; new day begin; and weeks and months pass by
without parents finding suitable occasion to indulge into serious
communications with their off springs. Although, the problem of raising
resonsible, nature, conscientious, and righteous children is a serious
matter that all parents are worried about; but how to deal with the
younger generations and to establish a friendly, rational, and logical
communications with them is an art, and naturally all of us are not
skilled artists. So, the things remains within the chests of parents
awaiting for an appropriate opportunity, which very often never arises
or at least when it is already too late.

The author of the book: How to bridge? The Generations Gap, has
provided you this God-given opportunity, so keenly desired by all the
parents. The present book was first published in Persian in the year
1963, and deals with such important topics such as The Rights of
Rarents. The Child's Rights, The Responsbilities of Parents, The Teacher
Rights, The Role and Neccessity of Religious, Faith, and The Hidden
Treasures of the East etc. in a simple logical manner. there now,
instead of wishing for the right opportunity and the right time, the
parents may simply present book as a birth day gift to their children.

At this critical and sensitive juncture, when the enemies are
determined to destroy all spiritual values of dear Islam with the empty
materialistic ones; more then any other time in the past, there is a
need to build the ideal monotheistic younger generations who could
culturally and ideologically defend the fortress of Islam.

We, the Muslim parents have a duty to produce a generation who mus
believe that Allah is Great: Greater then all the power of which men
might be afraid of; Greater then any body who could dare to challenge
His created laws. They must appreciate that Allah is not only the God of
his race, his country and mankind; but also belongs to tiny creatures
such as bees and ants. He is the Creator of stars, sun, moon, heaven,
milky ways and other galaxies. This future generation should be free
from all sorts of prejudices, narrowmindedness. nationalism,
sectarianism, shortsightedness and should think about the domain of
Islam for beyond the narrow limited national boundaries. They must
consider themselves like a fish in the ocean of Towheed (Monotheism) as
pro-claimed by Allamah Iqbal Lahori, fifty years ago.

The success of the Islamic movement in the near future will depend if
we could bestow upon the young generations the enlightement regarding
the Principles, Beliefs, Monotheism, Day of judgement, prophethood,
Imamat, Will of Allah, Ethics, Purification of Self, Desirable
Characteristics. Forbidden Characteristics, and Social obligation etc.
They should be thoroughly familiar with the discouses of the Holy Qur'an
and narrations about Patience, Jihad, World and Hereafter.

They must be knowledgeable about the international political issues;
identify the friends and foes; be aware about the enemy onslaughts and
tactics and should know how to counteract them. We, the Muslim parents
are duty bound to make the younger generation familiar with all the key
issues facing the Islamic Ummah.

Simultenously, we must do our utmost to produce, the younger generation
who could orint their lives with the Holy Qur'an. They must feel the
sweetness of the following verses in their own lives.

"And put thy trust in Allah for, Allah is sufficient as
trustee."(33;3)

But Allah is your protection, and He is the best of Helpers."(3-150) If
Allah is your helper, none can overcome you, and if He withdraw His help
from you, who is there who can help you? In Allah let believers put
their trust (3:160) "Whosoever surrender his purpose to Allah, Â while
doing good, he verly has grasped the firm hand, unto Allah belongs the
sequel of All things."(31:22)

May Allah bless all the present, a
nd coming future Muslim generations to pay heed to the wisdom of the
following verses of The Holy Qur'an given by Loqman - the wise to his
son; "O my son!" (said luqman), If there be (but) the weight of a
mustard-seed and it were (biddnin a rock, or (anywhere) in the heavens
or on earth, God will bring is forth: for God understands the finest
mysteries, (and) is well-acquaited (with them)." (31;16)

"O my son! establish regular prayer, enjoin what is just, and forbid
what is wrong; and bear with patient constancy whate'er betide thee; for
this is firmness (of purpose) in (the conduct of) affairs." (31;17) "And
swell not they cheek (for pride) at men, nor walk in insolence through
the earth; for Allah loveth not any arrogant boaster." (31:17) In this
modern glittering age of science anf technology in the present 20th
century, together with the wordly education, if we could produce a
generation, who could feel the presence of Allah in their daily lives
then we as parents must thank Him for giving us the blessing of
discharging our obligations successfully.

Since completion of this translation coincides with the "Week of Eight
Years of Sacred Defence" in the Islamic Republic of Iran, it will be
be-fitting to dedicate theis translation to the martyrs of the imposed
war, who sacrified themselves so that the divine light of Allah's
revelations remain ignited forever. The history will bear withness the
heroic defence of the Islamic combatants who, with faith in Allah
resisted the deadly pressures of all the arrogant powers for eitght long
years.

To the extent it was possible, I have tried to remain faithful to the
original text but, at some places where word by word translation in
English was not possible, efforts have been made to reflect the theme of
main text by omitting some phrases and sentences. I wish to thank all
those who have contributed to the realization of this translation,
especially, Mr. Sayyid Mohammad Taqi Hakim for proof reading the Arabic
text. Sincere thanks are due to Mr. Soulat Parviz for his diligence and
quality work in type-setting. I convoy sinere gratitude to Ayatullah
Ibrahim Amini, the learned scholar jurisprudent from the Religious
Learning Center of Qom, and Mr, Ansaryan for their valuable suggestions,
guidance, and encouragement. Finally, from the bottom of my heart, I
would like to thank my friends for edithing, proof reading, and making
helpful suggestions; and who out of modesty prefer to remain discreetly
in the background.

Elucidatory footnotes added by the translator are indentified with
(Tr.): all other footnotes are by Mr. Hakim himself: For any errors of
commission, I take responsibility.


Sayyid Hussein Alande
r September 27, 1994
Rabi-attani 20, 1415
Tehran


