Biography
=========

of Hujjat al-Islam Wal-Muslimeen Sayyid Mohammad Taqi Hakim He was born
in the year 1926 in the famous ancient city of Shoostar, in Khozestan
Province, Southwestern Iran. Both his parents belonged to religious
scholarly families and therfore he spent his childhood years in a pure
spritual atmosphere. His great grand father was a famous learned
scholar; Allamah Sayyid Nematoallah Jazari. After finishing his primary
education, with encouragement of his father he started his religious
studies in 1950 at Shooshtar.

In his early theological studies at Shoostar he finished sarf-e-Mir
O~N~Y' a~i'O\` with Ayatullah Sayyid Mohammed Jaffar Marooj; Tasreef
E^O~N~i'Y' with Hujjat al-Islam Sayyid Mohammad Baqir Hakim, and Hadaya
a\*I"C,i'a\* under the able tutorship of Ayatullah Sayyid Mohammad Hasan
Aley Tayyib. After finishing his primary theological studies within a
period slightly more than two years, he was able to join the famous
Religious learning Center of Qum in the year 1942. He was resident at
famous Faiziyey School in Qum for five years. In his stay in Qum he
received higher theological education under the able guidance and
tutorship of eminent jurisprudence such as Hujjatul-Ialam Sayyid
Mohammad Kazim Aley Tayyed, Mustafa Amili, Sheikh Abul Qasim Nahvi,
Sheikh Abulfazal Qummi, Shikh Abul Qasim Ashtiyani, and Martyr Ayatullah
Sheikh Murtaza Motahari (r.a.). Having completed his higher education at
the Religious Learning Center at Qum, he went to the city of Ahqaz
Khuzestan Province in the year 1947. He stayed there for four years and
during this period continued higher theological education under eminent
sholars such as Aytullah Marza Jaffer Ansari and late Ayatullah Sayyid
Mohammad Taqi Aley Tayyeb.

In order to further pursue higher religious learning, he joined the
famous Religious Learning Center at Najaf in Iraq in the year 1950.
During his stay over there he completed higher religious currriculum
under the tutorship of eminent learned scholars such as Ayatullah Mirza
Hasan Yazdi, Ayatullah Sheikh Mohammad Taqi Iravani, Ayatullah sheikh
Mujtaba Lankarani, and Ayatullah Sayyid Abdul Ali Sabzavari. Also during
this perion he attended the lectures of Grand Aytullah Sayyid Mohsin
Hakim (r.a.) for Dars-e-Kharij 1 as well as participated n the lectures
of Grand Ayatullah Sayyid Abul Qasim Khoei (r.a.) for Dars-e-Kharij
(Usool)2 After completing the advance theological learning during one
year

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Dars-e-Kharij. The highest level of theological education relation
to jurisprudence, in the form of lectures, beyond the limited boundries
of text books.
2. Dars-e-Kharij (Usool) (Ibid).

and a half, he again returned to Ahwaz in 1951.

He continued his stay in Ahwaz for next 9 years, and during this period
taught Jurisprudence, principles of jurisprudence, and literature at the
religious learning centers. He came to Tehran in 1961 and accepted the
leadership "Imamate" of the Hisar-e- Bounali Mosque in Niavaran, and has
remained in this position till today.

During his stay in Tehran, apart from his responsibilities for managing
the Hisar-e- Bouali Mosque and relevant social affaires; he has written
numerous books and articles covering educational, theological, and
ethical matters. Also, he is a professor of Arabic at the University of
Tehran and at various religious learning centers (Howze-Ilmias) in
Shemiran. He has a good command of the Persian, Arabic languages and is
familiar with English. He has written numerous atticles which have been
published in the famous magazines of Iran namely; Payam-e-Inqilab,
Khanavadeh, Ayand-e-Sazan, Iman and Saf, He is a prominent scholar and
jurisprudent and have produced valuable literature covering religious,
social, ethical, and medicine etc. Some of his famous books may be
listed as follows: Sayings of Imam ibn Jaffar (as), The guide for Hajj
Rituals, Arabic-Grammar Guide, how to bridge? The Generation Gap, The
Philosophy and Mesteries of Hajj, The Sayings of Imam Ali (as), Foods
and Drinks, The Message of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.). The Qur'an from the
tongue of Qur'an, How to recite the Holy Qur'an, Hajj Guide in
accordance with the decrees of Grand Ayatullah Hakim (r.a)

He has also translated numerous literary works from Arabic to Persian.
His translations include: the rights of women in Islam, and the Limits
of Freedom and Rights of Women in Islam. He has recently completed a
book "The life of Qazi Nourirullah Shooshtari," (956-1019 AH) who is
famous as Third Martyr (shahid-e- Thalis) in the Islamic History, and
was martyred by the Moghal Emperor Jahangir, his tomb is located n the
city of Agra, Province of Uttar Pradesh in India.

**4. An Atmosphere for Conversation**

Spring has arrived and the universe is reborn. Trees once again done
their fresh, green apparel. The earth becomse green and pleasant and the
spring breeze is filled with heavenly fragrance. Birds are singing sweet
songs. Everywhere the air is filled with joy, Sadness turns to joy. No
one can tolerate saying indoors, so people, young and old, men and
women, take to the fields and meadows to enjoy the spring, this new gift
from God. All with their loved ones are gathered in small groups sitting
around throughout the green lawns and by floweres gardens. It is a new
atmosphere, Everyone has abandoned worries about anything. Every face is
wearing a smile. In short, people are moved, from with, with new
thoughts and aspirations. Some are lying down without caring about their
neatly pressed parments, Students taking advantage of the clean fresh
air, and busy studying. Families have com here to hold a family reunion.
The joy of this kind of gathering is so noticeable from every face.
Smiles and play are the order of the day. When tired of sitting and
visiting, they strenth their legs and take a short walk.

In one such family, there was a father busy visiting wityh his child.
They had put the problems of their daily lives out of their minds and
were deeply involved in a heart-to-heart conversation, in a totally free
atmosphere. The father had long been waiting for a opportunity to open
up his heart to express his feelings openly to his child. But the
pressures and difficulties fo daily life would not allow him to do so.
however, this was a perfect opportunity. So, he took advantage of it and
he fimally opened up. His child too, in return, did likewise in such a
warm, sincere atmosphere for a heart-to-heart conversation.

**5.Hospitality and Appreciation The Father:**

My child! If a person invites you to dinner in his home and treats you
with warmth and in a comfortable enviroment, undoubtedly you will thank
him. And if one takes you out for a meal, again, you will thank him. If
while on a trip, one accommodates you over night, you will never forget
his kindness. If someone invites for a lunch or dinner at his house, you
will always remember his favour. If one gives you a drink when you are
thirsty, I do not think you would not offer him your thanks.

If one gives you a pen or a book for a gift, every time you use it, you
will be thinking of him. If one helps you rest after you are tired, you
will express your thanks. If one helps you with your studies, you will
tell him thank you. If one gives you a helping hand, you will be obliged
to him. If one lets you use his automobile, he will receive you thanks,
as is the case when someone gives you a ride in his car or when one
offers you his seat on a bus. And finally, if one is only kind to you by
worlds and not by his deeds, there too, it is unrealistic to say you
will not say thanks.

My child! How is it then that for all these relatively small favours
you show your apprecaition, but to all the love, attention, care and
happiness and to all the material convenieces that you parents have
provided for you, you are so indifferent and are taking them for
granted?

The Child:

Oh, how great it is that you have awakened me. And how appropriately
you brought this to my attention! I really have been neglectful as to
all you love, copassion and hospitalities and have been taking them for
granted. I have done so, just as one who pays no attention to the
importance of the sum simply because it rises every day. Now I confess
that I am gratly indepted to you and owe you all my existence. I take
this opportunity to give all my thanks and appreciation to you and my
mother even though I shall never be able to compensate you enough.

**6. Mistakes and Apologies The Father:**

My child! When you realize you have done somebody wrong, or have
treated him in a rude manner or with harsh words, you would ask for
forgiveness. If you suspect you have been disrespectful to someone or
when bumping into him, you would say "excuse me, please" in an
apologetic tone.

In short, you do your best to please others and keep their respect and
be nice to them as soon as your realize you have offended them in the
slightest way. But how is it that you would not say even one word of
apology to your father and mother even though you are certain you have
disobeyed, belittled and been rude the them? And you to nbot try to
cherish those who reared and nourished you?

The Child:

I confess that I have been wrong. And now in the name of your child who
is guilty of disobedience from head to toe, I beg your forgiveness.

**7.The Most Sincere Caring The Father:**

My child! Whoever does anything good for you or does you a favour,
expects something in return. But your parents, who through their most
sincere servies and caring as well as their material means, have done
their best to reise you and guatantee you comfort while growing up, have
no expectation whatsoever for anything in return or to be compensated in
any way. Rather, they have done so for you simply because they love you.
My Child! Think and think hard. Try to see how your father and mother
are trying hard. to provide you with whatever you want and need.
Remember all their wishes directly or indiectly are aimed at your
interest and welfare. And when you become what you wish to be, and when
your dreams are fulfilled, they will be most happy for you. And they
take it as if thet gave received the answer to their prayers.

My child! Don't you ever believe there is anyone on earth who will love
you, or will care for you or will stand by you in the time of grief or
will come to your secure, more than your father and mother do. Your
Parents want your happiness regardless of anything in return. They just
love you.

The Child:

The harder I took, the more I realise there is no one more worthy of
respect than you, my loving parents. I know of no one kinder than you.
My heart tells me your kindness toward me matches that of none. I
believe it is quite natural you care for me. That is because of such
caring, that you do your utmost in making me happy. I wonder how much I
my self will be able to do for myself.

**8. The Unmatchable Love The Father**

My child! It seems that you have forgotten everything. You think you
were born that big! You are ignoring the different stages in your life.
And how gradually you have grown through them! Think of your childhood,
and the many exhausting troubles your parents were through for your
sake. Think of when you were in your mother's womb1 and she carried your
weight and of how she had to suffer morning sickness and many other
complications related to different stages of pregrenancy untill you were
born. That was just the begining. The beginning of a series of new
inconviences for her as well as for your father. Your mother would nurse
you, quiet you when you were crying, she would wash you, change you and
keep your clothes clean. During the night, she had to stay up in order
to feed you and to lullaby you to sleep. Many time, she would beg
others

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. The Holy Qur'an describes this theme as follows: (Tr) "And We have
commended unto man kindness towards parents. His mother bearth him woth
pain, and bringth him forth with pain, and bringeth him forth with pain,
and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months, till,
when he attaineth full strenth and reachth forty years. He saith: My
Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for the favour wherewith Thou
hast favoured me and my parents, and that I may do right acceptable unto
Thee. And be gracious unto me in the matter of my seed. Lo! I have
turned unto Thee repentant, and lo! I am of those who surrender (unto
Thee)."-(46-15)

to be quiet so you could go to sleep. When you were healthy, they would
worry that you wouldn't get sick. And when you were ill, they would do
their best to seek medical assistance untill you recovered your health
again. In either situation, they would alter their life style to meet
yours. When you became of age you needed, even if they would do that
with pleasure and satisfavtion of being able to provide your food. And
when you become a little older and were able to play with toys, They
purchased for you toys and games.

My Child! As you grew older, they sent you to kindergarten, primary
school, high school, college, and university. They paid for all your
school needs to the best of their ability. They assigned a special room
for your study. Around your examination time, they worry abut your test
results. And whenever you receive passing grades, it would make them the
happiest parents under the sun. My child! When you are happy, they are
happy and when you are sad, they are sad too. Whatever troubles your
body amd soul, or comforts it, would bother or comfort theirs.

My dear child! In the family setting, your father and mother would
rather for you to be the one to have the best food, clothing, and
accommodations. They would spare you from any unpreventable inconvience.
Even if they were not concerned about their own future, They certainly
cared about yours. They worked hard to send you on a vacation so you
would not get tired and bored. In the summer time, they would work in
the hot climate but would send you to a cool place. My child! When you
were at home, looking at you brought joy to their hearts. And when you
were away on a trip, you were constantly on their minds. How could they
forget about you? You are in their hearts. Whoever is in one's heart is
on one's mind.

My child! If you were a few minutes late in coming home from school,
they would worry about you. The same way if you were late coming home
after going to see a friend. Think again, and think hard. Do you have
anyone else in this world who would be so much concerned about you? My
beloved! You are the apple of you parent's eyes, the joy of their lives
and the source of their pride. Without you, the home is such a dull
place. When your parents are out, their thought are with you, and upon
returning home, they step in the house with anticipation of the joy of
seeing you here. My child! After your educational goal is reached and
you are ready to fo to work, they will use all their night and means to
help you find your desired kind of employment, so you would serve your
society in the best possible capacity. And now that you are putting your
education to work and starting to reap it's intellectual and material
fruits, your parents have nor the least expectaition to share it's
benefit with you. Instead, they are happy for your good fortune. My
child! when you are ready for marriage, your parents, with their
blessings and happiness, will assist you in preparing for and make
happen this jouous event of your life.

My child! By the time you enter the society and occupy you place in
accordance with what you contribute to it, you have gone through many
life situations and in short, you have come a long way. My beloved
child! Take a good look at your past. Review and analyze every event.
See who had faithfully and sincerely stayed by you and helped you.

Were they any other than your father and your mother? Yes? It was only
they. It was only they who help you with your problems; got rid of
obstacles from your path and help you fulfill you dreams and accomplish
your goals. It was they who put up with all sorts of hardships and
hazards! Words cannot express the degree and extent of all such
inconveniences. Is there anyone who can do so? Only Allah knows all your
father and mother had suffered for your sake!

The Child:

I shall never forget all your endeavours that you, my father and
mother, have done for my success, and in my upbringing. Also, I shall
never be able to tell you how important you have been in my life. Or to
mention the depth of your love for me. However, I look forward to
finding an opportunity to express my appreciation both in words and in
deeds, indeed.

**9. A Gift of Allah The Father:**

My child! Keep in mind that children are gifts of Allah. Do not
belittle this fact. Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) once said: "A rightous child
is a flower from flowers of heaven".

- The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197.

He also said:

"Of the signs of prosperity, the righteous child is one."

- The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197. And Imam Zain al-Abidin (as)
is quoted as saying:

"One of the signs of a man's prosperity is having children from whom he
gets helps."

- The book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197 Imam al-Sadiq (as)1 said: Once
there was a man who said, he did not wish to have any children untill he
went to Mecca. There at Arafat, he came across a young man with tears in
his eyes who was praying to Allah for his father. Seeing that situation,
persuaded me to have chidren.

- The Book Wafi, Part 12, pages 196-197.

The Child:

Yes, a child is a gift, and man has been assigned obligations for this
gift as Imam al-Sadiq (as) once said:

"Sons are gift and daughters are righteous deeds. Allah holds one
responsible for a gift but be rewards one for righteous deeds."

- The Book Wafi, part 12, pages 196-197.

Therefore, the father are responsible for their children and they
should be careful how they treat and rear them.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1. The sixth Imam, Ja'far, known as al-Sadiq
(as) (83/699-148/765). The son of the fifth Imam, he lived in an
increassingly favourable climate and was able to teach openly in Medina.
Large numbers of scholars gathered around him to learn, including such
famous Sunni figures as Abu Hanifah, the founder of the one of the four
Sunni schools of law.
Towards the end of Imam Ja'far's life severe restrictions were placed
upon his activities, as a result of growing shi'ite unrest. More
traditions are recorded from him than from all the other Imams together.
He is so important for twelve-Imam Shi'ite law that it is named the
"Ja'fari School" after him. He is buried in the Baqi, cemetery in
Medina.
Ja'far's fame for religoius leaning was great, greater than that of his
father or of any other Twelver Imam except for Ali b. Abi Talib (as)
himself. Perhaps the earlist historical reference presenting Ja'far as
one of the nost respected and highly esteemed personalities of his
epoch, and as having profound knowledge and learning, is Ya'qubi's
statement that it was customary for scholars who related anything from
him to say: "The Learned One informed us."
Even the famous jurist of Medina, the Imam Malik b. anas, is reported
to have said, when quoting Ja'far's traditions: "The Thiqa (truthful)
Ja'far b. Muhammad himself told me that ..." Similar compliments for
Ja'far are attributed to the Imam Abu Hanifa, who is also reported to
have been his pupil. Al-Sadiq's (as). knowledge was great in religion
and culture, he was fully informed in philosophy, he attained great
piety in the world, and he abstained entirely from lusts. He lived in
Medina long enough to greatly profit the sect that followed him, and to
give his friends the advantage of the hidden science.


