Testimonies of Non-muslims About Islam
======================================

My child! Now we have to see which religion had all the above
characteristics. A study of different religious faiths indicate that
Islam1 is such a religion, because it is a collection of laws that
ensure the prosperity of its followers. The Islamic religion commands to
perform good deeds and to avoid bad ones. The Islamic religion calls for
gentleness, fortitude, patience, steadfastness, resistance, truggle and
sacrifice

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Here it will be appropriate to refer to definations of Islam as
defined by Imam Ali (as) as follows:

"Praise be Allah who revealed Divine Laws through Islam. For its
followers He made its code easy to undertand and gave its principles a
position so exalted and so noble the their eminence overcomes all
contentions and objection. He destined Islam to be a harbinger of
eternal peace and haven of unfailing security for those who enter its
fold. Its doctrines provide logical and well founded arguments for those
who what to defend truth and justice. Its precepts contain the
best-proction for pirty and virtue."

"It is a heavenly beacon unto seekers for light, and a great source of
enlightenment for inetllectual persons. Who pay due attention to it will
find geat wisdom in its teachings, and its careful examination will
prove it to be a very bright manifestation of the goodness of virtue.
Islam furnishes most educative patterns and instances to those who want
to discern between right and wrong and who are willing to accept its
timely admonitions of the consequences of evil and falsehood, It brings
salvation to tis testifiers, great moral strength to its believers,
perpetual peace and comfort to its faithfuol followers, and considerable
power of resistence against sin and vice to those patiently beat
suffering in life."

- Nahjul-Balagha Sermon No.109

"You must be thankful to Allah that He made you a Muslim and selected
you ro represent and propagete Islam. As its name indicates it is a
religion which brings peace and salvation to mankind. He has bestowed
universality of truth through its simple, distinct and intelligible code
as well as, through the deeper and far reaching significance and
inferences hidden in its orders and interdictions. The wonders that
Islam can achieve in improving human mind and miracles it can work to
raise the standard of human life, will never come to an end.

Islam holds secrets of real peace and prosperity which you will never
acquire but through its help; it can direct you to ways of improving
your knowledge (about material as well as spiritual world), and you can
never attain this but through its guidance. The Merciful God had ordered
you to faithfully accept its principles and to sincerely and diligently
obey its commands and interdictions. It brings salvation to those who
follow it, and worldly protection to those who enter it's folds."

- Nahjul-Balagha Sermon No.156

"Have you fully realized what Islam is? It is a religion founded on
truth. It is such a fountain-head of lerning that from it flow out
several streams of wisdom and knowledge. It is such a lamp that from it
several lamps will be lighted. It is a tall beacon lightig the path to
Allah. It is a set of principles and beliefs which will satisfy every
seeker of truth and reality.

Know you all that Allah has made Islam the most sublime path rowards
His supreme pleasure and the highest standard of His worship and
obedience. He has favoured ti with noble precpts, exalted principles,
undoubtable arguments, unchallengeable supremacy and undeniable wisdom.
It is up to you to maintain the eminence and dignity granted to it by
the Lord, to follow it sincerely, to do justice to its articles of faith
and belief, to implictly obey its tenets and orders, and to give the
proper place in your lives."

- Nahjul-Balagha Sermon No. 203

in the way of a holy cause, fainess, mercifulness, generosity,
chastity, mosesty, justice, honesty, truthfulness, equality,
brotherhood, know-now and performance, glory, endeavour, earning a
living, an cleanliness. And it warns against inactivity, laziness,
idleness, begging, treason, telling lies, arrogance, selfishness,
injustices and violating the rights others.

Count Henry Decasterie, the French scientist, in the book Islam and
Thoughts, writes: "Islam had occupied an extensive area of the world
because of its grand and simple instructions. It was the sound and firm
Islamic Laws that persuaded and uncivilized, fantical idol worshippers
to accept the faith of Islam and to fly its flag not only on the roof
tops of their houses but also throughout their country as well as major
countries of the world."

- Hygiene in Islam

Lothron Stodard, the famous American scientist and historian says:

"For the greatness of Islam it is enough to say that despite all
obstacles, it still manifests its truths and excellence in the world. It
does so, because Islam is a simple and prudent religion."

- Hygien in Islam Wells, the famous English historian in the book
General History writes:

"Islam is a social order, and a civil law for the humanity. It appeared
in the Dark Ages and has struggled against any kind of tyranny, treason,
crime, and injustice with its holy instructions."

- Hygiene in Islam Dr. Gustave Lebon, the French historian, in the
book, The Islamic culture and the Arabs, writes:

"The simlplicity and clarity of the principles of Islamic beliefs and
its beneficient way of dealing with masses, which is minted on the coin
of the Islamic faith, is the reason for its conquering of the globe."

- Hygiene in Islam Sir Quwlliam an English in a book in Islam,
writes:

"Islam like a fast horse has taken big steps in the path of human
progress and civilization. It has rapidly come a long and difficult way
and has entered the land of truth. Its noble commandments teach lessons
in morality, sociability and conduct in a beautiful way."

- Hygiene in Islam Prince Boorguise in the book New Italy, writes:

"The greatness of Islam is apparent from the fact that the Islamic
civilization began with the start of Islam and the appointment of its
prophet (p.b.u.h.) whereas the European civilization became apparent six
hundred years after Christ and christianity."

- Hygiene in Islam The English Lady, L.E. Cbbold, in the book, Toward
God writes:

"Islam in all senses is a great and flawless social law; because its
principles are on the fundamental of civilization, progress, intellect
and reason, it shall never die."

- Hygiene in Islam Conte de Gobineau in the book, Three Years in Asia,
says:

"Islam has brought a chaste, immaculate and flawless religion for
humanity."

- Hygiene in Islam Emile der Menghem writes:

"Islam, like a loud call, moved the hearts and its awakened the East
and the West from impiety and ignorance. It had such an impact on hearts
that throughout ages, the human history does not remember such a
spiritual revolution and a social movement"

- Hygiene in Islam Bernard Shaw, the famous writer in his book getting
Married, writes:

"I have always looked at Mohammed's religion with extreme respect
because it has wonderful energy and freshness. In my opinion, it is the
only religion that can adjust itself to different stages of a free life.
It's instructions are compatable with time.

- Hygiene in Islam

**20.5 Islam and Productivity:**

My child! Islam has form and valuable instructions on productivity. I
will twll you of one such instruction so you would become aware of how
its leaders have advised people to strengthen their financial mean and
to increase their wealth through productive activities.

Imam al-Sadiq (a. s) says: "Agricultural is the greatest Alchemy" -
Foru'e Kafi Fith Ed. p, 261 Everyone is in search of "Alchemy", hoping
it will make their dreams in getting all they want in life come true.
Here, our sixth Imam is saying that the best Alchemy is Agriculture.
Whoever wants to meet all his needs must pursue them in this way. Take a
good look and see how beautifully he is expressing a noble idea in such
a simple phrase. What a rich and meaningful statement. One cannot but to
admire its clarity. I believe on order to better introduce Islam, Its
leaders and its wealth of knowledge, this sort of maxims should be
written in large letters and in a calligraphic manner and be placed in
all agricultural colleges and learning centers.

**20.6 The Hidden Treasures in the East:**

My child! Our religious leaders through interpretation of the Holy
Qur'an, as a duty, have explained to us all the good and the evil. Their
instructions are concerned with our individual as well as social welfare
and happiness in both this world and the world to come. Their word,
without any shortcoming, is a completeguide for a happy, free from
anxiety, and a prosperous individual and social life.

But unfortunately, we have not pondered into them deeply enough. In
many literary sources of the East and the West, I have come across the
fact, that more than a thousand years ago, our Holy Book and religious
leaders have been the pioneers in revealing valuable sublime realities
about life. They have excelled in doing so, at a time when there were no
scientific or interllectual thoughts available.

Think about it and see the guidelines and instructions our religious
lerders have given us on morality, hygiene, psychological, scientific,
social and political issues. And see how recently we have been getting
similar instuctions as new and modern Ideas from the Western countries!
At this time I would like to present you some guidalines and laws of
others and in order to prove their truth would quote some Islamic
religious commandments what I call, the hidden treasures (of knowledge)
in the East as follows:

1. In the advanced countries, now they have found out that you cannot
put a man's body and soul through too much work. And that the maximun
length of work as well as minimum length of rest period should be eight
hours. This idea is now a universal law, whereas this same thing was
said by Imam Ali (as) more than thirteen hundred years ago. In the
Nahjul-Balagha, his unique book of wisdom, he says:

a'" "A believer divides his day into three parts. He spends one for
worshipping Allah, another for making a living, and another for resting
and for ligitimate pleasurable activities."

- Nahjul-Balagha, p. 545

Of course, by worshipping Allah, we do not mean that one should spend
all his time only in prayers, rather to become engaged in activities
which pleases Him, such as serving people and charity of public
interest. The Holy Prophet (p.n.u.h) said: "One who endeavours the most
in goodwill toward people on earth, shall have the highest rank with
Allah in the day of Judgement."

- Wafi, Third part, p.99 "The Prophet of Allah once was asked who is
the most beloved person in the eyes of Allah. He relied: "'The one who
benefits people most."

- Usul Kafi, Second Volume, pp.163-164 The Prophet (p.b.u.h) of Islam
also said:

"He who spends a say without making any efforts in the affairs of
Muslims, is not a Muslim himself." - Usul Kafi, Second Volume, pp.
163-164 The Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) also said: "The best worshipper of
all is the one who is the most truthful and the most benevolent to and
the most found of the Muslims." - Usul Kafi, second volume
pp:163 -164.

Thus, if a person in addition to the prescribed obligations such as the
daily preyers, engages himself in such actions as assisting, encouraging
others by soft words, visiting the sick and ridding someone of his
problems, he has done acts of worship. If every Muslim follows these
instructions, by spending several hours a day in the affairs of public
interest would not then the Islamic countries be the best countries and
the Muslims people be the most tranquil people of the world?

II Dale Carnegie under the heading of Don't hurt of ungratefulness
writes: "The owner of a national corporation gave ten thousand dollers
as a Christimas bonus to thirty four employees. None of them thanked him
for it. And he was complaining about it."

- How to Live,k p. 138 Imam Ali (a.s) discussing this same topic
said:

"Do not get discouraged when you do someone a favour but he does not
appreciate you for it."

- Nahjul-Balagha III. Homer Croy has entitled one of his articles:

"After any hardship there is a relief."

- How to Live. p.271 First of all, the Holy Quran under this subject
matter says:

"Even with difficulty, there will be relief."

- The Holy Qur'an 94;5 Secondly, still in this matter Imam Ali (as)
says:

"When hardship comes to an end, relief comes about, and when the rings
of difficulty become too tight, there comes comfort." - Nahjul Balagha.
p. 536

IV. Dale Carnegre on page 95 of the book how to Live, under the topic
of "Take with calm has no cure" concludes: "Get along and cooperate with
what is incurable." He also quotes Shopenhauer as saying:

"Submitting to the incurable events is the most important provision for
a journey through life."

Now, let us examine the sayings of our own religious leaders, which are
full of wisdom and are based upon faith on Allah, regarding the topics
earlier disdcussed. Imam Sadiq (as) says:

"About the events, the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) never woud say I wish
they would have happened in a diffrent manner." - Usul Kafi, Second
Volume p. 63.

He also asks:

"How could could one know that he is a believer? "Through submission to
Allah, and being satisfied with whatever joy or anxiety that comes his
way." - Usul Kafi, second volumes p. 63

V. Dale Carnegie in the book How to live on page 130, concludes:

"Never attempt to take revenge because you will hurt yourself more then
others."

With paying a little attention, you will find this same conclusion in
what our own religious leaders have said. On this subject, the Holy
Prophet (p.h.u.b.) says:

"Shall I advise you of the best disposition in this world and the world
to come? To the one who rejects you, attach yourself. To the one who
deprives you, give. And to the one who treats you with injustices, offer
forgivesness."

- Usul Kafi, second volume, p.107

Also Imam Ali (as) has spoken eloquently about this matter as
follows:

"In being thankful for coming out victorious forgive your enemy after
you have defeated him."

- Nahjul Balagha, p.470.

My dear child! These were just a few samples of the many brilliant
topics on our faith and religious beliefs that explained to you. I hope
you have found them interesting. You can take it from here to see that
everty single Islamic commandment is just as acceptable s these, as one
can find no faults with them. Religion is an important topic and the
discussions about it are extensive. There have been numerous books
written on it. But for the sake of brevity, and in order to make you
tired, I will stop at this point. I will never wish to impose upon you
my opinion or to force you into accepting a certain belief without any
logical reasioning.

As much as I thought it might be advisable, very briefly, I offered my
guidance. That, I feel is enough for you. The rest, I shall leave up to
you. Allah has granted man intellectual power by which he may
distinguish the Good from the evil, and accordingly may select the best
course for himself. I whole heartedly accept and faithfully believe in
the matters I have just discussed with you. You can think them over and
if your intellects permits you may accept and believe in them, as well
as other Islamic instructions and obligations regarding prayers, social,
and ethical issues.

The Child:

Your explanations about religion have enlightened me and have created
an optimism in me. Now I am looking at religion with respect. What I
have learned from you, has made one realize that what I thought to be
ambiguities in religion in fact are not. Rather, I had not understood
them correctly. Through asking qauestions and research, we must
eliminate any such uncertainties. At last, I understand that Islam can
be a world wide religion. It can manage the affairs of people. And it
can establish discipline and universal peace. And finally it can provide
eternal happiness for mankind.


My child! My purpose of speaking about the religious issues was for you
to become familiar with a sample of the beliefs of you father and
mother, and to become certain that it is not without reasons that they
are fond of religion. Even, if these discussions did not convince you,
and if you still are of your old opinion about them, and should think
your parents are old fashioned and supersticious, this rights, to be
rude to them or to treat them disrespectfully. As the rights of your
parents are natural and intellectual and in any case they are
inviolabel. e Have you not ever heard of a Christian youth by the name
of Zakariya who became Muslim and who went to Medina to Imam al-Sadiq
(as) and said to him:

"I was a Chirstian, now I have become Muslim. My father, mother and
entire family are Chirstians also my mother is blind. Do you see it
advisable for me to stay with them?"

The Imam Said:

"Certainly, be good to your mother and pay attention to her."

- Usual Kafi, New edition, 2nd Volume, p. 16 The youth, upon the return
to his home town of kufa, started to render his services to his mother.
And more than ever before, he treated her with kindness. So much so the
it surprised his mother. She inquired about the reason of his extreme
kindness after becoming Muslim. He told her of the Imam's advice. She
was impressed and consequently, she too accepted Islam.

The Child:

Of course the matter of religious beliefs has nothing to do with the
rights of parents. They exist whether the child is in agreement with
parent's principles and beliefs or not.


