The Rights of Fathers and Mothers the Father
============================================

My child! Even if the Holy Qur'an and the religious leaders had not
advised you on how to treat your father and mother, your intelligence
would command you to honour them. And as far as human nature is
concerned, treating them wityh due respect is a must. There are many
verse in the Holy Qur'an, as well as many statements concerning the
topic. The Almighty, in the Holy Qur'an says:

"And your Lord has decreed that you shall not worship except Him and
honour your parents. For as long as they live, one of them or both of
them, you shall not speak harshly to them or mistreat them; you shall
speak to them amicably. And lower for them the wings of humility and
kindness and say: My Lord, have mercy on them for they brought me up
from infancy.

- The Holy Qur'an 17: 23-24 The Almighty Allah in another place in the
Holy Qur'an says:

"We enjoined the human being to honour his parents; his mother bore him
as he got heavier and heavier and cared for him for two years until
weaning. You shall be appreciative to Me and to your parents. To me is
(thy final) goal."

- The Holy Qur'an 31:14 The Holy Prophet (p.b. u.h.) in answer to a
person who had asked what right has father to his child, said:

"The child should not call him by his name. Neither should he walk in
front of him: nor be seated before he is seated and he should use no
evil words, to anyone, except after one has used evil words against his
father."

- Usul al-Kafi, New Edition, vol.II pp. 159-161 A foster sister of
Prophet once went to his visit. The Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) treated her
with utmost love and reapect. After she had left, her brother went to
his visit. But he did not receive as much attention from him. People
present at both meetings, asked athe reson. The Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h)
explained:

"The reason is that she had treated parents with more respect and
kindness than he had."

- Usul al-Kafi, New Edition, vol II.159-161 Our Fourth Imam, Imam
Sajjad (as) says:

"You are indebted to your mother for she carried you in a manner that
no one else did. She fed you the essence of her life whereas no other
person did. she fed no other person such food.

She used her entire being for the purpose of protecting you. Whereas,
she would not care about herself being hungary or thirsty, she fed you
and quenched your thirst. She dressed you well when she had no cover for
herself. If she were in the sun, she would put you in the shade. She
deprived herself of a peacful sleep for you sake, She proctected you
from heat and cold. She did all these so you would stay alive for her.
Oh human, without Allah's help. you shall never be able to thank her
enough! And you are indebted to your father for that he is your roots.
If he were not, you would be not give him credit for all good fortunes
you may have, because he is the one, who is the basis for them. Be
grateful and appreciative to him. And there is no power except by
Allah."

- Wafi, 3rd part, 0.127 Â Imam al-Rida (as)1 quotes the Holy Qur'an
where Allah say:

"Oh human give thanks unto me and unto your father and mother."

- Oyoon Akhbar al-Rida, p. 143 Therefore, he who does not appreciate
his parents, he does not appreciate Allah. Again Imam al-Rida (as)
says:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. The Eighth Imam, Ali, known as al-Rida (as) (148-203/817). The son
of the seventh Imam, he lived in a period when the Abbasids were faced
with increasing difficulties because of Shi'ite revolts. Finally the
caliph al-Ma'mun thought he would solve the problem by naming the Imam
as his own successor, hoping thus to ensnare him in worldly affairs and
turn the devotion of his followers ways from him. After finally being
able to persuade al-Rida (as) tp accept, al-Ma'mun realized his mistake,
for Shi'ism began to spread even more rapidly. Finally he is said to
have had the Imam poisoned. Al-Rida (as) is buried in Mashhad in Iran.

"He who does not express his appreciaton for a gift, given to him by
someone, has not indeed thanked Allah."

- Oyoon Akhbar al-Rida, p. 194 The Child:

Of course, the wisdom advises one to honour one's father and mother.
And Holy Qur'an as well as our religious leaders confirm such as
advise.

**23. The Chid's Rights The Father:**

My child! In order not to judge in a one sided manner, I should tell
you that as any child is obligated to his parents, they in return are
obligated to him too. In reply to a man who had asked about his
obligations to his child, the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said:

"It is for you to give him a good name and to raise him in a good
manner and to teach him an appropriate trade"

- Wafi, 12th part, pp. 210-211 The Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) has other
points in this respect such as:

"Teach your children swimming and archery."

- Wafi, 12th part, pp. 210-211 "Parents are equally obliged to
discharge their responsibilities towards their children and are
accountable in case of failure. Similarly children are responsible to
discharge their obligation towards parents"

- Wafi, 12th part, pp. 210-211

"May Allah have mercy upon those parents who help their children so
that the children could reciprocate the same tawards them. They asked
how can they help. He replied by accepting any easy task he may fulfill;
and by not requiring him to do hard labour; and by not being rough and
unfair to him."

- Wafi, 12th part, pp. 219-211 Imam Ali (as) says:

"Do not force your children in having the same characteristics as you
do. Because they created in an era which is different from yours."

- Al Imam Ali, vol. III, p 733 Further he said: "A father has three
obligations towards his child: 1. To give him a good name, 2: To raise
him in a good manner, and 3: To teach him Holy Qur'an.

- Nahjul Balagha, p. 546.

I think, by this, he does not merely mean the proununciation of
Qur'anic words, but rather the practice and implementation of its
commondments, method, and its exalted moral guidelines in their day of
day lives. You should familiarize yourself with the sublim realities in
the Qur'anic text, so that you can meet your spiritual needs. What
better honour is there to lead a life according to the teaching of the
Holy Qur'an. Our fourth Imam, Imam Sajjad (as) says: "You should be
aware of the fact that your child has come from you and that people
associate his good or bad deeds with you. You are responsible to teach
him good manners, and to guide him to the way of the Creator of the
World and to help him on obeying Him. Most assuredly, you will be
rewarded for the being good to your child, and will be punished for
abusing him."

- Wafi, Part III, p.127 Imam al-Sadiq (as) says:

"He who is beneficient to his child, is so to his parents" - Wafi, part
II, p. 211 Our seventh Imam, Imam Musa al-Kazim,1 (as) says:

"It is appropriate to encourage a boy during his childhood to do
difficult work in order to grow up a patient and meek adult." - Wafi,
Part II,P. 211

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. The Seventh Imam, Musa, entitled al-Kazim (128/44-183/799) The son
of the sixth, he was contemprerary with such Abbasid caliphs as
al-Mansur and Harun al-Rashid. He lived most of his life in Medina with
several restrictions placed upon him and finally died in prison in
Bagdad. After him, the Imams were oftern not able to live in their
traditional home of Medina, but were forced to remain near the caliph in
Baghdad or Samara. He is buried in Kazimayn in Iraq.

The Child:

As you admit for the most part, rearing a child and preparing him for a
material and spiritual life is up to his parents.

**24. The Responsibilities of Fathers & Mothers The Father:**

My child! based on the verse in the Holy Qur'an that advise benevolence
to parents, next to worshipping of Almighty Allah, it is undrstood that
next to our obligations to Him, there is no greator obligation than that
to our parents.

The Child:

My honourable father! Your responsibilities to me as parents are as
great as your authority over me. It is all up to you as to how you raise
and rear me and and how to educate me. Our times are different from each
others. Our enviroment too is different from that in which you wre
grewing up. A simple life, with no means of corruption and not too many
social obligation or luxuries, raised you to the way you are. But I was
born into this world in the age of Atom, machine and cinema and in a
polluted enviroment.

As if I were to spend all day and night serving you would not be too,
much, you should do likewise for me, and have a watching eye day and
night one me in this rough sea (of life). If I am about to drown, grab
my hand and rescue me. Parents should periodically go to their
children's schools and inquire about their education and behaviour from
their teachers. Ask about their associates and close friends and
particalarly to ask about where they spend their time when they are out
for the evening.

At night at home they should help their children with their homework by
offering them guidance. If they are about to engage in an unwise
activity, they should stop them by explaining to them the harms that may
be involved. In this way, they will learn from their parent's past
exprinces. Of course, their involvement should not be deterimental to
the children's independent personality or to their confidence
building.

**25. Rearing of a Child The Father:**

My child! Speaking of rearing of a child, I must agree that a child is
capable of being trained. If it were not so, we the parents, would not
have been obligated for your upbringing. He also is capable of
improving. Many evil doers who received the right kind of advice became
righteous people. And many ill-tempered accepted guidance and converted
into good natured gentle individuals. So, in this manner, it is only
wise for parens to offer their good advice to their children whenever
they note the later are starting to misbehave or the weaken their
religious beliefs. Not by beating them up or by putting them under
material pressure, or by kicking them out of the house. Rather, by
offering advice or by having a mutually trusted individual talk to them
and give them guidance. Furthermore, in a sumpathetic way, they should
pray to Allah that the child be corrected. they should rest assured that
he will then be guided.

A man named Dawood (David) went to Imam Musa al-Kazim (as) complaining
about his own son that he had wasted a large amount of his money. The
Imam said to him:

"Try to correct your child. And know that compared to the blessings of
having a child, one hundred thousand Dirhams (dinars) are nothing." -
Wafi, part XII, p. 211 The Child:

As you just mentioned, the best way to rehabilitate a child and bring
him back to doing good deeds again, is by twlling him the solutions in a
soft voice and in a respectable manner. One should avoid harsh words so
the the child would feel that all that is being said is well intended
and is only for his welfare and that the purpose is to change his course
to the right path in life.

**26. Importance of Mother's Rights**

My child ! please be aware that the rights of mothers are more
important than that of the father. An individual once asked the Holy
prophet (p.b.u.h) "To whom should I be kindest?" He replied: "Your
mother." Then he asked: "After her, to whom" He again said: Your
Mother". The man asked the same question for the third time. The reply
was the same, Your Mother". And he repeated his question for the fourth
time, the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) answered him "Your Mother."

- Usul Kafi, New Edition Tehran, Vol. II p. 159 Again a man asks the
Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) about being kind to parents. In reply for three
times, he said: "Your mother": and oly then he said " Your father."

- Usul Kafi, New Edition Tehran, Vol. II P. 162

Perhaps there are two reasons for this importance: (A) Motherly
affection, and (B) Mother's influence on the child's character. 26.1 A.
Motherly Affection:

It is the mother who suffers more pain in taking care and in protection
of the child. She nourishes and brings up the child in her love filled
lap until she delivers him to the society. One would be quite astounded
to realize what a mother does for her child. Only then, one would agree
that none would match a mother. Not even an affectionate maid or
babysitter. Suppose a maid or a babysitter is able to offer the
services, they do so in return of a wage, not merely for the affection
to the child.

**26.2 B. Mother's Influence on the Child's Character:**

The mother lays the basic foundation of the child's bahaviour and
character. As through her mild she provides nourishment for the body,
through her teachings, she strengthens his spirit. Consequently, the
child inherits his mother's mannerism, habits and other characters since
early infancy and will keep them throughout his life. Fanally, the
child's happiness depends on the way he is reared by his mother. The
Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) says:

"Do not select stupid women or women with visual important for nursing
your children because milk affects character."

- Wafi, part XII, p. 27 Imam Ali (a.s.) says:

"Be careful as to who nurse your children since they will grow up with
same milk." - Wafi, Part XII,PP. 27-27

He also says:

"No milk is more blessed for a child than that of his own mother." -
Wafi, Part XII, pp. 27-28 Imam Baqir1 (a.s.) says:

"Choose good natured women for nursing your children and avoid the evil
one because milk transfers character." - Wafi, Part XII,pp.27-28

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. The Fifth Imam, Hummad, known as al-Baqir (57/675-114/732). The son
of the fourth Imam, he was present at Karbala at a young age. Because of
changing political and religious conditions, among them the general
revolusion following the events at Karbala, many people came to Medina
to learn the religious and spiritual sciences from him. He trained
numerous well-known men of religion, and mainly for this reason is the
first Imam after 'Ali from whom large numbers of traditions are
recorded. He buried in the Baqi cemetry in Medina.[Tr]

Samuel Smiles says:

"Those who swing children's cradles are more influential than those who
run the government."

- The Book of Ethics, Part 1, pp. 38-48 "Rearing of a child begins at
the time of his first smile."

- The Book of Ethics, Part 1, pp. 38-48 "Infancy is like a mirror. It
reflects whatever is placed in front of it."

- The Book of Ethics, Part 1, pp. 38-48 "The model constantly present
in front of the child is his mother"

- The Book of Ethics, Part 1, pp. 38-48 "Mother has far more influence
on the child than does his father."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 An Ancient Greek once said: "If
you put your slave in charge of rearing your child, soon you will have
two slaves."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 George Herbert says: "One good
natured mother is worth one hundred teachers."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 John Randolph, the will known
American politician says: "Only one thing saved me from becoming
atheistic. That was the thoughts of the moments when my mother in her
death bd took my hands and placed me on her lap and made me repeat after
herm her belief in the Lord."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 It has been said that: "A good
mother is nature's masterpieces."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 Napoleon Banaparte used to say:
"A child's good and bad behaviour always depends upon that of his
mother."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 Adams, the American President,
says: "During infancy, I had the greates blessing anyone could have.
That, having a mother who was capable of raising a family in an
excellent instructions from her. If there are any shortcomings and
deviations in my life, it is of my own fault and it has nothing to do
with her"

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 Joseph Demister, after discussing
the inventions and art works produced by some famous men, continues
that: "It is true that women have produced no such things, but what they
have done is far more important than all these works because it is women
who have raised such pious and industrious men."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 He throughout his works, refers
to his mother with love and respect. In one instance, he says:

"Good natured mother was a heavenly angel who was bestowed a human body
temporarily by God." - The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 Goethe had a
great affection and love for his mother. About her he says: "My mother
had excellent qualities for living."

- The Book of Ethics, Part, pp. 40-54 And when he was in Frankfurt, he
would meet with all people who had in any way been kind to his mother
and would thank them for that. Samuel Johnson talks with extreme respect
about his mother. "She was a wise and well educated woman who enforced
religious sentiments in him since early childhood. And in appreciation,
he, with his small income, would provide all kinds of conveniences for
her."

- The Book of Ethics, and Editions, Part 1, pp. 50-54

The Child:

I admit that the rights of mothers are extremely important. That is why
to mother, I say " I shall never forget about your contribution as my
mother, I have read that Heaven is under the footsteps of mothers like
you and happiness comes through being obedient to you. I consider that a
big mistake on my part if I am not a decent and worthy child, for you.
And a life in which I do not fulfill my obligations to you would be a
miserable life."

I am certain that you will be happy with me even if I am not good to
you. And no matter how nasty I am. you will forgive me. Your being happy
with me, and your forgiveness is enough to make me happy in life on this
earth and to save me forever from Allah's wrath on the Day of
Judgement.


