8) Piety And Prophethood
========================

Taqwa in relation to prophethood means that man should know that human
beings exist since birth to unknown time. He should also realize that
man cannot understand his loss and gain. Hence, he is in need of a more
perfect guide to lead him to perfection and a stronger device to rule
over the world. Man has no power to secure his own interests. Therefore,
there should be those who go between the Creator and the creatures; to
receive the message from the creator and to convey it to the creatures.

These people are known as prophets or divine envoys. Imams and their
successors follow the path of the prophets. The necessity of a system or
order among the creatures, as well as a guide in the same way that the
heart is the guide of the realm of body, the fact that not all human
beings are capable of receiving revelation, that earth cannot be devoid
of a proof of God, that human mind cannot comprehend everything, are
some of the reasons which prove the truthfulness of prophets. In our
time, the greatest miracle is the Holy Quran. Although this Divine Book
has been challenged, no one has been able to bring a verse like it.

In the Holy Quran, we see that when divine messengers invite people to
God and monotheism, and invite them to their own truthfulness and
adherence and warn them of anything other than God, Taqwa has been
mentioned too. The Quran says: be careful of your duty against any
deviation.

This theme has been repeated in the Holy Quran: ***“(The tribe of) Aad
denied the messengers (of Allah). When their brother Hud said to them:
will you not guard (against evil)? Surely I am a faithful apostle to
you; therefore guard against (the punishment of) Allah and obey
me.”***[^1]

Elsewhere God says: ***“(The tribe of) Thamud denied the messengers (of
Allah. When their brother Salih said to them: Will you not guard
(against evil)? Surely I am a faithful apostle to you; therefore guard
against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me.”***[^2]

In this relation, God says: ***“The people of Lot denied the messengers
(of Allah). When their brother Lot said to them: Will you not guard
(against evil)? Surely I am a faithful apostle to you; therefore, guard
against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me.”***[^3]

God has also said: ***“The people of Noah denied the messengers (of
Allah). When their brother Noah said to them: Will you not guard
(against evil)? Surely I am a faithful apostle to you; therefore, guard
against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me. And I do not ask you any
reward for it; my reward is only with the Lord of the worlds: So guard
against (the punishment of) Allah and obey me. They said: Shall we
believe in you while the meanest follow you?”***[^4]

[^1]: Qur'an, 26:123-126.

[^2]: Qur'an, 26:141-144.

[^3]: Qur'an, 26:160-164.

[^4]: Qur'an, 26: 105-111.


