9) Piety And the Day Of Judgment
================================

When it was proved for us that God is All-wise and His administration is
wise, how can He not have another world for which He has created man?
When God has created man firstly with such complicated body and soul,
some of people live for a second, an hour, a month, a year and as long
as a hundred or a thousand years and then they will die, what is the
philosophy behind it, especially when human beings reach perfection with
so much suffering? Is this not something absurd and vain?

Secondly, the obedient and the guilty, the oppressors and the oppressed,
the sick and the healthy, the privileged and the underprivileged have a
living of their own and enjoy divine blessings in this world where
reward or punishment do not exactly exist, then, where will be God’s
justice if there is no other world? How can we prove that God is
All-wise?

Thirdly: the divine laws will be useless, for law is aimed to
distinguish between humans and animals. When there is no other world,
the law will be useless, for it will not be enacted.

Fourthly: it may show the falsehood of the Lord (we seek Allah’s
protection from that), for Allah has sent prophets with books in which
there are the news of the Day of Judgment as well as Heaven and Hell.

Fifthly: The prophets and Imams’ news are enlightening. It is for this
reason that God has used the word Taqwa: ***“How, then, will you guard
yourselves if you disbelieve, on the day which shall make children
grey-headed?***[^1]

Truly, one, who disbelieves in the Day of Judgment, is not certain about
it and considers it as a fable or has doubt about it, cannot possibly be
a man of piety or to practice it. On the contrary, one who believes in
the Day of Judgment and the Hereafter will certainly have piety.

[^1]: Qur'an, 73:17.


