10) Piety And Imamate
=====================

One of the other instances in which the word Taqwa has been used is when
we obey Allah and obey the apostle and those in authority from among us,
for there is a perpetual life in obedience and perpetual punishment in
disobedience. Beyond doubt, if God has punished a nation with
thunderbolt, heavenly and earthly afflictions, and if they have been
afflicted with famine, it has been due to disobedience of divine calls
and challenges to the Messenger of Allah (SAW).

Hence, we notice that in most cases when prophets have invited people to
monotheism, to God and to the adherence to the prophets, the word Taqwa
has been used. In the Quranic Chapter, the Poets (ash-Shu’ara 26), we
read about the states of prophets Moses, Noah, Salih, Hud, Lot and
Shu’aib (AS). When they say to their tribes: ***“Surely I am a faithful
apostle to you”*** immediately, they says: ***“Therefore guard against
(the punishment of) Allah and obey me.”***

Sometimes, the Lord of the universe advises His messenger to practice
Taqwa: ***“O prophet! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and do not
comply with (the wishes of) the unbelievers*** ***and the hypocrites,
surely Allah is Knowing, Wise. And follow what is revealed to you from
your Lord: surely Allah is Aware of what you do.”***[^1]

In certain verses, the following has been added: ***“And do not obey the
bidding of the extravagant.”***[^2]

In certain Quranic chapters, God says: ***“O you who believe! Answer
(the call of) Allah and His apostle when he calls you to that which
gives you life; and know that Allah intervenes between man and his
heart, and that to Him you shall be gathered. And fear an affliction
which may not smite those of you in particular who are unjust; and know
that Allah is severe in requiting (evil).”***[^3]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has been quoted by Abu Ayyoob al-Ansari as
saying: “O Ammar! Soon after me, there will be big mischief so much so
that swords will be drawn, some will kill each other and some will hate
each other. In that case, it is incumbent upon you to resort to this
bald-headed man, sitting on the right side of me (meaning Ali ibn Abi
Talib). If all people follow one line and Ali follows another line, you
should follow his line and leave others. O Ammar! Surely Ali will not
misguide you and will not direct you to destruction. O Ammar! To obey
Ali is to obey me and to obey me is to obey Allah.” [^4]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by al-Mufaddhal ibn Umar as saying:
“God Almighty has chosen Ali as an emblem and standard between Him and
His creatures. No one has such a position. Therefore, whoever obeys him
is a believer and whoever denies him is an unbeliever. Whoever denies
him will enter fire.” [^5]

The Imam (AS) has also been reported as saying that when Gabriel
appeared to the Messenger of Allah (SAW), he said: “O Mohammad! Allah
sends you greetings and says: I have created the seven heavens and what
is there in them…and I have not created any place higher than the Rokn
(the corner of the Kaaba) and the Maqam (the place where Prophet Abraham
(a.s.) used to offer prayer). If any one of my servants call Me and
meets Me (dies) while he denies the Imamate of Ali, I will throw him
into the fire on his face.”[^6]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “There is no heresy unless a
Sunnah (prophetic norm) is abandoned (by it). Therefore, keep away from
heresy. Walk on a sound way, for long-cherished orders (orders of God
and the Messenger) are the best. What heresy has produced will be the
worst.” [^7]

After warning the people of Basra about what was to occur, Imam Ali (AS)
says: “Whoever can, at this time, keep himself clinging to Allah should
do so. If you follow me, I shall certainly carry you, if Allah so wills,
on the path of paradise, even though it may be full of severe hardship
and of bitter taste….You should adhere to the Book of Allah because it
is the Strong Rope, a clear light, a benefiting cure, a quenching for
thirst, protection for the adherent, and deliverance for the attached.
It has no any curving to be straightened, and does not deviate from the
truth. Whatever it is repeated and whatever it knocks the hearings, it
does not become old. Whoever speaks according to it, speaks of the truth
and whoever acts according to it shall advance (to success).”

A man stood up and said: ‘O Ameerol Mo'minin! Tells us about the
disturbance and whether you enquired it from the Holy Prophet (SAW)’.
Thereupon Ameerol Mo'minin said: “When Allah, the Glorified sent down
the verse: ***‘Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, we
believe, and not be tried?’***[^8] I came to know that the disturbance
would not befall us so long as the Prophet is among us.

So I said: O Messenger of Allah, what is this disturbance of which
Allah, the Sublime, has informed you? And he replied: ‘O Ali, my nation
shall be tried after me.’ I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, on the day of
Uhud, when Muslims had fallen martyrs and I was not among them, and this
had been very annoying to me, did you not say to me: ‘Cheer up, for you
shall be killed (martyred) later on!’

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: ‘Yes, it is so, but what about your
endurance at receiving martyrdom?’ I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, this
is not a matter of endurance, but it is a matter of delight and
gratefulness.’ Then he said: ‘O Ali, Muslims shall soon fall into
sedition because of their properties their wealth, put Allah under
obligation that they have faith, expect Allah’s mercy, and wish to be
safe from His wrath, and because of false doubts and desires, they take
His unlawful things as lawful. So, they will then consider wine as just
a juice of grapes and dates, bribe as gift, and usury as selling and
buying, and thus consider them lawful.’

I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, how should I deal with them at the time?
Shall I consider them as apostates and disbelievers or ones involved in
sedition?’ He said: ‘Sedition and trial.’” [^9]

What mischief is worse than this! After the Messenger of Allah (SAW) the
Ummah was divided into seventy-three sects as the Holy Prophet (SAW) had
said: “The Jews will become seventy-one sects, the Christians
seventy-two and my Ummah will be divided into seventy-three sects (after
me).” [^10]

Ibn al-Maghazeli has reported: “The Holy Prophet(SAW) said to Ali ibn
Abi Talib: ‘The Ummah after me will soon hatch plots against you.’”
[^11]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported by many narrators as having said: The
Messenger of Allah (SAW) said to me: ‘Surely God has made Jihad against
mischief-makers incumbent upon you as He made Jihad against the atheists
incumbent upon me.’ I asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah! What is this
mischief that has made Jihad incumbent?’ The Holy Prophet (SAW) said:
‘There are some who bear witness to the Oneness of God and my mission
but they challenge the Sunnah.’ I asked the Holy Prophet: ‘What should I
fight them for while they bear witness to what I testify?’

The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: ‘For the heresy in religion and challenging
Imamate.’ I said: ‘You promised that I would be martyred. So I beg God
to bring about my martyrdom soon before you.’ The Messenger of Allah
said: ‘Who will fight the Naketheen (the breakers of covenant who fought
against Imam Ali (a.s.) in the battle of al-Jamal), the Qassiteen (the
oppressors (Mo’awiya and his followers) who fought against Imam Ali
(a.s.) in Siffeen), and the Mariqeen (the renegades or the Kharijites
who fought against Imam Ali (a.s.) in an-Nahrawan) then?”[^12]

Therefore, it is incumbent upon every human to exercise piety in
obedience. He should be obedient to those whom God has ordered. Jabir
al-Ansari has been reported by Jabir al-Ju’fi as saying: “I asked the
meaning of the following verse from the Holy Prophet: ***“O you who
believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from
among you.”***[^13]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: ‘They are my successors and the Imams of
Muslims after me. The first of them is Ali ibn Abi Talib, then al-Hasan
and al-Hossain, then Ali ibn al-Hossain, then Mohammad ibn Ali known as
Baqir in the Torah. O Jabir, you will live long enough to see him.
Whenever you meet him, give my regards to him. The next will be
as-Sadiq, Ja’far ibn Mohammad, then Musa ibn Ja’far, then Ali ibn Musa,
then Mohammad Ibn Ali, then Ali ibn Mohammad, then Hassan ibn Ali and
then a person of my name, the poof of Allah on the earth, Baqiyyatullah,
the son of al-Hassan ibn Ali, one at whose hands Allah will conquers the
east and the west of the earth. He will be in occultation away from his
followers and companions that no one shall keep on believing in his
imamate except those whom Allah has tried their hearts with faith.”[^14]

[^1]: Qur'an, 33:1-2.

[^2]: Qur'an, 26:151.

[^3]: Qur'an, 8:24-25.

[^4]: Khulasat al-Minhaj, vol. 2, P. 187.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, P. 133.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 1, P. 432

[^8]: Qur'an, 29:2.

[^9]: Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 1, P. 490.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 28, P. 29.

[^11]: Ibid., P. 75.

[^12]: Ibid., P. 79.

[^13]: Qur'an, 4:59.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 289


