11) Piety And Knowledge (Science)
=================================

One of the other issues about which a human should exercise piety, that
is to say, he must be careful not to be deviated and misguided is the
acquisition of knowledge, for the word ‘knowledge’ can be as deceitful
(how much knowledge one has) as the word ‘scholar’ (how much knowledge
that scholar has) is.

Apparently those who go after what is called knowledge or science are
usually known as scholars or scientists whether in mathematics, physics,
chemistry, astronomy, geography, natural sciences, medicine, and
industry or in the science of distinguished men, ancestry and lineage,
history, Hadith, insight, morphology and syntax, rhetoric, beliefs,
theology, philosophy, wisdom, prosody, literature, mysticism, ethics and
behaviors, whether they have taken a right or wrong path. Sheikh Tusi,
Khajeh Nasseeruddeen, Majlesi, Allahmah Helli and Boroojerdi are called
scholars while Abu Hanifah, Malik, ash-Shafi’ee, Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
al-Ghazali, al-Fakhr ar-Razi, Seyed Qutb, Shaltut, Ibn Abil Hadeed and
Ibn Hajar are called scholars too.

However, we must exercise piety in this area too by making sound
knowledge distinct from the wrong knowledge, by making justice distinct
from injustice. What is of significance to Islam is clear for all. Imam
Musa ibn Ja’far (AS) has been reported as saying: “One day, the
Messenger of Allah (SAW) entered the mosque. He saw a group of people
gathering around a man. He asked who the man was, and it was said that
he was a scholar. The Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: ‘What is he expert
in?’

They said: ‘He is the most knowledgeable in the lineages of the Arabs,
the events of the pre-Islamic era, poetry as well as Arabism.’ The Holy
Prophet (SAW) said: ‘His knowledge does not harm one who does not know
it nor does not benefit the one who knows it.’ The Messenger of Allah
(SAW) said: ‘Knowledge or science is of three types; a clear sign that
is the principles of faith, a just obligation that is ethics which is
the middle course between the two extremes, and a well known norm
(Sunnah) that is religious orders as well as issues related to lawful
and unlawful things.” [^1]

It is said that the principles of faith are related to human mind,
ethics to his soul and heart, and lawful and unlawful things to his
body.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “I have found all knowledge
in four things; to get to know your Lord, to know what He has given to
you, to know what He wants from you, and to know what takes you out of
your religion.” [^2]

Commenting on this narration, Allamah Majlisi says: “First, you should
get to know your Lord through attributes of perfection, Divine act, and
essence of God. Secondly, you should realize His glory through
intellect, senses, His Grace of revealing the Book and other blessings.
Thirdly, you should get to know His will by self-restraint, obedience
and acknowledgment of Him through intellect and narration. Fourthly, you
should know that following the leaders of misguidance and sin will take
you out of your faith.” [^3]

Sadr al-Mota’aliheen Molla Sadra, has reported how the Imam has
classified knowledge or science into three groups while rejecting the
rest, though knowing everything is better than not knowing it. Then he
says: “If knowledge, like that of sorcery, is reproached, it is because
of its result which is aimed at creating separation between wife and
husband. It seems that the Imam wishes to bring up a kind of knowledge
which can save human beings in the hereafter. Hence, if astronomy is
related to faith, ethics and religious orders, it is considered as part
of them. Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as having said: “knowledge is
for religion, medicine for body, syntax for language and astrology for
knowing the time.” [^4]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has been reported as having said: “Science is of
two categories: science in the heart which is beneficial and science on
the tongue which is a proof for God’s servants.” [^5] Nevertheless, if
they (two kinds of science) are used solely for worldly gain or if they
are detrimental to human beings, they are blameworthy. Hence, the story
of the man around whom people had gathered and he was blamed by the Holy
Prophet might be of a political nature. So the Holy Prophet (SAW) did
not really mean to condemn knowledge of lineage. God knows it better.

One of the branches of knowledge, about which human beings should be
careful, is theology, that is the rectification and perfection of faith,
for thoughts run into different directions and there are different
viewpoints and books in that area. Hence, many individuals have gone
astray in this path and are entangled with amazement and bewilderment.

For this reason, God has mentioned the word ‘Taqwa’ by saying: ***“Most
surely in the*** ***variation of the night and the day, and what Allah
has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for a people
who guard (against evil)”***.[^6]

Those who have studied the states of theologians, philosophers and those
who have worked in this field know how God has mentioned the word
‘Taqwa’. Hence, it is incumbent upon all human beings to rectify their
belief and faith. It is faith which benefits or harms a human being. If
he has a good faith, he will achieve success, but if he has no faith, he
will suffer loss. Knowledge and science can serve as a great factor in
correcting one’s belief. On the contrary, ignorance makes human belief
corrupt. In this relation, God says: ***“Are those who know and those
who do not know alike? Only the men of understanding are
mindful.”***[^7]

Elsewhere God says: ***“Is he then who knows that what has been revealed
to you from your Lord is the truth like him who is blind? Only those
possessed of understanding will mind.”***[^8]

The use of ‘men of understanding’ and ‘those possessed of understanding’
are meaningful.

The Holy prophet’s companions have related that a man from the Ansar
came to the Holy prophet (SAW) asking: “O Messenger of Allah! Which one
do you like better; to attend a funeral or to meet a scholar?”

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: “If there is anyone to attend the
funeral, to go to the presence of a scholar is better than attending a
funeral, visiting a thousand patients, rising up at night for prayer,
fasting for a thousand days, giving a charity of a thousand Dirhams to
the poor, performing the minor hajj a thousand times, and a thousand
non-obligatory wars against the enemy in the way of Allah with your life
and property. Do you not you know that God has been obeyed with
knowledge and worshipped with knowledge and all the good of the world
and the hereafter is with knowledge and all the evil of the world and
the hereafter is with ignorance?” [^9]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “Sitting in the presence of
scholars for an hour is better to God than a thousand years of
worshipping. Looking at a scholar is better than seclusion of one year
in the House of God. Visiting scholars is better than seventy
circumambulations around the Ka’ba and is better than seventy minor
Hajj. God will count seventy rewards for that one, will send blessings
for him, and angels will testify that he will deserve Paradise.”[^10]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “A prayer by a scholar is
better than seventy thousand prayers by an ascetic.” [^11]

It is with the right knowledge that human beings will never go astray or
deviate from the right path.

A scholar always works thoughtfully and mindfully; his prayer is mindful
and his steps are taken thoughtfully. He writes thoughtfully. His rising
up and sitting down is thoughtful; he speaks thoughtfully; his silence
is thoughtful; his eating, sleeping, praying, his state in associating
with others, in sickness and health, are mindful. A layman, however, is
not such. He may sometimes do his job out of ignorance. He may offer his
prayer incorrectly and he may act in a way a simpleton might act.

It is for this reason that God uses the word ‘Taqwa’ in relation to
every subject.

[^1]: Al-Kafi, Feature of Knowledge (Sifat al-Ilm).

[^2]: Al-Kafi, Bab al-Nawadir..

[^3]: Mir’at al-Oghool, vol. 1, p. 35.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 218

[^5]: Ibid., vol. 2, P. 37

[^6]: Qur'an, 10:6.

[^7]: Qur'an, 39:9.

[^8]: Qur'an, 13:19.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, P. 204.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 205.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 19.


