12) Piety In Practice
=====================

One of the other cases in which the word ‘Taqwa’ has been used is in
relation to human deed. Human beings are rewarded on the Day of Judgment
for their deeds. On that day, man will reap what he has sown. Perhaps
all the Quranic verses and narrations on ‘Taqwa’ are aimed at human deed
which includes intention too.

In this relation, the Lord of the universe says: ***“O you who believe!
Be careful of (your duty to) Allah, and let every soul consider what it
has sent on for the morrow, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah;
surely Allah is Aware of what you do.”***[^1]

In this verse, the word “Taqwa” has been used twice and ***“what it has
sent on for the morrow (deed)”*** is in between. Perhaps, it refers to
the fact that one, who wishes to do something, has to have good
intention that is for the sake of God. He should keep away from false
incentives. He should be thorough when doing something. Furthermore, he
should exercise piety in it.

This will cover many affairs including the question of justice. In this
connection, God says: ***“Act equitably, that is nearer to piety, and be
careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is Aware of what you
do.”***[^2]

On benevolence and doing good, God says: ***“… if you do good (to
others) and guard (against evil), then surely Allah is Aware of what you
do.”***[^3]

On assistance, God says: ***“… help one another in goodness and piety,
and do not help one another in sin and aggression; and be careful of
(your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is Severe in requiting
(evil).”***[^4]

On the foundation of mosque, God says: ***“And say: Work; so Allah will
see your work and (so will) His Apostle and the believers; and you shall
be brought to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, then He will inform
you of what you did. …certainly a mosque founded on piety from the very
first day is more deserving that you should stand in it; in it are men
who love that they should be purified; and Allah loves those who purify
themselves. Is he, therefore, better who lays his foundation on fear of
Allah and (His) good pleasure, or he who lays his foundation on the edge
of a cracking hollowed bank, so it broke down with him into the fire of
hell; and Allah does not guide the unjust people.”***[^5]

In the above-mentioned verses, God refers to the Dhirar Mosque that had
been built to divide the believers who gathered in the Qoba Mosque. When
the Holy prophet (SAW) migrated to Medina where people were attracted by
his good character and manners, Abu Aamir the Monk, an aristocrat member
from the Khazraj tribe and well-versed in Torah and Gospel, envied the
Holy prophet (SAW) and continuously challenged him until he participated
in the battles of Uhud and Hunain. He finally fled to Rome to prepare an
army to fight against Islam. From Rome, he wrote a letter to build the
Dhirar Mosque, but God informed the Holy prophet (SAW) of the issue.

When the Messenger of Allah (SAW) returned from the battles of Tabuk,
the hypocrites came to him, saying: “O Messenger of Allah! We have built
a mosque, so bless it with your coming.” They meant to give value to the
mosque with the Holy prophet’s presence in it and to achieve their goal,
but immediately the following verse was revealed:

***“And those who built a Masjid to cause harm and for unbelief and to
cause disunion among the believers and an ambush to him who made war
against Allah and His Messenger before; and they will certainly swear:
We did not desire aught but good; and Allah bears witness that they are
most surely liars. Never stand in it at all...”***[^6]

Also al-Mofaddhal relates: “I was in the presence of Imam Sadiq (AS)
when the question of deeds was brought up. I said: ‘How little my deeds
are!’ The Imam said: ‘Be silent! Ask for forgiveness of God!’ Then he
said: ‘A little deed with piety is better than many deeds without
piety.’ I said: ‘Are many deeds devoid of piety?’ The Imam said: ‘Yes.
It is like a man who feeds the poor, is kind to the neighbors, his house
is open with generosity, but a door of unlawfulness is opened to him and
he enters through it. Such a deed is devoid of Taqwa. There is another
person who has nothing but never does an unlawful act.” [^7]

These verses and narrations were used to say that our deeds should be
righteous. Furthermore, the results of deeds are important, for our
deeds have no value without result. In this connection, God says: ***“I
swear by time, most surely man is in loss, except those who believe and
do good.”***[^8]

God has also said: ***“Whoever does good whether male or female and he
is a believer, We will most certainly make him live a happy
life.”***[^9]

In another verse, God says: ***“Then (as for) those who believe and do
good, they shall have forgiveness and an honorable sustenance.”***[^10]

On the same topic, God says: ***“And the blind and the seeing are not
alike, nor those who believe and do good and the evil doer.”***[^11]

Elsewhere, God has said: ***“Shall We treat those who believe and do
good like the mischief-makers in the earth? Or shall We make those who
guard (against evil) like the wicked?”***[^12]

There are narrations to the same effect, stressing that deeds have to be
good and righteous. Furthermore, there should be no obstacles on their
way of acceptance. The following is an example.

Ibn Fahad al-Hilli in his book Uddatod-Da’ee and Seyed ibn Tawus in
Falah as-Saa’il mention that the Holy Prophet (SAW) has been reported by
Mu’ath ibn Jabal as saying: “Before creating heavens, God created seven
angels, appointing each of them in a heaven and made that heaven
splendid with that glory. Then, God appointed an angel as gatekeeper to
each of the gates of the heavens.

The guardian angels record man’s deeds day and night and send them up
and a light like the light of the sun is sent for him to the lower
heaven. When they reach the sky of the world, they refine the deed and
add to it, but all of a sudden, the angel will say: Wait! Throw this
deed against the face of its doer. I am the angel of backbiting. I will
not let the deed of a backbiter pass on to heaven. This is the order of
my Lord.’ He added: ‘Then the next day while carrying good deeds, the
angels return and pass by the former angel, refine the deed and add to
it till they reach the second heaven where the angel of that heaven will
say: Stop here! Throw this deed against the face of its doer, for with
this deed, he was following mean objectives in the world. I am the angel
of worldly affairs and will not let the deed of this person pass on to
others from here.’

He said: ‘The next angels take up the deed of God’s servant from whose
charity and prayer they are happy. However, when they reach the third
heaven, the angel will say: Throw this deed against the face of its
doer. I am the angel who record arrogance. This person had good deeds
but, he was arrogant to people. My Lord has ordered me not to let his
deed pass on to others from here.’ Then he said: ‘The guardian angels
took up the deed of God’s servant while it was shining like a star and
his voice was up with glorification of God, fasting, and performing of
Hajj. They were taking it up to the fourth heaven when an angel would
say: Stop here! Throw it against the face and belly of its doer. I am
the angel that record self-admiration. He was self-conceited. He had
good deeds, but he was self-important. My Lord has ordered to stop his
deed to pass on to others from here.’

Then he said: ‘The next stage, the guardian angels take up man’s deed
which is like a bride ready for wedding. When they reach the fifth
heaven, the good deed is accompanied by Jihad, and prayer with rays of
light like those of the Sun.’ However, the angel will say: ‘Stop here! I
am the angel recording envy. Throw it against the face of its doer and
put it on his shoulder. He was envious against the seekers of knowledge
and the obedient ones to God. Whenever he saw someone superior in
devotion, he envied him. Here, that man’s deed is put on his shoulder
while his deed curses him. Then he said: once again, the guardian angels
take up man’s deeds to the sixth heaven, but the angel will say: Stop
here! I am the angel recording mercy. Throw this deed against the face
of its doer and make him blind, for he had no mercy on anyone. If anyone
committed a wrongdoing or suffered a loss, he would blame him.

My Lord has ordered me to stop his deed from passing on from here. He
said: The guardian angels take up to heaven man’s deed which is
accompanied by understanding, endeavor and piety while it has a sound
like that of thunder and lightning. In addition, three thousand angels
will accompany it. When they reach the angel in the seventh heaven, he
will say: Stop here! Throw this deed against the face of its doer. I am
the angel in charge of veiling. I will conceal from Him any deed which
is not for the sake of Him.

This person intended to obtain a high position with the chiefs and to
have reputation. My Lord has ordered me to stop him from passing on to
others as long as his deed has not been refined for God. Then he said:
This time, the guardian angels will take up man’s deeds for which man is
happy. Deeds like prayer, alms, fasting, Hajj, good temper, silence and
remembrance of God which are accompanied by the heavenly angels as well
as the seven angels rip all the veils till they stand before God and
they testify for him in practice and with Du’a. However, God will say:
You are the guardians of the deeds of My servants but I am the guardian
of what passes in his heart. He did not intend Me with his deeds. My
curse be upon him. The angles will say: Your curse and our curse be on
him!

At this time, Mu’ath started weeping and then said: ‘What shall I do to
have devotion in my deed?’ The Holy Prophet said: ‘Follow your prophet
in being certain about the unity of God.’

Mu’ath reports: ‘I said: You are the Messenger of Allah and I am
Mu’ath!’ The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: ‘O Mu’ath! If you have any
shortcoming in your deed, do not criticize your brothers in faith and
the carriers (memorizers and expert) of the Holy Quran. Blame *yourself*
for your wrongdoing not your brethren. Do not ever justify yourself by
reproaching your brothers in faith. Do not overestimate yourself at the
price of humiliating your brothers. Do not dissimulate.

Let not your worldly desires interfere in your affairs of the hereafter.
Watch your tongue when associating with people so that people will not
keep aloof from you. Do not whisper in an assembly. Do not magnify
yourself, for you will be deprived of the blessings. Do not reproach
people, for the dog of hell will reproach you. God says: ***“(I swear)
by the Nashitat (the angels who draw out the souls of people)!”***[^13]
Do you know what “Nashitat” is? It is the dogs of Hell that eat away
flesh and bone!”

I said: ‘Who can forbear this description?’ The Holy Prophet (SAW) said:
‘O Mu’ath! This will be easy to one for whom God has made it easy.’

The narrator says: ‘Thereafter, I did not see Mu’ath recite the Holy
Quran as much as he would read this tradition.” [^14]

Allamah Sheikh Baha’ee says: “This tradition should make you understand
that pure deeds are few. I wish you success in self-restraint.”

Truly, piety in practice means that human beings should keep aloof from
moral, ideological and scientific deviations. Whatever they do should be
aimed at pleasing God. They should have only God in mind and avoid
passions and the obeying of Satan.

There are many people who mistakenly think they are doing good deeds
whereas they are practically following their desires and Satan, though
their deeds might be done in the name of prayer or religion.

About such people, God says: ***“Say: Shall We inform you of the
greatest losers in (their)*** ***deeds? (these are) they whose labor is
lost in this world’s life and they think that they are well versed in
skill of the work of hands. These are they who disbelieve in the signs
of their Lord and His meeting, so their deeds become null, and
therefore, We will not set up a balance for them on the Day of
Resurrection. Thus, it is that their recompense is hell, because they
disbelieved and held My signs and My apostles in mockery.”***[^15]

Imam Sajjad (AS) has been reported as saying: “O people, exercise divine
piety and know that your return is towards Him. In this relation, the
Holy Quran says: ***“On that day every soul shall find present what it
has done of good and what it has done of evil. It shall wish that
between it and that (evil) there are a long duration of time; and Allah
makes you to be cautious of (retribution from) Himself.”***[^16]

[^1]: Qur'an, 59:18.

[^2]: Qur'an, 5:8.

[^3]: Qur'an, 4:128.

[^4]: Qur'an, 5:2.

[^5]: Qur'an, 9:105-109.

[^6]: Qur'an, 9:107.

[^7]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 190.

[^8]: Qur'an, 103:1-3.

[^9]: Qur'an, 16:97.

[^10]: Qur'an, 22:50.

[^11]: Qur'an, 40:50.

[^12]: Qur'an, 38:28.

[^13]: Qur'an, 79:2.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, pp. 246,248.

[^15]: Qur'an, 18:103-106.

[^16]: Qur'an, 3:30.


