14) Piety And Islamic Rules
===========================

Rules made by God Almighty are binding and it does not make any
difference whether they are real or superficial (apparent), for benefits
and harms in them have been taken into consideration. Therefore, when a
religious authority issues a religious decree, he should be careful not
to let his own opinion interfere in his Fatwa. Ibn Shabramah has been
reported by Ibnul Sheikh in his Majalis from Husayn ibn Ubaydillah
al-Ghadha’iri as saying: “Abu Haneefah and I went to see Imam Sadiq
(AS).

I said: ‘God has honored you. This is a man from Iraq, who has an
understanding of religion and wisdom.’ Imam Sadiq (AS) said: ‘Perhaps he
is the one who interprets religion due to his own opinion.’ Then the
Imam (AS) said: ‘Which one is greater, prayer or fasting? I said:
‘Prayer.’ The Imam (AS) said: ‘Why is it that a menstruating woman has
to fast the missed days of fasting, but she does not have to perform the
missed prayers (because of menstruation)? O Servant of Allah, fear
Allah.”[^1]

1. Taqiyyah
-----------

If a servant of Allah wants to observe a real rule which entails risk,
it is unlawful. He has to observe the superficial rule. Traditions on
dissimulation (Taqiyyah) [^2] which has the same root as Taqwa refer to
the same meaning.[^3]

Dissimulation is a kind and the highest degree of piety. Abdullah ibn
Jundab has been reported by Hammad ibn Eesa as saying: “Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (AS), in giving the meaning of this verse: “Surely, the most
honorable of you with Allah is the most careful of his duty”, has said:
‘It is the one with the utmost piety.’”[^4]

Abdullah ibn Ya’foor reports: “I heard Imam Sadiq (AS) say: ‘Taqiyyah is
the shield and the protector of a believer. One who has no Taqiyyah is
not a believer.” [^5]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has also been reported as saying: “There is nothing
better than ‘Khaba’ to God in worshipping Him. I asked what ‘Khaba’ is,
and the Imam said: ‘It is the same as Taqiyyah.’” [^6]

There are many traditions on Taqiyyah which mean sometimes that man
should conceal his faith in order to protect his own life and sometimes
the lives of others.

At some times, it is necessary for a Muslim to perform his religious
duties like the opponents. Sayyid Murtadha (may Allah have mercy on him)
has mentioned in his book al-Muhkam wel-Mutashabih that Imam Ali (AS)
said: “When man has the option, he has been forbidden to take an
unbeliever as his leader of Imam. Nevertheless, God has obliged man by
giving him permission (dissimulation) to fast as the opponents fast,
break his fasting like them, and perform prayer as they do out of
Taqiyyah. Otherwise, it is incumbent upon him to follow his own beliefs.

God Almighty has said: ***“Let not the believers take the unbelievers
for friends rather than the believers; and whoever does this shall have
nothing of (the guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves
against them, guarding carefully; and Allah makes you cautious of
Himself.”***[^7]

Therefore, dissimulation is a blessing that God has given to the
believers so as to save themselves and others. The Messenger of Allah
(SAW) has said: “Allah likes His servants to observe what He has
permitted and what he has forbidden.” [^8]

2. Ablution (Wudu’)
-------------------

Dawood ar-Raqqi has been reported as saying: “One day, I went to Imam
Sadiq (AS) to ask him how to perform ablution correctly. The Imam (AS)
said: ‘What God has made obligatory is to wash the face once. The
Messenger of Allah (SAW) has added one more to it to mind for the weak
people. Whoever washes his face three times, his prayer will become
invalid.’ At this time, Dawood ibn Zurbi arrived and asked the same
question. The Imam (AS) said: ‘Three times, three times and whoever does
less than that, his prayer is not valid.’

My (Dawood ar-Raqqi) body started shivering. I was being almost tempted
by Satan. Seeing a change of color in me, Imam Sadiq (AS) said: O
Dawood, calm down! Which one is of unbelief, this order or the act of
beheading?’

When we went out, we found that people had spoken ill of Ibn Zurbi
before al-Mansoor ad-Dawaneeqi (the Abbasid caliph), accusing him of
being heretic and associating with Imam Sadiq (AS). Ibn Zurbi was in an
orchard near the orchard of al-Mansoor.

Al-Mansoor said to himself: “I will try him to see how he performs his
ablution. If he does it like Ja'far ibn Mohammad (AS) which I do not
approve, it will become evident that what they say about him is true. In
that case, I will kill him.” Therefore, he waited for Ibn Zurbi to
perform ablution. Ibn Zurbi did as Imam Sadiq (AS) had told him.
Al-Mansoor sent someone to call him.

Dawood says: ‘When I went to al-Mansoor, he greeted me, saying: ‘O
Dawood! They have said something wrong about you. The way you performed
ablution was not like the purification by the heretics, so forgive me.’
Then he ordered a hundred thousand Dirhams to be given to him.’

Dawood ibn Zurbi and I went to see Imam Sadiq (AS). Zurbi said: my
master, you save my life in this world. Thanks to you. We hope for
paradise. The Imam said: ‘May God reward you and all the believers.’

Addressing Zurbi, the Imam said: ‘Tell Dawood ar-Raqqi what happened to
you so that he will have no fear.’

Dawood Zurbi says: ‘I told him the whole story. The Imam (AS) said: ‘It
was for this reason that I issued such a Fatwa for him, knowing that he
may be killed.’ Then, the Imam said: ‘O Dawood ibn Zurbi! Wash your face
twice when performing ablution. Do not add, for if you add to it, your
prayer will become invalid.’”[^9]

The same story happened between Ali ibn Yaqteen and Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(a.s.) who first ordered him to perform ablution like the opponents, and
when the danger of Haroon ar-Rasheed (the Abbasid caliph) had gone, in a
letter, he said: “O Ali ibn Yaqteen! Perform ablution as God Almighty
has ordered… for the danger that we were afraid for you of has
gone.”[^10]

3. Prayer
---------

Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (AS) has been reported by Ali (AS) ibn Yaqteen and
Sheikh Sadooq as saying: “When dissimulating, it is valid to prostrate
on clothes and carpets.” [^11]

Imam Reza (AS) has been reported by Bazanti as saying: “In relation to
Qunoot (supplicating Allah earnestly in the prayer), Imam Baqir (AS) has
said: “You have an option to or not to recite Qunoot.”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim(AS) has said: “When you are in Taqiyyah, do not
recite Qunoot, and I will be answerable for that.”[^12]

Abdullah ibn Sinan reports: “I heard Imam Sadiq (AS) say: “I invite you
to fear Allah. Never be tough to people, for you will be abased. God
Almighty has said: ***“…you shall speak kindly to people.”***”[^13]

Then the Imam said: “Visit their (non-Shia Muslims) patients, take part
in their funerals, bear witness for and against them and perform prayers
with them in their mosques.”[^14]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has also been reported as saying: “Whoever performs
prayer with them in the first line is like one who has performed prayer
behind the Messenger of Allah (SAW) in the first line.” [^15]

In another narration, we read that the Imam said to Isshaq ibn Ammar:
“Take part in their prayer, for whoever performs prayer in the first
line with them, is like one who has drawn the sword in the way of
Allah.”[^16]

4. Fasting
----------

There are numerous traditions on fasting in which the infallible Imams
(AS) did not observe fasting to cope with the tyrant caliphs. One of the
companions of Imam Sadiq (AS), who had come to visit him, said: “Would
you break your fasting on a day of Ramadan?” The Imam said: “Yes, by
Allah! To violate my fasting in a day of Ramadan is better to me than to
be beheaded.”[^17]

From what we have said, it is inferred that we have to do what is
obligatory and to avoid what is forbidden when there is no obstacle on
the way. But, in certain circumstances, we have to forsake an obligatory
act and do something forbidden in order not to appear as opponent (to
others). We should practice Taqwa in a way that if our Imam divides a
pomegranate into two and says that this part is lawful and the other
part is unlawful, we should unconditionally accept it. We should say to
ourselves: What the Imam says is exactly what the prophet and God say.

As Taqiyyah is applied in the Islamic rules, it is applied in relation
to ideology too. There are many narrations in this connection. Imam
Sadiq (AS) has said: “Be careful of your religion. Conceal it with
Taqiyyah, for there is no faith for one who does not observe Taqiyyah.
You are like a honeybee among birds. If a bird knows what is inside a
honeybee, it will keep on eating the honey until nothing remains of it.
If the opponents know that there is the love of the Ahl al-Bayt in your
hearts, they will eat you with their tongues and will curse you openly
and secretly. May God bless a servant who follows our guardianship
(wilayah).”

In some traditions, Imam Ali (AS) has said: “Soon, you will be asked to
curse me. Curse me, but when you are asked to disavow me, do not do it,
for I am on the Fitra (nature of true faith).”[^18]

In certain narrations, we read: “Do not do it (do not disavow me) even
if you are killed.”

It is well to mention that Taqiyyah is not a feature of our time, rather
it was part of the rules of former religions too. The Companions of the
Cave, the believer of Aal Firoun (the family of the Pharaoh), and
Assiyah wife of the Pharaoh are good examples.

On the concealing of faith by Abu Talib, Imam Sadiq (AS) mentions the
example of the Companions of the Cave, saying: “The example of Abu Talib
is like the Companions of the Cave, who concealed their faith and
declared atheism. So God rewarded them twice.”[^19]

As for disavowing, Maytham at-Tammar an-Nahrawani says: “One day,
Ameerul Mo’minin (AS) called me, saying: ‘O Maytham! What will you do if
Ubeidillah asks you to declare immunity towards me or he will call you
bastard?’ Maytham said: ‘By Allah, I will never disavow you. The Imam
(AS) said: ‘By Allah, he will either kill or hang you.’ Maytham said: ‘I
will endure it! This is the least I can do in the way of God!’”[^20]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by Mohammad Ibn Marwan as saying:
“What prevented Maytham from practicing Taqiyyah? By Allah, he truly
knew that this verse ***“…he who is compelled while his heart is at
rest.”***[^21] was revealed in honor of Ammar and his companions.” [^22]

In the exegesis (tafsir) of Qumi, we read: “The tribe of Quraish
arrested Ammar in Mecca. They tortured him with fire to compel him to
utter what they wanted, but his heart was full of faith. The verse
***“…except he, who is compelled while his heart is content with
faith”***[^23], refers to Ammar ibn Yassir.”[^24]

Ammar ibn Yassir is one of the persons whose perfect faith the Messenger
of Allah (SAW) has testified. The opponents too have said: “The faith of
Ammar is up to his shoulders.”

It is narrated that one day Ammar asked the Holy Prophet’s permission to
enter his room. As soon as Ammar entered the room, the Holy Prophet
(SAW) said: “Welcome, O the purified one!”

Ammar is one about whom the Holy Prophet (SAW) has said: “Whoever is the
enemy of Ammar is the enemy of God and whoever has rancor against Ammar
has rancor against God.” Ammar is one about whom the Holy Prophet (SAW)
has said: “Paradise longs for four persons: Ammar, Ali, Salman and
Miqdad.” In another narration, we read: “Paradise longs for Ali, Ammar,
Salman and Bilal.”[^25]

Ammar was one of those persons, who along with his father Yassir and his
mother Sommayyah, lived in the desert of Mecca with sufferings. He was
ninety when martyred at Siffeen.”[^26]

5. Trade
--------

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by Ali ibn Abdul Aziz as having asked:
“What did Umar ibn Muslim do?” I said: “He has become an ascetic,
leaving aside trade.” The Imam (AS) said: “Woe unto him! Does he not
know that the prayer of one who leaves trade is not responded to?”

Then, the Imam said: “Some of the companions of the Holy Prophet (SAW),
who had heard this verse: ***“…and whoever is careful of (his duty) to
Allah, He will make for him an outlet and give him sustenance from
whence he thinks not”***,[^27] closed the doors behind themselves, were
engaged in worshipping God, saying: ‘This is sufficient for us.’ This
news reached the Holy Prophet (SAW). So he sent for them, saying: “What
made you to do so?” They said: “O messenger of Allah! God gives us our
sustenance. Therefore, we are engaged only in worshipping.”

The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: “Whoever does this, God will not respond to
his prayer. It is incumbent upon you to be engaged in a business.”[^28]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) and Imam Sadiq (AS) have been reported as saying:
“Not being dependent on others is a good example of divine piety.”[^29]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has also said: “Cursed is one who is a burden to
others.” [^30]

### Piety And Trade (Business)

One of the topics dealt with in the Holy Quran and Hadith is the
question of trade and business as elaborated in the books of
jurisprudence. Some scholars have written separate books on it. In this
relation, we can mention Makasib written by the master of jurisprudence
Sheikh Ansari, and Anees al-Tejarat written for the Farsi-speakers by
Allamah Naraghi, which is the best of its kind. As for books of Hadith,
which deal with trade and business, we can mention such books as Wasa’il
al-Shiah, and Bihar al-Anwar, one or two volumes of which have been
devoted to this topic. In these books, there are traditions on the
merits of trade and business and the care one must take in relation to
them.

Jameel ibn Salih has reported Imam Sadiq (AS) as saying about the verse:
***“Our Lord! Grant us good in this word and good in the
hereafter.”***[^31], “The meaning of good is the pleasure of God and
paradise in the hereafter, abundant sustenance, and good temper in the
world.”[^32]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has reported Imam Ali (AS) as saying to Mawali:[^33]
“Engage in trade, and God will give you blessings, for I heard the
Messenger of Allah (SA) say: “Sustenance has ten parts, nine of which
are in trade and one part is in other things.”[^34]

It has been narrated that Asbaat came to see the Imam who asked after
Umar ibn Muslim. Asbaat said: “He is a righteous man, but he has put
trading aside.” The Imam said: “It is an act of Satan.” The Imam
repeated this three times and said: “Do you not know that the Messenger
of Allah (SAW) bought a flock of sheep from Damascus and sold them with
profit in a way that he paid his debt and divided the rest among the
relatives.? On this occasion, God revealed the following verse: ***“Men
whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from*** ***remembrance of
Allah.”***[^35]

The Imam (AS) has also been reported as saying: “Leaving trade will
diminish one’s wisdom.”[^36]

It has been narrated: “The disciples of Jesus (AS) were walking behind
him and whenever they got hungry, they would ask: ‘O Spirit of Allah! We
are hungry.’ Jesus (AS) touched the earth and water gushed out. The
disciples drank from it and said: ‘O Spirit of Allah, Who is better than
us! When we get hungry, you give us food, and when we get thirsty, you
quench our thirst. We truly have faith in you and follow you?’

Jesus (AS) said: ‘Better than you is one who works with his own hands
and eats from what he himself earns.’”[^37]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “God revealed to Prophet
Dawood (David) (AS): “You were a good servant if you did not eat from
the public treasury. You do not do work with your own hands!”

Prophet David began weeping. God revealed to iron: “Be soft and lenient
for My servant, Dawood!”

God Almighty made iron soft for him in a way that Prophet Dawood (a.s.)
would make a cuirass every day and sell it for a thousand Dirhams. He
made 360 cuirasses, selling them for 360 thousand Dirhams and was never
in need of the public treasury.”[^38]

Having a share of the public treasury does not necessarily mean a bad
thing, but in the story of Prophet Dawood, there was wisdom behind it.

Mohammad ibn Munkadir reports: “On a hot day, I went to Medina where I
saw Imam al-Baqir (AS) leaning on two slaves due to his being corpulent.
I said to myself: ‘A great man of Quraish working at this hour of day in
search of the material world! I will certainly give him an advice.’
Therefore, I approached and saluted him. While gasping, the Imam (AS)
greeted me back. Sweat was pouring from his head and face because of hot
weather.

I said: ‘May Allah improve your affairs! A great man of Quraish seeking
the world at this time of the day! What will happen if death overtakes
you in this situation?’ Taking his hands away from the shoulders of the
two slaves and leaning against the wall, he said: ‘By Allah, if death
overtakes me and I am in this situation, I will be in a state of
obedience to Allah by which I can preserve my value from you and people.
I am afraid of death only when I am committing a sin!’ I said: ‘May
Allah bless you! I intended to give you advice, but *you* gave me
advice.’” [^39]

Furthermore, trade and business must be accompanied with an
understanding of the Islamic rules. Al-Asbagh ibn Nabatah reports: “I
heard Ameerul Mo’minin say from on the pulpit: ‘O group of tradesmen!
First, you should learn and know the rules of lawful and unlawful trade
and then engage in trade. By God, usury amongst this Ummah is more
hidden than an ant walking on a black stone. Let your faith be
intermingled with truthfulness. A tradesman is a transgressor and
transgressors are in fire unless you give with justice and take with
justice.”[^40]

Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported by Jabir as saying: “Ameerul Mo’minin
used to walk in the marketplace with a whip in his hand. He stopped in a
place and said: ‘O group of tradesmen! Fear Allah!’ Then, he would
remind them of what was related to trade: usury, selling with
underweight, injustice, false oath, besides fairness and justice.” [^41]

In addition to knowing the rules of trade, a Muslim should act according
to his own duty and safeguard the dignity and honor of Muslims and
Islam. He should not do anything for which the enemies of Islam will
mock at us. A tradesman must be a model for Islam, not a source of
dishonor.

He should observe what is recommended and not blameworthy in business or
trade. He should practice what is lawful and avoid what is unlawful like
monopoly, underweight selling, and usury.

Truly, one of the activities of human beings in the world is business
and trade. If transactions are made justly, they are permissible,
praiseworthy and even obligatory. However, if they are not done
correctly and are contrary to the rules of Islam, they are blameworthy
or unlawful.

One of the cases that trade is blamed for is to earn wealth through
usury against which God has warned in the Holy Quran: ***“…Allah does
not bless usury, and He causes charitable deeds to prosper.”***[^42]

Elsewhere, God has said: ***“O ye who believe! Observe your duty to
Allah, and give up what remains (due to you) from usury, if ye are (in
truth) believers. And if you do not, then be warned of war (against you)
from Allah and His messenger.”***[^43]

Usury has been discussed in detail in books of jurisprudence and is
considered as a major sin. The rulings on it can be found in the same
books.

As for the punishment of usury, Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as
saying: “One Dirham of usury to God is worse than seventy acts of incest
committed in the House of God.” [^44]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has been reported as saying: “One who swallows
down usury, God will fill his stomach with the fire of hell as much as
he has swallowed down usury. Should he earn a wealth after that, God
will not accept anything of his act. God and His angels will curse him,
as long as a measure of one carat from usury is with him.”[^45]

The Holy prophet (SAW) has also been reported as saying: “The worst
trade is the one mixed with usury.”[^46] Such a trade is forbidden in
all religions and by all prophets.

Allamah Qutb Ravandi in his book Da’awat has reported: “The Messenger of
Allah (SAW), during his night journey, saw a red river with a man
swimming in it. On the bank of the river, there was sitting a man with
many stones around him. The swimmer would often come to this man and
open his mouth. The man sitting on the bank of the river would put a
stone in the swimmer’s mouth. This was his repeated doing.

The Holy prophet (SAW) asked about it and it was said to him: “He has
eaten usury during his life.”[^47]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported by Imam Baqir (AS) as saying: “One who
eats usury, the agent, the one who writes (the contract), and the two
witnesses involved in the dealing of usury are equal in the sin.”[^48]

Allamah Tabarsi mentions that Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “The Messenger of
Allah has cursed five groups of people concerning usury; the eater of
usury, the agent, the two witnesses, and the writer (of the
contract).”[^49]

It is for this reason that the Lord of the universe has made piety
obligatory in the matter of usury. Whenever the question of sale and
usury are raised, God says, “Fear Allah” so that human beings are warned
against it and keep away from this punishment.

Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali has reported Imam Baqir (AS) as saying: “The
Messenger of Allah (SAW), during the farewell (last) Hajj, delivered a
sermon, saying: “O people! By Allah! There is nothing that takes you
nearer to Paradise and keeps you away from Fire except that I have
enjoined on it to you, and there is nothing that takes you near to fire
and keeps you away from Paradise except that I have forbidden it. Be
aware! Gabriel inspired me that no one dies unless he has fully received
his sustenance. Therefore, be careful of your duty to Allah. Behave well
in seeking sustenance. Take care not to get anything unlawfully when
your sustenance comes late; for what is with God cannot be sought except
by obedience to Him.”[^50]

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasa‘il, vol. 1, p. 75.

[^2]: Taqiyyah means not to disclose or make public one's faith or some
articles of faith to the aggressive mischief-mongers, or to those who
are not fit to accept the truth.

[^3]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, pp. 459,520.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 466.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 461.

[^6]: Ibid., vol. 11, p. 462.

[^7]: Qur'an, 3:28.

[^8]: Wasail al-Shiah, vol. 1, P. 81.

[^9]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 1, P. 312.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 313.

[^11]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 696.

[^12]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 4, p. 901.

[^13]: Qur'an, 2:83.

[^14]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 5, p. 382.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 381.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 382.

[^17]: Ibid., vol. 7, p. 95.

[^18]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 478.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 476.

[^20]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 477.

[^21]: Qur'an, 16:106.

[^22]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 476.

[^23]: Qur'an, 16:106.

[^24]: Tafsir of Safi, p. 305.

[^25]: Goroohe Rastgaran (Those who were delivered), vol. 1, pp. 470,
473.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Qur'an, 65:2-3.

[^28]: Wasa’il al- Shiah, vol. 12, p. 15.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 16.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 18.

[^31]: Qur'an, 2:201.

[^32]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 12, p. 3.

[^33]: Mawali (plural form of mawla) means “one’s manumitted slaves”.

[^34]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 12 p. 5.

[^35]: Qur'an, 24:37.

[^36]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 12, p. 5.

[^37]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 478.

[^38]: Ibid.

[^39]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 12, p. 10.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 282.

[^41]: Ibid., p. 284.

[^42]: Qur'an, 2:276.

[^43]: Qur'an, 2:278-279.

[^44]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 507.

[^45]: Ibid., p. 505.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 507.

[^47]: Ibid., p. 507.

[^48]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 12, p. 430.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Al-Kafi, chapter of piety.


