16) Piety And Prayer
====================

As it can be inferred from traditions, prayer is the best act after the
acknowledgement of God. Mo’awiyah ibn Wahab reports that Imam Sadiq (AS)
was asked: “What is the best act which takes servants near to their
Lord?” The Imam (AS) said: “I do not consider any act better than prayer
after the acknowledgement of God. Do you not know that the righteous
servant of God Jesus (AS) said: ‘God has recommended prayer to me.’ In
the Holy Quran, there are about sixty or seventy occasions on which God
has spoken of it.”

It is for the same reason that the acknowledges and sworn enemy of human
beings, Satan, works hard to mislead worshippers in different ways like
making a worshipper perform his prayer not within the divine boundary,
making it invalid or dissuading the person from performing his prayer at
all. Hence, the Lord of the universe has recommended his messenger to
tell His servants:

***“Shall we call on that besides Allah, which does not benefit us nor
harm us, and shall we be returned back on our heels after Allah has
guided us, like him whom the devils have made to fall down perplexed in
the earth? He has companions who call him to the right way, (saying):
Come to us. Say: Surely the guidance of Allah, that is the (true)
guidance, and we are commanded that we should submit to the Lord of the
worlds. And you should keep up prayer and be careful of (your duty to)
Him; and He it is to Whom you shall be gathered.”***[^1]

Should you have a look at the prayer of the Muslims of the world and
think about its quality and quantity, you will see many deviations and
negligence in it, whereas God has recommended Taqwa after ordering the
prayer.

There are among Muslims ones who do not perform prayer, as if prayer is
a mountain and they are charged to carry it. Some of them even mock at
prayer. Should they deny it, they will be considered as apostate then.
There are another group of Muslims who do not deny prayer nor do thy
mock at it, but they are indifferent. Some others perform prayer, but
what a prayer! Neither correct purification nor correct ablution!
Neither perfect recitation of prayer nor perfect genuflection and
prostration! Neither the permissibility of the place of prayer not of
their clothes is important to them! Neither lawful nor unlawful issues
of prayer are of any importance to them!

There are other Muslims who perform their prayer correctly, but their
prayer has no spirituality. There are people who have performed prayer
for their whole lives, but have not reached any spiritual position.
Perhaps, most of us are included in this category.

It is perhaps for the same reason that after ordering prayer, God
Almighty has ordered Taqwa, that is to be careful of negligence,
waywardness, laziness, intoxication, idle sport, and the adherence to
anyone other than God, the Prophet, and his household.

What is this prayer, which has been so emphasized by God?

We should know that the greatest factor which prevents indecency and
evil is prayer that too accompanied by Taqwa. In this relation, God
says: ***“Surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and
evil.”***[^2]

Indecency has been defined as something whose ugliness in behavior and
speech is evident. Evil (denied deeds) is an act considered ugly by
sound reason or considered ugly by religion when sound reason cannot
pass a judgment on it. Even if there was no benefit for prayer other
than what we said, it would suffice.

Prayer has been recommended to all prophets including Jesus, John,
Abraham (AS) and others. Above all, the prophets themselves ask the Lord
of the universe to make them keep up prayer. Prophet Abraham (AS) asks
God: ***“My Lord! Make me keep up prayer and from my offspring
(too)...”***[^3]

To keep up prayer is one of the features of believers, benefactors, the
pious and men of understanding. There are numerous verses in the Holy
Quran, which refer to the same subject: ***“Those who believe in the
unseen and keep up prayer”***[^4]

Elsewhere, the Holy Quran says: ***“These are verses of the Book of
Wisdom, guidance and a mercy for the doers of goodness, those who keep
up prayer...”***[^5]

The Holy prophet (SAW) has been reported as saying: “The best of deeds
to God the most High and Exalted is prayer, benevolence, and Jihad.”[^6]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “I advise you to keep to
prayer and be careful of it. Surely, that is the best act and it is the
pillar of your religion.”[^7]

There are many benefits in prayer about which a separate book can be
written. Prayer is the best way to talk with God. That is why Imam Ali
(AS). Imam Sajjad (AS), and other Imams (AS) performed a thousand rak’as
of prayer during a day and a night; the prayer that was offered in the
highest spirituality and acknowledgement of God, the prayer they
themselves recommended to us: “Offer your prayer as if it is the last
one. Therefore, perform it with humbleness, in congregation, in the
mosque, at its proper time, in clean clothes, with mindfulness, long
prostration and full submission.”

One should note that prayer is the best way to get near to God and for
sins to be forgiven. Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali has reported: “I heard Imam
Baqir (AS) and Imam Sadiq (AS) say: “Imam Ali (AS) asked people: ‘What
is the most hopeful verse in the book of Allah?’ Some man said: ‘It is
this verse: ***“Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be
associated with Him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He
pleases.”***[^8]’

Imam Ali (AS) said: ‘It is a good verse, but it is not the answer.’

Another man said: ‘It is this verse: ***“And whoever does evil or acts
unjustly to his soul then asks forgiveness of Allah, he shall find Allah
Forgiver and Merciful.”***[^9]’

Imam Ali (AS) said: ‘It is a good verse, but it is not the answer.’

A third one said: ‘It is this verse: ***“O my servants! Who have acted
extravagantly against their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of
Allah; surely Allah forgives the faults altogether; surely He is the
forgiving, the Merciful.”***[^10]***’***

Imam Ali (AS) said: ‘It is a good verse, but it is not the answer.’

A fourth man said: ‘The answer is this verse: ***“And those who when
they commit an indecency or do injustice to their souls remember Allah
and ask forgiveness for their fault- and who forgives the fault but
Allah- and (who) do not knowingly persist in what they have
done.”***[^11]***’***

Imam Ali (AS) said: ‘It is a good verse, but that is not the answer.’

(Abu Hamzah added) People rushed towards the imam, saying: ‘By Allah, we
have no knowledge of it.’

Imam Ali (AS) said: ‘I heard from the Messenger of Allah his saying,
‘The most hopeful verse in the book of Allah is ***“And keep up prayer
at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night; surely
good deeds take away evil deed; this is a reminder to the
mindful.”***[^12]*’”*

The messenger of Allah (SAW) said: “O Ali! I swear by Him Who has sent
with the truth as a bearer of good tidings and a warner that whenever
one of you gets up to perform wudu’ (ablution), sins began falling away
from his body, and when he stands up with his face and heart before God
for prayer, nothing shall remain from his sins before he finishes his
prayer. It is as if he has been born just then. And if he commits a sin
between two prayers, shall it be for him as that (to be omitted by the
next prayer as said before).” Until he counted five prayers.

Then the messenger of Allah (SAW) said: “O Ali! The example of the five
prayers for my Ummah is the like a river flowing near the door of your
house. If there is filth in the body of one of you and he purifies
himself in that river five times a day, will there remain any filth in
his body? By Allah, such are the five prayers for my Ummah.”[^13]

Considering what we have said, leaving prayer is blameworthy and entails
severe punishment, which is Hell. That is why when the inhabitants of
Hell shall be asked: ***“What has brought you into hell, they shall say:
We were not of those who offered prayers.”***[^14]

It is for the same reason that the forsakers of prayer are considered as
unbelievers by the great jurisprudents of Islam, in the case if they
think that giving up the prayer is lawful, but if the think it is
unlawful, then after giving up intentionally three prayers, when there
is a discretionary punishment between them, one deserves to be killed.

The Holy prophet (SAW) has been reported as saying: “One who is sluggish
and careless in offering his prayer, will be afflicted with fifteen
afflictions by God, blessing will be removed from his life and
sustenance, the miens of the righteous shall be removed from his face,
he shall not be rewarded for any good deed he does, his supplication
shall not be raised to heaven, there shall be no share for him from the
supplication of the righteous, he will die hungry and thirsty, God will
assign an angel in his grave to torment him, his grave shall be dark, an
angel shall be ordered to draw him on his face while people shall look
at him, he will be reckoned a hard reckoning, God will not look at him
with mercy, he shall not be purified, and there shall be a severe
chastisement for him.”[^15]

[^1]: Qur'an, 6:71-72.

[^2]: Qur'an, 29:45.

[^3]: Qur'an, 14:40.

[^4]: Qur'an, 2:3.

[^5]: Qur'an, 31:2-4.

[^6]: Bihar al- Anwar, vol. 82, p. 206.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 209

[^8]: Qur'an, 4:48.

[^9]: Qur'an, 4:110.

[^10]: Qur'an, 39:53.

[^11]: Qur'an, 3:135.

[^12]: Qur'an, 11:114.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 220.

[^14]: Qur'an, 74:42-43.

[^15]: Safeenat al- Bihar, vol. 2, p. 43.


