29) Backbiting
==============

One of the factors which leads to the dismemberment of a society and
causes division and requires Taqwa is backbiting which has been
prohibited by religion and disapproved by reason. Backbiting is that two
or more persons speak of others (in their absence) in a way that if they
hear it, they will be annoyed. It does not really make a difference
whether what they say is related to a physical or a moral defect, or it
is related to speech or deeds.

The late Naraghi in Jami’ as-Sa’adaat says: “…even if defect might be in
his clothes, house, or mount.”

Backbiting is an indecent act and it is improbable that a devoted Muslim
commits such a blameworthy act. In this connection, God has said: ***“…
nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat the
flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it; and be careful of (your
duty to) Allah, surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy),
Merciful.”***[^1]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as
saying: “Backbiting a Muslim is worse than canker is inside one’s
abdomen. In the same way that leprosy eats away the body members,
backbiting too eats away one’s faith.”

After defining backbiting and mentioning its kinds, Allamah Majlisi
says: “Backbiting is that when people speak ill of a person with
reference or sarcastic statements. The prohibition of backbiting has
been agreed on by all jurisprudents. It is a major sin and its
punishment is the Fire according to the Holy Quran and the Sunnah.

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Jabir and Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri as saying: “Avoid backbiting, for it is worse than adultery
is. A man, who commits adultery, may repent and God may accept his
repentance, but one who backbites will not be forgiven unless the one
who has been backbitten will forgive him.”[^2]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Ali (AS) as
saying: “Paradise is forbidden for three groups of people: those who
often remind others of the favors they do to them, those who backbite,
and those who drink wine.”[^3]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has also been reported as saying: “Will anything
throw people into fire on their face except the results of their
tongues?”[^4]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has said: “To abandon backbiting is better
than ten thousands of recommended prayers for God.”[^5]

Imam Reza (AS) has been reported as saying: “God revealed the following
to one of his prophets: ‘When you get up in the morning, eat the first
thing you see, conceal the second thing you see, receive the third thing
you see, do not disappoint the fourth thing you see, and escape from the
fifth one.”

When the morning came, the first thing the prophet saw was a big black
mountain. He said to himself: ‘God Almighty has ordered me to eat it.’
However, he wondered how he could do that. Then, he said to himself: ‘My
Lord does not order anything that I cannot do.’ So, he started to walk
to the mountain. The nearer he walked toward the mountain, the smaller
became the mountain until it became like a morsel. So he ate it up. It
was the most delicious morsel. He walked on until he reached a tub of
gold. He said to himself: ‘My Lord has told me to cover it.’ He dug a
ditch and buried it. When he walked away, he found out that the tub was
out. He said to himself: ‘I did what My Lord had ordered.’

He walked further away when he saw a bird with a hawk behind it. He said
to himself: ‘My Lord has told me to receive it.’ He let his sleeve open
and the bird went into it. The hawk said: ‘Did you catch my bird while I
was after it for several days?’ The prophet said to himself: ‘My Lord
has told me not to disappoint it.’ So he cut off the leg of the bird and
threw it to the hawk.

He walked further when he reached stinking corpse. He said to himself:
‘My Lord has ordered me to escape from it.’ So he escaped from it and
returned to where he was.

In his dream, it was said to him: ‘You did what I had ordered. Do you
know the story?’ The prophet said: ‘No.’ It was said to him: ‘As for the
mountain, it is anger. A servant, who gets angry, cannot see himself
because of the intensity of his anger. If he has self-restrain and he
controls his anger, his anger will become a pure morsel which he can
eat. As for the tub, it is a righteous deed. Whenever a servant conceals
it, God Almighty will reveal it as an ornament for him in the hereafter.
As for the bird, it is a man who gives you an advice. Accept it. As for
the hawk, it is a needy man who comes to you. Do not disappoint him! As
for the stinking corpse, it is backbiting. Escape from it.”[^6]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Sa’eed ibn Jubair as
saying: “On the day of judgment, a man is brought before the divine
justice; he is given the Record of Deeds. When he does not see his good
deeds, he shall say: ‘My Lord! This is not the record of my deeds. I do
not see my acts of obedience.’ It shall be said to him: ‘Your Lord
neither errs, nor does He forget anything. Your deeds are gone by
backbiting.’ Then another man is brought; he is given his record of
deeds. Many acts of obedience shall be seen. He shall say: ‘O Lord, this
is not the record of my deeds! It shall be said to him: ‘So-and-so
person had backbitten you. His good deeds were written for you.’

Sheikh Baha’ee has related: “One day, my name was mentioned in an
assembly. A man, who claimed to be my friend, backbit me and attributed
something indecent to me, not knowing that God has said: ***“Does one of
you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother?”*** Finding that the news
had reached me, he wrote a long letter, regretting his act. I wrote to
him: ‘May God reward you for having sent a gift for me. Your gift will
make my good deeds weighty on the Day of Judgment. The Messenger of
Allah has said: ‘On the Day of Judgment when a God’s servant is brought
for reckoning, his good deeds are put on one pan of the scales and his
wrong deeds are put on the other pan of the scales. The pan of sins
becomes heavier. At this time, a record is put on his good deeds. His
good deeds become more than his sins. He shall say: ‘My Lord! What I had
of good deeds was in the pan of good deeds. What is this record then?’
God will say: ‘This is due to what they have said about you, but you
were free from it.’ This traditions makes me thank you. Even if you
would do something worse than this, I would not retaliate, but forgive
you. The remaining years of my life are too precious than to be spent on
revenge. One should think how to make up for the past and missed
things.”[^7]

It is worth mentioning that every human being should analyze the root of
sins to see the stimulation to abandon it.

Moralists have said that the factors behind backbiting are: anger,
rancor, jealousy, suspicion, derision, satisfying one’s revenge, and the
like. Therefore, human beings should do their best to eradicate these
factors and to purify themselves from them. It is in this way that they
will strengthen their Taqwa.

It is worth mentioning that both the one who backbites and the one who
hears backbiting have a share of the sin, for they both deal a blow on
society and they both disgrace a Muslim.

It is mentioned in traditions that “there is no meeting built on
backbiting, except that many things from religion are destroyed in it.
Therefore, purify your ears from listening to backbiting, because the
speaker and the listener (of backbiting) are participant in the sin”[^8]

Evidently, there are certain exceptions about the forbidden act of
backbiting mentioned by moralists in their books of jurisprudence. In
his book Ghawa’id, Shahid has said: ‘Backbiting is permissible and even
obligatory in seven cases as follows:

1- When someone deserves backbiting like those who openly talk about
their debauchery and corruption

2- When an oppressed person complains of the oppressor

3- In consultation when a suitor or trade partner counsels with others
about someone

4- When evaluation a narrator of Hadith

5- When mentioning the people of heresies and misleading thoughts

6- When bearing witness about debauchery and vices before the judge

7- When two persons know about a third one’s sin and they talk to each
other about that sin

Perhaps, backbiting in the above-mentioned cases is permissible because
it does not cause division among Muslims, rather it shall be a source of
unity and honor of Islam and Muslims. What is forbidden in Islam and
requires observance of Taqwa is everything that causes division,
dispersion and humiliation of Muslims and Islam.

[^1]: Qur'an, 49:12.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 222.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 260

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 261

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 418.

[^7]: Kashkool, vol. 5, p. 161.

[^8]: Jami‘ al-Akhbar, p. 172.


