34) The Difference of Opinions and Creeds
=========================================

One of the issues, which have to be avoided and in relation to which
Taqwa has to be exercised, is divergence of opinions and sects. Since
Adam was created, all differences, conflicts, wars, bloodletting and
disputes have come about as a result of diversity in opinion and sects.

See what the idolatry has done! The idols were Lat, Ozza, Ba’al, Hobal,
Zul Khalasah, Nawa’, Widd, Fals, Yaquth, Ya’quq, Nasr and the like!
Dualism, the concept of the existence of many gods, six-fold gods, god
of domestic and white animal, god of fire, god of metals, god of earth,
god of waters, god of plants, god of heavenly planets and stars and
fire-worshipping!

Different philosophical schools like of skeptics, cynics, stoics, and
sophists have emerged. Several creeds like Yoga, Lokayata, Sankhya and
Nyaya have come into existence.

Chinese and Japanese faiths, Buddhism and other faiths prevailing in
Asia, Europe and Africa have appeared.

Islam and its division into Shiism and Sunnism and their subdivisions
into seventy-three sects are also there.

In his book *al-Milal wen-Nihal*, Shahrestani has mentioned fifty-three
sects of Sunnism as follows:

1- Mo’tazilah

2- Wasiliyyah

3- Motheiliyyah

4- Nidhamiyyah

5- Khabtiyyah

6- Boshriyyah

7- Mo’ammariyyah

8- Mardariyyah

9- Thumamiyyah

10- Hishamiyyah

11- Jahidhiyyah

12- Khayyatiyyah

13- Juba’iyyah

14- Bahshamiyyah

15- Jabriyyah

16- Jahmiyyah

17- Najjariyyah

18- Dhirariyyah

19- Sifatiyyah

20- Ash’ariyyah

21- Moshabbihah

22- Karamiyyah

23- Khawarij (Kharijites)

24- Azariqah

25- Najdat Aathiriyyah

26- Bayhasiyyah

27- Ajadah

28- Saltiyyah

29- Hamziyyah

30- Khalafiyyah

31- Rasheediyyah

32- Maymooniyyah

33- Atrafiah

34- Jazimiyyah

35- Tha’alibah

36- Rashediyyah

37- Akhnasiyyah

38- Shaybaniyyah

39- Makrumiyyah

40- Ma’loomiyyah

41- Majhooliah

42- Abadhiyyah

43- Hafsiyyah

44- Harithiyyah

45- Yazeediyyah

46- Safariyyah

47- Morji’ah

48- Yoonusiyyah

49- Ubaydiyyah

50- Ghassaniyyah

51- Tharbaniyyah

52- Tomeniyyah

53- Salehia

The sects of Shiism are as follows: Kayssaniyyah, Harithiyyah,
Bayaniyyah, Razamiyyah, Zaydiyyah, Jaroodiyyah, Solaimaniyyah, Tabariah,
Baqiriyyah, Ja’fariyyah, Fatahiyyah, Shamatiyyah, Mousawiyyah,
Isma’eeliyyah, Batiniyyah, Imamiyyah, Nawoosiyyah, Hashimiyyah,
Mahdawiyyah and Alawiyyah.

Beyond doubt, the straight path of God is a single path and other
schools of thought are misleading.

There is a book entitled, Elzam al-Nawasb whose author was non-Muslim,
and then, God had guided (to Islam). The late Allamah Hajj Aqa Bozorg
Tehrani in his book *al-Tharee’ah* says: “The author of the book is
unknown, though the book is attributed to Sayyed ibn Tawoos and others.
It is a precious book. The author writes: ‘I have studied many
religions, but when I came to study Islam, I found it the most
comprehensive religion. I realized that the followers of Islam were
either Shiite or Sunni.

Studying about their leaders, I found out that the hagiology of Shiite
leaders is found in both the Shiite and Sunni books, but I did not find
anything about Sunni leaders except in the Sunni books. Furthermore,
eulogies found in the Sunni books were few and fake. Besides this, their
blameworthy qualities were abundant in the books of both Shiite and
Sunnis. I realized that the Shiites were rightful.’”

Then, he elaborates on Imam Ali (AS) and proves that he is the immediate
successor of the Holy Prophet (SAW). He chooses the title “Elzam
an-Nawasib” to prove the caliphate of Ali ibn Abi Talib. At the end of
the book, he resorts to the tradition of “The truth is with Ali wherever
he is.”

All theologians, in their theological books, have proved the right of
the caliphate of Ameerul Mo’minin Ali (AS) with strong proofs. The best
of them is the book, Kefayat al-Mowahhideen, by Noori Tabarsi.

The author of this book has written a treatise entitled, “Debate between
Father and Son”. Some part of the book reads: “Even if there is no proof
to show that Ali was the immediate successor to the Holy Prophet, such
praiseworthy qualities of Imam Ali as knowledge, forbearance, courage,
bravery, patience, steadfastness, piety, eloquence, generosity, devotion
and statesmanship were sufficient to prove his vicegerency. Let alone
the fact that God addressed the Holy Prophet when saying, ***“O Apostle!
Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord, and if you do it
not, then you have not delivered His message.”***[^1]

God has also said: ***“This day have I perfected for you your religion
and completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a
religion.”***[^2]

There are other verses in which the obedience to Ali (AS) is considered
the same as the obedience to God and the Holy Prophet (SAW): **“O you
who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from
among you.”**[^3]

In another verse, God has appointed Ali as an authority after Himself
and His Messenger: ***“Only Allah is your guardian and His Apostle and
those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while
they bow.”***[^4] Here, the reference is to no one but Imam Ali (AS).

In the successively transmitted traditions of Shiite and Sunni Muslims,
we read that the Holy Prophet (a.s.) has repeatedly announced the
appointing of Imam Ali (AS) as his successor: “Surely my successor is
Ali ibn Abi Talib and after him my grandson, Hassan and Hossain and
following them, the nine Imams from the progeny of Imam Hossain (a.s.),
who are the leaders of the believers.” “The most knowledgeable among you
in judgment is Ali.” “You (Ali) are my vicegerent and heir.” “I am
leaving among you two weighty things; the Book of Allah and my progeny,
my household.” “You (Ali) are to me as was Aaron to Moses except that
there is no prophet after me.” “The example of my household is like the
example of Noah’s ark and Bab Hittah (gate of forgiveness) in the
Children of Israel.” “I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate.”
“Surely, my vicegerents and successors and the proofs of Allah to people
after me are twelve. The first of them is Ali and the last of them is my
son, Mahdi.” All these quotations can be found in the books, Yanabee’
al-Mawaddah by Sheikh Suleiman al-Balkhi, Ethbaat al-Hudaat and other
books written by Shiite and Sunni scholars.

Therefore, if one wishes to have social piety, to seek unity and to
enjoy purity, he must put aside his bias, open the eyes of his heart,
listen with the ears of his heart, put aside Satanic temptations, fight
against falsehood, seek assistance from God, not fear crowds of people,
observe the truth and not see his own relatives and kin. He must be
attracted by the truth and not be by falsehood.

I would like to draw the attention of dear readers to an interesting
tradition mentioned by Tabarsi in his book, Dala’il al-Imamah, which
conveys both the praiseworthy qualities of the Ahlul Bayt (AS) and the
harms of the enmity against them. It is then that the harms of diversity
of opinions and sects and the truth of Islam become clear.

Imarah ibn Zeid reports: “When Hisham ibn Abdul Melik ibn Marwan had
gone to perform the Hajj, Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (AS) were there to
perform the Hajj too. Imam Sadiq (AS) delivered a sermon as follows:
“Praise be to Allah who appointed Mohammad as prophet and honored us by
his prophethood. Therefore, we are the chosen ones among the people and
the selected among His servants. Therefore, happy is one who follows us
and wretched is one who is our enemy. Some people say that they love us,
but they love our enemies. One who follows and assists them is our
enemy. Such a person has not listened to the words of our Lord nor has
he acted to them.”

(Imam) Abu Abdullah Ja’far ibn Mohammad (as-Sadiq)(AS) said: “Mosaylamah
ibn Abdul Melik reported to his brother what he had heard. He did not
show any reaction until he went to Sham and we went to Medina. Then, he
sent a herald to the governor of Medina, asking him to send my father
and me to Sham.

When we reached Sham, he did not give us permission to go to the court
of Hisham (the Umayyad caliph). After three days, we were given
permission to go to the court. We found him sitting on his royal throne
and armed courtiers were standing in front of him. The noblemen of his
tribe were shooting their arrows at the mark they had put opposite to
them. At this time, Hisham said to my father: “Try shooting with the
noblemen of your tribe.” By saying these words, he intended to dishonor
my father. He thought that my father was not able to shoot arrows and
was in need of consolation.

My father said: “Well, I have grown old. You would better exempt from
it.” Hisham said: “By God Who has honored us with His religion and His
Messenger, I will not exempt you.”

Referring to one of the Sheikhs of the Umayyads , he said: “Give your
bow to him!”

Taking the bow and one arrow from him, my father put the arrow in the
bowstring, drew and hit the target. He did the same successively with
nine arrows. Sign of anger could be seen on Hisham’s face. He could not
but say: “O Abu Ja’far! You have done well. You are the best archer
among the Arabs and non-Arabs! Why did you say you had grown old?”

Regretting for what he had asked, Hisham was about to order the killing
of my father. He had lowered his head while my father and I were
standing before him.

As our standing lasted long, I could see the sign of anger in my
father’s face, for whenever he got angry, he would give an abrupt look
at the sky. Seeing this state of my father, Hisham called: ‘O Mohammad!
Come up!

My father went up and I followed him too. Hisham hugged my father,
making him sit on his right side and then hugged me, making me sit on
his left side. Turning to my father, Hisham said: ‘The tribe of Quraish
should take pride over the Arabs and the non-Arabs for having you among
them. But tell me who has taught you the art of archery and how long it
took you to learn it?’

My father said: ‘As you know, archery is prevailing among the people in
Medina. I learnt it in my childhood and then gave it up. As Ameerul
Mo’minin has asked me, I took the bow and shot the arrows.’

Hisham said: ‘I have not seen such archer since I have known myself. I
do not think there is anyone on the earth with such a skill. Is Ja’far
too as good as you are?’

My father said: ‘We are the heirs of the religion that God has described
as the following: ***“This day have I perfected for you your religion
and completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a
religion.”***[^5] The earth is never emptied of one of us who are
perfect when others are imperfect.’

Imam Baqir (AS) says: ‘Hearing this from my father, Hisham’s right eye
transformed. He was red with anger. He lowered his head, kept silent for
a moment and asked my father: ‘Are our ancestors, the sons of Abd Manaf,
and yours not the same?’

My father said: ‘It is so, but God Almighty, be highly praised, has made
us exclusive with His own knowledge and not others.’

Hisham said: ‘Has God Almighty not sent Mohammad from the tree of Abd
Manaf to all people? How have you inherited what others have been
deprived of? This is while the Messenger of Allah has been ordained for
all people and that is the words of Allah: ***“And there is nothing
concealed in the heaven and the earth but it is in a clear book.”***[^6]
How is it that you are the heir of that knowledge when there is no
prophet after Mohammad and you are not a prophet either?’

My father said: ‘It is according to the words of Allah to the Messenger:
***“Do not move your*** ***tongue with it to make haste with it.”***[^7]
What the Messenger of Allah (SAW) revealed was for all people and what
he did not reveal, was exclusively for us. It is for the same reason
that he talked privately with his brother Ali and not with his other
companions. On this basis, God sent down the Holy Quran: ***“… and that
the retaining ear might retain it.”***[^8]

Addressing his companions, the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said: ‘I asked
God to make it be your ear, O Ali.’ It is for the same reason that in
Kufa, Ali ibn Abi Talib said: ‘The Messenger of Allah taught me a
thousand gates of knowledge, from each one of which a thousand other
gates open. The Messenger of Allah (SAW) taught him the hidden things
making it exclusive to him. In the same way that God made his knowledge
exclusive to His most honorable one of His people, His Messenger too
made Ali exclusive with the hidden secrets and taught him what no one of
his tribe knew. It was in this way that we inherited the hidden
secrets.’

Hisham ibn Abdul Melik said: ‘Ali claimed to know the unseen whereas God
had not made anyone aware of His invisible knowledge. How can he claim
such a thing?’ My father said: ‘God, be highly praised, sent down a book
to His Messenger, in which He has explained everything that has been, is
or will be until the Day of Judgment: ***“We have revealed the Book to
you explaining clearly everything”***,[^9] and ***“and a guidance and an
admonition to those who guard (against evil)”***,[^10] and ***“…and We
have recorded everything in a clear register.”***[^11] and ***“We have
not neglected anything in the Book.”***[^12] and ***“And there is
nothing concealed in the heaven and the earth but it is in a clear
book.”***[^13]

God revealed to His Messenger not to leave anything of the hidden
secrets unsaid unless he would make Ali familiar with them, to order Ali
alone to collect the Holy Quran after him, and to enshroud and bury him.

The Messenger of Allah told his companions that it was forbidden for
them and his household except Ali to look at his private parts, for Ali
was from him and he was from Ali. Whatever was (lawful) for him was
(lawful) for Ali, and whatever was against Ali, would be against him. It
was Ali who would fulfill his mission and would keep his promises.

Addressing his companions, the Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib is fighting for the exegesis of the Quran as I was fighting
for its revelation. The perfect exegesis of the Quran is only with Ali
and with no one else.’

It was for the same reason that the Messenger of Allah (SAW) said to his
companions: ‘The most knowledgeable in judgment is Ali.’ Umar ibn
al-Khattab used to say: ‘If Ali was not there, Umar would perish.’”

At this moment, Hisham thought for a while and after a long pause said:
‘Ask what you need.’ Imam Baqir (AS) said: ‘I left my family while they
were in fear.’ Hisham said: ‘May Allah keep them safe from fear with
your going back!’

My father hugged him, prayed for him and said goodbye to him. I too did
what my father did. Then, we went out. Opposite to his court, there was
an open field on one side of which people were sitting. My father asked:
‘Who are those people?’ The doorkeeper of Hisham said: ‘They are priests
and monks and one who will come soon is a scholar who holds a gathering
once a year for people to come and ask their religious questions.’

My father wrapped his head with a piece of cloth and I did the same. He
moved towards and sat near them. I sat behind my father. This news
reached Hisham. He ordered his agents to attend the gathering and inform
him of what my father would do. A group of Muslims circle round my
father.

The Christian scholar, who had fastened a yellow silk ribbon around his
head, came in. All the priests and monks rose up for him. They greeted
him until he reached the chief seat of the gathering. He looked at all
those who were present, and then asked: ‘Are you from us or from the
mercified nation?’ My father said: ‘From this mercified nation.’ He
asked: ‘Are you from their scholars or from their unlearned ones?’ My
father said: ‘I am not from their unlearned ones.’ Being shaken up and
anxious, he said: ‘I am going to ask you a question.’ My father said:
‘Ask your question!’ He said: ‘How do you claim that the dwellers of
Paradise eat and drink, but they do not urinate or defecate? What proof
do you have for that from this world?’ My father said: ‘Our proof is
invisible and cannot be denied is foetus in the mother’s womb. A foetus
eats, but does not defecate.’

The Christian scholar became more anxious and said: ‘Why did you not say
you were one of their scholars?’ My father answered: ‘I said I was not
from their unlearned ones.’ In the meantime, Hisham’s agents were
closely watching the scene.

The Christian scholar said to my father: ‘I am going to ask you another
question.’ My father said: ‘Ask your question!’ He said: ‘How do you
claim that the fruits of Paradise are always fresh and whatever the
inhabitants eat from them, they are not diminished. What proof do you
have for this claim?’

My father said: ‘The proof is our Quran which is always fresh. It is
something imperishable with all Muslims.’

The Christian scholar became very upset, saying: ‘You did not say you
were one of their scholars.’ My father said: ‘And not from their
unlearned ones.’ Then, the Christian scholar said: ‘I will now ask you a
question (as if it was very important).’ My father said: ‘Ask your
question!’ He said: ‘Tell me about an hour which is neither the hour of
night nor the hour of day.’

My father said: ‘It is an hour between the dawn and the sunrise during
which a sick person calms down, one who has a pain goes to sleep and an
unconscious one comes to consciousness. God has set it as a delight for
the people of delight and people of deed in the hereafter, a clear proof
and a veil for unbelievers and those who do not worship.’

The Christian scholar gave a loud cry and said: ‘There is one more
question. By God, I will ask you a question that you cannot answer.’ My
father said: ‘Ask your question. I know that you will break your oath!’
He said: ‘Tell me about infants who were born on the same day and died
on the same day. One of them lived as long as a hundred and fifty years
and the other one lived for fifty years.’

My father said: ‘They are Uzair and Uzairah. They were born on the same
day. They reached the age of maturity. Being twenty-five, Uzair passed
by a cemetery. He was riding on his ass. He asked himself: ‘How will God
raise the dead when their bones are decayed?’ When Uzair, whom God had
chosen and guided, said such words, God was angry with him, and He hence
made him die for a hundred years. Then He raised him to life. When Uzair
went back to his home, he did not even recognize his own brother
Uzairah. He sent for his son and grandson who had grown old while he
himself was a young man of twenty-five.

They asked: ‘Are you a man of heaven or the earth?’ Uzair said to his
brother: ‘I am Uzair! God was angry with me because of what I had said,
though He had chosen and guided me. So, he made me die and then raised
me to life to make me certain that He has power over everything. This is
the food, drink and the ass with which I left you. They are as they were
before so that you will believe in God with certainty.’ Uzair lived for
another twenty-five years with them and God made him and his brother die
on the same day.

The scholar, and all the other Christians, rose up while addressing the
people: ‘You have brought here someone more knowledgeable than me so as
to disgrace me! Muslims should know that they have a person who has a
comprehensive knowledge about our religion and the knowledge that he has
we do not have. By God, I will speak no more with you nor will I sit
here!’

All people left, but my father sat in his place. I was with him too.

The news reached Hisham. We returned home. Hisham sent us a prize and
ordered us not to stay there, but to go back to Medina. Since the news
had spread among people, Hisham sent a book to the city of Madyan,
reading: “The two magicians, sons of Abu Torab, Mohammad ibn Ali and
Ja’far ibn Mohammad, whom I summoned to Sham, have converted to
Christianity, and hence they are apostates. Whoever greets them, sells
anything to them, or shakes hand with them is sentenced to death.”

When we arrived in the city of Madyan, people closed the doors before
us, cursed us and cursed Ali ibn Abi Talib. They did not sell food to
us.

My father spoke to them softly, saying: ‘Fear Allah, and do not err! We
are not so as what you have been falsely told, nor as what you are
saying about us. Treat us as you treat the Jews, the Christians and the
Zoroastrians!’ They said to us: ‘You are worse than the Jews, the
Christians and the Zoroastrians, for they pay poll tax (Jizyah), but you
do not pay it.’

My father said: ‘Open the doors and charge us with poll tax as you
charge them.’ They said: ‘We will not open the doors until you starve to
death on your horses, and your horses will starve to death under your
feet.’

My father advised them, but it was useless. He went up the mountain.
Reaching the top, he put his fingers into his ears and loudly cried:
***“And to Madyan, their brother, Shu’aib…”***[^14] until he reached
this verse: ***“What remains with Allah is better for you if you are
believers.”***[^15]

Then, the Imam said: ‘By God! We are the remainder of Allah on His
earth.’

God sent a black wind which made the voice of my father be heard by
women, men, and children who went up to the roofs to watch my father. An
old man from Madyan, who had come up to the roof, loudly said: ‘Fear
Allah, O people of Madyan!’

They all felt fear. So, they opened the doors and received us. This news
reached Hisham. The following day, we moved towards Medina. Hisham wrote
to the governor of Madyan to kill the old man who had asked people to
help us. He had also written a letter to the governor of Medina to have
my father poisoned, but before he did it, Hisham had died.”[^16]

Truly, social piety requires every individual to refrain from creating
division in society. A society would never be corrupt if Taqwa would be
followed and people walk in the straight path. Even if there was a
little difference among people, the divine rule of “make peace between
brethren” could be a solution; ***“The believers are but brethren,
therefore make peace between your brethren and be careful of (your duty
to) Allah that mercy may be had on you.”***[^17]

Were it not for divergence of ideologies and sects, there would be no
wars, conflicts, bloodlettings, poverty, sanctions, insecurity, high
prices, hoarding, despotism, opportunism, and individual and social
deprivations.

[^1]: Qur'an, 5:67.

[^2]: Qur'an, 5:3.

[^3]: Qur'an, 4:59.

[^4]: Qur'an, 5:55.

[^5]: Qur'an, 5:3.

[^6]: Qur'an, 27:75.

[^7]: Qur'an, 75:16.

[^8]: Qur'an, 69:12.

[^9]: Qur'an, 16:89.

[^10]: Qur'an, 3:138.

[^11]: Qur'an, 36:12

[^12]: Qur'an, 6:38.

[^13]: Qur'an, 27:75.

[^14]: Qur'an, 11:84.

[^15]: Qur'an, 11:86.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 181, 189.

[^17]: Qur'an, 49:10.


