35) Choosing of Companions
==========================

One of the other issues in which man has to observe Taqwa is the matter
of choosing friends. If one is indifferent, he shall suffer losses in
this world and the hereafter. One should make friend with those who are
Godly, whose speech and whose deeds are accepted by Allah. In this
relation, God says:

***“And withhold yourself with those who call on their Lord morning and
evening desiring His goodwill, and let not your eyes pass from them,
desiring the beauties of this world’s life; and do not follow him whose
heart We have made unmindful of Our remembrance, and he follows his low
desires and his case has gone beyond all bounds.”***[^1]

From this Quranic verse, it is inferred that we should associate with
people who call God morning and evening, and who seek God’s pleasure and
not the people of pleasures who are unmindful of God.

Ibn Abbas relates: “The Messenger of Allah (SAW) was asked: ‘Which
friends are the best?’ He said: ‘One whose sight reminds you of God,
whose saying adds to your knowledge, and whose deeds remind you of the
hereafter.”[^2]

The same tradition has been related on the authority of Prophet Jesus
(AS) who has said: “Get close to God and away from people of sins.
Befriend God by enmity with them and seek God’s pleasure at the cost of
their anger.”[^3]

Imam Ali (AS) advises us in this way: “It is incumbent on you to be
truthful to your friends! Make friends as many as you can, for they are
your power at the time of ease and a shield in trials. Counsel those who
fear Allah. Love your brethren as much as you love Taqwa. Beware of bad
women, and be careful even before the good ones.”[^4]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as
saying: “Every man follows the faith of his friends. Therefore, each of
you should take care whom he befriends.”[^5]

A friend has great influence on his friends. Most of human sufferings
and losses arise from friends. It is a friend who pushes one to
addiction and causes him misfortune in this world and the hereafter. It
is a friend who makes one a hypocrite, makes him enter battle against
God, makes him corrupt and deviant. It is on this basis that the
Messenger of Allah (a.s.) has said: “Every man follows the religion of
his friend.”

Therefore, we should be very careful in choosing our friends. Any
negligence results in misfortune. One hour of friendship with a deviated
friend might change our fate and cause a lot of regrets.

In traditions, it has been advised not to associate with fool, miser,
timid, liar, astray, wrongdoer, adulterer, tyrant king, deceitful
friend, wealthy oppressor, enemy, one who has no love for relatives,
evildoers, women, people of heresies, and those who curse the friends of
God. Addressing his son Imam Hassan (AS), Imam Ali (AS) says: “My son!
Avoid making friend with a fool, for he intends to benefit you, but he
will harm you. Avoid making friend with a miser, for he prevents you
from getting what you need. Avoid making friend with a wrongdoer, for he
betrays you out for a little. Avoid making friend with a liar, for he is
like a mirage that makes far things appear close to you and makes close
things appear far to you .”[^6]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “Keep away from those whom
your hearts do not like.”

Evidently, the Lord of the universe has naturally created all human
beings pure and innocent. The conscience, which is the inner ruler of
man, can say what is praiseworthy and what is blameworthy. Hence, a pure
heart is not pleased with vices and does not approve any indecency.

Mostafa Lotfi, in his book *Ghorfat al-Ahzan* (chamber of sorrows),
relates an admonitory story as follows: “I had a friend whom I loved
very much. He was the only friend who never hurt me. I never hurt him
either. I had to go on a long journey. Hence, I left Cairo and said
farewell to my dear friend. We wrote to each other for a long time, but
all of a sudden all the correspondence stopped. There was no news of him
anymore. When I went back to Cairo, I went to his house, but I was said
he had moved to a new place. I was very sad and did my best to find his
address, but it was useless.

One night when I was going home, I got lost and found myself in a
faraway neighborhood of the city. I felt I was being drowned in a black
sea between two high mountains when I heard the moaning of a man. I said
to myself: ‘How strange that this dark night has hidden the secrets of
the miserable man in it.’ I had vowed to help any misfortunate man I
found. The moaning came from a house. I knocked the door. A small girl
in shabby dress opened the door. I asked her if there was a sick person
at home. She said that her father needed help. I entered the house,
feeling that I was going to the world of the dead from the world of
living ones. I went near the sick person and sat beside him. He was
nothing but skin and bones.

He looked at me for a long time, moving his lips and finally said:
‘Thanks God, I finally found my friend!’ He was my old friend! I became
very upset and my heart stood still. I asked him surprisingly: ‘What is
this condition?’ With a gesture, he suggested I should raise him to a
sitting position. I did so. He started to talk with a weak voice,
telling his story: ‘I was living with my mother for ten years. A wealthy
man living in a splendid palace was our next-door neighbor. I was
enchanted by his beautiful girl. I made friend with her with the promise
of marrying her, but before marriage, she became pregnant. I was
double–hearted as to whether I should marry or leave her.

Finally, I made up my mind to leave her. I moved to a new house without
any information. One day, I received a letter from the girl to whom I
had lied about marriage. The letter greatly shook me.’ My friend
stretched his hand and took out a letter from under the pillow. He gave
the letter to me to read it.

The letter started with these words: ‘If I am writing to you, it is not
because I love you, for your deceitful behavior is not important. When
you left me, you did not think about the fate of me and the child I had
with me. I cannot call you a human being with your merciless and
inhumane behavior. You said you loved me, but you were lying. You seduce
me and broke your promise! The result was that I escaped from home and
took residence in a poor district of the city. My parents died
frustrated in their hopes. I am in my deathbed in the last days of my
life. You are a liar, deceitful, a criminal! I do not think that God
will let you free and let you go unpunished! I am not writing this
letter to express my love, for you are too mean to be loved. You have a
trust with me and that is your innocent daughter. If you have a bit of
fatherly love, come and take this miserable child!’

I had hardly finished the letter when I realized that he was bitterly
weeping. He said: ‘When I read this letter, I was about to die. I
speedily went to her place which is this very house. I found her lying
motionless on this bed with her daughter sitting next to her. Seeing the
girl weeping, I became unconscious. When I came to consciousness, I had
the feeling that my inhumane crimes had turned into ferocious beasts
which were about to attack me.

Therefore, I decided to live and die like her in the same room which I
called the ‘chamber of sorrows’. Now my death has come and an inner call
says to me that God has forgiven me.’ When he said this, he stopped
talking and fell down on the bed. The last thing he said was: ‘I entrust
my daughter to you, my friend.’”[^7]

We can say that most of misfortunes, good or bad fate of human beings
depend on friend and someone with whom we associate. Hence, we should
observe Taqwa in relation to that.

[^1]: Qur'an, 18:28.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 186.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 189.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 187.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 192.

[^6]: Nahj al-Balaghah Faiz, vol. 2, p. 1094

[^7]: Javan, vol. 1, p. 322 quoted from Al-Nadharat, vol. 1, p. 245


