38) Hypocrisy
=============

One of the factors that make people drive away and dislike someone is
hypocrisy which, due to religion and reason, is forbidden. It is
reproached both by God and people. Hypocrisy has been strictly
prohibited by the Holy Quran and the Sunnah.

Hypocrisy has been blamed in several verses in the Holy Quran: ***“So
woe to the praying ones, who are unmindful of their prayers, who do good
to be seen and withhold the necessaries of life.”***[^1]

In describing the hypocrites, God says: ***“…and when they stand up to
prayer, they stand up sluggishly; they do it only to be seen of men and
do not remember Allah save a little.”***[^2]

In relation to charity, God says: ***“O you who believe! Do not make
your charity worthless by reproach and injury, like him who spends his
property to be seen of men and does not believe in Allah and the last
day.”***[^3]

In relation to hypocrisy in Jihad, God says: ***“Be not as those who
came forth from their dwellings boastfully and to be seen of men, and
debar (men) from the way of Allah, while Allah is surrounding all they
do.”***[^4]

As it can be inferred from these verses, hypocrisy is of different
kinds. The late Naraghi has classified it into two categories; either in
faith or in religious duties. Hypocrisy in religious duties is
classified into three kinds; 1- In the origin of worships 2- In
recommendable worships 3- In the description of worships.

Nevertheless, hypocrisy can be classified into other divisions as
follows:

1- Physical hypocrisy, like those who pretend not to pay attention to
their own physical appearance; to deceive people, they leave their hair
disheveled, put a sign of prostration on their forehead, and undergo a
diet to lose weight to show that they do not care for the worldly
affairs.

2- Hypocrisy in the way they are dressed; they wear ragged and shabby
clothes to show their sanctity to people.

3- Hypocrisy in speech; they give lectures on morality, recite verses
from the Quran and remember Allah pretentiously to show that they are
religious. They show their anger on prohibited act and express regret
for people’s sins.

4- Hypocrisy in action; performing long prostration and genuflection,
putting their hands on their thighs in prayer and doing pretentious act
in the Hajj, fasting, charity, Jihad, feeding the poor, and meeting with
the Islamic scholars are some of the examples of this kind of hypocrisy.
It is well to mention that if we see such behaviors in others, we should
not always consider them as hypocrisy. A man with such conducts might be
a hypocrite.

Hypocrisy invalidates religious duties and causes God’s wrath. It is for
the same reason that it has been prohibited, and Taqwa has been
recommended.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has reported his father as saying: “The Messenger of
Allah (SAW) was asked what salvation on the Day of Judgment would be,
and he said: “If you look for salvation, do not act deceitfully, for God
will act deceitfully too. Whoever plays tricks on God, God will play
tricks on him too and takes away his faith as long as his ‘self’ plays
tricks on Him.”

The Holy Prophet (SAW) was asked: “How can one act deceitfully towards
God?” The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: “When he acts to what God has ordered
but his act is intended for others. Therefore, observe Taqwa and avoid
hypocrisy, for it is like associating something with Allah. A hypocrite
is called by four names on the Day of Judgment: “O disbeliever!” “O
wrongdoer!” “O deceitful!” and “O loser!” It shall be said to him: ‘your
acts are worthless!’ ‘Your reward has gone!’ ‘There is no share for you
today. Ask your reward from the one you have acted for!’”[^5]

Abu Baseer narrated: “I heard Imam Sadiq (AS) say: ‘On the Day of
Judgment, a God’s servant, who has performed prayer, shall be brought.
He shall say: ‘O Lord! I offered prayers for Your commandment.’ It shall
be said to him: ‘You offered prayers so that people would say: ‘how good
his prayer is!’ Throw him into fire!’

Another servant who has learnt how to recite the Quran shall be brought.
He shall say: ‘O Lord! I learnt the Quran for Your sake.’ It shall be
said to him: ‘You learnt it so that people would say: ‘what a good voice
he has!’ Throw him into the fire!’

A servant, who has fought in the front, shall be brought. He shall say:
‘O Lord! I fought for Your sake.’ It shall be said to him: ‘You fought
so that people might say: ‘how brave he is!’ Throw him into fire!’

A God’s servant, who has given charity, shall be brought. He shall say:
‘O Lord! I spent my wealth for Your sake.’ It shall be said to him: ‘But
you have spent it just to be said (about you): how generous he is!’
Throw him into fire!’”[^6]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Whoever does a good deed
secretly, it is written secretly for him and whenever he speaks of it,
it will be written openly. If he speaks of it again, it will be omitted
and “hypocrisy” shall be written for him.”[^7]

There are many traditions on hypocrisy, but the following is a story
related by Sayyed Jaza’iri: “Some man, who was used to hypocrisy, said
to himself: ‘I would better go to the so-and-so mosque in the outskirt
of the city and offer the prayer there, in order not to be seen. When he
reached the mosque, he began offering prayer until it got dark. He was
offering prayer when he heard the sound of the opening of the door. He
became happy saying to himself: ‘Thanks to God, I was seen here while
offering prayer.’ He prolonged his prayer until dawn. When it was
morning and somehow clear, he saw a black dog that had found refuge in
the mosque from rain! He said to himself: ‘Alas! Even one night that I
wished to pray for the sake of God, I actually prayed for the black
dog.”[^8]

It has been narrated that a worshipper had to re-offer his prayers that
he had offered for thirty years. He always attended the congregational
prayer in the first row. One day when he failed to take part in the
prayer on time, he became annoyed. He came to know that all his prayers
had been affected by hypocrisy.

[^1]: Qur'an, 107:4-7.

[^2]: Qur'an, 4:142.

[^3]: Qur'an, 2:264.

[^4]: Qur'an, 8:47.

[^5]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 1, p. 51

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 301.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 324.

[^8]: Anwar al-Nomaniah, p. 251.


