39) Self-Conceit
================

One of the factors, which must be avoided, is self-conceit. It
dismembers the society and leads to the effacement of religious acts.
Self-conceit means that one is pleased with himself and considers
himself superior to others whether he has an accomplishment or not. In
other words, he is proud of himself.

Some people have said that self-conceit means to magnify a feature while
forgetting its source.

Sheikh Baha’iy has been reported as saying: “Beyond doubt when a someone
does a praiseworthy act, like keeping vigil, it is a source of delight
to him. If he considers it as a blessing from God and he fears God at
the same time, such condition is not self-conceit. But if he considers
it as from him himself and from God and sees it as great, it is as if he
lays God under an obligation for having performed prayer or having
fasted, and in this case, it is considered as self-conceit.

It is a feature blamed by the Holy Quran and traditions. God says:
***“…therefore, do not attribute purity to your yourselves; He knows him
best who guards (against evil).”***[^1]

Elsewhere He says: ***“What! Is he whose evil deed is made fair to him
that he considers it good?”***[^2]

On the same topics, God says: ***“Shall We inform you of the greatest
losers in (their) deeds? (These are) they whose labor is lost in this
world’s life and they think that they do good work.”***[^3]

Allamah Majlisi says that most ignorant people have this feature, for
they do what is, due to reason and religion, forbidden, but they
consider them as good features and take pride in them.

About this feature, God says: ***“They make it a favor unto you that
they have become Muslims. Say: Deem not your becoming Muslims a favor
unto me; but Allah does confer a favor on you, inasmuch as He has led
you to the Faith, if ye are truthful.”***[^4]

Ali ibn Sowayd narrated: “I asked Imam Ali (AS) about self-conceit that
omits the good deeds, and the Imam (AS) said: ‘Self –conceit has certain
stages. One stage is that when one does something wrong, but it seems
fair to him and he has the impression that he has done a good deed. The
next stage is that when one believes in God, but makes favor unto God
whereas it is God Who makes favor unto him.”[^5]

Abdurrahman ibn al-Hajjaj narrated: “I said to Imam Sadiq (AS): ‘A man
may do something and he is fearful and worried. Then he does something a
little good, and he may feel a little self-conceit.’ The Imam (AS) said:
‘When he is fearful, he is in a better state than when he is
self-conceited.”[^6]

Imam Ali (AS) said: “A sin, which makes you regretful, is better than a
good deed, which makes you self-conceited.”[^7]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: “One day, Prophet Moses (AS) was
sitting in a place when Satan entered with a colorful shirt on. When he
approached Prophet Moses, he took off the shirt, stood opposite to, and
greeted him. Prophet Moses (AS) said: ‘Who are you?’ He said: ‘I am
Iblis.’ Prophet Moses said: ‘You are Iblis?! May God keep you away from
us!’ He said: ‘I have come here to greet you, for you have a high
position with God.’ Prophet Moses said: ‘What is this shirt?’ Iblis
said: ‘I attract the hearts of the children of Adam with it.’ Prophet
Moses asked: ‘What is the sin that, which if is committed by the
children of Adam, makes you be dominant on them?’ Iblis said: ‘Whenever
one is self-conceited, his deed seems great and his sin seems little to
him.”[^8]

God said to Prophet David (AS): “O David, Give good tidings to the
sinners and warn the veracious!” Prophet David said: “How can I give
good tidings to the sinners and warn the veracious?” God said: “O David!
Tell the sinners that I accept repentance, and warn the veracious not to
be self-conceited, for there is no servant, who is called for reckoning
and is not perished.”[^9]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: “There are three things that cause
destruction; obeyed stinginess, followed desires, and
self-conceit.”[^10]

It has been narrated: “One day, Prophet Jesus (AS) was making a journey
and a short man was accompanying him. They went on their journey until
they reached the sea. Prophet Jesus (AS) said: ‘In the name of Allah’,
and walked on the water. Following Jesus, the man too said ‘in the name
of Allah’, and began walking on the water. Self-conceit afflicted the
man. He said to himself: ‘This is Jesus, the spirit of Allah walking on
the water. I am walking on the water too. What is his superiority over
me then?’ As soon as he said this, he sank in the water. He was about to
drown when Jesus (AS) saved him, saying: ‘O short one! What did you
say?’ He said: ‘So-and-so thought came to my mind.’ Jesus (AS) said:
‘You exceeded the limits, hence God became angry with you.”[^11]

We must take the devotion and piety of the prophets and the infallible
Imams as a model. When Imam Baqir (AS) sees Imam Sajjad with his
devotion, Sahifah (supplications), prayer, recitation of the Quran,
prolonged prostrations, weeping (out of the fear of Allah), he cannot
help weeping. The father calls him, saying: ‘Bring me some of the papers
containing the supplications of Ameerul Mo’minin Ali ibn Abi Talib.’
When they are brought, he looks at, puts them on the floor, and says:
‘How can your father’s worship be compared to Ali’s worship!’ In another
tradition, it is narrated that ‘Who has the power to practise Ali’s
worship?’

In the Sabah (morning) Supplication, Imam Sajjad (AS) says: “O Lord! My
heart is veiled to see You and my self is sick and defective! Passions
have overcome me! My devotion is little! My sins are abundant, and my
tongue confesses my sins.”

Addressing God in his Abu Hamzah Supplication, Imam Sajjad (a.s.) says:
“Your good comes down to us and our evils go up to You! But this does
not prevent You from showering us with Your blessings and being Kind to
us with Your inward and outward blessings. Help me to weep over myself,
for I have wasted my life with false desires.”

In the Sha’baniyyah Supplication, the Imams said: “O Lord! If my errors
have made me abased before You, forgive me for the sake of my confidence
in You. O Lord! If my sins have kept me away from Your grace, being
certain about Your generosity has awakened me.”

Jesus (AS) said: “What a many lantern which is extinguished by wind and
what a many devoted person who has become corrupt by self-conceit!”[^12]

It has been narrated: “A pious man from among the Israelites said to God
Almighty: ‘O Lord! how is my state with You? If it is good, I will add
to my good deeds, and if it is bad, I can reproach myself before death.’
Someone came to him and said: ‘There is nothing good for you with God.’
He said: ‘O Lord! Where have all my good deeds gone?’ God said:
‘Whenever you did something good and you informed the people of it,
nothing remained for you (from that good deed) except that which you
yourself were pleased with.”[^13]

It is narrated: “A scholar went to a pious man, saying: ‘How is your
prayer?’ The pious man said: ‘One like you asks about my prayer while I
have worshipped God for so many years!’ Then, the scholar asked: ‘How is
your weeping?’ The pious man said: ‘I weep in a way that my tears run on
my cheeks.’ Realizing that self-conceit was about to lead him to
perdition, the scholar said: ‘Surely your laughing when you fear Allah
is better than your weeping when you offer your worship as a favor from
you on God, for the prayer of one who lays God under an obligation shall
never go up.”[^14]

Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (AS) have been reported as saying: “Once, two
men entered a mosque. One of them was pious and the other was a
wrongdoer. They came out of the mosque. The wrongdoer became a veracious
man and the pious became a wrongdoer. This is because the pious man
entered the mosque while being proud of his devotion, but the wrongdoer
was ashamed and asked forgiveness for his sins.”[^15]

How can we dare then to be proud of our prayer and good deeds before
God? Can we really lay God under an obligation? What a shame, what
ignorance, what self-centeredness and what folly?!

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by Abu ar-Rabee’ as saying: “Whoever
is self-conceited is perished, and whoever is proud of his own opinion
shall be perished.”

Then the Imam (AS) narrated that Jesus (AS) said: “I have cured many
diseases with the permission of God. I have healed born-blind people and
the lepers. I have raised a dead to life by the permission of God, but I
could not improve folly.” Jesus (AS) was asked: “O Spirit of Allah, who
is fool?” Jesus (AS) said: “One who is self-conceited, one who sees that
all favors should be for him not from him towards others, and one who
always considers the right for himself and not from towards others. This
is a fool for whose disease there is no cure!”

Allamah Majlisi says: “The pests of self-conceit are too numerous to be
counted. Hence, more Taqwa is needed to be observed to keep away from
it. The word ‘beware’ or ‘avoid’ is used against self-conceit. Imam Ali
(AS) in a letter to Malik al-Ashtar writes: ‘Beware of self-admiration,
trusting in what pleases you of yourself, and approving to be praised…
because this is one of the most important opportunities for Satan to
obliterate the good deeds of the virtuous.”[^16]

Since self-conceit is a vice and the source of other vices, we will
briefly discuss the factors behind it and the way to cure it.

Allahmah Naraghi says: “The factors behind self-conceit are: Knowledge,
mysticism, devotion, piety, courage, generosity and other good features
which attract others. When one sees all these qualities in himself and
realizes that other people lack them, automatically he feels
self-conceited. He considers himself as worthy and others as unworthy.
Now, if such a person analyzes his self-conceit, it will become clear to
him that his deed is not much satisfactory.

As for knowledge, a self-conceited person should know what the worth of
knowledge is. If knowledge is not accompanied with forbearance and
action, then, a scholar becomes lower than an ignorant person. In this
connection, the Holy Quran has likened the Jewish scholars to asses. In
case of Bal’am Ba’oora’, he has been likened to a dog when his knowledge
drove him to self-conceit. A self-conceited person should foresee his
state on the Day of Judgment. He should realize that if his knowledge is
not accompanied with deed, he will be thrown into Fire and his stink
shall harm all the dwellers of hell. He will be the most regretful one
on that day.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Seventy sins of an
ignorant man will be forgiven against one sin of a learned man.”[^17]

As for devotion and prayer, a self-conceited person should know what
devotion is. Is devotion anything other than feeling humble, resisting
one’s passions, seeking nearness to God and feeling low and ashamed
before the One God following the models of the worships of the prophets
and the Imams? If it is so, what is self-conceit for then? Did Satan not
worship God more than we do? Can we catch up with him in worshipping
God?

In the words of Imam Ali (AS), Satan worshipped God for six thousand
years. It is not known whether this number belongs to the years of this
world or it belongs to the years of the hereafter, each day of which is
equal to fifty thousand years. But what was the end?

As for piety, a self-conceited person should know what the worth of such
a virtue is. He should take into consideration the lineage, beauty,
wealth, power, strength, wits and cleverness and see what their worth
is. If he manages to gain the points, it will be good for him, and if he
fails, he should know that having piety without its positive results is
not only useless, but also harmful.

[^1]: Qur'an, 53:32.

[^2]: Qur'an, 35:8.

[^3]: Qur'an, 18:103-104.

[^4]: Qur'an, 79:17.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 313.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 312.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 316.

[^8]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 314.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Khisal, vol. 1, p. 42.

[^11]: Mi‘raj al-Sa‘adah, p. 207.

[^12]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 313.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 314.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 2, p. 1021.

[^17]: Mi‘raj al-Sa‘adah, p. 213.


