44) Piety And Family Rights
===========================

One of the other issues, which require Taqwa and that man has to be very
careful of it, is the family rights.

On marriage and family life, God Almighty says:

***“And do not marry the idolatresses until they believe, and certainly
a believing maid is better than an idolatress, even though she should
please you, and do not give (believing women) in marriage to idolaters
until they believe, and certainly a believing servant is better than an
idolater, even though he should please you; these invite to the fire,
and Allah invites to the Paradise and to forgiveness by His will, and
makes clear His communications to men, that they may be mindful. And
they ask you about menstruation.***

***Say: It is a pollution; therefore keep aloof from the women during
the menstrual discharge and do not go near them until they have become
clean; then when they have cleansed themselves, go in to them as Allah
has commanded you; surely Allah loves who turn much (to Him), and He
loves those who purify themselves. Your wives are a tilth for you, so go
into your tilth when you like, and do good beforehand for yourselves;
and be careful (of your duty) to Allah, and know that you will meet Him,
and give good news to the believers.***

***And make not Allah, because of your swearing (by Him), an obstacle to
your doing good and guarding (against evil) and making peace between
men, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing. Allah does not call you to account
for what is vain in your oaths, but He will call you to account for what
your hearts have earned, and Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing. Those who
swear that they will not go in to their wives should wait four months;
so if they go back, then Allah is surely Forgiving, Merciful.***

***And if they have resolved on a divorce, then Allah is surely Hearing,
Knowing.***

***And the divorced women should keep themselves in waiting for three
courses; and it is not lawful for them that they should conceal what
Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the last
day; and their husbands have a better right to take them back in the
meanwhile if they wish for reconciliation; and they have rights similar
to those against them in a just manner, and the men are a degree above
them, and Allah is Mighty, Wise.***

***And remember the favor of Allah upon you, and that which He has
revealed to you of the Book and the Wisdom, admonishing you thereby; and
be careful (of your duty to) Allah, and know that Allah is the Knower of
all things.***

***And if you wish to engage a wet-nurse for your children, there is no
blame on you so long as you pay what you have promised for according to
usage; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah and know that Allah sees
what you do.***

***And if you divorce them before you have touched them and you have
appointed for them a portion, then (pay to them) half of what you have
appointed, unless they relinquish or he should relinquish in whose hand
is the marriage tie; and it is nearer to righteousness that*** ***you
should relinquish.”***[^1]

[^1]: Qur'an, 2:221-237.


