48) Piety and Blessings
=======================

One of the other cases, in which no one thinks he should observe Taqwa
but he is really duty-bound to be careful of it, is the God’s infinite
blessings. It is a sign of God’s grace, bounties, and His hidden and
open favors. About these blessings God has said: ***“And if you would
count Allah’s favors, you will not be able to number them.”***[^1]

Therefore, it is impossible to count God’s blessings. How can human
beings count those blessings when they do not know about one thousandth
of the blessings given to them, or about the creatures around them, and
the extent of the Divine blessings that have encompassed the world?

The late Mohaddith Qumi says: “It is impossible to know the different
blessings of God, but man would better ponder over a single blessing to
understand his own inability.”

He says: “When you intend to put a morsel of bread into your mouth, look
at the process it has gone through. This morsel could not be prepared
without this world having a sound system, for wheat does not grow
without the help of the four seasons, a combination of temperaments,
winds, rains, and interaction of some stars with others in a certain
direction. ”

When wheat is grown, the tools of milling are needed. This is not
possible without having access to iron found in the heart of mountains,
and the finding of iron in mountains is not possible without having
access of other instruments for excavating and taking off the iron.
Following this, the four elements of water, fire, wind and earth should
gather to produce this morsel of bread.

How this morsel of bread is used and absorbed by the body requires
knowing anatomy and medicine. It is then that you will understand the
meaning of ***“And if you would count Allah’s favors, you will not be
able to number them.”***

This morsel of bread is one of the apparent blessings of God, whereas
there are both apparent and hidden blessings of God and human beings
know a little about this matter.

There are such great blessings as prophethood and Imamate which God has
repeatedly mentioned in the holly Quran.

Raghib Isfahani has called it practical heavy blessing, for “Minnah” is
of two kinds: practical and verbal.

“Practical” is one of the features of God who has practically blessed
His servants, like guidance, prophethood and imamate. “Verbal” is in
relation to human beings which is blamed in the Holy Quran and
traditions. In this relation, God says: ***“O you who believe! Do not
make your charity worthless by reproach and injury.”***[^2]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “Reproaching ruins
benevolence”.[^3]

On the Prophet’s mission, God says: ***“Certainly Allah conferred a
benefit upon the believers when He raised among them an Apostle from
among themselves, reciting to them and teaching them the Book and the
Wisdom, although before that they were in manifest errors.”***[^4]

About other blessings too, God advises the apostles to remind people of
the days of Allah. This is seen in the state of Prophet Moses (a.s.)
when God says: ***“And certainly We sent Musa with our communications,
saying: Bring forth your people from other darkness into light and
remind them of the days of Allah; most surely there are signs in this
for every patient, grateful one. And when Musa said to his people: call
to mind Allah’s favor to you when He delivered you from Pharaoh’s folk,
who subjected you to severe torment and slew your sons and spared your
women.”***[^5]

Skeikh Toosi, in his Amaali, has related a tradition about the
companions of the Messenger of Allah (SAW): “Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman,
Abdurrahman, Abu Ubaydah, Imam Ali and some of the Muhajireen and Ansar
were present in a gathering when the Quranic sura of “Luqman” was
recited until this verse: “…and made complete to you His favor outwardly
and inwardly”[^6] and then the Quranic sura of “Ibrahim” was recited up
to this verse: ***“…and remind them of the days of Allah”***,[^7] the
Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: ‘The days of Allah are His blessings,
trials and the stories of the former generations.”

Turning to those who were present, the Holy Prophet (SAW) said: “I have
been entrusted to advise you about the fear of slumber and negligence.
Actually, Allah revealed to me to remind you of His blessings and to
inform you of His Book which He has given to you.” Then, he recited:
***“…and made complete to you His favor.”*** Then, the Holy Prophet
(SAW) said: “Tell me what is the first blessing that God has given to
you and through it He tried you?”

All the companions started contemplating and each one mentioned a
blessing. Hearing all the answers, the Holy Prophet (SAW) turned to Ali,
saying: “They have given their answers. Now, you give your answer!”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “O messenger of Allah! May my parents be sacrificed
for you! What should I say except that God has guided us through you!”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “Say it! What is the first blessing that
God tried you with and made complete to you His favor?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “God, highly glorified, created me and I was a thing
not worth mentioning.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the second?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He was kind to me that He created me alive not
dead.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the third?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “Praise be to Allah! He created me in the best form
and the best balanced shape.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the forth?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He made me thoughtful not negligent.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the fifth?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He gave me senses to get whatever I want and made
for me a shining lamp.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the sixth
one?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He guided me to His religion and did not mislead
me.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the seventh?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He made an eternal life for me with no end.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the seventh?”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “He made me a master and not a slave.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the ninth?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He subjugated for me the heavens and the earth and
what thereis in and between them.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is the tenth?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “He made us males with guardianship over our wives,
and not make us women.”

The Holy prophet (SAW) said: “You said the truth. What is next?”

Imam Ali (AS) said: “God’s blessings are numerous. God has said: ***“And
if you would count Allah’s favor, you will not be able to number
them.”***

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) smiled and said: “Be delighted with wisdom,
be delighted with Knowledge O Abul Hasan! You are the heir of my
knowledge and the explainer to my nation what they disagree on. Whoever
loves you for your faith and follows your path is guided to the right
path, and whoever turns away from your guidance, becomes your enemy, and
leaves you alone, there will be no share for him on the Day of
Judgments.”[^8]

What we have mentioned are just a few of God’s abundant blessings which
Imam Ali (AS) counted. The Lord of the universe has made prophets to
remind people of those blessings. The Holy prophet (SAW) has said: “I
have the mission to admonish you not to be misled by prolonged desires.
Take lessons from former generations, observe Taqwa in using the
blessings, use them in their right places, and avoid excessiveness.”

Imam Reza (AS) has been reported as saying: “O people, fear Allah in the
blessings He has given to you. Do not keep them away from you by
disobeying Him, but make them continual by obeying and thanking Him for
His blessings and favors.”[^9]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “The least of gratitude to
the Giver of blessings is not to be disobeyed with His own
blessings.”[^10]

The blessings, which the Lord of the universe has given to His servants,
can be classified into continued and discontinued, inward and outward or
material and spiritual ones.

Human beings should benefit from these blessings in their right places
or they shall be called to account. There are verses and traditions in
which the word “Taqwa” has been used directly, but they refer to Taqwa
indirectly and implicitly, like the following verse: ***“And follow not
that of which you have not the knowledge; surely the hearing and the
sight and the heart, all of these, shall be questioned about
that.”***[^11]

Most of the prohibitions mentioned in the Quranic verses and traditions
have the same meaning that concerns Taqwa. Therefore, whether they are
inward or outward, whether they are continued or discontinued, it means
to make use of blessings in the actual way they have been created for.
If they are used rightly, then they are appreciated, and if not, it will
be ingratitude. In this relation, God says: ***“…and very few of My
servants are grateful.”***[^12]

Gratefulness, as the scholars of ethics have said, is realized by a
heart that perceives the blessing, a tongue that thanks the Giver of the
blessing, and other parts of the body that make use of the blessings in
their proper places. This is because firstly, most of people do not mind
the blessings; secondly, they do not thank God for the blessings; and
thirdly they make use of blessings in committing sins.

The heart that God has created as a source of intuition, understanding,
and knowledge is involved in committing sins. The tongue that God has
created for acknowledging, remembering, and offering prayers for Him is
involved in backbiting and slandering. The ears that must be used for
learning maxims, advice, knowledge and sound words are involved in
committing sins. The limbs created for serving Islam and Muslims,
propagating of religion and meeting the needs of Muslims are involved in
thieving, beating and harming others.

There are other blessings such as trees, fruits and natural resources
that may be misused. It is for this reason that God has said: ***“Then
on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the boons
(blessing).”***[^13]

According to the saying of Imam Reza (AS), it is that we shall be
questioned about the blessings of Imamate and the love for the Ahlul
Bayt on the Day of Judgment.

[^1]: Qur'an,16:18.

[^2]: Qur'an, 2:264.

[^3]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^4]: Qur'an, 3:164

[^5]: Qur'an, 14:5-6.

[^6]: Qur'an, 31:20.

[^7]: Qur'an, 14:5.

[^8]: Bihar al-Hikam, vol. 67, p. 20.

[^9]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 673.

[^10]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^11]: Qur'an, 17:36.

[^12]: Qur'an, 34:13.

[^13]: Qur'an, 102:8.


