49) Piety And Health
====================

One of the affairs in relation to which man should observe Taqwa is the
observation of piety concerning his health. One has to be careful about
his diet, food, health, factors causing diseases, environment, and to
keep away from contagious diseases whether viral or non-viral. He should
never have the impression that Taqwa only concerns the soul and it has
nothing to do with the body, for Taqwa is to keep away and be careful of
all what is harmful for human beings, whether it is physical or
spiritual. That which is harmful has been prohibited by the Islamic
laws. Imam Ali (AS) has defined this kind of Taqwa as: “The fear of
Allah…is the cure for the aliments of your bodies.”[^1]

Fortunately, the Lord of the universe has made man familiar with his
physical constitution and condition of health in a way that he can
diagnose his ailment and be the physician of himself.

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying to a man: “You cure is in
yourself while you do not know, and your disease is from yourself while
you do not understand.” Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said, “You have been made the
physician of yourself. Ailments have been made clear to you and the
signs of health are known to you and you have been guided to the cure.
Therefore, see what you can do for yourself.”[^2]

There are Quranic verses and traditions that refer to the same issue.
Furthermore, common sense confirms the same. Even those, who do not
believe in religion, observe certain rules about health and hygiene in a
way that they keep away from what is harmful to health. This can be seen
even in animals. The Lord of the universe says: ***“…eat and drink and
be not extravagant, surely He does not love the extravagant.”***[^3]

The great scholar Faiz Kashani, in his commentary, says: “God has
gathered medicine in a half of a verse, when He said, “Eat and drink and
do not be extravagant!”

As further explanation, it is related that Haroon al-Rasheed (the
Abbasid Caliph) had an expert Christian physician who, one day, said to
Ali ibn al-Hossain al-Waqidi: “There is nothing about medicine in your
book whereas knowledge is of two kinds; knowledge of body (medicine) and
knowledge of religion (jurisprudence).”

Al-Waqidi, in response, said: “God has summarized medicine in half a
verse and he recited the above-mentioned verse. He added: “Our prophet
(SAW) has said: ‘The stomach is the house of every ailment, and diet is
the best cure. Give to each body what you have accustomed it with.”

The Christian physician said: “Your Book and Prophet have left no
medicine for Galen.”

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “Whoever eats
little, will have a sound body and a pure heart, and whoever eats too
much will get sick and will become hardhearted.”[^4]

Ar-Rabee’, the doorkeeper of al-Mansoor ad-Dawaniqi (the Abbasid caliph)
has been reported as saying: “One day, Imam Sadiq (AS) was present in
the court of Mansoor. There was an Indian, well-versed in medicine. He
was reading from medical books and the Imam (AS) was listening. When the
Indian man finished reading, he said: “O Abu Abdullah! Do you want me to
say anything to you? The Imam (AS) said: “No, for what is with me is
better than what is with you.”

The Indian man said: “What is it?” The Imam (AS) said: “I can cure cold
with hot and hot with cold, humidity with dryness and dryness with
humidity and will entrust the affairs to God. I will also apply what the
Messenger of Allah (SAW) has said. I know that the stomach is the house
of all ailments and abstinence is a cure which restores health.”

The Indian man said: “And is medicine anything other than this?[^5] Now,
tell me where have you obtained this knowledge from?” The Imam (AS)
said: “I have obtained it from my grandfather, from the Messenger of
Allah, from Gabriel, and above all from the Lord of the universe, the
Creator of souls and bodies.” The Indian man said: “You said the truth.
I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that Mohammad is the
Messenger of Allah and His servant and that you are the most learned man
of your time.”

Perhaps it is for the same reason that Sheikh Mofeed, in elaborating the
beliefs of Sheikh Sadooq, said: “Medicine is a sound science, the
knowledge about it is proved, and its way is the revelation.”

He further says: “Scholars have learnt medicine from the prophets, and
there is no way for the fact of ailment except through hearing, and
there is no way for knowing the cure, except by the grace coming from
God. So it is true that through hearing it from the scholars, who are
aware of secrets and who relate from the infallible imams (a.s.) that
this saying of Ameerol Mo'minin (a.s.) “‘The stomach is the house of
every ailment, and diet is the best cure. Give to each body what you
have accustomed it with” has been interpreted.

I do not claim that in our religion, medicine has been learned from God,
but I am speaking of the early stage of creation when there was no way
for knowing ailment and cure other than by revelation. There must be a
relation between the Lord of the universe and the medical herbs He has
created. How could man realize that he could cure fever with pansy, or
cold with honey which is described in the Holy Quran as a cure of
people? This is not possible save through the Real Physician that is the
Wise God. It is He Who knows all relations and has put medical
properties in the herbs and He knows the cure for every ailment.

Asbagh ibn Nabatah has reported Imam Ali’s advice to his son, Imam
Hassan (AS) as follows: “O my son! Shall I inform you of four things so
that you will not be in need of any physician?” Imam Hassan (AS) said:
“Yes, O Ameerul Mo’minin!” Imam Ali (AS) said: “Do not sit for eating
except when you are hungry. Do not rise up from eating unless you have
an appetite for food. Chew the food well and go to the water closet
before you go to bed. If you follow these instructions, you will not be
in need of any physician.” Then, the Imam (AS) said: “A Quranic verse
has summed up the whole medicine: ***“Eat and drink and do not be
extravagant…”***[^6]

In another narration, Imam Ali (AS) has said: “If anyone follows the
above mentioned instructions, he will not get sick unless death comes to
him.”[^7]

The messenger of Allah (SAW) and the infallible Imams (AS) have been
reported as saying: “One, who has many sorrows, his body too shall get
sick.”[^8]

They have also said: “Avoid drugs as long as your body can tolerate the
pain, but when your body cannot tolerate pain any more, then look for
the cure!”[^9]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “Get along with your pain as
long as it is with you (as long as it does not harm you).”[^10]

The Imam (AS) has also said: “A Muslim does not seek cure unless his
disease overcomes his health.”[^11]

In relation to the curing of an ailment with something forbidden, Imam
Baqir (AS) has been reported as saying: “Taqwa is necessary in all
cases, but when the child of Adam is obliged (when there is no any way
at all except unlawful), God makes lawful for him what is
unlawful.”[^12]

About the cure of fever, jaundice, blood pressure, insanity, epilepsy
and other disease, there are many traditions in *Bihar al-Anwar*.

There are also many traditions about the properties of fruits, cereals,
vegetables, and various kinds of meat which make us more fond of our
religion. For example, about the property of melon, the messenger of
Allah (SAW) has said: “Eating melon is recommended to you, for there are
ten properties in it. Melon is food, water, sweetmeat and at the same
time it refines the bladder, cleans the stomach, increases semen and
potency, cures cold, and brightens the skin.”[^13]

The same has been reported by Imam Ali and Imam Sadiq (AS).[^14]

It is related that Imam Reza (AS) has versified the ten properties of
melon as follows:

*“The days have offered to us a watermelon,*

*From the lawful gifts of the earth and abode of peace.*

*So said the Chosen Mustafa, my grandfather Muhammad;*

*It has great features that I have gathered and described in order;*

*Water, sweet, refreshment, fruit, cure, food, seasoning,*

*Refreshes the bladder, purifies the faces, and makes pleasant the
breath.*

*These are exactly ten.”*[^15]

About overeating, the messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as
saying: “Avoid overeating which ruins the body, causes ailment and
prevents one from worshipping.”[^16]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has also said: “Eat when you feel hungry, drink
when you feel thirsty, urinate when you are under its pressure, do not
have sexual intercourse except when you need it, and go to bed whenever
you feel sleepy, for in this case you will have sound body.”[^17]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “If people are moderate in
having food, they will have healthy bodies.”[^18]

About fasting, the messenger of Allah (SAW) said, “Fast, in order to be
healthy!” [^19]

About travel, he has said: “Travel in order to be healthy and gain
(morally or materially)!”[^20]

About spending the night in worshipping, he has said: “Spending the
night in worshiping makes the body healthy”.[^21]

About the Hajj, he has said: “Perform minor and major Hajj to have
healthy bodies, have more sustenance, have good faith, and be relieved
from the burdens of people and your families.”[^22]

The Prophet (a.s.) said: “Beware of cold at its (seasonal) begging and
receive it at its end (of season), because it affects bodies in the same
way as it affects trees; its begging burns, and its end makes (trees)
send out leaves.” [^23]

The messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “Make use of
the cold of spring, for it affects your bodies in the same way as it
affects your plants, and avoid the cold of autumn, for it affects your
bodies in the same way as it affects your plants.”[^24]

There are many traditions about cleanliness, brushing and flossing the
teeth, removing the body hair, taking bath and clipping the nails on
Thursdays and Fridays.

On brushing the teeth, the Messenger of Allah (SAW) has said: “Were it
not difficult for my nation, I would order them to brush their teeth
before every prayer.”[^25]

In the science of fundamental dogmas, the word ‘order’ denotes
necessity. Hence, it means, “I would make the brushing of teeth before
every prayer obligatory.”

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “There are twelve features
in the brushing of teeth; it cleans the mouth, strengthens sight, makes
God pleased, makes the teeth white, fills up the cavities of teeth,
strengthens the gums, increases appetite, removes the phlegm,
strengthens memory, increases good deeds, and makes angles happy.”[^26]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has said: “A two-rak’a prayer while you have
brushed your teeth is better than seventy rak’as of prayer without
having brushed your teeth.”[^27]

There are many traditions on how and when to brush one’s teeth whether
horizontally or vertically, and the kind of brush to be used. When there
is no brush, one can do it with his finger.

There are traditions about toothpicks too. The Holy prophet (SAW) has
been reported as saying, “Make your mouth clean with tooth–pick, for it
(the mouth) is the place of the two recording, guardian angels.”[^28]

He has also said: “Use tooth-pick after having food, for it keeps your
mouth and teeth healthy and increases your sustenance.”[^29]

About entertainment, the Holy prophet (SAW) said: “From the rights of
guest is to provide him with a tooth-pick”.[^30]

There are also traditions on the kinds of toothpicks we use. We have
been warned against using straw, the wood of pomegranate tree, salt
tree, and some other woods which cause leprosy as toothpicks.

The etiquette of having food, washing the hands and not wiping them,
eating with the hands, licking the fingers, eating with three fingers,
drinking water, and how much to drink are the rules which show the
greatness of Islam.

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “Eating after
you are full will cause vitiligo.”[^31]

It would not be out of place to relate some anecdotes in this relation.

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as saying:
“A believer eats in one gut, whereas a disbeliever eats in seven
guts!”[^32]

As for the meaning of the tradition, Sayyid Razi, Rawandi, and others
have expressed their opinions, the summary of which is that since a real
believer, in order to gain strength for worshipping, serving Islam and
the Muslims, what he eats is well-gotten; he eats as much as to remain
alive, refrains from ill-gotten food, and he has Taqwa, whereas an
unbeliever does not care for what he is eating, what he is drinking,
whether it is pork or lamb, and whether it is lawful or unlawful.

Therefore, the above-mentioned quotation means that a believer fills a
part of his stomach from food, whereas an unbeliever fills his stomach
and bowels as much as he can.

Luqman the wise has advised his son as follows: “My son! Whenever your
stomach is filled with food, your thinking power will slumber, wisdom
will become dumb, and all parts of your body will cease to worship
God.”[^33]

Prophet Jesus (AS) has been reported as saying to the Israelites: “O
children of Israel! Do not overeat, for whoever overeats will sleep
much, and whoever sleeps much will not perform his prayer properly, and
whoever does not perform his prayer properly will be among the
unmindful.”[^34]

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 626.

[^2]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 122.

[^3]: Qur'an, 7:31.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 63, p. 338.

[^5]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 77.

[^6]: Khisal, p. 229.

[^7]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 169.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 59, p. 326.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 66.

[^10]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^11]: Khisal, vol. 1, p. 161.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 59, p. 82.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 59, p. 297

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 63, pp. 194,197.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 194.

[^16]: Ibid., vol. 59, p. 266.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 261.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 266.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 267.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 59, p. 271.

[^25]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 674.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 675.

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 63, pp. 436,443.

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 63, pp. 436,443.

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Ibid., p. 331.

[^32]: Ibid., p. 325.

[^33]: Abwab al-Jinan (the doors to paradises).

[^34]: Ibid.


