55) Friends of Allah (Saints)
=============================

In the Holy Quran, the Lord of the universe has considered the pious as
the guardians or the friends of Allah. God says: ***“And what (excuse)
have they that Allah should not chastise them while they hinder (men)
from the Sacred Mosque and they are not (fit to be) guardians of it; its
guardians are only those who guard (against evil), but most of them do
not know.”***[^1]

In another verse, God says: ***“Verily on the friends of Allah there is
no fear, nor shall they grieve.”***[^2]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (SAW) his
saying: “Whoever recognizes Allah and glorifies Him prevents his mouth
from (idle) speaking and his stomach from having food and busies himself
with fasting and praying.” They said: “May our fathers and mother be
sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah! Are they the friends of
Allah?” The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: “Be aware that the friends of Allah
are silent; their silence is remembrance, their look is meaningful, they
speak and their speech is full of wisdom, and they walk and their walk
is full of blessing. If there had not been fixed periods of life for
each, their spirits would not have remained in their bodies, because of
their eagerness for paradise and fear of chastisement.”

Sheikh Baha’iy, in a commentary on this tradition, says: “This tradition
includes the important features of the mystics and traits of the friends
of Allah.” Then, he sums up these features as the following:

1- Silence which is the gate of salvation

2- Hunger which is the key to all good

3- Busying oneself with fasting and spending the night in worshiping
(this is a reference to the worship of the Messenger of Allah, Imam Ali
and others)

4- Reflection which is better than the worships of sixty years

5- Remembrance with tongue and the heart

6- Pondering to take lessons

7- Wise speech of knowledge and sciences which contains the good of this
world and the hereafter

8- Helping people by fulfilling their deeds, guiding and delivering them
from perishment

9- & 10- Fear and hope together, which is the ultimate goal of every
perfect man

The meaning of the eagerness for reward (paradise) is clear, but the
fear of chastisement is to remain in this world and to be exposed to
fire because of passions and desires.

Imam Ali (AS) has said: “The saints of Allah are those who look at the
inward side of the world, while other people look at its outward side;
they busy themselves with its remoter benefits, while other people busy
themselves with the immediate benefits. They kill those things which
they feared that they might kill them, and leave here in this world what
they think would leave them. They consider trivial what others consider
as much. They are enemies of those things which others love while they
love things which others hate. Through them, the Quran has been learnt
and they have been taught by the Quran. By them, the Quran is followed,
and by the Qur'an, they are followed. They do not see any object of hope
above what they hope and no object of fear above what they fear.”[^3]

3. “The greatness of the Creator is seated in their hearts, and so,
everything else appears small in their eyes. Thus, to them, paradise is
as if they see it and are enjoying its favors. To them, Hell is also as
if they see it and are suffering torture in it.”[^4]

The pious are in such a state because they have a realistic worldview.
Whatever they see (in this world) they consider powerless ans is in need
of God, and when they look at God, they find Him All-wise, All-powerful,
Self-subsistent and Lord of all beauty and perfection. They see all
creatures controlled by Him and humble before Him. It is good for human
beings to look at the creation of beings in the universe, to see their
needs, to have a look at heavens and to walk on the earth, to have a
glance at the material and spiritual worlds, to reflect on the world of
plants, animals and inanimate objects, to see the human beings and the
jinn and to have a look a the world of angels and archangels.

God says: ***“Most surely in the variation of the night and the day, and
what Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for
a people who guard (against evil).”***[^5]

In another verse, God says: ***“Most surely in the heavens and the earth
there are signs for the believers. And in your (own) creation and in
what He spreads abroad of animals there are signs for a people that are
sure; and (in) the variation of the night and the day, and (in) what
Allah sends down of sustenance from the cloud, then gives life thereby
to the earth after its death, and (in) the changing of the winds, there
are signs for a people who understand.”***[^6]

***“Allah is He Who made subservient to you the sea that ships may run
therein by His*** ***command, and that you may seek of His grace, and
that you may give thanks. And He has made subservient to you whatsoever
is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, all from Himself; most
surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect.”***[^7]

About the verse ***“would that you know with a certain
knowledge”***,[^8] Imam Sadiq (AS) said: “It means to see with one’s own
eyes.”[^9]

Abu Baseer narrated: “Imam Sadiq said: ‘There is nothing for which there
is no limit. I asked: ‘What is the limit of reliance?’ The Imam said:
‘Certainty.’ I asked: ‘What is the limit of certainty?’ He said: ‘It
means that when you are with God, you will not fear anything.’”[^10]

It is related that Imam Ali’s servant Qanbar loved Imam Ali (a.s.)
greatly. Whenever Imam Ali went out of home, Qanbar would follow him.
One night, Imam Ali saw Qanbar behind him, so he asked: “What are you
doing here, Qanbar?” Qanbar said: “I followed you to protect you, O
Ameerul Mo’minin!” The Imam said: “May Allah have mercy on you! Are you
protecting me from the inhabitants of heaven or those of the earth?”
Qanbar said: “from the inhabitants of the earth.” The Imam said: “The
inhabitants of the earth have no power over anything except with the
permission of God. Go back!” Qanbar returned home.”[^11]

Ishaq ibn Ammar narrated: “I heard Abu Abdullah (Imam Sadiq) (a.s.) say:
‘The Messenger of Allah was offering the Fajr (dawn) Prayer in the
mosque when he saw a young man with sunken eyes, bent down head, and was
pale, lean and slumbering. The Holy Prophet said: ‘How did you pass the
night?’ The young man said: ‘I passed the night in a state of
certainty.’

The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: ‘For every conviction, there is a truth.
What is the truth of your conviction?’ The young man said: ‘O Messenger
of Allah! It is He who makes me feel sad, makes me wakeful at night and
hungry during the day. I am detached from this world and what is in it
that as if I look at the Throne of my Lord that has been set up for
reckoning and people have been resurrected for this purpose, and I am
among them, and as if I look at the inhabitants of paradise who enjoy
the bliss of it.

They are sitting on couches looking at each other. And it is such that I
look at the inhabitants of hell and see them crying. I can hear the
sound of the blazing fire with my own ears.’ The Holy Prophet said:
‘This is the servant whom God has enlightened his heart with faith.’
Then, he said: ‘Keep to what you are in!’

The young man said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! Pray God to reward me with
martyrdom.’ The Holy Prophet (SAW) prayed for him. Soon, he took part in
a battle and was the tenth martyr after nine other martyrs.”[^12]

The same happened to Harithah ibn Malik. When he was asked: “How are
you?” He said: “A true believer.” When the Holy Prophet asked him about
it, he said: “It is as if I can see the people of paradise who meet one
another and as if I hear the voice of the people of fire.” The Holy
Prophet said to him what he had said to the young man. Haritha too asked
the Holy Prophet to pray for him to be martyred. After killing nine men
(from the enemy) in the battle, he was martyred too.[^13]

8-12: Their hearts are grieved, they are protected against evils, their
bodies are thin, their needs scanty, and their souls are chaste. These
are the features of the pious. They have a right to grieve when they see
this world and the hereafter. Imam Ali (AS) has said: “A believer is
happy in the face and grieved in the heart.”[^14]

They are protected against evils. This is clear, for “love of the world
is the root of all evils.”[^15] The pious have no love to the worldly
pleasures, and hence they are away from its evils.

Their bodies are thin, for anyone who is afraid of death, the Day of
Judgment, and Reckoning shall be naturally thin. Anyone who remembers
the resurrection, paradise and hell, Sakran, Ghadhban, and the woes in
the Hell must be naturally thin. Anyone who cares for religion, and
cares much for Muslims and suffers to see unmanly acts must be thin.
Anyone who thinks of his sins, his failure to do his religious duties,
spends his nights offering prayer, and eats little must be naturally
thin.

Their needs are scanty, for they are not fond of the world. The world is
worthless to them. In the words of Imam Ali, the pious see the world as
the house of the wretched, the house of sorrows, the house of opponents,
the source of every sin and calamity, a passing cloud-shadow, a dream, a
vanity fair, or the ultimate goal of the wretched.[^16] Therefore, there
is no room for the pious to give importance to such a world. Hence, they
are content with what is as little as possible.

Their souls are chaste. They avoid evil acts and make chastity their
motto. They have self-restraining against what is unlawful. They
overcome their passions: “The best worship is to abandon what is
unlawful.”[^17]

In a commentary on the verse: ***“O children of Adam! We have indeed
sent down to you clothing to cover your shame, and (clothing) for beauty
and clothing that guards (against evil); that is the best. This is of
the communications of Allah that they may be mindful”***,[^18] Imam
Baqir (AS) says: “The clothing of Taqwa is chastity which is the
best.”[^19]

Imam Hasan (AS) was asked about fairness and manliness, and he said:
“Chastity in faith, good measure in livelihood, and patience in
calamities.”[^20]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) was asked what might make man enter
paradise, and he said: “Taqwa (piety) and good temper.” He was asked
what would make man enter hell, and he said: “The two hollows: the
stomach and the private parts.”[^21]

The Holy Prophet (a.s.) has also said: “Whoever guarantees to me what is
between his jaws (mouth; whether by eating just well-gotten foods or
saying just good) and between his legs (to be chaste), I will guarantee
the Paradise for him.”[^22]

It is truly so, for most of vices like blasphemy, unlawful acts,
adultery, sodomy, backbiting and slander are rooted in these two
sensitive organs. Therefore, safeguarding these two organs is the same
as the safeguarding of one’s faith, and the self-restraining against
them is abstinence from all sins and keeping aloof from vices and
crimes.

13-14: Patience is another feature of the pious. Imam Ali (AS) says:
“They endured (hardship) for a short while, and in consequences they
secured comfort for a long time. It is a beneficial transaction that
Allah made easy for them. The world aimed at them, but they did not aim
at it. It (worldly life) captured them, but they ransomed themselves
from it.”[^23]

Certainly, patience, as we have already discussed, shall lead to
salvation in the hereafter. Imam Baqir (AS) has said: “Paradise has been
intermingled with hardships. Therefore, whoever endures hardship will
enter paradise. Hell is intermingled with pleasures and passions.
Therefore, whoever makes himself enjoy (all) the pleasures (of this
worldly life) shall enter fire.”[^24]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as
saying: “There shall come a time when kingdom will not be obtained save
by killing and oppression, wealth shall not be obtained except by
usurpation and avarice, and love shall not be obtained except by
deviation from religion and adherence to desires; therefore, if one who
live at that time is patient with poverty while he can be rich, patient
with grudge while he is capable of love, and patient with humiliation
while he can be mighty, God will give him the reward of fifty true
believers who believe in me.”[^25]

As for the world which aims at the pious, but they turn their backs to
it, it is a blameworthy world, for the world is of two kinds;
praiseworthy and blameworthy. In the words of Allamah Majlisi, first of
all the blameworthy world has to be identified.

Allamah Majlisi believes that the world and the hereafter are two states
from the states of the heart. The near state is this world and the
distant state is the hereafter. In the near state, if man has knowledge
and practice, it will be a praiseworthy world even if it is filled with
pleasure as in the state of the well-known Mir-Damad. When he finished
his night study and resolved scientific problems, he would go out of his
chamber and would say: How can kings and princes enjoy such a pleasure?!

However if man spends his life in pleasures of sins, silver, gold, and
mammonism, there shall be no provision for the hereafter. Such a world
is blameworthy. Scholars of ethics have classified the world into that
of mines, plants and animals.

Mines are related to gold, credits, buildings, palaces, tools, dishes
and their likes. Plants are related to fun, entertainments, medicine,
food and clothes. Animals are related to eating, riding, defeating
enemies, traveling, and idle sport. One type of human beings is like
animals; exploited, alienated, and indulged in pleasure. Perhaps it is
due to the same reason that God says:

***“Know that this world’s life is only sport and play and gaiety and
boasting among themselves, and a vying in the multiplication of wealth
and children…”***[^26]

This verse has its root in what God says in another verse: ***“The love
of desires, of women and sons and hoarded treasures of gold and silver
and well bred horses and cattle and tilth, is made to seem fair to men;
this is the provision of the life of this world; and Allah is He with
Whom is the good goal (of life).”***[^27]

This is the world which Imam Sadiq (AS) describes as follows: “The
parable of this world is like the water of the sea, the more you drink
from it, the more thirsty you will become until it will kill you.”[^28]

This is the same world which Imam Sadiq (AS) has described in one of his
sermons, saying: “O people! This world is transient and the hereafter is
perpetual. Therefore, take from this world for your abode. Do not tear
off the veils with One for Whom your secrets are not hidden. You live in
this world, but you have been created for the hereafter. Surely, the
world is like poison that only one, who does not know it, will eat
it.”[^29]

Imam Sajjad (AS) has been reported as saying: “By Allah! This world and
the hereafter are but like the two pans of the scales. When one of them
outweighs, it shall remove the other.” Then, he recited this verse:
***“When the great event comes to pass, there is no denying that it will
befall.***[^30]” [^31]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “The world and the hereafter
are two enemies with different directions. One, who loves the world and
is fond of it, hates the hereafter and becomes its enemy. The world and
the hereafter are like the east and the west. When one approaches one of
them, he becomes distant from the other. They are like two women having
one husband.”[^32]

It suffices this world to be lowly that it has taken many things from
the saints of Allah and put them at the disposal of His enemies. This
does not mean that the friends of Allah are not capable of obtaining it
(worldly pleasures), but they have voluntarily abandoned it. In fact,
God does not will this world for them.

The Prophet Muhammad (SAW) had put a rock on his belly (because of
hunger). Prophet Moses (a.s.) ate little and was extremely lean. Prophet
Jesus (a.s.) used to say: “My food is hunger, my shirt is fear, my
garment is woolen, my horse is my two feet, my lamp is the moon, my
warmth is the sunlight, my fruit is what is grown out of the earth for
the quadrupeds, I spend the night while I have nothing, but yet there is
no one wealthier than I am.”[^33]

Solayman ibn Dawood (Prophet Solomon son of David) (a.s.) ate barley
bread, wore shabby clothes at nights, fastened his hands to his neck,
passed the night weeping, and said: “O Lord! I have been unjust to
myself. If You do not forgive me, and have no mercy on me, I will be
among losers. There is no god but You. Glory be to You. Surely I am
among the wrongdoers.”

Abdullah ibn Sinan narrated from Imam Sadiq (AS) his saying: “The
Messenger of Allah (SAW) was leaving his house for a battle while he was
sorrowful. An angel, with the keys of treasures of the earth, came down
and said to him: ‘O Mohammad! These are the keys to the treasures of the
world. Your Lord says: Open them and collect for yourself whatever you
want!’ The Messenger of Allah said: ‘The world is the house of one who
has no house (in the hereafter), and one, who has no reason, heaps
(wealth) in it.”[^34] The angel said: “(I swear) By the One who has
deputed you as a prophet, I heard the same from an angel in the forth
heaven when I was given the keys.”

15-16: One of the other features of the pious is that “During the night
they are upstanding on their feet reciting the Quran ponderingly. With
it, they grief themselves, and by pondering and deeply thinking on it
they find the cure of their ailments. If they come across a verses
having encouragement (toward paradise), they pursue it avidly, their
spirits turn towards it eagerly, and they feel as if it is in front of
them. And when they come across a verse having frightening (against
hell), they turn the ears of their hearts toward it, and feel as if the
sound of Hell and its cries are reaching their ears. They are bending
down, putting their foreheads, hands, knees, and toes on the ground,
beseeching Allah the Sublime for their deliverance (from Fire).”[^35]

Thus, three important subjects are benefited; spending the night in
worshipping an supplicating, reciting the Qur'an ponderingly to seek the
cures of one’s sufferings, and the frequent prostrating before Allah.

[^1]: Qur'an, 8:34.

[^2]: Qur'an, 10:63.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1277.

[^4]: Hammam Sermon.

[^5]: Qur'an, 10:6.

[^6]: Qur'an, 45:3-5.

[^7]: Qur'an, 45:12-13.

[^8]: Qur'an, 102:5.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 176.

[^10]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 95.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 158.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, pp. 159,174.

[^13]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 90

[^14]: Minhaj al-Bara’ah, vol. 6, p. 7.

[^15]: Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 2, p. 1233.

[^16]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 269.

[^18]: Qur'an, 7:26.

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 271.

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 273.

[^21]: Ibid

[^22]: Ibid, p. 272.

[^23]: Hammam Sermon.

[^24]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 73.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 74.

[^26]: Qur'an, 57:20.

[^27]: Qur'an, 3:14.

[^28]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 79.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 88.

[^30]: Qur'an, 56:1-2.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 88.

[^32]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1123.

[^33]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 110.

[^34]: Ibid.

[^35]: Hammam Sermon.


