57) Reciting the Holy Quran
===========================

Before discussing the recitation of the Holy Quran and how to do that,
it would not be out of place to briefly discuss the greatness and glory
of the Holy Quran.

As to the greatness of the Holy Quran, it will suffice to say that both
the Shiite and Sunni scholars have reported the Holy Prophet (SAW) as
saying: “Verily, I am leaving among you two weighty (very important)
things. You will not go astray after me as long as you adhere to them.
One is greater than the other is; the Book of Allah and my household.
They will never separate from one another until they shall come to me at
the Pond (in Paradise).”[^1]

From this tradition, it is inferred that what happens to one of them
shall happen to the other too and being separate from one of them means
the separation from the other.

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as
saying: “I am the first person who is present before God Almighty; then,
the Book and my household, and then my nation. I shall ask them what
they have done to the Book of God and my household!”

No one can express the treasons committed against these two valuable
things in history. If one wishes to understand it well, he has to study
carefully the truths of the Holy Quran and the infallible Imams of
guidance and observe what offences have been made against them from the
time of the Holy Prophet (SAW) up to the present time.

About the recitation of the Holy Quran, Fodhayl ibn Yasar has reported
Imam Sadiq (AS) as saying: “What prevents a merchant, who is engaged in
business in the market, from reciting a chapter of the Holy Quran when
he comes home and before going to bed? For every verse which he recites
ten good deeds are written and ten of his bad deeds are written
off.”[^2]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Baqir (AS) as
saying: “Whoever recites ten verses (from the Qur'an) every night shall
not be considered among the unmindful. Whoever recites fifty verses will
be among the rememberers. Whoever recites a hundred verses will be among
the obedient and worshippers. Whoever recites two hundred verses will be
among the humble ones. Whoever recites three hundred verses will be
among the winners (of Paradise). Whoever recites five hundred verses
shall be among the mujtahids. Whoever recites a thousand verses, there
shall be a Qintar (quintal) for him, and each Qintar is equal to fifteen
thousand weights of gold, and the weight is twenty-four carats, the east
of which is like the Mount of Uhod and the biggest is as the distance
between the heavens and the earth.”[^3]

This tradition has been reported in Usool al-Kafi, Amali of Sheikh
Sadooq, Thawab al-A’maal and Ma’ani al-Akhbar.

Benefits of the Reciting of the Holy Quran
------------------------------------------

1- Reciting the Holy Quran entitles you to be among the rememberers, the
obedient, the humble ones, the delivered, the jurisprudents, and not the
unmindful. It will entitle you to the reward of the charity of a Qintar.

2- Whoever recites a verse from the Quran, ten good deeds will be
written for him and ten bad deeds will be written off.

3- Whoever recites the Quran only by looking at it and not by heart,
will benefit from his eyes and will diminish the chastisement of his
parents even if they are unbelievers.[^4]

4- Whoever recites the Quran by looking at it, not reciting by heart,
will torment Satan.

5- Whoever recites the Quran by looking at it will not only enjoy the
reward of recitation but also his looking at the Quran is a kind of
worship. In this relation, Abu Tharr reports: “I heard the Messenger of
Allah say: ‘Looking at Ali ibn Abi Talib is worship, as the looking
kindly and mercifully at one’s parents is worship, and the looking at
the Quran and the Ka’ba is also worship.”[^5]

6- Reciting every chapter of the Quran, as mentioned in Usool al-Kafi,
has special benefits such as being safeguarded against certain diseases
and the torment of the grave. Increased sustenance, relieving of pain,
happiness, reward of a martyr, forgiveness of sins, safety, and entering
paradise are other benefits.

How to Recite the Quran
-----------------------

Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported as saying: “Reciters of the Quran are
of three kinds; the first is one who recites the Quran and takes it as
an article of commerce, flatters the rulers, and shows off before
people. The second is one who learns the art of recitation of the Quran
and spoils its boundaries (rulings). Allah may not increase such kinds
of reciters of the Qur’an! The third is one who recites the Quran,
considers it as a cure for his ailment, passes the night with it, spends
his days with thirst with it, spends his times with it in the mosques,
and leaves his bed for it. By this kind of the people of the Qur'an, God
repels the enemies, and by them, God sends down rain from the sky. (I
swear) by Allah! This kind from among the reciters of the Quran are
rarer than red sulfur.”[^6]

To recite the Quran distinctly and in a well-measured way is very
important. Abd ibn Solaiman narrates: “I asked Imam Sadiq (AS) about the
meaning of ***“and recite the Quran in a well-measured way”***, the Imam
said: ‘Ameerul Mo’minin (a.s.) has said: ‘Recite it clearly, and do not
cut it like the cutting of the hair (or do not read it like poetry), and
do not scatter it like the scattering of sand (or do not read like
prose). Reflect on its wonders and motivate with it your hard hearts.
Never think how to finish the Surah quickly.’’”[^7]

If we think deeply as by whom, for whom, and with what purpose this
divine Book and this Greater Weight was revealed, we will come to know
about its significance.

The Holy Quran is the Book of tranquility, healing, life, salvation, and
liberation. The Holy Quran is the source of knowledge and sciences for
all generations. The Holy Quran contains law, ethics, manners, religious
rulings, faith, medicine, history and stories. The Holy Quran orders of
prayer, fasting, Hajj, enjoining the good and forbidding the evil,
taking the friends of God for friends and denouncing the enemies of God.

The Holy Quran is power, supply, and asset. The Holy Quran is light,
ship of deliverance, sources of happiness and fortune. The Holy Quran is
not a divan of a poet, but it is a well-adorned heavenly book. The Holy
Quran is both guidance and a firm Rope extended between God and human
beings. The Holy Quran has seven layers of meaning with each layer
having seven other layers. The Holy Quran contains explicit, implicit,
summary, restricted, and unrestricted verses. The Holy Quran is about
guardianship, government, immunity, traditions, parables, obligations,
and rulings.

Asbagh ibn Nabatah narrated: “I heard Ameerul Mo’minin (AS) say: ‘The
Quran was revealed in three parts; the first part is about us (the Ahlul
Bayt) and about our enemies, the second part is about traditions,
examples and maxims, and the third part is about religious duties and
commandments.”[^8]

Finally, the Quran is a book that no one can appreciate unless he can
communicate with it, that is the Messenger of Allah and the infallible
Imams of guidance.

Whenever Imam Sadiq (AS) wanted to recite the Quran, he would say: “O
Allah! Make my look at it as worship, my reading as reflection on it,
and my reflection on it as taking of lessons. Make me among those who
take advice from it to keep away from sins. Do not put a seal on my ear
when reciting it. Do not put a veil on my eyes when reciting it. Do not
make my reciting the Quran as the reciting of one who does not reflect
on it, but make me reflect on its verses and orders, and resort to the
laws of Your religion. Do not make my look at it as neglectful and my
reading void. Surely, You are Kind and Merciful.”[^9]

What is important concerning the Quran is to act according to it, for
the doing according to the Quran is the ultimate goal of the Imams of
guidance as seen in the benediction after reading the Quran: “O Allah!
Make me among those who take lawful what is lawful in it (the Qur'an)
and unlawful what is unlawful in it, and believe in its explicit and
implicit verses. And Make it (the Qur'an) a good companion to me in the
grave and at my resurrection. Make me among those whom You promote to
the highest position by reading each verse of it (the Qur'an). Amen, O
Lord of the worlds!”

Another issue, which has to be observed in relation to the Quran, is
that one has to keep silent when it is being recited (loudly). Abdullah
ibn Abi Ya’foor narrated: “I said to Imam Sadiq (AS): ‘When a man is
reciting the Quran, is it incumbent on the one, who is hearing it, to
keep silent and listen to it?’ The Imam (AS) said: ‘When the Quran is
being recited in your presence, it is incumbent on you to remain silent
and listen.’”[^10]

Reading the Quran frequently has been highly recommended. It has been
related that Imam Reza (AS) used to read the Quran from the beginning to
the end within three days and said: “If I decide I can do it in less
than three days, but I never read a verse without reflecting on it and
knowing on what occasion it was revealed. That is why I finish the
reciting of the Quran in three days.”[^11]

About Nafeesah, the granddaughter of Imam Hasan (AS), it has been
written that she had dug her grave with her own hands and had read the
Quran six thousand times.[^12]

As for Borayr, it is said that “every night, he read the Quran from the
beginning to the end.”[^13]

The secret behind reciting the Quran frequently is because the Qur'an is
a builder of man, a law of prosperous life and happiness for human
beings, besides its divine knowledge and sciences. Hence, it is
incumbent on human beings to understand its different dimensions, to get
familiar with its life-giving message and with the religious charter of
Islam. Little reading of the Quran means little information, and not
reading it means lack of information, whereas reading it frequently
entails further understanding of this divine Book.

[^1]: Sunni and Shiite books.

[^2]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 4, p. 851.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 852.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 853.

[^5]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 4, p. 854.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 459

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 92, p. 215.

[^8]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 459.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 92, p. 207.

[^10]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 4, p. 861.

[^11]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 4, p. 863.

[^12]: Tohaf al-Ahbab, p. 393.

[^13]: Montaha al-Aamaal, vol. 1, p. 378.


