59) Remembrance of God (Zikr)
=============================

This is one of the other features of the pious and it is of two kinds;
remembering God in the heart and remembering Him by the tongue.

Remembering God has been frequently recommended. It is with the
remembrance of God that man can somehow make up for the blessings that
God has given him and express his gratitude to Him.

There are many Quranic verses about ‘Zikr’ or remembrance of God,
whether by the heart or the tongue: ***“Therefore, remember Me, I will
remember you, and be thankful to Me, and do not be ungrateful to
Me.”***[^1]

Elsewhere, God says: ***“O you who believe! Remember Allah with much
remembrance.”***[^2]

Mohammad ibn Moslem, who was a great narrator, has reported Imam Sadiq
(AS) as saying: “The tasbeeh (glorification) of Lady Fatima is a
frequent Zikr ordered by God Almighty.”[^3]

Elsewhere in the Holy Quran, God says: ***“O you who believe! Let not
your wealth, or your children divert you from the remembrance of Allah;
and whoever does that, these are the losers.”***[^4]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “God revealed to Moses
(AS): ‘Do not rejoice at much wealth. Do not leave My remembrance under
any conditions. Surely, the abundance of wealth makes forget sins (be
indifferent when committing sins), and leaving My remembrance makes the
hearts hard.”[^5]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “O Ali, the
best deed has three features; justice on your part, helping and
consoling your brother in faith in the way of God Almighty, and the
remembrance of God in all conditions.”[^6]

In another tradition, we read: “Remembering God is not to say: ‘glory be
to Allah, praise be to Allah, there is no god but Allah, and Allah is
the Greatest’ alone, but if a man intends to do something unlawful and
he fears God Almighty at that moment and gives it up, it will be Zikr.”

Another narration of this tradition is that if a man, who intends to
commit a sin, remembers God Almighty and this remembrance creates a
distance between him and the sin, it is Zikr. This is the meaning of the
verse: ***“Surely, those who guards (against evil), when a visitation
from Satan afflicts them they become mindful, then lo! They see.”***

In another tradition, we read that Imam Ali (AS) has said: “In every
place that you remember God, He will be with you.”

Imam Ali (AS) says: “Remember Allah Almighty frequently when you go to
marketplaces and when people are engaged in businesses, for it (the
remembrance of God) is a ransom for sins and an increase in good deeds,
and you are not recorded among the unmindful.”[^7]

There are many traditions in this relation but to sum it up, one can say
that although remembering God is necessary under all circumstances, it
is more recommended in the following conditions:

1- On the marketplace, a tradition reads: “A marketplace is the field of
Iblis, where he comes with his banner, sets his throne, and spreads his
children.”[^8]

2- In the warfront; Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “Whenever
you face your enemy in war, speak little and remember God
frequently.”[^9]

3- When you are commanded by God or when you have been prohibited from
something as narrated by Imam Sadiq (AS) [^10]

4- In secret and concealment

When man remembers God, his Lord too will remember him. Beyond doubt,
when God remembers someone, it will entail many benefits for him. In
this relation, the Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying:
“Whoever wishes to know his position with God, he should see what the
position of God with him is.”[^11]

God has said: “I am the companion of one who remembers Me.”[^12]

Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported by Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali as saying:
“As long as a believer remembers God, he is continuously in a state of
prayer, whether he is standing, sitting or lying in bed, for God has
said: ***“Those who remember Allah standing, sitting and lying on their
sides...***[^13]***”*** [^14]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as
saying: “There is no people that gather together in a meeting and do not
remember Allah and do not pray Him to send His blessing on their
prophet, except that that meeting shall be to them regret and woe.”[^15]

Inadvertence
------------

Inadvertence or heedlessness, the opposite of remembrance, is prohibited
by God in the Holy Quran, blamed in traditions and reproached by wits.
In a verse, God says: ***“…and be not of the heedless ones.”***[^16] In
other verses, God says:

***“Most surely in the variation of the night and the day, and what
Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for a
people who guard (against evil). Surely those who do not hope in Our
meeting and are pleased with this world’s life and are content with it,
and those who are heedless of our communication; (as for) those, their
abode is the fire because of what they earned.”***[^17]

Elsewhere in the Quran, we read: ***“…and most surely the majority of
the people are heedless to Our communications.”***[^18]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “If Satan is enemy, then
what is heedlessness for? And if death is true, them what is rejoicing
for?”[^19]

It is related that Jesus (AS) passed by a village whose people had been
destroyed by God’s wrath. The disciples asked Jesus (a.s.) to bring one
of the destroyed people to life to ask him why they had been destroyed.
When Jesus (AS) brought one of them back to life and asked him the
reason, the resurrected man said: “Submission to tyrants, the love of
the worldly pleasures, lack of fear (of Allah), unlimited wishes,
heedlessness and engagement in idle fun and amusement.”[^20]

Sheikh Baha’ee has set an example of man’s heedlessness. He has written:
“The likeness of an arrogant and heedless man is the likeness of a man
who hangs himself in a well, and there is a dragon at the bottom of the
well, waiting for him to fall down, with its mouth open to devour him,
and there are two black and white locusts, chewing at the rope with
which the man is hanging. The man, who sees a little honey intermingled
with the soil at the wall of the well with bees attacking it, tries to
have a share from the honey without taking heed of what is above or
beneath.”

Sheikh Baha’ee further says: “The well is the world, the rope is life,
the two white and black locusts are the day and the night, the honey
intermingled with soil is the worldly pleasures which are intermingled
with sufferings and sorrows, and the bees are the people of the world
who harm the man.”

Sheikh Baha’ee then has the following supplication: “We pray God for
vision and guidance and seek refuge with Him from heedlessness and going
astray.”[^21]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “The most
heedless and unmindful people are those who do not take lesson from the
changes of the world.”[^22]

It has been narrated that the message of a cock’s crow is: “O you the
heedless one! Remember God!”[^23]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “When Iblis
comes to you, saying: ‘how plentiful your prayer is!’ Say to him: ‘my
heedlessness is more than my prayer is.”[^24]

The pious are those who spend the night in fear and in the morning, they
are delighted, and thinking of that, which they might have left out of
inadvertence, and trying their best to be away from inadvertence every
moment, especially in the hours they have been advised to remember God.
Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported as saying: “Iblis, on whom be the
curse of Allah, scatters his hosts of the night from the time when the
sun sets until the sunrise. Therefore, remember God frequently during
these hours, seek refuge with Him from the evils of Iblis and his hosts,
and shelter your children during these hours, for they are the hours of
heedlessness.”[^25]

In supplications, we ask God not to make us from among the heedless
ones. In the Supplication of the month of Rajab, we read: “O Allah
(please do) lead me to the path of the well-guided ones, and grant me
the determination of the hardworking ones, and do not include me with
the unmindful ones who are dismissed (from Your mercy).”

One of the other features of the pious is that they are happy with the
favor and mercy of Allah. Some scholars have explained the meaning of
the words ‘favor’ and ‘mercy’ as love for the Ahl al-Bayt and ‘Shariah’
and some other scholars have interpreted them as religious duties and
praiseworthy acts which bring about God’s favor and mercy.

41-59: One of the other features of the pious is that their minds refuse
to submit to the desires of their selves if there is a bit of
irrecommedability in them (desires), and even they sometimes refrain
from lawful pleasures for fear of being blamed. They always think of the
afterlife and the reward of Allah and wish for what lasts forever not
transient worldly pleasures… They mix knowledge with forbearance, and
saying with doing.

You will see his hopes simple, his shortcomings few, his heart before
Allah the Mighty Lord of the heavens and the earth submissive and
fearing, his soul contented, his meal little and simple, his religion
sound, his desires dead, and his anger suppressed. Good alone is
expected by him. Evil from him is not to be feared. Even if he is found
among those who forget (Allah) he is counted among those who remember
(Him), but if he is among the rememberers, he is not counted among the
forgetful.”[^26]

A pious man does not obey his ‘self’, for he knows what ‘self’ is. He
knows that ‘self’ is one of the ardent enemies of man. Imam Ali (AS) has
been reported as saying: “Your most hostile enemy is the ‘self’ that is
between your two sides.”

When the Holy Prophet (SAW) returned from one of the battles, he hailed
his army and invited them to the greater Jihad. He said: “It is the
Jihad against one’s self (desires).” This is the same ‘self’ that
seduces toward sin, that is sometimes called the blaming soul, the
peaceful soul, the contented and satisfied soul, and sometimes the
distinguished soul. Such a self has its desires and passions which make
man helpless. They are the same desires that lead to the massacre of
hundreds, thousands and millions of human beings. They are the same
desires that make man faithless and take happiness away from him.

It is for the same reason that Imam Ali (AS) says: “The pious are those
who do not obey their passions. They reflect to see whether what they do
pleases God or not. If it pleases God, they will do it and if it does
not please God, they will keep away from it. Their joy is in what
remains for human beings, that is, what the scholars call as the
enduring good deeds which include serving people, rearing good children,
giving charity, performing night prayer, observing fasting, guiding
people and those who are misled and keeping away from what is not
perpetual, that is this world and what is therein.”

One of the other features of a pious man is that he mixes knowledge with
forbearance.

It is to be noted that forbearance, together with knowledge, is worthy,
because forbearance with ignorance is of no worth. Only a learned man
knows which forbearance is praiseworthy.

A pious man practices what he says. In this relation, God says: ***“O
you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do? It is most
hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do.”***[^27]

If a pious man claims to be a believer, he shows his faith by his
organs. He knows that faith is a heart-felt acknowledgement of God,
expression with the tongue and act by the organs of the body.”[^28] He
knows that “faith is a mixture of speech and act.”[^29] Faith is to
practice what you say. Faith is not just sayings, practice is necessary.

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “No one
commits adultery if he is a believer and no one commits theft if he is a
believer.”[^30]

Al-Halabi narrates: “I heard Imam Sadiq (AS) say: ‘It is not from the
nature of a believer to tell lies, to be stingy, or indecent. He may
commit one of these, but he does not keep on it.’” The Imam (AS) was
asked: “May he commit adultery?” He said: “Yes, he may, for he is
seduced, and he repents, but no child is born for him from that
adultery.”[^31]

From this tradition, it is inferred that a pious man should prove his
piety by action. That is to say a believer not only does not tell lies,
but he is truthful. He not only does not do anything wrong, but he does
righteous deeds. He not only does not commit adultery, but he has a
sound behavior towards his brother in faith. He not only does not commit
theft, but he is benevolent and he gives charity. A pious man proves
what he says by his actions. He keeps aloof from unlimited wishes, for
he knows that unlimited wishes make man wretched. Imam Ali (AS) has
said: “O people, what I fear most about you are two things; acting
according to desires and unlimited hopes. As for acting according to
desire, it prevents from truth, and as for unlimited hopes, it makes one
forget the next world.”[^32]

In the Holy Prophet’s last will to Imam Ali (AS), we read: “O Ali! There
are four features indicating misfortune; dry-eyedness (not to cry out of
pity), hardheartedness, unlimited wishes and the love of
perpetuity.”[^33]

It has been related that Usamah ibn Zeid purchased a slave girl for a
hundred Dinars for a period of one month. Hearing this, the Messenger of
Allah (SAW) said: “Does his act not surprise you? Surely Usamah has
unlimited hopes. By the One in Whose hand the soul of Mohammad lies, I
never open my eyes without thinking that God may grasp my soul before
closing them, nor do I close my eyes without thinking that God may grasp
my soul before opening them. I do not take any morsel of food without
thinking that I may die before eating it.” Then, he said: “O children of
Adam! If you are wise, count yourselves among the dead. By the One in
Whose hand my soul is, what you have been promised will come and you
cannot do anything about it.”[^34]

It is related that in India there was a custom of holding a festival
outside the city at the end of every century. People, young and old,
took part in that festival. Heralds on behalf of the king of the Hindus
would call on the persons who had witnessed the latest festival to go up
a big rock and talk to people. This person sometimes happened to be a
blind old man who had lost all his power, or an old woman with a
shivering body. At other times, there was no person living long enough
to have seen the latest century festival.

The person who went up the stone would raise his or her voice as much as
he or she could and say: “I was a small child when so-and-so king ruled,
so-and-so person was his vizier, so-and-so person was the judge, and
so-and-so people lived here, but they are buried now and there is no
sign of them.” Then, a preacher went up the stone, gave them advice, and
reminded them of death. He reproached unlimited desires in a way that
made people weep and return home repentant.”[^35]

Abdullah has reported: “One day, the Messenger of Allah (SAW) drew a
square with a line in the middle of it. He extended the line out of the
square and drew some other small lines around it. He also drew another
line outside the square. Being asked what the meaning of this drawing
was, the companions said: ‘God and the prophet know it better.’ The Holy
Prophet (SAW) said: ‘The middle line stands for man, the square stands
for death, the small lines stand for events, calamities, and diseases
which afflict man, and the line outside the square stands for desires.
The square of death does not allow desires to be fulfilled.”[^36]

The lapses of the pious are scanty, because lapses are the results of
desires and passions and adherence to self (one’s fancies) and Satan.
Lapses are the result of the love of the world and the forgetting of the
hereafter. One, who is not attached to the world and his ultimate goal
is the hereafter and paradise, has no lapses.

A pious man has a contented spirit. He is humble before God. Whatever he
sees is a sign of God’s glory. He is absorbed in Allah, and hence, he
feels humble in his heart.

Contentment is a feature that should not be ignored. Imam Sadiq (AS),
quoting the Torah, said: “O son of Adam! Be as you wish. You shall be
treated as you treat others. Whoever is content with God for his little
daily food God too is pleased with his small act, and whoever is content
with a little of what is lawful, his expenses are little, his business
is pure, and he will be away from vices.”[^37]

The messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “Piety has
four pillars; the fear of God, acting according to the Quran,
contentment with little possessions, and the readiness for
departure.”[^38]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “Whoever is content with what
suffices him from the world, will be pleased with the least, and whoever
is not pleased with what is sufficient for him, nothing of this world
will suffice him.”[^39]

Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported as saying: “Whoever is content with
what God has given to him for sustenance will be the richest of
people.”[^40]

Man should be content with what he has for two reasons; to be pleased
with God’s will and to be heedless of the world(ly pleasures). When he
chooses such a state, he will be pleased with his sustenance and will
know that he has to leave them behind and depart from this world. He
will know that he will be reckoned for lawful things and be punished for
unlawful things. Therefore, a wise man is content with little
possessions.

A pious man’s meal is small and simple. He eats only to remain alive. It
is the animals that eat as much as they can and it is a hypocrite who
eats with seven stomachs. Imam Sadiq (AS) has reported the Holy Prophet
as saying: “A believer eats as little as (the capacity of) one stomach,
but a hypocrite eats as much as seven guts.”[^41]

A pious man is aware of Imam Sadiq’s saying: “A stomach rebels against
eating. Man is closer to God when his stomach is empty (with little
food) and more disliked to God he is when his stomach is full.”[^42]

A pious man knows that God hates overeating.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has also said: “There is no choice for the son of Adam
but to eat to remain alive. Therefore, when you eat, devote one third of
your stomach to food, another third to water and the last third to air.
Do not be fat as pigs are fattened for slaughtering.”[^43] In the
section of “piety and health”, we have elaborated the issue.

The pious are of little trouble to others and even if they trouble
others their trouble is little, for they are detached from the world and
have no love of worldly pleasures. They safeguard their faith. They sell
the world to keep their faith safe. Their ultimate goal is to have faith
and to carry out God’s commandments. Their desires are dead, for they
have no desire other than God’s will. They like what God likes and
refrain from what is not Godly. They suppress their anger as it was
already discussed. Imam Sadiq (AS) says: “There is no one, who
suppresses his anger, except that God promotes his honor in the world
and the hereafter. God Almighty has said: ***“…and those who restrain
(their) anger and pardon men; and Allah loves the doers of good (to
others).”***[^44] God will reward them for restraining their
anger.”[^45]

In a tradition, we read that one day the Messenger of Allah (SAW) was
passing by a group of people who lifted heavy stones. The Holy Prophet
(SAW) asked: “What are you doing?” They said: “We are testing our
strength by lifting stones.” The Holy Prophet (SAW) said: “Shall I
inform you of the strongest of you?” They said: “Yes, O Messenger of
Allah!” He said: “The strongest of you is one whose delight, when he is
pleased, does not make him commit sin and when he is angry, his anger
does not make him away from truth, and when he obtains power, he does
not misappropriate what does not belong to him.”[^46]

Good alone is expected from a pious man and evil from him is not to be
feared. People know that the pious remember God in all states; they seek
God’s pleasure. They always try to make God and people pleased with
them. They work hard not to harm anyone. They remember God even when
they are among the forgetful ones and when they are among rememberers,
they are not counted among the forgetful.

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “A rememberer
of God among the forgetful is like a fighter among those who escape from
battlefield.”[^47] The pious forgive those who are unjust to them, and
give to those who deprive them. They maintain relationship with those
who cut off relations with them. They behave well with those who behave
ill with them.”[^48]

As for forgiveness, although we have already discussed it, we will
briefly speak about it. God has spoken of it on several occasions in the
Holy Quran including this verse: ***“…and those who restrain (their)
anger and pardon men; and Allah loves the doers of good.”***

In Majma’ al-Bayan, it has been related that when the above-mentioned
verse was revealed to the Holy Prophet (a.s.), he asked Gabriel what the
verse meant, and Gabriel said that he did not know it. So he left and
when he came back, he said: “O Mohammad! God has ordered you to pardon
one who has done you injustice, forgive one who has deprived you,
maintain relationship with one who has cut off relations with you, and
to keep away from the ignorant.”[^49]

Harith ibn Dilhath narrated: “I heard Imam Reza (AS) say: ‘A believer is
not a true believer unless he has three features; a tradition (norm)
from his Lord, a tradition from his prophet and a tradition from his
Imam. As for the tradition of his Lord, he should keep His secret. God
Almighty has said: ***“The Knower of the Unseen! So he does not reveal
His secret to anyone.”***, except one who has been approved by His
Messenger. As for the tradition of his prophet, he should treat people
well. God Almighty has ordered the Holy Prophet to be moderate with
people: ***“Keep to forgiveness and enjoin good and turn aside from the
ignorant.”***[^50]

As for the tradition from his Imam, he should be patient in distress and
ease. These are the truthful and the pious.”[^51] The same has been
narrated by Imam Ali (AS) with a little difference.

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “My Lord has
advised me to nine features and I advise you to what I have been advised
with; sincerity in public and in secret, justice in pleasure and anger,
moderation in wealth and indigence, to forgive one who is unjust to me,
to give one who deprives me, maintain relationship with one who cuts off
relations with me, that silence is to be my reflection, my words to be
remembrance, and that my looking is to take lessons.”[^52]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Ali (AS) as
saying: “Keep to nobilities of character! Surely God Almighty has sent
me with them. From the nobilities of character is to forgive one who has
done you wrong, give to one who has deprived you, maintain relationship
with one who has cut off relations with you, and visit one who does not
visit you (when being ill).”[^53]

Indecent speech is far from a pious one. A pious man does never revile
anyone and does never use any bad word, for he knows that Imam Baqir
(AS) has said: “Surely God hates abusive people.”[^54]

Whatever man says is recorded. Hence, Imam Ali (AS) has said: “There is
nothing more deserving of long imprisonment than the tongue is.”[^55]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “A believing servant of God
is recorded to be benefactor as long as he keeps silent. But when he
speaks, he is recorded as benefactor or evil-doer.”[^56]

Imam Sajjad (AS) was asked: “Which one is better, speech or silence?”,
and he said: “There are pests for both of them, but if they are safe
from pests, speech is better than silence.” He was asked: “How is it O
son of the Messenger of Allah?” He said: “God Almighty has not sent the
prophets to keep silence; rather, He has sent them to speak out.
Paradise cannot be deserved by silence, nor is the guardianship of Allah
deserved by silence, nor can fire be avoided by silence. I would never
compare the moon to the sun. You describe the preference of silence to
speech and you do not describe the preference of speech to
silence.”[^57]

From these traditions, it is inferred that there are pests for both
speech and silence. The pests of speech are idle talk, which has been
reproached in narrations, and talkativeness, which is said to be a sign
of defect in reason. It is said that excessive talking and excessive
wealth are both fatal and lead to falsehood, like talking with
evildoers, with those who are drunken, and the like, and to involve in
disputations, on which there are many traditions, as well as indecent
speech, revilement, accusation of innocent people, telling lies,
backbiting, slandering, tale-bearing, illegal jesting, and the like.

The pests of silence are the following: the abandonment of enjoining the
good and forbidding the evil, the abandonment of religious duties like
prayer whose punishment shall be Fire, and the abandonment of giving
witness or concealing it. In these cases, silence is unlawful and
forbidden.

The speech of the pious is lenient. Hence, the Lord of the universe
invites Prophet Moses (a.s.) and his brother, Haroon, who are the best
examples of the pious, to be lenient in speech with the Pharaoh:
***“Then speak to him a gentle word; haply he may mind or fear.”***[^58]

Addressing the Holy Prophet (SAW), God says: ***“Thus it is due to mercy
from Allah that you deal with them gently, and had you been rough, hard
hearted, they would certainly have dispersed from around you.”***[^59]

It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet (SAW) was neither
harsh-tempered nor did he raise his voice.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Knowledge is the friend of
a believer, forbearance his vizier, patience his commander, moderation
his brother, and leniency is his father.”[^60]

Vices are not found with the pious. Only virtues are present in them.
Goodness is found in them and mischief is far away from them, for they
are duteous. They believe in the unseen. They believe in what has been
revealed to the Holy Prophet. They believe that God is All-seeing, and
the world is the presence of God, God is Reckoner, and man finally dies
and reaps what he has sown. They shall see both the hell and paradise.
They observe human duties. They have enlightened hearts. They
distinguish between good and evil deeds. They see the results of good
and the consequences of evil. They turn to good and avoid evil.

60-66: One of the other features of a pious man is that he remains
dignified during calamities, patient in distress, and thankful at ease.
He does not wrong his opponents, and does not commit sin for the sake of
one whom he loves. He admits truth before evidence is brought against
him.[^61]

The pious are such that they do not lose their dignity when calamities
befall them. They know that great events come from the Lord and even
when human deeds are involved, they have no option other than patience,
endurance and peacefulness. Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying:
“A believer is stronger than a mountain. A mountain is affected by an
axe, but a (true) believer is not affected in his faith.”[^62]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has also said: “Surely a believer is more resistant than
the blocks of iron, for the blocks of iron are changed when put into
fire, whereas a believer’s faith never changes even if he is killed and
then become alive and is killed again.”[^63]

Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (AS) has been reported as saying: “A man from the
city of Qum will call people to truth. People will gather around him.
They are like blocks of iron. No storm can shake them, nor are they
tired of war or fear. They rely on God and the good end is for the
pious.”[^64]

Al-Halabi says: “I said to Abu Abdullah (as-Sadiq) (AS): ‘What is the
best feature for a man?’ He said: ‘Dignity without fear and awe,
nobility without expectation, and engagement in what is not
worldly.”[^65]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “The best
ornament for man is tranquility with faith.”[^66]

In a commentary on this, Ibn Abi al-Hadeed writes: “Ali ibn al-Hossain
(AS) was offering prayer when a snake fell on his head. He did not move.
Then the snake fell down in front of him. He did not move his feet, and
the color of his face was not changed.”[^67]

A pious man is patient in distress, for he knows what a good feature
patience is. Patience has been recommended in the Holy Quran as well as
in traditions. In this relation, God says: ***“And We will most
certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger and loss of property
and lives and fruits; and give good news to the patient, who, when a
misfortune befall them, say; Surely we are Allah’s and to Him we shall
surely return. Those are they on whom are blessing and mercy from their
Lord, and those are the followers of the right course.”***[^68]

From this verse, it is inferred that all the sufferings can lead man to
sublime positions or make atheists convert to Islam. When the atheists
see such patience, firmness and steadfastness in Muslims, they will say
to themselves that this faith is certainly truthful, for no wise man
forbear such hardships for an absurd deed. Such a state shows both the
acknowledgement of God and servitude to Him (we are Allah’s) and
admission of death (to Him we shall surely return).[^69]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as
saying: “There are four features that make a man an inhabitant of
Paradise; one whose motto is “there is no god but Allah”, one who says:
“praise be to Allah” when He gives him a blessing, one who says: “I seek
forgiveness of Allah” when he commits a sin, and one who says: “surely
we are Allah’s and to Him we return”, when a calamity befalls him.”[^70]

In another verse, God says: ***“Verily, the patient will be paid back
their reward in full without measure.”***[^71]

There are many verses on “patience”, but here, the fruits of patience
are summed up:

1- Patience helps man.

2- It wins the divine love.

3- It increases God’s blessings and mercy.

4- It wins the companionship of God.

5- It leads to a good end.

6- It causes admission in Paradise.

7- It brings about double and infinite reward.

8- It is from the virtues of the prophets.

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “When a believer enters the
grave, the prayer (he has offered) is placed on his right side, the alms
(he has given) on the left side, benevolence in front of him, and
patience creeps into a corner. When the two angels enter the grave,
patience will say to the prayer, alms, and benevolence: ‘take hold of
your companion and protect him. If you cannot do, I will be in charge of
that.’”[^72]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has said: “We are the patient and our followers (the
shia) are more patient than we are.” The narrator asked: “How is it that
your followers are more patient?” The Imam (AS) said: “This is because
we are patient with what we know, but our followers are patient with
what they do not know.”[^73]

In a commentary on the meaning of this tradition, Allamah Majlisi
writes:

1- We foresee the misfortune that makes it easier to tolerate.

2- We know the reason and wisdom behind the misfortune and the sublime
stations of them.

3- We know the end of it and the following developments like the
knowledge of Prophet Joseph (a.s.) at the bottom of the well about the
end of his affair, and the knowledge of the infallible Imams (a.s.) of
their futures.

As we have already discussed patience, we will not speak about it
anymore.

The pious are thankful during ease. Being thankful to God for His
blessings is a requirement of being humane. Man is duty bound to thank
his Lord in the heart and by the tongue. He should regard the inward and
outward blessings, and hence prostrates himself for his Lord.

Imam Sadiq (AS) said: “When something made the Holy Prophet happy, he
would say: ‘praise be to Allah for this blessing (favor)’, and when
something made him sad, he would say: ‘praise be to Allah in all
conditions.’”[^74]

To say “praise be to Allah” in distress is logical, for a pious man
knows that whatever comes from God Almighty is in his own interest.
Therefore, he should praise God under any circumstances whether he is in
a happy or a sad state. Furthermore, man does not know the wisdom behind
some events. A calamity might prevent a worse disaster. For example,
when a house is demolished following a flood or an earthquake, the
flood-stricken or the earthquake-stricken person should be happy that he
has not died. Sometimes, a tribulation entails a reward in the
hereafter, or it is a ransom for sins, and this is a blessing and
requires thanksgiving. If this calamity is worldly, it can be tolerated.
What happens if one’s faith faces a calamity?!

How good it is for one to have a look at the way people live in the
earth and to realize what blessings he enjoys that others are deprived
of. He should not think solely about wealth, automobiles, positions and
palaces. Rather, he should think about his health, faith, children,
honesty, decent friends, good neighbors, teacher, chastity, honor, and
dignity. He should see people’s blind-heartedness, deviation,
misfortunes, and indigence and to compare himself with them and then to
be thankful to God.

A pious man is not unjust to one whom he hates and does not do any wrong
to one whom he loves. In the words of Allamah Khoo’ee: “Love and hate
should not make one neglect his religious duties, for he is duteous. He
controls his passions. His anger does not make him abuse others. Love,
pleasure and desire do not make him commit sins. Fatima bint al-Hossain
has reported the Messenger of Allah (SAW) as saying: “There are three
features that make a believer’s faith perfect; when he is pleased, his
pleasure does not make him commit sins, when he gets angry, his anger
does not make him do injustice, and when he is in power, he does not do
what is not right.”[^75]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Whoever controls himself
when he desires something or when he fears, when he wishes for something
and when he gets angry, God will protect him from fire.”[^76]

There are several traditions to the same effects that show the
importance of self-control. A pious man or a true believer controls his
passions. The pious are such that love and hate will not affect their
religious duties.

The state of a pious man never changes in anger, fear, or pleasure. It
is an impious man whose states change, for he cannot control his ‘self.
It is not easy to control one’s self. It requires a strong will. Hence,
in describing the pious, it has been said: “They are like firm
mountains! The dried leaves of trees cannot shake them.”

A pious man acknowledges the truth before evidence is brought against
him. One of his worthy features is that he does not do any injustice to
anyone. He refrains from telling lies, and does not deny anyone’s right.
If he commits a mistake, he confesses it. He always follows the truth
and does never keep away from announcing it.

67-77: “He does not misappropriate what is put in his custody, and does
not forget what he is required to remember. He does not call others bad
names. He does not cause harm to his neighbor. He does not involve in
the untruth and does not give up of the truth. If he is silent, his
silence does not grieve him. If he laughs, he does not raise his voice,
and if he is wronged, he endures until Allah take revenge on his
behalf.”[^77]

The pious are such that when something is put in their custody, they
will not misappropriate it, whether it is a divine duty or a people’s
trust. Divine duties like prayer or other trusts, to which reference has
been made in the Holy Quran as: ***“Surely We offered the trust to the
heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they shrank from bearing it
and were afraid of it; and man assumed it. Surely he is unjust,
foolish.”***[^78]

As for prayer, God has said: ***“And those who are watchful of their
prayers.”***[^79]

As for the divine trust, God says: ***“And those who are keepers of
their trusts and their covenant.”***[^80]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Fear Allah! It is
incumbent upon you to give the trust back to one who has entrusted you
with it. If the killer of Ameerul Mo’minin (AS) entrusts me with a
trust, I will give it back to him.”[^81]

Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali has reported Ali ibn al-Hossain (AS) as having
sent the following message to his followers: “It is incumbent upon you
to give back the trust (to its owner)! I swear by the One Who has sent
Mohammad as a prophet, if the killer of my father entrusts me with the
sword with which he killed my father, I will give it back to him.”[^82]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported by Imam Baqir (AS) as
saying: “Do not regard the plenty of their prayer, fasting, Hajj,
benevolence, and their buzzing at night, but see their truthfulness in
speaking and their giving back the trusts to their owners.” [^83]

As for misappropriation of trust, it does not make any difference
whether one does not give the trust back to its owner, does not keep the
trust properly, or is slack in doing his duty.”[^84]

The pious are those who do not forget what they are required to
remember. They keep on remembering God, the Day of Judgment, paradise,
hell and the lessons they have taken.

The Lord of the universe has repeatedly reminded us: ***“But when they
neglected that with which they had been admonished, We opened for them
the doors of all things, until when they rejoiced in what they were
given, We seized them suddenly; then lo! They were in utter
despair.”***[^85]

God has also said: ***“So when they neglected what they had been
reminded of, We delivered those who forbade evil and We overtook those
who were unjust with an evil chastisement because of the transgression
they used to commit.”***[^86]

The question of remembrance and reminding is sometimes related to the
Quranic verses, confirmation of God, prophethood, the Day of Judgment,
or in brief, what concerns the creed and the fundamentals of the
beliefs, and at other times, it is related to the reminding of the
divine blessings, the creation, the prophets, the advancing of Muslim
army in the warfronts with few men, the reminding of prayer, the rules
of the slaughtering of animals, and in the position of judgment.
Obviously, forgetfulness and oblivion is the opposite of remembrance and
reminding.

The pious are also those who do not call others bad names. In this
relation, the Holy Quran says: ***“O you who believe! Let not (one)
people laugh at (another) people, perchance they may be better than they
are, nor let women (laugh) at (other) women, perchance they may be
better than they are, and do not find fault with your own people nor
call one another by nicknames; evil is a bad name after faith, and
whoever does not turn, these it is that are the unjust.”***[^87]

In a commentary written by Ali ibn Ibrahim on this verse, which was
revealed about Safiyyah daughter of Huyay ibn Akhtab and wife of the
Holy Prophet, we read that Aa’ishah and Hafsah reproached and vexed her
by saying to her: “You are a daughter of a Jew!” Safiyyah complained to
the Holy Prophet about that, and the Holy Prophet said: “Did you not
answer them?” Safiyyah said: “What would I say to them, O messenger of
Allah?” The Holy Prophet said to her: “Say to them: my father is Aaron,
the prophet of God, my uncle is Moses, the interlocutor of Allah, and my
husband is Mohammad, the Messenger of Allah. Why are you denying this of
me?” Safiyyah said the same to them, and they said to her: “The
Messenger of Allah has taught this to you.” Then, God revealed the
above-mentioned verse.”[^88]

The pious are those who do not cause harm to their neighbors. They
consider neighbors as members of their own families. They not only do
not cause any harm to them, but they consider themselves duty-bound to
be useful to them. They even pray for them in the same way that Lady
Fatima (a.s.) prayed for the neighbors first and then for her own
family. When she was asked the reason, she would say: “The neighbor
first and then the family.”

There are many traditions concerning neighbors. The Messenger of Allah
(SAW) has been reported as saying: “One, who cause harm to his neighbor,
God will deprive him of the paradise. His abode is hell and it is the
bad abode. Whoever denies his neighbor’s rights is not from us. Gabriel
advised me about neighbor to such a degree that I thought neighbor has a
share in (one’s) inheritance.”[^89]

Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported by Imam Sadiq (AS) as saying: “The
Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said before a gathering of the Muhajireen, the
Ansars, and the people of Medina: “Consider your neighbor as yourself;
do not harm him. Respect your neighbor as you respect your mother.”[^90]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by Zurarah as saying: “One day, Lady
Fatima (a.s.) came to the Messenger of Allah (AS) complaining of some
things. The Holy Prophet (a.s.) gave her a note, saying: ‘Learn what is
there in it.’ The note read: ‘Whoever believes in God and the Last Day
let him not cause any harm to his neighbor, and whoever believes in God
and the Last Day should respect his guest, and whoever believes in God
and the Last Day let him either say something good or keep silent.”[^91]

Sometimes, showing disrespect to a neighbor is harmful even in this
world. It has been related that al-Kisa’ee was living in indigence when
he was busy studying and learning. He had a neighbor who kept on causing
him harm, saying to him: “Stop studying! Choose a business for yourself!
Studying shall not take you anywhere.” Al-Kisa’ee laughed at the words
of his neighboring grocer, who one day came forward, saying ironically:
‘Is it not time for you to put all these papers in a ditch and water
them, so that they may grow?’ These words were so offensive to him that
they broke his heart. He said to himself: ‘One day, these papers will
promote me to a position that no one can imagine.’

The grocer said: “If you ever visit this place with a carriage, order my
house to be demolished.” His house was on the top of the corridor with a
low ceiling from under which the learner frequented.

Soon, the emissary of the commander of Basra came to al-Kisa’ee, saying:
“The commander wishes to see you.” Al-Kisa’ee said: “How can I visit the
commander with these shabby clothes?” The emissary left, and after a
short while, came back with fine clothes and one thousand weights of
gold for him. Al-Kisa’ee was taken to the public bathhouse and then to
Baghdad to be a tutor of al-Ameen and al-Ma’moon, the sons of Haroon
al-Rasheed the Abbasid caliph. Two thousand Dirhams were fixed for him
as a regular salary. One day, al-Kisa’ee said to Haroon al-Rashid: “I
have a request from you.” Haroon said: “Say what your request is.”
Al-Kisa’ee said: “I want to visit to my hometown.”

Haroon ordered all the means that al-Kisa’ee needed for his trip to be
put at his disposal. He arrived in Basra gloriously and when his
carriage reached that corridor, the carriage could not pass through it.
He ordered to demolish that building so the carriage could pass through.
All the noblemen of Basra visited him. Among them was the grocer of the
old quarter, who asked after the health of al-Kisa’ee and for
forgiveness. Turning to the grocer, al-Kisa’ee said: “You can see how
those pieces of paper have fruited now!” The grocer became extremely
ashamed.”[^92]

The pious do not feel happy at others’ misfortunes nor do they reproach
them. They know that causing any harm to the distressed ones is a sin,
and breaking their hearts is forbidden. This has been highly recommended
by Islam. It is said: “When you see people of tribulation, praise Allah
that you have not been afflicted with that tribulation, but do not say
it loudly, for it makes them sad and breaks their hearts.”[^93]

The pious do not involve in the untruth and do not give up the truth.
When they are silent, their silence does not grieve them. They are not
fond of talking. They speak and keep silent when it is necessary. Only
those who are accustomed to talking dislike silence, and if they do not
speak, they feel that they have lost something. The pious are not such.
They first think and see if it is the time to speak or to keep silent,
for they are aware of the benefits of silence and of the pests of the
tongue.

When the pious laugh, they do not raise their voices. In a tradition, we
read: “When one laughs loudly, he should say: ‘O my Lord, do not detest
me!’” In another tradition, we read: “Laughing loudly is from
Satan.”[^94]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by Imam Reza (AS) as saying: “How many
a person, who laughs much vainly (in this life), that shall weep too
much on the Day of Judgment, and how many a person, who weeps much for
fear of his sins, that shall laugh too much in the Paradise on the Day
of Judgment.”[^95]

The pious are those who, if been wronged, endure until God takes revenge
on their behalf. They themselves never decide to take revenge. They are
patient with the others’ wrongdoing. They entrust that to God, for they
know that the Lord of the universe is watching everything. The Holy
Quran says: ***“Surely, your Lord is ever watchful.”***[^96] God does
not miss anything. He reckons everything.

God Almighty says: ***“And do not think Allah to be heedless of what the
unjust do; He only respites them to a day on which the eyes shall be
fixed open (of terror).”***[^97]

The Messenger of Allah (SAW) has been reported as saying: “Avoid
injustice, for injustice near Allah is darkness on the Day of
Judgment.”[^98]

God Almighty has said: “My wrath is intense on one who oppresses another
one who has no help save Me.”[^99]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “The worst supply for the Day
of Resurrection is the oppression against people.”[^100]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Whoever does an injustice
to anyone, God Almighty will raise one who will do the same to him, to
his children and his descendants.” [^101]

Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported as saying: “When the death of Ali ibn
al-Hossain (a.s.) approached, he drew me to his chest, saying: ‘O my
son! I advise you to what my father advised and the father of my father
advised: ‘O my son! Keep away from doing any injustice to one who has no
helper save God.”[^102]

It goes without saying that sometimes an oppressor may turn to be
oppressed and the oppressed one may turn to be oppressor, when the
oppressed one curses the oppressor excessively. Therefore, the pious
entrust everything to God and do not act personally. It is to be noted
that their inaction does not mean that they are indifferent to
oppression and oppressors, but it means that they are not hasty in
taking revenge.

Nevertheless, when it is necessary, the pious will rise up against
atheism, hypocrisy, and oppression and will fight them as seen by the
infallible Imams (AS).

78-86 One of the other features of a pious man is that: “His own soul is
in distress, while people are at peace from him. He puts himself in
hardship for the sake of his next life, and makes people feel safe from
him. His keeping away from others is by way of asceticism and honesty,
and his nearness to those, whom he is near to, is by way of leniency and
mercifulness. His keeping away from people is not because of vanity or
feeling of greatness, nor his nearness because of deceit and
cheating.”[^103]

The pious always wish hardship for themselves and ease for others. They
put themselves in hardship for the hereafter through offering prayers
and fasting as it is the state of the Godly people.

Their keeping away from people is not because of arrogance,
self-conceit, and vanity, but because of asceticism and purification.
They know that the more they keep away from people, the less they will
be engaged in backbiting, lying, slander, and tale-bearing. Hence, they
will have faith that is safe. Hence, there are many traditions on
seclusion which does not mean that one should keep away from society and
social affairs. Seclusion is good when people feel that if they are
involved too much in society, their faith will be harmed, their beliefs
will become loose, their thoughts will be deviated, and their piety will
be harmed. This issue has been proved by experience.

For this reason, Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Do not
come out of your house if you can, for if you come out, it is incumbent
upon you not to backbite, not to lie, not to envy, not to be hypocrite
and not to flatter others. A Muslim’s hermitage is his house. He keeps
his soul, eyes, tongue, and honor therein.”[^104]

Rabee’ ibn Khaytham narrated: “If you can afford to be in a position
when you do not know and are not known, do so, for in seclusion lies the
safeguarding of the organs, peace of mind, sound living, breaking of
Satan’s weapon, and remoteness from every evil. There is no prophet or
successor of a prophet except that he chose seclusion in his own time,
either in the beginning or at the end of his life.”[^105]

Rawandi, in his book Da’awat, has reported Imam Baqir (AS) as saying:
“Some man found a page of a book and brought it to the Messenger of
Allah (SAW) who called the public to attend a gathering. All the people,
men and women, came to his presence. The Holy Prophet went up the pulpit
and said: ‘This is from Yusha’ ibn Noon, the successor of Prophet Moses
(AS). The page read: “In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the
Most Merciful. Surely, your Lord is Kind and Merciful to you. Be aware
that the best servant of Allah is the pious, pure, unknown one, and the
worst one of Allah’s servants is one at whom fingers are pointed
(because of his sins and vices).””[^106]

From this quotation, it is inferred that the best of the servants of God
is one who is purified from the filth of sin, and the worst is the one
who is famous for vices. He is infamous for sins which are committed
more by going out of his house than by seclusion.

The nearness of the pious to those, whom they are near to, is not
because of deceit as hypocrites do. Their nearness is because of
leniency and mercifulness as it has been said about the Holy Prophet of
Islam and the believers: ***“Mohammad is the Apostle of Allah, and those
with him are firm of heart against the unbelievers, compassionate
among*** ***themselves.”***[^107]

In relation to hypocrites, God says: ***“And when they meet those who
believe, they say: We believe, and when they are alone with their
devils, they say: Surely we are with you, we are only mocking.”***[^108]

The nearness of the pious to people is not as such. When they meet the
believers, it is by way of sincerity. They consider visiting each other
as visiting God, and the respect to the believers as respect to the
Lord, for “the believer is higher than an archangel to God.”[^109]

Therefore, there is no deceit in the believers’ meeting and visiting one
another, whereas the hypocrites are not only deceitful by nature to the
believers, but they are unfaithful to themselves too.

It is related that Hammam fell into deep swoon, and because of that
swoon, he left to the better world. Then, Ameerul Mo’minin said: “By
Allah, I had this fear about him.” Then he added: “Serious exhortations
do so to their people (who receive them willingly).” Some man (called
who was present (Abdullah ibn al-Kawwa’ who was a Kharijite) said: “What
about you, Ameerol Mo'minin!” The Imam (AS) replied: “Woe to you! For
every death, there is a fixed term which cannot be exceeded, and a cause
which is not passed to another. Now look, never do (say) such thing
again! It is but Satan that puffed on your tongue.”[^110]

The pure hearts of believers are ready for such things that when they
see or hear the truth, they fear and they spiritually changed. In this
relation, the Holy Quran says: ***“Those only are believers whose hearts
become full of fear when Allah is mentioned, and when its***
***communications are recited to them, they increase in faith, and in
their Lord do they trust.”***[^111]

If the believers are very receptive, they fall in deep swoon and their
souls leave their bodies in the same way that Hammam passed away. Imam
Ali (AS) said: “I avoided the reply. By Allah, I had this fear about
him.” Then he said: “Serious exhortations affects their people (who
respond to them).”

It is worth mentioning that if one wants to become perfect, he must seek
advice of loyal people. He should take care as to from whom he should
seek advice and to whom he should devote his heart and mind. He should
note that there is nothing above the word of wisdom which assists his
guidance and saves him from vices, as reported from the Messenger of
Allah (SAW) in the book Ershad al-Ghuloob.[^112]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) has been reported as saying: “What an excellent
gift the gift of advice is.”[^113]

It is worth mentioning that an advice is effective (like the one given
to Hammam) which is given by one who practices what he preaches of and
believes in what he says. If a scholar does not practice what he
preaches of, his advice slips away from the hearts as the drops of rain
slip from a stone.”[^114]

Imam Ali (AS) has said: “The slip of a scholar is like shipwrecking; it
(the ship) sinks and makes others drown.”[^115]

God reproaches such individuals by saying: ***“…why do you say that
which you do not do? It is most hateful to Allah that you say that which
you do not do.”***[^116]

A preacher and advisor should be like pathologists. Imam Ali (AS) first
avoided the reply, for he knew that Hammam had no capacity of hearing
the exhortation, and especially from Ameerul Mo’minin. Hence, the
so-called spiritual physicians discover people’s capacities and
weaknesses, so that their sermon may be to the point and in conformity
with the capacity of the listener. For this reason, it is said, “The
best of speech is that which is short with full meaning.”

The listeners to exhortations too have to observe certain duties. First,
they should aim to win God’s pleasure, pay attention to the content and
gist of the exhortation, and not to the preacher himself. There are many
preachers who do not act to their duties, but their advices are useful.
Advice seekers should have a hunger for advice and feel in need of it.
They should consider themselves as those who are in search of light and
guidance. They should remember what God said to Prophet Moses (AS):
“Learn the good and teach it to one who does not know it, for I will
enlighten the graves of learners and teachers of good so that they will
not fear their abodes.”[^117]

Abdullah ibn al-Kawwa, who challenged Imam Ali (AS), said: “O Ameerul
Mo’minin, how is it that you do not receive such an effect? (meaning:
you are the cause of Hammam’s death.” The Imam softy said: “Woe to you!
For death, there is a fixed hour which cannot be exceeded.” It means
that Hammam’s life had come to an end. But as the cause of death is a
certain factor, the cause of death here is the good advice, and were it
not for the advice, his death would not have happened. Therefore, his
death was not in my hand. Never repeat such talk which Satan has put on
your tongue.”

Here, two main issues have to be discussed; death and Satan’s
temptations.

As for death (the hour of death), there are several verses in the Holy
Quran which indicate that death cannot be deferred or advanced:
***“…when their term comes, they shall neither defer it for an hour, nor
shall they advanced it.”***[^118]

God has fixed man’s death in such a way that no one can delay or advance
it.

The way death overtakes human beings is quite different. Sometimes a
scholar is engaged in teaching, a preacher is giving an advice, a driver
is driving to a certain destination, or a shopkeeper is receiving money
from a buyer when death overtakes them.

The Lord of the universe has fixed death for every being. The Only Being
Whom death cannot overtake is God Almighty. The Holy Quran says:
***“Everyone on it must pass away, and there remains but the Face of
your Lord of Might and Glory.”***[^119]

As for the second issue, Satan’s temptation is of great importance.
Satan is of the jinn kind and has a great power which penetrates the
human mind and heart. According to tradition, Satan enters the blood
circulation launching his evil plans. There are only few verses in the
Holy Quran in which Allah does not warn human beings against Satan. If
we read the Holy Quran carefully, we will realize what a parasite of
corruption Satan is and how he can destroy our faith.

God Almighty says: ***“Did I not charge you, O children of Adam, that
you should not serve Satan? Surely, he is your open enemy, and that you
should serve Me; this is the right way. And certainly he led astray
numerous people from among you. What! Could you not then
understand?”***[^120]

God also says: ***“… do not follow the footsteps of Satan; surely he is
your open enemy. He only enjoins you evil and indecency, and that you
may speak against Allah what you do not know.”***[^121]

In another verse, we read that Satan says: ***“Most certainly I will
take of Thy servants an appointed portion; and most certainly I will
lead them astray and excite in them vain desires, and bid them so that
they shall slit the ears of the cattle, and most certainly I will bid
them so that they shall alter Allah’s creation; and whoever takes Satan
for a guardian rather than Allah, he indeed shall suffer a manifest
loss. He gives them promises and*** ***excites vain desires in them; and
Satan does not promise but to deceive. These are they whose abode is
hell, and they shall not find any refuge from it.”***[^122]

In another verse, after God warns man of intoxicants, games of chance
and idolatry, says: ***“Satan only desires to cause enmity and hatred to
spring in your midst by means of intoxicants, games of chance, and to
keep you off from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer. Will you
then desist?”***[^123]

When God takes Satan to account, and Satan argues that he is better than
man, God expels him from paradise. Satan asks for a respite until the
Day of Judgment, and God says: ***“Surely you are of the respited
ones.”***[^124]

Satan says: ***“As Thou hast caused me to remain disappointed, I will
certainly lie in wait for them in They straight path. Then, I will
certainly come to them from before them and from behind them, and from
their right-hand and from their left-hand side; and Thou shall not find
most of them thankful.”***[^125]

In another verse, God says: ***“O children of Adam! Let not the Satan
cause you to fall into affliction as he expelled your parents from the
garden, pulling off from them both their clothing that he might show
them their evil inclinations, he surely sees you, he as well as his
host, from whence you cannot see them; surely We have made devils to be
the guardians of those who do not believe.”***[^126]

Addressing God, Satan says: ***“Then by Thy Might, I will surely make
them live an evil life, all, except Thy servants from among them, the
purified ones.”***[^127] God says: ***“The truth then is and the truth
do I speak: that I will most certainly fill hell with you and with those
among them who follow you all.”***[^128]

These were some of the Quranic verses about Satan. As for traditions,
Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “There is no heart except
that there are two ears in it. On one, there is an angel who guides, and
on the other there is a devil who whispers. Satan orders him to commit
sin, and the angel deters him from sin, and this is the words of God
Almighty: ***“He utters not a word, but there is by him a watcher at
hand.”***[^129]

Imam Ali (AS) has been reported as saying: “For Iblis, there are kohl,
safoof (medicinal powder), and la’ooq (something licked as a sweetmeat
or a cure). As for his kohl, it is (man’s) sleeping, his safoof is
(man’s) anger, and his la’ooq is (man’s) telling lies.”[^130]

In a sermon called al-Qasi’ah, in disparagement of Satan, Imam Ali (AS)
says: “Take a lesson from what Allah did with Satan. His long deeds and
greet efforts went to nothing, after he had been worshiping Allah for
six thousand years, and it is not known whether they are from the years
of this life or the years of the afterlife, because of haughtiness of a
moment. Therefore, you should fear, lest Satan infects you with his
disease, or leads you astray through his call, or marches on you with
his horsemen and footmen, because, (I swear) by my life, he has prepared
for you the arrow of (vain) promise, stretched the bow strongly, and
aimed at you from a nearby position, and he (Satan) said: ***“My Lord!
Because Thou hast sent me astray, I verily shall adorn the path of error
for them in the earth, and shall mislead them all.”***[^131]

It is noteworthy that Imam Ali (AS) is teaching us how to fight Satan as
if there is a battlefield and the enemy is ready to attack from nearby
positions.

Ali ibn al-Hossain (Imam Sajjad) (AS) was asked: “How did you begin your
day, O son of the Messenger of Allah?” The Imam said: “I began the day
while I was indebted for eight things; Allah Almighty asks me for
obligations, the Holy Prophet (SAW) asks me for the Sunnah, the family
asks me for nourishment, the self asks me for pleasures, Satan asks me
for disobedience, the two guardian angels asks me for true deeds, the
angel of death asks me for the soul (life), the grave asks me for the
body, so I am indebted for all these things.”

There are many traditions on Satan the mentioning of which requires a
separate book. I have gathered all those tradition under the title of
“Man and Satan”.

What is Satan, who has been reproached so much? What kind of enemy is he
whom God has warned man against to this extent? Who is this parasite of
corruption whom even the prophets and the friends of God fear? What a
dangerous thief and warrior enemy is he that the adhering to him causes
all misfortunes of this life and the enmity to him brings happiness and
prosperity?

Satan is the implacable enemy, the faithless friend of human beings, the
ungrateful creature of God, and the rebellious servant of God Almighty.
Satan is an experienced enemy who is cunning, deceitful and wicked with
a great number of hosts, who lived among angels and spent his life with
them. He learnt servitude from angels and reached a position which was
envied by them. He was considered as the chief of angels.

It was later that God created man and ordered the angels to prostrate
before him. All the angels did so except Satan who refused to do.
Therefore, he was disfavored by God, and from that moment, he tried to
tempt the weak human beings. He entered paradise, deceived Adam and Eve
by swearing that he wished to promote them to a sublime station, but he
made them wretched!

Following this success, he was an accomplice in the murder of Abel by
Cain. Then, he challenged the prophets, though he failed to win the
battles. He was persistent in his fighting against nations.

In the time of our Holy Prophet (SAW), Satan took part in the battle of
Badr. In Dar al-Nadwah, he was a member of the advisory council. In
Saqeefah, he was the first one who pledged allegiance to the first
Caliph, so much so that he divided Muslims into seventy-three sects. Not
only did he create division in Islam, but he made people worship him in
a way that until now there are people who are Satan worshippers.

Satan interferes in all human affairs. He tries to make people’s belief
shaky. He attempts to deviate man from the right path. He even goes
further that he takes part in the formation of human foetus. He tempts
man to adhere to him. He makes women as trap for men to commit sin, as
seen in the states of some worshippers. He raises his banner in the
markets everyday. He deceives people, even scholars, in different ways.
He does not leave people in ease even at the point of death.

The late Hajji Molla Hashim has related: “A pious scholar from the city
of Najaf became sick. As he was about to die, he was asked to recite the
shahada by the one who had come to visit him, but he refused to recite
it, arguing that: ‘this is the first subject of theology and it has to
be proved!’ People were quite surprised to hear this from a scholar.
Fortunately, God healed him. Later on when the story was told to him, he
said: ‘When you persuaded me to recite the shahada, a man with white
beard was standing near me, saying: ‘If you recite the shahada, I will
set this promissory note on fire.’ I had lent an amount of five Tomans
to some one and I had put the note in a coffer!’

After recovering, the man tore the note into pieces, so that he would
not be preoccupied with it. Satan attempts not only to undermine our
prayer, but also to nullify our worship. When he fails to do so through
hypocrisy, he will carry out his plots by making man forget to perform
his prayer.

Satan attempts to cause troubles and quarrels in families, create
discord between teachers and students in schools, create division among
the ranks of army, between the rulers and the ruled, among nations, and
between upper classes and lower classes to make them join his party.

May God save us from the temptations of Satan and make us victorious in
the battle against him. We humbly ask the Lord of the universe to make
us among the pious and wake us up from slumber.

Amen, O Lord of the worlds and peace be on whoever follows the guidance.

[^1]: Qur'an, 2:152.

[^2]: Qur'an, 33:41.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 90, p. 155.

[^4]: Qur'an, 63:9.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 90, p. 150.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 90, p. 154.

[^8]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 673.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar,vol. 90, p. 154.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 155.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 163.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Qur'an, 3:191.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 90, p. 161.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Qur'an, 7:205.

[^17]: Qur'an, 10:6-8.

[^18]: Qur'an, 10:92.

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 70, p. 157.

[^20]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 323.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 100.

[^25]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 99.

[^26]: Hammam Sermon.

[^27]: Qur'an, 61:2-3.

[^28]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p. 64.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 65.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 67.

[^31]: Ibid.

[^32]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 42.

[^33]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 164.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 166.

[^35]: Kashkool, vol. 1, p. 14.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 35.

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 175.

[^38]: Al-Jawahir al-Adadiyyah.

[^39]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 178.

[^40]: Ibid.

[^41]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 16, p. 498.

[^42]: Ibid., p. 497.

[^43]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 16, p. 497.

[^44]: Qur'an, 3:134.

[^45]: Minhaj al-Bara’ah, vol. 6, p. 17.

[^46]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 289.

[^47]: Minhaj al-Bara’ah, vol. 6, p. 18.

[^48]: Hammam Sermon.

[^49]: Noor al-Thaqalain vol.2, p. 111.

[^50]: Qur'an, 7:199.

[^51]: Noor al-Thaqalain ,vol.2, p. 111.

[^52]: Ithna Ashariyyah, p. 315.

[^53]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 420.

[^54]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 327.

[^55]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 277.

[^56]: Ibid.

[^57]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 274

[^58]: Qur'an, 20:44.

[^59]: Qur'an, 3:159.

[^60]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 326.

[^61]: Hammam Sermon.

[^62]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 35.

[^63]: Ibid., p. 37.

[^64]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 14, p. 144.

[^65]: Ibid., vol. 68, p. 397.

[^66]: Ibid, p. 337.

[^67]: Sharh Ibn Abi Al-Hadeed, vol. 10, p. 159.

[^68]: Qur'an, 2:155-157.

[^69]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 238.

[^70]: Ibid.

[^71]: Qur'an, 39:10.

[^72]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 73.

[^73]: Ibid., p. 80.

[^74]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 33.

[^75]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 359.

[^76]: Ibid.

[^77]: Hammam Sermon.

[^78]: Qur'an,33:72.

[^79]: Qur'an, 23:9.

[^80]: Qur'an, 23:8.

[^81]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 114.

[^82]: Ibid.

[^83]: Ibid.

[^84]: Ibid.

[^85]: Qur'an, 6: 44.

[^86]: Qur'an, 7:165.

[^87]: Qur'an, 49:11.

[^88]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 144.

[^89]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 8, p. 448.

[^90]: Ibid., p. 487.

[^91]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 8, p. 488.

[^92]: Zeenat al-Majalis.

[^93]: Minhaj al-Bara’ah, vol. 6, p. 20.

[^94]: Ibid., p. 21.

[^95]: Minhaj al-Bara’ah, vol. 6, p. 21.

[^96]: Qur'an, 89:14.

[^97]: Qur'an, 14:42.

[^98]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 105.

[^99]: Ibid.

[^100]: Ibid.

[^101]: Ibid.

[^102]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 109.

[^103]: Hammam Sermon.

[^104]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 186.

[^105]: Ibid.

[^106]: Ibid., p. 185.

[^107]: Qur'an, 48:29.

[^108]: Qur'an, 2:14.

[^109]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 35.

[^110]: Hammam Sermon.

[^111]: Qur'an, 8:2.

[^112]: Abwab al-Jinan, vol. 1, p. 4.

[^113]: Ibid.

[^114]: Ibid., p. 7.

[^115]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 58.

[^116]: Qur'an, 61:2-3.

[^117]: Abwab al-Jinan, vol. 7.

[^118]: Qur'an, 10:49.

[^119]: Qur'an, 55:26-27.

[^120]: Qur'an, 36:60-62.

[^121]: Qur'an, 2:168-169.

[^122]: Qur'an, 4:118-121.

[^123]: Qur'an, 5:91.

[^124]: Qur'an, 7:15.

[^125]: Qur'an, 7:16-17.

[^126]: Qur'an, 7:27.

[^127]: Qur'an, 38:82-83.

[^128]: Qur'an, 38:84-85.

[^129]: Qur'an, 50:18.

[^130]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 98.

[^131]: Qur'an, 15:39.


