4) The Effects Of Piety
=======================

We can realize the worth and significance of everything from its
achievement and assess its value with the quality and quantity of its
fruits. Beyond doubt, everything which is of more fruits will be
naturally of more value and everything with least fruits will be of
least value.

There may be things which are of abundant results quantitatively but
qualitatively they may not be important.

Fortunately, one of the subjects important in terms of quality and
quantity is ‘Piety’ or Taqwa. Hence numerous fruits have been mentioned
for it in the holy Quran and narrations each of which is significant and
worthy by itself.

1) Observing the Rituals (Sha’a’ir)
-----------------------------------

As God Himself says: ***“… and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this
is (the outcome) of the piety of hearts.”***[^1]

The Arabic word “Sha’a’ir” is the plural of “Sha’eerah” used in the
Quran on different occasions and several meanings. One of them is used
for the Hajj rituals including the stops (in certain places),
circumambulation, and sa’iy (the running between Safa and Marwa). The
second meaning is the camel which is fattened for sacrifice. The third
meaning is the religion of God; and the fourth meaning would be anything
signifying obedience to God for the performance of which man rises and
any negligence of it is not permissible. In this relation, God says:
***“… do not violate the sings appointed be Allah.”***[^2]

Therefore, when it is said one of the fruits and effects of piety is to
observe religious rituals, it means that a pious man has to perform
duties in relation to the religion that God has determined and the holy
prophet (SAW) and the imams of guidance have elaborated, that too, with
devotion and love. Even if one fails to perform such duties, he has to
ask God to help and give him the blessing of its performance.

The above-said verse is used to show that the Hajj rituals being an
example of the divine decrees is the result of piety of hearts, for when
a heart is purified, it has the capacity to direct a man to act
according to the rules of religion and decrees of God. Only a diseased
heart disobeys and rebels against the path of guidance.

2) God Loves The Pious
----------------------

This is one of the other achievements of piety and self-restraint. In
this relation, God says: ***“Whoever fulfills his promise and guards
(against evil), then surely Allah loves those who guards (against
evil).”***[^3]

The fact that God loves the pious can be seen elsewhere in the holy
Quran including the verses 4 and 7 of the chapter “Repentance (9)”.

What are the results and fruits of being loved by God? When a person
loves another person, he will do his best to please him and never does
anything to hurt him. Now, when God loves someone, you can guess what He
will do. We may love someone but we may not have all the possibilities
and our hands may be tied. However, what God, Who has everything under
His control, Who is Omnipotent, and Who has created the universe without
labor, will do with one whom He loves? Imagine what God will do with one
who extends his hands towards Him!

3) Wilayah (Guardianship)
-------------------------

About the guardians of the Inviolable Mosque (the Ka’aba), we read:
***“And what (excuse) have they that Allah should not chastise them
while they hinder (men) from the Inviolable Mosque and they are not (fit
to be) guardians of it; its guardians are only those who guard (against
evil), but most of them do not know”***.[^4]

From this rule, it is inferred that leadership in all parts of the world
is the right of the pious and the leadership of transgressors is wrong
and an act of usurpation. Hence, Muslims’ affairs should be administered
by the pious. Imagine what will be the result if the reins of affairs
are put in the hands of such people!

It is for the same reason that we believe human leaders have to be the
pious, for they are the true example of the prophets and saints.

4) The Hereafter
----------------

The Lord of the universe has said: ***“Say: The provision of this world
is short, and the hereafter is better for him who guards (against) evil;
and you shall not be wronged the husk of a date stone.”***[^5]

In another verse, He has said: ***“…the abode of the hereafter is better
for those who guard (against evil) ;do you not then understand?”***[^6]

The same meaning is repeated in the verse 109 of the Quranic Chapter of
“Yusuf (12)”. In this chapter, we read: ***“And certainly the reward of
the hereafter is much better for those who believe and guard (against
evil).”***[^7]

Elsewhere, He has said: ***“And if they had believed and guarded
themselves (against evil),*** ***reward from Allah would certainly have
been better; had they but known (this).”***[^8]

In another verse, God says: ***“…if you believe and guard (against evil)
He will give you your rewards, and will not ask of you your
possession.”***[^9]

On piety, God says: ***“Those among them who do good (to others) and
guard (against evil) shall have a great reward.”***[^10]

Again in another verse, He has said: ***“A parable of the garden which
those guarding (against evil) are promised: therein are rivers of water
that does not alter, and rivers of milk the whereof does not change, and
rivers of drink delicious to those who drink, and rivers of honey
purified; and for them therein are all fruits and forgiveness from their
Lord.”***[^11]

After describing the gardens of Paradise, God says: ***“The gardens of
perpetuity, they shall enter them, rivers flowing beneath them; they
shall have in them what they please. Thus does Allah reward those who
guard (against evil).”***[^12]

Elsewhere, He has said: ***“But (as for) those who are careful of (their
duty to) their Lord, they shall have lofty halls, above them lofty
halls, built (for them), beneath which rivers flow; (this is) the
promise of Allah: and Allah will not fail in (His) promise”***.[^13]

In describing the Paradise for those who repent and the worthy
believers, God says: ***“…these shall enter the garden, and they shall
not be dealt with unjustly in any way: the gardens of perpetuity which
the Beneficent God has promised to His servants in the unseen; surely
His promise shall come to pass. They shall not hear therein any vain
discourse, but only peace, and they shall have their sustenance therein
morning and evening.”***[^14]

Then He says: ***“This is the garden which We cause those of Our
servants to inherit who guard (against evil).”***[^15]

After describing the provision of the life of this world, in another
verse, God says: ***“Shall I tell you of what is better than these? For
those who guard (against evil) are gardens with their Lord, beneath
which rivers flow, to abide in them, and pure mates and Allah’s
pleasure; and Allah is seer of His servants.”***[^16]

All these rewards are important and noteworthy but what the pious must
take into consideration is Allah’s pleasure which cannot be valued. All
prophets, Imams and the saints of Allah have tried to reach it, for
prophethood, divine mission, Wilayah and Imamate are summed up in it.
Human beings were created to obey God and to win His pleasure. When
Allah’s pleasure is won, everything is won too.

It would not be out of place to talk here about the paradise of the
pious. The late Koleini has reported that Imam Baqir (AS) has said: “The
Holy Prophet (SW)was asked about the meaning of the Quranic verse:
***“The day on which We will gather those who guard (against evil) to
the Beneficent God to receive honors.”***[^17] The Holy Prophet (SAW)
said: ‘O Ali, this group of people is but riders and they are a few men
who refrain from committing sins. Therefore, God loved them and gave
them a special position, praised their deeds and called them the
pious.’”

Then, the Holy Prophet (SAW) said: O Ali! By Allah Who has split the
grain, brought out the plant and created the creatures, they will come
out of graves while angels will receive them with she-camels of honor,
adorned with gold, pearl, rubies and green silk as well as purple cloth,
and those she-camels shall fly with them towards the gathering place in
the heaven. Every man shall be accompanied by a thousand angels from
every side to the gate of paradise.

Near the gate of paradise, there is a tree which is purified. Each will
drink a syrup of it. Then, God Almighty will clean their hearts from
jealousy and will make extra hair on their bodies fall down. This is the
meaning of ***“and their Lord shall make them drink a pure
drink.”***[^18]

Then, from the left side of that tree, they will move to another spring
called the Spring of Life when they perform ‘Ghusl’[^19] as a result of
which they will never die. Then, they will stop before the Throne where
they are made safe from pests, diseases, pains, cold and hot. Then, the
Omnipotent God will address the angels as the following: ‘Take them to
Paradise. Do not make them wait with other people, for My pleasure has
become incumbent on them. How can I halt them with the companions of
good deeds and bad deed?’

Thereafter, the angels accompany them to Paradise. When they reach the
gate of Paradise, angels knock at the door, making a great sound. The
assembly of Houris, whom the Benevolent God has prepared in palaces,
hear the sound, rejoice and give one another the good tidings, saying:
‘The friends of God are coming towards us!’ Then, the gate of Paradise
is opened to them and they will enter it. A group of Houris and humans
will receive and welcome them, saying: ‘How eager we were to meet you!’
God’s friends will say the same thing.

Then, Imam Ali (AS) asked the Messenger of Allah (SAW) about the meaning
of God’s words: ***“They shall have high halls, above them high
halls”***, saying: ‘Why have these places been built?’ The Holy Prophet
(SAW) said: ‘O Ali! God has made these places with pearls, rubies and
topaz, with their ceilings of gold and silver for His friends. Each
place has a thousand gates of gold with an angel guarding at each gate.
Therein are upraised couches and some raised upon the others, of fine
silk in different colors, filled with musk, ambergris and camphor. This
is the meaning of words of God Almighty: ***“And exalted
throne”.***[^20]”

When a believer enters his abode in Paradise, they will put a royal
crown of honor on his head with rubies and pearls, dress him with
garments of gold and silver of seventy colors interwoven with gold,
silver, pearls and rubies as God Almighty has said: ***“they shall be***
***made to wear therein bracelets of gold and pearls, and their dress
therein shall be silk.”***[^21]

When the believer takes his seat on the throne, his throne will start
moving out of joy and when that friend of Allah settles in his abode, a
guardian angel will ask him permission to greet him with the divine
regards. Then, the believer’s servants of girls and boys will say to
him: “Be in your place. The friend of Allah is in his seat and his pure
beautiful mate is prepared to receive him. Wait until the friend of God
becomes free.”

His mate will came flauntingly out of her tent towards him. The servant
girls will surround her. He wears a garment or rubies, pearls and topaz
perfumed with musk and ambergris and sandals of gold decorated with
rubies and pearls with rubies as sandal laces.

When the houri approaches the friend of God, she will arise and will say
out of eagerness: “O God’s friend! Today is not the day of hardship.
Arise! I belong to you and you belong to me!”

They will then hug each other for a long time without getting tired
***“…and the angels will enter unto them from every gate.”***[^22] And
will say: ***“Peace be upon you because you were constant. How
excellent, is then, the issue of the abode.”***[^23]

The excellent abode is a reference to God’s words: ***“And when you see
there, you shall see blessings and a great kingdom.”***[^24]

The Holly prophet (SAW) said: “This is a reference to what angels and
God’s messengers ask permission from Him and they do not enter it
without permission with regard to the great kingdom and bounties. Rivers
flow beneath the palaces with fruits at close hand. God Almighty has
said: ***“Its shades will be close over them and its fruits will be
hanging low.”***[^25]

This is in a way that if the believer rises up, the trees will rise up
too at the height of his stature and if he sits down, the branches will
bow down to be easy to reach. If he wishes, the branches will come down
lower.

Imam Baqir (AS) has said: “Gardens mentioned in the Holy Quran are
garden of Eden, garden of Paradise, garden of Bliss, and garden of
Refuge. There are other gardens in the Holy Quran, which are
intermingled with these gardens, that the believer will enjoy them in
whatever manner he wishes. Whenever the believer wishes for anything, he
will say: ‘Glory to Thee, my Lord’ and upon saying it, he will have it.
This is a reference to God’s words: ***“Their cry in it (Paradise) shall
be: Glory to Thee, O Allah! And their greeting in it shall be: Peace;
and the last of their cry shall be: Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.”***”[^26]

5) Having No Fear or Sorrow (The Pious Have No Grief)
-----------------------------------------------------

As God has said ***“O children of Adam! If there come to you apostles
from among you*** ***relating to you My communications, then whoever
shall guard (against evil) and act aright- They shall have no fear nor
shall they grieve.”***[^27]

Obviously, only a person who has no strong shelter for himself has fear
and is sorrowful. But how will a person, who has chosen piety and is
wholeheartedly devoted to God and has no guardian, protector, giver of
honor, savior and king other than God, be sorrowful? In this respect,
whether the fear is related to this world or the hereafter, only piety
can remove it.

6) Ease of Affairs (The Pious At Ease)
--------------------------------------

In the Holy Quran, God says: ***“Then as for him who gives (in charity)
and fears Allah, and accepts the best, We will facilitate for him the
easy end.”***[^28]

This is evidently clear, for one who exercises piety, establishes a kind
of relation with the Lord of the universe Who is the Causer of causes.
Hence, He will resolve all problems, for He is the Remover of all
sorrows and Destroyer of griefs.

7) Reaching A Higher Rank (Piety, A Superior Stage)
---------------------------------------------------

In relation to disbelievers, God says: ***“The life of this world is
made to seem fair to those who disbelieve, and they mock those who
believe, and those who guard (against evil) shall be above them on the
Day of Resurrection; and Allah gives means of subsistence to whom he
pleases without measure. ”***[^29]

8) Removing Evil Acts And Forgiving Sins (Piety Removes Evil)
-------------------------------------------------------------

God says: ***“And if the followers of the Book had believed and guarded
(against evil), We would certainly have covered their evil deeds and We
would certainly have made them enter gardens of bliss.”***[^30]

On the same topic, God says: ***“O you who believe! If you are careful
of (your duty to) Allah, He will grant you a distinction and do away
with your evils and forgive you; and Allah is the Lord of infinite
grace.”***[^31]

About those who, with the temptations of Satan, drank wine but returned
and exercised piety, God says: ***“On those who believe and do good
there is no blame for what they ate, when they are careful (of their
duty) and believe and believe, then they are careful (of their duty) and
believe, then they are careful (of their duty) and do good (to others),
and Allah loves who do good (to others).”***[^32]

God has used the word Taqwa three times in this verse which shows its
significance. Furthermore, God does not desire a temporary piety but a
permanent and continued one, a piety accompanied with faith, good deeds
and benevolence. Such a piety removes evil acts and sins.

9) Piety, A Heavenly Blessing
-----------------------------

About piety and heavenly blessings, God has said: ***“And if the people
of the towns had believed and guarded (against evil), We would certainly
have opened up for them blessings from the heaven and the earth, but
they rejected, so We overtook them for what they had earned.”***[^33]

10) Piety, A Solution
---------------------

Resolving of problems, ease of affairs, getting rid of afflictions
caused by oneself or others, whether in this world or at the time of
death, whether on the Day of judgment, the Day of Reckoning, or passing
over (the bridge of) Sirat, are some of the results of piety. In this
connection, the Lord of the universe says: ***“…and whoever is careful
of (his duty to) Allah, He will make for him an outlet, and give him
sustenance from whence he thinks not.”***

As for those who will enter Hell, God says: ***“And there is not one of
you but shall come to it; this is an unavoidable decree of your Lord.
And We will deliver those who guarded (against evil) , and We will leave
the unjust therein on their knees.”***[^34]

In another verse, God says: ***“And Allah shall deliver those who guard
(against evil) with their achievement; evil shall not touch them, not
shall they grieve.”***[^35]

Again in another verse, God has said: ***“…if you are patient and guard
yourselves, their scheme will not injure you in any away.”***[^36]

It is obviously so, that all problems and entanglements related to this
world and the hereafter arise from a kind of impiety and deviations
whereas one, who guards against evil and exercises piety, is not only
uninvolved in entanglements but lives in ease and with peace of mind.

11) Piety Overcomes Satan
-------------------------

As the Lord of the universe has said: ***“Surely, those who guard
(against evil), when a visitation from Satan afflicts them, they become
mindful, then lo! They see.”***[^37]

Therefore, Satan’s visitation, scheme and temptations will not affect
the pious, for the latter have found their right way and are safe from
moral, social, political, ideological and family deviations.

12) God Is With The Pious
-------------------------

God has said: ***“Surely, Allah is with those who guard (against evil)
and those who do good*** ***(to others).”***[^38]

The same verse is seen in Imam Ali’s last will and testament after the
Imam (AS) salutes the angels.

13) Piety And Invisible Assistance
----------------------------------

The Lord of the universe has said: ***“Yea, if you remain patient and
are on your guard, and they (enemy) come upon you in a headlong manner,
your Lord will assist you with five thousand of distinctly marked
angels.”***[^39]

In Kashf al-Ghummah, we read: “On the day (battle) of Badr, most of the
unbelievers were killed by Imam Ali (AS), some by the companions and
some others by the angels.” [^40]

Abu Khadijah has been reported as saying: “One day, I went to
Abul-Hassan Musa ibn Ja'far (al-Kadhim) (AS) who said to me: “Truly, God
Almighty supports the believer with Gabriel. He will summon the believer
to His presence any time he does good and exercises piety and becomes
absent from him whenever he commits a sin or he transgresses.” [^41]

14) Piety And Distinction
-------------------------

God says: ***“O you who believe! If you are careful of (your duty to)
Allah, He will grant you a distinction and do away with your evils and
forgive you; and Allah is the Lord of infinite grace.”***[^42]

15) Piety And Salvation
-----------------------

About salvation, God has said: ***“And he who obeys Allah and His
Apostle, and fears Allah, and is careful of (his duty to ) Him, these it
is that are the achievers .”***[^43] (24:52)

***In another verse, God says! “These are on a right course from their
Lord and these it is that shall be successful.”***[^44]

16) Piety And Divine Knowledge
------------------------------

God has said: ***“And be careful of (your duty) to Allah, Allah teaches
you, and Allah knows all things.”***[^45]

17) Piety And Good Deeds
------------------------

Abel and Cain offered sacrifices to God but He accepted Abel’s sacrifice
while He rejected the other.

In this relation, God says: ***“Allah only accepts from those who guard
(against evil).”***[^46]

18) Piety And Nearness To God
-----------------------------

About the honor people have with God, He says: ***“O you men! Surely We
have created you of a male and female , and made you tribes and families
that you may know each other; surely the most honorable of you with
Allah is the one among you most careful (of his duty);surely Allah is
knowing, Aware.”***[^47]

Someone asked Prophet Jesus (AS): “Which people are the better ones?”

Prophet Jesus (AS) took two handfuls of earth, saying: “Neither of these
has preference over the other. Rather they are equal. People too are as
such. The most honorable of them are those who are most careful (of
their duty).”[^48]

On the relation of the Quranic Sura of al-Hujurat, the verse 13,
commentators have written: “One day, the Holy prophet of Islam (SAW) was
walking in the market of Medina. He saw a salve on sale. The salve kept
on saying: ‘Whoever buys me should let me perform my daily prayers.’” A
man bought him with the same condition. Thereafter, whenever the Holy
Prophet (SAW) performed daily prayers, the slave would take part in them
too. A few days passed, but there was no news of the salve.

The Holy prophet (SAW) asked after him. They said: He suffers from
fever. The Holy prophet (SAW) went to visit him. After three days, the
Holy Prophet inquired after his health. His master said: He is dead. The
Holy Prophet (SAW) personally took charge of performing his burial
service. Both the Muhajireen and the Ansar were surprised. God Almighty
revealed the above mentioned verse indicating that lineage is no honor,
rather it is piety which brings about honor.”[^49]

Imam Sajjad (AS) has been reported by Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali as saying:
“There is no privilege for Quraish over the Arabs save due to modesty,
and no honor save due to piety; no knowledge save due to good intention
and no prayer save due to mindfulness.”[^50]

19) Piety And the Day Of Judgment
---------------------------------

God says: ***“The friends shall on that day be enemies one to another,
except those who guard (against evil).”***[^51]

In this world, friendships are based on worldly gains with no real aim
or they are not for the sake of God. Obviously all friendships will come
to an end save those which are for the sake of God, a feature of the
pious. In this relation, Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying:
“Brothers are of three kinds; one who is fair to his self, and the
second is such with his wealth. They are truthful in friendship. And the
third kind is one who takes from you what he needs and likes you for
fun. Do not trust him!” [^52]

20) Piety And The Good End
--------------------------

The Lord of the universe inspired Prophet Moses (AS) to say to his
tribe: ***“Ask help from Allah and be patient; surely, the land is
Allah’s; He causes such of His servants to inherit it as He pleases, and
the end is for those who guard (against evil).”***[^53]

Elsewhere, the Lord of the universe consoles Prophet Hud (a.s.) by
saying: ***“Therefore be patient; surely, the end is for those who guard
(against evil).”***[^54]

In another verse, God says to the Holy prophet (SAW): ***“And enjoin
prayer on your people, and steadily adhere to it; We do not ask you for
subsistence. We do give you subsistence, and the (good) end is for
guarding (against evil).”***[^55]

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported as saying: “Among the children of
Israel, there was a man who would repeatedly say “praise is due to the
Lord of the worlds and good is for those who guard against evil.” Iblis
became angry. So he assigned a Devil to go to him saying: ‘The good end
is for the wealthy’, but the man did not accept it. So they decided to
choose an arbiter to judge between them. Anyone against whom the
judgment was passed would have one of his hands cut off. They set out
till they reached a man whom they informed of their intention. That
person said: ‘The good end is for the wealthy.’ One of the hands of the
pious man was cut off. Yet, he would say: ‘The good end is for those who
guard against evil.’ Satan said: ‘Do you still say the same thing?’ The
pious man said: “I believe in what I say even if I lose the other hand!“
They set out again and reached another person. They informed him of the
story. That person too said: “The good end is for the wealthy.”

The other hand of the pious man was cut off while he was saying: “The
good end is for those who guard against evil!” Satan said to him: “Will
you bet on your head?” The pious man said: “Yes.”

They set out again and on their way, they saw a manlike shadow. They
stopped before him and told him the story. That shadow touched the pious
man’s hands which were restored to their normal positions and beheaded
Satan saying: “… the good end is for those who guard against evil.”[^56]

Obviously, what lasts forever is truth and rightfulness and what
perishes is injustice and falsehood.

There are usually many things which have no truth or spirit. The worldly
life, wealth, position, power, force, hypocritical acts, indecent words,
evil acts and their likes are such. The only thing which lasts forever
and makes people prosperous is the right path which is free from
deviation. Piety includes all the virtues.

21) Piety And Divine Guardianship
---------------------------------

About divine guardianship, God says: ***“Surely the unjust are friends
of each other, and Allah is the guardian of those who guard (against
evil).”***[^57]

22) Piety And Divine Guidance
-----------------------------

God says: ***“These (the pious) are on a right course from their Lord
and these it is that shall be successful.”***[^58]

23) Piety Is Never Undermined
-----------------------------

Imam Ali (AS) has said, “He who is strong rooted in piety does not come
to destruction, and the plantation of a people based on piety never
remains without water.”[^59]

Imam Ali (AS) means that the life of one that is based on piety, will
not be ruined with negative propaganda in the same way that plantation
based on piety will never get burnt down.

24) Piety Is Never Ignored
--------------------------

Imam Ali (AS) has also said: “Action accompanied with fear of Allah does
not fail, and how can a thing fail that has been accepted?!” [^60]

25) Piety, A Wealth
-------------------

Imam Sadiq (AS) has been reported by Ya’qoob ibn Shu’aib as saying: “God
does not promote a servant from the humiliation of sins to the honor of
piety, except that He makes him rich without wealth, honorable without
tribe, and a friend of Him without friends of people.”[^61]

26) Piety, Cure For All
-----------------------

Imam Ali (AS) says: “Certainly, fear of Allah is the medicine for your
hearts, sight for the blindness of your spirits, the cure for the
ailments of your bodies, the rectifier of the evils of your breasts, the
purifier of the pollution of your minds, the light of the darkness of
your eyes, the consolation for the fear of your heart and the brightness
for the gloom of your ignorance.”[^62]

27) Piety, A Divine Grace
-------------------------

The Holy Quran says: ***“…and be careful of (your duty) to Allah, Allah
teaches you.”***[^63]

The Holy prophet (SAW) has been reported as saying: “Fight against your
passions so that your hearts will be filled with wisdom.”[^64]

This concept proves the worth and the importance of piety which makes
the wild and troublesome knowledge easy for human beings. With piety,
man can easily get to know the mysteries in sciences as if these people
are inspired with knowledge.

[^1]: Qur'an, 22:32.

[^2]: Qur'an, 5:2.

[^3]: Qur'an, 3:76.

[^4]: Qur'an, 8:34.

[^5]: Qur'an, 4:77.

[^6]: Qur'an, 6:32.

[^7]: Qur'an, 12:57.

[^8]: Qur'an, 2:103.

[^9]: Qur'an, 47:36.

[^10]: Qur'an, 3:172.

[^11]: Qur'an, 47:15.

[^12]: Qur'an, 16:31.

[^13]: Qur'an, 39:20.

[^14]: Qur'an, 19:60-62.

[^15]: Qur'an, 19:63.

[^16]: Qur'an, 3:15.

[^17]: Qur'an, 19:85.

[^18]: Qur'an, 76:21.

[^19]: Meaning “Ritual ablution”.

[^20]: Qur'an, 56:34.

[^21]: Qur'an, 35:33.

[^22]: Qur'an, 13:23.

[^23]: Qur'an, 13:24.

[^24]: Qur'an, 76:20.

[^25]: Qur'an, 76:14.

[^26]: Qur'an, 10:10.

[^27]: Qur'an, 7:35.

[^28]: Qur'an, 92:5-7.

[^29]: Qur'an, 2:212.

[^30]: Qur'an, 5:65.

[^31]: Qur'an, 8:29.

[^32]: Qur'an, 5:93.

[^33]: Qur'an, 7:96.

[^34]: Qur'an, 19:70-71.

[^35]: Qur'an, 39:61.

[^36]: Qur'an, 3:120.

[^37]: Qur'an, 7:201.

[^38]: Qur'an, 16:128.

[^39]: Qur'an, 3:125.

[^40]: Kholasat al-Manhaj, vol. 4, p. 239.

[^41]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, p. 235.

[^42]: Qur'an, 8:29.

[^43]: Qur'an, 24:52.

[^44]: Qur'an, 2:5.

[^45]: Qur'an, 2:282.

[^46]: Qur'an, 5:27.

[^47]: Qur'an, 49:13.

[^48]: Kholasat al-Manhaj, vol.5, p. 351.

[^49]: Ibid., P. 350.

[^50]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 1, P. 33.

[^51]: Qur'an, 43:67.

[^52]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, P. 35.

[^53]: Qur'an, 7:128.

[^54]: Qur'an, 11:49.

[^55]: Qur'an, 20:132.

[^56]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, P. 293.

[^57]: Qur'an, 45:19.

[^58]: Qur'an, 2:5.

[^59]: Nahj al-Balaghah, P. 669.

[^60]: Ibid., P. 1129.

[^61]: Wasa’il al-Shiah, vol. 11, P. 190.

[^62]: Nahj al-Balaghah, P. 635.

[^63]: Qur'an, 2:282.

[^64]: Ten Discourses, P. 26.


