6) Piety And Faith
==================

One of the issues a human being has to take seriously and in the words
of some religious authorities, the question of following others is not
sufficient or as some others say one must reach certainty, is the
question of principles of religion and ideology. It is incumbent on
every Muslim and non-Muslim to deeply think about his religious
principles, that is to choose a right path, to realize that there is a
God who is the Lord of the universe and to know with certainty that
other gods are false and made by the human imagination. One should truly
realize that all beings are Allah’s creatures and before Him, he should
prostrate. In this relation, God says: ***“And I am your Lord, therefore
fear Me.”***

One should know that human beings are in need of leaders ordained by God
as prophets and Imams. He should firmly believe that he has been created
for the other world and that this world is transient. Perhaps, it is a
reference to piety when we read in narrations that faith is superior to
Islam. Imam Baqir (AS) has been reported by Hamran as saying: “I heard
the Imam says: Truly God has made faith superior to Islam in the same
way that He has made the Ka’aba superior to the Inviolable Mosque.”[^1]

The Imam (AS) then mentions different ranks of Islam and faith. On
Taqwa, the Imam says: Piety is superior to faith and certainty is
superior to piety in terms of rank. Therefore, Taqwa here is an
ideological piety, for the Imam has considered Islam as the lowest and
certainty as the highest degree while piety is in between.

[^1]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, P. 52.


