7) Piety And Monotheism
=======================

Piety in relation to monotheism means that man has to know that the
All-seeing, the All-hearing, the All-wise, the Maker, the Creator, the
Healer and the Provider is the One and Only God and that other beings
are His creatures. It is really not very difficult to prove the
existence of God. Nevertheless, we would like to mention certain reasons
to prove it.

1- Whenever man sees an object in this world, he will automatically
think about its producer and inventor. Even if a girl, who has a doll in
her hands, is told that this doll has been made by itself, she will
laugh at that. How can this universe with the earth, the sky, plants,
animals, human beings, waters, mountains, winds, rains, space, planets,
light and darkness, fruits, grains and millions of other things exist
without a Maker who is All-knowing and All-wise?

2- How can cosmos, the order of days and nights, the four seasons, the
function of eyes, ears, heart, digestive tract, and solar system not
lead us to the existence of God?

3- In dangers, our hearts are directed towards a Savior and Helper even
if we are not Muslims.

4- The news brought by prophets, Imams and the messages of scholars and
scientists about an Eternal Being and the Lord of the universe is one of
the strongest reasons to prove God’s existence.

When God’s oneness is proved for man, and when man realized that there
is no one in this universe save God, who is All-hearing, All-seeing, the
King, the Provider of human beings and animals, One who brings forth the
living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living and the
Manager of the world, he should exercise this piety that he is not
inclined to anything but God.

In this relation, God says: ***“Say: who gives you sustenance from the
heavens and the earth? Or who controls the hearing and the sight? And
who brings forth the living from the dead and brings the dead from the
living? And who regulates the affairs? Then they will say: Allah. Say
then: Will you not then guard (against evil)?”***[^1]

That is to say, one should not take heed of false gods or idols, rather
he should safeguard himself from vicious circle and deviations which is
the same as inclination for idols and their likes.

Regarding this, God has said: ***“Take not two gods, He is only One God;
so of Me alone should you be afraid. And whatever is in the heavens and
the earth is His, and to Him should obedience be (rendered) constantly;
will you then guard against other than (the punishment of)
Allah?”***[^2]

That is to say the One who deserves Taqwa is the One God and it is He
who punishes, takes us to task and rewards us.

As for those who do not believe, God says: ***“Surely the vilest of
animals in Allah’s sight are those who disbelieve, who will not believe;
those with whom you make an agreement, then*** ***they break their
agreement every time and they do not guard (against punishment).”***[^3]

[^1]: Qur'an, 10:31.

[^2]: Qur'an, 16:51-52.

[^3]: Qur'an, 8:55-56.


