Two Kinds of Imams
==================

The Holy Quran has mentioned two types of leaders (Imams). The first
type is the one who leads the people towards Hell. Allah declares in
Surah Qasas, verse 41,

'And We made them Imams who call to the Fire, and on the Day of
Resurrection they shall not be assisted.' It means that the end of the
one who accepts such an Imam will be in Hell.

The second group of Imams guides the people by Allah's command. Surah
Sajdah, verse 24 points out 'And We made of them Imams to guide by Our
command when they were patient, and they were certain of Our
communications.' 'Say: Is there any of your associates who guides to the
truth? Say: Allah guides to the truth. Is He then Who guides to the
truth more worthy to be followed, or he who himself does not go aright
unless he is guided? What then is the matter with you; how do you
judge?'

(Surah Yunus, Verse 35)

Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) has described the characteristics of both
kinds of Imams in his orations. 'The reality of people is not understood
by their names but by the pattern of their behavior and mannerisms. Just
as clothes hide the defects of the body, external manners cloak the
defects of the soul. A connection of the soul is a necessity between the
Imam and the follower. If a person (i.e. Imam) is not pious in his own
heart, he will not be able to guide his followers towards piety and
servitude. Hence if we desire Heaven and want to safeguard our eternal
life from the chastisement of the Hellfire, then we have to search for
an Imam whose inner and outer selves both are complete manifestations of
divine command.

Such an Imam must necessarily be adorned with piety completely, i.e.
must be an infallible.

We will discuss the characteristics of the Imam of Hellfire and the
Imam who guides to the truth, in the light of the sermons of Hazrat Ali
(a.s.).


**The Imam of the Hellfire**

'…certainly, the worst man before Allah is the oppressive Imam who has
gone astray and through whom others go astray. He destroys the accepted
Sunnah and revives abandoned innovations. I heard the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) predict - On the Day of Judgment the oppressive Imam will be
brought without anyone to support him or anyone to advance excuses on
his behalf, and then he will be thrown into Hell, where he will rotate
as the hand-mill rotates. Then eventually he will be confined to its
hollow.'

(Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 164, vol. 1, pg. 608-609, Ansariyan
Publications)
An oppressor is not only the one who usurps the rights of others and
persecutes others. The Quran declares, '…and whoever exceeds the limits
of Allah these it is that are the unjust.'

(Surah Baqarah, Verse 229)

These include those disobedient of Allah's commands, who have violated
His edicts and exceeded His limits. The Quran further proclaims, 'and
whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that are
the unjust.' (Surah Maidah, Verse 45)

If somebody makes additions to the religion or forbids an obligation,
he has violated the divine command which tantamount to injustice.
Therefore, any person who has not been appointed an Imam by Allah and he
claims this position for himself, he has transgressed the limits of
Allah and has disregarded Allah's orders. He is a tyrannical and an
oppressive leader, whose end has been described above in Hazrat Ali's
(a.s.) sermon. Indeed the Holy Quran condemns even those people as
oppressors who befriend such persons - '…and whoever makes friends with
them, these are the unjust.'

(Surah Mumtahenah, Verse 9)


