Chain of Guidance
=================

It is crystal clear that Imamat is the exclusive right of the Ahle Bait
(a.s.) and anyone who claims this right for himself/themselves is a liar
and an oppressor. There is a well-known tradition from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) widely narrated by all scholars and traditionalists in their
books. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) prophesied,

'This nation will have twelve leaders and guides and all of them will
be from the Quraish. The one who leaves them will not harm them.' (i.e.
the one who has distanced himself will be among the losers, because his
death will be that of ignorance). (Musnad-e-Ahmad b. Hanbal, vol.5, pg.
312)

The tradition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) clearly highlights that
there will only be twelve Imams till the Day of Judgment and all these
leaders will be from the tribe of Quraish. Within the Quraish, the Imams
will be from Bani Hashim. From the traditions mentioned above we
conclude that after the demise of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) till the
Day of Resurrection, this nation will have twelve Imams and all of them
will be from Bani Hashim.

Regarding the tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) - 'I leave
among you two weighty things (Saqalain), the Book of Allah and my
progeny', Imam Ali (a.s.) was asked - Who is the progeny? He (a.s.)
replied:

I, Hasan (a.s.), Husain (a.s.) and the nine Imams (a.s.) from the
progeny of Husain (a.s.), of whom the ninth one will be the Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) and the Qaem (a.t.f.s.). Neither will they separate from the
Book of Allah nor will the Book of Allah separate from them, till they
meet the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) at the Pool of Kausar.'

(Kamaluddin, vol.1, pg. 240-241)

Aamir bin Kasir asked Imam Ali (a.s.): O Ameerul Momineen (a.s.)! You
have made us aware of the guides of disbelief and the caliphs of evil,
now introduce to us the guides of truth and the real guides after you.'
Imam Ali (a.s.) informed him, 'Yes, surely it is the promise of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) to me that this religion will have twelve Imams and
leaders, nine of whom will be from the progeny of Husain (a.s.). The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has narrated, 'When I went to the heavens
for Meraj, I saw written on the pillar of the Arsh
'There is no god except Allah, Mohammad (s.a.w.a.) is His Messenger,
and I have aided him through Ali (a.s.) and I have helped him through
Ali (a.s.)'

And I saw twelve Lights. I asked:

O My Lord! Whose lights are these?

The reply was - These lights are of Imams from your progeny.

Then I (Ali (a.s.)) asked: O Messenger of Allah, will you not tell me
their names?' The Holy Prophet replied,

'Yes, certainly. You are Imam and Caliph after me, you will repay my
debts and fulfill my promises. After you will be your two sons, Hasan
(a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), and after Husain (a.s.) will be his son Ali -
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), after Ali (a.s.) will be his son Mohammad (a.s.)
whose title is Baqir. After Mohammad (a.s.) will follow his son Jafar
(a.s.) whose title is Sadiq. After Jafar (a.s.), will be his son Moosa
(a.s.) whose title is Kazim. After Moosa (a.s.), will be his son Ali
(a.s.) whose title is Reza. After Ali, his son Mohammad (a.s.) will
succeed him and his title is Zaki. After Mohammad (a.s.) will follow his
son Ali (a.s.) whose title is Naqi. After Ali (a.s.) will come his son
Hasan (a.s.) whose title is Ameen and Askari. After him will be the son
of Hasan (a.s.), Qaem (a.t.f.s.), whose name will be my name and who
will bear maximum similarity with me. He will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it would have been filled with oppression and
injustice.'

(Vol. 1, pg. 138, Imam Ali (a.s.) narrated about the condition of Imam
Mahdi (a.s.))

There isn't just one tradition like this. We find several traditions on
these lines and the number goes up to 20. For instance, Imam Ali (a.s.)
recounts from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) who has categorically stated
that from the time of his (s.a.w.a.) death till the Day of Qiyamat there
will only be twelve Imams, and then each has been mentioned by his
name.

The entire arrangement was made so that people would know that Allah
and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had already selected the Imams. It was not
that anyone could be an Imam according to the wishes of the Islamic
nation. It was not that an Imam who was supposed to follow his father in
the chain of Imamat, died in his father's lifetime, leaving the chain of
Imamat suspended until the people appointed the deceased's son as the
Imam in his place. All the above traditions, were narrated when Janabe
Ismail b. Jafar Sadiq was not even born. The list of Imams (a.s.)
narrated by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and Imam Ali (a.s.) does not
show Janabe Ismail's name. Therefore, if he was never destined to be an
Imam then where does the question of usurping his Imamat arise?

Another thing that is evident is that the twelve Imams (a.s.)
enumerated in the prophetic tradition mentions the first Imam as Imam
Ali (a.s.) and the twelfth and last Imam as Hazrat Wali-e-Asr
(a.t.f.s.), who is the Imam of our time and is alive on this earth today
and is amongst us but we are deprived of his meeting due to our sins and
disobedience.

Asbagh bin Nubata (r.a.) a very reliable companion of Hazrat Ali (a.s.)
narrates, 'I presented myself before Hazrat Ali (a.s.). I saw that he
was engrossed in some thought and marking with his blessed finger on the
earth. I queried, 'O Ameerul Momineen (a.s.)! What is the matter, I find
you today in some perplexity, making signs on the earth, do you love
this earth? He (a.s.) replied:

I swear by Allah that it is not so. I have never befriended this world,
rather I was reflecting about that son, the eleventh one from my
progeny. He is the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), who will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it was filled with injustice and tyranny. There is
an occultation for him in which some people will be deviated while
others will be guided.

(Kamaluddin, vol.1, pg. 288-297, A'laamul Wara, pg. 400)

How clearly Hazrat Ali (a.s.) has described and illuminated the chain
of guidance and Imamat. Who could be more unfortunate and wretched that
despite such a clear and illumined chain of guidance and Imamat, rejects
it for those deviated guides who have usurped Hazrat Ali's (a.s.) right?
Those who have harassed and persecuted Janabe Zahra (s.a.), burned down
her door and waged war against her husband - the rightful Imam and
celebrated on his martyrdom and were the main protagonists of the
incident of Karbala. Their sons killed Imam Husain (a.s.) in Karbala,
they made captives the Ahle Bait (a.s.) and martyred them one after the
other.

Their lives were devoid of Islamic teachings, they opposed the Quranic
commands secretly and publicly, they were steeped in sins and prohibited
acts and abandoned the religious obligations completely. They were
prisoners of their carnal desires and neglected the hereafter and in
this manner deprived themselves of guidance. Then how was it possible
for them to guide others?

Guidance has only one path and that path is the way of Hazrat Ali Ibne
Abi Talib (a.s.), finally terminating in Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) who is
the Imam today. There is no other path leading to true guidance and
there is no other guarantee for success and happiness in the world and
the hereafter.

We end this discussion with the declaration of Hazrat Ali (a.s.)
inviting everyone to leave aside prejudices and rise above personal
interests, to purify the intellect and consciousness, to decide about
one's own end, lest the coming of the Angel of Death finds us perplexed
and uncertain. Today there is time and tomorrow could be too late. Our
decision will take us either to Paradise or to Hell. Let us not spoil
our hereafter for this fleeting world.

'Observe this world, which you desire, towards which you move with
desire and proximity, which sometimes angers you and at other times
makes you happy. It is neither your actual abode nor the station for
which you were created, nor is it the place towards which you are
invited.' 'Take lesson, for it is not going to remain for you, nor are
you in it forever. If it has beguiled you with its charm then it has
also made you fearful with its wickedness. Do not be influenced by its
scare and do not seek it greedily out of its fear.' 'Advance towards
that abode towards which you have been invited and turn your hearts away
from this world. None of you should lament like maids on deprivation of
a thing of this world. Be patient on the obedience of Allah and wish for
the completion of the bounties by safeguarding that which has been
commanded by our Book to be safeguarded.'

'Pay heed, if you have safeguarded your religious beliefs then loss of
anything of this world will not harm you. And if you have wasted and
destroyed your religion then none of the worldly things, which you have
safeguarded, can bring you any benefit.' (Nahjul Balagah, Sermon 173,
vol. 1, pg. 644, Ansariyan Publications)

May Allah turn our hearts towards truth and give us the blessing of
patience!

--------------------------------------------------------------

Freedom, Human Destiny, and the World in the Nahj al-Balaghah Dr. Syed
Waheed Akhtar

The theme of freedom is repeatedly emphasized and elaborated in the
Nahj al-Balaghah. We shall quote a few relevant passages to substantiate
the points made so far.

. . . (God) has given inborn disposition to human minds to shape
themselves either towards good or towards evil." (Khutbah 75) They were
given complete liberty in this world, of thought and deed, to think as
they like and to do as they desire, so that they may develop their
minds, and with the help of such developed minds, free will, and the
span of life allotted to them, find the purpose for which they were
created . . . . 12 (Khutbah 86).

In Khutbah 86, Imam 'Ali (a) further says that human beings are given
sound bodies and limbs with perfect senses to acquire the knowledge of
the external world and the light of reason and wisdom, so that they are
able to exercise their freedom of thought and action.'" This point forms
a recurring theme of the Nahj al-halaghah, for a sound body, sound
senses, and reason are necessary conditions for exercising freedom.
Those who are deficient in these respects are not held responsible for
their acts, such as insane persons and infants. Solely those endowed
with these things are responsible for their acts:

. . . Lives of men who were enjoying themselves to their hearts'
content and had perfect freedom of action have such useful lessons in
them to teach . . (Khutbah 86)14

From the above-quoted passages, certain points can be inferred: man is
given complete freedom with the ability to exercise it; freedom has a
purpose: to realize and obey Allah and act in a just manner. Justice can
be defined as maintaining equilibrium among various obligations and
rights. One has to be just to oneself. There are many verses in the Holy
Qur'an and innumerable passages in the Nahj al-Balaghah restraining men
from indulging in excesses even in desirable deeds, such as generosity,
excess of which is israf and is prohibited.

Doing justice to others, which ensures social and political morality,
and just behaviour in relation to God, requires abstaining from
overindulgence in ritual worship. By maintaining justice in all the
three aspects-that is in relation to oneself, others and God-man is free
to determine his destiny. In contemporary Western philosophy
existentialism is credited with introducing the notion of man's freedom
in shaping and molding his own destiny, but a glance at the Nahj
al-Balaghah is sufficient to arrive at the conclusion that it was Imam
'Ali (a) who advanced this idea for the first time:

"If by destiny you mean compulsion (physical or otherwise) whereby we
are forced (by nature) to do a thing, then it is not so. Had it been an
obligation of that kind, then there would have been no question of
reward for doing it and punishment for not doing it (such as breathing,
sleeping and eating are physical necessities entailing no reward or
punishment), and the promised blessings and punishments in afterlife
will have no meanings. The Merciful Lord has given His creatures
complete freedom to do as they like, and they are prohibited from
certain actions and warned of the consequences of such actions.

These commands carry in them the least trouble and lead us towards the
most convenient way of life . . . . He sees people disobeying Him and
tolerates them, not because He can be overruled or be compelled to
accept human supremacy over Him. He did not send His prophets to amuse
Himself or provide amusement for them. He did not reveal His orders
without any reason and purpose. Neither has He created the galaxies and
the earth without any design, purpose, and program. A universe without
plan, purpose, and program is the idea of the infidels and heathens;
sorry will be their plight in the fires and the hell. . ." (Sayings:
78)

(Destiny) was an order of God to do it, like the order he has given in
His Holy Book "You are destined to worship him and nobody else'' .Here
destined means "ordered", it does not mean physical compulsion.15

From this brief saying, many points relevant to philosophical and moral
issues can be derived: determining one's destiny is an act of man's free
will, different from physical compulsion; Divine commands are rationally
designed and have a purpose; the universe itself has a design and a
purpose; in this purposive scheme of creation man is free to act or not
to act in accordance with the Divine purpose; voluntary acts of men
deserve reward or punishment according to their nature; and that freedom
brings in its wake responsibility.

Kant, who could not bring himself to accept the existence of God on the
strength of ontological, causal, and teleological arguments, had to
evolve a moral proof for the existence of God, in which God, freedom of
human will, and life after death served as the essential postulates of
morality. If we compare Imam 'Ali's approach to the problems of freedom,
morality, purposiveness of creation, and the existence of God, we may
come to a more convincing philosophy.

Imam Ali does not require any proof for the existence of God, but
believes in Him on the ground of revelation and his own inner
experience. This is the same stand which was taken in the West by
Kierkegaard in the 19th century after realizing the inadequacy of reason
in proving or disproving God. Recent theology in the West accepts the
inner yearning of man to have faith in a Supreme Being as the only
criterion of belief in God.

Starting from the same position 'Ali ('a) proves the purposiveness of
creation, arguing that it is created by an intelligent, knowing, and
just God with a design and a purpose, and all His commands are just and
reasonable, for He does not command man to do something that is beyond
his capacity. Human freedom is an essential constituent of this
purposive world, without which man would not have been able to pursue
certain goals. It is also necessary for morality, which comprises
voluntary actions.

Thus freedom is not a postulate in Imam Ali's world-outlook, but an
organic part of a just and purposive order. His firm faith in a just God
makes him believe in the Hereafter. In this way, the Islamic
world-outlook he presents is more coherent and consistent than that of
Kant or any other Western philosopher. In this system, human reason does
not give rise to antimonies, because it is not required to trespass the
region of faith or inner experience.

All the three axioms of morality which Kant derived from his moral
philosophy follow in Ali's Islamic system of thought from faith in God
and freedom of human will. In the world conceived by him all individuals
are free and they form a "kingdom of ends," that is the beings sovereign
in this world and only subordinate to Divine commandments. They are not
subservient to other human beings and are masters of their own destiny.
In this sense Imam 'Ali (a) considers this world of ours better than any
conceivable worlds. There is a saying of his that refutes the commonly
believed notion that the Imam ('a) despised the world and his approach
to it was ascetic and pessimistic. He heard someone abusing the world
and said to him that it was not the world which deceived man but it was
man who was allured and enchanted by it, and subsequently debased
himself and polluted the world. He said:

"Verily this world is a house of truth for those who look into it
carefully, an abode of peace and rest for those who understand its ways
and moods, and it is the best working ground for those who want to
procure rewards for their life in the Hereafter. It is a place of
acquiring knowledge and wisdom for those who want to acquire them, a
place of worship for the friends of God and for angels. It is the place
where prophets receive revelations of the Lord. It is the place for
virtuous people and the saints to do good deeds and to be assigned with
rewards for the same; only in this world they could trade with God's
favours and blessings, and only while living here they could barter
their good deeds with His blessings and rewards. Where else could all
this be done?16 (Sayings: 130)

This passage may remind one of Leibnitz's saying: "Ours is the best of
all possible worlds", which reflects an optimistic view of the physical
world. 'Ali (a) regards it so because it is here and here alone that
man's freedom is tested as to how far he acts justly. In the light of
this passage we can justify Iqbal's view that man chose freely to leave
Heaven and come to this world.


