Taqiyyah
========

***“He who disbelieves in Allah after his belief in Him, (is the liar)
except he who is compelled while his heart remains steadfast with the
faith (has nothing worry). But who opens his breast for infidelity; on
these is wrath of Allah, and for them is a great torment.”*** [^1]

This verse of the *Qur’an* refers to the incident when 'Ammar bin Yasir
(May Allah be pleased with both) had to utter some words against Islam
to save himself from the Quraishite infidels. It clearly allows hiding
one 's true faith when one is in danger of one's life. This rule is
called *taqiyyah*.

Question 1
----------

**What is the meaning of "*****Taqiyyah*****"?**

Its literal meaning is to safeguard; to defend; to fear; piety (because
it saves one from the displeasure of Allah). Al-Munjid says:  
*“This gist of above is that the word taqiyyah means to be on guard, to
fear, to be pious.”*  
 The dictionary as-Surah says, (*Taqiyyah, tuqat =* piety)

Question 2
----------

**What is its significance in Islamic terminology?**

In Islamic terminology it means "to save life, honor. or property
(either one's own or of other believers) by hiding one's belief or
religion". [^2]

Question 3
----------

**Is it something peculiar to the Shi'ism, because I have heard many
people accusing** **the Shi'as because of** ***taq'iyah*****?**

Every society, religion and group practices it and has practiced it at
one time or the other. You will find so many examples of *taqiyyah*in
the Old and the New Testaments, and even in the lives of the Holy
Prophet of Islam, his Companions and many Sunni scholars.

Question 4
----------

**But is this practice allowed in Islam?**

Yes. Allah has allowed it in the *Qur’an*; and reason too shows the
wisdom of this permission.  
 Shah \`Abdul \`Aziz Dehlawi writes:  
 "It should be known that *taqiyyah* is, in fact, allowed by
*shari\`ah*, by authority of the *Qur’an*ic verses, "*except when you
have to* *guard against them*" ; and "*except he who is compelled while
his heart remains steadfast with the faith*.” [^3]

Famous Sunni scholar, \`Allamah Wahidu 'z-zaman Khan of Hyderabad
(India) says: "*Taqiyyah* is proved from the *Qur’an*, "*except when you
have to guard against* *them*"; and ignorant people think that
*taqiyyah* is something peculiar to the Shi'as, while it is allowed in
the Sunni faith also at times." [^4]

If you hide your belief and declare yourself to believe in some
anti-Islamic tenets, won't you automatically go outside the pale of
Islam and become a '*Kafir*'?

Question 5
----------

**If you hide your belief and declare to believe in some anti-Islamic
tenets, won’t you automatically go outside the pale of Islam and became
a “*****Kafir*****”?**

Belief and faith as well as the disbelief or rejection of faith (in
short, *Iman* and *Kufr*) are basically the matters of "heart". That is
why Allah rebuked those newly-converted Arabs who claimed to be
\`Believers':

***The desert Arabs-say: "We believe" : Say (unto them): "You believed
not; rather say "we accepted Islam" because the Faith has not yet
entered your hearts*** *".* [^5]

The declaration by tongue has a very minor role in it., A belief without
declaration is acceptable but a declaration without belief is condemned
in the *Qur’an* in severest terms:

***When come unto thee the hypocrites, they say: "We bear witness that
verily you are the Messenger of Allah"; and verily Allah knows that you
are certainly this Messenger; and verily Allah bears witness that the
hypocrites are certainly the liars.*** [^6]

Now remember that the life of a Muslim is very precious in the eyes of
Islam. The importance attached to even one life is seen in this verse:

***And he who saves it (i.e., a human life) shall be as though he has
saved the whole mankind.*** [^7]

And a Muslim is bound to save a life from unlawful destruction, whether
it is some one else's or his own:

***And cast not yourselves with your own hands into perdition**.* [^8]

It is for this reason that suicide has been declared a capital sin just
like murder; and it is for this reason that Shi'a *Shari\`ah* does not
allow starting a jihad (war) without permission of the Prophet, Imam or
their especially appointed deputies or in defense.  
 And it is to save the life of a believer that one is allowed to utter a
lie and save that precious life.

Question 6
----------

**All Right. You saved a life; but you committed one of the greatest
sins, i.e., lie. So, spiritually you are doomed to disgrace in either
case. Then, why not tell the truth and let the enemies kill you if they
want?**

When a person is in such a situation that no matter whichever course of
action he chooses he has to commit an evil, then the reason says that he
should select the lesser evil.

Or if he is forced to destroy or damage one of his two possessions, then
surely he would damage or destroy the less-expensive item to save the
more precious one.

Imam Fakhru 'd-din ar-Razi says commenting on the events of the Prophet
Musa  
 (as) and Khidr (as), mentioned in Surah al-Kahf:

When one is confronted by two damaging alternatives, it is *wajib* to
bear the lesser one in order to ward off the greater one; and this was
the principle followed in the three actions (done by Khidr)’ [^9]

Islamic *Shari\`ah* abounds with examples of this principle. Prayer is
the most important pillar of Islam. But if you are praying and a child
falls down a well, and there is no one else to save the child, the
*Shari’ah* commands you to leave your prayer, and try to save the child.
If you ignored this command, that prayer would not be accepted, and you
would be guilty of neglecting to save a life.

Now, suppose the unbelievers are determined to kill a Muslim, not
because he has committed any crime but just because of his faith. The
said Muslim goes into hiding and you know where he is. The unbelievers
come to you and ask you whether you knew where that person was. You are
caught between two evils: either you say \`No' and become a liar, or you
say \`Yes' and cause the murder of an innocent Muslim. The reason says
that telling a lie in that situation is preferable than the truth which
would lead to murder. [^10]

Now suppose that the unbelievers have caught a Muslim and that Muslim
happens to be \`You'. They put two alternatives before you: Either
renounce Islam or be killed. If the flame of true Faith is lighting your
heart, mere words of tongue cannot extinguish it at all. Those words of
disbelief will be just like a dark cover to hide the light of your faith
from the unbelievers, but they can have no adverse effect on the flame
itself.

And if you do not hide that flame behind that cover, your life will be
forfeited and with that you will lose the possibility of serving Islam
at some other time.

In short, by uttering a few false words against Islam you will save your
life as well as your faith; and by not uttering those words your life
will come to its end and with it will vanish all chances of Islamic
services which you could have rendered had you been alive. Allah,
therefore, has allowed you to save your life by uttering a few false
words against Islam.[^11]

Question 7
----------

**Say whatever you like, but the fact remains that** ***taqiyyah*** **is
just another form of** ***Nifaq*** **(hypocrisy).**

Far from it. In fact *taqiyyah* is opposite of *Nifaq*. Remember, *Iman*
and *Kufr*, when seen with their \`declaration', can be divided in four
categories only:

• Correct belief of Islam by heart and its declaration in words. This is
open *Iman* (faith).

• Belief against Islam by heart and expression of that anti-Islamic
belief in words.

This is open *Kufr* (infidelity). These two categories are opposite to
each other and cannot combine in one place.

• Belief against Islam in heart but declaration of Islam in words. This
is *Nifaq* (hypocricy).

• Correct belief of Islam by heart but declaration of anti-Islamic
belief in words.

This is *taqiyyah*, and these two categories (*Nifaq* and *Taqiyyah*)
are, likewise, opposite to each other and can never be found in one
place. [^12]

Question 8
----------

**You claimed above that many companions of the Holy Prophet practiced
it. Can you** **give an example?**

We have mentioned in the very beginning the example of 'Ammar bin Yasir
(ra): The Quraishites brutally martyred Yasir and his wife Sumaiyah just
because of their faith. They were the first martyrs of Islam. When the
parents were killed, 'Ammar pretended to renounce Islam, and thus saved
his life. Someone told the Prophet that 'Ammar had become kafir.

The Prophet said: "Never; verily the flesh and blood of 'Ammar is
saturated with true faith." Then 'Ammar came to the Holy Prophet
bitterly weeping that he had to utter evil words against Islam so that
he could slip away from the clutches of the infidels. The Prophet asked
him; \`How did you find your heart?" 'Ammar said: "Steadfast in Faith".
The Holy Prophet told him not to worry and advised him to repeat those
words if the infidels again asked him to do so.

And it was not only the Holy Prophet who liked the choice of 'Ammar
(ra). Even Allah confirmed his action in the verse which has been
written in the beginning:

*He who disbelieves in Allah after his belief in Him* (is the liar)
*except he who is compelled while his heart remains steadfast with the
faith* (has nothing to worry). *But he who opens his breast for
infidelity, on these is the wrath of Allah, and for them is a great
torment.* [^13]

All commentaries of the *Qur’an* narrate that it was revealed concerning
the above incident of 'Ammar (ra).[^14]

Question 9
----------

**Is there any other verse sanctioning such a cause of action?**

Yes. See the following verse which says:

***Let not the believers take the disbelievers as their friends rather
than the believers; whoso shall do this then he has no relation with
Allah except when you have to guard Yourselves against them for fear
from them; but Allah cautions you of Himself for unto Allah is the end
of your journey. Say, whether you conceal what is in your hearts or
manifest it, Allah knows it; and He knows all that is in the heavens and
all that is-in the earth; and verily Allah has power over all things**.*
[^15]

The reason of this permission is given in this very *ayah*: **"*****Say
whether you conceal*** ***what is in your hearts or manifest it, Allah
knows it*****".** Here Allah assures the Muslims that Faith is a
spiritual thing, connected with heart;. and if your faith inside your
heart is un-impaired, then Allah is pleased with you whether you
manifest that faith or hide it. It is all the same with Allah, because
He knows your hidden secrets, and even when you hide your faith from
unbelievers, Allah knows it and recognizes it.

As explained in reply to Question No. 1, *taqiyyah* and *tuqat* both are
synonymous.

as-Suyuti writes inter alia under this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واخرج ابن جرير وابن ابي حاتم من طريق العوفي عن ابن عباس في قوله: الا
ان تتقوا منهم تقاة: فالتقية باللسان من حمل على امر يتكلم به وهو معصية
لله فيتكلم به مخافة الناس وقلبه مطمئن بالايمان فان ذلك لايضره انما
التقية باللسان ... واخرج عبد بن حميد عن الحسن قال التقية جائزة الى يوم
القيامة. واخرج عبد عن ابي رجاء انه كان يقرء الا ان تتقوا منهم تقية.
واخرج عبد حميد عن قتادة انه كان يقرؤها الا ان تتقوا منهم تقية بالياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

"And Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim have narrated through al-\`Awfi from
Ibn 'Abbas (that he said about this verse): \`So *taqiyyah* is by
tongue. Whoever is compelled to say something which is disobedience of
Allah and he speaks it because of those people's fear while his heart
remains steadfast in the faith, it will do him no harm; verily
*taqiyyah* is with the tongue only.'

"…. And \`Abd ibn Hamid has narrated from al-Hasan (al-Basri) that he
said:

\`*Taqiyyah* is lawful up to the day of resurrection. And \`Abd (ibn
Hamid) has narrated from Abu Raja' that he was reciting, \`*illa an
tattaqu minhum taqiyatan*'; and \`Abd ibn Hamid has narrated from
Qatadah that he was reciting (likewise) .... taqiyatan with
*ya*”.[^16]  
 Imam Fakhruddin ar-Razi has mentioned some rules concerning *taqiyyah*
under this verse, some of which are given here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحكم الثالث للتقية انها تجوز فيما يتعلق باظهار المولاة والمعاداة وقد
تجوز ايضا فيما يتعلق باظهار الدين. فاما ما يرجع الى الغير كالقتل
والزنا وغصب الاموال والشهادة بالزور وقذف المحصنات واطلاع الكفار على
عورات المسلمين فذلك غير جائز
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحكم الرابع: ظاهر الاية يدل على ان التقية انما تحل مع الكفار الغالبين
– الا ان مذهب الشافعي رضي الله عنه ان الحالة بين المسلمين اذا شاكلت
الحالة بين المسلمين والمشركين حلت التقية محاما على النفس.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحكم الخامس: التقية جائزة لصون النفس وهل هي جائزة لصون المال يحتمل ان
يحكم فيها بالجواز لقوله صلى الله عليه وسلم "حرمة مال المسلم كحرمة دمه"
ولقوله صلى الله عليه وسلم "من قتل دون ماله فهو شهيد" ولان الحاجة الى
المال شديدة والماء اذا بيع بالغبن سقط فرض الوضوء وجاز الاقتصار على
التيمم دفعا لذلك القدر من انفاق المال فكيف لا يجوز ههنا. والله اعلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحكم السادس: قال المجاهد هذا الحكم كان ثابتا في اول الاسلام لاجل ضعف
المؤمنين فاما بعد قوة دولة الاسلام فلا. وروى عوف عن الحسن انه قال
التقية جائزة للمؤمنين الى يوم القيامة وهذا القول اولى لان دفع الضرر عن
النفس واجب بقدر الامكان
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Third Rule**: *Taqiyyah* is allowed in matters related to
manifestation of friendship or enmity; and it is also allowed in matters
connected to professing (their) religion. But it is certainly not
allowed in matters which affect other persons, like murder, fornication,
usurpation of property, perjury, slander of married women or informing
the unbelievers about the weak points in the Muslims' defense.

"**Fourth Rule:** The *Qur’an*ic verse apparently shows that *taqiyyah*
is allowed with dominant unbelievers. But according to the madhhab of
Imam Shafi'i (May Allah be pleased with him) if the condition between
(various sects of) the Muslims resembles the condition between the
Muslims and the polytheists, then *taqiyyah* (from the Muslims too) is
allowed for the protection of one's life.

**"Fifth Rule:** *Taqiyyah* is allowed for protection of life. The
question is whether it is allowed for the protection of property;
possibly that too may be allowed, because the Prophet (saw) has said:
\`The sanctity of a-Muslim's property is like the sanctity of his
blood'; and also he (saw) has said: \`Whoever is killed in defense of
his property, is a martyr'; and also because man greatly needs his
property; if water is sold at exorbitant price, *wudhu*' does not remain
*wajib* and one may pray with *tayammum* to avoid that small loss of
property; so why should not this principle be applied here? And Allah
knows better.

**"Sixth Rule:** Mujahid has said that this rule (of *taqiyyah*) was
valid in the beginning of Islam, because of the weakness of the
believers; but now that the Islamic government has got power and
strength, it is not valid. But \`Awfi has narrated from al-Hasan
(al-Basri) that he said: \`*Taqiyyah* is allowed to the Muslims up to
the day of resurrection.' And this opinion is more acceptable because it
is *wajib* to keep off all types of harm from one's self as much as
possible."[^17]

Imam Bukhari has written a full chapter, *Kitabul Ikrah*, on this
subject of compulsion, wherein he writes, inter alia:

And Allah said \`*except when you hale to guard yourselves against them
for fear* *from them*’. And it is *Taqiyyah*.

.... And Hassan (Basri) said: \`*Taqiyyah* is up to the Day of
Resurrection .... And the Prophet (s.a:w.) said: \`Deed are according to
intention. [^18]

As-Sayid ar-Radi (the compiler of Nahj ul Balaghah) writes, inter alia,
in explanation of the verse 3:28-29:

"Then Allah made an exception (in. this rule of not keeping friendship
with the unbelievers) and that exception is the situation of *taqiyyah*;
so he said and it is also read ( ةيقت)(*taqiyatan*), and both words have
the same meaning.

"It means that Allah bas permitted in this situation (when one is afraid
of ahem) to show their friendship and one's inclination towards them
\`with tongue' but not with intention of heart." [^19]

Also, there are four verses in the *Qur’an* which allow eating unlawful
food when one is starving to death and no lawful food is available: One
of them says:

***Verily, verily; He has but prohibited that which dies of itself and
blood and swine flesh and whatsoever has other name than Allah's invoked
upon it; but whoever is forced to it without the desire (for it) not to
transgress (the limits) then it a no sin on him; verily Allah is
Forgiving,*** ***Merciful'**.*[^20]

The same thing has been repeated in 5:3, 6:145 and 14:115.

As explained earlier, the life of a believer is the most precious thing.
And it is for this reason that one has been allowed to eat such
abominable things as dead body or pork when life depends on it.

The same principle will apply if safety of life depends on uttering a
few false words. That is why the Prophet (saw) has categorically said:

He who has no *taqiyyah* has no religion. [^21]

And Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) has said:

*Taqiyyah* is religion and the religion of my forefathers: He who has no
*taqiyyah* has no faith. [^22]

Question 10
-----------

**Though this practice is allowed in the** ***Qur’an*** **and**
***hadith*****, nevertheless it is** **something evil. I do not believe
that Allah would like us to resort to it even if it is allowed.**

You have just now seen that *taqiyyah* is not only allowed but even
*wajib* in some cases. Do you think that Allah would make something
*wajib* without liking it. Also, the Prophet (saw) makes *taqiyyah*
synonymous with religion, and Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) confirms it in
clear words.

However, if you ponder on the *Qur'an* you will see that the Holy Book
of Allah presents *taqiyyah* in a very commendable light. In the verse
40:28 Allah says:

***And said a man who was a believer from among the people of Pharaoh:
who used to conceal his faith*** *…*[^23]

It shows that Allah was well-pleased with that hiding of the faith
because it had great benefits, as Abu Talib kept his faith secret
because it had great benefits. Just because Abu Talib did not announce
his Faith, he was able to protect the life of the Holy Prophet (saw):
Likewise, that believer from the family of Pharaoh was able to protect
Prophet Musa (as) by not declaring his Faith openly.

Anyhow, his Faith based on *taqiyyah* was so pleasing to Allah that he
was counted as a "*Siddiq*" (Most Truthful). The Holy Prophet (saw) has
said:  
 "There are three *siddiqin*: (1) Habib Najjar; (2) The faithful from
the family of Pharaoh arid (3) 'Ali bin Abi Talib".[^24]

Not only "the Believer from the Family of Pharaoh" but, according to
Al-Baidawi, even the Prophet Musa (as) had spent a considerable period
of his life in *taqiyyah*: See his Commentary under the following
*ayat*,

***Said (Pharaoh): Did we not cherish you amidst us as a child? And you
did dwell amidst us for years of your' life**.*[^25]

Coming back to the time of the Holy Prophet of Islam, we know that the
Holy Prophet kept his Mission secret for 3 years; and we have seen how
'Ammar bin Yasir resorted to *taqiyyah*. This was in Meccan period. Even
after Hijrah there remained in Mecca many believers whose Islam was
unknown to others. When the peace of treaty was concluded in Hudaibiyah
in 6 A.H. many Muslims were displeased with its terms.

Hadhrat Umar bin Khattab was so incensed that he protested to the Holy
Prophet (saw), and in later days he used to say:

I did not entertain any doubt about the prophet hood of the Holy
Prophet-since I accepted Islam except on that day of Hudaibiyah. [^26]

Replying to that group, Allah explains one of the reasons of that treaty
and one of the causes why war was not waged at that time:

***And were it not for the believing men - and believing women, not
having known them you might' have trodden them down; a crime would have
afflicted you because of them without (your) knowledge**.*[^27]

This verse clearly says that there were believing men and believing
women in Mecca whose Islam was unknown, not only to the pagans but even
to the Muslims of Medina. And Allah describes those who practiced
*taqiyyah* as 'believing men' and \`believing women'.

In short, these verses, traditions and incidents clearly show and
demonstrate that if one is in danger of one's life because of his faith,
then it is allowed to utter words against one's true belief of Islam, to
save the life which is more important and that \`lie' will not be
counted against him.  
 As-Sayid ar-Radi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد علمنا ان التقية لا تدخل الا في الظاهر دون ما في الضمير الباطن –
لان من خوف غيره ليفعل امرا من الامور اذا كان من افعال القلوب لا يتمكن
من معرفة حقيقة ما في قلبه، وانما يستدل باظهار لسانه على ابطال جنانه –
فالذي يحسن عند التقية اظهار مولاة الكفار قولا بالخلاط والمقاربة وحسن
المعاشرة والمخالطة ويكون القلب على ما كان من قبل اضمار عداوتهم واعتقاد
البراءة منهم وينوي الانسان بما يظهره من ذلك مأربين الكلام واحتمالات
الخطاب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

" … and we know that *taqiyyah* affects only externally (i.e.' its
effect is only on the tongue) and not internally (on the heart, spirit,
soul). When someone forces another one to do something, (and that thing
happens to be connected with heart) then the oppressor has no way of
knowing that his wish has been complied with, except through some
uttering’s by the tongue from which he will conclude that he has
succeeded in changing the heart of the oppressed. Therefore, the best
course of action at the time of *taqiyyah* is to show the friendship
with the unbelievers by words, to mix with them and live with them with
good manners, but the heart must remain firmly with the previous
feelings towards them, of hidden enmity and the belief of aloofness from
them.

"And such a man (who finds himself in such a situation) should-as far as
possible-use dissimulation and double-entendre (i.e. words and sentences
that admit two interpretations-one correct, one wrong; the speaker
intends correct meaning and the unbelievers take it to mean the other
meaning).'[^28]

[^1]: Holy Qur'an; sura 16 verse 100

[^2]: Shah \`Abdu 'l-\`Aziz Dehlawi, Tuhfa-e-Ithna-'ashariyah, ch. 1, p.
368.

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: \`Allamah Wahidu'z-Zaman Khan, Anwaru 'l-lughah, Bangalore ed.,
Para 20, p. 84.

[^5]: Qur’an, 49:14

[^6]: Qur’an, 63:1

[^7]: Qur’an, 5:32

[^8]: Qur’an, 2:195

[^9]: ar-Razi, Tafsir Mafatihu 'l ghayb, old ed. vol. 5, pp. 746-750.

[^10]: All Muslim sects agree that taqiyah is not only permissible but
compulsory (wajib) in conditions like this. See, for example, Sahih
Muslim with its Sharh by Nawawi which says: وقد اتفق الفقهاء على انه لو
جاء ظالم يطلب انسانا مختفيا ليقتله او يطلب وديعة لانسان لياخذها غصبا
وسأل عن ذلك وجب على من علم ذلك اخفاءه وانكار العلم به وهذا كذب جائز بل
واجب لكونه في دفع الظالم The Islamic jurisprudents are agreed that if an
oppressor comes looking for a man in hiding with intention to kill him,
or looking for a thing given in trust, with an aim to usurp it.
unlawfully, and he asks about him or it, then it is wajib on a person
who knows about it to hide it and to deny any knowledge of him or it;
and this is lawful - rather wajib - lie; because it is spoken to ward
off an oppressor. (See its pages 106, 110, 200 and 325) Imam Muslim has
written a whole chapter on 'this theme, i.e., The chapter of
unlawfulness of lie and description of lawful lies. al \`Ayni, Umdatu
'l-Qari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, Egypt, vol. 5, p. 581; vol. 6, p. 352.
Imam ar-Razi, Tafsir Mafatihu 'l-Ghayb, vol. 6, p. 164. \`Allamah Wahidu
'z-Zaman, Nuzulu 'l abrar min fiqhi 'n Nabii 'l-Mukhtar vol. 3, p. 123.-

[^11]: See the above references to appreciate that the Sunni scholars
unanimously agree that Taqiyah is allowed to save one's own life, honor
or property.

[^12]: Imam ar-Razi too has clearly described this contrast in his
tafsir in the following words: هذه اشارة الى ان الاعتبار بما في القلب
فالمنافق الذي يظهر الايمان ويضمر الكفر كافر والمؤمن الذي يظهر الكفر
ويضمر الايمان مؤمن والله اعلم بما في صدور العالمين This points to the
fact that (in these matters) consideration is given only to what is
hidden iii the heart. A hypocrite who shows faith and hides disbelief is
a disbeliever, while a believer who under compulsion shows disbelief and
hides faith is a believer; and Allah better knows that is hidden in the
hearts of all. (Vide Tafsir Mafatihu ‘l ghayb, Egypt, under verse
19:10).)

[^13]: Qur’an, 16:106.

[^14]: (a) as-Suyuti, Tafsir ad-Durru 'l-manthur, vol. 4, p. 132; (b)
ar-Razi, Tafsir Mafatihu l-ghayb; (c) az-Zamakhshari, Tafsir
al-Kashshaf, Beirut, vol. 2, p. 43c). Practically all books of Tafsir
describe this event under this verse.

[^15]: Qur’an, 3;28-29.

[^16]: as-Suyuti, ad-Durru l-manthur, vol. 2, pp. 10-17.

[^17]: as-Sayuti, ad-Durru 1-Manthur Ed 2.page. 16-17.

[^18]: al-Bukhari, as-Sahib. Egypt ed., vol. 9, pp. 24-25.

[^19]: as-Sayid ar-Radi, Tafsir Haqa'iqu 't-ta'wil, vol. 5, p. 74.

[^20]: Qur’an, 2;173.

[^21]: Mulla \`Ali Muttaqi, Kanzu l-\`ummal, Beirut, 5th ed., 1405/1985,
vol. 3, p. 96, hadith no. 5665.

[^22]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Tehran, 1388, vol. 2, p.174.

[^23]: Qur’an, 40:28

[^24]: \`ubaydullah Amritsari, Arjahu 'l-rnatalib, 2nd ed., p. 23

[^25]: Qur’an, 20.18; Tafsir al-Baydawi, Egypt, vol. 1, pp. 112, 396 as
quoted in Fulkun-Najat, vol. 2, p. 103.

[^26]: as-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-manthur, vol. 6, p. 77

[^27]: Qur’an, 48:25

[^28]: as-Sayid ar-Radi, op. cit, p. 77.


