Publishers Note
===============

Ever since the advent of despotic rulers on Earth, humanity has suffered
a diversity of indignities, gyration disintegrations free will and
confiscation of human freedoms. Humanity suffered greatly the tyrannies
of the tyrants and oppression of inhuman rulers, sufferings both tragic
and bloody, resulting in massacres of thousands, even millions of
people, uprooting of many more, transgressing upon their honor
demolishing their home and hearth usurping their lands. Killings, fire
and pillaging was the tyrant's order of the day.

Humanity experienced no relief from its endless sufferings and forced
subjugation except while under the protection of heavenly religions
delivered by such great Prophets of Divinity as Abraham, Moses, Jesus
(peace be upon them) and the Last and the most perfect of them, the holy
Prophet of Islam, Muhammad (s.a.w).

The Final Prophet was ordained at a particularly difficult juncture of
social development when human communities had turned their backs upon
all the divine religions and even against Allah. A deeper study of that
period, about six centuries after Jesus Christ (a.s), is essential to be
able to comprehend the prevailing environment.

Describing the period in which the Prophet(s.a.w) was ordained, the
Leader of the Faithful, Ali ibn Abi Talib(a.s.) said: "Allah sent him
when there hadn't been a messenger for a long time, when the nations
were in deep slumber, vilest evils raising their heads, men's affairs
disrupted, bloody wars raging everywhere, world devoid of light
dominated by arrogance, the tree of life dried up with its leaves turned
yellow holding out no hope of any fruit, with its waters deep and
inaccessible, the guiding signposts all ruined, the banners of
annihilation raised aloft staring sternly at its subjects, frowning upon
the seeker, its fruit being sedition and its food a rotting carcass, its
dress fear and its head cover a hanging sword."

He further added: “Allah sent Muhammad (s.a.w) as it waiter to all the
worlds and as it trustee of the Qur'an, while you, O' Arabs, were
followers of the worst of creeds dwelling in the worst of abodes,
kneeling down among rough stones and venomous serpents, drinking muddy
water, eating disgusting food, shedding your own blood, severing your
nearest relations; when idols were set up among you and sins stuck with
you.

He further said: "He, the Exalted, deputed Muhammad (s. a. w.) when the
people of live Earth were divided into groups, their desires were
diverse, and theft ways disunited...", and similar other discourses
portraying the bitter conditions and painful sufferings with which human
beings were afflicted. The Prophet of Islam with total devotion,
unparalled zeal and highest sacrifices spread Islam to the hounds of
Arabian Peninsula in his blessed lifetime.

Later, the struggle was continued by Muslims under the leadership of the
Imams (a.s) from his progeny against the tyrants of successive reigns,
both within the Islamic community and outside of it. Many states
perished, and the glorious procession of Islam marched on joined by
millions of the oppressed of the Earth, the *mustaz’afin*, who sought
deliverance from subjugation and darkness towards true freedom in
Allah's servitude and eternal light.

Yet, a great many of them were prevented from the true path by harriers
of darkness set up by the tyrants. Again and again forces of despotism
overcame human progress throwing the world into dark abyss. In this
century the powers of darkness rose again so that humanity witnessed two
of the bitterest tragedies in human history: worst tragedies ever seen
during the so-called civilized age such that it has been called - the
age of knowledge, of civilization and technology - that is, the two
world wars whose harvest was the lives of uncounted people.

As a result of those World Wars there rose a great cry for peace and the
right of humanity to live in freedom, dignity and peace, which was
expressed in a call for establishing a charter for peace and human
rights. This outcry was a true expression of the humanity's long and
bitter suffering experienced through innumerable centuries of torment,
especially during the preceding two centuries. Thus, there was born the
\`Universal Declaration of Human Rights', on 10th of December 1948,
following the end of the Second World War. It was signed by 48 member
states, while communist countries (USSR, Belorussia, Ukraine,
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Poland), South Africa, and Saudi Arabia
abstained.

On the other hand Islam centuries earlier was the first to give man his
civilized values and pioneer human rights. The stress on man's rights
and duties is quite clearly embodied in the enduring constitution of
Islam, the Glorious Qur'an and the noble Sunnah (traditions) of the
Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.).

The Fourth Imam of Able Bait (the Sacred Household), All ibn Hussain,
Sajjad (a.s.), composed a thesis on human rights, which is still the
focus of attention and analysis of serious researchers of social
sciences.

But western historians of human rights and their development stepped
wide over the Islamic period in a long stride to reach the eighteenth
century, when the French Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
proclaimed on 28th of August 1789 and later incorporated in the French
constitution on the 3rd of September 1791, neglecting, knowingly or
unwittingly the fact that Islam had much earlier presented to the world
the most elaborate bill on human rights.

Despite the fact that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights laid
emphasis on the fundamental need for establishing and guaranteeing the
essential and natural human rights, nevertheless it remained an
experiment denoting an earthly attempt lacking full understanding and a
true comprehension of the Purports of the rights and related
considerations and objects which were to guide the precepts of the
proposed bill of rights.

Consequently, the authors failed to see much of what should have been
included as the fundamental rights of man. They confined their attention
to peripheral matters, more concerned with their material requirements,
regarding wrong as right, and right as wrong, unaware that Allah the
Almighty,

***"Knows what is before them and what is behind them, and they do not
comprehend anything out of His knowledge except what He wills".***[^1]

He did not legislate religion except on the basis of confirming the
right and condemning the wrong by whosoever it may be committed, at all
times and at all places.

Here is a pioneer Islamic presentation whose fundamental articles were
presented by the learned scholar, \`Allama Shaikh Muhammad All Taskhiri,
before the Organization of the Islamic conference (OIC).

An official recommendation to record this Declaration was made in 1979,
when the 10th Conference of the Foreign Ministers decided to form a
consulting committee of Islamic experts to prepare a bill regarding
human rights in Islam. It was referred to the 11th Conference which, in
turn referred it to a legal subcommittee. The amended recommendations
were presented at the 3rd Islamic Summit Conference, which referred it
to another committee. The 4th Conference of the Foreign Ministers in
Dacca agreed upon the hill's introduction and Article 1, referring the
other articles to a third committee; then followed a succession of
conferences which emphasized it.

At last, at the Tehran meeting convened in December 1989 the final
format was drafted, and finally approved by the 19th Conference of the
Foreign Ministers at Cairo. Thus, the hill was circulated in ten
conferences of the Foreign Ministers (held in Fez. Islamabad, Baghdad,
Niami, Dacca, Sanaa, Amman. Riyadh, Tehran and Cairo) as well as summit
conferences in Ta’if, Casablanca and Kuwait, as well as a number of
experts committees the last of which was one convened at Tehran.

Human Rights is something that must be practiced rather than preached as
many laws have been drafted and too many hills presented, but they
remained merely "ink on paper", covered with dust, in the tellers of
history and disused archives, like the code of Hammurabi engraved on a
solid, silent obelisk of ancient times.

It needs sincere purpose and, a determined will to translate the word
from its theoretical concept to its practical application in human
existence so that man might regain his right and attain complete freedom
in life as prescribed by Allah, and time which lie was created.

This present publication is an analytical study of human rights in Islam
as a prescription of divine wisdom in a comparison with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights framed according to the unenlightened
opinions of human beings. This survey of the two Declarations goes a
long way in confirming the foresight of Islam in treating all aspects of
human life at all times and places. The prolific and persuasive pen of
the well-known Islamic jurisprudent and scholar, Shaikh Muhammad Ali
Taskhiri, has fulfilled a compelling need of the moment in elucidating
many of the complexities of this fundamentally important international
issue.

January 1997

[^1]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 2 Al Baqara, Verse 255


