Human Rights and Their Conceptual Development
=============================================

In order to avoid ambiguity, definitions of all terms employed in the
text must be clearly explained. This basic requirement acquires deeper
meaning when the discussion deals with legal terminology, and certainly
gains added significance when its application is considered at a
universal level encompassing international legalities.

Inter-Relation between Philosophic and Social Questions
-------------------------------------------------------

It is paradoxical that when one considers issues related to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, one notices so many terms used
without any clear explanation of their intended meanings, For instance:

What does "Right" mean?

Who is the "Human" being talked about?

What is man's intrinsic dignity?

What is meant by the human family, brother hood, equity, friendly
relations, humanistic spirit and the like?

The ambiguity becomes more acute when we realize that this Universal
Declaration was intended to remain apart from the question of ideology,
say from “The philosophic question" i.e. the question of defining
attitudes towards the Universe, life and man.

This is a consequence and influence of capitalist views which impose its
social ideas, removed from the philosophic question declaring that there
was no relation between them, whereas we positively believe that a
logical connection exists between them.

Whatever an ideology, it stems from reality, otherwise, man would not
know what ought to be unless he knows what is and what is the demand of
reality.

This concept is reaffirmed when man, for example, holds faith in the
divinity of Allah, the Exalted and Most High, and that He the Most High,
had sent His messenger with guidance and hearing true faith, Islam, to
direct and organize all aspects of life. Holding such beliefs, a
faithful person has a choice between two options, no more. He is either
to follow an Islamic Ideology, and organize his conduct logically or to
reject his previously held perceptions renouncing all old beliefs.

Positively if a person held a materialistic conception of the world, he
would have before him substitute ideologies and multiple gods, each
drawing him to his way:

*"Allah sets forth an example: a man owned by several partners
quarreling and a man owned by a single man. Are the both equal in
similitude?"*[^1] *He will have no right to turn to one particular
ideology”*[^2]

In the words of Martyr Mutahhari (may his spirit be sanctified):  
*“Basically ideology is founded on one’s overall view…Ideology is a kind
of practical wisdom, whereas conception is a kind of theoretic
wisdom.”*[^3]

Learned teacher, Martyr Sadr (may Allah sanctify his Spirit) says:

*“The question of social existence is related to the reality of life,
and it would not take it correct shape unless it is based on if central
set of beliefs explaining existence, its reality and limits. But the
capitalist system lacks such a foundation, and it involves deceit and
misleading, or haste and impatience, when the real question of existence
is put in a freeze separating it from the social issue which is
separately studied.”*[^4]

Referring to the text of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we
find that it entirely ignores this vital question, despite the fact that
it is related to same issues.

We shall, Cod willing, return to this subject again. For the present, it
is important for us to perceive correctly what is meant by "Right" and
"Humanity", so that we could logically proceed to comprehend the stages
of the development of human rights.

The Right
---------

Going back to the root of this term, we find that it implies fixed,
permanent and unchangeable, at least this is how it is applied.

In these terms, Allah, the Most High, is Right. No alteration is
conceivable concerning Almighty Allah. A piece of news is right if it
conforms to reality at the time of reporting, and there can be no basis
for imagining and alteration in facts, in spite of the unfounded claims
of the "relativists". This is the real implication neither imagined nor
derived. Yet, in this manner a nominal concept and view has been
formulated and called by this word, and brought to use I respect of
social relations and individual conduct, such as: The Right to Freedom.

Consequently, social rights must cover two elements:

Firstly, Growing from a real condition (genetic composition, real
interest...), and

Secondly, conforming to legal or conventional standards in order to
organize Social life.

It may be argued: The first criterion alone would suffice to prove the
right, but the social reaction naturally requires constant need, which
convention has turned into it legal condition.

The Human Being
---------------

As to man, we cannot regard him as merely it material being formed by
nature and shaped on the whole by social environment. Whatever is
implied by the meaning of humanity is anything but the social
reflections its Durkhaim says, or the contractual form, as Freud insists
or the social - economical principle as portrayed by Marx, or the mental
product of Berkeley, and other materialistic concepts.

Such it being cannot claim any rights. Could one possibly talk about the
rights of iron, wood, or water?

Consequently, we have to imagine. Before everything, that man is it
being quite distinct from all others, endowed with special values and
particular intrinsic drives which demand, in themselves, a particular
course and conditions, and require evolutionary stages based on a
prearranged plan. Then, it would be possible to conceive certain fixed
conditions (rights) for such it being.

In a nutshell, primarily we have to believe in the theory of the
“fitrat” (human nature), only then could we proceed to discuss human
rights, justice, freedom, dignity, equity, human soul and the like.

Otherwise, what is the use of talking about these conceptual values if
we do not believe in the innateness and the supreme Islamic meaning
governing these perceptions, practical moral direction and evolutionary
motives?

"So, there must be a natural direction and a frame-work for man. If he
trespasses he would no longer be of mankind, unless there is education
and until the well-known expression: ‘Man's alienation from his
essence’[^5] comes true."

Therefore, the man who in our view should have any rights is the being
who possesses natural qualities which are innately with him and remain
with him. They warrant a particular course any deviation front which
would be deviating from the human characteristics.

***“And be not like those who forsook Allah, so He made them forsake
their own selves, they are the very evil-doers.”***[^6]

**“....** ***They are like cattle, nay, they are even worse*****.”**[^7]

If man were to be treated contrary to his essential nature it would be
inhuman.

Thus, when Pharaoh suppressed his people and deprived them of their
rights, he was condemned by entire humanity.

***"He incited them to impetuosity and they obeyed him, they were an
evil-doing people."***[^8]

Thus, he must have his natural status, and his natural rights; any
disrespect to them would be an inhuman practice.

This is the man we know, and no hill and no logical Declaration may
claim to speak of his rights unless they accept this definition of him.

Rights Unknown to Materialistic Concepts
----------------------------------------

In the light of what has been said, it is clear that human rights
provide the natural conditions necessary for natural human existence so
that man stay proceeds along the natural course of his perfection.

On this basis we believe that human rights predominate all that has been
said and written in relation to other related matters, such as "the
right of worship and belief, the right of moral cart, or even the right
of holding the true faith", and so on.

This right forms the basis of the important religious discussion
concerning the need for Prophet, and that religion is a blessing for
man, and that Allah, the Exalted is the source of grace and
beneficence - a fact which admits the necessity of sending prophets of
mercy. We shall not go into details, leaving those to the relevant
subjects.  
 Nevertheless, it is worth referring to certain natural conditions
needed by man's nature to proceed along his evolutionary course. We may
summarize them as the material, intellectual, ethical and civil
legislative needs.

### The Material Needs

These cover the natural human needs such as the need for food, security,
clothing, health, lodgings and all that keep man active and lively
within the society. It also covers satisfaction of man’s sexual needs,
mother and child care, and similar needs which let the human generation
survive and struggle.

### The Intellectual Needs

These cover the need for intellectual freedom, mental development, and
freedom of contemplation of the universe, cultivating man’s philosophic
concepts and strengthening the logical method of comprehending things -
all of which are undeniable human needs.

### The Ethical Needs

These are natural needs and tendencies in man which need to be suitably
satisfied, such as the need for proper education, preparing the suitable
atmosphere for the development of aesthetic and moral senses, rejecting
all that is not in conformity with natural purity, providing for an
environment of compassion and sympathy, that is, providing for whatever
is considered to be a natural and original need, among which,
undoubtedly, the inclination towards worshipping his only Creator holds
a Fundamental place.

### The Civil Legislative needs

These refer to man’s need to establish the society, and what such a
society needs offer to get a temporary and permanent civil legislation,
and thus man’s need attain the most Formalized codes of implementing his
innate drive to achieve happiness. This requires that his legislative
needs should be satisfied in the best way.

The Criteria for Recognizing Human Rights
-----------------------------------------

In this respect, certain criteria have been, or are in the process of
being presented, such as custom, wise people, law and religion, interest
and evil, pleasure and pain, sentiment and intellect, the requirements
of justice and the like.

These can either be the sources of right or means of discovering it, or
of its requisites and so on. At any rate, before assigning the criterion
for telling whether such a thing constitutes a human right or not, we
must observe the following two points:

First: That which we referred to as the meaning of right, the meaning of
man, and his original motives and needs.

Second: To turn to a criterion which possesses without regard to its
being clouded with the social forms and temperaments, otherwise, which
are characteristics of nature of the right being merely humanistic.

What is, then, this criterion which uncovers the fixed natural need of
the human bring perfected in the course of natural progress?

There is nothing before us but the conscience which everybody possesses
within himself, with its general meaning donating intellectual
conscience, and ethical conscience.

Yet, if we only satisfy ourselves with only the ethical conscience
commonly possessed by all we can discern the general principle of human
rights, no matter if there be differences in evidence and applications.
We shall see that conscience itself leads us to a means of making sure
of the correctness of those evidences, giving us an elaborate picture of
these rights. If we forsake conscience we will find no criterion for
recognizing the rights, let alone any human knowledge.

So, we take man to be imprisoned within himself in the way wanted by
Berkeley. Man without conscience (in the general sense) loses every
human color, and will be nothing but a piece of wood, and there are no
right for wood!

But what is conscience, anyhow? Probably we cannot define it, not
because of its ambiguity, but because of its obviousness. It is the
truth which we are dealing with, and we cannot prove it except by
itself. The one who denies conscience and its governing role can never
be persuaded at all.

It is through conscience that we reach decisive intellectual judgments
which form the basis of all our knowledge, and through it we get to what
we believe in of the beautiful and the ugly, upon which all the moral
and social institutions are founded.

Probably those who trusted the Universal Declaration had unknowingly
started from the natural conscience basis, despite the fact that they
separated the question of the rights from the question of believing in
conscience and its requirements it is conscience that confirms the
goodness of justice and evils of injustice. It is conscience that
confirms life, freedom and human dignity. It is that which confirm
racial equality on a humane basis, similarly the right to maternity, to
nationality and the rest.

As regards how to reach the positive proofs of these rights, there are
only two possible ways:

First: Complete induction of human behavior studying all incidents and
discovering common ideas despite difference in circumstances, which make
incomplete syllogism and probably cannot be carried out as a research
study, nor many conclusions be obtained even if it could be applied.

Second: Religion, which guides conscience to mark its imaginary
foundations through the intellectual power which leads man to discover
the secret of this wonderful cosmic order and the Absolute Perfect
Existence who created this cosmos - the Existence who is
self-.sufficient, all-knowing, all-living, all-affectionate. He, owing
to His grace, sends His messengers with His religion to explain to human
beings the complete framework of their individual and social rights, and
to show the best plan for proceeding along the road to perfection.

So, either one believes in religion, or is satisfied with that
incomplete general picture, which, in its turn, is the product of belief
in the theory of basic human nature. Should anyone deny this, logically
he cannot speak of human rights and the creation of man, as has formerly
been stated.

Humanistic Jurist Marks in History
----------------------------------

We can rightly confirm in that human conscience, in the first place, and
the extensive dimensions of the religious factor in the historical
perspective in the second place, have their influence upon the course of
human rights, even on the level of legends.

Allama Ja'fari, in his note-worthy book on this subject, says:  
 "It is natural that the objective of the amendment of human
relations…constitute a continual practical respect to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in the minds of modern intellectuals... As a
result we notice some different expressions and articles, taken to be
natural dispositions, rights or educations elements among diverse
peoples and nations."[^9]

George Sabine says: *"Generally speaking, the Greeks, in the fifth
century BC, said that the natural rights were everlasting and
unchangeable. So, if we could discover this constant and unchangeable
law, and if we could harmonize it with human life, human life would
become logical and rational, to some extent. It would decrease evil and
mischief. Thus, the human course to perfection is to follow the fixed
natural law. The aim of this philosophy can be summarized in the
following expression: Looking for the constant among the variables, and
for the unity among the various.”*[^10]

Following up the opinions of the philosophers, historians and poets
along history, we would meet many expressions referring to this general
conscious effect.

Here, the philosopher Cicero (106-43 BC), confirms that the rights are
not based on imagining and guessing, but the natural, used and necessary
justice is based on tile human conscience.[^11]

Here we are reminded that the historians concerned with rights and their
developments passed over the Islamic era in long strides to reach the
eighteenth century, when the French Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was issued on the 28th of August. 1789, and was later
incorporated in the French Constitution, on the 3rd of December 1791,
ignoring, knowingly, or unknowingly, that Islam had presented the most
comprehensive bill on human rights, through the guidance of the Glorious
Qur’an and the noble prophetic traditions, which provided the legal
hoists for all forms of Islamic humanistic practices in the course of
history.

As to the recently issued Islamic Declaration, it is a worthy attempt to
publish these rights announced in their conventional format current in
these days. Otherwise, the following Qur’anic verses, for example, form
the historical legal declaration of fixed human rights:

***“And surely we have honored the children of Adam.”***[^12]

***“O’ Mankind! We have created you from a male and a female and have
made you nations and tribes that you may know one another. Surely, the
noblest of you with Allah is the one who fears Allah this most.”***[^13]

***“…whoever kills a human being not for a human being or not for
causing corruption in the earth is as if he has killed all mankind, and
whoever enlivens it, is if as if he has enlivened all mankind.”***[^14]

And many other illustrating texts quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
and his noble progeny (a.s) altogether caused a wondrous effect on
Islamic beliefs.[^15]

But if we wanted to study the course recent thinking concerned with
rights, the French Declaration- despite the fact that it made use of the
British Declaration of Rights issued in the same year, and the
Independence Declaration of thirteen American colonies issued 13 years
earlier – could present a comprehensive bill on this subject.

In its Article 1, it describes the rights of freedom and equality. In
the second article it offers the right of freedom of possession,
security, and defense against injustice. The third article explains
people’s rights in government. The fourth stresses personal freedom
which does not transgress other’s freedom. The fifth article specifies
law providing the right to prevent harm. The sixth article confirms the
right of all persons to participate in framing the law. The seventh
assures equality before the law and access to posts. The eighth decides
that there should be no punishment outside the law.

The ninth confirms the idea of “The accused is innocent until he is
proven guilty.” The tenth refers to freedom of belief. The eleventh
announces freedom of expression. The twelfth guarantees the right to
formation of armed forces. The thirteenth allows levying taxes to
provide for armed forces. The fourteenth gives the people the right to
supervise taxation. The fifteenth affords the society the right to
supervise employment. The sixteenth regards the societies which do not
accept the human rights to the unconstitutional societies. The last
Article No.17 prohibits the seizure of property except in public
interest.

In this way, this important Declaration became a law gradually
recognized by other states. Changes in text continued until the United
Nations ratified the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on the 10th
of December, 1948, following the end of the Second World War. It was
signed by 48 members, with the abstention of communist countries
(Russia, Belorussia. Ukraine, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Poland),
South Africa and Saudi Arabia, of course with entirely different
motives.

[^1]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 39 Az-Zumar, Verse 29.

[^2]: Towards the Islamic Constitution, by the same author, pg.15.

[^3]: Revelation and Prohethood, by Martyr Mutahhari.

[^4]: Our Philosophy, Martyr Sadr, pg.18 and 19.

[^5]: In Allah’s path, by the same author, pg.19

[^6]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 59 Al Hashr, Verse 119

[^7]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 7 Al A’raf , Verse 179

[^8]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 43 Az-Zukhruf , Verse 5

[^9]: “The Universal Human Rights” pg.16

[^10]: “The History of Political Philosophy” pg.177

[^11]: “On the History of Philosophy of Rights” pg.67

[^12]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 17 Al Isra, Verse 70

[^13]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 49 Al Hujurat, Verse 13

[^14]: The Holy Qur’an, Surah 5 Al Ma’idah , Verse 32

[^15]: Risalatal Huquq by Imam Ali ibn Hussain(a.s) which covers all the
mutual rights


