Text of the ‘Universal Declaration of Human Rights’
===================================================

Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation
of freedom, justice and peace in the world,

Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in
barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the
advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech
and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the
highest aspiration of the common people,

Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse,
as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that
human rights should be protected by rule of law,

Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations
between nations,

Whereas the people of the United Nations have in the charter reaffirmed
their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the
human person and in the equal rights at men and women and have
determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in
greater freedom,

Whereas Member states have pledged themselves to achieve, in
co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect
for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms,

Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the
greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge.  
 Now, therefore,  
 The General Assembly.

Proclaims this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that
every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration
constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote
respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures,
national and international, to secure their universal and effective
recognition and observance, both among the people of Member states
themselves and among the peoples of territories under their
jurisdiction.

Article 1
---------

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are
endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in
a spirit of brotherhood.

Article 2
---------

Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this
Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, color, sex,
language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status.

Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political,
jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to
which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non- self-
governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty.

Article 3
---------

Everyone has the right to life, liberty and the security of person.

Article 4
---------

No one shall be held in slivery or servitude: slavery and slave trade
shall be prohibited in all their forms.

Article 5
---------

No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment.

Article 6
---------

Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the
law.

Article 7
---------

All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination
to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to equal protection
against any discrimination in violation of this Declaration and against
any incitement to such discrimination.

Article 8
---------

Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national
tribunals for acts violating the fundamental right granted him by the
constitution or by law.

Article 9
---------

No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.

Article 10
----------

Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by in
independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights
and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.

Article 11
----------

a. Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed
innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which
he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defense.

b. No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of any
act or omission which did not constitute a penal offence, under national
or international law, at the time when it was committed.

Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable
at the time the penal offence was committed.

Article 12
----------

No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy,
family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honor and
reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against
such interference or attacks.

Article 13
----------

a. Everybody has the right to freedom of movement and residence within
the borders of each state.

b. Every person has the right to leave any country, including his own,
and to return to his country.

Article 14
----------

a. Everyone has the right to seek and enjoy in other countries asylum
from persecution.  
 b. This right may not be invoked in case of prosecutions genuinely
arising from non-political crimes at from acts contrary to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.

Article 15
----------

a. Everyone has the right to it nationality.  
 b. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor denied
the right to change his nationality.

Article 16
----------

a. Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race,
nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found it family.
They are entitled to equality as to marriage, during marriage and at its
dissolution.  
 b. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent
of the intending spouses.  
 c. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and
is entitled to protection by society and the state.

Article 17
----------

a. Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in
association with others.  
 b. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.

Article 18
----------

Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion:
this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and
freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice,
worship and observance.

Article 19
----------

Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression: this right
includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to see,
receive and impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers.

Article 20
----------

a. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and
association.  
 b. No one may be compelled to belting to an association.

Article 21
----------

a. Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country,
directly or through freely chosen representatives.  
 b. Everyone has the right of equal access to public service in his
country.  
 c. The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of the
government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine
elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be
held by secret vote on by equivalent free voting procedures.

Article 22
----------

Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and
is entitled to realization, through national effort and international
co-operation and in accordance with the organization and resources of
each state, of economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for
his dignity and the free development of his personality.

Article 23
----------

a. Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just
and favorable conditions of work and to protection against
unemployment.  
 b. Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to equal pay for
equal work.  
 c. Everyone who works has the right to just and favorable remuneration
ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human
dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of social
protection.  
 d. Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the
protection of his interests.

Article 24
----------

Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including reasonable
limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay.

Article 25
----------

a. Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the
health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food,
clothing, and housing and medical care and necessary social services,
and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness,
disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in
circumstances beyond his control.  
 b. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and
assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy
the same social protection.

Article 26
----------

a. Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at
least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education
shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made
generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to
all on the basis of merit.

b. Education shall be directed to the full development of the human
personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding, tolerance and
friendship among all nations, racial or was presented.


