Text of the Islamic Declaration Of Human Rights
===============================================

The idea of formally committing this Declaration down to writing took
shape in 1979, when the Tenth Conference of the Islamic Foreign
Ministers decided to form a consulting committee composed of Muslim
experts to prepare a hill regarding human rights in Islam.

The first draft was referred to the Eleventh Conference, which in its
turn, referred it to a legal committee, subsequently the amended test
was presented to the Third Islamic Summit Conference, hoverer, it
referred it to yet another committee. The Fourteenth Conference of the
Foreign Ministers in Dacca gave approval to the Introduction part and
the First Article, then referred tile remaining articles to a third
committee.

Then there followed a succession of conferences which approved until the
meeting field in Tehran in December, 1989, in which the final draft was
presented. It was ultimately approved in the 19th Conference of Islamic
Foreign Ministers (in FEZ, Islamabad, Baghdad, Niami, Dacca, Sana’a,
Oman, Riyadh, Tehran, and Cairo), three Summit Conferences (at Ta’if,
Casablanca, and Kuwait) and a number of experts’ committee meetings the
last of which was the Tehran Conference of 1989.

***In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

***“O’ Mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and have
made you into nations and tribes that you may know one another. Surely,
the noblest of you with Allah is the one who fears Allah most.” (The
Glorious Quran, 49:13)***

Believing in Allah, the lord of the worlds, the creator of everything
and the giver of all favors, the one who created man in the highest
form, bestowed honors upon him, appointed him his successor on earth,
entrusted him with cultivating and reclaiming it, charged him with
divine duties, and made subservient to man all that is in the heavens
and the earth.

Believing in the message of Muhammad (s.a.w), as the Messenger of Allah
who brought divine guidance and true faith as a mercy for mankind,
liberator of the enslaved and destroyer of tyranny and oppression,
declared equality for all human beings, admitting no superiority for
anyone except through piety, abolishing all differences and hatred among
all people whom Allah had created from the same spirit.

Starting from faith in pure Tawhid (Monotheism) on which is founded the
structure of Islam, and which invites the entire mankind to worship no
one but Allah, and to associate no one with Him and to take no other
gods besides Allah, and which lays the true foundation for the real
freedom of men and their eternal dignity, protecting the faith, the
soul, the intellect, the honor, the wealth and the generation,
distinguished for its comprehensiveness and moderation in all its
attitudes and judgments, thus producing a linkage between Matter and
Spirit, gathering reason and heart together.

Confirming the historical and civilizing role of the Islamic *Umma*,
which Allah designed to be the best, bequeathing to humanity a balanced
universal order that links this world with the Hereafter, inter-linking
science and faith: what is expected today from this *Umma* is to guide
humanity, contused in the middle of diverse competing currents and
beliefs, to undo the chronic difficulties besetting the materialistic
civilization,

Participating in the ongoing efforts concerning formulation of human
rights which aim at protecting man from exploitation and suppression,
and for confirming his freedom and his rights ensuring an honorable life
in accordance with the Laws of Islam,

Being confident that humanity having progressed in various fields of the
physical sciences to a high degree has been, and will remain, in dire
need of economic resources for maintaining its civilization, and also in
need of an effective deterrent to maintain close watch over these
rights,

And believing that the basic rights and public liberties in Islam are it
part of the Muslim's faith and nobody has the right to, wholly or
partially, abolish, violate or neglect the divine precepts and duties
enjoined by Allah in His Books, and with which He sent His last
Messenger, and by which He completed what had earlier been conveyed
through divine communications, and whose observance became devotion, and
whose neglect or rejection became sin; since everybody is personally
responsible for them, and the *Umma* is, jointly and severally,
responsible for them, the member - states of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, consequently declare the following:

Article 1
---------

a. The human beings are all a single family, joined together in
servitude to Allah and filiation to Adam. All people are equal in their
original human dignity, obligation and responsibility, without any
distinction of race, color, tongue, sex, faith, political beliefs,
social status or any other consideration. In fact, following the correct
faith is the best guarantee for the development of this dignity and the
road to human perfection.

b. All creatures are Allah's subjects and the most favored by Him is the
one most beneficent to His dependents, and no one is preferred over
another, except on the basis of Taqwa (Piety) and good deeds.

Article 2
---------

a. Life is a gift from Allah. It is guaranteed to all. Individuals,
communities and states are responsible to protect this right against any
transgression. No life may be destroyed without due legal process.

b. It is prohibited to resort to means which annihilate mankind.

c. Preserving the continuity of human life, as long as Allah wills, is a
religious obligation.

d. The human dead body must be shown due respect; it must not be
violated. It may not be subjected to autopsy without proper legal
authority, and the states are responsible to ensure that.

Article 3
---------

a. In case of war and armed conflicts, it is not permitted to kill those
who do not take part in the fighting, such as the old, women and
children. The wounded and the sick have the right to be treated, and the
captives to get food, lodging and clothing. It is prohibited to mutilate
the corpses. Exchange of prisoners should be allowed as well as the
rejoining at families separated by the conditions of war.

b. Cutting trees, damaging seed and breed, destroying the enemy's
non-military buildings and installations through bombing, shelling and
similar means is prohibited.

Article 4
---------

Every individual has his personal respect and has the right to protect
his reputation during his life and after his death. The state and the
society are obliged to protect his body and grave.

Article 5
---------

a. The family is the basis for building the society, and marriage is the
basis of forming the family. Men and women have the right to marry,
which cannot be prevented by such obstructions as race, color or
nationality.

b. The society and the state are obliged to remove the barriers from the
way of marriage, to facilitate it and to protect the family and care for
it.

Article 6
---------

a. Woman is equal to man in human dignity, and she has rights much as
she has obligations. She has her civil status and independent financial
resources, and the right to keep her name and lineage.  
 b. The man has to carry the burdens of financially supporting his
family and be responsible for it and take care of it.

Article 7
---------

a. Every child, ever since its birth, has the right over its parents,
the society and the state for nursing, education and financial, mental
and moral care.  
 Similarly, the fetus and its mother have the right to protection and
specialized care.  
 b. The parents or their substitutes have the right to choose the kind
of education they wish for their children, taking into consideration
their interests and future in the light of moral values and religious
precepts.  
 c. The parents have rights over their sons, and the relatives have
rights over their relatives according to the precepts of the Islamic
law.

Article 8
---------

Everyone has the right to exploit his lawful capacity concerning
assigning and undertaking obligations. On losing or diminished legal
capacity in law, his guardian acts in his place.

Article 9
---------

a. Seeking knowledge is obligatory and providing facilities for learning
is an obligation of the society and the state. They have to make
provision for it. Facilitate its ways and means, and ensure its
diversities to implement the interest of the society and help man to
know the religion of Islam, the facts of the universe and how to exploit
them for the good of humanity.  
 b. Everyone has the right upon the different establishments of
education and learning, such as the family, the school, the university,
the mass media and the like, to have them educate man in religion and
worldly knowledge affording a thorough and balanced education,
strengthening his belief in Allah, respecting rights and obligations,
and safe guarding them.

Article 10
----------

As man is to follow Islam, the religion of the innate nature, it is not
permissible to subject him to any kind of compulsion, nor is it
permissible to exploit his poverty, weakness or ignorance to force him
to convert his faith to another faith or to atheism.

Article 11
----------

a. Man is born free, no one may enslave, humiliate, oppress or exploit
him; nor force him to servitude to any other then Allah, the Exalted.  
 b. Imperialism in all its manifestations being the worst kind of
enslavement, is totally prohibited, and the peoples suffering from it
have the right to free themselves from it and gain self-determination.
All states and peoples are duty hound to support them in their
liberation struggle aimed at liquidating all kinds of imperialism or
foreign domination. All peoples have the right to safeguard their
independent identity and to control their wealth and natural resources.

Article 12
----------

Everyone has the right, within the frame-work of Islamic law, to freely
move and choose the place of his residence inside or outside his
country. In case of being subject to persecution, he has the right to
seek asylum in another country. The country granting him asylum is bound
to protect him until he reaches a safe haven, provided that the reason
for seeking refuge was not a crime forbidden in religion.

Article 13
----------

Work is a right guaranteed by the state and the society for whoever is
able to work. Everyone has the right to choose the work most suitable
for him, with the aim of attaining his and the society's interests. The
worker has his rights to security, safety and all forms of social
insurance. He is not to be ordered to do what is beyond his capacity,
nor is he to be forced, exploited or harmed. The worker, male or female,
has the right to get a fair wage for his work without delay. He is to
enjoy his holdings, allowances and the promotions he deserves. He has
the duty to be sincere and strict. In case of a dispute between the
worker and their employer, the state is obliged in interface to settle
the dispute, remove injustice, establish justice and keep equity with
impartially.

Article 14
----------

Man has the right to lawful work without monopoly, cheating or causing
harm to oneself and to others. Usury is decisively prohibited.

Article 15
----------

a. Everyone has the right to own by lawful means and to enjoy the right
to ownership without harming oneself or other individuals or the
society. Arbitrary expropriation is not allowed except for the public
interests, but for immediately paid fair compensation.  
 b. It is prohibited to confiscate or seize property except by order of
the law.

Article 16
----------

Everyone has the right to be benefited by the fruits of his practical,
literary, artistic and technical labor, and he has the right to protect
his relevant literary and financial interests, provided that the said
products are not contrary to religious commandments.

Article 17
----------

a. Everyone has the right to live in an environment free from evil and
from moral corruption, so as to be able to morally develop himself. The
society and the state are obliged to facilitate for them the
implementation of this right.  
 b. Everyone has the right upon his society and state to receive medical
and social care through the provision of public facilities needed by him
within the available resources.  
 c. The state is to ensure for everyone his right to an honorable life,
sufficiently providing for him and his dependents. This covers food,
clothing, lodging, education, medical treatment and other basic needs.

Article 18
----------

a. Everyone has the right to live in security for himself, his faith,
family, honor and belongings.  
 b. Everyone has the right to be independent regarding his private
affairs in his house, family, wealth and communications. It is not
allowed to spy upon him, have an eye on him or offend his reputation. He
is to be protected against all arbitrary meddlings.

c. Privacy of residences is to be respected in all cases, and they
should not be trespassed unlawfully and without the owner's permission.
They should not be pulled down, requisitioned, nor should their dwellers
be driven out.

Article 19
----------

a. All people, whether rulers or the ruled are equal before the law.  
 b. The right to resort to the law is guaranteed to all.  
 c. Responsibility is basically personal.  
 d. No Offence and no penalty except according to the adjudication by
the law  
 e. The accused is regarded innocent until he is proven guilty in a fair
trial ensuring provision of all that is necessary to defend him.

Article 20
----------

No one may be arrested, detained, exiled or punished without due process
of law. He may not be subjected to physical or psychic duress, nor to
any kind of humiliating, cruel and degrading treatment contrary to human
dignity. No one is to be subjected to medical or scientific experiments
without his consent, and provided that his health and life may not be
endangered, nor is it allowed to frame exceptional laws allowing the
executive authorities to practice it

Article 21
----------

Taking a person as hostage is prohibited in any form and for any
purpose.

Article 22
----------

a. Everyone has the right to steely express his opinion in a way not
contradicting the principles of the law.  
 b. Everyone has the right to enjoin good and forbid evil according to
the Islamic regulations.  
 c. Publicity is a vital necessity for society, but it is forbidden to
be exploited and misused, or to abuse sacred religious sanctuaries or
show disrespect to the prophets and whatever may disgrace higher values
and cause society to be disorganized, disrupted, harmed, or to forsake
faith.  
 d. It is not allowed to instigate national and religious hatred, and
whatever may stir racial discrimination in different forms

Article 23
----------

a. Authority is a trust; it is emphatically prohibited to, be
despotically practiced; or to be misused, since it is guarantee for
basic human rights.  
 b. Everyone has the right to take part in the management of the
country’s general affairs, directly or indirectly. He also has the right
to hold public posts according to rules and regulations.

Article 24
----------

All the rights and liberties stated in this Declaration are in
accordance with the precepts of the Islamic Law.

Article 25
----------

The Islamic law is the only source for the interpretation or explanation
of any Article of this Declaration.


