Foundations of Human Rights in Islam and the Universal Declaration
==================================================================

In the light of what has thus far been said, we must emphasize that the
Universal Declaration, regrettably, failed to correlate the realities of
human existence and social issues, whereas the Islamic Declaration
confirmed this linkage quite explicitly; hence, it was logical in itself
as well as in relation to the proposed human rights. The Universal
Declaration declared the following basis in its permeable:

1. The necessity of acknowledging man's essential standing while
providing freedom, justice, and peace

2. The occurrence of brutality as a consequence of denying human rights.

3. The coming into being of a new world order where freedom of
expression and of beliefs prevailed, without fear of poverty, as the
supreme hope for humanity.

4. The necessity of protecting the rights lest the people are compelled
to revolt against injustice.

5. The necessity of promoting friendly relations.

6. The nations\` resolve to promote social progress.

7. The necessity of effecting mutual cooperation.

However, the basic question is what is man's intrinsic dignity? Is it
his natural disposition? If it be so, how should this Declaration be
introduced to a world submerged in material wants denying the concept of
natural disposition? What are the differences between a brutal act and
humane one? Can we attain real general criteria if we do not believe in
the theory of human perfection? Has there been a study about human
aspirations such that it proves that aspirations are confined only to
freedom of expression and belief, and eliminating fear and poverty?

Would it be correct to say that aspirations imply man bring free to say
whatever he wanted to say, and to believe in whatever he liked, without
let even if he, for instance, wanted to ridicule what was held sacred by
others?

Isn't here an intermixing of the foundations and the upper edifice?
Except if it is said that the general human aspirations are to be
accepted as necessary needs.

If that were so, then we would observe: "Is it not a valid human
aspiration to attain awareness of the Absolute Creator, to depend on the
Ultimate Power, to worship the Real Master" Aren’t these common human
aspirations clearly manifested even through a brief glimpse of human
history?

Furthermore, is the basic human aspiration other than achieving
comprehensive moral order'? Where is any mention of it? Isn't it true
that giving way to individual freedom in all respects: behavior, belief,
economy and politics, without being governed by any moral limits leads
to the destruction of a great deal of the moral values?

The same is true of the other bases as stated in the preamble to the
Declaration.

Anyhow, a researcher would not recognize therein any logical
relationship between the foundation and the upper edifice whereas
probably he would have recognized other political objectives as
expressed in certain phrases such as: "It is essential, if man is not to
be compelled to take recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion or
revolution, that human rights should be protected..." or "...to promote
the development of friendly relations between nations..." and the like,
through which one could perceive that the critics would cast doubts on
the motives of the Universal Declaration due to the circumstances
prevailing at the time of its inception.

It was proposed after the end of World War II, when the Big Powers had
taken control of the entire world, especially U.S.A which had come out
of the war with the least losses in men and material, whereas the
European allies carte out of it exhausted and weakened on the one hand,
while on the other communism extended its sphere of influence by
presenting a historic philosophy on which a revolutionary theory was
founded, making the months of deprived masses water, and so attracting
their attention.

At the same time, there grew it worldwide longing for it new
international system in which disputes would be few and through which
mankind's dream of a noble world order would finally be attained.

All these circumstances required a universal bunion philosophy and it
slogan whereby the U.S.A would appear as the champion of human
civilization heading towards a glorious human future. This would enable
it to come out of its isolation and as a world leader expand its
capitalist philosophy based on individual freedom and then proceed to
compete with the communist system armed with an opposing social system
which too would make the mouths of the deprived water.

But they thought it necessary that the deprived nations be given a
make-believe right to be heard- so the General Assembly of the United
Nations was shaped as a model of equality in voting, say of the U.S.A
with Burma, whereas in exercise of power and supremacy it remains the
domain of the Big powers who dominate everything through the Security
Council and their right to veto.

Such is the picture portrayed by those who look dubiously at the real
motives behind that Declaration.

Nevertheless, it undoubtedly represents it great stride towards
international recognition of human rights – a fact which is undeniable,
despite all its weak points, as will. God willing, be explained later
on.

The Islamic Declaration
-----------------------

While studying the preamble, which explains the bases on which the
Islamic Declaration has been founded it will be seen that the proposed
rights are much more advanced and more logical in respect of linking the
said two questions, such that it enables one to clearly recognize all
the rights as stated in the Declaration.

### The Primary Basis

The leading basis rests on the belief in Allah and in His Attributes of
Perfection, and that creation of everything (granting all the favors,
creating man in the best form. generosity. assigning man as successor,
entrusting him with building, placing obligations upon his shoulders,
granting: him the use of universe) all of which are concepts
constituting a basis for believing in man’s right to life, dignity,
building the earth, carrying out obligations, utilizing the universe,
rather, one could identify the rights from within this passage.

### The Second Basis

Is to believe in Islam as the true guidance, the true faith, the
religion of mercy for all the worlds, the religion of liberating the
enslaved, destroying the tyrants; the religion of equality based only on
Taqwa (piety); the religion of abolishing discrimination and hatred
among all people whom Allah created of a single soul.

The researcher may also deduce from these buses the most important
individual and collective rights such as the right to seek cooperation
and assistance, the right to liberty, the right to fight tyranny, the
right to equality and the like.

### The Third Basis

Is the unconditional belief in Tawhid (Unity of Allah), that is
worshipping Allah alone, and freeing oneself from all other than Him
thereby gaining freedom, responsibility and dignity.

### The Fourth Basis

Is the Islamic legislations that preserve faith, life, intellect, honor,
property, and offsprings while observing the general characteristics of
comprehensiveness, moderation and practicability. It provides, in
itself, a basis for other rights in general.

### The Fifth Basis

Is the civilizing role of the Islamic *Umma* (community) as the best
*Umma* which gave humanity a balanced civilization which links this
world to the Hereafter and combines science with faith.

### The Sixth Basis

Is the belief in the people's participation in protecting human rights.

### The Seventh Basis

Is the belief in humanity's persistent need for a fundamental faith.

### The Eighth Basis

Is the belief that the basic rights are it part of faith hence observing
them is worship, and neglecting them is sin, and everyone is
individually responsible for them, while the whole *Umma* collectively
share responsibility for them. This in principle is the basis for the
individual and collective responsibility for the application of the
Articles of Declaration.

The above-mentioned bases provide firm foundations for the proposed
rights as incorporated faithfully in the Declaration. It is on the
belief that they make natural foundation for these upper constructions
which will complete the edifice. Nevertheless, it is our opinion that
the matter needs further deliberation.

Accordingly, a number of shortcomings which need to be amended are
listed below:

1. In the First Basis, a reference to Allah's essential attributes must
be included namely, Knowledge, Power and Life, which have an important
place in respect to the validity of these rights, especially in that
Islam requires the Muslims to be godly and equip themselves suitably
with the divine attributes.

2. How much more appropriate would it be if the 'Third Basis' could be
transferred to the stage succeeding the First Basis, since that is it's
natural place following the stage of the attributes, i.e. the stage of
Tawhid

3. Next it would be in natural sequence to link the \`Fourth Basis' to
the Third, as certain other attributes of the *Shariat* (Islamic Laws)
could be added, since they hear positive effect on the question of human
rights - attributes such as: actuality, comprehensiveness, eternity,
flexibility, correlation among the parts of the *Shariat*, their concept
of solidarity and progress among the members of humanity and the Islamic
*Umma*, and the like.

4. A reference to the system of Islamic Law in the Preface, as well as
to the ethical order and its objective is deemed necessary.

5. It would be appropriate to present in the preface the concept of the
universality of the Message, so as to ward off an intruding suspicion
that these rights would not be appropriate at the universal level. But
Islam, based on the concept of *fitrat* (nature) and the characteristic
of reality, and principle of actuality confirms the question of
conformity with innate human needs - a fact which would give it a
universal character, because the innate disposition does not differ
between persons or classes.


