Essential Differences in Human Rights in the two Declarations
=============================================================

First of all, a quick look at the outline of the rights stated in the
two Declarations is necessary to be able to make a comparison between
them. However, before studying this outline it would be noted that the
arrangement of the articles differs in the two Declarations and also it
right may have been covered under more than one Article. It will be
noted that the sequence in the Islamic Declaration is more logical than
that in the Universal Declaration which illustrates the superiority of
the Islamic Declaration in thoroughness.

Furthermore, it may be possible to combine these rights together due to
their general and particular commonality. However, presenting such
rights in separate articles relates to their particular importance and
the necessity of stressing them.

Similarities between the two Declarations
-----------------------------------------

For a summary of the most important similarities between the two
Declarations, we may refer to the following: Both Declarations agree
upon suitable rights of life liberty, security, abolition of oppression,
injustice and rejecting the behavior contrary to self-respect, i.e.
abusing.

Both the Declarations agree on the rights of providing a proper hygienic
environment, public services and an honorable life, prohibiting
arbitrary detention without valid legal authorization, limiting personal
liberty, prohibiting illegal punishments or exceeding the limits
prescribed for each crime, guaranteeing personal dignity, preventing
abuse of social status and respect, and the right of enjoying it proper
living standard.

The two Declarations are in agreement on the question of the equality of
men and women in respect to personal dignity, the necessity of ensuring
social standing for women as much as for men, as well as ensuring for
the women their financial and legal status, including that marriage will
be contracted by mutual consent of both parties: that the family forms
the basic pillar of the society, having the right of obtaining the
support of the state and the society that faith, finances, honor,
personal, family, national, international securities are ensured, and
have the right to be independent in their private affairs (residence,
family, income. correspondence and communications).

They further agree on the principle of education and learning, with the
object of attaining human perfection (notwithstanding their different
concepts of perfection), acknowledging preference for the parents
opinion on this subject.

Both Declarations affirm that everyone is born free and may not be
enslaved, and that all persons are equal in their rights, and that they
possess intellect and conscience (though these have legal implications),
and that it is necessary to co-operate with a fraternal spirit.

They both confirm freedom of thought, belief and expression (to a
reasonable limit), and that man has the right to enjoy his scientific,
literary and artistic achievements, and he has the right to adopt any
religion, to be free in his expression to the extent of not harming
himself or others, the right to his legal privileges, the right to move
from one place to another, and the right to seek asylum provided that no
non-political offences were involved.

The two Declarations are in harmony about admitting the right to work,
to freely choosing it, not to burden the worker with more than his
capacity, to enjoying equitable wages, to providing him with a moderate
living standard during unintentional unemployment, sickness, disability,
widowhood and old age.

They also agree that everyone is presumed to be innocent until proven
guilty; that crime is personal responsibility, that everyone has the
right to have a fair trial and that the punishment would be as
prescribed for a crime as at the time of its commission.

Similarly they agree on the right to personal possessions rejecting
deprivation of ownership-if it was not harmful to the society.

They agree on preventing despotism and support everyone’s right to
participate in formulating political decision making, holding public
posts ensuring equality before the law, having the right to have access
to a suitable tribunal, and forming charitable or social associations.

Finally, they both confirm that all are obliged to support these
liberties and benefit from them. Man is required to endeavor to attain
perfection and not to transgress upon the freedom of others. This law is
not to be misused to carry out particular individual or governmental
purposes.

These were the most important points as briefly summarized above.

Differences in the Declarations
-------------------------------

As to the instances of differences in the texts, these are enumerated
below:

1. The Islamic Declaration, quite correctly distinguishes between the
original dignity (or the dignity which man has clue to his affiliation
with humanity), and the dignity acquired by him during his progress on
the course of moral development and good deeds in service of people.
This is an important point which the universal Declaration failed to
perceive and consequently it remained deficient. Every conscientious
person would recognize the differences between the life of a great
scholar such as Avicenna, and a common person living for himself, who
leave no leading behind him.

2. The Islamic Declaration, stressing that all creatures were Allah’s
family, high-lights fully the concept of this equality in terms of
dignity, not being satisfied merely with its legal aspects. In addition
to linking dignity in general to the Absolute Beneficent Being, all
creatures are Allah's family and their relationship to Him is exactly
equal. However there exists a competition among them in trying to attain
spiritual proximity to Him by means of self-improvement through holding
true faith and doing good deeds in accordance with the requisites of
creation. But the Universal Declaration totally lacks such an acute
level of perception.

3. This same concept has been reemphasized in the second Article of the
Islamic Declaration which denotes that life is, conceptually, a gift
from Allah, thereby according it quite a high legal value. Thus it
should be protected and secured, as much as possible, in order to
implement the grand purpose behind this divine gift. As to the Universal
Declaration, it is devoid of such sublimity, although it does admit that
man possesses reason and conscience. Actually, that afforded a good
lead, but the text stops at this clear fact without proceeding further
logically to furnish the essential pre conditions.

4. In the Islamic Declaration, the stress laid on the prohibition of
annihilating life's fountain, is a pertinent observation on the said
divine gift emphasizing the necessity of the continuation of this divine
blessing –a fact which is not referred to in the Universal Declaration,
and it wouldn't be irrelevant to say that there existed generalizations
in certain Articles, which are vague and have little legal consequence.

With reference to the phrase concerning the necessity of the
continuation of life as long as Allah wills, it alludes to the duty of
everyone to protect life, even one's own life, which one has to protect
against any kind of danger whatever it might be. In fact, the great care
shown by Islamic texts for human life is not equaled by any other
religion or any ideological or social theories presented to the world
society.

5. To the above can be added the provision of protecting the fetus, as
contained in Article 7, which is ignored by the Universal Declaration.

6. Then there is the emphasis on the sanctity of the human dead which
should be shown due respect and not to be arbitrarily subjected to post
mortem examination without proper legal authorization. This again has
been ignored in the Universal Declaration.

7. Article 3 refers to the ethics covering conflicts and will, for which
Islam suggests the most wonderful regulations unprecedented in human
history. Life is protected to the ultimate extent and the sanctity of
human dignity is preserved even after death, as mutilation is prohibited
even of it rapacious dog. And taking of prisoners of war has its ethical
rules framed with full sympathy; it is also stipulated that farm lands
and other civil establishments are to be preserved. The like of this
Article cannot be found in the Universal Declaration, which is a serious
short coming - although the world tried to make amends for it later in
the Geneva Agreements.

8. Article 8 of the Islamic Declaration confirms respect for humanity,
which is also confirmed by the Universal Declaration, but here it is
extended to after death, including protecting the body and it's burial.

9. Despite the fact that both Declarations confirm that the family
constitutes a fundamental pillar in the building of human society, and
that both the society and the state are responsible for its protection,
and that men and women are entitled to marry without any racial, color
and nationality barriers yet there are differences between the two
Declarations, which could be summarized as follows:

a. The Islamic Declaration declares that marriage is the basis for
universal constitution, while the Universal Declaration makes no
reference to it.

b. The Universal Declaration grants equal rights to men and women,
covering even such matters as alimony, marriage portion, divorce and the
like, but the Islamic Declaration elaborates these aspects stating that
a woman has rights equal to her obligations, has her civil status,
independent financial responsibilities, and the right to retain her name
and lineage, whereas the responsibility for maintaining the family and
their expenses rests on man.

c. The reference made by the Islamic Declaration to the social
obligations of the society and the state to remove all barriers in the
way of marriage and to facilitate it, has not been considered in the
Universal Declaration.

d. Another difference worth mention is that religion has not been
regarded as an obstacle to be removed from the Islamic Declaration,
whereas the Universal Declaration has concentrated upon it. In fact,
common faith and belief in it to a certain extent, such as the unity of
faith between husband and wife to the extent of believing in the same
Allah and His message, is essential for achieving required harmony,
otherwise all hopes of forming a family as the social foundation, would
be dashed.

10. The Islamic Declaration again differs from the Universal Declaration
in that the former confers certain rights on the parents and the
relatives as well.

11. In the field of training and education we find that the Islamic
Declaration makes it incumbent upon the society and the state without
limits and at all stages, whereas the Universal Declaration confirms
that only primary level education should be compulsory and free,
thereafter proposing equal opportunity for all for the latter stages.

12. According to Islamic Declaration, the objectives of education have
been summarized as: attaining perfection and balance in personality
growth, strengthening belief in Allah and respecting rights and
obligations, and protecting them.  
 In this context Universal Declaration stresses the perfect development
of personality, supporting respect for human rights and liberties,
facilitating the principle of open mindedness, sacrifice and respect for
opposing ideologies, spreading love and striving for peace. The
difference between the two Declarations is only too obvious.

13. Article 10 of the Islamic Declaration is quite in harmony with the
principles of human ideologies. It confirms that Islam accords fully
with the first and last characteristics of man, the *Fitrat* (Nature),
it being the religion of humanity.

Consequently, it would be natural to prohibit all forms of compulsion
and exploitation that leads man away from the line of his natural
tendencies as it would mean estrangement from one's inner self.

Thus, it would be noted that the Islamic Declaration is compatible with
Article 10 which prohibits compulsion and exploitation, and keeps silent
about freedom to make change because Islam has expressed its complete
and explicit opinion of the said article. It is the religion of innate
nature while other religions had deviated and, as it result, had lost
their religious credibility.

As regards heresy it is, as seen by Islam, it deviation from the bounds
of humanity to the world of animality or straying even further.

On the other hand, it will be observed that the Universal Declaration
asserts the freedom of changing ones faith and beliefs totally, which
signifies an essential difference in their approach. It is not our
intention to prove that only the Islamic approach was correct, what we
intend to emphasize is that the Universal Declaration separates the
legal and the philosophic questions, as already discussed – an attitude
which we firmly rejected.

14. Article 11 of Islamic Declaration is matched by Article 4 of the
Universal Declaration, but with deep seated difference, as the Islamic
position declares that man is naturally born tree, and rejects his being
enslaved, exploited and humiliated, and regards his freedom as it
consequence at his servitude to Allah, the Exalted. Servitude to Allah
does not mean - contrary to what the uninformed might think -
reinforcing Divine Being since Almighty Allah is the Absolute Sovereign
without doubt. What it does imply is being free of attachment to any
other than Him and acting according to His guidance as the way to
success, whereas the Universal Declaration, although it rejects
enslavement and serfdom however, fails to offer any basis or to suggest
the nature of human relationship with Allah.

15. Another distinguishing feature of the Islamic Declaration is its
rejection of imperialism in all its guises, condemning it altogether,
and giving the peoples the right to strive for liberty and self-
determination, as also requiring all other peoples to support such
struggle and thereon confirming the sovereign identity of all nations.
However the Universal Declaration does not mention this point, a fact
which exposes weakness in its objectives or perhaps the purpose was to
warn some nations lest they might revolt against their masters as is
evident front Article 3 in its preamble.

16. Another outstanding feature of the Islamic Declaration is that it
makes no reference to the question of the right of holding a
nationality. This is because it has been identified as one of those
spurious issues which tear asunder the unity of it single nation causing
serious obstacles in the way of its unified existence.

17. Despite the fact that both Declarations reaffirm rights of workers,
the Islamic Declaration goes further enjoining upon the worker to be
sincere and efficient in work, as it also demands from the state to
unbiasedly mediate in labor disputes occurring between the workers and
the employers to maintain justice without prejudice.

18. Article 14 of the Islamic Declaration confirms the right to work
provided that it be lawful, which gives us to understand that there
exist unlawful occupations such as holding monopoly, cheating, pursuits
harmful to oneself and others, as it also strongly prohibits usury,
whereas the Universal Declaration does not touch on these matters.

19. Article 15 regards private ownership lawful, subject to the
condition that such ownership may not be harmful to the owner himself or
to others. And, if we proceed further with expanding the concept of
"harm" to cover different facets of social harm, we will realize the
strictness of the Islamic expression and its disgust with the
capitalist's exploitation of this right to cause harm to others by
striking at their economy and plundering their wealth.

20. Another noteworthy characteristic of the Islamic Declaration is that
it regards the ethical question to be an important human rights issue,
confirming it in its Article 17.

The Universal Declaration offers no corresponding Article, although its
Article 29 does state that observing the requirements of morality may
define the limits permissible for the individuals’ enjoyment of
liberties. The expression: "...in a democratic society", in the Article,
leads one to think that by morality is meant the freedoms of others, not
the high ethical concepts. At any rate, it certainly does not require
human rights to have a clean moral quality leading man to moral
self-development.

21. One of the characteristics of the Islamic Declaration is its
rejection of subjecting man to medical and scientific experimentation,
except on two conditions: consent and safety.

22. Article 20 rejects framing of emergency laws that permit subjecting
man to torture, humiliation, cruelty and degradation, or subjecting him
to experiments and the like. It is an idea worthy of consideration, but
it has not received due emphasis in the Universal Declaration.

23. Some people might regard the Universal Declaration as distinguished
for granting absolute freedom of expression and speech, but we declare
it to be inappropriate because no speech could be allowed to create
morally destructive effects, or to distort truth and insult others'
sanctities, since insulting sacred things is assuredly much worse than
insulting a person. Therefore, restricting it in the Islamic
Declaration, with the phrase: "In a way not contradicting the principles
of law" is nearer to the spirit of humanity, as declared in Article 22c.

24. Another distinction of the Islamic Declaration is granting man the
right to "enjoin good and forbid evil", which stresses the
responsibility of the individual in preventing violations of ethics on
the one hand and raising the moral values of the society, on the other.
In the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference in Cairo, while discussing
this Article and the Islamic proposition, we strongly advocated the
inclusion of the condition of \`Enjoining the Good' but quite
inexplicably some of the members insisted upon it's omission due to
unknown reasons.

25. The Islamic Declaration incorporates a noteworthy fact that
authority was a trust not to be misused. Similar ideals are not to be
seen in the Universal Declaration, while in our view necessity demanded
that general conditions relating to the Islamic law covering use of
authority should have been incorporated.

26. Among other differences between the two declarations quite naturally
is the condition whereby the Islamic Declaration binds all Articles to
the precepts of Islam, while the Universal Declaration binds all its
provisions to the liberties of others.

27. The Islamic Declaration states that the Islamic law is the only
recourse for the interpretation or explanation of any Article, whereas
the Universal Declaration relies or no such recourse.

28. Finally, it trust be observed than there are many other differences
which cannot be referred to in detail in this report, such as when
freedom is mentioned it is sometimes bound with responsibility, referred
to as "responsible freedom": or within the limits of law, so that it may
not be converted into repugnant courses.


