The Whispered Prayer of the Lovers
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the Name of ALLAH, the All-compassionate the All-merciful, the
All-compassionate*

BIS-MIL-LAAHIR-RAH'-MAANIR-RAH'EEM

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ صَلّ عَلَى مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمّد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, send blessings on Muhammad and on the family of Muhammad,*
ALLAHUMMA S'ALE A'LAA MUHAMMAD WA AALE MUHAMMAD

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلهِي مَنْ ذَا الَّذِي ذَاقَ حَلاوَةَ مَحَبَّتِكَ، فَرامَ مِنْكَ
بَدَلاً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O! My God, who is the one to have tasted the sweetness of your love and
then looked for a replacement in place of you?*

ILAAHEE MAN D'AAL-LAD'EE D'AAQA H'ALAAWATA MAH'AB-BATIKA FARAAMA MINKA
BADALAA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي أَنِسَ بِقُرْبِكَ، فَابْتَغَى عَنْكَ حِوَلاً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Who can claim to have become familiar with your nearness, then wanted
removal from you?*

WA MAN D'AAL-LAD'EEE ANISA BIQUR-BIKA FAB-TAGHAA A'NKA H'IWALAA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلهِي فَاجْعَلْنا مِمَّنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O My God, include us among the ones whom you have-*

ILAAHEE FAJ-A'L-NAA MIM-MAN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اصْطَفَيْتَهُ لِقُرْبِكَ وَوِلايَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*chosen for your nearness and friendship,*

IS'-T'AFAY-TAHOO LIQUR-BIKA WA WILAAYATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَخْلَصْتَه لِوُدِّكَ وَمَحَبَّتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom you have purified through your
love and affection,*

WA AKH-LAS'-TAHOO LIWUD-DIKA WA MAH'AB-BATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَوَّقْتَهُ إلى لِقَآئِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom, you have given the desire for
meeting with you,*

WA SHAW-WAQ-TAHOOO ILAA LIQAAA-IK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَضَّيْتَهُ بِقَضآئِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And(include us among the ones) who are pleased with all your
decisions,*

WA RAZ''-Z''AY-TAHOO BIQAZ''AAA-IK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنَحْتَهُ بِالنَّظَرِ إلى وَجْهِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who are granted permission to gaze upon
your face,*

WA MANAH'-TAHOO BIN-NAZ'ARI ILAA WAJ-HIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَبَوْتَهُ بِرِضاكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom you have shown the favor of your
good pleasure,*

WA H'ABAW-TAHOO BIRIZ''AAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعَدْتَهُ مِنْ هَجْرِكَ وَقِلاكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom you have exempted from your
separation and anger*

WA AA'D'-TAHOO MIN HAJ-RIKA WA QILAAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَوَّأْتَهُ مَقْعَدَ الصِّدْقِ فِي جَوارِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who are settled in a sure sitting place
in your proximity,*

WA BAW-WAA-TAHOO MAQ-A'DAS'-S'ID-QI FEE JIWAARIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَصَصْتَهُ بِمَعْرِفَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who have been chosen to gain true
knowledge of you*

WA KHAS'AS'-TAHOO BIMAA'-RIFATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَهَّلْتَهُ لِعِبادَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who you have made worthy to worship
you*

WA AH-HAL-TAHOO LII'BAADATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَيَّمْتَ قَلْبَهُ لإرادَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose heart are captivated with
yearning for you*

WA HAY-YAM-TA QAL-BAHOO LIIRAADATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْتَبَيْتَهُ لِمُشاهَدَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom you have picked for contemplating
in you*

WA AJ-TABAY-TAHOO LIMUSHAAHADATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَخْلَيْتَ وَجْهَهُ لَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who you have made totally absorbed in
you*

WA AKH-LAY-TA WAJ-HAHOO LAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَرَّغْتَ فُؤادَهُ لِحُبِّكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose hearts you have freed, to
experience nothing but your love,*

WA FAR-RAGH-TA FOO-AADAHOO LIH'UB-BIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَغَّبْتَهُ فِيمَا عِنْدَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who you have made desirous of what is
with you ,*

WA RAGH-GHAB-TAHOO FEEMAA I'NDAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْهَمْتَهُ ذِكْرَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who are inspired with your
remembrance,*

WA AL-HAM-TAHOO D'IK-RAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْزَعْتَهُ شُكْرَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who have been chosen in giving thanks
to you,*

WA AW-ZAA'-TAHOO SHUK-RAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَغَلْتَهُ بِطاعَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who are occupied with obeying you,*

WA SHAGHAL-TAHOO BIT'AAA'TIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَيَّرْتَهُ مِنْ صالِحِي بَرِيَّتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom you have turned into one of your
righteous creatures,*

WA S'AY-YAR-TAHOO MIN S'AALIH'EE BAREE-YATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْتَرْتَهُ لِمُناجاتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) who you have chosen for reciting the
whispered prayer to you,*

WA AKH-TAR-TAHOO LIMUNAAJAATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَطَعْتَ عَنْهُ كُلَّ شَيْء يَقْطَعُهُ عَنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whom you, have inspired to cut off from
all things, that may divert their hearts from remembrance of you*

WA QAT'AA'-TA A'N-HOO KUL-LA SHAY-EE-YAQ-T'AU'HOO A'NK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّهُمَّ اجْعَلْنَا مِمَّنْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O ALLAH, place us among those*

AL-LAHUM-MA AJ-A'L-NAA MIM-MAN-

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَأْبُهُمُ الارْتِياحُ إلَيْكَ وَالْحَنِينُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*whose habit is rejoicing in you, and yearning for you,*

DAA-BUHUMULIR-TEEAAHOO ILAY-KA WAL-H'ANEEN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَهْرُهُمُ الزَّفْرَةُ وَالأَنِينُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose time is spent in sighing and
lamenting for you!*

WA DAH-RUHUMUZ-ZAF-RATU WAL-ANEEN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جِباهُهُمْ سَاجِدَةٌ لِعَظَمَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose foreheads are bowed down, before
your might,*

JIBAAHUHUM SAAJIDATUL-LIA'Z'AMATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعُيُونُهُمْ ساهِرَةٌ فِي خِدْمَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose eyes are awake in your service,*

WA U'YOONUHUM SAAHIRATUN FEE KHID-MATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدُمُوُعُهُمْ سآئِلَةٌ مِنْ خَشْيَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose tears flow in fear of you*

WA DUMOOU'HUM SAAA-ILATUM-MIN KHASH-YATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلُوبُهُمْ مُتَعَلِّقَةٌ بِمَحَبَّتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose hearts are permanently set upon
your love,*

WA QULOOBUHUM MUTAA'L-LIQATUM-BIMAH'AB-BATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَفْئِدَتُهُمْ مُنْخَلِعَةٌ مِنْ مَهابَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And (include us among the ones) whose hearts are detached from other
things in love of you.*

WA AF-IDATUHUM MUN-KHALIA'TUM-MIM-MAHAABATIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا مَنْ أَنْوارُ قُدْسِهِ لأَبْصارِ مُحِبِّيهِ رآئِقَةٌ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O He, the lights of whose holiness attracts wonder in the eyes of His
lovers,*

YAA MAN ANWAARU QUD-SIHEE LIAB-S'AARI MUH'IB-BEEHEE RAAA-IQAH

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسُبُحاتُ وَجْهِهِ لِقُلُوبِ عارِفيهِ شآئِقَةٌ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And the glory of whose face arouses the longing of the hearts of those
who know him!*

WA SUBUH'AATU WAJ-HIHEE LIQULOOBI A'ARIFEEHEE SHAAA-IQATUN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُنى قُلُوبِ الْمُشْتاقِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O the ultimate wish of the hearts of the ones who desire you*

YAA MUNAA QULOOBIL-MUSH-TAAQEEN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيا غَايَةَ آمالِ الْمُحِبِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O the utmost of the hopes of the lovers!*

WA YAA GHAAYATA AAAMAALIL-MUH'IB-BEEN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْأَلُكَ حُبَّكَ وَحُبَّ مَنْ يُحِبُّكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I ask you for your love, and also love for those who love you,*

AS-ALUKA H'UB-BAK WA H'UB-BA MAY-YUH'IB-BUK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُبَّ كُلِّ عَمَل يُوصِلُنِي إلى قُرْبِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And I ask you to make me love every deed which will bring me to your
proximity,*

WA H'UB-BA KUL-LI A'MALEE-YOOS'ILUNEEE ILA QUR-BIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تَجْعَلَكَ أَحَبَّ إلَيَّ مِمَّا سِواكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And that you make yourself more beloved to me than anything other than
you*

WA AN TAJ-A'LAKA AH'AB-BA ILAY-YA MIM-MAA SIWAAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ تَجْعَل حُبِّي إيَّاكَ قآئِداً إلى رِضْوانِكَ َ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and make my love for you to lead me to pleasing you*

WA AN TAJ-A'LH'UB-BEEE EE-YAAKA QAAA-IDAN ILAA RIZ''-WAANIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَوْقِي إلَيْكَ ذآئِداً عَنْ عِصْيانِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And make my longing for you to protect me against disobeying you!*

WA SHAW-QEEE ILAY-KA D'AAA-IDANA A'N I'S'-YAANIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَامْنُنْ بِالنَّظَرِ إلَيْكَ عَلَيَّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*honor me by allowing me to gaze upon you,*

WA AM-NUM-BIN-NAZ'ARI ILAY-KA A'LAY

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانْظُرْ بِعَيْنِ الْوُدِّ وَالْعَطْفِ إلَيَّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*While you are gazing upon me with affection and tenderness,*

WA ANZ'UR BIA'Y-NIL-WUD-DI WAL-A'T'-FI ILAY

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَصْرِفْ عَنِّي وَجْهَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And do not turn your face away from me,*

WA LAA TAS'-RIF A'N-NEE WAJ-HAK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَهْلِ الإِسْعادِ وَالْحُظْوَةِ عِنْدَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and make me one with whom you are happy with and that am in your
favored position!*

WAJ-A'L-NEE MIN AH-LIL-IS-A'ADI WAL-H'UZ'-WATI I'NDAKA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا مُجِيبُ، يا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Responder, O Most Merciful of the merciful!*

YAA MUJEEBU YAAA AR-H'AMAR-RAAH'IMEEN


