The Whispered Prayer of the Thankful
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the Name of ALLAH, the All-compassionate*

*the All-merciful,*

 BIS-MIL-LAAHIR-RAH'-MAANIR-RAH'EEM

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ صَلّ عَلَى مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمّد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, send blessings on Muhammad and on the family of Muhammad,*
ALLAHUMMA S'ALE A'LAA MUHAMMAD WA AALE MUHAMMAD

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلهِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My God,*

ILAAHEE

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَذْهَلَنِي عَنْ إقامَةِ شُكْرِكَ تَتابُعُ طَوْلِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The uninterrupted flow of your favors has led me to be distracted from
expressing my thanks to you!*

AD'-HALANEE A'N IQAAMATI SHUK-RIKA TATAABUU' T'AW-LIKA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعْجَزَنِي عَنْ إحْصآءِ ثَنآئِكَ فَيْضُ فَضْلِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The overflowing flood of your blessings has made me incapable of
counting your praises*

WA AA'-JAZANEE A'N IH'-S'AAA-I THANAAA-IKA FAY-Z''U FAZ''-LIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَغَلَنِي عَنْ ذِكْرِ مَحامِدِكَ تَرادُفُ عَوآئِدِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The succession, one after the other ,of your kind acts has diverted me
from mentioning all your praises!*

WA SHAGHALANEE A'N D'IK-RI MAH'AAMIDIKA TARAADUFU A'WAAA-IDIK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعْيانِي عَنْ نَشْرِ عوارِفِكَ تَوالِي أَيدِيكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The continuous rush of your benefits has obstructed me from spreading
the news of your good favors!*

WA AA'-YAANEE A'N-NASH-RI A'WAARIFIKA TAWAALEEE AYAADEEK

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهذَا مَقامُ مَنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This is the position of him who*

WA HAD'AA MAQAAMU MANI

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْتَرَفَ بِسُبُوغِ النَّعْمآءِ، وَقابَلَها بِالتَّقْصِيرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Acknowledges the abundance of your favours, but responds with nothing
but shortcomings,*

AA'-TARAFA BISUBOOGHIN-NAA'-MAAA-I WA QAABALAHAA BIT-TAQ-S'EER

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَهِدَ عَلى نَفْسِهِ بِالإهْمالِ وَالتَّضْيِيعِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And is a witness to his own forgetfulness and negligence.*

WA SHAHIDA A'LAA NAF-SIHEE BIL-IH-MAALI WAT-TAZ''-YEEA'*-*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْتَ الرَّؤُوفُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And you are the gentle one, the Compassionate,*

WA ANTAR-RA-OOFUR-RAH'EEM

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْبَرُّ الْكَرِيمُ، الَّذِي لا يُخَيِّبُ قاصِدِيهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*the Good, the Generous one, who does not disappoint those who seek from
Him,*

AL-BAR-RUL-KAREEMUL-LAD'EE

LAA YUKHAY-YIBU QAAS'IDEEH

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَطْرُدُ عَنْ فِنآئِهِ آمِلِيهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Nor cast out from His courtyard, those who are expecting from Him!*

WA LAA YAT'-RUDU A'N FINAAA-IHEEE AAAMILEEHEE

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِساحَتِكَ تَحُطُّ رِحالُ الرَّاجِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In your gate are layed down the saddlebags of the hopeful*

BISAAH'ATIKA TAH'UT'-T'U RIH'AALUR-RAAJEENA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِعَرْصَتِكَ تَقِفُ آمالُ الْمُسْتَرْفِدِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And in your ground stand the hopes of the ones who are seeking help!*

WA BIA'R-S'ATIKA TAQIFU AAAMAALUL-MUS-TAR-FIDEEN

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلا تُقابِلْ آمالَنا بِالتَّخْيِيبِ وَالإياسِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So meet not our hopes by disappointing and disheartening us*

FALA TUQAABIL AAAMAALANAA BIT-TAKH-YEEBI WAL-EE-AAS

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تُلْبِسْنا سِرْبالَ الْقُنُوطِ وَالإِبْلاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and please do not clothe us not in the shirt of despair and dejection*

WA LAA TUL-BIS-NAA SIR-BAALAL-QUNOOT'I WAL-IB-LAAS

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَصاغَرَ عِنْدَ تَعاظُمِ آلائِكَ شُكْرِي، إلهِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My God, my thankfulness is very small before the magnitude of your
blessings,*

ILAAHEETAS'AAGHARA I'NDA TAA'AZ'UMI AAALAAA-IKA SHUK-REE

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَضَاءَلَ فِي جَنْبِ إكْرَامِكَ إيَّايَ ثَنآئِي وَنَشْرِي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And my praise and spreading of your news shrink beside your generosity
toward me!*

WA TAZ''AAA-ALA FEE JAMBI IK-RAAMIKA EE-YAAYA THANAAA-EE WA NASH-REE

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَلَّلَتْنِي نِعَمُكَ مِنْ أَنْوَارِ الإِيْمانِ حُلَلاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Your favors have wrapped me in the robes of the lights of faith,*

JAL-LALAT-NEE NIA'MUKA MIN ANWAARIL-EEMAANI H'ULALAA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَرَبَتْ عَلَيَّ لَطآئِفُ بِرِّكَ مِنَ الْعِزِّ كِلَلاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And your subtle goodness have let down over me delicate curtains of
dignity!*

WA Z''ARABAT A'LAY-YA LAT'AAA-IFU BIR-RIKA MINAL-I'Z-ZI KILALA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَلَّدْتَنِي مِنْكَ قَلائِدَ لا تُحَلُّ، وَطَوَّقْتَنِي أَطْوَاقَاً
لا تُفَلُّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Your kindness has put on me collars not to be moved and adorned me with
neck-rings not to be broken!*

WA QAL-LADAT-NEE MINANUKA QALAAA-IDA LAA TUH'AL-LU WA T'AW-WAQAT-NEEE
AT'-WAAQAL-LAA TUFAL

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَآلاؤُكَ جَمَّةٌ ضَعُفَ لِسانِي عَنْ إحْصائِها،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Your blessings are plentiful but my tongue is too weak to count them!*

FAAALAAAW-UKA JAM-MATUN Z''AU'FA LISAANEE A'N IH'-S'AAA-IHAA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَعْمآؤُكَ كَثِيرَةٌ قَصُرَ فَهْمِي عَنْ إدْرَاكِها فَضْلاً عَنِ
اسْتِقْصآئِها،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And your favours are many ,but my understanding of them falls short of
grasping them, let alone exhausting them!*

WA NAA'-MAAAW-UKA KATHEERATUN QAS'URA FAH-MEE A'N ID-RAAKIHAA FAZ''-LANA
A'NI AS-TIQ-S'AAA-IHAA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ لِي بِتَحْصِيلِ الشُّكْرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So how can I achieve giving thanks?*

FAKAY-FA LEE BITAH'-S'EELISH-SHUK-RI

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشُكْرِي إيَّاكَ يَفْتَقِرُ إلى شُكْر،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For my thanking you will require me to thank you for giving me the
capacity to Thank*

WA SHUKREEE EE-YAAKA YAF-TAQIRU ILAA SHUK-R

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلَّما قُلْتُ: لَكَ الْحَمْدُ، وَجَبَ عَلَيَّ لِذلِكَ أَنْ أَقُولَ:
لَكَ الْحَمْدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whenever I say, 'To you belongs all praise!', it becomes obligatory for
me to mention your gift that allows me to express this praise.*

FAKUL-LAMAA QUL-TU LAKAL-H'AM-DU WAJABA A'LAY-YA LID'ALIKA AN AQWLA
LAKAL-H'AM-D

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلهِي فَكَما غَذَّيْتَنا بِلُطْفِكَ، وَرَبَّيْتَنا بِصُنْعِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My God, as you have fed us through your gentleness and nurtured us
through your support*

ILAAHEE FAKAMAA GHAD'-D'AY-TANAA BILUT'-FIK WA RAB-BAY-TANAA BIS'UN-I'K

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَمِّمْ عَلَيْنَا سَوابِـغَ النِّعَمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*so also complete for us lavish favours,*

FATAM-MIM A'LAY-NAA SAWAABIGHAN-NIA'M

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَادْفَعْ عَنَّا مَكارِهَ النِّقَمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And remove from us unpleasant manners*

WA AD-FAA' A'N-NAA MAKAARIHAN-NIQAM

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتِنا مِنْ حُظُوظِ الدَّارَيْنِ أَرْفَعَهَا وَأَجَلَّها عاجِلاً
وَآجِلاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Please give us the best and the greatest shares of this world and the
hereafter, in both the immediate (blessings) and the ones to come*

WA AAATINAA MIN H'UZ'OOZ'ID-DAARAY-NI AR-FAA'HAA WA AJAL-LAHAA
A'AJILAW-WA AAAJILAA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ عَلى حُسْنِ بَلاَئِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To you belongs praise for your good trials*

WA LAKAL-H'AM-DU A'LAA H'US-NI BALAAA-IKA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسُبُوغِ نَعْمآئِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and the lavishness of your blessings*

WA SUBOOGHI NAA'-MAAA-IKA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَمْدَاً يُوافِقُ رِضاكَ، وَيَمْتَرِي الْعَظِيمَ مِنْ بِرِّكَ
وَنَداكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*a praise conforming to your good pleasure and attracting your great
goodness and magnanimity.*

H'AM-DAY-YUWAFIQU RIZ''AAKA WA YAM-TAREEL-A'Z'EEMA MIM-BIR-RIKA WA
NADAAKA

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عَظِيمُ يا كَرِيمُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O All-mighty, O All-generous!*

YAA A'Z'EEMU YAA KAREEMU

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِرَحْمَتِكَ يا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By your mercy, O Most Merciful of the merciful!*

BIRAH'-MATIKA YAA AR-H'AMARAAH'IMEEN


