Preface
=======

***In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

A Brief Biography of the Author
-------------------------------

The author is the venerable Shaykh Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali bin
al-Hasan bin Babawahy commonly known as Sadooq. He was among the Shia
scholars of the 4th century Hijri. He was also the chief of the clan, a
minaret of truth and religion, a leader of his time and in general such
a personality that no praise is sufficient to do justice with his actual
status.

The whole Muslim community is unanimous about his leadership and lofty
status. He was born through the prayers of the Imam of the time
(a.t.f.s.) and a written certificate was also issued by the Holy Imams
(a.s.) in his favor: “He is a very righteous and blessed jurisprudent.”

After this holy testimony whatever may be said or written about him will
definitely be less than what befits his position. His bounties have
surrounded all and his writings and books have benefited the scholars as
well as laymen. Each and every example of his knowledge and action
testifies to his lofty stature and greatness.

And one who undertakes a deep study of biographical books will conclude
that Shaykh Sadooq, on the basis of his merits and intellectual
excellence was the leader of all those who succeeded him. He is the
standard bearer of jurisprudence; he is the leader of tradition
scholars, the Imam of hadith narrators and a master of scholastic
theology.

All the qualities of excellence in knowledge, perfection of intellect,
goodness of understanding, a remarkable memory and sharp perception had
gathered in his person. He traveled far from the place of his birth in
order to collect traditions from the narrators of traditions and he
stayed with them to obtain the narrated reports from them. Among the
places he traveled to included Astarabad, Gurgan, Nishapur, Marawalruz,
Samarqand, Farghana, Balkh, Hamadan, Baghdad, Faid, Mecca and Medina.

It should be remembered that travel has many benefits. It is the best
way of perfecting the intellect and developing knowledge. In addition to
this it also includes spread of knowledge, propagation of religion and
dispersal of facts. And if there had not been such great personalities
in this community, who first acquired knowledge and then undertook to
spread it among others, a great many people would have remained ignorant
and mired in misguidance and deviation from religion.

And if the traveling personalities are intelligent and hardworking, they
would obtain from the scholars of other areas such points of knowledge
and recognition that they cannot gain from the scholars of their own
areas. They would also succeed in learning many things that they have
not learnt from their teachers. In the same way the people of the places
to which they travel would also learn from him things that they could
not learn from the local scholars.

Many debates take place between the traveling scholar and intelligentsia
of those places resulting in clearing many misunderstandings and
clarification of doubts. There are many other benefits that accrue from
the journey of religious interaction. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوْلَا نَفَرَ مِنْ كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ
لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا
إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Why should not then a company from every party from among them go
forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious?***[^1]

The venerable Shaykh Sadooq was an expert in this field who attained
priority among all in such a way that no one could claim to have got
even one-tenth of what he achieved. Actually he used to take lightly the
difficulties of his journeys and did not accord much importance to the
discomfort he had to face. He traveled through arid deserts; battle
ravaged areas, traversed deserts and crossed mountains. He passed
through foreign lands and alien cities at a time when a traveler was
susceptible to so many perils and the modes of travel were beyond
description.

Let us go through some details of his travel in order to gain a clearer
picture:

The author was born in the Iranian town of Qom. He attended classes of
scholars and gained knowledge from the learned of Qom. Thereafter upon
the insistence of the people of Rayy he shifted there for some time.
Then he visited the holy mausoleum of Imam Reza (a.s.) and returned
again to Rayy.

On his return journey from Nishapur he was surrounded by the elders of
Nishapur and the scholars stood before him in rows. They benefited from
the light of his wisdom and gained from his expertise in religious
sciences. In the same way, the author also profited by the knowledge of
great scholars of Nishapur like Abu Ali Husain bin Ahmad Baihaqi. He
also heard traditions from Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Abdewas
Nishapuri, Abu Mansur Ahmad bin Ibrahim Ibne Bakar al-Khauri, Abu Saeed
Al-Muallim Muhammad bin Al-Fadl bin Muhammad bin Ishaq Nishapuri, Abu
Tayyib Husain bin Ahmad bin Muhammad Razi, Abdullah bin Muhammad bin
Abdul Wahhab Sajazi and Abu Nasr Ahmad bin Ishaq Husain bin Ahmad bin
Ubaid.

During his stay in Nishapur, people visited him in groups. In his
interaction with these people, Shaykh Sadooq surmised that most of them
harbored doubts about the Twelfth Imam (a.t.f.s.) and were confused in
this regard. They did not acknowledge the evidences in this matter. So
he focused all his efforts in bringing them to the right path and
removing their misconceptions through his knowledge and scholarly
expertise. He undertook this mission in such a dedicated way that very
soon he earned the title of the greatest scholar of Khorasan.

After that he headed for Marawalruz. At this place he heard traditions
from a group of scholars, including Abul Husain Muhammad bin Ali bin
Shah Faqih and Abu Yusuf Rafe bin Abdullah bin Abdul Malik. Later he
turned his attention to Baghdad where he was accorded a warm welcome and
the elders of the Imamiyah sect heard traditions from him.

He in turn heard traditions from a group of scholars in Baghdad that
included personalities like Hasan bin Yahya Alawi Husaini, well-known as
Ibne Abi Tahir, Ibrahim bin Harun Haisati, Ali bin Thabit Dawalaibi and
Muhammad bin Umar al-Hafiz. Shaykh Sadooq visited Baghdad twice, once in
352 A.H. and again in 355 A.H.

On his return from the Holy House of Kaaba when he reached the city of
Faid, Abu Ali Ahmad bin Abi Ja’far Baihaqi narrated traditions to him.
After this, he entered Kufa and heard traditions from the Kufan scholars
including Muhammad bin Bukran Naqqash, Ahmad bin Ibrahim bin Harun Qazi
Fami in the Kufa mosque, Hasan bin Muhammad bin Saeed Hashmi Kufi Abul
Hasan Ali bin Isa Mujawar in Kufa mosque, Abul Qasim Hasan bin Muhammad
al-Sikri Mudakkar, Abu Zar Yahya bin Zaid bin al-Abbas Bazzaz and Abul
Hasan Ali bin al-Husain bin Sufyan bin Yaqoob al-Hamadani in their
residences.

The next town on agenda was Hamadan where he heard traditions from Qasim
bin Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abdwiya as-Siraj, Fadl bin al-Abbas Kindi and
Muhammad bin al-Fadl bin Zainuya Jallab Hamadani. Then he journeyed to
Balkh and noted own traditional reports from local scholars of that area
that included Husain bin Muhammad Ashai ar-Razi al-Adl, Husain bin Ahmad
Astarabadi, Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Umar Attar, Hakim Abu
Hamid Ahmad bin al-Husain bin Ali, Ubaidullah bin Ahmad al-Faqih, Tahir
bin Muhammad bin Yunus bin Haiwa al-Faqih and Abul Hasan Muhammad bin
Saeed Samarqandi al-Faqih.

The next place of his visit was Ilaq. In Ilaq he was related traditions
by Muhammad bin Amr bin Ali bin Abdullah Basri, Muhammad bin al-Hasan
bin Ibrahim al-Kharqi al-Katib, Abu Muhammad Bakr bin Ali bin Muhammad
bin al-Fadl Ash-Shashi al-Hakim and Abul Hasan Ali bin Abdullah Ibne
Ahmad Aswari.

During his stay there he was paid a visit by Sharifuddin Abu Abdullah,
popularly known as Ibne Numa who requested him to compile a book of
Islamic laws. Shaykh Sadooq accepted his advice and wrote his excellent
book titled Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih. From Ilaq the Shaykh went to
Samarqand and paid audience to traditions narrated by Abu Muhammad Abdus
bin Ali bin al-Abbas al-Juzjani, and Abu Asad Abdus Samad bin Abdush
Shaheed al-Ansari. During his visit to Farghana he heard narrations from
Tameem bin Abdullah al-Qarashi Abu Ahmad Muhammad bin Ja’far al-Bandaar
ash-Shafei al-Farghani, Ismail bin Mansur bin Ahmad al-Qasar and Abu
Ahmad Muhammad bin Abu Abdullah ash-Shafei.

All this was for the sake of remaining close to the Book of Allah and
the Family of Revelation, for defending their sanctity, fulfillment of
duties, defense of truth, dissemination of divine recognition and
propagation of faith.

Indeed in the history of Islam he has opened an illuminated and vast
chapter for himself in which prominently shine his writings and books.
The passage of time couldn’t destroy them because he was like a raging
sea of information and the greatest scholar of the science of traditions
whose writings illuminated all the corners of the world. In the matter
of Islamic jurisprudence he was an authentic point of reference.

Questions regarding various aspects of religion and religious laws were
sent to him and he replied to them in the best way. Najjasi has
mentioned something under the title of ‘Replies to problems’ in his book
Rijal which would further illustrate this point. He says: Shaykh Sadooq
had replied to questions received from Qazwin, Misr, Basra and Nishapur
and they are compiled in different books.

He also wrote a book in reply to the letter of Abu Muhammad Farsi, a
book in reply to a letter from Baghdad and yet another in reply to a
question received in the month of Ramadan. He wrote a letter to the
people of Rayy regarding the matter of Ghaibat (occultation).

In the same way he held discussions and debates in defense of the true
religion that were written down for the posterity. The best of such
debates is the one that was held in the court of King Ruknuddind
Buwayhid Dailami. It was held at a time when the fame of Shaykh Sadooq
had reached all the corners of the world. The ruler sent one of his
representatives to invite the Shaykh. When he reached the court he was
received by the King himself.

The King had him seated next to himself and paid exceeding honor to him.
Then he asked the Shaykh some very complex and difficult questions which
he replied with absolute satisfactory replies, illuminating the veracity
of the true religion. The King and other attendees accepted the
arguments and the opponents had no choice but to accept the proofs.

Among the books listed by Najjashi are: Account of the debate in the
court of Ruknuddaula, Account of another Debate, Account of Third
Debate, Account of Fourth Debate and Account of Fifth Debate etc. The
most important point of discussion in these gatherings was the veracity
of the Imamiyah faith and the matter of Ghaibat (occultation).

These debates and discussion were especially arranged for the Shia
people of Twelver (Ithna Ashari) Faith because they had, at that time
separated from the Imam who should have been present among them all the
time. The situation was such that even during the period of Minor
Occultation (Ghaibat Sughra) only the four special deputies in their
respective tenures had direct contact with the Holy Imams (a.s.).

Also even the learned and scholars of the community spoke of him using
titles and codes without openly disclosing his name and qualities etc.

So the majority of the people were very prone to all kinds of doubts and
illusions. Consequently the debates of scholars like Shaykh Sadooq went
a long way in clarifying doubts of the Shia populace and further
strengthened the foundation of Imamiyah faith on which would be built in
the near future an edifice of jurisprudence that shall last till the
Holy Imam (a.s.) himself reappears to openly take the reins of his
community.

The doubts prevalent in that age were further promoted by the
proliferation of sub-sects like the Zaidiyyah (who were particularly
strong), Kaisaniyah, Ismailia and Waqifiya who did not believe in any
Imam after Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.).

These sub-sects were becoming stronger by the day and some of them even
aligned with each other putting the true Imamiyah beliefs into a grave
danger and deviating a large number of Shia people from the faith of
their forefathers.

The author sensed this looming peril and stepped forward to correct the
situation and save the Shias from this deviation and annihilating
circumstances. If it was not for the efforts and debates of scholars
like Shaykh Sadooq, it was very likely that the majority of Shia people
would have succumbed to their doubts and completely washed their hands
from the belief of Imam Mahdi (a.s.).

History and traditions bear witness how these warriors of the field of
knowledge strived to save the people from perdition and the true
Imamiyah faith from destruction. History bears witness that how they
endeavored to remove doubts and clarified complex issues of religion,
especially the matter of Ghaibat, so that the Shia community may not
give up the authentic faith and stray to the path of deviation.

Valuable Writings
-----------------

The venerable Shaykh penned books on almost all religious sciences and
illuminated all the aspects of faith that were required by the Muslim
Ummah. All his writings are marked with a distinctive style and
arrangement. As mentioned by Shaykh Tusi, the number of his writings
reach to 300. However most of them were destroyed by the ravages of time
and circumstances and decayed in some corners of libraries. So what
remains is only the sketch of the original and those that are lost have
only left behind their names (titles).

Some of his books survived for a few hundred years and then suddenly
disappeared as if they were lifted up to the heavens. Only a part of his
huge wealth, comprising of not more than 20 books, has survived to this
day. Even these few books were littered with errors and differences in
various versions etc.

As a result of which they were neither accepted by the scholars nor
reached the standards of scholarship. It was so because those who were
involved in their reproduction were neither capable not committed to
this job.

Thus a situation appeared when despite the presence of these few books
they were of hardly any scholarly value.

This problem was not only with the books of Shaykh Sadooq. It was the
same for writings of other well-known scholars. For example in the case
of Ibne Quluwahy nothing remains from his writings except the book of
Kamiluz Ziyaraat, although it is confirmed that he had written dozens of
books. Shaykh Mufeed had written more than 200 books but only a few have
survived to this day. The same is the case with the writings of Shaykh
Tusi and Allamah Hilli.

In his compiled book, Tarihi has mentioned that 500 treatises written by
the hand of Allamah Hilli were found; which were in addition to the
books that people had access to. Ninety percent of Allamah Hilli’s
writings are lost as a result of centuries of conflict and bloodshed
between Muslim sects in which the greatest loss was suffered through
burning of libraries or throwing books into the sea/river.

After that the remaining books were destroyed by the Tatars. Thus our
written treasures were always prone to destruction at the hands of the
opponents. In the present age also some people approached us from far
away lands and took away portions of our written heritage in exchange of
a paltry sum.

Actually this matter is highlighted only to create an awareness how our
laxity and indifference in this matter has wreaked havoc with our
Islamic heritage, so that we do not repeat such mistakes.

Also most books that see the light of publication in this period are
such that they are printed very badly without any regard for correcting
textual errors and even lack proper sources from which it is taken so
that it can be compared with them. Booksellers and publishers who are in
this trade only for the sake of monetary gains have contributed largely
in worsening the situation.

When such books comes to a researcher he is absolutely defeated if he
wants to understand or confirm a word, a phrase or some lines. In spite
of all his efforts he would not be able to achieve his aim as the
publisher has not provided any clue from which version he has reproduced
it.

Though we must admit that some books stand out prominently as they were
fortunate to have been corrected, checked and edited by a great scholar.
May the Almighty bestow a great reward to them for such a service to
Islam. Only these are the books that can be relied upon.

Teachers and Students of the Author
-----------------------------------

Shaykh Sadooq (q.s.) has narrated traditions from a large number of
important traditionists whose count reaches to 250. One can refer to the
Foreword of Maani al-Akhbaar where all the names are listed.

In the same way around twenty learned scholars have narrated traditions
from Shaykh Sadooq, and they are introduced in the Foreword of Man Laa
Yahzrul Faqih.

Death and Place of Burial
-------------------------

**(From the introduction of Maani al-Akhbaar)**

Shaykh Sadooq (q.s.) passed away in the year 381 A.H. He was aged
seventy and odd years at that time. His magnificent tomb having a
towering dome is built near the mausoleum of Abdul Azeem Hasani in the
Rayy province. Many people visit the place seeking blessings and paying
respects. This mausoleum was first built by Fath Ali Shah Qachar in 1238
A.H. This was after the well-known miracle that convinced the king, the
queen and the courtiers.

The details of this incident are mentioned in Raudhat of Khwansari,
Qisasul Ulama of Tankabani, Tanqihul Maqaal of Mamaqani and Muntakhib
at-Tawarikh of Khorasani. Khwansari says: Among his miracles is one that
was seen in the present age and which a large number of people with
perception themselves witnessed and which people from faraway places
also saw is that the Shaykhs tomb which is situated in Rayy was damaged
with heavy rains as a result of which there developed a crack.

When renovation began and the gap was examined closely it was found that
it led to an underground chamber in which the last remains of the Shaykh
were placed. In this chamber, people saw an elegant dead body which was
half covered but the private parts were not exposed. It was a huge body
and the nails showed henna coloration and around the body lay twisted
dusty threads of the shroud cloth.

This news spread all over the city of Tehran and even reached Fath Ali
Shah Qachar who was the great grandfather of Nasiruddin Shah. This
happened around 1238 A.H. So the King, with perfectly good faith,
decided to see for himself and he reached the tomb with an entourage of
courtiers. Since the officers advised that King himself does not enter
the burial chamber, he deputed some reliable persons to go down and
report the facts to him. At last, the truth of the miracle was confirmed
for him and he finally ordered that the crack be filled and the tomb be
renovated in the most magnificent way.

I myself have heard about this incident from an eyewitness and some of
our senior scholars have mentioned this event in their books.

Mamqani has quoted this incident from the personification of justice and
truth, Sayyid Ibrahim Lawasani Tehrani’s Tanqihul Maqaal.

[^1]: Surah Taubah 9:122


