Chapter 7: Account of the death of Prophet Musa, occultation of Successors and Divine Proofs till the period of Prophet Isa
===========================================================================================================================

**Chapter 7: Account of the death of Prophet Musa (a.s.) and account of
occultation of Successors and Divine Proofs till the period of Prophet
Isa (a.s.)**

1 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan: Narrated to us Hasan bin
Ali Sukkari: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Zakariya al-Basri: Narrated to
us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ammarah from his father that he said: I said
to As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.): Tell me about the passing away
of Musa bin Imran (a.s.). He replied:

“When the end of Musa (a.s.) approached and the angel of death came and
said, O Kalimullah (the one with whom Allah conversed)! Assalaamo
A’laikum, Musa (a.s.) responded, “Wa a’laikas salaam! Who are you?” The
angel replied, “I am the angel of death.” He asked, “Why have you come?”
He replied, “To take your soul.” Musa (a.s.) asked, “From where will you
seize it?” He replied, “From your mouth.” Musa (a.s.) asked, “How will
you seize it from the mouth when I have conversed with the Almighty with
it?” The angel replied, “All right! I will seize it from your hands.”
Musa (a.s.) exclaimed, “How will you seize it from my hands when these
hands have held the Torah?”

The angel said, “I will seize it from your feet.” Musa (a.s.) said, “I
have gone to Mount Toor on these very feet to talk with My Lord.” The
angel said, “Then I will take it from your eyes.” Musa (a.s.) said, “I
have always looked with these eyes hopefully towards my Lord’s Mercy.”
The angel said, “Then from your ear.” Musa (a.s.) said, “I have heard my
Lord’s Words with these very ears.” Then Almighty Allah revealed to the
angel, “Do not seize his soul until he himself desires it.” So the angel
of death went back and Musa (a.s.) lived for quite a long time
thereafter. Then one day he called Yusha, gave his will to him, made him
his legatee and asked him to keep the will a secret till the time of his
(Musa’s) death.

He also asked Yusha to pass on the Wasiyyat (Will) at the time of his
(Yusha’s) death to someone else as desired by Allah. Saying this Musa
(a.s.) disappeared from his people. During these days of his absence he
once met a man digging a grave. Musa (a.s.) told him that he would like
to help him in digging that grave. He said, ‘Why not?’ Musa (a.s.)
engaged himself in the digging. Soon the grave was completed by them.
Then Musa (a.s.) lay down in it sideways to see how it feels.

At that moment the Almighty Allah showed him his place in Paradise. So
he said: “My Lord, call me towards You.” So the angel of death seized
his holy soul then and there. Then he buried him in the same grave and
closed it by filling it with earth. That man digging the grave was
actually the angel of death in the shape of a man.

This happened in Tiyah. An announcer announced from the heavens that
Musa Kalimullah (a.s.) has died and who is it that does not die?”

Narrated to me my father from my grandfather from his father (a.s.)
that:

The Messenger of Allah (S) was asked about the location of the grave of
Prophet Musa (a.s.). He replied: “Near the highway adjacent to the red
hillock.”

After Musa (a.s.), Yusha bin Nun (a.s.) became the leader of Bani
Israel. He was always busy in their affairs and was bearing all kinds of
difficulties caused to him by the kings of those days. Three of those
kings died. Thereafter the condition of Yusha (a.s.) became strong and
be became independent in the matter of law and order (giving orders to
do or to refrain from doing things).

Then two hypocrites of the community of Musa (a.s.) conspired and took
Safra daughter of Shuaib, the wife of Musa (a.s.) with them and revolted
against Yusha bin Nun (a.s.) with 100000 men. Yusha bin Nun (a.s.)
overpowered them. Many groups of them were killed and those who remained
alive fled by the Divine Order and Safra daughter of Shuaib became a
captive. Yusha (a.s.) told her, “I am leaving you in this world so that
in the other world when I meet Musa (a.s.) the Prophet of Allah, I may
complain to him about you and your community about what I have suffered
due to you.”

Safra said, “By Allah! If Paradise is made open to me so that I can
enter it I will feel ashamed of seeing there Musa (a.s.) the Prophet of
Allah, as I have torn his veil and thereafter I revolted against his
legatee.”

The Imams and leaders that succeeded Yusha bin Nun for four hundred
years till the time of Prophet Dawood (a.s.) remained in concealment.
They were eleven in all and during each of their times the people used
to visit them and obtain guidance. Finally it was the turn of the last
of them. He remained away from the people then he reappeared and gave
the glad tidings of the advent of Prophet Dawood (a.s.).

He also foretold that it is only Dawood (a.s.) who would cleanse the
earth from Jaloot and his army and that the deliverance of the people
was dependant only upon his reappearance. So the people began to await
for him. When the time of Dawood (a.s.) arrived, he had four brothers
and his father was very much advanced in age. Among them Dawood (a.s.)
was the bearer of the divine message and prophethood. He was the
youngest among his brothers. While they were unaware that it is Dawood
for whom they were waiting and one who will cleanse the earth from
Jaloot and his army. And the Shias of Dawood (a.s.) had learnt that he
has already taken birth and reached maturity. Whereas those people used
to see and meet him but they did not know that it was him.

After that one day Dawood, his brothers and their father went out to
take part in the battle organized by Taloot. But Dawood (a.s.) did not
accompany them saying: In what way would it help me from this aspect?
The father and brothers of Dawood (a.s.) made fun of him and he began to
graze the sheep belonging to his father. When the battle intensified and
people faced terrible hardships, the father of Dawood (a.s.) came to him
and said: Take some food and provisions for your brothers so that
through it they may be able to defeat the enemies. Dawood (a.s.) was of
a short stature and there was scanty hair on his head.

But from the aspect of conscience and morals he was absolutely pure.
Thus when he came to the battlefield he saw that all the people of his
side were close to each other and all of them had returned to their
centers. When he passed by a stone it spoke up in a loud voice: “O
Dawood, take me with you and through me slay Jaloot. Indeed I have been
created to kill him.” So Dawood (a.s.) picked it up and put it in his
bag that he used for carrying stones when he was grazing sheep and
goats. When he entered the army he found that those people considered
Jaloot very great and they thought that it was no use trying to subdue
him. So he said: “Why do you consider it a difficult proposition.

By Allah if I were to see him, I would slay him.” The people began to
discuss about him and at last he was taken to Taloot. Taloot asked him:
O young man, how much strength do you posses and how have you tested
yourself? Sometime a lion attacks my flock and carries off an animal. So
I used to chase the lion, catch it by its head, pry open its jaws to
release my animal. Now the Almighty Allah had previously revealed to
Taloot that none can slay Jaloot except one who can wear Taloot’s coat
of mail with a perfect fit.

So he called for his coat of armor and when Prophet Dawood (a.s.) wore
it, it fitted him perfectly. Taloot was amazed and so were the people of
Bani Israel who were present at the scene. Taloot said: It is hoped that
Allah will kill Jaloot through him. When it was morning and the people
met him, Dawood (a.s.) said: Show Jaloot to me. When Jaloot was shown to
him, he took that stone and shot it at Jaloot. It hit him between the
eyes and split his head upto the brain. Jaloot crashed down from his
mount.

There was a furor in the people that Dawood has killed Jaloot and in
this way they made Dawood their king. Gradually the influence of Taloot
waned and people gathered around Dawood (a.s.). The Almighty Allah
revealed the Psalms upon him, taught him the skill of working iron and
made the iron soft for him. Allah ordered the mountains and birds to
sing the divine praises with Dawood (a.s.). The Almighty Allah gave him
such a melodious voice that no one had ever heard such a voice. He also
bestowed him the strength for the worship of God and made him His
prophet in Bani Israel.

And the method of the Qaim shall also be such. The Almighty Allah will
give him such a standard that it will spread among the people on its own
and the Almighty will bestow it the power of speech and it will call
out: O Wali of Allah, eliminate the enemies of Allah. And he shall have
a sword that will be concealed in the scabbard. When it would be the
time of his reappearance he will take it out and the Almighty Allah will
also provide it the power of speech.

It will call out: O Wali of Allah, rise up! Because it does not behove
that you keep sitting during confrontation with the enemies of God. Thus
he would arise and set out and wherever he comes across the enemies of
Allah he shall slay them. He shall enforce the divine laws and apply the
prescribed penalties. And he shall judge and rule according to the
divine commands.”

Regarding this narrated to me Abul Hasan Ahmad bin Thabit Dawalaini in
Baghdad from Muhammad bin al-Fadl Nahvi from Muhammad bin Ali bin Abdus
Samad al-Kufi from Ali bin Asim from Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa from his
father from his forefathers from Husain bin Ali (a.s.) from the
Messenger of Allah (S) in a lengthy traditions at the end of which he
has mentioned that which I have included in the chapter of traditions of
the Messenger of Allah (S) proving Nass on His Eminence, Qaim (a.s.) and
(also) that he is the twelfth Imam.

After that Dawood (a.s.) wanted to appoint Sulaiman (a.s.) as his
successor because Allah, the Mighty and the High had revealed to him
thus. When he announced this to Bani Israel they raised a clamor that he
was appointing a young man over them while there were others more
advanced in age. Dawood (a.s.) summoned the leaders of Bani Israel and
told them: Your talks have reached me. So show me your staffs and
whosever’s staff fructifies will be the master of affair after me. They
said: We agree to this proposal.

Dawood (a.s.) said: Now each of you write your name on your staff. So
they wrote their names on their respective sticks. Then Sulaiman (a.s.)
brought his staff and wrote down his name upon it. Then all the sticks
were put in a room and the door was closed. The leaders of Bani Israel
kept watch (for the night). In the morning Dawood (a.s.) conducted the
Morning Prayer and then stepped forward and opened the door. They took
out the sticks and it was seen that all had leaves while the stick of
Sulaiman (a.s.) had fructified.

So they gave it to Dawood (a.s.). Dawood (a.s.) then examined Sulaiman
(a.s.) in the presence of Bani Israel and asked him: “Tell me son, what
is it that gives coolness?” He replied: “Allah’s forgiveness of the
people and the mutual forgiveness among the people.” Dawood (a.s.)
asked, “What is it that is sweet?” He replied: “Love, and it is the soul
of Allah among the people.” Dawood (a.s.) laughed in joy, brought him to
Bani Israel and said: “He is my successor among you after me.”

After that Sulaiman (a.s.) kept his matter confidential. He got married
and kept himself away from his followers for a long time. One day his
wife said: “May my parents be sacrificed on you, how perfect your habits
are! How fragrant you are! And I don’t find in you any trait or habit
that I may dislike, except that you live depending on my father. Thus if
you go to the market and with the help of Allah make effort to earn a
livelihood I am sure Allah will not fail you. Sulaiman (a.s.) said: By
Allah neither have I done any work so far nor can I do anything
properly. But anyway, he set out for the market and spent the whole day
roaming here and there without earning anything.

At last he returned home and told his wife that he was unable to make
any money. “No problem,” she said, “Try again tomorrow.” Again the next
day he departed to the market, spent the whole day roaming about but
again did not have any luck. When he returned and told his wife about it
she said, “If Allah wills, something will happen tomorrow.” On the third
day, after walking for a long time he reached the river banks where he
met a fisherman and said to him: “I can assist you in your work, after
which you can pay me something.” “Why not?” said the fisherman. So he
began to work with the fisherman who at the end of the day paid him in
kind with a couple of fishes.

He took up the fishes and thanked and praised Allah for the same. Then
he cut open one of the fishes to find that it contained a jewel (ring).
He took it out and pocketed it praising and thanking the Almighty. Then
he cleaned up the two fishes and brought them home. His wife was much
pleased and she asked him to invite her parents so that they may know
that he has started earning.

So they were invited, and they arrived and began to eat with them. After
the dinner Sulaiman (a.s.) asked, “Do you know who I am?” “No,” they
replied, “Except that we have seen nothing but goodness from you.” Thus
when he took up his ring in his hand the wind and birds began to move
towards him and his rulership became apparent. After that he took his
wife and her parents and set out for the city of Istakhar. When he
reached there his followers gathered around him and began to talk about
the glad tidings of his arrival. Thus the Almighty Allah brought them
out from the confusion of his occultation.

When his end approached, according to Allah’s command he appointed Asif
bin Barkhiya as his legatee and successor. Asif therefore remained among
them and the followers continued to interact with him and sought
religious guidance from him. Then the Almighty Allah made Asif also go
into occultation and after a considerable period brought him back to the
people among whom he lived for a long time.

Finally when he bid adieu, the people asked when they shall meet again.
Upon this he replied: We shall now meet at the Sirat Bridge, and then he
disappeared from them according to Divine will. As a result of his
occultation calamities intensified on Bani Israel and Nebuchadnezzar
gained political power upon them. He used to eliminate whoever he could
find and those who managed to escape were pursued and their children and
family members were made captives.

Thus he selected four persons from the family of Yahooda whom he had
imprisoned, among whom Prophet Daniyal was also included and he selected
Uzair from the progeny of Harun (a.s.). Since he was younger of the two
he remained under his control and the other people of Bani Israel
continued to suffer the worst of the tortures. The Proof of God, Prophet
Daniyal (a.s.) remained a prisoner of Nebuchadnezzar for ninety years.
Thus he learnt of his excellence and superiority and he came to know
that Bani Israel was awaiting for his advent and uprising and that they
hope for deliverance and victory at his hands.

So he ordered that he should be kept in a huge pit along with a lion so
that it may make him a morsel of death, but the lion did not even go
near him. After that he ordered that he should be starved to death. But
the Almighty Allah sent him food and water through one of His prophets.
Thus Prophet Daniyal used to fast during the days and end his fast in
the evening with the food that was sent to him. During that time
hardships increased on his supporters and followers, his people and
those who were in anticipation of his advent and most of them, due to
the excessive prolongation of occultation got deviated from their
religion.

When it was time for the end of the hardships of Prophet Daniyal and his
people, Nebuchadnezzar saw in dream that army after army of angels is
descending from the heavens and entering the pit in which Daniyal was
held. Each of them was greeting him and giving the glad tidings of
deliverance and success. In the morning he was ashamed for the treatment
he had meted out to Daniyal and he ordered him to be taken out from the
pit. When he was brought out to him, he asked for his forgiveness for
having imprisoned for crime and for having tortured him so much. After
that he handed over the reins of his government to him. He was also
entrusted to judge cases of litigation.

Thus the people of Bani Israel, who were in hiding so far, came out and
assembled around Prophet Daniyal (a.s.) because they were sure that it
was the time of deliverance and comfort. Thus Daniyal (a.s.) remained in
this condition for sometime and at last departed for the eternal abode
entrusting all the affairs of the kingdom to Prophet Uzair (a.s.). Now
the people congregated around him and gained proximity from him. They
obtained religious guidance and instructions from him.

After that the Almighty Allah kept Uzair in occultation from them for a
hundred years and then made him reappear once more. The divine
representatives that came after him also remained in concealment. In
this way hardships increased upon Bani Israel till Yahya bin Zakariya
(a.s.) took birth. He continued to grow upto the time of the declaration
of his prophethood which was at the time when he was only seven years
old.

He came before the people and addressed them. After extolling the praise
and glorification of the Almighty he warned them of divine chastisement
and he told them that the hardships faced by the righteous people were
due to the sins of Bani Israel and the good end is for those who are
pious. He also informed them that Jesus Christ will appear after twenty
odd years. When Christ was born the Almighty Allah kept his birth a
secret and his presence in concealment because when Lady Maryam
conceived him she took him away from the people to a place and later
Prophet Zakariya and her aunt followed her footprints and reached there.

The two of them chastised her while Maryam had already delivered the
baby and she was saying: Oh, would that I had died before this, and had
been a thing quite forgotten! But the Almighty Allah bestowed the power
of speech to His Eminence Christ (a.s.) in order to justify Maryam and
to establish the proof and evidence. When Jesus declared his mission the
troubles and restrictions increased on Bani Israel and the tyrant rulers
suppressed him till happened what the Almighty Allah has told us about.
After that Shamoon bin Harun and other followers of Isa (a.s.) went into
hiding and reached an island and began to spend their lives there.

The Almighty Allah brought out springs of potable water, created all
kinds of fruits for them and also provided them with animals. Allah sent
a particular type of fish towards them. It was called Qumud and had
neither flesh nor bone. It consisted only of skin and blood. The
honeybee was made to mount it and these fishes brought the honeybees to
the Island. The bees made honeycombs on the trees of the island and soon
there was plenty of honey there. Nothing about Isa (a.s.) was concealed
from the people of that island.”


