Chapter 8: Prophecies made by Isa about the advent of Prophet Muhammad
======================================================================

**Chapter 8: Prophecies made by Isa (a.s.) about the advent of Prophet
Muhammad Mustafa (S)**

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani (r.a.):
Narrated to us Abu Ahmad Abdul Aziz bin Yahya bin Ahmad bin Isa
al-Jaludi al-Basri in Basra: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Atiya
ash-Shami: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Amr bin Saeed al-Basri: Narrated
to us Hisham bin Ja’far from Hammad bin Abdullah bin Sulaiman - scholar
of divine books - that:

“I have read in Injeel that: O Isa, struggle in My matter and work and
do not be shortcoming in it. And listen and obey, O son of the chaste
and virgin lady, you have not been created with the union of sexes. I
have created you as a sign for the worlds. Therefore serve only Me and
trust Me only. Take up the book strongly. Explain to the Syrian people
in the Syriac language and convey My message to them that indeed only I
am that God Who is eternal and permanent and there is no decline for Me.

Accept the truth of the prophet who will be the owner of the camel, coat
of mail, crown (turban), shoes and the staff. He would have large eyes
and a wide forehead. His cheeks will be chubby and his nose will be
raised from the middle and have small nostrils. His upper and lower
front teeth will be wide and his neck will be shinning like a silver
pitcher as if light is coming out of it. He will have hair on his body
from the chest upto the navel. His belly and chest will not have any
hair.

He would be wheat-complexioned. From the chest upto his belly he will be
having soft delicate hair. His palms and feet will be hard and short. If
his steps turn they will turn both together and if he walks he would do
so with very firm steps. If he is with a group of people he would be the
most prominent among them. His perspiration on his face will shine like
pearls and the fragrance of musk will be emanating out of it. There is
none like him neither before him nor after.

His purified body will be fragrant and he will have many wives. His
progeny shall be less but it will be through Mubareka (Lady Zahra) who
is having a special house in Paradise, in which there shall neither be
any sorrow nor pain. In the last age this Mubareka will be under a
guardian like your mother was under the guardianship of Zakariya. She
would have two sons who shall be martyred.

The speech of this prophet is Quran and his religion is Islam and I am
the one who grants peace and security. Thus Tooba shall be for one who
witness his time, see the period of his prophethood and listen to his
words. Isa (a.s.) said: O Lord, what is Tooba? He was told, “It is a
tree I have myself planted in Paradise and which provides shade to all
the gardens. Its roots are from Rizwan and its source is from the water
of Tasneem spring. The coolness of this spring is like coolness of
camphor and its taste is that of wine. One who drinks a mouthful of it
will never feel thirsty again.

Isa (a.s.) said: O Lord, give me to drink from it. He was told: It is
prohibited for all till that prophet does not drink from it and it is
prohibited for all nations till the nation of that prophet does not
drink from it. O Isa, I am going to raise you towards Myself and in the
last period of time I will make you descend to the earth so that you may
witness the strange phenomena of this Ummah and you shall see that they
would be around that accursed Dajjal. I shall make you descend at the
time of prayer so that you may pray with them. This Ummah is the one
that is eligible for mercy.

The Christ had also gone into occultation from his community a number of
times and during those times he used to travel in the land. In that
period his followers and community did not have any information about
him. When he came out of the occultation he appointed Shamoon bin Hamoon
as his legatee and when Shamoon also departed from the world the divine
proofs that came after him remained in occultation.

People became anxious to meet him and their hardships increased.
Religion was being destroyed, rights were trespassed, obligatory and
recommended practices were eliminated. People became deviated and
leaving the straight path began to go astray without realizing what the
truth is and what the falsehood is. This occultation lasted for two
hundred and fifty years.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar; and Saad bin Abdullah, all
of them from Ayyub bin Nuh from Abdullah bin al-Mughairah from Saad bin
Abi Khalaf from Muawiyah bin Ammar that he said: Abu Abdullah (a.s.)
said:

“People remained without an apparent divine proof for two hundred and
fifty years after Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.).”

3 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yahya
al-Attar from Yaqoob bin Yazid from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Saad bin
Abi Khalaf from Yaqoob bin Shuaib from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Between Isa (a.s.) and Muhammad (S) there was a gap of five hundred
years out of which for two hundred and fifty years there was neither a
prophet nor any learned one from Allah who was apparent. I (the
narrator) asked: What did the people follow? The Imam replied: They
followed the religion of Isa (a.s.). I asked: What was their actual
condition? He replied: They were believers. Then he said: The earth
never remains devoid of a learned one.”

Among those who roamed in the lands in search of divine proof was Salman
Farsi (r.a.). He continued to move from one learned to another and moved
from one jurisprudent to another and remained in the pursuit of divine
secrets. He gained guidance through narrations. He awaited for the Qaim,
the Qaim and the chief of the formers and the latters, Muhammad (S) for
four hundred years till he received the glad tidings of his birth. When
he became certain of deliverance he set out for Tahama and he was taken
a captive there.


