Chapter 9: Report of Salman Farsi regarding the advent of Prophet Muhammad
==========================================================================

**Chapter 9: Report of Salman Farsi (r.a.) regarding the advent of
Prophet Muhammad (S)**

1 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yahya
al-Attar; and Ahmad bin Idrees, all of them from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Isa from Muhammad bin Ali bin Mahziyar from his father who asked from
Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.):

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, will you not tell us what was the reason
Salman Farsi accepted Islam?

He replied: my father (a.s.) informed me that one day Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.), Salman Farsi, Abu Zar and a group of people from Quraish had
congregated at the tomb of the Holy Prophet (S) when Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said to Salman Farsi: O Aba Abdillah will you not tell us the
beginning of your story? Salman said: By Allah O Amirul Momineen, if
anyone other than you had asked I would not have told anything. I was a
resident of Shiraz and the son of a farmer and my father loved me very
much.

One day I was going with my father to attend a festival of the people of
that town when by chance we passed by a monastery in which a man was
screaming: I testify that there is no god except Allah and that Isa is
the spirit of Allah and Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. Thus the
description and praise of Muhammad permeated my flesh and blood and
after that I was interested in neither eating nor drinking. My mother
asked: What is wrong with you son, that today you did not prostrate at
the time of the rising of the sun? When I opposed her she fell silent.
When I went to my room I saw a letter hanging from the roof. I asked my
mother what that letter was.

She said: O Ruzbah when we returned home after celebrating our festival,
we found it hanging from the roof. So you don’t go near it. If you do so
your father will kill you. Salman said that he continued to argue with
his mother. When night fell and my parents went to sleep, I arose and
took up the letter. I saw written therein: In the Name of Allah the
Beneficent the Merciful. It is a covenant from Allah with Adam that He
will create a prophet from his loins who will be named Muhammad.

He will teach the best of morals and restrain the people from
idol-worship. O Ruzbah, go to the legatee of Isa, accept the Faith and
leave the Majoosi[^1]1 religion. He (Salman) says that after this he
screamed and fell down unconscious and his trouble increased. He says:
Thus my father became aware of this and he cast me into a deep pit. He
said: Come back to your religion or I would kill you. I told him: You do
whatever you like with me. The love of Muhammad will not leave my heart.
Salman says: Before reading that letter I didn’t know Arabic and Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime taught me this language from this day. He says: I
remained in that pit and they used to throw small pieces of bread to me.

When my matter became prolonged I raised up my hands to the heavens and
prayed: O my Lord, You have put the love of Muhammad and his legatee in
my heart. So I beg you in their name that You hasten my deliverance and
take me out from the condition I am in. At that moment a person came to
me dressed in white. He said: Ruzbah, get up. After that he held my hand
and took me to the monastery.

I began to recite: I testify that there is no god except Allah and Isa
is the spirit of Allah and that Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. The
person who resided in the monastery came to me and asked: Are you
Ruzbah? “Yes,” said I. He said: Go up. I went up and continued to serve
him for two complete years. When it was the time of his death he said: I
am going to die. I asked him: On whom are you leaving me? He said: I
don’t know anyone who follows my beliefs except a monk who lives in
Antioch. Thus if you meet him, convey my salutations to him and give him
this tablet. Saying this he gave me a tablet.

When he died I gave him the funeral bath, shrouded and buried him and
taking the tablet set out for Antioch. When I reached the monastery in
Antioch I began to recite: I testify that there is no god except Allah
and Isa is the spirit of Allah and that Muhammad is the beloved of
Allah. The resident of the monastery came to me and said: Are you
Ruzbah? “Yes,” said I. He said: Go up. I went up and continued to serve
him for two complete years. When it was the time of his death he said: I
am going to die. I asked him: On whom are you leaving me? He said: I
don’t know anyone who follows my beliefs except a monk who lives in
Alexandria.

Thus when you meet him, convey my salutations to him and give him this
tablet. Saying this he gave me a tablet. When he died I gave him the
funeral bath, shrouded and buried him and taking the tablet reached the
monastery he had indicated. Upon reaching there I began to chant: I
testify that there is no god except Allah and Isa is the spirit of Allah
and that Muhammad is the beloved of Allah. Thus that monk came to me and
asked: Are you Ruzbah? “Yes,” said I. He said: Go up.

I went up and continued to serve him for two complete years. When it was
the time of his death he said: I am going to die. I asked him: On whom
are you leaving me? He said: I don’t know anyone in the world who
follows my beliefs and indeed the birth of Muhammad bin Abdullah bin
Abdul Muttalib is near. So if you meet him, convey my salutations to him
and give this tablet to him. When he died I gave him the funeral bath,
shrouded and buried him and set out taking the tablet with me. I met a
group of people and I offered to serve them if they gave me food and
water and they agreed.

When their mealtime arrived, they tied up a sheep and beat it to death.
After that they prepared Kebab with some of the meat and some they
roasted red on the fire. When I declined to partake it, they said: Eat
it! I told them: I am a monk and a young man that spent his life in a
monastery and monks do not eat meat. They began to beat me and were
about to take my life when some of them said: Wait till the wine
arrives. And know that he would not take wine also. When they brought
the wine I said: I am a monk and young man who lived in a monastery and
the people of monastery do not imbibe wine.

They tied me up and decided to eliminate me. I said: O people, do not
beat me or put me to death as I have confessed to be a slave of yours.
And I agreed that I was a bondman of one of them. That person saved me
from those people and sold me to a Jew for three hundred dirhams. Salman
says that the Jew asked me about my story and I told him about it and
said that I had no fault except that I loved Muhammad and his legatee.
The Jew said: Then know that I hate you and Muhammad. He took me outside
his house where there was a huge quantity of sand. He said: O Ruzbah, if
you are not able to shift all the sand till the morning next I will
surely kill you. Salman says: I spent the whole night shifting that sand
from one place to another.

When I was absolutely exhausted, I raised my hands to the sky and
prayed: O my Lord, You have filled up my heart with the love for
Muhammad and his legatee. So I ask you in their names, please hasten my
deliverance and save me from this terrible situation. So Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime sent a windstorm that transferred all the sand to the
spot that Jew had specified. In the morning the Jew was surprised that I
had shifted all the sand.

Then he said: O Ruzbah, since you have proved to be a sorcerer, I shall
throw you out of this town so that you may not destroy the locals. Thus
he externed me from there and sold me to a kind-hearted lady. She was
very kind to me. She had an orchard which she put at my disposal and
said: It is for you, you can take whatever you want from it or give to
anyone or spend in charity.

Salman says that: I lived in that orchard for a very long time. One day
I was sitting there when a group of seven persons shaded by a cloud came
towards me. I said to myself: By Allah all of them cannot be prophets
but one of them is definitely a prophet. They moved forward and entered
the orchard and the piece of cloud was also moving with them. The group
that entered the orchard comprised of the Messenger of Allah (S), Amirul
Momineen (a.s.), Abu Zar, Miqdad, Aquil bin Abi Talib, Hamza bin Abdul
Muttalib and Zaid bin Haritha.

They entered the orchard and began to eat the date fruits that had
fallen from the trees. The Messenger of Allah (S) was saying: Eat the
fallen date fruits and do not spoil anything that belongs to these
people. So I went to my owner and said: Please give me a tray of fresh
dates. She said: You can have six. Salman says that he took up a tray of
fresh dates and said to himself: If one of them is a prophet he would
not eat Sadaqah and he would not mind eating a present. So I kept the
tray before them and said: This is Sadaqah. The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: Eat it.

But he himself abstained from eating as did Amirul Momineen (a.s.),
Aquil bin Abi Talib and Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib. Zaid was told to go
ahead and eat. I said to myself that this was the first sign of
prophethood. Then I went to my mistress and said: Give me another tray.
She said: You can have six. Salman says that I picked up a tray and came
to them and placed the fresh dates before them and I said: This is a
present. The Messenger of Allah (S) stretched out his hand and uttered:
In the Name of Allah…eat.

All of them began to eat the dates. So I said to myself: This is the
second sign. After that when I moved towards his back the Holy Prophet
(S) became attentive to me and said: Ruzbah, are you looking for the
mark of prophethood? “Yes,” I said. He displayed his shoulders and I saw
the mark of prophethood on him and above it were some hair. Salman says
that he fell down at the feet of the Messenger of Allah (S) and began to
kiss them. He (the Prophet) said: Ruzbah, go to that lady and say that
Muhammad bin Abdullah is asking if she would sell this slave to him.

So I went to her and said: Muhammad bin Abdullah is asking if you would
sell this slave to him? She replied: I will not sell the slave except in
exchange of four hundred date trees two hundred of which should be
yellow and two hundred golden. Salman says that when he conveyed this to
the Holy Prophet (S) he said: How easy is that which she has asked. Then
he said: Arise, O Ali and gather all the date seeds. Ali gathered all
the seeds and sowed them in the ground. The Prophet told him to pour
water on them which Ali did. He had hardly finished watering that the
trees grew up so much that they began to strike one another.

Then the Prophet told me to go to the lady and tell her: Muhammad bin
Abdullah is saying: Take your thing and give me mine. Salman went and
told the lady. She came out, saw the trees and said: By Allah, I will
not sell him unless all the trees become yellow. Salman says: Jibraeel
descended and touched his wings to those trees. All of them became
yellow. Then the Messenger told me: Go and tell her: Muhammad is saying:

Take your thing and give me mine. Salman says that when I conveyed this
to her she said: By Allah, one of those trees is more precious to me
than your Muhammad and you. I said: By Allah, a day in the company of
Muhammad is more precious to me than you and everything including you.
After that the Messenger of Allah (S) emancipated me and named me
Salman.”

The author says: The name of Salman was Ruzbah Ibne Khasboodan and he
had never prostrated to the sun. He always prostrated to Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime. Since the Qibla direction towards which he had been
commanded to pray was in the east, his parents thought that he was also
prostrating to the sun like them.

Salman was the legatee of the legatee of Isa (a.s.) and he was entrusted
with the burden that terminates at the successorship of the Imams. The
name of Isa’s legatee was Aabi and some people say that it was His
Eminence, Abu Talib. This group has erred at this point because when
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was asked about the last successor of Isa (a.s.)
he said: ‘Aabi’. But people mistook it for ‘Abi’ which in Arabic means:
My father. And Burdah has also mentioned this.

[^1]: Fire worship


