Chapter 10: Report about Quss bin Saidatul Iyadi
================================================

Quss bin Saidatul Iyadi was considered unique from the aspect of his
knowledge and wisdom. He knew the Holy Prophet (S) and was awaiting his
advent. He used to say: Indeed, there is a religion with Allah which is
better than the religion that you follow. The Holy Prophet (S) has
invoked divine mercy upon him and said: He shall be raised up on
Judgment Day as a separate nation.

1 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan bin Mahboob from Alaa bin
Zarin from Muhammad bin Muslim from Abu Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“One day the Messenger of Allah (S) was sitting in the courtyard of the
Kaaba and it was the day when Mecca had been conquered. In the meantime
a delegation came to him and saluted him. “To which tribe do you
belong?” “We are a delegation from Bakr bin Wail tribe,” they replied.
“Do have any news about Quss bin Saidatul Iyadi?” the Messenger asked.
“Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S),” they replied. “What happened to him?”
asked the Prophet. They said, “He has passed away.” The Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “All the praise is for the One Who gives death and life.

Every soul has to taste death. As if I can see Quss bin Saidatul Iyadi
in the market of Ukaz atop a camel and telling people: Assemble here,
and when you are assembled, keep quiet; and when you are quiet, listen
and when you listen, try to understand; and when you understand,
remember it and consider it truth. Know that one that lives, ultimately
dies and loses the life and one who loses life never comes back.

Doubtlessly there are hidden secrets in the heavens and lessons for the
earth. There is a high roof upon the sky and the earth is a cradle
spread out. The planets are in motion and the night is rotating and the
sea water is moving in waves. Quss swears that all this is not play and
sport and there are astonishing facts behind it. Because I can see that
people die and they do not return. Are they satisfied with the place
they are in; and that is why they continue to stay there? Or leaving
this world they have gone to sleep?

Quss takes an oath that can never be minor, that there is a religion
with Allah which is better than the religion you follow. After that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: May Allah have mercy on Quss, on Judgment
Day he shall be raised up alone like a nation. Then he said: Is there
anyone among you who can accurately quote some of his couplets? Someone
said; I have heard him recite the following couplets:

In those who have gone before us in the past centuries there are
edifying insights.

When I took note of different circumstances I could not find any special
cause of death.

I saw my people that the young and old, all move towards it.

Those who go away do not return to me and neither those who have
survived will continue to live.

Therefore I became certain that I would also have to go where the others
have gone.

Such was the level of the wisdom and recognition (Marefat) of Quss bin
Saidatul Iyadi that whenever a person from Iyad tribe came to visit the
Messenger of Allah (S) he used to ask him about the wise sayings of Quss
and listened to them with all the attention.”

2 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Abdullah bin Saeed: Narrated to us Abul
Hasan Ali bin Husain bin Ismail: Informed us Muhammad bin Zakariya:
Narrated to us Abdullah bin Zahhak from Hisham from his father that a
delegation from the Iyad tribe paid a visit to the Messenger of Allah
(S). When the latter asked them to mention some wise sayings of Quss he
was told that Quss had said as follows:

O one who brings the news of death, the dead ones are in the graves and
upon their bodies are remaining of some cotton clothes.

Leave them! Indeed there is a day appointed for them, just as thunder
and lightning awakes those who are asleep.

Some will be unclothed and some dressed up. Some shall be in new clothes
and some will be wearing worn out clothes.

Till they will change from one condition to another into a new
generation and after that another generation shall come into being.

Rain and vegetation, fathers and mothers, those who have gone and the
newcomers, signs after signs, dead ones after dead ones, light and
darkness, nights and days, the poor and the rich, the righteous and the
bad, the good doers and the sinners, it is news and warning for those
who are oblivious. Everyone who does something should improve it. Know
that it is nothing but that Allah is one. Neither is He begotten nor is
the father of anyone. Only He has turned back and He has initiated and
tomorrow one has to return to Him only.

After this, O people of the Iyad tribe, Where is Thamood and Aad? And
where are our ancestors? Where is the righteous one who was not
rewarded? And where is the wrong doer who was not penalized? Never! By
the Lord of the Kaaba, one who is created shall be brought back and if
not today then he will be returned on another day.

This is Quss bin Saidah bin Hadhaqah bin Zuhr bin Iyad bin Nizar who was
the first among the people of the Age of Ignorance who brought faith in
the advent of the Prophet. And he was the first man who kept a staff
with him and used it for support. And it is said that he lived for six
hundred years and knew the Holy Prophet (S) by his name and genealogy
and gave the people the glad tidings of his advent. He used to observe
dissimulation and dispensed good advice to the people and exhorted them
also to observe dissimulation.”

3 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Abdullah bin Saeed: Informed us Abul Hasan
Ali bin Husain bin Ismail: Informed us Muhammad bin Zakariya bin Dinar:
Narrated to me Mahdi bin Sabiq from Abdullah bin Abbas from his father
that he said:

“Quss bin Saida assembled his sons and said: Hunger is satiated by
vegetables and by milk diluted with water. If someone makes a false
allegation against you, you should know that he is having the same
defect. One who oppresses you shall certainly have to face oppression.
When you observe justice by opposing your selfish desires you shall also
be dealt with justice. When you prohibit people from something, begin
with your own self. Do not hoard that which you do not consume and do
not eat what you don’t need.

If you save something it must be only your deeds. Observe thrift;
generosity will get you the leadership of your community. Never take
advice from a busy person even though he might be stable in character
and has determination. Neither should you take advice from the one who
is hungry even though he might be wise. Also don’t take the advice of a
coward even though he may be capable of dispensing good advice. Do not
take up a responsibility which will not be possible without any
difficulty. When you observe enmity, follow the dictates of justice and
equity and when you speak, you must speak less.

Do not give a loan to anyone even though he might be your closest
relative, because you will always dread that he will not repay; and the
one whom you lend shall have the discretion to repay or not. Till the
time he is indebted to you he is the master and you are his slave. If he
commits excess on you, you are deserving of it due to your foolishness.
And if he fulfills his promise, only he shall be eligible for praise and
not you. Continue to pay alms (Sadaqah) as it is expiation of mistakes
and sins.

Thus Quss never gave loans to anyone and he spoke in such a way that
laymen cannot understand the underlying points and only specified
individuals may comprehend his words.”


