Chapter 11: Regarding the report of Tubba
=========================================

Tubba the king (of Yemen) was among those who knew the Holy Prophet (S)
and was in anticipation of his advent because he had received
information about it. He knew that in the near future a prophet would
arise in Mecca and migrated to Yathrib (Medina).

1 - Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan
bin Ali from Umar bin Aban from Aban rafa’u[^1], that once while walking
Tubba recited the following couplets:

Till there came to me a learned one from the Quraiza who was a Rabbi,
and I swear by your life he was famous among the Jews.

He told me to abstain from attacking a hidden village because a prophet
from Quraish would arise from Mecca.

Thus I excused them but I did it unwillingly and I left them for the
fear of the eternal day.

And I abstained from attacking Mecca for the sake of Allah and in hope
of His forgiveness. For the sake of the day of accounting and the
blazing (fire of) Hell.

And I left behind a man from my community for this prophet. I left a
person of merit whom people praised.

A person who shall have victories and divine help in his generations.
And through this I hope in reward of the Lord of Muhammad.

I didn’t even expect that there would be a manifest house of Allah in
the land of Mecca where He would be worshipped.

They told me that there was a rich treasury in Mecca. Treasures of
pearls and emeralds.

So I made an elaborate plan but my Lord did not allow it to be
fulfilled. And Allah saves his Masjid from destruction.

Thus, whatever I had aspired, I left upon them. And I performed this
exemplary deed only for these pure-hearted personalities.

Abu Abdillah (a.s.) said: Indeed he was informed that a prophet would
arise from here (Mecca) and his migration shall be towards Yathrib
(Medina). Thus he took with himself a group of people from Yemen and
settled them with the Jews so that after the advent of that prophet they
might help, support and regarding him, he composed the following
couplets:

I testify that Ahmad in certainly the Messenger of that God Who is the
Creator of the universe.

Thus if I had such a long age that I could meet him I would indeed
become his vizier and his cousin.

And I would become a punishment for the polytheists and made them drink
the ale of death and sorrow.

2 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim from
his father from Ibne Abi Umair from Ibrahim bin Abdul Hameed from Walib
bin Sabih from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

Tubba told Aws and Khazraj: You people stay here till that prophet
arises and as for me, if I live till that time I will serve and help
him.

3 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Husain al-Bazzaz: Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Yaqoob Asam: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Abdul Jabbar
Utaridi: Narrated to us Yunus bin Bukair Shaibani from Zakariya bin
Yahya Madini: Narrated to me Ikrimah: I heard Ibne Abbas say:

“You must not have any misgiving regarding Tubba, because he was a
Muslim.”

[^1]: Rafa’u is a term that means that the original narrator has
mentioned a name which the subsequent narrator/s has/have omitted.


