Chapter 16: Report of Abul Moheeb, the Recluse
==============================================

Abul Moheeb, the recluse knew the Prophet and his characteristics and
was having information about his prophethood. He also knew that Amirul
Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) is his successor.

Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan; and Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad
and Muhammad bin Ahmad Shaibani - may Allah be pleased with them - they
said: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Yahya bin Zakariya al-Qattan that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ismail from Abdullah bin Muhammad that
he said: Narrated to me my father; and Qais Ibne Saad Duili from
Abdullah bin Bahir al-Faqassi from Bakr bin Abdullah al-Ashjai from his
ancestors that they said:

“The year the Holy Prophet (S) traveled to Damascus in a trade caravan
carrying Lady Khadija’s merchandise, he was accompanied by Abde Manat
bin Kinana and Naufal bin Muawiyah bin Urwah bin Sakhar bin Yamir bin
Namama bin Adi in the same caravan. When they reached Damascus, Abul
Moheeb, the recluse saw them and asked: Who are you people? They
replied: We are the inhabitants of the Kaaba. We are some traders of
Quraish. He asked if there was someone else from Quraish along with us.

They said: “There is a youth from Bani Hashim, named Muhammad.” Abul
Moheeb said: “I want to meet him.” They said: “There is none in Quraish
having lesser fame than him. He is called the orphan of Quraish. He has
come to market the goods of Khadija, a lady of Quraish. And he is doing
it on a remuneration. What do you want with him?” Abul Moheeb said:
“Show him to me.” They said: “We left him in the bazaar of Busra.” They
were having this conversation when the Prophet was seen approaching.

When the monk looked at the Prophet, before the people could identify
him, he exclaimed: It is he! And he took the Prophet aside and spoke to
him in private for a long time. Then he kissed the Prophet on his
forehead. He took out something from his sleeve and wanted to give it to
the Prophet and the Prophet declined to accept. Finally the monk came to
the people and said: Accept my advice. Remain attached to him and obey
him because by Allah, this young man is the last prophet and he will
soon be appointed to the ministry. He will call the people to the saying
of ‘There is no god, except God’ (monotheism).

When he declares his prophethood you must harken to him without any
hesitation. Then the monk asked if the uncle of this youth, Abu Talib
had a son named Ali. He said: Either he is born or will be born soon. He
would be the first to bring faith in this prophet. I have read that he
shall be his successor.

He would be the chief of the Arabs, the divine scholar of this Ummah and
the Dhulqarnain of the last prophet. He shall display excellent
swordsmanship in battles. In the high heavens his name is Ali. On the
Judgment Day he will have the highest station after the Prophet. The
angels call him by the titles of ‘the successful one’, ‘the illuminated’
and ‘the brave’. He shall conquer wherever he turns and among the
companions of your Prophet he will be more famous than the sun of the
sky.”


