Kamaaluddin Wa Tamaamun Niâ€™ma (Perfection of faith and completion of favor)
===========================================================================

This book is very penetrating in its subject and exceptional in its
domain. No other book excels it in perfection, sweetness and attraction.
Though many detailed books are composed on this topic, none is like it
in clarity and comprehensiveness. In this book, the author has dealt
with the personality of the Hidden Imam (a.s.), his occultation and
everything related to him in an analytical and systematic manner. He has
supported each of his contentions with the saying of the Infallible
Imams (a.s.).

It also contains the debates and discussions with the opponents of Shia
faith and provides clarifications of doubts and misunderstandings that
haunted some followers of the Imamiyah religion. He has composed
detailed refutations of those who deny the Holy Imam (a.s.). He has
included in this book all that has been recorded on this subject and
which has gained currency among the populace, whether it be authentic or
weak, good or not; he has collected all the material that was available
to him. But when he is arguing his point he has taken the help of only
authentic and excessively narrated (Mutawatir) traditions.

For example after writing about the cases of extremely long age he
remarks: These reports are not among those that can be used to prove
occultation because the factuality and truth of Ghaibat is proved for us
by the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and narrational reports of the
Holy Imams (a.s.), just as traditions prove the veracity of the faith of
Islam, its Shariah and practical laws.

Editions of this Book
---------------------

This book was published twice in Iran and once in Najaf al-Ashraf. It
was also once printed with translation.

The Arabic version from which this book is translated into English was
based on seven manuscripts dating from 966 to 1079 A.H. The Arabic
editor, Ali Akbar Ghiffari, a very capable scholar has fully checked the
text and compared it with various versions and very painstakingly
removed all typographical and textual errors that abounded in almost all
previous editions of this important book.


