Chapter 18: Report of Yusuf the Jew about the Holy Prophet (S)
==============================================================

Narrated to us my father (r.a.) that: Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim
from his father from Ibne Abi Umair from Aban bin Uthman in a rafa’u
tradition, from his chains of reporters that he said:

“When Abdullah reached maturity, Abdul Muttalib got him married to Amina
binte Wahab and lady Amina became pregnant. She says: “When I became
pregnant no signs of pregnancy became apparent in me and the conditions
usually seen in pregnant women were absent. Once I saw in dream that a
person came to me and said:

You are carrying the best of men. At the time of delivery he was born
without any discomfort to me. The Holy Prophet (S) placed his hands on
the ground and came down. At that moment a caller called out: You have
given birth to the best of men. Give him in refuge of Allah from the
evil of every oppressor and jealous one.”

The Holy Prophet (S) was born after twelve nights of the month of Rabi
I.

Lady Amina says that when he was born he placed his hands on the ground
and raised his head to the sky and a light beamed out of me which
illuminated the earth and the sky. When the satans tried to fly to the
sky, stones rained upon them and an obstruction appeared between them
and the sky. Seeing these phenomena the Quraish were terrified and
exclaimed that these were the signs of the apocalypse.

They went to Walid bin Mughaira and told him about all those happenings.
Walid bin Mughaira was considered a wise man. He said: Look at the stars
with whose help you seek directions in the sea and on land. If you don’t
find them in their original places you should know that the apocalypse
is here and if they remain at the proper positions a great event has
occurred.

The satans also saw this and they gathered around Iblees who cried:
Throughout this night I have observed momentous changes in the heavens
and earth. Some great event must have transpired on the earth,
unparalleled since the ascension of Isa to heaven; fly to discover what
it is. The subordinate fiends flew in all directions, on their infernal
errand, but returned without making any discovery to satisfy the doubts
of Shaitan, who then undertook the matter himself, glided down to the
earth, and sought far and wide around, till at last, coming to Mecca, he
found the sacred place encircled by a host of angels, who repelled him
with a shout.

He then entered from the side of Hira mountain, but Jibraeel detected
him and sternly said, Begone, accursed! He replied: Tell me what has
happened? Jibraeel answered: Muhammad, the best of the prophets, is
born. Have I any portion in him? Inquired the fiend. No, said Jibraeel.
But have I no portion in his Ummah? added the evil spirit. Yes, replied
the archangel, upon which Iblees professed himself satisfied, and
departed.

There was a Jew, named Yusuf, in Mecca. When he saw these phenomena he
said: This is the night of the birth of the same prophet about whom we
have read in the books. He is the seal of the prophets and because of
him stones were rained on the Satan. In the morning he came to Quraish
and asked: Was a baby boy born in your tribe last night? No, they said.
He said: A boy has definitely taken birth. He is the most superior among
all the prophets and he is the last of them. The people went out in
different directions to inquire about it and came to know that a son was
born to Abdullah Ibne Abdul Muttalib.

They called this Jew scholar and said: Yes, a boy is born. He asked: Was
he born before I mentioned it or after that? Before, they said. He said:
Take me to him. They brought him to lady Amina and said: Take out your
child so that we may have a look at him. Lady Amina brought the Prophet
to them. Yusuf opened his shoulders and back, saw the mark of
prophethood and swooned. The Quraish were amazed at this and they began
to make fun of Yusuf. He said: You are making fun of me while he is that
prophet who will slay you with the sword. The prophethood has been taken
away from Bani Israel till the Judgment Day. The people dispersed from
there and the prophecies of the Jew became a topic for discussion
everywhere.”


