Chapter 20: Report of Zaid bin Amr bin Nufayl
=============================================

Zaid bin Amr bin Nufayl was also in search of the Hanif religion and he
had information about the prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S). He was in
anticipation of his advent and he went out in search of him and was
killed on the way.

1 -Narrated to us Abul Hasan Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Husain Bazzaz
Nishapuri that: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yaqoob bin Yusuf that:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Abdul Jabbar Utaridi: Narrated to us Yunus bin
Bukair from Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar Madani that he said:

“Zaid bin Amr bin Nufayl had investigated Judaism and Christianity
properly and did not like any of these faiths. So he came out of Mecca
in search of the Abrahamic religion. When his wife Safiya binte Hadhrami
learnt of his intention, she informed his uncle, Khattab bin Nufayl so
that he may restrain him but he set out in search of the Abrahamic
religion and passing through Mosul and other Arab islands and reached
Damascus. Whenever he came to know about a scholar or a monk he used to
go and meet. Finally, he came to know about a hermit in Balqa who
possessed complete knowledge of the Christian faith. So he went to meet
him and inquired from him about the Abrahamic faith.

He said apparently there was no one having correct information about
this religion as it was a very ancient faith. But very soon a prophet
will arise in the same town from where you have come. He shall be on the
Abrahamic faith. So you must hurry back to your hometown as the time of
his advent is now. And it is even possible that he has already appeared.
Upon hearing this, Zaid started on the return journey with speed but was
killed on the way. When Waraqa bin Naufal who also followed the same
faith, came to know about his death he cried much and recited the
following elegy in his honor:

O Amr you have achieved guidance and gained the bounty. And you have
saved yourself from the blazing fire.

By choosing such a Lord who has no equal and by abandoning the
disobedient idols who remain as they were.

And the mercy of his Lord reaches man even though he may be sixty layers
beneath the earth.”

2 - From the same chain of narrators from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Ishaq
bin Yasar Madani that he said: Narrated to me Muhammad bin Khattab and
Saeed bin Zaid that they said:

“O Messenger of Allah (S), shall we pray for forgiveness of Zaid? Yes,
he said, you must pray for forgiveness of Zaid as on the Judgment Day he
will be raised as a separate community.”

3 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Husain Bazzaz that: Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Yaqoob bin Yusuf: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Abdul
Jabbar from Yunus bin Bukair from Masudi from Nufayl bin Hisham from his
father that his grandfather, Saeed bin Zaid that he asked the Messenger
of Allah (S) about his father, Zaid bin Amr:

“O Messenger of Allah (S) Zaid bin Amr was as you have seen. He had
heard the reports about you and if he had reached you he would have
accepted faith. Shall we pray for his forgiveness?

The Messenger of Allah (S) replied: Yes, you must pray for his
forgiveness. On the Judgment Day he will be raised as a complete
community. He had belief (in me) and was in search of the true religion;
and he died while in pursuit for it.”

The author says: Before the proclamation of prophethood the
circumstances of the Holy Prophet (S) were same as they are of the
Master of the Time (a.t.f.s.) in this age we are in. At that time also
only the hermits and scholars had information regarding the prophethood
of the Holy Prophet (S) and Islam was in a poor state, such that when a
prophet used to pray for the advent of the Holy Prophet (S) the ignorant
and deviated people used to make fun of him and said: When will that
prophet arise, who according to your view will be the owner of the
sword?

Whose call shall spread in the east and the west and to whom will submit
the kings of the world? It is just as the ignorant people tell us today:
When will this Mahdi, in whom you believe, appear? A group denies him
and another group accepts him. And the Holy Prophet (S) has said: “Islam
certainly began strange and it will revert to being strange. Thus
blessed be the strange ones.”

Thus according to the statement of His Eminence, Islam has reached a
poor state in the present age but with the reappearance of the Wali of
Allah and His Proof it will again become powerful like it was
strengthened by the advent of the Prophet of Allah and His Messenger and
will cool the eyes of those who await for him and those who have faith
in his Imamate in the same way as were cooled the eyes of those who
anticipated the advent of the Messenger of Allah (S) and those who
believed in him after he had appeared. And indeed Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime will fulfill the promise He has made to His Awliya (saints) and
exalt His word and complete His light even though the polytheists may be
averse.

4 - Narrated to us Ja’far bin Ali bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abdullah bin
Mughairah Kufi (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to me my grandfather Hasan
bin Ali from his grandfather Abdullah bin Mughairah from Ismail bin
Muslim from As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father from his
ancestors from Ali (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Islam certainly began strange and very soon it will revert to being
strange. Thus blessed be the strange ones.”

5 -Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Amari
Samarqandi (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Masud from his father Muhammad bin Masud from Ja’far bin Ahmad from
Amaraki bin Ali Bufaki from Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from Ali bin Musa
Reza from his father Musa bin Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad
from his father Muhammad bin Ali from his father Ali bin Husain from his
father Husain bin Ali from his father Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Islam certainly began strange and very soon it will revert to being
strange as it started. Thus blessed be the strange ones.”


