Chapter 22: Continuation of successorship from Prophet Adam (a.s.)
==================================================================

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar and Saad bin Abdullah
and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them said: Narrated to us Ahmad
bin Muhammad bin Isa; and Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab; and
Haitham bin Abi Masruq Nahdi; and Ibrahim bin Hashim from Hasan bin
Mahboob Sarrad from Muqatil bin Sulaiman Ibne Dawal Doz from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I am the chief (Sayyid) of the prophets, and my successor is a chief
and the greatest among the successors of prophets. My successors are the
best among the successors of prophets. Indeed Adam (a.s.) implored Allah
to bestow him with a noble successor. Allah revealed to him, ‘I have
exalted My prophets with Messengership for testing the faith of the
creatures. And from the righteous people chose successors of the
prophets.

O Adam! Make a bequest to your son Sheeth.’ He was Hibtullah the son of
Adam (a.s.). Adam (a.s.) appointed him as his successor. Sheeth (a.s.)
appointed Shaban as his vicegerent. Shaban was born through the Hoori
sent by Allah from Paradise as a wife for Sheeth (a.s.). Shaban
bequeathed the vicegerency to his son Mohhith. Mohhith to Mahooq, Mahooq
to Ameesha, Ameesha to Akhnooh. Akhnooh is known as Idrees (a.s.).
Idrees (a.s.) appointed Nahoor as his legatee, Nahoor’s bequest was for
Nuh (a.s.). Saam was the vicegerent of Nuh (a.s.) Saam delegated to
Athamar, Athamar to Bareeshasha, Bareeshasha to Yaafith, Yaafith to
Baraa, Baraa to Jafeena, Jafeena to Imran.

Imran transferred the legacy to Ibrahim (a.s.), Ibrahim to Ismail,
Ismail to Ishaq, Ishaq to Yaqoob, Yaqoob to Yusuf, Yusuf to Bathariya,
Bathariya to Shuaib. Shuaib entrusted the legacy to Musa (a.s.), the son
of Imran. Musa (a.s.) to Yusha bin Nun. Yusha to Dawood; Dawood to
Sulaiman, Sulaiman to Asif bin Barkhiya. Asif to Zakariya, Zakariya to
Sayaa, Sayaa to Isa son of Maryam (a.s.). Isa (a.s.) bequeathed to
Shamoon, Shamoon to Yahya bin Zakariya. Yahya bin Zakariya to Mundar,
Mundar to Saleema, Saleema to Burda, Burda entrusted the legacies to me.
And O Ali! I make the bequest to you.

You entrust the legacy to your vicegerent and he would pass it to his
successors. All of them are from your progeny. One after the other, this
series shall reach the best inhabitants of this Earth. He shall be the
last of the Imams. People shall have serious disagreements regarding
your successorship. Anyone from the people who believes in your
successorship shall be like one who has a firm faith. And one who
dissociates with you and does not follow you, shall be in the Hell fire.
And it is the abode of disbelievers.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.) that: Narrated
to us Ahmad bin Muhammad Hamadani: Narrated to us Ali bin Hasan bin Ali
bin Faddal from his father from Muhammad bin Fudhail from Abi Hamza
Thumali from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Allah, the Blessed and the Mighty had taken an oath from Adam (a.s.)
that he shall not approach the prohibited tree. But he approached it and
also tasted its fruit. As mentioned by Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ عَهِدْنَا إِلَىٰ آدَمَ مِنْ قَبْلُ فَنَسِيَ وَلَمْ نَجِدْ
لَهُ عَزْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We gave a commandment to Adam before, but he forgot;
and We did not find in him any determination.”***[^1]

When the Almighty sent Adam (a.s.) to the earth, Habeel and his sister
were born as twins. Then Qabeel and his sister were born together. Adam
(a.s.) commanded both of his sons to perform a sacrifice for the
Almighty. Habeel owned a flock of sheep while Qabeel was a farmer.
Habeel sacrificed the best ram from his flock. Qabeel on the other hand
was careless of his occupation and offered uncleaned ears of corn and
bad quality crop as gifts to Allah. Consequently the sacrifice of Habeel
was accepted and that of Qabeel wasn’t. In the words of Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ ابْنَيْ آدَمَ بِالْحَقِّ إِذْ قَرَّبَا
قُرْبَانًا فَتُقُبِّلَ مِنْ أَحَدِهِمَا وَلَمْ يُتَقَبَّلْ مِنَ
الْآخَرِ قَالَ لَأَقْتُلَنَّكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And relate to them the story of the two sons of Adam with truth whey
they both offered an offering, but it was accepted from one of them and
was not accepted from the other.***[^2]

During those days whenever an offering was accepted by Allah a fire used
to appear and consume it. So Qabeel made a fireplace. And he was the
first person who constructed a place to contain a fire. He said, “I
shall worship the fire so that it accepts my offering.” Satan, the enemy
of Allah, told him that the offering of Habeel had been accepted and his
own rejected. “If you let him live he would beget children who would
pride upon your children for the superiority he has gained over you.”

Qabeel accepted the suggestion and killed Habeel. He came to Adam (a.s.)
who asked him where Habeel was. Qabeel said, “I don’t know, you did not
entrust him to me.” When Adam (a.s.) learnt that Habeel was murdered he
exclaimed, “O Earth! Curse of Allah be on you! For you have accepted the
blood of Habeel,” and continued to weep for forty days and supplicated
Allah to grant him another son. He was granted a son whom he named
Hibtullah because he was a gift (Hiba) from Allah.

Adam (a.s.) was very affectionate towards him. When the Prophethood of
Adam (a.s.) neared its end and he reached old age, the Almighty revealed
to him that time had come for him to transfer the Prophetic knowledge
and relics to his son Hibtullah. “Indeed We shall never take away from
the progeny of Hibtullah the relics and prophetic science till the day
of judgment,” said Allah. “I shall never leave the Earth devoid of a
scholar from his progeny. People will derive religious knowledge and
spiritual guidance through this scholar. Anyone who follows him or Nuh
(a.s.) will be assured deliverance.”

Adam (a.s.) was reminded of Nuh (a.s.) at this juncture and said, “The
Almighty shall send a Prophet who will call the people towards Allah.
People would reject him and Allah shall destroy them through the flood.”
There was a gap of ten generations between Adam and Nuh (a.s.). All the
ancestors of Nuh (a.s.) were Prophets. Adam (a.s.) made a bequest to
Hibtullah and told him that if anyone of them met Nuh (a.s.) he should
believe in him and follow him in order to be saved from the deluge.

When Adam (a.s.) was on his deathbed he summoned Hibtullah and told him
to convey his regards to Jibraeel (a.s.) or any other angel if he
happened to see them. “And tell them that your father requests them for
a fruit of Paradise.” Hibtullah met Jibraeel (a.s.) and conveyed the
message of his respected father. Jibraeel said, “O Hibtullah! Your
father has departed to meet his Creator and I have come to perform his
prayers (of dead).” When Hibtullah returned home, he saw that Adam
(a.s.) had departed for his heavenly abode.

Jibraeel (a.s.) taught him the method of bath of dead body. Hibtullah
bathed Adam (a.s.) and when it was the time of prayers of dead Hibtullah
told Jibraeel (a.s.) to stand in front and pray. Jibraeel (a.s.) said,
“As Allah had once ordered us to prostrate before Adam (a.s.) it is not
proper that we lead (Imamate) any of his sons.” Hibtullah stood before
Jibraeel (a.s.) and prayed prayer of the dead. Jibraeel (a.s.) stood
behind him with a group of angels and recited thirty takbeers (Allaho
Akbar).

The Almighty Allah then commanded Jibraeel (a.s.) to reduce 25 takbeers
for the progeny of Adam (a.s.). Consequently, it is the practice among
us to recite five takbeers, although the Holy Prophet (S) has recited
seven and nine takbeers for the martyrs of battle of Badr.

Hibtullah buried Adam (a.s.). Qabeel approached him and said, “I know my
father has entrusted you specially with the knowledge that he kept away
from me. And it is the same knowledge with which Habeel prayed and made
his offering that was honored. I killed him so that he would not have
children to pride over my children. If you do not give me a little of
that knowledge bequeathed by our father I shall kill you too.”

Thus Hibtullah and his sons used to fervently guard the Prophetic
knowledge and divine relics till the time of Nuh (a.s.). During the time
of Nuh (a.s.) people were shown the will of Adam (a.s.) and it was
learnt that Adam (a.s.) had prophesied the advent of Nuh (a.s.) The
people believed in Nuh (a.s.), testified to the veracity of his claim
and obeyed him. Adam (a.s.) had also commanded Hibtullah to read his
will at the beginning of every year and renew their oath. That
particular day became the day of Eid (feast) for them. They continued
the ritual year after year. Every succeeding prophet made similar
bequests till the advent of Prophet Muhammad (S).

People recognized Nuh (a.s.) through prior knowledge. And that is
exactly the meaning of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly, We sent Nuh to his people…”***[^3]

There were some Prophets between Adam (a.s.) and Nuh (a.s.) but they did
not declare their Prophethood to the people. That is the reason why
Quran is too silent about them and does not mention their names. Some
Prophets however declared their Prophethood as their names are stated in
Quran.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُسُلًا قَدْ قَصَصْنَاهُمْ عَلَيْكَ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَرُسُلًا لَمْ
نَقْصُصْهُمْ عَلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (We sent) apostles We have mentioned to you before and apostles
we have not mentioned to you;”***[^4]

Imam (a.s.) explains that Prophets mentioned by name were those who
declared their Prophethood and Prophets not mentioned by name were those
who kept their mission secret. Nuh (a.s.) propagated religion among his
people for 950 years. Nuh (a.s.) did not have any assistant prophet.
People rejected all the Prophets between Adam and Nuh (a.s.), as
mentioned by Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The people of Nuh rejected the apostles.***[^5]

When the time of Nuh’s Prophethood approached it’s end, the Almighty
sent a revelation to Nuh (a.s.) and commanded him to bequeath the
prophetic sciences, the relics and other trophies to his son. “Indeed,
We shall never take away from the progeny of Saam the prophetic
inheritance like I had caused it to remain from Adam (a.s.) to your
generation I shall never leave the earth devoid of a scholar from your
progeny. People will understand religion through him and he shall be the
means of their salvation.

Especially for the people who are born between the time of two Prophets.
Hud (a.s.) became the Prophet after Saam. There were some apparent as
well as some concealed Prophets between Nuh and Hud (a.s.). Nuh (a.s.)
had already predicted that Allah the Almighty shall send a Prophet by
name of Hud (a.s.). “He shall invite his people towards Allah while they
will reject him. So Allah will destroy the people.

Therefore one who lives until that time must believe in him and follow
him. The Almighty shall deliver you from His chastisement.” Nuh (a.s.)
commanded Saam to read this will and renew the vow at the beginning of
each year on the day of Eid. When Hud (a.s.) arrived the people saw the
will of Nuh (a.s.) regarding him. So the people believed in him,
confessed to his truth and followed him. They obtained security from
divine punishment. Allah the Almighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ هُودٌ أَلَا
تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ad gave the lie to the apostles. When their brother Hud said to them:
Will you not guard (against evil)?***[^6]

And Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِلَىٰ عَادٍ أَخَاهُمْ هُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And to Aad (We sent) their brother Hud.***[^7]

Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّىٰ بِهَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons and (so did)
Yaqoob.***[^8]

Then He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ ۚ كُلًّا هَدَيْنَا ۚ وَنُوحًا
هَدَيْنَا مِنْ قَبْلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We gave to him Ishaq and Yaqoob; each did We guide, and Nuh did
We guide before.***[^9]

Some from the progeny of Hud (a.s.) were appointed to keep them informed
about the advent of Ibrahim (a.s.) and to take oaths regarding him.
There was a gap of ten generations between Hud and Ibrahim (a.s.).

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا قَوْمُ لُوطٍ مِنْكُمْ بِبَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nor are the people of Lut far off from you.***[^10]

Allah also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَآمَنَ لَهُ لُوطٌ ۘ وَقَالَ إِنِّي مُهَاجِرٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Lut believed in Him, and he said: I am fleeing to my
Lord.***[^11]

And the words of Ibrahim (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ إِنِّي ذَاهِبٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely I fly to my lord; He will guide me.***[^12]

All (ancestors of Ibrahim a.s.) were Prophets. Thus it is divine
practice that between two great Prophets there is a gap of ten or nine
or eight generations. All of them used to be Prophets and they used to
prophesize the advent of the coming Prophet. They also took the vow from
their legatees that they would believe and obey him.

All the Prophets took such oaths of fealty like Adam, Nuh, Salih, Shuaib
and Ibrahim (a.s.). This continued till the time of Yusuf (a.s.). After
Yusuf (a.s.) it was transferred to the progeny of his brother, Asbat.
The series reached Musa the son of Imran. Between Yusuf and Musa (a.s.)
also was a gap of ten generations. Then Allah sent them towards Firon,
Hamaan and Qaroon. The Almighty sent Prophets one after the other to
every people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلَّ مَا جَاءَ أُمَّةً رَسُولُهَا كَذَّبُوهُ فَأَتْبَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ
بَعْضًا وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَحَادِيثَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whenever there came to a people their apostle, they called him a
liar, so We made some of them follow others and We made them
stories.***[^13]

People continued to reject the Prophets and continued to perish due to
divine chastisement. This continued till the time of Bani Israel. These
people murdered as many as two, three or four Prophets every day.
Sometimes as many as seventy Prophets were slain together and the Bani
Israel did not care. They remained busy in their occupations all day.
When Torah was revealed on Musa (a.s.) he gave glad-tidings of Prophet
Muhammad (S). Yusha bin Nun was the successor of Musa (a.s.) and Qata
was the successor of Yusha bin Nun. As mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَىٰ لِفَتَاهُ لَا أَبْرَحُ حَتَّىٰ أَبْلُغَ مَجْمَعَ
الْبَحْرَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Musa said to his servant: I will not cease until I reach
the junction of the two rivers.”***[^14]

Thus all the Prophets continued to prophesize the advent of Prophet
Muhammad (S). As mentioned by Allah in Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي يَجِدُونَهُ مَكْتُوبًا عِنْدَهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ
وَالْإِنْجِيلِ يَأْمُرُهُمْ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَاهُمْ عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whom they find written down with them in the Taurat and the Injeel,
(who) enjoins them good and forbids them evil …”***[^15]

And in the words of Isa (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمُبَشِّرًا بِرَسُولٍ يَأْتِي مِنْ بَعْدِي اسْمُهُ أَحْمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And giving the good news of an Apostle who will come after me, his
name being Ahmad.”***[^16]

Thus Musa and Isa (a.s.) had clearly prophesied about Prophet Muhammad
(S) just as the previous Prophets had informed about the Prophets to
come after them. This continued till the time of Prophet Muhammad (S).
When the last moments of the Holy Prophet (S) arrived the Almighty
revealed to him to entrust all the knowledge and relics to Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) and promised that they shall remain in his progeny forever
just as they had remained from the time of Adam (a.s.). And this is the
saying of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِنْ بَعْضٍ
وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of Imran above the nations. Offspring, one of the other;
and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.”***[^17]

“Indeed Allah has not made the knowledge as ignorance. He did not leave
the question of scholars in dark. He has provided express authentication
for each Prophet or Imam. And He has introduced them fully to the
people. It has never been the case that Allah has created a person to be
appointed as a Prophet on people and the people do not accept his
authority and that he is not conversant with the divine commands and
secrets of creation. Allah has never entrusted the affairs of this
religion to a proximate angel or a Prophet. He selects an angel as a
messenger and through him conveys His likes and dislikes to the Prophet.
He also conveys through this angel the past and future knowledge. So the
Prophets learnt of this knowledge through their predecessors and the
holy people and those who were specially selected by Allah.” Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have given the book and wisdom to the progeny of Ibrahim
(a.s.). And gave them a great kingdom.”***[^18]

‘Book’ denotes Prophethood, ‘Wisdom’ indicates the great intellectual
position of those personalities. And all of them are from this progeny.
Some excelling over others. The Almighty Allah has appointed Prophethood
among them and ordained that His message shall be conveyed and protected
by these people alone.

After Prophets, themselves, comes their progeny, their brothers and
people of their family. One who acts with faith in the message of these
Prophets achieves salvation. But one who considers that the bearers of
Allah’s message and holders of exalted station are not these
personalities but some other non-deserving relatives, he has acted
against the divine sciences without the medium of Prophets actually
falsified Allah. They have gone against the will and obedience of Allah.
They have not acknowledged the repositories of the Divine message that
Allah has appointed. Thus they are misguided souls and they misguide
their followers. They shall have no excuse on Judgment Day (Qiyamat).
There is no proof except that of the progeny of Ibrahim (a.s.). The
Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have given the book and wisdom to the progeny of Ibrahim
(a.s.). And gave them a great kingdom.”***[^19]

The proof is only for the Prophets and their family, and it shall remain
so till the day of Judgment. As mentioned in the Book of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His name
may be remembered in them.”***[^20]

“These are our houses and the houses of Prophets, guides and wise
people. This is the rope of faith by catching hold of which people
before you achieved success. And through the same connection people
would attain salvation in the future.” Indeed the Almighty has stated in
His book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ كُلًّا هَدَيْنَا وَنُوحًا
هَدَيْنَا مِنْ قَبْلُ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِهِ دَاوُودَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ
وَأَيُّوبَ وَيُوسُفَ وَمُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ ۚ وَكَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي
الْمُحْسِنِينَ وَزَكَرِيَّا وَيَحْيَىٰ وَعِيسَىٰ وَإِلْيَاسَ كُلٌّ
مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَالْيَسَعَ وَيُونُسَ وَلُوطًا
وَكُلًّا فَضَّلْنَا عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ وَمِنْ آبَائِهِمْ
وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ وَإِخْوَانِهِمْ وَاجْتَبَيْنَاهُمْ وَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ
إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ ذَٰلِكَ هُدَى اللَّهِ يَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ
يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَلَوْ أَشْرَكُوا لَحَبِطَ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحُكْمَ
وَالنُّبُوَّةَ فَإِنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهَا هَٰؤُلَاءِ فَقَدْ وَكَّلْنَا
بِهَا قَوْمًا لَيْسُوا بِهَا بِكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Nuh did we guide before, and of his descendants, Dawood and
Sulaiman and Ayyub and Yusuf and Harun; and thus do we reward those who
do good (to others). And Zakariya and Yahya and Isa and Ilyas; everyone
was of the good; And Ismail and Al-Yasha and Yunus and Lut; and everyone
we made to excel (in) the worlds; And from among their fathers and their
descendants and their brethren, and we chose them and guided them to the
right way. This is Allah’s guidance, He guides thereby whom He pleases
of His servants; and if they had set up others (with Him), certainly
what they did would have become ineffectual for them. These are they to
whom we gave the book and the wisdom and the prophecy; therefore if
these disbelieve in it we have already entrusted with it a people who
are not disbelievers in it.”***[^21]

Thus even if the whole community rejects the Prophet, the people of his
house (Ahlul Bayt) will remain firm in their faith and the message of
Prophet. This is what the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime convey:

Therefore if these disbelieve in it We have already entrusted with it a
people who are not disbelievers in it.[^22]

They shall also be the legatees and successors of Prophets. They shall
be the repositories of Divine sciences and under no circumstances would
they be fallible. Neither shall they be contaminated with falsehood,
evil designs and show-off. There is no doubt in whatever Allah has
stated regarding the successors of His Prophets.

They are infallible and to love them is to recompense for the Prophet’s
labor in conveying the Divine message. They are bestowed with Wilayat
and Imamate (Guardianship and guidance). They are the legatees of the
Prophet. “O people! Derive lessons from this. Ponder upon my words.
Align yourself with the knowledge and Imamate that Allah has bestowed
upon us. And attain salvation through these means.

So that on the day of Judgment you would have proof, and gain success
from it. These personalities are your intercessors with Allah. Your
Wilayat shall not reach Allah but through them. Thus it is incumbent on
Allah to befriend and not punish those who act upon this. On the other
hand it is certain that Allah shall degrade and punish those who do not
act upon this.

The mission of some Prophets was confined to a particular group of
people. And the Prophethood of other Prophets was general. Nuh (a.s.)
was sent for the people of the whole world. His Prophethood was general
and included Messengership (Risalat), Hud (a.s.) was appointed specially
for the people of Aad. Salih (a.s.) was given the responsibility of
guiding the people of Samood, a tiny village on the banks of a river.

This hamlet consisted of only forty odd houses. Shuaib (a.s.) was
designated as the Prophet for Madayn, a habitation of less than forty
families. Initially the Prophethood of Ibrahim (a.s.) was for the people
of Kosariya, a district in Iraq. Later he migrated from there. But this
migration was not due to war or conflict, As Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ إِنِّي ذَاهِبٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely I fly to my lord, He will guide me.***[^23]

Thus the flight (Hijrah) of Ibrahim (a.s.) was not due to war. Ishaq
(a.s.) was the Prophet after Ibrahim (a.s.). Yaqoob (a.s.) was appointed
Prophet for the Canaan region. He later moved to Egypt and spent the
rest of his life there. But after his demise his mortal remains were
brought to Canaan and buried there. As regards the dream of Yusuf (a.s.)
wherein he saw eleven stars and the Sun and Moon prostrating before him,
it is certain that his Prophethood was for the people of Egypt. He had
twelve successors.

Later, the Almighty appointed Musa and Harun (a.s.) in Egypt. Yusha bin
Nun was the vicegerent of Musa (a.s.) for Bani Israel. There are many
other Prophets in Bani Israel some of whom have been mentioned by Allah
in Quran and some are not. Then the Almighty sent Isa Ibne Maryam for
Bani Israel. His Prophethood was confined to the area of Baitul
Muqaddas. Isa (a.s.) had twelve disciples and the faith remained
concealed in his family members. After Isa (a.s.) was raised to the
heavens, the Almighty sent Prophet Muhammad (S) for all the creatures.
He was the final Prophet.

He was also succeeded by twelve successors appointed by Allah. We have
seen some of them and some shall come in the future. This is an account
of Prophethood and Messengership. Every Prophet of Bani Israel, whether
special or general had twelve successors. The practice of Isa’s twelve
successors is replicated in the successorship of Muhammad (S). (The
appointment of) Ali (a.s.) was on the practice of Isa (a.s.) This is a
brief account of Prophets and the Divine practice of sending Prophets
and Messengers. Peace of Allah be upon all of them.”

3 - Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - may Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Isa from Safwan bin Yahya from Abil Hasan al-Awwal - that
is Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.), that he said:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has not left this earth without an Imam
ever since the death of Adam; through whom people are guided towards
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and he is a Proof for His servants. Thus
one who leaves him, is deviated and one who serves him, gets salvation
and it is the right on Allah.”

4 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan
bin Ali bin Faddal from Amr bin Saeed Madaini from Musaddiq bin Sadaqah
from Ammar bin Musa Sabati from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Since the creation of the earth it has never been devoid of a Learned
and Divine Proof, who may enliven the matters of truth that the people
may kill (destroy).” Then he recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَيَأْبَى
اللَّهُ إِلَّا أَنْ يُتِمَّ نُورَهُ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers
are averse.***[^24]

5 - Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan -May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Haitham bin Abi Masruq Nahdi from Muhammad bin Khalid Barqi from Khalaf
bin Hammad from Aban bin Taghlib from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The Divine Proof is there before the creation, with the creation and
after the creation.”

6 -Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan -May Allah be pleased
with them - they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from
Muhammad bin Husain from Ali bin Asbat from Sulaym, slave of Tirbal from
Ishaq bin Ammar that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The earth never remains devoid of a scholar so that if the Muslims
exceed in some matter he may bring them back to truth and if they are
deficient in some matter he may complete for them.”

7 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin
Ja’far Himyari: Narrated to us Harun bin Muslim from Abil Hasan Laithi
that he said: Narrated to me Ja’far bin Muhammad from his ancestors that
the Prophet (S) said:

“In every generation of my people there is a just one from my Ahlul Bayt
who will negate the deviation of the extremists, the false claims of the
people of falsehood and the wrong interpretations of the ignorant in
this religion. Indeed your Imams are those who will take you to Allah;
thus you must follow them in your religion and your ritual prayer.”

8 - Narrated to us my father: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from
Abdullah bin Muhammad Hajjal from Hammad bin Uthman from Abi Baseer from
Abi Ja’far (a.s.) regarding the words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.***[^25]

He replied: “(It denotes) the Imams from the progeny of Ali and Fatima
(a.s.) till the Judgment Day.”

9 - Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ishaq: I went to our master, Abi
Muhammad Hasan bin Ali al-Askari (a.s.) and he asked:

“O Ahmad what is your condition regarding which people are confused?” I
said, “O my Chief, none of us including men, women and even youths have
any scope in doubting those matters that are clearly mentioned in the
Quran.” The Imam said, “Thanks to Allah for this, O Ahmad; don’t you
know that the earth is never devoid of the Divine Proof? And I am that
Divine Proof” or he said, “I am the Divine Proof.”

10 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah
bin Ja’far Himyari: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ishaq that:

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) wrote a letter to a person in which it was
mentioned: “Such doubt as was observed in my Imamate, was not present in
the case of any of my forefathers. Thus if this matter of Imamate is as
you believe, there is scope for doubt in it, but if this matter is
related to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime there is no scope for doubt.”

11 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and
Abdullah bin Ja’far, all of them from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil
Khattab from Ali bin Asbat from Abdullah bin Bukair from Amr bin Ashath
that he said: I heard Aba Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“You people think that we have discretion in the matter of Imamate and
that we can appoint anyone we like as Imam. It is never so by Allah, it
is the covenant of the Messenger of Allah (S) to a person and after him
to another till it reaches to its rightful owner.”

12 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar and Saad bin Abdullah
and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Ibrahim bin Mahziyar
from Ali bin Hadid from Ali bin Noman and Hasan bin Ali Washa all of
them from Hasan bin Abi Hamza Thumali from his father that he said: I
heard Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“The earth is never devoid of a person who is aware of the truth so that
when people resort to excess in religion he may inform that it is excess
and when they are deficient he may warn that it is a deficiency. If they
bring him the truth, he testifies it. If it had not been so, it will be
difficult to discriminate between truth and falsehood.”

Abdul Hameed bin Awaaz Tai says: By Allah, except whom there is no
deity, I have heard this tradition from him.

13 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari that they said: Narrated to us Ibrahim
bin Mahziyar from his brother from Nazr bin Suwaid from Asim bin Hameed
and Faddala bin Ayyub from Aban bin Uthman from Muhammad bin Muslim from
Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed Ali (a.s.) is the scholar of this nation and knowledge is
transferred to him through inheritance. None of us passes away, except
leaving someone from his family who has similar knowledge or as Allah
wills.”

14 - And from the same chain of narrators from Ali bin Mahziyar from
Hammad bin Isa from Rabi from Fudhail bin Yasar that he said: I heard
Aba Abdillah and Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say:

“Verily, the Knowledge that was brought down with Adam (a.s.) was not
taken back, it was transferred through inheritance. The knowledge and
heritage of prophethood and messengership not related from Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) is false. And Ali (a.s.) is the scholar of the community. And
none of us (scholars) passes away but that he leaves behind an inheritor
who has similar knowledge or as Allah wills.”

15 -And from the same chain of narrators from Ali bin Mahziyar from
Faddala bin Ayyub from Aban bin Uthman from Harith bin Mughaira that he
said: I heard Aba Abdillah (a.s.) say:

“The earth is never without a scholar who is aware of the lawful and the
prohibited and what the people are needful of. And he is not in need of
the people.” I asked: “May I be sacrificed on you, what is the source of
his knowledge?” He replied: “From the inheritor of the Messenger of
Allah (S) and Ali (a.s.).”

16 - And from the same chain of narrators from Ali bin Mahziyar from
Faddala from Aban bin Uthman from Hasan bin Ziyad that he said: I asked
Abu Abdullah (a.s.):

“Can the earth be such that there is no Imam in it?” He replied: “It can
never be so, except that there is an Imam in it who is aware of the
lawful and the prohibited and what the people are needful of.”

17 - And from the same chain of narrators from Ali bin Mahziyar from
Faddala from Aban bin Uthman from Ibne Abi Umair from Husain bin Abi
Alaa from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he asked him:

“Can the earth remain without an Imam?” He replied: “No.” I asked: “Can
there be two Imams at one time?” He said: “No, unless one of them is
silent.” I asked: “Does the Imam know about the Imam who will succeed
him?” “Yes.” I asked, “Is the Qaim an Imam?” “Yes, he is an Imam, son of
Imam and before his reappearance he has been followed.”

18 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them said: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Isa bin Ubaid from Yunus bin Abdur Rahman from Harith bin Mughaira
from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Allah, the Mighty and Sublime never leaves the earth without a scholar
whom the people need. And he is not needful of the people as regards the
knowledge of the lawful and the prohibited.” I asked, “May I be
sacrificed on you, from where does he get knowledge?” He replied: “From
the inheritance of the Messenger of Allah (S) and Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.).”

19 - And from the same chain of narrators from Harith bin Mughaira from
Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed the knowledge brought down with Adam (a.s.) was not taken back.
None of us passes away without bequeathing his knowledge (to one after
him). Indeed the earth is never without a scholar.”

20 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Abbas bin Maroof from Ali
bin Mahziyar from Hasan bin Saeed from Muhammad bin Ismail Quraishi from
those who have narrated from Ismail bin Abi Rafe from his father Abi
Rafe that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

Jibraeel (a.s.) once brought a writing for me, which contained
information about worldly kings. It was mentioned therein that when
Ashanj Ibne Ash-haan became a king he ruled for 266 years. After he
completed 51 years of his rule Isa (a.s.) was made a Prophet (by Allah).
Allah had bestowed on him (Isa a.s.) light, and knowledge and wisdom
along with the knowledge of all the past Prophets. Isa (a.s.) began his
mission with all this God-given sciences (awareness) for propagation of
Allah’s word.

Allah gave him Injeel and guided him toward Baitul Maqdas (Jerusalem).
He was sent to guide the people of Bani Israel but they became deniers
and rebelled. So Isa (a.s.) cursed them and prayed to Allah against
them. Consequently some of them were disfigured in the shape of Shaitans
so that he may show them one of the signs of his Prophethood and they
may take admonition. Anyhow, Isa (a.s.) continued to propagate among
them for 33 years in Baitul Maqdas and gave them encouragement to rush
toward Divine rewards. But their rebellion only increased. (At last
Allah raised him up to heaven).

Then the people began to look for him. Some claimed that they had
punished him and buried him alive and some said they had killed and
crucified him. But all of them were speaking untruths. Allah never
allowed them to gain control over Isa (a.s.) and this matter became
doubtful for them. But as mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي مُتَوَفِّيكَ وَرَافِعُكَ إِلَيَّ وَمُطَهِّرُكَ مِنَ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I am going to terminate the period of your stay (on earth) and cause
you to ascend unto Me and purify you of those who disbelieve.***[^26]

Thus they never had enough power to kill or bury alive or punish Isa
(a.s.). Because if they had succeeded in this, the word of Allah would
have been disproved that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ رَفَعَهُ اللَّهُ إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay! Allah took him up to Himself.***[^27]

Allah lifted him up into the heavens after he had completed his tenure
and when He decided to take him up He revealed to him to entrust his
light and wisdom and the knowledge of the Divine scripture to Shamoon
bin Hamoon who is called Safaa. Isa (a.s.) willed him as his caliph on
the believers.

Then Shamoon kept on propagating Allah’s Word and continued to give the
directives of Isa (a.s.) to his community and to struggle against the
disbelievers. Whoever obeyed him and believed (put faith) in the things
which he possessed from Allah became a believer and whoever denied and
disobeyed him became an infidel until Allah called Shamoon back to Him.
Then He sent another Messenger from His virtuous slaves to guide the
people.

He was Yahya, son of Zakariya. (a.s.). When Shamoon passed away from
this world, Urdeshir son of Scotish became king and ruled for 14 years
and ten months. When he completed 14 years of his rule the Jews martyred
Yahya (a.s.) son of Zakariya (a.s.). At the time of the martyrdom of
Yahya (a.s.) Allah sent a revelation (revelation) to him that he should
bestow his will (Wasiyyat) and leadership (Imamate) to the progeny of
Shamoon and to order the disciples (hawaries) and companions of Isa
(a.s.) to remain with them and to obey them. They did so.

At that time Saboor bin Urdeshir was in power. He ruled for thirty years
till the Almighty Allah killed him and appointed knowledge, effulgence,
wisdom and excellence in the progeny of Yaqoob bin Shamoon and the
disciples of Prophet Isa (a.s.) followed him. After that Bakht Nassar
ruled for 187 years. After 47 years of his rule Allah Almighty appointed
Uzair (a.s.) as a Messenger (Divine) for those city-dwellers who were
made alive after a hundred year death. They were residents of different
townships who had fled for fear of death and had resided near about
Uzair (a.s.).

All of them were believers. Uzair (a.s.) talked pleasantly with them and
heard them with interest. He loved them due to their faith and tied the
knot of brotherhood-in-faith with them. One day he had gone away from
them for some reason. When he returned the next day he saw all of them
lying dead. He became very sorry and surprisingly exclaimed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَّىٰ يُحْيِي هَٰذِهِ اللَّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا ۖ فَأَمَاتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When will Allah give it life after its death?***[^28]

So Allah retrieved his soul also then and there. Thus all of them
remained there in the same state for one hundred years. After a hundred
years Allah made Uzair (a.s.) alive along with the others. They were
warriors numbering 1,00,000. But Bakht Nassar overpowered them and
killed each and every one.

Thereafter Bakht Nassar died and his son Mehrooyah became king. After
ruling for 16 years and 20 days Mehrooyah dug a very huge pit and threw
Daniyal (a.s.) and his Shias in it and torched it. But nobody was
harmed. When Mehrooyah saw that the flames of fire did not touch them he
imprisoned all of them and released many beasts of prey therein and
tortured them in various methods till Allah Almighty released them from
his clutches. The group referred to as ‘Ashaab al Ukhdood’ (people of
the pit) in the holy Quran were these people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ النَّارِ ذَاتِ الْوَقُودِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Killed were the makers of the pit, Of the fire (kept burning) with
fuel.***[^29]

When Allah desired to call back Daniyal (a.s.) to His Mercy, He
commanded him to turn over his Divine light of wisdom to his son
Makeekha and to make him his caliph and he obeyed the command of Allah.
At that time Hormuz was the king. He ruled for 33 years, 3 months and 4
days. Thereafter Behram ruled for 26 years. At that time the custodian
of religion and Shariat (religious code) was Makeekha Ibne Daniyal
(a.s.).

His companions were among the believers and testifiers. But they could
not express their faith and were not able to tell the truth openly.
After Behram, his son ruled for 7 years. Thereafter the chain of
Prophets was broken and the age of Fitrat (intermission) began and the
Wali-e-Amr (Divine Commander) and Imam (leader) and legatee was Makeekha
(a.s.). He had his companions with him. When the time of his death
approached, Allah asked him to hand over the Divine Light of Wisdom to
Inshoo bin Makeekha and to make him his legatee.

And the period of Fatra (without prophet) between Isa (a.s.) and
Muhammad (S) was of four hundred and eighty years and a number of
persons in the progeny of Inshoo became religious leaders one after
another as Allah wished. After Behram, Hormuz’s son Shapoor came to
throne and he ruled for 92 years. He was the first king who made a crown
and adorned it on his head. At that time too the legatee was Inshoo.
After Shapoor his brother Urdeshir ruled for 2 years. It was in his time
that Allah made Ashaab Kahf-O-Raqeem (people of the Pit and the Sheet)
alive.

At that time Allah’s caliph was Inshoo’s son Waseehaa (a.s.). After
Urdeshir his son Shapoor became king and ruled for 50 years. In his time
too Waseehaa (a.s.) was the leader of Allah’s creation. After Shapoor,
his son Yezdjard came to throne and ruled for 21 years, five months and
19 days. In his time also Waseehaa (a.s.) was the Divine caliph.

When Allah willed to call Waseeha back to Him he revealed through a
dream to Waseehaa (a.s.) that he should hand over the divine Light,
wisdom, commandments and intelligence to his son Nastooras (a.s.). after
Yezdjard, Behram ruled for 26 years and 18 days. In that time also the
Hujjat (Divine Proof) was Nastooras (a.s.).

After Behram, Firoz, son of Yezdjard, got kingship who ruled for 70
years. In his time also Nasturas (a.s.) remained the Proof of Allah
(Hujjat) and the believers of that period were with him. When Allah
intended to call Nasturas (a.s.) back to His Mercy, He asked him in a
dream to appoint Mareza (a.s.) as his legatee and to hand over the
knowledge and wisdom to him. Then, after Firoz, his son Falaas ruled for
40 years and during this time Mareza (a.s.) was the viceroy of Allah.

Thereafter his brother (Falas’s brother) Qabaad ruled for 43 years and
after him his brother Jamaasp ruled for 46 or 66 years. At that time
also Mareza (a.s.) was the Caliph of Allah (protector of faith and
Shariat). After Jamasp, Qabad’s son Kisri became king and he ruled for
46 years and 8 months. In his time also Mareza (a.s.) was the protector
of Religion and Code of Life. Then Allah desired to call him back to His
Mercy and ordered him in a dream to pass the Divine light of wisdom to
Baheera (a.s.) the Rahib and to make him his Khalifah.

After Kisrai his son Hurmun came to throne and ruled for 38 years. In
his time also Baheera (a.s.) was the protector of religion and Shariat
who also had believers who put faith in him and testified in him. After
Hurmumz Kisra e Parvez got kingship. In his time also Baheera (a.s.) was
the caliph of Allah until the time when the period of the occultation of
the Hujjats of Allah became lengthy and Divine Revelation was stopped.

The people became ungrateful with Allah’s blessings and devalued them,
they became prey to Allah’s anger. They weakened religion. They left
prayers and Qiyamat came nearer. Religion was torn into pieces and
people drowned in the darkness of ignorance and became bewildered with
various religions and fell in doubt about the true path. Affairs were
dispersed. Long period passed since the arrivals of Prophets. Some
remained on the religion of their Prophets and some became ungrateful to
Allah.

They became oppressive instead of thankful and obedient to Allah. Then
Allah for his Messengership selected from the holy pious family tree,
the one whom He had given the highest status over all the past tribes
and whom He had made the fountainhead of all holy personalities and the
mine of sacred souls, that is, He chose Muhammad Mustafa (S) for His
Messengership and bestowed on him His choice for Prophethood and exposed
His Religion fully through him so that he could decide matters with
justice between His slaves and fight against His enemies and He also
gave all the knowledge and wisdom of all the past Prophets and their
legatees. Moreover He gave the holy Quran to him in the rich language of
Arabic wherein falsehood can never find a way and he provided
information about both the past and the future in it.

21 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Hasan
bin Ali Khazzaz from Amr bin Aban from Hasan bin Abi Hamza from his
father from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“O Abu Hamza, the earth does not remain empty from a scholar from us
Ahlul Bayt who may point out if the people commit excess in religion and
if they are deficient he may point out that also. And the Almighty Allah
does not let this scholar leave the world till he does not leave a
successor from his progeny who has the same knowledge.”

22 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Yaqoob bin Yazid from Abdullah Ghiffari
from Ja’far bin Ibrahim and Hasan bin Zaid, all of them from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) from his ancestors from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he
said:

“There is no decline for my descendants. They shall remain in security.”

23 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Yaqoob bin Yazid from Safwan bin Yahya
that he said: I heard Ar-Reza (a.s.) say:

“The earth can never remain devoid of an Imam from among us.”

24 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ayyub bin Nuh from Rabi bin
Muhammad bin Musli from Abdullah bin Sulaiman Aamiri from Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) that he said:

“There is always a Divine Proof on the earth who is aware of the lawful
and the prohibited and who calls the people to Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. And the earth shall not be without Divine Proof but forty days
prior to the Judgment Day. When that Divine Proof will be taken up by
Allah the door of repentance shall be closed and the faith of those who
accept it after the going away of Divine Proof will be of no use. They
shall be the worst of creatures. After that the Judgment Day will be
established for them.”

25 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to me Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from Ahmad bin Muhammad
bin Isa from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi Nasr from Uqbah bin Ja’far that
he said: I asked Abul Hasan ar-Reza (a.s.):

“You have reached this stage, but you don’t have an issue?” He replied:
“O Uqbah bin Ja’far, the Imam does not pass away before seeing his
descendants.”

26 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa
from Hasan bin Mahboob from Ali bin Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is much above the fact that He
should keep the earth without a just Imam.”

27 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar; and Saad bin
Abdullah; and Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari that they all narrated from
Muhammad bin Husain Ibne Abil Khattab, from Ali bin Noman from Fudail
bin Uthman from Abi Ubaidah that he said: I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“May I be sacrificed on you, Salim bin Abi Hafsa Yalqani asked me if we
believed that if a person dies without recognizing the Imam (of his
time) his death is that of ignorance?” I replied, “Yes it is our
belief.” He said, “Who is your Imam after the passing away of Abu
Ja’far?” I, may I be sacrificed on you felt averse to say: Ja’far
(a.s.), so I said, “My Imams are the descendants of Muhammad.”

He said, “I don’t think you are following the right Imam.” The Imam
said: “Woe be to Salim bin Abi Hafsa – may Allah curse him – does Salim
know what is the position of the Imam? The position of the Imam is much
above than what Salim and all people think. None one of us (Imams)
passes away but that he leaves behind one who is having similar
knowledge and who is like him in manners.

Who invites to matters like he invited. And nothing prevents Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime from bestowing to Prophet Sulaiman better than what
He bestowed to Prophet Dawood (a.s.).”

28 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
[he said: Narrated to us Ibrahim bin Hashim from Abi Ja’far from Uthman
bin Aslam from Dharih from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said: I heard him
say:

“By Allah, after Adam (a.s.) Allah, the Mighty and Sublime did not leave
the earth without an Imam, who may guide the people to Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime and who is the Proof of Allah on the people. One who leaves
him is destroyed and one who remains attached to him gets salvation. And
it is the right upon Allah (the Mighty and Sublime).”

Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far from
Muhammad bin Isa from Ja’far bin Bashir and Safwan bin Yahya, all of
them from Dharih from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) the same tradition.

29 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Ibne Mahboob from Alaa from
Ibne Abi Yafoor that he said: Abu Abdillah (a.s.) said:

“The world cannot exist even for a day without an Imam from us Ahlul
Bayt, due to whom the Ummah is safe.”

30 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.) : Narrated to us Saad bin
Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Muhammad bin
Husain from Ibne Abi Umair from Hamza bin Humran that he said: I heard
Aba Abdillah (a.s.) say:

“If only two persons survive on the earth, one of them would be the
Divine Proof or the second.”

31 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Muhammad bin Abdul Hameed from Mansur bin Yunus from Abdur
Rahman bin Sulaiman from his father from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) from Harith
bin Naufal that he said:

Ali (a.s.) asked the Messenger of Allah (S): “O Messenger of Allah,
would the guides be from us or others?” He replied: “From us are the
guides to Allah till the Judgment Day. Through us has Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime saved the people from the deviation of polytheism and
through He saved them from the deviation of evil. Through us have the
people become brothers after being in the deviation of evil just as they
became brothers after being in the deviation of polytheism. Through us
will Allah conclude like He initiated through us.”

32 -Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from
Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid from Husain bin Saeed from Ja’far bin
Basheer; and Safwan bin Yahya, all of them from Moalla bin Uthman from
Moalla bin Khunais that he said: I asked Aba Abdillah (a.s.):

“Did it become necessary after Prophet Nuh (a.s.) that there should be a
person among the people, to obey whom is incumbent on them?” He replied:
“It is so, but most people do not believe.”

33 -Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Isa
bin Ubaid from Muhammad bin Ismail bin Bazee from Mansur bin Yunus from
a companion of his from Abi Hamza that he asked from Abi Ja’far (a.s.)
regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Everything is perishable except His face.***[^30]

The Imam said: “O so and so, (do you think that) everything will be
destroyed and only the face of Allah will remain? Allah is much above
than what is attributed to Him. It actually means that everything will
be destroyed except His religion and we are that face through which
Allah is reached. And there is always someone among the people who is
Rubah.” I asked: “What is Rubah?” He replied: “Need, thus when the
people don’t need the Divine Proof anymore Allah will take us up and
will do what He likes.”

34 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar from Muhammad bin
Husain Ibne Abil Khattab from Ja’far bin Basheer from Amr bin Aban from
Dhuraith Kunnasi from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) regarding the words of Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***-Everything is perishable except His face.***[^31]

“We are that face through which Allah can be reached (is recognized).”

35 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Hasan as-Saffar; and Saad bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far
Humyari, all of them said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid:
Narrated to us Abul Qasim Hashimi: Narrated to me Ubaid bin Nafees
Ansari: Informed us Hasan bin Samaa-a from Ja’far bin Samaa-a from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Jibraeel (a.s.) descended on the Prophet (S) with a scroll from the
heavens, which was such that Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty,
had never sent down such a writing before or after that. It had a number
of gold seals.

Jibraeel (a.s.) said: ‘O Muhammad, this is your instruction concerning
successorship to the noble among your household.’ He said: ‘Who are the
noble ones, O Jibraeel?’ He said: ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and his sons
(a.s.).’ The Prophet (S) handed it on to Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
commanding him to break open one of its seals and carry out what (was
written) in it. After the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S) Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) broke open a seal and carried out what was in it.

Then he handed it on to Hasan Ibne Ali (a.s.), and he broke open one
seal and carried out what was in it. Then he handed it on to Husain Ibne
Ali (a.s.), and he broke open one seal and found in it: ‘Go forth with a
group of men to martyrdom, for there is no martyrdom for them except
with you; and sell yourself to Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty.’
So he did (this).

Then he handed it on to a man after him [Ali Ibne Husain (a.s.)], and he
broke open one seal and found in it: ‘Lower your head in silence, do not
speak out, stay in your house, and worship your Lord till what is
certain (death) carries you away.’ So he did (this). Then he handed it
on to his son [Muhammad Ibne Ali (a.s.)], and he broke open one seal and
found in it: ‘Speak to the people, give them legal rulings, and
disseminate the knowledge of your ancestors.’ So he did (this).

Then he handed it on to his son [Ja’far Ibne Muhammad (a.s.)], and he
broke open one seal and found in it: ‘Speak to the people, give them
legal rulings and testify for your ancestors. And do not fear other than
Allah, indeed you are in the protection of Allah and in His guarantee.
And he was ordered to transfer it and he transferred it to one after him
and so on till [the rising of Mahdi and] the Judgment Day.”

36 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari: Narrated to us Hasan bin Ali Zaitooni from Ibne Hilal from
Khalaf Ibne Hammad from Ibne Muskan from Muhammad bin Muslim from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The Divine Proof is there before the creation, with the creation and
after the creation.”

37 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin
Ja’far: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain from Yazid bin Ishaq Sha-ar
from Harun bin Hamza Ghanwi that he said: I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“Did it become necessary after Prophet Nuh (a.s.) that there should be a
person among the people, to obey whom is incumbent on them?” He replied:
“It is so, but most people do not believe.”

38 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.) that: Narrated to us Saad
bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far, all of them from Muhammad bin
Husain from Muhammad bin Sinan from Hamza bin Humran from Abi Abdullah
(a.s.) that he said:

“If only two persons remain on the earth one of them will be the Divine
Proof and if one of them dies, the remaining one will be the Divine
Proof.”

39 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari: Narrated to us Ahmad
bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan bin Mahboob from Hisham bin Saalim from
Yazid Kunnasi that he said: Abu Ja’far (a.s.) said:

“O Aba Khalid, the earth cannot remain without the Proof of Allah on the
people even for a day since the time Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
created Adam (a.s.) and settled him on the earth.”

40 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.) that: Narrated to us Saad
bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Ayyub bin
Nuh from Safwan bin Yahya from Abdullah bin Khidaish Basri that a man
asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“Can the earth remain without an Imam even for a moment?” He replied:
“The earth can never be without truth (Imam).”

41 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Ahmad bin Idrees:
Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Abi Nasr from Hammad bin Uthman from Abdullah bin Abi Yafur that he
asked Aba Abdillah (a.s.):

“Can the earth remain without an Imam?” He replied: “No.” Then he was
asked, “Can there be two Imams at one and the same time?” “No,” he
replied, “Except that one of them is silent (and he does not announce
his Imamate).”

42 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa
from Abbas bin Maroof from Ibrahim bin Mahziyar from his brother Ali bin
Mahziyar from Hasan bin Bashshar Wasiti that he said: Husain bin Khalid
asked Ar-Reza (a.s.) in our presence:

“Can the earth remain without an Imam?” He replied: “No.”

43 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Isa from Ibne Mahboob from Ali bin
Abi Hamza from Abi Baseer from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed, Allah is greater and more sublime than that He should leave the
earth without a just Imam.”

44 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan: Narrated to us Abbas bin
Fadl Muqri: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Mansur: Narrated to us
Amr bin Aun: Narrated to us Hasan Ibne Ubaidullah from Abi Zuha from
Zaid bin Arqam that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two heavy (very important) things, the Book of Allah
and my progeny – my Ahlul Bayt. The two shall not separate from each
other till they come to me at the Pool (of Kauthar).”

45 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ahmad bin Yunus: Narrated
to us Abbas bin Fadl from Abi Ruz-aa from Kathir bin Yahya Abi Malik
from Abi Awana from Amash from Habib bin Abi Thabit from Aamir bin
Wathila from Zaid bin Arqam that he said:

“When the Messenger of Allah (S) returned from the Farewell Hajj he
halted at Ghadeer Khumm. Then he ordered a shade to be put up under some
tall trees. Then he went to it and said: I have received summons from
Allah and I have accepted them. Thus I leave among you two heavy (very
important) things. One of them is greater than the other. The Book of
Allah and my progeny – my Ahlul Bayt – so you take care how you behave
with them after me.

The two shall not separate from each other till they come to me at the
Pool (of Kauthar). Then he said: Allah is my master and I am the master
of all the believers. Then he raised up the hand of Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.) and said: Of whomsoever I am the master, this Ali is also his
master. O Allah love one who loves him and be inimical to one who is
inimical to him. The narrator asked Zaid bin Arqam, “Have you heard this
statement from the Messenger of Allah (S) directly?” Zaid replied, “All
who were present there, heard and witnessed it directly.”

46 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ja’fra bin Husain Baghdadi: Narrated to
us Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Abdul Aziz by dictation: Narrated to us
Bishr bin Walid: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Talha from Amash from
Atiyyah bin Saad from Abi Saeed Khudri that the Prophet (S) said:

“I feel that I shall be summoned (to Allah soon) and I will accept the
call. And I leave among you two important things. The Book of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and my progeny. The Book of Allah is a rope
stretching between the heavens and the earth – and my progeny – my Ahlul
Bayt – indeed, the Kind and the Informed One has informed me that the
two of them shall not separate from each other till they arrive to me at
the Pool (of Kauthar). So be careful how you take them as my
successors.”

47 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar Baghdadi: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Husain bin Hafs Khathami: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ubaid:
Narrated to us Salih bin Musa: Narrated to us Abdul Aziz bin Rafi from
Abi Salih from Abi Huraira that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S)
said:

“I leave among you two things. You will never deviate after me if you
remain attached to them and act according to them: The Book of Allah and
my Sunnah. And the two of them shall not separate from each other till
they arrive to me at the Pool.”

48 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar al-Hafiz: Narrated to us Qasim bin
Abbad: Narrated to us Suwaid: Narrated to us Amr bin Salih from Zakariya
from Atiyyah from Abi Saeed that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S)
said:

“I leave among you that which if you remain attached to, you will never
be deviated. The Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, which is a
stretching rope and my progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. The two shall not
separate from each other till they arrive to me at the Pool.”

49 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Abdullah bin Saeed: Informed us Muhammad
bin Ahmad bin Hamdan Qushairi: Narrated to us Husain bin Hameed:
Narrated to me my brother Hasan bin Hameed: Narrated to me Ali bin
Thabit Dahhan: Narrated to me Suaad - and he is Ibne Sulaiman - from Abi
Ishaq from al-Harith from Ali (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said:

“The time of my summons (of death) is near and I will accept it. Thus I
leave among you two heavy things. One of them is superior to the other:
the Book of Allah and my progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. The two shall not
separate from each other till they reach me at the Pool.”

50 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Abdullah bin Saeed: Informed us Qushairi
from Mughirah bin Muhammad bin Muhallab: Narrated to me my father from
Abdullah bin Dawood from Fudhail bin Marzuq from Atiyyah Aufi from Abi
Saeed Khudri that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two matters, one of them being longer than the other:
the Book of Allah, which is a rope drawn from the heavens to the earth,
an end of which is with Allah; and my progeny. The two shall not
separate from each other till they reach me at the Pool. I asked Abi
Saeed: ‘Who are his progeny?’ He replied: ‘His Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’”

51 - Narrated to us Ali bin Fadl Baghdadi: I heard Aba Amr associate of
Abu Abbas Thalab saying: I heard Abu Abbas Thalab being asked about the
meaning of the Prophet’s statement:

“I leave among you two heavy things.” That why they are called two heavy
things. He replied: “Because remaining attached to them is ‘heavy’
(difficult).”

52 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Ali bin Shuaib Abu Muhammad Jauhari:
Narrated to us Isa bin Muhammad Alawi: Narrated to us Abu Amr Ahmad bin
Abi Hazim Ghiffari: Narrated to us Ubaidullah bin Musa from Shareek from
Rukain bin Rabi from Qasim bin Hassan from Zaid bin Thabit that he said:
The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two heavy things: the Book of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime and my progeny -my Ahlul Bayt. Know that they are my successors
after me and they shall not separate from each other till they reach me
at the Pool.”

53 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Ali bin Shuaib Abu Muhammad Juhari:
Narrated to us Isa bin Muhammad Alawi: Narrated to us Husain bin Hasan
Hairi in Kufa: Narrated to us Hasan bin Husain Arni from Amr bin Jumai
from Amr bin Abi Miqdam from Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father (a.s.)
that he said:

“One day when Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari arrived, I asked him to tell me
something about the Farewell Hajj. So He narrated a lengthy tradition
and then said that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I leave among you
that which if you remain attached to, you will never be deviated after
me: the Book of Allah and my progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. Then he said
thrice: O Allah be a witness to this.”

54 -Narrated to us Hasan bin Ubaidullah bin Saeed: Informed us Muhammad
bin Ahmad bin Hamdan Qushairi: Narrated to us Abul Hatim Mughirah bin
Muhammad bin Muhallab: Narrated to us Abdul Ghaffar bin Muhammad bin
Kathir Kilabi Kufi from Jareer bin Abdul Hameed from Hasan bin
Ubaidullah from Abi Zuha from Zaid bin Arqam that he said: The Messenger
of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you that which if you remain attached to, you will never
be deviated: the Book of Allah and my progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. And they
shall not separate from each other till they reach me at the Pool.”

(\*) Narrated to us Hasan bin Abdullah: Informed us Muhammad bin Ahmad
bin Hamdan Qushairi: Narrated to us Husain bin Hameed: Narrated to me my
brother Hasan bin Hameed: Narrated to us Ali bin Thabit Dahhan: Narrated
to us Suaad - and he is Ibne Sulaiman - from Abi Ishaq from al-Harith
from Ali (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Very soon I am going to receive the summons (of death) and I will
accept it. Thus I leave among you two heavy things. One of them is
superior to the other: the Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and my
progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. The two shall not separate from each other till
they reach me at the Pool.”

(\*\*) Narrated to us Hasan bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Qushairi:
Narrated to us Mughirah bin Muhammad: Narrated to me my father: Narrated
to me Abdullah bin Dawood from Fudail bin Marzuq from Atiyyah Aufi from
Abi Saeed Khudri that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two matters, one of them is longer than the other:
the Book of Allah, which is a rope drawn from the heavens to the earth,
an end of which is with Allah; and my progeny. The two shall not
separate from each other till they reach me at the Pool. I asked Abi
Saeed: ‘Who are his progeny?’ He replied: ‘His Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’”

55 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar Hafiz Baghdadi: Narrated to me
Abdullah bin Sulaiman bin Ashath: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Moalla Adami:
Narrated to us Yahya bin Hammad: Narrated to us Abu Awana from Amash
from Habib bin Abi Thabit from Aamir bin Wathila from Zaid bin Arqam
that he said:

“When the Messenger of Allah (S) returned from the Farewell Hajj he
halted at Ghadeer Khumm. Then he ordered a shade to be put up under some
tall trees. Then he went to it and said: I have received summons from
Allah and I have accepted them. Thus I leave among you two heavy (very
important) things.

One of them is greater than the other. The Book of Allah and my progeny
– my Ahlul Bayt – so you take care how you behave with them after me.
The two shall not separate from each other till they come to me at the
Pool (of Kauthar). Then he said: Allah is my master and I am the master
of all the believers. Then he raised up the hand of Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.) and said: Of whomsoever I am the guardian, this Ali is also his
guardian. The narrator says that he asked Zaid bin Arqam, “Have you
heard this statement from the Messenger of Allah (S) directly?” Zaid
replied, “All who were present there, heard and witnessed it directly.”

56 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar: Narrated to me Abdullah bin Yazid
Abu Muhammad Bajali: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Tareef:

Narrated to us Muhammad bin Fudhail from Amash from Atiyyah from Abi
Saeed from Habib bin Abi Thabit from Zaid bin Arqam that he said: The
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I have received the summons of death and I have accepted it. Thus I
leave among you two heavy (very important) things. One of them is
greater than the other. The Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, which
is a rope drawn from the heavens to the earth and my progeny – my Ahlul
Bayt – the two shall remain together till they come to me at the Pool
(of Kauthar). So be careful how you consider them as my successors.”

57 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar: Narrated to us Abu Ja’far Muhammad
bin Husain bin Hafs from Abbad bin Yaqoob from Abi Malik Amr bin Hashim
Janbi from Abdul Malik from Atiyyah that he heard Abi Saeed narrating
from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said:

“O people, I leave among you which if you remain attached to, you will
never be deviated after me: the two heavy (very important) things: One
of them is greater than the other. The Book of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, which is a rope drawn from the heavens to the earth and my
progeny – my Ahlul Bayt – the two shall not separate from each other
till they come to me at the Pool (of Kauthar).”

58 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar: Narrated to me Hasan bin Abdullah
bin Muhammad bin Ali Tamimi: Narrated to me my father: Narrated to me my
chief, Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad: Narrated to me my father
from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin Ali
from his father Ali from his father Husain from his father Ali (a.s.)
that he said: The Prophet (S) said:

“I leave among you two heavy (very important) things: The Book of Allah
and my progeny – my Ahlul Bayt – the two shall never separate from each
other till they come to me at the Pool (of Kauthar).”

59 - Narrated to us Abu Muhammad Ja’far bin Nuaym bin Shazan Nishapuri:
Narrated to me my uncle Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Shazan from Fadl bin
Shazan: Narrated to us Ubaidullah bin Musa: Narrated to us Israel from
Abi Ishaq from Hansh bin Motamar that he said:

“I saw Abu Zar Ghiffari (r.a.) catching hold of the chain of the door of
the Kaaba and saying: Those who know me know me and those who don’t
should know that I am Abu Zar Jundab bin Sakan. I heard the Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “I leave among you two heavy (important) things: The
Book of Allah and my progeny – my Ahlul Bayt – the two shall never
separate from each other till they come to me at the Pool (of Kauthar).
Know that they are like the Ark of Nuh. One who boarded it was saved and
one who left it was drowned.”

60 - Narrated to us Shareefuddin Sadooq Abu Ali Muhammad bin Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Ziyarah bin Abdullah bin Hasan bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.): Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah: Narrated to
us Fadl bin Shazan Nishapuri from Ubaidullah bin Musa: Narrated to us
Shareek from Rukain bin Rabi from Qasim bin Hassan from Zaid bin Thabit
that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two successors: The Book of Allah and my progeny – my
Ahlul Bayt – the two shall not separate from each other till they come
to me at the Pool (of Kauthar).”

61 - Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus al-Attar
Nishapuri (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah from Fadl
bin Shazan: Narrated to us Ishaq bin Ibrahim: Narrated to us Isa bin
Yunus: Narrated to us Zakariya bin Abi Zaidah from Atiyyah Aufi from Abi
Saeed Khudri that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two heavy (very important) things: One of them is
greater than the other. The Book of Allah, which is a rope drawn from
the heavens to the earth and my progeny – my Ahlul Bayt – the two shall
not separate from each other till they come to me at the Pool (of
Kauthar).”

62 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin
Qutaibah: Narrated to us Fadl bin Shazan: Narrated to us Ishaq bin
Ibrahim from Jareer from Hasan bin Ubaidullah from Abi Zuha from Zaid
bin Arqam from the Prophet (S) that he said:

“I leave among you the Book of Allah and my Ahlul Bayt. The two shall
not separate from each other till they come to me at the Pool (of
Kauthar).”

63 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Isa from Husain bin Saeed from Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Umar
Yamani from Sulaym bin Qais Hilali from Amirul Momineen, Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed Allah, the Blessed and the Mighty purified us and made us
infallible and appointed us as a witness on His creatures and a Proof on
His earth. And He kept us with Quran and kept the Quran with us. Neither
shall we separate from the Quran nor will the Quran separate from us.”

64 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamdani (r.a.):
Narrated to me Ali bin Ibrahim Ibne Hashim from his father from Muhammad
bin Abi Umair from Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from as-Sadiq Ja’far Ibne
Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin Ali from his father Ali bin Husain
from his father Husain bin Ali (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen, Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) was asked about the statement the Messenger of Allah (S):

“I leave among you two heavy things, the Book of Allah and my progeny.”
That who constitute the ‘progeny’? He replied: “I and Hasan and Husain
and nine Imams from the progeny of Husain, the ninth of whom shall be
their Mahdi and Qaim. They will not separate from the Quran and it will
not separate from them till they come to the Messenger of Allah (S) at
his Pool.”

65 -Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah
Barqi from his father from his grandfather Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah from
his father Muhammad bin Khalid from Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from Thabit bin
Dinar from Saad bin Tareef from Saeed bin Jubair from Ibne Abbas that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.):

“O Ali, I am the city of wisdom and you are its gate and one cannot
enter the city except through its gate. Thus lied has one who thinks
that he loves me while he hates you. Because you are from me and I am
from you. Your flesh is my flesh and your blood is my blood and your
soul is my soul. Your secrets are my secrets and your apparent is my
apparent. And you are the Imam of my Ummah and my Caliph on it after me.
Good is the one who obeys you and evil the one who disobeys you. And
profited the one who loved you and made loss the one who bore enmity to
you.

Saved was the one who remained attached to you and destroyed was one who
deserted you. Your simile and the simile of the Imams after you is like
the simile of the Ark of Nuh; one who boarded it was saved and one who
left it was drowned. And your simile is like the simile of the stars.
When one star sets another rises (and this goes on) till the Judgment
Day.”

Meanings of Itrah, Aal, Ahl, Dhurriyat and Sulaala
--------------------------------------------------

The author of this book (r.a.) says: If someone asks about the statement
of the Messenger of Allah (S) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تارك فيكم ما إن تمسكتم به لن تضلوا بعدي كتاب الله وعترتي ألا وإنهما لن
يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“That why you don’t consider Abu Bakr and all the Banu Umayyah to be
included in the Itrah or why do consider only the descendants of Hasan
and Husain (a.s.) as Itrah. And in that case Ali (a.s.) also does not
come within the sphere of Itrah. “*

They will be replied as follows: Our contention is based on Arabic
lexicon and the statement of the Messenger of Allah (S): عتري يأهلبي ي
in which ‘Ahl’ is taken from أهاة ةالبت ت and it denotes those who
inhabit the house.

Thus anyone that inhabits a house is called the ‘Ahl’ of that house.
That is why the Quraish were called the ‘Aal of Allah’ because they
inhabited the house of Allah and were its caretakers. ‘Aal’ and ‘Ahl’
are synonymous. In the story of Prophet Lut (a.s.) the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَسْرِ بِأَهْلِكَ بِقِطْعٍ مِنَ اللَّيْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So remove your followers in a part of the night.***[^32]

And it is also mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا آلَ لُوطٍ ۖ نَجَّيْنَاهُمْ بِسَحَرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Except Lut’s followers; We saved them a little before
daybreak.***[^33]

Here ‘Ahl’ is called as ‘Aal’ and Aal and Ahl are synonymous. Aal is the
diminutive of Ahl. The Arabs made the diminutive of Aal as Aheel but due
to the heaviness of ‘ha’ it was dropped and it was pronounced as Aal.
This Aal means everyone related to a person.

After that the word of ‘Aal’ was used as an equivalent of Ummah in the
metaphorical sense and everyone that followed the Holy Prophet (S) was
included in the ‘Aal’ and the following words of Allah are presented as
evidence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Make Firon’s people enter the severest chastisement.***[^34]

Since the ‘Aal-e-Firon’ means the followers of Firon and Allah had
flayed them due to their disbelief and not because of their
relationship. Thus here ‘Aal¬e-Firon’ does not denote Firon’s Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) - family members. In other words the word of ‘Aal’ is used for
family members except that there should be some evidence for metaphor.
It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that ‘Aal’ means sons.

Thus ‘Ahl’ denotes the descendants of a person, the children of his
father and the nearest descendants of the grandfather. But it does not
include the descendants of distant grandfather (like the great
grandfather and the great great grandfather). That is why the Arabs do
not consider the Persians as their ‘Ahl’ even though the progenitor of
both is Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.).

In the same way the Quraish do not consider the Mudhir as their ‘Ahl’.
And if all the Quraish were considered as Ahl of the Messenger due to
relationship, the descendants of Mudhir and all the Arabs would have
been ‘Ahl’ of each other. Thus Ahl means the close relatives of a person
and the thus Ahl of the Holy Prophet (S) are Banu Hashim. Therefore if
anyone had asked about the explanation of this statement of the Holy
Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إي يف فم ما ان نتمسم مه هلنتضلواب بهلل .وعتري يل لبيتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

That what does Itrah denote, the Holy Prophet (S) would have said that
my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the Itrah in lexicon is that tree that grows at
the edge of the crocodile’s lair. As Hudhali as composed the following
lines:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فماكت تأي يأنأم مخالفهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ة ةأبياتا اينبتالعتر
  </p>
</blockquote>

I don’t fear rising up against them for six lines of poetry as the Atar
tree grows.

Abu Ubaid in book, Amthal has narrated from his namesake expert of
language, Abu Ubaid, that ‘al-atar’ and ‘al-at’ar’ means the origin of
man, that is why there is a saying that; Lamees came back to her
original (al-a’tar’) habit which she had left.

In the original language Itrat means the family of a man. That is why
the Holy Prophet (S) said, “My progeny; my Ahlul Bayt.” Thus Itrat means
one’s family and the family of ones children. If Itrat did not mean
family and only meant the family of children Ali (a.s.) would not have
been included in the statement of the Holy Prophet (S) and if he had not
been included he would not have been included among those who would not
separate from the Holy Quran and attachment to whom will not let one to
go astray.

Secondly, the statement of the Holy Prophet (S) is regarding some
particular persons related to him. And even if this statement is
restricted only to his children, in them also considering it to pertain
to some particular persons would not be objectionable.

That Ali (a.s.) is also included in Itrat is itself proved by the
statement of the Holy Prophet (S): “The two shall not separate till they
meet me at the Pool.” Because the Ummah is unanimous Ali (a.s.) never
separated from the dictates if the Book of Allah. After the Holy Prophet
(S) there was no one more knowledgeable about the Book of Allah than Ali
(a.s.).

And Imams Hasan and Husain (a.s.) were also included among those whom
the Holy Prophet (S) left behind as Itrat. Thus there is no one in the
Ummah who can claim that they were more knowledgeable about the Book of
Allah than Ali (a.s.). Rather the two of them received knowledge of
Imamate as inheritance from Ali (a.s.). And the statement of the Holy
Prophet (S) that: “I am leaving among something, that if you remain
attached to you will never go astray,” is not without qualification.
Either it is for all the times or for a particular time.

If it is for all the times, during the time of Ali (a.s.) who was there
from the Itrat whom the Holy Prophet (S) had left? Did at that time it
denote Hasan and Husain (a.s.) or Ali (a.s.)? If someone says that it
denoted Hasan and Husain (a.s.) it would mean that Hasan and Husain
(a.s.) were more knowledgeable about the Book of Allah than their father
and in such a case one who follows this belief will go against the
consensus of the Ummah.

And if someone says that the statement of the Holy Prophet (S) is not
applicable for more than one particular time period; that is you have to
remain attached to them only in a particular time; at other times
attachment to them is not necessary, there is nothing which proves this.
Thus if the statement of the Holy Prophet (S) is considered applicable
to all time, Ali (a.s.) in his time will be taken as the representative
of Itrat. And the statement of the Holy Prophet (S) proves that Divine
Proof shall remain till the Judgment Day and no period will be without
an Imam.

Because the Holy Prophet (S) has said: “Their (Ahlul Bayt’s) example is
like that of stars. When one star disappears another appears and this
will continue till the Judgment Day.” This proves our contention that
the earth will never be devoid of Divine Proof whether it is apparent or
hidden because without the Imam the foundations of religion becomes
false and as the Messenger of Allah (S) has mentioned in the following
tradition, the Itrat comprises of persons who are close to the Holy
Quran.

Narrated to me Ahmad bin Hasan Qattan from Hasan bin Ali Sukari from
Muhammad bin Zakariya Jauhari from Muhammad bin Ummara from his father
from as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin Ali
(a.s.) from his father Ali bin Husain from his father Husain bin Ali
from his father Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said:

“I leave among you two important things, the Book of Allah and my
progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. The two shall not separate till they meet me at
the Pool like this,” and saying this he joined his index and middle
finger together. Jabir Ibne Abdullah Ansari stood up and asked, “O
Messenger of Allah (S), who are your Itrat?” He replied: “Ali, Hasan,
Husain and the Imams that will come from the progeny of Husain till
Qiyamat.”

Muhammad bin Bajr Shaibani has narrated from Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar,
companion of Abul Abbas Thalab, in his book entitled, Kitabul Yaqoot,
Abul Abbas Thalab narrated to me that Ibne Arabi narrated to me that
Itrat means a big piece of musk and its diminutive is ‘Utira’. And Itra
also means sweet water and its diminutive is also ‘Utira’: and Itrat is
that tree grows at the edge of a crocodile lair.

I think that it denotes the progeny of a man, that is why the progeny of
Ali (a.s.) and Fatima (s.a.) is called the progeny of Prophet Muhammad
(S). Thalab says that he asked Ibne Arabi why on the day of Saqifah Abu
Bakr said: We are the Itrat of the Prophet? Ibne Arabi replied: Abu Bakr
meant to say that we are the townsmen of the Messenger of Allah (S) and
from his tribe.

And the Itrat of Muhammad is only the progeny of Fatima (s.a.). What
proves this is the fact that Abu Bakr was recalled and Ali (a.s.) was
sent to preach the verses of Surah Baraat because the Holy Prophet (S)
was commanded to preach the verses himself or send someone from his
family. If Abu Bakr was included in Itrah by genealogy he would not have
been recalled from delivering the verses of Surah Baraat and Ali (a.s.)
would not have been sent in his stead.

It is also said that Itra is huge boulder in which the crocodile makes a
big hole and lives in it. And this is due to lack of guidance. And it is
said that Itra is the cut off roots of the tree that grows from its
roots. And Itrat, according to the statement of the Holy Prophet (S)
neither means ‘Fara’ (the first issue of a camel sacrificed as
thankfulness for idols) nor ‘Ateera’ (animal sacrificed to idols in
Rajab and its blood is applied to the idol’s head).

And Asmai has said that during the Age of Ignorance people used to make
vows of sacrificing one of their sheep and if the number of their sheep
increased to hundred and that it would be included among his sacrifice
of Rajab or ‘Ateera’. And sometimes it so happened that they used to act
miserly and instead of sacrificing their sheep they used to catch a deer
and sacrifice it before their idols so that his vow is fulfilled. Harith
bin Hillizara Yashkari has composed a line of poetry in this:

“An unlawful sin and injustice like a deer which is in refuge, is
sacrificed instead of a sheep.”

That is, he is caught due to the sin of others like a deer which is
slaughtered instead of sheep. Asmai says that Itrat means breeze and in
the same way the word of Itrah is used in the meaning of tree which has
many branches while itself is very small. And it is like Tihama[^35].
Riyashi says that he asked Asmai about the meaning of Itrat and he said
that it was a sapling like mouse-ear that grew in a scattered way.

Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain, the author of this book says: Itrat means
the progeny of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and Lady Fatima (s.a.) and they
are the descendants of the Holy Prophet (S) and if those who are
divinely appointed (Nass) through the Messenger of Allah (S) and they
are twelve persons. The first of them is Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and
the last is Imam Mahdi (a.s.). All the Bani Hashim and descendants of
Abu Talib are like pieces of musk and their sciences are sweet in the
view of scholars. They are the tree whose root is the Messenger of Allah
(S), trunk is Ali (a.s.) and the branches are the Purified Imams (a.s.).
Its leaves are Shia people and their sciences are the fruits of this
tree and they are the foundations of religion in the sense of tribesmen
and fellow citizens.

They are true guides, that is they are a huge boulder in which the
crocodile makes its lair and lives in. That is why there is lack of
guidance in it. And they are the roots of this cut tree because they are
left alone. They are oppressed and their rights trespassed and relations
were severed from them. They were boycotted. Thus they began to grow
once again from their roots. One who cut off relations from them could
do them no harm because they are appointed by Allah through the words of
the Messenger of Allah (S).

Itrat denotes those oppressed ones who were imprisoned for no crime
while many benefits accrue from them. They are the source of knowledge
like a tree that is full of milk. They are the party of Allah as Asmai
said Itrat is a wind and the Messenger of Allah (S) has said that wind
is the army of Allah and there is a famous tradition of the Holy Prophet
(S) that wind is a punishment to one community and a blessing to other.
And in the statement of the Holy Prophet (S): “I leave among you two
important things,” these exalted personalities are joined to the Holy
Quran and regarding the Holy Quran it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ
لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۙ وَلَا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to the
believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust.***[^36]

And the Almighty Allah also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَا أُنْزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَقُولُ أَيُّكُمْ
زَادَتْهُ هَٰذِهِ إِيمَانًا فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَزَادَتْهُمْ
إِيمَانًا وَهُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ
مَرَضٌ فَزَادَتْهُمْ رِجْسًا إِلَىٰ رِجْسِهِمْ وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ
كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whenever a chapter is revealed, there are some of them who say:
Which of you has it strengthened in faith? Then as for those who
believe, it strengthens them in faith and they rejoice. And as for those
in whose hearts is a disease, it adds uncleanness to their uncleanness
and they die while they are unbelievers.***[^37]

All of them were martyred in different places and remained far away from
their original home. From that aspect someone has said: Indeed Itrat is
like the mouse-ear sapling which grows far and wide and its blessings
are widespread.

Abu Ubaidah says regarding ‘Dhurriyat’ (descendants) that when
‘Dharayaat’ is pronounced with Alif and Taa it means offspring and
successors and the meaning is implied in the Holy Quran also. As the
Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا
وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who say: O our Lord! grant us in our wives and our offspring
the joy of our eyes.***[^38]

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has recited it as a singular. And in the
following verse also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآيَةٌلَّهُمْأَنَّاحَمَلْنَاذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And a sign to them is that We bear their offspring.***[^39]

While in the following verse Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَآأَنشَأَكُممِّنذُرِّيَّة ِقَوٍْمآخَرِين َ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…even as He raised you up from the seed of another people.***[^40]

Here we have two words: ‘Dhurriya’ and ‘Dhirriya’. Imam Ali (a.s.)
recited it as ‘Dhurriya’ and Abu Amr also did the same. This is the
recitation of the people of Medina except for one report which is
attributed to Zaid bin Thabit that he recited as ‘Dhirriya’. And Mujahid
has recited it to mean: They were from his progeny to whom Musa was sent
while their ancestors were dead. Fara says that they are referred to as
‘Dhurriya’ because their fathers were Copts and mothers were from Bani
Israel. He says that it just like the people of Fars who are born in
Yemen, are called Abna. Because their mothers and fathers belong to
different races. And Abu Ubaida says: Fara means to say that they are
called ‘Dhurriya’ and the pure blood are those who are implied in the
phrase: Dhurriya ar-rajul (progeny of man).

That is ones born through that man. And this is derived from the root
‘Dharoot’ and there is no ‘a’ (Hamza) in it. But it is the statement of
Abu Ubaidah himself that there is Hamza in its root but the Arabs have
omitted it. Thus according to Abu Ubaidah it denotes those whom Allah
has given in ones progeny. Like the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ذَرَأْنَا لِجَهَنَّمَ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We have created for hell many of the jinn and the
men.***[^41]

Thus ‘Dhurriyat’ means: descendants that Allah has given to a person
through his loins.

‘Salaalat’ means the gist of something. It is also called ‘Salaalah’ and
‘Saleel’. The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
م مق قعد دالرن نن نل لة ة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Allah, quench the thirst of Abdur Rahman from the Salil (cold water)
of Paradise.”*

The water in Paradise is called Salil because it is the purest form of
drinking thing. Thus this verb is in the form of subject. And the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ سُلَالَةٍ مِنْ طِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We created man of an extract of clay,***[^42]

In this verse Salala means the purest soil of the earth. Salalah also
means fruit. That is when a person is born from his mother and it is as
if he has come as a result of her.

Hind binte Asma wife of Hajjaj bin Yusuf Thaqafi has composed the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ول لد دال .مهة ةعربيةسلة ةأفرس سا ابغل
  </p>
</blockquote>

And what can Hinda be except a mare of the Arabian stock? She is from
the stock of the pure horses whom a mule has dominated.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فن نت تمهراكرا افب االحريون نك كأقراا اا افعاللفل ل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thus if this mare of Arabian stock gives birth to a pure blood horse,
what a lucky thing it would be.

If impure ones are born it is the fault of male.

It is also narrated about these couplets that: The male has given birth
to it. Saleel means result and Saleelah means a result which is not
having any impurity.

[^1]: Surah Taha 20: 115

[^2]: Surah Maidah 5: 27

[^3]: Surah Araaf 7:59

[^4]: Surah Nisa 4:164

[^5]: Surah Shuara 26:105

[^6]: Surah Shuara 26:123-124

[^7]: Surah Araaf 7:65

[^8]: Surah Baqarah 2:132

[^9]: Surah Anaam 6:84

[^10]: Surah Hud 11:89

[^11]: Surah Ankaboot 29:26

[^12]: Surah Saffat 37:99

[^13]: Surah Mominoon 23:44

[^14]: Surah Kahf 18:60

[^15]: Surah Araaf 7:157

[^16]: Surah Saff 61:6

[^17]: Surah Aale Imran 3:33–34

[^18]: Surah Nisa 4:54

[^19]: Surah Nisa 4:54

[^20]: Surah Noor 24:36

[^21]: Surah Anaam 6:84-89

[^22]: Surah Anaam 6:89

[^23]: Surah Saffat 37:99

[^24]: Surah Taubah 9:32

[^25]: Surah Nisa 4:59

[^26]: Surah Aale Imran 3:55

[^27]: Surah Nisa 4:158

[^28]: Surah Baqarah 2:259

[^29]: Surah Buruj 85:4-5

[^30]: Surah Qasas 28:55

[^31]: Surah Qasas 28:55

[^32]: Surah Hud 11:81

[^33]: Surah Qamar 54:34

[^34]: Surah Momin 40:46

[^35]: Coastal plain along the southwestern and southern shores of the
Arabian Peninsula.

[^36]: Surah Isra 17:82

[^37]: Surah Taubah 9:124-125

[^38]: Surah Furqan 25:74

[^39]: Surah Yasin 36:41

[^40]: Surah Anaam 6:133

[^41]: Surah Araaf 7:179

[^42]: Surah Mominoon 23:12


