Chapter 23: Nass of the Almighty Allah for al-Qaim and that he is the Twelfth Imam
==================================================================================

**Chapter 23: Nass (textual stamp) of the Almighty Allah for al-Qaim
(a.s.) and that he is the Twelfth Imam**

1 -Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees (r.a.): Narrated to us my
father: Narrated to us Abu Saeed Sahl bin Ziyad Adami ar-Raazi: Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Adam Shaibani from his father Adam Ibne Abi Iyaas:
Narrated to us Mubarak bin Fadala from Wahb bin Munabbih – rafa’u - from
Ibne Abbas that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“When I went on ascension I was called: O Muhammad. I replied: Lord of
majesty, here am I. The Almighty Allah revealed to me: O Muhammad, what
are you apprehensive about in the highest heavens? I said: My God, I
don’t know. I was asked: Have you not appointed among men your vizier,
brother and successor? I said: O Lord, whom should I appoint as my
vizier? Please choose him for me. So the Almighty Allah revealed to me:
O Muhammad, Ali is your successor and the inheritor of your knowledge
after you.

He is the standard bearer of your Liwa-ul-hamd till the Judgment Day. He
is the distributor of water at Kauthar and he will provide drinking
water to the believers of your Ummah. Then He said: I Muhammad, I swear
by My right that I will not allow the water of this pool for your, your
Ahlul Bayt’s and your progeny’s enemies. O Muhammad, I will admit your
whole Ummah in Paradise except those who refuse to enter it. I said: O
Lord, would anyone refuse to enter Paradise? He replied: Yes. I asked:
Why would he refuse? He replied: O Muhammad, I have chosen you among My
creatures and after you chosen your successor and made his position in
relation to you like the position of Harun with Musa (a.s.) except that
there will no prophet after you.

And I have placed his love in your heart and made him the progenitor of
your progeny. Thus his right on your Ummah after you is the same as your
right on your Ummah during your lifetime. So one who denied his right,
denied your right. Whoever denied his guardianship (Wilayat), denied
your Wilayat, and whoever denied your Wilayat, he has in fact refused to
enter Paradise. Thus I fell down in prostration of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime and thanked for those bounties that Allah had bestowed on me.
Then a voice came: Muhammad, raise your head and ask Me so I may give
you.

I said: My Lord, gather my whole Ummah on the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) after me so that they meet me at my Pool on Judgment Day.
Revelation came: O Muhammad, I have decided about My servants before I
created them and My decision has been applied on them. Thus I will
destroy whom I like and guide whom I like. Thus after you, I gave your
knowledge to him and after you I made him your vizier and caliph on your
family and your Ummah, and I have decided [I will surely admit in
Paradise one who loves him] and I will not admit to Paradise one who
harbors malice for him and is inimical to him.

Thus one who harbors malice to Ali he has harbored malice to you and one
who bears malice to you he has borne malice to Me. One who is inimical
to him, he has been inimical to you and one who has been inimical to you
he has been inimical to me. One who has loved him has loved you and one
who has loved you has loved me. I have given this excellence to him and
through his loins I will give you eleven guides all of who shall be from
Batool. Behind the last of them will pray Isa bin Maryam and he would
fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be fraught with
injustice and oppression. Through him there will be escape from
destruction and salvation from misguidance.

Through him the blind will get sight and the sick will get cure. I said:
My Lord, when will his advent be? He replied: When knowledge would have
disappeared and ignorance will be widespread. The Quran will be recited
in excess and less will be acted on. There will be murders in excess.
The rightful jurisprudents will be few and the unscrupulous
jurisprudents will be many. Poets will be there in large numbers and
your Ummah will make graves a place of prostration. The Quran will be
confined in receptacles and mosques will be decorated with gold and
silver. There will be oppression and rebellion in excess.

Your Ummah will be exhorted to commit evils and stopped from performing
good deeds. Women will satisfy their lusts with women and men with men.
The rulers will disbelieve, the saints will transgress and their
companions will oppress. Family ties will be severed. There will be
eclipse for three days. The first day in East, then in West, then in the
Arabian Peninsula. A person from your Ummah will appear and ransack
Basra.

The blacks will follow him. A person from the progeny of Husain bin Ali
will appear and Dajjal will appear from Sajistan in the East. Sufyani
will also appear. I asked: My Lord, after how long would this happen? So
Allah told me all about the oppression of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas
and the trouble that will befall my cousin and all the events that will
occur till Qiyamat. When I came down to the earth I mentioned all this
to the son of my uncle and conveyed the message. I thank Allah as the
prophets have done and everything before me did and like everything He
has created will do until the Judgment Day.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Hamam: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Mabundaz: Narrated to us
Ahmad bin Hilal from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Mufaddal Ibne Umar from
as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father from his ancestors (a.s.)
from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S)
said:

“When I was taken to the heavens during the ascension (Me’raj) my Lord
revealed to me: O Muhammad, I glanced at the earth and selected you from
it, and made you the prophet and named you after My name as I am Mahmood
and you are Muhammad. Again I glanced at the earth and chose Ali from it
and made him your successor and caliph and the husband of your daughter.
I named him also after My name. Thus I am the Ali Aala and he is Ali.
And I created Fatima, Hasan and Husain from your Noor
(light/effulgence).

At that time I presented their Wilayat (Mastership) to the angels so
that whoever may accept it, will gain proximity to My court. O Muhammad,
if a servant of Mine worships so much that he becomes tired and his body
becomes as brittle as musk but he is a denier in their Wilayat, and he
comes to Me, I will not accommodate him in My Paradise and not shade him
under My Arsh. O Muhammad, would you like to see them? I said: ‘Yes, my
Lord!’

The Almighty Allah said: ‘Raise your head.’ So I raised my head and saw
the lights of Ali, Fatima, Hasan, Husain, Ali bin al-Husain, Muhammad
bin Ali, Ja’far bin Muhammad, Musa bin Ja’far, Ali bin Musa, Muhammad
bin Ali, Ali bin Muhammad, Hasan bin Ali and Muhammad bin al-Hasan
al-Qaim. And among them one shone like a brilliant star. I asked: ‘O
Lord, who is that?’ He replied, ‘They are the Imams, and he is the Qaim,
who will make My lawful, lawful and My unlawful, unlawful. And through
him I shall take revenge from My enemies. And he is the source of
comfort for My friends.

He is the one who will bestow your Shias and followers, respite from the
infidels. And he will bring out Laat and Uzza fresh and burn them up.
Indeed the trial and test of the people by him will be much more
difficult than the mischief of the Calf and Samari.’”

3 - Narrated to us more than one of our associates: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Hamam from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari: Narrated
to me Hasan bin Muhammad bin Sama-a from Ahmad bin Harith: Narrated to
me Mufaddal bin Umar from Yunus bin Zabyan from Jabir bin Yazid al-Jofi
that he said: I heard Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari say:

“When Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, revealed upon His Prophet
Muhammad (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger and those
possessing authority among you***[^1] ***,***

I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! We know Allah and His Messenger. But who
are the possessors of authority whose obedience Allah has accompanied
with your obedience?’ He explained, “They are my caliphs, O Jabir, and
the Imams of the Muslims after me. The first of them is Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), then Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.), then Ali Ibn Husain
(a.s.), then Muhammad Ibn Ali (a.s.) the one who is famous as al-Baqir
in the Old Testament. Soon, you will meet him, O Jabir, so when you face
him, convey my salutation to him. He will be followed by Sadiq, Ja’far
Ibn Muhammad, then Musa Ibn Ja’far, then Ali Ibn Musa, then Muhammad Ibn
Ali, then Ali Ibn Muhammad, then al-Hasan Ibn Ali, then the one who will
be my namesake and bear my agnomen, the proof of Allah in His earth and
His remainder among His servants, the son of Hasan Ibn Ali. He
(a.t.f.s.) is the one at whose hands Allah, High be His remembrance,
will open the east of the earth and its west.

He (a.t.f.s.) is the one who will be concealed from his Shias and his
friends, an occultation in which none will be steadfast on the belief of
his Imamate except the one whose heart has been tested by Allah for
faith.” Jabir says that he asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! Will the
Shias benefit from him during the occultation?’ He replied, “Yes, by the
One Who sent me with Prophethood! Surely they will benefit with his
light and gain from his mastership in his occultation like the people
derive benefit from the sun when the clouds hide it. O Jabir! This is
from the hidden secrets of Allah and the treasures of His knowledge, so
hide it except from the ones worthy of it.”

Jabir Ibn Yazid recounts: When Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari paid a visit to
Ali Ibn Husain (a.s.) and was conversing with him, Muhammad Ibn Ali
al-Baqir (a.s.) emerged from the ladies room while he was a small boy
and a forelock was dropping on his forehead. The moment his eyes fell on
him, Jabir trembled all over with every strand of hair on his body being
raised in amazement. Jabir stared at him for a long time and then asked,
‘Son! Come forward’, he came forward.

Then he said, ‘Go back’ and he duly obliged. Jabir exclaimed, ‘By the
Lord of the Kaaba! His traits are exactly like those of the Prophet
(S).’ Jabir stood up and going near him, asked, ‘Son! What is your
name?’ He replied, “Muhammad.” ‘Whose son?’ “Ali Ibn Husain” was the
response. Jabir queried, ‘Son, may my life be sacrificed for you, are
you al-Baqir?’ He replied in the affirmative and said, “Convey to me
what you are carrying from the Messenger of Allah (S).” Jabir responded,
‘O my master! The Messenger of Allah (S) gave me glad tidings of
survival till I meet you and convey his salutations to you. O my master!
The Messenger of Allah (S) conveys salutations to you!’ Abu Ja’far
(a.s.) remarked, “O Jabir! May the salutations be on the Messenger of
Allah (S) till the heavens and the earth subsist. And may the
salutations be on you for conveying the salutations.”

Thereafter, Jabir used to frequent him and learn things from him. Once,
Imam Baqir (a.s.) asked him some question. At this, Jabir pleaded, ‘By
Allah! I don’t intend to violate the prohibition of Allah’s Messenger
(S). For certainly, he has informed me that you are the Imams, the
guides from his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) after him.

The most forbearing of the people in childhood and the most
knowledgeable of them in old age. And he warned, “Don’t teach them for
they are more knowledgeable than you.” Hearing this, Abu Ja’far (a.s.)
retorted, “Indeed my grandfather (S) has spoken the truth. Certainly, I
am more informed than you of what I asked you, as I have been granted
wisdom in childhood. All this is due to the grace of Allah and His mercy
upon us Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).”

4 - Narrated to us Hasan bin Muhammad bin Saeed Hashimi: Narrated to us
Furat bin Ibrahim bin Furat Kufi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin
Ahmad Hamdani: Narrated to me Abul Fadl Abbas bin Abdullah Bukhari:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Qasim bin Ibrahim bin Abdullah bin Qasim bin
Muhammad bin Abi Bakr: Narrated to us Abdus Salam bin Salih Harawi from
Ali bin Musa ar-Reza (a.s.) from his father Musa bin Ja’far from his
father Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin Ali from his
father Ali bin Husain from his father Husain bin Ali from his father Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The Almighty Allah has not created any creature better than me and
there is no one more respectable near Him than me.”

Ali (a.s.) says that he asked, “O Allah’s Messenger, are you better or
Jibraeel?” He (the Prophet) replied, “O Ali, the Almighty Allah has
given superiority to the Messenger Prophets over His proximate angels
and He gave me superiority over all the Messengers and Prophets. And O
Ali, after me you and after you the Imams are having superiority over
them because the angels of God are our servants and servants of our
friends.

O Ali, the bearers of the Arsh and the angels around it praise and
glorify their Lord and they pray for the forgiveness of those who
believe in your Wilayat (mastership). O Ali, if we hadn’t been there,
the Almighty Allah would neither have created His Eminence, Adam (a.s.)
nor Her Eminence, Hawwa (a.s.) neither Paradise nor Hell, neither the
earth and the sky. And why shouldn’t we be superior to the angels? We
have preceded them in praising and glorifying our Lord. It is so because
the first creations of Allah were souls and He made us speaking with His
unity and magnification.

Then He created the angels. When they saw us with an effulgence (Noor),
they considered our affair to be of a great importance. I said: ‘Glory
be to Allah’, so that the angels may understand that we are creatures
and servants of God. And that the Almighty Allah is more exalted and
purified of our qualities. So by our glorification the angels learnt how
to glorify Allah and they understood that God is purified and clean of
qualities (of the creatures). And when they noticed our greatness and
majesty, we said: ‘There is no god except Allah’, so that the angels may
understand that there is no one worthy of deification except Allah and
that we are the servants of God, we are not partners in His divinity.

Thus they (also) reiterated: ‘There is no god except Allah.’ When the
angels realized our greatness we said: ‘Allah is the Greatest’, so that
they may understand that God is much greater than that which can be
imagined and all the greatness, power and strength is reserved only for
God. After that when they saw that Allah has bestowed us with honor and
power, we said: ‘There is no power and strength except by Allah, the
High and the Great’, so that the angels may understand that there is no
power and might except for Allah. Thus the angels also repeated: ‘There
is no power and strength except by Allah.’

When they witnessed the bounties that Allah has bestowed on us and that
our obedience is made incumbent on all creatures by Him, we said: ‘Al
Hamdulillaah’ (Praise be to Allah) so that the angels may know that it
is the right of Allah upon us to thank Him for His bounties. So the
angels also said: ‘Al Hamdulillaah’. In other words, the angels received
guidance through our Barakat, and understood the unity, glorification,
praise and magnification of God.

After that Allah created Adam (a.s.) and entrusted our effulgence to his
loins and due to our respect and honor ordered the angels to prostrate
before him. Their prostration was due to their servitude of God and
their respect and honor to His Eminence, Adam (a.s.) was due to His
obedience. Because we were in his lions, then why we shouldn’t be
superior to the angels, as all of them prostrated before His Eminence,
Adam (a.s.)?

And when I was taken to the heavens, His Eminence, Jibraeel (a.s.)
recited the Azan and Iqamah twice and told me, ‘O Muhammad go ahead and
lead the Prayers’, I said: ‘O Jibraeel, should I take precedence over
you?’ ‘Yes’, he replied, ‘because God had given superiority to all
prophets over the angels and endowed you with a special excellence’.
Thus, I stood in the front and prayed with him. But I do not say this
due to pride. After that I reached upto the veil of effulgence and His
Eminence, Jibraeel (a.s.) said, ‘Muhammad (S), now you go ahead,’ and he
himself remained there. I said, ‘You are leaving me at this juncture?’

He replied, ‘O Muhammad (S) this is the limit that Allah has fixed for
me, if I take a step forward my wings will burn down.’ Thus I was put
into the ocean of effulgence and I began to swim in the seas of divine
lights. Till I reached at that place in the cosmos upto which Allah
desired. Then a voice came to me, ‘O Muhammad.’ I said: ‘Here I am My
Lord, You are the bestower of honor and dignity.’ ‘Muhammad, you are My
servant, My messenger among My creatures, You are My Proof upon My
servants.

I have created Paradise for everyone who obeys you and prepared the fire
of Hell for all those who oppose you. I have made favors and honor
incumbent upon Me for your successors, and made divine rewards incumbent
for their Shias.’ I said, ‘My Lord, please introduce my successors to
me.’ He said, ‘Your successors are those whose names are inscribed on
the empyrean of My throne.’ So I looked and I was before my Lord. I saw
twelve lights on the empyrean of the throne. In each light I saw a green
line. The names of each of my successors was written in it. The first
name was that of Ali Ibne Abi Talib and the last was Mahdi. I asked, ‘O
my Lord, are they my successors after me?’ The reply was, ‘Yes, O
Muhammad, after you, they are My friends, legatees, the chosen ones and
My proof on My servants. They are your successors and Caliphs and the
best of Creations after you. By My majesty and glory, I shall reveal My
religion through them and I shall exalt My words through them and
through the last of them, I shall purify the earth from My enemies.

And I shall make him the absolute master of the whole world. I shall
make the wind subservient to his command and I shall make the hard cloud
proof for him so that he may ride upon it to go wherever he likes in the
sky and the earth and I shall assist him with My armies. And I shall
strengthen him with My angels. So that My call is raised and all the
creatures gather upon My Oneness.

Thus his rulership would endure and continue and from My friends, I
shall make one after the other the leaders of My faith till Qiyamat.

And Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and blessings be upon our
prophet, Muhammad and his purified and chaste progeny.’”

[^1]: Surah Nisa 4:59


