Chapter 24: Nass of the Prophet for al-Qaim and that he is the twelfth Imam
===========================================================================

**Chapter 24: Nass (textual stamp) of the Prophet for al-Qaim (a.s.) and
that he is the twelfth Imam**

1 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to me my
uncle, Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Muhammad bin Ali Sairafi Kufi from
Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar from Jabir Ibne Zaid Jofi from
Saeed bin Musayyab from Abd al-Rahmaan Ibn Samura that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said:

“The disputers in the religion of Allah have been cursed on the tongues
of seventy prophets (a.s.). Whoever disputes concerning the signs of
Allah, has indeed disbelieved. Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يُجَادِلُ فِي آيَاتِ اللَّهِ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَلَا
يَغْرُرْكَ تَقَلُّبُهُمْ فِي الْبِلَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***None dispute concerning the communications of Allah but those who
disbelieve, therefore let not their going to and fro in the cities
deceive you.***[^1]

Whoever explains the Quran whimsically, has forged a lie against Allah
and whoever passes a judgment amongst the people without knowledge, upon
him is the curse of the sky and the earth.” I requested, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (S)! Guide me to salvation.’ He advised, “O son of Samura! When
desires differ and opinions vary, then fasten unto Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.). For surely, he is the Imam of my Ummah and my caliph upon them
after me. He is the distinguisher, who will differentiate between truth
and falsehood. Whoever asks him (a.s.), he will answer him and whoever
seeks guidance from him (a.s.), he will guide him. Whoever searches for
truth in him shall find it.

Whoever requests guidance from him, will find it. Whoever seeks refuge
in him, will be secure. Whoever fastens unto him, will be saved. Whoever
follows him, he will guide him. O son of Samura! Whoever amongst you is
at peace with him and takes him as a master will be safe. However,
whoever rejects him and bears enmity against him, will be destroyed. O
son of Samura! Surely Ali (a.s.) is from me.

His soul is from my soul and his soil (teenat) is from my soil. He is my
brother and I am his brother. He is the husband of my daughter Fatima
(s.a.), the chief of the women of the Universe, from the beginning to
the end. From him are the two Imams of my Ummah and the two chiefs of
the youth of Paradise, Hasan and Husain (a.s.), and the nine descendants
of Husain (a.s.). The ninth of them is the Qaim of my Ummah, who will
fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be filled with
injustice and oppression.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai
from his uncle Husain bin Yazid from Hasan Ibne Ali Saalim from his
father from Abi Hamza from Saeed bin Jubair from Abdullah Ibne Abbas
that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Surely, Allah, the Blessed and High, glanced at the earth, chose me
from it and appointed me as a Prophet. Then He glanced for the second
time, selected Ali (a.s.) and made him an Imam. Thereafter, He ordered
me that I take Ali (a.s.) as a brother, friend, successor, caliph and
vizier. So, Ali (a.s.) is from me and I am from Ali (a.s.). He is the
husband of my daughter and the father of my two grandsons, Hasan (a.s.)
and Husain (a.s.).

Know that surely Allah, the Blessed and, has appointed me and them as
proofs upon His servants. From the offspring of Husain (a.s.), He has
designated Imams who will stand by my affair and will protect my will.
The ninth of them will be the Qaim (a.s.) of my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He
will be the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) of this nation (Ummah) and the most similar
to me in traits, words and deeds. He will appear after a prolonged
occultation and a deviating confusion. After that, he will announce the
command of Allah and manifest the religion of Allah, the Mighty and
Majestic. The assistance of Allah and His angels will help him. He will
fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be replete with
injustice and tyranny.”

3 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai
from his uncle Husain bin Yazid from Hasan Ibne Ali bin Abi Hamza from
his father from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said:

“Jibraeel (a.s.) has reported to me from the Lord of the Might, may His
Majesty be Mighty, that He said, ‘Whoever knows (believes) that there is
no god but Me alone, Muhammad (S) is My servant and My messenger, Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is My caliph and that surely the Imams from his
progeny are My proofs, I will make him enter Paradise on account of My
mercy, save him from My hell due to My forgiveness and allow him to
reside in My neighborhood.

I will make My honor obligatory on him, complete My bounties on him and
make him from My special and pure (servants). If he calls Me, I will
answer him, if he invokes Me, I will accept his invocation and if he
asks Me, I will grant him. If he is silent, I will initiate the talk
with him and if he errs, I will have mercy on him. If he flees from Me,
I will call him and if he returns unto Me, I will accept him. If he
knocks on My door, I will open it.

But one who does not witness that there is no god but Me alone; or bears
testimony for the same but does not bear witness that Muhammad is My
servant and My messenger; or testifies for the above two but does not
acknowledge that Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is My caliph; or witnesses for
all the above but refuses to confess that the Imams (a.s.) from his
progeny are My proofs, then indeed he has denied My bounties, belittled
My greatness and disbelieved in My signs and My books.

If he desires Me, I will veil Myself from him and if he asks Me, I will
deprive him. When he calls Me, I will not hear his call and when he
invokes Me, I will not accept his invocation. If he expects from Me, I
will disappoint him. This is my retribution for him and I am not unjust
unto My servants.’”

At this juncture, Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari stood up and asked, ‘O
Messenger of Allah (S)! Who are the Imams from the progeny of Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.)?’ He informed, “Hasan and Husain, the two leaders of
the youth of paradise. Then, the chief of the worshippers in his time,
Ali Ibn Husain, then Baqir, Muhammad Ibn Ali; soon you will reach unto
him O Jabir, so when you meet him, convey my salutations unto him.

He will be followed by Sadiq, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, then Kazim, Musa Ibn
Ja’far, then Reza, Ali Ibn Musa, then Taqi, Muhammad Ibn Ali, then Naqi,
Ali Ibn Muhammad, then Zaki, Hasan Ibn Ali, then his son, the one who
will rise with the truth, the Mahdi of this Ummah. He will fill the
earth with justice and equity, as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression. These, O Jabir, are my caliphs, my successors, my
descendants and my progeny.

Whoever obeys them has obeyed me and whoever disobeys them has defied
me. Whoever denies them or denies even one of them, then indeed he has
denied me. Through them, Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, will prevent
the skies from falling on the earth, of course, with His permission. Due
to them, Allah protects the earth from swallowing up its inhabitants.”

4 -Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abi
Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Musa bin Imran from his uncle Husain bin
Yazid from Hasan Ibne Ali bin Abi Hamza from his father from Yahya bin
Abil Qasim from as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father from his
grandfather (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The Imams after me will be twelve. The first of them is Ali Ibn Abi
Talib and the last of them is the Qaim. They are my caliphs, my
successors, my friends and the proofs of Allah upon my nation after me.
One who accepts them is a believer and the one who denies them is an
unbeliever.”

5 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah
Barqi from his father from his grandfather Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah from
his father Muhammad bin Khalid from Muhammad bin Dawood from Muhammad
bin Jarud Abdi from Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said:

“One day Amirul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) came out, holding the
hand of his son Hasan, while he was saying, “The Messenger of Allah (S)
met us in a similar fashion one day. That is, my hand was in his hand
and he was saying, ‘The best of creatures after me, and their chief is
this brother of mine and he is the Imam of every Muslim and the master
of every believer after my death. Beware!

And certainly I declare, ‘The best of creatures after me, and their
chief is this son of mine and he is the Imam of every Muslim and the
master of every believer after my death. Beware! He will be oppressed
after me just as I was oppressed after the Messenger of Allah (S). The
best of creatures and their chief after Hasan is my son and his brother
Husain (a.s.), the oppressed after his brother and the martyr at
Kerbala. Know that he and his companions are the chiefs of the martyrs
on the Day of Judgment.

After Husain (a.s.), nine of his descendants are Allah’s Caliphs in His
earth, His proofs upon His servants, His trustees upon His revelation,
the Imams of the Muslims, the leaders of the believers and the pilots of
the pious. The ninth (of the Imams) is the Qaim through whom Allah will
fill the earth with light after its darkness, justice after its
oppression and knowledge after its ignorance. By the One Who sent my
brother Muhammad with Prophethood and chose me for Imamate, revelation
has descended from the sky in this regard on the tongue of the
Trustworthy Spirit Jibraeel (a.s.). Indeed, the Messenger of Allah (S)
was asked while I was with him, concerning the Imams after him. He
replied to the questioner,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوجِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***By the sky, the possessor of constellations!***[^2]

Certainly, their number is equal to the number of the constellations, by
the Lord of the nights, days and months and their number is equal to the
number of the months!” The questioner asked, ‘Who are they, O Messenger
of Allah (S)?’ He placed his hand on my head and said, “He is the first
of them and the last of them is Mahdi. Whoever befriends them has
befriended me and whoever bears enmity against them bears enmity against
me.

Whoever loves them loves me and whoever bears malice against them, bears
malice against me. Whoever denies them denies me and whoever recognizes
them, recognizes me. Through them, Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, will
protect His religion, inhabit His cities and sustain His servants. Due
to them, rains descend from the sky and the earth throws up its
bounties. They are my chosen ones, my caliphs, the Imams of the Muslims
and the masters of the believers.”

6 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway: Narrated to us Ali bin
Ibrahim from his father from Ali bin Mabad from Husain bin Khalid from
Ali Ibn Musa al-Reza (a.r.) from his father from his forefathers that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Whoever desires to fasten unto my religion and board the ark of
salvation after me, must follow Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), bear enmity
against his enemies and befriend his friends. For sure, he is my
successor and my caliph on my followers in my life and after my death.
He is the chief of every Muslim and the chief of every believer after
me. His saying is my saying, his command is my command, his prohibition
is my prohibition, his follower is my follower, his helper is my helper
and one who forsakes him has forsaken me.”

Then he continued, “Whoever separates from Ali (a.s.) after me, shall
not see me and I will not see him on the Day of Judgment. Whoever
opposes Ali (a.s.), Allah will make Paradise forbidden for him, his
abode will be the Hell-fire, and evil will be his fate. Whoever forsakes
Ali (a.s.), he will be forsaken on the Day of Presentation, and whoever
helps Ali (a.s.) Allah will help him on the day he will meet Him. The
Divine Proof (Hujjat) will prompt his answers to him on the day of
questioning.”

Thereafter he said, “Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) are the two Imams of
my Ummah after their father and the leaders of the youth of Paradise.
Their mother is the chief of the women of universe, and their father is
the chief of the successors. From the descendants of Husain (a.s.),
there will be nine Imams, and the ninth of them will be the Qaim of my
progeny. Their obedience is my obedience and their defiance is my
defiance. I will complain to Allah against those who challenge their
superiority and deny their sanctity after me. Allah suffices as a Master
and as a Helper for my progeny and the Imams of my Ummah, and as an
Avenger for those who have denied them their rights.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنْقَلَبٍ يَنْقَلِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back.***[^3]

7 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far: Narrated to us Ali bin
Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Ali bin Mabad from Husain bin
Khalid from Abil Hasan Ali bin Musa ar-Reza (a.r.) from his father from
his forefathers that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I am the chief of the creation of Allah, the Mighty and Glorified. I am
better than Jibraeel, Mikaeel, Israfeel, the carriers of the Throne
(Arsh), all the close angels of Allah and the messengers of Allah
(s.a.). I am the owner of the Intercession – شفاعة - and the honorable
Hauz. I and Ali are the fathers of this Ummah. Whoever recognizes us has
indeed recognized Allah, the Mighty and Glorified. And whoever refutes
us has indeed refuted Allah, the Mighty and Glorified. From Ali are the
two grandsons of my Ummah and the chiefs of the people of Paradise,
Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.). From the descendants of Husain (a.s.)
are nine Imams (a.s.), their obedience is my obedience and their
disobedience is my disobedience. The ninth of them is their Qaim and
their Mahdi.”

8 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Informed us
Ahmad bin Muhammad Hamdani: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hisham: Narrated
to us Ali bin Hasan as-Saaih that he said: I heard al-Hasan bin Ali
al-Askari (a.s.) say: Narrated to me my father from his father from his
grandfather (a.s.): The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.):

“O Ali! None will love you but the one whose birth is pure and none will
hate you but the one of impure birth. None will befriend you but a
believer and none will bear enmity against you but a disbeliever.”
Abdullah Ibn Masud stood up and asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! We
came to know the sign of impure birth and a disbeliever in your life by
malice and enmity against Ali (a.s.). But what is the sign of impure
birth and disbelief after you, when Islam will appear only on the
tongues while its essence shall remain concealed?’

He answered, “O son of Masud! Surely, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) is your
Imam after me and my caliph upon you. After he expires, my son Hasan
(a.s.) is your Imam after him and my caliph upon you. When he dies, my
son Husain (a.s.) is your Imam after him and my caliph upon you.
Thereafter nine descendants of Husain (a.s.), one after the other are
your Imams and my caliphs upon you. The ninth of them is the Qaim in my
nation, who will fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression. None shall love them save the one
whose birth is pure and none shall hate them but the one with impure
birth.

None will befriend them but a believer and none will bear enmity against
them but a disbeliever. Whoever denies any one amongst them has indeed
denied me and whoever denies me has indeed denied Allah, the Mighty and
Glorified. Whoever rejects even one from them, then indeed he has
rejected me and whoever rejects me has rejected Allah, the Mighty and
Glorified. For certainly, their obedience is my obedience and my
obedience is the obedience of Allah. (Similarly), their disobedience is
my disobedience and my disobedience is the disobedience of Allah, the
Mighty and Glorified. O son of Masud!

Keep away from any skepticism in your heart concerning their judgments,
lest you become a disbeliever. By the Might of my Lord, I am not
indulging in pretense nor am I speaking from my desire concerning Ali
and the Imams from his descendants.” Then he raised his hands towards
the sky and prayed, “O Allah! You take him as Your slave whoever takes
my caliphs and the Imams of my Ummah after me as their masters, and You
take as enemy whoever takes them as enemy. You help him who helps them
and You forsake him who forsakes them.

Do not leave the earth without a proof from them, either he is apparent,
or occult and fearful that Your religion, Your proof and Your arguments
may not be nullified.” Then he said, “O son of Masud! I have told you
now, all those things which if you leave, you will be destroyed but if
you fasten unto them, you will be saved. And safe is the one who follows
the guidance.”

9 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Yaqoob bin Yazid from Hammad bin Isa from Abdullah bin
Muskan from Aban bin Taghlib from Sulaym bin Qais Hilali from Salman
Farsi (r.a.) that he said:

“I came to the Prophet (S) to find Imam Husain (a.s.) seated in his lap
and the Prophet was kissing him and saying: You are a Sayyid son of a
Sayyid. You are an Imam son of an Imam, brother of an Imam and father of
Imams. You are the proof of Allah, son of His Proof and father of nine
proofs from your loins, the ninth of whom will be Qaim.”

10 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar from Yaqoob bin Yazid from
Hammad bin Isa from Umar bin Uzaina from Aban bin Abi Ayyash from
Ibrahim bin Umar Yamani from Sulaym bin Qais Hilali that he said: I
heard Salman Farsi (r.a.) say:

“I went to visit the Holy Prophet (S) during his terminal illness and I
was seated there when Lady Fatima (s.a.) entered and began to weep at
the condition of the Messenger of Allah (S). Tears were flowing on her
cheeks. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Why are you weeping, Fatima?
She said: O Messenger of Allah (S), I fear destruction of myself and my
children after your passing away. Eyes of the Messenger of Allah (S)
filled with tears and he said: Fatima, do you know that the Almighty
Allah has preferred for us, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) the hereafter over this
world?

And made annihilation inevitable for all creatures? And Allah glanced at
the earth and chose me among His creatures and honored me with
prophethood. Then Allah glanced at the earth the second time and chose
your husband and revealed to me that I should give your hand in marriage
to him and appoint him as my successor, Vizier and Caliph among my
Ummah? Thus your father is superior to all the prophets and your husband
is superior to all the successors and you shall be the first one to meet
me. Then Allah glances at the earth the third time and from among the
creatures chose your two sons.

Thus you are the chief of the ladies of Paradise and your sons Hasan and
Husain are the chiefs of the youths of Paradise and the sons of your
husband are my successors till Judgment Day. All of them are Mahdi and
Hadi (guided and guiding ones). Of them the first will be my brother
Ali, then Hasan, then Husain, then nine Imams from the progeny of
Husain; all of them will be in my grade in Paradise. There is no grade
nearer to the Almighty Allah than the grade of me and my father, Ibrahim
(a.s.). Daughter, do you know that your husband is the best person of
the Ummah and the best of my Ahlul Bayt?

His Islam is the oldest. His forbearance is the greatest. His knowledge
is paramount. After hearing this, Lady Fatima (s.a.) became happy. Then
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: My dearest, there are excellences for
your husband. He was the first to express faith in Allah and His
Messenger and no one in my Ummah is having this precedence. He has the
knowledge of the Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and my practice
(Sunnah) and there is no one in my Ummah other than him who has complete
knowledge of my sciences. The Almighty Allah bestowed knowledge to me
and not to anyone else.

And He bestowed knowledge to His angles and His prophets. And I have
more knowledge than the angels and prophets. Then the Almighty Allah
commanded me to transfer this knowledge to him (Ali) and I did that.
Thus apart from him there is no one in my Ummah for whom has come
together my knowledge, my wisdom and my understanding. And indeed my
daughter is his wife and his sons, Hasan and Husain, are the two
grandsons of my Ummah. Your husband fulfils the duty of enjoining good
and forbidding evil. The Almighty Allah has given him wisdom and
eloquence.

My dear, the Almighty Allah has given us Ahlul Bayt, six such qualities
as have neither been given to anyone before nor will be given to anyone
ever. The prophet of us, Ahlul Bayt, is the chief of the prophets and
messengers. And that is your father. And our successor is the chief of
the successors, and that is your husband. Our martyr is the chief of the
martyrs, and that is Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib, the uncle of your father.
Lady Fatima (s.a.) says: O Messenger of Allah (S), Is he only the martyr
of those who were martyred with him? He replied: No, among all the
martyrs of former and latter people except the prophets and successors.
And Ja’far bin Abu Talib whom Allah has bestowed with two wings and he
flies around with the angels in Paradise.

And your sons, Hasan and Husain are the grandsons of this Ummah and the
chiefs of the youths of Paradise. I swear by One in whose hands is my
life, the Mahdi shall be from us who will the earth with justice and
equity just as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. Lady
Fatima (s.a.) asked who was the most superior of them. The Messenger of
Allah (S) said: After me Ali is the most superior among this Ummah. The
Almighty Allah has preferred the hereafter for us Ahlul Bayt, instead of
the world. Then the Messenger of Allah (S) looked at Lady Fatima (s.a.),
her husband and her sons and said: O Salman, I make Allah the witness
that peace with them is peace with me and war with them is war with me.

They shall be with me in Paradise. Then he called Ali (a.s.) near him
and said: My brother, you will have to suffer great tribulations at the
hands of the Quraish after me. Thus if you find helpers you fight your
enemies, otherwise observe patience and keep away from taking up arms;
don’t throw yourself to perdition. You are in relation to me as Harun
was to Musa (a.s.) whom his community had weakened and was about to kill
him. So you must also be patient at the atrocities of Quraish as your
example is like that of Harun.

Those who oppress you will be like the calf worshippers. O Ali, the
Almighty Allah has destined discord and disunity for this Ummah. If
Allah wanted He could have united all the people on guidance till there
would not have been difference even between two persons and there would
have been no controversy. Neither the inferior would have denied the
superior. And if Allah wanted, He could have made haste in taking
revenge and changed the circumstances till the falsehood of the unjust
would have become manifest and people would have known the position of
truth.

However, the Almighty Allah has made this world as the abode of deeds
and made the hereafter the abode of recompense so that the good may be
recompensed with good and the bad may be recompensed with bad. Ali
(a.s.) said: Praise be to Allah, thankfulness for His blessings and
patience in calamities.”

11 - Narrated to us Abul Hasan Ahmad bin Thabit Daulibi in Baghdad:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Fadl Nahvi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali
bin Abdus Samad Kufi: Narrated to us Ali bin Asim from Muhammad bin Ali
bin Musa from his father Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far from his father Ja’far
bin Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin Ali from his father Ali bin
Husain from his father Husain Ibne Ali (a.s.) that he said:

“I went to the Messenger of Allah (S) while Ubayy Ibn Ka’b was with
him.’ The Messenger of Allah (S) exclaimed, “Welcome! O Aba Abdillah! O
adornment of the heavens and the earth.”

Ubayy asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! How somebody other than you can
be the adornment of the heavens and earth?’

He replied, “O Ubayy! I swear by the One, Who raised me as a Prophet
with truth. Verily, Husain Ibn Ali, in the heaven enjoys a greater
position than in the earth. Surely, it is written on the right side of
the Throne that he is the light of guidance, the ark of salvation, the
untiring Imam, might, pride, the ocean of knowledge and the
treasure-chest. (Is he still not the adornment of the heavens and the
earth?).

Certainly, Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, has carried in his loins
pure, blessed and chaste sperm, which was created before the creation
came into existence in the wombs of the mothers, or semen flowed in the
loins of the fathers, or even before day and night existed. Indeed,
Allah inspired the creatures the prayers by which they would invoke but
that Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, would gather them with him
(Husain). He will be their intercessor in his hereafter and Allah will
remove from him, his difficulty, repay his debt, ease his affair, expand
his path, strengthen him against his enemy and will not rip apart his
veil (i.e. conceal his sins).”

Ubayy enquired, ‘What are these prayers, O Messenger of Allah (S)?’

He answered, “When you are sitting after finishing your prayers say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك بكلماتك ومعاقد ع رشك وسكان سماواتك (وأرضك) وأنبيائك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورسلك (أن تستجيب لي) فقد رهقني من أمري عسر، فأسألك أن تصلي على
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد وآل محمد وأن تجعل لي من عسري يسرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Allah!** **Certainly I ask You for the sake of Your Kingdom, the
contracting parties of Your Might, the residents of Your heavens (and
Your earth) and Your Prophets and Messengers (that You answer me)
because difficulty has overcome my affair. Thus, I ask You that You
bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad and that You make my affair
easy for me.**

Then surely Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, will ease your affair,
expand your heart for you and inspire unto you the testimony

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا إله إلا الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘There is no god but Allah’ at the time of your death.’

Ubayy questioned, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! What is this sperm, which
is in the loin of my beloved Husain (a.s.)?’

He elucidated, “The likeness of this sperm is like that of the moon,
which throws light and shows the way; whoever follows it will be guided
and whoever deviates from it will be led astray.”

He asked, ‘Then, what is his name and what is his supplication?’

He explained, “His name is Ali and his supplication is,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا دائم يا ديموم، يا حي يا قيوم، يا كاشف الغم ويا فارج الهم، ويا باعث
الرسل، ويا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صادق الوعد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Eternal! O Everlasting! O Living!** **O Controller! O Reliever of
sorrows! O Remover of grief! O Sender of Messengers and O Truthful in
His promise!**

Whoever invokes through this supplication, Allah, the Mighty and
Glorified, will raise him along with Ali Ibn Husain and he will be his
guide to Paradise.

Ubayy enquired, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! Will he have any caliph or
successor?’

He replied, “Yes. For him will be the inheritances of the heavens and
the earth.”

Ubayy asked, ‘What does ‘the inheritances of the heavens and the earth’
mean?’

He replied, “Decreeing the truth, ordering righteousness, interpretation
of the laws and explanation of what will be.”

Ubayy asked, ‘What is his name?’

He replied, “His name is Muhammad. Verily, the angels will soon be
acquainted with him in the heavens and invoke with his invocation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إن كان لي عندك رضوان وود فاغفر لي ولمن تبعني من إخواني وشيعتي
وطيب ما في صلبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! If there is any satisfaction or love near You for me, then
forgive me and whoever follows me from my brothers or my followers, and
purify what is in my loins, O the most Merciful of all mercifuls.

Then, Allah will place in his loin a blessed, pure and immaculate sperm.
Jibraeel informed me that surely Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, has
purified this sperm and named it Ja’far and made him a guide, the guided
one, he is satisfied with Allah and Allah is satisfied with him. He
prays to his Lord and says in his supplication,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ديان غير متوان يا أرحم الراحمين اجعل لشيعتي من النار وقاء، ولهم
عندك رضاء، فاغفر ذنوبهم، ويسر امورهم، واقض ديونهم، واستر عوراتهم، وهب
لهم الكبائر التي بينك وبينهم، يا من لا يخاف الضيم ولا تأخذه سنة ولا
نوم، اجعل لي من كل (هم) وغم فرجا
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Untiring Provider! O the most Merciful of all mercifuls! Grant
protection for my Shias from the fire and satisfaction near You for
them. Then, forgive their sins, ease their affairs, repay their debts,
conceal their secrets and forgive their major sins which are between You
and them. O He, Who does not fear injustice nor does sleep and slumber
overtake Him! Grant salvation for me from every grief and sorrow.

Whoever prays with this supplication, Allah will raise him with a white
(bright) face along with Ja’far Ibn Muhammad to the paradise, O Ubayy!
Surely Allah, the Blessed and High, has placed in this sperm a pure,
blessed and immaculate sperm, upon which He has sent mercy. He named it
Musa and made him an Imam.

Ubayy asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! Have each one of them been
described in detail, procreate, inherit and describe each other in the
aforementioned manner?’

He replied, “Jibraeel (a.s.) has described them for me on the authority
of Allah, the Lord of the worlds, Mighty be His Majesty.”

Ubayy asked, ‘Did Musa (Ibn Ja’far) have any specific supplication,
which he prayed, other than the supplications of his forefathers?’

He replied, “Yes. He will say in his supplications

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا خالق الخلق، ويا باسط الرزق، ويا فالق الحب (والنوى)، ويا بارئ النسم
ومحيي الموتي ومميت الاحياء، و (يا) دائم الثبات، ومخرج النبات افعل بي
ما أنت أهله
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Creator of creation! O Giver of sustenance! O Splitter of grain! O
Creator of winds! O Giver of life to the dead and Who causes death to
the living! O Everlasting and Who brings forth the vegetation! Do unto
me as You are worthy of doing.**

One who invokes in this manner, Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, will
fulfill his needs and raise him on the Day of Judgment along with Musa
Ibn Ja’far. Surely, Allah has placed in his loin a pure and immaculate
sperm with which He is satisfied. He has named it Ali and Allah, Mighty
and Glorified be He, in His knowledge and His wisdom, was satisfied with
his creation. He made him a proof for his Shias, through which they will
demonstrate on the Day of Judgment. He has an invocation by which he
invokes

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
م مي ي، ،وثبتي ي، ،واحشري يه هآمناأن نن ن .خف فعله هوالحن نال .جز، ،ك
كل لالتقى ىوأهلالمغفرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Allah! Grant me guidance, make me firm on it, and raise me on it in
a state of security, like the safety of the one who has neither fear nor
grief nor sorrow. Surely, You are Worthy of fear and Worthy of
forgiveness.**

And verily, Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, has put in his sperm a
blessed, pure and immaculate sperm, with which He is satisfied and named
him Muhammad Ibn Ali. He is the intercessor of his Shias and the
inheritor of his grandfather’s knowledge. He has clear signs and
apparent arguments. When he will be born, he will declare:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اله هال .هلل .مد درسل لهلل .صى ىهلل .عليهوه ه
  </p>
</blockquote>

**There is no god but Allah. Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.**

And he will recite in his supplications.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا ان ن .ه هه هال .مثا، ،أت تهلل . .ه هال .ت تال .ق قال .ت
تتفنيالمخلوقينوتبي ي، ،حلت تعمن، ،وي يالمغفة ةرضاك
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O the One Who has neither any similar nor any example. You are Allah,
there is no god but You and there is no creator but You. You will
annihilate the creatures while You will remain. You are forbearing with
the one who disobeys You and in forgiveness is Your satisfaction.**

Whoever prays with this supplication, Muhammad Ibn Ali will be his
intercessor on the Day of Judgment. Surely Allah, Blessed and High, has
placed in his loin a pure, bright, blessed, immaculate and clean sperm.
He has named it Ali Ibn Muhammad. He has clothed him with contentment
and dignity, and deposited in him sciences and secrets of every hidden
thing. Whoever meets him, he will inform him of what is in his heart and
caution against his enemy and he will supplicate in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يانوريابرن نيامنيرا ان نيارباي يشرالشروروآفاتالدهور،وأسألكة ةيم مخ
خفيالصور
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Light of all lights!** **O Proof! O Illuminator! O Explanator!** **O
Lord! Protect me from the evil of the evil ones and the calamities of
the times. I ask You salvation on the Day when the trumpet is blown.**

Whoever recites this supplication, Ali Ibn Muhammad will be his
intercessor and his leader to paradise. Surely Allah, Blessed and High,
has placed in his loin a sperm and named it Hasan Ibn Ali. He made him a
light in His cities, a caliph in His earth, an honor for His nations, a
guide for His Shias, an intercessor for them near their Lord, a
punishment for those who oppose him, a proof for whoever befriends him
and a clear argument for whoever takes him as an Imam. He will say in
his supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا اعزز زز زي يعز، ،ياعزيا اعزي يبعزك،وأيدنيبنصك كوأبد دعي
يهمزاتالشياط، ،وادع عي يك كوامع ععي يك كواجعلي ين نر رخلق، ،ا
اواحدياأد ديافد دا اصمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Mighty of reverence in His Might! O Mighty! Grant me might for the
sake of Your Might, assist me with Your help, keep far from me the
whisperings of the devils, defend me** **with Your defense, protect me
with Your protection and make me from the chosen ones of Your creatures.
O One! O Unique! O Singular! O Needless!**

Whoever invokes with this supplication, Allah, the High, will raise him
with him (Hasan Ibn Ali) and for him is salvation from hell even if it
was obligatory on him. Surely Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, has
placed in the loins of Hasan, a blessed, pure, clean, immaculate and
purified sperm. Every believer from whom

) is satisfied with it and onlytheواليةAllahhas taken the covenant of
mastership (

deniers will disbelieve in him. He is the pure, immaculate, righteous,
guide and guided Imam. He is the beginning of justice and its end. He
will verify Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, and Allah will verify him
in his saying. He will emerge from Mecca till the proofs and signs are
manifested.

In Taliqan, he will have treasures that are neither gold nor silver but
beautiful war-horses and imposing men. Allah, Mighty and Glorified be
He, will gather for him three hundred and thirteen men from distant
cities equal to the number of the Muslim soldiers in Badr. With him is a
sealed book, which comprises the number of his companions along with
their names, their genealogy, their cities, their business, their speech
and their agnomen. They will be steadfast and will strive hard in his
obedience.

Ubayy asked, ‘And what will be his proofs and his signs, O Messenger of
Allah (S)?’

He replied, ‘He will have a standard. When the time of his reappearance
nears, this standard will unfurl on its own and Allah, the Blessed and
High, will give it the power of speech. The standard will call out,
‘Emerge, O friend of Allah, and kill the enemies of Allah.’ He will also
have two flags and two marks, besides a sheathed sword, which will call
out, ‘Come forth, O friend of Allah, as it is not permitted for you to
sit (quietly) before the enemies of Allah.’ Then he will reappear and
kill the enemies of Allah wherever he will find them.

He will uphold the laws of Allah and judge by the judgment of Allah.
Jibraeel will appear from his right side, Mikaeel from his left,
(Prophets) Shuaib and Salih in front of him. Soon, you will remember
what I am telling you and I entrust my affairs to Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, even if it is after a long time. O Ubayy!
Congratulations to the one who meets him, congratulations to the one who
loves him and congratulations to the one who believes in him. Allah will
save him from destruction because of his acknowledgement in Him, in the
Messenger of Allah (S) and in all the Imams (a.s.).

Allah will open for them the paradise. Their likeness in the earth is
like that of the (perfume) musk, the fragrance of which never diminishes
after diffusion. Their similarity in the heavens is like that of an
illuminated moon, the light of which never extinguishes.

Ubayy asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S)! How has Allah, the Mighty and
Glorified, explained the condition of these Imams?’

He answered, “Surely Allah, Blessed and High be He, sent down upon me
twelve seals and twelve books. The name of each Imam is on his seal and
his attribute is in his book, may Allah bless them all.

12 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to me my
uncle Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi from
Muhammad bin Ali Qurashi from Muhammad bin Sinan from Mufaddal bin Umar
from Abi Hamza Thumali from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir from
his father Ali bin Husain from his father Husain Ibne Ali (a.s.) that he
said:

“I and my brother (Hasan) went to my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah
(S). He made me sit on one lap and made my brother sit on the other.
Then he kissed us and said, ‘By my father! You two are Imams, grandsons
and virtuous. Allah has chosen you from me, from your father and your
mother. He has also chosen from your progeny, O Husain, nine Imams. The
ninth of them is their Qaim and all of them are equal before Allah in
superiority and status’.”

13 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
me Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from
Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Ibne Mahboob from Abil Jarud
from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that he said:

“One day I came to Fatima (s.a.) and before her was a tablet inscribed
with the names of successors from her progeny. I counted twelve names,
the last of whom was al-Qaim. There were three Muhammads and four Alis –
bliss of Allah be on them all.”

14 -Narrated to us Hamza bin Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ja’far bin Muhammad
bin Zaid bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said:
Informed us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed: Informed us Qasim bin Muhammad
bin Hammad: Narrated to us Ghiyath bin Ibrahim: Narrated to us Husain
bin Zaid bin Ali from Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) from his ancestors that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I give you glad tidings - and he repeated this thrice. The similarity
of my nation is like that of rain. One does not follow whether its
beginning is good or its end. Surely, the likeness of my nation (Ahlul
Bayt) is like that of a garden from which one group is fed in one year
and another is fed in another year so much so that the last group, which
is fed from it, is the broadest of them all, like an ocean, the deepest
and tallest of them all and the best of them in love. How can that
nation be destroyed which begins with me and which will end with twelve
righteous ones, the possessors of intellect, after me and Masih Isa, the
son of Maryam? Only those who spread mischief between these two eras
will be destroyed. They are not from me and I am not from them.”

15 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin and from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Umar bin
Uzaina from Aban bin Abi Ayyash from Sulaym bin Qais Hilali that he
said: I heard Abdullah bin Ja’far at-Tayyar say:

“We were present in a gathering that included Muawiyah, Hasan, Husain,
Abdullah Ibne Abbas, Umar bin Abu Salma and Usamah bin Zaid. Traditions
were being narrated. The narrator said to Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan: I
heard the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I have a greater claim on the
faithful than they have on themselves, after my brother Ali is having
greater claim on the believers than they have on themselves.

Then after him my son, Hasan has a greater claim on the believers than
they have on themselves. After him my son, Husain has a greater claim on
the believers than they have on themselves. After him his son, Ali has a
greater claim on the believers than they have on themselves. And you O
Ali will see him. After him his son, Muhammad has a greater claim on the
believers than they have on themselves.

And you O Husain will see him. Then he completed twelve Imams nine of
whom were from the progeny of Husain. Abdullah says: This statement of
mine was verified by Hasan, Husain, Abdullah Ibne Abbas, Umar bin Abu
Salma and Usamah bin Zaid in the presence of Muawiyah.” Sulaym bin Qays
says: I heard this tradition from Salman, Abu Zar, Miqdad and Usamah bin
Zaid who said that they heard it from the Messenger of Allah (S).

16 - Narrated to us Abu Ali Ahmad bin Hasan bin Ali Abde Rabb: Narrated
to us Abu Zaid Muhammad bin Yahya bin Khalaf bin Yazid Marwazi in Rayy
in the month of Rabi al-Awwal of the year 302: Narrated to us Ishaq bin
Ibrahim Hanzali in the year 238 – alias Ishaq Ibne Rahawi: Narrated to
me Yahya bin Yahya: Narrated to us Hisham bin Khalid from Shabi from
Masruq that he said:

“We were sitting with Abdullah bin Masud when a youth asked Abdullah bin
Masud if the Prophet had taken oath for any successor after him. Ibne
Masud said: You are young in age but you have posed a question that no
one has ever asked before. Yes, our Prophet has taken oath from us that
after him there will be twelve caliphs, according to the number of the
chiefs of Bani Israel.”

17 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan: Narrated to us Abu
Abdillah Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Ibrahim Ibne Abi Rajjal Baghdadi:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ubdus Harrani: Narrated to us Abdul Ghaffar
Ibne Hakam: Narrated to us Mansur bin Abil Aswad from Matraf from Shabi
from his uncle, Qais bin Ubaid that he said:

“We were sitting in a circle in which Abdullah bin Masud was also
present. A Bedouin came and asked: Is there Abdullah among you? Abdullah
bin Masud said: I am Abdullah. He asked: Did your Prophet tell you how
many caliphs will be there after him? Abdullah bin Masud replied: Yes,
twelve, same as the number of the chiefs of Bani Israel.”

18 - Narrated to us Abul Qasim Attab bin Muhammad Hafiz: Narrated to us
Yahya bin Muhammad bin Saaid: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Abdur Rahman bin
Fadl and Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Sawwar and Ibne Warraq Nufaili that
they said: Narrated to us Abdul Ghaffar bin Hakam: Narrated to us Mansur
bin Abil Aswad from Mutarraf from Shabi that he said: Attab said:
narrated to us Ishaq bin Muhammad Anmati: Narrated to us Yusuf bin Musa:
Narrated to us Jareer from Ashath bin Sawwar from Shabi that he said:
Attab said: narrated to us Husain bin Muhammad Harrani: Narrated to us
Ayyub bin Muhammad Wazzan: Narrated to us Saeed bin Muslimah: Narrated
to us Ashath bin Sawwar from Shabi, all of them said: from his uncle
Qais bin Ubaid: Abul Qasim Attab said - and this is the report of
Mutarrif - he said:

“We were sitting in the Masjid and in our company was Abdullah bin Masud
when a Bedouin arrived and asked: Is there Abdullah [Ibne Masud] among
you? Abdullah said: Yes, I am Abdullah. What do you want? He said: O
Abdullah, did your Prophet inform about the number of caliphs among you?
Abdullah bin Masud replied: You have asked something no one has ever
asked before since I came to Iraq. Yes, twelve caliphs. Same as the
number of the chiefs of Bani Israel.”

19 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan: Narrated to us Abu Bakr
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abde Rabb Nishapuri: Narrated to us Abul Qasim
Harun bin Ishaq - that is Hamdani - that he said: Narrated to us my
uncle, Ibrahim bin Muhammad from Ziyad bin Alaqah and Abdul Malik bin
Umair from Jabir bin Samura that he said: With my father I was in the
presence of the Prophet (S) when I heard him say:

“There will be twelve Amirs after me. Then he said something in a low
voice. I asked my father: What did The Messenger of Allah (S) say in a
low voice? He replied: He said: All of them will be from Quraish.”

20 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan: Narrated to us Abu Ali
Muhammad bin Ali bin Ismail Sukkari Marwazi: Narrated to us Sahl bin
Ammar Nishapuri: Narrated to us Amr bin Abdullah Ibne Zarin: Narrated to
us Sufyan from Saeed bin Amr from Shabi from Jabir bin Samura that he
said:

“I went to the Masjid with my father and the Messenger of Allah (S) was
speaking. I heard him say: There will be twelve after me – that is Amirs
– then he lowered his voice and I could not make out what he said. So I
asked my father: What did he say? He replied: He said: All of them will
be from Quraish.”

21 -Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Ishaq Dainawari: Narrated to
us Abu Bakr bin Abi Dawood: Narrated to us Ishaq bin Ibrahim bin Shazan:
Narrated to us Walid bin Hisham: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Zukwan:
Narrated to me my father from his father from Ibne Sireen from Jabir Ibn
Samura that he said:

‘We were with the Prophet (S) when he said, “This matter (Islam) will
continue till there are twelve (Caliphs). The people started screaming
due to which I could not hear what he said thereafter. I asked my
father, who was closer to the Prophet (S) than me, ‘What did the
Messenger of Allah (S) say?’ He replied, “All of them will be from
Quraish and their like will not be seen.”

22 - Narrated to us Abdullah bin Muhammad as-Saigh: Narrated to us Abu
Abdillah Muhammad bin Saeed: Narrated to us Hasan bin Ali bin Ziyad:
Narrated to us Ismail Tayyan: Narrated to us Abu Usamah: Narrated to me
Sufyan from Burd from Makhool when he was asked:

Did the Prophet (S) say: There will be twelve caliphs after me? Makhool
replied, ‘Yes.’

23 -Narrated to us Abdullah bin Muhammad as-Saigh: Narrated to me Abul
Husain Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya Qasrani: Narrated to me Abu Ali
Bishr bin Musa bin Salih: Narrated to us Abul Walid Khalaf Ibne Walid
Basri from Israel from Simak that he said: I heard Jabir bin Samura say:
I heard the Prophet (S) say:

“There will be twelve Amirs after me. Then he said something I could not
understand. So I asked the people and the said: He said: All of them
shall be from Quraish.”

24 - Narrated to us Abdullah bin Muhammad: Narrated to us Abul Hasan
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya Qasrani: Narrated to us Abu Ali Husain bin
Kumayt Bohlool Musili: Narrated to us Ghassan bin Rabi: Narrated to us
Sulaiman bin Abdullah, slave of Aamir Shabi from Aamir from Jabir that
he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The affair of my Ummah will continue to be bright till the twelve
caliphs endure; and all of them will be from Quraish.”

25 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Yaqoob bin Yazid from Hammad bin Isa from Umar bin Uzaina
from Aban bin Abi Ayyash from Sulaym bin Qais Hilali that he said:

“I saw Ali (a.s.) in Masjid-e-Nabawi during the caliphate of Uthman and
some people were mentioning some traditions and discussing Fiqh and
knowledge. They talked about Quraish, their merits and those who brought
Faith in the beginning and their migration to Medina and what virtues
the Holy Prophet (S) had mentioned about Quraish, like his saying that
all Imams will be from Quraish and people will be following Quraish and
the Quraish will be the Imams of Arabs, and his saying that one should
not say bad things about Quraish and one Quraish will have twice the
strength of a non-Quraish man, and he who bears enmity to Quraish, Allah
bears enmity with him, and his saying that whoever humiliates Quraish,
Allah will humiliate him.

They talked about Ansaar, their merits, who were first ones to accept
Islam and their help and how Allah has praised them in His Book, and
discussed what virtues the Holy Prophet (S) had mentioned and what he
said about the funeral of Saad ibn Maaz, and talked about Hanzala ibn
Abu Aamir, who was given the ritual bath by angels, and talked about
that person who was helped by a honeybee. They talked until they did not
leave any of the merits of Ansaar. Every tribe said they had this one
and that one from their tribe. Quraish said that the Holy Prophet (S)
was from them, Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib was from them, Ja’far was from
them, Ubaidah ibn Harith and Zaid ibn Haaresaa were from them, and so
were Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Saad, Abu Ubaidah, Saalim and ibn Awf.

They did not leave anybody among the ones who accepted Islam in the
beginning. There were more than 200 people – some were facing Qibla and
some were sitting in a circle. From Quraish, from what I can remember,
was Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), Saad ibn Abi Waqqas, Abdul Rahman ibn Awf
and Zubair and Talha and Ammar, Miqdad, Abu Zar, and Hashim ibn A’tbah,
Abdullah ibn Umar, and Hasan and Husain (a.s.), Abbas and Muhammad ibn
Abi Bakr, Abdullah ibn Ja’far, Ubaidullah ibn Abbas.

From the Ansaar there were Ubayy ibn Kaab, Zaid ibn Thabit, Abu
Ayyub-e-Ansari, and Abul Haytham Ibnul Taihan, Muhammad ibn Muslimah and
Qays ibn Saad ibn Ubadah, Jabir ibn Abdullah, Abu Maryam and Anas ibn
Malik, Zaid ibn Arqam, Abdullah Awf, Abu Layla and with him his son
Abdul Rahman who was sitting next to him, who was a young boy – as yet
he did not have a beard growing and was very handsome. Abul Hasan Basri
came and with him was his son Hasan who was a young boy, as yet, did not
have a beard growing and was very handsome. His height was medium. I
started looking at him and Abdul Rahman Abi Layla.

I could not decide who was more handsome between these two except that
Hasan was older and taller. Then people said many things from morning to
midday and Uthman was in his house and did not even know what these
people were talking about. Ali (a.s.) was quiet – he did not talk and
neither did anyone from his household.

Then all these people turned to Ali (a.s.) and said, ‘O Abul Hasan! What
has stopped you from talking?’ So Ali (a.s.) replied: ‘There is no tribe
from which a tribesman has not spoken about merits and not said truth.’
Then he said: ‘O people of Quraish! O group of Ansaar! Through whom has
Allah given you these merits – is it because of you yourselves or
because of your tribes, or people of your house or somebody else apart
from you?’ Everyone replied: ‘God has given, and because of the Holy
Prophet (S) has obliged us, and we have acquired all these because of
him and we have got it. So all merits that we have acquired in religion
and world is because of the Holy Prophet (S).

We have not acquired it because of our own selves or our tribes or
people of our houses.’ He said: ‘You have spoken truth, O groups of
Quraish and Ansaar. So do you accept that whatever good you have
acquired in religion and world is specially due to us Ahlul Bayt and not
due to yourselves, and you have heard the Holy Prophet (S) saying: ‘I
and my brother Ali ibn Abi Talib are created from the same clay until
Adam.’

People of Badr, Uhad and people of Saabeqah (people who accepted Islam
first) all said: ‘Yes we have heard it from the Holy Prophet (S).’ He
asked: ‘What, do you accept that my brother, the Holy Prophet (S), said:
‘I and my Ahlul Bayt – we were, each and everyone of us, one Noor
(light) that were walking in presence of Allah 14000 years before Adam
was created, and when Adam was created, this light was put in his loins
and brought to this earth. Then this light was put in the boat through
Nuh, and then in the fire through Ibrahim and after that transferred on
highly esteemed loins and pure wombs and then from pure wombs towards
extremely respected loins, within such fathers and mothers who never met
each other unlawfully.’

Then Ali (a.s.) said: ‘Bearing Allah as Witness, I am saying do you know
Allah, in His first Books, has in many verse given my merits and in this
Ummah nobody reached Allah and His Prophet before me?’ Everyone replied:
‘Bearing Allah as Witness – Yes.’ He asked: ‘Bearing Allah as Witness,
do you know when the verses

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّابِقُونَ الْأَوَّلُونَ مِنَ الْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالْأَنْصَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘And (as for) the foremost, the first of the Muhajirs and
Ansaar...’***[^4]

And…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘And the foremost are the foremost, these are they who are drawn nigh
(to Allah).’***[^5]

Were revealed, the Holy Prophet (S) was asked whom these were for. He
replied: ‘Allah has revealed them for Prophets and their inheritors and
I am more meritorious than all Prophets and Messengers, and Ali ibn Abi
Talib, my inheritor, is more meritorious than all inheritors?’ All
replied: ‘Bearing Allah as Witness – Yes.’

He said: ‘I am telling you bearing Allah as Witness, do you know when
these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you.’***[^6]

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Only Allah is your Wali and His Apostle and those who keep up
prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow.’***[^7]

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَتَّخِذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ وَلَا رَسُولِهِ وَلَا
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَلِيجَةً ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘What! Do you think that you will be left alone while Allah has not
known those of you who have struggle hard and have not taken any one as
an adherent besides Allah and His Apostle and the believers.’***[^8]

Were revealed people asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah, is this for
particular believers or is it for believers in general?’ Then Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime commanded His Prophet to inform them who is Ulil Amr
and explain Wilayat to them like prayer, fasting, Zakat, Hajj was
explained to them. At that time the Holy Prophet (S) appointed me at
Ghadeer Khumm, then he gave a sermon and said: ‘O people, Allah has
given me such a Message that my chest is becoming tight, and I thought
people will not believe me, so He demanded that I pass the Message on,
or He will punish me.’

Then the Holy Prophet (S) ordered and it was announced that prayer is
being established and gave a sermon and said: ‘O people, do you know
that Allah is my Maula and I am Maula of Momineen and I have more
authority over the lives of Momineen than they themselves?’ Everyone
replied: ‘Surely, O Prophet of Allah.’ He said: ‘O Ali, get up.’ So I
got up. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منت تموه هفعي يموه هم مول لن نوه هود دن نعاده ه
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Whosever’s Maula I am, then this Ali is his Maula – O Allah befriend
him who befriends them and bear enmity towards him who bears enmity
towards them (i.e. Ahlul Bayt).’ Salman then stood up and asked: ‘O
Messenger of Allah, what kind of Wilayat?’ He replied: ‘On whomever I
have more authority, Ali also has more authority’ and then the Almighty
Allah revealed the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَأَكْمَلْتُلَكُمْدِينَكُمْوَأَتْمَمْتُعَلَيْكُمْنِعْمَتِ
يوَرَضِيتُلَكُم ُاإلِسْالَم َدِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion.’***[^9]

Then the Holy Prophet (S) recited Takbir and said, ‘Allaho Akbar, my
Prophethood is complete and Allah’s religion is complete with Ali’s
Wilayat after me.’ Abu Bakr and Umar stood up and asked: ‘O Messenger of
Allah! Is this verse only for Ali?’ The Holy Prophet (S) replied:
‘Indeed, for him and for all my inheritors till the Day of Judgment.’
They both said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! Tell us who they are.’

The Holy Prophet (S) said: ‘Ali, my brother, my vizier, my successor, my
inheritor, and my caliph in my Ummah after me, and guardian of all
Momineen after me, then my son Hasan, then my son Husain, then my son
Husain’s nine children, one after the other. Quran will be with them all
and they will all be with Quran. They all will not leave Quran and Quran
will not leave them all until they reach me at my Fountain.’

Then people said: ‘Yes, surely, bearing Allah as Witness, we have heard
it and we are witness – it is like what you said.’ Some people said: ‘We
remember most of what you said, but do not remember everything.’ Ali
(a.s.) said: ‘You have said truth – all people are not equal in memory.
I bear Allah as witness – these people have remembered it when the Holy
Prophet (S) stood up and explained it to them.’ Then Zaid ibn Arqam,
Baraa ibn Aazib, Abu Zar, Miqdad and Ammar stood up and said: ‘We bear
witness, we remember the Messenger of Allah saying, when he was on the
pulpit and you were next to him: ‘O people, Allah has commanded me that
I appoint an Imam for you after me who will be responsible and he will
be my inheritor, my caliph, and whose obedience, Allah – in His Book –
has made obligatory on believers and has joined his obedience to His and
my obedience.

He has given command about his Wilayat in His Book, and I spoke again to
Allah concerning this, fearing taunts and disbelief of hypocrites. Allah
commanded firmly that I pass this Message or He will punish me.’ ‘O
people, Allah has commanded in His Book to pray, so I explained it to
you and He commanded Zakat, fasting and Hajj, so I mentioned these and
explained these to you. And He has commanded you concerning Wilayat, and
I am bearing you as witnesses that this Wilayat is for him (Ali)
especially, (and he put his hand on Ali).

Then after him, it is for his two sons and after them all inheritors who
will be his children. They will not separate from Quran and Quran will
not separate from them until they reach me at the Pool.’ ‘O people, I
have told you, after me what your shelter will be and after me who your
Imam, Wali, and Hadi will be. He is this – my brother Ali ibn Abi Talib.
He has the same status that I have with you. Listen to him in matters of
religion, and in your tasks, obey him because he has all that Allah has
given me – His Knowledge and Wisdom. So ask him and learn from him and
after him, his inheritors. Do not teach him and do not by-pass him, and
do not fall behind him because he is with truth and truth is with him.
He will always be with truth and truth will always be with him.’ Then
they all sat down.

Sulaym says that Ali (a.s.) said: ‘O people, you know that when Allah in
His Book revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying.’***[^10]

The Holy Prophet (S) gathered me, Fatima and my two sons, Hasan and
Husain, and then put a cloak over us and said: ‘These are my Ahlul Bayt,
my flesh, what displeases them will displease me, what hurts them will
hurt me, and what troubles me will trouble them, so keep them away from
evil and keep them as pure as they have a right to be.’ Umme Salma
asked: ‘What about me, O Messenger of Allah?’ The Holy Prophet (S)
replied: ‘You are worthy, but this verse is only for me, my brother, my
daughter Fatima and my two sons, and my son Husain’s nine children, and
nobody else is included with me – except them.’ Everyone replied: ‘Yes,
indeed, we bear witness that Umme Salma told this to us. We asked the
Holy Prophet (S) and he said exactly what Umme Salma had related to us.’

Then Ali (a.s.) said: ‘I am telling you, bearing Allah as Witness, do
you know when the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَكُونُوا مَعَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with
the true ones.’***[^11]

…was revealed, Salman asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah, is this verse
general or particular?’ Holy Prophet (S) replied, ‘All believers have
been commanded here but Sadiqeen are particular, i.e. My brother Ali and
after him my inheritors until the Day of Judgment?’ Everyone said:
‘Bearing Allah as Witness – Yes.’ Ali (a.s.) said: ‘Bearing Allah as
Witness – do you know I asked the Holy Prophet (S) at the time of the
expedition of Tabuk why he had left me behind and he replied: ‘Medina
cannot be alright without either you or me, and you are to me as Harun
was to Musa, except that after me there will not be another Prophet?’
Everyone said: ‘Bearing Allah as Witness – Yes.’ Ali (a.s.) asked:
‘Bearing Allah as Witness, do you when know Allah revealed in Surah
Hajj:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ارْكَعُوا وَاسْجُدُوا وَاعْبُدُوا
رَبَّكُمْ وَافْعَلُوا الْخَيْرَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘O you who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves and serve your
Lord, and do good that you may succeed…till the end of Surah…***[^12]

Salman stood up and asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah, who are these people
over whom you stand witness and they stand witness over people, whom
Allah has chosen and has left no obstacle in religion and their father
Ibrahim’s religion?’ He replied: ‘Allah has meant only 13 people, the
Ummah is not included.’ Salman requested: ‘O Messenger of Allah, tell me
who they are.’ The Holy Prophet (S) replied: ‘I, my brother and eleven
from my children?’ Everyone replied: ‘Bearing Allah as Witness – Yes.’

Ali (a.s.) said: ‘I ask you, bearing Allah as Witness, do you know that
the Holy Prophet (S) gave a sermon after which he did not give any
sermon. He said: ‘O people, I leave behind you two heavy things –
Allah’s Book and my Ahlul Bayt. Keep close to them, you will not
deviate, because Lateef and Khabeer (Allah) has informed me and has
promised me that these two will not separate until they come to the Pool
to me.’ Umar stood up and looked angrily.

He asked: ‘O Prophet of Allah, all the people of your house?’ He
replied: ‘No, but those from them who are my inheritors. The first of
them is my brother Ali, who is my vizier, my inheritor, my caliph in my
Ummah and after me, the guardian of all believers. He is the first of
them, then my son Hasan and then my son Husain, then nine from the
posterity of Husain, one by one, until they come to me at the Fountain.

They will be witness on the earth of Allah and will be authority on His
Creation, and will be mines of His Wisdom. He who obeys them will have
obeyed Allah, and he who disobeys them will have disobeyed Allah?’
Everyone said: ‘We bear witness that the Holy Prophet (S) had said
that.’ Then for a long time Ali (a.s.) was questioned. He did not leave
anything, bearing Allah as Witness, until he reached his final merits
that the Holy Prophet (S) has mentioned about him. All kept confirming,
bearing Allah as Witness, that this was true.”

26 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Umar Hafiz: Narrated to me Abu Bakr
Muhammad bin Ali Muqri – alias Qattah – that he said: Narrated to me
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya Soosi: Narrated to us Abdul Aziz bin Aban:
Narrated to us Sufyan Thawri from Jabir from Shabi from Masrooq that he
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَاأَيُّهَاالَّذِين
َآمَنُوااركَْعُواوَاسْجُدُواوَاعْبُدُوارَبَّكُمْوَافْعَلُواالْخَيْرَلَعَلَّكُمْتُفْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I asked Abdullah (Ibn Masud), ‘Did the Prophet (S) inform you how many
caliphs will there be after him?’ He replied, ‘Yes, twelve caliphs. All
of them will be from Quraish.”

27 - Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masroor: Narrated to us
Husain bin Muhammad bin Aamir from Moalla bin Muhammad Basri from Ja’far
bin Sulaiman from Abdullah bin Hakam from his father from Saeed bin
Jubair from Abdullah bin Abbas that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S)
said:

“Indeed, my caliphs and legatees and the divine proofs over the
creatures after me shall be twelve. The first of whom is my brother and
the last is my son. He was asked: O Messenger of Allah, who is your
brother? He replied: Ali Ibne Abi Talib. Then he was asked: Who is your
son? The very Mahdi who will fill the earth with justice and equity just
as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. By the One Who
sent me as the giver of glad tidings even if a day remains from the
tenure of the world, the Almighty Allah would definitely prolong that
day to such an extent that he reappears in it. At that time Isa bin
Maryam, the spirit of Allah will descend and pray behind him. And the
earth shall be illuminated by his effulgence and his kingdom and power
will stretch to the east and the west of the earth.”

28 - Narrated to us Ali bin Abdullah Warraq ar-Raazi: Narrated to us
Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Haitham bin Abi Masrooq Nahdi from
Husain bin Ulwan from Umar bin Khalid from Saad bin Tareef from Asbagh
bin Nubatah from Abdullah bin Abbas that he said: I heard the Messenger
of Allah (S) say:

“I, Ali, Hasan, Husain and nine (Imams) from the progeny of Husain are
the purified and the infallible ones.”

29 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hasan al-Qattan: Narrated to us Ahmad bin
Yahya bin Zakariya al-Qattan: Narrated to us Bakr bin Abdullah bin
Habib: Narrated to us Fadl bin Saqr Abdi: Narrated to us Abu Muawiyah
from Amash from Abaya bin Rabi from Abdullah bin Abbas that he said: The
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I am the chief of the prophets, Ali Ibne Abi Talib is the chief of
successors. And my successors after me are twelve. The first of them is
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and the last is al-Qaim (a.s.).”

30 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Yahya al-Attar from Sahl Ibne Ziyad and Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa
that they said: Narrated to us Hasan bin Abbas bin Harish ar-Raazi from
Abi Ja’far the second, from his father from his ancestors that Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said: I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say to his
companions:

“Have faith in the Night of Power (Lailatul Qadr). Indeed it is for Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and his eleven sons after him.”

31 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab
and Muhammad bin Isa bin Ubaid and Abdullah bin Aamir bin Saeed from
Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran from Hajjaj Khashshab from Maroof bin
Kharrabooz that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far (a.s.) say: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said:

“The example of my Ahlul Bayt in this Ummah is only like the example of
the stars in the sky, when one of the stars disappears another one
appears.”

32 - Narrated to us more than one of our associates: Narrated to us Abu
Ali Muhammad bin Hammam: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far from Ahmad
bin Hilal from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Saeed bin Ghazwan from Abi
Baseer from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) narrates from his forefathers that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Surely Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, chose Friday from the days,
the the month of Ramadan from the months, the Night of Power لية ةالقدر
from the nights, chose me from all the Prophets and chose Ali (a.s.)
from me. He granted him (Ali) superiority over all the successors. From
Ali (a.s.) He chose Hasan (a.s.) and Husain (a.s.) and from Husain
(a.s.), He chose the successors from his descendants.

They (descendants) will dispel the distortion of the exaggerators
غالينfrom the Quran,the plagiarism of the liars and the interpretation
of the deviated ones. The ninth of them is their Qaim (a.t.f.s.) and he
is their apparent and their concealed.”

33 -Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Ziyad Hamdani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Muhammad bin Maqil Qirmiseeni: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Abdullah Basri: Narrated to us Ibrahim bin Mihzam from his father from
Abi Abdullah from his father from his ancestors from Ali (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The Imams will be twelve from my Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Allah, the High,
will grant them my understanding, my knowledge and my wisdom and He will
create them from my clay- طينت. Then woe unto the arrogant ones against
them after me, who will break my relations concerning them. What is
wrong with them (opponents)? May Allah not make them reach my
intercession!”

34 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Hammam Abu Ali from Abdullah bin Ja’far from Hasan bin
Musa Khashshab from Abi Muthanna Nakhai from Zaid bin Ali bin Husain bin
Ali from his father Ali bin Husain (a.s.) from his father Husain bin Ali
(a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“How can that people be destroyed whose foremost are me, Ali and eleven
of my descendants, the possessors of signs and whose last is Masih, the
son of Maryam. But between these two eras, he will be destroyed who is
not from me and I am not from him.”

35 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us my father from Muhammad bin Abdul Jabbar from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Ziyad Azdi from Aban bin Uthman from Thabit bin Dinar from
the Chief of the worshippers Ali bin Husain from the Chief of the
martyrs Husain bin Ali from the Chief of the legatees Amirul Momineen
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“There will be twelve Imams after me. The first of them is you, O Ali
and the last of them is the Qaim by whom Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
will conquer the east and the west of the earth.”

36 -Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway: Narrated to me my uncle
Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi: Narrated to
me Muhammad bin Ali Qurashi: Narrated to me Abu Rabi Zahrani: Narrated
to us Jareer from Laith bin Abi Sulaym from Mujahid that he said: Ibne
Abbas said: I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say:

“There is an angel of Allah named Dardaeel. He is having sixteen
thousand wings and the distance between each wing is equal to that of
the distance between the earth and the sky. One day a thought came to
the mind of this angel that is there anything greater than the Almighty
Allah? The Almighty Allah gave him the same number of wings again and
now he had thirty-two thousand wings. Then the Almighty Allah ordered
him to fly. So he continued to fly for fifty years but could not reach
any end of the heavens. When he was tired, the Almighty Allah told him:
O angel, come back to your original place, Our greatness is effective on
all great things and there is no one greater than Me, nor can I be
related to a particular place. Then the Almighty Allah confiscated his
wings and expelled him from the rows of angels.

When Imam Husain (a.s.) was born on a Thursday night the Almighty Allah
commanded the caretaker angel of hell to extinguish the fire as a mark
of celebrating the birth of the son of the Prophet and told the
caretaker of Paradise to decorate Paradise. Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime also asked the Houries of Paradise to embellish themselves for
the occasion. He instructed the angels to stand in organized rows as a
mark of respect and recite glorifications and divine praises.

Archangel Jibraeel was directed that a thousand delegations of angels,
each consisting of a thousand angels mounted on horses having black and
white marks and decorated with rubies and jewels, must go and
congratulate the Prophet. They must also be accompanied by angels, known
as Ruhanis, holding trays of effulgence. Jibraeel was also told to
inform the Prophet that the newborn should be named ‘Husain’.

He was also to tell the Prophet: O Muhammad, the evil people of your
community mounted on the worst vehicles would slay Husain. Thus woe be
to the killer, woe be to one who supports him and woe be to the one who
shows the path of evil. I am aloof from the killer of Husain and he is
away from My mercy because no crime would as dreadful as the killing
Husain till the Judgment Day. On the Judgment Day Husain’s killer will
enter Hell along with the polytheists. The Hell is eager to have the
killer of Husain like the Paradise is desirous of righteous people.

Thus Jibraeel set out towards the earth but when he passed by Dardaeel
he asked: O Jibraeel what matters have been decided with regard to the
earth, tonight in the heavens? Is the doomsday near? Jibraeel said: No,
a child is born in the house of Muhammad and the Almighty Allah has sent
me to congratulate Muhammad on this occasion. Dardaeel said: O Jibraeel
when you go to Muhammad tell him to request the Almighty to forgive me
for the sake of this newborn, restore my wings and allow me to rejoin
the ranks of the angels. Jibraeel came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and
congratulated him as the Almighty Allah had commanded.

The Messenger of Allah (S) asked: would my people kill my son? ‘Yes,’
said Jibraeel. ‘They would not be from my community. I am immune from
them. And the Almighty Allah is aloof from them. Jibraeel said: O
Muhammad, I am also aloof from them. After that the Holy Prophet (S)
came to Lady Fatima and congratulated her and also informed her about
the killing of Husain, she began to cry and said: Alas, would this child
had not been born. May Allah send the killer of Husain to hell.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: O Fatima, I guarantee hell for the killer of
Husain. But your son will not be martyred till he does not father a son
who would be an Imam from whose progeny would come the rest of the
guiding Imams. Then he said: From the Imams is Ali the guide, then Hasan
the guiding one, then Husain the helper, then Ali bin Husain, the helped
one, then Muhammad bin Ali, the intercessor, then Ja’far bin Muhammad,
the befitter, then Musa bin Ja’far, the trustworthy, then Ali bin Musa,
the ar-Reza, then Muhammad bin Ali, the doer, then Ali bin Muhammad, the
giver of peace, then Hasan bin Ali, the scholar and then the Qaim,
behind whom Isa (a.s.) would pray.

On hearing this Lady Fatima stopped her lamentation. Then Jibraeel
informed the Holy Prophet (S) about that angel and conveyed his request.
Ibne Abbas says that the Messenger of Allah (S) took up Imam Husain
(a.s.) who was wrapped in a cloth. Then gesturing to the heavens said: O
Allah, for the sake of this newborn, rather for the sake of the right
You have on his grandfather Muhammad, and Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq
and Yaqoob, if there is any status of Husain bin Ali and Fatima in Your
view, please forgive Dardaeel, restore his wings and admit him to the
ranks of the angels once again.

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime accepted the request of the Holy Prophet
(S) and forgave the mistake of this angel. Thus the distinguishing
feature of this angel in Paradise is that he is the slave of Husain bin
Ali (a.s.) and Fatima, daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S).”

37 -Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar bin Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Nasr from Hasan bin Musa Khashshab: Narrated
to us Hakam bin Bohlool Ansari from Ismail bin Hammam from Imran bin
Qurra from Abi Muhammad Madani from Ibne Uzaina from Aban bin Abi Ayyash
that he said: Narrated to us Sulaym Ibn Qais Al-Hilali relates:

“I heard Ali (a.s.) say, “No verse from the Quran descended on the
Messenger of Allah (S) but that he recited it for me and dictated it,
while I jotted it down. He taught me its interpretation, its exegesis,
its abrogating verse, its abrogated verse, its clear verse and its
ambiguous verse. He prayed to Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, that he
should teach me its understanding and its memorization.

Consequently, I never forgot even one verse from the Book of Allah, nor
the knowledge, which he dictated to me and I had written it down. He did
not leave anything which Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, taught him
from the permissible and the prohibited, the commands and the
prohibitions, the past and the present, obedience as well as defiance,
but that he taught me and I memorized it. I did not forget even one word
from them.

Then he placed his hand on my heart and prayed to Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, that He should fill my heart with knowledge,
understanding, wisdom and light. I did not forget any of these nor was
there anything which I did not write.” I asked, “O Messenger of Allah
(S), do you fear forgetfulness for me afterwards?” He replied, “I do not
fear for you forgetfulness or ignorance. Indeed, my Lord, mighty is His
Majesty, has informed me that He has responded to my prayer for you and
your partners, those who will follow you.” I asked, “O Messenger of
Allah (S)! Who are my partners after me?” He replied, “Those whom Allah,
Mighty and Glorified be He, has accompanied with Himself and me in His
verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اطيعا اهلل .واطيعواالرسل لواولىار رمنكم...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and the possessors of authority
amongst you…”***[^13]

I inquired, “O Messenger of Allah (S)! Who are they?” He replied, “My
successors till they reach unto me at the pond (of Kauthar). All of them
are guides and guided. One who forsakes them will not harm them. They
are with the Quran and the Quran is with them, neither it will separate
from them, nor will they separate from it. Due to them my people will be
helped, due to them they will receive rains, due to them calamity will
be dispelled from them and their prayers will be accepted.”

I requested, “O Messenger of Allah (S)! Name them for me.” He rejoined,
“This son of mine” and he placed his hand on the head of Hasan, “then
this son” and he kept his hand on the head of Husain (peace be on them
both), “then his son Ali, who will be born in your life, so convey my
salaam to him and thus twelve (Imams) will be completed.” I prayed, “May
my father and my mother be sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah (S),
name each one of them for me.” So, he named them one by one.

By Allah! O brother of Bani Hilal, amongst them, is the Mahdi of this
people, Muhammad, the one who will fill the earth with justice and
equity like it has been fraught with injustice. By Allah! Surely I know
who will pay allegiance to him between the Rukn and the Maqaam (in
Kaaba) and I know their names and their fathers and their tribes.”

[^1]: Surah Ghafir 40:4

[^2]: Surah Buruj 85:1

[^3]: Surah Shuara 26:227

[^4]: Surah Taubah 9:100

[^5]: Surah Waqiya 56:10-11

[^6]: Surah Nisa 4:59

[^7]: Surah Maidah 5:55

[^8]: Surah Taubah 9:16

[^9]: Surah Maidah 5:3

[^10]: Surah Ahzab 33:33

[^11]: Surah Taubah 9:119

[^12]: Surah Hajj 22:77

[^13]: Surah Nisa (4): verse 59


