Chapter 25: Statements of the Holy Prophet (S) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat
==================================================================================

1 - Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masroor (r.a.): Narrated to
us Husain bin Muhammad bin Aamir from his uncle Abdullah bin Aamir from
Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Abi Jamila Mufaddal bin Salih from Jabir bin
Yazid Jofi from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that he said: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said:

“Mahdi is from my descendants. His name is my name and his agnomen
(Kunniyat) is my agnomen. He most closely resembles me in appearance and
behavior than all other people. There will be occultation and confusion
for him. So much so that people will deviate from their religion. Then a
time will come when he would appear like a shooting star and he would
fill up the earth with equity and justice just as it would be brimming
with injustice and oppression.”

2 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Hasan as-Saffar from Ahmad bin Husain bin Saeed from Muhammad bin
Jumhur from Fadala bin Ayyub from Muawiyah bin Wahab from Abi Hamza from
Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Blessed be those who are fortunate to live in the time of Qaim of my
Ahlul Bayt. Those who will believe in him during his occultation and
before his advent, who will love his friends and remain aloof from his
enemies. Such people will be my closest ones and my friends on the Day
of Judgment.”

3 - Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad (r.a.): Narrated to us Abu
Amr Balkhi from Muhammad bin Masud: Narrated to me Khalaf bin Hammad
from Sahl bin Ziyad from Ismail bin Mehran from Muhammad bin Aslam Jabli
from Khattab bin Musab from Sadeer from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Glad tidings for those who live till the time of the Qaim of my Ahlul
Bayt and follow him before his advent. Those who, during his
occultation, have faith in him and the Imams preceding him and will be
aloof from their enemies for the sake of Allah, they shall be my friends
and the most honorable persons of my Ummah.”

4 -Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan and Muhammad bin Musa
bin Mutawakkil -May Allah be pleased with them -they said: Narrated to
us Saad bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari and Muhammad bin
Yahya al-Attar, all of them said: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin
Isa and Ibrahim bin Hashim and Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi and Muhammad
bin Husain bin Abil Khattab, all of them said: Narrated to us Abu Ali
Hasan bin Mahboob Sarrad from Dawood bin Haseen from Abi Baseer from
as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his ancestors that the Messenger of
Allah (S) said:

“Mahdi is from my progeny. There is an occultation and perplexity for
him, during which period communities will deviate. He will bring the
relics of the prophets. At that time he would fill up the earth with
justice and equity as it will be fraught with injustice and oppression.”

5 - Narrated to us Abdullah Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus al-Attar
Nishapuri: Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah Nishapuri:
Narrated to us Hamadan bin Sulaiman Nishapuri from Muhammad bin Ismail
bin Bazee from Salih bin Uqbah from his father from Abi Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali al-Baqir from his father the Chief of the worshippers Ali bin
Husain from his father, the Chief of the martyrs Husain bin Ali from his
father the Chief of the legatees Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Mahdi is from my progeny. There will be occultation due to which people
will fall into confusion and go astray. He will come with the relics of
the prophets (a.s.) and fill the earth with equity and justice as it
would have been fraught with injustice and oppression.”

6 -And from the same chain of narrators it is narrated from Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The best worship act is waiting for the reappearance.”

7 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil (r.a.): Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ismail
Barmaki from Ali bin Uthman from Muhammad bin Furat from Thabit bin
Dinar from Saeed bin Jubair from Ibne Abbas that he said: The Messenger
of Allah (S) said:

“Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) is the Imam of my Ummah and my caliph on it
after me. And from his progeny is the awaited Mahdi who will fill the
earth with justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and
tyranny. By the One who has sent me with truth, as the giver of glad
tidings and a warner, those who will be steadfast in faith upon him
during his occultation will be more precious than red sulphur. Jabir
Ibne Abdullah Ansari stood up and asked: O Messenger of Allah, is there
occultation for the Qaim from your progeny? He replied: Yes, by my Lord,
through him will Allah exalt those who believe and destroy those who
disbelieve. O Jabir, it is one of the celestial matters and one of the
secrets of Allah which is concealed from the people. Thus one who doubts
in it, he in fact doubts in the matter of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.”

8 -Narrated to us Abul Hasan Muhammad bin Ali bin Shah Faqih Marwaruzi
in Marwaruz: Narrated to us Abu Hamid Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Husain:
Narrated to us Abu Yazid Ahmad bin Khalid Khalidi: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Salih Tamimi: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hatim
Qattan from Hammad bin Amr from Imam Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father
from his grandfather from Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) in a long tradition
about the bequest of the Prophet (S) in which he mentions that the Holy
Prophet (S) said to him:

“O Ali, know that, the faith is astonishing and certainty great of those
who shall be there in the last period of time. There will be no prophet
among them and Divine Proof will be hidden from them inspite of that
they will believe in black upon white (writings/books).”


