Chapter 26: Statements of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat of the Twelfth Imam
========================================================================================================

1 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Husain -May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari and Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad
bin Idrees, all of them from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid Barqi and
Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of them from Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from
Thalaba bin Maimoon from Malik Juhani. And narrated to us Muhammad bin
Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan
al-Saffar and Saad bin Abdullah from Abdullah bin Muhammad Taylisi from
Mundhir bin Muhammad bin Qaboos from Nazr bin Abi Sarri from Abi Dawood
Sulaiman bin Sufyan Mustariq from Thalaba bin Maimoon from Malik Juhani
from Harith bin Mughirah Nasri from Asbagh bin Nubatah (r.a.) that he
said:

“I presented myself before Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) I
saw that he was engrossed in some thought and marking with his blessed
finger on the earth. I queried, ‘O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)! What is the
matter, I find you today in some perplexity, making signs on the earth,
do you love this earth? He replied: I swear by Allah that it is not so.
I have never befriended this world, rather I was reflecting about that
son, the eleventh one from my progeny. He is the Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), who
will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be filled with
injustice and tyranny.

There is an occultation for him in which some people will be deviated
while others will be guided. I asked: O Amirul Momineen, would this come
to pass? He replied: Yes, just as they are created and O Asbagh, I am
telling you that they shall be the best of this Ummah with the righteous
ones of this progeny. I asked: What will happen after that? He replied:
After that Allah will do whatever He wants. He alone is the master of
intentions, aims and the final ends.”

2 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan and Muhammad bin Ali
Jilaway - May Allah be pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abil Qasim Majilaway from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi Qurashi
Muqri from Nasr bin Muzahim Minqari from Umar bin Saad from Fudhail bin
Khadij from Kumayl bin Ziyad Nakhai.\# And narrated to us Muhammad bin
Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) from Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar and
Saad bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Isa and Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of them from Abdur Rahman
bin Abi Najran from Asim bin Humaid from Abi Hamza Thumali from Abdur
Rahman bin Jundab Fazari from Kumayl bin Ziyad Nakhai.

\#And narrated to us Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Abdul Wahhab bin Nasr bin
Abdul Wahhab Qurashi: Informed me Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Dawood bin
Sulaiman Nishapuri: Narrated to us Musa bin Ishaq Ansari, the Qadi of
Rayy: Narrated to us Abu Nuaym Zirar bin Surad Tamimi: Narrated to us
Asim bin Humaid Hannat from Abi Hamza from Abdur Rahman bin Jundab
Fazari from Kumayl bin Ziyad Nakhai. \# And narrated to us Ahmad bin
Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani: Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim
from his father from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran from Asim bin Humaid
from Abi Hamza Thumali from Abdur Rahman Ibne Jundab Fazari from Kumayl
bin Ziyad Nakhai.

\# And narrated to us Shaykh Abu Saeed Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ali bin
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ali bin Salt Qummi (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abbas Harwi: Narrated to us Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Ishaq
bin Saeed Said: Narrated to us Abu Hatim Muhammad bin Idrees Hanzali
ar-Raazi: Narrated to us Ismail bin Musa Fazari from Asim bin Humaid
from Abi Hamza Thumali from Abdur Rahman bin Jundab from Kumayl bin
Ziyad Nakhai – (in another tradition Fudail bin Jadij has narrated from
Kumayl) that he said:

“Once I saw Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in the mosque of Kufa, and when we
completed our late evening prayer (i.e. Isha), he took me by his hands
and came out of the Masjid. He did not say a word till we arrived at the
rear part of Kufa. As he entered the desert, he heaved a sigh and said:

“O Kumayl, no doubt these hearts (i.e. minds) are containers, and the
best of them are those who retain most. Remember from me what I say;
people are of three categories: the learned men (of piety), the students
on the path of salvation, and (the third one) the riffraff of the
society, following every crowing of the crows, bending as the wind
blows; never benefiting from the light of knowledge, nor finding a
refuge with a strong supporter.

O Kumayl, knowledge is better than wealth; for knowledge guards you
while you have to guard wealth; and wealth is diminished when spent,
while knowledge grows and increases when you put it to use.

O Kumayl, to have liking and affinity for a learned man is the best way
to entrench ones faith in Allah, it enables one to be obedient to Him
during lifetime, and to be praiseworthy after one has died.

O Kumayl, dividend from wealth disappears with its loss, O Kumayl, the
hoarders of wealth have died, while the learned men exist forever; their
bodies have disappeared but their teachings and wisdom are ingrained in
the hearts.

And then pointing to his chest said: Here is well-grounded, plentiful
knowledge; I wish it had true recipients and adherents.

But unfortunately, some unscrupulous men of understanding have tried to
misuse it, using religion as a weapon to earn the worldly gain, and
seeking undue power by divine authority over Allah’s creatures, abusing
His bounties which He bestowed upon them. So the feeble-minded people
accepted them as reliable; or took them as compliant with (divine)
wisdom, discarding the true guardians of truth. (The truth is that) such
people (who they have adopted as their guides) have no insight into its
ramifications; with the result that with the slightest confusion, doubt
enters their minds. Neither of them could be the true carrier of
knowledge.

And then there are those with insatiable lust, easily misled by the
pleasures of flesh, or enticed by accumulating wealth, not at all among
those who care for religion. They very much resemble the grazing cattle.
Thus knowledge dies with the death of such carriers.

Yet, the earth is never devoid of either a manifest divine power, or the
one in concealment, ensuring that His clear signs are not lost. Surely,
with those fewer people of enormous import, Allah protects His proof,
till they succeed to transmit it further to their likes, and plant it
deep in their hearts. They are the ones overwhelmed by the true
knowledge of certitude, and have made it easy for themselves to tread on
the path which men in luxury found difficult. They derive pleasure and
enjoyment from things which repel the ignorant. Though they live on
earth with their bodies, their souls hang unto the higher plane. They
are the (true) representatives of Allah on His earth, the ones who
invite (people) to His religion.

Alas! How keen I am to have sight of them! And I seek forgiveness from
Allah for me and for you all.”

And in the report of Abdur Rahman bin Jundab: “You may leave when you
like,”

3 -Narrated to us Abu Saeed Muhammad bin Fadl bin Muhammad bin Ishaq
Mudakkar in Nishapur: Narrated to us Abu Yahya Zakariya bin Yahya bin
Harith Bazzaz: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Muslim Damishqi: Narrated to
us Ibrahim bin Yahya Aslami Madani from Ammara bin Juwain from Abi
Tufayl Aamir bin Wathila that he said:

“We witnessed the funeral prayer of Abu Bakr after that we gathered
around Umar bin Khattab and paid allegiance to him and visited him in
the masjid for some days, till we addressed him by the title of chief of
believers. One day we were seated with him when a Jew, who imagined to
be a descendant of Harun, brother of Musa (a.s.) came and stood before
Umar and said: O chief of believers, who among you is most knowledgeable
regarding the Sunnah of your Prophet and the Book of your Lord so that I
can ask my questions? The narrator says: Umar pointed out towards Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

The Jew said: O Ali, are you such? He replied: Yes, ask me whatever you
want. The Jew said: I have three, three and one question. Ali (a.s.)
said: Why don’t you say that you have seven questions? He replied: If
you reply the first three questions correctly I will ask the next three
and if you reply to them also correctly I will ask the remaining one.
But if you answer the first three questions wrongly, I will not ask any
more questions. Ali (a.s.) asked: How would you know whether the replies
I have given are right or wrong? The narrator says: The Jew put his hand
inside his garment and took out an old book and said: I have inherited
this book from my forefathers. It was dictated by Musa (a.s.) and
written down by Harun (a.s.).

It contains replies to all the questions I am going to ask you. Ali
(a.s.) said: If I reply to all your questions correctly, will you accept
Islam? “Yes,” he said, by Allah, if you reply to my questions I will
immediately embrace Islam at your hands. Ali (a.s.) said: You may ask.
He said: Which was the first stone to come down to the earth? Which was
the first spring of water that gushed out on the earth? And which was
the first tree that grew on the earth?

Ali (a.s.) said: O Jew, you people say that the first stone is that of
Baitul Maqdas. It is a lie. The first stone is the Black Stone which
came with Prophet Adam (a.s.) from Paradise. Which he placed at the Rukn
of the House of Allah. People touch and kiss it and through it renew
their covenant with Allah. The Jew said: By Allah, you are right. Ali
(a.s.) said: Jews say that the first tree that grew on the earth is that
of olive. It is a lie.

The first tree is that of Ajwa dates that came down with Adam (a.s.) and
his wife. The Jew said: By Allah, you are right. Ali (a.s.) said: You
people say that the first spring that gushed forth is the spring of
Baitul Maqdas. You lie. The first spring is that in which the companion
of Musa (a.s.) forgot the salted fish and when the water of the spring
of life reached it, it became alive and swam away and Musa and his
companion followed it and met Khizr. The Jew said: By Allah, you are
right. Ali (a.s.) asked: Ask the next three questions? He said: How many
just Imams are there after the Prophet in this nation?

What is the place of Muhammad in Paradise? And who all will stay with
him in his house in Paradise? Ali (a.s.) said: O Jew, there are twelve
Imams in this nation and their enemies cannot do them any harm. The Jew
said: By Allah, You are right. Ali (a.s.) said: The house of Muhammad
(S) in Paradise is in the Jannat of Adn. It is at the center of Paradise
and nearest place to the throne of the Beneficent.

The Jews said: By Allah, You are right. Ali (a.s.) said: And those who
will stay with him in his house are the twelve Imams. The Jew said: By
Allah, You are right. Ali (a.s.) said: You may ask the remaining
question also. He asked: For how many years will the successor of
Prophet Muhammad (S) live? Would he have a natural death or will be
murdered? Ali (a.s.) replied: O Jew, he would live for thirty years
after the Prophet. This will be dyed with this. Saying this he pointed
towards his beard and his blessed head. The narrator says: At that
moment the Jew got up from his place and said: I bear witness that there
is no god, except Allah; Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and you are
the successor of the Messenger of Allah (S).”

4 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to me my
uncle Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid Barqi
from Qasim bin Yahya from his grandfather Hasan bin Rashid from Abi
Baseer from Muhammad bin Muslim from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali
al-Baqir from his father Ali bin Husain from his father Husain bin Ali
from his father Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“The Almighty Allah has concealed four things in four things. He has
concealed His pleasure in His obedience, so do not consider His
obedience insignificant. Perhaps what you think is insignificant, in
that lies His pleasure and you may know about it. He conceals His anger
in His disobedience. So do not consider something unimportant in His
disobedience. It is possible that the disobedience in which you are
indulging not considering it serious, His anger lies in that only and
you may not be aware of it.

And He conceals His acceptance in supplication. So do not consider any
supplication unimportant. It is possible that His acceptance is there in
this supplication only and you are unaware about it. And He conceals His
Wali (friend/saint) among His servants. So do not consider any person as
lowly. It is possible that only he may be the Wali of Allah and you may
not be aware of it.”

5 -Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan -May Allah be pleased
with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and Muhammad bin
Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad bin Idrees, all of them from Ahmad bin Abi
Abdullah Barqi and Yaqoob bin Yazid and Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of them
from Ibne Faddal from Aymun bin Muhriz Hadhrami from Muhammad bin Sama-a
Kindi from Ibrahim bin Abi Yahya Madyani from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that
he said:

“After the death of Abu Bakr when people paid allegiance to Umar a young
Jew came to him in the Masjid and greeted him, while people also sat
around Umar. The young man from Jews said: O chief of believers, who
among you is most knowledgeable regarding the Sunnah of your Prophet and
the Book of your Lord? Guide me to him. Umar pointed out towards Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

The Jew turned to Ali (a.s.) and said: O Ali, are you such? He replied:
Yes. The Jew said: I have three, three and one question. Ali (a.s.)
said: Why don’t you say that you have seven questions? He replied: No,
if you reply the first three questions correctly I will ask the
remaining. But if you answer the first three questions wrongly, I will
not ask any more questions. Ali (a.s.) said: If I reply correctly do you
have the capability to understand that it is right?

That young man was a Rabbi and in the view of the Jews he was a
descendant of Harun bin Imran, the brother of Musa (a.s.). He said: Yes.
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: You swear by Allah, besides whom there is
no deity, that if I reply to your questions correctly you will embrace
Islam and give up Judaism. The Jew took the oath and said: I am in
search of truth and submission. Ali (a.s.) said: You may ask so that you
may be informed. He said: Which was the first tree that grew on the
earth? Which was the first spring of water that gushed out on the earth?
And which was the first stone to come down to the earth?

Ali (a.s.) said: Jews say that the first tree that grew on the earth is
olive. It is a lie. The first tree is Ajwa dates that came down with
Adam (a.s.) and his wife. It is from which all the date trees have
grown. As for your question about the first spring that burst forth on
the earth, Jews think that it is the spring of Baitul Maqdas. You lie.

The first spring is that in which the companion of Musa (a.s.) forgot
the salted fish and when the water of the spring of life reached it, it
became alive. And there is no dead that comes in contact with the water
of this spring but it becomes alive. Khizr was leading the expedition of
Dhulqarnain which was searching for this spring. He found it and drank
from it and Dhulqarnain could not find it. As for your question that
which is the first stone that came to the earth, the Jews think that it
is the stone of Baitul Maqdas. It is a lie. The first stone is the Black
Stone that which came with Prophet Adam (a.s.) from Paradise. Which he
placed at the Rukn of the House of Allah where people kiss it. It was
initially whiter than snow but due to the sins of human beings it has
become black.

The Jews asked: Tell me, how many guiding and guided Imams are there in
this nation, whose opponents cannot harm their Imamate? What is the
place of Muhammad in Paradise? And who all from the Ummah will stay with
him in his house in Paradise? Ali (a.s.) said: As for your question that
how many guiding and guided Imams are there in this nation, whose
opponents cannot harm their Imamate, there are twelve Imams in this
nation and each of them is guided and the guiding. And their enemies
cannot do them any harm.

As for your question that what is the place of Muhammad in Paradise?
Well, his place is the best and most respectable in Paradise, that is
the Adn Paradise. As for your question that who all from the Ummah will
stay with him in his house in Paradise? It is the same twelve guiding
Imams.

The young man said: By Allah, You are right. Ali (a.s.) said: The house
of Muhammad (S) in Paradise is in the Jannat of Adn. It is at the center
of Paradise and nearest to the throne of the Beneficent. The Jews said:
By Allah, You are right. Ali (a.s.) said: And those who will stay with
him in his house are the twelve Imams. The Jew said: By Allah, besides
whom there is no god, you are right. It is just as mentioned in the
scroll dictated by Musa (a.s.) and written by the hand of Harun (a.s.).
Then he asked: For how many years will the successor of Prophet Muhammad
(S) live? Would he have a natural death or will be murdered? Ali (a.s.)
replied: Woe be unto you, O Jew, I am the successor of Muhammad (S) and
I would live for thirty years after him. Neither a day less nor a day
more.

This will be dyed with this. Saying this he pointed towards his beard
and his blessed head. The narrator says: At that moment the Jew got up
from his place and said: I bear witness that there is no god, except
Allah; Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and you are the successor of
the Messenger of Allah (S). Then a man who shall be more wretched than
the killer of the she-camel of Prophet Salih (a.s.), would strike my
head due to which my beard will be dyed in my blood. After that he wept
much. The Jew youth came forward and said: I testify that there is no
god, except Allah, and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah [and you are
the successor of the Messenger of Allah (S)].

Abu Ja’far Abadi said: In a rafa’u tradition – that the Imam said: All
the people of Medina confess that this boy was the most knowledgeable
among the Jews like his father.”

6 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali Majilaway (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid Barqi from
his father from Abdullah bin Qasim Hayyan Sarraj from Dawood bin
Sulaiman Ghassani from Abi Tufayl that he said:

“We witnessed the death of Abu Bakr and the allegiance to Umar while Ali
(a.s.) sat in a corner. Just then a well dressed young Jew, who was a
descendant of Harun (a.s.), came to Umar and stood before him said: O
chief of believers, are you the most knowledgeable in this community
regarding the Sunnah of your Prophet and the Book of your Lord? Umar
continued to look down. He said: I am addressing you.

Then he repeated his question. Umar said: What concern you have with
this? The boy said: I am in search of truth and I am having doubts about
my religion. Umar pointed to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and said: This
young man is such. The Jew asked: Who is that young man? Umar said: He
is Ali Ibne Abi Talib, the cousin of the Messenger of Allah (S), father
of Hasan and Husain, sons of the Messenger of Allah (S) and husband of
Fatima, daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S). The Jew came to Ali
(a.s.) and said: O Ali, are you such? He replied: Yes. The Jew said: I
have three, three and one question. Ali (a.s.) said: O Harooni, why
don’t you say that you have seven questions?

He replied: No, if you reply the first three questions correctly I will
ask the remaining. But if you answer the first three questions wrongly,
I will not ask any more questions. Ali (a.s.) said: If I reply correctly
would you enter my faith? The young man said: That is why I have come to
you. Ali (a.s.) said: Ask what you like. The young man said: Which was
the first drop of blood to fall on the earth? Which was the first spring
of water that gushed out on the earth?

And which was the first thing that grew on the earth? When Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) replied to all the question he said: Now tell me the
next three. Who are the just Imams after Prophet Muhammad (S)? In which
Paradise would Prophet Muhammad reside? And who would stay with him? Ali
(a.s.) said: O Harooni, there are twelve caliphs and just Imams of
Prophet Muhammad (S). Opposition of the people will not be able to
discourage them and they will not fear the adversaries.

They shall be more steadfast on the religion of Allah than a mountain.
Muhammad (S) will be in Adn Paradise and the very twelve will live with
him. The Jew said: By Allah, besides whom there is no god, you are
right. It is same as my uncle Musa (a.s.) dictated to my father, Harun
(a.s.). Tell me one more thing. He asked: For how many years will the
successor of Prophet Muhammad (S) live after the passing away of the
Prophet?

Would he have a natural death or will be murdered? Imam (a.s.) said: O
Harooni, after the passing away of Prophet Muhammad (S) he would live
for thirty years. Neither a day more nor a day less. Then he will be hit
on the head. Saying this he pointed to his head. And his beard will be
dyed in the blood of his head. Hearing this, the Harooni screamed and
tore his collar.

Then he said: I testify that there is no god, except Allah. He is One
and without a partner. Muhammad is His servant and messenger and you are
his successor. People should confess to your greatness and not that they
should dominate you. They must confess to your excellence instead of
weakening you. The narrator says: After that Ali (a.s.) took him home
and imparted the knowledge of religion to him.”

7 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari from Muhammad bin Isa from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Hashim from Ibne
Abi Yahya Madyani from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“A Jew came to Umar and asked him some questions. Umar sent him to Ali
(a.s.). He asked Ali (a.s.): Tell me how many just Imams there will be
after your prophet? In which Paradise your prophet will be? And who all
will stay with him there? Ali (a.s.) said: O Harooni, there will be
twelve just Imams after Prophet Muhammad (S) and they will be such that
the opposition of the people will neither discourage them nor make them
afraid. They shall be more steadfast on the religion of Allah than a
mountain. Muhammad (S) will be in Adn Paradise and these twelve will
live with him. The Jew accepted Islam and said: In this gathering you
are better than this man (Umar), you are the highest and no one is more
excellent than you.”

8 -Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan -May Allah be pleased
with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from Muhammad
bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Hakam bin Miskeen Thaqafi from Salih
bin Uqbah from Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said:

“When Abu Bakr died after making Umar the caliph, one day Umar was
sitting in the masjid when a man came and said: O master of believers, I
am a Jew and the greatest scholar among them. I want to ask you a few
things. If you answer them correctly I will accept Islam. Umar asked:
What are those things? He said: I will ask three, three and one
questions.

You may answer the questions yourself or send me to anyone among your
people who is more knowledgeable than you. Umar said: This young man
(Ali) will reply to your questions. Ali (a.s.) came to the Jew and said:
Why are you saying that you will ask three, three and one question? Why
don’t you say that you will ask seven questions? He replied: If you
cannot reply the first three questions I will not ask the remaining. Ali
(a.s.) said: If I reply will you accept Islam? “Yes,” he said. Ali
(a.s.) said: You may ask.

He said: Which was the first stone to come down to the earth? Which was
the first spring of water that gushed out on the earth? And which was
the first tree that grew on the earth? Ali (a.s.) said: O Jew, you
people say that the first stone is that of Baitul Maqdas. It is a lie.
The first stone is the one which came with Prophet Adam (a.s.) from
Paradise. The Jew said: You are right. The same thing is mentioned in
the scroll that Prophet Musa (a.s.) dictated to Harun (a.s.). Ali (a.s.)
said: You people say that the first spring that gushed forth is the
spring of Baitul Maqdas. You lie.

The first spring is that in which Yusha bin Nun washed the fish and the
water Khizr (a.s.) drank, and one who drinks this water never dies. The
Jew said: You are right. The same was dictated by Musa (a.s.) to Harun
(a.s.). Ali (a.s.) said: You people say that the first tree that grew on
the earth is olive. You lie. The first tree is Ajwa that came down with
Adam (a.s.). The Jew said: You are right. The same was dictated by Musa
(a.s.) to Harun (a.s.). Ali (a.s.) asked: What are the next three
questions?

He said: How many rightful Imams are there in this nation, whom the
opponents will not be able to discourage? He replied: They are twelve.
The Jew said: You are right. The same was dictated by Musa (a.s.) to
Harun (a.s.). Now tell me in which Paradise your prophet will be? Imam
(a.s.) said: He will be in Adn Paradise. The Jew said: You are right.
The same was dictated by Musa (a.s.) to Harun (a.s.). Now tell me who
all will stay with him? Imam (a.s.) said: The twelve Imams. The Jew
said: You are right. The same was dictated by Musa (a.s.) to Harun
(a.s.).

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: What is your seventh question? He asked: For how
many years will the successor of Prophet Muhammad (S) live? He replied:
Thirty years. He asked: Would he have a natural death or will be
murdered? Imam (a.s.) said: He will be assassinated. He would be hit on
the head and his beard will be dyed in blood. The Jew said: You are
right. The same was dictated by Musa (a.s.) to Harun (a.s.). [Then he
embraced Islam].

9 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Ahmad bin
Idrees: Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari Kufi:
Narrated to me Ishaq bin Muhammad Sairafi from Abi Hashim from Furat bin
Ahnaf from Saad bin Tareef from Asbagh bin Nubatah from Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) that he mentioned the Qaim and said:

“He shall be in occultation till the ignorant say: What need does Allah
have for Aale Muhammad?”

10 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and
Haitham bin Abi Masruq Nahdi from Hasan bin Mahboob from Hisham bin
Saalim from Abi Ishaq Hamadani: Narrated to me a reliable person from
our associates that he heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

“O Allah do not leave Your earth devoid of Your Proof on Your creatures,
either manifest or hidden so that Your arguments and Proofs are not
invalidated.”

11 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah:
Narrated to us Harun bin Muslim from Saadaan from Masada bin Sadaqah
from Abi Abdullah from his forefathers from Ali (a.s.) that he said from
the pulpit of Kufa Masjid:

“O Allah, it is necessary that Your earth does not remain devoid of Your
Proof on Your creatures, who may guide the people to Your religion and
who teaches Your religion, so that Your argument is not rendered invalid
and those who follow Your saints may not be misguided after having
received guidance, whether this Proof is seen and not be obeyed or is
hidden and the enemies are lying in ambush for him and he is himself
hidden from the view of the people while his knowledge will not be
hidden from the people and his laws are firm in the hearts of the
believers and they act upon them.”

12 - Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees (r.a.): Narrated to us
my father from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari from Abbad bin
Yaqoob from Hasan bin Hammad from Abil Jarud from Yazid bin Tomah that
he said: I heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say regarding the way people
will search for the Imam:

“As if I can see you bleating like cattle; searching for pasture, but in
vain.”

13 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Musa bin Imran
(r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad Ibne Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us
Saad bin Abdullah from Muhammad bin Abdul Hameed and Abdus Samad bin
Muhammad, all of them from Hannan bin Sadeer from Ali bin Hazawwar from
Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said: I heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

“The master of this affair is that same wandering, homeless and lonely
one.”

14 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ahmad Shaibani (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Ja’far Kufi: Narrated to us Sahl bin Ziyad Adami: Narrated
to us Abdul Azeem bin Abdullah Hasani (r.a.) from Muhammad bin Ali bin
Musa bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.) from his father from his ancestors from Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
that he said:

“For our Qaim there is an occultation, which shall be prolonged. As if I
can see the Shias resembling quadrupeds searching for pasture but being
unable to find it. Know that, whosoever from them remains firm on his
religion and whose heart is not hardened due to the prolonging of
occultation, then he shall be with us in our rank on the Day of
Judgment. Then he said: When our Qaim arises, he would not have the
allegiance of anyone upon his neck, therefore his birth shall be secret
and he himself shall be in occultation.”

Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Ja’far Kufi from Abdullah bin Musa Ruyani from Abdul Azeem bin
Abdullah Hasani from Muhammad bin Ali ar-Reza from his father from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) exactly the same above tradition.

15 - Narrated to us Ali bin Abdullah Warraq: Narrated to us Saad bin
Abdullah from Ibrahim bin Hashim from Ishaq bin Muhammad Sairafi [from
Hisham] from Furat bin Ahnaf from Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said: Qaim
was (a.s.) mentioned in presence of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and he said:

“Indeed he shall go into occultation till the ignorant will say: For the
Almighty Allah there is no need of Aale Muhammad.”

16 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Ali bin Mabad from
Husain bin Khalid from Ali bin Musa ar-Reza from his father Musa bin
Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin
Ali from his father Ali Ibne Husain from his father Husain bin Ali from
his father Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said:

“Your ninth descendant, O Husain is the same one who will rise with the
truth (Qaim bil Haqq) and the one who will expound the religion and
spread justice.” Husain asked: O Amirul Momineen, will this actually
come to pass? He replied: Yes, by the one who sent Muhammad with
prophethood, and chose him over all the people; but it will be after
occultation and confusion during which period none shall remain
steadfast and firm in his faith except the sincere ones, who have the
soul of certainty. They are the ones from whom Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime has taken oath on our Wilayat and has guarded faith in their
hearts and supported them through the Holy Spirit.”

17 -Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim from
his father from Muhammad bin Sinan from Ziyad Makfoof from Abdullah bin
Abi Uqbah, the poet that he said: I heard Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) say regarding the way people will search for the Imam:

“As if I can see you running like camels, searching for pasture in
vain.”

18 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abil
Jarud Ziyad bin Mundhar from Abdullah bin Abi Uqbah the poet, that he
said: I heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say regarding the way people will
search for the Imam:

“As if I can see you roving around like camels, searching for pasture,
but unable to find it.”

19 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan (r.a.) - May Allah be pleased
with them - they said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar from
Sahl Ibne Ziyad Adami and Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa that they said:
Narrated to us Hasan bin Abbas Harish ar-Raazi from Abi Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali, the second, from his ancestors (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said to Ibne Abbas:

“The grand night (Lailatul Qadr) comes every year. And it is on this
night that the commands of Sunnah come down; and after the Messenger of
Allah (S) these commands come down to his successors. Ibne Abbas asked:
Who are those successors? He replied: I am, and after me, the eleven
narrating Imams from my progeny [who will narrate traditions from the
Messenger of Allah (S)].”


