Chapter 27: Narration of Lady Fatima Zahra
==========================================

Narration of the scroll regarding the names of Imams, names of their
mothers, and that the twelfth of them will be the Qaim.

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq Taliqani (r.a.):
Narrated to us Hasan bin Ismail: Narrated to us Abu Amr and Saeed bin
Muhammad bin Nasr al-Qattan: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Muhammad Salmi:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Saeed bin Muhammad: Narrated to us Abbas bin Abi Amr from Sadaqah bin
Abi Musa from Abi Nazra that he said:

“When the last moments of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) approached, he
summoned his son, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and took the oath of Imamate
from him. The brother of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), Zaid bin Ali bin
Husain said: O Brother, why don’t you let the matter proceed like in the
case of Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.)? The Imam said: Abul
Hasan, Imamate is not transferred by emulation and it is not given from
one to another by way of a custom. It is one of the decided proofs of
the Almighty.

Then the Imam called for Jabir bin Abdullah and said: O Jabir, narrate
to me the tradition about what you saw in the scroll of Fatima. Jabir
said: Yes, O Abu Ja’far, one day I went to the house of Fatima to offer
greetings at the birth of Imam Hasan (a.s.). I saw in the hands of
Fatima, a scroll in a white binding. I asked: O chief of the ladies,
what scroll is this? She said: It contains the names of the Imams from
my progeny. I said: Can I see it? She replied: Only the Prophet, the
successor of the Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) can touch this
scroll. If this restriction had not been there I would have given it to
you. But I can permit you to see it without touching it.

Jabir says: I read this scroll. It was written therein: Abul Qasim
Muhammad bin Abdullah Mustafa, whose mother is Amina binte Wahab, Abul
Hasan Ali Ibne Abi Talib al-Murtuza, whose mother is Fatima binte Asad
bin Hashim bin Abde Manaf, Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ali al-Birr, Abu
Abdullah Husain bin Ali Taqi, both of whose mother is Fatima binte
Muhammad, Abu Muhammad Ali bin Husain al-Adl whose mother is Shaharbano
binte Yazdjird Ibne Shahanshah, Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir
whose mother is Umme Abdullah binte Hasan bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.),
Abu Abdullah Ja’far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq whose mother is Umme Farwa
binte Qasim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr, Abu Ibrahim Musa bin Ja’far Thiqa
whose mother is a slave wife named Hamida, Abul Hasan Ali bin Musa
ar-Reza whose mother is a slave wife named Najma, Abu Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali Zaki whose mother is a slave wife named Khizran, Abul Hasan Ali
bin Muhammad Amin whose mother is Susan the maid, Abu Muhammad Hasan bin
Ali Rafiq whose mother is Samana the maid and her patronym was Ummul
Hasan, Abul Qasim Muhammad bin Hasan, the proof of Allah on the
creatures whose mother is Narjis the maid slave; peace of Allah be on
them all.”

The author says: The name of the Qaim is mentioned in this tradition but
in the coming chapters we will mention traditions that prohibit
pronouncing the name of the Qaim, Insha Allah.


