Chapter 28: Nass for the Qaim in the Tablet that Allah gave to His Messenger
============================================================================

And he passed it to Fatima (s.a.) who showed it to Jabir bin Abdullah
Ansari. Jabir read and copied it and informed about it to Abu Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.) later on.

1 -Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan -May Allah be pleased
with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin
Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Abil Hasan Salih bin Abi Hammad and
Hasan bin Tareef, all of them from Bakr bin Salih and narrated to us my
father and Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil and Muhammad bin Ali
Majilaway; and Ahmad bin Ali bin Ibrahim; and Hasan bin Ibrahim bin
Natana; and Ahmad bin Ziyad Hamadani - May Allah be pleased with them -
they said: Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim from his father Ibrahim bin
Hashim from Bakr bin Salih from Abdur Rahman bin Saalim from Abi Baseer
from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“My father (a.s.) said to Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari, ‘I have some work
with you. So, when is it possible for you to give me some time that I
may ask you something?’ Jabir replied, ‘Whenever you wish.’ Thus, when
my father (a.s.) met him in privacy, he asked him, “O Jabir! Inform me
about the Tablet which you saw in the hand of my mother, Fatima, the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S) and what did she tell you as to
what was written in it?”

Jabir replied, ‘I hold Allah as Witness that I went to visit your
mother, Fatima (a.s.) during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S)
to congratulate her for Husain’s (a.s.) birth. I saw in her hand a green
Tablet, which I thought to be of emerald and its writing was as bright
as sunlight. I asked her, ‘May my parents be sacrificed for you, O
daughter of Allah’s Messenger (S)!

What is this Tablet?’ She (s.a.) replied, ‘This is the Tablet, which
Allah, to whom belong might and majesty, has gifted to the Messenger of
Allah (S). In it is the name of my father, the name of Ali, the name of
my two sons and the names of the successors from my progeny. In turn, my
father gave it to me that I may rejoice through it.’

Jabir said, ‘Thus, your mother Fatima (a.s.) gave it to me. I read it
and copied it.’ My father (a.s.) asked, ‘O Jabir! Can you show it (the
copied manuscript) to me?’ He replied in the affirmative. My father
(a.s.) accompanied Jabir to his house where he took out a scroll of
parchment and gave it to my father he said, ‘I hold Allah as Witness
that this is what I saw written in the Tablet:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a Book from
Allah, the Mighty, the Wise to Muhammad, His light, His ambassador, His
veil and His proof. The trustworthy spirit (Jibraeel) has descended with
it from the Lord of the worlds. O Muhammad! Magnify my names, be
grateful for My bounties and do not deny My endowments. Verily I am
Allah, there is no god but Me, the Destroyer of the oppressors, the
Degrader of the tyrants and the Establisher of the Day of Judgment.

Verily I am Allah, there is no god but Me. Whoever expects grace from
other than Me or fears other than My justice and My punishment, I will
punish him in such a way that I will not punish anybody in this manner
in the worlds. Hence, worship only Me and rely only on Me. Indeed, I did
not raise a messenger, completed his days and terminated his duration
but that I appointed for him a successor. Certainly, I made you superior
over all other Prophets and made your successor superior over all other
successors. After him, I honored you with your two grandsons, Hasan and
Husain.

I made Hasan the mine of My knowledge after the end of the days of his
father and I made Husain the treasure chest of My revelation, I honored
him with martyrdom and sealed it for him with eternal bliss. So, he is
the best of the martyrs and the highest of them in grade before Me. I
have placed My perfect word with him and the complete proof near him.
Through his progeny, I shall reward and punish.

The first of them is the chief of the worshippers and the adornment of
My past friends, then his son (Muhammad) who resembles his grandfather
al¬Mahmood[^1], the splitter of My knowledge and the mine of My wisdom.
Soon, those who doubt concerning his son Ja’far will be destroyed.

He who rejects him has rejected Me. I speak the truth, I will indeed
honor the position of Ja’far and make him happy vis-à-vis his Shias, his
helpers and his friends. After him, I have selected Musa and there will
be a blinding, dark corruption so that the spark of My obedience is not
terminated, My proof is not hidden and My friends are not afflicted with
misfortune. Beware! Whoever denies even one of them has denied My
bounty. Whoever changes one verse from My Book, then indeed has
attributed a lie unto Me.

Then woe unto the liars, the deniers with the termination of the
duration of My servant, My beloved and My chosen one, Musa. Verily, the
one who denies the eighth is as if he has denied all My friends (Imams).
Ali is My friend, My helper and the one upon whom I have placed
Prophethood’s burden of proof and conferred upon him mastership. An
arrogant devil[^2] will murder him. He will be buried in a city, which
the righteous servant[^3] has built, next to the worst of My creatures.
I speak the truth, I will soothe his eyes with Muhammad, his son and his
successor after him. He is the heir of My knowledge, the mine of My
wisdom, the place of My joy and My proof upon My creatures.

None shall believe in him but that the paradise will be his abode and I
will allow him to intercede for seventy of his family members, even if
all of them are eligible for hell. I will complete his bliss with his
son Ali, My friend, My helper, My witness amongst My creatures and My
trustee upon My revelation. From him, I will bring forth Hasan, the
caller to My path and the treasurer of My knowledge. Thereafter, I will
complete this (chain of Imamate) with his son, the perfection of Musa,
the mercyfor the worlds. He will possessم.ح.م.د.

brightness of Isa and the patience of Ayyub. Soon, My friends will be
humiliated in his time and their heads will be gifted as trophies like
the heads of the Turks and the Dailamites. They will be killed, they
will be burnt, they will live in a state of fear, terror and
trepidation. The earth will be colored with their blood and wailing and
sobbing will be commonplace among their womenfolk. They are My true
friends! Through them I will repel all blinding and dark mischief,
remove the earthquakes and do away with the burdens and the chains.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ ۖ
وَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are those upon them is the blessings of their Lord and mercy.
And they are the guided ones.***[^4]

Abdur Rahman bin Salim says: Abu Baseer says, ‘If you do not hear in
your time anything but this tradition, it will suffice for you. Hence,
conceal it except from those who are worthy of it.’

2 - Narrated to us Ali bin Husain bin Shazawiya Moaddab; and Ahmad bin
Harun al-Qadi - May Allah be pleased with them - they said: Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from his father from Ja’far
bin Muhammad bin Malik Fazari Kufi from Malik Saluli from Durust bin
Abdul Hameed from Abdullah bin Qasim from Abdullah bin Jabala from Abi
Safatij from Jabir Jofi from Abi Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.)
from Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that he said:

“One day I came to Lady Fatima (s.a.) and before her was a tablet from
which an amazing light emanated. There were twelve names in this tablet.
Three on the outer side and three on the inner, three in the end and
three in one direction. Thus there were twelve names in all. I asked:
Whose names are these? She replied: These are the respected names of
successors, the first of whom is my cousin, and eleven shall be from my
progeny. The last of them will be Qaim, bliss of Allah be on them all.
Jabir says: I saw the name of Muhammad at three places and Ali at four
places.”  
 3 -And narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to me my father from Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab from
Hasan bin Mahboob from Abil Jarud from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) from Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari that he said:

“One day I came to Fatima (s.a.) and before her was a tablet inscribed
with the names of successors from her progeny. I counted twelve names,
the last of whom was al-Qaim. There were three Muhammads and four Alis –
bliss of Allah be on them all.”

4 - And narrated to us Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Hamza Alawi (r.a.):
Narrated to us Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Husain bin Durust Sarrawi from
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik that he said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Imran Kufi from Abdur Rahman bin Abi Najran; and Safwan bin Yahya from
Ishaq Ibne Ammar from Abi Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“O Ishaq, shall I give you a glad tiding? I said: Please do, may I be
sacrificed on you, O son of Allah’s Messenger. The Imam said: I saw in
the scroll dictated by the Messenger of Allah (S) and written by Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) the following:

“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a Book from
Allah, the Mighty, the Wise…and then he narrated the tradition (of
tablet) mentioned above exactly except that at the end there is the
sentence:

Then Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): O Ishaq, this is the religion of the
angels and messengers. Protect it from those unworthy of it. May Allah
protect you and reform your children. Then he said: One who has
recognized this (religion) is safe from the chastisement of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime.”

5 - And narrated to us Abul Abbas Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq
Taliqani (r.a.): Narrated to us Hasan bin Ismail: Narrated to us Saeed
bin Muhammad bin Qattan: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Musa Ruyani Abu
Turab from Abdul Azeem bin Abdullah Hasani from Ali bin Hasan bin Zaid
bin Hasan bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib that he said: Narrated to me Abdullah
bin Muhammad bin Ja’far from his father from his grandfather that:

“Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) summoned together his sons and among them
was his uncle Zaid bin Ali also. Then he took out a scroll written in
the hand of Ali (a.s.) on the dictation of the Messenger of Allah (S).
It was written therein:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a Book from
Allah, the Mighty, the Wise…then he narrated the tradition of the Tablet
till the words: “And they are the guided ones.” Then at the end he said:
Abdul Azeem said: It is amazing and pitiful regarding Muhammad bin
Ja’far who campaigned against the Imam of the time although he had heard
this tradition from his father.

Then he said: It is the secret of Allah and His religion and the
religion of the angels. So mention it only to those who are worthy.”

6 - Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees (r.a.): Narrated to us my
father from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa and Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of
them from Hasan bin Mahboob from Abil Jarud from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) from
Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that he said:

“One day I came to Fatima (s.a.) and before her was a tablet inscribed
with the names of successors from her progeny. I counted twelve names,
the last of whom was al-Qaim. There were three Muhammads and four Alis –
bliss of Allah be on them all.”

[^1]: A title of the Messenger of Allah (S).

[^2]: Mamoon al-Abbasi.

[^3]: Dhulqarnain

[^4]: Surah Baqarah 2:157


