Chapter 29: Statements of al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) regarding the occurrence of Ghaibat of al-Qaim and that he is the Twelfth Imam
================================================================================================================================

1 -Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan -May Allah be pleased
with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and Abdullah
bin Ja’far Himyari and Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad bin Idrees
all of them said: Narrated to us Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah Barqi: Narrated
to us Abu Hashim Dawood bin Qasim Ja’fari from Abi Ja’far the second,
Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) that he said:

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) entered Masjidul Haraam accompanied by Imam Hasan
(a.s.) and leaning on the hand of Salman; and he sat down (in the
Masjid). A man of elegant appearance and nice dress entered and saluted
Amirul Momineen (a.s.). His Eminence returned his salutations. He said,
“O Amirul Momineen (a.s.) I wish to ask you about three things. If you
give me correct replies I would know that those who claimed caliphate
before you were false and that their world and the hereafter are not
safe. If you do not reply correctly I will know that your path is the
same as those who preceded you. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Ask me
whatever you like”. He asked, “When a person dies, where does his soul
go?”

“How does man remembers one thing and forgets the other?”

“Whom does a child resemble more, the paternal uncles or the maternal.”

His Eminence told Imam Hasan (a.s.) to reply the queries. Imam Hasan
(a.s.) replied the questions as follows:

As for your question that where does the soul of man goes when he is
asleep, the reply is that his soul is related to the breeze/wind. And
breeze is related to the air till the time the one who is asleep begins
to wake up. And when the Almighty Allah permits, his soul is returned to
his body. In this way the soul is pulled out from the breeze. And the
breeze is pulled out from the air. And the soul comes and stays in the
body of its owner. If the Almighty does not allow that the soul may be
restored to its owner, the air pulls the breeze and the breeze pulls the
soul.

And then the owner of the soul will not be restored his soul till the
time of resurrection.

As for your next question that how does a man remember and how does he
forget, the heart of man is in a casket which is covered with a tray. If
he recited complete Salawat on Muhammad and Aale Muhammad the tray moves
away from the casket and he recalls whatever he has forgotten. But if he
does not recite the Salawat on Muhammad and Aale Muhammad or recites an
incomplete Salawat the tray covers the casket and his heart remains in
darkness, thus he forgets whatever he has been told.

As for your question that how does a man resemble his paternal or
maternal uncle, the reply is that when a man goes to his wife with
tranquility, rested nerves and comforted body, and his seed stays
restfully in her womb, the child resembles its parents. But if the man
approaches his wife in a disturbed state the seed will rest on one of
the nerves of the wife. If those are related to paternal side the child
will resemble the paternal uncle and if the nerves are concerned with
the maternal side the child will resemble the maternal uncle.

The man said, “I bear witness that there is no god except Allah and I
have always borne witness thus. And I bear witness that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah and I have always testified to it. And I bear witness
that you are the legatee of the Messenger (S), and one who establishes
his proof and evidence (pointing towards Amirul Momineen (a.s.) he said,
“I have always testified this.” Then indicating towards Imam Hasan
(a.s.) he said, “I bear witness that you are the legatee of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and one who shall establish his proof and evidence.

That is you and the one who proves the prophethood of the Messenger of
Allah (S). And I bear witness that Husain bin Ali (a.s.) is the legatee
of his brother and he is the one to establish the proof after him. And I
bear witness that Ali bin al-Husain (a.s.) after the Imamate of Husain
(a.s.) is the proof of Allah.

Then Muhammad bin Ali, after him Ja’far bin Muhammad, then Musa bin
Ja’far, then Ali bin Musa, then Muhammad bin Ali, then Ali bin Muhammad,
then Hasan Ibne Ali. After that I bear witness that that person is the
Divine Proof who is the son of Hasan bin Ali whose name and patronymic
(Kunniyat) will not be revealed till the time he fills the earth with
justice and equity like it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression. And peace be on you, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)!” After that
he arose and departed from there.

His Eminence told Imam Hasan (a.s.), “O Aba Muhammad, go after him and
see where he goes.” Imam Hasan (a.s.) went out and returned after a
moment and said, “He placed one foot outside the Masjid and after that I
don’t know where he disappeared.” Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said, “O Aba
Muhammad, do you know who it was?” Imam Hasan (a.s.) replied “Allah, His
Messenger and Amirul Momineen (a.s.) know better.” Ali (a.s.) said, “He
was Khizr.”

2 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father:
Narrated to us Jibraeel bin Ahmad from Musa bin Ja’far Baghdadi:
Narrated to me Hasan bin Muhammad Sairafi from Hanan bin Sadeer from his
father Sadeer bin Hakim from his father from Abi Saeed Aqisa that he
said:

“When Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) signed the peace treaty with Muawiyah some
people came to him a condemned him for making peace. So he said: Woe be
on you, you don’t know why I did that. By Allah whatever I have done is
better for my followers (Shias) than everything. Don’t you know that I
am your Imam whose obedience is incumbent on you?

And on the basis of the statement of the Messenger of Allah (S) I am one
of the chiefs of the youths of Paradise? All said: Yes, indeed it is so.
The Imam said: Don’t you know that when Khizr (a.s.) made a hole in the
boat, repaired the wall and killed a boy, Musa bin Imran (a.s.) did not
like it since he was unaware of the wisdom behind those actions, even
though all those actions were according to the dictates of divine
wisdom?

Do you know that there is none among us who did not have the allegiance
of the tyrant ruler of his time around his neck, except for Qaim, behind
whom the Spirit of Allah, Isa bin Maryam will pray? Indeed, Allah, the
Mighty and the Sublime has kept his birth secret and his person unseen.
When he reappears, he would not have the allegiance of anyone upon his
neck.

He is the ninth descendant of my brother, Husain. He is the son of the
best of the maidservants. The Almighty Allah will prolong his age during
the occultation, then He would, through His power, make him appear as a
youthful man of less than forty years of age so that it may be known
that the Almighty Allah is powerful over everything.”


