Chapter 1: Regarding the Occultation of Prophet Idrees
======================================================

**Chapter 1: Regarding the Occultation (Ghaibat) of Prophet Idrees
(a.s.)**

Among the first occultations is the well-known occultation of Prophet
Idrees (a.s.). His occultation was so much prolonged that his followers
fell into dire circumstances and the tyrant ruler of that time killed
some of them; while some he subjected to poverty and terror. After that
Prophet Idrees (a.s.) reappeared and promised the removal of the
travails of his Shias through the uprising and Jihad of one of his
descendants, that is Prophet Nuh (a.s.). Then Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime raised up Idrees (a.s.) towards Himself.

And century after century his followers continued to wait for the advent
of Nuh (a.s.), one generation after another. And during that time they
continued to bear with patience the humiliating oppression of the tyrant
rulers till the prophethood of Nuh (a.s.) became apparent.

Narrated to us my father, and Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid;
and Muhammad bin Musa bin Mutawakkil - may Allah be pleased with them -
they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: and Abdullah bin Ja’far
Himyari; and Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar who said: Narrated to us Ahmad
bin Muhammad bin Isa; and Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of them from Hasan bin
Mahboob from Ibrahim bin Abi Bilaad from his father from Abu Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“It was the initial period of the prophethood of Idrees (a.s.) when a
tyrant king was in power. Once when he went out for recreation he passed
through a land rich in greenery, which belonged to a pious believer who
did not follow the religion of the king. The ruler liked that piece of
land for himself, so he inquired from his viziers regarding its owner.
They told him that it belonged to a certain believer from their kingdom
who was among the servants of the king. And that he was a rebel.

The king called the believer and said that he wanted his piece of land.
The believer replied that his family needed the plot of land more than
the king. The king asked him to sell it to him but the believer was
adamant that he would neither surrender that piece of land nor sell it
to the ruler. This angered the king and he returned to his kingdom in
this condition. He was full of rage and sorrow due to this matter. The
king had a blue-eyed wife from the Azariqa tribe whom he considered very
intelligent and consulted her frequently. On reaching home he called for
her to take advice regarding the owner of the land. When she reached the
court she saw the king in an angry mood.

The woman said: What had made you so disconcerted? Tell me about it
before you take some drastic step. He narrated the incident of the
believer’s land. She replied that only he gets angry who neither has the
power to turn the circumstances to his advantage nor take revenge. “If
you don’t prefer to eliminate him without any excuse I will do it for
you and make that land a part of your property in such a way that your
subjects will consider you to be on the right.” “What pretext would that
be?” asked the king.

She replied that a group (from her Azriqa tribe) will be sent to arrest
him and they would testify that the person has turned away from the
king’s religion. “This would justify your executing him and seizing his
land.” “Do that,” said the king. (The Imam says) So a group of people
from Azriqa, who followed the queen’s religion and who considered lawful
the slaughtering of a believer were called. They testified before the
king that that man had turned away from the state religion.

On hearing this, the king ordered his execution and confiscated his
land. Allah was angry at the believer’s murder and He revealed to Idrees
(a.s.) to go and tell the tyrant ruler, “Were you not content with
killing the believer that you also usurped his land impoverishing
family? I swear by My majesty and power that I will avenge his murder in
Qiyamat and in this world I will abolish your rulership. I will change
your honor and status into humiliation and disgrace; and dogs will
devour the flesh of you wife. Has My tolerance and endurance, which was
supposed to test you, made you arrogant?”

Thus Idrees (a.s.) entered his court with the message of his Lord, while
the king was surrounded by his courtiers. Then he addressed the king, “O
tyrant ruler! I am the messenger of Allah and I have brought His message
to you that: ‘Were you not content with killing the believer that you
also usurped his land impoverishing family? I swear by My majesty and
power that I will avenge his murder in Qiyamat and in this world I will
abolish your rulership. I will change your honor and status into
humiliation and disgrace; and dogs will devour the flesh of you wife.
Has My tolerance and endurance, which was supposed to test you, made you
arrogant?’ The king said: “O Idrees (a.s.), leave my court and don’t do
anything that may compel me to eliminate you.”

After that he called for his wife and narrated the message of Idrees to
her. She said: “The message of the God of Idrees should not make you
afraid. I am alone sufficient to take care of this matter of Idrees. I
will send some people to eliminate him and they will do it as a
consequence of which the message of his god and whatever he brought,
would be proved false. The king told her to do it. Among the friends of
Idrees (a.s.) there were some who used to attend the royal court. Idrees
(a.s.) had informed them of the revelation to him and of his conveying
the message to the king. They were fearful that Idrees (a.s.) would be
killed.

The queen sent forty Iraqi men to kill Idrees (a.s.). They reached the
place where Idrees (a.s.) used to sit with his companions but did not
find him there, so they returned. When his friends saw that they had
come to kill Idrees (a.s.) they dispersed and then met Idrees (a.s.).
They informed him that forty men had come to kill him, so he should
leave the town immediately. So Idrees (a.s.) left the locality the very
same day and he was also accompanied by some of his followers. At the
time of dawn, Idrees (a.s.) prayed to Allah, “O my Sustainer! You sent
me to that tyrant to deliver Your message to him.

He threatened me and is after my blood. Rather if they had got power
over me they would have eliminated me. Allah revealed to Idrees (a.s.)
to keep away from the king. “I swear by My honor that I will enforce My
decree on him and prove your word and My messengership to be true.”
Idrees (a.s.) said, “O my Nourisher, I have a wish.” Allah said, “Ask me
and I shall fulfill it.” Idrees (a.s.) said, “Till such time as I allow,
there should be no rains.” Allah said, “The country will be ruined and
people will starve to death.” Idrees (a.s.) said, “Whatever may happen,
this is my wish.” Allah replied, “All right. I accept it, and till the
time you pray I will not send rain. I am the most truthful to My
promise.”

Idrees (a.s.) briefed his companions about his discussion with Allah and
said, “O my friends leave this country and go to some other place.”
There were twenty of them and they spread out to different areas. The
people came to know about the prayers of Idrees (a.s.). Idrees (a.s.)
himself sought refuge on a hill. Allah appointed an angel who used to
bring food to him every evening. Idrees (a.s.) fasted during the day and
broke his fast in the evening when the angel brought food to him. Allah
destroyed the kingdom of the tyrant king. The king was killed, his
kingdom destroyed and the flesh of his wife was eaten by dogs due to
their transgression against a believer.

Another unjust tyrant oppressor occupied the throne. Twenty years passed
without a drop of rain. The people were in severe hardships and
difficulties and their condition deteriorated. They used to bring food
supplies from far off countries. When their condition turned from bad to
worse they discussed among themselves that this calamity was due to the
prayer of Idrees (a.s.) who had asked Allah that till the time he
allowed there should be no rains. “We are not aware of his whereabouts
because he has concealed himself from us.” They decided that as Allah is
more Merciful than Idrees (a.s.) pray to Him and repent so that it rains
on their land and in the neighboring areas. So they wore coarse clothes
and applied mud on their head and standing on the earth they wailed,
cried and repented to Allah.

Allah felt pity on them and revealed upon Idrees (a.s.) that, “Your
people are repenting, wailing and weeping and I am God the Beneficent
and Merciful and the one who accepts repentance and forgive sins. I have
mercy on them and wish to fulfill their desire for rains. I have no
obstruction save that you had requested me not to send rains till you
pray for it. Therefore, O Idrees you pray to Me that I may send rains
for them.” Idrees (a.s.) said, “O my Nourisher, I will not pray for
rains.” Allah once again revealed on Idrees (a.s.) to pray for rains.
Idrees (a.s.) again refused. So Allah recalled the angel who was
appointed to bring food for Idrees. When it was evening and the food did
not arrive Idrees (a.s.) became restless but waited patiently.

The second day when again the food did not arrive his restlessness
increased. On the third day he lost his patience and appealed to Allah,
“O my Nourisher before taking my soul you have discontinued my
sustenance?” Allah revealed, “O Idrees! You are complaining in three
days but you are not concerned about your nation that has suffered for
twenty years? I informed you that they were suffering, and I was
merciful on them and I wished that you pray for rain so that I send
rain. But you abstained from it, so I wanted you to know what hunger is
and you lost your patience and complained. Now come out of the cave and
search for your sustenance. I have left you on your own.”

So Idrees (a.s.) came down from the hill to procure food. When he came
near the town he saw smoke coming out from a house. An old lady had made
two loaves of bread and was roasting them on the fire. He requested her
to give him something to eat, as he was very weak and restless due to
hunger. She said that due to the curse of Idrees (a.s.), Allah has not
given left them anything that they can feed anyone, and swore that
except for the two loaves of bread there was nothing in the house. She
told him to leave the city and go somewhere else for food. Idrees (a.s.)
requested:

At least give me one loaf so that I can save my life and can start
walking. She said: “I have only these two loaves, one for me and the
other for my son. If I give you my loaf I will die and if I give you my
child’s he will die. I don’t have anything else to give you.” Idrees
(a.s.) said, “Your son is young, half a loaf will suffice him and half
will help me to live.” The woman ate her share and distributed the other
between Idrees (a.s.) and her son. When the child saw Idrees (a.s.)
eating from his share, he started crying and was so disturbed that he
died. The woman screamed, “Stranger! You have killed my child.” Idrees
(a.s.) said, “Do not fear, by the order of Allah I will make him alive.”

Saying this he kept his hands on the shoulder of the boy and said, “O
soul who has left the body of this child, by the order of Allah, return
to his body again. I am Idrees (a.s.) the Messenger of Allah.” The boy
was alive once more. The woman saw this and said, “I witness that you
are Prophet Idrees (a.s.).” And she ran out shouting, “O people!
Congratulations to you and glad tidings that we will be relieved of our
troubles and sufferings as Idrees (a.s.) has returned to our city.”
Idrees (a.s.) came out and reached the palace of the first tyrant king,
which was on a hill.

A group of people came and complained, “O Idrees! In these twenty years
you did not have any mercy on us. We were involved in such difficulties
and miseries and many of us starved to death. We request you now pray to
Allah for rains.” Idrees (a.s.) replied, “I will not pray till the time
this tyrant king and the people of your city come to me walking,
barefoot and request me.” When the king heard this, he sent forty people
to kill Idrees (a.s.). When they reached near Idrees (a.s.), he cursed
them and they all died. When the king heard this he sent 500 people to
arrest him. They came to Idrees (a.s.) and said, “We have come to take
you to the king.” Idrees (a.s.) replied, “Look at these forty men (who
had come before you to take me); see how they are lying dead. If you all
don’t go back you too will meet the same fate.”

They said, “O Idrees, you have involved us in hunger for twenty years
and now you are cursing us. Is there no mercy in your heart?” Idrees
(a.s.) replied, “I will not go to that tyrant nor will I pray for the
rains till that tyrant and all the people don’t come to me walking
barefoot.” Upon this the people returned to the king and repeated the
statement of Idrees (a.s.).

So the King together with the people came to Idrees (a.s.) and all stood
helplessly before him and requested him to pray for rain. Idrees (a.s.)
said: “Now I will pray to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime for rain.” So
Idrees (a.s.) prayed to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime for rain on that
locality and the surrounding areas. At that moment clouds gathered in
the sky, there was thunder and lightning and it started raining so
heavily that the people thought they would drown. Finally they all
returned to their homes fearing they shall be drowned in the floods.”


