Chapter 3: Regarding the Occultation of Prophet Salih
=====================================================

**Chapter 3: Regarding the Occultation (Ghaibat) of Prophet Salih
(a.s.)**

1 - Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan as-Saffar; and Saad bin
Abdullah; and Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari that they said: Narrated to
us Muhammad bin Husain Ibne Abil Khattab, from Ali bin Asbat, from Saif
bin Amirah from Zaid Shahham from Abi Abdullah as that he said:

“Salih (a.s.) remained in occultation from his community for a period of
time: The day he disappeared from them he was of middle age, wide belly,
elegant body, thick beard, fair complexioned and medium height. When he
returned to his people, they did not recognize him from his face. And he
found them divided into three groups: A group had denied him and they
were not prepared to retract their denial. Another group was of those
who had doubts about him. The third group was firm in its faith. So he
addressed the group of doubters and said: ‘I am Salih.’ They denied and
chided him and snubbed him saying: ‘May Allah become aloof from you,
Salih was indeed having a different appearance.’

The Imam says: Then Salih went to the deniers and they paid no heed to
his words and expressed a deep hatred for him. After that he went to the
third group which was a group of faithful believers and told them that
he was Salih. They said: ‘Please tell us something through which we may
not have any doubt about you. We have no doubt that Allah, the Mighty
and the High, Who is the Creator can change the appearance of anyone He
wants. We had been informed about it and we have researched and studied
the signs and portents regarding the reappearance of the Qaim.

And it would be correct when he brings the news from the heavens. Salih
said: I am that same Salih who brought the she-camel by miracle. They
said: You are right. It is the same point we argued on. But tell us what
its sign was? An alternate day was reserved for this she-camel to drink
from the stream and alternate for you. We have brought faith on Allah
and also believed on whatever you have brought. At that time Allah, the
Mighty and the High said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِمَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُمْ أَتَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ صَالِحًا
مُرْسَلٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you know that Salih is sent by his Lord?”***[^1]

And the believers and people of faith said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلَ بِهِ مُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely we are believers in what he has been sent with.”***[^2]

And the arrogant ones – those who doubted him – said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا بِالَّذِي آمَنْتُمْ بِهِ كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely we are deniers of what you believe in.”***[^3]

The narrator asked:

Was there among them a scholar and who knew Salih? Imam replied: The
Almighty Allah is more equitable that He should leave the earth without
a scholar that guides the people to Allah. This community passed seven
days in this manner after the reappearance and advent of Salih as they
had no recognition of a leader or Imam for themselves. But in spite of
this they had something from divine religion and they had remained firm
on that. Their beliefs were same. And when Salih reappeared they
gathered around him. And there is no doubt that the simile of Qaim
(a.s.) is like that of Salih.”

[^1]: Surah Araaf 7:75

[^2]: Surah Araaf 7:75

[^3]: Surah Araaf 7:76


