Chapter 4: Regarding the Occultation of Prophet Ibrahim
=======================================================

**Chapter 4: Regarding the Occultation (Ghaibat) of Prophet Ibrahim
(a.s.)**

As for the occultation of Ibrahim; the friend of the Beneficent (peace
be on him), it exactly resembles the occultation of our Qaim (peace be
on him), rather it is more astonishing because Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime kept Ibrahim (a.s.) concealed when he was in the womb, so much
so that Allah through His power transferred him from her womb to her
back. Then He concealed the matter of his birth till an appointed time.

1 - Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - may Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Yaqoob bin Yazid from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Hisham bin Saalim from
Abi Baseer from Abi Abdullah as that he said:

“Ibrahim’s father was the court astrologer of Nimrod, the son of Canaan
and Nimrod did not take any step without seeking his counsel. One night
Azar was studying the position of the stars and the next morning he told
Nimrod, ‘I saw a strange thing last night.’ ‘What?’ asked Nimrod. He
replied: ‘I saw that a boy is to take birth in our country and that he
would destroy us all, and only a short time is left before his mother
conceives him.’ Nimrod was amazed and asked if his conception has
already taken place. Azar said: Not as yet. Though he had learnt that
the same boy was going to be burnt in fire he didn’t know that he would
be saved by the Almighty. Nimrod issued a diktat that women must be
separated from men. Thus except for one no woman remained in the city.

All were externed so that their men may not interact with them.
Ibrahim’s father slept with his wife and this resulted in the conception
of Ibrahim (a.s.). His father suspected the conception and he called for
an experienced women to examine if his wife was pregnant. They were so
expert that if a woman was pregnant they definitely knew it. So they
carefully examined Ibrahim’s mother who was pregnant, but Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime transferred whatever there was in her womb to her
back.

The midwives said: We don’t see any pregnancy. When Ibrahim (a.s.) was
born his father decided to take him to Nimrod, but his wife restrained
him saying that the king would kill her son. ‘Leave him to me. I shall
take him to a cave and abandon him there. He will soon perish and thus
you won’t be an accomplice in the murder of your son.’ The father agreed
and Ibrahim’s mother took him to a cave.

After suckling him she left him inside and closed the mouth of the cave
with a boulder. The Almighty Allah caused his sustenance to flow from
his thumb. He sucked his thumb and consumed the milk that flew from it.
He grew up faster than ordinary children. His growth in a day was equal
to a week’s growth in other children. In a week he grew as much as
other’s grow in a month. And in a month his body developed as much as
much as it develops in a year. After some days his mother took leave of
Azar and came to the cave. She saw that Ibrahim (a.s.) was alive and his
eyes shone like brilliant lamps. She embraced him and gave him suck.
When she returned, the father asked her about Ibrahim (a.s.).

She said that it has died. ‘I have buried him,’ she wept. Now whenever
she got a chance she used to come to the cave and suckle Ibrahim (a.s.).
This continued for quite some time. When Ibrahim (a.s.) was able to
crawl on his knees and his mother had come to feed him, he clung to her
and pleaded her to take him with her. ‘Have patience!’ said the mother.
‘Let me take your father’s permission.’

Thus Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) kept his being in hiding and concealed his
matter till the time he emerged and announced the command of Allah and
the Almighty Allah expressed his power through him. Then Ibrahim (a.s.)
went into another occultation. It was at the time when the tyrant ruler
had expelled him from Egypt. Thus he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعْتَزِلُكُمْ وَمَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ وَأَدْعُو رَبِّي
عَسَىٰ أَلَّا أَكُونَ بِدُعَاءِ رَبِّي شَقِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And I will withdraw from you and what you call on besides Allah, and
I will call upon my Lord; may be I shall not remain unblessed in calling
upon my Lord.***[^1]

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا اعْتَزَلَهُمْ وَمَا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ وَهَبْنَا
لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَكُلًّا جَعَلْنَا نَبِيًّا وَوَهَبْنَا
لَهُمْ مِنْ رَحْمَتِنَا وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ لِسَانَ صِدْقٍ عَلِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when he withdrew from them and what they worshipped besides Allah,
We gave to him Ishaq and Yaqoob, and each one of them We made a prophet.
And We granted to them of Our mercy, and We left (behind them) a
truthful mention of eminence for them.***[^2]

That is through Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). Because Ibrahim (a.s.) had
prayed to Allah, the Mighty and the High that among the latters He
should appoint for them a truthful speaker. Therefore the Almighty Allah
made Ali the truthful tongue for Ibrahim and Yaqoob (a.s.). Thus Ali
(a.s.) informed that the Qaim shall be his eleventh descendant and with
the same attestation it is that Mahdi who would fill the earth with
justice and equity just as it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression.

And also that there shall be an occultation for him and that the people
shall be confused about him, due to which many groups would go astray
and many shall be guided. And this will indeed come to pass just as he
has put on the garb of creation.” And he (Ali) has mentioned in the
tradition of Kumayl Ibne Ziyad Nakhai: Indeed the earth shall remain
established through a Divine Proof who shall either be apparent and
well-known or concealed and hidden so that the proofs of Allah and His
clear evidences do not become invalid.

I have quoted both the narrations with the chain of narrators in this
book in the chapter wherein are mentioned reports of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) regarding the occurrence of occultation. And these two reports
are repeated here because it was needed to be quoted in the incident of
Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.).

And there was another occultation for Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) in which he
undertook journey to other parts for the purpose of religious
propagation.

2 - Narrated to us my father; and Muhammad bin Hasan - may Allah be
pleased with them - they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah; and
Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari, all of them from Ahmad Muhammad bin Isa
from Hasan bin Mahboob from Malik bin Atiya from Abi Hamza Thumali from
Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“One day Ibrahim (a.s.) set out for a walk to derive some lessons from
the creatures of Allah. Wandering through the town he reached wilderness
and saw a man standing up in prayers. His voice was reaching the sky and
his dress was made of hair. Ibrahim (a.s.) stood there in amazement and
watched him pray. Then he sat down waiting for him to conclude the
prayers. A long time passed. At last Ibrahim (a.s.) nudged him with his
hand saying that he had a request from him and that he should shorten
his prayers. The person concluded the prayers and turned towards Ibrahim
(a.s.).

“For whom do you offer prayers?” asked Ibrahim (a.s.) “For the God of
Ibrahim (a.s.).” “Who is the God of Ibrahim?” “The One who has created
you and I.” “I like your way,” said Ibrahim (a.s.), “I wish to make you
my brother for Allah’s pleasure. Tell me, where do you live? So that
whenever I wish, I can pay you a visit.” The worshipper said, “My house
is across this water,” and he indicated towards the river. “And the
place of my prayer is this only, if Allah wills you shall find me here.”

Then this man asked Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.): “Do you want something from
me?” “Yes,” replied Ibrahim (a.s.), “Pray to Allah and I shall say Amen,
or I will pray and you says Amen.” He asked, “But what shall we pray
for?” “For the sinners among the believers,” replied Ibrahim (a.s.). The
worshipper refused and when asked the reason he said that he was praying
for a particular thing for the past three years and his prayers have not
been answered so far. “I feel ashamed of requesting Allah for something
about which I am not sure if it will be fulfilled,” he explained.

The Ibrahim (a.s.) asked him as to what his need was that he continues
to invocate Allah. The worshipper said, “One day while busy in prayers
at my usual place, I saw a handsome boy pass by. A light shone his
forehead and his tresses flowed on his back. He was grazing some cows
with such shiny skins, as if anointed with oil. He also had well-fed and
healthy sheep. I was elated at the sight and asked him, “O young man. To
whom do these cows and sheep belong?” “They are mine,” replied the boy.
“Who are you?” asked I. “I am Ismail, the son of Ibrahim the Khaleel of
the Beneficent, the Mighty and Sublime.”

At that moment I prayed to Allah that He grant me the chance to see His
friend (Khaleel).” Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) said: “I am Ibrahim, the
Khaleel of the Beneficent (Rahman) and that boy is my son.” The man
said, “Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds. He has granted my
prayers!” Then he kissed the cheeks of Ibrahim (a.s.) and putting his
arms around his neck said, “Now you supplicate and I’ll say ‘Amen’.” So
Ibrahim (a.s.) supplicated Allah for the believers from that time unto
the day of Qiyamat and requested Allah to condone their sins and to be
pleased with them. The worshipper recited ‘Amen’ on his invocations.
Imam Baqir (a.s.) says: “Ibrahim’s (a.s.) prayer is effective for our
Shias right upto the day of Qiyamat.”

[^1]: Surah Maryam 19:48

[^2]: Surah Maryam 19:49-50


