Lesson 10: The Conditions for an Ideal Object of Worship
========================================================

The Lord of the World, as presented in the Qur’an, possesses all the
necessary conditions of an ideal object of worship. He is the creator of
love and all forms of beauty, the originator of all forms of power and
energy. He is a vast ocean on the slightest ripple of whose surface the
swimmer of the intellect is tossed around like a plaything.

It is He Who preserves the heavens from falling and the earth from
collapsing. If, for an instant, He closes His eye of mercy or avert, it
from this world, the whole of the universe will perish and hurtle toward
non being in the form of dust. The existence and survival of every atom
in the universe is, therefore, dependent on Him.

It is He Who bestows all bounties and all felicities, Who owns us and
may freely dispose of us. When He commands and an order goes forth, as
soon as He says, *"Be!,"* a creature comes into being.

Truth and reality derive their substance from His essence, and freedom,
justice, and other virtues and perfections derive from the rays of His
attributes. To take flight towards Him, seek to draw near to His
glorious threshold, is to attain all conceivable desire at the highest
degree. Who ever gives his heart to God, gains an affectionate companion
and a loving friend; the one who relies upon Him has placed his hope on
a firm foundation, while the one who attaches his heart to other-than
God is a prey to illusion and builds a foundation on wind.

He Who is aware of the slightest motion that takes place any-where in
creation can also determine for us a path leading to happiness and lay
down a way of life and a system of human relations that conforms to the
norms He has established in the order of creation. He is, after all,
aware of our true interests, and it is even His right alone to lay down
a path for us as the logical outcome and natural consequence of His
divinity. To act in accordance with the program He lays down is the only
certain guarantee for our ascent toward Him.

How is it possible that man should be so enamored of truth and justice
that he is ready to sacrifice his life for their sake, unless he is
aware of their source and origin?

If a being is worthy of worship, it cannot be anyone other than the
Creator Who is the axis of all being. No thing and no person has such a
rank as to deserve the praise and service of man. All values other than
God lack absoluteness and primacy and do not subsist in and of
themselves; they are relative and serve only as a means for the
attainment of degrees higher than themselves.

The primary qualities that elicit man's worship are being the bestower
of all bounties and being aware of all the possibilities, needs,
capacities and energies contained in man's body and soul. These
qualities belong exclusively to God; all beings stand in need of and
rely upon that being Who is existent by virtue of His own essence. The
caravan of existence is constantly moving toward Him by means of His
aid, and His commands descend unceasingly of every speck in the
universe.

Absolute submission and worship belong, then, exclusively to His Most
Sacred Essence. His glorious presence, uninterrupted by a single moment
of absence, is felt at the heart of each atom of being. All things other
than God resemble us in that impotence and deficiency prevail over them.

They are, therefore, unworthy of our submission and are not worthy of
usurping sovereignty over any part of God's realm, which is the whole
broad plain of existence. Man, too, is too noble and valuable a being to
be subjected and humbled by anything other than God.

In the whole broad plain of being, it is God alone Who deserves man's
praise. Man must grant to his love of God, to his efforts to draw near
to Him and earn His pleasure, precedence over all other beings and
objects of love. This will result in the ennobling of man and, the
augmenting of his value, for man is but a small drop and if not united
with the ocean, he will be swept away by the storm of corruption, dried
up by the burning sun of chaos.

Man gains his true personality and becomes eternal when he attaches
himself to that effulgent source, when God gives meaning to his world
and becomes the interpreter of all the events of his life. It is in this
sense that men's worlds may be either broad and expansive or narrow and
constricting.

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, says, in
discussing the weaknesses of man and his limited capacities: "How
strange and remarkable is the affair of man! If he becomes hopeful with
regard to a certain desire, greed will render him abject; desire will
lead to greed, and greed will destroy him. If he falls prey to
hopelessness, grief and sorrow will kill him. If he attains happiness
and good fortune, he will fail to preserve them. If he falls prey to
terror and fear, they will reduce him to utter confusion.

If abundant safety is granted him, he will become negligent. If his
blessings are restored to him, he will become arrogant and rebellious.
If he is stricken with misfortune, sorrow and grief will disgrace him.
If he acquires wealth, he will become overweening. If poverty lays hold
of him, he will be plunged in misery. If he is weakened by hunger, he
will be unable to rise from the ground. If he eats to excess, the
pressure of his stomach will discomfort him. So all deficiency in the
life of man is harmful, and all excess leads to corruption and
ruin."[^1]

Generally speaking, justice, nobility, virtue and other qualities that
earn respect and praise must either be illusionary and imaginary, or we
must consider these values as real and necessary, based on the
perceptions of conscience and instinct. In the latter case, we ought
humbly to submit to that universal existence and absolute perfection
which flows over with virtue, life and power, and from which all values
derive.

\*\*\*\*\*

When we look into the matter carefully, we see that all the countless
beings that exist in the world, as well as the love and aspirations that
are rooted in the depths of our being, all converge at one point, all
revert to one source—God. The very essence and reality of the world is
identical with its connection, relation and attachment to God.

Being re-ascends by a different route to the point where it began and
from which it descended, and that point alone is worthy of man's love
and devotion. Once man discovers this point, he becomes so enamored of
its absolute beauty and perfection that he forgets all else.

We see that all phenomena have emerged from non-being into a state of
being, and that throughout the period of their existence, whether short
or long, they are dependent on a source external to themselves for aid
and sustenance; they are marked indelibly with subordination and lack of
autonomy.

If the ideal object of worship we seek and toward which we are
attempting to advance were unaware of the pains we suffer and the nature
of the world; if it were unable to satisfy our desires and longings,
being replete with impotence and deficiency just like ourselves and
belonging to the same category as us, it could not possibly be our final
aim and ultimate object or possess absolute value.

When we seek the fulfillment of a wish by means of our worship, it is
God alone Who can respond by meeting our needs. The Qur’an says:

***"Those whom you call upon other than God are servants like yourselves
(i.e., they have no power of themselves)."*** **(7:194)**

The Commander of the Faithful, upon whom be peace, while supplicating
his Lord in the mosque of Kufa, said:

O my Master, O my Master! You are God the Great and I am your wretched
and insignificant slave. Who can show mercy to His insignificant slave
but God the Great? O Master of mine, O Master of mine! You are strong
and powerful, I am weak and impotent; other than one strong and
powerful, who can show mercy to the weak?

O Master of mine, O Master of mine! You it is Who bestows generosity on
the beggar, and I stand as a beggar at your threshold. Who will show
mercy to the beggar other than the generous and the munificent one?

O Master of mine, O master of mine! You are eternal existence and I am a
creature destined to perish. Who will have mercy on one destined to
perish other than the eternal, everlasting essence?

O Master of mine, O Master of mine! You are the guide Who points out the
way, and I am lost and bewildered. Who will take pity on the lost and
bewildered if not the guide Who points out the way?

O Master of mine, O Master of mine! Have mercy upon me by Your infinite
mercy; accept and be satisfied with me in Your generosity, favor and
kindness, O God, possessor of generosity, favor and kindness, and in
Your all-embracing mercy, O most merciful of the merciful!”[^2]

Thus, to show reverence to other-than God, to orient oneself to other
than His pure essence, is in no way justifiable; apart from God, nothing
can have the slightest effect on our true destiny. If an object of
worship deserves man's devotion and love and is capable of lifting him
to the peaks of felicity, that object of worship must be free of all
deficiency and inadequacy.

Its eternal rays must touch all creatures with sustenance and life, and
its beauty must cause every possessor of insight to kneel down in front
of it. Possessing infinite power, it quenches the burning thirst of our
spirits, and gaining knowledge of it, is nothing other than attaining
the ultimate source of our true nature.

If we choose an object of love and worship other than God, it may have
certain capacities and be able to fulfill our desires up to a point, but
once we reach that point, it will no longer be an object of love and
worship for us. It will no longer be able to arouse and attract us; it
will, on the contrary, cause us to stagnate.

For not only will it not satisfy our instinctive desire to worship, it
will prevent us from reflecting on any higher value and imprison us in a
narrow circle, in such a way that we no longer have any motive to
advance or ascend.

If the object we choose to worship and love be inferior to us, it can
never cause us to ascend and refine our beings. Our inclination to it
will, on the contrary, drag us down to decline, and we will, then, be
like the needle of a compass which is diverted from the pole under the
influence of a completely alien magnetic field. The result will be total
loss of direction; eternal misery will become man's inevitable destiny.

Worship, Man's Loftiest of Expression of Gratitude
--------------------------------------------------

An object of worship can give direction to man's motion and light up his
darkness with its brightness when it is able to give him ideals, is
endowed with a positive and elevated existence, is the cause of effects,
and is the very essence of stability and permanence. Then, the object of
worship produces inner effects in man and guides him in his thought and
his actions. It facilitates for the essence of man, that part of him
nurtured by the divine wisdom, its search for perfection.

Any effort or motion on the part of man to choose a false direction for
himself, to take the wrong path in life, will result in his alienation
from himself, his loss of all content, and the distortion of his
personality.

Man cannot possibly come to know himself correctly if he has separated
himself from his Creator. To forget God means to forget oneself, to be
oblivious to the universal purposes of human life and the world that
surrounds one, and to be unable to reflect on any form of higher values.

Just as attachment to other-than-God alienates man from himself and
transforms him into a kind of moving biological machine, so, too, does
reliance on God and supplication at His threshold draw mono-dimensional
man, lacking all spiritual life, up from the oceanic depths of neglect,
revive him and restore him to himself.

Through worshipping God, the spiritual capacities and celestial forces
in man are nourished. Man comes to understand the lowliness of his
worthless material, hopes and desires and to see the deficiencies and
weaknesses without his own being. In short, he comes to see himself as
he is.

To be aware of God and take flight toward the invisible source of all
being illumines and vivifies the heart. It is utterly pleasurable, a
pleasure that cannot be compared to the pleasures of the three
dimensional material world. It is through orienting oneself to that
abstract, non material reality that thoughts become lofty and values
transformed.

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, discusses the
wonderful effect of awareness of God on men's hearts as follows: "The
Almighty Creator has made awareness of Him the means for purifying the
heart. It is through the awareness of God that deaf hearts begin to
hear, blind hearts begin to see, and rebellious hearts become soft and
tractable."[^3]

He says, too: "O Lord! You are, the best companion for those who love
You and the best source of remedy for all who place reliance upon You.
You observe them in their inner states and outer doings and are aware of
the depths of their hearts. You know the extent of their insight and
knowledge, and their secrets are manifest to You. Their hearts tremble
in separation from You, and if solitude causes them fear and unease, the
awareness of You comforts them, and if hardship and difficulty assail
them, You alone are their refuge."[^4]

Imam Sajjad, upon whom be peace, that paragon of purity and justice who
had an unbreakable bond with his Lord, demonstrates to us in his
supplicatory prayers the highest expression of love.

This was a sacred love that had inflamed all of his being, and although
his spirit was sorely pressed by the mortal sorrow of separation, the
powerful wing of love enabled him to soar up into the limitless heavens.
With indescribable sincerity and humility, he thus prayed at the
threshold of God, the Eternal: "O Lord! I have migrated to Your
forgiveness and set out to Your mercy. I ardently desire Your pardon and
rely on Your generosity, for there is naught in my conduct to make me
worthy of forgiveness, and Your kindness is my only hope. "

"O God, send me forth on the best path and grant that I die as a
believer in Your religion and be resurrected as a believer in Your
religion. "

"O Lord Whom I worship! O You whose aid the sinners supplicate through
Your mercy! O you in the remembrance of Whose generosity the wretched
seek refuge! O You in fear of whom the wrongdoers bitterly weep!"

"O source of tranquility for the heart of those banished in fear from
their homes! O consoler of those who sorrow with broken hearts! O
succorer of the lonely, helper of the rejected and needy! I am that
servant who responded obediently when You commanded men to call on you.
"

"O Lord! Here I am prostrate in the dust at Your threshold. O God, if
You show mercy to whomever calls upon You in supplication, then let me
be earnest in my supplications, or if You forgive whomever weeps in Your
presence, then let me hasten to weep. "

"O God, do not make hopeless the one who finds no giver but You; do not
thrust me away with the hand of rejection now that I stand here at Your
threshold."[^5]

Anyone who wishes to understand the profound meaning of supplication
must realize that rational explanation and logical deduction are
incapable of yielding a deep understanding of questions touching on
spiritual illumination.

The Noble Qur’an describes the conduct and way of life of the
unbelievers and materialists as follows:

***"The deeds of those who are unbelievers are like a mirage in a flat
and waterless desert. A thirsty man will imagine them to be water and
hasten toward them, but when he reaches them, he will find no water.
"*****(24:39)**

***God and His Messengers summon mankind to the truth; other than God,
all claims are baseless and vain, for they are unable to meet any of
man's needs. One who relies upon them will be like the one who dipped
his hand in a well to drink from it but found his hand could not reach
the water. The unbelievers summon men only to misguidance.***
**(13:14)**

***The dwelling of those who choose other than God as friends and
protectors is like the dwelling of the spider; were the spider to know,
the weakest of dwellings is his.*****(29:41)**

***The deeds of those who disbelieve in God are like ashes that are
swept away by a strong wind; they have no benefit from all their
strivings. This is the path of misguidance, utterly distinct from the
path of salvation.*** **(14:18)**

The loftiest expression of thankfulness that man can make at the
threshold of his true object of worship is supplication, the profession
of love for His absolute perfection and devotion to it. This he does in
harmony with all of creation, because all beings praise and glorify God.

The Qur’an says:

***"The seven heavens and the earth and all they contain praise God.
There is no a creature not engaged in the praise and magnification of
its Lord, but you do not understand their praise. God Almighty is
forbearing and most forgiving."*** **(17:44)**

This worship and praise naturally do not bring God the slightest
benefit, for He possesses all perfections to an infinite degree and
neither the world nor man can add anything to Him or take anything away
from Him. Is it at all conceivable that He would create man in order to
benefit from his worship and praise?

On the contrary, it is man who, by gaining knowledge of the supreme
being and worshipping Him in His sublimity, reaches his ultimate aim and
true perfection.

Professor Ravaillet, celebrated philosopher and physicist, has the
following to say about consciousness in the universe: "The new cosmology
says that atoms and molecules know what they are doing; in the normal
sense of the word, they have awareness of the tasks they perform and of
the course of their lives. This consciousness of theirs is superior to
the knowledge of the physicist, because all the physicist knows of an
atom is that if it were not tangible and recognizable, no one would know
anything about it. "

"Bodies, motion, speed, the concepts of here and there, radiation,
equilibrium, space, atmosphere, distance, together with many other
things, all came into existence thanks to the atom. If the atom were not
to exist, what would be the origin of all the remarkable phenomena of
creation? There exists the same affinity between consciousness and body
as there does between motion and motionlessness, or the positive and
negative aspects of motion. "

"Now, space, taken as a whole, is not blind. We demonstrated, if you
remember, when examining the field of vision, that the eye is not the
basic and determining factor. Since it is fixed at a given point on the
globe, according to the limited circumstances of the human species and
other terrestrial beings, it has a certain narrow physical field within
which it operates.

But as for the space between the earth and the sun, between the sun and
the galaxies, and between the galaxies and remote gigantic planets,
where huge forces with tremendous range are engaged in exchanging
energy, there an organ such as the eye of terrestrial creatures has no
opportunity to show itself or demonstrate its effectiveness. "

"But precisely for this reason we cannot believe that lack of
consciousness and awareness prevail in that field for the exchange of
vast energies and forces ruled by the laws of attraction, equilibrium,
motion, light and centrifugal force. Blindness does not exist in these
wondrous phenomena, and even particles of light cannot be regarded as
something akin to an illiterate mailman whose only job is to deliver
messages he cannot read."[^6]

[^1]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Irshad, p. 142.

[^2]: Mafatih al-Jinan., p. 400.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 220.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 225.

[^5]: Sahifa as-Sajjadiya, pp. 163-198.

[^6]: Dau Hazar Danishmand dar Justuju-yi Khuda-yi Buzurg, pp. 61 and
99.


