Lesson 12: The Infinite Power of God
====================================

The infinite power of God has no clearer proof than that furnished by
the study and examination of the phenomena of the created universe and
the multiple forms and colorations of nature that can never be fully
described.

When we look at God's creation we find ourselves confronted with so vast
an energy that no limit can be imagined for it. A look at creation and
the millions of truths secreted in the wonders of nature and the depths
of man's own being provides the clearest indication of the scale of the
power of the One Who has created it, for the rich and complex order of
being admits of no other explanation.

It is God's incomparable power that compels man to bow humbly before the
Creator of this great scheme. There is no word to express the dimensions
of His power; that unique essence has much power that whenever He wills
a thing to come into existence, it suffices for the command ***"Be!"***
to issue forth from Him and the object addressed will be. The Qur’an
says:

***"When He wills a certain thing, He commands it 'Be!' and it is"
(36:82)***

The law expounded in this verse is the best indicator of His limitless
power and manifestation of His boundless power and splendor. It negates
any limit that might be set on God's power and proclaims the inadequacy
of all criteria and measures when confronted with this divine law.

The champions of the natural sciences, the men of the laboratory,
despite all the advances they have achieved, have not yet gained
complete knowledge of the inner secrets of a single one among the
numerous and varied beings of the created universe. Nonetheless, the
partial and defective knowledge that man has acquired concerning a few
of the beings that exist in this world is enough for him to realize with
all his being that the great power that has created such variety and
abundance in the universe must be infinite.

Consider the range of His creation: tiny creatures and monstrous beasts
with strange appearances both dwelling in the depths of the ocean;
delicate and melodious birds with multicolored wings, the beauty of
which skilled artists imitate as an adornment to their craft; stars that
shine in the heavens and the sun that rises and sets; the dawn and the
moonlight; the planets, galaxies and nebula each of which sometimes
contains at its heart millions of great shinning stars giddying in their
apparent infinitude.

Does not a creation such as this, awe inspiring in its splendor,
indicate the infinite power of its Maker? Can one disregard the power of
a Creator Who imparts such variety to life and made distinct, finite
forms of it appear in all this vast range of phenomena?

Now, given the fact that all these captivating forms of creation
ultimately arise from the atom, the question of being cannot be
explained except by reference to a guiding and infinite power. It is He
Who impels all things toward the assumption of life-giving form and
possesses the power and intelligence to plan and design this vast and
precise scheme.

\*\*\*\*\*

Large and small, difficult and easy, are properties pertaining to finite
beings; in the infinite realm of God's essence and attributes, there is
no question of great and little, much and few. Impotence and inability
are caused by the finiteness of the energy at the disposal of an agent,
by the existence of an obstacle on his path, or by the absence of means
and instruments; they are inconceivable in the case of an infinite
power.

The Qur’an says:

***"Nothing in the heavens or on earth can induce weakness or impotence
in God; indeed, God is all-knowing and all-powerful."*** **(35:44)**

Although God is capable of doing all things, He has created the world
according to a precise and specific scheme in the framework of which a
set role has been assigned to certain phenomena in the origination of
others.

Those phenomena are completely and unquestioningly subordinate to His
command while fulfilling that role and never rebelling against His
orders in the slightest. The Qur’an says:

***"The sun, the moon and the stars are all at His command. Be aware
that creation belongs only to God; it is His penetrating command that in
its exalted purity creates the world and all it contains."*** **(7:54)**

Strictly speaking, no creature in the scheme of the universe can be a
manifestation of power or have any share in His will and command, for
just as God has no partner in His essence, so, too, He has no partner in
His agenthood. Just as all creatures in the world lack independence in
their essence and are dependent on Him, they also lack it in producing
acts and effects.

Every agent and cause derives the essence of its being from God and also
its power to act and produce an effect. Whenever He wills and
necessitates it, the order that encloses all beings abandons its role,
for that order is itself subordinate to His will, precious and firm
though it may be.

The Creator Who has assigned a particular effect to every factor and
cause is able to neutralize and suspend that effect at any instant. Just
as one command brought the order of the universe into existence, another
command robs phenomena of their customary effect. Thus, the Qur’an says:

***"They said, 'Burn Abraham and thus us render help unto your gods, if
you are men of action.' We commanded the fire, 'be cool for Abraham and
harm him not.' They sought a stratagem against him, but We made them the
losers."*** **(21:68-69)**

Although the powerful attraction exerted by the sun and the earth
prevails over a vast space, both bodies are subordinate to His will. As
soon as He gives a little bird the necessary power, the bird is able to
resist the pull of the earth and take flight. The Qur’an says:

***"Do they not look at the birds in the heavens and see how the skies
have been subjugated to them? It is God alone Who keeps them aloft, and
in this there is an evident sign of God's power for the people off
faith."*** **(16:79)**

Whatever phenomenon may be imagined to exist in the world of being finds
its needs for sustenance and life met by the Creator. Therefore,
whatever power and capacity is found in the scheme of creation must
necessarily go back to the infinite power of God.

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, him, says in a
sermon reproduced in the Nahj al Balaghah: "O God, we cannot penetrate
the depths of Your splendor and majesty. We know only that You are
living and self-subsistent, that You are exempt from eating and
sleeping. No mind can perceive You and no eye can see You. But You see
all eyes, You know the life span of all things, and You are
all-powerful.

Although we have perceived nothing of Your creation, we are astounded by
Your power and praise You mightily. That which is hidden from us and our
eyes cannot see and our mind and intelligence cannot attain, which is
concealed from us by veils of the unseen, is much greater than what we
can see ..”[^1]

When man decides to build something, for example, a hospital, he
assembles the necessary tools and pieces of equipment that do not have
any essential relationship with each other, and, then, connects them
with each other by means of a series of artificial relationships in
order to reach his goal.

In order to create such artificial relationships, he makes use of
different forces and object that he finds to be already existing. His
work and activity are a part of the system of creation; they are not
properly speaking creative activity, but only a form of motion that
takes place within existing objects. Divine creation forms a quite
different category from the production of artificial relationships
between unrelated objects.

God originates things with all their properties, forces and energies and
characteristics. When we say that God is all-powerful, we must be aware
that His power relates only to things that are possible. Things that are
rationally impossible are entirely outside the sphere of His power, and
to use the word "power" or "capacity" in connection with things that are
impossible is incorrect and meaningless.

Although the power of God is, indeed, unlimited, the receptive capacity
of things and their ability to serve as locus for the manifestation of
divine power must be taken into consideration. The implementation of
God's will is intertwined with the relations between cause and effect,
with the complex network of reasons and causes.

In order for a thing to become the object of the divine will, it must
not be impossible and must, in its essence, possess receptive capacity;
divine will is accomplished by means of the receptivity of things. It is
true that the divine effulgence is infinite and constantly overflowing,
but the ground destined to receive it may be defective and unable to
absorb the infinite share that superabundant source offers it.

The ocean is an immensely abundant source of water, but a tanker has
only a limited capacity to take on its water; in fact, only a minute
amount of that water can be loaded onto a tanker. Clearly enough, what
is finite and limited in this case is the capacity of the tanker, not
the water in the ocean.

Someone once asked ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, upon whom be
peace, "Is your Lord able to fit the whole world into a hen's egg?" He
answered: "God Almighty is, indeed, able to do anything, but what you
ask is something impossible." So although God's sacred essence is
utterly free of all impotence and inability, it is meaningless and
irrational to ask whether God can do something inherently
impossible.”[^2]

\*\*\*\*\*

One whose heart beats with the love of God and flows over with belief in
the Creator of all being will never be discouraged lonely and hopeless
even in the midst of the most complex difficulties. Whatever deed he
undertakes he does so in the consciousness of being in the protective
shade of a supreme power that can make him triumph over all
difficulties.

A man who is aware of God and knows that he enjoys His support can
resist and endure all kinds of hardship. Difficulties are for him like
foam on swift vanishing foam on the face of the waters The fire that
burns within him becomes ever brighter and he emerges stronger than ever
from the crucible of hardship.

Throughout the toils he endures, he is comforted and strengthened by
God's kindness and favor, and it is this that forms the true motor of
his activity. Failure does not block his path and cause him to
surrender; instead, with sincere intention and diligent effort, he
continues his strivings until final victory.

He understands well that his efforts cannot remain fruitless and that
victory goes to the deserving. Whenever He wills, God takes the hand of
the fallen and the oppressed who have no refuge other than Him and
raises them up to the apex of power. Sometimes, too, He rubs in the dust
of humiliation and disaster the noses of the powerful and arrogant
oppressors who believe only in violence and the logic of force and treat
men as if they were worthless.

How many arrogant tyrants have been cast down by disaster in the course
of human history, sinking and vanishing in a tempest of shame!

The story of God's messengers represents in itself a complete and ideal
model of human values. We all know how the messengers stood alone
against the oppressive forces of their day in order to guide men to
salvation, reform their society, and inculcate lofty values in them. In
doing so, they lit the first spark that ultimately destroyed polytheism

The response aroused by their beliefs caused such a positive tumult that
they were able to change the face and direction of history. They laid
the foundations of monotheistic worship and established the principles
of virtue in the most comprehensive way. Who can deny the role played by
their devotion and faith in the untiring struggle they waged? How far
can will power alone take man, and how much can it enable him to endure
and sacrifice?

A cursory review of the proud history of the Prophets' lives enables us
all to behold, in the most vivid fashion possible, the sincerity and
devotion they displayed, their mercy and forbearance, and their intense
desire to guide and reform men. The fundamental secret of their success
was the fact they never thought of themselves for a single instant; they
sincerely renounced their own beings, making them a gift to God's cause.
God then responded by bestowing immortality and everlasting fame on
them.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 159.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, IV, p. 143.


