Lesson 16: Hardship, A Cause of Awakening
=========================================

Those who are drunk on the arrogance of power and success and who have
totally forgotten humane ethics because of the seduction of their soul
and their senses will sometimes find, in various corners of the world,
that the occurrence of unpleasant events makes them open to fundamental
changes and developments that tear away from them the veils of
forgetfulness.

They may even be guided to a path leading to some degree of moral
perfection and a future more fruitful than their present. They are
people in whom misfortune has induced a profound transformation.

Considering the harmful effects of neglectfulness and the intoxication
of arrogance, on the one hand, and the numerous moral lessons taught by
misfortune, on the other, it can be said that failure and misfortune are
relative insofar as they contain great blessings; they contribute
fruitfully to the building of man's awareness and will.

Hardship is, then, the preliminary to higher, more advanced states of
being; it prepares man for the recompense that awaits him, and from his
response to it, it becomes apparent whether he has attained the lofty
degree of sincerity and devotion or is sunk in decay. The Qur’an says:

***"We have created man in the embrace of hardship."*** **(90:4)**

***"We test you with fear, hunger, the loss of wealth and possessions,
death, and the loss of the fruits of your toil . Give glad tidings to
those who struggle manfully on this path that those who say when
afflicted with calamity and pain, 'We are from God and to Him we return
on our path to perfection,'—that it is they who receive kindness and
mercy from their Lord together with their suffering, and they it is who
are truly guided."*** **(2:155-57)**

Without doubt, God could have created a world without hardship, pain and
misfortune, but that would have meant His depriving man of freedom and
choice; he would have been let loose in the world as a creature without
will or the power of decision, just like any other creature lacking
perception and awareness, formed exclusively by nature and totally
obedient to it. Would he then have deserved the name of man?

Having paid the heavy price of losing all his innate capacities and
freedom, his most precious resource, would he have advanced toward
perfection, or decayed and declined? Would not the world, too, have lost
all goodness and beauty, these being comprehensible only in terms of
their opposites?

It is plain that the power to distinguish and discriminate makes
possible the existence of good and evil, of beauty and ugliness. By
giving man the inestimable blessing of freedom and the ability to
choose, God, whose wisdom is manifest throughout creation, wished to
display fully His ability to create phenomena bearing witness to His
wisdom and power.

He placed within man's being the possibility of doing both good and
evil, and although He compels him to do neither, He always expects him
to do good. God does not approve of evil; it is righteous conduct that
meets with His approval and, in exchange for which He provides abundant,
unimaginable reward. God warns man against following the path of evil
and threatens him with punishment and torment if he does so.

Thus, by using the power of choice that God has bestowed on him, man can
act as he should, conforming both to divine guidance and to his own
conscience.

But, if occasionally his foot should slip and he should commit some sin,
the path remains open for him to return to purity and light, to God's
favor and mercy. This is in itself a further manifestation of God's
generosity and all-embracing justice, one more of the blessings He
bestows on His servants.

Were God to give immediate reward to the virtuous for their righteous
conduct and acts, they would not in any way be superior to the corrupt
and the sinful. And if the evil in thought and in deed were to be always
met with instant punishment and retribution, virtue and purity would not
enjoy any superiority in this world to vice and impurity.

\*\*\*\*\*

The principle of contradiction, is, in fact, the basis of the created
world; it is what enables matter to change and evolve so that God's
grace flows through the world. Were matter not to take on different
shapes as a result of its encounter with various beings and were being
unable to accommodate new forms within itself, the differentiation and
advancement of being would be impossible.

A stable and unchanging world would resemble stagnant capital that
produces no profit.

For creation, change is the capital that brings about profit. It is, of
course, possible that the investment of a certain portion of capital
should result in loss, but the constant motion of matter as a whole
definitely results in profit. The contradiction that takes place in the
forms of matter results in the advancement of the order of being toward
perfection.

There is some question as to whether evil exists in the world in the
real sense of the word. If we look carefully, we will see that the evil
of things is not a true attribute; it is a relative one.

Fire arms in the hands of my enemy are an evil for me, and firearms in
my hands are an evil for my enemy. Setting aside me and my enemy,
firearms are in themselves neither good nor bad.

The course of nature can be said to be mathematical; that is, its system
has been established in such a way as not to answer all of our needs.
We, however, wish to fulfill all our countless desires without
encountering the least hindrance, and the forces of nature do not answer
the limitless wishes we cherish, wishes which are in any event worthless
from the point of view of our essential nature. Nature pays no attention
to our desires and refuses to submit to our wants. So when we encounter
unpleasantness in our lives, we become unjustifiably upset and we term
the causes of our discomfort as "evil."

If someone wants to light his lamp when there is no oil in it, he will
not start sighing and complaining or curse the whole universe!

Creation is constantly advancing toward a clear goal, through unceasing
effort and striving. Specific causes determine each step it takes, and
the changes and development it undergoes are not designed to meet men's
approval or satisfy their desires.

It should be accepted that some of the occurrences of this world will
not correspond to our wishes, and we ought not to regard as injustice
things we experience as unpleasant.

The Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali, peace be upon him, describes the
world as an abode of hardship, but nonetheless a good place for the one
who knows it properly. Although he encountered himself all kinds of
hardship and unpleasantness, he constantly drew men's attention to the
absolute justice of God![^1]

Another important point which must not be overlooked is that good and
evil do not represent two mutually exclusive categories or series in the
order of creation. Goodness is identical with being, and evil is
identical with non-being; wherever being makes its appearance,
non-existence is also implied.

When we speak of poverty, indigence, ignorance or disease we should not
imagine that they have separate realities: poverty is simply not having
wealth, ignorance is the absence of knowledge, and disease is the loss
of health. Wealth and knowledge are realities, but poverty is nothing
other than the emptiness of the hand and the pocket, and ignorance, the
absence of knowledge. Hence poverty and ignorance have no tangible
reality; they are defined through the non-existence of other things.

The same is the case with calamities and misfortunes that we regard as
evil and the source of suffering. They, too, are a kind of loss or
non-being, and are evil only in the sense that they result in the
destruction or non-existence of something other than themselves. Apart
from this, nothing, insofar as it exists, can in any way be called evil
or ugly.

If calamities did not entail sickness and death, the loss and ruin of
certain creatures, thus preventing their capacities from unfolding, they
would not be bad. It is the loss and ruin arising from misfortunes that
is inherently bad. Whatever exists in the world is good; evil pertains
to non-being, and since non-being does not form a category independent
of being, it has not been created and does not exist.

Being and non-being are like the sun and its shadow. When a body is
turned to the sun, it casts a shadow. What is a shadow? The shadow has
not been created by anything; it consists simply of the sun not shining
in a given place because of the existence of an obstacle; it has no
source or origin of its own.

Things have a real existence by virtue of having been created without
reference to things other than them in this sense, they are not evil.
For a worldview derived from belief in God, the world is equivalent to
good.

Everything is inherently good; if it is evil, it is so only in a
relative sense and in connection with things other than itself. The
existence of everything is unreal for other than itself, and untouched
by creation.

The malarial mosquito is not evil in itself. If it is described as such,
it is because it is harmful to man and causes disease. That which is
created is the existence of a thing in and of itself, which is a true
existence; speculative or conditional existence has no place in the
order of being and is not real.

We cannot, therefore, ask why God has created relative or conditional
existence.

Conditional or abstract entities are inseparable from the real entities
that give rise to them; they are their inevitable concomitants and do
not partake of their being. One cannot then speak of conditional
entities having been created.

That which is real must necessarily derive its being from the Creator.
Only those things and attributes are real that exist outside the mind.
Relative attributes are created by the mind and have no existence
outside it so one cannot go looking for the creator.

Furthermore, that which has the potential to exist is the world as a
whole, with all the objects it contains and the attributes that are
inseparable from it; the world represents an indivisible unit. From the
vantage point of God's wisdom, either the world must exist on the
pattern that is peculiar to it, or it cannot exist at all.

A world without order or lacking the principle of causality, a world
where good and evil were not separate from each other, would be an
impossibility and a fantasy. It is not possible to suppose that one part
of the world should exist and another should not. Creation is a whole,
like the form and figure of man, and its parts are inseparable from each
other.

God is absolutely free of all need, and one consequence of this is that
He freely bestows being, like a generous man whose largess expects no
return, or like a skilled artist who is constantly busy with the
creation of new forms . Such abundant generosity and creativity define
the essence of the Lord Whose signs are manifest and evident in every
phenomenon.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah, ed., Subhi Salh, p. 493.


