Lesson 18: A General View of the Problem
========================================

One of the questions that has always attracted the attention of thinkers
concerned with the nature of human life and been the subject of eternal
controversy is whether man is free to choose his aims and implement his
wishes in all his deeds and activities, in all the affairs of his life,
whether material or otherwise. Are his desires, inclinations and will
the only factor determining his decisions?

Or are his acts and his conduct imposed upon him? Is he compelled to
helplessly perform certain acts and take certain decisions? Is he an
involuntary tool in the hands of factors external to himself?

In order to understand the importance of this question it must be borne
in mind that on its solution depends our ability to benefit fully from
economics, laws, religion, psychology and all other branches of
knowledge that take man as their subject. Until we find out whether man
has free will or not, whatever law be propounded for man in any of the
sciences will apply to a being whose nature remains unknown to us. It is
evident that no desirable result is then to be had.

The question of free will versus determinism is not exclusively an
academic or philosophical problem. It is of concern, too, to all those
who posit a duty for man that he is responsible for fulfilling and
encourage him to do so. For if they do not, at least, implicitly believe
in free will, there will be no basis for rewarding people who do their
duty and punishing those who do not.

After the rise of Islam, Muslims, too, paid special attention to the
question, because the worldview of Islam caused it to receive more
profound scrutiny than had been the case hitherto and all the attendant
obscurities to be clarified. For, on the one hand, the problem was
connected with the unity of God and, on the other, with His attributes
of justice and power.

Thinkers of both past and present can be divided into two categories on
the question of free will vs. determinism. The first resolutely rejects
the freedom of man in his actions, and if his acts appear to show the
signs of free choice, this is because of the faulty and deficient nature
of human perception.

The second category believes in free will and say that man enjoys
complete freedom of action in the sphere of volitional acts; his ability
to think and decide has far-reaching effects and is independent of all
factors external to him.

Naturally, man experiences the effects of compulsion with regard to his
birth, as well as various factors that surround him and occurrences he
encounters during his life. The result of this may be that he ends up
believing there is no such thing as free will. He entered the world
involuntarily and appears to be completely controlled by fate, blown
around like a piece of paper until he finally leaves the world.

At the same time, man clearly perceives that he is free and independent
in many things, without any form of compulsion or imposition. He has the
ability and capacity to struggle effectively against obstacles and to
extend his control of nature by relying on previous experience and
knowledge. An objective and practical reality he cannot deny is that
there is a profound and principal difference between the volitional
motions of his hands and feet and the functioning of his heart, liver
and lungs.

So, given his will, awareness and ability to choose, which are a
hallmark of his humanity and the source of his responsibility, man knows
that he does, indeed, have free will in a whole series of acts and that
no obstacle prevents him from implementing his will or forming his
belief. But in other respects, his hands are tied and he has no power to
choose: matters determined by material or instinctual compulsion which
make up a considerable par of his life, and others that are imposed on
him by factors external to him.

Determinism
-----------

The proponents of determinism do not believe that man is free in the
acts he performs in the world. Theological determinists such as the
Muslim theological school known as the Ash'arites, relying on the outer
meaning of certain verses of the Qur’an and not pausing to reflect on
the true meaning of all the relevant verses or on the nature of God's
power to predetermine, conclude that man has no freedom whatsoever.

They also deny that things produce effects and do not acknowledge that
causes have a role to play in the creation and origination of natural
phenomena. They consider everything to be the direct and unmediated
effect of the divine will, and they say that although man has a certain
amount of will and power at his disposal, it has no effect on his acts.

Men's acts are caused not by their power and their will but by God's
will, which produces all effects in exclusivity. Man can only give a
certain coloring to the acts he performs with his aim and intention, and
this coloring results in acts being qualified as good or as bad. Apart
from this, man is nothing but the locus for the implementation of God's
will and power.

They also say that if we suppose man to possess free will, we will have
narrowed the sphere of God's power and governance. God's absolute
creativity requires that no man confront him as a creator; likewise,
belief in the doctrine of the oneness of God, considering the absolute
sovereignty we ascribe to Him, must mean that all created phenomena,
including the acts of men, are enclosed in the sphere of the divine will
and volition.

If we accept that a person creates his own acts, we deny God's
sovereignty over all of creation, which is incompatible, in turn, with
God's attribute of creator, for we would, then, enjoy complete
sovereignty in the realm of acts and there would be no role left there
for God. Thus, a belief in free will is held to lead inexorably to
polytheism or dualism.

In addition, some people make the principle of determinism, whether
consciously or unconsciously, an excuse for committing acts contrary to
religion and morality, opening the way to all kinds of deviation in the
sphere of belief and action. Certain hedonist poets belong to this
group; they imagine predetermination to be sufficient excuse for their
sins and hope, in this way, to escape both from the burden of conscience
and from ill-repute.

\*\*\*\*\*

This determinist mode of thought is contrary to the principle of
justice, with reference both to God and to human society. We clearly see
divine justice manifested in all its dimensions throughout creation, and
we praise His most sacred essence as possessing this attribute. The
Qur’an says:

***"God bears witness to His own oneness; He it is Who*** ***maintains
justice; and His unique essence is empowered aver all things and is
knowledgeable of all things."*** **(3:18)**

God also describes the establishment of justice in human society as one
of the purposes for the sending of the Prophets and states this desire
that His servants should maintain justice:

***"Indeed We sent our messengers with proofs and miracles and sent down
to them the Book and the Balance so that men should establish
justice"*** **(57:25)**

On the Day of Resurrection, God's treatment of His servants will
similarly be based on justice, and no one will be subject to the
slightest injustice. The Qur’an says:

***"We will establish the scales of justice on the Day of Resurrection
and none shall suffer injustice."*** **(21:47)**

Now would it be justice to compel man to do something sinful and then to
punish him for it? Were any court to issue a verdict providing for
punishment under such circumstances, it would certainly be unjust.

If we deny the principle of freedom and assign no positive role at all
to man's will, no difference will remain between man and the rest of
creation. According to the determinists, the acts of behavior of man
resemble those of other creatures in that they are caused by a series of
factors beyond their control; our will does not of itself have the power
to produce an effect.

But if God creates the volitional acts of man, if He is the Creator of
injustice and sin, even of the assignation of partners to Himself, how
can we explain such behavior on the part of a Perfect and Exalted Being?

The belief in determinism nullifies and abolishes the principles of
prophethood and revelation; the concept of a divine message that is to
serve as the source of human awareness; the idea of commands and
prohibitions, of religious criteria and ordinances, of law and of creed;
and the doctrine of certain requital for one's deeds. For once we
believe that all of men's acts take place mechanically, without any will
or choice on his part, no role will remain for the message of the
Prophets who have been sent to assist man in his strivings.

If the duties imposed on man and the instructions addressed to him have
nothing to do with his free will and ability to obey and respond, of
what use are they?

If man's spiritual states and outer actions are to be mechanically
determined, all the ceaseless efforts of moral educators to redeem human
society and move it in the direction of creativity and higher values
will be totally ineffective.

Their efforts would serve no purpose; it is fruitless to expect a being
whose every act is determined to change. But man is responsible for his
own salvation or destruction as well as that of others; his choice
fashions his destiny, and once he knows that every act he performs has
some consequence, he will choose his path with great care. His reliance
on God's love and favor will cause windows of power to be opened for
him.

It may be objected that considering the belief in the comprehensive
knowledge of God (He has from the beginning known all that transpires in
the world; nowhere in the world does an event occur, major or minor, of
which He does not have prior knowledge), God must necessarily know in
advance of the atrocities, evil deeds and sins men commit, and since
they take place nonetheless, men are clearly unable to refrain from
them.

We answer as follows. It is true that God is aware of all phenomena,
both lesser and greater, but this knowledge does not mean that man is
compelled in all that he does. God's knowledge is based on the principle
of causality; it does not apply to phenomena or human acts that lie
outside that framework. A knowledge that operates by means of cause and
effect does not involve compulsion.

God was aware of the future course of events in the world and knew that
men would perform certain acts in accordance with their free will. Their
exercise of free will is part of the chain of causality that leads to
their acts, and it is men themselves who decide to do either good or bad
deeds. In the latter case, through misuse of their free will, they cause
ruin and corruption, so if evil and oppression exist in a given society,
this is the result of men's deeds. It is not created by God. God's
knowledge has no effect on man's choice of good or evil.

It is true that within the sphere of man's freedom and power to decide,
certain factors exist—such as environmental circumstances, the innate
nature of man, and divine guidance, which play a role in the choices he
makes. But that role is confined to the arousal of inclination, to the
encouragement and assistance of man's will; it does not compel man to
choose a certain direction.

The existence of these factors does not mean that man is imprisoned in
their grasp; on the contrary, he is fully able either to obey the
inclinations created by external factors or to resist them by confining
them or changing their course. An individual can profit from the
guidance available to him through insight and clear vision, giving shape
to his inclinations and controlling or modifying them. The abundant
instinctual drives man has within him can never be fully eliminated, but
it is important to rein them in and deny them the opportunity to run
wild.

\*\*\*\*\*

Suppose an expert mechanic inspects a car before it sets out on a
journey and foresees that the car will not be able to proceed more than
a few kilometers before stopping because of some technical defect. Now,
if the car sets out and breaks down after a few kilometers, just as the
mechanic has predicted, can it be said that he was the cause of the
breakdown simply because he has predicted it?

Obviously not, because the car's poor state of repair was the reason for
its breaking down, not the knowledge of the mechanic and the prediction
he made; no rational person can regard the knowledge of the mechanic as
the cause of the breakdown.

To give another example: a teacher knows of the progress his pupils are
making and knows that one pupil will fail in his final examinations
because of his laziness and refusal to work. Once the results of the
examinations are given out, it becomes apparent that that negligent
student has indeed failed to pass. Now, is the cause of such a result
the knowledge of the teacher or the laziness of the pupil? Obviously,
the latter.

These examples enable us to understand, to some degree, why God's
knowledge is not a cause for the deeds of His servants.

\*\*\*\*\*

One of the harmful effects of determinism on society is that it makes it
easier for arrogant oppressors to stifle and repress the down trodden
and more difficult for the downtrodden to defend themselves.

Using determinism as an excuse, the oppressor denies all responsibility
for his violent and pitiless acts; he claims that his hand is the hand
of God and attributes all his transgressions to God, God Who is beyond
all reproach and objection. The oppressed are then obliged to endure and
accept whatever the oppressor does with them, because to struggle
against his injustice would be in vain and efforts to bring about change
would inevitably fail.

The imperialists and other major criminals in history have sometimes
used determinism to perpetuate their cruelty and oppression.

When the family of the Commander of the Martyrs, Husayn b. ‘Ali, peace
be upon him, came into the presence of Ibn Ziyad, that wretched criminal
said to Zaynab al-Kubra, peace be upon her: "Have you see what God did
with your brother and family?"

She answered: "From God I have seen nothing but kindness and good. They
have done that which God wanted of them to elevate their station and
performed the duties that were entrusted to them. Soon you will all be
gathered in the presence of your Lord and called to account; then you
will understand who has triumphed and who has been saved."[^1]

In respect of the question of free will and determinism, the
materialists are caught in a contradiction. On the one hand, they see
man as a material being, subject, like the rest of the world, to
dialectical change and unable to produce an effect of himself; faced
with environmental factors, historical inevitability and pre-determined
circumstances, he lacks all free will.

In choosing his path of development, his ideas and acts, he is entirely
at the mercy of nature. Any revolution or social development is
exclusively the material result of a certain environmental situation,
and man has no role to play in it.

According to the determining relationship between cause and effect,
nothing occurs without its own preceding cause and man's will, too, when
faced with the material and economic circumstances of his environment
and mental factors, is subject to inflexible laws, being, in fact,
little more than the "effect" they produce.

Man is compelled to choose the path that is imposed on him by the
demands of his environment and its intellectual content. There is, thus,
no way for the independent will and choice of man to express itself, and
no role for his sense of moral responsibility and discrimination.

But, at the same time, the materialists consider man able to influence
society and the world, and they place even more emphasis than other
schools of thought on propagation and ideological discipline within an
organized party.

They summon the masses who have been victimized by imperialism to rise
up in violent revolution and try to make men change their beliefs and
play a role different from that which they were previously playing—all
this by relying on the power of free choice. This ascription of a role
to man contradicts the whole scheme of dialectical materialism since it
proclaims that free will exists after all!

If the materialists claim that arousing the oppressed masses and
strengthening revolutionary movements accelerates the birth of the new
order from the womb of the old, this would be illogical, because no
revolution or qualitative change can take place out of turn or at other
than its proper time. Nature performs its own task better than anyone,
according to the dialectical method; to engage in propaganda and to seek
to mobilize opinion is an unjustifiable interference in the work of
nature.

It may also be said by the materialists that freedom consists in knowing
the laws of nature in order to make use of them for the sake of certain
goals and purposes, not in some independent stance vis-à-vis the laws of
nature. But this, too, fails to solve the problem, because even after
one has learned those laws and decided, in principle, to make use of
them for specific purposes, the question remains of whether it is nature
and matter that determine those purposes and impose them on man or man
that freely chooses them.

If man is able to choose, are his decisions a reflection of the wishes
and conditions of nature, or can they run counter to them?

The materialists have regarded man as a mono-dimensional creature so
that even his beliefs and ideas are the result of economic and material
developments and are subject to class positions and production relations
within society—in short, they reflect the particular conditions arising
from the material needs of human beings.

It is, of course, true that man has a material existence and that the
material relations of society and physical, geographical and natural
conditions all have an effect on him. But other factors, arising from
within man's essential nature and his inner being, have also influenced
man's destiny throughout history, and it is not possible to regard the
intellectual life of man as having been inspired exclusively by matter
and the relations of production.

One can never overlook the important role played by religious and ideal
factors, by spiritual impulses, in man's choice of a path to follow; his
will is definitely one link in the causal chain leading him to do a
certain act or not to do it.

No one doubts that man is subject to the influence of natural actions
and reactions, and or that the force of history and economic factors
prepare the ground for the occurrence of certain events. But they are
not the sole determinants of history and they do not play the
fundamental role in deciding the destiny of man. They are unable to take
from man his freedom and power to decide, because he has progressed to a
point that he has a value which lying beyond nature enables him to
acquire consciousness and a sense of responsibility.

Not only is man not a prisoner to matter and the relations of
production; he has power and sovereignty over nature and the ability to
change the relations of matter.

Just as changes in material phenomena are subject to external causes and
factors, certain laws and norms exist in human society that determine a
nation's degree of prosperity and power, or fall and decline. Historical
events are neither subject to blind determinism nor accidental; they
correspond to the norms and designs of creation, among which man's will
holds an important place.

In numerous verses of the Glorious Qur’an, oppression, injustice, sin
and corruption are shown to change the history of a given people, this
being a norm observed in all human societies.

***" When it is decided that a land shall be destroyed, the
self-indulgent worshippers of profit in that society begin to work
corruption and sin. Then God's ineluctable decree comes to pass
concerning the vile and corrupt people who have been caught up in the
deeds of pleasure-seeking hoarders of wealth the land is turned upside
down and its people are destroyed."*** **(17:16)**

***"Did you not see what God did with the people of 'Ad ? Or the people
of Iram who had great power, a might the like of which had never existed
in any other land ? Have you not seen the people of Thamud who split the
hearts of rock and raised up palaces for themselves? Or the Pharaoh who
had abundant forces and troops that arrogantly wrought oppression and
much corruption in the land? God brought down on them the scourge of His
wrath; indeed, God lies in wait for the oppressors."*** **(89:6-14)**

The Qur’an also reminds us that men who worship their desires and obey
their stray inclinations cause many of the calamities of history:

***"Pharaoh began to act with arrogant rebelliousness in the land and
cast dissension among its people, humbling and laying low the Children
of lsrael. He killed their sons and left alive their womenfolk; he was,
indeed, given to corruption and evil."*** **(28:4)**

***"He (the Pharaoh) humbled his own people, compelling them all to obey
his command; truly they were a sinful and corrupt people.*** **(43:54)**

How much bloodshed, war, ruin and disorder has been caused by the
worship of passionate desire and the hunger for power! Men, who are the
component elements of society, possess intelligence and innate will in
their own beings, prior to their inclusion to society; the individual
spirit is not powerless vis-à-vis the collective spirit.

Those who claim that the individual is completely determined in his acts
by the social environment imagine that any true compounding must
necessarily involve the dissolution of the parts in the unity of the
whole to enable a new reality to emerge. The only alternative to this,
they believe, would be either to deny the objective reality of society
as a compounding of individuals and acknowledge the independence and
freedom of the individual, or to accept the reality of society as a
compound and abandon the independence and freedom of the individual. It
is impossible to combine these two possibilities, they maintain.

Now, although society possesses greater power than the individual, this
does not mean that the individual is compelled in all his social
activities and concerns. The primacy of essential nature in man, the
outcome of his development on the natural plane, gives him the
possibility of acting freely and rebelling against the impositions of
society.

Although Islam posits personality and power for society, as well as life
and death, it regards the individual as capable of resisting and
struggling against corruption existing in his social environment; it
does not see in class conditions determining factors leading to the
emergence of uniform beliefs among those subject to them.

The duty of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is itself a
command to rebel against the orders of the social environment when these
involve sin and corruption. The Qur’an says:

***"O you who believe, hold firm to your faith, because the misguidance
of others can never compel you to fall into misguidance."*** **(5:108)**

***"When they die, the angels will ask them, 'What did you do?' They
will answer, 'We were weak and powerless on earth.' The angels will then
say, 'Was God's earth not wide enough for you to travel in it?' (thereby
escaping the environment; i.e., their excuse will not be
acceptable)."*** **(4:97)**

In this verse, those who regard themselves as compelled to conform to
society are strongly condemned and their excuse for failing to assume
responsibility is rejected.

For man to progress morally and spiritually, the existence of free will
in him is indispensable. Man has value, and values can be expected of
him, only insofar as he is free. We acquire individual independence and
value only when we choose a path conforming to truth and resist the evil
tendencies within ourselves and our environment by means of our own
efforts. If we act only in accordance with the course of natural
development or dialectical determinism, we will have lost all value and
personality.

There is, then, no factor compelling man to choose a certain path in
life, nor a force obliging to abandon one. Man may claim to be making
himself not when he chances his form in accordance with the laws
prevalent in society or pre-fashioned goals, but only when he himself
chooses, decides and invests his own efforts.

[^1]: Muntaha al-Amal, p. 299.


