Lesson 1: The Development of Beliefs Through Ages
=================================================

Among the fundamental intellectual topics that concern human life,
religious questions enjoy a particular importance. They have always been
regarded, in fact, as the most basic concern for the well- being and
destiny of man and have produced profound insights and extensive
knowledge.

Scholars and researchers have undertaken wide-ranging and comprehensive
studies on the origins and motives of man's religious concerns, pursuing
their researches with a particular point of view and methodology that
governs also their judgments and conclusions.

The truth of the matter is that since the earliest prehistoric times,
faith and belief have always been part of the texture of human society;
neither in the past nor in the present is it possible to find a society
in which religious issues have not been raised.

The Noble Qur’an refers in several verses to the historical fact that
heaven-sent Prophets constantly appeared in past nations where, in
addition to their beneficial spiritual influence, they also played a
fundamental role in the creation of human civilization.

The study of the way in which human life has evolved and knowledge
developed, together with the knowledge yielded by the most distant
horizons of history, shows that man was attached to religious belief
before he became fully aware of the methods of rational deduction.

The first era of man's knowledge and industry does not, therefore, enjoy
primacy over the earliest eras of religion and belief. It may even be
claimed that human endeavor in the realm of religion and belief has been
more strenuous and longer-lasting than his efforts in the area of
knowledge and art, for the knowledge of a transcendent reality that is
the essence of the world of being is more difficult and less accessible
than the essence of those things which knowledge and art strives
constantly to attain.

The essential nature of the resplendent sun, which is the most manifest
of all things, remained unknown to man for many centuries and its
movements and effects were subject to all kinds of interpretations;
although none could deny the luminosity of its rays, the minds of most
men remained in deep darkness with respect to its knowledge.

The perception of great truths, is, then, impossible without logical
examination, deduction and comprehensive study. If superstitions and
religious myths are to be found among ancient peoples, constantly being
infused into new moulds because of deficiency and weakness in thought
and restriction in knowledge, this does not mean, then, that religion,
with its doctrinal content, is false.

Rather, it demonstrates the primacy and autonomy of religious aspiration
in the very depths of the human soul and heart. Moreover, from the
science that seeks to explore prehistoric times, we cannot expect that
it will uncover more of ancient religions than the traces of myths and
superstitions decipherable in the vestiges of primitive man and beneath
the earth.

Since human conduct and activity are always accompanied by two clear
characteristics—primacy and autonomy, on the one hand, and
comprehensiveness and universality among the members of the species, on
the other hand—it appears entirely logical that we should posit some
origin for that conduct and activity in the depths of the human spirit.

The existence of such a continuous phenomenon in an eternal and
universal form, throughout history and prehistory, cannot be regarded as
the effect of customs and habits; it is the manifestation of a
primordial thirst and imperative instinct for truth. All religious
beliefs, with their different aspects and forms, arise from a single
gushing, abundant source—the primordial nature of man, which is neither
externally imposed nor accidental.

First there comes into being within man's disposition, the capacity to
accept belief, and then belief takes form. The same inward inclination
that impels a person to intellectual investigation and research in order
to perceive reality is an indication of man's need of religious
knowledge. This, of course, does not mean that an inward state and
predisposition is necessarily accompanied by a correct and fully formed
belief.

In just the same way that the body desires nutritive substances without
this desire, does not imply the goodness and wholesomeness of the food,
the soul, too, seeks out its food—namely faith and belief—insistently
seeking awareness of its lord and wishing to supplicate at His
threshold. But the instinct that impels it to search is unable to
recognize and assess beliefs and creeds, distinguishing the true from
the false.

Scholars are agreed that religious beliefs have always been intertwined
with human life. However, their opinions differ concerning the
fundamental roots of religion and the factors that have played a primary
role in its establishment and development. Their judgments, in this
respect, are generally based on studies of superstitious religions and
primitive beliefs, with the result that their conclusions are, in the
final analysis, defective and illogical.

It is true that certain religions, lacking a connection with the
principles of revelation, have been influenced in their appearance and
growth by the social environment and similar factors. However, it is
illogical to ascribe the foundation of all faiths and religious
tendencies to material or economic circumstances and demands, to fear of
the terrifying forces of nature, to ignorance or to considerations
rejected by science.

Without doubt, one of the factors in the emergence of anti-religious
ideas and a phalanx of deniers of God, has been the false teachings, the
inadequacies and the intellectual perversions of the followers of some
religions. The peculiarities and separate characteristics of each
religion must, therefore, be individually examined when studying the
reasons that have led men to adhere to that religion.

In many historical events, religion can be seen to have dominated all
relationships. If religion were not a primary phenomenon it would have
to be enclosed within the four walls of material motives. However, what
factor could have given religious personalities such firmness and
steadfastness for the sake of their religious goals?

Was it the expectation of material benefits and personal gains that made
the bitter hardships of misfortune and difficulty sweet-tasting to their
souls? On the contrary, we see that they sacrificed all their material
resources prosperity and personal desires, to their religious sentiments
and ideals, going so far as lovingly to sacrifice their souls.

In the story concerning the Pharaoh and his sorcerers, we read that he
summoned all his magicians in order to defeat Moses, the one addressed
by God (peace be upon our Prophet and him), hoping that with their
ingenuity and magical powers, they might compel him to submit. But
thanks to the miraculous power vested in Moses, they were overpowered
and they turned to the true belief.

The furious Pharaoh, whose arrogance had been broken, began to slander
and threaten them, saying he would punish them with the worst of
tortures: the severance of their limbs. But a profound revolution had
taken place in the souls of the sorcerers; they remained firm and
steadfast in the face of the threats and capling of the Pharaoh and his
painful tortures. They replied, with remark- able fortitude,

***"..give orders for us to be tortured; your writ runs only in this
narrow world."*** **(20:72).**

This was a clear display of the strength of the innate desire for truth
and reality in man when confronted with suppression, coercion and brute
force. Men who had lived at the very heart of the Pharaoh's apparatus
and had benefited from it, raised up their heads in rebellion and were
ready to renounce their own lives.

The specific inclination of man to religious concerns cannot, therefore,
be explained in terms of materialist interpretations; on the contrary,
incidents such as that of the sorcerers demonstrate the primacy of the
religious sense in man.

Illogical beliefs do not pertain only to religious questions. Before
they were properly refined, many of the sciences were commingled with
superstitions. Men found their way from incantation and magic to true
and beneficial medicine and from unrealistic alchemy to realistic
chemistry.

No one can claim that if man once committed an error in searching for
something, he is bound always to remain in error and will never find a
way of reaching the truth. Those who believe in scientific philosophy
and the primacy of the experimental method, accept that their
experiments may yield erroneous results although they invariably give
them the status of truth.

Those who deny God insist on the conclusion that God is the product of
human thought. For example, the English philosopher, Bertrand Russell,
regards the fear of natural forces to have been the origin of religion.
"In my opinion, religion is above all founded on fear: fear of the
unknown, fear of death, fear of defeat, fear of the mysterious and the
hidden. In addition, as already remarked, a sentiment comes into being
enabling everyone to imagine that he has a supporter in all his problems
and struggles.'[^1]

This is merely a claim, unsupported by any evidence.

Samuel King says, "The source of religion is shrouded in mystery. Among
the countless theories of scholars on the subject, some appear to be
more logical than others, but even the best of them is open to objection
from the point of view of scientific proof. They cannot transcend the
sphere of logical speculation. There is, therefore, intense disagreement
among sociologists concerning the origins of religion.”[^2]

Nonetheless, we can respond that even if we accept the original and
fundamental motive for man's belief in a creator to have been fear, this
in no way proves that the existence of God is a mere fancy without
reality.

If fear motivated man to seek a refuge and if in the course of that
search he discovered a certain reality (God), is there any objection to
be made? If fear is the cause for the discovery of a certain thing, can
we say that that thing is imaginary and unreal because it was fear that
prompted man to seek it out?

It would surely be illogical to maintain, for example, that the science
of medicine has no reality because man has sought and discovered it out
of fear, fear of disease and death? The truth of the matter is that the
science of medicine is a reality, irrespective of whether the original
motive of man in discovering it was fear of disease and death or some
other factor.

In all the affairs and occurrences of life, belief in a wise and
powerful Lord is a real refuge and strong support. This is quite a
different matter from whether or not men's motive in searching it out
was fear of vicissitudes and the search for a refuge or not. The two
matters are quite separate and must be studied separately.

No doubt, in the primitive stages of his life, man was, indeed, prey to
humiliating and painful terror when faced with awesome natural
occurrences such as storms, earthquakes and diseases. A nightmare of
fear cast its inauspicious shadow on all aspects of his life and his
thoughts, and in the unceasing struggle he waged against impotence and
fear, he sought a support where he might take refuge from his terrifying
environment and find inner peace. Finally, through unrelenting effort,
he conquered the nightmare of abjection and fear and attained a
remarkable triumph.

The study of the different stages in the life of primitive man, and the
discovery of evidence that fear prevailed in his thoughts, do not prove
that fear and ignorance were the sole fundamental factor in man's
inclination to religion. Such an assertion would be the result of seeing
only one dimension of the matter.

General conclusions can be drawn from historical research and studies
only when the entirety of history, with all the different periods in the
life of man, is investigated and researched, not one corner of his vast
and variegated history.

The domination of human affairs by fear and abjection in specific and
limited periods must not be made the basis for a general judgment
concerning all eras. Would it not be a hasty judgment to say that all
the religious ideas and sentiments of men, the inclination to the
worship of God in all periods down to and including the present, have
been caused simply by terror, by fear of the wrath of nature, of war and
disease?

In actual fact, the most firmly convinced among men are by no means the
weakest. Those who, in the course of time, have raised high the banner
of religion have been the strongest and most steadfast of men. A
person's faith is never increased in proportion to his weakness, and the
leader of a people in matters of religious belief is not the foremost
among them in weakness, abjectness and impotence.

Is the belief in religion of thousands of scholars and thinkers the
product of fear on their part of storms, earthquakes and disease? Can
their inclination to religion, the result of scholarly studies, of logic
and rational proof, be attributed to their ignorance and lack of
awareness of the natural causes of phenomena? What would be the answer
of an intelligent person?

Moreover, it is not in order to attain some kind of peace that man turns
to religion. Rather, it is after attaining belief and conviction that he
begins to enjoy the fruits of religion—peace and tranquility.

In the opinion of divinely guided scholars, the world is a compendium of
finely calculated causes and reasons, the precise system of the cosmos
bearing witness to the existence of a source characterized by knowledge
and power. The confused and incomprehensible brush strokes of a painting
cannot be taken as the indication of a skilled artist, but precise
strokes and designs with meaningful content are indeed evidence for the
existence of a talented painter.

\*\*\*\*\*

There are also people who regard belief in a reality beyond nature as to
be the product of economic factors. They make strenuous efforts to
establish some connection between religion and economics. They claim
that religion has always been in the service of imperialism and
exploitation and that it was the invention of the ruling, exploiting
class as a means for breaking the resistance of the exploited masses.

Religion has been used, they claim, to stupefy the deprived toilers and
to encourage them to accept their deprivation. There is no doubt that,
like everything else in the world, religion can be misused.

When diverted from its true aims, it becomes a tool in the hands of
profiteers who wish to enslave the nations. However, this misuse of
religion should not provide opportunists with a pretext for mercilessly
attacking everything that bears the name of religion. A clear separation
must be made between perverted religions concocted by imperialism to
stupefy the masses, and authentic, constructive religions.

It is possible that in many human societies, unfavorable economic
conditions, stagnation and backwardness may coexist with religious
belief. But this coexistence does not necessitate any causal
relationship; one cannot be presented as the cause of the other.
Sometimes we see a society enjoying prosperity and flourishing
economically that is deeply attached to religion, while another society
that enjoys similarly favorable economic conditions is to tally averse
to religion.

Similarly, in an environment of poverty and backwardness, the sun of
religion may set, while in another such environment, the influence of
religion may be at its zenith. The obvious lack of congruity between
economic conditions and the prevalence or decline of religious influence
is a clear proof of the fact that contemporaneity does not suffice to
establish a causal relationship. Some special factor must obtain for the
emergence or disappearance of one to be linked to the existence or
non-existence of the other.

We can clearly observe this lack of congruity in two societies that are
both under the oppressive domination of the exploiting class. In one of
them, religion has totally left the scene, while in the other, its
influence has expanded.

Objective realities show us, then, that man is drawn to religion in a
variety of external circumstances. Wherever religion demonstrates its
appeal, one must look for the fundamental inward motive in the specific
nature of religion, not in economic circumstances.

In addition, when we examine the aims of the heavenly religions, we
reach the conclusion that the provision of prosperity and establishment
of a just economic system based on religion have been one of the reasons
for the sending of the Prophets. This, too, is one of the reasons why
men have gravitated to religion and one of the benefits humanity has
gained from religion.

[^1]: Russell, Why I am not a Christian., p. 37.

[^2]: King, Sociology, p.99.


