Lesson 19: Free Will
====================

The proponent of this school say that man is automatically aware that he
possesses freedom in his actions; he can decide as he wishes and fashion
his own fate in accordance with his own will and inclinations. The
existence that decrees responsibility for man, the regret man feels for
certain acts he commits, the punishments the law provides for criminals,
the deeds men accomplish in order to change the course of history, the
foundation of science and technology—all of these prove man to be free
in his actions.

Likewise, the question of man's religious accountability, the sending of
the Prophets, the proclamation of divine messages, and the principle of
resurrection and judgment—all these rest on man's free will and choice
in the acts he performs.

It would be completely meaningless were God, on the one hand, to compel
men to do certain things and, on the other, to reward or punish them. It
would surely be unjust were the Creator of the world to set us on
whatever path He chose, by means of His power and His will, and then to
punish us for actions we have committed without any choice on our part.

If the deeds of men are, in reality, the acts of God, all corruption,
evil and cruelty must be regarded as His work, whereas His most sacred
being is utterly pure of all such corruption and injustice.

If there were no free choice for man, the whole concept of man's
religious accountability would be unjust. The oppressive tyrant would
deserve no blame and the just would merit no praise, because
responsibility has meaning only within the sphere of what is possible
and attainable for man.

Man deserves blame or merits praise only when he is able to decide and
to act freely; otherwise, there can be no question of blame or of
praise.

Those who adhere to the above position have gone to such extremes in
asserting the principle of man's free will that they regard man as being
the undisputed possessor of absolute free will in all his volitional
acts. They imagine that God is unable to extend His rule over the will
and wishes of His creatures and that men's volitional acts are excluded
from the realm of His power. This, in summary, is the position of the
proponents of absolute free will.

\*\*\*\*\*

Those who say that it is natural norms and the will of men that create
the phenomenal world, and that neither the rotation of the world nor the
act of men have any connection with God, are ascribing all effects to a
pole opposed to God. At the very least, they are making created things a
partner with God in His creation, or setting up another creator in
confrontation with God, the Creator. They unconsciously regard the
essences of created things as independent of the divine essence.

The independence of a creature-be it man or other than man —entails
belief in that creature being a partner with God in His acts and His
independence, resulting clearly enough in a form of dualism. Man is,
thus, led away from the lofty principle of divine unity and cast into
the dangerous trap of polytheism.

To accept the idea of man's absolute freedom would be to withdraw from
God His sovereignty in a given area, whereas, in fact, He embraces all
beings, for we would be attributing to man untrammeled and indisputable
sovereignty in the sphere of his volitional acts. No true believer in
God's unity can accept the existence of a creativity separate from that
of God, even in the limited realm of man's acts.

While recognizing the validity of natural causes and factors, we must
regard God as the true cause of all occurrences and phenomena and
recognize that if God wished, He could neutralize it even in the limited
sphere where it operates and render it ineffective.

Just as all creatures in the world lack independence in their essence,
all being dependent on God, they also lack independence in causation and
the production of effects. Hence, we have the doctrine of unity of acts,
meaning perception of the fact that the entire system of being, with its
causes and effects, its laws and its norms, is the work of God and comes
into being from His will; every factor and cause owes to Him not only
the essence of its existence, but also its ability to act and produce
effects.

The unity of acts does not require us to deny the principle of cause and
effect and the role that it plays in the world, or to regard everything
as the direct and unmediated produce of God's will, in such a way that
the existence or non-existence of causational factors would make no
difference.

But we should not attribute independent causation to those factors, or
imagine that God's relationship to the world is like that of an artist
to his work—for example, that of a painter to his painting. The work of
art is dependent on the artist for its origination, but after the artist
has completed his job, the charm and attractiveness of the painting
remain independent of the artist; if the artist leaves this world, his
brilliant work will still remain.

To imagine God's relationship with the world to be of the same type is a
form of polytheism. Whoever denies the role of God in phenomena and in
the deeds of men supposes, thereby, that God's power stops short at the
boundaries of nature and of human free will. Such a view is rationally
unacceptable, because it implies both a denial of the entirety of God's
power and a limiting of that unlimited and infinite essence.

One holding such an opinion will regard himself as free of any need for
God, which will cause him to rebel against Him and engage in all manner
of moral corruption. By contrast, a feeling of dependence on God, of
reliance on Him and submission to Him, has a positive effect on the
personality, character and conduct of man.

Recognizing no source of command other than God, whether inner or outer,
passionate desires and inclinations will be unable to drag him this way
and that, and no other man will be able to enslave him.

The Noble Qur’an denies man any participation with God in managing the
affairs of this world:

***"Say: 'Praise belongs to God alone, He Who took no offspring and Who
has no partner in the managing of the world. There is never any
diminution in His power that He might stand in need of a helper. Praise
His essence continuously as possessing the greatest attributes of
perfection.'"*** **(17:111)**

Numerous verses unambiguously proclaim the absolute power and might of
God. For example:

***'God controls whatever exists in the heavens and on the earth, and He
has power over all things.'*** **(5:120)**

***'Nothing in the heavens or on earth can weaken God, for He is
all-knowing and all-powerful.'*** **(35:44)**

The beings of this world need God for their survival and perpetuation
just as strongly as they do for their origination. The entirety of
creation must receive the gift of existence anew every instant failing
which the whole universe would collapse.

The creativity of all the forces in the world is identical with the
creativity of God and is an extension of His activity. A being that in
its very essence is dependent on the divine will does not have any
independent standing on its own.

Just as electric lamps derive their light from the power station which
first switched on, so, too, they must constantly receive energy from the
same source in order to remain alight.

The Glorious Qur’an emphatically and clearly declares:

***'Men at all times are in need of God, and it is He alone Who is
utterly free of need.'*** **(35:15)**

All essences derive from His will and are dependent on Him; all
phenomena are continually sustained by Him. The powerful and magnificent
order of the universe is oriented to one pole alone and turns on one
axis alone.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, said: "The power and might of
God are too lofty for aught to occur in the universe that is contrary to
His will."[^1]

Had God not bestowed on us the principle of free will and were He not
every instant to endow us with life, resources and energy, we would
never be able to do anything. For it is His unchanging will that has
determined that we should perform volitional acts according to free
will, thereby fulfilling the role He has assigned to us. He has willed
that man should construct his own future, good or bad, bright or dark,
in accordance with his own discernment and desires.

Our volitional acts are, then, connected both with ourselves and with
God. We can use the resources God has placed at our disposal in full
awareness either to uplift and improve ourselves in accordance with a
correct choice, or to plunge into corruption, sin and self-indulgence.
It remains, of course, true that the scope of our volitional acts lies
within a fixed framework; power is from God, and the use made of it,
from us.

Suppose that someone has an artificial heart, powered by a battery that
we can switch on and off in a control room; whenever we want, we can
turn off the switch and stop the heart functioning. That which lies
within our power is the current that goes from the battery to the heart;
at any moment we can stop it.

But as long as we allow the battery to function, the person in which the
heart is implanted will be free to act as he wishes. If he performs a
good or an evil act, it will, without doubt, be in accordance with his
own will. The way in which he makes use of the power we have placed at
his disposal depends entirely on him and has nothing to do with us.

Similarly, our power derives from God and He can withdraw it from us at
any moment, but He has assigned the manner in which we make use of that
power entirely to our free choice.

The Median School
-----------------

All beings in the world enjoy a form of guidance particular to the stage
of development they have reached; their specific forms of guidance
correspond to their different degrees of existence.

It is possible for us to clarify and distinguish our own position among
the different beings in this world. We know that plants are captives in
the hands of the determining forces of nature, while exhibiting, at the
same time, certain slight developmental reactions vis-à-vis changes in
their environment.

When we analyze the properties of animals, we feel that they possess
attributes quite different from those of the plants. In order to obtain
their nourishment, animals have to engage in a wide range of activities,
since nature does not invite them to a feast at which their nutritional
needs are placed before them. Animals need certain tools and instruments
in their efforts to gain food, and these nature has provided them with.

Although animals are subject to the strong pull of the instincts and
are, in this sense, subjugated beings, they enjoy a certain degree of
freedom by means of which they can free themselves, to some extent, from
the harsh captivity of nature.

Scientists are of the opinion that the weaker animals are with their
respect to their natural structure and organs, the stronger they are
with respect to their instincts and the more they enjoy the direct aid
and protection of nature. Conversely, the better equipped they are as
regards sensory and conceptual powers and the greater their degree of
independence, the lesser the extent to which they are guided by
instinct. In the first period of his life, the child is covered directly
by the comprehensive protection of his father and mother; as he grows,
he gradually emerges from their all-encompassing supervision.

Man who has attained the highest level of development as the only being
possessing the faculty of independent will and discernment, has a
relatively low level of instinctual power. As he gradually attains his
freedom, he is progressively beset with relative weakness in his sensory
capacities.

Nature satisfies in various ways all the different needs of the plants.
In the animal realm, although the mother has to make certain efforts to
carry, nurture and protect her offspring, instincts appear very early in
the young and the mother need not concern herself with training and
educating them.

But in the case of man, we see that he does not possess powerful natural
instincts, and his power to resist unfavorable and hostile environmental
factors is much inferior to that of the animals. Thus, his dependence on
his parents continues for many years until he finally attains
independence and self-sufficiency and is able to stand on his own feet.

\*\*\*\*\*

The Noble Qur’an speaks clearly of man's weakness and impotence:

***"Man was created weak and impotent."*** **(4:28)**

Nature has left man to his own devices far more than the animals. We see
in man, on the one hand, an unfolding of freedom and an emergence of a
capacity to grow and gain awareness, and, on the other, an increase in
dependence and neediness. While implying a relative freedom, man is
powerfully drawn deeper and deeper into the thralls of need.

These varying situations of different orders of creation constitute, in
the view of certain thinkers, factors impelling growth and development.
The farther a being advances on the ladder of progress, the closer it
comes toward freedom. It is precisely neediness and lack of innate
equilibrium that enable growth and advancement to take place.

For free will and choice to express themselves, a factor opposing
natural instinct must exist. Man will, then, be caught between two
opposing attractions, each seeking to gain his obedience, so that he is
compelled to choose the path he desires, freely, consciously, and
relying on his own efforts and resources. Free of all determining
factors and mental preconceptions, he begins the work of making and
developing himself on the basis of specific principles and criteria.

Once faced with this element of contradiction, man cannot attain
equilibrium or choose a correct path for himself by acting as an
automaton or refraining from all effort. Bearing as he does the burden
of the divine trust, the great divine gift that the heavens and the
earth were unfit to receive, man alone proving worthy of accepting it,
man is confronted with only two choices in his conflict and struggle.

Either he becomes a prisoner to the tyranny of instinct and unbridled
desire, thus debasing and degrading himself; or, drawing on his abundant
capacities of will, thought and decision, he embarks on the path of
growth and development and begins to ascend.

\*\*\*\*\*

Whenever a being is freed from compulsory obedience to the instincts,
casts off the chains of servitude, and beings to make use both of its
innate capacities and its acquired abilities, its sensory faculties are
weakened and its natural capacities diminish.

The reason for this is that any organ or capacity left stagnant and
unused in a living being gradually stultifies. Conversely, the more
intensively an organ or capacity is used, the more it will grow and be
filled with energy.

So, when the light of man's conscious and creative will, inspired by the
power of discernment and reason, lights his path and determines his
actions, his power of insight and thought enable him to discover new
truths and realities.

Furthermore, man's state of bewilderment and hesitation between two
opposing poles inclines him to reflect and assess, so that through
rational exertion he can distinguish the right path from the wrong. This
will activate his mental faculties, strengthen his reflective
capacities, and endow him with a greater degree of motion and vitality.

Ownership, the desire for liberty, science and civilization- all these
are the direct result of man's exercise of his free will. Once man
attains freedom and continues his necessary and positive efforts, eh can
advance swiftly in the process of growth and the unfolding of all
aspects of his innate, essential nature. As his talents and capacities
mature, he will be transformed into a source of benefit and virtue in
society.

We see the results of free will everywhere, and the struggle waged
against its proponents by those who oppose it is itself a clear
indication that the latter implicitly accept it.

Now let us see what limits are set on man's power of choice and what
scope he enjoys in the exercise of this faculty.

The authentic view of Shi'ism, which is drawn from the Qur’an and the
words of the Imams, represents a third school, intermediate between the
determinists and the proponents of absolute free will. This school does
not suffer from the inadequacies and weaknesses of determinism, which
contradicts reason, conscience and all ethical and social criteria and
denies God's justice by attributing to Him all the atrocities and
injustices that take place, nor by asserting absolute free will does it
deny the universality of God's power and reject the oneness of God's
acts.

It is obvious that our volitional acts differ from the motions of the
sun, the moon and the earth, or the movements of plants and animals.
Will power arises from within us and makes it possible for us to perform
or not to perform a certain deed, thus giving us freedom of choice.

Our ability to choose freely whether to perform good or evil deeds
arises from our freely exercised capacity of discernment. We must use
our gift of free choice consciously; first, we must reflect maturely and
carefully, weigh things with precision, and then make a calculated
choice. It is God's will that we should use our freedom in this way in
the world that He has created, with consciousness and alertness.

Whatever we do is definitely included in the sphere of God's antecedent
knowledge and will. All aspects of life, all that touches on the destiny
of man, is limited by and conditional on His knowledge; it is defined by
limits already existing in God's knowledge.

Furthermore, we are not free of need for a single instant of that
Essence to which we are connected, and the use of the powers inherent in
our being is impossible without God's continuous aid.

With His supreme, overwhelming power, He closely watches us, and in a
way beyond our imagination, He has complete awareness and sovereignty
over all our intentions and deeds.

Finally, our free will cannot go beyond the limits of the order
established by God in this creation, and it does not, therefore, create
any problem with respect to the oneness of God's acts.

While being able to create effects in the world by means of his will,
man is, himself, subject to a series of natural laws. He enters the
world without any choice on his part, and closes his eyes on the world
without any desire to do so. Nature has fettered him with instincts and
needs. Nonetheless, man possesses certain capacities and abilities;
freedom produces a creativity within him which enables him to subjugate
nature and establish dominance over his environment.

Imam Ja'far Sadiq, peace be upon him, said: "Neither determinism nor
free will; the truth of the matter lies between these two."[^2]

So there is free will, but it is not all-embracing, because to posit a
separate sphere for man would be equivalent to assigning God a partner
in His acts. The free will that man enjoys is willed by the Creator of
nature, and God's command manifests itself in the form of the norms that
rule man and nature, natural relations, causes, and factors.

\*\*\*\*\*

In the view of Islam, man is neither a ready-made creature, condemned to
determination by fate, nor has he been cast forth into a dark and
purposeless environment. He is a being overflowing with aspirations,
talents, skills, creative awareness and diverse inclinations,
accompanied by a kind of in dwelling guidance.

The mistake made both by the determinists and the protagonists of
unlimited free will is that they have imagined man to have only two
possible roads before him: either all his acts must be attributed
exclusively to God, so that he then loses all freedom and becomes
determined in his acts, or we are obliged to accept that his volitional
acts derive from an independent and unbounded essence, a view entailing
the limitation of God's power.

However, the fact that we have free will does not affect the
comprehensiveness of God's power, because He has willed that we should
freely take our own decisions, in accordance with the norm and law He
has established.

From one point of view, man's acts and deeds can be attributed to him,
and from another point of view, to God. Man has a direct, immediate
relationship with his own deeds, while God's relationship with those
deeds is indirect, but both forms of relationship are real and true.
Neither does human will set itself up in opposition to the divine will,
nor is man's will contrary to what God desires.

Obstinate men intent on disbelief, who oppose all kind of preaching and
warning, initially take up their erroneous position though an exercise
of free will, and then experience the consequences of their obstinacy
and blindness of heart, visited on them by God.

Obeying the desires of their lower self, these people of inequity
prevent their hearts, their eyes and ears from functioning, and, as a
result, earn a state of eternal perdition. The Qur’an says:

***"Whether you warn them or warn them not, they will not believe you.
God has placed a seal on their hearts; there is a veil over their ears
and their eyes, and a painful torment awaits them."*** **(2:6-7)**

Sometimes corruption and sin are not of such magnitude that they block
the path of return to God and the truth. But at other times they reach
an extent that the return to true human identity is no longer possible;
then the seal of obstinacy is set on the polluted spirits of the
unbelievers. This is an entirely natural result of their behavior,
determined by God's will and desire.

The accountability of such persons originates in their exercise of free
will, and the fact that they have not acquired the blessings of guidance
does not lessen their accountability. There is a firm and self-evident
principle to the effect that "whatever originates in free will and
culminates in compulsion does not contradict free will."

The Imam is related to have said: "God wished that things should take
place through causes and means, and He decreed nothing except by means
of a cause; He, therefore, created a cause for all things."[^3]

One of the causes employed by God in His creation is man and his will,
in keeping with the principle that particular causes and means are
established by God for the appearance of every phenomenon in the
universe: the occurrence of the phenomenon necessitates the prior
existence of those causes and means, and were it not for them, the
phenomenon would not appear.

This is a universal principle which inevitably governs our volitional
actions as well . Our choice and free will come to form the last link in
a chain of causes and means that result in the performance of an act on
our part.

The Qur’anic verses which relate all things to God and depict them as
arising from Him are concerned with proclaiming the pre- eternal will of
the Creator as the designer of the world and explaining how His power
embraces and penetrates the entire course of being. His power extends
through every part of the universe, with no exceptions, but God's
unchallenged might does not diminish the freedom of man.

For it is God Who makes free will a part of man, and it is He Who
bestows it upon him. He has made man free to follow the path of his own
choosing, and He holds no individual or people accountable for the
failings of another.

If there is any compulsion in the affairs of man, it is only in the
sense that he is compelled to have free will, as a consequence of God's
will, not in the sense that he is condemned to act in a given way.

So when we undertake the best of deeds, the capacity to perform them is
from God, and the choice to use that capacity is from us.

Certain other verses of the Qur’an clearly emphasize the role of man's
will and actions, decisively refuting the views of the determinists.
When it wishes to draw man's attention to the calamities and torments he
endures in this world, it describes them as being the result of his
misdeeds.

In all the verses that are concerned with God's will, not even one can
be found which attributes man's volitional acts to the divine will.
Thus, the Qur’an proclaims:

***"Whoever does the smallest good deed shall experience the result of
it, and whoever does the slightest evil deed shall experience the result
of it."*** **(99:7-8)**

***"Certainly you are accountable for what you do."*** **(16:93)**

***"Those who assign partners to God say that their worship of idols and
other deeds derive from God's will; had God not willed it, they and
their forefathers would not have become polytheists, and they would not
practice the deeds of the Age of ignorance. Those who went astray in
previous times also spoke such nonsense, denying the heavenly teachings
and attributing their misguidance to God but they suffered the
punishment for their lies and their slander. Say to them, O Prophet: 'Do
you have a decisive proof for what you say? If you do not, your excuses
are nothing but the result of erroneous ideas and fantasies; you speak
vainly and lying.'*****(6:148)**

Were the salvation and misguidance of man to be dependent on God's will,
no trace of misguidance or corruption would exist upon earth; all would
follow the path of salvation and truth whether they wished to or not.

Certain miscreants who seek excuses for themselves have claimed that
whatever sinful acts they commit are willed and desired by God. Thus the
Qur’an says:

***"When they commit some abominable act, they say: 'We found our fore
fathers doing this, and God has commanded us to do it.' Tell them, O
Prophet, 'God never commands men to commit foul deeds, but you attribute
to God every sinful and erroneous act you commit in your
ignorance.'*****(7:28)**

In just the same way that God has willed a reward for good acts, so,
too, He has willed punishment for sin and corruption, but in both cases,
willing the result is different from willing the act that leads to the
result.

Man's being and the natural effects of his acts are, indeed, subject to
God's will, but his volitional acts arise from his own will.

The view of Islam, as conceived by Shi'ism, is that man does not possess
such absolute free will that he is able to act outside the framework of
God's will and desire, which cover the entire uni- verse in the forms of
fixed laws and norms, thus reducing God to a weak and impotent entity
when confronted with the will of His own creatures. At the same time,
man is also not prisoner to a mechanism that prevents him from choosing
his own path in life and compels him, like the animals, to be a slave to
his instincts.

The Noble Qur’an clearly states in some of its verses that God has shown
man the path to salvation, but he is compelled neither to accept
guidance and salvation nor to fall into misguidance.

***"We have shown man the path of truth and the path of falsehood; he
may choose either the path of guidance and offer the thanks, or choose
the path of ingratitude." (76:3)***

To attribute man's volitional acts to God is, therefore, rejected by the
Qur’an.

[^1]: al-Kafi, I, p. 160.

[^2]: al-Kafi, I, p. 160.

[^3]: al-Kafi, I, p. 183.


