Lesson 20: The Form of God’s Will and Volition
==============================================

Fate and destiny are one of those controversial topics that are often
misinterpreted because of lack of precise understanding or, some- times,
malicious intention. In order to explore the topic, we will analyze it
here as concisely as possible.

Everything in this world is based on a precise calculation, logic and
law. It has been put in its place according to an exact measurement, and
it derives its defining characteristics from the causes and factors on
which it is dependent.

Just as every phenomenon derives its primal existence from its specific
cause, it also acquires all its outer and inner properties from the same
source; it derives its shape and extent from the cause. Since there is a
homogeneity between the cause and the effect, the cause inevitably
transmits to the effect a characteristic bearing affinity to its own
essence.

In the worldview of Islam, fate and destiny have the meaning of God's
firm decree concerning the unfolding of the affairs of the world, their
extent and their limits. All phenomena that occur within the order of
creation, including man's deeds, become fixed and certain by means of
their causes, their being a consequence of the universal validity of the
principle of causality.

Fate (qada') has the meaning of something terminated and irreversible,
and it refers to the creativity and the acts of God. Destiny (qadar) has
the meaning of extent or proportion and it indicates the nature and
quality of the order of creation, its systematic character; it means
that God has endowed the world of being with a planned and systematic
structure. In other words, destiny is the result of His creativity as it
leaves its impress on all created things.

To express it differently, what is meant by destiny is the external and
objective fixing of the limits and proportions of a thing, externally
and objectively, not mentally. Before executing his plan, an architect
will prepare in his mind the qualities and dimensions of the complex he
proposes to build. The Qur’an speaks of these fixed forms, properties
and proportions of things as qadar:

***"We have created everything according to a fixed proportion."***
**(54:49)**

***"God has fixed a quantity and proportion for all things."***
**(65:3)**

The term, fate (qada'), in the Qur’an means rational and natural
necessities, all the parts of the cause that lead to the emergence of a
thing. It implies that God's want will implement itself only when the
fixed quantities, conditions and causes of a thing are aligned with each
other.

The Creator takes into consideration the spatio-temporal situation of
all phenomena, together with their limits and proportions, and then
issues His decree based on them. Whatever factor or cause is visible in
the world is the manifestation of God's will and knowledge and the
instrument for the fulfillment of what He has fated.

\*\*\*\*\*

The capacity for growth and development is fixed in the very heart of
things. Matter, which is subject to the law of motion, has the capacity
of assuming different forms and traversing various processes. Under the
influence of different factors, it assumes a whole variety of states and
qualities. It derives energy from certain natural factors that enable it
to advance, but when it encounters certain other factors, it loses its
existence and vanishes.

Sometimes it continues to advance through different stages until it
approaches the highest degree of development; at other times, it lacks
the necessary speed to advance through further stages of progress and
moves sluggishly.

So, the outcome of things is not directly connected with fate and
destiny because it is the cause that determines the nature of the
effect. Since material beings are connected with a variety of causes,
they will necessarily follow different paths; each cause fixes the being
subordinate to it in a particular path.

Imagine that someone is suffering from appendicitis. This is a destiny"
arising from a particular cause. Two additional, separate "destinies"
await this invalid: either he agrees to surgery, in which case he will
recover his health, or he fails to agree, in which case he dies. Both of
these choices represent a form of destiny.

Destinies can, then, be interchangeable, but whatever decision the
invalid takes and acts upon will not be outside the sphere of what God
has destined.

One cannot sit with hands folded and tell oneself, "If it is my fate, I
will remain alive, and if it is not my fate, I will die, whatever effort
I make to be treated."

If you seek treatment and recover, this is your destiny, and if you
refuse treatment and die, that, too, is your destiny. Wherever you go
and whatever you do, you are in the embrace of destiny.

People who are lazy and refuse to work first decide not to work and then
when they are penniless, they throw the blame on destiny. If they had
decided to work, the money they earned would equally have been the
result of destiny. Thus, whether you are active and diligent or idle,
you in no way contravene destiny.

A change in destiny does not, then, mean the rebellion of a certain
factor against fate or opposition to the law of causality. No factor
producing an effect in the world can be exempt from the universal law of
causality. Something that causes a change in destiny is, itself, one
linking the chain of causality, one manifestation of fate and destiny.
To put it differently, one destiny is changed by means of another
destiny.

In contrast with the sciences that point in only one direction and show
the orientation only of certain aspect of phenomena, the laws of
metaphysics are not concerned with phenomena from the conjunctural point
of view although the laws do regulate the phenomena, they are
indifferent with respect to the orientation they assume.

In reality, both the phenomena themselves and their orientation are
subject to the vast and comprehensive laws of metaphysics: in whatever
direction the phenomena tend, they are still held inescapably in the
embrace of those laws.

The situation is like that of an expansive, broad plain; even its most
northerly and most southerly parts are included within the plain.

\*\*\*\*\*

In short, fate and destiny represent nothing other than the universality
of the principle of causality; they represent a meta- physical truth
that cannot be measured in the same way as the data of science.

The principle of causality says only that every phenomenon has a cause;
it cannot of itself make any prediction, this being a property totally
absent from metaphysical awareness.

For the laws of metaphysics, which is a descriptive form of knowledge
and the firm and stable ground for the various phenomena of the world,
it makes no difference which particular phenomena occur. A highway along
which men travel thanks to its firmness and stability is completely
indifferent to the direction in which they are traveling.

‘Ali, peace be upon him, the Commander of the Faithful, was resting in
the shade of a broken wall that seemed likely to collapse. suddenly he
arose and went to sit in the shade of another wall. He was asked: "Are
you fleeing what God has destined?"

He said, "I am taking refuge in God's power from what He has destined,"
meaning, 'I am fleeing from one destiny to another destiny. Both sitting
and rising were equally subject to destiny. If the broken wall collapses
on me and I am harmed, it will be fate and destiny, and if I leave the
zone of danger and escape all harm, that, DO, will be fate and destiny."

The Glorious Qur’an describes as divine norms the systems and laws of
nature that rule over the world and follow inevitable and immutable
courses: *"The divine norm is immutable and unchanging."* (33:62)

The immutable norm of God decrees, among other things, that:

***"If a people provides itself with the capital of faith and performs
good and worthy deeds, it will be triumphant on the stage of life and
win the viceregency of the earth."*** **(24:55)**

According to the Qur’an, this, too, is an immutable divine norm:

***"God will never change the destiny of a society until its people
change that Society."*** **(13:11)**

From the point of view of the religious worldview, realities are not
confined within the four walls of material causation. Phenomena ought
not to be considered purely in their sensory relations and heir material
dimensions. Non-material factors have access to realms that are totally
closed off to material factors, and they have independent and decisive
role in the emergence of phenomena.

The world is by no means indifferent to the distinction between good and
bad; man's acts produce certain reactions during his lifetime. Kindness
and benevolence toward one's fellows and the love and service of God's
creatures are factors that, through non- material means, ultimately
result in a change of human destiny and contribute to tranquility,
happiness, and an abundance of blessings.

Oppression, malevolence, egoism, aggression also bear bitter fruit and
have inevitably harmful results. So, from this point of view, some form
of requital is inherent in nature, for the world possesses perception
and consciousness; it sees and it hears. The manner in which it requites
deeds is one manifestation of fate and destiny; it is impossible to flee
from it, for wherever you go, it will seize you.

A certain scientist says: "Do not say the world lacks perception, for
you will then have accused yourself of lacking perception. You have come
into being as part of the world, and if there is no awareness in the
world, there is none in you either."

Concerning the role of non-material factors in fashioning des- tiny, the
Qur’an says the following:

***"Were the people of the earth to believe and act with piety, We would
open to them the gates of all heavenly and earthly blessings, but since
they denied the truth, We punished them for their evil behavior."***
**(7:96)**

***"We never destroy region unless its people become cruel and
aggressive."*** **(28:59)**

The concepts of fate and destiny are cited by the proponents of
determinism as one of their proofs. In their opinion, it is not possible
for any act to be performed independently by anyone, for God has
predestined the acts of man, general and particular, good and bad, so
that no scope remains for any volitional acts on his part.

There is a difference between determinism and irreversible destiny.
Every phenomenon is bound to occur once all of its causes are present.
One link in the chain of causes is man's will, which plays a definite
role of its own. Man is a being endowed with free will, hence his acts
pursue definite goals, and in pursuit of those goals, he does not follow
some automatic law of nature, like raindrops that fall in accordance
with the law of gravity. Were it to be otherwise, man could not, in
fact, pursue the goals he has in mind as a being possessing free will.

This is in contrast with the determinist view, which regards the free
will of man as inoperative and relates all causes exclusively to God and
to factors external to man's own essence.

Belief in fate and destiny results in determinism only when they are
regarded as supplanting man's powers and will, so that no role or effect
is ascribed to his wishes in the acts he performs. In reality, however,
the and destiny are nothing other than the system of cause and effect.

The Qur’an proclaims that some of those who opposed the Prophets and
raised the banner of rebellion against the chosen of God interpreted
fate and destiny in a determinist sense. They did not want the existing
situation to change in such a way that the social order of monotheism
should replace the rotten customs to which they were attached.

These are the relevant verses:

***"They said, 'If God wanted us not to worship the angels, we would not
do so.' They speak not in accordance with logic or scientific proof, but
t with their own vain imaginings . Did We ever send them a book
containing proofs for their erroneous belief in determinism?"***
**(43:20-21)**

By contrast with the determinists, the messengers of God and the
followers of heavenly teachings have been concerned not with the
preservation of the status quo but with the overthrow of traditions and
looking toward the future.

The Noble Qur’an promises mankind ultimate victory in its struggle
against tyrants and emphasizes that the final government to rule upon
the earth will be the government of justice; falsehood will vanish and
the final outcome of all affairs will belong to the God fearing. This is
the promise of the Qur’an:

***"It is Our will that We show favor to those who have been oppressed
throughout history by making them leaders and the inheritors of the
earth."*** **(28:5)**

***"God promises those among you who believe and do good deeds that He
will make you viceregents on earth, that He will firmly establish the
religion He has chosen for you, and that He will bestow on all the
believers safety after their fear of the enemy this, in order that you
might worship Me alone and not ascribe to Me any partners."***
**(24:55)**

***"We made the people who had been oppressed to inherit the blessed and
promised land. Thus did the favor of God to the Children of Israel reach
its full measure, and as a reward for their patience in enduring
hardship We destroyed Pharaoh and his people together with an they had
wrought."*** **(7:137)**

So the Qur’an depicts an opposition between belief and unbelief, between
the deprived and the tyrannical, and it tells us that the world is
moving toward the triumph of truth over falsehood, of the deprived over
their oppressors; a revolutionary movement is underway that is in
harmony with the motion of all creation toward perfection.

The call of the Prophets, reward and punishment, paradise and hellfire
all these prove that man has duties and responsibilities, and the Qur’an
accordingly links man's salvation in this world and the hereafter to his
deeds.

According to the doctrine of fate and destiny, man is free and
responsible for his own destiny and in control of it. Fate and destiny
are, indeed, at work if one people is powerful and another, wretched and
humble, if one community is triumphant and proud, and another, defeated
and humble.

This is only because fate and destiny determine that one people make use
of the means of progress and advancement and walk on the path of honor
and dignity, while another chooses self-indulgence and indifference, and
can expect nothing but defeat, humiliation and wretchedness. The Qur’an
clearly states:

***"God never changes the state of a people until they themselves change
their own situation."*** **(8:53)**

No doubt it may happen that our wishes are not fulfilled as we expect,
but this does not in any way prove that man is compelled and determined
in his acts. The fact that the scope of man's volitional acts is limited
does not in any way contradict his definite possession of free will; to
assert that man has free will in no way implies that his free will is
unlimited.

God has set numerous factors to work throughout the vast expanse of
being. Sometimes these factors, together with the phenomena in which
they result, are evident to man, and some- times they are not. A careful
and realistic interpretation of the concept of fate and destiny will
inspire man to strive harder to know and to recognize all of those
factors, so that by taking them into account, he can aspire to still
greater accomplishments.

It is precisely because of the limitations of man's capacities that he
is unable to acquire all the factors needed for success so that his
wishes and desires remain unfulfilled.

In accordance with the general principle of causality, the destiny of
every being is tied to the causes that precede it. Whether one accepts
the existence of a divine principle or not has no bearing on the
question of the freedom and destiny of man, because one may either
attribute the system of cause and effect to the will of God, or assume
that it is independent and has no connection to a divine principle.

This being the case, it can also not be maintained that determinism
results from belief in the doctrine of fate and destiny. What we mean by
destiny is the inseparable link of every phenomenon with its causes,
including the will and choice of man; we are certainly not denying
causality.

Fate and destiny bring forth the existence of every phenomenon by means
of its particular cause. The divine will rules over the entire world as
a universal principle and law. Any change that takes place is also on
the basis of a divine custom or norm. Were this not to be the case, fate
and destiny would never have any external expression.

Any scientific school of thought that accepts the principle of universal
causality is obliged to accept the reality of the relations between a
phenomenon and its cause, whether it is theistic or materialistic in its
outlook.

Now, if a definite link between the occurrence of a phenomenon including
human acts and its causes leads to man being an automaton, predetermined
in his acts, both theism and materialism are open to objection, insofar
as they both accept causality. But if it does not lead to that
conclusion (as indeed It should not), the question still arises: what is
the difference, in this respect, between theism and materialism?

\*\*\*\*\*

The difference is that the theistic worldview, in contrast with that of
materialism, regards ideal and non-material factors as fully capable of
exerting an effect. Those factors are, indeed, more subtle and complex
in the web of creation than are material factors.

The worldview based on belief in God gives spirit, aim and meaning to
life It bestows on man courage, vitality, breadth of vision, profundity
of insight, and strength of mind; prevents him from falling into the
abyss of purposelessness; and bears him upward in an unending arc of
ascent.

So, a believer in God who is firmly convinced of fate and destiny, who
perceives that there are wise purposes at work in the creation of man
and the universe, will advance on the straight path through his reliance
on God; knowing himself to be supported and protected by God, he will be
more confident and hopeful of the results of his activity.

But one who is caught up in the worldview of materialism, whose mental
framework inclines him to belief in a material fate and destiny, enjoys
none of these advantages. He is deprived of a sure and invincible
support in striving to attain his goals.

It is, then, obvious that there is a profound difference between the two
schools of thought as far as their social and psychological effects are
concerned.

Anatole France says: "It is the beneficial effect of religion that
teaches man the reason for his existence and the consequence of his
deeds. Once we reject the principles of theistic philosophy, as almost
all of now do in this age of science and freedom, we no longer have any
means of knowing why we came into this world and what we are meant to
accomplish after setting foot in this world.

"The mystery of destiny has enveloped us with its powerful secrets, and
if we wish completely to avoid experiencing the sorrowful ambiguity of
life, we must not think at all. For the root of our sorrow lies in our
complete ignorance of the reason for our existence. Physical and
spiritual pain, torment of the soul and the senses all would be bearable
if we knew the reason for them and believed God to have willed them.

"The true believer takes pleasure in the spiritual torment he endures.
Even the sins he commits do not rob him of hope. But in a world where
the ray of faith has been extinguished, pain and sickness lose their
meaning and become ugly jokes, a form of sinister ridicule."


