Lesson 21: An Improper Interpretation of Faith and Destiny
==========================================================

Some pseudo-intellectuals have erroneous ideas about fate and destiny
and imagine that this doctrine causes stagnation and inactivity,
restraining man from all forms of effort to improve his life.

The source of this notion in the West is a of adequate understanding of
the concept, particularly as it is expounded in Islamic teachings. In
the East, it has gained influence because of decline and backwardness.

It is fairly well-known that whenever individuals or historical
communities fail to reach its goals and ideals, for whatever reason,
they console themselves with words such as 'luck "accident," "destiny,"
"fate."

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, expressed
himself eloquently on this matter An age will come for the people of my
community when they will commit sin and inequity, and in order to
justify their corruption and pollution, they will say: 'God's fate and
destiny decreed that we act thus.' If you encounter such people, tell
them I disown them.

Belief in fate and destiny does not prevent man from striving to reach
his goals in life. As those who have the necessary religious knowledge
realize, Islam calls on human beings to strive to the utmost in
improving their lives, both morally and materially. This is, in itself,
a powerful factor in intensifying the efforts man makes.

One of the Western thinkers who has an inadequate understanding of fate
and destiny is Jean-Paul Sartre. He imagines it is impossible
simultaneously to believe in a fate and destiny determined by God and in
the freedom of man, and that it is, therefore, necessary to choose
either belief in God or the freedom of man: Because I believe in
freedom, I cannot believe in God, because if I believe in God, I will
have to accept the concept of fate, and if I accept fate, I will have to
renounce freedom. Since I am attached to freedom, I do not believe in
God.

However, there is no contradiction between belief in fate, on the one
hand, and the freedom of man, on the other. While regarding God's will
to be universal in scope, the Noble Qur’an also ascribes a free and
active role to man, describing him as capable of consciously fashioning
his own destiny with a knowledge of good and bad, ugly and beautiful,
and the capacity to choose between them.

***We have shown the path to man, and he is free to choose the right
path and be thankful or to choose the path of ingratitude.*** **(76:3)**

 ***Whoever wishes for the eternal abode and strives for it as needed
will find his efforts rewarded.*** **(17:19)**

Those who on the Day of Judgment seek refuge in determinism and say:

 ***If*** ***God wished, we would not worship other than Him***
**(16:35)**

are rebuked for attributing their own sinfulness and error to divine
will and fate.

In none of the verses of the Qur’an are the corrupt and evil deeds of
individuals or societies attributed to fate and destiny. Equally, fate
and destiny are not depicted as obstacles to a corrupt and polluted
society's reforming itself. Not a single verse can be found in which
God's will has supplanted man's will, or in which it is said that men
started to suffer because of fate and destiny.

The Qur’an repeatedly mentions the wrath of God that will overtake the
tyrannical and corrupt, bringing painful punishment in its wake.

Since God is extremely loving and merciful to His servants, having
bestowed countless bounties on them, and is, at the same time, clement
and ready to accept repentance, He always keeps open for the sinner the
path of return to purity and rectitude. God's acceptance of repentance
is, in itself, a great instance of His mercy.

Although the scope of man's will is greater and more extensive than that
of all other known living creatures and plays a more creative role, his
will has effect only in areas delimited for his activity and deeds by
God. He cannot, therefore, accomplish everything he wants throughout his
life.

It often happens that man decides to do something but however hard he
tries, he is unable to accomplish it. The reason for this is not that
God's will opposes itself to man's will and prevents him from doing what
he wishes. It is rather that in such cases some unknown external factor
which lies beyond the scope of man's knowledge and control creates
obstacles in his way and prevents him from attaining his goals.

Both individuals and societies constantly encounter such obstacles.
Considering the fact that in the natural realm there is no cause without
an effect and no effect without a cause, and that our means of
perception are limited to this world and to the human realm, it should
not be difficult for us to accept that our aspirations may not be
fulfilled as we desire.

God has set billions of factors to work in the order of being. Sometimes
those factors are apparent to man, at other times they remain unknown to
him and cannot be incorporated in his calculations. This, too, relates
to fate and destiny, but not only does it not result in depriving man of
free will or prevent him from striving to attain satisfaction in life;
it also guides him in both thought and activity and imbues the very
depths of his being with greater vitality. He seeks to augment his
knowledge and identify, as precisely as possible, the factors that pave
the way for attaining greater success in life. Belief in fate and
destiny is then a potent factor in advancing man toward his aims and
ideals.

\*\*\*\*\*

The question of the salvation or damnation of man is implicitly solved
in the preceding discussion, since salvation and damnation arise from
the deeds and acts of men, not from matters that lie beyond their will
or from natural phenomena that have been implanted in human existence by
the Creator.

Neither environmental and hereditary factors nor the natural capacities
present in man have any effect on man's salvation or damnation; they
cannot fashion his destiny. That which fixes man's future, is the axis
on which his salvation or damnation turns and the of his ascent or
descent, is the degree to which man, as a being endowed with choice,
makes proper use of his intellect and knowledge and other powers.

Happiness and salvation do not depend on an abundance of natural
capacities. It is, however, true that the one who has greater capacities
than others also bears greater responsibilities. A slight error on his
part is far more significant than a similar error on the part of a weak
and powerless individual. Everyone will be called to account in
accordance with the talents and capacities he possesses.

It is entirely possible that a person whose innate capacities and
resources are slight should order his life in accordance with the duties
and responsibilities that have been imposed on him and reach that true
happiness which alone is worthy of the lofty station of man. What will
enable him to achieve that result is the intensity of his efforts he
expends in order to make correct use of the limited capacities he has
been given.

Conversely, one who has been given abundant inward resources and
capacities, not only may not use them to benefit himself, he may
actually misuse them to trample on his own human dignity; and cast
himself into the swamp of corruption and sin. Such a person is, without
a doubt, a sinner destined to damnation and will never catch a glimpse
of salvation. The Qur’an says:

***Every soul will be held in pledge for what it has acquired.***
**(74:38)**

Hence, the salvation or damnation of a person is dependent on the
volitional acts, not on his natural or psychological make-up. This is
the clearest manifestation of God's justice.

\*\*\*\*\*

One of the characteristic doctrines of Shi'ism is bada', a term meaning
that men's destinies change when the factors and causes regulating them
change: what appears to be eternal and immutable changes in accordance
with a change in man's conduct and acts. Just as material factors can
reshape a man's destiny, non-material factors may also elicit new
phenomena.

It is possible that such non-material factors may make apparent what is
hidden and contrary to the apparent course of affairs. In fact, through
a change in causes and circumstances, God will decree that a new
phenomenon will appear, more beneficial than the phenomenon it has
replaced. This is comparable to the principle of abrogation in revealed
law. If an earlier law is abrogated in favor of another, this does not
indicate ignorance or regret on the part of the divine lawgiver, but
only that the validity of the abrogated law has expired.

We cannot interpret the concept of bada in the sense of God changing His
mind after the reality of something previously unknown to him becomes
known to Him. This would contradict the principle of the universality of
God's knowledge and so it cannot be accepted by any Muslim.

\*\*\*\*\*

Recommended (*Nawafil*) prayer is another factor, the effectiveness of
which should not be belittled. It is obvious that God is aware of the
innermost secrets of everyone, but in man's relationship with God,
*Nawafil* prayer plays the same role as man's efforts and acts in his
relationship with nature. Quite apart from its psychological effect,
prayer exercises an independent effect.

Every instant new phenomena appear in nature in the emergence of which
preceding causes play a role. Likewise, in one great sphere of
existence, *Nawafil* prayer is profoundly effective in advancing man
toward his goals. In just the same way that God has assigned a role in
the system of causality to each of the natural elements, so, too, He has
assigned an important role to *Nawafil* prayer.

When a person is besieged by difficulties, he must not fall into
hopelessness and despair. The doors of God's mercy are never closed to
anyone. It maybe that tomorrow a new situation emerges in no wise
corresponding to what he had anticipated. For, as the Qur’an says:

***Each day God is engaged in a different affair.*** **(55:29)**

One should, therefore, never relinquish one's efforts. A *Nawafil*
prayer that is not joined to appropriate efforts is, as the Master of
the God fearing, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, has said, Like a person who
wishes to loose an arrow from a bow without a string.

While making continuous efforts, one should place one's desires before
God, in hope and sincerity, and seek aid with one's whole being from
that source of infinite power. God will then certainly take one by the
hand and aid him. The Qur’an says:

***When My servants ask you whether I am far from them, distant or near,
let them know that I am near to them. Whoever calls upon Me, I shall
answer him and fulfill his prayer. Let them hearken to My call and
believe in Me in order to attain happiness.*** **(2:186)**

Man's spirit will ascend toward God and immerse him in true happiness
when he avoids the pitfall of neediness by severing himself from all
causes and turning directly to God. He will then see himself linked
directly to God's essence and palpably feel His infinite favor and
grace.

Imam Sajjad, peace be upon him, addresses God as follows in the prayer
known as the Prayer of Abu Hamza: O Creator! I see the paths of request
and petition leading to You open and smooth and the sources of hope in
You abundant. I see it permissible to request aid from Your favor and
mercy, and I see the gates of prayer open to all who call upon You and
beg for Your aid . I am certain that You are prepared to answer the
prayer of those who call upon You and to grant refuge to those who seek
it with You.[^1]

There is also a tradition concerning the effects of sin and good deeds:
“Those who die on account of sin are more numerous than those who die on
account of natural death, and those who live on account of performing
good deeds are more numerous than those who live on account of their
natural life span.”[^2]

It was the effect of prayer that enabled Zakariya, a true Prophet who
had despaired of having a child, to attain his desire; it was the effect
of repentance that saved the Prophet Yunus and his people from disaster
and annihilation.

The laws that the great Creator has implanted in the system of the
universe do not in any way limit His infinite power or lessen its scope.
He has the same absolute discretion in changing those laws, in
confirming or abrogating their effects, as He did in establishing them.

That Unique Essence, Whose careful and comprehensive supervision covers
the whole system of being, can hardly be helplessly subject to laws and
phenomena He Himself has created, or lose the power and capacity to do
whatsoever He wills.

When we say that God is able at any instant to change the phenomena He
has created in the world, we do not mean that He destroys the order of
the world and its fixed regulations or overturns the laws and principles
of nature.

The very process of change takes place in accordance with certain
unknown principles and criteria that escape our limited perception and
cognition.

If man looks carefully and critically at the matter and takes into
consideration the wide range of possibilities with which he is
confronted, it will prevent him from ambitiously attempting to predict
all things on the basis of those few principles which he has been able
to observe in the natural realm.

[^1]: Mafatih al-Jinan, p. 185.

[^2]: Safinat al-Bihar, I, p.488.


