Lesson 2: The Depth of Mans being Impel Him to Seek God
=======================================================

Outside the complex system of his body, man has vast and vital
dimensions that are not in any way confined by his bodily mechanism. In
order to discover those aspects and planes that are beyond the bodily
structure and physical dimension of man, one must search out the inward
and spiritual structures of man and perceive the broad horizons of his
comprehensive nature, together with the delicate and refined
manifestations of his feelings and instincts.

\*\*\*\*\*

A series of special modes of perception exist in man's being that are
rooted in themselves, arise from the very stuff of man's nature, and do
not owe their emergence to any external factor. Among these perceptions
are the sense of commitment to trust, justice, veracity and honesty.

Before he enters the realm of science and knowledge with all its
concerns, man is able to perceive certain truths by means of these
innate perceptions. But after entering the sphere of science and
philosophy and filling his brain with various proofs and deductions, he
may forget his natural and innate perceptions or begin to doubt them. It
is for this reason that when man moves beyond his innate nature to
delineate a belief, differences begin to appear.

Inclination to religion and belief in God, draw, in their initial
stages, on instinctive motives and innate perceptions, but then they
develop and evolve with the help of ratiocination and reflection.

The roots of innate feeling in the disposition of man are so deep and,
at the same time, so clear and evident that if a person purges his mind
and his spirit both of religious concepts and of anti religious thoughts
and then looks at himself and at the world of being, he will clearly see
that he is moving in a certain direction together with the whole caravan
of being.

Without any desire or will on his part, he begins his life at a certain
point, and again without willing it, he advances toward another point,
one which is unknown to him. The same reality can be observed in all
natural creatures, operating in a precise and orderly way.

If a clear-sighted man, still in the state of nature, looks at the
circumstances surrounding him, he will distinctly feel the existence of
a great force that encompasses him and the whole world. In his own
being, which is an extremely small part of the great world, he will see
knowledge, power and will to exist, and he will ask himself how
knowledge, power and will could not exist in the world as a whole.

It is the finely calculated order and motion of the world that compels
man to accept the existence of a universal intellect that, lying beyond
the world of nature, nonetheless designs and commands it; unless this be
accepted, the orderliness of the world cannot be explained. Anyone
assessing his position in the world can perceive that there is a power
which creates him, brings him here, inspires motion in him, and then
removes him again, without his permission or assistance being sought for
any of this.

The Commander of the Martyrs, Husayn b. â€˜Ali, may peace be upon both of
them, said in his intimate supplications to the Creator:

"How is it possible to deduce Your existence from a thing which depends
upon You for its very being? Why do You not possess that manifestness
that other-than-You possesses, so that it might make You evident? When
were You ever hidden from the inward eye so that You might need proofs
as a guide to You? When were You ever distant from us so that Your
traces and signs might draw us nigh to You? Blind be the eye that does
not see You watching over and guarding it!

"O God, You Who have manifested Yourself to us with Your splendor, how
can You be hidden when You are manifest and evident? How can You be
absent when with Your unceasing manifestation You watch over Your
Servants?"[^1]

Nowhere and at no time has a thing made without a maker been seen, nor a
deed without a doer. The search for the link between cause and effect
arises from an inward instinct in man; awareness of causality cannot be
removed from anyone.

Likewise, the religious feeling, the search for a Creator, can also not
be removed from anyone. Even a child with no experience of the world,
whenever he hears a sound or observes a motion, will instinctively turn
his attention to the origin of the sound or the motion.

The foundations both of practical life and of knowledge rest upon the
acceptance of a cause for every effect. The norm of causality is, in
fact, an absolute one which admits of no exceptions. Geology, physics,
chemistry, sociology, economics, in these and other sciences, research
has the purpose of specifying the causes and factors that determine
relationships.

In short, it is clear that science and knowledge are nothing other than
the search for causes; all progress and advancement in human affairs
result from the investigations carried out by scholars into the causes
of phenomena.

Were it to be possible for us to find in a single being or corner of the
universe a sign of absolute self-origination or creativity, we would be
justified in extending that one instance to the whole scheme of being.

Of course, it is not necessary that the law of causality should always
manifest itself to us in familiar forms. The variety and multiplicity of
causes is such that an investigator concerned with only one phenomenon
might not be able to specify all the causes. However, in all the affairs
of mankind, particular and general, past and future, in the
circumstances of the individual or of society, not a single point can be
found that is accidental.

Not only is there a particular order inherent in the creation of each
separate phenomenon; there is also observable in the relationship of
every phenomenon with other phenomena, as well as the relationship of
each phenomenon with the environment within which it exists, a subtle
and finely calculated order.

For example, in the cultivation of a tree, the laws of the heavens and
the earth operate in perfect harmony with the structure of its roots and
branches. There is also a relationship of animals with that tree insofar
as they draw nourishment from it. How is it possible that accident
should lie at the origin of such orderly relationships?

If a phenomenon were to take shape at a certain level in the structure
of being, unconsciously and on the basis of chance, this would furnish
an excellent groundwork for the disappearance and destruction of the
world.

For the slightest disruption in the balance of elements and the smallest
disharmony in the radiant laws of the universe would be enough to make
things lose their moorings and the heavenly bodies collide, resulting in
a massive explosion and the destruction of the world.

If the origin of the world were based on accident, why are the theories
even of the materialists based on the supposition of a plan, an
ordering, an absence of chance? If the whole world is the result of
chance and accident, what is it that did not emerge on the basis of
chance? If an existent thing came into being not by virtue of chance,
what are its distinguishing features and characteristics and can they be
applied to the numerous and variegated phenomena of the universe?

Now since accident is opposed to order and harmony, it follows that
whatever bears traces of planning, design and calculation should be
disharmonious and discontinuous, because the concepts of planning,
design and calculation are opposed to accident and chance.

To suppose that accident is the infrastructure of the universe and its
governing principle does not rest on any logical proof or scientific
evidence cannot be accepted as a definitive solution to the geometry of
the structure of being.

When the experimental sciences demonstrate that the elements and natural
factors cannot exert any independent influence and do not possess any
creativity; when all of our experiences, our sensory feelings, and our
rational deductions point to the conclusion that nothing occurs in
nature without a reason and cause and that all phenomena are based on an
established system and specific laws, when all of this is the case, it
is surprising that some people turn their backs on scientific
principles, primary deductions and propositions based on reflection, and
deny the existence of the Creator.

Education and environmental factors are among the causes that either
prevent man's innate perceptions from displaying themselves, or, on the
contrary, reinforce them. Whatever displays itself from the source of
instinct resembles in its orderliness the patterns of nature.

Those who have been left free to follow the original course of their
creation without being imprisoned by habit and whose inner nature has
not been colored by words and expressions, are better able to hear the
summons of their inner being and to distinguish good deeds from bad and
true beliefs from false.

Irreligion, which is, in fact, a turning away from original nature, is,
therefore, rarely to be seen among such individuals. If someone tells
them that the world has no indwelling order and that it is the offspring
of chance, decking out his words in philosophical terminology, he will
have no effect on such people, because they will reject his theories by
virtue of their own original nature.

Those who are caught up in the webs of science may fall prey to doubt
and confusion as a result of alluring terminology. The limited knowledge
that inspires arrogance in man is like a piece of colored glass placed
in front of the aperture of the intellect and the original nature;
whoever possesses this knowledge sees the world tinged with the color of
his learning and art.

He imagines that the entirety of reality is what he sees through the
narrow aperture of his senses and intellect that are a prey to color. Of
course, we do not mean that man should refrain from developing his
intellect in order to safeguard himself against illusion. However, he
should not be limited by or take pride in his limited knowledge and art.

Most people, instead of making their learning and knowledge a ladder for
the ascent of their intellect in order to raise themselves to a higher
level, remain stationary and imprisoned within the four walls of
concepts and terms.

Man's original nature, once it senses danger, rushes to his aid. When a
person is pressed by hardship and overwhelming problems, when material
factors turn their back on him, when he has no access to any of the
resources of life and is drowning like a straw in a maelstrom of
vicissitudes and death is but one step awayâ€”then an inward motive guides
him instinctively to a non-material source of support.

He seeks aid from one whose power is superior to all powers, and he
understands that it is that compassionate and all-powerful Being who can
succor him with His extraordinary power and save him. Because of his
perception, with all of his strength he seeks the aid of that most
sacred being to save him from danger, and in the sanctum of his heart,
he feels the power and strength of that being at work for his salvation.

Once someone asked Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, to guide him
toward the Lord, saying that he had been confused by the words of the
polemicists. The Imam asked, "Have you ever traveled by ship?"

He answered, "Yes."  
 The Imam: "Did it every happen that the ship sprang a leak and there
was nobody to save you from drowning in the tempestuous waves of the
ocean?"  
 "Yes."

The Imam: "At that dangerous moment and in that state of despair, did
you have the feeling that an infinite and almighty power might save you
from your terrible fate?"  
 "Yes, that's the way it was."

The Imam: "It is God Almighty Who is the source of reliance and toward
Whom men look with hope when all doors are closed.-"[^2]

Even rebellious and materialistic men of power who are oblivious to the
eternal power of God when they enjoy dominion, change when they fall
into the trap of defeat and destruction. They forget the denial of God
that their environment and materialist schools of thought had inculcated
in them and they wholeheartedly turn to the origin of all beings and the
source of all strength.

History records numerous examples of such persons who fell victim to
difficult and trying circumstances so that the dust of pollution was
suddenly removed from their original natures and from the depths of
their souls they turned toward the peerless Creator.

In addition to the inner resources that are innate in man's being and
help him to discover reality so that free from all mental constructs and
constraints he advances on the path of his original nature, the external
factor of guidance and admonition is also necessary to show him the way
and to reinforce his original nature. It is guidance that reforms
rebellious qualities and protects the intellect and original nature from
perversion and obedience to false gods.

The Prophets were sent to make men aware of the subtle perceptions of
their original nature, to make their godly inclinations flow in their
proper course, and to give wings to their lofty aspirations.

The Commander of the Believers, Imam â€˜â€˜Ali, upon whom be peace, said,
"God sent His Messengers among men so they might question them
concerning their covenant with God, recall to them the forgotten
bounties of God, speak to them by way of admonition, arouse in them
hidden wisdom, and display to them the signs of God's power."[^3]

Such guidance and admonition do not in any way imply extinguishing the
light of man's creative will or depriving him of his freedom and ability
to think and to choose. It is, on the contrary, a kind of assistance to
his positive inclinations and instincts enabling them to grow and
develop. It is through guidance and admonition that men are freed of
their bonds and enabled to profit from all the dimensions of their
original nature and to flourish with all of their beings.

The Qurâ€™an says:

***"The Prophet removes all arduous rules and customs that men had
placed on their necks like chains. So those who believe in him, respect
him and aid him, who follow the light that has been revealed to him,
they are, in truth, those who are saved in this world."*** **(7:157)**

***"O you who believe, respond and obey when God and the Messenger
summon you to life-giving commands."*** **(8:24)**

***"O mankind, in truth an admonition has come to you from your Lord and
a healing cure for the sicknesses of your soul."*** **(10:57)**

The first people who accepted the summons of the Prophets were men of
pure hearts and enlightened consciences. The ranks of their opponents
consisted of those who relied on their illusory power and wealth or were
filled with pride on account of their paltry knowledge and deficient,
illusion-tainted intellects, in such a way that their groundless
arrogance prevented their inner capacities and aspirations from
flourishing.

A certain scholar has put it thus: "In spiritual matters, too, the law
of supply and demand prevails. If the demand for religion did not exist
in man's nature, the supply provided by the Prophets would be wasted. We
see that the supply provided by the Prophets did find customers; their
fertile, unclouded and authentic visions found numerous followers and
supporters. This is proof that the demand for religion exists within man
and his innermost consciousness."

In fact, the basic preaching of all the Prophets was a call to
monotheism, not a proof of the existence of God. They negated the
worthiness of idols, of the sun, the moon and the stars, to be
worshipped, so that man's inner and natural thirst for worship should
not be satisfied by recourse to external objects such as these and they
might, instead, seek all their aims and values in a firm arc ascending
to the true object of worship.[^4]

Their hearts should be attached to infinite perfection, and with such a
faith ever ascending, they should constantly advance toward the source
of all values and virtues, finally reaching their aim.

All varieties of polytheism and irreligion, the primitive form that is
idolatry and the advanced form that is materialism, are the result of
turning away from innate nature.

The progress of knowledge concerning religious experience which is
taking place all over the world has resulted in discoveries that permit
certain important conclusions to be drawn.

Based on the considerable data collected by sociologists, archaeologists
and anthropologists, the history of religions now analyzes the religious
instinct, together with the institutions, beliefs, customs and the
factors that shape society, in a new way that is largely at variance
with the explanations previously given.

There is now a current of thought that is constantly winning new
adherents from various schools of thought to the effect that the
religious feeling is a primary, natural and stable component of the
human spirit and that it is an innate means of perceiving the
supra-rational.

In about 1920, a German philosopher by the name of Rudolf Otto was able
to prove that parallel to the intellectual and ethical elements in man,
there are also innate, supra-rational elements that constitute the
religious feeling. Attributes concerning God such as power, greatness
and transcendence have the purpose of emphasizing that sanctity cannot
be reduced to any other concept. It is an independent category that
cannot be derived from any other category and cannot be identified with
any other concept, rational or otherwise.

One of the peculiarities of the present age is, in fact, the search for
a fourth dimension in the world of nature called "time." Like the other
dimensions, it must be intermingled with bodies, and, therefore, no body
exists in the world free from the time which arises from motion and
change.

It is likewise a characteristic of the age that the researches of
scholars have led to the discovery of a "fourth dimension" of the human
spirit, the religious feeling.[^5]

The other three dimensions or feelings consist of the sense of
curiosity, the sense of virtue, and the sense of beauty. The religious
sense, or the concept of the sacred, is the fourth dimension and the
most basic of senses. Everyone has innately an attraction and
inclination to what lies beyond nature, separately and independently
from the other three senses.

With the discovery of the religious sense, the three dimensional prison
of his spirit collapsed and it was proven that man's religious
inclinations are autonomously rooted in his being. They showed
themselves even in ages when men were living in forests and caves.

Despite the primacy, autonomy and effectiveness of the senses of
curiosity, virtue and beauty and the role they played in the emergence
of science, morality and art, it was the religious sense that prepared
the ground for the activity of these three senses, helping them to
advance on their path and to discover the secrets of the created world.

From the viewpoint of a believer, the world has been designed on the
basis of laws and a precise, well-calculated plan. This belief in an
ordaining, wise God stimulates the sense of curiosity to seek out and
discover the laws and mysteries of nature that are based on a chain of
cause and effect.

The role of the religious sense in the development and advancement of
man's lofty qualities, in modifying his instincts and fructifying his
sense of morality and virtue, is undeniable. Those who follow the
dictates of religion regard it as one of their most important religious
duties to control their instincts and to acquire outstanding, lofty
attributes.

Religious thought has also been a factor throughout history in
cultivating the aesthetic sense. Primitive men produced their most
creative works of art in order to glorify their gods. The remarkable
temples of China, the great pyramids of Egypt, the distinctive statues
of Mexico, the refined and astounding architecture of the Islamic East
all these drew on the religious sense.

Psychologists believe that there is a connection between the crisis of
maturity and the sudden emergence of religious feelings. In this period
of life, even in persons who had previously been indifferent to
religious matters, the religious sense takes on a special intensity.

There is no doubt that inward summons manifest themselves in such a way
that no obstacle can block their path. However, certain factors such as
contrary propaganda can decrease the growth and development of inward
feeling and correct thought, although such negative influences cannot
result in the complete uprooting of natural tendencies. If such
hindrances are removed, sound instincts resume their activity and
display themselves by means of their inward creative effort.

We know that more than half a century has passed since the communist
revolution of the Soviet Union, but the roots of religion are still
alive deep in the souls of many of the Soviet people. Despite all the
efforts that have been made over this long period by the rulers to
obliterate religion, they have been unable to remove the religious sense
from the masses.

The existence of materialist ideas in the world does not, therefore,
contradict the fact that belief in God is natural to man. If a certain
school leaves the path of original nature, thereby making an exception
of itself vis-Ã -vis other schools, both in the present world and in past
times, this cannot be regarded as disproving the contention that belief
in God is natural to man; exceptions exist in all spheres. What history
shows is that the materialist school was founded in the sixth and
seventh centuries before Christ.

[^1]: Du'a â€˜Arafa in Mafatih al-Jinan, p. 265.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, III, p.41.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah., ed. Subhi Salih, p. 43.

[^4]: There is a clear reference to this matter in the following words
of Imam Sajjad, upon whom be peace: "Pure and exalted are You, O Lord,
Who knows the weight of the heavens! Pure and exalted are You, O Lord,
Who knows the weight of the earth! Pure and exalted are You, O Lord, Who
knows the weight of the darkness and the light! Pure and exalted are
You, O Lord, Who knows the weight of the shade and air!" (Sahifa-yi
Saniya, prayer 55).

[^5]: Hiss-i-Dini, translated by Engineer Bayani.


