Lesson 4: Belief in the Reality of the Unseen Involves More than God
====================================================================

One of the characteristics of the unique God to the knowledge and
worship of Whom Prophets and religious leaders summon us is that He is
utterly inaccessible to sense perception. In addition, He possesses the
attributes of pre-eternity and post-eternity. Existing everywhere, He is
nowhere. Throughout the world of nature and sensory being His
manifestations have an objective existence and His will is everywhere
manifest in the world of being, all the phenomena of nature declaring
the power of that wise Essence.

Of course, such a being that man cannot perceive with his senses, that
is not in any way colored by materiality, and that does not correspond
to our normal experience and observation, is extremely difficult for us
to imagine. Once the existence of a thing is difficult to imagine, it
becomes easy to deny it.

Those who want to solve the question of existence of God within the
framework of their own intellectual limitations and narrowness of vision
ask how it is possible to believe in an unseen being. They overlook the
fact that sense perception, being limited, can help man to know and
perceive only one mode of being; it cannot discover other modes of being
and penetrate all the dimensions of existence.

Sensory organs do not permit us to advance a single step beyond the
outer aspects of phenomena, in just the same way that the empirical
sciences cannot carry human thought beyond the boundaries of the
supra-sensory.

If man, through the application of scientific instruments and criteria,
cannot perceive the existence of a thing, he cannot deny its existence
simply because it is incompatible with material criteria, unless he
disposes of some proof that the thing in question is impossible.

We discover the existence of an objective law from within the totality
of phenomena that t it is capable of interpreting. If, then, the
establishment of scientific truth is possible only by means of direct
sensation, the majority of scientific truths will have to be discarded,
since many scientific facts cannot be perceived by means of sensory
experience or testing.

\*\*\*\*\*

As far as the realities of the material world are concerned, no rational
person will commonly regard his not seeing or not sensing a given thing
in his everyday life as grounds enough to deny it. He will not condemn
as non-existent whatever fails to enter the sphere of his sense
perception. This same will hold true a fortiori of nonmaterial
realities.

When we are unable to establish the cause of something in a scientific
experiment, this does not lead us to deny the law of causality. We say
only that the cause is unknown to us because the law is independent of a
given experiment; no experiment can lead to the negation of causality.

Is it not true that all the things we accept and believe to exist have
an existence belonging to the same category as our own or as things that
are visible to us? Can we see or feel everything in this material world?
Is it only God we cannot see with our senses?

All materialists are aware that many of the things known to us consist
of matters and realities that we cannot sense and with which we are not
customarily familiar. There are many invisible beings in the universe.
The progress of science and knowledge in the present age have uncovered
numerous truths of this kind, and one of the richest chapters in
scientific research is the transformation of matter into energy.

When the beings and bodies that are visible in this world wish to
produce energy, they are compelled to change their original aspect and
transform it into energy. Now is this energy—the axis on which turn many
of the motions and changes of the universe— visible or tangible?

We know that energy is a source of power, but the essence of energy
still remains a mystery. Take electricity on which so much of our
science, civilization and life depend. No physicist in his laboratory—or
anyone else, for that matter, dealing with electrical tools and
appliances—can see electricity itself or feel and touch its weight or
softness. No one can directly perceive the passage of electricity
through a wire; he can only perceive the existence of a current by using
the necessary equipment.

Modern physics tells us that the things of which we have sense
perception are firm, solid and stable, and there is no visible energy in
their motions. But despite outward appearances, what we, in fact, see
and perceive is a mass of atoms that are neither firm nor solid nor
stable; all things are nothing other than transformation, change and
motion.

What our sense organs imagine to be stable and motionless lack all
stability and permanence and immobility; motion, change and development
embrace them all, without this being perceptible to us by way of direct
sensory observation.

The air that surrounds us has a considerable weight and exerts a
constant pressure on the body; everyone bears a pressure of 16,000
kilograms of air. But we do not feel any discomfort because the pressure
of the air is neutralized by the inward pressure of the body. This
established scientific fact was unknown until the time of Galileo and
Pascal, and even now our senses cannot perceive it.

The attributes assigned to natural factors by scientists on the basis of
sensory experiments and rational deductions cannot be directly
perceived. For example, radio waves are present everywhere and yet
nowhere. There is no locus that is free of the attractive force of some
material body, but this in no way detracts from its existence or lessens
its substance.

Concepts such as justice, beauty, love, hatred, enmity, wisdom, that
make up our mental universe, do not have a visible and clear-cut
existence or the slightest physical aspect; nonetheless, we regard them
as realities. Man does not know the essence of electricity, of radio
waves, or energy, of electrons and neutrons; he perceives their
existence only through their results and effects.

\*\*\*\*\*

Life very clearly exists; we cannot possibly deny it. But how can we
measure it, and by what means can we measure the speed of thought and
imagination?

From all this it is quite clear that to deny whatever lies beyond our
vision and hearing is contrary to logic and the conventional principles
of reason. Why do the deniers of God fail to apply the common principles
of science to the particular question of the existence of a power ruling
over nature?

A certain materialist of Egypt went to Mecca in order to engage in
debate, and there he met Imam as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace. The Imam
said, "Begin your questioning."  
 The Egyptian said nothing.  
 The Imam: "Do you accept that the earth has an above and a below?"  
 The Egyptian: "Yes."  
 The Imam: "So how do you know what is below the earth?"

The Egyptian: "I do not know, but I think there is nothing below the
earth."  
 The Imam: "Imagining is a sign of impotence when confronted with what
you cannot be certain of. Now tell me, have you ever been up in the
skies?"  
 The Egyptian: "No."

The Imam: "How strange it is that you have not been to the West or to
the East, that you have not descended below the earth or flown up to the
heavens, or passed beyond them to know what lies there, but nonetheless
you deny what exists there. Would any wise man deny the reality of what
he is ignorant of? And you deny the existence of the Creator because you
cannot see him with your eyes."

The Egyptian: "No one talked to me before in this way."  
 The Imam: "So, in fact, you have doubts concerning the existence of
God; you think He may exist and He may not exist?"  
 The Egyptian: "Perhaps so."

The Imam: "O man, the hands of one who does not know are empty of all
proof; the ignorant can never possess any kind of evidence. Be well
aware that we never have any kind of doubt or hesitation concerning the
existence of God. Do you not see the sun and the moon, the day and the
night, regularly alternating and following a fixed course?

If they have any power of their own, let them depart from their course
and not return. Why do they constantly return? If they are free in their
alternation and rotation, why does the night not become day and the day
not become night? I swear by God that they have no free choice in their
motions; it is He Who causes these phenomena to follow a fixed course;
it is He Who commands them; and to Him alone belongs all greatness and
splendor."

The Egyptian: "You speak truly."  
 The Imam: "If you imagine that nature and time carry men forward, then
why do they not carry them backwards? And if they carry them backwards,
why do they not carry them forward?" "Know that the heavens and the
earth are subject to His Will Why do the heavens not collapse onto the
earth? Why are the layers of the earth not overturned and why do they
not mount up to the heavens? Why do those who live on the earth not
adhere to each other?"

The Egyptian: "God Who is the Lord and Master of the heavens and earth
protects them from collapse and destruction."  
 "The words of the Imam had now caused the light of faith to shine on
the heart of the Egyptian; he submitted to the truth and accepted
Islam."[^1]

Let us not forget that we are imprisoned in the framework of matter and
its dimensions; we cannot imagine an absolute being with our customary
habits of thought. If we tell a villager that a great and populous city
exists called London, he will conceive in his mind of some big village,
maybe ten times bigger than his own, and the same with respect to its
buildings, the way people dress, their way of life and dealings with
each other. He will assume that the characteristics of people everywhere
are the same as in his own village.

The only thing we can tell him to correct the unrealistic way he thinks
is that London is indeed a place of settlement, but not of the kind you
imagine, and its characteristics are not of the same kind you see in
your own village.

What we can say concerning God is that God exists, and that He possesses
life, power and knowledge, but His existence and knowledge and power are
not of the kind familiar to us. In this way we can, to some extent,
escape the restrictions placed on our understanding. For the
materialist, too, it is impossible to conceive of the essence of primary
matter.

Although it appears that sense objects are the things we know most
clearly and precisely, we cannot rely exclusively on such objects in
scientific and philosophical matters. Laying aside all fanatical
attitudes, we must assess the true nature of sense objects and the
degree to which they can aid men in uncovering the truth. Otherwise,
they will mislead us, because sense perception relates only to certain
qualities of the external aspect of sense objects. It cannot perceive
the totality of those qualities or the essence and mere substance of
sense objects, let alone non-sensing objects.

The eye that is the surest means for the perception of reality is, in
many cases, unable to show reality to us. It can observe lights only
when their wave length is not less than 4% microns and more than 8%
microns, and, therefore, it cannot see lights higher than violet or
lower than red. In addition, the errors made by sense perception form an
important section in books on psychology: the eye is known to commit
numerous errors.

The colors we recognize in the external world are, in fact, not colors.
They are vibrations on different wave lengths. Our visual sense
experiences have different wave lengths of light in accordance with its
own particular mechanism as colors. In other words, what we perceive by
means of our senses is limited by the structure and capacity of those
senses.

For example, the structure of the visual sense in certain animals such
as cows and cats causes them to see monotone external reality as
colored. From the viewpoint of scientific analysis, the nature of the
mechanism in man's visual sense that permits him to see colors is not
entirely clear and the theories put forward so far are all hypothetical.
The question of man's ability to see colors is obscure and complex.

In order to see how the sense of touch may be deceived, you can fill
three bowls with water: the first with very hot water, the second with
very cold water, and the third with lukewarm water. Then place one hand
in hot water and the other in cold water, and leave them there for a
time. Then place them both in lukewarm water, and you will see to your
great surprise that you experience contradictory sensations. One hand
will tell you that the lukewarm water is extremely cold, and the other
will proclaim that it is extremely hot. Of course, the water is one and
the same, and its temperature is known.

Now, reason and logic say that it is not possible for water to be both
cold and hot at the same time, to have two contradictory attributes. It
is the sense of touch that is at fault, having lost its self-control as
a result of the two bowls of water in which the hands were immersed.
What it feels is at variance with the truth, and reason and the mind
point out its error.

This being the case, how can we rely on sense perception without the
guidance of the intellect and mental criteria? Is there any way to
protect ourselves against the errors of sense perception other than
rational judgment?

Once someone asked the Commander of the Believers, upon whom be peace,
"Have you seen your Lord?"  
 He answered: "I will never worship a Lord whom I cannot see."  
 The man then asked: "How did you see him? Explain it to us."  
 He replied, "Woe upon you! No one has ever seen Him with the physical
eye, but hearts filled with the truth of faith have contemplated
Him."[^2]

It is then the judgment of reason that is entrusted with the task of
correcting the errors of sense perception, and the source of that
judgment lies beyond the sensory realm.

\*\*\*\*\*

Sense perception cannot, therefore, yield a realistic vision; its only
value is practical. Those who rely exclusively on sense perception in
their investigations will never be able to solve the problems of
existence and the riddle of creation.

From our assessment of the competence of sense perception, we reach the
conclusion that even in the empirical, sensory realm, it is unable to
bestow alone certain knowledge on man and to guide him to the truth. A
fortiori, the same is true of matters that are beyond sensory
perception.

The followers of metaphysics are convinced that in just the same way
that experiment and testing are the method of investigation and
cognition to be followed in the sensory sciences, it is intellection
that is the means of discovering the truth in metaphysical matters.

The Primality of the Life Principle
-----------------------------------

Science says it is life that creates life. The life of animate beings is
possible only by means of generation, procreation and the reproduction
of species. No single cell has yet been discovered that was born from
lifeless matter. Even the lowest forms of living being, such as fungi
and parasites, cannot come into existence and grow unless a cause that
itself partakes of life is to be found in its environment.

According to the testimony of science, the earth went through long
periods in which there was no possibility of life because of the extreme
heat prevailing. No vegetation was to be seen on the face of the planet
and there were no rivers or springs.

The atmosphere was full of molten metals and volcanic eruptions. Later,
when the crust of the earth began to cool, only inorganic matter could
be found there for millions of years. In short, throughout the
tumultuous changes that took place on the surface of the earth, there
was no trace of life on it. How, then, did life suddenly gush forth?

There is no doubt life came into being some time after the appearance of
the earth; how long that process took and how it came about is not
known.

For centuries researchers have been striving in their laboratories to
uncover the mystery of life, this truly remarkable phenomenon, but they
have not yet come any closer to solving the riddle.

One researcher writes in the book Distant Worlds, "What a bewitching
word is life! Did existence come into being from non-existence? Can
organic matter emerge from inorganic matter? Or is some powerful and
creative hand at work?

It is sometimes suggested that life may have come to our planet from
other heavenly bodies, because when the lowest forms of life—the seeds
of vegetable microbes—swimming in the atmosphere of a heavenly body rise
to a great elevation, the rays of the sun may carry them by means of
pressure into space, so that they ultimately reach the surface of
another heavenly body where they flourish and develop.

"This hypothesis does not represent the slightest progress in the
solution of the great riddle, because if the hypothesis be true, we
still do not know how life appeared, whether on one of the planets in
the solar system or one of the Great Dog stars. Just as a clock is not
made by heaping together springs, cogs, bolts and levers, so, too, the
creation of life is not possible in the absence of a heart—i.e., that
which sets life in motion—and a summons that proclaims 'come to life!"

We know that matter in and of itself lacks life and that no material
element possesses life unaided. Thus life cannot be supposed to proceed
from the harmonious compounding of the atoms that make up matter. The
question arises why living matter cannot repeat itself other than by
procreation and reproduction of the species.

Chemical actions and reactions are constantly underway in inanimate
bodies without any trace of life being reflected in them. To say that
matter is inclined to compounding and that life suddenly emerged in the
course of its development and evolution is to describe the living and
vital phenomena we sensorially observe; it is not to explain the origin
of life and its cause.

Moreover, the particles of matter were not originally incompatible with
each other; a cause must, therefore, have operated to bring about the
compounding of some of them and to prevent the compounding of others.
And what is the cause for some particles being endowed with life and
others deprived of it?

The only thing to result from the compounding of two or more elements is
that each element gives to the other some of the properties it
possesses; how should it make a gift of something it does not possess?
The elements acquire a common property as a result of compounding, a
property that cannot go beyond the properties that each possess, but
life with its unique character bears no similarity to the properties of
matter. Life displays itself in ways of which matter is incapable, and
in many respects, indeed, life dominates matter.

Although life appears to be dependent on matter, matter being the mould
which receives it, motion, will and, ultimately, perception and
knowledge appear in matter only when life casts its rays upon it. It is,
therefore, unjustifiable to attempt to interpret life in terms of
chemical reactions.

What factor is it that manufactures cells in numerous different
varieties and with different programs and then inserts them in a planned
form? It prepares reproductive cells that transfer the characteristics
and peculiarities of fathers to their offspring, without the slightest
error occurring in the performance of that function.

We see that life cells have certain particular characteristics in their
composition, among which are repair, reconstruction, preservation of the
species, and the capacity for variation.

Every cell in man functions at the required time and in the required
manner. The distribution of labor and function among cells is
remarkable. They are distributed in the quantity needed to assure growth
of the body, and every cell goes to its appointed place in the brain,
the lungs, the liver, the heart and the kidneys. Once the cells have
taken up their appointed positions, they do not fail for an instant in
performing their vital functions; they disperse and repel superfluous
and useless matter and preserve exactly their proper volume.

To ascribe this remarkable classification which has the purpose of
forming, in due proportion, the limbs and organs needed by animate
beings to mechanical and unconscious factors is a completely inadequate
interpretation. What freely thinking person would accept such
illogicality?

Life is, then, a light which shines from lofty horizons on material
entities that have the capacity to receive it; it sets them in motion
and puts each intelligently in its particular locus.

It is the guiding will of the Creator, His power to decide in a way that
ensures movement and development toward perfection, and His
comprehensive and far-reaching wisdom, that bestow the great miracle of
life, with all its properties, on lifeless matter.

A man who is aware of the truth sees a constant thread of life running
through the changing and moving substance of matter. He contemplates God
in His aspect of continuous creation and origination, His ceaseless
impelling of all things toward perfection.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, III, pp. 51-53.

[^2]: Tafsir al-Mizan, Vol. VIII, p.255.


