Lesson 5: The Manifestations of God in Nature
=============================================

The world of matter and nature, conceived as a created whole, is the
best, clearest and most universal evidence for the knowledge of God. The
wise will of that Eternal Principle can be discovered in the very
processes of material change. It is apparent that His eternal rays
bestow life and sustenance on all beings, and that all of creation
derives both its existence and its advancement from Him.

To study the different beings in the universe, the mysteries of the book
of creation, the pages of which all bear witness to the operation of a
lofty intelligence in its creation, provides, then, evidence on which to
base knowledge and belief in a wise Creator Whose power is but slightly
manifested in the order of beings for all their splendor and vastness.

It is, moreover, a simple and straightforward proof that lacks the
complexity and weightiness of philosophical evidence. It is a path for
study and contemplation that is open to all; everyone can benefit from
it, both thinkers and scholars and the simple masses of humanity.

Everyone, to the extent permitted by his capacity and vision, can see in
all the phenomena of creation indications of connectedness, harmony, and
purposefulness, and find in every one of the countless particles of
creation a firm proof for the existence of the source of being.

The complete adaption of every species of animal to its conditions of
life is a great sign of God; each has been created with all the
particular instruments needed for its conditions of life.

Moses, the one who spoke with God, peace be upon our Prophet and him,
made use of this proof in order to demonstrate the existence of God to
the Pharaoh. The Pharaoh said to Moses and his brother: *"Who is your
Lord ?"* Moses, peace be upon our Prophet and him, replied,

***"Our Lord is the one Who endowed all things with a particular form of
creation."*** **(20:49)**

Likewise, Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said to Mufaddal, "Look
carefully at the structure of the bird's creation; see how it has been
created light and small in volume to enable it to fly. It was given only
two legs instead of the four given to other animals and only four of the
five toes they have on each foot. Birds have slim, pointed breasts to
enable them to fend the air easily and fly in every direction.

The long legs of the bird fit easily beneath its tail and its wings, and
its whole body is covered with feathers so that air might penetrate them
and aid it to fly. Since the food of birds consists of seeds and the
flesh of animals that they consume without chewing, they have no need of
teeth.

Instead, God created for birds a hard and sharp beak that cannot break
when tearing off meat or suffer injury when gathering seeds. To enable
this creature to digest the food it has not chewed, it has been given a
powerful digestive system and a warm body. Furthermore, birds reproduce
by laying eggs so they can remain light enough to fly; if their
offspring were to grow in their stomachs, they would become too heavy to
fly."

Then the Imam referred to a general law, saying, "Thus all the
peculiarities of a bird's creation conform to its environment and its
manner of life."[^1]

The question of animal speech—the means by which animals communicate
with each other—is another divine sign. They possess a special kind of
language that enables them to communicate with each other.

The Noble Qur’an thus relates the story of an ant addressing the Prophet
Solomon, peace be upon our Prophet and him,

***"An ant said, "O ants, enter your dwellings lest Solomon and his army
unwittingly trample you underfoot."*** **(27:18)**

Modern scientists have discovered a sophisticated system of
communication among the animals that is more complex and precise than
our own system of communication. Crissy Morrison writes, "If we put a
female moth next to the window of our room, it emits soft signals that a
male moth picks up from an incredible distance and it sends its own
signals in return. However much you may wish to disturb this
communication, you will be unable to do so. Does this weak creature
carry some kind of transmitter, or does the male moth have a receiver
concealed in his antennae?

"A cricket rubs its legs together, and the sound can be heard up to a
kilometer away on a quiet, still night. In order to summon its mate, the
male cricket sets sixty tons of air in motion and the female cricket
sends a warm response to his wooing by some physical means, although
apparently no sound is audible from her.

"Before the invention of radio, scientists used to imagine that animals
communicated with each there by means of smell. Supposing this
hypothesis to be true, it would still be something of a miracle, because
the smell would have to move through the air to reach the nostrils of
the female insect. This is quite apart from the question of whether a
wind is blowing or not and how the female insect is to pick up the smell
and tell where it is coming from, enabling her to know where her suitor
is located.

"Today, thanks to highly complex mechanical means, we have gained the
ability to communicate with each other over great distances. Radio is a
remarkable invention, enabling us to communicate with each other
instantaneously. But the use of this invention is dependent on a wire
and our being present in a certain place. The moth is still way ahead of
us."[^2]

Choosing the empirical sciences as a means of studying the infinite
mysteries of the world has another advantage in addition to lying within
the reach of everyone. It is that awareness of the wonders of creation
and the order prevailing in it which naturally links man to the God Who
has created it; such awareness displays to man the attributes of
perfection, knowledge and limitless power that characterize the Creator
and Source of all being.

This precise order indicates an aim, a plan, broad and extensive wisdom.
What creativity, what power, what knowledge He has invested in all the
world of being, in the smallest and the greatest of His creation
alike—in the earth, in the atmosphere, in the heavenly bodies, in the
heart of stones, in the heart of atoms!

When we speak of "order" it should be understood that the concept of
order is applicable to a phenomenon when its different parts are somehow
interrelated in such a way that they harmoniously pursue a specific aim;
the collaboration of the parts with each other must also have been taken
into account.

Although those who deny the existence of order in the universe generally
do not deny the existence of an active cause (since they accept the law
of causality), what is meant by the principle of mutual acquaintance in
nature is the ultimate cause, and this—implying as it does the
intervention of aim and purpose in natural phenomena—they do reject.

In numerous of its verses, the Noble Qur’an invites men to ponder on the
order of creation so that the mass of people should be able, in the
simplest way possible, to become aware of the existence of the Unique
Creator. These are some of the verses in question:

***"In the creation of the heavens and the earth, in the alternation of
the night and the day, in the sailing of ships through the ocean for the
profit of mankind; in the rain which God sends down from the skies and
the life He gives therewith to a land that is dead; in the beasts of all
kinds that*** ***He scatters through the earth; in the change of the
winds and the clouds which they trail like their slaves between the sky
and the earth—in all of these matters, there are for the wise, clear
proofs of the knowledge and power of the Creator. " (2:164)***

***"God it is, that Pure Essence, that has raised the heavens without
any pillar, as you see, and then adorned His throne in the midst of
creation with perfect power. He has subjected the sun and the moon to
His will so that each of them rotates in due course. He has imposed firm
order on the affairs of the world and set forth the signs of His power
with detailed proofs, that you may believe with certainty in the meeting
with your Lord." (13:2)***

***"He it is Who spread out the earth and raised the mountains upon it.
He made the rivers course and brought forth every kind of fruit, and He
created all things in pairs. He covered the bright day with the dark
night. Certainly in these matters are clear proofs for the thoughtful of
the power of the Creator." (13:3)***

If we accept and have recourse to every theory that has been put forward
by the specialists and researchers, even the theory of evolution
concerning the appearance of the various species found in the world,
none of the theories in question will be comprehensible without the
presence of an absolute power, the intervention of a will, an awareness,
and a final purpose and aim.

Gradual creation within the system of nature also clearly displays the
intervention of will and awareness in its processes; all the stages in
the movement and progress of nature have been based on a very exact
choice and calculation, and nature has never diverged in the slightest
in millions of years from its ordained path.

It is true that in the initial stages of deriving proof for the
existence of God from the orderliness of the universe, use is made of
empirical data, and that some parts of the argument are constructed with
the help of the senses, the study of nature and empirical observation.

However, in reality, the argument is not an empirical one but rather a
rational one, guiding us away from nature toward the transcendent
reality that lies beyond nature. Empirical proofs concern the
relationship between two parts of nature, each of which must be
sensorially perceptible to permit the relationship between the two
phenomena to be established.

When we estimate the degree of knowledge and awareness of a person by
examining his works and achievements, we are not engaged in an empirical
discovery, for the degree of knowledge and intelligence of a person is
not a tangible quantity for us subject to direct experimentation on our
part. Of course, man directly experiences will, intelligence, and
thought within his own being, but he does not have a similar awareness
of their existence in others; they are inaccessible to him.

It is through the works and achievements of men that we become aware of
the existence of intelligence and thought in them, although there is no
empirical proof of their existence in them.

Now the discovery of intelligence in others by way of their works and
achievements rests on a rational proof, not an empirical deduction in
the sense of intelligence and its workings being directly susceptible to
direct examination so that their interrelations might be discovered.
This discovery also does not rest on a logical comparison in the sense
of positing an identity between one individual and all others.

Given, then, that the recognition of thought and intelligence in men
does not take place by way of empirical proof, it is obvious that the
argument of orderliness in the universe and its connection with the
divine essence also does not belong to the category of empirical proofs.

\*\*\*\*\*

From another point of view, since man is not the creator of nature but a
part of it, his actions in the world of nature represent the
establishment of a relationship between different parts of that world.

The aim and the purpose pursued by man in the compounding of a whole
series of material elements (as, for example, in constructing a
building, a car, or a factory) relate to his own being; that is, the
ultimate purpose and aim is the maker himself, not the thing made.

The relationship between the parts of the things made is, therefore, a
non-natural relationship; by establishing that relationship, the maker
wishes to attain his own purposes and to relive his own deficiencies,
for all the efforts of man are a movement from potentiality to actuality
and deficiency to perfection.

However, these two characteristics do not apply to the relationship
between created beings and God. The relationship between the different
parts of God's works is not a non-natural one, and the purpose of the
created phenomenon does not relate to the Creator. Put differently, the
aims of God's acts all relate to the acts themselves, not to the Agent,
for God's wisdom necessitates that He should cause all beings to attain
their perfection.

If in the course of developing the argument of the orderliness of the
universe we attempt to prove the existence of a maker similar to the
human maker, the divine maker will, in reality, also be a created being
on the level of man; proving the existence of such a maker is an
entirely different matter from proving the existence of the Maker and
Creator of all being.

From a scientific point of view, the self-origination of matter is
impossible; the Marxist theory that the material world is constantly
evolving and advancing toward higher states is clearly contradictory to
scientific data and the realities of nature. All development and motion
in the mineral realm is due either to the intervention of a will
external to matter or to attraction, interchange, and compounding with
other bodies.

In the vegetable world, development, growth and increase occur as the
result of rainfall, sunshine and obtaining the necessary materials from
the soil. The same is the case in the animal world, except that there
the factor of volitional movement toward what is useful and necessary
must be added.

In all the instances just mentioned, there is a clear cooperation
between things and creatures, on the one hand, and factors external to
them, on the other. In accordance with the particular properties innate
in each being and the laws and formulae to which it is subject, it is
incapable of disobeying the commands that have been engraved in its
being.

The particular properties. We sense clearly that beings in this world
are subject to change and impermanence. Throughout the period of its
existence, any material being is either proceeding along the path of
growth and development or advancing toward decay and decline. In short,
no material being on the plane of existence remains fixed and
unchanging.

Finiteness is another property of a sensory existent. From the smallest
particle to the biggest galaxy, all things are in need of space and
time; it is simply that certain things occupy a greater space or a
longer time, and others, a shorter time and a smaller space.

Moreover, all material beings are relative from the point of view of
their very existence as well as the properties they possess; whatever
attributes such as power, magnificence, beauty and wisdom we ascribe to
things, we do so in comparison to something else.

Dependence and conditionality are also among the characteristics of
these beings. The existence of any being we may conceive is dependent
and conditional on other factors, and it, therefore, stands in need of
them. No material thing can be found in the world that relies entirely
upon itself, that has no need of anything other than itself. Neediness
and dependence, therefore, circumscribe all material beings.

Man's intelligence and thought are able to transcend the veils of
outward appearance, unlike his senses, and to penetrate the depths and
inner dimension of being; they cannot accept that existence should be
confined to relative, finite, changing and dependent beings.

On the contrary, the power of thought clearly recognizes the necessity
of the existence, beyond the observable realm, of a stable, absolute and
self-subsistent reality upon which all other beings rely and depend.
This reality is present in all times and at all places; were it not to
be present, the totality of the world would cease to exist and would
lose all share of being.

Once we see the dependency of the created world and realize that no
phenomenon can exist unaided, we conclude that there is a Necessary
Existent, for we are compelled to ask, "Upon what is every phenomenon
ultimately dependent?"

If we answer, "On another body," then we must ask, "On what is that
body, in turn, dependent?" If, then, the answer is given, "On a thing
the nature of which is unknown to us," the question arises, "Is that
thing simple or compound?"

If it is said to be compound, then we reply that a compound is also
dependent on its parts, since first the parts must exist in order for
the compound to come into being. Since nature is a compound, it cannot
be the Necessary Existent.

We are, therefore, compelled to say that the first cause must be simple;
it must also be coterminous with the Necessary Existent, since the chain
of causality cannot continue indefinitely.

The totality of the world is, then, in need of a reality that is
independent and upon which all conditional, finite and relative
phenomena depend. All things need that reality to fill them with being,
and all beings possess a sign of its infinite life, knowledge, power and
wisdom.

They, thus, permit us to gain valuable knowledge concerning that reality
and enable every intelligent, curious person to deduce the existence of
a Creator.

\*\*\*\*\*

The mutual dependence of matter and the laws of being in no way points
to the independence of matter. On the contrary, the different phenomena
that arise from matter, together with their close interrelatedness,
indicate that matter, in its mode of existence, is compelled to accept
and follow certain laws and norms that impel it to order and harmony.

Existence depends on two basic factors: matter and orderliness, which
are closely interrelated and give birth to a coherent and harmonious
world.

Some people regard matter as independent and imagine that it has itself
gained this freedom and elaborated the laws that rule over it. But how
can they believe that hydrogen and oxygen, electrons and protons, should
first produce themselves, then be the source for all other beings, and
finally decree the laws that regulate themselves and the rest of the
material world?

Materialism imagines that lowly objects are the source for the emergence
of higher objects without troubling to ascertain whether the higher, in
fact, exists at the level of the lower. If lowly matter is unable even
at the highest stage of its development, namely thought and
reflection—either to create itself or to violate any of the laws that
rule over it, it follows ineluctably that it is unable to create other
beings and the laws regulating them. How, then, can it be believed that
lowly matter should engage in the creation and origination of higher
beings or have the power to bestow existence on lofty phenomena?

In the new science of systems, the principle has been established that
systems comprising living elements that have an aim or systems organized
externally on the basis of a given program, may develop in the direction
of expansion, greater orderliness and improvement.

However, all systems, whether simple or compound, need to be aided by
and interrelated with factors external to themselves; they are unable to
construct themselves. No system or substance in the world will be able
to create or to will a moving and developing organ unless it enjoys a
measure of will power and consciousness.

Based on the law of probabilities, the result of universal independent
motivation could be only dispersal and anarchy, tending to a uniform
death.

The law of probabilities also decisively refutes the appearance of the
world by way of accident, considering it irrational and impossible. Even
calculations based on the mathematical law of probabilities confirm the
necessity of correct guidance and planning for the world, in accordance
with a precise program and a conscious will.

The law of probabilities deals, in fact, a decisive blow to those who
believe in theory of the accidental origination of the universe. If we
attempt to apply the theory of accident to a simple system or to small
numbers, its applicability is not impossible, although extremely
unlikely.

But it is inconceivable that one should ever chance on a geometric
accident expressing the firm orderliness and harmony that prevail in the
complex system of the world. Partial and simple changes in the order of
existence are also unable to explain the transformation of the world,
the coalescing of diverse elements, and the compounding of fundamental
atoms to form a harmonious compound.

If nature was once engaged autonomously in composition and formation,
why does it not now display any initiative in the direction of changing
itself further; why does it no longer exhibit profound, automatic
change?

Even slight and simple occurrences in the world result in the creation
of remarkable images that are harmonious and consonant with the aim of
creation. This is itself an indication of the truth that behind all the
stupendous changes, a conscious and powerful force is engaged in
creating and producing the wondrous system of the universe: it gives
shape to the remarkable crystallization of the world of creation and
traces out the plan and order of being.

\*\*\*\*\*

The harmony and interconnectedness of millions of natural phenomena and
their relationship to life can be explained on the basis of one
hypothesis only—namely that we conceive of a Creator for this vast
system Who has established the diverse elements of life on this globe by
means of a limitless and infinite power and drawn up a program for each
of those elements. This hypothesis is in conformity with the harmonious
links that we see embedded in a phenomenon.

If we do not accept this hypothesis, how likely is it that such harmony
should have come about—accidentally and without purpose among the
variegated orders of being? How could it be believed that matter should
itself be the origin of millions of attributes and characteristics and
thus be the equivalent of the purposeful, wise and all-knowing Creator?

If the world of being did not exist, with all its wonders that bedazzle
the intellect and the splendor of which human knowledge cannot fully
comprehend, and if the universe consisted simply of a mono-cellular
being, still the possibility that such a slight and insignificant
entity, together with the order prevailing over it and the necessary
conditions and materials, should come into existence as a mere chance, a
possibility, an accident, such a possibility represents, according to
the Swiss biologist Charles Unguy, so minute a figure as to be
mathematically inconceivable.

\*\*\*\*\*

All the particles of existent beings are subject, both in their internal
structure and in their interrelations, to a well-established order.
Their composition and their relations with each other are such that they
aid each other to advance along their respective paths to the aims that
lie before them.

Benefiting from the relationship they have with all other beings and
from their exchange of influence in them as determined by their own
composition, they are able to advance toward their aim and destination.

The principal accomplishment of the material sciences is to identify the
external aspects and qualities of the world; to identify the essence and
true nature of created beings and phenomena lies beyond the grasp of
those sciences.

For example, the utmost achievement of which an astronomer is capable is
to know whether the billions of spheres in the heavens are fixed and
stationary by virtue of centrifugal force or whether they are continuing
to rotate while a force of attraction prevents them from colliding with
each other and maintains their equilibrium. He may also measure their
distance from the earth and their speed and volume by means of
scientific instruments.

However, the final result of all this knowledge and experimentation does
not extend beyond the interpretation of the external and superficial
aspect of creation, for the astronomer is unable to perceive the true
nature of the attractive force, the essence of the centrifugal force or
the manner in which they and the system they serve came into being.

Scientists can interpret a machine without being aware of the
interpretation of the motive power. The natural sciences are similarly
incapable of interpreting and analyzing the millions of truths that are
embedded in nature and in the human person.

Man has delved into the heart of the atom but has been unable to solve
the complex and obscure mysteries of a single living atom. In short, it
is these bastions of mystery that the champions of the natural sciences
have been unable to conquer.

One of the wonders of creation is the mutual harmony existing between
two phenomena that are not contemporaneous with each other. This harmony
is of such a nature that the needs of a phenomenon that has not yet come
into being are already provided for in the structure of another
phenomenon.

The best example of this kind of harmony can be seen in the relationship
between mother and child. Among humans and other mammals, as soon as the
female becomes pregnant and as the foetus grows in the womb, the mammary
gland that produces milk—a pleasant and comprehensive form of
nurture—sets to work under the influence of special hormones.

As the foetus grows, this nutritive substance increases in quantity so
that when the foetus is on the threshold of birth and is ready to step
forth into the broad and limitless world, the nutriment needed by the
child and suited to all its bodily needs stands ready.

This ready-made substance is perfectly attuned to the still undeveloped
digestive system of the infant. It is stored in a hidden depot—the
breast of the mother, a depot with which the mother was equipped years
before the infant took shape. In order to facilitate the feeding of the
newly-born infant, small, delicate holes are placed in the tip of the
breast—itself of a size to fit in the mouth of the infant—so that the
milk should not flow directly into the mouth of one who does not have
the power to swallow it. Instead, the infant draws the daily sustenance
it needs from that depot by sucking.

As the newly born infant grows, changes appear in the milk that are
linked to his age. It is for this reason that physicians believe the
suckling of a newly born infant by wet-nurses who have not born a child
in some time to be inadvisable.

Here the question arises: is not the provision for the needs of a being
made in the structure of one being for the needs of another being that
does not yet exist, something planned and foreseen on the basis of
wisdom and exactitude? Is not this provision for the future, this subtle
and wondrous interrelation between two beings, the work of a powerful
and all-wise power? Is it not a clear sign of the intervention of an
infinite power, a great designer and planner, whose purpose is the
continuation of life and the growth of all phenomena toward perfection?

We know well that the precise calculations which we can see underlying
all machines and industrial tools are the result of the talents and
ideas that went into their planning and construction. Similarly, based
on our objective observations we can reach the general philosophical
conclusion that wherever order and assembly based on balance and
calculation are to be observed, will, intelligence and thought should
also be sought.

The same precision that can be observed in industrial machines is to be
seen to a higher and more remarkable degree in natural beings and their
composition. Indeed, the degree of planning and organization visible in
nature is at such a high level that the precision expended by man on his
own creations cannot in any way be compared with it.

When, without hesitation, we recognize that our industrial order is the
product of thought and of will, ought we not perceive the operation of
infinite intelligence, will and knowledge behind the precise planning of
nature?

\*\*\*\*\*

In the present age, the science of medicine has reached a degree of
progress that permits it to remove a kidney from within the human body
and implant it in the body of a person whose kidney has stopped
functioning and who is on the verge of death. This advance is assuredly
not the result of one physician's labors alone; it draws on the legacy
of several millennia.

A transplant operation is then the final stage in a long process, the
preliminary stages of which were accomplished by earlier scientists: the
ideas and insights of scientists had to accumulate for several thousand
years before a kidney transplant could take place.

Is it possible that this result could have been attained without
knowledge? Plainly not: powerful human brains had to labor for several
millennia for the transplanting of kidneys to be made possible.

Now let us pose another question. Which requires the more knowledge and
science: the changing of a tire on the wheel of an automobile—a task
which admittedly calls for a certain technical skill—or the manufacture
of the tire itself? Which is more significant: the making of the tire or
changing it?

Although a kidney transplant is a medically significant procedure, it
resembles changing the tire on the wheel of an automobile; it fades into
insignificance when compared with the structure of the kidney itself and
the mysteries, subtleties and calculations that it contains.

What realistic scientist, sincerely given to seeking the truth could
claim today that while a kidney transplant is the result of centuries of
continuous scientific research and experimentation, the structure of the
kidney itself reveals no trace of a creative intelligence and will,
being the product of mere nature—nature which has no more knowledge or
awareness than a kindergarten pupil?

Is it not more logical to posit the existence of intelligence, will and
planning in the creation of and ordering of the world than to attribute
creativity to matter which lacks intelligence, thought, consciousness
and the power to innovate?

Belief in the existence of a wise creator is without doubt more logical
than faith in the creativity of matter, which has neither perception,
consciousness, nor the ability to plan; we cannot attribute to matter
all the properties and attributes of intelligence that we see in the
world and the ordering will that it displays.

Mufaddal said to Imam as-Sadiq (upon whom be peace!): "Master, some men
imagine that the order and precision we see in the world are the work of
nature."

The Imam responded: "Ask them whether nature performs all its precisely
calculated functions in accordance with knowledge, thought and power of
its own. If they say that nature possesses knowledge and power, what is
there to prevent them from affirming the eternal divine essence and
confessing the existence of that supreme principle?

If, on the other hand, they say that nature performs its tasks regularly
and correctly without knowledge and will, then it follows that these
wise functions and precise, well calculated laws are the work of an
all-knowing and wise creator. That which they call nature is, in fact, a
law and a custom appointed by the hand of divine power to rule over
creation."[^3]

The Subtleties of Nature
------------------------

Consider a malarial mosquito. There is no need to use a microscope;
through the customary use of the naked eye you will be able to perceive
the precise and complex order contained in that insignificant object.

Within this delicate object there exists a complete set of members and
senses, remarkable for their precision: a digestive system, a
circulatory system, a nervous system, a respiratory system. The mosquito
possesses a fully equipped laboratory: with wonderful precision and
speed it processes all the materials it needs. Compare with it a
scientific laboratory:

For all the human and economic resources devoted to it, it can never
attain the speed, precision and exactitude of the contemptible
laboratory of the mosquito. How much time, reflection and intelligence
are needed, for example, to manufacture a cure for the mosquito's sting!

When so much planning, thought and precision are needed for man to
perform such a task, are not the subtlety, exactitude and orderliness
observable in the world a proof of origination deriving from the
intelligence, creative planning and far-reaching wisdom of the creator?
Is it at all feasible to regard all the precise geometry, functioning
and movement of the universe as the outcome of matter in its ignorance?
We proclaim most affirmatively that the phenomena of creation express
order and regularity; they do not proclaim purposelessness, anarchy and
disorder.

If we occasionally perceive weak points in nature this does not imply
inadequacy or defect in the vast book of creation. Our thought and
perception and unable to soar and take flight, and the reach of our
intelligence is too short to understand all the mysteries and enigmas of
the universe. Our intellect cannot discern all the aims and goals of
existence.

If we are unable to understand the function of a small screw in a great
machine, does this give us the right to accuse and condemn its designer
as ignorant? Or is that the horizon of our gaze is too narrow to
encompass the true aim and purpose of the machine?

Accident cannot perform the task of knowledge, knowledge, moreover, that
is never commingled with ignorance in any way. If, as the materialists
imagine, the world of nature did not arise from knowledge and will
(despite the signs of creativity and inventiveness apparent in its every
phenomenon) then man, too, in order to attain his purposes would have to
abandon his advance on the path of knowledge and imprison himself in
ignorance in order to conform to the ignorance of nature itself.

The reality that guides and directs the functioning of the world with
such regularity and orderliness possesses an aim, purpose and will that
cannot be denied. It cannot be supposed that the ceaseless process of
action and reaction advances in a fixed direction without the
intervention and supervision of an intelligence.

After years of careful planning and exhausting labor, biochemists have
succeeded in discovering certain experimental organisms on a very simple
and primitive level from which all trace of life is absent. This
scientific triumph was regarded as very valuable and received with great
enthusiasm in scientific circles, and nobody claimed that this highly
deficient and primitive laboratory creation had come into being as the
result of chance, without direction, planning and precision.

This being the case, those who ascribe all the beings in the vast system
of the universe, together with their complex and mysterious properties
to the blind and unconscious forces of matter, are, in reality, doing
violence and injustice to logic and human intelligence and waging open
war on the truth.

Give your attention for a minute to a typesetter in a printing house. He
expends great care and attention when he is setting the letters required
for one page of a book, but when he reviews his work, he comes across
small errors arising from some slight inattention. Were the typesetter
to take a handful of letters and scatter them over the plate instead of
carefully arraying them in rows, is it at all possible that the
resulting page should be correct in its contents and free of error?

It would be still more absurd to claim that a hundred kilograms of
molten lead, forced through a tube, should emerge in the form of ready
made letters; that a fierce tempest should then pick up those letters
and arrange them in a particular and regular order on thousands of metal
plates; and that these plates should result in the printing of a
thousand-page book containing numerous precise scientific discussions
and attractive, alluring expressions, all this without the slightest
error occurring.

Could anyone support such a theory?

What do the materialists who deny God have to say concerning the
emergence of the variegated forms of the letters of creation and the
precise and complex relations that regulate the heavenly bodies, natural
creation and all material objects? Are the letters of creation (i.e.,
the atoms and the particles that comprise them) in any way lesser than
the letters used in printing?

Is it in any way acceptable that these orderly, meaningful letters, this
precise and well-organized geometry, the astounding forms depicted in
the book of creation, should be the work of ignorance and aimlessness?
That a great and wise power, a miraculous ordering principle, should not
be present in the very texture of the world? Do not all phenomena arise
from a manifestation of consciousness, awareness and power?

If the power hidden in the depths of matter does not arise from the
universal intelligence, what factor guides it to the elaboration of
forms, to an amazing regularity and harmony?

If that power is an agent devoid of intelligence and conscious will, why
does it never fall prey to disorder, and why does its compounding of
matter never result in collision and destruction?

It is here that belief in the creator bestows meaning on all existence
and endows the world with sense and content. Those who possess deep
vision and clear thought perceive plainly that an infinite power assures
the preservation of the order of the world by means of firm supervision
and absolute sovereignty.

In the past, everyone used to guide and control his own riding beast,
and he was similarly accustomed throughout the ages to see an owner or
supervisor in control of every piece of property, every scrap of land,
every group or organization. Now matters are different. Today's man has
gained access to remote-controlled satellites, electronic devices and
pilotless planes, all equipped with automatic instruments and gadgets.

Everyone knows that it is possible to construct a well equipped machine
that will react in appropriate ways to various contingencies, without
the maker of the device being present or visible. We, therefore, no
longer have the right obstinately to deny the existence of God simply
because His hand is not visibly at work in the affairs of
creation—visibly, that is, to our deficient understanding and knowledge.

It would, of course, be a highly defective analogy were we to draw a
parallel with the maker of an artificial satellite or rocket who sitting
in a fully equipped station on earth and with the aid of complex
equipment guides and controls the course and movement of a spaceship.

But if the intervention of God's hand in the order of creation is not
visible to our physical eye and perception (although we can observe
signs and indications that are like a ray proceeding from the splendor
of His majesty) can we for that reason overlook the existence of a
planner and mover who alone possesses true knowledge, power and will,
simply because he cannot be contained in the narrow framework of time
and space?

It is true that our capacities are limited in understanding a being who
is without all like or exemplar in the sensory realm and whom human
language is unable to describe fittingly and precisely. The lamp of our
intelligence sheds little light on this endless plain, or—to put it
differently—it encounters walls of limitation. A

t the same time, our relations in this world are with phenomena; that
which impresses itself on our minds consists of the lines that are
traced out by the observance of the objective world. But in perceiving
that world, the problem of imagining it is removed from us; no barrier
exists between our concepts and the necessary amount of cognition.

Nonetheless, certain skeptical persons who have abandoned the sound mode
of thought that derives from man's essential nature and who have become
limitingly accustomed to the existent entities of nature constantly
await the occurrence of a miracle from God which will rupture the
current order of nature in order to make a gift to them of faith and
belief, making His existence readily comprehensible and acceptable.

However, they overlook that whatever new traces and signs of God might
appear will cause only a temporary excitement and agitation; with the
passage of time, they will become "normal" and no longer arouse
attention.

Although all phenomena are now included in the framework of the order of
creation, they began by rupturing the order of nature, and since all
beings have been repeated on the stage of the world since the first
manifestation, they now appear to be normal and customary.

By contrast, a sensorially imperceptible being—a being, moreover, that
is replete with splendor and majesty and full of sanctity and
greatness—will always influence men's souls. Their attention to such a
being will, indeed, always increase and they will constantly look
towards it with desire.

It is the dominance of a spirit of obstinacy, of judgment based on a
discordant logic, that shackles human thought with limitations. For
every creature in the order of being is an adequate proof for those who
purse and empty their minds of obstinacy and the causes of denial.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, III, pp. 103-104.

[^2]: Morrison, Raz-i Afarinish, pp. 102-104.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, II, p.21.


