Lesson 8: Pseudo-Scientific Demagoguery
=======================================

The materialists claim that the establishment of their school of thought
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was directly connected to the
progress of science and that the dialectical method was a fruit plucked
from the fertile tree of science.

They depict every philosophy apart from materialism as a form of
idealism, opposed to the scientific method of thought, and insist that
their position is a scientific and progressive one. According to them,
realism consists in turning away from metaphysical truths; everyone
ought to base his worldview on sensory and empirical logic and opt for
materialism. But this claim is nothing more than a fanatical illusion
based on unproven theories. Views such as these derive directly from a
system of thought centered on materialism; within it, everything is
defined and delimited with reference to materialism.

Belief in an object of worship is without doubt one of the principal
sources of human culture and knowledge. The propounding of belief in God
as basis for a correct worldview has brought about profound changes in
the foundations of society and thought throughout human history.

Now, too, in the age of science and technology, when man has found his
way into space, a considerable number of scientists have a religious
outlook as part of the intellectual system; they have come to believe in
the existence of a creator, a source for all beings, not only by means
of the heart and the conscience, but also through deduction and logic.

\*\*\*\*\*

If the materialists' justification for their worldview were true,
instead of being based on inadequate knowledge of the history of
materialist thought, there ought to be a particular connection between
science and an inclination to materialism; only materialist views would
be represented in the realm of science.

Has every philosopher and scholar, in every age, held an atheistic
worldview and belonged to the materialist camp? A scholarly examination
of the lives and works of great thinkers will suffice to show that not
only is the religious camp by no means empty of true scientists, but
also that many great scientific thinkers and personalities, including
the founders of much of contemporary science, have believed in
monotheism.

In addition, materialistic and atheistic beliefs have by no means been
confined to the period of the evolution and advancement of science;
since ancient times and, indeed, throughout history, materialists have
stood in opposition to a united front of believers.

Today it is primarily in a vulgarized form of Marxism that the wares of
science have been turned into a tool of deception. Those who supposedly
should be mapping out their path in the clear light of knowledge and
weighing all matters with profound, logical perception and
investigation, in complete freedom from all fanaticism and hasty
prejudice—precisely these people have fallen prey to stagnation and
blind imitation. They have arrogantly denied all values higher than
intellect and reason, and even boast of their ignorant denial.

Their claim that the coming of science has put out the notion of God is
purely rhetorical and has nothing to do with logical method, because
even thousands of scientific experiments could not possibly suffice to
demonstrate that no non-material being or factor exists.

Materialism is a metaphysical belief, and must, therefore, be proven or
disproven according to philosophical method. Precisely for this reason,
an acceptance of materialism cannot be made a basis for the denial of
metaphysics. To interpret materialism in such a sense is in the final
analysis strictly meaningless; it would be a superstitious notion
involving the perversion of truth, and to regard it as scientific would,
in fact, be treason to science.

It is true that until very recently man was largely unaware of the
natural causes and factors that give rise to phenomena and that he had
little awareness of the occurrences that took place around him. But his
belief did not derive from ignorance, for if it did, the foundations of
belief in God would have collapsed once certain facts concerning the
world were discovered. On the contrary, we see in the present age that
with the discovery of a whole mass of mysteries concerning creation,
belief in God has taken on added dimensions.

Now science illumines a limited realm; the scientific worldview is a
knowledge of the part, not a knowledge of the whole. Science is unable
to demonstrate the aspect and form of the whole of creation. But at the
same time, since the scientific mode of perception is precise and
specific, belief in God acquires a more scientific nature and a new kind
of logic through the advancement of science. Man's awareness comes into
being through his perception of cause and effect, and one who believes
in causality underlying phenomena cannot possibly ignore the role of the
most fundamental factor that is at work over and above all other causes.

\*\*\*\*\*

Until very recently, man imagined his own being to consist simply of a
symmetrical and well-proportioned form; he was unaware of the complex
mysteries contained in his creation. Today he has discovered astounding
and far-reaching truths concerning the interior of his slight being,
realizing that there are tens of millions of billions of cells in the
body. This makes possible a particular appreciation of the greatness of
the creator responsible for this artifact that was not possible in the
past.

Is it logical to say that belief in God is peculiar to those who know
nothing about man's composition and creation, and that, by contrast, a
scientist who is aware of the natural laws and factors responsible for
man's growth and development, who knows that law and precise calculation
preside over all stages of man's existence, is bound to believe that
matter, lacking all perception and consciousness, is the source of the
wondrous laws of nature?

Do scientific discoveries and knowledge cause such a scientist to
conclude that matter, unknowing and unperceiving, is his creator and
that of all beings? Materialism looks at the world with one eye closed
and, as a result, is unable to answer numerous questions.

Science, too, offers no answer to the question of whether the world can
be divided into two parts, material and non-material, or to the question
of whether the world has an innate purpose. These questions do not
belong to the realm of science; scientific knowledge can acquaint us—to
a certain degree—with what is, but it is unable to show us a direction
in life or inspire us with a path to be followed.

A scientific worldview cannot, then, be the foundation for a human
ideology. The value of scientific knowledge is primarily practical, in
that it enables man to dominate nature. It is ideal and theoretical
values that are required as the foundation of belief.

Furthermore, science is based on experiment and investigation, and laws
having experiment for their foundation are bound to be changing and
unstable. Faith requires a basis that partakes of eternity, being immune
against change, and is able to answer questions such as the nature and
shape of the world as a whole in a trustworthy and permanent manner.
Only thus can man's need for a comprehensive interpretation and analysis
of existence be met.

As he advances toward perfection, man requires spiritual and
intellectual equilibrium; lacking an aim, he will stray along false
paths and risk disaster. A man who does not find his aim in religion
will pursue an aim of his own making, which will be nothing other than a
kind of revolt against the will of nature; it will have nothing to do
with creativity or intellectual maturity.

The Reasons for Denial and Unbelief
-----------------------------------

Books on the history of religion try to delineate the factors that have
drawn men to religion. But attempts such as they make are in vain and
incapable of uncovering the truth of the matter. It is necessary to
focus on man's innate tendency to monotheism, that primary existential
characteristic of the human species which gives man—for all his internal
contradictions, thoughts, and desires—a special place in creation. It
then becomes possible to discover the factors that lead man to trample
on his own nature by foreswearing religion.

Man's religious ties are an outgrowth of his nature, and materialism is
something opposed to his nature. In accordance with his specific
make-up, man will create his own god if he does not discover the true
God, and the god he discovers may be nature or historical inevitability.
This fake god takes the place of the true God with respect to
comprehensiveness of authority, effectiveness of decree, and capacity to
guide man on a certain path and propel him forward, unhindered by
anyone's desires.

This is the source of the trade in false gods, the adherence to the new
idolatry, that would cruelly sacrifice God to history and exchange a
pearl for a bead.

Alas that so many people smitten with self-inflicted abjection have
bowed down before the idol they themselves have fashioned and deified!
They have turned away from the peerless creator and willingly accepted
the polluting disgrace of such misdirected worship.

If we examine the matter closely, we see that the appearance of
materialism in Europe as a school of thought, the severance of men's
links with a sublime principle, their imprisonment in the fetters of
matter, the choice of science in place of religion—all this was caused
by a series of social and historical factors that emerged in the West.

\*\*\*\*\*

One of the factors that aroused a widespread reaction in Europe and
caused the emergence of freethinking and anti-religious propaganda, was
the crushing pressure exerted by the Christian ecclesiastical
authorities at the beginning of the Renaissance on scholars who were
propounding new scientific ideas.

In addition to specifically religious doctrines, the Church was also
beholden to certain scientific principles concerning man and the world
that it had inherited from ancient—primarily Greek— philosophers and
that it was placed on the same footing as religious beliefs. Whatever
theory appeared to contradict the Bible and these inherited principles
was regarded as heretical, and whoever espoused it would be severely
punished.

The clear contradiction between science and religion created a mutual
hostility in both camps. Intellectuals and scientists saw that the
Christian church was enslaving intelligence and thought, preventing the
free development of ideas; through its adherence to a petrified system
of thought and an anti-intellectual tradition, it was creating a
stifling atmosphere for the man of the new age. Thinkers thus retreated
into a painful isolation from religion.

These accumulating pressures finally led to violent reactions that
engulfed the whole of Europe. Once the power and dominion of the Church
declined and its oppressiveness came to an end, Western thought
recovered its lost freedom and reacted strongly against the limitations
once imposed on it.

The intellectuals removed the chains of ancient ritual from their necks
and turned away from religion. All the pain and anger they had felt
found expression in a great wave of hostility to religion. An acute
spiritual crisis began that culminated in the separation of science from
religion. An illogical desire for vengeance on religion led to the
denial of heavenly truths and of the existence of God.

It is true that some of the doctrines connected with religion were
illogical or even baseless, having no connection with authentic
religious knowledge. But to take revenge on the Church is one thing, and
to fall into hasty and erroneous prejudice concerning religion, as such,
is something else. It is obvious that vengeance, being a purely
emotional matter, has nothing to do with scholarly precision.

The spiritual poverty of man thus advanced at a rate commensurate with
his scientific and technological wealth. As he progressed in industry,
he regressed in ethics and spirituality, to such a degree that he lacked
the moral capacity to make proper use of his newly acquired knowledge.

Scientific knowledge is in itself indifferent to values; one cannot
determine the duties of a responsible human being by referring to
science. However far science advances, it cannot see more than one step
ahead of itself. Human knowledge cannot attain to the essence of the
world and perceive it in its totality, nor can it foretell the future
destiny of man.

It is only the worldview of monotheism that does not attempt to confine
man to the material aspects of his existence. On the contrary, through
the symbols and signs that have been given to man to guide him on his
path, monotheism delineates an exalted origin and destiny for man. Once
man places himself on the path of monotheism, he acquires a
comprehensive worldview within the framework of which he finds answers
to his probing fundamental question. Once he has reached this stage of
comprehensive and multidimensional belief, man's life takes on fresh
vigor and the values that are the fruit of that worldview come to
fruition. The struggle with the church was, then, one factor in the
divorce of science from religion.

Another group abandoned religion and took refuge in materialism because
the concepts propounded by the Church were improper and inadequate,
lacking transcendental value. These concepts were naturally found
unacceptable and unconvincing by intelligent people. The church would
present God in material and human terms, in a sense that was opposed to
the human desire for absolute values and the striving to break through
and transcend all limiting frameworks.

There can be no doubt that if an indubitable truth is impressed in
someone's mind in the defective form of a legend, that person will react
negatively as soon as he reaches intellectual maturity.

Confronted with the anthropomorphic depiction of God made in Christian
theology, the exaltation of belief over reason, and the insistence that
faith should precede thought, enlightened people realized that these
narrow-minded efforts to imprison wisdom and science in the monopoly
held by Christian theology were incompatible with rational criteria and
scientific method.

Since they had no authentic source from which they might learn true
teachings about God, being wholly dependent on the institutions of the
Church and its corrupted books, and since they had no access to a
superior system which would satisfy both their spiritual and their
material needs and offer them a suitable framework for integrating all
the vital elements of life, material and spiritual, emotional and
intellectual, the worldview of materialism took root in them, leading to
the denial of all transcendental and supra-human values.

They were unaware that although error leads religion astray when it
follows the path of ignorance, true religion, free of all illusion,
superstition and distortion, can liberate man from bondage to myth and
superstition, hold him firm on the axis of true belief, and supply him
with a correct understanding of teachings concerning God, one that
satisfies the enquiring mind.

Instead, Western intellectuals were aware only of the superstitious
aspect of false religion and how the established dogmas of religion
lacked all logical basis, so they had no hesitation in condemning
religion as such to be baseless. Their judgment was based on their
discouraging experiences with their own religion, and it could not fail,
then, to be hasty, unrealistic, irrational and illogical.

This is expressed as follows by a scholar of physiology and
biochemistry: "The fact that certain scholars have not been led, in the
course of their researches, to a perception of the existence of God, has
numerous reason. Here we will mention only two of them.

First, the political circumstances created by despotism, together with
the attendant social and administrative conditions, have tended to cause
men to deny the existence of the Maker.

Second, human thought has always been influenced by certain fantasies
and illusions, and although man may have no fear of spiritual or bodily
torment, he is still not completely free to choose the right path.

"In Christian families, most children come to believe early in life in
the existence of a God similar to man, as if man had been created in the
form of God. When they begin to enter the realm of science and to learn
and implement scientific concepts, they can no longer reconcile their
feeble, anthropomorphic concept of God with the logical evidence and
methods of science. So, after a certain time, when all hope of
reconciling belief and science has disappeared, they totally abandon all
concept of God and expel it from their minds.

"The main cause for this is that the evidence of logic and the
categories of science do not modify their previous feelings and beliefs
but, instead, cause them to feel that they were mistaken in their
previous belief in God. Under the influence of this feeling, combined
with other psychological factors, they are appalled at the inadequacy of
their concepts and turn away from all attempts at the knowledge of
God."[^1]

Hence, scientists tried, by propounding all kinds of laws and formulae,
to leave no place for God and religion in the solution of questions
touching on existence and creation. They tried to sever men's hopes from
religion and to depose God from playing any role in the functioning of
the world and the ordering of nature.

Whenever they came to a dead end, they tried to solve the problem by
means of various hypotheses or postpone its definite solution until more
extensive research had taken place. They imagined that in this way they
were avoiding surrender to non-scientific formulae and superstitions.
Thus, although they did escape the perils of assigning polytheism, they
regrettably took up arms for irreligion and atheism.

\*\*\*\*\*

Although a faith in God and belief in an originating principle is
natural and innate in man, it cannot be compared to the material
necessities of life which man constantly strives to obtain. It is quite
distinct from material life, and being an inward need, belongs to a
totally separate category.

In addition, it is easier to deny an invisible being than it is to
affirm it, given our inability to describe it adequately. People who
lack mental capacity, therefore, choose the easy and painless path of
denial instead of undertaking mental exertion.

The path of denial does not, moreover, involve any apparent harm. By
turning away from God, people gradually acquire an attitude of obstinacy
and hostility to religion, tainted with fanaticism. The profound effects
of such an attitude can easily be seen in the malicious arguments of
those who have turned their backs on religion.

It is also easier to deny an invisible being because to affirm it
implies various obligations for man; those who wish to shake off those
obligations simply deny the existence of an originating principle. The
Qur’an says:

***"Does man wish to spend all the remaining days of his life in impiety
and vain desire? For he asks, implying denial, 'When will be the day of
resurrection and accounting?' Say: 'On a day when the eyes of mankind
will be blinded in terror and fear."*** **(75:5-7)**

\*\*\*\*\*

The teachings of ignorant and illogical professional ascetics also
cannot be overlooked as a factor impelling certain groups of people in
the direction of materialism.

The instincts that come into being together with the natural life of man
that are intertwined with his existence, not only are not vain and
purposeless; they are, also, a determining and destiny-shaping force, a
factor of development and motion, that drives man forward to the purpose
envisaged in his creation. It is true that man should not be a
blindfolded slave to his instincts like a prisoner all of whose being
and motions are under the control of the jailer.

But he should also not do battle with the reality of his own being and
seek to block all activity and movement on the part of his instincts. A
fruitful existence for man is, in fact, dependent on the active presence
in his life of his instincts, deployed in proper equilibrium; the
suppression of the instincts leads to complexes and the destruction of
the personality.

The worldview prevailing in Christianity during the Middle Ages was
based on an exclusive orientation to the hereafter that entailed the
devaluating of the material world. Now what will be the consequence if
one denies all validity to the forces of instinct, in the name of God
and religion, and even tries to annihilate them; if one sanctifies
celibacy and monasticism and denounces as impure marriage and
procreation, the very activity that secures the survival of the species;
and if one regards poverty and deprivation as the guarantee of bliss?
Will it, then, be possible to expect religion to play an active and
creative role?

The true role and mission of religion is to refine, to guide and to
control the instincts; to delimit the sphere of their activity; and to
purge them of all perversion and excess. It is not to annihilate and
abolish them.

Through controlling the instincts and striving always to free himself
from the trap they may present, man creates a purposeful destiny for
himself. If he fails to do this, the intense clash of instincts within
him is so intense that he cannot easily be master of his own being. He,
therefore, needs a comprehensive system of moral education.

Man is, on the one hand, subject to the influence of the religious
impulse; this tames him inwardly and draws together his scattered
energies in the grasp of its power, directing them toward the
acquisition of virtue and benefit. On the other hand, he is also subject
to the influence of his instincts.

In any society where people are constantly told, in the name of God and
religion, that the path to happiness lies in turning one's back on the
gifts of this world, an opening is automatically created for the
development of materialism and a concentration on material values, so
that the lofty concepts of religion, with all their far reaching
implications, disappear from the scene.

But this does not represent the true logic of religion. True religions
direct man's attention to authentic spiritual values, basing themselves
on belief in the creator and presenting man with comprehensive teachings
and principles for living. They extend the field of his vision to the
frontiers of the heavenly realm, deliver him from the servitude of
self-worship and materialism, and, at the same time, permit him to enjoy
material pleasures to a reasonable extent.

\*\*\*\*\*

Some people imagine that the free enjoyment of certain things religion
has prohibited will guarantee them happiness. They think that religion
is obstinately fighting against all enjoyment and is in no mood to
compromise with the pleasures of this world, as if God were forcing man
to choose between happiness in this world and happiness in the
hereafter.

This attitude to religion is totally misleading and unrealistic. If
religion seeks to play a role in man's efforts, and his choice of
direction, it is because unbridled indulgence of desire, unconditional
surrender to instinct and appetite, and obedience to the commands of the
ego, darken man's life and propel him into a form of unconscious
slavery.

Despite his essentially pure nature, he falls from his true rank and
strays from his real path. Were the free indulgence of instinctual
desire not a cause of eternal misery and painful degradation, it would
not have been forbidden.

It is considerations such as these which make it possible to understand
why religion has forbidden certain things and how worldly happiness is
compatible with happiness in the hereafter.

Similar considerations apply to the imposition on man of certain duties.
The attempt to perform obligatory acts of worship, sincerely and without
any hypocrisy, brings about an inward change in man; the purpose of
these acts is not in any way to diminish man's worldly happiness.

Worship is like a tempest in the stagnant lagoon of the heart,
transforming man's inner nature and his criteria of judgment. It is the
cornerstone on which the foundation of religion is made firm, a fruitful
educative practice that penetrates the depths of the soul. Its sharp
sword severs the skein of corruption and lowliness in man, enabling him
to take flight for a pure, vast and limitless realm. In short, it makes
it possible for man to grow to true maturity.

Not only is there no contradiction between the concerns of life and
those of the spirit; spiritual concerns are conducive to a life of
greater happiness in this world.

It may be that the unconvincing and illogical teachings of Christianity
have influenced the anti-religious tendencies of people like Bertrand
Russell. He evidently believed that faith in God leads to unhappiness,
as is apparent from the following words: "The teachings of the Church
have made man choose between two forms of misery and deprivation: either
misery in this world and deprivation of its enjoyments, or misery in the
hereafter and deprivation of the joys of paradise.

For the Church, one of these two forms of misery must necessarily be
endured. One must either submit to misery in this world and suffer
deprivation and isolation in order to enjoy pleasure in the hereafter,
or, if one wishes to enjoy the pleasures of this world, he must accept
that he will be deprived of pleasure in the hereafter."

The diffusion of opinions such as these, which display an intense and
profound ignorance of the religious worldview, may determine the fate of
the prevailing religion in a given society. Their effect on human
beliefs and actions is too profound to be adequately measured with a
passing, superficial glance.

This mode of thought has caused the attention of man to be directed
exclusively to the material sphere consciously or unconsciously. The
resulting concentration on pleasure and indulgence has caused the
weakening of spiritual and moral concerns.

Religion does not condemn man to enduring one of two forms of misery. It
is entirely possible to combine happiness in this world with happiness
in the hereafter. Why should God, Whose treasury of mercy and grace is
inexhaustible, not wish for His servants a complete happiness that
embraces both this world and the hereafter? This is precisely what He
does wish.

\*\*\*\*\*

Another factor in the spread of materialistic ideas has been indulgence
of passion and immersion in the cesspool of lust. Every mental
perception and idea forms the base of some external action; man's path
of action takes shape under the influence of his beliefs. Conversely,
man's actions and morals also bring about qualitative changes in his
mental habits and mode of thought.

A man who worships his lusts will gradually lose all exalted ideas about
God. Once he chooses an axis for his existence other than God and
imagines that whatever exists in this world has simply been cast into
it, free of any purpose, so that the very idea of an aim in life becomes
meaningless, he begins to devote all his mental energies to the
maximizing of pleasure. This humiliating plunge to a lowly plane of
existence withers the roots of all aspiration for growth and
development.

The idea of belief in God is, by contrast, like a seed that needs
suitable soil in which to grow. It can blossom only in a pure
environment, an environment in which man can swiftly and easily attain
the degree of perfection that is peculiar to him, thanks to a framework
in which the principles of his life are set down. Belief in God can
never flourish in an unfavorable environment where corruption is
rampant.

One of the obstacles to the knowledge of God and the reasons for man
denying this existence, despite all the clear signs and decisive proofs
that are available, is, then, surrender to sin and indulgence in
passion.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, said in answer to Mufaddal in
the Risalah-yi Ahlija: "I swear by my own soul that God has not failed
to make Himself known to the ignorant, for they see clear proofs and
decisive indications of the Creator in His creation and behold wondrous
phenomena in the kingdom of the heavens and on earth that point to their
Creator.

"The ignorant are those who have opened the gates of sin before them and
followed the path of indulgence in passion and lust. The desires of
their souls have gained dominance over their hearts, and because of
their oppression of their own selves, Satan has gained dominance over
them. God has sealed the hearts of the transgressors.”[^2]

The desire for comfort, contentiousness, profligacy, the weak logic of
certain ignorant believers these, too, are among the factors impelling
men to materialism.

The chaos and confusion of life, the abundance of mass produced goods,
affluence and power, the dazzling and distracting aspects of modern
life, the proliferation of means for enjoyment and pleasure all these
completely overwhelm greedy men. They try completely to withdraw
themselves from the sphere of religious concern and refuse to accept the
authority of any superior power, for not only would this not bring them
any material benefit, it would also rein in the tempest of their
overweening desires.

In an environment where people are immersed in sin, dissipation and
corruption, and refuse to accept any limitation governing their deeds,
religion can exist only in name.

Self-indulgent and materialistic people cannot be seekers and
worshippers of God. When one of the two opposing principles,
pleasure-seeking and belief in God, has occupied the mental space of an
individual, the other must necessarily vacate it. Once the spirit of
worship prevails in human existence, it casts out all materialistic
inclinations by severing the firm fetters of lowly desire and inspiring
constant effort in man to ascend in the direction of his goal. Thus, a
complete model of human freedom from slavery to nature emerges.

The more elevated and distant the goal man sets himself, the sharper is
the incline leading toward it and the greater and more prolonged the
effort required to reach it. So, if we choose God as our goal, we have
chosen an infinitely elevated goal, and the path leading to attainment
of the goal will be similarly infinite, although clear and straight at
the same time. It is a goal that will answer many problems and
questions, and since it will compel us to negate the tyranny of the ego,
it will bestow absolute freedom on us.

If we accept God as our goal, freedom will be harmonized with our growth
and development. Our efforts to develop and progress will take on
content and meaning, thanks to the divine impulse and the desire for
eternal life. In short, the desire for progress and advancement, once
regulated by the worship of God, neither contradicts man's freedom nor
results in his enslavement.

We can claim to have attained freedom only when we are in step with the
universal advancement of the world toward perfection, deliberately,
consciously, and in awareness of the benefits this will bring. To act in
obedience to nature or historical inevitability is not freedom, for when
man ignores his own welfare to follow the dictates of nature, this is
nothing other than slavery or blind obedience.

[^1]: Isbat-i Vujud-i Khuda, p.60.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. III, p. 152.


