A Meeting with the Al Ulama’  (The Learned Men)
===============================================

My friend took me to a mosque next to the mausoleum, where the floors
were covered by carpets, and around its Mihrab there were some Qur'anic
verses, engraved in beautiful calligraphy. I noticed a few turbaned
youngsters sitting near the Mihrab studying, and each one of them had a
book in his hand.

I was impressed by the scene, since I had never seen Shaykhs aged
between thirteen and sixteen, and what made them look so cute were their
costumes. My friend asked them about the Master "al-Sayyid", so they
told him that he was leading the prayer. I did not know what he meant by
"al-Sayyid", and thought he might be one of the Ulama, but later I
realized it was "al-Sayyid al-Khu'i" the leader of the Shiite community.

It was worth noting here that the title "Sayyid", master for the Shi’a,
is given to those who are the descendants of the family of the Prophet
(saw), and the "Sayyid", whether he is a student or an Alim (learned
man), wears a black turban, but other Ulama usually wear white turbans
and bear the title of "Shaykh". There are other notables (al-Ashraf) who
are not Ulama and wear a green turban.

My friend asked them if I could sit with them, whilst he went to meet
al-Sayyid. They welcomed me and sat around me in a semi-circle and I
looked at their faces which were full of innocence and purity, and then
I remembered the saying of the Prophet (saw) "Man is born to live by
nature, so his parents could make him a Jew or a Christian or a Magus"
and I said to myself, "Or make him a Shi'i."

They asked me, which country I came from, I answered. "From Tunisia."
They asked, "Have you got religious schools?" I answered, "We have
universities and schools." I was bombarded by questions from all sides,
and all the questions were sharp and concentrated. What could I say to
those innocent boys who thought that the Islamic world was full of
religious schools where they teach Jurisprudence, Islamic Law, principle
of Islam and Qur'anic commentary?

They did not know that in the modern world of Islam we have changed the
Qur'anic schools to kindergartens supervised by Christian nuns so should
I tell them that they are considered by us as being "backward"? One of
the boys asked me, "Which Madhhab (religious school) is followed in
Tunis'?" I said, "The Maliki madhhab." And noticed that some of them
laughed, but I did not pay much attention. He asked me, "Do you not know
the Jafari Madhhab?" I said, "What is this new name? No we only know the
four Madhahibs, and apart from that is not within Islam."

He smiled and said, "The Jafari Madhhab is the essence of Islam, do you
not know that Imam Abu Hanifah studied under Imam Jafar al-Sadiq? And
that Abu Hanifah said, "Without the two years al-Numan would have
perished." I remained silent and did not answer, for I had heard a name
that I had never heard before, but thanked Allah that he i.e. their Imam
Jafar al-Sadiq was not a teacher of Imam Malik, and said that we are
Malikis and not Hanafis.

He said, "The four Madhahibs took from each other, Ahmed ibn Hanbal took
from al-Shafii, and al-Shafii took from Malik, and Malik took from Abu
Hanifah, and Abu Hanifah from Jafar al-Sadiq, therefore, all of them
were students of Jafar ibn Muhammad, who was the first to open an
Islamic University in the mosque of his grandfather, the Messenger of
Allah and under him studied no less than four thousand jurisprudents and
specialists in Hadith (prophetic traditions).

I was surprised by the intelligence of that young boy who seemed to have
learnt what he was saying in the same way that one recites a Surah from
the Qur'an. I was even more astonished when he started telling me some
historical references which he knew the number of their volumes and
chapters, and he continued with his discussion as if he was a teacher
teaching a student.

In fact I felt weak before him and wished that I had gone with my friend
instead of staying with the young boys. I was not able to answer every
question connected with jurisprudence or history that they asked me.

He asked me, "Which of the Imams I followed?" I said, "Imam Malik." He
said, "How do you follow a dead man with fourteen centuries between you
and him. If you want to ask him a question about current issues, would
he answer you?" I thought for a little while and then said, "Your Jafar
also died fourteen centuries ago, so whom do you follow?" He and other
boys answered me quickly, "We follow al- Sayyid al-Khu'i, for he is our
Imam."

I did not know who was more knowledgeable, al-Khu'i or Jafar al-Sadiq. I
tried my best to change the subject so I kept asking them questions such
as, "What is the population of al- Najaf? How far is al-Najaf from
Baghdad? Did they know other countries beside Iraq?”

And every time they answered, I prepared another question for them to
prevent them from asking me, for I felt incapable of matching their
knowledge. But I refused to admit it, despite the fact that inside
myself, I accepted defeat. The days of glory and scholarship in Egypt
had dissipated here, especially after meeting those youngsters, and then
I remembered the following wise words:  
 Say to him who claims knowledge in Philosophy, "You have known one
thing but you are still unaware of many things."

I thought the minds of those young boys were greater than the minds of
those Shaykhs whom I met in al-Azhar and the minds of our Shaykhs in
Tunisia.

Al-Sayyid al-Khu'i entered the place, and with him came a group of Ulama
who looked respectable and dignified, and all the boys stood up, and me
with them, then each one of them approached al-Sayyid to kiss his hand,
but I stayed rigid in my place. Al-Sayyid did not sit down until
everybody sat down, then he started greeting them one by one, and he was
greeted back by each individual until my turn came, so I replied in the
same way.

After that my friend, who had whispered to al-Sayyid, pointed to me to
get nearer to al-Sayyid, which I did, and he sat me to his right. After
we exchanged the greetings my friend said to me, "Tell al-Sayyid the
things you hear in Tunisia about the Shi’a." I said, "Brother, let us
forget about the stories we hear from here and there, and I want to know
for myself what the Shi’a say, so I want frank answers to some questions
that I have."

My friend insisted that I should inform al-Sayyid about what we thought
of al-Shi’a. I said, "We consider the Shi’a to be harder on Islam than
the Christian and Jews, because they worship Allah and believe in the
Message of Musa, may Allah grant him peace, but we hear that the Shi’a
worship ‘Ali and consider him to be sacred, and there is a sect among
them who worship Allah but put ‘Ali at the same level as the Messenger
of Allah." Also I told him the story about how the angel Gabriel
betrayed his charge, as they say, so instead of giving the message to
‘Ali he gave it to Muhammad (saw).

Al-Sayyid remained silent for a little while, with his head down, then
he looked at me and said, "We believe that there is no other God but
Allah, and that Muhammad (saw) is the Messenger of Allah, and that ‘Ali
was but a servant of Allah." He turned to his audience and said,
indicating to me "Look at these innocent people how they have been
brain-washed by the false rumors; and this is not surprising for I heard
more than that from other people, (so we say) there is no power or
strength save in Allah, the Highest and the Greatest."

Then he turned to me and said, "Have you read the Qur'an?" I answered,
"I could recite half of it by heart before I was ten." He said, "Do you
know that all the Islamic groups, regardless of their sects agree on the
Holy Qur'an, for our Qur'an is the same as yours?" I said, "Yes I know
that." He then said, "Have you not read the words of Allah, praise be to
Him the Sublime:

***“And Muhammad is no more than a messenger, the messengers have
already passed away before him.” (Holy Qur'an 3:144)***

***“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are from of
heart against the unbelievers.” (Holy Qur'an 48:29)***

***“Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the
Messenger of Allah and the last of the Prophets.” (Holy Qur'an 33:40)***

I said, "Yes I know all these Qur'anic verses." He said, "Where is ‘Ali
then? If our Qur'an says that Muhammad (saw) is the Messenger of Allah,
so where did this lie come from?"

I remained silent and could not find an answer. He added, "As for the
betrayal of Gabriel, God forbid, it is worse than the first, because
when Allah sent Gabriel unto Muhammad (saw), Muhammad (saw) was forty
years old then, and ‘Ali was a lad of six or seven years, so how could
Gabriel make a mistake and did not differentiate between Muhammad (saw)
the man and ‘Ali the lad?" He stayed silent for a long time, and I
started thinking about what he had said, which appeared to me as logical
reasoning, so that it left a deep impression on me, and I asked myself
why we did not base our analysis on such logical reasoning.

Al-Sayyid al-Khu'i added, "I would like to inform you that the Shi’a is
the only group, among all the Islamic groups, which believe in the
infallibility of the Prophets and Imams; so if our Imams, may Allah
grant them peace, are infallible, and they are human beings like us,
then how about Gabriel, who is an angel favored by Allah and He called
him "The faithful spirit"?

I asked, "Where did all these rumors come from?" He said, "From the
enemies of Islam who want to divide the Muslims into groups that fight
each other, otherwise Muslims are brothers, whether they were Shi’a or
Sunnis, for all of them worship Allah alone and do not associate any
other God with Him, and they have one Qur'an, one Prophet and one Qiblah
(Direction to which Muslims turn in praying i.e. Kabaa). The Shi’a and
the Sunnis only differ on issues regarding jurisprudence, in the same
way that the different schools of jurisprudence in the Sunni school
differ among each other; as Malik did not agree all the way with Abu
Hanifah who himself did not agree all the way with al-Shafii and so on."

I said, "Therefore, all the things which have been said about you are
just lies?" He said, "You, praise be to Allah, are a sensible man and
could comprehend things, also you have seen Shi'i countries and have
travelled in their midst; so did you hear or see anything related to
these lies?" I said, "No, I have not seen or heard anything but good
things, and I thank Allah for giving me the opportunity to meet Mr.
Munim on the ship, since he was the reason for my presence in Iraq, and
indeed I have learnt many things that I had not known before."

My friend Munim said, with a smile, "Including the existence of a grave
for the Imam ‘Ali?" I winked at him and said, "In fact I have learnt
many new things even from those young lads and wish I had had the
opportunity to learn as they do in this Religious School."  
 Al-Sayyid said, "Welcome, if you want to study here, then there will be
a place for you in this school." Everybody welcomed the suggestion,
especially my friend Munim whose face was full of joy.

I said, "I am a married man with two boys." He said, "We will take care
of your accommodation and living and whatever you need, but the
important thing is learning."  
 I thought for a little while and said to myself, "It does not seem
acceptable to become a student after having spent five years as a
teacher and educationalist, and it is not easy to take a decision so
hastily."

I thanked al-Sayyid al-Khu'i for his offer and told him that I would
think about the matter seriously after I came back from al-Umrah, but I
needed some books. Al-Sayyid said, "Give him the books."

A group of learned people stood up and went to their book cabinets and
after a few minutes each one of them presented me with a book, so I had
more than seventy. I realized that I could not carry all these books
with me, especially as I was going to Saudi Arabia, where the
authorities censor any book entering their countries, lest new ideas get
established, in particular those ideas which do not agree with their
creed.

However, I did not want to miss the chance of having all these books
which I had never seen in all my life. I said to my friend and the rest
of the people that I had a long journey ahead of me, passing through
Damascus, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, and on the way back my journey would
be even longer for I would travel through Egypt and Lybia until I
reached Tunisia, and beside the weight of these books was the fact that
most of the countries prohibit the entry of these books to their
territories.

Al-Sayyid said, "Leave us your address and we will send them to you." I
liked the idea and gave him my personal card with my address in Tunis on
it. Also, I thanked him for his generosity, and when I was about to
leave him he stood up and said to me, "May Allah grant you safety and if
you stand by the grave of my forefather the Messenger of Allah please
pass my greetings to him."

Everybody, including myself, was moved by what al- Sayyid had said, and
I noticed that tears were coming from his eyes, and then I said to
myself, "God forbid that such a man could be wrong or a liar; his
dignity, his greatness and his modesty tell you that he is truly a
descendant of the Prophet." I could not help myself but to take his hand
and kiss it, in spite of his refusal.

When I stood up to go, everybody stood and said farewell to me, and some
of the young lads from the religious school followed me and asked me for
my addresses for future correspondence, and I gave it to them.

We went back to al-Kufa after an invitation from a friend of Munim,
whose name was Abu Shubbar, and stayed in his house where we spent a
whole night socializing with a group of intellectual young people. Among
those people were some students of al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr who
suggested that I should meet him, and they promised to arrange an
interview with him on the day after. My friend Munim liked the idea but
apologized for not being able to be present at the meeting because he
has a prior engagement in Baghdad. We agreed that I would stay in Abu
Shubbar's house for three or four days until Munim came back.

Munim left us shortly after the dawn prayers and we went to sleep. I
benefitted so much from these students and was surprised about the
variety of subjects they study in the Religious School. In addition to
the Islamic studies which include Jurisprudence, Islamic Law (Shariah)
and Tawheed (Islamic Theology); they study Economics, Sociology,
Politics, and History, Languages, Astronomy and a few more subjects.


