A Meeting with Al Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al Sadr
===============================================

I went with Abu Shubbar to al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr's house, and
on the way he honoured me and talked to me about the famous Ulama and
about Taqlid (adoption of a legal decision by the Mujtahid) and so on
until we entered the house where we found al Sayyid al Sadr surrounded
by many young turbaned students.

Al-Sayyid stood up and greeted us, then I was introduced to him and he
welcomed me warmly and sat me next to him. After that he started asking
me about Tunisia and Algeria and about famous Ulama like al-Khidr Husayn
and al-Thahir ibn Ashoor and others. I enjoyed his talk, and despite his
high position and the great respect he commands from his students, I
found myself at ease with him and felt as if I had known him before.

I benefitted so much from that meeting because I listened to the
questions asked by the students and his answers to them; also I
appreciated then the idea of adopting the decision of the living Ulama
who could answer all sorts of questions directly and clearly. I became
convinced that the Shi’a are Muslims worshipping Allah alone, who
believe in the message of our Prophet Muhammad (saw).

At the beginning I suspected that what I saw was just acting, or perhaps
as they call it Taqiyyah, i.e. they show what they do not believe; but
these suspicions disappeared quickly since it was inconceivable that the
hundreds of people that I saw or heard coordinated their acting, and why
should there be acting anyway?

Besides who was I, and why should they be concerned about me to the
extent that they used Taqiyyah with me? And all their books, whether
they were old ones that had been written centuries ago or the newly
published ones, all professed the unity of Allah and praise His
Messenger Muhammad (saw). There I was, in the house of al-Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, the famous religious authority inside Iraq and
outside it, and every time the name of Muhammad (saw) was mentioned, the
entire audience shouted in one voice "May Allah's blessings be upon
Muhammad and his household."

When the time for prayer was due, we left the house and went to the
mosque, which was next door, and al-Sayyid Muhammad al-Sadr led the
midday and afternoon prayers. I felt as if I was living among the
Companions (of the Prophet), for there was a solemn invocation from one
of the men who had a moving voice, and when he finished the invocation
the whole audience shouted, "May Allah's blessing be upon Muhammad and
his household." The invocation was basically to thank and glorify Allah,
the Great Majesty, and then Muhammad (saw) and his good and purified
posterity.

After the prayer, al-Sayyid sat in the Mihrab (the prayer niche) and
people came to greet him, some asked him private questions, others asked
him general questions, and he answered each one of them accordingly.
When the person obtained an answer for his question, he kissed the hand
of al- Sayyid then left, what lucky people to have such a dignified
learned Imam who lives their experiences and solves their problems.

Al-Sayyid showed me so much care and generosity to the extent that I
forgot all about my family and tribe, and felt that if I stayed for one
month with him, I would have become a Shi’i, because of his manners,
modesty and generosity. Whenever I looked at him he smiled and asked me
if I needed anything, and I did not leave his company during the four
days, only when I wanted to go to sleep.

There were many visitors who came to see him from all over the world;
there were Saudi Shi’i from Hijaz, others came from Bahrain, Qatar,
United Arab Emirates, Lebanon, Syria, Iran, Afghanistan, Turkey and
Black Africa; and al-Sayyid spoke to each one of them and solved their
problems, later they left him feeling happy and comforted.

Here I would like to mention a case which was brought to al-Sayyid when
I was in his company, and I was very impressed by the way he dealt with
it. I mention it because of its historical importance so that the
Muslims know what they have lost by leaving the rule of Allah.

Four men, who were probably Iraqis, judging by their accents, came to
see al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr. One of them had inherited a house
from his grandfather, who had died a few years ago, and had sold that
house to a second person (he was present then). One year after the
completion of the sale, two brothers came and proved that they were also
legal inheritors of the dead man (i.e. the father).

The four of them sat before al-Sayyid and each one of them produced a
number of papers and deeds, which al-Sayyid read, and after he spoke for
a few minutes with the men, he passed a fair judgment. He gave the
purchaser the full right to his house, and asked the seller to pay to
his two brothers their shares from the selling price, and after that
they stood up and kissed al-Sayyid's hand and embraced each other. I was
astonished about what had happened and asked Abu Shubbar, "Has the case
ended?"

He said, "Yes, everyone received his right. Praise be to Allah!" In such
case, and in such a short time, only a few minutes, the problem was
solved. A similar case in our country would have taken at least ten
years to resolve, some of the plaintiffs would die and their sons resume
the case; often the legal costs exceed the price of the house. The case
would move from the Magistrate Court to the Appeal Court to the Court of
Review, and at the end no one is satisfied, and hatred between People
and Tribes are created.

Abu Shubbar commented, “we have the same thing if not worse." I asked,
"How?" He said, if people take their cases to the state courts, then
they would go through the same troubles which you have just mentioned,
but if they follow the Religious Authority and commit themselves to the
Islamic Laws, then they would take their cases to him and the problem
would be solved in a few minutes, as you saw. And what is better than
the Law of Allah for people who could comprehend? Al-Sayyid al-Sadr did
not charge them one Fils, but if they went to the state courts, then
they would have paid a high price."

I said, "Praise be to Allah! I still cannot believe what I have seen,
and if I had not seen it with my eyes, I would not have believed it at
all."

Abu Shubbar said, "You do not have to deny it brother, this is a simple
case in comparison with other more complicated ones which involve blood.
Even so, the Religious Authorities do consider them, and it takes them a
few hours to resolve." I said with astonishment, "Therefore you have two
governments in Iraq, a government of the state and a government of the
clergy. He replied, "No, we have a government of the state only, but the
Muslims of the Shi’i Madhhab who follow the Religious Authorities, have
nothing to do with the government of the state, because it is not an
Islamic government.

They are subjects of that government simply because of their
citizenship, the taxes, civil laws and personal status; so if a
committed Muslim had an argument with a non committed Muslim, then the
case must be taken to the state courts, because the latter would not
accept the judgment of the Religious Authorities. However, if two
committed Muslims had an argument, then there is no problem, whatever
the Religious Authorities decide is acceptable to all parties. Thus, all
cases seen by the Religious Authorities are solved on a day-to-day
basis, whereas other cases linger on for months and years."

It was an incident that made me feel content with rule of Allah, praise
be to Him the Exalted one, which helped me to comprehend the words of
Allah in His Glorious Book:

***“... And whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the unbelievers.” (Holy Qur'an 5:44)***

***“... And whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the unjust.” (Holy Qur'an 5:45)***

***“... And whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the transgressors.” (Holy Qur'an 5:47)***

That incident aroused in me feelings of anger and resentment about those
who change the just rules of Allah with some unjust, man-made rules.
They even go further, and with all impudence and sarcasm, they criticize
the divine rules and condemn them for being barbaric and inhuman because
it draws the limits cuts the hand of the thief, stones the adulterer and
kills the killer. So where did all these new theories that are foreign
to us and our culture come from? There is no doubt they came from the
West and from the enemies of Islam who know that the application of
Allah's rules mean their inevitable destruction because they are
thieves, traitors, adulterers, criminals and murderers.

I had many discussions with al-Sayyid al-Sadr during these days, and I
asked him about everything I had learnt through the friends who talked
to me about their beliefs and what they thought about the Companions of
the Prophet (saw), and about ‘Ali and his sons, beside many other issues
that we used to disagree upon.

I asked al-Sayyid al-Sadr about Imam ‘Ali and why they testify for him
in the Adhan (the call for prayers) that he is "Waliy Allah" (the friend
of Allah). He answered me in the following way:

“The Commander of the Believers, ‘Ali, may Allah's blessings be upon
him, was one of those servants of Allah whom He chose and honored by
giving them the responsibilities of the Message after His Prophet. These
servants are the trustees of the Prophet (saw), since each prophet has a
trustee, and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib is the trustee of Muhammad (saw).

We favor him above all the Companions of the Prophet (saw) because Allah
and the Prophet favored him, and we have many proofs of that, some of
them are deduced through logical reasoning, others are found in the
Qur'an and al-Sunnah (the Tradition of the Prophet Muhammad (saw)), and
these proofs cannot be suspect, because they have been scrutinized, and
proven right, by our own learned people (who wrote many books about the
subject) and those of the Sunni Madhahibs.

The Umayyad regime worked very hard to cover this truth and fought Imam
‘Ali and his sons, whom they killed. They even ordered people, sometimes
by force, to curse him, so his followers, may Allah bless them all,
started to testify for him as being the friend of Allah. No Muslim would
curse the friend of Allah in defiance of the oppressive authorities, so
that the glory was to Allah, and to His Messenger and to all the
believers. It also became an historical land mark across the generations
so that they know the just cause of ‘Ali and the wrong doing of his
enemies.

Thus, our learned people continued to testify that ‘Ali is the friend of
Allah in their calls to prayer, as something which is commendable. There
are many commendable things in the religious rites as well as in
ordinary mundane dealings, and the Muslim will be rewarded for doing
them, but not punished for leaving them aside.

For example, it is commendable for the Muslim to say after al-Shahadah
(i.e. to testify that there is no God but Allah, and that Muhammad (saw)
is His messenger): And I will testify that Heaven is true and Hell is
true, and that Allah will resurrect people from their graves.”

I said "Our learned people taught us that the priority of the succession
was for our master Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, then to our master Umar al-Faruq,
then to our master Uthman, then to our master ‘Ali, may Allah bless them
all."

Al-Sayyid remained silent for a short while, then answered me: “Let them
say what they want, but it would be impossible for them to prove it on
legal grounds, besides, what they say contradicts their books which
state: The best of the people is Abu Bakr then Uthman, and there is no
mention of ‘Ali because they made him just an ordinary person, however,
the later historians started to mention him for the sake of mentioning
the Rightly Guided Caliphs.

After that I asked him about the piece of clay on which they put their
foreheads during the prayers and they call it "al-Turbah
al-Husayniyyah". He answered,

We all prostrate on the dust, but not for the dust, as some people claim
that the Shi’a do, for the prostration is only for Allah, praise be to
Him the Highest. It is well established among our people, as well as
among the Sunnis, that the most favourable prostration is on earth or on
the non-edible produce of the earth, and it is incorrect to prostrate on
anything else. The Messenger of Allah (saw) used to sit on the dust, and
he had a piece of clay mixed with straw, on which he used to prostrate.
He also taught his Companions, may Allah bless them all, to prostrate on
the earth or on stones, and forbade them from prostrating on the edges
of their shirts. We consider these acts to be necessary and important.

Imam Zayn al-Abideen ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (may Allah bless them both) took
a Turbah (a piece of clay) from near the grave of his father Abu
Abdullah, because the dust there is blessed and pure, for the blood of
the chief martyr was spilt on it. Thus, his followers continue with that
practice up to the present day.

We do not say that prostration is not allowed but on Turbah, rather, we
say that prostration is correct if it is done on any blessed Turbah or
stone, also it is correct if it is done on a mat which is made of palm
leaves or similar material.

I asked, with reference to our master al-Husayn, may Allah's blessings
be upon him, "Why do the Shi’a cry and beat their cheeks and other parts
of their bodies until blood is spilt, and this is prohibited in Islam,
for the Prophet (saw) said: He who beats the cheeks, tears the pockets
and follows the call of al-Jahiliyyah is not one of us."

Al-Sayyid replied,  
 The saying is correct and there is no doubt about it, but it does not
apply to the obsequies of Abu Abdullah, for he who calls for the
avenging of al-Husayn and follows his path, his call is not of the
Jahiliyyah. Besides, the Shias are only human beings, among them you
find the learned and not so learned, and they have feelings and
emotions. If they are overcome by their emotions during the anniversary
of the martyrdom of Abu Abdullah, and remember what happened to him, his
family and his companions from degradation to captivity and then finally
murder, then they will be rewarded for their good intentions, because
all these intentions are for the sake of Allah. Allah - praise be to
Him, the Highest - who rewards people according to their intentions.

Last week I read the official reports from the Egyptian government about
the suicide incidents that followed the death of Jamal Abdul Nasser.
There were eight such incidents in which people took their lives by
jumping from buildings or throwing themselves under trains, besides them
there were many injured people. These are but some examples in which
emotions have overcome the most rational of people, who happen to be
Muslims and who killed themselves because of the death of Jamal Abdul
Nasser, who died of natural causes, therefore, it is not right for us to
condemn the Sunnis and judge them to be wrong.

On the other hand, it is not right for the Sunnis to accuse their
brothers the Shi’a of being wrong because they cry for the chief martyr.
These people have lived and are still living to this present day the
tragedy of al-Husayn. Even the Messenger of Allah (saw) cried after the
death of his son al- Husayn, and Gabriel cried also.

I asked, "Why do the Shi’a decorate the graves of their saints with gold
and silver, despite the fact that it is prohibited in Islam?"

Al-Sayyid al-Sadr replied,  
 This is not done just by the Shi’a, and it is not prohibited. Look at
the mosques of our brothers the Sunnis in Iraq or Egypt or Turkey or
anywhere else in the Islamic world, they are all decorated with gold and
silver. Furthermore, the mosque of the Messenger of Allah (saw) in
al-Madinah al-Munawarah and the Kaba, the House of Allah, in the blessed
Mecca is covered every year by a cloth decorated by gold which costs
millions. So such a thing is not exclusive to the Shi’a.

I asked "The Saudi Ulama say that touching the graves and calling the
saints for their blessings is polytheism, so what is your opinion?"  
 Al-Sayyid al-Sadr replied:  
 If touching the graves and calling the dead is with the understanding
that they could cause harm or render a benefit, then that is polytheism,
no doubt about it, the Muslims are monotheists and they know that Allah
alone could cause harm or render a benefit, but calling the saints and
Imams (may Allah bless them all) with the understanding that they could
be an intermediary to Allah, that is not polytheism.

All Muslims, Sunnis and Shias, agreed on this point from the time of the
Messenger up to the present day, except the Wahabiyyah, the Saudi Ulama
who contradict all Muslims with their new creed. They caused
considerable disturbances among the Muslims, they accused them of
blasphemy, they spilt their blood and even beat old pilgrims on their
way to the House of Allah in Mecca just because they say "O Messenger of
Allah, may peace be upon you", and they will never let anybody touch his
blessed grave. They had so many debates with our learned people, but
they persisted in their stubbornness and their arrogance.

Al-Sayyid Sharaf al-Din, a famous Shi'i learned man, went on pilgrimage
to the House of Allah during the time of Abdul Aziz ibn Saud, and he was
one of those Ulama who were invited to the King's palace to celebrate
with the King 'Id al-Adhha, in accordance with the customs there. When
his turn came to shake the King'shand, Sayyid Sharaf al-Din presented
him with a leather bound Qur'an.

The King took the Qur'an and placed it on his forehead then kissed it.
Al Sayyid Sharaf al-Din said, "O King, why do you kiss and glorify the
cover which is only made out of goat's skin?" The King answered, "I
meant to glorify the Holy Qur'an, not the goat's skin." Al-Sayyid Sharaf
al-Din then said, "Well said, O King. We do the same when we kiss the
window or the door of the Prophet's (saw) chamber, we know it is made of
iron and could not harm or render a benefit, but we mean what is behind
the iron and wood, we mean to glorify the Messenger of Allah (saw) in
the same way as you meant with the Qur'an when you kissed its goat's
skin cover.

The audience was impressed by al-Sayyid and said, "You are right." The
King was forced to allow the pilgrims to ask for blessings from the
Prophet's relics, until the order was reversed by the successor of that
king. The issue is not that they are afraid of people associating others
with Allah, rather, it is a political issue based on antagonizing and
killing the Muslims in order to consolidate their power and authority
over the Muslims, and history is the witness to what they have done with
the Muslim nation.

I asked him about the Sufi orders, and he answered me briefly:  
 There are positive and negative aspects to them. The positive aspects
include self-discipline, austere living, renunciation of worldly
pleasures and elevating one's self to the spiritual world. The negative
aspects include isolation, escapism and restricting the mention of Allah
by verbal numbers and various other practices. Islam, as it is known
accepts the positive aspects but rejects the negative ones, and we may
say that all the principles and teachings of Islam are positive.


