Skepticism and Perplexity
=========================

The answers of al-Sayyid al-Sadr were clear and convincing, but it was
very difficult for a person like me to comprehend them. Twenty-five
years of my life had been based on the idea of glorifying and respecting
the Companions of the Prophet, especially the Rightly Guided Caliphs.
The Messenger of Allah commanded us to follow their teachings, in
particular Abu Bakr al-Siddiq and Umar al-Farooq, but I had never heard
their names mentioned since I arrived in Iraq. Instead, I heard strange
names that I had never come across before, and that there were twelve
Imams, and a claim that the Messenger of Allah had stated before his
death that Imam ‘Ali should be his successor.

How could I believe all that (that all Muslims and the Companions of the
Prophet- who was the best of people -, after the death of the Prophet
agreed to stand against ‘Ali - may Allah honor him) when we had been
taught from childhood that the Companions of the Prophet - may Allah
bless them all - respected ‘Ali and knew very well what kind of man he
was. They knew that he was the husband of Fatima al-Zahra and the father
of al-Hasan and al-Husayn and the gate to the city of knowledge.

Our Master ‘Ali knew the quality of Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, who became a
Muslim before anybody else, and accompanied the Prophet to the cave, as
is mentioned by Allah, the Mighty, in the Qur'an, and whom the Messenger
of Allah charged with the leadership of the prayers during his illness,
and said about him, if I was taking a very close friend, I would have
chosen Abu Bakr." Because of all that, the Muslims elected him as their
caliph.

Imam ‘Ali knew the position of our master Umar, with whom Allah
glorified Islam, and the Messenger of Allah called him al-Farooq, he who
separates right from wrong. Also Imam ‘Ali knew the position of our
master Uthman, in whose presence the angels of the Merciful felt shy,
and who organized al-Usrah's army, and who was named by the Messenger of
Allah as "Dhu al-Nurayn", the man who is endowed with two lights.

How could our brothers, al-Shi’a, ignore or pretend to ignore all that,
and make these personalities just ordinary characters subject to all
worldly whims and greed so that they deviated from the right path and
disobeyed the orders of the Messenger after his death. This was
inconceivable since we know that these people used to hasten to execute
the orders of the Messenger; they killed their sons and fathers and
members of their tribes for the sake of glorifying Islam and its
ultimate victory. He who would kill his father and son for the sake of
Allah and His Messenger could not be subject to worldly and transitory
ambitions such as the position of Caliph, and ignoring the orders of the
Messenger of Allah.

Yes, because of all that I could not believe all the Shi’a were saying,
in spite of the fact that I was convinced about many things. I remained
in a state of doubt and perplexity: doubtful because of what the Shii
learned scholars Ulama said to me, which I found sensible and logical;
and perplexed because I could not believe that the Companions of the
Prophet, may Allah bless them all, would sink to such a low moral stand
and become ordinary people like us, neither sharpened by the light of
the Message nor able to be enlightened by Muhammad.

O my God, how could that be? Could the Companions of the Prophet be at
the level described by the Shi’a? The important thing is that doubt and
perplexity were the beginning of weakness and the realization that there
were many hidden issues to be uncovered before reaching the truth.

My friend came, then we travelled to Karbala, and there I lived the
tragedy of our master al-Husayn in the same way his followers, and only
then did I know that he had not died an ordinary death. People tend to
crowd around his grave like butterflies and cry with such sorrow and
grief that I have never seen before, as if al-Husayn had just been
martyred. I heard speakers who aroused the feelings of people when
describing the incident at Karbala, accompanied by crying and wailing,
and soon the listener loses control of himself and collapses.

I cried and cried and let myself go as if crushed, and felt a relief
that I had never experienced before that day; I felt that I had been in
the ranks of al-Husayn's enemies and had suddenly changed sides to be
one of his followers who sacrificed themselves for his sake. The speaker
was reciting the story of al-Hurr, who was one of the commanders in
charge of fighting al-Husayn, who stood in the middle of the battlefield
shaking like a leaf, and when one of his friends asked him, "Are you
afraid of death?" He answered, "No, by Allah, but I am choosing between
heaven and hell." Then he kicked his horse and went towards al-Husayn
and asked, "Is there a repentance, O son of the Messenger of Allah?"

When I heard that, I could not control myself and fell on the floor
crying and felt as if I was in the position of al-Hurr, asking
al-Husayn, "Is there repentance, O son of the Messenger of Allah?
Forgive me O son of the Messenger of Allah. The voice of the speaker was
so moving that people started crying and wailing, and when my friend
heard my cries, he embraced me, like a mother embracing her child, and
started crying and calling, "O Husayn...O Husayn..."

These were moments, during which I learnt that meaning of real crying
and felt that my tears washed my heart and body from the inside, and
then I understood the meaning of the Messenger's saying: If you knew
what I know, you would have laughed little and cried more.

I was depressed throughout the day, although my friend tried to
re-assure me and cheer me up by offering me some refreshments, but I had
lost my appetite completely. I asked him to repeat the story of the
martyrdom of al-Husayn, for I did not know much about it except the fact
that our religious leaders told us that the enemies of Islam killed our
masters Umar, Uthman and ‘Ali, and that the same enemies killed our
master al-Husayn; and that is all we knew. In fact we used to celebrate
Ashura, as one of the festival days of Islam; alms were distributed and
various types of food were cooked and the young boys went to their
elders who gave them money to buy sweets and toys.

However, there are a few customs in some villages during Ashura: people
do not light fires or do any kind of work. People do not get married or
celebrate a happy occasion. We usually accept them at face value without
any explanation given, and strangely enough, our religious leaders talk
to us about the greatness of Ashura and how blessed it is.

After that we went to visit the grave of al-Abbas, the brother of
al-Husayn. I did not know who he was, but my friend informed me about
his bravery. We also met many pious religious leaders whose names I
cannot recall in detail, but I can still recall their surnames: Bahr
al-Ulum, al-Sayyid al-Hakim, Kashif al-Ghita, al-Yasin, al-Tabatabai,
al- Feiruzabadi, Asad Haidar, and others, who honoured me with their
company.

They are truly pious religious leaders, possessing all the signs of
dignity and respect, and the Shi’a population respects them and gives
them one fifth of their incomes.

Through these donations they manage the affairs of the religious
schools, open new schools, establish presses and assist students who
come to them from all over the Islamic world.

They are independent and not connected in any way with the rulers;
unlike our religious leaders who would not do or say anything without
the approval of the authorities, who pay their salaries and appoint
them, and remove them whenever they want.

It was a new world that I had discovered, or rather, Allah had
discovered for me. I started to enjoy it having previously kept away
from it, and gradually blended with it after I had opposed it. I gained
new ideas from this new world, and it inspired me with the quest for
knowledge and research until I reached the desired truth which always
comes to mind whenever I read the saying of the prophet:

The sons of Israel were divided into seventy-one groups, and the
Christians were divided into seventy-two groups, and my people will be
divided into seventy-three groups, all of which, except one group will
end up in Hell.

Here is not the place to talk about the various religions which claim to
be the right one and that the rest are wrong, but I am surprised and
astonished whenever I read this saying. My surprise and astonishment is
not at the saying itself, but at those Muslims who read it and repeat it
in their speeches and brush over it without analyzing it or even
attempting to find out which the group is going to be saved and which
are going to be doomed.

The interesting thing is that each group claims that it is the saved
one. At the end of the saying came the following: "Who are they, O
Messenger of Allah?" He answered, "Those who follow my path and the path
of my Companions." Is there any group that does not adhere to the Book
(Qur'an) and Sunnah (the prophetic tradition), and is there any Islamic
group that claims otherwise? If Imams Malik or Abu Hanifah or al-Shafii
or Ahmed ibn Hanbel were asked, wouldn't each and every one of them
claim that he adheres to the teachings of the Qur'an and the Right
Sunnah’?

These are the Sunni Madhahib, in addition to the various Shi’i-groups,
which I had believed at one time to be deviant and corrupt. All of them
claim to adhere to the Qur'an and the correct Sunnah which has been
handed down through Ahl al-Bayt (the Prophets Family) who knew best
about what they were saying. Is it possible that they are all right, as
they claim?

This is not possible, because the Prophets saying states the opposite,
unless the saying is invented or fabricated. But that is not possible
either, because the saying is accepted by both the Shi’a and Sunnis. Is
it possible that the saying has no meaning? God forbid that His
Messenger (saw) could utter a meaningless and aimless saying, as he only
spoke words of wisdom. Therefore we are left with one possible
conclusion: that there is one group which is on the right path and that
the rest are wrong. Thus, the saying tends to make one confused and
perplexed, but in the meantime it encourages research and study by those
who want to be saved.

Because of that, I became doubtful and perplexed after my meeting with
the Shi’a, for who knows, they might be saying the truth! So should I
not study and investigate?

Islam, through the Qur'an and Sunnah ordered me to study, investigate
and to compare, and Allah, the Most High said:

***“And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways.” (Holy Qur'an 29:69)***

***He also said: “Those who listen to the word then follow the best of
it; these are they whom Allah has guided, and those it is who are the
men of understanding.” (Holy Qur'an 39:18)***

The Messenger of Allah (saw) said: “Study your religion until it is said
that you are mad.”

Therefore research and comparison are legal obligations for every
responsible person.  
 Having reached this decision and resolution, and with this promise to
myself and my Shi’i friends from Iraq, I embraced them and bade them
farewell, full of sorrow since I liked them and they liked me. I felt
that I had left dear and faithful friends who had sacrificed their time
in order to help me. They did it out of their own choice and asked for
nothing except the approval of Allah, Praise be to Him. The Prophet
(saw) said, "If Allah chooses you to guide one man (to the right path),
then that is worth more than all the riches on earth."

I left Iraq having spent twenty days among the Imams and their
followers, and the time had passed like a nice dream from which the
sleeper was loathe to awake. I left Iraq feeling sorry for the brevity
of this period and sorry to leave dear friends who were full of love for
Ahl-al-Bayt.

I left Iraq for the Hijaz seeking the House of Allah and the grave of
the Master of the First and the Last (saw).


