The Companions of the Prophet as seen by the Shi’a and the Sunnis
=================================================================

One of the most important studies which I consider to be the cornerstone
for all the studies that lead to the truth is the research into the life
of the Companions, their affairs, their deeds and their beliefs; because
they were the foundations of everything, and from them we took the
principles of our religion, and they enlightened our darkness, so that
we can see the rules of Allah. Many Muslim scholars- convinced of the
above - embarked on the study of the lives and deeds of the Companions,
among them: "Usd al-Ghabah fi Tamyeez al-Sahabah", and "al-Isabah fi
Maarifat al-Sahabah", and "Mizan al-I'tidal" and various other books
which look critically and analytically at the lives of the Companions,
but all from the point of view of the Sunnis.

There is a slight problem here, and that is that most of the early
scholars wrote in the way which suited the Umayyad and Abbasid rulers
who were well known for their opposition to Ahl al-Bayt and all their
followers. Therefore, it is not fair to depend on their works alone
without reference to the works of the other Muslim scholars who were
persecuted and ultimately killed by these governments simply because
they were followers of Ahl al-Bayt and the cause behind the revolutions
against the oppressive and deviant authorities.

The main problem with all that was the Companions themselves, for they
disagreed about the wish of the Messenger of Allah (saw) to write them a
document which would help them to remain on the right path until the Day
of Judgment. This disagreement deprived the Islamic nation of a unique
virtue, and has thrown it into darkness until it was divided and plagued
with internal quarrels and finally ended up as a spent force.

It was they who disagreed on the issue of the Caliphate (the
successorship of the Prophet), and were divided between a ruling and an
opposing party, thus dividing the nation into the followers of ‘Ali and
the followers of Muawiyah. It was they who differed in the
interpretations of the Book of Allah and the sayings of His Messenger,
which led to the creation of the various creeds, groups and subgroups;
and from them came many scholars of scholastic theology and schools of
thoughts and philosophies inspired by political ambitions with one aim
in mind and that was to obtain power.

The Muslims would not have been divided and in disagreement had it not
been for the Companions, for every disagreement that has been created in
the past, or is being created at the present time is due to their
disagreement about the Companions. There is one God, one Qur'an, one
Messenger and one Qiblah, and they all agree on that, but the
disagreement among the Companions started on the first day after the
death of the Messenger (saw), in the Saqifah (house) of Bani Saidah, and
has continued up to the present day, and will continue for as long as
Allah wills it.

Through my discussions with the Shiite scholars, I discovered that, in
their views, the Companions were divided into three categories:

The first category included the good Companions who knew Allah and His
Messenger truly well, and they acclaimed him (the Messenger) to the last
moments of their lives. They were truly his friends by words and deeds,
and they never abandoned him, but rather stood their ground with him.
Allah - the most High - praised them in many places in His Holy Book,
and the Messenger of Allah (saw) also praised them in many places. This
group of Companions are mentioned by the Shi’a with reverence and
respect, they are also mentioned by the Sunnis with the same reverence
and respect.

The second category were the Companions who embraced Islam and followed
the Messenger of Allah (saw) either through choice or through fear, and
they always showed their gratitude to the Messenger of Allah (saw) for
their Islam. However, they hurt the Messenger of Allah (saw) on a few
occasions, and did not always follow his orders, in fact they often
challenged him and challenged the clear text with their points of view,
until Allah, through the Holy Qur'an, had to intervene by rebuking them
or threatening them. Allah exposed them in many Qur'anic verses, also
the Messenger of Allah (saw) warned them in many of his sayings. The
Shi’a mention this group of Companions only because of their deeds, and
without respect or reverence.

The third type of Companions were the hypocrites who accompanied the
Messenger of Allah (saw) to deceive him. They pretended to be Muslims
but inside themselves they were bent on blasphemy and on deceiving Islam
and the Muslims as a whole. Allah has revealed a complete Surah in the
Qur'an about them, and mentioned them in many other places, and promised
them the lowest level in Hell. Also the Messenger of Allah (saw)
mentioned them and issued warnings about them, and even informed some of
his close friends about their names and characteristics. The Shi’a and
the Sunnis agree in cursing this group of Companions and have nothing to
do with them.

There was a special group of Companions who distinguished themselves
from the others by being relatives of the Prophet (saw), in addition to
having possessed ethical and spiritual virtues and personal distinctions
from Allah and His Messenger that no one else was honored with. These
were Ahl al-Bayt (the Prophet's Family) whom Allah cleansed and
purified, and ordered us to pray for them in the same way as he ordered
us to pray for His Messenger.

He made it obligatory for us to pay them one fifth of our income, and
that every Muslim must love them as a reward for the Muhammadan Message.
They are our leaders and we must obey them; and they are people firmly
rooted in knowledge who know the interpretation of the Holy Qur'an and
they know the decisive verses of it, as well as those verses which are
allegorical.

They are the people of al-Dhikr whom the Messenger of Allah equated with
the Holy Qur'an in his saying "the two weighty things" (al-Thaqalayn),
and ordered us to adhere to them[^1], He equated them to Noah's Ark:
whoever joined it was saved, and whoever left it drowned[^2]. The
Companions knew the position of Ahl al-Bayt and revered them and
respected them. The Shi’a follow them and put them above any of the
Companions, and to support that they have many clear texts as proofs.

The Sunnis respect and revere the Companions but do not accept the above
classification and do not believe that some of the Companions were
hypocrites; rather, they see the Companions as being the best people
after the Messenger of Allah. If they classify the Companions then it
would be according to their seniority and their merits and their
services to Islam. They put the Rightly Guided Caliphs in the first
class, then the first six of the ten who were promised with heaven,
according to them. Therefore when they pray for the Prophet (saw) and
his household they attach with them all the Companions without
exception.

This is what I know from the Sunni scholars, and that is what I heard
from the Shi’i scholars regarding the classification of the Companions;
and that is what made me start my detailed study with the issue of the
Companions. I promised my God - if He led me on the right path - to rid
myself from emotional bias and to be neutral and objective and to listen
to what the two sides said, then to follow what was best, basing my
conclusions on two premises:

1. A sound and a logical premise: that is to say that I would only
depend upon what everybody is in agreement with, regarding the
commentary on the Book of Allah, and the correct parts of the honorable
Sunnah of the Prophet.

2. The mind: for it is the greatest gift that Allah has given to human
beings, and through it He honored them and distinguished them from the
rest of creation. Thus, when Allah protests about what His worshippers
do, He asks them to use their minds in the best possible way, and He
says: Do they not understand? Do they not comprehend? Do they not see?
etc."

Let my Islam primarily be the belief in Allah, His angels, His Books and
His messengers; and that Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger; and
that the Religion of Allah is Islam; and that I will never depend on any
of the Companions, regardless of his relation to the Messenger or his
position, for I am neither Umayyad nor Abbasid nor Fatimid, and I am
neither Sunni nor Shi’i, and I have no enmity towards Abu Bakr or Umar
or Uthman or ‘Ali or even Wahshi, the killer of our master al-Hamzah, as
long as he became a Muslim, and the Messenger of Allah forgave him.
Since I had forced myself into this study in order to reach the truth,
and since I had rid myself, sincerely, from all my previous beliefs, I
decided to start, with the blessing of Allah, by considering the
attitudes of the Companions.

[^1]: Kanz al Ummal, vol 1 p 44, Ahmed's Musnad, vol 5 p 182

[^2]: al Mustadrak, al Hakim (al Dhahabi's abridged), vol 3 p 151,Al
Sawaiq al Muhriqah, Ibn Hajjar, p 184, 234


