The Companions at the Peace Treaty of al Hudaibiyah
===================================================

Briefly the story is as follows: In the sixth year after the Hijrah
(emigration of the Prophet from Mecca to Madinah), the Messenger of
Allah with one thousand and four hundred of his Companions marched
towards Mecca to do the Umrah. They camped in "Dhi al-Halifah" where the
Prophet (saw) ordered his Companions to put down their arms and wear the
Ihram (white gowns worn especially for the purpose of the pilgrimage and
the Umrah), then they dispatched al-Hady (an offering for sacrifice) to
inform Quraysh that he was coming as a visitor to do the Umrah and not
as a fighter.

But Quraysh, with all its arrogance, feared that its reputation would be
dented if the other Arabs heard that Muhammad had entered Mecca by
force. Therefore, they sent a delegation led by Suhayl ibn Amr ibn Abd
Wadd al-Amiri to see the Prophet and ask him to turn back that year, but
said that they would allow him to visit Mecca for three days the year
after. In addition to that, they put down some harsh conditions, which
were accepted by the Messenger of Allah as the circumstances warranted
such acceptance, and as revealed to him by his God, Glory and Might be
to Him.

A few of the Companions did not like the Prophet's action and opposed
him very strongly, and Umar ibn al-Khattab came and said to him, "Are
you not truly the Prophet of Allah?" He answered, “Yes, I am." Umar
asked, "Are we not right and our enemy wrong?" The Prophet answered,
"Yes." Umar asked, "Why do we then disgrace our religion?"

The Messenger of Allah (saw) said, "I am the Messenger of Allah and I
will never disobey Him and He is my support." Umar asked, "Did you not
tell us that we would come to the House of Allah and go around it?" The
Prophet answered, "Yes, and did I tell you that we were coming this
year?" Umar answered, "No." The Prophet said, "Then you are coming to it
and going around it." Umar later went to Abu Bakr and asked him, "O Abu
Bakr, is he not truly the Prophet of Allah?" He answered, "Yes." Umar
then asked him the same questions he had asked the Messenger of Allah,
and Abu Bakr answered him with the same answers and added, "O Umar he is
the Messenger of Allah, and he will not disobey his God, Who is his
support, so hold on to him."

When the Prophet had finished signing the treaty, he said to his
Companions "Go and slaughter (sacrifices) and shave your heads." And by
Allah one of them stood up until he had said it three times. When nobody
obeyed his orders, he went to his quarters, then came out and spoke to
no one, and slaughtered a young camel with his own hands, and then asked
his barber to shave his head. When the Companions saw all that, they
went and slaughtered (sacrifices), and shaved one another, until they
nearly killed one another.[^1]

This is the summary of the story of peace treaty of al-Hudaibiyah, which
is one of the events whose details both the Shi’a and Sunnah agree upon,
and it is cited by many historians and biographers of the Prophet such
as al-Tabari, Ibn al-Athir, Ibn Saad, al-Bukhari and Muslim.

I stopped here, for I could not read this kind of material without
feeling rather surprised about the behavior of those Companions towards
their Prophet. Could any sensible man accept some people's claims that
the Companions, may Allah bless them, always obeyed and implemented the
orders of the Messenger of Allah (saw), for these incidents expose their
lies, and fall short of what they want! Could any sensible man imagine
that such behavior towards the Prophet is an easy or acceptable matter
or even an excusable one! Allah, the Almighty, said:

***“But no! By your God! They do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not and any straightness in their hearts as to what
you have decided and submit with entire submission.” (Holy Qur'an
4:65)***

Did Umar ibn al-Khattab succumb to them and find no difficulty in
accepting the order of the Messenger (saw)? Or was he reluctant to
accept the order of the Prophet? Especially when he said, "Are you not
truly the Prophet of Allah? Did you not tell us? Etc." and did he
succumb after the Messenger of Allah gave him all these convincing
answers?

No, he was not convinced by his answers, and he went and asked Abu Bakr
the same questions. But did he succumb after Abu Bakr answered him and
advised him to hold on to the Prophet? I do not know if he actually
succumbed to all that and was convinced by the answers of the Prophet
(saw) and Abu Bakr! For why did he say about himself, "For that I did so
many things..." Allah and His Messenger know the things which were done
by Umar.

Furthermore, I do not know the reasons behind the reluctance of the rest
of the Companions after that, when the Messenger of Allah said to him,
"Go and slaughter (sacrifices) and shave your heads." Nobody listened to
his orders even when he repeated them three times, and then in vain.

Allah, be praised! I could not believe what I had read. Could the
Companions go to that extent in their treatment of the Messenger? If the
story had been told by the Shi’a alone, I would have considered it a lie
directed towards the honorable Companions. But the story has become so
well known that all the Sunni historians refer to it.

As I had committed myself to accept what had been agreed on by all
parties, I found myself resigned and perplexed. What could I say? What
excuse could I find for those Companions who had spent nearly twenty
years with the Messenger of Allah, from the start of the Mission to the
day of al-Hudaibiyah, and had seen all the miracles and enlightenment of
the Prophethood? Furthermore the Qur'an was teaching them day and night
how they should behave in the presence of the Messenger, and how they
should talk to him, to the extent that Allah had threatened to ruin
their deeds if they raised their voices above his voice.

[^1]: Sahih, Bukhari, Book of al Shurut, Chapter: Al Shurut fi al Jihad
vol 2 p 122


