The Companions and the Raziyat Yawm al Khamis (The Calamity of Thursday)
========================================================================

Briefly the story is as follows:  
 The Companions were meeting in the Messenger's house, three days before
he died. He ordered them to bring him a bone and an ink pot so that he
could write a statement for them which would prevent them from straying
from the right path, but the Companions differed among themselves and
some of them disobeyed the Prophet and accused him of talking nonsense.
The Messenger of Allah became very angry and ordered them out of his
house without issuing any statement.  
 This is the story in some details:

Ibn Abbas said: Thursday, and what a Thursday that was! The Messenger's
pain became very severe, and he said, "Come here, I will write you a
document which will prevent you from straying from the right path." But
Umar said that the Prophet was under the spell of the pain, and that
they had the Qur'an which was sufficient being the Book of Allah. Ahl
al-Bayt then differed and quarreled amongst themselves, some of them
agreeing with what the Prophet said, while others supported Umar's view.
When the debate became heated and the noise became louder, the Messenger
of Allah said to them, "Leave me alone."

Ibn Abbas said: “The disaster was that the disagreement among the
Companions prevented the Messenger from writing that document for
them.”[^1]

The incident is correct and there is no doubt about its authenticity,
for it was cited by the Shi’i scholars and their historians in their
books, as well as by the Sunni scholars and historians in their books.
As I was committed to consider the incident, I found myself bewildered
by Umar's behavior regarding the order of the Messenger of Allah. And
what an order it was! "To prevent the nation from going astray", for
undoubtedly that statement would have had something new in it for the
Muslims and would have left them without a shadow of doubt.

Now let us leave the points of view of the Shi’a, that is that the
Messenger wanted to write the name of ‘Ali as his successor, and that
Umar realized this, so he prevented it. Perhaps because they do not
convince us initially with that hypothesis, but can we find a sensible
explanation to this hurtful incident which angered the Messenger so much
that he ordered them to leave, and made Ibn Abbas cry until he made the
stones wet from his tears and called it a "great disaster"? The Sunnis
say that Umar recognized that the Prophet's illness was advancing, so he
wanted to comfort him and relieve him from any pressure.

This type of reasoning would not be accepted by simple-minded people,
let alone by the scholars. I repeatedly tried to find an excuse for Umar
but the circumstances surrounding the incident prevented me from finding
an excuse. Even if I changed the words "He is talking nonsense", God
forbid, to "the pain has overcome him", I could not find any
justification for Umar when he said, "You have the Qur'an, and it is
sufficient being the Book of Allah."

Did he know the Qur'an better than the Messenger of Allah, for whom it
was revealed? Or was the Messenger of Allah, God forbid, unaware of what
he was? Or did he seek, through his order, to create division and
disagreement among the Companions, God forbid.

Even if the Sunni reasoning was right, then the Messenger of Allah would
have realized the good will of Umar and thanked him for that and perhaps
asked him to stay, instead of feeling angry at him and telling them to
leave his house. May I ask why did they abide by his order when he asked
them to leave the room and did not say then that he was "talking
nonsense"?

Was it because they had succeeded in their plot to prevent the Prophet
from writing the document, so that there was no need for them to stay
any longer? Thus, we find them creating noise and difference in the
presence of the Messenger, and divided into two parties: one agreeing
with the Messenger of Allah about writing that document, while the other
agreed with Umar "that he was talking nonsense.”

The matter is not just concerned with Umar alone, for if it was so, the
Messenger of Allah would have persuaded him that he could not be talking
nonsense and that the pain could not overcome him in matters of the
nation's guidance and of preventing it from going astray. But the
situation became much more serious, and Umar found some supporters who
seemingly had a prior agreement on their stand, and so they created the
noise and the disagreement among themselves and forgot, or perhaps
pretended to forget, the words of Allah, the Most High:

***“O You who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one another,
lest your deeds become null while you do not perceive.” (Holy Qur'an
49:2)***

In this incident they went beyond raising their voices and talking loud
to accusing the Messenger of Allah of talking nonsense, God forbid, then
they increased their noise and differences until it became a battle of
words in his presence.

I think the majority of the Companions were with Umar, and that is why
the Messenger of Allah found it useless to write the document, because
he knew that they would not respect him and would not abide by the
command of Allah by not raising their voices in his presence, and if
they were rebellious against the command of Allah, then they would never
obey the order of His Messenger.

Thus, the wisdom of the Messenger ruled that he was not to write the
document because it had been attacked during his lifetime, let alone
after his death.

The critics would say that he was talking nonsense, and perhaps they
would doubt some of the orders he passed whilst on his death-bed, for
they were convinced that he was talking nonsense.

I ask Allah for forgiveness, and renounce what has been said in the
presence of the holy Messenger, for how could I convince myself and my
free conscience that Umar ibn al-Khattab was acting spontaneously,
whereas his friends and others who were present at the incident cried
until their tears wet the stones, and named the incident "the misfortune
of the Muslims". I therefore decided to reject all the justifications
given to explain the incident, and even tried to deny it so that I could
relax and forget about the tragedy, but all the books referred to it and
accepted its authenticity but could not provide sound justification for
it.

I tend to agree with the Shi’i point of view in explaining the incident
because I find it logical and very coherent.

I still remember the answer which al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr gave
me when I asked him, "How did our master Umar understand, among all the
Companions what the Messenger wanted to write, namely the appointment of
‘Ali as his successor, as you claim, which shows that he was a clever
man?"

Al-Sayyid al-Sadr said: Umar was not the only one who anticipated what
the Messenger was going to write. In fact most of the people who were
present then understood the situation the same way as Umar did, because
the Messenger of Allah had previously indicated the issue when he said,
"I shall leave you with two weighty things: the Book of Allah and the
members of my Family (Ahl al-Bayt) and their descendants, if you follow
them, you will never go astray after me."

And during his illness he said to them, "Let me write you a document, if
you follow its contents, you will never go astray." Those who were
present, including Umar, understood that the Messenger of Allah wanted
to reiterate, in writing, what he had already said in Ghadir Khum, and
that was to follow the Book of Allah and Ahl al-Bayt and that ‘Ali was
the head of it. It was as if the holy Prophet (saw) was saying, "Follow
the Qur'an and ‘Ali." He said similar things on many occasions, as has
been stated by many historians.

The majority of Quraysh did not like ‘Ali because he was young and
because he smashed their arrogance and had killed their heroes; but they
did not dare oppose the Messenger of Allah, as they had done at the
Treaty of al-Hudaibiyah, and when the Messenger prayed for Abdullah ibn
Abi al- Munafiq, and on many other incidents recorded by history. This
incident was one of them, and you see that the opposition against
writing that document during the Prophets illness encouraged some of
those who were present to be insolent and make so much noise in his
presence.

That answer came in accordance with what the saying meant. But Umar's
statement, "You have the Qur'an, and it is sufficient, being the Book of
Allah" was not in accordance with the saying which ordered them to
follow the Book of Allah and the Household (Ahl al-Bayt) together. It
looks as if he meant to say, "We have the Book of Allah, and that is
sufficient for us, therefore there is no need for Ahl al-Bayt."

I could not see any other reasonable explanation to the incident other
than this one, unless it was meant to say, 'Obey Allah but not His
Messenger." And this argument is invalid and not sensible. If I put my
prejudices and my emotions aside and base my judgment on a clean and
free mind, I would tend towards the first analysis, which stops short of
accusing Umar of being the first one to reject the Prophet's Tradition
(al-Sunnah) when he said, "It is sufficient for us, being the Book of
Allah.”

Then if there were some rulers who rejected the Prophet's Traditions
claiming that it was "contradictory", they only followed an earlier
example in the history of Islam. However, I do not want to burden Umar
alone with the responsibility for that incident and the subsequent
deprivation of the nation of the guidance. To be fair to him, I suggest
that the responsibility should be borne by him and those Companions who
were with him and who supported him in his opposition to the command of
the Messenger of Allah.

I am astonished by those who read this incident and feel as if nothing
happened, despite that it was one of the "great misfortunes" as Ibn
Abbas called it. My astonishment is even greater regarding those who try
hard to preserve the honor of a Companion and to correct his mistake,
even if at the cost of the Prophet's dignity and honor and at the cost
of Islam and its foundations.

Why do we escape from the truth and try to obliterate it when it is not
in accordance with our whims…why do not we accept that the Companions
were human like us, and had their own whims, prejudices and interests,
and could commit mistakes or could be right?

But my astonishment fades when I read the Book of Allah in which He
tells us the stories of the prophets- may Allah bless them and grant
them peace - and the disobedience they faced from their people despite
all the miracles they produced. Our God! Make not our hearts to deviate
after thou hast guided us aright, and grant us from Your Mercy; surely
You are the Most Liberal Giver.

I began to understand the background to the Shi’a's attitude towards the
second Caliph, whom they charge with the responsibility for many tragic
events in the history of Islam, starting from "Raziyat Yawm al-Khamis"
when the Islamic nation was deprived of the written guidance which the
Messenger wanted to write for them. The inescapable fact is that the
sensible man who knew the truth before he encountered the men seeks an
excuse for the Shias in this matter, but there is nothing we can say to
convince those who only judge truth through men.

[^1]: Sahih, Bukhari, Chapter: About the saying of the sick, vol 2,
Sahih, Muslim, End of the book of al Wasiyyah, vol 5 p 75, Musnad,
Ahmed, vol 1 p 335, vol 5 p 116 Tarikh, Tabari, vol 3 p 193, Tarikh, Ibn
al Athir, vol 2 p 320


