Foreword
========

**In the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful**

Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Universe. He created man from clay and
shaped him in the best possible way. He favored him above all other
creatures and made His closest angels prostrate themselves before him.
He graced him with the mind that changed his doubt to an absolute
belief. He gave him two eyes, one tongue, two lips and showed him the
two ways.

He sent him messengers giving him the good news, warning him, and
alerting him, and preventing him from going astray with the cursed
devil. He told him not to worship the Devil, for the Devil is his enemy,
and to worship Allah alone and follow His right path, with understanding
and a convincing belief, and not to imitate the belief of his
forefathers and friends and relatives who followed those before them
without any clear reasoning.

Who could say better things than he who called for Allah and did good
deeds and said that he was one of the Muslims, may the Lord's blessings,
peace and greetings be upon the Messenger who brought mercy unto the
people, supporter of all the Oppressed and the weak, savior of all
mankind from the darkness of ignorance, he who will guide them to the
enlightened path of the faithful and the good.

Our master Muhammad ibn Abdullah, prophet of the Muslims, and chief of
the singularly radiant may these blessings and greetings be upon his
good and purified posterity whom Allah has chosen from among all the
truthful. He stated in the Quran that we are compelled to love them,
after he had purified them and made them infallible. He promised that
anybody who goes on board their ship will be saved, and anybody who does
not do so will perish.

May these blessings and greetings be upon his honorable companions who
supported him, honored him and sacrificed themselves for him and for the
victory of Islam. They knew the truth, so they pledged allegiance to him
with conviction and stayed on the right path without changing it and
were thankful. May Allah reward them for their services to Islam and the
Muslims. May these blessings and greetings be upon their followers and
upon those who kept on their path and were guided by their light to the
Day of Judgment.

Please Lord accept my request for You are the All hearing and the Most
Knowledgeable. Please my Lord open my heart for You are the One who
guides us to the absolute truth.

Please my Lord help me to express myself, for you grant wisdom to any
one You wish from amongst Your faithful worshippers. Please my Lord
grant me more knowledge and join me with righteous people.


