The Beginning of the Change
===========================

I stayed unsettled and perplexed for three months, even when I was
asleep; my mind was overwhelmed by doubts and fears about myself
regarding the Companions whose lives I was researching. I found many
astonishing contradictions in their behavior, because throughout my life
I had received an education based on the respect and the veneration of
those sages who would hurt anybody that spoke badly about them or
disrespected them in their absence, even if they were dead.

I had read once in "Hayat al-Haywan al-Kubra" by alDamiri:[^1] There was
a man riding in a Caravan with his friend, and during the journey he
kept insulting Umar, and his friend tried to prevent him from doing so.
When he was in the toilet, a black snake bit him, and he died
immediately. When they dug his grave, they found a black snake inside
it; they dug another one, and the same thing happened. Every time they
dug a new grave, they found a snake inside it.

Then a learned man told them, "Bury him anywhere you wish, even if you
dig the whole earth, you will find a black snake. This is because Allah
wants to chastise him in this life before the hereafter, for insulting
our master Umar."

Thus, while I was forcing myself through this difficult research, I felt
fearful and confused, especially as I had learnt in al-Zaytuna that the
best caliphs were Abu Bakr al-Siddiq then Umar ibn al-Khattab al-Farooq,
whom Allah will use to divide right from wrong, after that comes Uthman
ibn Affan Dhul-Noorayn, from whom the angels of the Merciful felt shy,
and after him comes â€˜Ali ibn Abi Talib the gate to the city of
knowledge.

After these four come the remaining six of the ten who were promised
Paradise, and they are Talhah, al-Zubayr, Sa'ad, Sa'eed, Abdul-Rahman,
and Abu Ubaydah. After them come all the Companions, and after we were
recommended of the Holy Qur'anic verse "We do not differentiate between
any of His messengers" as a premise on which we should base the
assumption that we should not differentiate in our respect for all the
Companions.

Because of that I feared for myself, and asked my Lord for forgiveness
on many occasions, and indeed I wanted to leave the issues that made me
doubtful about the Companions of the Messenger of Allah, and then made
me doubtful about my own religion.

During that period, and throughout my conversations with a few learned
people, I found many contradictions that could not be accepted by
sensible people, and then they started to warn me that if I continued
with my research about the Companions, Allah would take His grace from
me and finish me off.

Their continuous stubbornness and their denial of whatever I said,
coupled with my scientific mind and eagerness to reach the truth, forced
me to resume the research, because I felt an inner force urging me to do
so.

[^1]: Hayat al Haywan al Kubra, al Damiri


