A Dialogue With a Scholar
=========================

I said to one of our scholars: “When Muawiah killed the innocent and
disgraced the honourable, you judge him as being an interpreter of Islam
who got it wrong, and therefore has one reward. When Yazid killed the
descendants of the Messenger and authorized the sacking of al-Medinah
al-Munawwarah by his army, you judge him as an interpreter of Islam who
got it wrong, and therefore has one reward.

Some of you even said about him that ‘al-Husayn was killed by the sword
of his grandfather.’ Why should I not then interpret Islam through this
study, which is forcing me to doubt the intentions of the Companions and
to blow the cover of some of them, which would not be equated with
killings done by Muawiah and Yazid of the Prophet's family? If I am
right I deserve two rewards, and if I am wrong, I would have only one
reward.

However, my criticism of the Companions is not for the sake of insulting
them or cursing them, but it is a means through which I hope to reach
the truth. Who is the right group, and who is the wrong group. This is
my duty and the duty of each Muslim, and Allah, praise be to Him, knows
what is inside ourselves. The scholar then answered me, ' O my son,
Ijtihad (the interpretation of Islamic religion) has not been allowed
for some time."

I asked, "Who disallowed it?"  
 He said, "The four Imams."  
 I said liberally, "Thanks be to Allah! Since neither Allah disallowed
it, nor His Messenger or the rightly guided caliphs, whom we are ordered
to follow, then there are no restrictions on me to interpret Islam, as
they did.”

He said, "You may not interpret Islam unless you know seventeen
disciplines, among them: Tafsir (commentary on the Holy Qur'an),
Linguistics, Grammar, Sarf (Morphology), Rhetoric, Hadiths ( Prophetic
traditions), History and others."

I interjected by saying, "My Ijtihad is not to show the people the rules
of the Qur'an and the Prophet's tradition, or to be a religious leader
of a new creed. Nay! All that I want to know is who is right and who is
wrong. For example, to know whether Imam ‘Ali was right or Muawiah, I do
not need to master seventeen disciplines. All I need to do is to study
the life and works of each one of them to know the truth.”

He said, "Why do you want to know all that?

***This is a people that have passed away; they shall have what they
earned and you shall have what you earn, and you shall not be called
upon to answer for what they did."*** ***(Holy Qur'an 2:134)***

I asked, "Do you read Tusaloon (the Arabic word for Questioned) with
Dammah (the vowel point upon the letter ta) or with Tasaloon with Fathah
(the vowel) point a)?"  
 He said, "Tusaloon, with Dammah."

I said, Thanks be to Allah, if it was with Fathah, then there would be
no research. As it is written with Dammah, then it means that Allah -
praise be to Him - will not make us accountable for what they have done,
similarly, He, the Most High, said:

***"Each soul is pledged to whatever it has earned." (Holy Qur'an
74:38)***

Also He said:

***"There is nothing for man except what he has strived for." (Holy
Qur'an 53:39).***

And the Holy Qur'an urged us to know about the earlier nations and to
learn lessons from their histories. Also, Allah told us about the
Pharaohs, Haman, Nimrod, Quaroon, and about the early prophets and their
nations, not for the sake of pleasure, but to show us what is right and
what is wrong. As for your question as to why I want to know all that?
It is important for me to know all that.

Firstly, to know who is the friend of Allah so that I may befriend him,
and to know who is the enemy of Allah, so that I may oppose him, and
that is what the Qur'an asked me, or indeed, ordered me to do.

Secondly, it is important for me to know how I should worship Allah and
draw near to Him by obeying His commands, in the way He - the Majesty -
wants them to be, not as Malik or Abu Hanifah or any other interpreter
of Islam wants them to be.

I found that Malik does not prefer the saying of "In the name of Allah
the most Merciful and the most Compassionate" during the prayers,
whereas Abu Hanifah considers it a "must". Others say that the prayers
are not valid without them. Because prayers are a pillar of Islam, if
accepted other deeds would be accepted; but if they were rejected, other
deeds would be rejected.

Therefore, I do not want my prayers to be invalid. The Shiites say that
during the ablution we must rub our feet with wet hands, whereas the
Sunnis say that we must wash them. But when we read the Holy Qur'an we
find "rub your hands and feet" which is clear about the rubbing. So how
do you expect any sensible Muslim to accept this and reject the other
without research and analysis?"

He said, "You can take what you like from each creed, because all of
them are Islamic creeds, and all of them came from the Messenger of
Allah."

I said I am afraid that I may become one of those about whom Allah said:

***"Have you then considered him who takes his low desire for his god
and Allah has made him err having knowledge and has set a seal upon his
ear and his heart and put a covering upon his eye. Who can then guide
him after Allah? Will you not then be mindful?" (Holy Qur'an 45:23).***

Sir, I do not think that all the four lslamic religious schools
(Madhahib) are correct, as long as one of them allows something while
the other forbids it; and it does not seem logical for one thing to be
allowed and forbidden simultaneously. The Messenger of Allah (saw) did
not question the rules of the Holy Qur'an because they are revelation:

***“And if it were from any other than Allah, they would have found in
it many a discrepancy.” (Holy Qur'an 4:82).***

Because of the vast differences between the four religious Islamic
schools, they cannot be from Allah or from His Messenger, for the
Messenger did not contradict the Holy Qur'an.

When the scholarly Shaykh found my argument logical and sound, he said,
"I advise you, for the sake of Allah, that no matter how doubtful you
may be, do not doubt the rightly guided caliphs, because they are the
four pillars of Islam, if one of them collapses, the whole building will
collapse."  
 I said, "God forbid Sir, but what about the Messenger of Allah if those
people were the pillars of Islam?"

He said, "The Messenger of Allah is that building He is the whole of
Islam."  
 I smiled when I heard his analysis, and said, "I ask Allah for
forgiveness, yet again! Sir, you are saying, indirectly, that the
Messenger of Allah (saw) would not be able to stand without the support
of those four, whereas Allah, the Most High, says:

***"He it is Who sent His messenger with guidance and a true religion
that He may make it prevail over all the religions; and Allah is enough
for a witness." (Holy Qur'an 48:28)***

He sent Muhammad with the Message and did not involve any of the other
four, or anybody else, and Allah said with regard to this:

***"We have sent among you a messenger from among you who recites to you
Our communications and purifies you and teaches you the Book and the
wisdom and teaches you that which you did not know." (Holy Qur'an
2:151).***

He said, "That is what we have learnt from our religious leaders and
teachers, and we did not argue about what they taught us, as you the new
generation do today. You doubt everything, even the religion itself.
This is one sign of the nearness of the Hour, that is the Day of
Judgment, and the Messenger of Allah said: the Hour will come as a
result of the evil in people."

I said, "Sir, why all this exaggeration? God forbid if I doubt the
religion, I believe in Allah, Who is unique and has no partner. I
believe in His angels, Books and Messengers. I believe in our master
Muhammad as His servant and Messenger, and that he is the best of all
the prophets and the last of the messengers, and that I am one of the
Muslims. So how could you accuse me of all that?"

He said, "I accuse you of more than that, because you doubt our masters
Abu Bakr and Umar, and the Holy Prophet said: If the faith of my nation
and the belief of Abu Bakr were put on a balance, the faith of Abu Bakr
would have weighed heavier. The Holy Prophet also said in honor of Umar:
‘I was shown my nation and each one of them was wearing a shirt that
came to the chest, and I was shown Umar and he was pulling his shirt.’
They said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! How do you interpret this? He said:
‘The Religion.

And you come today, in the fourteenth century (Hijri) and doubt the
righteousness of the Companions and especially Abu Bakr and Umar. Don't
you know that the people of Iraq are the people of disunity, blasphemy
and hypocrisy!’"

What could I say to this man who claimed knowledge and scholarship, and
who became so arrogant that he changed a well structured dialogue into a
disordered talk full of lies and propaganda? He said it in front of
people who admired him, and I noticed that their faces lit up with
excitement and evil.

I quickly went home and brought back two books, "al-Muwatta of Imam
Malik" and "The Sahih of al-Bukhari". Then said, "Sir, what made me
doubt Abu Bakr was the Messenger of Allah himself." I opened al-Muwatta
and read: He said to the martyrs of Uhud, "Those, I bear witness
against." Abu Bakr then said, "O Messenger of Allah, are we not their
brothers? Did we not become Muslims as they did? Did we not fight as
they did?"

The Messenger replied, "Yes, but I do not know what you are going to do
after me."  
 On hearing that, Abu Bakr cried bitterly and said, "We are going to
alter many things after your departure."[^1]

After that I opened the "Sahih" of al-Bukhari and read: Once Umar ibn
al-Khattab came to Hafsah and found with her Asma bint Umays. When he
saw her, he asked, "Who is she?" Hafsah answered, "Asma bint Umays."
Umar said, "Is she that Ethiopian?" Asma replied, "Yes." He said, "We
emigrated (that is to say from Mecca to Medinah) before you, so we are
more entitled to the Messenger of Allah than you."

She became very angry, then she said, "No, by Allah, you were with the
Messenger of Allah, who fed your hungry people and advised the ignorant
among you; whereas we were in a foreign land, in Abyssinia, for the sake
of Allah and His Messenger, and whenever I ate or drank anything, I
remembered the Messenger of Allah (saw) and we were hurt, and we were
frightened. By Allah I will mention this to the Prophet without lying,
adding anything or deviating from the subject."

When the Prophet came, she said, "O Prophet of Allah, Umar said such and
such." He asked, "What did you say to him?" She answered, "Such and
such." He said, "I am not more entitled to him than to you." He and his
companions had one emigration, but you, people of the ship, had two
emigrations." She said, "I found Abu Musa and the people of the ship
coming to me in groups and asking me about the Hadith, very much
delighted with what the Prophet (saw) had said to them."[^2]

After having read the Hadiths, the looks on the faces of the scholarly
Shaykh and that of the audience changed. They looked at each other and
waited for the scholar, who was too shocked at what he had heard, to
reply. All he did was to raise his eye brows, as a sign of astonishment
and then said, "O my God grant me more knowledge."

I said, "If the Messenger of Allah (saw) was the first to doubt Abu
Bakr, and did not bear witness against him, because the Messenger did
not know what would happen after him; and if the Messenger of Allah did
not approve of the preference of Umar over Asma bint Umays, but indeed
preferred her to him; then it is within my right to doubt and not to
have a preference for anybody until I know the truth. Evidently, these
Hadiths contradict and nullify all the known Hadiths in favor of Abu
Bakr and Umar, because they are more realistic than these which mention
their alleged virtues."

The audience said, "How could that be?" I said, "The Messenger of Allah
(saw) did not bear witness against Abu Bakr and said: ‘I do not know
what they will do after me!’ This sounds very reasonable. History has
proved that, and the Holy Qur'an and history bear witness that they did
change after him.

Because of that Abu Bakr cried for he changed and angered Fatimah
al-Zahra, daughter of the Messenger as we explained before, and he
changed until he repented and wished that he was not a human being.

As for the Hadith: If the faith of my nation and the faith of Abu Bakr
were put on balance, the faith of Abu Bakr would weigh heavier", it is
invalid and implausible. It is not possible for the faith of a man, who
spent forty years of his life believing in polytheism and worshipping
idols, to be greater than the faith of the entire nation of Muhammad,
which has many God-fearing and pious people and martyrs and Imams, who
spent all their lives fighting for the sake of Allah.

How could Abu Bakr fit into this Hadith? If it was true, he would not,
in later life have finished that he was not a human being. Further, if
his faith was greater than the faith of the entire nation of Muhammad,
Fatimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah and the leading lady,
would not have been angry at him or asked Allah to punish him in each
prayer she prayed."

The scholar did not say anything, but some of the men said, "By Allah!
This Hadith made us doubtful.” Then the scholar said to me, "Is that
what you wanted? You have made these people doubt their religion." It
sufficed me that a man from the audience replied by saying, "No, he is
right, we have not read a whole book in our life, we followed you
blindly and without any argument, and now it appears to us that what
al-Hajj has been saying is right, and it is our duty to read and
research!" Other people agreed with him, and that was a victory for
truth and justice. It was not victory by force, but by logical deduction
and proof. Allah says:

***"Say, bring your proof, if you are telling the truth." (Holy Qur'an
27:64)***

That is what encouraged me to undertake the study and opened the door
for me, so I entered it in the name of Allah by Allah and tracing the
footsteps of the followers of the Messenger of Allah. I hope that Allah,
praise be to Him, the Most High, grants me success and enlightenment,
for He promised to enlighten anyone who searches for the truth, and He
does not break His promises.

The study went on for three years, because I often re-read the books,
right from the first page to the last.

I read "al-Muraja'at" by Imam Sharaf al-Din several times, since it
opened new horizons for me and enlightened me and pleased me for the
love and the fellowship of Ahl al-Bayt.

I read "al-Ghadeer" by Shaykh al-Amini three times because of the clear
cut facts it contained. I also read Fadak in History" by al- Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr and al-Saqifah" by Shaykh Muhammad Rida
al-Muzaffar, which explained so many vague issues.

I read "al-Nass wal Ijtihad", the Text and the Interpretation, and
became more convinced. Then I read "Abu Hurayra" by Sharaf al-Din and
Shaykh al-Mudira" by Shaykh Mahmud Abu Rayyah al-Misri, and learnt that
the Companions who changed after the departure of the Messenger of Allah
were two types. The first changed the rule because of its power and
authority. The second changed the rules by attributing false Hadiths to
the Messenger of Allah.

I read “Imam al-Sadiq the four Madhhabs" by Asad Haydar and learnt about
the differences between gifted knowledge and acquired knowledge. I also
learnt about the differences between Allahs wisdom which He grants to
whom He pleases, and the intrusion on knowledge and the belief of
personal interpretation (of Islam) which kept the nation away from the
spirit of Islam.

I read more books by al-Sayyid Ja'far Murtada al-Amili, and al-Sayyid
Murtada al-Askari, and Al Sayyid Al-Khusi,and al-Sayyid al-Tabatabai,
and Shaykh Muhammad Amin Zain al-Din, and al-Fayroozabadi, and Ibn Abi
al-Hadid al-Mu'tazili in his commentary on "Nahj al-Balagha", and Taha
Husayn's "al-Fitna al-Kubra".

From the history books I read the following Annals written by al-Tabari,
Ibn al-Athir, al-Masudi and al-Ya'qubi. And I read more, until I became
convinced that the Shi’a Imamiyya were right.

Thus, with the help of Allah, I boarded Ahl al-Bayt's ship and sought
their fellowship, because I found, thanks be to Allah, the alternative
to the Companions, who, to the best of my knowledge, regressed and only
a few of them were saved.

I exchanged them for the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, the Prophet's Family,
whom Allah cleansed and purified and made it our duty to seek their
fellowship.

The Shiites are not, as some of our religious scholars claim, the
Persians and the Magus whose power and glory were destroyed by Umar in
al-Qadisiyyah war and that is why they hate them!

My answer to these who are ignorant is that following the creed of the
Prophet's Family is not restricted to the Persians, for there are
Shiites in Iraq, Hijaz, Syria, Lebanon, and all of them are Arabs. In
addition to that, there are Shi'tes in Pakistan, India, Africa, America,
and all of those are neither Arabs nor Persians.

If we confine ourselves to the Shiites of Iran, the issue becomes
clearers because I found that the Persians believe in the leadership of
the twelve Imams, all of whom were Arabs from Quraysh from Bani Hashim,
the family of the Prophet (saw). If the Persians were prejudiced and
hated the Arabs, as some people claim, they would have been taken Salman
al-Farisi as their Imam, for he was a great Companion and respected by
both Shiites and Sunnis.

On the other hand I found that most of the leading Sunni Imams were
Persians, such as Abu Hanifa, al-Nisa'i, al-Tirmidhi, al-Bukhari,
Muslim, Ibn Maja, al-Ghazali, Ibn Sina, al-Farabi and many others. If
the Shiites were all Persians who rejected Umar ibn al-Khattab because
he destroyed their power, then how can we explain the rejection of the
Arabs who were not Persians?

Therefore, this is an illogical claim. These people refused Umar because
of his role in excluding the Commander of the Believers, ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, from the caliphate after the departure of the Messenger of Allah,
and because of the tragic civil wars and decline of this nation. It is
high time that the truth was unveiled to every free-thinking scholar so
that he may refute the allegation without any prior animosity.

It is true that the Shiites, whether they were Arabs or Persians or any
other nationality, followed closely the Qur'anic Texts and the tradition
of the Messenger of Allah and his Family, and refused to accept the
alternative despite the oppressive policies of the Umayyads and later
the Abbasids for seven centuries.

During that period, they pursued the Shiites everywhere; they killed
them, they made them homeless, they denied them their rightful grants,
they removed their cultural and intellectual heritage and they spread
all sorts of rumors about them in order to keep people away from them.
The legacy of these policies is still felt up to the present day.

However, the Shiites stood their ground, remained patient and took the
blame for their commitment to Allah and they are paying the price of
their defiance to this very day. I challenge any of our religious
scholars to enter a debate with their religious scholars without coming
out of it overwhelmed by their enlightened way.

Yes, I found the alternative, and thanks be to Allah Who guided me to
this because I would not he there without His Guidance. Thanks and
praise be to Allah Who led me to the saved group, for which I was
eagerly searching.

I have no doubt that the commitment to ‘Ali and Ahl al-Bayt is the
commitment to the unbroken link - the link to Allah. There are many
sayings by the Messenger of Allah agreed by all Muslims, which bear
witness to that. The sensible mind is, perhaps, the best proof for
anybody who is prepared to listen. ‘Ali was the most knowledgeable
companion and certainly the bravest, as the entire nation testified.
This is a sufficient condition to support the lawful claim of ‘Ali,
alone and no one else, to the succession of the caliphate.

Allah the Most High said***:***

***'And their prophet said to them, "Surely Allah has raised Talut to be
a king over you." They said, "How can he hold kingship over us while we
have a greater right to kingship than him, and he has not been granted
an abundance of wealth?" He said, "Surely Allah has chosen him in
preference to you, and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and
physique, and Allah grants His kingdom to whom He pleases, and Allah is
Ample giving, knowing." (Holy Qur’an 2:247)***

And the Messenger of Allah said. "‘Ali is from me, and I am from ‘Ali,
and he is the master of every believer after me."[^3]

Al-Zamakhshari said in some of his poetry:  
 Doubt and differences have increased. Every one claims that he is the
right way. But I have committed myself to: there is no other god but
Allah, and my love to Ahmed (Muhammad) and ‘Ali. A dog won the love of
the companions of the cave, how could I be ever distressed with the love
of the Prophet's Family.

Yes I found the alternative, praise be to Allah. and I became a follower
of - after the Messenger of Allah - The Commander of the Believers,
master of all guardians, leader of the chosen elite, the victorious lion
of Allah Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib; and the two masters of Heaven's youth,
and the Prophet's two followers, Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Zaki, and
Imam Abu Abdullah al-Husayn; and the daughter of al-Mustafa (Muhammad),
mother of the Imams, the essence of the Message, she, for whom Allah
feels angry if she is angered, the most honorable lady Fatimah al-Zahra.

I have changed Imam Malik for the leader of all Imams, and teacher of
the nation, Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq.

I have committed myself to the nine infallible men from the posterity of
al-Husayn, Imams of all Muslims and the good friends of Allah. I have
changed the Companions who turned back on their heels, like Muawiah, Amr
ibn al-As, al-Mughira ibn Shu'ba, Abu Hurayra, Ikrima, Ka'b al-Ahbar and
others, for the grateful Companions who never broke the promise they
gave to the Prophet, like Ammar ibn Yasir, Salman al-Farisi, Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari, al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad. Khuzayma ibn Thabit - Dhu
al-Shahadetain - and others, and praise be to Allah for this
enlightenment.

I have changed the religious leaders of my people, who discouraged us
from thinking and whose majority followed the rules and the sultans,
throughout time. I changed them for the devoted religious leaders of the
Shi’a who never closed the opportunity for studying and interpreting
Islam, and who neither rose to oppose nor submitted to the oppressive
rulers.

Yes, I changed dogmatic beliefs, full of contradictions for new
enlightened and liberal ones based on logical deductions and reasoning.

As they say now a days "I have washed my brain" of the dirt that had
accumulated over thirty years; lies of the Umayyads. I purified it with
the ideology of the infallibles, those whom Allah cleansed and purified.
I have done that for the remainder of my life.

O Allah...please let us live our lives following their footsteps, and
let our nation follow their tradition, and gather us with them, for Your
Prophet (saw) said: Man is placed together with those whom he loves.

Thus I have returned to my origin. For my father and uncles used to talk
to us about our family tree. and often told us that we were from al-Sada
(plural of Sayyid: a descendant of the Prophet) who escaped from Iraq
under Abbasid pressure and found refuge in North Africa until they
settled in Tunisia where their marks remain up to the present day.

There are many people like us in North Africa who are descendants from
the purified posterity, and are called "Sada", but they went astray
through the oppression of the Umayyads and the Abbasids, and now they
have nothing of the truth except the people's respect for them. Priase
be to Allah for his guidance...and praise be to Allah for my
enlightenment and for opening my eyes to see the truth.

[^1]: Muwatta, Malik, vol 1 p 307 ; Maghazi, al Qawidi, p 310

[^2]: Sahih, Bukhari, vol 3 p 307

[^3]: Sahih, al Tirmidhi, vol 5 p 296; Khasai's, al Nisai, p 87;
Mustadrak, al Hakim, vol 3 p 110


