An Invitation to Friends to Join the Research
=============================================

The change was the beginning of a spiritual happiness for me, and I
sensed an inner silence with great joy for the right creed that I had
discovered, and had no doubt that it was the true Islam. I felt ecstatic
and proud of myself for what Allah had granted me from His guidance and
direction.

I could not bear the silence and the secrecy about what was going on
inside me, and I said to myself, "I have got to tell the truth to
people." "Talk about the graces of your Lord", and it is one of the
greatest graces, or indeed, it is the greatest grace in this world and
the life hereafter, and "he who keeps silent about the truth is a dumb
devil" and "after the truth there is nothing to go astray."

What made me convinced that I should spread this truth was the innocence
of those Sunni traditionists and al-Jamaah who love the Messenger of
Allah and Ahl al-Bayt, and all what needs to be done is to remove that
mist which was made by history and then they would follow the right
path, and that is what happened to me personally.

Allah, the Most High, said,

***"... You too were such before, then Allah conferred on you a
benefit." (Holy Qur'an 4:94)***

Within a month we finished the book, and the three friends were
enlightened and I supported them and helped them along the way and gave
them all that I had accumulated from experience and knowledge during the
years of investigation. I started to taste the sweetness of guidance and
became very hopeful about the future.

Frequently, I invited friends from Gafsa who I used to know through the
mosque's school or the Sufi orders in addition to some of my faithful
students. A year passed, and praise be to Allah, we became a large
number. We were all friends of Ahl al-Bayt. We are the friends of their
friends, and the enemy of their enemies, we celebrate their festivals
and mourn during Ashura.

Two of my early letters which carried the news of my enlightenment were
sent to al-Sayyid al-Khu'i and al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, during
the festivity of al-Ghadir, which we celebrated for the first time in
Gafsa. Everybody got to know about my conversion to Shiism and that I
was calling people to follow Ahl al-Bayt, and all sorts of accusations
and rumors started to go around the country.

I was accused of being an Israeli spy working to make people doubt their
religion, that I cursed the Companions and was planning to cause
disturbances among the people ... etc. In the capital Tunis I approached
two friends, Rashid al-Ghannushi and Abdul Fattah Moro, who expressed
strong opposition to my ideas. and in a conversation that took place in
Abdul Fattah's house I said that as Muslims, we ought to re-read our
hooks and look again at our history, and I gave Sahih al-Bukhari as an
example, for it contains materials that any sensible person would find
difficult to accept.

They became very angry with me and said, "Who are you to criticize
al-Bukhari?" I did my best to persuade them to be involved in the
research, but they refused, saying, "If you yourself have become Shi’i,
that is your business, but do not try to convert us to Shi’ism. We have
a more important task than that: namely to resist the government which
does not work according to Islam."

I answered by saying, "What is the use? If you come to power, you will
do more than they are doing now, because you do not know the true
Islam." Thus our meeting ended with a state of aversion between us.

Some people from The Muslims Brotherhood ran a campaign against us,
because they were not aware at that time of the Islamic Trend Movement,
and started to spread rumors among their ranks that I was a government
agent and that I was encouraging Muslims to doubt their religion in
order to keep them away from the main issue: namely resisting the
government.

Gradually people started to make us feel isolated, especially the young
members of the Muslims Brotherhood and the Shaykhs who follow Sufi ways,
and we experienced difficult times, living like strangers in our own
homes and among our own brothers.

But Allah - praise be to Him - changed our situation for the better, and
many young people from various cities came to see us to investigate the
truth, and I tried my utmost to persuade them, and as a result many
young men were able to see the light; they were from Tunis, Kayrawan,
Susa and Sidi Bu Zayd. During my summer visit to Iraq I travelled
through Europe and met friends in France and Holland and discussed the
subject with them, and praise be to Allah, they too saw the light.

I was absolutely delighted when I met al-Sayyid Muhammad al-Sadr at his
house in Holy Najaf where he was surrounded by a group of learned
people. He introduced me to them as being the seeds of Shi'ism
(following Ahl al-Bayt) in Tunis. He also told them that he had cried
when he first received my letter which carried the news that we had
celebrated the festival of al-Ghadir, and how I complained about the
difficulties we were facing including malicious rumors and isolation.

Al-Sayyid said: It is inevitable that we pass through difficult times
because the path of Ahl al-Bayt is a difficult one. A man once came to
see the Prophet (s.a.w.) and said to him, "O Messenger of Allah, I love
you." He replied, "Then expect many tribulations." The man said, "I love
your cousin ‘Ali." He replied, "Then expect many enemies." The man said,
"I love al-Hasan and al-Husayn." He replied, "Then get ready for poverty
and much affliction."

What have we paid for the cause of justice for which Abu Abdullah
al-Husayn (as) paid his life and the lives of his family's members and
companions; and for which the Shi’is along the path of history have paid
and are still paying up to the present day as a price for their
allegiance to Ahl al-Bayt? My Brother, it is inevitable that we go
through difficulties and give sacrifices for the cause of justice, and
if Allah helped you in guiding one man to the right path, it is worth
the whole world and what is within it.

Al-Sayyid al-Sadr also advised me against isolating ourselves and
ordered me to get even closer to my Sunni brothers whenever they wanted
to keep away from me, and to pray behind them so that there would be no
rupture in relations, and to consider them innocent victims of distorted
history and bad propaganda, because people are the enemy of what they do
not know.

Al-Sayyid al-Khu'i also advised me on the same lines, and al-Sayyid
Muhammad ‘Ali al-Tabatabai al-Hakim had always sent us letters full of
advice that had a great influence on enlightened brothers.  
 My visits to the Holy City of Najaf and its learned people became more
frequent, and I committed myself to spend each summer holiday near Imam
‘Ali and attend the lessons of al-Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, from
which I reaped great benefits.

I also promised myself to visit the graves of all the twelve Imams and
Allah helped me to realize my wish for I was even able to visit the
grave of al-Imam al-Rida which is situated in Mashhad, on the borders
between the U.S.S.R. and Iran. There I met some of the most outstanding
scholars, from whom I benefited a great deal.

Al-Sayyid al-Khu'i, whom we follow in our religious affairs, gave me
permission to use Khums and Zakat to help our enlightened group, and to
give them what they needed regarding books and grants and many other
things. I also was able to establish a small library which contained
some important references connected with the research which belonged to
both parties (Sunnis and Shiis). I called it "Ahl al-Bayt Library" and
benefited many people, praise be to Allah.

Fifteen years ago Allah doubled my joy when the clerk to the city
council of Gafsa agreed to naming the street where I live "Imam ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (as) Street". I would like to take this opportunity to thank
him for that honorable gesture, for he is one of the hard-working
Muslims and has a great respect and love for Imam ‘Ali, and I presented
him with "al-Murajaat" by Sharaf al-Din. He and our group have mutual
respect and love for each other, so may Allah reward him well and grant
him whatever he wishes.

There were some wicked people who tried to remove the street's sign, but
all their attempts were in vain and Allah willed it to stay where it
was, and we received letters from all over the world carrying the name
of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib's street, whose honourable name blessed our
good city.

In accordance with the advice of Ahl al-Bayt (as) and the advice of the
learned scholars of the holy city of Najaf we are determined to keep in
touch with our brothers from the other madhahibs and have maintained our
relation with al-Jamaah by praying together. Thus people started asking
us about our prayers, ablution and our beliefs.


