The Pilgrimage to the House of Allah
====================================

I was eighteen years of age when the Tunisian national society of Scouts
agreed to send me as one of six Tunisian representatives to the first
conference for Islamic and Arab scouts which took place in Mecca. I was
the youngest member of the mission, and certainly the least educated,
for there were with me two headmasters, a teacher from the capital, a
journalist and a fifth whose job I did not know, although I later
realized that he was a relative of the then minister for education.

The journey was rather indirect, our first stop was Athens where we
stayed for two days, next was Amman, the capital of Jordan, in which we
spent four days, and then we arrived in Saudi Arabia and participated in
the conference and performed the rites of pilgrimage and Umra.

I cannot describe my feelings when I entered the House of Allah for the
first time; my heart was beating so fast. I felt as if it was coming out
of my chest to see this ancient House for itself, and the tears kept
coming out of my eyes endlessly. I imagined the angels carried me over
the pilgrims and up to the roof of the Holy Kaba and answered the call
of Allah from there: "Allah, here I am, your servant came to you to be
at your service, Labbayka Allahumma Labbayk." Listening to other
pilgrims, I gathered that most of them had waited for a long time and
saved up throughout their lives to come to Mecca.

In my case, the journey was sudden and I was not prepared for it. I
remember my father bidding me a tearful farewell, when he saw the
airplane ticket and knew for certain that I was going to perform the
Pilgrimage, saying, "Congratulations, my son, Allah has willed that you
should perform the Pilgrimage before me at this age, for you are the son
of Sidi Ahmed al-Tijani, pray for me at Allah's House to forgive me and
grant me the pilgrimage to His House." I felt that Allah Himself called
me and cared for me and brought me to the place where everybody longs to
visit, although some cannot make it.

I appreciated this opportunity, therefore I threw myself into my prayers
and tawaf (circling around the Kaba) even when the drinking from the
water of Zamzam and going up the mountains where people competed to get
to Hara cave in al-Nur mountain. I was only beaten by a young Sudanese
pilgrim so I was "second of two". When I got there, I rolled myself on
the floor as if I was rolling on the Great Prophet's lap and smelled his
breathing what great memories they left such a deep impression on me
that I will never forget.

Allah has cared for me in many ways, for I was liked by everybody I met
in the conference, and many asked for my address in order to write to me
in the future. As for my Tunisian companions, they looked down on me
from the first meeting we had at the Tunisian Capital when we were
preparing for the journey. I sensed their feeling, but I was patient,
for I knew that the people of the North look down on the people from the
South and consider them backward Soon enough their views started to
change.

Throughout the journey and during the conference and the pilgrimage I
proved myself to be worthy of their respect due to my knowledge of
poetry and my winning of many prizes. I went back to my country with
mare than twenty addresses from different nationalities.

We stayed twenty five days in Saudi Arabia, during which we met many
learned Muslim scholars (Ulama) and listened to their lectures. I was
influenced by some of the beliefs of the Wahahi sect and wished that all
Muslims followed them. Indeed, I thought that they were chosen by Allah
among all His worshippers to guard His House, for they were the purest
and most knowledgeable people on earth, and Allah had given them oil so
that they could serve and could care for the pilgrims, guests of the
Merciful.

When I came back from the pilgrimage to my country I wore the Saudi
national dress and was surprised by the reception that my father had
prepared. Many people gathered at the station, led by Shaykhs of the
Isawiyya, Tijaniyya and the Qadiriyya Sufi order complete with
ceremonial drums.

They took me through the streets of our town chanting and cheering, and
every time we passed a mosque I was stopped for a short time whilst
people, especially the old folk, came to congratulate me with tears in
their eyes longing to see the House of Allah and to visit the Prophet's
grave. People looked at me as if they have not seen a young pilgrim
(Hajj) of my age in Gafsa before.

I lived the happiest days of my life during that period, and many
people, including the notables of the town came to visit and to
congratulate me, and often asked me to read al-Fatihah (the Opening Sura
of the Qur'an) with the prayers in the presence of my father, from whom
I was embarrassed although he kept encouraging me. Every time a group of
visitors left the house, my mother came to the sitting area to burn
incense and read some amulets in order to rid me of bad spells.

My father kept the celebration going for three nights in the centre of
the Tijani Sufi order, each night he slaughtered a sheep for a banquet.
People asked me all sorts of questions, and my answers were mainly to
praise the Saudis for their efforts to support and spread Islam.

Soon people started calling me Hajj (Pilgrim), and whenever somebody
shouted Hajj, it only meant me. Gradually I became known amongst the
various religious groups especially the Muslim Brotherhood, and I went
around the mosques lecturing on religious issues, telling people not to
kiss the graves or touch the woods for blessing because these are signs
of Polytheism.

My activities started to increase and I was giving religious lessons on
Fridays before the Imam's speech. I moved from Abi Yakub mosque to the
Great Mosque because the Friday prayers were held in different times in
those mosques; at midday in the former and during the afternoon in the
latter.

On Sundays, my lessons were mostly attended by my students at the
secondary school where I taught Technology. They liked me and
appreciated my efforts because I gave them a lot of my time trying to
help them in removing the clouds from their minds due to the teachings
of the atheist and communist teachers of Philosophy and there were
plenty of them!

My students used to wait with eagerness for these religious circles and
some of them came to my house for I bought a number of Islamic books and
read them thoroughly to bring myself up the standard of the questions I
used to be asked. During the year in which I did the pilgrimage to
Mecca, I completed the other half of my religious duties by getting
married.

It was the wish of my mother to see me married before she passed away,
for she had seen the weddings of all my half-brothers and Allah gave her
what she wished and I got married to a young lady that I had never met
before. My mother died after having been present at the birth of my
first and second child, and she was preceded by my father who had died
two years before her. Prior to his death he did the pilgrimage to Mecca,
and two years later before his death, he turned to Allah in repentance.

The Libyan revolution succeeded during the period when the Arabs and the
Muslims were feeling their humiliating defeat at the hands of the
Israelis, and we saw that young revolutionary leader speaking on behalf
of Islam and praying among his people calling for the liberation of
al-Quds.

I became attracted to his ideas, as did many young Muslims and Arabs,
and as a result we organized an educational visit to Libya by a group
consisting of forty men for the Education Department. We visited the
country at the beginning of the revolution and when we came back home we
were very optimistic and hopeful for a better future for Muslims and
Arabs in the whole world.

During the previous years I had corresponded with some friends, and my
friendship with a few of them became very close, so that they even asked
me to visit them. Thus, I made all the preparation for a journey during
the summer vacation which lasted three months. I planned to go to Libya
and Egypt by road and from there across the sea to Lebanon, Syria,
Jordan and then to Saudi Arabia. I meant to do Umra there and to renew
my commitment to the Wahabiyya in whose fervor I campaigned amongst the
students and in the mosques which were frequented by the Muslim
Brotherhood.

My reputation passed from my hometown to other neighboring towns through
visitors who might attend the Friday prayer and listen to the lessons
then go back to their communities. My reputation reached Shaykh Ismail
al Hadifi, leader of the Sufi order in Tuzer, capital of al-Jarid and
the birthplace of the famous poet Abu al-Qasim al-Shabbi. This Shaykh
has many followers in Tunisia and abroad, especially among the working
classes in France and Germany.

I received an invitation from him through his agents in Gafsa who wrote
me a long letter thanking me fur my services to Islam and the Muslims.
In the letter they claimed that the things I was doing would not bring
me nearer to Allah because I had no learned Shaykh: “He who has no
Shaykh his Shaykh will be a devil, and you need a Shaykh to show you the
way, otherwise half of the knowledge is not completed.” They informed me
that (the greatest of his age) Shaykh Ismail himself had chosen me among
all people to be one of his closest private circle of followers.

I was absolutely delighted when I heard the news. In fact I cried in
response to the divine care which had elevated me to the highest and
best places simply because I had been following the steps of Sidi al-
Hadi al-Hafian, who was a Sufi Shaykh known for his miracles, and I had
become one of his closest followers. Also I accompanied Sidi Silah
Balsaih and Sidi al-Jilani and other contemporary Sufi leaders. So I
waited eagerly for that meeting.

When I entered the Shaykh's house I looked curiously at the faces, and
the place was full of followers among whom were Shaykhs wearing spotless
white robes. After the greeting ceremony ended, Shaykh Ismail appeared
and every one stood up and started kissing his hands with great respect.
His deputy winked at me to tell me that this was the Shaykh, but I did
not show any enthusiasms for I was waiting for something different from
what I saw.

I had drawn an imaginary picture of him in my mind in accordance with
what his agents and followers had told me about his miracles, and all I
saw was an ordinary man without dignity or reverence. During the meeting
I was introduced to him by his deputy, and the Shaykh received me warmly
and sat me to his right and gave me some food.

After dinner the ritual ceremony started and the deputy introduced me
again to take the oath from the Shaykh, and everybody congratulated me
and blessed me. Later on I understood from what men were saying that I
was known to them, which encouraged me to disagree with some of the
answers given by the Shaykh to questions from the audience. Such
behavior led some of the men to express their disgust and to consider it
bad manners in the presence of the Shaykh who is usually left
unchallenged. The Shaykh sensed the uneasy atmosphere and tried to cool
the situation by using his wit, so he said,

"He whose start is burning, his end will be shining." The audience took
that as a graceful sign from the Shaykh, which would guarantee my
shining end, and congratulated me for that. However the Shaykh was
clever and very experienced, so he did not let me continue with my
irritable incursion and told us the following story:

One day a learned man attended a class held by a pious man and the pious
man asked the learned man to go and get washed, so the learned man went
and washed himself then returned to the class. The pious man repeated
his demand, "Go and get washed". The learned man went and washed himself
again thinking that he had not done it right the first time. When he
came back to the class, the pious man asked him to wash again. The
learned man started crying and said.

"Master, I have washed myself from my work and knowledge and I have
nothing left except that which Allah has granted me through your hands."
At that moment the pious man said, "Now you can sit down,"

I realized that I was the one whom the Shaykh referred to in the story,
and everyone else realized that as well, for they rebuked me when the
Shaykh left us to have a rest. They asked me to be silent and to show
respect for the Shaykh lest I fail in my work, basing their argument on
the Qur'anic verse:

***“O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak to one another, lest
your deeds become null while you do not perceive.”***  
***(Holy Qur'an 49:2)***

I then recognized my limits, so I complied and obeyed the orders, and
the Shaykh kept me near him, and subsequently I stayed with him for
three days, during which I asked him many questions, some of them to
test his knowledge.

The Shaykh knew that and used to answer me by saying that there are two
meanings for the Qur'an, one revealed and another hidden to a seventh
degree. He opened his private safe for me and showed me a personal
document which contained the names of pious and learned people
connecting him with Imam ‘Ali via many people such as Abu al-Hasan
al-Shadhili.

It is worth noting here that these meetings held by the Shaykh are
spiritual ones, and usually start with the Shaykh reciting and chanting
some verses from the Qur'an. After that he reads a few poetic verses
followed by chants and "dhikrs" by the men, and these chants are mainly
centered on asceticism, piety and the renunciation of this life and the
eagerness to seek the life hereafter.

After having finished with this part, the first man on the right hand
side of the Shaykh reads what he can from the Qur'an, and when he says
"And Allah said that truthfully" the Shaykh reads the beginning of
another piece of poetry and the whole congregation recites it after him,
each person then reading a Qur'anic verse. Shortly after that the men
start leaning gently to the left and to the right, moving with the
rhythms of the chants until the Shaykh stands up, and with him the
entire congregation, forming a circle with him at the centre.

Next they start chanting Ah, Ah, Ah, Ah, and the Shaykh turns around in
the centre, and then goes to each one of them, and shortly after that
the tempo heats up and the men start jumping up and down, shouting in an
organized but irritating rhythm.

After some hard work, quietness gradually prevails, and the Shaykh reads
his last pieces of poetic verse, and then everybody comes to kiss the
Shaykh's head and shoulders until they finally sit down. I have shared
with those people in their rituals but not convincingly, for they
contradicted my own beliefs of not attributing any associates to Allah
i.e. not to request anything but from Allah. I fell on the floor crying
and my mind scattered between two contradictory ideas.

One being the Sufi ideology in which a man goes through a spiritual
experience based on the feeling of fear, on asceticism and on trying to
approach Allah through the saints and the learned men.

The second idea was the Wahabi which had taught me that all of that was
an attempt to attribute associates to Allah, and that Allah will never
forgive them.

If the Great Prophet Muhammad (saw) cannot help, nor could he intercede,
then what is the value of those saints and pious people who came after
him?

In spite of the new position given to me by the Shaykh, for he appointed
me as his deputy in Gafsa, I was not totally convinced, although I
sometimes sympathized with the Sufi orders and felt that I should
continue to respect them for the sake of those saints and God fearing
people. I often argued, basing my argument on the Qur'anic verse:

***“And call not with Allah any other god, there is no other god but
He.” (Holy Quran 28:88)***

And if somebody said to me that Allah said:

***“O you who believe be careful of (your duty to) Allah and seek means
of nearness to Him.” (Holy Quran 5:35)***

I answered him quickly in the way that the Saudi Ulama had taught me by
saying "The way to seek Allah is by doing a good deed." In any case, my
mind was rather confused and troubled during that period, but from time
to time some followers came to my house, where we celebrated al-Imarah
(a type of dhikr).

Our neighbors felt uneasy about the noises which we produced, but could
not confront me, therefore they complained to my wife, via their wives,
and when I learnt about the problem, I asked the followers to celebrate
dhikr elsewhere. I excused myself by informing them that I was going
abroad for three months, so I said farewell to my family and friends and
sought my God, depending on Him, and not believing in any other god but
Him.


