In Egypt
========

I stayed in Tripoli, the Libyan Capital, long enough to obtain an entry
visa from the Egyptian Embassy to enter the land of Kinana i.e. Egypt. I
met a few friends who helped me in this matter, so may Allah reward them
for their effort. The road to Cairo is a long one, it took us three days
and nights, during which I shared a taxi with four other Egyptians
working in Libya who were on their way home.

Throughout the journey I chatted too them and read the Qur'an for them,
so they liked me and asked me to be their guest in Egypt. I chose one of
them, Ahmed. I felt very fond of him for he was a pious man and he gave
me the highest level of hospitality. I stayed in Cairo twenty days
during which I visited the singer Farid al-Atrash in his flat
overlooking the Nile. I liked him for what I had read about his modesty
in the Egyptian press, but I only managed to meet him for twenty minutes
because he was on his way to fly to Lebanon.

I visited Shaykh Abdul Basit Muhammad Abdul Samad, the famous reciter of
the Qur'an, whose voice I liked very much. I stayed with him for three
days, and during that time I discussed with his friends and relatives
many issues and they liked me for my enthusiasm, frankness and
knowledge. If they talked about art, I sang; and if they spoke about
asceticism and Sufism, I told them that I followed the Tijani order as
well as the Medani; and if they spoke about the West I told them about
Paris, London, Belgium, Holland, Italy and Spain which I visited during
the summer holidays; and if they spoke about the pilgrimage, I told them
that I had made the pilgrimage to Mecca and that I was on my way to
perform the Umrah.

I told them about places which were not known to people who had been on
pilgrimage seven times such as the caves of Hira and Thawr and the Altar
of Ismail. If they spoke about sciences and technology I gave them all
the figures and the scientific names; and if they spoke about politics,
I told them my views saying, "May Allah bless the soul of al-Nasir Salah
al-Din al- Ayyubi who deprived himself from smiling, and when some of
his closest friends criticized him by saying: “The great Prophet
(s.a.w.) was often seen smiling,” he answered: “How do you want me to
smile when the al-Aqsa Mosque is occupied by the enemies of Allah. Nay,
by the name of Allah I will never smile until I liberate it or die."

Some of al-Azhar's Shaykhs used to come to these meetings and liked what
I recited from the Qur'anic verses and the sayings of the Great Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.), besides they were impressed by my strong arguments
and asked me from which university I had graduated. I used to answer
them proudly that I graduated from al-Zaituna University which was
established before al-Azhar, and added, that the Fatimids - who
established al-Azhar - started from the town of al-Mahdiah in Tunis.

I met many learned people in al-Azhar, and some of them presented me
with a few books.

One day while I was at the office of an official responsible for the
al-Azhar affairs, a member of the Egyptian Revolutionary Command Council
came to attend a mass meeting for the Muslim and Coptic Communities in
one of the biggest Railway Companies in Cairo. The mass meeting was held
in protest against Sabotage activities in the aftermath of the June war.
The member of the Command Council insisted on my accompanying him to the
meeting, so I accepted the invitation, and sat on the VIP rostrum
between father Shnoodah and the Azhari Shaykh. I was also asked to
address the meeting, which I did with ease due to my experience in
giving lectures in Mosques and Cultural Committees in Tunis.

The main point which I have mentioned in this chapter is that I started
feeling big and somehow over confident, and I thought I had actually
become learned. Why should I not feel so when there were a number of
Ulama from al-Azhar who attested for me, some of them even told me that
my place was there, i.e. at al-Azhar. What really made me proud of
myself was the fact that I was allowed to see some of the Great
Prophet's (s.a.w.) relics.

An official from Sidi al-Husayn Mosque in Cairo took me to a room which
could only be opened by himself. After we entered he locked it behind
us, then he opened a chest and got the Great Prophet's (s.a.w.) shirt
and showed it to me. I kissed the shirt, then he showed me other relics
which belonged to the Prophet (s.a.w.), and when I came out of the room
I cried and was touched by that personal gesture, especially when the
official did not request any money from me, in fact he refused to take
it when I offered it to him. In the end, and only after my insistence,
he took a small amount and then he congratulated me for being one of
those who have been honored by the grace of the Great Prophet (s.a.w.).

Perhaps that visit left a deep impression on me, and I thought for a few
nights about what the Wahabis say regarding the Great Prophet (s.a.w.),
and how he died and passed away like any other dead person.

I did not like that idea and became convinced of its falsity, for if the
Martyr who gets killed fighting in the name of Allah is not dead but
alive (by his God), then how about the master of the first and last. My
feelings became clearer and stronger due to my early encounters with the
teachings of the Sufis who give their Shaykhs and Saints full power to
see to their affairs. They believe that only Allah could give them this
power because they obeyed Him and accepted willingly what He offered
them. Did He not state in the sacred saying: "My servant ... Obey me,
then you will be like me, you order the thing to be, and it will be."

The struggle within me started to have its effect on me. By then I had
come to the end of my stay in Egypt, but not before visiting, in the
last few days, a number of mosques and I prayed in all of them. I
visited the mosques of Malik, Abu Hanifah, al-Shafii, Ahmed ibn Hanbal,
al-Sayyidah Zaynab and Sidi al-Husayn; I also visited the Zawiah of al-
Tijani Sufi order, and I have many stories about the visits, some of
them are long, but I prefer to be brief.


