Miracles- Their Value Arid Significance
=======================================

IF PEOPLE, PARTICULARLY the enlightened minds of the educated ones
among us, only know the meaning of a miracle, its actual value and its
significance in the field of guidance to humanity towards the divine
truth, far from demanding it, they would never think of it.

A miracle is called in arabic ' Mo'jiza' , i.e., an act or manifesta-
tion which makes the world helpless against it, i.e., none in the world
other than the men of God, can work it. A miracle has three definite
aspects of its indication:-

1. The need of it relating to the mission of an apostle of God, means
his helplessness to make men realise the truth or understand it through
the appeal to the faculty of reasoning in the intellect of the people.
Or the unreasonable adamance on the part of the people to believe in the
bonafide of the man of God being in fact an apostle of God.

2. The demand of it on the part of the people, is an indication of the
lack of the necessary strenath of the faculty of reasoning to realise,
understand or recognise the truth by means of their own native endowment
of the intellect, and their readiness to believe in a thing only when
they are made help- less against it.

3. The use of a miracle in leading the people to the belief in a
factor, is to somehow compel them to do it, forcing the belief on them,
though they may like it or not.

The power to work miracles was given to every apostle of God, and to
the Holy Prophet the last one of them and along with him, every one of
the Imams or the divinely commissioned guides from his Holy House, was
given the power in its totality. All the prophets, preceding the Holy
Prophet, freely used the power and worked out miracles for two
reasons:-

1.The people in the initial or transitory stages of their intellect,
failed to grasp the truth by their limited reasoning and needed
something unusual and impossible to be enacted to convince them of the
bonafide of the claim of the man of God to be the apostle from God.

2. Since man in those ages, with his yet to develop intellect, was on
the wrong track, the divine mercy willed to stop his straying, even by
the force of the manifestation of the supreme power of the miracles.

When the final message of guidance in its perfect consolidation was to
be given to man with his intellect developed to the extent necessary to
understand the right and the wrong without any difficulty, and when man
had to be given the individual responsibility after receiving the final
guidance, there was no necessity to force the conscience or the
intellect in man to accept anything blindly, merely guided by the
manifestations of miraculous events. When the heaven's decree of ' No
compulsion in faith' ' None shall bear the burden of the other'-'Every
atom of goodness shall have its return and every atom of evil shall be
punished'- had to be announced, there was neither the necessity to show
any miracles nor there was any meaning in forcing the truth on man when
man had to be tried with the responsibility of the individual choice of
the right course.

**The Biggest Miracles of the Holy Prophets**

THE EXPLANATION REGARDING the meaning of a miracle, and its
significance given above, does not mean that the Holy Prophet or the
Imams of His Holy House did not show any miracles to their people. The
miracles shown by the previous prophets ended with them and remained
only in the scriptures, but the miracles of the Holy Prophet had been of
various kinds. Some of his miracles were timely as those of the previous
apostles- viz.

1. The dead, dried and the rotten tree getting evergreen by his
touch.
2. The coming of the date palm to him and its returning to its original
position, by his command.
3. His foretelling the fate of the Benedict against Abu Taleb, hung in
the Ka'ba, and the innumerable other similar events. Some were those
which continued until his stay on earth viz.

1.The sweet fragrance of his body which every approacher to him felt.
2. His possessing a shadowless body.
3. His belt being taken out of his waiste, without being untied or
loosened, passing through his body.
4. His seeming taller than the tallest one when walking besides him.
5. His prophecies, besides the revelations from the Lord.
6. His having no education under any mortal, and yet being the
fountainhead of knowledge to be called the 'City of Knowledge.' And the
greatest and the ever- current or the everlasting miracle of his, is the
Holy Qur'an with its ever- current challenge to the world as a whole, to
bring a chapter, or a few verses of its kind, which humanity till now
could not do, nor would it do until the end of the world.

Similarly, every Imam of his Holy House worked innumerable miracles in
his own time.

**The Succession to an Apostle of God**

To KNOW AS to who is that, with whom rests the authority to appoint a
successor to an apostle of God, God or man ? one should first know who
actually is God's apostle. The first apostle Adam, is titled by God
Himself as his 'Khalifa' or Vicegerent. Thus it becomes clear that an
apostle of God is a 'Khalifatullah' i.e., the Vicegerent of God on
earth.

**Who appoints a 'Khalifatullah'**

To KNOW AS to who appoints a Khalifatullah' , i.e., the Vicegerent of
God ? God Himself or man ? or to know as to how the appoint- ment is
effected, by God's independent decree or by any election among men by
themselves, or by the nomination of a man by another man, we need not
refer to any authority of any priest or consult any philosopher, for the
Holy Qur'an is too plain and too aloud about the matter. In the very
second chapter of the Holy Book, is there, that God did not consult even
the sinless and the faithful specie of the angels, but only informed
them of His decided will, to appoint Adam as His Vicegerent on earth:-

"When said thy Lord unto the angels, Verily, I am appoint- ing a
'Khalifa' (a Vicegerent) in the earth. 2:30 Hearing the announcement of
the will of the Lord, the angels submitted their knowledge about the
character and the conduct of the people who then inhabited the earth,
saying:-

"What! wilt Thou appoint the one who maketh mischief in it and
slteddeth blood? and we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness."
2:30

The absolute independence of the Lord did not tolerate even the enquiry
on the part of the angels who submitted only a truth, and immediately
the Lord remarked:-

"Verily I know what ye know not." 2:30

The above one verse of the Holy Qur'an gives out many impor- tant
factors about the Vicegerency of the Lord, the mode of the appointment
of a Vicegerent, his duties, and his position among the creation as a
whole. The verse gives out:-

1. The ' Khalifatullah' or the Vicegerent of God on earth, is appointed
by God Himself.

2. The personal qualities of the 'Khalifatullah' are in- conceivable
by, or unknown even to the angels.

3. The personal excellence of the 'Khalifatullah' is known only to God,
and God does not deem even the angels as fit to bear the knowledge of
it, hence He did not give it out to them. The angels were only told what
God knoweth about His ' Khalifa', even they knew not.

4. The term ' Khalifa' suggests that the one appointed is to rule the
kingdom of God on behalf of God, i.e., as God wills.

5. A ' Khalifa' is he who is vested with all the powers and the
authority of him whom he represents. Thus the 'Khalfatullah' will be
endowed with all the powers and the authority over the Kingdom of God.
All creation of the Lord will be under the 'Khalifatullah' and the '
Khalifatullah' being under the absolute submission to the Lord.

6. The Holy Qur'an gives out another factor for our guidance that a '
Khalifa' or the vicegerent of God, is given the store of knowledge
necessary for the office, by God Himself. Adam was given knowledge by
God Himself and then the angels were asked to give out what was taught
to Adam, which they failed to do.

"And He (God) taught Adam all the Names, then presented them to the
Angels; He(God) said (unto the Angels), 'Tell Me ye the names of those
if ye be truthful'." 2:31

The Angels said that they knew nothing more than what they were taught.
2:32

It means that what was taught to Adam was not taught to the Angels.

7. As the vicegerency will proceed further, according to the
evolutionary progress of the human intellect with which the Vicegerent
of the age and of the place Will have to deal, so will the Lord,
naturally gift His Vicegerent with higher intellect and an increased
store of knowledge.

8. When it is the will of the Lord to send to mankind His Last or the
Chief Vicegerent, 33 :40, the Vicegererit now sent, will naturally and
necessarily be endowed with knowledge in its fullness- and such a
Vicegerent alone will have the right and courage to say :'I am the City
of Know1edge' And only such a Vicegerent will naturally be the nearest
one to the Lord 53 :9 and His dearest one. Being the nearest one, he
would not speak or act but. what the Lord reveals to him and only about
such a Deputy of His, the Lord declared:-

" Nor doth he (The Holy Prophet Muhammad) speaketh of his own
inclination."

It is naught but a revelation revealed. 53:3

It is a natural and a simple inference that when the first of God's
apostles, sent into the world in its primitive state, is called His '
Khalifa' or the Vicegerent, the Last one of His apostles sent to
humanity with the maturity of intellect to bear the truth in its
fullness, must naturally and necessarily be the 'Khlifa' or the
Vicegerent of God in the Highest Order or Grade. The Holy Qur'an gives
out the fact that among the apostles of God, there are grades of
superiority of one over the other:- "These apostles, We have exalted
some of them over the others. Of them are some unto whom God hath spoken
20:11 and some He bath raised in degrees." 2:253

9. If the first ' Khalifa' or the Vicegerent of God, was superior to
the angels in his personal excellence as to entitle him to the 'Sijdah'
or the prostration of the angels 20:116 the Last or the Chief of the
Apostles will naturally be of a superior- most excel- lence. His purity
physical and spiritual, will be matchlessly divine among the creation as
a whole. Naturally such a super-fine personality can never be succeeded
but by those of the same purity. Referring to the purity of the Last
Apostle and the people of his Holy House, the Ahlul-Bait, God has
declared :-

" God only willeth that He keepeth away uncleanliness from you, 0'
Ahlul-Bait, and purify you a thorough purifi- cation." 33:33 God could
have purified only the Holy Prophet, if the divine guidance to mankind
had to end with him. The equal purification of his 'Ahlul-Bait' along
with him, can never be purposeless for God is the All-Wise Lord. The act
of the All-Wise can never be purpose- less or vain. Thus the equal
purification of the 'Ahlul- Bait' along with the Holy Prophet, clearly
indicates that the 'Ahlul Bait' have also to serve one and the same
identical purpose along with the Holy Prophet and after him, not as
apostles but as the 'Imams' or the vicegerents of the Lord on earth. It
is only a matter of simple common sense to know that the place of the
pure can be taken only by the pure and no impurity or pollution can ever
fit in, in the place of purity, perfect and supreme.

10. Every apostle of God was a ' Khalifatullah' or the vicegerent of
God, some were for themselves, some for a particular people and some for
a particular place and age with particular assignment and jurisdiction:
Noah was sent to a particular people 23:23, Moses to the people of
Pharaoh 20:24, Saleh to Thamud 7:7.3, Lot to his people 7:80 and
similarly the others.

11. The Last Apostle or the Chief Vicegerent of God, was sent not to
any one people or time, but to mankind as a whole i.e., as long as
mankind is there on earth 7:158, 4:79, 34:28. And he was declared not
only a ' Nazeer' or a Warner or a ' Rasool' i.e., a Messenger but as '
Sirajun Muneer' an Ever- Lighted Lamp 33 :46 and more than any other
status or position, he has been given an exclusive distinction as the
'Mercy unto the Worlds' 21 :107.

12. The position of the Last Apostle of God is clearly stated to be
over and above all the other apostles as a witness over them on the Day
of Judgment which declaration also clearly hints that in the realm of
spirit or in the order of existence , the Last one of the apostles, must
necessarily have existed even prior to Adam as the Holy Prophet said
'Awwalo' ma Khalaqallah Noori' i.e., What God first created is my 'Noor'
, Light. It is evident that he was ever vigilant over the ministries of
all the apostles of God, preceding him in the apostolic service on
earth. Otherwise he could not be a witness on all his predecessors: "
"And on that Day We shall raise up in every people a witness on them
from among themselves, and bring thee (0' Our Apostle Muhammad) as a
witness on them (all). 16:89

It is a well-known fact that a doctor alone can take the place of a
doctor or an Engineer only can take the place of an Engineer. It is
quite natural that a successor to a ' Khalifatullah' can never be but a
' Khalifatullah and he could be none else other than of those purified
by God Himself 33:33 of the same calibre and of the same excellence and
purity. It is referring to this fact identifying the personal excellence
of his successors the Holy Imams (the Khalifatullahs), that the Holy
Prophet, has said:-

" I and Ali are of one and the same Light."

And about the Twelve Imams who will succeed him, the Holy Prophet
declared:-

Awwalona Muhammad - The First one of us is Muhammad
Ausatona Muhammad The Middle one of us is Muham- mad
Aakirona Muhammad- The Last one of us is Muhammad
Kollona Muhammad Every one of us is Muhammad

i.e.,Like the Holy Prophet Muhammad, all the Imams succeeding him,
though not as apostles of God, are identical in their being the
vicegerents of the Lord, on the earth with the same purity and the
excellence, physical and spiritual, gifted to them by their Lord
Himself.

It is necessary for the readers to know that 'Khilafat' means here
'Imamat' and 'Imamat' actually means 'Vilayat' or the divine
guardianship or mastery.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad was an 'Imam' as well as a ' Rasool'
(Apostle) or ' Nabi' (the Prophet of God)- The 'Imamat' , or the '
Vilayat' of the Holy Prophet is superior or higher to his ' Risalat',
i.e., apostleship, or his ' Nubowwat', i.e., prophethood, and his '
Risalat' and his ' Nubowwat' end ' with the conveyance of the message or
the conclusion of his ministry as a Prophet but his 'Imamat', i.e.,
Leadership or Guidance, or his ' Vilayat', i.e., his Guardianship or
Mastery remains with him and his successors 'Imams' or the ' Valies',
for ever, until the end of the world.

It is in the light of these guiding factors given out by the Holy
Qur'an, the Final Word of God, that one has to view the position of the
Holy Prophet Muhammad or the Holy Imams, particularly of Husain,
connected with the subject of this brief work.

**The Imamat, promised to Abraham**

THE IMAMAT OR the Guidance or the Leadership first bestowed upon
Abraham, and promised by the Lord to be continued in his seed, was
fulfilled in the immediate succession to the Holy Prophet:

" And when his Lord tried Abraham with certain words, he fulfilled
them. He said "Verily I make thee an Imam (Guide) for mankind." Said
(Abraham):'And of my offspring? Said He (God) 'And My covenant reacheth
not the ' Zalimeen" (i.e., the iniquitous) 2:24 The wording of the reply
to Abraham in the above verse is clear that the Imamat conferred on him
will reach the offsprings of Abraham who are not Zalims (iniquitous).

The above saying agrees with the declaration in the Old Testa- ment.
When Abraham prayed for Ishmael, the Lord said:-

"And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee. Behold, I have blessed him, and
will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly ; Twelve
Princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation." OT., Gen.
88:20 The greatest 'Zulm' or iniquity according to the Holy Qur'an is '
Shirk' i.e., polytheism or idolatry:-

"-Verily ' Shirk' (ascribina partners to God) is the greatest
'Zulm'(iniquity)." 31:13

It is a hard fact of history that besides the Holy Prophet Muhammad, in
the lineage of Abraham through Ishmael, there is only one and that is
Ali ibne Abi Taleb whom the ' Zulm' the iniquity. of ' Shirk' polytheism
(i.e., idolatry) never touched, who never bow- ed before any one besides
God. It is for this fact the general muslim world mention the name of
Ali with the suffix ' Karramallaho Wajhaho' (i.e., he whose face God has
graced not to bow to any one besides Him). All the others of the
companions of the Holy Prophet, had once been idolaters. The members of
his House and his lineage including Abu-Taleb (the father of Ali, the
first Holy Imam), all had been free from this most abhorrent abomin-
able pollution.

About Abu-Taleb, suffice it to say that if Abu-Taleb had not adopted '
Taqiah so successfully as he did, he would not have been able to give
the asylum of safety and security to the Holy Prophet and Islam, against
the hostile pagan world in Mecca. The very wordings of his sermon on the
occasion of the wedding of the Holy Prophet with Lady Khadija, his
commanding his son Ali to abide by the Holy Prophet's faith, and his
suffering the historic privation known as the Sheb-e-Abu Taleb for the
sake of the Holy Prophet and his faith and the Holy Prophet declaring
the year of Abu-Taleb's death as the 'Aamul- Huzn' i.e., the Year of
Grief, is sufficient to indi- cate as to what Abu Taleb was, at heart.
The similitude of Abu-Taleb is the similitude of ' Ezkeil' the Momine
Aale Firaun' the Believer of the people of Pharaoh. Thus Abu Taleb was
the 'Momine -Qoreish' the Believer among the Qoreish.

**The Logical Identification of an Imam**

THE ALL-MERCIFUL LoRD has not spared any point of guidance, neces- sary
to lead man to the right path. The Gracious Lord has merci- fully
promised guidance to every one who sincerely seeks it:-

"(What!) Is he then who leadeth to the Truth more worth to be followed,
or he who findeth not the way unless he is guided (by some one else)?
What is the matter with you? How do ye judge? 10:33 '(What!) Is then, he
who goeth prone upon his face, better guided or he who walketh uprtght
on the straight path?" 67:21

The above verses of the Holy Qur'an give the clearest indica- tion that
only the Holy Prophet and his Ahlul-Bait, who never had any education
from any mortal in the world and yet were the fountain- heads of
learning and knowledge, are those who could be the 'Imams' or guides or
the leaders for mankind.

Only about Ali, the Holy Prophet had said:-

"I am the City of Knowledge and Ali is its Gate." "I am the City of
'Hikmat' (Wisdom) and Ali is its Gate." "The Truth is with Ali and Ali
is with Truth."

It is needless to stress much upon the position of Ali in the divinely
gifted knowledge, for the muslim world as a whole knows it that there is
none to match Ali in this regard besides the Holy Prophet. There are
innumerable sayings of the Hoy Prophet about Ali's unique position as
the 'Imam' immediately succeeding him.


