The Importance of the Choice of the Right Lmam
==============================================

ACCORDING TO THE declaration of the Holy Qur' an every individual man
and woman, is individually charged with the responsibility of choosing
an 'Imam' or guide for himself or herself in this life for it has been
clearly announced that every people will be called on the Day of
Judgment along with his or her ' Imam ':-

"On the day (of Resurrection) We shall call every people witht their
(respective) 'Imam' (Guide)." 17:71 Confirming the above announcement
and warning mankind particularly the muslims against any failure in this
regard, the Holy Prophet had said:-

"He who died and did not know the Imam of his age, had died the death
of ignorance."

The above apostolic saying, besides giving out the importance of the
significance of knowing by every one, the 'Imam' of his age, discloses
the fact that in every age there will be an 'Imam' and no age until the
end of the world can be without an 'Imam' in it.

Every Individual Responsible for His Own Choice

HAVING SHOWN MAN the right course and giving a additional guiding notes
directing him to the right path, man has been left to be gratefully
guided aright or ungratefully get astray, rejecting all the divine
guidance:-

"Verily We have shown man the Way, be he thankful or be he unthankful.
76:3

Since the truth has been made clearly manifest against false- hood, it
has been declared that there shall be no compulsion in faith:-

"There is no compulsion in religion, the right way has been made
clearly manifest from the error."2:256 Man has also been repeatedly
warned against the unwarranted undertaking by the false leaders of the
faith, to bear the burden of the sins of their followers:-
" No bearer shall bear the burden of the other." 2:48, 6:165, 36:18,
39:7, 53:38 Every individual has bcen warned that the least vice will be
punished and the least virtue will be rewarded:-

"So he who doeth an atom weight of good shall see it." "And he who
doeth an atom weight of evil shall see it." 99:7,8

**The Door of Pardon for Sincere Repentance open**

HAVING HARNESSED THE brute or the self in man with the heavy
responsibilities, and the individual accounting for the choice of the
right course and faithfully following it, the All- Merciful let the door
of His Merciful Pardon, open for those who sincerely repent and amend
their mistaken conduct:-

"Say (0' Our Apostle Muhammad!) 0' My servants who have been prodigal
to their own selves, despair ye not of the mercy of God. Verily God
forgiveth sins alto- gether. Verily He is Forgiving Mercful." 39:53

A sinner when assured of some one else having paid the price of the
sins of the world, as is preached by the Christian church, get freely
licentious with the surety that his sins have been paid for. But man
with the individual, responsibility of being good, and being assured of
pardon against any unintentional failures, remains cautious and at the
same time attached to the Lord for the mercy he hopes for from Him. When
one is totally disappointed against his sins not being pardoned at all,
gets desperate and when he is assured of the pardon against a sincere
repentance, naturally one, some time or the other gets mindful of giving
up the wrong course in the hope of the promised pardon for his past and
return to the right path.

**Redemption or Intercession through the Right means Possible**

IF THE HOLY Qur'an has said that neither intercession will be accepted,
nor any ransom, it does not mean that redemption or intercession is
totally ruled out. It needs only a proper and intelligent recital of the
Word of God. Intercession or ransom which will not he accepted is that
of the man's own fancied false leaders of the faith whom man
unwarrantedly followed, and the false god the disbeliever wrongly
worshipped with the false hope of having any intercession on his behalf
for his sins. Otherwise man has been clearly informed of the
intercession through the right course accepted by God or through those
permitted by him:-

" Who is he that can intercede with Him (God) but by His permission."
2:255

"There is no intercessor except after His (God's) permission." 10:3

"On the day when no intercession avails except of him whom the
Beneficent (God) allows, and whose word He is pleasca with." 20: 109

The above verses of the Holy Qut'an clearly declare the availability of
intercession but only through those permitted by God and those whose
word God is pleased with. Mere common sense is sufficient to say that
those permitted or those whose words God is pleased with, can be no
others than those whom God Himself purified (33 :33) i.e., 'Ahlul-Bait
'. Those who are impure to any degree, less or more can never even be
imagined to be of any use at all for they themselves will be held up in
accounting for their own pollutions.

**What is Imamat?**

'IMAMAT' IS THE 'Kihilafate-Ilahiah' or the vieegerency of God on
earth. 'Imamt' is the heart and soul of 'Risalat' Prophethood, or '
Nubowwat' , i. e., Apostleship. The Holy Prophet Muhammad was a 'Rasool'
, Prophet , 'Nabi' (Apostle) as well as an 'Imam' (the Guide or the
Leader) i.e. ' Khilafatullah,' i.e., the Vicegerent of God on earth.

"Imamat' or the ' Khilafate-Ilahiah,' i.e., vicegerency of God Is not a
thing for men jointly or severally to award it to or bestow it on any
one. It is an office which is not given to any one after his getting
qualified there in this world, but to the one who is already chosen by
God Himself for the purpose and is sent into the world duly conditioned
for it.

The demonstrative instance of Abraham's being given the 'Imamat' after
the trial and the verse of the reply to Abraham's prayer for his
offspring about the 'Imamat' awarded to him, if studied intelligently,
gives the important factors about the signi- ficance of Imamat and as to
what actually it is.

"And when his Lord tried Abraham with certain words, he fulfilled them.
He (God) said : Verily I make thee an Imam for mankind. Said (Abraham) '
And my offiprings?' Said He (God) ' My Covenant reacketh not the
'Zalimeen' (the Iniquitous)." 2:124

The following is the verbal and meaningful analysis of the above
verse:-

1. 'Imamat': even to an apostle of God, like Abraham is given only
after a trial and his passing it successfully.
2. 'Imamat' :is not an automatic product of any success in any trial,
until it is awarded by the divine will.
3. 'Imamat' : is awarded by none but God Himself.
4. 'Imamat : is a Covenant of the Lord.
5. 'Imaat' : does not automatically pass on as a hereditary right,
irrespective of the heir to an Imam, being equitous or iniquitous.
6. 'Imamat' : is awarded only to the equitous.
7. 'Imamat' : is a gracious award only to Abraham and to the equitous
ones in the seed of Abraham and not to any one or every one, even if he
be equitous.
8. 'Imamat' : is an independent award of the Lord only to His Chosen
ones.

It may be asked, if an apostle or an 'Imam' is sent into the world
already purified and conditioned by God Himself, what is meant by
putting him once again to trial in his earthly life? The answer is that
the trial is not for God to know the mettle or the calibre or the native
endowment in him which He himself has effected, but it is to show to the
world the degree of his personal excellence and his devotion and
absolute submission to the will of his Lord.

**The Start of the Imamat of Ali**

THE APOSTOLIC DECLARATION at the historic assembly at 'Ghadeer- e-Khum'
in compliance with the will of the Lord, declared through the verse 6:67
by which the Holy Prophet declared Ali as the 'Maula' or the Lord or the
Master of the Faithful, in his own place, Ali became the 'Maula' of the
Faithful. And it must also be remembered that while felicitating Ali,
Omar was asked by the Holy Prophet to address Ali as the
'Ameerul-Momineen', i.e., the Commander or the Ruler of the Faithful and
it was only at the declaration of Ali as the 'Maula' in the place of the
Holy Prophet, by the verse 6:3 the religion Islam was declared to be
complete and to be the creed accepted by God.

God had commanded the Holy Prophet to appoint the one already nominated
by Him, in his place, before he leaves the world and then only to return
unto his Lord, and the Holy Prophet acted accordingly in response to
verse 6:67:-

"So when thou (0' Our Apostle Muhammad) has finished (completed the
ministry) appoint- And unto thy Lord incline." 94:7, 8 Thus in pursuance
of the declared will of the Lord, with the departure of the Holy Prophet
from this world, started the 'Imamat of Ali or the ' Khilafate-Ilahiah'
or the Vicegetency of God on earth.

The Kalifate started at the 'Saqeef-e-Bani Sa'ada' with the dis- pute
for it, between the Mohajirs (the Emigrants) and the Ansars (the
helpers) was the kalifate or the rulership of the people and not the
'Khilafat- e- Rasool' or the succession to the Holy Prophet in his
apostolic office. It was only the succession to the Prophet as the ruler
of the state. It could not be the spiritual leadership in the place of
the Holy Prophet for it passed through characters like Yazeed ibne
Ma'aviah and the several others of the Omayyids and the Abbasides whose
personal qualities, history has already re- ported to the world. Thus
the Kalifate should not be confused with the 'Imamat' for the Imam, the
Vicegerent of God on earth, cannot be but one like Abraham and the Holy
Prophet which the physical and the spiritual or the external and the
internal excellence possessed by these Chosen Ones of God. God's
Vicegerent can never be the debauchees, the drunkards, the assassins and
the murderers even of their own kith and kin. The 'Imamat' i.e., the
'lmam' has to remain until the end of the world, but the world knows the
historic fact that the man-made Kalifate started by man in the 'Saqeefa'
could not survive long; it was annihilated or dismissed by another man
the Ataturk at Constantinople. The ' Khilafat-e-Ilahiah' or the
Vicegerency which is bestowed by God Himself on His apostles or through
His apostles, remains and to remain as long as lasts the world.

**Ali as the Imam**

ALT WAS NEGLECTED and ignored by the people as any apostle of God
suffered at the hands of his people but it never affected the divine or
the heavenly position of the apostle and the apostle always played his
role as assigned to him by His Lord. If the people got benefited by his
ministry it was for themselves and if not, it was also against them:-

"If they reject thee, already did reject before them, the people of
Noah and ' Ad and Thamood did reject (the prophets)." 22:42 "If ye do
good, ye do good unto your own selves. And if ye do evil, then it shall
be for the self (itself). Simi- larly did Ali act." 17:7

**The Position of an Imam**

THE POSITION OF an Imam and the duty assigned to Imamat is to act as
the Vicegerent of God for the guidance of those who seek it, towards the
already revealed course of life and not to go on canvas- sing support
for him. The conveyance of any message, is the duty of a Messenger or an
Apostle, and Imam has no new message to convey but he is the custodian
and the Guardian of the already delivered message and a Guide towards
it, for those who seek a way towards the truth. The position of Imam is
the position of the 'Ka'ba' , the Hajies go to it and it does not go to
any one requesting him to be its Haji. It was the lookout of the people
to seek a way to the Imam and get duly guided, if they desired to have
the correct guidance.

**Tenure of the Kalifate started at the Saqeefa**

ABu BAKR RULED as Kalif for about two years, i.e., from 11 A.H. to 13
A.H, and handed over the charge of the Kalifate without any election or
nomination from the public or from any one else. Omar ruled from 11 A.H.
to 24 A.H., about 11 years. Omar nomi- nated a committee with Abdur
Rahman ibne Auf as its chairman with a veto, and Othman became the third
ruler or the third Kalif. Othman ruled from 24 A.H. to 35 A.H., i.e.,
about 11 years.

What was the lot of the Ahlul-Bait during this period, is a matter
which could better be had in its details from history. Any sincere
seeker of the truth about the lot of the godly ones of the House of the
Holy Prophet, may better refer to history and then shed tears for the
sufferings of the Holy souls at the hands of the people for whose
guidance they had been sent into the world, and know the lot they
suffercd at the hands of those who called themselves Muslims.

**Ali Resembles the Holy Prophet**

HAVING LOST THE paternal love of the Holy Prophet and the godly
partnership in life, of Lady Fatema, Ali resembled exactly the same as
was the Holy Prophet after losing the paternal protection of Abu Taleb
and the faithful partner in life, Lady Khadija. As the Holy Prophet was
surrounded with the enemies from all sides in Mecca, after the demise of
the Great Protector Abu Taleb, Ali was also left all alone deserted,
ignored, neglected and pushed to seclusion by the atmosphere which had
turned treacherous and immediately following the departure of the Holy
Prophet from the midst of the people.

It is a historic fact that Ali was the greatest protector of the Holy
Prophet and Islam. It was Ali's sword which,defending the faith and the
faithful against the unprovoked aggression from the pagans of Mecca,
that had killed many of the heathen veterans who aimed at killin the
Holy Prophet and annihilating the faith for ever, particularly at Badr,
and Khandaq. Most of the pagan Meccans had yielded only to the fast
rising power of Islam and just to fall in line with the march of time,
and had embraced Islam without any conviction of the truth at heart.
This fact is borne out by the Qur'anic declaration:-

"The dwellers of the desert say : 'We believe, Say thou (O' Our Apostle
Muhammad )' Ye believe not, but say ye 'We submit' ; and faith hath not
yet entered into your hearts- 94:14

Besides, the above disclosure of the hypocrisy of the people, there is
the Chapter as a whole on the hypocrites of the time (Chapter 63).

Thus those who had joined the ranks of Islam only succumbing to the
circumstances, having professed the faith, got busy in all sorts of
subversive activities mentioned in the Holy Qur'an of teasing the
believers and obstructing others joining the faith. They worked as the
fifth-columnists against the progress of the faith and its power.
Remaining in the ranks, the hypocrites tried the worst possible for
them, by deserting the Holy Prophet and running away from the
battlefields, creating the possibility and the opportunities of defeat
for Islam so that the field may be open to them and to the others to
return to their original faith and power. But God had not allowed them
to succeed in their plots. And now having joined the faith and the faith
having been strongly established and the opposition to it having been
crushed and annihilated for ever, their interest of the leadership and
power lay in their posing as the staunchest of the believers so that
they maybe the leaders of the faith- ful though they may not actually
like it.

There is a Persian couplet:-

Car gonaahi bakoni dar shab- e- Aadeena bakon Taake az Sadr nasheenaane
Jahannam baashi

If thou commit any sin, commit it on the 'Shab-e-Juma' (the Thursday
night)

So that even in Hell you mav be of the Chiefs of it. Thus all the
opportunists who had joined the ranks of Islam and who were the
relatives of the pagan veterans killed by Ali at Badr and Ohod and
Khandaq, and who now had gained power, had decided to wreak vengeance on
Ali and his issues, revenging their pagan elders and relatives killed by
him in the onslaughts against Islam. The fact about this attitude of the
people was leaked out by Yazeed son of Ma'aviah, son of Abu Sofyan,
while seated fully drunk on his throne at Damascus, with the heads of
Husain and his devotees, placed under his throne, before him, and the
ladies and the children of the holy family of the Holy Prophet,
including the ailing son, Ali son of Husain, standing fettered in heavy
chains, sang the verses in Arabic saying:-

" Had my elders who died at Badr and Ohod been alive they would have
seen how well have I revenged their blood."

Thus the Ahlul-Bait, particularly Ali, was now in an atmosphere wholly
hostile and treacherous with avowed enemies determined to wreak
vengeance on the House of the Holy Prophet.

**Ali during the age of the three Kalifates**

UNCONCERNED WITH THE matters of the state with no aspiration to own any
political power, fully contented with his resignation to the wi11 of the
Lord, Ali was busy releasing the streams of knowledge through his
sermons to those few who, mindful of God and the life hereafter, had
gathered around him and remained attached to him. Those sermons of Ali,
put together, are today called the 'Nahjul- Balagha', i.e., the Course
of Eloquence, which is nothing but a Treasury of the Highest knowledge
of the Qur'anic Truth and the Highest treatise of the the spirit of
Islamic Philosophy.

Ali has supplied to the world of devout faith many beautifully and
masterly worded supplications (prayers); Firstly, they have been found
cent per cent effective in invoking the divine mercy, in getting the
prayers of the sincere supplicants readily heard and secondly, they are
such pieces of divinely worded literature that even the greatest master
minds since then till today, could only say that the matter is 'Below
the Word of God and above the word of man.'

Ali is unanimously recognised by all the mystic schools in Islam, as
their First Leader or Guide or the Generator of the Mystic Know- ledge.
All the various schools of mysticism revert only to Ali for their
origin. Whenever any problematic difficulty arose even the courts of the
Kalifate sought Ali's help and Ali always helped every seeker of
knowledge, irrespective of the seeker being his friend or a foe.

There is a famous saying of Omar:-

'Lau la allyyin lahalakal Omar'
Had Ali not been there, Omar would have been lost.
The Religious Landmarks of the age- Ali witnessed

1 . Faterna's House was set on fire.
2. Ali was arrested and carried as a captive.
3. Fatema's property was confiscated.
4. Fatema was killed.
5. The two Muta's, the Muta-e-Nisa and the Muta-e-Haj ordained by the
Holy Qur'an and valid during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet and during
thc time of the first Kalif and even for years during Omar's time, were
abolished by Omar.
6. The use of 'Haiya ala Khairil amal' was removed from 'Azan'- by Omar
and instead of it, the use of 'As- Salaato khaira minan naum' was
inserted by him.
7. Omar started the 'Taraweh.'
8. Ma'aviah was given the governorship of Syria, by 0mar.
9. The banishment by Othman of the aged faithful Gom- panion of the
Holy Prophet Aba-zare Ghaffari to wilderness, where, in the desert,he
died a miserable death.

What all passed on during the long period of the rule of the three
Kalifs, is not concerned with the subject of this work, and nor can all
that happened affecting the interest of the Ahlul- Bait be accommodated
in this brief work. Only some relevant incidents which show, through
what kinds of channels passed the holy soul of Husain the King of
Martyrs, the significance of the lmamat and the circumstances under
which it worked, had necessari- ly to be given for without the
prerequisite knowledge of the men and the matters concerned, a mere
narration of the isolated event of Karbala, will not serve any purpose
of giving out its significance or importance to human life on earth.

In short, the life of Ali, after the Holy Prophet, was that of an
apostle, though he was not an apostle, for apostleship had concluded and
ended with the Holy Prophet and no other apostle or prophet was to
come.

To speak of any aspiration on the part of Ali for any political power
or authority, will be sheer foolishness or the betrayal of one's
bankruptcy of the knowledge about Ali's godly personality. Ali's
aspiring for any temporal power on earth will be equal to own- ing the
kingdom of the whole of a vast dominion and to yet aspire for a petty
landlordship of a small strip of barren useless land, in it. As the
Vicegerent of God on earth, what is the other power or authority left
over, for Ali to aspire.

Ali was he who could pluck out the huge iron gate of the fortress of
Khaiber by his one hand and make it the bridge over the ditch, holding
the huge heavy iron door- frame on his palm and making the whole of the
muslim army pass over it,crossing the ditch and entering the fortress
captured by him, Ali was the one who could be present at several places
at one and the same time and he could by God's given power to him, do
and undo things for which he is even today popularly called both by his
friends and focs alike as the ' Mazharul-Ajaib' and he who, when in
power, as the 'Kalif ' in charge of the Treasury, stood in the treasury
room and addressing the heaps of gold and silver, said ' O' yellow, O'
white, go! beguile, and prouden any one else other than me! Ali has
divorced ye two thrice. There can be no return for you unto me! It is
said that once when he was the Kalif, Ali was mend- ing his own shoes
which were totally worn out and Salman the faithful devotee of the
'Ahlul- Bait' remarked ' O' Ameertul Mominneen! What is left in them
that thou mendest them ? Ali asked Salman ! What thinkest thou that this
torn or worn out shoe worths? Salman replied. ' O' Ameerul Momineen !
Only God and thou knowest it.' Ali smiled and said ' Salman! know thou
that this torn away and worn out shoe is to me of more worth and value
than the Kalifate.

' Aspiration for any worldly power on the part of such a divine is
urnmaginable. And if Ali had ever accepted to rule, it was in the
interest of the wel- fare of the people themselves, to give them the
blessings of a godly kingdom on earth. If the world had accepted Ali, at
the very first instance, it would have saved itself of all the chaos and
confusion which ended the life of the Third Kalif. The opinion of a non-
muslim writer on the history of the muslims, Mr. Seddillot, quoted by
Mr. Justice Ameer Ali in his famous work 'the Spirit of Islam' will give
out the truth in the above statement which, a dispassionate and
unprejudiced mind of even a non-muslim scholar realised:-

"Had," says Seddillot : "the principles of hereditary succession in
favour of Ali been recognised at the outset, it would have prevented the
rise of those disastrous pretentions which engulfed Islam in the blood
of muslims. The husband of Fatema, united in his person the right of
succession as the lawful heir of the prophet as well as the right by
election. It might have bee thought that all would submit themselves
before his glory, so pure and so grand." (SI by AA)


