Ali Weds Lady Ummol-baneen
==========================

THE WORLD AROUND the Holy Prophet witnessed and history has vouched the
fact that the gap in the domestic life and the happiness of the Prophet,
created by the demise of Lady Khadija doubtlessly proved as irreparable
for no other woman fittingly filled it up to give the Apostle of God the
happiness at home or the harmony in his domestic life, and it is only
about the good Lady Omme Salema that the Holy Prophet said: ' Ante alal
Khair, i.e., Thou arton good- ness, which the good Lady proved true by
not leaving the house of the Holy Prophet even after his departure from
this world, and remaining as attached to his Ahlul Bait as she was
during his life- time. The same was the case with Ali the First Imam,
the Vice- gerent of God on earth, succeeding the Holy Prophet. After the
martyrdom of the Holv Lady Fatema, there was none in the world to take
her holy place in the house of Ali and the good Lady Ommol- Baneen
served Ali after Holy Lady Fatema as did Omme Salema to the Holy Prophet
after the demise of Lady Khadija.

**The alliance for a Holy Cause**

THE PROPIIECY FROM the Holy Prophet about the impending ' Zibhe Azeem'
or the Great Martyrdom of Husain, had gained so much currency and had
become a matter of such a conviction and concern to the AhluI-Bait that
after the departure of Lady Fatema,Ali called his brother Aqeel who was
known for his knowledge about the tribal geneologies and told him to
find out a respectable lady of a noble family, known for its bravery,
for him to wed for he wanted to have a brave son from her to be his own
representative there at Karbala to serve Husain the son of the Holy
Prophet and help him in the calamitous situation against his enemies and
lay his life defending Husain on his own behalf, for Hasan and Husain
were hailed as the sons of the Holy Prophet and each one was addressed
as 'Ibne Rasoolullah' (son of the Holy Prophet).

Ali expressly and particularly stressed when he told Aqeel for the
selection of a lady, that he wanted the determined issue from the lady
to be the bravest one in the world, to serve Husain at Karbala on his
own behalf. Aqeel said:- " Marry thou, Ommol- Baneen- e- Kalbi, the
daughter of Hazm bin Khalid- e- Kalbi, for braver than her father, there
was none in the tribes."

**Abbas the Standard-Bearer of Husain arrives**

THE DESIRE OF Ali was readily granted by the Lord. Ali wanted one
issue, to serve on his behalf at Karbala, God gave him three more along
with the one desired by him and the Lady Ommol- Baneen gave four Sons to
Ali:-

1. Abbas 2. Jaffar 3. Othman 4. Abdullah.

The birth of Abbas has been given by God, certain similarities with the
birth of his father Ali. When Ali was born, he did not open his eyes
until came to him the Holy Prophet and took him in his lap and on the
apostolic hands Ali opened his eyes for the first time in the world and
looked first at the holy face of the Apostle of God and smiled.
Similarly did Abbas for lie opened his eyes first when Husain came and
took him in his lap and Abbas opened his eyes and looked first at the
holy face of Husain and smiled.

When Ali was born, he was given to the Holy Prophet who adop- ted him
as his son and Ali remained with the Apostle of God and was brought up
by him. Similarly, Abbas was given to Husain and remained closely
attached to Husain, and Abbas prided treating himself as the slave of
Husain addressing Husain not as brother, though he was a brother, but as
'Syed wo Maula' My Chief and my Master. In short, if the Holy Prophet
had come into the world to present Islam and if Ali was given to him as
an assistant and helper in the apostolic mission, Husain, had been sent
by the Lord to save Isalm and re-establish it at Karbala and Abbas was
given to Husain to assist him and to help him in the godly mission of
apostolic nature.

In resonse to the desire of Ali the First Holy Imam or the Vicegercnt
of God on earth, God had sent Abbas for Husain, as was sent Ali for the
Holy Prophet, to exhibit exactly the same matchless bravery, wonderful
valour, irresistible prowess and the amazing and the inimitable and
ideal faithfulness to defend Husain and the truth at Karbala.

For the marked resemblance with his father, Abbas was popu- Iarly known
as 'Haider-e-Thani', i.e., Haider (Ali) the Second ; and for his
extraordinary handsome features, he was fittingly called the
'Qamar-e-Bani Hashim', i.e., The Moon of the Hashimites. Abbas is
reported to be of such a well built and a tall stature that historians
report that when he mounted a horse, his knees touched the ears of the
steed and that the animal would proudly bear the commanding personality
of its majestic rider.

All his life, right from his infsney, Abbas moved most closely with
Husain, practically as a faithful slave to his loving master, or a
dutiful son to a respectable father, exactly as Ali moved with the Holy
Prophet.

The ways of heaven are obvious but to the awakened minds of those who
believe in Him, His Might, His Wisdom and His Ever- Fulfilled Will. When
God wants His will to be fulfilled on earth, He sends down His own
agencies, ha they angels or men, duly fitted by Himself to serve His
purpose. Apostles of God when assigned any taskful allotment of any
mission, ware given the help by another one like them to assist them.
Mosas was commended to proceed against Pharaoh and he was given an
assistant in his brother Aaron. The Help Prophet Muhammed was to deal
with the pagan and the heathen world and he was given en assistant in
his brother Ali and Hosaim now having been sant to face the devils in
human frames and to re-establish Gid's Religion, offering the Greatest
Sacrifice (the 'Zibhe Azeem' ) ever offered on earth, he was given Abbas
his brother duly fitted with all the qualities necessary to fulfil the
divine purpose at Karbala.

**The Kulifate thrust upon Ali**

THE THIRD KALIFATE ended in chaos, turmoil and the murder of the kaif
Othman. There was unrest among sPa people all over the empire. Ma'aviah
the governor of Syria appointed by Omar 30 A.H., took full advantage of
the patronage of the Omayyids by the third kalif and had astablishad
himself stongly at Damascus and had made the place a stronghold of his
own.

An amazing situation was created that the Kalifate aftes which people
ran and for which there was so much of dispute and tension, now was
ronning after Ali imploring him to accept it. There waa no question of
any election, nomination or co-optation now; the whole nation was now at
Ali's door, imploring him to be gracious enough rn accept their
Kalifate. Ali repeatedly refused but the public as a whole would not
accept any excuse from him. The great historian Oakly in his famous work
the History of the Saracens and other historians too, say that Ali said
:-

"If you excuse me and elect another , whomsoever you may think fit
choose, shall most submissively Vield obe- dience to him, if not, and I
must with your wish to accept the offer,I must say frankly at the
outset

that I shall conduct the administration quite indepcn

dently and I shall deal with all of you according to

the Holy Book of the Lord and to the best of knowledge and judgment.”
Ok. HS. p. 289.

The people unhesitatingly and unanimously assented to the condition and
gladly extended their hands in token of their fealty to Ali,but he
refused to accept their assent unless it be in public, in order that
none might have any doubt about the offer being from the people and none
might have any cause to grumble thereafter.

The next day, the Mosque of the Holy Prophet was so fully packed that
none could cross through the crowd and the multitude of those who could
not get into the Mosque were thronging around the holy edifice to hear
about Ali’s consent to their offer and last of them all, arrived the
Vicegerent of the Holy Prophet and mounting the pulpit making plain and
clear to every one, his condition for accepting the offer, assented to
it. People, who on the previous occasions were running away from paying
their fealty to the Kalifate and who had to be forced, coerced,
threatened, encouraged and purchased to pay it, now were rushing to have
the honour of kissing the holy hand of Ali.

**The state of affairs—Ali was offered**

PEOPLE AND THE state of affairs Ali had been offered to rule,can not be
depicted in this brief work. Readers interested to know about the
details of the historic chaos, confusion and turmoil and the unrest that
prevailed when Ali was forced to undertake the Kalifate, may refer to
Tabari or the other detailed works on the History of the muslims after
the departure of the Holy Prophet.The following quotation from the
famous and the popular work the ‘Spirit of Islam’ by Justice Amir Ali
will suffice to give a rough idea of the situation:—

“Under Othman there was complete reversal of the policy and the
administration. Merit and faithful services were wholly disregarded. All
offices of trust and emolument were seized by the Omayyids. The
governorships of the provinces were bestowed on men who proved
themselves most inimical to Islam, and the treasury was emptied in their
favour." SI. AA.

People had mostly been naturalised in corruption and accustomed to
bribing bargains. Some of the opportunists were labouring under some
false expectations. The corrupt ones thinking Ali to have been
disappointed all the while until the Third Klif, for not getting the
chance to rule, and now having got it, expected Ali also to canvas
support and the unearned and illegal popularity at a higher scale to
maintain his position by the same favouritism and bribes.

To rule a wicked people, strictly by the Word of God with the strict
maintenance of the scale of justice, is quoting unpopularity and
troubles. Thus Ali had always to face intrigues and revolts against his
godly rule with his uncompromising love of truth, pure justice, fair
play, strict discipline and, impartial treatment totally void of any
kind of nepotism or favourtism which were unknown to him, and to every
one of the Ahlul-Bait.

Justice Amir Ali remarks: -

"Had Ali been allowed to reign in peace, his virtues, his firmness and
his ascendancy of character would have perpetuated the old republic and
its simple manners." S.I., AA.

In fact, if Ali had been allowed to have his own ways in the rule and
administration of the affairs of the state and of the people, even after
the chaos and the confusion which ruled the state when he received the
reigns of the rule after the Third Kalif, the world would have enjoyed
the godly kingdom on earth. There would not have been any trouble at all
if the Omayyids the declared enemies of Islam and the Holy Prophet, had
not been given the opportunity to rule over the destiny of the Muslims.
The trouble started with Ma'aviah and was perpetuated by him in the
start of the Omayyid dynasty of the assassins of the holy ones of the
Ahlul-Bait, who also murdered their own kith and kin, and were the
debauchees and the drunkards who had broken the records of all kinds of
licentiousness.

The first to revolt against the Kalifate of Ali unanimously set up by
the people as a whole was Ma'aviah. The Muslim world very well knows as
to who Ma'aviah was and of what calibre he was of. He was the son of
Abu-Sofyan the Arch-enemy of Islam, who was the causative factor behind
every battle that was forced on the Holy Prophet. Ma'aviah, had gathered
strength sufficient to establish his independence in Syria. Thus Ali had
to meet Ma'aviah in a battle at Siflin. The treachery and the deceit
with which ended this battle, is there in the history.

After Ma'aviah, Ali was forced to meet the army under the command of
Ayesha in the battle at Basra, called the Battle of the Camel (Jange
Jamal).

After the battle of Jamal, Ali had to meet the forces of the hypocrites
at Naharvan, in which Ali had prophecied that only nine wi11 be killed
on his side and only nine will escape death, on the other side and it
happened exactly so. The godly rule of the muslim empire, by Ali, the
Vicegerent of God, was not allowed to continue beyond 40 A.H., (i.e.,
for about four years).

**The unique position of Ali**

ALl's DEPARTURE FROM this world was actually the departure of the Holy
Prophet, tor both of them, were the personification or the
manifestations of one and the same Divine Light.

"I and Ail are of one and the same Divine Light." (SM.)

The Holy Prophet Muhammad had come to conclude the apostleship and Ali
was sent to inaugurate the Imamat, i.e., the serial of the divinely
commissioned Guides, the Imams, himself being the First of them.

Though the apostleship had concluded with the Holy Prophet, the
guidance from God for mankind is an evercontinuous process of the divine
grace which has to remain until the end of the world. God has never
allowed any gap to be in the continuity of his guid ance Prophets were
sent in all parts of the world, one after another; where one prophet was
called back, another one in his place was sent, as a prophet or a
vicegerent or the Wasi of the retiring one.

"We abrogate not a sign or cause it to be bypassed but We bring one
better than it or one like it ; knowest thou not that God over all
things as powerful." 2 : 106

The wordings of the above verse of the Holy Qur'an needs a careful
study. It clearly says that when one sign God is re moved, another
better than it or the like of it is brought in its command of the verse
5:67, as the 'Maula' , i.e., the Master or the Lord or the Commander or
the Ruler or the Governor in the place of the Holy Prophet, as was the
Holy Prophet himself.

What is said above is the truth and it is quite a different thing
altogether if any one accepts it or not and truth can never be wiped out
even if the human world as a whole jointly endeavours to do it, for it
is the challenge of the Lord that His Light, the Truth, none shall put
out:-

"They desire to put out the Light of Cod with their mouths, but God
perfecteth His Light, though the disbelievers may be averse to it."
61:8

**Comparing Alito others**

BEFORE THINKING OF comparing Ali to any one besides the Holy Prophet,
one should first get himself informed of the unique position of Ali and
the glorious height of his position in divinity identical with the Holy
Prophet, as depicted by the Holy Qur'an the Word of God and as open
declaration by the Holy Prophet, about him.

In what sense can any one be compared to the one who was of one and the
same Light with the Holy Prophet?

How could the Brother of the Holy Prophet be equal to any one else?

What comparison could any one have with the one who was the Head of the
Body of Muhammad, who was the Soul to the Body of the Apostle of God,
who was of the same blood and flesh of the Holy Prophet? (Lahmoka Lahmi,
Damoka Dami).

How could any one be compared to the 'Asadullah,' i.e., Lion of God who
stood fast with the cause of God, along with the Holy Prophet on the
trying occasions when every one even the closest compa nions had taken
to their heels and had disappeared for days together.

Ali was declared the Gate of the City of Knowledge. How could the
Treasurer of knowledge be compared to the ignorant ones:- " Are those
who know and who know not, alike?" 36:9

The Holy Prophet had told Ali : "O' Ali thou seest what I see and thou
heareth what I hear"- How could the one who had the divine sight and
insight as had the Holy Prophet, be compared to any one who owns not
this gift of the Lord.

" Are the blind and the seeing alike?

Or, are darkness and light equal?" 13:16

How could Ali, who though wrongly, was doubted by some people (the
'Nusairie's ) to be God Himself, be compared to any one of those whose
bonafide about the sincerity of their faith itself is questionable.

;To go into the details of the exclusive distinctions of Ali in his
excellence which was doubtlessly divine and certainly incomparable with
any other mortal save the Holy Prophet; will need a separate volume of
its own. In short it could be said that to attempt to compare Au to any
one else besides the Holy Prophet, will be nothing short of the
bankruptcy of the intellect or the betrayal of one's ignorance of the
position of this Holy one in the human race. The same is the position of
Lady Fatema in her personal excellence, and the divinity of her soul,
cannot be compared to any other Lady in the world.

**Husain intercedes for Shimar**

IT IS REPORTED that once, in Kufa, Shimar was convicted and imprisoned
during the rule of Ali. Through the window of the prison, Shimar saw
Husain passing by, and cried aloud:-

" O Son of the Apostle of God; I intercede on my behalf to thy Father
Ali and get me free from this prison.

Husain went straight to his Father Ali and appealed for mercy for
Shimar.

Ali asked: " Dost thou know, Husain, that this is Shimar, he would be
the murderer of thine and the Torturer of Thy family at Karbala?"

Husain said: " Father! I am the Son of the Apostle of God who is the
mercy unto the worlds and thy Son who is Commander of the faithful and
the Reliever of the distressed ones and the Son of Fatema the Lady of
Paradise and the Liberator of the sinners Shimar has appealed for mercy
throngh me - Father! I will act as I should, and let Shimar act as he
liketh." Thus Shimar was granted mercy and the same Shimar was the one
who severed the head of Husain in Karbala and raised it on his lance,
and tortured his family and children.

**Hasan receives the Imamat**

WHEN FATEMA HAD left this world suffering the treachery of the
followers of her father, and Ali had shed the blood of his head, in
prayer in the niche of the Mosque in Kufa and had departed from this
world, Hasan and Husain were left alone amidst an atmosphcre totally
hostile and murderous to the Ahlul-Bait.

After Ali, Hasan his eldest son became the Second Imam and along with
the Imamat, he received also the Kalifate or the Rule of the Muslim
Empire. But Ma'aviah the son of Abu Sofyan the Governor of Syria,
appointed by Omar and strengthened by Othman, had by this time been
adding strength to his strength and had firmly established himself as an
independent monarch at Damascus, making the place a powerful stronghold
to execute his rebellious plans against the central authority, and had
assumed for himself the sole indefiable paramount power of a despot.


