The Sulhi-hudaibiah Repeated
============================

THE HISTORIC SULH (or Truce) was concluded at Hudaibiah by the Holy
Prophet who having gone to Mecca had to return content with the Treaty.
People taking it to be a defeat of the purpose of the Holy Prophet,
doubted even in the bonafide of his being the apostle of God.Even the
one like Omar could not resist giving vent to his doubting about the
bonafide of his claim to the apostleship, saying:-

"Never did I doubt about the apostleship of the Holy Prophet as I did
at Hudaibiah."

But the Treats of Hudaibiah later proved to be one of the greatest
stratagems which only a divine, like the Holy Prophet could have struck,
and it proved to be of invaluable worth and value to the establishment
and the progress of Islam and without which Islam could not have
proceeded further.

The same thing happened with Hasan. People doubted the wisdom in the
Fruce or the Treaty he had entered into with Ma'aviah. The Treaty of
Hasan with Ma'aviah proved of the same value and worth as did the Sulhe
Hudaibiah concluded, by his Grandfather the Holy Prophet. Without the
Sulhe or the Truce which Hasan concluded, the Shias of Ali, the devotees
of the Ahlul-Bait, the advocates of the Original Islam would have been
totally wiped out and there could have been no opportunity for the Holy
Imam and his devotees to preserve the Original Faith and to carry it
further, upto this day, which today is identified with the caption of
'Shia'ism.' Besides, there would not have been the least peace and
security in the land for life and the property of the gentle public, and
the gentle womanhood would have suffered the worst at the hands of the
dcvilish forces let loose to gain the paramount power of the Kalifate.

It must be remembered that the aim or the object of the lives of the
men of God, particularly the apostles, is not to own any temporal power
in earth. Their first and the foremost concern is to guide man on the
right path of thought and action, and to do the best possible to
establish peace in earth and maintain it. Men of God had been on the
earth to act as demanded by the circumstances:

ZuI-Qarnain:Was sent to conquer some mischief-mongering and
blood-shedding nations.

Job:To manifest divine patience and submission to the divine will.

David:To show the standard of justice.

Solomon:To own power and dominion as a godly monarch.

Zachariah John: As the sincere supplicants to the Lord.

Moses: The National Leader of the Israelites to lead them out of the
clutches of Pharaoh and put them on the path of godliness. Jesus: To
re-establish the Mosaic Law and manifest passive resistance to
aggression.

Muhammad (The Last Apostle):To consolidate the religious Truth and give
the Final Code for faith and its practice.

Ali (The First Imam): To help the Last Apostle of God in establishing
Islam and to dissipate the highest knowledge of the Qur'anic Philosophy
and the Divine Truth.

Hasan ,(The 2nd Imam): To preserve the faith by Ideal patience.

Husain ,(The 3rd Imam):To re-establish Islam with his matchless
sacrifice the 'Zibhe-Azeem.

**A Liar has no Memory**

IT IS A well-known fact that liars cannot remember their own lies The
fabulous stories about the number of the wives Hasan had married and
divorced, prove the truth in the proverb that Liars have no memory. The
reports about the number of the wives of Hasan are so funny and fabulous
that even a schoolboy will laugh at the self- contradictory stories, and
the ridiculous number reported. One says that Hasan had married fifteen
wives, the other says no, Seventy-five, another one says humdred and
seventy , the fourth one says they were two hundred and fifty and the
sixth one says three hundred. Any one will only be puzzled and none
would ever believe such cock and hull stories. It is quite evident that
those who were bribed with a greater sum gave a greater number and those
who were given less money gave the lesser number.

**Had Womanhood gone Mad**

IT IS NOT difficult but impossible to believe that womanhood as a
whole, in Kufa bad gone mad to rush to Hasan continuously inspite of
knowinr the fate of the hundreds of the divorced ones of their own
sex.0r was it that history repcated the state of affairs with the Holy
Prophet after the departure of Lady Khadija, when though he had crossed
the age of fifty girls of even the tender age of nine and eleven were
offered to him and ladies who were far advanced in age covetcd to be the
wives of the Holy Prophet and he could not refuse them the privilege
they craved for. Ali had become the Fourth Kalif and people knew that
Hasan would succeed his father as the Fifth Kalif, was it that women in
order to be the wife i.e., the quecns of the ruler ofthc Muslim Empire,
coveted to gain the royal positions. In fact all the allegations are
merely the vicious fabrications of the corrupt ingenuity employed for
the wicked purpose to blackmail the Holy Imam.

**The False Allegation Against Hasan as well as Ali**

THE FABRICATION HAS gone to the extent of saying that Hasan had married
so many and divorced so many women that Ali preached in the Bazaars of
Kufa advising women not to marry his son Hasan, for he is the greatest
divorccr of women, and not content with the Bazaar preachings of his
against his own son, Ali even went to the extent of preaching openly
from the pulpit the same thing. It must be remembered that Ali was
openly cursed from the pulpits and any one who refused to curse Ali was
put to death. The heartless treatment meted out to Meesam has already
been given above, and this story of Ali's preaching against his son,
Hasan's conduct, is only in continuation of the same propaganda against
Ali, for an intelligent reasoning mind will say that the preaching of
Ali against Hasan is not in fact so much against Hasan as it is against
Ali himself, for knowing the moral defect in Hasan and himself making it
known to the public his own knowledge of it, Ali handed over thc charge
of the Imamat to Hasan.

It is for the readers now to think how far and in what all ways the
propaganda against the holy ones of the House of the Holy Prophet was
carried on and how patiently the holy ones suffered all the calamities
against the divine purity of their godly selves.

None in the Muslim world as a whole, can deny the fact that Hasan is
one of the Holy Ahlul-Bait who have been purified by God (33:33). He is
one of those Holy Five of the historic mysterious event of the Kisa (or
the Mantle) Whose perfect purity was employed On occasion of the
historic Mubahila the Spiritual contest with the Christian disbelievers
of Najran.

Inspite of all the efforts to do the worst possible to blackmail these
holy ones , every attempt failed and only proved like throwing dust to
cover the sun, or spitting on the sun which brings hack the spit on the
face of the spitter himself. Though the people had turned hostile to
these holy Ones, but the stamp of their personal divinity on the hearts
of the people could not he removed. And when Hasan was martyred, even
the worst of his enemies shed tears and were struck with sorrow. But
Ma'aviah on getting the news of Hasan's passing away, was jubilant .

**Hasan the Third 'Muhammad'**

IF THE FOILOWING is in fact the Word of God:-

"Muhammad is but an apostle." 3:143

and if the following Word of God bears any truth in it:-

"He (the Holy Prophet), speaketh not of his own inclination but a
revelation, revealed (unto him)." 53:3

The Holy Prophet's word as well as action, his conduct and character,
his love and hatred, his life personal and private as well as social and
public, must necessarily and essentially be apostolic and divine, and
his word must be the revealed will of the Lord. given expression through
the words uttered by him.

Similarly, if it is true that the Holy Prophet had said that the First,
the Middle, the Last and Every one of his 'Ahlul- Bait' was Muhammad,
undoubtedly Hasan was the Third Muhammad and Husain was the Fourth and
so on until the Last of the Holy Imams of the Holy House.

It is certainly true that God has created a wonderful House, of His own
chosen ones of the family of Abraham with Personalities of amazing
purity of body and soul for the guidance of mankind on earth and
certainly such perfected ones of His Own, must have been the First and
the Foremost of His Creative Will, i.e., the Objects of His creation, in
the Arc of Descent and the Last in the Arc of Ascent as the Greatest
Luminaries of His Creative Art:-

"Verily the First House appointed for the guidance of men is the one at
'Bakka' (Mecca) blessed and a guidance f or the worlds." 3:95

The next verse identifies the houses of thc members of the above
House:-

"(These are) the houses in Which God has permitted to be exalted and
His name glorified. Therein do (they) g1orify Him in mornings and
evenings, the men whom neither merchandise or selling diverts them from
the remembrance of God." 24:36, 37 lt is about the members of His Own
appointed House that God has announced:-

" God only willeth to keep away uncleanliness from you O' people of the
House and to purify you a ( thorough) purification." 33:33 And certainly
none else but only Ali, as belonging to those mentioned in verse 24:37,
could keep himself undisturbed in his supplication to the Lord while the
Jarrah, i.e., the surgeon cut open his foot and took out the point of
the arrow stuck into it. Similarly did Hasan and Husain remain
undisturbed in their godliness while facing the worst persecution and
the wholesale murder of their dear ones and their faithful devotees.

The Holy Prophet had told Ali:-

"Thou hearest whatevcr I hear and thou seest whatever I see."

Hasan proved his being of the same quality of the calibre of his father
and possessed the same divine excellence, for it is reported that Hasan
used to hear what was revealed to his Grandfather the Holy Prophet, by
the Messenger Angel, and used to come to his mother, the Lady of Light,
and relate the revelation before it was disclosed to any one. The Holy
Lady would smile and relate it to her father the Holy Prophet who would
embrace Hasan and kiss him and say: 'He is of me and I am of him.' This
was Hasan the Second Imam and the Brother of Husain.

**Hasan's Patience-the Reason for it**

IT IS ASKED why did not Hasan handle the sword as did Husain and why
did not Husain exercise patience as did his elder brother Hasan?

The answer is: that Ma'aviah though a rebel against the established
Kalifate which was only a temporal power, and to own it, he had played
havoc, and though religion was continuously undergoing corruption and
adulteration, but the ruling authority had not stooped to the deliberate
Yazidian infidelity and the open disbelief in the bonafide of the Holy
Prophet and the truthfulness of Islam.

Be it known that neither the Holy Prophet nor the godly Ahlul-Bait had
come into the world to wield their swords for any territorial ambition
or to own any temporal power by force. The sword and the strength God
had given to these the Holy ones, was for use in the cause of God, on
the occasions divinely destined for the purpose, which they knew
beforehand.

As Husain re-established Islam rescuing it when it was on the verge of
being annihilated for ever, Hasan maintained it, in an cqually effective
way, from getting wiped out, by avoiding the true and the faithful
devotees of the faith the Shias being totally wiped out of existence and
the faith getting extinct with them If Hasan had not pullel on with his
ideal godly patience he would have witnessed the end of Islam with his
own eyes through the wholesale slaughter of the faithful devotees and
the advocates of the faith through whose existence the Islam-Original
could be maintained and spread in the world, though it was done under
the most hostile and the murderous persecutions.

According to the situations, did act the two holy Imams, Hasan and
Husain. Hasan should not have used the sword and Husain could not remain
patient, both the holy ones acted as they did, in the interest, of the
Religion of God and godliness on earth. Ali, the Asadullah, the Lion of
God, the Ever Triumphant Matchless Hero of Islam, who had no match for
his godly strength, prowess and bravery, when occasion demanded it to
save Islam, allowed himself to be tied in ropes and dragged by the
cowards of the people, Hasan followed the footsteps of his father to do
the same. If any occasion had only demanded it, Hasan would certainly
have risen equal to the occasion as did his father during the time of
the Holy Prophet.

The Holy Prophet being the Apostle of God the greatest godly advocate
of Peace on earth who had come to establish peace in the true meaning of
the word, had to use the sword when it was unavoidable to save the
religion of God from being wiped out by the disbelievers. Husain
followed the footsteps of his Grandfather in this regard as in any
other, to re-establish the same faith when infidelity intended to
destroy it for ever and when the Muslim World was being misled and taken
far astray from the right path, with the open declaration of the
disbelief in the apostleship of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Qur'an
being the revealed Word of God.

Both the Holy Imams, Hasan and Husain, had acted duly according to
their respctivc divine assignments.

Before doubting in the divine wisdom in Hasan's patience and his treaty
with Ma'aviah, one should remember that the people doubted even in the
bonafide of the Holy Prophet when he concluded the Sulhe Hudaibiah (the
Treaty of Hudaibiah). The godly ones only know the will of the Lord they
executed and man always criticised it.

**Husain takes charge of the Imamat**

BEFORE BREATHING HIS last, Hasan handed the charge of the Imamat to his
brother Husain. Husain was now the Third Imam, the Vicegerent of God on
earth, in the place of the Holy Prophet Muhammad.

The world was now without the Apostle of God. Fatema the Holy Lady of
Light had been martyred. Ali and Hasan had also left the world. Husain
was left alone in an atmosphere totally hostile, for Ma'aviah had
successfully purchased the public support to execute his plan of placing
Yazid on the throne of the Kalifate, to perpetuate the rule of the
Muslim Empire in his family and thus to start the Omayyid dynasty of the
Kalifs. All possible efforts to brina the people and keep them under the
complete control of the throne were employed. Corruption and godlessness
ruled the destiny of the people.

As Ali had done during the reigns of the first three Kalifs, and Hasan
after Ma'aviah's usurping the paramount power, Husain also following the
footsteps of his father and brother, had retired into seclusion in
Madina. Husain's main concern was supplication to the Lord and acting as
the heavenly torch of the Divine Light of guidance towards God and
godliness.

Husain was now the godly commissioned guardian of the Holy Qur'an, its
teachings and its correct practice. He was the Vicegerent of the Lord
holding the Kingdom of God on earth. It is surely ridiculous even to
imagine Husain's ever thinking of, or aspiring for, any temporal power
or authority, when he already held the Imamat divinely assigned to the
House of the Holy Prophet and as such was God's Deputy on earth. He had
nothing to do with the politics of the state or the political affairs of
the people. Husain had already been informed of every detail of the
divine assignment to him and he knew every step of the march of his life
up to its end. The Holy Prophet had already informed Husain of all that
was in store for him to meet, and when and where each event will take
place. It was only with the knowledge of the lot to befall Husain, his
father Ali had desired to have a son like Abbas. It was only in view of
the great task of re-establishing Islam by Husain with the great
sacrifice, i.e., the 'Zibhe Azeem', the Holy Prophet had said: 'Husain
is of me and I am of Husain.' Now Husain was acting like Jesus, resigned
to the will of the Lord and waiting for the hour to fulfil his covcnant
with the Lord to save His religion Islam and to sccurc His Final Word to
man, the Holy Qur'an, for ever.

Husain passed a quiet life of supplication, discharging the duties of
the 1mam in the place of his Grandfather the Holy Prophet.

**The Ruling Power and thc Ahlul-Bait**

ThERE IS ONE thing about the holy members of the House of the Holy
Prophet which needs mention here, that no ruling power or any
monarchical pomp, power or glory could ever create the least impression
on the godly minds of these holy ones. No threat or terror, could ever
create the least awe in them to subjugate their godly inclinations and
their attitude to this life. Neither Ali could be subjected by the first
three Kalifs nor as Hasan in the least impressed by the awe -striking
threats or the pomp, power and the monarchical glory of Ma'aviah.
Husain, in this regard was bolder still, for whenever Ma'aviah's
atrocities affected the human rights or the interest of the safety and
the security of life and the integrity of the people, Husain never in
the least hcsitated in reprimanding Ma'aviah. Whenever Husain heard of
any godly soul particularly of the devotees of the House of the Holy
Prophet suffering any unprovoked aggression, he was moved to tears for
the helpless souls, and when Hajr bin Adi-e-Kandi was mercilessly
killed, Husain did not spare admonishing and condemning Ma'aviah through
open, written communications from him, warning him against the wrath, of
God.

**A Wonderful Act of Pure Godliness**

MA'AVIAH GOVERNOR OF Iraq, Ahdullah's wife Zainab was a pious lady of
noted beauty. The exaggerated accounts of the beauty of the good lady
had reached even Damascus. Yazid the son of Ma'aviah heard it and at
once his voluptuous mind naturalised in licentiousness determined to
somehow own the wife of Abdullah for his own. All possible ways and
means of deceit and temptations to induce Abdtillah to divorce his wife
went in vain Ma'aviah to please his son thought of a very craftv device.
Abdullah was at once summoned to the capital. When Abdullah came to
Damascus, he was received with unusual and extraordinary honours and
regards and was housed in a palatial abode luxuriously furnished
particularly for him.

On the third day of his arrival Ahdullah was offered to wed Ma'aviah's
daughter, to which Abdullah resented but the offer was also with the
threat of losing his position as well as his life against any refusal.
Poor Abdullah was forced to accept the offer. The next day of his
acceptance, Abdullah was asked to divorce Zainab, saying that the
daughter of the Ruler,a princess could not have any rival to her bed.
Abdullah was forced to write a letter of divorce to Zainab.when Abdullah
had executed thc divorce, the very next day after it, he was not given
an interview with Ma'aviah, saying that the offer to wed his daughter
was only an offer and had been withdrawn.

The letter of divorce was sent to Zainab through a special messenger
with Yazid's offer to wed her, Zainab was then at Madina when Abu Darda
the messenger from Ma'aviah arrived there.

God is always there to protect the interest of the righteous ones when
they are unjustiy aggressed by any tyrant. Abu Darda before going to
Zainab, went first to pay his regard to Husain the Holy Imam and
intimated to him the object of his visit to Madina.

Husain hearing the painful story, told Abu Darda to convey his own
(Husain's) offer to Zainab along with that of Yazid's. Zainab receiving
the letter of her divorce, began to sob. When the offers of Yazid and
Husain were conveyed to her she readily preferred the Holy Imam, and got
herself wedded to him.

When the disappointing story was conveyed to Ma'aviah and Yazid,it
enraged both the father and the son. Abdullah was dismissed from the
governorship, and all his property in Iraq and elsewhere was confiscated
and he was rendered a destitute. Poor Abdullah having lost his wife, his
post, and all his properties, did not know what to do, and at last he
walked all the way from Iraq to Madina to recover from Zainab the money
he had left with her. Reaching Madina he went to the residence of the
Holy Imam. Now Zainab could talk to Abdullah only from behind the
screen; neither he could see her nor she could look at him. Both stood
quietly shedding tears, when Husain suddenly appeared and removed the
screen from between them saying:-

"Abdullah! God is my witness, not a glance of mine has fallen on thy
wife. Zainab is still thy wif as was she before, for the divorce under
compulsion was no divorce and my wedding her was no wedding. I wedded
her just to protect her and restore her unto thee. Take her with thee
and go happy. "

Both, Abdullah and Zainab were stunned with tears of joy in their eyes
and returned home praising the Holy Imam and cursing those who had
wickedly devised to separate them.


