The Situation That Demanded Another 'muhammad' To Rescue the Correct Faith
==========================================================================

IT WAS THE Seventh Century A.D., Europe was still a wilderness. Rome
and Greece were still pagan, the christian creed emanated from the
welding of the monastic christianity with the pagan cult of Rome,
effected by King Constantine of Rome, after about 300 years after the
departure of Jesus was still ignorant of the elementary knowledge about
the world. Its knowledge even about the earth was childish for even
centuries later it had yet to pelt stones on Columbus when he told them
that the earth was round. This was the state of Europe when Islam had
already preached the truth about the Universe as a whole; the truth
which even to this day is the highest and the modern scientists with all
their claims of wonderful advancement and amazing discoveries, have yet
to arrive at the Islamic disclosures already made through the Holy
Qur'an.

America was yet to be discovered and it was the part of the earth
unknown to man.

Africa was called the Dark Continent. Man there had yet to learn the
necessity to cover its body and was a nude.

India was a country with petty princes ruling small states drowned in
idolatry and rituals extending to human sacrifice.

China was led by the impracticable and emotional creed of Buddhism ; of
the total renunciation of the earthly life which even the people
claiming to be Buddhist by creed, could not as a whole practise.

The only hope lay in the most practicable and the most reasonable
Faith, Islam and its practice, but, with the alienation of the
Ahlul-Bait from the paramount authority over the affairs of the people,
started the corruption in the faith and with the Omayyids on the throne,
began the ever progressive adulteration of the Faith and the unwanted
innovations in its practice.

The only hope of the world getting on the right track was in Islam, but
with Yazid on the throne declaring disbelief in the bonafide of the
apostleship of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Qur'an being the revealed
Word of God, all hopes of the redemption of humanity from the abyss of
material degradation and the lack of the truth about the real Creator of
the Universe and the position and the commitment of man in it, were at
stake.

In short, the same atmosphere of darkness was once again, impending to
shroud the world which prevailed half a century ago and which had
demanded the advent of the Holy Prophet. But no apostle was yet to come,
for the final code of the necessary knowledge and discipline for man on
earth had been given in the Holy Qur'an. However, the situation demanded
one Like Muhammad to brave the forces of falsehood and re-establish the
Truth once again so that never may it again he shaken or disturbed.

When no apostle was to come, the only one to play the role of an
apostle was Husain, the Imam of the age, who was in the place of the
Apostle, the Vicegerent of God on earth. Only in view of the unique
position of his grandson Husain, and the duty identical with his own,
which Husain was destined to discharge, that the Holy Prophet had said
:-

"Husain is of me and I am of Husain."

It is for this occasion of the imperative demand for the rescue of the
True Faith that the All-Knowing Lord had reserved the 'Zibhe Azeem.'

Letters inviting Husain to handle the situation, began to pour in from
all parts of the country, particularly from Kufa, imploring Husain to
proceed to guide the people. There were promises from the people, saying
that strong armies were waiting to act under his command. But the
invitations contained the taint of political aim and territorial
ambition and Husain was not for it at all. He knew the Hour was getting
nigh and waited for a call pure and plain exclustvely for God and
godliness.

Husain was fully conscious of the heavenly object of his very advent in
the world being nothing but to meet this situation and to rescue Islam,
God's revealed faith, to elevate mankind to the glorious heights of the
heavenly bliss. Husain knew the godly task of the divine assignment to
him. He lived all these days in waiting for the hour to act as per his
commitment to the Lord. He also knew when to respond to the call from
the people.

If Husain had any desire to gain any temporal power, the hundreds,
rather thousands, of the letters with the strongest promises and
assurances from the people to march under his command, were more than
sufficient to stimulate an ambitious mind. Like his father he hated the
world as a rotten bone of a leper's corpse in the mouth of a dog.

If Husain had taken any initiative to act of his own accord at the
invitations from the people, with the assurance of the armies ready to
act under his command, the sincerity or the purity of his purpose would
have been marred by his intention of getting misunderstood by the world
and doubted by the general public attributing to it selfishness and
ambition to gain the political power for himself. He waited for a call
from the situation purely in the name of God for the godly cause of
saving the faith one day which he knew, was sure to come from the
people.

**Husain prophesies His Son's Martyrdom**

HuSAIN'S SECOND SON Ali (who after the tragedy of Karbala became known
as Ali-e-Akbar) resembled the Holy Prophet Muhammad so much in all his
physical features that people from distant places, desirous of having
again a view of the departed Apostle of God, the Holy Prophet Muhammad,
visited Madina to have a look at Ali e-Akbar. It is reported that once a
party of such visitors had come to Madina from Egypt and having seen
Ali-e-Akbar were amazed at the wonderful beauty of the young Ali and his
remarkable resemblance to the Holy Prophet. Husain, the Holy Imam asked
them as to how much they would like to have a son like his Ali, they
submitted:- "0' son of the Holy Prophet, we as the humble beings and
sinners to have such a great blessing fromGod?"

Husain asked as to how much they would value it if they were blessed by
God with such a handsome son.

They submitted :- "0' son of the Holy Prophet, if we get such a gift
from God, we will not allow the child to walk on the ground. We would
prefer a lance piercing our eyes instead of any thorn pricking his
foot."

Husain said:- " Know ye all that when this very same handsome son of
mine will be in the prime of his youth in the eighteenth yea? of his
age, I will offer him in the way of the Lord at Karbala, myself
witnessing his beautiful breast pierced with a lance."

The people could not control shedding tears.

**The Call from the Governor**

In 6o A.H., it was night when the news of the death of Ma'aviah was
conveyed to Valid the Governor of Madina on behalf of Yazid the son of
Ma'aviah who had succeeded as the Kalif at Damascus. Besides the
intimation about the death of Ma'aviah, the letter con tained orders to
Valid to demand Baith, i.e., allegiance particularly from Husain and if
Husain refuses to pay it, to cut off his head and send it to Yazid, at
Damascus. On receipt of the letter from Yazid, Valid immediately called
his servant and sent word inviting Husain, the Holy Imam, to visit him.
It was night and Husain was in the Mosque when Valid's servant came to
him with the message inviting Husain to the Government House. The moment
Husain heard of the call from the Governor, he suddenly exclaimed that
Ma'aviah had died.

In reply to the call Husain sent word to the Governor Valid saying, it
was too late and he was in the Mosque and he will visit him the next
morning.

Husain returned home with the news to his family about the Invitation
he had from the Governor. The first to get worried were his sisters
Zainab and Omme Kulthoom. Zainab extremely worried immediately asked
Husain : -

" What has the Governor to do with us, Brother?"

Husain replied:-

"The will of the Lord is being done sister dear! but worry not now, for
the day of worry for thee is yet to come!" The next day when Husain
prepared to go to the Governor, the Hashimites youth and particularly
Abbas, submitted to the Holy Imam saying:-

"Master! We will accompany thee fully prepared with our swords to meet
any deceitful eventuality, never will we allow thee to go alone to the
crafty servants of the crafty ruler."

Husain said :-

" Brethren! I fully appreciate your offer but the Governor has invited
only me and it behoves not me to take others with me uninvited."

The most worried sister of Husain, Zainab implored saying:-

" Brother dear! I will not allow thee to go alone, take these men with
thee. I will send my sons though young to accompany thee. Take Abbas
with thee Brother."

Husain at last agreed but reaching the entrance of the Governor's
house, he told the Hashimites to stay at the door watchful and if they
hear Husain talking unusually aloud they may get in to him.

As Husain entered the court, it was customary in those dave that when a
dignitary visited another dianitary, a slave of his visitor always
accompanied him. After entering the court, Husain remembered that he had
not brought any one with him, turned round and found Abbas standing
behind him with folded hands, like a slave. Husain said, Abbas! I had
told thee to be out. Abbas immediately replied: 'Master! Leave thou, thy
shoes, Abbas will take them and depart and return when thou needest
them. Valid stood erect in regard for the Holy lmam and with all respect
and regard offered him the seat besides him and read out the letter he
had received from Yazid and when had reached the matter asking him to
send the severed head of Husain, if Husain refuses to pay allegiance,
Valid gave the letter to Husain to himself read the passage. Husain read
it and smiled and said:-

"0' Valid invite the muslims of Madina tomorrow and ask them if they
say that I should pay allegiance to Yazid, let us then decide. "

Valid readily accepted the Holy Imam's reply but Marwan the old enemy
of Islam who was expelld by the Holy Prophet out of Madina, seated
there, addressing Valid said:-

"Let not Husain go out of thy grip now, lest the fox is out of the four
walls of thy court thou wilt not approach the dust behind it. Cut off
his head now and here let not this unique opportunity go for thou wilt
never get it again."

When Marwan uttered the above insulting words Husain stood up to depart
from the Governor and hearing the insulting words of Marwan, Husain the
son of Ali the Lion of God put his hand on his sword and exclaimed
aloud:-

"0' enemy of God! Thou or this man (Valid) to touch my head?"

Marwan immediately got up and ran away and the Hashimite youths who
stood restless and anxious, hearing the voice of the Holy Imam, rushed
into the court with drawn swords and the first of them all was Abbas.
Husain immediately commanded restraint and bad not Husain controlled the
situation, the matter would have been settled then and there, which knew
no bounds, and brought all of the Hashimites back home.

**Husain decides to leave Madina**

HUSAIN DECIDED TO leave Madina. Learning about the decision of the Holy
Imam, people in groups approached him asking the reason for his decision
to leave the holy city. Husain said that his refusal to pay 'Bait' to
Yazid, will certainly be defied and Yazid will not spare shedding blood
for it, and he did not like the holy city of his Grandfather, the Holy
Prophet, to become the battlefield and the poor people of the city to
suffer the wholesale massacre the tyrant's forces will enact. Poor
people, old and young, men and women, and even young children will
perish and the city will be ruined. Secondly, if Husain remained there,
later people would say, why did not Husain leave the place when he knew
the enemy would not leave him unchased. Hence he had decided to go to
Mecca and after the pilgrimage to decide what to do.

Husain visited the shrine of his Grandfather and leaning on it said:-

"0' Grandfather dear! Seest thou my fate after thee at the bands of the
people who profess to follow thee. I leave thy city and thy grave, not
of my own accord but forced by the circumstances.Pardon thou thy
grandson for going away from thee."

While saying this a drowse dawned on Husain and Husain saw in a vision
his Grandfather standing out from his grave and telling him:-

" Husain my dear! Hasten thou toward Iraq; the Lord willeth to see thee
martyred and thy Grandfather is with thee."

Husain arose from the holy grave and then visited his Mother's grave
and took leave of it and then visited his Brother Hasan's grave and
taking leave of it, returned home and started preparations for the
journey. From every house in Madina, particularly of the Hashimites, was
heard the laments of the people for losing the Holy Imam from the city.
Ladies in groups visited Zainab and in surprise asked her the reason for
the decision of the Holy Imam to leave the place. Zainab could only say
that it is God's will that her Brother Husain, the Holy Imam, was
allowing to be done and none had any voice in it.

The youth of the city came to meet the children of Husain with tears in
their eyes and asking when they would return, to which the young souls
said: If God wills it.None could say when.

Husain's sister Umme Kulthoom being a widow resided with Husain and
Zainab who had been married to Abdullah bin Jaffar, rushed to her
husband and implored for permission to accompany Husain, saying that she
would not live without Husain in the city. Abdullah granted the request
and Zainab returned and prepared to leave with Husain.

Fatema Sughra, a daughter of Husain was sick with high fever and Husain
the Guardian of the Word of God, could not act against it and thus had
decided to leave the young daughter at home with his grandmother Omme
Salema the faithful wife of the Holy Prophet who alone remained attached
to the House of the Holy Prophet. The young soul Fatema Sughra, anxious
to accompany her parents and not be left alone in the deserted house,
was restlessly implering her father the Holy Imam who was unable to take
her against the Word of God. The poor daughter of Husain in her sickness
was requesting every member of the family to recommend her case to her
father and none could go against the decision of God. The whole house
was shedding tears for this young, sick and miserable soul. The
implorations from the citizens to Husain to reconsider his decision to
leave Madina, did not cease till the last moment. Muhammad-e-Hanafia one
of the sons of Ali came to Husain and advised him in the same way as
others had done to which Husain said that he had to go in the fulfilment
of the Divine Will disclosed to him by his Grandfather the Holy Prophet.
Then Muhammad asked why he was taking the women and children with him,
to which Husain said the Lord has destined that they should suffer
captivity. Zainab who heard this discourse cried to Muhammad saying 'Why
dost thou 0' Muhammad! Endeavour to cause separation between me and my
brother?" Hearing Zainab, Muhammad kept quiet.

Lady Ommul Baneen whom Ali had married with a definite desire to have
of her a son like Abbas, called her four sons and said:-

"Go ye, all of you in the service of the son of Fatema. Beware! If
anything untoward happeneth to Husain or to any of his children, ye
shall not return unto me alive! Let me have the face to show to Fatema
on the Day of Judgment."

Then the lady called Abbas and said:-

" Be thou close to Husain wherever he is and see that nothing untoward
happens to him or to any of his children. It is for this day thy father
desired thy advent into this world, and see the object of thy father is
realised to his satisfaction. Beware! Abhas! The world has turned
inimical to Husain. Shed thou thy life- blood but let not Husain or his
family and children be inconvenienced in the least. Go, God be with
Thee!"

Abbas and his brothers kissed the feet of their mother and Abbas
said:-

"Mother dear! I assure thee in the name of God, that until Abbas is
alive, nothing shall happen to my Master Husain or any of his dear
ones.

**The Holy Imam's Determination**

PEOPLE OF MADINA were fully aware of the dreadful consequences that
would follow the blunt refusal of the Holy Imam to pay ' Baith' to Yazid
They went to the Holy Imam in large numbers to know his final decision.
Husain replied to them:-

" DO you imagine for a moment that Husain, fearing death and
destruction at the hands of the tyrant would ever allow to be undone all
that his Holy Grandfather, the Last Apostle of God, had done after
facing untold dangers and undergoing innumerable difficulties?" "Do you
think that Husain would allow all the sacrifices offered and the
bitterest experiences suffered and the heart rending tortures borne by
his Father, Mother and Brother to go in vain?"

" Do you imagine Husain would ever allow the Faith revealed by God for
humnanity as a whole, to perish and to vanish away for ever, when it has
been established by the shedding of the sacred blood of his father in
the Mosque of Kufa?

" Nay! Never! God willing, you all shall see that Husain, wading
through his own blood, directs the Ark of Islam out of the stormy seas,
safe to the haven of everlasting safety."

At last dawned the historic day of Husain's leaving Madina. All the
ladies mounted the fully veiled litters on the backs of the camels and
when the turn of Zainab came to mount, Ali-.e-Akbar held the screen and
Abbas lowered his knee for Zainab to place her foot on it and Husain
held her hand to help her, and the daughter of Fatema mounted the camel.
At last Husain bade goodbye to even one of the huge crowd of citizens
that had assembled, and turning towards the graves of his Grandfather,
Mother and Brother, Husain gave his last salutation. The caravan began
to move with the people of the city crying aloud behind it with their
lamentations saying :-

" Today died the Holy Prophet. Today died the Holy Lady Fatema and
today died Hasan."

Fatema Sughra in the high fever and in her disappointment had swooned
and availing of the unconscious state of his daughter, Husain had asked
the people of the house to make haste and start. When the caravan had
left, Fatema returned to consciousncss and seeing the whole house empty,
asked Omme Salema about the inmates to which she was told that they had
all gone. Fatema got up and with the help of a stick in her hand, began
to walk behind the caravan crving out:-

"Baba ! Baba ! Baha! i.e., Father ! Father ! father!" The caravan had
gone sufficient away but God alone knows how Husain could hear the
feeble voice of the crying of his ailing daughter coming at a
consideralc distance behind the caravan, inspite of the loud noises of
the moving caravan. Husain called aloud to Abbas telling him:-

"Stop Abbs! Stop! Fatema is coming behind."

The caravan stopped and Fatema somehow reached the caravan and began to
implore saying:-

" Father dear! If there be no space for me with my mother and sisters,
I will sit with the servant maid Fizza and will not worry any one with
my sickness."

Husain came down from his horse and tried to console her, explaining
his inability owing to her sickness under which the Word of God does not
allow him to take her on the journey.

This is an occasion for parents among thc readers to imaginc the state
of mind of Fatema's mother and her other relatives. At last Fatema made
a request to her father which he could not resist granting:- " Father!
If I have to be left behind, leave with me baby brother Ali-e- Asghar. I
will spend my time with him and will see he is duly looked after by a
Hashimite nurse. "

Husain said:-

" Yes, beckon thy brother Ali, if he cometh, take him away with
thee."

Fatema went near the camel on which was her mother with her baby
brother Ali-e-Azghar. The moment she beckoned, the baby rushed into her
lap.

How could the caravan move now, with the mother leaving away the
suckling babe away from her. The mother tried her best to get the baby
back ftom Fatema, and along with the mother all other relatives tried,
and even Husain tried his best to see that the baby returns from Fatema
but every one failed and even time the baby looked at the face of the
one who beckoned it and smiled and turned around and put both its hands
round Fatema's neck, the caravan had stopped. At last Husain getting
near the baby's ears, moved his lips saying something in the ears of the
Innocent and the baby which did not respond to any one beforc and even
to its mother, now hearing the words uttered into its ears by the Holy
Imam, at once left Fatema and got into the lap of the Holy Imam Fatema
stood disappointed and at last the caravan moved away.

After the Massacre of Karbala, some one asked Ali ibnul Husain as to
what was it that Husain said into the cars of the babe which did not
respond to anybody' s beckoning and even to Husain when he did it
before, at once came away into Husain's lap. In reply Syyed-e-Sajjad
Ali-ibnul-Husain sighed aloud saying:-

Ah! Ah!What a heart rending event, 0' man! Thou reminded me of!

"My Father only told in the ears of my baby brother Ali. Son I need
thee also at Karbala for thy name also is there in the list of the
martyrs and without thee, my darling, my sacrifice will be incomplete!
Hearing this my baby brother at once responded to the call and returned
from my sister Fatema's lap.


