Abbas the Brave, Guards the Camp of the Holy Imam
=================================================

THE CAMP OF the Holy Imam contained the ladies and the children of the
House of the Holy Prophet. Apprehending a surprise attack from the
enemy's forces which consisted of people who had turned treacherous to
the Holy Imam and his family, a ditch was dug around the camp and fire
was lighted the whole night and Abbas the Brave, guarded the camp in a
vigil the whole night walking around it with his sword in his hand
mindful of the safety of the Holy Imam and the inmates of the camp, with
a vigilant eye on the ranks of the enemy.

**The Night in the Yazidian Camp**

WHILE THE HUNGRY and thirsty devotees of God in thc Holy Imam's camp
spent the night in prayers and the devotional sup- plicative services to
God, the soldiers in the Yazidian ranks in the opposite camp spent the
whole night in drinking, feasting and making merry in the hope of the
promised rewards from Yazid in return for the destruction of the family
of the Holy Prophet. God alone knows how many thousands of bowls of wine
were emptied on that night. The Yazidian forces anxiously awaited the
break of the dawn of the next day to effect the brutal slaughter of the
Holy Imam and the small band of his kith and kin and faithful
devotees.

**The Holy Imam's Last Prayer with His Devotees on Earth**

AT THE BREAK of the dawn of the fateful day, 10th Muharram 61 A.H.
(October 68o A.D.), Husain called his son Ali (Ali-e- Akbar) who
resembled the Holy Prophet the most, and said:-

"Ali, my dear! Let me hear thy 'Azan' (the call for prayer) for the
last time in this world!"

When Ali e-Akbar gave the call 'Azan' in the Sahara, reporters say that
the voice resembled the voice of the Holy Prophet and Husain hearing the
last ' Azan' of his son in the voice of his Grand- father, remembering
the Apostle of God, shed tears, and as the voice of Ali e-Akbar reached
the inmates in the camp, Zainab along with Umme Laila, the mother of
Ali-e-Akbar and the other ladies came out of the tents to hear the call
for prayer in the sweet enchanting voice of the beautiful son of Husain
resembling the voice of the Apostle of God, raising their hands to
heavens prayed for the safety of their dear Caller to prayers.

It was the third day of the thirst inflicted on the whole camp of the
Holy Imam. The Holy Imam and his devotees performed 'Tayammum' instead
of ' Wozu' (Ablution) and the Holy Imam offered the last congregational
prayers with his devotees on earth. An Urdu poet has referred to this
historic 'Namaz' (Prayer) and the ' Namazies', i.e., the supplicants in
a beautiful couplet:-

" Chand shar' maa'ey
Chah'ray mutajalli aisay
Na Imam aisa,howa
Phir na musalli aisay."

"Ashamed would be the Moon,
faces so bright,
The Imam of the kind, never did appear
Nor the supplicants like these.

Husain had not even finished his prayers when a rain of arrows from the
Yazidian forces began to shower on the praying Imam and his godly
devotees. It is reported that Omar Ibne Sa'd was the first to take the
how in the Yazidian camp and shoot an arrow towards Husain saying:
(addressing the men of his forces):-

"Witness ye all that I am the first to shoot an arrow against
Husain."

Reporters of the event relate that along with Omar 4,000 archers in the
Yazidian ranks simultaneously shot towards the Holy Imam's camp, and
before the holy souls could conclude their prayers, thirty (30) of the
godly ones, who were engaged in the prayer, were shot dead.

Soon after the prayer was over, the Holy Imam ordered all his faithful
companions to fall in, and divided his small godly band into three
flanks, i.e., the right and the left wings and the central body. Husain
called his brave brother, Abbas, the Faithful and presented to him the
Holy Standard of Truth and thus Abbas from that day came to be known as
' Abbas-e-Alamdar' or Abbas the Standard Bearer.

**Sermon of the Holy Imam on the Day of Ashoora**

AT LAST WHEN it became sure that the devilish forces were bent upon a
wholesale massacre, Husain spoke out aloud addressing the men of the
Yazidian forces in an apostolic tune.

"o' people! Do ye recognise me?

By God tell me?" The reply from the enemy was: " By God, yes, We do
recognise thee, Thou art the Son of the Holy Prophet." Husain again
said:-

" Do ye know me! Am I not the son of the Apostle of God?"

The reply was:-

" Yes, we do know thee, Thou art the son of the Apostle of God."

Husain said :-

" Do ye know that my father is Ali-a l-Murtaza son of Abu Taleb, and my
mother is Fatema Zahra, the daughter of the Apostle of Cod and my
grandmother is Lady Khadija daughter of Khowailad, who was the first to
embrace Islam?"

The reply was:-

" Yes. It is so."

Husain said: -

" By Cod, tell me, is not Harnza the Chief of the Martyrs of Islam, one
of my uncles?"

The reply was:-

" Yes.

Husain said:-

"0' people! Do ye recognise this turban on my head, is it not the
turban of the Holy Prophet and this sword at my hand, that of the
Apostle of God?"

The reply was:-

" Yes we do recognise."

Husain said :-

" Do ye know that my father Ali ibne Abi Taleb was the first among men
to join the Holy Prophet in the faith Islam, and he was the most
learned, and the most forbearing of all men and was the ' Maula' (or the
Master, Lord) of all men and women?"

The reply was:-

" Yes! We know that everything thou sayest is truth." Then Husain asked
aloud:

" Say ye then, why do ye make lawful the shedding of my blood? "

The reply from the brutal forces was:-

" Yes! We shall kill thee in thy thirst."

The voice of the Holy Imam was heard in the tents in camp. The ladies
and the children hearing the last reply from the enemy began to weep for
Husain and Zainab and Omme Kulthoom the two sisters of Husain, the
daughter of Ali and Fatema were the most effected. (Zindagani
Husain-Imadzadeh, Tehran)

**Hur joins the Holy Imam**

HUR, THE COMMANDER of Yazid's regiment, who had obstructed Husain's way
near Kufa, was also present in the enemy's forces in Karbala. He spent
all his time in repenting for having obstructed the way of the son of
the Holy Prophet. The enemy's officers and soldiers were only wondering
at the mysterious sorrowful silence and the serious pensive mood in
which Hur spent all his time since his arrival on the plain.

While he distributed weapons of defence to his devotees in his camp,
the Holy Imam reserved a lance but did not say for whom it was. He only
announced in a mysterious tone that a faithful one in the enemy's ranks
was to join the ranks of the fighters for Truth. In the meanwhile, there
in the ranks of the enemy Hur called his brother and his son secretly in
his tent and said:- " We are doomed-driven towards ' hell.' There is yet
time. I have decided to dash out of the ranks of Satan and join the side
of the Holy Imam and seek pardon of the son of the Apostle of God. Would
you like to accompany me or stay where you are?" The brother and the son
of Hur both readily consented to accompnay him and Hur's slave who was a
faithful and trusted one of his master, was present in the tent and
implored saying ' Master! take me away from this God's cursed side,
along with thee. Pray leave me not for hell' and Hur agreed.

Hur, with his son, brother and a slave, dashed out of the enemy's ranks
and joined the Holy Imam. Hur appearing before the Holy Imam, begged his
pardon for the wrong he had done. The return of Hur had already been
foretold by Husain in his camp. Hur was received very warmly by Husain
and his companions and when the fight against the Devil began, Hur was
the first one who went into the field against the enemy and laid down
his life.

**The Battle of Truth Against Falsehood**

THus THE BATTLE of Truth against Falsehood began. One after another of
the godly ones from the Holy Imam's side went into the field and laid
down his life after exhibiting wonderful bravery, courage, valour and
prowess. It looked as if the thirst, hunger, heat and the wounds had no
effect whatsoever on the patience, the strength and the determination of
Husain's devotees. At last when the deceitful Ibna-i-Sa'd saw the
wonderful fhght, he was astonished that each one from the Holy Imam'S
side easily destroyed dozens before he fell, and who proved
unconquerable, he or dered a sally in contravention of the solemn
agreement entered into, the previous night. The bravery and the skill
displayed by the faithful supporters of the sacred cause, the matchless
resignation to the Divine will, and the flawless devotion and the ideal
attachment of each one of the hungry and thirsty sufferers of the godly
cdmp, to the Holy Imam and to the sacred cause of Truth, drowned the
Devil's army and their officers in wonder and astonishment, and they had
become so awe-stricken at the miraculous strength and unparalleled
courage of the helpless suffcrers that they began to dread the very
countenance of each of the godly devotees of the Holy Imam who came
alone into the field and fought and fell in the way of God.

Thus, whenever a supporter of the Holy cause went against the Devil's
forces and fell, the Holy Imam rushed out and brought his body and laid
it in a tent pitched particularly for the martyrs. As the battle for
Right against Might proceeded and the supporters of the Truth fell one
after another, the tent containing the bodies. of the martyrs was turned
into a' Ganje Shaheedan' or the 'Re- pository of the Martyrs.'

**Zainab sends Her two Young Sons**

WHEN DEVOTEE AFTER devotee fought and fell, in defence of the Holy
Family,Husain's sister, Zainab, called her two sons, Aun and Muhammad
aged 10 and g years respectively, who were with the Holy Imam, and asked
them:-

"what ! death has come to so many of the Holy Imam's devotees and you
are still alive?"

The children submitted:-

"Mother dear! We are only waiting for the Holy Imam's permission, get
it for us now, our mother dear! and then see what these two slaves of
yours would do."

Zainab immediately sent for her brother the Holy Imam and implored that
her two Sons be permitted to go into the field. Husain could not say no
to his sister. When these two boys went into the field, they got
martyred. Husain and Abbas brought the two bodies of the young martyrs
and laid them down in the tent of Zainab. Zarnab came to the two bodies
of her sons and addressing them said:- " My dear children! Now I am
pleased with you for you have proved your worth and Laid down your lives
for Truth and pleased God and His Holy Prophet.

**Qisim, son of Hasan**

WHEN THE YOUNG Qasim aged about fourteen years, son of Imam Hasan,
sought permission to go, it is reported that Husain re- membered the
wish of his late brother Hasan that one of his daughtcrs be wedded to
his son Qasim. At the same time Qasim presented to the Holy Hum a closed
note, written and given to him by his father, to be opened only when the
worst calamity befeIl him, in which was written addressing Qasim:-

"My dear Son Qasim when your uncle Husain is besieged by his enemites
from all sides and when erery true lover of God and the Holy Prophet,
lays down his life, defend- ing the cause of Truth, you sacrifice
yourself for the cause on my behalf." The Holy Imam kissed his late
brother's writing. It is reported that Husain wedded his daughter
Fatema-Kubra to Qasirn and immediately after the wedding, Qasim took his
uncle's permis- sion and went into the battlefield and after killing
five famous warriors of the Devil's army (Azrag and his four sons) fell
from his horse. Alas ! before Husain could reach Qasim in response to
his call for help, the whole cavalry of the Devil moved trampling over
Qasim's body.

**Abbas the Brave-The Standard Bearer**

WHEN ABBAS, THE Lion-Hearted son of Ali, went into the field, his fight
very much resembled the fight of his father All, the Lion of God. Abbas'
fight can never be described in a line or two. Anis and Dabir, the two
famous Urdu Poets, have beautifully given a classical exposition of the
marvellous encounter of Abbas with the Devil's forces. Abbas' strength,
valour, dexterity, prowess, his devotion to the cause of Truth and his
attachment to the Holy Imam, are unique in the history of the world.
Against the wonder- ful dash which the Lion-Hearted son of the Lion of
God-made, the Devil's men had to give way. After a terrible fight, Abbas
reached the hank of the river and filled the sack with water for the
thirsty children in Husain's camp but never tasted a drop of it
saying:-

" Ah! When My Lord, the Holy Imam and his innocent children are
thirsty, how can Abbas taste this water."

Alas! While Abbas was returning from the river with the sack of water
on his shoulder, he was attacked from all sides and at last he fell near
the bank of the river but not until he had lost both his hands which
were severed by a treacherous attack from a hiding.

**Ali-e-Akbar's Martyrdom**

AFTER ABBAS, CAME the turn of Ali-e- Akbar, t o go to the battlefield.
It is reported that this eighteen year old son was so very much loved by
one and all in the camp that the account ofhis taking leave of his
mother, aunts, sisters, brothers and other relatives is so pathetic that
none can resist shedding at least a few tears over the heart-rending
event. At last when the Holy Imam sent Ali-e- Akbar, the '
Ahmad-i-thani' , i.e., (Muhammad the Second), to the battlefield, he
raised his head towards Heaven and said:-

"Lord! Here is sent in Thy way, the one who resemblcth the most with
Thy Prophet Muhammad, whenever we did desire to have a view of the Holy
Face departed away from us, we used to look at the face of this
youth."

"Lord! Husain has one Ali-e-Akbar and lie is sent to be sacrificed for
Thy cause, had I many more like him, I would have similarly offered them
all in Thy way.

Is not this offer more acceptable to God than that of Abraham who
offered with his eyes blindfolded ? Is not this a Greater Sacri fice
than that of Ishmael?

When Ali-e-Akhar went into the battlefield, it is reported that the
Devil's forces were so much amazed at his resemblance with the Holy
Prophet that such of those who had seen him before, wondered if the Holy
Prophet had reappeared in the world to help his dear grandson Husain.
People were so anxious to have a look at the enchanting beauty of the
youth that those in the rear of the enemy's ranks, mounted on the horses
and camels, even stood on the backs of the animals to have a look at the
matchless and the wonder- striking beauty of this son of the Holy Imam.
But lo! There was a treacherous onslaught and Ali-e-Akbar fell with a
lance pierced through his breast as the Holy Imam had prophesied. God
alone knows what a patient heart the Holy Imam had been endowed with,
which never gave way against any catastrophe even that of the loss of
such a son. The Holy Imam stood looking at his son dying before his eyes
and lifting his head towards Heaven said:- " Lord! It will he quite
sufficient for Thy Husain if thou accepteth this sacrifice and if thou
art pleased with this humble offer.

**Husain stands alone**

WHEN EVERY ONE of his devotees was slain and none was left on the Holy
Imam's side, he stood all alone in the field with his head resting on a
lance and his garments drenched not only in his own blood but also of
his martyred son, brothers, nephews and devotees, with the Devil's
forces all around him.

**Baby Ali-e-Asghar comes into the field**

WHEN THE HELPLESS Imam stood all alone in the field surrounded by the
enemies, he was summoned by a call from his sister Zainab in his camp.
When he went into the tent, he found his baby son Ali-e Asghar, dying of
thirst in his cradle and the poor mother Rubab, whose milk had dried up
by the continuous thirst and hunger for the three consecutive days,
could not help the baby with even a drop of her milk. Telling the mother
that he would show the baby to the enemy and get some water for it if
they give it, Husain took the babe to the field and getting on a camel
and raising it up in his arms to enable everyone in the enemy's forces
to see it said:-

"O' People! if in your opinion, Husaiu is guilty of any sin or crime,
this innocent babe has done nothing to hurt any one of you. It does not
even speak, and has not even uttered anything against you or your Amir
at Damas- cus. He is dying of thirst. He had neither in milk nor water
for the last three days. Would you quench his thirst by a fem drops of
water. If you suspect that Idemand water for myself in the name of the
babe, then I will kave it here, fyou want, and go away and you may
return it with his thirst quenched."

It is reported that the address of the Holy Imam and the scene, with
the thirsty innocent babe in his hands, was so touching, so pathetic and
so heart-rending that even the men in the Devil's army could not help
weeping and cursing the Devil and his Deputy Ibne Ziad, Governor of
Kufa, who had gathered them there against such Holy and helpless ones.
Ibna-i-Sa'd, fearing a revolt of his forces in sympathy for the Holy
Imam, at once ordered a stone- hearted brute named Hurrnula to answer
Husain. The tyrant, shot a three-pronged arrow from his bow which after
piercing through the Imam's arm got stuck into the tiny neck of the
innocent babe. Blood flowed from the neck and the baby looking at its
father's face smiled and stopped breathing for ever. Husain col- lcctcd
the little blood that came out of the tiny neck of his baby son in
his -hand, and it is reported that when he wanted to drop it on the
earth, from the earth the Holy Imam heard a voice saying:-

"O' Holy Imam! I can not bear this innocent blood."

And when Husain wanted to throw the blood towards heaven, he heard a
voice saying:-

"O' Hoy Imam! Throw not the innocent blood towards me for I can not
bear it."

An Urdu poet has vcrsified the event:-

"Inkar aasrna ko hai, Razi Zami nahi Asghar Tumhare Koon ka thikana
Kahi nahi."

i.e.The heaven refuses and the earth does not agree, o' Ali-e-Asghar,
thy blood has no place in the world.

It is reported that the Holy Imam smeared his face with the blood of
the innocent baby.

Husain could not take the dead baby to be returned to its mother who
was waiting anxiously for it, at the door of her tent in the camp. Hence
he sat down to bury his baby son in the burning sand of the desert. Does
not even this one single sacrifice suffice to touch every human heart ?
Can we not call this one sacrifice alone greater than the sacrifice
offered by Abraham ? God alone knows the degree of the patience and the
fortitude which He had endowed in the Holy Imam to bear the series of
such unbearable calamities.


