The Messenger From Madina
=========================

IT IS REPORTED that when the Holy Imam was busy digging a tiny grave
for the martyred baby, in the burning desert with his sword, a camel
rider arrived into the field and wished him. The Holy Imam raised his
wounded head and looked at him with wonder if there was any one still
left to wish him in that hostile land at that very terrible and testing
hour. The Arab was a messenger and had brought a letter from Fatema
Sughra the sickly daughter of the Holy Imam, whom he had left alone in
his deserted house at Madina.

She had requested him in the letter either to return home soon from his
journey or to send her brother Ali-Akber or her cousin Qasim or her
uncle Abbas, (who were already slain) to take her to him. The most
pathetic was her request to her father to kiss her baby-brother
Ali-e-Asghar, whom Husain was just then burying. The Holy Imarn could
not help shedding tears, and kissed the dead baby on behalf of its
sister at Madina saying:-

" Asghar dear! Your sister sends her kisses to you." and then addressed
the messenger saying:-

" Brother! Bear witness, that I have complied with the request and have
kissed Asghar before thee."

Husain took the letter and read it out to his brothers, his son, and
his nephews who lay martyred for whom it contained a wish and then
turning to the messenger said:-

" Bear thou witness Brother! that I have conveyed the messages also to
one and all concerned."

The messenger stood aghast, stunned and struck with sorrow and wonder.
When he demanded a reply to the letter, Husain was only thinking as to
what should he say in reply to it, when, suddenly an arrow from the
enemy's ranks struck his forehead and blood began to drop down from the
wound. Husain took a few drops of his blood on the letter and returned
it to the messenger saying:-

"Brother! Return thou to Madina with this reply and if my daughter asks
thee anything more about me, relate what thou hast see;: here and tell
her on my behalf to be patient."

"But, Beware, get thou quickly out of the range v/thy hearing, away
from this plain, for soon I will be issuing my last call, unto all
around for help in the way of the Lord, whosoever heareth, it shall be
imcumhent on him to respond to it. Lest thou heareth it and get obliged
to respond to the heavenly summon and then thou will not be able to
return to Madina without becoming an infidel Go away my brother! God be
with thee." The messenger in utmost wonder and sorrow left the fatal
plain with tears in his eyes for the plight of the Holy Soul.

**The Final Separation**

THE DETAILS OF the final separation of the Holy Imam from the helpless
ladies and children and other inmates of his camp, parti- cularly from
his sisters Zainab and Umme-Kulthoom, are very heart rending and it is
impossible for any one to describe the whole sorrowful scene in a
paragraph or two of a brief work like this. The Holy Imam at last bade
bood bye to all the helpless inmates of his camp foretelling the
calamities that were awaiting them following his martyrdom, and
preaching patience to one and all. To Zainab, his sister, he exhorted in
particular to bear every hardship and torture with extreme patience and
never to curse the enemy for her curse would surely invoke the wrath of
God upon the people and what he had done with so much of patience and
fortitude would be undone.

**Husain hands over the Charge of the Imamat**

ALI,THE ELDEST Son of Husain called Zainulabideen (i.e., the Grace of
the pious), was lying unconscious on his sick bed. Husain went to him
and handed over the charge of the sacred office of Imamat to him. He
enumerated the difficulties and the tortures that would befall him
immediately following his martyrdom and advised him (who was to succeed
as the Fourth Holy Imam) to observe the highest degree of patience and
fortitude against every aggression and oppression that would be
inflicted on him and his dear ones, and never to get angry or curse the
people.

**The Parting Advice to zainab and Umme-Kulthoom**

To ZAINAB AND Umme-Kulthoom, his two sisters, Husain said:-

"Our camp will be plundered and set on fire. After I am slain, the
series of calamities to you all would bein. Your heads will be stripped
of your covering cloths veils. Beware o' My Sisters dear, let not
patience under any suffering be lost. Bear every cala- mity in the way
of the Lord with patience and fortitude. Sisters dear, let not what I
have done be undone by your impatience." The Hoty Imam at last came into
the field bidding goodbye, to all, not to return again to his camp, but
to drink the cup of martyrdom to fulfil the covenant with the Lord to
save and secure the Truth for all times until the Day of Judgment.

**Husain in the Battlefield to Offer the Greatest Sacrifice for the
Truth**

HUSAIN FIRST pREACHED to his enemies, the love of God, the obedience to
the Holy Prophet and abstinence from vice and wickedness, and at last
asked the people:-

" Why doye kill me?"

" Did I commit any sin or crime?"

" Did I plunder anybody?"

" Did I interfere with any one's affairs?"

All stood dumb and nonc answered. Then the Holy Imam continued:-

"Then why do ye kill me? What answer have you to give to God, and to
the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judg- ment?"

When no answer from the Devil's forces, the Holy Imam said:-

"You have killed all my companions, my children, my brothers and even
my little baby; now I tell you leave me, I will migrate to Yeman, to
Iran or even to the far off Hind (India), stain not your hands with my
blood, which is the blood of the Holy Prophet himself, you will not have
salvation. It is for you; I tell you, shed not my blood and save
yourseLves.

This last offer of the Holy Imam was superb and matchless and yet the
devils did not avail of it. It was in fact the fulfilment of the
'Hujjat' or the argument to give the last chance to the greedy devils to
save themselves from the wrath of God.

**The Last Call of the Holy Imam in the Way of the Lord**

LEST LATER ANY one in the surroundings should say that he was neither
called nor given any opportunity to serve the cause of defending the
Truth by helping the Holy Imam who was fighting for it,Husain now
standing all alone, bleeding from innumer- able wounds from head to
foot, having lost one and all of his godly comrades, having offered the
last and the greatest of his offerings in the way of the Lord, the six
months babe Ali-e-Asghar, gave his last call to humanity around him,
inviting them to join him in the way of the Lord, saying:-

"Hal min Nasirin Yansorona ?"

'Is there any helper to help us?'

"Hal min zahbin yazubbo an Harame Rasoolullal?" 'Is there any defender
to repulse the enemy from approaching the tents of the family of the
Holy Prophet?'

When there was no response from any one of the thousands standing
around him, he then said aloud:-

"Alan Tasma'o ? Alaisa fikum Muslimu?"

Do ye hear me not ? Is there not even a single Muslim among you?

Yet there was no responsc.

When Husain gave his final call to the world around him inviting the
people in the way of the Lord, Husain's son Ali-e- Zainulabideen who was
confined to bed with high fever, and who had just a little before
received the charge of the Imamat from his father, got up and leaning on
a staff, dragged himself out of his tent with his feeble sickly voice,
walking towards the HoW Imam saying:-

" Labbaik Ya Abata, Labbaik!"

"Yes, Here I am o' Father dear ! Here I am."

Husain sccing his ailing Ali coming out tottering in the high fever,
bade him saying:-

"Get thee hack o' son! My progeny is to spring from thee."

It is rcportcd that in response to the call from the Holy Imam, Some
mysterious voices of 'Labbaik! Labbaik!' (Yes we are here o'son of the
Holy Prophet) were heard from the spiritual world above, to which the
Holy Imam replied 'Thanks to you all, but my concen here today is only
with the living in the physical world.' Saying this, the Great Godly
soul the Holy Imam himself to be mar- tyred by the Devil's forces
surrounding him.

**The Unique Unparalleled Prayer (Namaz)**

EVERY AWAKENED MIND will surely confess that it is not possible for any
mortal to understand the great heavenly personality which enacted the
absolute submission to the Lord, which he displayed on the field of
Karbala.

Having lost every one of his faithful comrades including his baby son,
himself fully wounded from head, to foot with arrows struck in his holy
body with his blood flowing from the wounds, his clothes drenched with
blood, and that of his comrades, his kith and kin whose dead bodies he
removed from the field of the massacre to a tent in his camp to spare
them from being trampled under the hoofs of the cavalry of the heartless
enemy, hunary with choking thirst for the last three days, Husain was
seen seated on his horse the Zul-Jinah, looking every now and then
towards Heaven with prayers for the acceptance of his sacrifices. In the
midst of the indescribable miseries, sorrow and grief, and under the
undcfinable agony of the worst torturous and the most painful death, the
Holy Imam ever remained mindful of the Lord and his submission to Him
with the desire not to leave the world defaulting not even a single one
of the prayers (Namaz) prescribed by him for man in this world.

His condition was such that Husain now could not of his own efforts get
down from the horse. Husain hinted to his horse saying:- " Wilt thou my
dear Zul-Jinah kneel down a little to enable mc to roll myself down to
the ground? I know thou hast also been hungry and thirsty along with me.
Pardon me my dear Zul-Jinah for Husain is helpless. May the Lord bless
thee."

The faithful animal which was itself hungry, thirsty and wounded,
spread its legs in such a way that the godly soul, one of the most
brilliant stars of the heaven of divinity, slid himself down.

Now lying with his bleeding wounds on the flaming sand of the burning
desert, Husain, desirous of offering his prayers gathered the sand in
front of him and himself engaged in his last prayer (Namaz) on earth,
resting his wounded forehead on a heap of the burning sand. Thus
ultimately the wounded Holy Imam lay in communion with the Lord.

Swords and axes began falling on him and Husain was bying fully wounded
from head to foot, and the sacred blood of the Holy Prophet, Ali and
Fatema was flowing on the earth.

Several men one after another, were deputed by the Commander of the
Devil s forces to cut off the head of the Holy Imam but every one that
came near the Holy one lying on the burning sand, found his lips moving
and heard to say:- "O' All-Merciful Lord of the Universe, accept the
humble sacrifice of thy Husain. Husain has submitted in Thy way all that
thou hast given him. If this son of Thy Holy Prophet had anything more,
he would have submitted that also to Thee-But O' Lord forgive the
sinners among the faithful, O' All-Merciful One."

and at the end of the prayers it was heard:-

"O Lord! Lord O' Lord! being repeated several times.

Hearing these last prayers of Husain, none dared to cut off his holy
head, even on an offer ofthousands of gold coins with promises of highly
tempting rewards, hut Shimar, the stone-hearted brute committed the
heinous crime.

Thus when the head of the Holy Imam was being severed from his body,
the helpless ladies and the innocent children in Husain's camp stood at
their tents shouting for help and were weeping aloud. And Husain's
sister, Lady Zainab ran bare-headed out of her tent towards her brother
shouting to Ibna-i-Sa'd for mercy but Ibna-i- Sa'd's heart was devoid of
mercy.

**The Severed Head of Husain Glorifies God**

THE MOMENT THE Holy Imam's head was severed from his body and raised on
the point of a lance, the severed head began glorifying God, aloud in
clear words saying:-

"Allaho Akbar' (i.e., God the Greatest)."

Thus Husainwon an everlasting victory over the Devil who could not
annihilate Truth with the massacre of the Holy Imam, for Husain
continued the glorification of the Lord even after his head was severed,
from the point of the very lance in the hand of his enemy.

Thus the Holy Imam by his own example has made it openly known how
abhorrent is falsehood and godlessness, how far it should be defied,
what value to humanity has Truth and godliness. How dear it must he to
every faithful one and at what cost it must be defended and upheld. And
how death in the cause of Truth, unfailingly earns thc life Rcal of
Eternal Bliss.

**Bodies of the Martyrs Trampled by the Devil's Cavalry**

WITH HUSAIN'S MARTYRDOM, only the wielding of thc sword by the Devil's
forces had stopped, but immediately after the massacre of the Holy Imam
and his faithful devotees, the brutes of the Devil's forces got busy in
the other horrible deeds. Horses were shod afresh and the enemy's
cavalry was ordered to ride over the holy dead bodies of the martyrs
trampling them under the hoofs of their horses.

**Husain's Camp Plundered and Set on Firc**

THE NEXT MOVE of the brutes was towards the Holy camp which now
contained only the helpless wailing ladies, the crying children, and
Ali-az-Zainul-abideen the ailing son of the Holy Imam lying unconscious
with high fever. They plundered the camp, setting the tents on fire. The
gentle and noble ladies, who were the unique models of chaste and modest
womanhood, and the innocent children ran hither and thither between the
burning tents of the camp, and some of the poor children are reported to
have perished in the fire The brutes took the ladies and the children as
captives, and the weak and the sick Ali-az-Zainulabideen, now the Fourth
Holy Imam, was bound in heavy thorny chains, fettered and was most
heartlessly treated as the sharp, piercing edges were almost choking
him.

**The Looted Caravan**

AFTERR BURNING THEIR dead and leaving the bodies of the Holy Imam and
his martyred devotees unburied, lying on the plain of the massacre, the
Devil's forces left the plain of Karbala for Kufa with the virtuous
ladies and the innocent children of Husain's family as their captives,
on bare backs of camels, snatching away their veils, without any purdah
with their necks tightly tied in ropes.

The sick Holy Imam Ali-son of Husain, who could not even sit up owing
to his illness, was bound in heavy chains and was made to walk
barefooted on the thorny plains and on the burning sand of the desert,
from Karbala to Kufa and from Kufa to Damascus.

**The Tortures of the Journey**

THE HISTORY OF the tortures of the journey from Karbala to Kufa and
from Kufa to Damascus which the sick Imam Ali, the helpless ladies and
the young children were put to, is a very pathetic record ofthe worst
brutality ever recorded on earth, the narration of which in detail needs
a separate volume. The captives of the family of the Holy Imam were
first marched on public roads and through the streets of the town of
Kufa, to the open court pf Ibna-i-Ziad the Governor of Kufa, and from
there they were marched to Syria to be presented in the open court of
the brute Yazid who before an audience of hundreds of his courtiers
seated on the throne there, were purchased by his wealth and who had
signed the death warrant of the Holy Imam supporting the claims of the
Brute to be Deputy of the Holy Prophet.

**The Divine Light Shines Out**

EVERY SOLDIER WHO was given the severed head of a martyr, to carry it
raising it on his lance was made responsible for its safe custody.
Khooli a hard-hearted tyrant was put in charge of the holy head of
Husain. As the Brute's army marched from Karbala after the great
massacre, it halted near Kufa where Khooli lived. Khooli left the camp
in the night to visit his wife in the town and carried with him the holy
head, and to hide it from his wife, he kept it covered under ashes of
the hearth in the kitchen of his house. when Khooli's wife came out of
her room in the middle of the night, she found a pillar of light rising
out from the hearth in the kitchen. She was stunned and when she saw
through a hole in the door, she found some heavenly figures descending
from heaven on a severed head in the hearth. She rushed back into her
room and waking up Khooli reported the matter to him. Khooli could no
more con- ceal the matter and spoke out to her what he had hidden in the
hearth. The good lady cried aloud cursing him saying:-

"May the wrath of God be on theeo' cursed One! Thou hast brought the
holy bead of Husain the Holy Imam in my house." Crying aloud, shedding
tears, the good lady madly rushed out of her house and out of the town,
wandered out into the wilderness and never again entered the house, and
ultimately gave up her life crying for the Holy Imam.

**The Severed Head of Husain Recites the Word of God**

THE DEVIL'S ARMY marched with severed heads of the martyrs raised on
their lances. Among the heads, were the head of the baby son of Husain,
AIi-e-Asghar. It is now left to the tender hearts of gentle women to
imagine in their own places, what would have been the feelings of the
mothers, the sisters and the children among the captives who were
marched along with the army, looking all the time at the severed heads
of their dear ones, on the points of the lances raised before their
eyes. Historians, reporting the grue- some events of the great tragedy,
say that people noticed the lips of the severed head of the Holy Imam
moving, and when people applied their ears carefully, they heard the
Holy lips uttering clearly the following verse of the Chapter 'Kahf' of
the Holy Qur'an:-

aayaa tina Ajabad 18 :9

'Thinkest thou that the Fellows of the Cave and the Inscription were of
Our wonderful signs. 18:9

The one who heard the recital of the sacred words, immediately cried
out saying:-

"Nay! o' Son of the Holy Prophet! The event of thy wonderful sufferings
and patience it more astonishing. Since its severance from its body the
holy head of Husain till its burial after about a year of remaining in
the custody of the Brute at Damascus, it manifested miracles after
miracles proving the Unity of God, the glory of the Lord of the
Universe, the bona- fide of the apostleship of his grandfather, the Holy
Prophet Muham- mad, and the truthfulness of Islam, as God's prescribed
rc1igio for Mankind as a whole.


