Supplement
==========

" Nevertheless I tell you the truth, that it is expedient for you thatt
I go amay,for if I go not away, the Con forter will not conic unto you,
but if I depart I will send him unto you, and when he is come he will
retrove the world of sin and of rtghteousness and of judgment. John
14:7, 8

Jesus made it clear that the Last one of the Apostles of God could not
come to deliver the Final Word of God and the whole of the Truth, until
the one who had come just to serve the timely need of the age, did not
depart, lest the imperfect and the perfect should be confused, and it
would create discord, disorder and confusion instead of unity and
harmony : -

Jesus had further declared:- " But the Comforter which is the Holy
Ghost whom tile Father will send in my namt, he shall teach you all
things and bring all things to your remembrance whatever I have said
unto you." John 14:26

By the above declarations, Jesus has made it perfectly clear that he
that had to come after him was the Holy Ghost, and the same statement
ofJesus also makes it clear that he had not said everything about the
Truth, which duty according to him, had been assigned by the Lord to the
Comforter who was the Holy Ghost: Jesus had done his best when he
said:-

" I have yet many Things to say unto you but ye cannot bear them
now."

" Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is come; he will guide you unto all
truth for he shall not speak of himself, but 'whatever he shall hear
that shall he speak' and he will showyou things to come." John i6:12 &
13.

The above declaration by Jesus makes it clear:-

1. That Jesus had to go away, without disclosing the whole truth due to
the inability ofthe people to bear it then.
2. That the one who had to come after hint would guide mankind unto all
truth which he (Jesus) could not do.
3. That the one to come after him would speak only that which he will
hear from the Lord which quality Jesus did not claim for himself
4.That the Spirit of Truth to come after him would show mankind things
to conic which Jesus did not do, and he will abide for ever.

Besides all the above prophecies, there are many similar declarations
made by the other Apostles of God in the various parts of the earth, at
different times, emanating from the Divine Mercy of the Lord, to keep
mankind informed of the Great Guide mankind Wou1d be blessed with, who
would consolidate all the goodness preached through the different
Apostles gone before him in the various parts of the world, at different
times, against the clouds of ignorance which were impending to darken
the atmosphere of the earth as a whole. The promised Last Deliverer,
Muhammad, appeared when tnspite of the Iabours of all the preceding
apostles of God, there was darkness everywhere on the earth.

**The Seed of Abraham caused to grow in the wilderness**

THE HOLY PROPHET Abraham, at the command of God, had brought and left
his wife Hagar with his baby son Ishmael, in the wilderness of the
barren desert land of Arabia, at the spot now called MECCA. The post
where Hagar and the Baby Ishmael were left was not only barren, sandy
and uninhabited, but was also water- less. For miles together around the
place there was no trace of water.

In short, when the poor mother wanted a little water for her Baby dying
of thirst, she ran hither and thither in her agony of maternal love for
her dying Baby. She ran from hillock to hillock, getting on the heights
and throwing glances all around, searching for some trace of water, but
all in vain. At last she sat down totally disappointed, only to witness
the impending death of her child, when suddenly she noticed a miraculous
fountain of fresh drinking water gushing out from under the heels of her
Baby (Ishmael) as it struck its feet on the earth, in its struggle with
the choking thirst. This fact has also been vouched by the Bible:-

" And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under
one of the shrubs. And she went, and sat her down over against him a
good way off as it were a bowshot; for she said, Let me not see the
death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lifted up her
voice, and wept. And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of
God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What ailetlt thee,
Hagar? Fear not; for Cod bath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

Arise,lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand for I will make him a
great nation.

And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water and she went,
andfihled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink. Gen.
21:15-19.

This miraculous spring, today is called the Zam Zam which is now
surrounded by the great Mosque around the Holy Ka'ba This divinely
created spring, generated from under the feet of Ishmael began giving
fresh drinking water, not only to the poor mother and her baby son but
also to the travellers and their caravans and through this providential
facility, the spot developed into a habitation with its unique
importance as the halting place for caravans from the various
directions, as a junction of the routes to the various important centres
of trade.

Hagar and Ishmael lived at the place, and when Abraham again visited
them, Ishmael his son whom he had left in babyhood, to the care of God,
was a grown-up young lad. Abraham, aided by his young son Ishmael raised
up the walls of the ancient Prayer House which was founded since time
immemorial, exclusively for worship to the only True God, which is now
called the Holy Ka'ba to which Haj (the pilgrimage) or a devoted visit
has been enjoined by Islam on all its adherents. The same spring which
gushed out from under the feet of Ishmael even today flows with greater
force, more than sufficient to supply fresh drinking water to millions
of visitors to the House of God raised by Abraham and Ishmael.

Abraham, while raising the walls of the Holy House prayed to God to
accept it, saying:-

"And when Abraham and Ishmael raised the founda- tions of the House
(Saying) Our Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the Knowing.

"Our Lord! and make us boTh submissive (Muslims) to Thee and (raise)
from our offsprings a nation submitting to Thee, and show us ways of
devotion and turn to us (Mercjful), surely Thou art the Oft Returning
(to mercy), the Merciful:

"Our Lord! and raise up in then: an Apostle from among them who shall
recite to them Thy communications and purify them; surely Thou art the
Mighty, the Wise. 2:127-129

In response to the above prayers, God addressing Abraham said:-

"And when W e made the house a resort for met, and a (place of)
security, and: Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing
place of Abraham.

And We enjoined Abraham and Ishmael, ' Purjfy My House for those who
visit (it) and those who abide (in it) for devotion and those who bow
down (and) those who pros- trate thentselves. 2:125

**Abraham tested with a sacrifice**

ABRAHAM REPEATEDLY HAD visions of slaying his son Ishmael. The Bible of
the Christian Church also mentions this with the change of the name of
the son from Ishmael to Isaac, which change is obviously a Jewish
tampering of the original event to suit their selfish ends, to shift the
great sacrifice to Isaac, the father of the Israelites. A vision to an
apostle of God is deemed to be the Lord's directive to him, to act
according to the directions given therein. Abraham related his vision to
his son Lshmael saying:- "O' Son! I see in vision that I slay thee. Holy
Qur'an 37:102

Ishmael, the dutiful son who was himself to be an apostle of God,
submitted to his father saying:-

"O' Father! Act as thou host been bidden (by the Lord) and thou wilt,
if God Willeth, find me of the patient ones." Holy Qur'an 37:102

Abraham told his wife, Hagar, the mother of Ishmael that he was taking
his son to his friend; and equipping himself with a knife and a rope,
left for an altar on a nearby mountain. Abraham laid down his son
Ishmael and tied his hands and legs lest the boy should struggle while
being slain, and blindfolded himself with a piece of cloth apprehending
his failure due to his paternal love, to bear the sight of his son
rolling in his own blood, and in com- pliance with the divine directive
received through the dream, Abraham offering his son to God, passed the
knife across, cutting the throat under it.

Abraham declared Truthful, but the Sacrifice, postponed

As SOON AS Abraham was sure that he had slain his son under the knife,
he immediately uncovered his eyes to pray to the Lord to accept his
sacrifice, but to his great surprise, he found Ishmael standing aside
and instead of Ishmael a ram lay slain. Any other father would have only
rejoiced at the miraculous escape of his son, but Abraham with his
wonderful love and devotion to the Lord and with his ideal submission to
His Will, stood sorrowful and disappointed thinking that his offering
was not accepted by the Lord, but a heavenly voice immediately consoled
Abraham saying:

"0' Abraham! of course thou han faithfully fulfilled the dream, thou
art of the truthful ones, but verily it is an open test, we have
substituted it with a Greater Sacrifice. We have transferred it to later
generations."

Holy Qur'an 37:105-108

The substitute-sacrifice destined to take place instead of the one
offered by Abraham, has been called by God as an Open Test and a Great
Sacrifice from which one naturally infers that the one to be sacrificed
would be greater than Ishmael in his position with the Lord, and such a
great sacrifice could naturally be offered by the one who would be
superior to Abraham in his submission to God's Will.

What Abraham was demanded to enact was only a test:-

1. To make it known to mankind the degree ofAbraham's love of God, and
his submission to God's Will.
2. To make Abraham himself know that he was still lacking in resistance
to witness the blood of his son when it had to flow in the fulfilment of
the Will ofthe Lord.
3. To declare the ideal devotion of Abraham and his implicit submission
to God, even to sacrifice his own son, when commanded by the Lord to do
it.
4. To make it known to man that when it is demanded in obedience to God
s command, man should sacrifice even his own son.
5. To make the children of Adam (Man) know that in obedience to their
parents, they must surrender themselves as Ishmael did.
6. To make it known to mankind that such an event is under the Divine
Will and it is a Great Test which shall be enacted openly and it shall
come to pass in the time to come, in the seed of Abraham.

Besides, the test, if it had to profit mankind, must be an open test?
with its causes and events openly known, to earn the appre- ciation of
its consequent effects. Abraham enacted the slaughter in obedience to
God's command, but since the nature of the command was shrouded in a
dream and every one could not know that the dream of an apostle of God
is a revelation of God' s Will, and with the ignorance of this mystic
factor, people, instead of appreciating the unique submission of Abraham
to the divine will of the Lord, would have condemned Abraham for having
fanatically slaughtered his son, beguiled by his own fanciful
interpretation of his dream. Thus if Abraham had in those circumstances
been allowed to slaughter Ishmael, the value of the Great Sacrifice
would have practically been wasted and its great purpose would not have
been fully served.

Secondly, the object of the sacrifice was, to associate it with the
life of the great Apostle, so that humanity in its sympathy to- wards
the tragic event may give due admiration to the Apostle, but there, in
this case, admiration would have gone only to Ishmael as being the
victim of Abraham s personal interpretation of his dream, which the
people could have mistaken to be fantastic, and Abraham would have been
condemned for his conduct, which in fact was a unique instance of
perfect submission to God s will. And over and above the other reasons,
the sacrifice, if it had been left to be enacted by Abraham, would have
been a sheer waste, for no universal religion had yet been regulated and
enforced for the human race as a whole, for mankind as a whole to be
drawn to it, through its sympathy towards the event. Moses had yet to
present the Ten Commandments and Jesus had to revive the teachings of
Moses after they had been corrupted, and yet when the teachings of all
the apostles from God got corrupted, Muhammad the Last Apostle of God,
the Maetrea foretold by Buddha, the ' Comforter,' the ' Holy Ghost and
the Spirit of Truth prophesied by Jesus, to abide with mankind for ever,
had yet to come. And the Great Sacrifice was then to be offered for only
then the human sympathy for the heart rending sufferings of the Great
Divine and his faithful corn- rades would lead mankind as a whole
towards the universal religion. Islam is the only divinely revealed and
perfectly regulated code for human discipline cumulative of the
teachings of all the apostles of God and which contains the Truth which
was exposed piece- meal by the other prophets in different ages, to
different people, in different languages. The Greatest of the Sacrifices
ever offered by any man, would naturally be for the sake of a reliaion
meant for the human race as a whole, and it could be offered by the one
whose life would be, not for himself but for the fulfilment of the Mercy
of the Lord unto the whole of Mankind.

**The Failure of Judaism and Christianity**

THE PURELY MONOTHEISTIC faith preached and practised by the great
Israelite prophets Moses and Jesus, had totally failed to exercise any
more of its correct influence on the minds of the Jews and the
Christians who had gradually sunk deep in all sorts of idolatrous
beliefs and pagan practices. The followers of Jesus the most recent of
the apostles of God, preceding the Holy Prophet Muhammad, had become
poIytheists in worshipping three gods instead of the One Whom they were
commanded to serve: " Unto thee it was shown that thou mighitest know
that Lord is God ; there is none else besides Him."

"I am the First and I am the Last and besides Me there is no God."
Isaiah 44:6

" Hear 0' Israel, the Lord thy God is One Lord." Deut 6:4

"I am God, and there is none else; I am God, there is none like Me."
Isaiah 46:9

" I am the Lord that is My Name, andglory willInot give to another,
neither My praises to graven imaages..." Isaiah 42:8

The New Testament:-

"And Jesus answered him, the First of all Commandments is, 0' Israel,
the Lord our Cod is One Lord." Mark 12:29

Then saith Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is wrftten thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt thou serve. Math.
4:io, Luke 4:8

".... .an idol is nothing in the world, and there is none other God but
One." Corin 8:6

" But to us there is but One God the Father."
Corin 8:6

Inspite of the definite Commandments from God conveyed to the people by
the holy prophets Moses and Jesus, the Israelites and the Christians had
started deifying their prophets and their saints, worshipping them.
Among the Christians had sprung up schools worshipping the idols of
Mary, Jesus and also the other saints of their own fancy. The Christians
condemned the Israelites as being meaningless, in their faith and the
Israelites criticised the Chrictians similarly in return, while both of
them were on the wrong track diametrically opposed to what they had been
preach- ed by their respective teachers, Moses and Jesus.

**The Darkened Earth**

Evry NATION HAD a guide in an apostle from God and there was not left
anyplace on the Earth which had not a warner or a guide (10:47, i6 :36,
35:24) to fight the satanic forces of evil and wicked- ness which
effectively ruled over the thoughts and actions of the human race. Satan
had beguiled every nation of the world and had taken every nation far
away from goodness in thought and action. Corruption ruled all over the
world:

" Mischief had appeared in the land and the sea, of what was wrought by
the hands of mankind..." 29:41 (H.Q)

Asia, which was the birthplace of the religious guides and the apostles
of God, had become the seat of all sorts of idolatry and heinous crimes
were committed in the name of religion. People in India worshipped not
only their own gods and goddesses but also animals, the serpents, the
trees, the mountains, the rivers, the sun, the moon, and the stars. Many
such objects were invoked as demigods or the agents of God, who were
believed to be able to grant the prayers of man. To appease the anger or
to gain the pleasure of the deities, all kinds of rituals and offerings,
including human sacrifices were offered. The teachings of the sacred
Vedas in India had created sects and sub-sects and had instituted com-
munal hatred and caste distinctions as a part of the religious
observances. Women had been deprived of any place in the human society
and denied the right of inheritance. Woman was tot only freely used by
man in the licentious satisfaction of tht sexual urge in him, in the
uncontrolled and the unrestricted polygamy but was subjected to the
disgraceful system ofPolyandry. In India a woman had no right to live
after her husband but to burn herself to death, in the same fire in
which her husband s body was cremated.

Persia was worshipping fire as God and the people believed in two
independent gods of virtue and vice, i.e., Mazda and Ahriman. The
countries towards the Pacific were also buried deep under similar
fantastic beliefs. Buddha had come to create the spirit of self-an
nihilation or self-denial in the day-to-day life of man but he was
misunderstood and quite a new and most impracticable creed became
innovated in his name, demanding humanity to tear itself away from the
human society and to resort to wilderness and to live on begging as the
Bhikshus.

The countries professing the religion of the Church founded in the name
of Christ, had started preaching the belief in three gods: Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost. This peculiar pheno mena of three in one and one
in three, had created diverse schisms and conflicting sects which vied
with one another in exploiting their brand in the C how the man Jesus
could also be God and how one could be three, and the same three could
remain one. The most impracticable ideals were preached, i.e. turning
the other cheek when one is smitten and surrendering the coat also when
the cloak is taken away.

"And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek, offer also the other,
and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat also."

" Give to every man that asketh thee, and of him that taketh away thy
goods ask them not." Luke 6 :20, 30.

Such horrible excesses were committed by the Christians in their
heartless persecution of even the monotheistic Jews, that the records of
their barbarous atrocities are absolutely unsurpassed in the history of
the world.

Not to uproot any evil but in their madness to swell the ranks of the
followers of their own established churches, the inhuman atrocities and
the brutal conduct of the Christian authorities would need volumes to
relate them in all their details. Gibbon has pictured their character
and conduct in his famous work, 'The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire :-

"At Minorea , says Gibbon, the clerics of St. Stephen converted in
eight days five hundred and forty Jews; with the help, indeed, of some
wit olesome seventies, such as burning the synagogues, driving the
obstinate infidels to starve among the rocks etc. In Alexandria the Jews
were expelled from the city, their houses plundered and their synagogues
appropriated to the use of the Church. The account of the Jews who were
plundered, sent away naked, banished. starved, tortured, left to perish
in prison, hanged and burnt by the Christians would fill many
volumes."

Gibbon further reports: "In almost every province of the Roman world,
an army of fanatics without authority and without discipline, invaded
the peaceful inhabitants; and the ruins of the fairest structures of
antiquity still display the ravages of those barbarians who alone had
time and inclination to exccutc such laborious destruc- tion."

Why go far to explore the ancient history of Christianity? Let us take
into account the recent atrocious and inhuman attack of Rome (Italy),
the seat of the supreme head of the Christian Religion,the Pope, on
another poor Christian country, Abyssinia, in World War II: Italy played
havoc upon the poor, helpless, ill-armed Abyssinians, merely for some
territorial lust. Should not the intelligent ones and the free-thinkers
question these Church authorities, if these acts were according to the
teachings of Jesus? Should not the intelligent ones and the
free-thinkers among our Christian brethren question their Church
authorities? What happened to the commandment referred to in Luke 6:29,
30?

Arabia presented a consolidated view of all kinds of vices and crimes
which were current in the different countries around it. Along with all
the barbaric inhuman character and the brutal conduct found elsewhere in
the world, Arabia had added something still more grievous and further
heinous in nature.

Idolatry had been so much ingrained in the nature of the people that
besides the three hundred and sixty idols in the very sacred shrine of
the Ka ba, the House built by Abraham and his son Ishmael, exclusively
for the worship of the One True God, there were also household gods of
every family and every house. And every individual had his own fancied
favourite guardian deity which he held as his persona! favourite god.
Before a man started on a journey, he would carry with him four stones,
three to make the hearth, and the fourth to be worshipped, and sometimes
only three stones were thought to suffice, for after the cooking was
over, one of the stones of the hearth, could be worshipped.

Stepmothers were inherited by the issues of a dead father, to he wifed,
and female babies were buried alive because of a fanciful shame against
giving away one s daughter to another man to be his wife.

Heartless plunder of travellers and of the unprotected habi- tations
had become a proud profession.

Use of all sorts of intoxieants had neither any restriction nor
control.

Angels were hailed as the daughters of God. Famous an- cestors of the
people were worshipped as the agents of gods. Fantastic superstitions
had gained the strongest hold upon the minds of the people.

Internecine feuds were of the greatest concern to the people which
engaged their whole attention for generations together. Human destiny
was imagined to be determined and decided by ceriain stars.

A controlled and disciplined life was a mockery to the people. People
led a nomadic life, wandering with their cattle and camping under the
tents of camel-skin wherever they found water and shade and forage for
their animals. A settled and a peaceful life which was essential for
cultivation of the human society and culture, was not only unknown to
the people but seemed to be impracticable. Petty groups of people lived
in small villages and still smaller groups had settled down in small
townships. The whole of the Peninsula was divided into independent petty
habitations, each tribe and clan assuming itself into a separate
political unit. Hosti- lities once started continued for generations
together.

Women were treated as mere chattels, as objects to serve man, to
satisfy his animal passions (i.e., his sexual lust), without any right
to inherit their deceased fathers, husbands or other relatives. A woman
could be teased and tortured to any extent at the un- controlled fancy
of man. She could be left in suspense, neither being allowed to marry
nor divorced. Woman's lot was very miserable. Besides poiyandry which
was freely practised, prosti- tution was also rife as a recognized
profession. The treatment meted out to womanhood was saturated with
contempt.

The dreadful belief in the existence of genies and evil spirits, played
havoc in the minds of the people and had found a solution in the use of
fanciful charms and incantations. Peculiar and fanciful beliefs about
the existence of the human soul after its leaving the corporeal body,
were maintained by the people and the worship of the dead formed a part
of their religion. Nowhere on the earth were current the practices or
original teachings of any of the apostles of God. Corruption ruled all
over the earth, and vice and wickedness had darkened it altogether.


