Brief Notes On Some of Those Martyred in Kufa and Karbala
=========================================================

1. Abu-Bakr ibne Ali ibne Abi Taleb:- He was called 'Muhammad-e-Azghar'
or Abdullah from Laila daughter of Mas'ud son of Hanzala son of Manath
son of Tameem.

2. Abi Bakr son of the Second Imam Hasan, son of Ali.

3. Abdul Hatoof Ansari and his Brother.

4. Sa'ad (both sons of Hur). Both from Kufa who joined the Holy Imam at
Karbala.

5. Adham son of Omayya-al Abdi. From Basra son o Abi Obaida, whose
father had been the constant attendant on the Holy Prophet.

6. Aslam-the slave who was purchased and liberated by the Holy Imam-was
the scribe engaged to write communications from the Holy Imam.

7. Anas bin Hars-e-KahiIi son of Baniah son of Kahli who was one of the
companions of the Holy Prophet.

8. Borair zibe Khozar-e Hamdani:- A very old, pious, and devoted
companion of Amirul-Momineen, Ali ibne Abi Taleb, one of the prominent
noblemen of Kufa. He was the one who came to the Holy Imam begging most
humbly to permit him to get martyred for he wanted to die in the way of
the Lord and show his face to the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgment.
The details about the faithfulness and the devotion of Borair are
many.

9. Omayyabib Sa'd at Taie: He was one of the companions of Amirul-
Mominecn.

10. Bush bin Amrual Hazrami from the famous ones among the faithful
devotees to the Holy Prophet.

11. Bakr bib Hai at Taimi: Of the Bani Taimi tribe who came to the Holy
Imam and volunteered to be martyred in the way ofthe Lord. 12. Jdbib
ibne Hajjaj al Taimi: He was the follower of Muslim-bin-Aqeel in Kufa.
Since Muslim was arrested, he hid him- self until Husain arrived in
Karbala, and reported himself to the Holy Imam and got martyred.

13. Jibilath ibne Ali-e Shaibani: The one who was attending on
Amirul-Momineen in the battle of Siffln.

14. Jafar ibne Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb: The Third brother of Abbas the
Standard Bearer of the Holy Imam.

15. Jafar ibne Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb: Brother of Muslim ibne Aqeel the
Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa.

16. Jinadat ibne Ka'b Ansari Al-Khazraji: Along with his son-Martyred
at Karbala- one of the greatest devotees of the Holy Imam. 17. jundab
bin Mujee al Khaulani: One of the companions of Ameerul-Momineen came to
the Holy Imam and fell down on his feet and prayed to be permitted to be
martyred.

18. Jaun-The liberated slave of Abi-Zar who after the death of Abi-Zar,
joined the Second Holy Imam and thereafter he remained with Husain and
had come to Karbala with Husain. He was trained under Abi-Zar and was a
very pious devotee of the Holy Imam.

19. Jaun bin Malike Tameemi: Of the tribe of Bani Tameem. One who was
in Yazid's army. Seeing the Devil's forces decided to attack the Holy
Imam which he never thought that it would ultimately happen, left the
ranks of the Devil's forces and joined the Holy Imam and was martyred.

20. Hars-The liberated slave of Hazrat Hamza the uncle of the Holy
Prophet-had come from Madina along with Husain to get martyred.

21. Habshi bin Qais-e-Nahmi: Of a group from the tribe of Hamdan. His
grandfather was one of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet.

22. Hars bin Amraul Qais-e-Kandi: A very brave nobleman of Arabia. He
went into the armies of the Devil, and found his own uncle there. His
uncle asked him: 'have you come to kill your uncle?' He replied 'Yes !
you are my uncle, no doubt, but God is my Lord and you have come here
against Him. He killed his uncle. Along with him three others from the
enemy's ranks joined the Holy Imam. All were martyred.

23. Habib bin Amir-e-Taimi: One who had already paid allegiance to the
Holy Imam at the hands of Muslim was martyred in Kufa, Habib left Kufa
and joined the Holy Imam on his way to Karbala and got martyred.

24. Habib bin Muzahir al-Asadi: He was known as Habib ibne Mazahir bin
Re'aab bin A1-Ashtar from the lineage of Asad Abdul- Qasim A1-Asadi-aged
70 years. He was one of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet who
after the Holy Prophet always remained with Ameerul-Momtneen Ali and
migrated to Kufa when the Capital was shifted from Madina to Kufa, and
accompanied Ali in all the battles he had to fight against the rebels
and traitors. His ideal faith- fulness and sincere devotion to the Holy
Imam has many glorious details.

25. Hajjai bin Masrooq al-Jaufi: One of the faithful companions of
Amecrul- Mominecn Ali in Kufa.

26. Hajjaji bin Badr as S'di: Of Basra from the tribe Bani Sa'd, famous
noble- man in Kufa. He was the one who carried the communications of the
Holy Imam to the pious ones of the devotees of the House of the Holy
Prophet in Kufa.

27. Hut ibne Yazid at Riyalui: He was the son of Yazid ibne Najiyah bin
Qa'nab bin Yitab bin Hur in the lineage of A1-Yarbo'ir Riyahi. A famous
nobleman of Kufa, an ex- perienced warrior specially selected by Ibne
Ziad to command a contingent against Husain.

He was the one who obstructed Husain's way near Kufa, but he never
believed that the venture of Ihne Ziad was to end in the martyrdom of
the Holy Imam. When at Karbala he found that the decision was to martyr
the Holy Imarn, Httr left the Devil's forces and joined the Holy Imam,
seeking pardon for his previous conduct. The Holy Imam received him with
special grace. Hur was among the foremost martyrs in the way of God.
Husain said: " Hur, as thy mother has named thee Hur (a free man) thou
art 'Hur' in this world and in the hereafter."

28. Hallas bin Amro' ar Rasibi: He was the son of Amru ar Rasibi who
was one of the faithful companions of Ameerul-Momineen Ali.

29. Hanzaia bin As'adus-Shabami: He was the one who carried the message
of exhor- tation from the Holy Imam to Ibne Sa'd in Karbala.

30. Rafe'- the liberated slave of Muslim Azdi: He came from Kufa and
volunteered to be martyred in the way of the Lord.

31. Zavir bin Amro al Kandi: A sincere devotee of the AhIuI-Bait who
was a devoted companion of the Holy Imam. He was a noble personality
very much revered and respect- ed by the people.

32. Zohair al Qaine Bijilly: He was a noble chieftain of his tribe, a
man of great influence in Kufa. In the beginning he was attached to the
Third Kalif Othman. Once returning from Haj he met the Holy Imam and be-
came a staunch devotee of Husain. He is the one who bade goodbye to his
wife DaIham daughter of Amru, liberating her with a divorce to go to her
relatives, and he joined the Holy Imam and got martyred. The details of
Zohair's devotion to the Holy Imam needs a lengthy note.

33. Ziad bin Areeb al Sa'idi: Son of Areeb one of the faithful
companions of the Holy Prophet and also a traditionist. A very pious and
brave noble personality enjoying the trust and the confidence of the
people.

34. Salim the liberated slave of Aamire Abdi: A staunch devotee of
Amirul-Momineen Ali, from Basra.

35. Salim the liberated slave of Bani Madinatul KaIbi: Of the tribe
'Kalb' one of the devotees of Amirul- Momineen Ali in Kufa. 36. Sa'd bin
Hars and Abul Hatoof bin Harse Ansari: These twin brothers had come from
Kufa cm- ployed in thc forces of the Devil to fight Husain. Later they
left the ranks of the Devil's forces and joined the Holy Imam and got
martyred.

37. Sa'd the liberaled slave of Amerrul-Mornineen Ali: After the
martyrdom of Arnirul-Momineen, he remained attached to Imame Hasan and
later after the martyrdom of Imame Hasan, he remain- ed devoted to
Husain and got martyred.

38. Sa'd-the liberated slave of Amro bin Khalid: He volunteered to be
martyred for the Truth. A noble personality with a high degree of
fidelity and valiance.

39. Sayeed bin Abdullah Hanafi: A noble and very influential
personality in Kufa uniquely brave. He was very helpful to Muslim bin
Aqeel in Kufa. He was the gentleman who carried Muslim's letter from
Kufa to Husain and remained with thc Holy lmam until he was mar- tyred.
He was the man who, while the Holy lmam offered his prayers in the field
of action (Karbala) stood in front of the Holy lmam and received the
arrows from the Devil's forces, on his breast, prutecttng the Imam in
prayers, and got martyrc.

40. Salman bin Mazarib bin Qais al Anmari al Bijilli: A cousin of
Zohair aI Qain. He went to Mecca with Zohair and when on his return from
Mecca Zohair decided to join the Holy Imam, he accom- panied him and got
martyred at Karbala. A man of very noble conduct and character endowed
with strong will and prowess. A very pious personality fearing none but
God.

41. Sulaiman bin Razeen-A liberated slave of the Holy Imem: A truthful
and a very reliable gentleman. A staunch devotee of the Holy Imam. He
carried Husain's letters to the devotees of the Ahlul-Bait in Basra.
Ibne Ziad the Devil's governor of Basra caught him and this faithful
servant of the Holy Imam got himself willingly martyred (at Basra).

42. Sawar bin Manyim-e-Nahmi: A highly respected noble veteran of Iraq,
travelled all the way to Karhala to join the Holy Imam to get martyred
with him.

43. Suwaid bin Amro bin AbiI Mataa al Anmari al Khash'mi: A noble,
highly respected, god-fearing and a brave personality. He fought and
fell seriously wounded, and was lying unconscious, the enemy thinking
him dead had left him, but when he returned to consciousness and heard
the rejoicing of the Devil's forces shouting that the Holy Imam had been
killed, he got up, and fought and got martyred.

44. Saif bin Hars Al Jabiri and Malik: These two cousins from Kufa
joined thc Holy Imam and got martyred.

45. Saif bin Mallk al Abdi at Basri: A leading devotee of the Holy
AhIuI-Bait.

46. Shabeeb a liberated slave of Hars-e-Jabiri-e-Hamdani: A very brave
gentleman who got martyred in the very first attack from the enemy.

47. Shaueb-e-Shakiri: Well-known in Kufa for his nobility of character,
courage, and a revered noble veteran of the town.

48. Zarghamah bin Malik-e-TaghIabi: A lion-hearted brave gentleman who
was faithful to Muslim bin Aqeel in Kufa. After Muslim's martyrdom, he
joined the Holy Imam and was martyred along with him.

49. Aaiz bin Majma'al Aazi: One of those six who along with Hur ibne
Yazid-e- Rivahi had joined the Holy Imam.

50. Aabis ibne Abi Skabeeb-e-Shakiri: One of the most pious devotees of
Amirul-Momineen, and one of the noblemen of Kufa. He was one of those
who helped Muslim ibne Aqeel in Kufa.

51. Amir bin Muslim at Badi Basri: With his liberated slave Salim, both
the devotees of Amirul-Momineen in Basra, joined the Holy Imam and got
martyred.

52. Abhas Ibne Ali ibne Abi Takb, Qamare Bani Hasham: This is the great
son of the First Holy Imam Ali ibne Abi Taleh, from the noble lady
Hazrat Ommul- Baneen, who was brought into this world to fulfil the
desire of Amirul-Momineen to have his own representative, on his behalf
to be martyred with Husain in Karbala. Ahbas is so well-known to the
Muslim World for the unique divine qualities he was endowed with, that
he in the first place needs no introduction, secondly, if a proper
attempt is to be made, it wou1d need a separate volume.

This great lion-hearted son of the Lion of God in his qualities and
position in Karbala, is next only to the Holy Imam Husain. The unique
grace bestowed by God specially on this Great Martyr, is such that any
one who prays for God's immediate help at the time of danger, invok- ing
the divine grace in the Holy name of ABBAS, is immediately heard and
helped. There are millions and millions of those who have had their
prayers heard by God, and who are still being graced by the Divine Mercy
through the medium of this Great Holy Soul, ABBAS the faithful brother
and the Standard Bearer of the Holy Imam at Karhala. Let any one try his
own luck even today by invoking the Mercy of the All-Merciful Lord in
the Holy name of this Saintly son of Arneerul-Momineen Ali. His holy
shrine in Karbala stands today as the resort for the sure rescue of his
sincere devotees to get the help from God at the times of unavoidable
needs, risks and dangers.

In short, all the details about the greatness of Ahbas and the unique
divine qualities he was exclusively distinguished with, cannot he iven
in this brief work.

He was next only to the Holy Imam in Karbala. The 'Alam' or the Banner
which he held on behalf of the Holy Imam, was the Standard of Islam or
the Truth, which is hoisted by the Shias, popularly during the mourning
season of Moharrarn, and is revered as do the faithful Subjects of a
good King as a token of their loyalty to him. The Banner being the
Standard of Truth is only revered and respected and never worshipped as
wrongly imagined and depicted by some ignorant ones. Worship in Islam is
due to none but the One, the Only True God.

53. ABDULLAH ibne HUSAIN, known as Ali-e-Azghar: The six-month-old baby
son of the Holy Imam, martyred in the very lab of his father whose mar-
tyrdom no human heart can bear without shedding tears.

54. ABDULLAH bin HASAN ibne ALI: The son of the Second Holy Imam Hasan,
a young boy who ran out of the tent to save Husain when he was being
martyred, and was martyred be- fore the Holy Imam.

55. ABDULLAH bin Bushr Khash'arni: Of the Anmari-e-Khash'ami tribe. A
well-known noble personality in Kufa. He came out of Kufa with ibne Sa'd
but joined the Holy Imam and got martyred with him.
56. ABDULLAH bin Omair Kalbi: He had come to Kufa from Madina, and
joined the Holy Imam. His wife also accompanied him to serve the Holy
Ladies. When Abdullah was martyred, his wife sitting at the dead body of
her husband said "0' Ahdullah! Thou hath entered Paradise, take me along
with thee. The good lady had not finished her lamentations when a slave
of Shimar delivered a blow on her head with an axe and she was
martyred.

57. Abdul Rahman and Abdullah sons of Orawah bin Harraq aI Ghaffari:
These two brothers were the noblemen of Kufa. Their grandfather, Harraq,
was one of the faithful companions of Ameerul-Momincen. They came to the
Holy Imam an& joined the noble cause and were martyred.

58. ABDULLAH bin Muslim bin Aqeei: Son of Muslim bin Aqeel ibne Abi
Taleb. His Mother was Roqiah daughter of Ali through his wife Sahba from
Yarnamah was martyred when he went to save the Holy Imam.

59. AbduIlah bin Yaqtar-e-Himyari: He was the son of the good lady who
had served the Holy Imam as his nurse in his babyhood.

60. Abde Qais Basri-e Abdi: Alongwith Abdullah bin Zaid-e-Abdi
Obaidullah bin Zaide Abdi, Yazid bin Sabeet at Abdi. These great men,
well-known and highly respected ones of their tribe came and requested
the Imam to permit them to drink the cup of martyrdom along with him,
and got martyred.

61. Abdul A'la bin Yazeed al Kalbi al Aleemi: The famous and respected
nobleman from Kufa.

62. Abdul Rahman bin Abdul Rab-e-Ansari Khazrjji: One of the faithful
companions of the Holy Prophet and a Traditionist and a faithful devotee
of Ameerul-Momineen.

63. Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb: Son of Aqeel from his wife
Omme Walad.

64. Abdul Rahman-e-Arhabi: One of those who carried the letters of the
devotees to the Holy Imam. He came to Husain and got himself martyred.

65. Abdul Rahman bin Mas'ood at Taimi: Came out of Kufa along with Ibne
Sa'd but later joined the Holy Imam and got martyred.

66. OTHMAN bin ALI ibne ABI TALEB: One of the brothers of Hazrate
Abbas, the third son of Ommt Baneen. Joined the Holy Imam on his way to
Karbala and was martyred.

67. X X X. X X X

68. Omar bin Janada-e-Ansari: This is the son of the godly lady who
came to the Holy Imam and implored for his permission for her son Omar
to be martyred and somchow succeeded, in getting it. When her son was
martyred, the Devil's army severed his head and threw it towards
Husain's camp. The godly lady, his mother, took up the severed head of
her son and threw it back into the ranks of the Devil's army saying:
"That which has been given away in the way of the Lord is not taken
back." She herself took up as tick from the camp and rushed to attack
the devils. Husain held her back saying 'Islam allows not 'jehad' by
women."

69. ALl-e-AKBAR son of the Holy Imam: The eighteen-year son of the Holy
Imam who resembled the Holy Prophet the most, was martyred by a lance
pierced through his breast. See the orIef note about the Holy Imam
offering this beautiful son of his in the way of the Lord.

70. Omer bin Zabi'ah Az Zabiyee: Son of Zabiya at Taimi. Came out of
Kufa with Ibne Sa'd but later joined the Holy Imam and was martyred.

71. Amro bin Khalid-e-Saidavi and three others; When these four person
marched towards the camp of the Holy Imam, Hur asked the Holy Imam for
permission to stop them from getting near the camp for they were coming
from the enemy's ranks. The Holy Imam miraculously said: "Ob- struct
them not,they are coming to me with a good heart. They are my devotees."
They joined the Holy Imam and were martyred.

72. Amru bin Abdullah-e-Jundayi: Of the tribe of Hamdan. He reported
himself to the Holy Imam and was martyred.

73. Amru bin Qarta al Ansari: One of the faithful companions of the
Holy Prophet and also of Amirul-Momineen.

74. Amru bin Ha'b Abu Thamama al Sa'idi: One of the faithful devotees
and companions of Amirul-Monuneen.

75. Amru bin Hasan at Talee: One of the staunch devotees of the
Ahlul-Bait.

76. Ammara ibne Salama al Daalaani: One of the companions of
Amirul-Momineen.

77. AUN and MUHAMMAD Sons of JAFAR-e-TAYYAR: Two sons of Hazrate Zainab
the Sister of the Holy Imam. Aun was her own son and Muham- mad was from
the deceased wife (Khausa), of her husband Abdullah bin Jaffar Tayyar.
These two were only young boys of about nine and ten years of age. The
Holy Lady Zainab, the daughter of Amirul-Momineen and Lady Fatema,
brought these two young boys and implored her brother, the Holy Imam, to
permit them to free the enemy. At the persistent implorings from his
sister the Holy Imam permitted, and these two young souls were martyred
before the very eyes of their mother. This godly daughter of Ali and
Fatema, the grand- daughter of the Holy Prophet, stood quiet at the dead
bodies of her children and said "I will not lament for you, for you have
gone in the way of the Lord." The whole camp wept hut Zainab prevented
them from crying saying "Let not my Brother feel that I am sorry for
losing them in the way of the Lord. Today I am pleased with my
children."

78. Qarib: The son of a liberated slave girl of Husain. This lady after
having been liberated by the Holy Imam, was married to a gentleman and
brought her son Qarib and presented him to the Holy Imam and Qarib was
brought up by the Holy Imam. He was martyred along with the other
devotees, offering himself in the way of the Lord.

79. QASIM bin HASAN bin ALl: Son of the Second Holy Imam. See the note
on his martyrdom.

80. Qasim bin Habib al Azdi: A well-known noble of Kufa.

81. Qasith, Kardoos, Musqit-Sons of Zohair al Taghlabi: These three
brothers were the devoted companions of Amirul-Momineen who were with
him in all his expeditions against the infidels and traitors. They came
from Kufa and offered themselves for the noble cause and achieved
martyrdom.

82. Qan'ab an Namri: Of the devotees of AmiruI-Monineen, came from
Basra and was martyred in the way of God.

83. Qais bin Mushir as Saidavi: A very pious personality from a group
of the Asadi Tribe, extra-ordinarily brave, faithful and one of the
sincere and faithful companions of the Holy Prophet. He reported himself
to the Holy Imam, from Kufa, and was martyred.

84. Kannah at Taghlabi: A very noble personality known for his piety in
Kufa. A good reciter of the Holy Qur'an and a very brave, God-fearing,
influencial and powerful noble of Kufa.

85. Majma'ul jahni: Son of Ziad bin Omar Jahni one of the aged com-
panions of the Holy Imam. When people began deserting the Holy Imam on
the Night of Ashoora, this old devotee of the Holy Imam remained and
achieved martyrdom.

86. MUSLIM bin Aqeel: The Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa, where he was
martyred.

87. Muslim ibne Ausaja al Asadi: One of the faithful companions of the
Holy Prophet. An aged veteran who had earned a glorious name and fame
for his valour and prowess in the expedi- tions against the infidels.
When on the Ashoora Night, the Holy Imam told his companions to find
their own ways and save themselves from the wholesale massacre of his
supporters which was in store for them the following day, Muslim
address- ing the Holy Imam said: "0' son of the Holy Prophet! Where am I
to go before myself getting martyred here?" Muslim was one of the most
prominent supporters of the Holy Imam in Karbala, and was martyred
there. 88. Muslim: bin Katheer al A'waj all Azdi: One of the devotees of
Amirul-Momineen in Kufa.

89. Mas'ood bin Hajjal Taimy and his son Abdur Rahman bin Mas'ood: The
devotees of Amirul-Momineen from Kufa.

These two were known for their piety and righteous- ness.

90. Muhammad bin Abdullah ihne Jafar: A young son of Abdullah son of
Hazrat Jafar-e- Tayyar, his mother was Khausa, daughter of Hafsa bin
Rabi'a.

91. Muhammad bin Muslim bin Aqeel: One of the two young sons of Muslim
bin Aqeel the Deputy of the Holy Imam who were martyred in Kufa.

92. Muhammad bin Abi Syeed bin Aqeel: The grandson of Muslim bin Aqeel
the Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa.

93. Munjek-the liberated slave of the Second Holy Imam Hasan: Who
accompanied Qasim bin Hasan from Madina and got martyred.

94. Mauq' bin Thamamah Asadi Saidavi Abu Musa: Of the devotees of the
AhltiI-Bait in Kufa, escaped from the town at night and joined the Holy
Imam at Karbala.

95. Nafe'bin Hilale Jamali: A companion of Ameerul-Momineen. Reciter of
the Holy Qur'an and Traditionist. A noble personality known in Kufa for
his piety, escaped from Kufa and joined the Holy Imam in Karbala. A
great devotee of Holy Imam who always re- mained by the side of ABBAS
the Standard Bearer of Husain. He could not bear the least disregard for
the Holy Imam, from any one in the Devil's forces.

96. Nasr bin Naizar: A liberated slave of Ameerul-Momineen. He was
presented to the Holy Prophet by the King of Persia and the Holy Prophet
presented him to Amterul-Momineen who fteed him. He came to Karbala and
got martyred.

97. Wazeh the Turk: The Turkish liberated slave of Harse Madhaji. A
pious gentleman, a good reciter of the Holy Qur'an, who came to Karbala,
presented himself to the Holy Imam and was martyred.

98. Hani bin Orwah: Martyred at Kufa with Muslim ibne Aqeel.

99. Yazid bin Ziad bin Mohasir-e-Kandi-Behdile Abush Sha'sa: One of the
nobles in Kufa. A staunch devotee of Ahlul-Bait. A very pious
personality who joined Husain from Kufa and was martyred.

100. Yazid bin Maghfal Ja'fi: A very pious devotee of Ameerul-Momineen.
A learned poet. His father and grandfather were faithful companions of
the Holy Prophet.

101. HUSAIN ibne Ali the King of Martyrs: The divinely promised and
prophesied Martyr of the 'Zibhe Azeem' (The Great Sacrifice) in the seed
of Abraham through his son Ishmae1,in the lineage of Ishmael through
Muhammad the Last Apostle of God, Ali the Ameerul-Momineen, the First of
the Holy Imams and Lady Fatema the Lady of Light.


