Husain the International Hero
=============================

TODAY WHEN THE leaders of every religion are revered only by their
respective followers, the Holy Imam Husain is the International Hero who
occupies a special position of love, honour, reverence and holiness in
the hearts of the followers of all the religions in the world. People in
every part of the world, without any dis- tinction of caste, creed,
colour or nationality, love Husain and hold him in reverence,
recognizing and hailing him as a Great Hero of Truth. Millions of
educated men and women today with ample proof, believe that the Holy
Soul of the King of Martyrs commend their prayers to be heard by God and
thus draw great blessings from the All-Merciful Lord through the
mediation of the Greatest of the Martyrs in His cause.

**Husain, the King of Martyrs**

HAVING GONE THROUGH the above very brief sketch of the terrible
sufferings of the Holy Imam Husain along with his family and friends
unequalled in the History of Mankind, and the great un- paralleled
sacrifices he has offered in the way of God to save the Truth for the
guidance of the human race as a whole with which the Holy Imam defied
the might of the Devil's forces surrendering his all, any intelligent
person will unhesitatingly declare the Holy Imam to be the KING OF
MARTYRS.

Some people have, even wrongly gone to the extent of wor- shipping
Husain as God Himself or His incarnation which is totally wrong. Today
Muslims, Hindus, Christians, Parsis, Jews and people of every religion
love Husain paying him their sincere homage and revere him in their own
ways. Those who believe in God and godliness take pride in naming their
children after the Holy names of the House of the Holy Prophet, but none
even tolerates his issues to be called by the cursed names of those who
had tortured the Holy Family, although the great tyrants ruled empires
in their respective times. Every justice loving soul today hates the
Arch-Devil Yazid, son of Ma'aviah, deeming him the Devil incarnate.

**Where is Yazid?**

Thus THE HOLY Imam established the Truth and won an Ever- lasting
Victory over Falsehood. He has not only proved Yazid, the Drunkard, the
Debauchee, the Gambler to he one worse than a brute and a devil but has
crushed falsehood for ever and placed the Truth in the highest pinnacle
of prominence and regard, in its original purity. And now no evil hand
can touch it till the end of the world. Yazid has earned the curse of
God and of the whole of the God-loving humanity in this world and a
permanent abode in hell for himself and his comrades for ever.

**The Friends and Focs of the Truth, Clear Distinction**

Now, TO KNOW who are the followers of the Truth, and who are the
supporters of Falsehood, is very easy. All those who love Husain will
naturally be found weeping, mourning, or at least feeling sorrowful for
the calamities that befell the Holy Imam in establishing the Truth.
Those who rejoice and make merry must naturally be the enemies of the
Holy Imam, and the supporters of the cause of Falsehood of which the
Devil Yazid was an embodiment.

**The King of Martyrs Mourned**

EvER SINCE THE massacre of the Holy Imam and his faithful devotees at
Karbala, true Muslims during the month of Moharram express their grief
and feelings for the sufferings of the Holy Imam, in their own ways
according to the customs of their own countries.

Some enthusiasts among the people beat their breasts to say that they
who do not care for their own selves and hurt their own bodies in love
for the Holy Imam, in fighting against the forces of the Devil. During
this .mourning period, the mourners men, women and children generally
dress in black, and give up every kind of rejoicing. The mourning for
the Holy Imam is observed through organised congregations called
'Majalis-e-Aza' or the Mourning Congregations.


