The Commemoration of the Historic'ashoora'
==========================================

'ASHOORA' MEANs THE 'Tenth', i.e., the Tenth day, of the Lunar month of
Moharram 61 A.H. on which historic day, Husain surren- dered his all in
the way of the Lord to save the truth and thus to save humanity from
getting beguiled by the Brute on the throne and the brutal forces of the
mercinary scholars whom he had enlisted under his command. All those who
love truth and the welfare of mankind at large, will naturally love
Husain and his holy family, and will naturally be moved to express their
sympathy and sorrow for the Great Godly Hero of Karbala who sacrificed
his all, suffered the worst of miseries and met the most torturous and
brutal death but neither yielded to the blasphemy perpetrated by the
Brute nor the destruction of the Divine Principle of his holy
Grandfather.

Honestly, not to commemorate such a solemn occasion will be
thanklessness and ingratitude to godliness and to God Himself, and to do
it will surely earn the blessings of the Lord. Every one who has the
least appreciation or the admiration for the matchless sacrifices, the
Great Hero and his godly comrades who suffered martyrdom along with him,
will naturally be moved to express his sorrow on the solemn occasion,
and those who love devilry and the Devil Yazid, will naturally be
festive on that day.

**Intercession or Shafa'at**

THE POSSIBILITY OF intercession for the sinners on the Day of Judgment
is quite obvious from the repeated declarations of the Holy Qur'an. The
declarations are so clearly worded that none can misinterpret them
otherwise:-

"Who is any one to intercede with Him, save with His pertntssion."
2:255

According to this verse, intercession is possible only with permission
of the Lord. There are the following verses clearer still:- "They shall
not own intercession, save lie who has cove- nanted with the Beneficent
God." 19:87

"On that Day (of Judgment) no Intercession shall avail except of him
whom the Beneficent Lord allows and with whose word He (God) is pleased
with." 20:109

The above verses are too clear to create any doubt against some dear
ones to the Lord having the authority from Him to intercede. Who else
could be more entitled to this divine grace and unique privilege than
the apostles of God, more particularly the Last one, the chief of them,
and those who have surrendered their lives in the way of the Lord like
Husain and his faithful comrades who were martyred along with him. The
point is that to one who sincerely seeks to know the truth, a straight
answer, with the simplest logic, will certainly suffice, but to one who
wants to go on arguing merely for argument's sake, even the apostles
from God could not satisfy. No amount of arguing will be of any avail
when the understanding is never to come at all from within the enquirer.
One can give an argument but never an understand- ing.

**The Houses of Miracles and response to Prayers**

LET THE MATERIALIST world know from the millions of the devoted
muslims, who have visited the Shrines in Iraq and other holy places, how
brightly the Glory of God shines in the shrines of Husain and the
members of his holy family and also of his faithful com- rades who
sacrificed their lives along with him in Karbala. One need not wait long
to witness any miraculous event on any of the week days, in the shrines
of Husain and Abbas, particularly the holy shrine of Abbas-e-Alamdar
(i.e., Abbas the Standard Bearer of Husain) is the place wherefrom
hundreds of thousands of the sufferers get their prayers immediately
heard, and many a time this valiant son of Ali, the Lion of God, has
rendered miraculous and timely rescue to those who invoked the mercy of
God in his holy name. It can be most confidently said, let any one try
his holy name. It can be most confidently said, let any one try his luck
if he needs any help from God with the necessary sincerity and devo-
tion to the great saintly brother of the King of Martyrs.

Even today the holy name 'ABBAS' is a watchword for millions and
millions of his sincere devotees for the immediate and miraculous rescue
needed, in any unavoidable risk or danger. Where is the wonder for one
who surrenders himself to God, God will also surely honour his name when
mentioned in any prayer to Him. God Himself enjoins on man to seek a
medium unto Him:-

"Seek ye a medium untO Him (God)." 5:35

It is the disbelievers who get hopeless of their dead. Be it noted that
the 'Kalema' or the Word of the Declaration of the Faith 'Shia'ism', is
only :-

" Lailaha Illallah Muhammadur Rasoolullah."

'There is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the (Holy) Prophet of God.'


