Remembrance of the Righteous Ones
=================================

REMEMBRANCE OF THE holy personalities for their righteousness has been
ordained by God-See 38:48.

Every educated and awakened mind knows that the remem- brance of the
godly ones by every possible means is remembring God Himself and such a
remembrance is highly commendable, rather essential to keep the models
of the various aspects of godli- ness always in view to be imitated or
copied by one, for himself or herself to become godly. The object of the
Holy ones having been sent into this World was only to set up the models
necessary for the guidance of man, for man to copy them and thus get
himself qualified and fit for the higher levels of the life of eternal
bliss.

The secret is that the ill-informed or the misinformed critics have not
at all understood the Most Exalted position of God. They do not know
that God is too Great, too Exalted, too Just, too Gracious, too Merciful
and too Excellent to be only on the watch to catch hold of every one and
chastise him, judging merely the actions or the external appearances,
irrespective of the intention or the real object latent in man. It is
man who cannot probe into the secrets of the heart of another man, that
accuses another man basing his accusation merely on his limited and
defective knowledge of the outward appearances or the external outlooks.
It must be remembered that man's actions are judged by God, the
All-Knowing Lord, by his intention.

Let every Muslim remember the well-known declaration of the Holy
Prophet:-

"An act is naught but with its intention and 'Verily the the actions
are judged only by the intentions'.

'Seena-Zani' or the Breast-Beating

THE SHIA YOUNG, in mourning for the great Martyrs of the Holy Ahlul-
Bait, particularly for the First Holy Imam Amecrul-Momineen Ali and the
Holy Imam Husain, the King of Martyrs, beat their breasts, sometimes to
the extent of bleeding themselves. Hurting of ones self is of course not
allowed in Islam. Shia'ism the Islam- Original, knows it and recognises
it fully and has no sanction against it. But when it is a matter for a
godly cause, it contents itself with exhortations from the pulpit and
the press, and if the uncontrolled emotion of any of its enthusiasts in
his extreme love and devotion to the godly cause, helplessly gives
expression to it in beating his breast, the law has to be considerate
and tolerable in view of the intention of the action not being any
defiance of the law, but the helplessness to the love for the godly ones
who suffered the miseries, tortures and the most cruel death in the way
of the Lord. In such cases, mere common sense will say that the
All-Merciful Lord will not only tolerate the well intentioned excess but
love the expression of the extreme devotion to His cause. Thus the
breastbeating in mourning for the great martyrs in the way of the Lord,
is not condemnable but tolerably commendable, for hurting of one's self
is prohibited if that be for any worldly cause besides God's and when it
is in the cause of the Lord Himself, the Shia Ulema do not spare
exhorting the enthusiasts to control their emotions while expressing
their love and devotion in this regard, and since the action does not
affect any of the fundamentals of Islam and the intention is not to
violate any law which rather in a way strengthens the bias for devotion
to a godly cause, it is not stopped by force. Such a toleration is
illustrated in the historic event popularly reported about the great
devotee of the Holy Prophet Owais-e-Qurani, who, with his own hands
pulled out his teeth and this action is praised by the Ulema from the
pulpit while they speak of the love and devotion to the Holy Prophet.
Why should the same and identical action by the Shias for the Ahlul-Bait
be seriously considered and unsparingly criticised instead of issuing an
similar to admiration the one given to Owais.

There is an apt example in the practical and every day life of man to
know how far such actions are ingrained in the native endowments in
man.

What is an Alam?

THE iS ALAM WRONGLY called, the 'Panja' in Southern India, is an cmblem
or the copy of the Holy Banner of the Holy Imam. It is installed in the
houses of the devotees of the Holy Imam and also in separate apartments
called the 'Ashurkhanas' or the Imambadas and is respected and honoured
as the standard of a king, loyal, respected and honoured by his faithful
subjects. The Brute Yazid lowered the one standard of Truth which the
Holy Imam held in Karbala but today God alone knows how many millions of
such token standards of the Holy Imam are made and honoured in the world
by his devotees.

It should be remembered that the Alam is not at all an idol it, any
sense of tire word. It is never held either in the place of God or in
the place of even the Holy Imam. It is only a copy of the Holy Standard
of Truth carried by theHoly Imam when he fought against Falsehood The
'Alam' is held in high esteem and honour as stated above and it is never
in any way worshipped. Worship in Islam is due only to God and not even
to the Holy rophet who is next only to God in authority over his
followers. About the Holy Imam Husain, Khawaja Moinuddin Chisti one of
the great mystics of India has said:- "Husain is King, the King of
Kings, He is Faith, Defence of Faith from him springs.

Beheaded though He never bowed to Yazeed By God, God's unity by him is
established"

In which grave is his thone, and his crown where is it. 'O' Earth! show
us where is the might ,of Yazid today. (Josh Malehahadi) Let Muslim
remember the well-known declaration of the Holy Prophet :

"And act is naught but with its intention" and "Verily the actions are
judged only by the intentions."

Take for instance, when a man dies, the nearest of his relatives
particularly his own children, and even among his children, they who
love him the most will naturally feel the separation from the departed
soul, more than any body else. One of the sons may be violentin thc
expression of his grief, hurting himself in an uncontrollable state of
behaviour, while the other son may be quietly shedding tcars, and others
who may also be sorrowful remains suppressing their grief. At the same
time such of the relatives and selfish friends, who were only waiting
for the death of the man, to have a share in the property left over by
him, or to occupy the post or position which he may be vacating, will
naturally feel happy though appear- ing quiet on the occasion. [he same
is the case in regard to the degree of expression of the grief for the
'Ahlul-Bait' by the Shias, and the rejoicing made at their martyrdom by
others. The fact is that those who are not sorry for the sufferings of
the holy ones, seek an excuse for their hard hearted inimical attitude
towards the family of the Holy Prophet, and take shelter under the guise
of abiding by the law, and since they are not sorry for calamities in-
flicted on the holy ones, they do not want others to express their
sorrow for the holy victims, for it discloses the devilish character and
conduct of the assassins whom they regard as their religious leaders.

**Alam or the Emblem**

'THE ALAM' WHICH is installed in the Imambadas, is another target of
attacks from our ignorant friends who not knowing its actual
significance and criticiseit as 'Bid' at i.e., an unwarranted
innovation. Be it known to the critics that the Alam is only the Emblem
of the Holy Standard of Islam of which, All the Ever Victorious Lion of
God was the Bearer on behalf of the Holy Prophet, and which was held
also by Abbas the lion hearted son of Ali the Lion of God on behalf of
the Holy Imam Husain, the grandson of the Holy Prophet Muhammad, against
the devilish forces of Yazid in Karbala, when the Yazidian power and
authority wanted to destroy the original teachings of Islam. Since the
devilish forces disrespected the Holy Standard of Islam and the Holy
Prophet Muhammad, every sincere muslim today, particularly those at-
tached to the Holy Ahlul-Bait the Shias, instal an emblem of the Holy
Standard and pay respect and regard to it, as they would have done, had
they been with the Holy Imam in Karbala. Every lover of Islam and the
Holy Prophet, would certainly like to do it with all the sincerity and
devotion at his command, for as a Royal Banner represents the King and
respect to Banner is respect to the King himself.

This tokcn or the emblem, the Alam, represents Islam and the Holy
Prophet, respect for the Alam is respect to Islam, and respect to Islam
is respect to the Holy Prophet himself. Before criticising the respect
or regard for the Alam or the Zarees, i.e., the models of the shrines of
the Holy Ahlul-Bait let the critics remember the vacant model of the
Mahmd of Hazrat Ayesha the wife of the Holy Prophet, which until
yesterday was brought in a Ceremonial way to Mecca every year on the
occasion of Haj, attended by the Ulema walking solemnly along with it.
Was Hazrat Ayesha actually sitting in it ? If any empty Mahmil without
an occupant in it could be rcspccted and solemnly followed 1 by the
Ulerna how could the cmblcm of the Standard of Ali Husain or Abbas or
any of the Holy oncs of the Ahlul-Bait, become a 'Bid at' and the
respect to it be deemed, objectionable.

**Majlis-e-Aza or the Mourning Congregations**

WHEN THE TYRANNES and the torturous death inflicted on the Holy Ahlul
Bait, could not be denied, the other course adopted to hide the most
disgraceful and most brutal and heinous deeds is to declare the Majlisc
Aza or the mournlna congregation for the Martyrs of the Ahlul-Bait who
are the authentic custodians of the Holy Qur'an and its teachings as
'Bid'at and 'Kufr'. The Majlis-e-Aza is the 'Sunnat-e-Zainabi', i.e.
what was inaugurated in Damascus itself by Hazrate Zainab the sister of
the Holy Imam Husain, the Great Martyr of Karbaia as soon as she was out
of the prison in Damascus. And what the Shias do today is only In the
footsteps of the Holy Sister of the King of Martyrs, Lady Zainab who was
one of the members of the family of the Holy Prophet, the daughter of
Ali and Fatema, one of the great sufferers at Karbala, Kufa and Damascus
and who herself was martyred in the way of the Lord was buried in
Damascus. This action of the Holy Lady Martyr Zainab has been
rcgularised by the dccree of the Holy lmam thus it has become a
prescribed duty of every true Muslim to carry out the godly command.

When the Majlise-Aza for the mourning of the Martyrs is criticised,
what about the 'Meelaf' and the 'Gyarwin Sherif' cele- brated every year
which had their origin only recently. Can any one prove from any
historic record of accepted authenticity like Tabari etc., that any such
celebrations were ever held in the ancient days even a century ago
anywhere in the world? why then this innovation now ? And if such
celebrations are com- mendable for the Holy Prophet or any other person
held as Holy what objection can there be against a similar commemoration
for the Holy Ones of the Ahlul-Bait? The objection can no doubt be if it
is to stop the narration of the torturous sufferings inflicted on the
holy ones, which automatically disclose as to who the devils of the
tyrants were, who enacted the heartless massacres of the godly ones of
the AhIul-Bait of the Holy Prophet.

The fundamental or the basic point underlying the mourning by the Shias
for the great martyrs of the Holy Ahlul-Bait is, not merely for the
death of those holy ones for, death is there for every one except God.
The Shias know it fully well that those who die in the way of the Lord,
are not dead but alive (2:154, 3:168). The great martyrs of the Holy
Ahlul-Bait have reached the glorious heavenly destination of the life,
of the highest eternal bliss exclusively reserved for them by their
Lord. Any one, be he a Muslim or a non-Muslim, and a friend or even a
foe, if he is only a human being and not a brute, will naturally feel
for the miserable sufferings and the painful death of another human
being, particularly when the sufferers are godly ones surrendering their
selves for the Truth. Only those who are void of the basic human
qualities of feelings, will remain effectless and unmoved under such
circumstances.

The mourning by the Shias is mainly for the heartless and inhuman
treatment inflicted on the Holy ones by those who, professing themselves
to be Muslims, have caused such shameful and disgraceful blots on the
pages of the history of the conduct and character of man on Earth, that
it can never be erased and for which every member of the human family
will certainly he unceasingly grieved, and will be ever cursing the
brutes in the human forms until the end of the world.

The Majlis-e-Aza has also been declared 'Bid'at' i.e., an un- warranted
innovation saying that mourning for the dead is forbid- den by Islam.
The hollowness of this allegation against the natural act of expressing
fellow feelings has already been dealt with above. Even granting for a
while that mourning for the dead is forbidden, none can show any
objection from Islam to the oppressed or the aggrieved protesting
against the miseries inflicted on them. Thc Majlis-e-Aza is a
congregational protest against the brutal atrocities inflicted on the
godly members of the family of the Holy Prophet as a revenge against
Islam itself. None will object to such protests excepting those
responsible for the brutal actions or those who support the devilish
conduct and character of those who are temperamentally identical with
the brutes possessing the same devilish tendencies.

The actuating factor behind all this mischievous move to mislead the
muslims and to create dissensions among them, is only Satan who, during
the lifetime of the Holy Ones, instigated his disciples the tyrants, to
inflict the most painful miseries and the torturous death on God's
commissioned guides to humanity, and now the same Devil is busy
beguiling the ignorant ones among the muslims by inspiring in their
minds all sorts of doubts and false notions against the truth and those
who have been successfully converted by Satan are employed by him as his
missionaries spread- ing the falsehood.

By God's grace, all the awakened minds in the ranks of Islam be the
Shias or Sunnis or of any other school of thought, are unanimous in
paying the due regard and reverence to the Holy Ahlul- Bait,
particularly in the matter of Husain all Muslims are united. Each one of
the sincere lovers of Islam today is ready to surrender his all for the
Holy Prophet and the Holy Ahlul-Bait, more particularly for Husain, the
King of Martyrs. 'TAQLEED.' The only, the greatest and the best
protection afforded in Shia'ism, against the continuous as well as the
occasional raids by Satan and his disciple missionaries is the ordinance
about 'Taqleed' (16:43) or to always abide by the 'A'lim' or the Most
learned one, called the 'Mujtahid'. This course guides one always to the
right or the correct way of the practice of the faith and pro- tects him
from committing any excess and from shortcomings, and at the same time
the individual from being exploited by the instigations of the satanic
forces.

'Taqleed' has also been misinterpreted into the innovated institution
of the 'Mureeds' blindly following the 'Pirs. Be it known that being
guided by a Mujtahid in matters of doubt about the practice of the
Faith, has nothing in common with it, and can never he compared to any
such unwarranted blind following Taqleed is only being attached to any
one of the greatest scholars who has reached the level of 'Ijtehad'
(i.e., the ability to derive the required correct inference from the
Holy Qur'an or the genuine traditions of the Holy Prophet) in matters of
doubt about any articles of the practice of the Faith 'Furu-e-Deen.'
Taqleed or any kind of following any one in the articles of faith i.e.,
'Usool-e-Deen' is 'Haram' (i.e., prohibited). As every one of the
adherents of the Faith cannot be expected to know all the minutesr
details about the practice of the Faith, or be able to draw the correct
in- ference about any doubts, from the Word of God, the Holy Qur'an, and
the Hadith or the Sayings of the Holy Prophet, the divinely prescribed
course to keep a muslim ahvays on the right course of his practical
life, as well as to protect him from getting astray by the misgivings
from the ill-informed or less-informed one is 'Taqleed' by which one
chooses of his own independent discretion any one of the accredited
scholars who in his considered opinion is the greatest one of the most
learned and the most pious ones of the age, and is always guided by the
directive of such a scholar in all matters of the individual's doubts
regarding any matter of the practice of the Faith. By this course one is
not oniy assured of the best possible guidance in the right course, by
the highest intellect of the age hut also of the safety against his
getting deluded by the unqualified, misqualified or purposeful
misgivings by any one.

Since the practice of the Faith by any adherent, unbounded by this
course of, 'Taqleed', it cannot doubtlessly be free from irregularities,
hence it will naturally be unacceptable.

The question of following the highest authority in knowledge and piety,
is only in the case of 'Fatawa' or the opinion of the Scholar about the
law and not about the application of the law for which 'Ijtehad' is
sufficient. The caution that Shia'ism, the Islam- Original, has sounded
against the ruinous effects of unqualified ad- ministration of justice
is worthy of note here for the information of the sincere adherents of
Islam, i.e., the special importance Shta'ism attaches to Justice being
meted out in the proper manner, and to the extraordinary care taken
against any unqualified and defective administration of it. The
following is the decree of the Sixth Holy Imam, Jafar ibne Muhammad the
Regulator of the Shia faith:- None shall take this seat save a Prophet
of God, the succes sor to the prophet or the evil one-

This declaration clearly warns any unqualified one without any
authority from the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imam, who assumes the seat
of 'Qazaiat' or (Justice) will be none but the evil one. Hence a 'Qazi'
(a judge) can be none but a 'Mujtahid' who gets himself qualified under
the declaration of the Imam re- ported above.

While condemning the yielding to the rule of 'Taghoot' i.e., an
authority without the divine sanction, the Sixth Holy Imam afar-ibne
Muhammad As-Sadiq said that 'instead of submitting to such tyrant seek
the greatest of the scholars among you,Who has learnt our traditions and
gained deep insight into our sanctions and rohibitions and who knows our
rulings well and accept him as your Judge (i.e. Qazi) and your Ruler, as
I have appointed him to rule over you. And if he gives a ruling and if
it is not accepted by any one, it will be the contempt of God's
Sovereignty which is almost 'Shirk' i.e., the recognition of an
authority beside God's.

The definition and the requirements of 'Ijtehad' and 'Taqleed' given
below, are those that have been prescribed by the 'Masoom' i-e.,the
Twelfth Holy Imam, as ordained by the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnat as a
part and parcel of the whole system of the Divine Sovereignty and the
Absolute Theocracy which is implemented in the very term 'Islam' which
means acceptance of the Absolute Sovereignty of God and complete
submission to His will. It is on this basis that the institution of
apostleship is established. God communicates His will to mankind through
the chain of the apostles, which was consummated in the apostleship of
the Holy Prophet of Islam through whom was presented the Final Word of
God in the form of the Holy Qur'an, and his own apostolic sayings. And
in the continuation of that sovereignty and the institution of
apostleship, the Holy Prophet declared Ali and the Eleven Imams in his
descent, as the authority joined with the Holy Qur'an representing his
as well as God's will.

When the period of the codification and the consolidation of the
'Kitab' and 'Sunnat' was completed, the ago of the Imamat for that
legislative purpose came to its conclusion. Hence the seclusion of the
Twelfth Imam was effected though his hidden existence continues as a
necessity, as a medium factor between God and His Creatures, in the
process of the Creative adminis- tration of the universe. The Imams
declared the institution of 'Ijtehad' as given below, as the sole
directive authority on their behalf, in leading mankind on the right
path of submission to the sovereignty and the will of God, in all the
practical aspects of the covenant which the 'Kitab' and the 'Sunnat' had
already dealt with. In short, 'Ijtehad' and 'Taqleed' are the
supplementary insti- tutions to 'Imamat' which in turn is supplementary
to 'Risalat' (Apostleship) which as a whole is the manifestation of the
Divine Sovereignty. There is no room left for any individual view or
choice except that the door is left open for every human being
irrespective of any racial or geographical bias or restriction, to
qualify one's self in knowledge and piety to the level of 'Ijtehad.' The
decree of the Holy Imam about the institution of 'Ijtehad' is as
follows:-

"Amma Hawadisal Waqi' aat, Fartjeoo ila ruwate Ahadeesena, fa innahom
hujjati alaikum wa ana Hujjatullah. 'In all the events of life, refer ye
to those who bear our traditions, they are the authority over you on my
behalf, and I am the authority on behalf of God.' The Decree of the Holy
Imam THE ABOVE DECREE of the the Masoom (i.e., the Sixth Holy Imam) in
this respect which is about 'Ijtehad,' is not the only tradition but
there are many undisputed traditions also of the other Imams
establishing the institution of 'Ijtehad' prescribing the minutest
details of its functioning, only a very brief outline of which is given
below:-
Of the many declarations of the other Imams in this respect, two of
them are the most outstanding. One from Hazrate- Imam Jafar
As-Sadiq,known as the 'Maqool-el-Omar bin Hanzala' (the tradition of
Omar ibne-Hanzala) and the other is from the Eleventh Holy Imam, Husan
Al-Askari.

**The Definition of 'Ijtehad'**

'IJTEHAD' LITERALLY MEANS an all out effort to interpret and ex- plain
explicitly the divine orders, rules and regulations from the
denotations, the connotations and the implications contained in the Holy
Qur'an and the authentic sayings of the Holy Prophet and the apostolic
Imams. 'Ijtehad' does not mean the use of one's discretion in the
findings, parallel to the Qur'an or the Sunnat, but it means the use of
one's discretion and sound reasoning in understanding the contents of
the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnat. Any one who has the capacity of
understanding the details of the Divine Laws, Rules and Regulations from
the Qur'an and the Sunnat of a 'Masoom' as given above, is a 'Mujtahid'
provided he is of outstanding learning, knowledge and piety.

Any one short of that standard of knowledge and piety be he a good
scholar in certain branches of the Islamic literature, is termed as a
layman in regard to the field of religion. A man who has not reached the
stage to take decisions in every detailed point of the Laws of Islam, on
the authority of the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnat, is a layman, and he has
to follow a person who has definitely reached that stan- dard, and
whoever has reached that standard has to follow his own decision, and it
is forbidden for him to follow any one else.

In case there are several men of equal standard, and they differ in
their decision, the layman has the choice to follow any one of them and
in case the 'Mujtahids' differ in the degree of their ac- complishments
the best among them is to be followed. In case one is better in
knowledge and the other inpiety, the latter is to be followed.

As to how to find the best one among the 'Mujtahids' the layman should
refer to the evidence ofthe competent pious scholars of Islamic Theology
who have no claim to 'Aalamiat' or to the evi- dence of the 'Mujtahids'
of the approximate standing about the best next to them.By the
collection of all these evidences, one can easily consider for himself
as to who is the best. This is the best method followed throughout the
history of the 'Niabat' of the Imam after the 'Ghaibat.'

There is no room for any election or the counting of votes of any class
or group to appoint one as the ecclesiastical head as used in the Papal
system of Christianity, nor is it the 'Peeri' and the 'Mureedi'
practised in the mystic system which is an unwarranted innovation among
the Muslims, carried as a counter section or parallel to the institution
of Imamat. Be it known that the quali- fications for 'Ijtehad' are
known, recognised and measurable and the qualifications for a 'Peeri' is
only fanciful heresy blindly accepted and neither fixed nor
measurable.

It is to be noted that the question of following the opinion of the
best in knowledge and piety is confined to such questions where the
'Mujtahids' differ, and the question of following any'Mujtahid' does not
arise in matters unanimously accepted by all 'Mujtahids.'
It is to be noted that for the administration of the theological
centres and the other religious and ecclesiastical services, any pious'
Mujtahid' is competent for the undertaking, and if any pious 'Mujtahid'
offers himself to shoulder the task the other 'Mujtahid' should not
stand in his way, on the other hand he must help him.


