Consolidated View of the Account As a Whole and the Co-relation of the Events
=============================================================================

WE HAVE GONE through a few of the various events of the life of the
Holy lmam and the Great Wholesale Slaughter at Karbala. Now let us take
a consolidated view of the accounts as a whole and co-relate the events
and find out what is the mean or the norm and where the arc or
co-relation ends.

If we take the isolated parts of a monotype printing machine separated
from each other and study each one of the parts for ages together we
wiIl never be able to know the maker or the deviser's mind or wisdom in
it. Nor we will ever be able to know the purpose it serves nor the
enormous use of the implement to the human life unless all the parts are
duly put together and see how they work together and what result they
produce.

Similarly, if we take the words of a heavenly scripture separ- ated
from the sentences and isolated from each other, spend ages together on
the various meanings each word gives we will never know those individual
words work together in a sentence to give a sensible meaning and unless
the sentences are duly arranged none can ever know the heavenly guidance
endowed in their proper combinations.

Unless we put together all the events of the life of the Holy ones of
the Ahlul-Bait, particularly Husain, the personality of our concern in
this brief treatise on him we will never be able to have a proper view
of the divine purpose of the Almerciful AIwise Creator Lord in the
creation of this holy soul and sending him on the earth and the
fulfilment of the purpose for the benefit of man in this world.

Let us recapitulate in brief the whole matter of this brief work into a
consolidated compact whole to have the overall view of it from God's
given heights of intelligence to realise the glorious grandeur of the
heavenly sight of the Great Event in a harmonious whole, with the data
at our disposal vouched by history and illustrat- ed by the words of the
holy scriptures.

1. It is a fact known to one and all of the educated ones in the world
that man is a created being by the Creator who is ack- nowledgly
EverLiving, Alwise and Omnipotent Absolutely Supreme Authority.

2. Man in the primitive stages of the life of his specie, led a wild
life in the jungles without any morals to control or law to bind his
thought or action with Might as the Right to survive.

3. The Almerciful Lord Creator of the Universe with His gracious will
to educate man and train him for the higher object of his creation and
to qualify him for the glorious heights of the heavenly bliss sent
apostle after apostle from Him.

4. Apostles of God were sent in every part of the earth to the people
jnhabiting it. Some were sent as mere preachers and some with
scriptures, some were for a limited zone and some for a wider area-some
superior to the others. Some as law givers as Moses and some as the
rerewers of the already given law, like Jesus. Most of them prophesying
the advent of the Last or the Final of God's Apostles and prophets.

5. Of the children of Adam God had chosen a particular lineage, and the
Lineage was particularly blessed to be progenitors of the selected
apostles of His Abraham was given the Imamat to be perpetuated in his
seed but teaching only those free from iniquity.

6. The Divine device was to present a pathetic sight of sacrifice in
the way of the Lord, depicting the sublime submission to the Divine
Will, which is the only source or the only Royal Road to the heavenly
bliss in store for man who earns it.

7. A rehearsal of the divinely destined drama of the sacrifice was made
employing Abraham and his son Ishmael for the trial.

8. Abraham and Ishmael proved true the selection but the event was not
to be as it was temporarily enacted only as a trial The aim behind its
proper enactment was too high, too great and too grave. There was yet no
demand for them to be presented on a mount unseen by any man and it was
not unknown to the human world. Just to make Abraham pass the knife that
a living body was placed under it.

9. Abraham was told by the Lord that the divinely designed event was a
Great Sacrifice.

10. Abraham was promised that God's Covenant will be estab- lisbed with
him and his seed. Abraham had two Sons Ishmael (through Lady Hagar) and
Isaac (through Lady Sarah) but the pro- mise to Abraham even according
to the Bible of the Christian Church does not mention the name of any of
the two sons, but only it was said that the Covenant will be with
Abraham and his seed.

"And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and in thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant." OT. Gen.
16:7

11. The divinity of the purity, physical as well as spiritual endowed
in Abraham flew in both the channels of his seed, Ishmael and Isaac and
Twelve Princes (Imams) were promised in the seed of Ishmael (OT. Gen. 18
:20).

12. The race that sprang of Isaac called the Israelites got corrupt and
rebellious and violated the Covenant of God-the prophets that were
raised among them either they killed them (.....)or they deified them
and worshipped them as the Sons of God and those of the apostles they
did not follow, they blackmailed them with horrible charges to create
hatred against them (.....) The Israelites who hated Jesus charged the
Holy Virgin Mary of adultery for having given birth to Jesus, without a
male partner to her. At last the Kingdom of God was taken away from the
seed of Isaac and given to another nation (the seed of Ishmael). Jesus
informed them of it:

"Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken front you,
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits threreof." Math. 21:43

13. The higher truth about the life divine of the process of the
complete submission to the Absolute to attain the glorious heights of
eternal bliss could not be given in its fulness to man in his mental
evolutionary stages. It has to be administered gradually. Jesus clearly
announced that he could give out to the people many things for they
could not bear it then (.......) and prophesied about the advent of the
Spirit of Truth who would fill the world with righteousness and truth
(........)

14. Moses was told by the Lord about the Prophet to come in whose mouth
will the Lord put His words whom every one would hearken (.........)

15. The great sage of India Buddha had prophesied of the ad- vent of
the Last Buddha called 'Maetrea' in the Pali language which in Arabic
means 'Rahmat' the title with which the Holy Prophet Muhammad has been
addressed in the words of God (. . . . .).

16. At last came the Last of the apostles of God-the Prophet prophesied
to Moses- The Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost pro- phesied by Jesus and
the Maetrea prophesied by Buddha the Holy Prophet Muhammad in the seed
of Abraham through his son Ishmael to give out the truth in its fulness
about the Kingdom of God-preaching the truthfulness and the purity
physical and spiritual of the personalities of all the preceding
prophets who had been blackmailed by the Israelites-Preaching the
Absolute Unity of God and brotherhood of man and the commitment of man
to his Lord-with a final code in the Last Revealed Word of God the Holy
Qur'an as the final code of discipline for human life on earth-Since all
the previous scriptures were either made extinct or corrupted this Final
Word of God came with a challenge that it will be preserved by God
Himself for it had to remain current for ever for there was no prophet
had to come after the Holy Prophet.

17. To preserve the purity of the Final Word ftom God to man and to
maintain the originality of its teachings and its practice, the
institution of the Imamat was started to succeed the Last Apostle of God
for the guidance of man against his getting astray after being guided
aright. The Imams had to be brought forth from the family of the Holy
Prophet himself hence the holy family was sent into this world duly
purified by God Himself (33:33).

18. The Holy Prophet had taken all possible steps to introduce the
position of his Ahlul-Bait, particularly of Ali identified with the Holy
Prophet in his punty, physical and spiritual, At the. very outset of the
apostolic mission and also at the conclusion of it Ali was declared in
clear cut words as the Kalif Vicegerent, Brother, and the Master or the
Maula, or the Amir, inthe place of the Holy Prophet.

19. On the very first day of his advent into this world,Husain's
mission m this world and the fate in store for himwas declared out by
the Holy Prophet.
20. As misfortune would have it, immediately as the Holy Prophet
departed from this world, the Ahlul-Bait were alienated from their
position preached by the Holy Prophet, and the people forgot all that
was said about Ali and Ali’s appointment in the place of the Holy
Prophet.

21. The final word of the Holy Prophet to the people was that he had
left Two important things behind him; the Book of God the Holy Quٌr'n
and his Ahlul-Bait and the people would be attached to these Two.

22. With alienation of the Holy Ahlul Bait, the religion got gradually
corrupted and by the time of Yazid son of Ma’aviah son of Abu Sofyan,
the disbelief in the Holy Qur’an being the revealed word of God and the
Holy Prophet Muhammad being the Apostle of God was openly pronounced
from the throne and people had become irreligious and the teachings of
Islam were ooenly defied, the Religion of Islam was on the verge of
being annihilated for ever, and the Holy Qur’an had practically lost its
original value as thcWord of God. The question or rescuing the Holy
qur‘an and its faith, Islam, arose demandtd the one like the Holy
Prophet to defy the falsehood and even to offer the greatest sacrifices
it may need. None but one from the family of the Holy Prophet, the one
purified by God Himself (33:33) could do it and from among the divinely
purified ones only Husain was now left in the world, to face the
situation. The sacrifice the task needed was the Greatest One, i.e., the
‘Zibhe Azeem'.

**Conclusion
**
The historic bean-rending event of Karabia has been presented in the
light of its historic background and the guidance of the holy
scriptures. It is for the learned readers to say that if it was or was
not that the devilish forces with the strength at their command

had not done the maximum possible for them to undo what all had been
donc for the guidance of man, and if it was or was not that divinity
pure and maximum had not gone into action to have succcssfully resisted
the satanic moves to re-establish the truth and godliness with the
maximum amount of the sacrifices the Humanity could afford to offer in
the way of the Lord.

It is now left for the historians of the world who never believe in any
effects with their causes and thus always related events with their
causativc factors to trace out and declare to the world, what were the
causcs of the effects of the tragic events suffered by the godly members
of the House of the Holy Probhet Muhammad. If there is truth in it or
not, if it be said that if the Holy ones of the Ahlul-Bait, particularly
Ali had not been alienated fixed by God and preachcd to man through His
Apostle the Holy Prophet, and if the Omayyid family of Abu-Sofyan, with
the knowledge of its attitude towards the Holy Prophet and Islam, bad
been brought into power, as it was done, would the calamities that
befell the Holy House, have been ever imaginable?

Could by any stroke of imagination, be ever deemed the object of Husaiu
the Holy Imam be any thing other than to demonstrate to man to what
extent falsehood should be resisted and at what cost the truth, the
obedience to God and to none else, should be established. Husain' s
object was to educate man with the absolute submission to God and to
yield only to God and to none else and to establish godliness on earth.
To yield only to right, however much it might have been neglected and
despised and defied by the world, facing might of whatever intensity and
strength it might be, and in doing at no sacrtficc on the part of man is
too great. It is for the civilised world to pronounce its verdict if any
act of extra gravity of the devotion to God consisting of superb
sacrifices and ideal surrender and submission to the Lord, would be
remembered or forgotten, and if any remembrance of any such act in a
fitting way be righteous or sinful, commendable or condcmnable, and at
the same time forgetting it will be gratitude or ingratitude to God and
godliness.

Hurting one's self for any wordly gain is undoubtedly condemnable and
also a sin in Islam but the same act if it be in the way of thc Lord is
called martyrdom and if it be in the love of any apostle of God has been
commended viz., Owais who broke his teeth with.

his own hands in his sympathy for thc Holy Prophet’s losing his in a
battle in the way of the Lord, was highly commended by the Holy Prophet
and is cited by all scholars of the Islamic law as an action of
devotion. If a father dies, one of his sons might mourn the loss
quietly, the other might cry aloud and the third might not control his
love and attachment to his departed father and might in the excessivc
emotion of his, tear his clothes and strike his head with his own hands.
The sympathisers with the bereaved family will only control the
emotional conduct and not condemn or punish him. If any devotee of the
Holy Imam unable to control his emotion and acts similarly, the godly
world will do its best to control the overactive individual and not
punish him, or condemn him as irreligious. On the other hand, while
commending control, will only admire the individual's uncontrollable
devotion to God and godliness.
There is one thing which irresistably comes out a natural and a logical
inference from the events that Omar could have invited the public to the
position of the AhIuI-Bait in relation to the life of the people and had
averted all the miseries they suffered. Omar was a man of fiery
temperament, a fact acknowledged by history and even by Shibli No'mani
in his well-known work 'Alfarooq' , and he was the brain that controlled
the affairs at the 'Saqeefa.' It was Omar's word that was carried there
and it was at Omar's command that Abu-Bakr extended his hand to receive
the fealty to him as the Kalif. It is an undeniable fact Omar was a man
of his will. Whatever he willed, he did it and none could resist it.It
was he who overruled the system or the method of any kind of election in
the matter of his succession and handed over the affair to a committee
of his own choice. If Omar had done one thing, which however was not
done, that after controlling the affairs at the 'Saqeefa ' as he
effectively did, and when matters had settled, after the last services
to the Holy Prophet, he could have called for a general assembly of the
people of Madina and had addressed them as follows:-

" O' ye brethren of mine, O' ye muslims!

"It is our misfortune that we have been deprived of the presence of the
Apostle of Cod from our midst. We have suffered the greatest loss. But
at the same time let us be thankful to God that when He withdrew His
Apostle front our midst he has spared amongst us Ali ibne Abi Taleb who
is of the same Light of which Was the Holy! Prophet. You have heard the
Holy Prophet saying: 'I and Ali are of one and the same Light.' You know
the Holy Prophet at the very outset of his ministry had shown Ali to the
world and said: 'This is my Brother, my Vicegerent and my Kaljf and you
know the historic event conducted by the Holy Prophet at Ghadeer-e-Khum
when he declared 'Of whosoever I am the Maula the Master this Ali is his
Master' and took allegiance to him and the first to pay allegiance to
Ali was my own self Besides all the qualities that we need in the one to
rule over us are undoubtedly there in Ali. "We need the most learned to
rule over us. Who else can be a greater scholar than the one about whom
the Holy Prophet has declared : 'I am the City of knowledge and Ali is
its Gate.'

"We need the just to manage our affairs. Who else could be more eqwtous
than the one about whom the Apostle of God has declared : 'The most just
among you is Ali ibne Abi Taleb .'

"We need the bravest to lead us. It is Ali and none else who has earned
the exclusive distinction of being called by the Holy Prophet
'Asadullah' (the Lion of God) and the "Tarraran ghare Farrarin' (The
repeated attacker and the one who knows not running away leaving the
field to the enemy). You know that at was Ali who stood with the Holy
Prophet when every one of us being unable to stay any longer ran away
from the field.

" Besides, you have all heard the Holy Prophet addressing Ali : 'Thou
art to me as Aaron was to Moses save that there is no a apostle to come
after me.' Thou art to me as the head is to the body.' 'Thou art to me
as the soul is to the body.' You all know that Ali is the self of the
Holy Prophet which was shown to us on the day of the historic
'Mubahila.'

" O' muslims ! the Holy Prophet has left behind Two things the Holy
Qur'an and his Ahlul-Bait and we have been asked to hold these Two fast
for these will not be separated from each other and the Holy Prophet has
declared: 'Qur' aanun Ma'al Ali wa Aliywun Ma'al Qur'an' i.e., The
Qur'an will be with Ali and Ali will always be with the Qur'an.
"Brethren you know that the Holy Prophet had not even breathed his last
people had assembled in the 'Saqeefa' with the problem about the
succession. You know myself and Abu-Bakr had also been there. It was
just to avoid any wrong step being against the verdict of the Holy
Prophet for you know that going against the decision of the Holy Prophet
is losing the faith and become infidels for the Lord has clearly
declared in the Holy Qur'an:-

" But no! thy Lord! they believe not until they make thee a judge of
what is in dispute, between them, then find not any straitness in their
hearts as to that which thou decidest and submit with full submission.
4:65

"Now brethren let us not go against the declared will and the decision
of the Holy Prophet which he declared at the very outset of his ministry
in the 'Dawate Asheera' and again reiterated it at the conclusion of it
at Ghadeer- e-Khum,for by doing so we, under the above verdict of the
Holy Qur'an, be of those who have not believed at all.

"You know brethren what happened at the Saqeefa and my getting Abu Bakr
declared as the Kalif but be it known that it was only an interim
arrangement to avoid the calamity to any violation of the will of the
Holy Prophet and I and Abu Bakr did it at the cost of our absence even
from the last services to the Holy Prophet and his funeral. And now that
matters have been settled let us all request Ali to come forward and
bless us by his lead."

At the end of such a speech from Omar, if Abu Bakr had got up and
said:-

"Brethren! Think not I accepted the Kaljfate to own any power or
authority not bestowed on me by the Holy Prophet. I accepted omar's
suggestion just as an inerim arrangement to avert the disturbance which
I and Omar apprehended immediately at the departure of the Holy Prophet.
Omar and myself had rushed to the Saqeefa not minding even the last
services to the Holy Prophet and his funeral to that the decision of the
Holy Prophet about his declared Vicegerent Ali. And now I would request
you to join me and Omar in requesting Ali to come forward and take up
the reigns to rule our destiny as the one nearest to the Holy Prophet
both in his relation to him and also in his personal purity and
excellence declared about the Ahlul-Bait by the Lord in the verse of
'Tatheer' (33:33).

How readily the muslim public would have accepted such a proposal how
best would have been the result, is given out in the opinion of even a
non-muslim historian which has been quoted by Justice Amir Ali in his
famous work 'The Spirit of Islam':-

"Had" says Sedillot: "The principles of hereditary succession in favour
of Ali been recognised at the outset, it would have prevented the rise
of those disastrous pretentions which engulfed Islam tn the blood of
muslims. The husband of Fatema united in his person the right of
succession as the lawful heir of the Prophet as well as the right by
election. It might have been thought that ALL WOULD SUBMIT THEMr SELVES
BEFOR HIS GLORY: SO PURE AND SO GRAND." (The Spirit of Islam by Amir
Ali).

Had Omar and Abu Bakr acted as above none could have doubted the
bonaflde of their intentions in their activity at the Saqeefa and today
their act would have been held as a golden deed and their praise would
certainly have decorated the pages of the Islamic History. Neither the
Omayyids had come to power nor any one of the members of the House of
the Holy Prophet had suffered any of the miseries and the calamities,
and the wholeale heart-rending massacre of Karbala would never at all
have taken place, the world today, under the godly rule of the Ahlul-
Bait had enjoyed the heavenly bliss on earth.


