The Land of Advent of the Last Apostle of God
=============================================

THE PEOPLES IN the various parts of the earth had been given guidance
from God in their respective languages through the apostles. Yet man
followed Satan and led a wild and brutal life. The people of the barren
sandy desert of Arabia, led a nomadic life, roaming in the waterless
plains with their herds of cattle and settl- ing down wherever they
found water for themselves and pasture for their animals. Most of the
land was not cuhivable for grains and the soil and the climate could
grow only date palms on it. The staple diet of the people was dates and
the milk of camel and sheep.

Owing to the scarcity of any other means of earning their livelihood,
the people in groups preyed on each other for their own survival and
thus got addicted to the worst of crimes such as plunder, piI- lage and
carnage which had become their personal traits and profes- sion.
Drinking and debauchery were a part of daily life. After the death of
their fathers, the men possessed their stepmothers as their wives, and
out of a fanciful shame against giving their daughters to be the wives
of the others, they buried alive their own female babies. Individual
selfishness and group interest had been so much ingrained in their blood
and emotions that a mere trifle of an offence against any individual was
sufficient to generate warfare between the tribes for ages and
generations together. There was no law for man to resort to, and might
alone was considered to be right. The people were not only drowned in
ignorance but were also most unyielding in nature.

**The Darkness Demanded the Promised Light**

THE HOPELESS SITUATION on the earth against which the infinite
knowledge of the All-Knowing and the All-Merciful Creator Lord had
already determined the panacea, had dawned. The darkness which shrouded
the earth, demanded the dawn of the Brightest Light which had been
promised by the Lord. At last dawned the heaven's Brightest Light in the
arrival of MUHAMMAD the Last ApostIe of God who was caIIed by Buddha as
Maetrea (i.e., the Mercy), by the Prophets preceding Jesus as The
Prophet, and by Jesus with several glorious titles viz., 'The Spirit of
Truth,' 'The Cottforter,' and 'The Holy Ghost' etc.

**The Lord's Covenant with Abraham Fulfilled**

AT LAST ON the 17th of the Lunar Month Rabiul Awwal in the Year of the
Elephant (Amul Feel) A.D. 587, Muhammad the Divine Light destined to
expel once for all the darkness, and destined to abide in his law with
mankind for ever, had his birth in this physical world, in the seed of
Abraham through Ishmael, in the fulfilment of the Covenant which the
Lord had established with Abraham.

Heaven's Announcement of the Advent of the Last Apostle of God

EVENTS RECORDED BY the historians relate that as the Holy Prophet
Muhammad was born in Mecca, there were heavenly signs announc- ing the
great advent of the Promised Mercy to the Worlds, the Last of the
Apostles of God, and the deliverer of the Lord's Final Word to humanity,
i.e., the Holy Qur'an, the Final Code of Discipline for Mankind.

I. The idols installed by the pagans in the Holy Ka'ba, themselves fell
down striking their faces to the ground. 2. In the distant land of
Persia, where Fire was wor- shipped, the fire burning continuously for a
thousand years in the altar, got itself extinguished.
3. The palace of Naushirwan the Just, the Persian King was shaken to
its foundation.
4. A quake shock shook the Earth.
5. There was an extraordinary issue of the shooting stars from
heaven.

It is quite obvious that the above signs were given to awaken man from
his slumber to know the arrival of the Promised Prophet with the Final
Word of Guidance from the Lord, for mankind as a whole.

The Immediate or the Nearest Ancestry of Muhammad the Promised Prophet,
the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost THE QOREISHITES WERE
the direct descendants of Abraham through Ishmael, and Abde Manaf had
four sons, Hashim, Muttalib, Naufal and Abdush Shams. Hashim died, away
from home in one of his trade expeditions and a young son of his was
left in the Caravan. Muttalib the brother of Hashim went and fetched the
son of his late brother and brought him up along with his own children,
and thus the son of Hashim was known as Abdul Muttalib. The children of
Hashim through his son Abdul Muttalib were called the Hashimites. Abdul
Muttalib had three sons, Abdullah, Abu Taleb and Jafar.

Abdush Shams, the son of Abde Manaf, had a clever, crafty and active
Roman slave boy Omayya whom Abde Manaf had pur- chased and presented to
his son Abdush Shams. Omayya, a heathen by birth, had spent his
childhood among the Roman Christians. He was not only of questionable
birth but was also evil hearted, mean by nature and vicious in
temperament. His master Abdush Shams owing to his close attachment, held
him as an adopted son. Omayya in his pride, bore an inherent envy and
enmity against Hashim and the Hashimites. Abde Manaf, before his death,
had handed over the charge of his privileged hereditary duties of
service to the Holy Ka ba to Hashim his eldest son who was very noble by
nature and godly in temperament. This aggravated the hatred, jealousy
and animosity of Omayya which tendency continued as a personality trait
from generation to generation in his seed.

The recent inquiries by the famous scholar A1-Ameeni of Iraq, the
author of the celebrated work 'A1-Ghadeer, and the other great research
scholar Imad Zadeh of Iran, in their great works, discount the story by
Ibne Athir and others, of Abdush Shams and Hashim being the twin issues
of Abde Manaf, born with their backs joined, which were separated by a
lancet, and some fortune teller predicting everlasting enmity between
the descendants of the twins; and Omayya being the son of Abdush Shams.
How- ever, the issues of Omayya, the slave boy adopted by Abdush Shams,
became known as the Ornayyads and their inherent envy and enmity against
the Hashimites came to stay as their hereditary trait as the native
endowment which further developed in the Omayyad blood. The enmity
between the two groups went on increasing. The Hashimites were known for
all kinds of virtues and goodness while the Omayyads became notorious
for the opposite qualities. As day-by day the honour, reverence, regard
and respect for the goodness of the Hashimites went on increasing more
and more, the jealousy and enmity of the Qrnavyads was got further more
aggravated against the Hashimites. In short, the Hashi- mites were good,
noble and gentle, while the Qmavyads were wicked, mean and aggressive.
The Hashimites held the Trusteeshi and the Custody of the Holy House of
God, the Ka'ba, which was the most coveted and unique honour enjoyed
exclusively by the Hashimites. The Omayyads envied this the most, and
could not bear it.

While the charitable disposition of the Hashimites could not allow the
hoarding of any persongl wealth, the selfishness and niggardliness of
the Omayyads had enabled them to store abundant wealth which had made
the Omayyads ever more haughty and proud against the noble, the gentle
and the meek ones of the Hashimites. Much fuel was added to the already
burning fire of envy and enmity of the Oniayyads when Abdul Muttalib,
son of Hashim, miraculously discovered the natural spring-well of 'Zam
Zam' which lay hidden and unknown to any one, for ages together. This
mysterious un- covering of the well by Abdul Muttalib which was nothing
short of a miracle, enhanced the regard and the reverence of the people
for him in the Arabian Peninsula as a whole. This odl veteran in the
seed of Abraham, through Ishmael, was the grandfather of the 'Spirit of
Truth', The Holy Prophet Muhammad and Ali.

Abdul Muttalib worshipped none but the One True God and was always
resigned to the Divine Will. His faith in God was proved in the ready
response he had to his prayers to Him, when the Abyssinian Christian
Prince reached the outskirts of the town of Mecca with a huge army on
elephants, with the determina- tion to destroy the Holy House of God,
the Ka ba. History records the wonderful event that an aerial force of
innumerable tiny birds, the Ababeel , appeared with small stones in
their tiny beaks and dropped the stones on the soldiers mounted on the
elephants, killing the soldiers and the huge animals on the spot.

This routed the enemy totally and the Abvssinian Prince who had come to
destroy the Holy House, had to experience the total destruction of his
huge army, and was himself killed by a small stone dropped on him by a
tiny bird. The year of this attack on Mecca by the Christian army on
elephants, was such a historic and memorable event of import- ance that
it gave birth to an Era of its own, called the AmuI Feel , i.e., the
Year of the Elephant, for the people began to count the passage of time
from that date. And this historic year of the mira- culous defeat and
destruction of the enemy of God, and the mysterious heavenly rescue of
the Holy House, the Ka ba, was to mark the birth of the Last Apostle of
God, the Holy Prophet pro niised to Mankind through Jesus in the Middle
East and by the great sages like Buddha in India who had foretold his
people about the advent of the Last Buddha calling him in the Pall
language as "Maetrea, and as regards the predictions in the Christian
scriptures (see Deut 18:18, John 1:21, John 16:17) already given in the
earlier pages.

To Abdul Muttalib, the great godly chief of the noble Hashimites, were
born Hazrat Abdullah and Hazrat Abu Taleb and Jafar. Hazrat Abdullah was
destined to be the father of the Holy Prophet Muhammad and Hazrat
Abu-Taleb to be !he father of Ali who was to be the Divinely
Commissioned Guide, immediately succeeding the Holy Prophet, as the
First of the Twelve Holy Imams (i.e., the Twelve Princes promised in the
seed of Ishmael vide Gen. 18 :20). Who was to be to the Holy Prophet
Muhammad as was Aaron to Moses. Thus the Divine Light of Guidance to
Humanity, which emanated from Abraham and Ishmael passed onto Abdul
Muttalib, and got bifurcated to flow into the two channels of the seeds
of Hazrat Abdullah and Hazrat Abu-Taleb, in the seed of the former, to
manifest in the apostleship and in the latter in the Imamat or the
Divine guidance. To Hazrat Abdullah was born Muhammad, the Holy Prophet,
and throughHazrat Abu-Taleb came Ali, the Vicegerent of the Holy Prophet
and the First Holy Imam (the divinely chosen Guide to Mankind).

In the fulfilment of the divine plan, the Holy Prophet Muhammad was
gifted by God with a daughter Fatema Zahra, the Lady of Light, endowed
with the maximum degree of purity and holiness ever had by any lady in
the human race as a whole, destined to be the wife of All and the mother
of the Eleven of the Twelve Imams, the Princes promised in the lineage
of Ishmacl (Gen. 18:20) God had chosen Abraham and his descendants:-

"Verily, God ,bath chosen Adam and Noah and the descen- dants of
Abraham and Jmran above all the worlds."

"(Their) Offsprings, one of the other, and God is All - knowing." 3:32,
33. (H.Q)

This declaration of the Holy Qur'an is attested by the statement of the
Old Testament: wherein God addressing Abraham says: "And I will
establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in
their generationsfor an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee and
unto thy seed after thee,"

"And I willgive unto thee, and to thy seedafler thee, the iand wherein
thou art a stranger, all tile land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession ; and I will be their God."

OT.(Gem 17-7,8)

Under the promise or the covenant which the Lord established with
Abraham and his seed, Abraham was endowed with the Divine Light of
guidance (Imamat) (see 2:124 H.Q) and to Abraham and his seed Ishmael,
was given the land now called Mccci and the country surrounding it, in
which Abraham was first a stranger, and which since its being inhabited
by Abraham and his seed lshmael, had been uninterruptedly possessed by
the descendants of lshmael or his followers, to remain with them for
ever.

The Divine Light endowed in Abraham was bifurcated and passed into the
two channels of the seed of Abraham viz., lshrnaei and Isaac. Through
Isaac, it passed on till Jesus, and through Ishmael it descended down to
Abdul Muttalib and ftoni Abdul Muttalib it was again bifurcated into the
two channels, Abdullah and Abu-Talcb, and again it was bifurcated into
the two channels of the seed of Au and Fatenia into Has3n and Husain,
Hasan des- tined to be the Second Holy Imam and Husain to be the Third
one and also the King of Martyrs. From Husain, it passed on to the Nine
Holy Imams in his seed until the Twelfth or the Last one in the line of
the Imamat, i.e., Muhammad-al-Mahdi, who is kept alive to re-appear
before the end of the world. As Jesus the last one in the seed of
Abraham through Isaac is kept alive, this Holy Imam, the last one in the
seed of Abraham through Ishmael, is also kept alive, and both these two
manifestations of the Divine Light endowed in the seed of Abraham will
meet before the end of the world, to fulfil the divine plan of cleaning
the earth of falsehood once for all, and establishing peace and harmony
on it, in the place of aggression, iniquity, enmity and hatred which
will be ruling the earth prior;o their Final advent, and this will be
the conclusion of the world.

The object of this work is only to present with extreme brevity the
great historic event of the matchless sacrifice of the King of Martyrs
the Holy Imam Husain, in the seed of Abraham through the Holy Prophet
Muhammad, offered to save the Truth and humanity from getting lost to
falsehood for ever, for the apostle- ship had been concluded with the
revelation of the Holy Qur'an, the Final Word of God. If anything had to
be done or could be done,, to save the Truth, it was only through the
Imamat which was destined to do it, and Husain was the divinely chosen
one for it. Both All and Fatema were martyred. Ali was assassinated
while in prayer in the Mosque at Kufa and Fatema was killed by the fall
of the door of her own house, caused by a tyrant.

From Ali and Fatetna, were born Hasan and Husairi, the second and the
third Imams Hasan was martyred by being secretly poisoned at the
instance of Ma aviah, and Husain was the victim of the brutal massacre,
enacted by Yazeed the son of Ma'aviah. Thus the Hashimites were the
family of nobles and martyrs in the way of the Lord, while the Omayyads
were the clan of tyrants and assassins.

The fact is that the Holy Five viz.,

1. Muhammad .. .. The Holy Prophet
2. Ali .. .. The First Holy Imam
3. Fatema .. .. The Lady of Light, the Holy Mother of the Eleven
Imams
4. Hasan .. .. The Second Holy Imam
5. Husain .. .. The Third Holy Imam

were the embodiment of the Divine Light or the models of the ideal
godly life on Earth, the presentations of the models of whose divine
purity and Holiness in the practical life was the fulfilment of the
Divine Plan and the realisation of the object of the ceation of the
Universe.

**The Last Apostle of God**

If ANYONE GOES through the life of the Holy Prophet Muhammad, he will
not be able to resist shedding tears for the tortures, the miseries and
calamities which the great godly soul suffered at the hands of the
people. Any intelligent reader would find that all the sufferings which
every one of the preceding apostles of God had suffered, had been
inflicted on the Last Apostle of the Lord, along with other additional
tortures and miseries which none else had ever experienced and he
suffered all the calamities with ideal patience, matchless fortitude,
unparalleled steadfastness and unshakable determination to fulfil the
covenant established with the Lord.

23. Nude dances were stopped, graceful dresstng was prescribed.
24. Seeking of knowledge was made compulsory, both for man and woman,
scholarship was encouraged and scholars honoured.
25. Gambling and all games of chance were declared as crimes.
26. Adultery was declared as the most abhorred and the most severely
punishable crime.
27. Slavery was abolished in the most practical and a peaceful way,
enjoining equal treatment to the slaves as compulsory, if slaves had to
be main- tained.
28. The law of Maktabah to facilitate slaves get liberated was
enforced.
29. Usury was strictly prohibited, loan without interest highly
commended.
30. Socialistic pattern of society was established through a
commonwealth called ' Bait- ul- maL.'
31. Accumulation of wealth was controlled through the Laws of
inheritance, and the annual taxattons, with the prescribed rates. 32.
Hoarding of foodgrains and other foodstuffs were declared as punishable
crimes.
33. Just and the correct use of Weights and Measures, was ordered.
34. Cleanliness of body, thought, conduct and character was made
compulsory.
35. Varieties of food and drinks and the limits of eating and drinking
fixed.
36. Strictly regulated fasting was prescribed and de- clared
compulsory.
37. Protection of travellers and helping them as much as possible, made
obligatory and highly com- mendable.
38. Patronage of orphans and the destitutes declared as one of the
great virtues and a strongly com- mended quality.
39. Compulsion in faith strongly deprecated and strictly prohibited.
40. Man was given the liberty in the choice of his faith, with personal
responsibility for a correct decision.
41. Reformation through many other characteristics and exclusively
distinctive commandments was en- forced through which human society was
re - volutionised and greatly profited.

The above facts justly warrant every intelligent and impartial reader
with his scholarship, logical reasoning and the sense of justice, to
fearlessly declare that the Man who could bring about such a wonderfu
revolution in the ideology of the people totally lost in the barbaric
paganism, and effected such a miraculous transformation in every sphere
ofthe practical life ofmankind, which for the greatest statesmen, or
even for the strongest of the dictatorial monarchs, could have been
nothing short of an impossibility, within the short span of only 23
years, must be the Wonderman, the Greatest Benefactor of Humanity ; and
he could be none else other than the Greatest of the Apostles of the
Almighty Lord. In fact, it was God s will, which none could ever resist
that was done on the earth, to finally guide mankind for aLl times,
which He had mercifully promised to do. This is what the Last Prophet of
God, gave effect to, and if this godly service is undone, he who does
it, will be none but Satan, even, if the individual appears in human
frame. And one who fights such a devil will naturally and necessarily be
the greatest hero of humanity with the maximum divinity endowed in him,
though he may not be a prophet, he must necessarily be a Deputy of an
apostle of God. This is the point to be remembered in judging the
personality of Husain, the King of Martyrs.


