The Logical Inference
=====================

SINCE BOTH THE Immigrants as well as the Ansars claimed the worldly
privileges and the secular advantages in return for what they had done,
any intelligent reader could reasonably say that neither the giving of
the asylum to the Holy Prophet by those Ansars nor the lmmiaration of
those Immigrants with him, was exclusively for God and the Faith. The
object of their respective services enumerated by them, as their
respective claims, could be nothing but what they claimed in return for
those services.

If what they enumerated had been done exclusively for God and for no
worldly gains or material advantages, the people, both the disputant
Mohajirs and the contestant Ansars would never, for anything in the
world, have stirred from the side of the Holy Prophet in the last
moments of his stay with them, and after his breathing his last, they
would have only minded their first concern with the last services to the
Apostle of God, observing the solemnity of the serious occasion and
their sad plight of having lost the Best and the Holiest one of God's
creation, from among their midst, as did the Holy Ahlul-Bait and the
other Hashimites who never even cared to know about what went on in the
' Saqeefa.'

By the claims advanced by both the groups themselves, it gets quite
evident that those of both the groups, were only waiting for the
opportunity to establish their claims, the objects of all their
respective services to the Holy Prophet and the Faith, each group
apprehending to be forestalled by the other. This could be the only
logical inference of any intelligent reading of the facts of the history
of the dispute at the ' Saqeefa.'

The following are a few of the impartial opinions of the cele- brated
Non- Muslim historian scholars, about Ali :-

"Ali was the cousin-germain of Muhammad and husband of Fatema, his
beloved daughter. The right of succession in order of consanguinity, lay
with Ali; and his virtues and services eminently entitled him to tt. On
the first burst of his generous zeal, when Islamism was a derided and a
persecuted faith, he had been pronounced by Mohammad his Brother, his
Vicegerent; he had ever since been devoted to him in word and deed, and
had honoured the cause by his magnanimity as signally as he has
vindicated it by his valour." W. Irving "The birth, the alliance, the
character of Ali which exalted him above the rest of his countrymen
might justify his claim to the vacant throne of Arabia. The son of Abu
Taleb was, in his own right, the Chief of the family of Hashim, and the
hereditary prince or guardian of the city and the temple of Mecca. The
light of prophecy was extinct, but the husband of Fatema might expect
the inheritance and the blessings of her father; the Arabs had sometimes
been patient of a female reign and thc two grandsons of the Prophet had
often been fondled in his lap, and shown in his pulpit, as the hope of
his age, and the Chief of the Youth of Paradise. From the first hour of
the mission to the last rites of his funeral, the Apostle was never
forsaken by a generous Friend, whom he delighted to name his Brother,
his Vtcegerent and the faithful Aaron of a second Moses." Gibbon
abridged by W.

Smith p. 466

Besides the above two quotations, the following is the one which the
great learned scholar and the judicial head Amir Ali has chosen to quote
in his famous work The Spirit of Islam:-

"Had," says Sedillot "the principle of hereditary succession in favour
of Ali been recognised at the outset a would have prevented the rise of
those disastrous pretentions which engulfed Islam in the blood of
Muslims. The husband of Fatema united in his person the right of suc-
cession as the lawful heir of the Prophet as well as the right by
election. It might have been thought that all would submit themselvcs
before his glory so pure and so grand." Spirit of Islam- Amir Ali
However, the right of Ali was ignored and later at a stage the fate of
the people passed into the hands of those who enacted the gruesome scene
of Karbala and the massacre of the godly members of the House of the
Holy Prophet.

**The Funeral of the Holy Prophet**

THOSE OF THE companions who were turned out by the Holy Prophet from
his presence, got busy in the Saqeefe and did not return until he was
buried.

When the Holy Prophet passed away, Ali assisted by his pupil Idne Abbas
and the other Heshimites, attended to the last rites to the Holiest one
of God's creation and the grief of Fatema moved the hearts of those
present there. History says that Hazrat Abu Bakr and Hazrat Omar and the
other companions being busy at the Sapeefe, could not attend the funeral
of the Holy Prophet (KO., AM., EXI).

**History repeats it self**

THE DEALINGS OF the wicked ones with the men of God particularly the
apostles from Him, had been indentical in all ages. The Holy Prophet had
already prophecied that all that happened among the people of the
ancient apostles particularly the people of Moses in the Israelites,
will happen among his followers.

Moses was absent for only about forty days and his people re- volted
against his Deputy Aaron and followed the Samiri and started worshipping
the Calf. Jesus was betrayed by his own disciples and was handed over to
be rucified. The Last Apostle of God similarly suffered an identical
desertion by his people even before his breathing his last.

**The Love of the World- Maddens man**

VERT RECENTLY EVEN when a worldly ruler of a big State was to be
buried, (Mr. Kennedy of America) almost all the Paramount Powers in the
world sent their representatives to attend the funeral as a token of
their regard and human sympathy with the bereaved family and the
sorrowful nation. But when the Prince of the Prophets, the Last Apostle
of God, who was divinely sent to rule over the human hearts and the
human affairs en earth and who was also the godly ruler of the state,
had not even breathed his last, the people who called themselves his
followers and claimed to be his close companions left him away to assert
and establish their res- pective contentions about their claims to rule
the state in the place of the Holy Prophet and returned only when he had
left this world and was buried by his Ahlul-Bait and the people of his
family the Hashimites.

Thus in the love of the world the people left away even the Apostle of
God unshrouded. This is the worst record of the mad- ness of man for the
material world. The paradox is that yet man claims himself to be the
lover of God, the lover of the Apostles of God and the lover of
godliness.

**Karbala's Foundation laid**

THE EVENTS OF history give out a clear verdict that the series of the
sufferings, the miseries and the calamities inflicted on the Ahlul-
Bait, which culminated at one stage in the wholesale massacre of the
Holy Imam Husain and his faithful devotees at Karbala and the
misfortunes and the assassinations of the other Imams and their families
and their devotees, which thereafter followed up to the ninth Imam Hasan
al Askari, was inaugurated at the Saqeefa. Had the people remembered the
repeated declarations about Ali and his Ahlul-Bait, the world would
never have witnessed the hideous scenes of the sufferings and the
massacre of the Holy ones; on the other hand, today the world would have
been ruled by the men of God, and humanity had enjoyed the godly kingdom
on earth, and the human race by this time would have been united under
one single brotherhood which was inaugurated by the Holy Prophet at
Madina.

**The Fate of the Kalifate**

THE COURSE WHICH the kalifate adopted at the Saqeefa, and the personnel
that occupied its throne and called themselves Kalifs, is a matter of
history to be referred to. Such of us who are not much acquainted with
Arabic and Persian, may refer to the famous work "The History of the
Arabs' by Hitti which is sometimes prescribed as a text book for the
university courses in Islamic History. How - ever, a list of the Omayyid
and the Abbaside Kalifs is given as an annexure to this work for the
general information of the readers. The particulars given in the chart,
are those given in the famous work by Hitti.

What happened to the Directive from God WILL NOT ANY one be he a muslim
or even a non-muslim, who has gone through the following verses of the
Holy Qur'an with the average understanding of a common man, ask 'What
about the divine directiv of Cod to the muslims in matters of dispute
among themselves:-

" 0 ye who believe! Obey ye God and obey ye the Apostle (Muhammad) and
those in authority, then if ye quarrel about anything, refer it to God
and His Apostle (Muhammad) if ye believe in God and the last day. This
is the righteous and the best (course) to (achieve) the end. 4:59

What happened to the Holy Prophet's appointing Ali as his heir, his
Khalif, and his Successor with the announcement of it, at the 'Dawate
Asheera' at the very outset of his apostolic mission? If this was too
old an event for the companions to remember it what about the most
recent appointment of Ali, only about ten or eleven weeks before the
dispute, the Holy Prophet declaring it officially in the historic
assembly convened by him at the command of the Lord (5:67) at 'Ghadeer-
e-Khum' announcing Ali as the 'Maula?, i.e., Master, Commander or the
Governor in his place, at which the Lord declared the reliaion Islam to
be complete and acceptable to Him, and at the end of which ceremony,
every one of them had paid ' Bai' at or allegiance to Ali. The condition
laid down by the above directive of God, is open and very severely
emphatic,commanding the muslims to act according to it, if they believe
in God and the last day, and the failure to do it, will naturally mean
disbelief in God and the last day of Judgment. The course laid down in
the above verse is said to be the Righteous and the Best One and
anything otherwise will naturally be unrighteous and the worst.

Besides the above, there is another verse of the Holy Qur'an which
gives out a clear verdict about those who do not uncondi- tionally
submit to, or implicitly obey the decision of the Holy Prophet :-

" But no! by thy Lord! They believe not until they make thee a judge in
what is in dispute between them then find not any straitness in their
hearts, as to that which thou decidest and submit with full submission."
4 :65

However, it is a fact that the matter ip the dispute was neither
referred to God nor to the Holy Prophet's definite decrees; on the other
hand what was already decreed by the Holy Prophet at the command of the
Lord was totally neglected and ignored. Under these circumstances it is
for the readers to say, if or not, the opening words of the above verse
get applicable to those who neglect, ignore and disobey the verdict of
the Holy Prophet about Ali's position in relation to him.

**Man cautioned against the Disobedience to God and the Holy
Prophet**

MAN HAS ALREADY been cautioned by the All-Merciful Lord against the
fate of those who go aoainst His will and the decree of the Holy Prophet
in the matter of the choice of a leader or guardian or a ruler of man's
destiny in this world:-

27. "On the day (of yudgment) when the wrong-doer will bite his hands
saying 'Would that I had taken a way with the Apostle Muhammad'."

28. "0' woe is me! would that I had not taken such a one (so and so)
for a friend."

29. "Certainly he has led me astray from the Reminder ( the Qur'an)
after it had come to me and the devil always deserts man." 30." And the
Apostle (Muhammad) will say ' My Lord! verily my people had taken this
Qur' an as forsaken'." 25:27-30

The above verses of the Holy Qur' an are sufficiently clear and plain
enough to necessitate any elucidation or a further explanation of the
matter. They are not about the disbelievers but about those who believed
in the Holy Qur'an and neglected it. The verses relate about those who
got astray after once getting guided aright. The verse No. 28 is too
aloud about the subject of the address and the cause of the repentance
on the Day of Judgment.

The Sense of Discretion and Discrimination

THE SENSE OF discretion and the faculty of discrimination, i.e., the
power of unrestricted prudence, liberty to act with the endowment of
conscience to note and distinguish the difference between good and evil,
or the faculty of equation is the greatest gift of the All- Wise and the
All-Merciful Providence, given exclusively to man and to no other
animal. The dawn of this faculty in a human individual is the first sign
of the maturity of the mind.

Animals also are given this power but only to the extent of
distinguishing the profitable and the harmful to their life, with no
regard for others, even for their own kind. Every animal takes only that
food which is profitable to its life and nothing otherwise.

Some people succumbing to the currents of over enthusiasm of their
righteousness or to imitate unwarranted godliness, forfeit this great
gift of God and pretend to pronounce neutrality and overlook the evils
in favour of some goodness. Particularly about certain persons of their
own choice, assigning some worldly deeds of credit to them. They forget
that such a course is unnatural and also ungodly. Unnatural in the
sense, however, good and nutritious the food one might have taken but
when the same individual takes a killing poison, the fatal drug will not
fail to act duly according to its nature and the intensity of its
property, undoing all the goodness and the nutrition of the diet taken
by the individual. Ungodly, or it has been proved that the one who is
titled as Satan, was not originally a Satan. He was a Jinn (18 :5o) who
for the extent and the degree of his supplication to the Lord, had been
raised to the rank of the angels and even as the Chief of them. His one
refusal to submit to the command of the Lord, to pay obeisance
prostrating to Adam, made him fall with the title of Lucifer.

**A Point of Note for False Unitarianism**

In the fall of Satan from the rank of the angels and his being expelled
from goodness for ever, lies a point of note against false unitarianism.
It is to be noted that Satan never refused to pay obeisance or
prostration to God, but he insisted that he would prostrate only before
God and not before man. The will of the Almighty Lord was that one
should not prostrate only to Him but to any one, He desires. No doubt
the prostration to the Lord will be the obeisance, surrender or the
submission to the Absolute Authority of the Lord and the prostration to
other than Him, will be the token sign of honour, respect and regard, as
did all the angels to Adam and as did also Holy Prophet Jacob with his
other sons, to his son Joseph on the throne. Thus prostration to any
holy person or to any sacred object, with the intention to pay the
individual or the object, any regard er reverence, can never be ungodly
or objectionable. The point lies in the intention.

**Goodness and Evil, can undo each other**

To ILLUSTRATE THE natural phenomena of goodness and evil, undoing each
other, the following is the law of the legislation of the Lord by which
man has been warned and encouraged with:-

Verily those who disbelieve and hinder (men) from God' s way and oppose
the Apostle after guidance is quite clear to them, never will they be
harming God in any way, and He will make their deeds vain.4:32

It is to be noted that the warning in the above verse refers
particularly to those to whom the signs of the Lord have been made
clear, i.e., to those who have accepted the clarity of the commands of
the Lord through His Apostle , i .e., the followers of the prophets like
the christians, the jews and the muslims.

" That is because they follow that which displeases God and are averse
to His pleasure so He maketh their deeds vain." 47:28 " That is because
they hate that which God hath sent down, So He bath made their deeds
vain. 47:9

Let us read the above verse with 5 :67 revealed at Ghadeer- e- Khum'
with reference to what the Holy Prophet commanded in compliance with the
command and the people's liking or dis- liking it, accepting or
rejecting it, or following or going against it. " O' ye who believe!
raise ye notyour voices above the Prophet' s voice, nor speak loudly to
him as ye speak loudly one to another, lest your deeds become vain,
while ye perceive not." 49:2

See also: 3:22-7, 147:9, 69:18, 105:39, 65:49, 169:5 6:S8 II, 16:2,
217.

The above verse gives a clear verdict about the deeds of those who
raised their voices in the presence of the Holy Prophet when he was
about to leave this world at which he was so much displeased with them
that he turned them out of his presence. There are similar verses about
the wiping out of the sins other than disobedience to God and the Holy
Prophet, in return for special acts of goodness as well as for
abstaining from greater sins:-

And God said: " Verily I am with you. If ye keep up prayer and pay the
poor-rate and believe My Apostle and offer to God a goodly gift, I will
certainly cover (wipe out) your evil deeds and make you enter Gardens
wherein rivers flow - "5:12 " If ye shun the great things (sins) which
ye are forbidden, We shall do away with your evils and cause you to
enter the honourable place of entering." 4:31

See also 42:35 and 53:32.

What greater virtue can there be than sincere devotion to God's Apostle
and his Ahlul- Bait and why not the lesser sins of the sincere devotees
of the Lord and the Holy Ones be wiped out. And what greater and graver
sin can there be than deserting the Apostle of God, leaving him in the
jaws of death, escaping away from the battle- fields, disobeying him,
torturing and killing his offsprings and what virtue could be of any
avail to the deserters of the Apostle of God, even though they might
have been admired by him thereafter, out of his personal grace and
goodness and even if they had been pardoned by him in this world, for
the Lord says:-

" Ask thou (0' Our Apostle Muhammad) forgiveness for them or ask thou
not forgiveness for them. Even if thou ask forgiveness for them seventy
times, never will God forgive them because they disbelieve in God and
His Apostle. And God guideth not the transgressing people." 9:80

It must be known that the Apostle of God will never pray for the
enemies of God, i.e., for the disbelievers or the infidels or the
idolators; his prayer could naturally be only for those who profess to
believe, but actually at heart they believed not, and were trea- cherous
calling themselves Muslims but in the words of God they are Munafiqs,
i.e., Hypocrites or the opportunists, about whom the Lord says:-

" When the hypocrites come unto thee (0' Our Apostle Muham- mad) they
say: "We bear witness that verily thou art the Apostle of God. Verily
God Knoweth that thou art His Apostle and God beareth witness that the
hypocrites are certainly liars." 63:1The people referred to in the above
verses are those the actual position of whose faith has been clearly
declared by God Himself:-

"The dwellers of The desert say: ' We believe Say thou; Ye believe not
but say ye we sunibit and faith has not yet entered into your hearts-"
49:14

The application of the above verses of the Holy Qur'an is not
restricted to any particular people of any particular age; those refered
to in the verses are the people of all times, if they own the qualities
referred to in the verses.


