The Successor To the First Kalif Nominated
==========================================

When on 13th Jamadi II. 13 A.H. (634 A.D), Abu Bakr got ill and got
hopeless of recovery, he nominated Omar in his place. (For details the
readers are refcrred to TKS., translation by Jarret). Any enlightened
man or woman would ask:

1. What happened to the principle of election resorted to in the case
of the choice of the first Kalif.

2. On what authority of the Holy Qur'an or Hadith or the principle of
politics was the appointment of the successor to the first Kalif
effected?

The Successor to the Second Kalif Co-opted

WHEN OMAR FELT the approach of his end, he avoided election as well as
nomination and appointed a committee of six men of his own choice to
elect a successor to him:-

1. Abdur Rahman b. Auf.
2. Ali ibne Abi-Talcb.
3. Sa'd ibne Abi Waqqas.
4. Othman ibne Affan.
5. Zobeir f. Alawam.
6. Talha ibne Obaidallah.

It was by Omar that Ma'aviah was appointed as the governor of Syria.
(Mr. Annl., EHI)

To know the details as to what took place and how Othman was elected,
and how the Kalifate was conducted by him, one would do better by
referring to Tabari and Kamil ibne Atheer etc., and W. Muir has given
the details in his Annals on p. 324. However, Othman was co-opted to the
Kalifate.

Othman' s patronage of his relatives gave further strength to Ma'aviah
son of Abu Sofyan to the extent that Ma'aviah's sonYazeed could play the
havoc of the heartless wholesale massacre at Karbala, and his issues,
the Ommayids, followed by the Abbasides, killed the holy Imams of the
House of the Holy Prophet, one after another, until the eleventh of
them, and the Twelfth one, like Jesus, was rescued by God to be kept
alive as per the will of the Lord.

**Fatema's house attacked**

IN COMPLIANCE WITH God's command 'Ba1ligh maa onzila ilaik-' (5:67) the
Holy Prophet had inaugurated the serial of 'Imamat' (Divine guidance in
succession to the Final apostleship) and had placed Ali as the First in
charge of it, and had declared it at the historic ceremonial event at
Ghadeer-e-Khum, before the multitude of the thousands of the Hajies, on
18.12.10 A.H. at the conclusion of which event was revealed 5:6..
.declaring the religion to be per- fect and Islam to be the religion for
man, accepted by God. In pursuance of the expressed divine will of the
Lord, Ali could not recognise or yield to the man-made authority set up
at the 'Saqeefa' and hence had not paid fealty to it.

**Ali to exercise patience**

THE HOLY PROPHET who knew through the divine gift of knowledge, as to
what would happen after him till the Day of Judgment, had advised Ali to
exercise the maximum possible patience against every atrocious move that
might confront him.In compliance with the apostolic will, without the
least interference into, or any concern with the affairs that proceeded
at the ' Saqeefa' , Ali had retired with a determination not to get out
until he collects together all the notes on the Holy Qur'an which he had
from the Holy Prophet about the external as well as the internal
meanings of the Final Word of God.

Without Ali being subjugated, the authority set up at the 'Saqeefa'
could not have the seal of the recognition of it, by the Holy Ahlul-Bait
and Ali was now the Chief of the Ahlul-Bait, the House of the Holy
Prophet, and he would not yield. The retirement of Ali was exploited and
a charge of conspiracy was coined and the people of the newly set up
rule, headed by Omar, collected at the door of Fatema, demanded Ali to
come out of the house. The reply from inside was that it was a vow Ali
had made not to come out until the collection of the impor- tant notes
on the Holy Qur'an is not completed. But the insurgent crowd would not
agree and a big row was set into action.

**Fatema's house threatened with fire**

THE HOLY LADY Fatema, bereaved only a day or two before, deeply sunk in
grief, standing behind the door of her abode re- monstrated saying:-

"0' people! it is only yesterday that my father, the Holy Prophet,
departed from you and today you have the audacity to attack his house in
which his daughter is mourning for him, which door he did not enter but
with a salutation on its inmates. Some historians say that fire and
firewood was already collected at the door ofthe holy house with the
threat to set the abode on fire and some say fire was already kindled.
However, Shibli No mani in his well-known ' Alfarooq' says:-

Some say that fire was already set, but with the short tem- perdness of
Omar this act was not improbable." (AF)

**Fatema wounded**

A VIOLENT KICK at the door from one among the crowd pushed it down on
the side of the Holy Lady Fatema standing behind it, breaking her rib
and the 'Khatoone Jannat' the Queen of Paradise, fell unconscious and
ultimately the hit and the wound killed the Holy Mother along with the
baby son in her womb. According to the tradition of the Ahlul-Bait, the
Baby was already named 'Mohsin.'

**Ali's patiencc**

EVEN AT THIS juncture the Lion of God abided with the will of the Holy
Prophet and like a helpless one, kept quiet without any resistance or
retaliation which, if he had only willed to resort, would have played
havoc the insurgents.

In short, if the valour and prowess of Ali during the time of the Holy
Prophet in the establishment of Islam and its propagation was a wonder,
his patience and forbearance and fortitude which he exercised against
all the atrocities from even the cowards among the people, was no less a
surprise and a wonder.

The point quite obvious in this regard is that to Ali the first concern
was the safety, security and the maintenance of the faith and not the
owning of any fortune through any temporal power, though the right to be
the temporal leader as well, besides being the spiritual guide, in the
place of the Holy Prophet, was of none but his, which fact is
unanimously acknowledged and openly declared even by his antagonists.

**Ali arrested**

HOWEVER, WHEN THE crowd shouted to Ali to come out, and even the door
of his abode had fallen on the side of his wife the Holy Lady Fatema,
throwing her down unconscious and seriously hurt, Ali came out. He was
tied by a rope round his neck and the world witnessed the unbelievable
sight of Ali the Lion of God, the Con- queror of Khaiber, the Victor
against the giant warriors of Arabia, Omar ibne Abda'ood and Marhab,
being dragged by the people to the court of the Kalifate. It is to this
extent that Ali fulfilled his promise of patience, to the Holy
Prophet.

The Holy Prophet had predicted to Ali saying:-

"Others will be preferred to thee when they will not be in their own
rights. Resign thyself to it until thou reacheth me at the Spring
(Kauthar)." (S.M.)

Ali reads out Salman's mind

ALONG WITH ALI, was also arrested Salman the well known faithful
companion of the Holy Prophet and the servant of Ali, on whom the Holy
Prophet had conferred the exclusive and the unique honour of declaring
him as:-

"As- Salman minna Ahlul- Bait

Salman is of we the Ahlut-Bait Salman was also tied with a rope and was
marched behind Ali. Salman was a very old gentleman, who, according to
the historians, was more than two hundred years old, for he is reported
to have died in 35 A.H while he was 250 years of age and according to
some historians his age at his death was 350. (EHI) WhiIe marching under
arrest, the oldest devotee of the House of the Holy Prophet could not
keep pace with the men dragging him and at the same time he was sunk
deep in wonder and surprise saying at heart :-

"What! is this the same Ali, the ever victorious Lion of God whose
strength is unconquerable and whose valiance and prowess matchless, who
fought and killed the giant warriors of Arabia in single combats and who
knew no running way from the battlefields even in the worst of the
circurnstances and when even the closest of the compantons had deserted
the Holy Prophet?"

Lost in his wonder and the irreconcilable surprise at the absolute
patience of Ali, poor old Salman could not keep pace with those who were
dragging him violently. Suddenly a violent blow from some one in the
crowd, fell on the neck of Salman with a shout to be quick. Ali, who was
walking qtietly under the rope, looking down, sounded to Salman behind
him:-

"Salman ! the blow thou didst receive is the reward for thy wonder at
heart about my silence and patience. what dost thou know Salman ! when
to draw the sword and when to he quiet. This is to fulfil the will of
the Lord declared to me through His Prophet.

**The open cnmity becomes settled hypocrisy**

WITH THE ESTABLISHMENT of Islam and the successful conclusion of the
ministry of Muhammad, the Last Apostle of God, ended the need to fight
any open enemy of the faith or of the Holy Prophet, for there did not
remain any in the land who did not profess the faith who could defy it
openly. As long as the faith was not firmly established and there were
the open enemies strong enough to openly attack Islam and the muslims,
there was the need of Ali, the Lion of God the ' Karraran ghaira
fararran' , who knew only to fight the enemy of God and of the Holy
Prophet and he knew not even to turn his face away from his antagonist,
far from runing away from him. Thus Ali was given to the Holy Prophet,
with the godly strength, the matchless bravery and the wonderful prowess
to play the role of the Ever-Triumphant Protector of the faith and the
faithful. But with the extirpation of the open opposition and aggression
against the faith, ended the duty of the Lion of God, of an open fight
against any open enemy, and with the departure of the Holy Prophet from
this world, started the problem of the preservance of the faith and the
maintenance of the fellowship of its adherents, lest the tender plant of
the just established faith which had not yet been sufficiently rooted in
the minds and the hearts of the people, would perish for ever, and there
was no other prophet to come to re-establish it. Until the firm
establishment of Islam, there were the disbelievers who repeatedly
attempted to regain the power and authority for their pagan cult, and
with the firm establishment of Islam as an unshakable power, and the
Holy Prophet departing from this world, started the struggle within the
ranks of those who had embraced the faith half-heartedly, for power and
authority which they rest-lessly waited to own for themselves. The one
impediment in the way of these opportunists, was the problem of the
declared position of the 'Ahlul', Bait', particularly of Ali who was the
declared Vicegerent of the Holy Prophet, openly announced both at the
very outset of the apostolic ministry (at the ' Daawate-Asheera' the
Feast of the the Relatives) and finally at the conclusion of the
apostleship, at ' Ghadeer- e- Khum' . Thus the pre Islamic enmity
against the Holy Prophet now changed its course against the 'Ahlul-
Bait' particularly against Ali, for without subjugating Ali and
neglecting the ' Ahlul- Bait' none could have his own way.

**The three classes of the people- The believers, the disbelievers and
the Hypocrites**

WITH THE ADVENT of Islam, the people of Mecca and Madina got sorted
into two main groups- the believers and the disbelievers, and among
those who professed belief in Islam, there were the sincere ones the '
Momins' and those who had joined the ranks succumbing to the changed
circumstances over which they could not gain any hold, they were called
the ' Monaftqs' or the Hypo- crites. As regards the sincere believers
gnd the hypocrites, Holy Qur'an clearly exposes the fact:-

The dwellers of the desert say ' We believe.' Say thou (0' Our Apostle
Muhammad unto them)' Ye do not believe (in fact). (Hence) say ye 'we
have submitted ' (i.e., only embraced Islam) And the faith has not yet
entered your heart-"49:14 Even the declaration of the hypocrites,
bearing witness to the apostleship of the Holy Prophet Muhammad has been
flatly denied by God, as a false profession:-

"When the hypocrites come unto thee (0' Our Apostle Muhammad) say they
(unto thee) ' Verily thou art the Apostle of God, and God knoweth that
verily thou art His apostle, and God beareth witness that the hypocrites
are certainly liars."63:1

Thus besides the evidence of history, there is the unchalleng- able
verdict of the Word of God about the fact that those who profess- ed
Islam and called themselves as muslims, during the time of the Holy
Prophet, all were not sincere. There were those in whose hearts the
faith, far from getting rooted therein, had not even entered, they were
only muslims (49 : 14) i.e., those submitted to the circumstances
unavoidable for them. Verse 63 :1 clearly gives out that the
lip-profession of the faith in the apostleship of the Holy Prophet was
not also the genuine conviction at the heart of the people and the
people have been clearly termed by God himself, as the Hypocrites.

**What happened to the Hypocrites**

BESIDES HISTORY, THE Holy Quran is too eloquent and too aloud to
declare the fact, about the hypocrites being in a definite group of
their own and how busy were the hypocrites in their subversive plans.
The importance and the significance of making known the presence of the
hypocrites among the muslims and their inimical activities, is quite
evident from a separate chapter altogether being assigned to describe
their conduct and character and declare their evil intentions and
devices.

The wonder is, what happened to the hypocrites, that as the Holy
Prophet departs from this world, there is a sudden silence about them,
and there is no mention of them at all in any of the writings of the
muslims. The amazing questions arise:-

1. Have they all suffered a wholesale death, immediately at the
departure of the Holy Prophet, which no history reports?

2. Or, were they only waiting for the departure of the Holy Prophet and
immediately as he left this world, they all, overnight became sincere
believers, that there is no mention of them at all?

3. Or, they are those who have joined together and formed an organised
front against the House of the Holy Prophet, for only in such a case
none can expect the hypocrites themselves to call themselves hypocrites
thereafter.

Otherwise where have they gone? What has happened to them that none
speaks or makes mention of them at all?

**The Possible and the Acceptable Answer**

THE ONE AND the only object of the hypocrites and their hidden
subversive activities, was the regaining of the power and authority from
the Holy Prophet, which they could not do until his stay in this world,
They only waited for his departure, and the moment he left, they had
their own way and had successfully established themselves in power and
authority neglecting the House of the Holy Prophet, (i.e., the Holy
Ahlul-Bait).

Thus the dirty body of hypocrisy went under the cloak of general Islam
and whenever the evils of hypocricy became too ob- vious to be hidden or
to be defended, they were termed as uninten- tional indiscretion of. a
well- intended ' Ijtehad.'

The Holy Qur'an and the history is there to vouch that as hypocrites,
during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet, they tried the worst possible
for them to displace the authority of the Holy Prophet by deserting him
in the battles and ultimately even to kill him on his return from the
battle of Hunain, and it is a historic fact that Hozaifa the faithful
companion of the Holy Prophet, had the list of the plotters who were
shown in their very person to the Holy Prophet, by heavens, through a
timely lighting. And now as Muslims, having the power and authority
which they lusted for so long, they easily bypassed the Holy Ahlul- Bait
and established themselves over and above them, and planned to do away
with them totally, by killing the godly ones one after another. Thus,
with the departure of the Holy Prophet, ended the peace and the safety
for the Ahlul-Bait, and started the age of their godly patience and
endurance against the atrocious murderous treachery of the people, and
simultaneously began the persecution and the slaughter of their
devotees.

**The Life in the House of the Ahlul-Bait**

FATEMA DURING HER lifetime, set the best examples of a riahteous and a
correct womanhood on earth.

Her marriage was so simple that if the muslims, particularly those who
proudly claim to be the devotees of the Ahlul-Bait, only follow the
example in their practical life, they will themselves be the happiest
souls in their practical life.

Fatema' s obedience to her husband was ideal and the contented life she
led was a Iesson to every muslim woman. Her godliness and godmindedness
was a beacon light of guidance to womanhood.

Her treatment to her handmaid ' Fizza' is a practical example to every
righteous woman. In her household life even alternate day Fatema herself
minded the whole work of the household and Fizza was given rest.

It was Fatema who said that the best thing for a woman is neither to
cast her glance on any ' Non-Mahram man nor to expose herself to his
glance. It is worth imagining that if women follow this Fatemite
Watchword for chaste Womanhood how pure and safe will be womanhood and
how graceful, healthy, happy and holy would have been the human society
today.

**Fatema's Position**

THE DISTINaIVE AND the distinguishing titles of the Holy Lady Fatema,
the only surviving issue and the most beloved one of the Holy Prophet
have already been given above. The following are a few of the well-known
declarations of the Holy Prophet about this Holy soul:-

Mansoor bin Makramah records that the Holy Prophet said:-

Fatema is a piece of my flesh. The one incurred her wrath, incurred my
wrath too."

A scion of mine is Fatema" said the Holy Prophet " Whatever maketh her
happy, maketh me happy, and whatever fllleth her with pain, filleth me
too with pain."

Fatema is a part of mine, whosoever annoyeth her,hath annoyed me, and
whosoever annoyeth me, hath annoyed God, and whosoever annoyed God, hath
turned an infidel." (SB., SM., KU., MsT., Etc.)

Before assessing the correct value of the above apostolic decla-
rations, one should remember the position of the Holy Prophet under the
following announcement of the Holy Qur'an :-

He (the Holy Prophet) speaketh not anything of his own inclination save
what hath been revealed to him (by God)." 53:3 It is how for every
believer in the Holy Qur'an as the revealed Word of God, to say that if
what is declared by the Lord is true, whatever the Holy Prophet said
about his Ahlul-Bait, including the above announcements of his about
Fatema, was it not the will of the Lord that was communicated to mankind
through His Apostle?

About annoying the Holy Prophet, the Holy Qur'an declares:-

"Those who annoy God and His Apostle, God hath cursed them in this
world and the hereafter, and He has pre- pared for them an abasing
chastisement." 33:57

**The miserable plight of the Holy Lady**

THIS HOLY LADY Fatema, the dearest of the Holy Prophet, the wife of the
First Holy Imam Ali, the Holy Mother of the Eleven Holy Imams, about
whom the Holy Prophet had taken the special care to repeatedly announce
her divine heavenly position, was the first victim of the treachery of
the people immediately after the departure of the Holy Prophet.

First of all, she was the most struck with sorrow and grief at the
departure of the Holy Prophet from this world. When the Holy Prophet was
about to breathe his last, he found Fatema standing before him shedding
tears. He embraced her and said something in her ears. The Holy Lady who
was sunk in sorrow and grief and restlessly shedding tears, on hearing
what was told into her ears by her departing Holy Father, went into a
smile and looked cheerful. When asked about what was it that suddenly
turned her sorrow into cheer and made her smile, she said that the Holy
Prophet consoled her saying:-

" Grieve not fatema! for thou will be the first among my Ahlul Bait to
meet me, and it is a very short interval of a few counted days of
separation."

It is already said that soon after the funeral of the Holy Prophet,
only a day or two had passed instead of offering condolences to the
bereaved holy family, an insurgent crowd surrounded the abode of this
Holy Lady, a kick at her door by a tyrant caused the door to fall on her
side, wounding her, breaking her rib, the wound which proved fatal.

The Holy Lady wept so much for her father the Holy Prophet that even
the people in the neighbourhood could not bear the laments. Besides the
grief and the sorrow for her father, was the treat- ment meted cut to
her husband Ali, the Vicegerent of the Holy Prophet.

To add to her grief, she was deprived of her rights over the garden of
Fidak which was bequeathed to her by her father the Holy Prophet. To
know the details as to how her claim was rejected by the Kalifate, the
reader may refer to Saheeh Bokhari which relates from Ayesha a detailed
note about Fatema's claiming the ' Fidak' and how it was rejected and
how Fatema got annoyed and to whom it was that she did not even talk,
until she departed from this world.


