Fatima Martyred : Succumbing To the Wound
=========================================

THUS AFTER SEVENTY-FIVE or ninety days after the departure of the Holy
Prophet, as prophesied, the Holy Lady passed away. But before breathing
her last she called Ali and desired that none of those particularly a
few ones who had turned hostile to the House of the Prophet and violated
the will of the Apostle of God, should be informed of her departure from
this world, and that she should be quietly buried in the darkness of the
night.

Some reporters say that when the body was lowered into the grave, by
Ali, in the grave appeared the two hands of the Holy Prophet, with a
voice addressing Ali:-

" Come on ! Ali! return thou the part of mine to me." It is said that
Ali shedding tears responded to the voice saying:- " I am ashamed of
thee 0' Apostle of God,for I took Fatema from thee sound in her body but
I am now returning her unto thee rib broken."

Thus the Holy Lady was the first of the martyrs among the Ahlul-Bait,
after the departure of the Holy Prophet.

It is now left to the intelligent ones of the readers to judge the
position of those who annoyed this holy one of God, (i.e., Lady Fatema)
under the apostolic announcements of the Holy Prophet and the verse of
the Holy Qur'an referred to above. It is authentically reported that the
Holy Lady once referring to her miserable plight and the sorrowful life
she had to lead, addres- sing her father, the Holy Prophet, standing
before his grave, said :- " Oh! Father dear! After thee, fell on me such
miseries that had they fallen on bright days, the bright days would have
turned into darkest nights."

The Holy Lady of Light left behind two sons and two daughters whose
ages at the time of her departing from them, were:-

Hasan
about 8 years.
Husain
about 7 years.

Zainab (daughter)
about 6 years.

Umme Kulthoom (daughter)
about 5 years.

**The Ahlul-Bait knew their lot, beforehand**

IT IS A universally acknowledged fact that every one of the Holy
Ahlul-Bait, knew beforehand, everything that would befall in his or her
life in this world, and the manner in which his or her earthly sojourn
will end.

1. The Holy Prophet had announced a year ago that that year was the
last one of his stay on earth and the pilgrimage he would perform that
year, would be the last one and no pilgrimage thereafter he would have
to do.

2. The Holy Prophet had already informed every one of the members of
his Ahlul-Bait, every calamity that would befall them and the
treacherous course the people would adopt after him with regard to his
family.

3. The Holy Prophet had informed particularly about the calamities that
would befall Husain and the details of the gruesome massacre at
Karbala.

4. To Ali the Holy Prophet had already said that he was seeing Ali with
his (Ali's) beard drenched with the blood of his (Ali's) head, in the
Mosque of Kufa.

5. Fatema had already foretold even her handmaid Fizza about her
departure. She was informed by the Holy Prophet about her stay in the
world after him.

6. Ali even used to point out to Abdur Rahman ibne Muljim as his
assassin, when there was no apparent sign of ibne Muljim entertaining
any idea of killing Ali. Days before his martyrdom, Ali had been
continuously informing his family about his destin- ed departure and had
already given the details of his funeral and the location of the place
of the burial.

7. Hasan knew his end and had advised Husain to be patient against the
atrocious behaviour of the people and not to insist upon his burial
besides his grandfather the Holy Prophet when it will be resisted and
prevented.

8. Husain's martyrdom was already prophecied by the Holy Prophet with
all the details of the Tragedy. The Holy Prophet had even given a
handful of a mysterious dust to Umme Salema his wife, saying that it was
the dust of the plain of Karbala where Husain will be martyred and when
Husain would be martyred, the dust would turn into blood, and it
happened so.

it is reported that Fatema before her departure, called her daughter
Zainab to her and willed to her that on the day when Husain would ask
her for some torn clothes, it will be the last departure of Husain from
her (Zainab), then to kiss Husain on her behalf on Husain's throat on
which will pass the sword of Shimar the assassin. Fatema again called
Husain to her and willed to him, that before his ultimate separation
from her (Zainab) to kiss on her behalf, on the two sides of her
(Zainab's) arms on which will be tied the ropes when the ladies of the
camp will be taken captives by the Yazidian forces.

**Ali's Regard for Fatema**

ALl's REGARD FOR Fatema was the same as was the regard of the Holy
Prophet for Lady Khadija. Until the life of Lady Khadija, the Holy
Prophet did not accept the hand of any other woman and likewise until
the life of Fatema, Ali did not marry any other woman.

The critics of Islam, in their ignorance of the truth, betray their
prejudice in their venture to criticise saying that the Holy Prophet was
extremely polygamous. Such prejudiced critics should know that when the
Holy Prophet was in the bloom of his youth, he was not only contented
but was the happiest husband of a lady in the decline of her age and the
death of the lady who was older than him- self, he observed the whole of
the year following the death,as Aamul-Huzn, i.e., the Year of Grief It
is an elementary truth of human life that if a man be lusty in his
sensual desires, particularly matrimonial, he would be such in his
youth. When the Holy Prophet was in the fullness of his youth and when
he had an aged wife, and if he had only desired to have a young lady,
there was already the offer from the people of Mecca to give the fairest
woman of his own choice, if he only spares his condemning idolatry, but
he bluntly refused. The fact is that the attachment of the Holy Prophet
to Lady Khadija was so much that none dared to offer his daughter and no
woman had the courage of even thinking of offering herself. It was only
at the departure of Lady Khadija that Abu Bakr could offer his daughter
Ayesha who was of about nine years. History is there to vouch that when
Ayesha was offered to him, at Mecca, the Holy Prophet refused and it was
only in Madina after the migration that the Holy Prophet could not
reject the offer of Abu Bakr any longer, just to please the companion
that the offer was accepted, other- wise he would not have asked for the
hand of a girl of only nine, when he had already crossed the fiftieth
year of his age and when there were only a few years before his
departure from this world. And the alliance of Hafsa with the Holy
Prophet, was only to please his other companion Omar. Similarly, came
one after another, ladies, some of them far advanced in age imploring
the Holy Prophet to give them the honour, privilege and the pride to be
the wives of the Apostle of God. As the Mercy unto the Worlds which he
was, the Holy Prophet could not deny the grace asked for, from him.

To know how happy and harmonious was the life of the Holy Prophet with
his aged wife Khadija-let us hear what Carlyle reports about it:-

This young brilliant Ayesha was, one day, questioning him: " Now am not
I better than Khadija? She was a widow; old, and had lost her looks :
you love me better than you did her?"-

"No by Allah! answered Mahomet: " No, by Allah!" She believed in me
when none else would believe. In the whole world I had but one friend,
and she was that!" - Seid, his Slave, also believed in him ; these with
his young Cousin Ali, Abu Taleb's son, were his first converts.
Carlyle's Sartor Resartus.

It is unimaginable that one who did not think of any other woman
besides his wife, when he was a full-grown youth, to have ever thought
of any woman, in the age ofabout 55 years. The truth is that none of the
ladies besides Lady Khadija, did the Holy Prophet desire to marry. They
were either offered by their parents or the ladies themselves
volunteered with prayers to accept them. The Holy Prophet, the Mercy
unto the Worlds, could say no to none.

It was perhaps a providential plan to prove to man the weakness in
women that even the Apostle of God who never talked or acted but by the
revealed will of the Lord, having mercifully accepted the ladies in
matrimony, could not escape the miseries that these ladies inflicted on
him which went to the extent that for about a full month or even more,
he discarded all of them and the suspension of his connection with the
ladies was so long, that people even suspected him to have divorced the
ladies and it was at the revelation of verse (66:1) that he resumed his
connections with them. See the interpretation of this in any commentary
of the Holy Qur'an by any commentator of any school of thought, be he a
muslim or a non-muslim.

This was definitely to show to man that when even an apostle of God who
is the most balanced head and the divinely conditioned personality,
inspite of maintaining full justice among them, could not escape the
torment of the envy of the women against each other, how can an ordinary
man manage with more than one wife at a time. Even the sanction of
having four wives at a time is only a sanction under emergencies and
exigencies and not an order. The closing clause of the verse (4:3)
clearly says that if equity could not be nbsp;maintained then, man
should take only one wife and the verse further clearly asserts that man
will never be able to maintain equity among the women, which means that
he can take only one at a time. If any one misinterprets the law to suit
his own fancy, law can never be responsible nor the Law-giver.

It must also be remembered that it was not Islam that started Polygamy
in the world. Most of the ancient prophets and even the great sages in
India who are worshipped as gods or the incarnations of gods, were
polygamous. On the other hand, Islam is the first of all the religious
orders of the world, which controlled and regu- lated the matrimonial
life of man and woman, protecting the rights of woman and restricted the
unbridled and unlimited polygamy in such a logical and realistic way
that it made man either naturally monogamous or got the lust in man for
sexual enjoyment, fully harnessed, loaded with heavy responsibilities to
his wives, safe- guarding the rights of woman. The responsibilities or
the restric- tions imposed on polygamy are such that the Holy Qur'an
clearly warns man saying it will be impossible for him to bear them.
What Islam has done for woman, no other religion in the world had even
thought of.

**The Holy Qur'an - Its Compilation**

IT IS A historic fact acknowledged on all hands that as and when the
Holy Qur'an was revealed in Suras, in parts of Suras, and in lonely
verses, it was then and there recorded by the scripts engag- ed by the
Holy Prophet for the purpose. It is also said that at the receipt of
each revelation, the Holy Prophet used to direct the scripts to place it
in a certain sura and thus by the end of the ministry the Book of God,
the Holy Qur'an, was completely compiled in the form of a perfect Book
and before his departure, the Holy Prophet declared:-

quot;1 leave behind amidst you, Two great things, the Book of God and
my Ahlut-Bait. Should ye be attached to these Two, never, never will ye
get astray after me, for verily these Two will never be separated from
each other until they both meet me at the Spring of Kauther." (TA., DM.,
Sm., and others)

The above declaration of the Holy Prophet, the genuineness of which is
universally acknowledged by all the traditionists, clearly indicates
that at the time of the departure of the Holy Prophet there was the Holy
Qur'an in the form of a complete Book approved by him. Otherwise the
statement on the part of the Holy Prophet that he was leaving the Book
will hold no truth.

Secondly, there is the clear undertaking by God Himself about the
preservation of the Holy Qur'an in its originality and purity, and the
Holy Book being guarded by God Himself:-

Varily We have sent down the Reminder (the Holy Qur'an) and We
Ourselves shall be its Guardian. 15:9

Who can believe that the above declared will of the Lord, expressed as
a challenge to those who had swallowed up the previous scriptures, was
not fulfilled and any human hand to have obstructed its fulfilment.

Besides history loudly declares and it is acknowledged by all the
traditionists that the following persons had the full text of the Holy
Qur'an in the form of a complete Book which had been read out to the
Holy Prophet and which he had approved-

1. Ali ibne Aid Taleb.
2. Abdullah ibne Mas'ood.
3. Ka'b ibne obai.
4. Ma'az bin Jabal.

and the copy of Ali ibne Abi-Taleb contained the explanatory and the
special notes about the external as well as the internal meaning of each
verse of the Holy Book, given by the Holy Prophet RN., TIB.

The question arises that when the above historic facts were known to
one and all in Madina and Mecca and to the world around, where was the
necessity of any fresh endeavour on the part of any one to collect the
Holy Qur'an anew:

It is said that the steps to collect the Qur'an were first taken during
the regime of the first Kalif and continued during the whole of the
regime of the second Kalif and ultimately the endeavour ended in the
regime of the third Kalif, without any result, for, history says that
the whole collection was deposited with Ummol Momineen Ayesha, the
daughter of the first Kalif and there, a part of the collection was
eaten away by a goat. There is no historic record to say that that
collection was ever completed and if so by whom and whether it was ever
put to any use by any one thereafter. What history says is only that the
third Kalif took some authentic copy and granted it, his official seal
as the authorised version and commanded that that version of the Holy
Qur'an only shall be followed, and in fact the same version was there in
the use of the people all the while since the departure of the Holy
Prophet hence there was not the least murmur or objection to it from any
quarter. Since the copy with the official seal was the one which was
already with them, the Ahlul-Bait also allowed it to be called the
official version.

It cannot be believed by any muslim that until about twenty five years
there was no Qur'an in the world. What was it then that the Holy Prophet
had said that he was leaving the Book of God and what happened to the
challenging declaration from God Himself (15:9) God Himself being the
Guardian of the Book which He revealed to the Holy Prophet?

There is history which declares that by the time the third Kalif set
his official seal on a copy of the Holy Qur'an and declared it as the
official version of the Holy Book, Iran had embraced Islam and the faith
had reached upto Azarbaijan on one side, and upto Egypt on the other,
and the Holy Qur'an was already in the regular daily use of the
people.

Thus the present Qur'an is the copy of the Holy Book which was compiled
in its present order and read to the Holy Prophet and approved by him
and was in use of the muslim world since then. No doubt, the copy of Ali
ibne Abi Taleb contained the special explanatory notes but when Ali
offered that copy, it was rejected by the Kalifate. However, the notes
of Ali were given out by his successor Imams, after him, to their
disciples which are found in the commentary of the Holy Qur'an based on
the version of the Ahlul-Bait. Whatever opinion about the Holy Qur'an
any one might have, but this is the Truth and to say that there was
nothing to be called a Book of God and yet the Holy Prophet said that he
was leaving it among the people is a clear calumny or that Ali ibne Abi
Taleb had the complete copy of it, but he suppressed it and did not
allow the public to have the due benefit of it, and he did not publish
it even when he had the opportunity to do it, when he was the Kalif, is
a false charge against the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imam Ali and a
blasphemy against God Himself of having taken the undertaking to guard
the Holy Book and not fulfilling His word. When one speaks of anything
of Islam or about Islam, the Holy Qur'an and the Hadith or the
Traditions of the Holy Prophet must be kept in view otherwise what will
be said, will be nothing but conjectures of no value whatsoever.

The Holy Prophet says that he has left Two very weighty things and they
will never be separated from each other until they reach him at the
'Spring Kauther'. If there was not such a book to be called the Holy
Qur'an until the third Kalif compiled it in 35 A.H. it would mean that
the Ahlul-Bait were without the Book of God for about twenty five years,
which is against the declaration of the Holy Prophet, which can never
be, which is definitely an impossi- bility for the word of the Holy
Prophet according to the Holy Qur'an, is the Word of God (53:3, 4).

If it be said that of the Ahlul-Bait Ali had a complete copy of the
Holy Qur'an and the saying of the Holy Prophet was not wrong, then the
proposition goes against the wording of the saying which is " I leave
among you" i.e., among the people, and not among the Ahlul-Bait.
Secondly , if the Book of God was secured with the AhIul-Bait with its
unavailability to the general public, how could the parting advice of
the Holy Prophet 'if ye be attacked to these Two' be enacted by the
muslims? The Truth is that when the Holy Prophet gave out the declara-
tion the ' Hadeethuth-Thaqalain'(the tradition of the Two Weighty
things), there was the Holy Qur'an with the people, the present copy of
it and it is a fact that the Ahlul-Bait will always be with the Holy
Book and the Holy Book in its present external form and with its
meanings plain as well as latent, will always be with the Ahlul-Bait.

If intelligently read, the ' Hadeethuth- Thaqalain' is a clear
guarantee or a proof-positive of the fact about the reverse of the
statement 'never will they be separated from each other', which clearly
indicates that as long as the Holy Qur'an is there in the world, there
will surely be one from the 'Ahlul-Bait'i.e., one of the di- vinely
commissioned Imams of them. It is a clear guidance that in this age also
there is one from the 'Ahlul-Bait' the last one of them the Holy Imam
Muhammad al-Mahdi. It is quite a different thing altogther,people
believing in him or not. There is God, as He is not seen some people
deny His Existence, it does not mean that the Existence of God, is
really questionable. God, the Almighty has kept certain chosen ones of
His, like ' Kidr', 'Idrees' , and 'Jesus'; some people may not believe
in this fact but it does not mean that God also is as helpless as any
one of us to be subjected to the little and the limited knowledge of the
laws of nature which we possess, whereas, He is the Independent Author
of nature and nature is subject to His will, and His will is not subject
to nature. Nature is nothing but the enactment of His Will. The motive
behind such allegations against the position of the Holy Qur'an is
obviously to say that the compilation, the preserva- tion and the
propagation of the Holy Qur'an was not done by the Ahlul-Bait but by
somebody else. This was another move to deprive the Holy ones, of their
divine right. Or it can be a charge against Ali that though he possessed
a copy of the Holy Book, he did not make it available to the muslims,
even when he once came to power as a Kalif.

Some of the scholars seem to have been misled when they speak of the
number of the verses reported to have been found in some version of the
Holy Book. They have obviously mistaken the explanatory notes might have
been there recorded besides the verses in those versions, owned by the
different people, as the verses them- selves. While arguing about the
number of the verses found in any other version with anybody else, one
should also remember the declaration of the Sixth Holy Imam Jaffar ibnc
Muhammad as-Sadiq that the Holy Qur'an is what is in between the two
pads' , i.e., nothing less and nothing more.

**The Devil's plan frustrated**

ABu SOFYAN THE old arch enemy of Islam and the Holy Prophet, thinking
Ali to have been disappointed at others getting into power, position and
authority over the Muslim Empire, deemed it an opportunity to create a
rift in the muslim ranks and to initiate a civil war among the muslims
themselves. He came to Ali and condemning the conduct of the people
against the legitimate rights of Ali, offered to aid Ali with a huge
army, if only Ali wanted to revolt against the Kalifate established by
the people. But Ali's reply utterly frustrated the Devil's plan to bring
ruin to Islam and the Muslims. Ali told Abu Sofyan :-

" You wanted to ruin Islam and the Muslims during the liftime of the
Holy Prophet and now also you aim to do the same, but Ali will never
allow you to succeed."


