Justifications Of Some Orientalists
===================================

Springer, a German Orientalist, says,

“Not only did \`Umar al-Faruq aim at educating the Bedouin Arabs, but
also he wished to save their courage and strong religious belief so that
they would be the rulers of the world. Writing and expansion of
knowledge were not compatible with this aim.”[^1]

Springer’s previous text reveals that the author intended to take
advantage of \`Umar’s decision of the prohibition of recording the
Hadith so as to expose that the spread of Islam depended upon an
illiterate power, and that neither writing nor was the expansion of
knowledge compatible, in \`Umar’s conception, with the Bedouin courage
and \`Umar’s combative spirituality. If truth be told, Orientalists, all
the time, used to disperse false and unproven claims and delusions in
their essays, such as the aforementioned one.

Another Orientalist, namely, G. Schacht, has claimed the nonexistence of
even a single authenticated Hadith about the Islamic jurisprudence since
all of the available ones were invented after the demise of the Holy
Prophet for pure religious interests![^2]

Moreover, Goldtzeher exceeds the limits when he claims that all the
narrations regarding the recordings were invented and that all the
compilations of Hadith that belong to the first age of Islam were
fabricated.[^3]

However, he has issued many such baseless opinions. Muslim authors, too,
have adopted such opinions. Isma’il ibn Ad-ham, in his thesis published
in AH 1353, claims that all the authenticated Hadiths do not rely upon
firm fundamentals and principles; rather they are doubtful and clearly
shown as invented.[^4]

For more details about the unsubstantiated opinions of the Orientalists
and their answers, we refer the gentle reader to Dr. Muhammad Mustafa
Al-A\`dhamiy’s book entitled *Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy* (Studies
about the Holy Hadith) and Muhammad Abu-Zahw’s book of *al-Hadith
wa’l-Muhaddithun* (The Hadith and Hadithists), as well as many other
books comprising refutations of these sayings and fabrications, where
this topic is discussed thoroughly. In this place, we see that to shun
such unfounded vanities is the best thing to select.

[^1]: Sayyid Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy: Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah 530
as quoted from Imtiyaz Ahmad: Dala'il al-Tawthiq al-Mubakkir Li’l-Sunnah
wa’l-Hadith (Significances of the Early Documentation) 230-231.

[^2]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy wa-Tarikhih
and G. Schacht: The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence.

[^3]: In 1890, one of his studies entitled ‘Muhammadanische Studiee’ was
published.

[^4]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy, 27 as
quoted from Dr. Mustafa al-Siba\`iy: al-Sunnah wa Makanatuha
fi’l-Tashriy. Mahmud Abu-Rayyah has recorded that Muhammad Abduh, Dr.
Tawfiq Sidqiy, Rashid Rida and many others believe that the Holy Qur’an
alone must be followed and the Holy Sunnah must thus be thrown away.
(See Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy, 26.)


