The Last Reason: The Author’s Opinion
=====================================

It is unfeasible that the prohibition of reporting, writing down, and
recording the Hadith was simultaneous or ascribed to one factor only. As
a matter of fact, there must be a number of factors and introductions
that contributed in the rise of such decision. In my conception, these
factors and introductions can be summarized in the following four
factors, yet there must have been more factors:

First Factor
------------

The first factor is the aforesaid discussion of the seventh reason, yet
in the sense that the prohibition of spreading the exegesis,
explanation, and explication of the Hadiths demonstrating the actual
status of the Ahl al-Bayt, especially the Hadiths that have definite
dimensions striking the other School of Caliphate (i.e. School of
Ijtihad and Opinionism) in the depth.

To a great extent, the reporting of the Ahl al-Bayt’s merits without
enlightenment was not intended by the decision of the comprehensive
prohibition from reporting and recording the Hadith. In the same point,
the prohibition from spreading the flaws and shortcomings of the famous
personalities of Quraysh is included, since the Holy Qur'an and the Holy
Prophet have praised certain persons and condemned others.

Hence, the Sahabah’s explanatory interpretation of the Holy Qur'an, the
expounding recitations of the Qur'anic texts,[^1] and the merits and
flaws of certain persons[^2]—all these matters were prohibited or, at
least, reduced under the claim that they would be confused with the Holy
Qur'an or it was anticipated that they would be falsely reported.

Second Factor
-------------

As the rulers did not have full acquaintance with the religious laws,
they had to, step by step, create for themselves a trend in the Islamic
legislation although many people would disagree with them about it. In
the first, the caliphs used to refer to the Sahabah as regards what they
had not known from the religious laws mentioned in the Holy Qur'an and
Sunnah and had to submit to the answers without showing any apparent
embarrassment.

However, by passage of days, these answers were characterized by finding
faults with the rulers and disputing with them on the matters involved,
as will be detailedly discussed later on in this book. For instance, it
has been narrated that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, once, recited the verse,

***“The vanguard (of Islam)—the first of those who forsook (their
homes), and of those who gave them aid, and those who follow them in
(all) good deeds.” (Holy Qur’an: 9/100)***

in an erroneous manner; therefore, Zayd ibn Thabit recited the accurate
form before him in order to show him his mistake.

However, \`Umar insisted on his mistake, and Zayd said, “Amir
al-Mu'minin (i.e. \`Umar) must be more knowledgeable!” Yet, \`Umar
summoned Ubayy ibn Ka\`b (the expert in the recitation of the Holy
Qur'an) and presented the question before him.

Ubayy said, “Indeed, I recited this verse in the very form recited by
Zayd ibn Thabit before the Messenger of Allah while you were abiding in
*Baqi\` al-Gharqad* (a place far away from the abode of the Holy
Prophet).” \`Umar thus commented, “You have memorized while I have
forgotten, and you devoted yourself to learning this while I was engaged
with other affairs, and you witnessed while I was absent...”[^3]

In order to evade such troubles and to lock the door of objections and
embarrassments, the best way was to prohibit the reporting, writing
down, and recording of the Hadith. Accordingly, the caliphs began to
threat and arrest the reporters of Hadith after they had ordered to
reduce reporting it.

Third Factor
------------

On later stages, the caliphs permitted themselves to be semi-sources of
the religious legislation. As a result, the conducts of the two Shaykhs,
namely Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, were legislated to be the partner of the
Holy Qur'an and Sunnah, as a first stage, and then other legislations
were enacted—all for purpose of corroborating the legislative rulership
of the caliphs besides the political authority.

As examples on this legislative authority, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab said
about the enactment of the *Salat al-Tarawih*, “Excellent is this
heresy,”[^4] and about the prohibition of the temporary marriage, “Two
issues were allowed during the age of Allah’s Messenger, but now I deem
them forbidden and will punish anyone who will violate this prohibition.
These are the temporary marriage and the allowable period (*Mut\`at*)
during the Hajj.”[^5]

Afterward, these laws have been called ‘Ijtihad’ and thus the caliph was
given the same position of the Holy Prophet and, in the intervening
time, they reduced the position of the Holy Prophet to the level of
those who issue religious verdicts according to their personal
conjectures! This process called for locking the door of reporting,
writing down, and recording the Hadith lest contradiction between the
caliph’s opinion and the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah would be manifestly
clear.

Fourth Factor
-------------

The factors of environment and society influenced the mentalities and
cultures. Those who prohibited the reporting and recording of the Hadith
grew up in a society that had not paid any attention to the recordation
and writing; rather it had concentrated on poetry, history of campaigns,
and pomposity. In fact, this was another motive that led to the issuance
of the decision of prohibiting reporting and recording the Hadith. It
goes without saying that the exaggeration in such matters, by virtue of
historical necessity, cut across the general culture of Islam.

The seven reasons previously discussed have not been convincing enough
to stand as perfect motives for the prohibition of reporting and
recording the Hadith. To explore the actual motives of the decision, we
have to, first of all, pass through two introductions that will be
useful in the discussion involved:

[^1]: The Sahabah used to recite certain Qur'anic texts with
explanation, such as that it has been narrated that the copies of the
Holy Qur'an kept by \`Ā'ishah, Hafsah, and Ummu-Salamah comprised the
following verse, “Guard strictly your (habit of) prayers, especially the
Middle Prayer;” with the addition, “the \`Asr Prayer.” Similarly, it has
been narrated that \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, Ubay ibn Ka\`b, \`Abdullah
ibn Mas\`ud, and Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib used to add the statement, “to
a fixed period’ whenever they recited the holy verse, “…seeing that ye
derive benefit from them, give them their dowers (at least) as
prescribed. 4/24” Books of Hadith and history have comprised many alike
examples.

[^2]: For instance, it has been recorded in al-Suyutiy’s al-Durr
al-Manthur 2:298 on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud that during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet, the Muslims used to add the statement,
“that \`Ali is the master of the believers,” to the following holy
verse, “O Messenger! Proclaim that which hath been sent to thee from thy
Lord. If thou didst not, thou wouldst not have fulfilled and proclaimed
His mission. And Allah will defend thee from men who mean mischief. For
Allah guideth not those who reject Faith. 5/67” Similar narrations have
been recorded about the holy verses, “O ye who believe! If a wicked
person comes to you with any news, ascertain the truth, lest ye harm
people unwittingly, and afterwards become full of repentance for what ye
have done. 49/6” “O ye who believe! Raise not your voices above the
voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk, as ye may speak
aloud to one another, lest your deeds become vain and ye perceive not.
49/2” “If ye two turn in repentance to Him, your hearts are indeed so
inclined; But if ye back up each other against him, truly Allah is his
Protector, and Gabriel, and (every) righteous one among those who
believe,- and furthermore, the angels - will back (him) up. 66/4”
“Behold! We told thee that thy Lord doth encompass mankind round about:
We granted the vision which We showed thee, but as a trial for men,- as
also the Cursed Tree (mentioned) in the Qur'an: We put terror (and
warning) into them, but it only increases their inordinate
transgression. 17/60”

[^3]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i)
11:7; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:305;
al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 3:269; al-Tha\`labiy: al-Kashf wa’l-Bayan
5:183 (with a further addition); Ibn Jinni: al-Muhtasib 1:300. Later on
in this book, many narrations regarding finding faults with \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab will be cited.

[^4]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 2:707 H. 1906; Sahih ibn Khuzaymah 2:155 H.
1100; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Sughra 1:481 H. 847; al-Bayhaqiy:
al-Sunan al-Kubra 2:493 H. 4379.

[^5]: Sharh Ma\`ani al-Akhbar 2:146; Sa\`id ibn Mansur: Kitab al-Sunan
1:352 H. 852; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 8:355, 10:113, 23:365; Ibn
Hazm: al-Muhalla 7:107; al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:366;
al-Jassas:Ahkam al-Qur'an 2:153.


