Analysis And Conclusion
=======================

As the second introduction and its appendages has been elaboration of
our opinion as regards the prohibition of recording the Hadith, and in
order not to avoid reference to some of the appertained wonderments and
probabilities, it seems necessary to cite \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s
justifications for the prohibition of recording the Hadith. As a matter
of fact, he presented two justifications only. First, he anticipated
that the Muslims would be influenced by the Ahl al-Kitab and, second, he
anticipated that the Muslims would follow the Holy Prophet’s
instructions and forsake the Holy Qur'an.

However, Ibn Hazm has regarded as improbable that \`Umar’s prohibition
of recording the Hadith included the Holy Sunnah; rather the decision,
according to Ibn Hazm’s opinion, was aimed at the very tales of the past
nations. In this regard, he says,

“The meaning of \`Umar’s prohibition of reporting and recording the
Hadith, had this thing been true, is manifested in the narration that I
recorded on the authority of Qaradhah.[^1] \`Umar only prohibited
reporting the narratives regarding the past nations and their likes. To
prohibit reporting the conducts and norms of the Holy Prophet is
absolutely violation. It is impermissible for anyone to believe that an
ordinary Muslim individual may prohibit the spread of the Holy Prophet’s
heritage.

On this account, it will be extremely unacceptable to think that \`Umar
would do so. My proof is that \`Umar himself reported many things from
the Holy Prophet. Had the reporting of the Hadith been discommended,
\`Umar would have contradicted himself when he reported very much from
the Holy Prophet. It is impermissible for any Muslim individual to
believe that \`Umar had prohibited a matter and than he himself did
it.”[^2]

Imitating Ibn Hazm, Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib deemed unacceptable to
say the \`Umar ibn al-Khattab prohibited the Sahabah from reporting and
recording the Hadith or imprisoned \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud and others
when they violated this decision because this claim is contrary to
sense.[^3]

Nevertheless, a deep investigation in the events of the first age of
Islam will unquestionably prove that the arguments of Ibn Hazm and his
fans have not been accurate as they are far away from the reality. The
uninterruptedness of the narrations that reported \`Umar’s having
decided to prohibit recording and reporting the Hadith are undeniable
and irrefutable.

Other narrations have confirmed that \`Umar’s decision generally
included any sort of Hadith and any Sahabiy. Moreover, it has been
authentically narrated that \`Umar treated the reporters and recorders
of Hadith with ultimate brutality. This fact cannot be denied save by
unreasonable contenders.

On this account, Ibn Hazm and his fans have attempted to invent
justifications for \`Umar’s deed. Yet, they have had nothing other than
regarding as improbable or wonderments that are not based upon any
scientific ground.

Regarding \`Umar’s ordering Qaradhah and his companions to reduce
reporting the Holy Prophet’s narrations, it must be exposed to one of
two probabilities; either \`Umar accused them all of fabricating lies
against the Holy Prophet or he ordered them to conceal the revelations
of Almighty Allah that were said to the Holy Prophet in private.

Neither Ibn Hazm nor would anyone of his fans accept any of these two
probabilities. Yet, I accept the first probability provided that another
matter is added to it. My proof on this is that \`Umar used to accuse
his officials of bribery and very often he seized half of their fortunes
in addition to the fact that he used to be severe with them to the
degree that his famous rod played on their bodies over and over again!
\`Umar’s general behaviors with the Sahabah proves that he distrusted
them, railed at them, and exposed their defects to the publics.

Because Ibn Hazm and his fans would never accept the two aforementioned
probabilities, they have had to claim that \`Umar prohibited reporting
and recording the narrations concerning the manners of the past nations
only. This voluntary claim cannot withstand in the face of the many
evidences inferred from the narrations that recorded the decision of
\`Umar’s having prohibited recording and reporting the Hadith.

To explain, the narrations intended have carried general sense and
\`Umar’s conducts as regards his application of the decision of
prohibition indicate generality, not specification, and his well-known
brutality has been too excessive to include a definite sort of
narration. \`Umar prevented \`Ammar ibn Yasir to report an undoubted
incident (concerning the Dry Ablution; *Tayammum*) that \`Umar himself
witnessed during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet!

Thus, \`Umar’s decision of prohibiting reporting and recording the
Hadith is not restricted to the narrations reporting the manners and
tales of the past nations although it is probable that he opted for this
justification in order to hide the actual purpose beyond his decision,
which is related to the psychological backgrounds of \`Umar who, during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet and in the beginning of the Divine
Mission, was prohibited from tracking and reporting the traditions of
the Jews. Hence, his decision could act as negative reaction of the Holy
Prophet’s situation against his reporting the Jews’ traditions.

As a result, \`Umar bore malice against reporting and recording any
tradition, including the Holy Prophet’s, whether these traditions were
authentic or not or whether they related to the manners of the past
generations or not.

Khalid ibn \`Urfutah narrated that \`Umar said: Once, I… copied a book
belonging to the Ahl al-Kitab and brought him before the Holy Prophet.

“What do you have in your hand, \`Umar?” asked the Holy Prophet.

“This is a book that I have copied so as to increase my knowledge,”
answered I.

The Holy Prophet became so angry that both of his cheeks turned red. He
then called people to gather. Having seen this situation, the Ansar knew
that the Holy Prophet was enraged; they therefore armed themselves and
surrounded the minbar. The Holy Prophet then said,

“O People: I have been given the comprehensives and seals of good
wording (of knowledge), which has been briefed for me. I have hence
given them to you as white and pure as they are. You must thus neither
be confused nor be deceived by the nonbelievers.”

Soon after that, I (\`Umar) stood up and declared, “I have accepted
Allah as my Lord, Islam as my religion, and you as the Messenger.”

The Holy Prophet then descended from the minbar.[^4]

According to another narration, \`Abdullah ibn Thabit reported that
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab, once, came to the Holy Prophet and said, “As I
have passed by one of my Jew friends, he recorded for me comprehensive
paragraphs from the Torah. May I show them to you?” On hearing this, the
Holy Prophet’s face changed. I (\`Abdullah) reproached \`Umar saying,
“May Allah spoil your brain! Can you not see what occurred to the Holy
Prophet’s face?” \`Umar hence shouted, “I have accepted Allah as my
Lord, Islam as my religion, and Muhammad as the Messenger.”[^5]

It has been authentically narrated that \`Umar associated the Jews and
copied some of their books. Having read these books, he liked their
materials. He therefore read these books not for investigation and
refutation; rather he was admired by their contents as he aimed at
educating himself through them. For this reason only, the Holy Prophet
became so angry since he had already warned his followers against
associating with the Jews. Likewise, the Holy Qur'an, on more than one
occasion, has declared the cunning and cheating of the Jews. In this
regard, Almighty Allah says,

***“O ye who believe! take not the Jews and the Christians for your
friends and protectors: They are but friends and protectors to each
other. And he amongst you that turns to them (for friendship) is of
them. Verily Allah guideth not a people unjust. (Holy Qur’an: 5/51)”***

***“Strongest among men in enmity to the believers wilt thou find the
Jews and Pagans. (Holy Qur’an: 5/82)”***

This incident had left a deep and negative reaction in \`Umar’s
mentality due to which he stood so severely against the reporters and
recorders of the Hadith some of whom were detained by him and others
were beaten by his famous rod. From this cause also, he confirmed the
decision of prohibition by saying, ‘This is a false wish just like that
of the Christians and the Jews.’

Supporting our discussion, Khalid ibn \`Urfutah narrated that he, once,
was sitting with \`Umar when a man from (the tribe of) \`Abd-Qays
residing in Sus was brought before him.

“You are so-and-so from A\`bd-Qays, are you not?” asked \`Umar.

“Yes, I am,” answered the man.

“You are living in Sus, are you not?” asked \`Umar.

“Yes, I am,” answered the man.

\`Umar then hit the man with a rod he had in his hand. “What have I
done, Amir al-Mu’minin?”[^6] shouted the man.

\`Umar then ordered him to sit down. When the man did, \`Umar recited,
(the holy verses)

***“In the Name of Allah, the All-compassionate and the All-merciful.
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verse of the Scripture that maketh plain. Lo!
We have revealed it, a Lecture in Arabic, that ye may understand. We
narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best of narratives in that We have
inspired in thee this Qur'an, though aforetime thou wast of the
heedless.” (Holy Qur’an: 12/1-3)***

\`Umar repeated these verses thrice and each time he recited, he beat
the man with his cane.

“What have I done, Amir al-Mu’minin?” asked the man again.

“It was you who copied the Book of Daniel, was it not?” asked \`Umar.

The man answered, “Well, I will carry out anything you will say.”

\`Umar thus instructed, “Go and erase it with fire and white wool. After
that, you must not recite it ever again and must not show it to anybody
at all. Beware! If I am informed that you will have recited it before
anybody, I will kill you under punishment.”

\`Umar then related to the man his story with that book of the Jews that
he had copied during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet… etc.[^7]

If truth be told, the decision of prohibition in this narration would
have been acceptably pleasing and accurate had it been dedicated to it.
Yet, the purpose of the decision has been trailed by many personal
opinions and intrusions that confused its path and contents.

Such a negative reaction occurred to Usamah ibn Zayd, too, when he
killed a Muslim individual thinking that the man had only declared being
Muslim because he feared of being killed. When Usamah was back, Almighty
Allah revealed the holy verse,

***“O ye who believe! When ye go abroad in the cause of Allah,
investigate carefully, and say not to any one who offers you a
salutation: ‘Thou art none of a believer!’ Coveting the perishable goods
of this life. (Holy Qur’an: 4/94)”***

Thus, Usamah became so fearful and hesitant that he abstained from
participating in Imam \`Ali’s campaigns against the breachers, the
violators, and the apostates, claiming that he would not kill Muslim
individuals. Yet, he forgot the many holy verses, Prophetic deeds,
Hadiths, and consensus of the Sahabah on the legality of putting to
death the Muslim married who commits fornication, the Muslims who deny
one of the fundamentals of Islam, the Muslims who violate the souls of
other Muslims, and many others. Pretending to have forgotten all these
Islamic laws, Usamah rested upon his personal views that to fight
against the breachers, violators, and apostates is not permissible
although his personal inferences were in violation of the Holy Qur'an
and Sunnah.

By the notice of \`Umar’s negative reaction against the aforementioned
incident that occurred to him in addition to his frequent encroachments
against the Sahabah whom are accused of treachery and fabrication,
detained and beat—by noticing all these factors, it becomes easy to
understand why \`Umar prohibited the others from reporting and recording
the Hadith while he allowed himself to do it.

Because he was the caliph, he thought that he had full authority to
report the Hadith while the others, because they were object to doubt,
distrust, and flaw, must not enjoy such an authority.

Moreover, the conduct of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab contradicts the
justification of Ibn Hazm. It is known that \`Umar was fond of the
narratives of the Ahl al-Kitab as well as the Jews who converted to
Islam and still kept the Torah, especially Ka\`b al-Ahbar who brought to
\`Umar a book, whose edges were torn due to oldness, comprising the
Torah and asked for permission to read it;[^8] hence, \`Umar permitted
him to read it day and night.[^9] In other words, \`Umar ordered him
neither to erase that book, nor to set fire to it, nor did he warn him
against such thing.

When he conquered *Bayt al-Maqdis* (in Jerusalem), Ka\`b al-Ahbar said
to him, “Your deed was predicted by a Prophet five hundred years ago!
Good tidings, Jerusalem! Al-Faruq (i.e. \`Umar) will purify you from
what you keep!”[^10]

According to another narration, Ka\`b al-Ahbar said to \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab, “In the Torah, it is written that this land, which was
inhabited by the children of Israel (i.e. the Israelites), would be
conquered at the hands of a virtuous man.” On hearing this, \`Umar
thanked Almighty Allah.[^11]

Ka\`b al-Ahbar also said to \`Umar, “In the Torah, we read that ‘Woe to
the king of the earth from the King of the Heavens.” \`Umar added,
“Except those who watch themselves.” Ka\`b al-Ahbar commented, “I swear
by Him Who grasps my soul; it is written in the Torah in this very form
(i.e. with the addition of \`Umar).” \`Umar thus raised his sound with
‘*Allahu Akbar*’ and prostrated himself.[^12]

When a man, who had absented himself in a hole in a mountain for four
days, claimed that he had entered Paradise, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
summoned Ka\`b al-Ahbar and asked him, “Can you see in your books that a
man belonging to our nation would enter Paradise and then come out of
it?”

Ka\`b al-Ahbar said, “Yes, I have read such a thing and, further, I can
tell which one is that person if he is now among you.”

\`Umar said, “Yes, he is among us.”

Ka\`b al-Ahbar looked at the attendants and then pointed at the
man![^13]

One day, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab summoned Ka\`b al-Ahbar and asked, “How
am I described (in the Torah)?”

Ka\`b al-Ahbar answered, “You are described as an iron age.”

“What comes next?” asked \`Umar.

“Then will come a caliph killed by an unjust faction,” answered Ka\`b
al-Ahbar.

“What comes next?” asked \`Umar.

“Then will come ordeals!” answered Ka\`b al-Ahbar.[^14]

Furthermore, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab sought the advice of Ka\`b al-Ahbar
in the most serious question of the Islamic nation; he consulted him
about the leadership of the ummah, saying, “What is your opinion about
the leadership of \`Ali? I need your conception in this regard.”

Ka\`b al-Ahbar answered, “From the aspect of personal opinions, he is
not fit enough. This is because he is very strict in the religious
affairs. He never overlooks any flaw, never shows mercy in any mistake,
and never acts upon his personal opinions.”[^15]

Ka\`b al-Ahbar also came to \`Umar ibn al-Khattab to inform him about
his eminent death as mentioned in the Torah. He said to him, “You
should, Amir al-Mu'minin, prepare your will, for you will die in three
days.”

“How do you know?” \`Umar asked.

Ka\`b al-Ahbar answered, “I read that in the Book of Allah—the
Torah!”[^16]

In addition, al-Bukhariy has recorded, in his book of *Sahih*,
narrations that refute Ibn Hazm’s justification. He narrated that it is
permissible to report from the Children of Israel. In this connection,
he has recorded on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that the Ahl al-Kitab
used to recite the Torah in Hebrew then translate it into Arabic for the
Muslims. Commenting on this, the Holy Prophet said, “You should neither
believe nor belie the Ahl al-Kitab; rather you should only repeat (the
verse that reads):

***Say: We believe in Allah and (in) that which had been revealed to us,
and (in) that which was revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and
Jacob and the tribes, and (in) that which was given to Moses and Jesus,
and (in) that which was given to the prophets from their Lord, we do not
make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do we submit. (Holy
Qur’an: (2/136))***”[^17]

Ibn Kathir says, “When he converted to Islam during the reign of \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab, Ka\`b al-Ahbar used to discuss, in the presence of the
caliph, matters driven from the sciences of the Ahl al-Kitab. \`Umar
used to listen to him in order to encourage him and also because he was
admired by these narratives. Many people thus sought \`Umar’s permission
to write down these narratives of Ka\`b al-Ahbar; therefore, they were
permitted to report from the Children of Israel. However, a big amount
of mistakes and a great deal of confusion occurred due to such.”[^18]

Although none is responsible for the contradictions between \`Umar’s
deeds and words, the previous discussion removed the accuracy of all the
justifications of Ibn Hazm and his fans in which they have spared no
efforts for fabricating excuses for \`Umar’s unacceptable deeds.

Two More Justifications
-----------------------

Other authors have attempted to find other justifications for \`Umar’s
decision. They have claimed,

“\`Umar only wanted to protect the Hadith against fabrication through
reducing the reporting and recordation of it; therefore, experts in
Hadith and the truthful reporters were excluded from the decision.”[^19]

Such sayings cannot convince any rational! Protection is senseless since
it is meaningless to prevent a trustworthy narrator from reporting the
Hadith, taking into consideration that some of those whom were directly
prohibited from spreading the Hadith were such trustworthy that the Holy
Prophet said about them words of praise and respect.

To actually protect the Hadith is to urge such persons to report it so
that others will spread the Holy Prophet’s heritage and convey it
throughout the Islamic regions and thus people would know the details of
their religion saving themselves from ignorance with the religious
rulings.

If \`Umar’s protection signifies the fear of a reporter’s inaccuracy,
oblivion, or the like flaws, this meaning must be first applied to
\`Umar himself without expecting it from others and hence preventing
them for reporting.

It is also so surprising to say that the experts in Hadith and the
trustworthy reporters were excluded from \`Umar’s decision because it
has been authentically narrated that \`Umar jailed grand Sahabah, such
as Abu-Dharr, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, Abu-Mas\`ud al-Ansariy, and
Abu’l-Darda’ because of their having breached the decision. He also
warned \`Ammar ibn Yasir, Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy and other Sahabah
against violating it.

It is also very improbable to say that acts like prohibition, putting in
jail, and beating were incompatible with \`Umar’s psychology for his
having been the caliph and one of the grand Sahabah and thus he should
be deemed far above committing such things! To refute it, we say that
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab has been well-known for his brutality and rough
treatment since the lifetime of the Holy Prophet.[^20] This is an
irrefutable fact. He also continued such behaviors during the reign of
Abu-Bakr.[^21] When he came to power, his rod did not depart him for a
single moment; he used to beat, punish,[^22] detain,[^23] exile, and
displace peoples[^24] for matters that could have been treated through
other means of discipline and guidance. Finally, in the first days of
his reign, he prayed to Almighty Allah to make him lenient![^25]

Historians have conveyed various pictures of \`Umar’s norm as regards
treating the subjects. Describing \`Umar, the author of *Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah* says,

“\`Umar’s tempers and words were full of violence and patent abuse. He
was intensely cruel, unsociable, harsh, and frowning. He regarded these
features as virtues and any opposite quality would be defect.”[^26]

As a consequence, it is not strange for \`Umar to adopt such a strict
situation against anyone who would break his decision of prohibiting
recording and reporting the Hadith, especially after he had been
reproached by the Holy Prophet for having copied a book of the Jews. To
add to the previous facts \`Umar’s overflowing tribalism and the danger
that the reporting of the Holy Prophet’s heritage would cause to the
legality of his position of leadership, the matter becomes easily
understandable.

Above all, \`Umar detained Abu’l-Darda’ who had disagreed with him on
certain jurisprudential issues and detained Abu-Dharr and \`Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud who both disagreed with him as regards the issue of forbidding
the temporary marriage. The same thing is applicable to the others whom
\`Umar disallowed to leave his capital.[^27]

These incidents indicate that \`Umar was extremely coarse to those
persons because they reported Hadiths whose significances did not appeal
to him or violated his personal legislations. On the other hand, he
neither detained nor beat nor censured Abu-Hurayrah who reported more
than 5374 Hadiths. He only satisfied himself with menacing and banishing
him for a period before he permitted him alone to report the Hadith.

The most obvious evidence on \`Umar’s having enjoyed this feature is the
narration that he, once, saw off a group of the Sahabah that he had
delegated to al-Kufah.

“Do you know why I am seeing you off?” asked he.

“Yes, we do,” they answered, “This is for the sake of our being the
companions and supporters of the Holy Prophet.”

Replying them, \`Umar said, “This is true. But I am seeing you off for
another matter that I wanted to tell you in private… you must reduce
reporting the Hadith and I am responsible for this decision.”[^28]

Because they were from the Ansar—the group of the pure compliance with
the Holy Prophet’s commandments whom are expected to report things that
\`Umar would not like to be spread among the Muslims lest his flaws
would float to the surface—\`Umar had to prevent them from reporting the
Hadith or had to order them to restrict it so that his lack of
experience would not come to view.[^29]

As has been earlier proven, all the invented justifications that have
been presented for defending \`Umar’s decision of prohibiting the
reporting and recording of the Hadith will never withstand the criticism
and investigation that is based on logic and knowledge.

For that reason, the foundation on which they have built their opinions
of finding suitable justifications for \`Umar’s decision has been the
big hallo that they sketched around \`Umar’s personality in their
mentalities as is seen in Ibn Hazm’s statement, “It is impermissible to
anyone to believe that an ordinary Muslim may prohibit the spread of the
Holy Prophet’s heritage. On this account, it will be extremely
unacceptable to think that \`Umar would do so.”

Moreover, other reasons, to be mentioned later on, prompted \`Umar to
prohibit reporting and recording the Hadith and expand the circle of
personal inferences and identification of advantages. The proofs on
which the adopters of this opinion depended were in fact present in the
mentalities of some of the Sahabah, headed by \`Umar, since the lifetime
of the Holy Prophet. Yet, \`Umar worked for establishing this idea.

Summary
-------

The discussions of the first introduction can be summarized in the
following points:

1) Since the age of the Holy Prophet, the Sahabah followed two different
trends; some of them complied thoroughly with the sacred texts and the
instructions of the Holy Prophet, while others followed their personal
opinions and views.

2) Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, the first and second caliphs, followed the
second trend of Ijtihad and Opinionism.

3) \`Umar ibn al-Khattab made expansive steps in the field of
establishing the foundations of his personal opinions that he unveiled
during his reign.

4) One of the factors that urged \`Umar ibn al-Khattab to prohibit the
reporting and recording of the Hadith was the negative reaction that
inflicted him due to his having copied the books of the Jews.

5) The justifications of Ibn Hazm as regards \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s
prohibiting from spreading the Hadith are actually baseless, because
\`Umar’s decision was general. The conducts of \`Umar with the Ahl
al-Kitab in general and Ka\`b al-Ahbar in particular, even during his
reign, contradicts the claims of Ibn Hazm. Similarly, the two last
justifications—that \`Umar issued such decision due to his excessive
carefulness to the religious affairs or that the decision would not
befit his psychological personality—have been proven as inaccurate.

[^1]: The narration that is reported on the authority of Qaradhah reads
that \`Umar send Qaradhah ibn Ka\`b along with a group of the Sahabah to
al-Kufah and ordered them to reduce reporting the Hadith by saying,
“Reduce reporting the Hadith of the Messenger of Allah and I am
responsible for this decision.”

[^2]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 2:226. In his book of ‘Dala'il
al-Tawthiq al-Mubakkir’ 230, Dr. Imtiyaz Ahmad concluded the
authenticity of the narrations of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s having
detained the Sahabah in order to stop spreading the Hadith.

[^3]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah Qabl al-Tadwin 106-107.

[^4]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 52.

[^5]: \`Abd al-Razzaq: al-Musannaf 6:113 H. 10164, 10:313 H.19213;
al-Haythamiy: Majma’ al-Zawa’id 1:174 (where the narration reads as
follows: \`Umar said, “Allah’s Messenger: These are comprehensive
paragraphs from the Torah that were given to me by a friend of mine
belonging to the Banu-Zurayq (a Jew tribe).” The Holy Prophet’s face
changed…).

[^6]: Amir al-Mu’minin (the commander of the believers) is a title that
the Holy Prophet granted for Imam \`Ali exclusively. Yet, all the
leaders of the Muslim States have used it for themselves. In fact, the
first one who seized this title was \`Umar ibn al-Khattab. (Translator)

[^7]: Tafsir ibn Kathir 2:468; al-Ahadith al-Mukhtarah 1:216 H. 115.

[^8]: This text demonstrates that Ka\`b al-Ahbar came to \`Umar after
converting to Islam and during his reign.

[^9]: Ibn Salam: Gharib al-Hadith 4:262; al-Harbiy: Gharib al-Hadith
3:95: al-Nihayah al-Athiriyyah 2:468.

[^10]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 4:160.

[^11]: Tarikh Dimashq 5:162.

[^12]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 12:575 H. 35797.

[^13]: Yaqut al-Hamawiy: Mu\`jam al-Buldan 4:386.

[^14]: Al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 1:84; al-Haythamiy: Majma\`
al-Zawa'id 9:65 (He adds: Al-Tabaraniy has reported this narration whose
series of narrators is trustworthy.)

[^15]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 12:81.

[^16]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 3:264.

[^17]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 8:160.

[^18]: Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 1:19.

[^19]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 105.

[^20]: Ibn Abi-Shaybah: al-Musannaf 3:171 H. 1352; al-Damiriy: Hayat
al-Hayawan al-Kubra 1:71.

[^21]: Sunan Sa\`id ibn Mansur 5:132 H. 942; Ibn Abi-Shaybah:
al-Musannaf 6:358 H. 32013, 7:434 H. 37056; al-Khallal: al-Sunnah 1:275
H. 337.

[^22]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:270; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:181, 12:75;
Ma’athir al-Anafah 3:339; Ibn Khallakan: Wafiyyat al-A\`yan 3:14 No.
317.

[^23]: Ibn Abi-Shaybah: al-Musannaf 5:294; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1:193 H. 374; al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat
al-Huffadh 1:7; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh Dimashq 40:501; Mu\`tasar
al-Mukhtasar 2:380.

[^24]: Masa'il al-Imam Ahmad 1:489; Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra
3:285, 2:609; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Isti\`ab 1:326; Ibn Hajar
al-\`Asqalaniy: al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 6:485 No. 8845, 6:182 No.
8142, 2:521 No. 2754; al-Tuhfah al-Latifah fi Tarikh al-Madinah
al-Sharifah 1:264; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh Dimashq 62:27, 23:408, 59:361;
al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 2:609; Ibn Qutaybah: Gharib al-Hadith
2:544, 545; I\`tiqad Ahl al-Sunnah 4:635 H. 1138; Ibn Makula: al-Ikmal
6:208; Tashifat al-Muhaddithin 2:896; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra
3:231 H. 1586; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhariy 7:4; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 9:89.

[^25]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 3 :274 ; Ibn Abi-Shaybah:
al-Musannaf 6:56 H. 29511, 7:256 H. 35835; Safwat al-Safwah 1:280.

[^26]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:183 and 6:327.

[^27]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:679.

[^28]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 6:7, Sunan al-Darimiy 1:85, Ibn
\`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i) 2:120,
al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:7, al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-’Ummal 2:284 H. 4017 et al.

[^29]: In my book of ‘Wudu' al-Nabiy’, I have proven that Qaradhah ibn
Ka\`b used to perform the ritual ablution by rubbing his feet and that
he objected to those who washed their feet. Moreover, according to
Shaykh al-Majlisiy, in Bihar al-Anwar 32:354 as mentioned in the book of
‘al-Kafiyah fi Ibtal Tawbat al-Khati'ah’, Qaradhah was one of the
adherents (Shi\`ah) of Imam \`Ali. In this regard, it has been narrated
on the authority of \`Amr ibn Shamr on the authority of Jabir on the
authority of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir that when Imam \`Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin approached al-Kufah after he had been in al-Basrah, the
people, headed by Qaradhah ibn Ka\`b, went out to welcome him. They met
him before the river of al-Nadr ibn Ziyad and began to congratulate him
for the victory and he was wiping sweat from his forehead. The first one
to speak was Qaradhah who said, “All praise be to Allah Who supported
your adherents, humiliated your enemies, and gave you victory over the
tyrants, oppressors, unjust... etc.”


