Second Introduction
===================

Muslims believe that a caliph must enjoy two authorities:

(1) **Political Capacity:** A caliph must enjoy experience in the
management of the ummah’s affairs in both states of war and peace,
protecting the frontiers of the Islamic State, confronting the enemies
of the religion, and subjecting them to the Islamic laws as well as the
other secondary affairs, such as organizing the economic affairs,
covering the requirements of the needy and the like.

(2) **Scientific Capacity:** A caliph must be capable of issuing
verdicts according to the rulings of the Holy Qur'an and the heritage of
the Holy Prophet. During the lifetime of the Holy Prophet, people used
to receive rulings directly from the Holy Prophet to whom they referred
in any new question. In the caliphs’ reigns, they should refer to the
caliphs for learning the laws and the innovated affairs.

Furthermore, most of them did not reside in Makkah or al-Madinah and
thus they should receive the religious knowledge from the companions of
the Holy Prophet. Hence, the majority of Muslims should have received
their religious directives from the caliph and their retinue taking into
consideration the big difference between a caliph and the Holy Prophet.

During the Holy Prophet’s lifetime, people considered him as legislator
for he, in the word of the Holy Qur'an, never speaks out of desire.[^1]
Accordingly, the Holy Prophet’s instructions were so authoritative that
none had the right to violate or disobey since their source was the
Divine Revelation.

A caliph does not enjoy the authority of the Holy Prophet or a
legislative role as regards the religious laws;[^2] rather he is
regarded as no more than a reporter from the Holy Prophet.

Having realized this fact, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, in the beginning, used
to convey the religious laws as exactly as found in the Holy Qur'an and
Sunnah. When they had to face an ambiguous issue, they would refer it to
the grand Sahabah asking them whether they had heard from the Holy
Prophet something in this regard. Then, they would convey the ruling to
those involved in the issue. Let us now cite examples on this
information:

(A) Maymun ibn Mahran is reported to have said, “When an issue is
presented before Abu-Bakr, he used to refer to the Holy Qur'an first. If
he found the answer, he would say it lest he would look in the Holy
Sunnah. If he would not find the answer, he would ask people whether
they had heard something in this regard from the Holy Prophet. One of
them would say what he had heard from the Holy Prophet about the issue.
When he could not find anything related, he would gather the most
experienced ones and consult them. When they agree on a definite ruling,
he would pass it.”[^3]

(B) Malik, Abu-Dawud, Ibn Majah, al-Darimiy and others have reported
that Abu-Bakr, once, said to a grandmother who came asking for her share
of an inheritance, “In the Holy Qur'an, I could not find anything
related to your case. Also, I could not find anything in the Holy
Sunnah. You should now wait until I consult people.”

Al-Mughirah said, “When such a case was submitted before him, the Holy
Prophet decided to give the one-sixth of an inheritance.” “Does anyone
else have anything in this respect?” asked Abu-Bakr. Muhammad ibn
Muslimah al-Ansariy stood and confirmed al-Mughirah’s claim. Thus,
Abu-Bakr accepted.[^4]

Like Abu-Bakr, \`Umar used to ask the Sahabah on such issues and then
judge.

(C) On the authority of al-Salamiy, al-Bayhaqiy narrated that \`Umar
consulted the people whether he would sentence to stoning punishment the
lady who committed adultery with a shepherd who refused to give her
water, while she was extremely thirsty, unless she would allow him to
sleep with her.

(Imam) \`Ali answered, “This lady was compelled; therefore I see that
you should release her.” Following \`Ali’s verdict, \`Umar did.[^5]

(D) \`Umar asked Abu-Waqid al-Laythiy about the Surahs that the Holy
Prophet used to recite in the Prayer of the Feast (*Salat al-Īdayn*).
“The Holy Prophet used to recite Surah of *Qaf* (No. 50) and Surah of
*Iqtarabat* (*al-Qamar* 54),” answered Abu-Waqid.[^6]

(E) On the authority of Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab, al-Hakim reported that
while \`Umar ibn al-Khattab was reciting the Holy Qur'an, he passed by
the holy verse,

***“Those who believe and do not mix up their faith with iniquity.”
(Holy Qur’an: 6/82)***

He summoned Ubayy ibn Ka\`b and asked, “Are we excluded from this verse
because none of us has ever committed iniquity?” Ubayy answered,
“Iniquity in this verse stands for polytheism as is proven by the holy
verse,

***“And when Luqman said to his son while he admonished him: O my son!
Do not associate aught with Allah; most surely, polytheism is a grievous
iniquity. (Holy Qur’an: 31/13)***”[^7]

(F) \`Umar ordered to apply the sentence of whipping to one of the first
Muhajirun because he had had strong drink. The man objected saying, “You
should not sentence me to whipping penalty; I can prove it in the Holy
Book of Allah (the Qur'an).”

“How is that?” asked \`Umar.

“Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur'an,

***‘On those who believe and do deeds of righteousness there is no blame
for what they ate, when they guard themselves from evil, and believe,
and do deeds of righteousness,(or) again, guard themselves from evil and
believe,(or) again, guard themselves from evil and do good. For Allah
loveth those who do good.’ (Holy Qur’an: 5/93)***

I am one of those who believed, did deeds of righteousness, then guarded
themselves from evil and believed and did deeds of righteousness. I
participated with the Holy Prophet in the battles of Badr, al-Khandaq,
and the Truce of al-Hudaybiyah as well as other campaigns.”

\`Umar asked the attendants for an answer; therefore \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas said, “The verse that you have cited as your excuse carried
excuses for the deeds that were done in the pre-Islamic era and also
carried arguments against the coming generations. This is because
Almighty Allah says elsewhere,

***‘O ye who believe! Intoxicants and gambling, (dedication of) stones,
and (divination by) arrows, are an abomination,—of Satan's handwork:
eschew such (abomination), that ye may prosper(Holy Qur’an: 5/90)’***

This holy verse carried a clear-cut prohibition of drinking strong
drink.”

Having been convinced by \`Abdullah’s refutation of the claim, \`Umar
said, “You have told the truth! Now, what do you think this man should
undergo?”

(Imam) \`Ali answered, “We see that because this man drank strong drink,
he has raved; and because he has raved, he forged fabrications (against
Almighty Allah); and the sentence of him who forges fabrications is to
undergo eighty whips.” \`Umar thus ordered to sentence the man to eighty
whips as punishment.[^8]

The aforementioned narrations, as well as many others that have not been
mentioned for fear of lengthiness, prove clearly that neither Abu-Bakr
not did \`Umar claim full knowledge with all the religious laws that
were said by the Holy Prophet or that they, and none else, were versed
in the Hadith; rather they, like the majority of the Sahabah, did not go
through many issues of the religious legislation.

On this account, the exaggerated claim that they were the most
acquainted with the Hadith and the most knowledgeable in the issues of
the religious knowledge and laws has been based upon a purely extreme
emotional, not rational, situation that is far away from the historical
reality. Moreover, the majority of the reports that narrated or
confirmed such claim are exposed to suspicion and uncertainty. One of
such fake reports has been the following: Imam \`Ali is reported to have
said, “We were telling each other that an angel was talking on behalf of
\`Umar!”[^9]

\`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud is reported to have said, “If the knowledge of
\`Umar is put in a scale of a balance and the knowledge of all the
peoples in the other, the scale of Umar’s knowledge will certainly
incline!”[^10]

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said, “Had there been a prophet to
come after me, \`Umar would have certainly been that prophet!”[^11] And,
“In the past nations, there were individuals communicated by the angels.
If this occurs to my nation, \`Umar will certainly be the one
communicated by the angels!”[^12]

The likes of such exaggerated superstitions are too many. Similarly, too
many are the motives and reasons beyond them.

One of the clear-cut issue is that had Abu-Bakr and \`Umar enjoyed
special knowledge in this respect, they would have directly given out
religious verdicts without need for consulting the Sahabah in matters
they ignored, no contradiction would have ever occurred in their
opinions and verdicts, they would not have withdrawn many of their
verdicts in view of the reports and opinions of the other Sahabah and
\`Umar would not have come to a point where he declared openly, ‘All
people are more knowledgeable than \`Umar,’[^13] and ‘Even women in
boudoirs are more knowledgeable than \`Umar!’[^14]

In conclusion, the recognition of the religious laws among the first
generation of Islam was not attained except through pure compliance with
the laws issued by Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet. This fact was
known by everyone during that period of the Islamic history. Similarly,
neither Abu-Bakr and \`Umar nor did any of the other Sahabah have the
right to adopt their personal opinions in issues judged by clear-cut
texts of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.

Nevertheless, they committed a breach of the Holy Prophet’s orders on
certain occasions when they adopted their personal views and violated
the sacred texts.

Referring to a necessarily obvious fact, Ibn Hazm says, “The Holy
Prophet, at issuing a verdict or a judgment, did not summon all the
inhabitants of al-Madinah to inform them; rather it was sufficient in
his view that the attendants listened to that judgment and they would
certainly convey it to the others whom, after that, would not be allowed
to claim unfamiliarity with that judgment.

Obviously, some of the Sahabah used to interpret a Hadith—that reached
his hearing—in such an inaccurate way that it would lose its actual
purport. In addition, some of them confessed that they were unaware of
many religious laws. In this connection, Abu-Hurayrah declared,

“The Muhajirun, my brethren, were always engaged in making deals in
marts; and the Ansar, my brethren too, were engaged by guarding their
fortunes.”[^15]

It has thus been obvious that the exaggerated picture in which \`Umar
was given such special and unattainable rank was the product of an
inordinate emotion that is rejected and denounced by \`Umar himself. To
make it more obvious, let us cite the following reports about the
Sahabah’s relationship with \`Umar.

[^1]: The Holy Qur'an reads, “Nor does he speak out of desire. 53:3”

[^2]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 1:11 and Dr. Muhammad Sallam
Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam et al.

[^3]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: A’lam al-Muwaqqi’in 1:62; al-Bayhaqiy:
al-Sunan al-Kubra 10:114.

[^4]: Malik ibn Anas: al-Muwatta' 2:513 H. 4; Sunan Abi-Dawud 3:121 H.
2894; Sunan Ibn Majah 2:909 H. 2724; Sunan al-Darimiy 2:359.

[^5]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:236; al-Tabariy: al-Riyad
al-Nadirah 3,4:163-164 and Dhakha’ir al-\`Uqba; Ibn Qayyim
al-Jawziyyyah: al-Turuq al-Hikamiyyah.

[^6]: Malik ibn Ansa: al-Muwatta’ 1:180; Sahih Muslim 2:607, H. 14;
Sunan Abi-Dawud 1:30 H. 1154; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 2:23 H. 532;
al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 3:294; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:408 H. 1282;
Sunan al-Nassa’iy 3:183 H. 184 (with little difference).

[^7]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:305.

[^8]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapury: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 4:376; Sunan
al-Daraqutniy 3:166 H. 245; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:320; Sunan
al-Nassa'iy 3:252 H. 5288. In addition to al-Hakim, al-Dhahbiy, in
Talkhis, decides this narration as authentic.

[^9]: Tarikh Wasit 1:167; Min Hadith Khaythama 1:42; Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat
al-Awliya’ 1:42; Muhibb al-Din al-Tabariy: al-Riyad al-Nadirah 1:376.
Al-Tabariy, in al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 7:18 H. 6726, has recorded this
narration on the authority of Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy who reported the
Holy Prophet as saying, “Among the nation of each and every Prophet that
Almighty Allah sent, there must be one addressed by the angels
(directly). If there is such an individual among my nation, he must be
\`Umar.” The Holy Prophet was asked how one can be addressed by the
angels. He answered, “The angels talk on behalf of him.” Al-Haythamiy,
in Mujma\` al-Zawa'id 9:69, added, “One of the reporter of this
narration is Abu-Sa\`d, the slave of al-Hasan al-Basiry, whom I cannot
tell. Yet, the others are trustworthy.”

[^10]: Al-Madkhal Ila’l-Sunan al-Kubra 1:126 H. 70; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Tamhid 3:198; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn
3:92 H. 4497; Jamal al-Din al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal 21:325 No. 4255;
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: A’lam al-Muwaqqi’in 1:20; Dr. Ruwas
Qal\`achiy: Fiqh \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, the Introduction.

[^11]: Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:619 H. 3686; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:92 H. 1279; al-Tabariy: al-Riyad
al-Nadirah 2:287; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:154; Ibn Hajar
al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhariy 7:51.

[^12]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 3:1279 H. 3282, 3:1349 H. 3486; Sahih Muslim
4:1864 H. 2398; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:285 H. 3776; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:86; al-Tabariy: al-Riyad al-Nadirah
2:287; Sunan al-Nassa'iy 5:39 H. 8119.

[^13]: Al-Zamakhshariy: Tafsir al-Kashshaf 3:573; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah 1:182; al-Jami\` li’Ahkam al-Qur'an 14:277; al-Suyutiy:
al-Durr al-Manthur 5:229; Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 2:253.

[^14]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:128.

[^15]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 1:153. The narration is also
recorded in Sahih Muslim 4:1940 H. 2492; al-Isfahaniy: Dala'il
al-Nubuwwah 1:86 H. 78; Al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’ 2:595.


