Umar And The Sahabah
====================

(1) Mu\`adh Ibn Jabal
---------------------

(A) A man complained to \`Umar ibn al-Khattab that after he had been
away from his wife for two years, he found her pregnant. \`Umar
consulted people whether he would sentence her to the punishment of
stoning. Mu\`adh ibn Jabal said, “If she is guilty, the fetus in her
womb is not. You should leave her until she gives birth. \`Umar did and
the woman gave birth of a baby whose father avowed for the similarity
between them. Commenting on the matter, \`Umar said, “Women are too
inadequate to give birth of one like Mu\`adh. Without Mu\`adh, \`Umar
would have perished.”[^1]

(B) \`Umar decided to sentence a retaliation punishment against a Muslim
who had broken the head of a Dhimmi (a non-Muslim enjoying the
protection of the Islamic state). Mu\`adh intruded, “As much as I know,
you are not allowed to decided such according to a report from the Holy
Prophet.” \`Umar therefore gave the Dhimmi one dinar[^2] as recompense,
and he accepted it.[^3]

(2) Zayd Ibn Thabit
-------------------

(A) Mujahid narrated that when he was in Syria, \`Umar decided to
sentence the retaliation punishment to a Muslim who had killed a Dhimmi.
But Zayd intruded, “You should not make your slave retaliate upon your
brother!” \`Umar therefore decided that the Muslim would undergo blood
money.[^4]

(B) Makhul narrated that \`Abadah ibn al-Samit, once, asked a non-Muslim
Bedouin to guard his riding animal while he would offer a prayer in the
holy Mosque of Jerusalem. The man rejected and \`Abadah, out of rage,
hit him on the head.

The man complained before \`Umar who decided to sentence retaliation
punishment to \`Abadah who claimed that his temper was so bad that he
could not control himself. Yet, Zayd ibn Thabit intruded, “You should
not allow your slave to retaliate upon your brother.” Hence, \`Umar
decided that \`Abadah would undergo blood money.[^5]

(C) Zayd ibn Thabit narrated that \`Umar, once, visited him… and said,
“I visited you to counsel me about the share of a grandfather from his
grandson’s inheritance. Zayd apologized because he had known nothing
about the matter. Once again, \`Umar visited Zayd for the same matter.
As he insisted, Zayd decided to write down his opinion. He also cited
the following example, “This issue is like a tree that grew up on one
trunk, which, later on, produced a branch.

That branch also produced another. The trunk thus supplies the first
branch with water. If the first branch is cut, water will directly go to
the second branch and if the second is cut, the water will directly go
to the first.” \`Umar recited this before people and decided to depend
upon Zayd’s verdict.[^6]

(3) Abu-‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah
------------------------------

\`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz narrated that \`Umar decided to kill the
Muslim individual who had killed a Dhimmi in Syria when he was there.
Objecting to him, Abu-\`Ubaydah said, “You are not allowed to do this.”
“Why am I not allowed to do it?” asked \`Umar. “Is it lawful to kill a
master as retaliation for his having killed his slave?” Abu-\`Ubaydah
asked. \`Umar could not find a reply; he therefore decided that the
Muslim should undergo one thousand dinars as blood money.[^7]

(4) Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman
--------------------------

One morning, \`Umar met Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman and greeted him.
Hudhayfah said, “How do you expect me to be! Indeed, I dislike the
right, love the temptation, testify the existence of a thing that I have
not seen, learn by heart what has not been created, offer the prayer
without ablution, and possess on this earth that which is not possessed
by Almighty Allah in the Heavens.”

On hearing this reply, \`Umar became so enraged that he left hastily as
he decided to harm Hudhayfah for such saying. On his way, he passed by
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib who noticed his rage and thus asked, “What for are
you so enraged, \`Umar?”

“As I greeted Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, he said to me that he dislikes the
right,” said \`Umar.

“This is true,” said \`Ali, “the man dislikes death, which is right!”

“He also said that he liked temptation!” added \`Umar.

“This is true,” said \`Ali, “the man liked his fortune and sons; and
Almighty Allah says,

***‘Your wealth and your children are only a temptation.’ (Holy Qur’an:
64/15)***”

“\`Ali: he also claimed that he testified the existence of things that
he had not seen!” added \`Umar.

“This is also true,” said \`Ali, “He testifies of Allah’s Oneness, the
death, the Resurrection, the Judgment Day, Paradise, Hell, and the Path
(*al-Sirat*) while he had not seen any of these.”

“\`Ali: he also said that he learnt by heart that which was not
created!” added \`Umar.

“This is also true,” said \`Ali, “He has learnt by heart the Holy Book
of Almighty Allah—the Qur'an that is not created.”[^8]

“He also claimed that he offered prayer without performing the ritual
ablution!” said \`Umar.

“This is also true,” said \`Ali, “He prays to Almighty Allah to send
blessings upon my cousin, the Messenger of Allah, without need for
performing the ritual ablution. This is of course permissible.”

“Abu’l-Hasan: he said a more serious thing,” said \`Umar.

“What was that?” asked \`Ali.

“He said that he possesses on this earth what is not possessed by
Almighty Allah in the heavens!” explained \`Umar.

“This is also true,” said \`Ali, “the man has a wife and sons on this
earth while Almighty Allah is too Exalted to have a wife and sons.”

Pondering over the answers of \`Ali, \`Umar confessed, “Son of
al-Khattab would have perished were it not there \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib.”[^9]

(5) \`Abdullah Ibn Mas\`Ūd
--------------------------

Ibrahim al-Nakha\`iy narrated that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab decided to
sentence death penalty to a man who had murdered another premeditatedly
although some of the victim’s heirs pardoned the murderer. \`Abdullah
ibn Mas\`ud intruded, “The soul of the murderer was in the hand of all
of the victim’s heirs, but when one of them allowed him to keep it, it
was thus given life. This one cannot take his due unless the others do.”

“What do you think the judgment must be then?” asked \`Umar.

“I think that you must decide that the murderer will undergo the blood
money and then you can exempt him from the share of the heir who
pardoned him.” \`Umar then agreed to this judgment.[^10]

(6) Ubayy Ibn Ka\`b
-------------------

(A) Al-Hasan al-Basriy narrated that when \`Umar ibn al-Khattab decided
to distribute all the gold and silver that were in the Holy Ka\`bah,
Ubayy ibn Ka\`b objected.

“What for do you object?” asked \`Umar.

“Almighty Allah, through the Holy Prophet, has explained the expenditure
of each and every fortune,” answered Ubayy.

“This is true,” confirmed \`Umar.[^11]

(B) Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah has reported that \`Umar intended to seize
the fortunes of the Holy Ka\`bah claiming that it did not need them. He
also intended to order the people of the Yemen to stop dying their
clothes with the urination of camels and to forbid the Muslims from the
*Mut\`at al-Hajj*.[^12]

Objecting to all of these, Ubayy ibn Ka\`b said, “Although they needed
the fortune of the Holy Ka\`bah, neither the Holy Prophet nor did the
Sahabah take it. Accordingly, you must not take it. The Holy Prophet and
the Sahabah used to use the Yemeni clothes while they knew that they
were dyed with the urination of camels. Yet, they did not warn people
against using them. In the presence of the Holy Prophet, we practiced
the *Mut\`at al-Hajj* about the forbiddingness of which the Holy Qur'an
has not said anything.”[^13]

(7) Al-Dahhak Ibn Sufyan Al-Kilabiy
-----------------------------------

Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab narrated that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab decided that
the blood money in an issue of slaughter would be distributed among the
victim’s kinsmen while the widow’s share is nothing. But when al-Dahhak
ibn Sufyan informed him that the Holy Prophet had ordered him to give
the widow of Ashyam al-Dhababiy a share of his blood money, \`Umar
retracted his decision.[^14]

(8) Shaybah Ibn \`Uthman
------------------------

Shafiq reported from Shaybah ibn \`Uthman that \`Umar, once, sat down
and decided to distribute all the fortunes of the Holy Ka\`bah among the
poor Muslims.

“You are not allowed to do so,” said Shaybah.

“What for?” asked \`Umar.

“This is because neither the Holy Prophet nor did Abu-Bakr take anything
of these fortunes although they need them more than you,” explained
Shaybah.

On hearing this, \`Umar left the place.[^15]

(9) \`Abdullah Ibn \`Abbas
--------------------------

Nafi\` ibn Jubayr narrated on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas
that he witnessed the event when a lady that had given birth of a child
only six months after her marriage was brought before \`Umar to judge.
All the attendants disapproved of her but \`Abdullah said to \`Umar, “Do
not be unfair!”

“How is that?” asked \`Umar.

\`Abdullah answered, “You should consider Almighty Allah’s sayings (in
the Holy Qur'an),

***‘And the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months.’
(Holy Qur’an: 46/15)***

and

***‘Mothers shall suckle their children for two whole years.’ (Holy
Qur’an: 2/233)***

As twenty four months is the period of the two whole years, six months
remains for pregnancy as a minimum. Almighty Allah advances and delays
the periods of pregnancy as He desires.” On hearing this answer, \`Umar
accepted it.[^16]

(10) \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib
------------------------

(A) \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas narrated that \`Umar, once, decided to
sentence to stoning punishment an insane woman who had committed
fornication. While she was led to the place where she would undergo the
punishment, \`Ali passed by her and asked about the matter, “This is
so-and-so, the insane. \`Umar decided to sentence her to stoning
punishment after he had consulted people.”

\`Ali asked them to take her back to \`Umar. He then followed them and
said to \`Umar, “You should have known that the Messenger of Allah said
that three categories of people are not condemned for any deed they
would commit—these are the immature, the asleep, and the insane. This
lady is insane. Perhaps, she committed this crime while she was in a
brainstorm.”

\`Umar thus released the lady and repeated saying ‘Allahu Akbar’ as sign
of his admiration of \`Ali’s answer.[^17]

(B) A young woman was fond of one of the Ansar’s youths but he did not
respond to her. She therefore decided to resort to trickery; she took an
egg, threw away its yolk, and poured the albumen on her dress and
thighs.

She then came towards \`Umar screaming and claiming that she had been
abused by that young man. \`Umar intended to punish that young man as
soon as some women, whom he had appointed to see the traces of the
crime, confirmed the existence of sperms on the young woman’s dress and
body.

Defending himself, the young man began shouting at \`Umar to be sure of
the question since he had not done it although she had sought to seduce
him but he rejected. When \`Umar referred the question to (Imam) \`Ali,
he looked at the traces on the dress, asked for a boiling water, poured
it on the dress, and then the albumen solidified. As he smelled and
tasted it, he knew that it was the white of an egg; therefore he scolded
the young woman and she confessed of everything.[^18]

(11) \`Abd Al-Rahman Ibn \`Awf
------------------------------

(A) \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas narrated that \`Umar, once, asked him whether
he had heard anything from the Holy Prophet or the Sahabah as regards
the doubts of the prayers. Meanwhile, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf cam and
asked about the question, “I heard the Messenger of Allah saying that if
one doubts in the prayer… etc.”[^19]

(B) Qatadah reported that \`Umar, once, was asked about the ruling if a
lady was divorced twice in the pre-Islamic era and then divorced once in
Islam. As \`Umar excused, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf said, “I have the
solution. Divorce before Islam is ineffective.”[^20]

Finally, even his wife corrected \`Umar’s information and cancelled his
verdict when he wanted to forbid rise in dowries.[^21]

The aforementioned examples prove evidently that the accurate course
that should have been followed by the Sahabah was the full compliance
with the judgments of Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet and caliphs
should have referred to the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah in the issuance of
verdicts. This fact seemed to be firmly present in the mentalities of
the Sahabah who corrected for the caliph his errors depending upon the
Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.

These events also confirm that \`Umar did not claim special rank in the
knowledge of the religious laws or having a distinctive mentality that
enabled him to extract the religious laws in such an idiosyncratic
manner that bespoke his unique mastermind due to which the Divine
Revelation used to depend his opinion and reproach the Holy Prophet for
not having acted upon \`Umar’s opinions, and the Holy Prophet said, ‘the
Right is following \`Umar wherever he would go’[^22] and \`Umar carried
the whole knowledge of the Holy Prophet as well as many alike
fabrications that \`Umar himself would have certainly denied had he
heard them!

As has been previously demonstrated, \`Umar’s compliance with the
Sahabah’s opinions appertained to the religious laws, as well as the
evidences that they used to infer from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah,
proves that he, on the first days of his reign, did not argue with them
on their verdicts and proofs; yet, he, later on, changed his trend by
confirming his personal opinions. He thus granted the caliphs a
distinctive feature due to which they alone have had the right to issue
religious verdicts. This issue will be discussed in details shortly.

The previous discussion can be summarized in the following three points:

1) \`Umar ibn al-Khattab did not have full acquaintance with the Holy
Qur'an and the Holy Prophet’s instructions. Also, the Sahabah did not
submit to his personal opinions.

2) The Holy Qur'an and the Holy Sunnah are the one and only sources of
the Islamic legislation and, in the conception of the Sahabah including
\`Umar himself, nothing can ever replace or be as important as them.

3) From the aforecited texts, we conclude that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab was
about to be engaged in the most intense embarrassment, since it was not
easy for the absolute ruler of the Islamic State to confess of his lack,
in the field of knowledge, at all times, especially when we know that
the majority of those who were experienced in the knowledge of the Holy
Qur'an and Sunnah did not agree with \`Umar in principle, conceptions,
and values. The coming discussions will demonstrate these facts more
obviously.

[^1]: Sunan al-Daraqutniyll-qutniy: orded in saorthy is Abu-ddressed by
the angels.ar.seligous is perosnal xts and the instructions of hte ent
and that n 3:322 H. 281; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 7:443 H. 15335;
Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 7:354 H. 13454; Musannaf Ibn Abi-Shaybah 5:543
H. 28812; Al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’ 1:452; al-Muzziy: Tahdhib
al-Kamal 28:111; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 12:202; Ibn
Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhariy 12:120;
al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 3:427.

[^2]: A currency

[^3]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-'Ummal 15:97; Musannaf \`Abd
al-Razzaq 10:100 H. 18511.

[^4]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-'Ummal 15:97 H. 40242; Musannaf
\`Abd al-Razzaq 10:100 H. 18509.

[^5]: Al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:31 No. 16; al-Bayhaqiy:
al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:32; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-'Ummal 15:94 H.
40232;

[^6]: Sunan al-Daraqutniy 4:93 H. 80; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra
6:247; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhariy
12:21.

[^7]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:32; Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-'Ummal 15:94 H. 40234.

[^8]: The question whether the Qur'an was created or was existent since
eternity is one of the issues of disagreement between the Muslim
theologians. For details, refer to books of Islamic theology.

[^9]: Ibn al-Sabbagh al-Malikiy: al-Fusul al-Muhimmah 35; al-Kinjiy:
Kifayat al-Talib 218-9.

[^10]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:60; al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab al-Umm
7:329; al-Shaybaniy: al-Hujjah 4:385. In al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-'Ummal 11:33 H. 30513, there is another issue that occurred between
\`Umar and \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud. In the world of Ibn al-Qayyim (in
I\`lam al-Muwaqqi\`in 2:237, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud disagreed with
\`Umar in more than one hundred issues.

[^11]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 5:159; al-Tabariy: al-Riyad
al-Nadirah 1-2:339; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 5:88 H. 9084; al-Muttaqiy
al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 14:100 H. 38052.

[^12]: For details on Mut\`at al-Hajj, refer to the books of the Islamic
laws.

[^13]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyya: Zad al-Ma’ad 2:208.

[^14]: Al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab al-Umm 6:88; Sunan Abi-Dawud 3:129 H. 2927;
Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:452; Sunan Ibn Majah 2:883 H. 2642; Sunan
al-Tirmidhiy 434; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:134; Al-Khatib
al-Baghdadiy: Tarikh Baghdad 8:343.

[^15]: Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:215 H. 2031; Sunan Ibn Majah 2:104 H. 3116;
al-Tabariy: al-Riyad al-Nadirah 1-2:339; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam
al-Kabir 7:300 H. 7195; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh
Sahih al-Bukhariy 3:456; Sahih al-Bukhariy 2:578 H. 1517, 6:2655 H.
6847; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 5:159 H. 9511; Musanaf Ibn
Abi-Shaybah 6:466 H. 32976; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:410.

[^16]: Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 7:352 H. 13449; al-Suyutiy: al-Durr
al-Manthur 7:442; Fath al-Qadir 5:19.

[^17]: Sunan Abi-Dawud 4:140 H. 4399, 4402; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 2:68 H. 2351; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 4:269, 8:264; Sunan al-Daraqutniy 3:138 H. 173; Sunan
al-Nassa'iy 4:324 H. 7347.

[^18]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: al-Turuq al-Hikamiyyah 47 (as reported
in al-\`Āmiliy: al-Ghadir 6).

[^19]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:190; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra
2:332.

[^20]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:482; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 7:181 H.
16289.

[^21]: Al-Zamakhshariy: Tafsir al-Kashshaf 1:258; Tafsir al-Qur'an
al-\`Adhim 1:467; Tafsir al-Qurtubiy 5:99; al-Suyutiy: al-Durr
al-Manthur 2:446.

[^22]: Dr. Nadiah al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 299.


