Preface
=======

‘*The Islamic Legislation and the Confusables of the Muslim Issuance of
Rulings*’ is the title of a scientific encyclopedia that has been
undertaken by the author of this book. So far, a number of studies of
this encyclopedia have come into sight. ‘*The Prohibition of Recording
the Hadith*,’ the fifth study of this encyclopedia, has been deposited
in two frames—foundational and practical.

The author has made many studies in the fields of the Hadith, the
different recitals of the Holy Qur'an, the repeal of certain Qur'anic
verses, and the major points of differences between the Islamic schools
of law, such as Inerrancy (*‘Ismah*), Analogy (*Qiyas*), Equitable
Preference (*Istihsan*)[^1], and the like questions.

Regarding the author’s practical studies, he has written a number of
volumes about ‘*the Holy Prophet’s Ritual Ablution*’ and the causes of
the Muslims’ disagreement in this issue. Without neglecting the
methodology of the past jurisprudents who hint at these issues, the
author has also taken in consideration the modern Muslim’s mentality in
understanding the events and texts explaining plainly the circumstances
that created such disagreements among the Muslims about the religious
rulings. Thus, he has written ‘*Adhan Between Genuineness and
Distortion*’ and ‘*the Holy Prophet’s Ritual Prayer*’ as well many
similar issues.

The author’s methodology in investigating the Islamic jurisprudential
questions and the doctrinal topics rests upon the study of the
legislative and historical confusions that caused the issuance of
certain rulings or religious belief. He thus acquaints the reader with
the time and circumstances that surrounded a narrative or a narrator as
well as the hidden themes that influence the understanding of a text.

Following this methodology, a new stage of study exceeding the limits of
the fundamentals, molds, and frames that each school has had to observe
in understanding the sacred texts[^2] and deducing the religious laws.
Due to such commitments, each school of law has rejected or detained any
other viewpoint or concept even if it is closer to the actuality.

Such a new methodology has freed the Islamic jurisprudence from its
sectarian limits and untouchable bases invented by each Muslim
jurisprudential schools and has given it a new wider and more
comprehensive perspective enabling it to unify or, at least, reaches
closer steps of unity after it has lived in irony and restricted
concepts.

Finally, the author has briefed about some of the roots of separation
after the departure of the Holy Prophet in addition to the ideas that
branched out the Muslims into numerous sects and schools.

The book has been reprinted three times so far. The first edition was
published by Imam \`Ali Foundation - Qumm, Islamic Repulic of Iran in
Safar, AH 1418. The second edition was published by al-A\`lamiy
Foundation - Beirut, Lebanon in AH 1418/1997. The third edition, upon
which the translator has depended, was published by Dar al-Ghadir -
Qumm, Islamic Republic of Iran in AH 1425/2004.

[^1]: In the Sunnite jurisprudence, istihsan is the use of one's own
judgment to determine the best solution to a religious problem that
cannot be solved by citing sacred texts.

[^2]: Whenever the Sacred Texts are mentioned in the book, they stand
for the Holy Qur'an and the Holy Sunnah that comprises the words, deeds,
and confirmations of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams.


