The Identification Of Advantage And The Sacred Texts
====================================================

Mr. Khalid Muhammad Khalid says,

“\`Umar ibn al-Khattab neglected the sacred texts of the Holy Qur'an and
Sunnah when the advantage (*maslahah*) imposed him to do so. While the
Holy Qur'an ordains that the party called ‘*al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*
(those whose hearts have been reconciled to the Truth)’ must have a
share in the Zakat, \`Umar canceled this share saying, ‘We will not give
anything for the sake of being Muslim.

Then whosoever will, let him believe, and whosoever will, let him
disbelieve’ although the Holy Prophet and Abu-Bakr did observe this
share. Similarly, while Abu-Bakr permitted selling the bondmaids who
have given birth of children to their masters, \`Umar forbade it.

Also, the Holy Sunnah and the consensus of the Muslims have decided to
treat the three statements of divorce that are uttered on one occasion
as one only, but \`Umar violated the Holy Sunnah and infringed the
consensus.”[^1]

Ibn Qudamah says,

“It is impermissible to ignore the rulings of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah
unless there is an abrogation. Yet, abrogation is not subjected to
probabilities; rather it must be issued during the lifetime of the Holy
Prophet because it must be included by a sacred text; and sacred texts
stopped after the demise of the Holy Prophet and the termination of the
age of Revelation.

In addition, a Qur'anic law cannot be abrogated by any text other than
the Qur'an itself. How was it then possible for them to neglect the
judgments of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah and, instead, invent others out
of their personal opinions? Or how was it possible for them to neglect
texts from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah and adopt a personal view said by
one of the Sahabah although the personal views of the Sahabah are
preceded to the so-called ‘*Qiyas*’? ”[^2]

Rashid Rida, the author of *Tafsir al-Manar*, says,

“Nowadays, the imperialist powers that work for enslaving all the
Muslims through keeping them away from their religion are dedicating a
part of their budgets to the Muslims whom are inclined to other
religions. Such efforts of inclination have taken several forms, such as
protecting them or seducing them to disturb the Islamic countries or
disunite the Islamic unity. The Muslim authorities should have exerted
similar efforts for encouraging others to be Muslims.”

According to the expression of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, it seems that he
understood that the share of the *al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum* was given as
bribe for Islam or was restricted to those who had actually converted to
Islam.

In other words, his speech is another picture of the speech of the
missionaries who rest upon the policy of supplying people with food and
medicine so as to make them convert to Christianity.

He should have understood that the Holy Prophet, through dedicating a
share of the zakat to that party, did not want to seduce them to convert
to Islam by money; rather he aimed at preparing their hearts to receive
the invitation to Islam so that they would believe by heart.

The Holy Prophet’s ways for achieving this aim were various; he once
appointed one of them as the commander of a Muslim campaign, consulted
with them about some affairs of the Muslims and so on. The question had
nothing to do with the power or weakness of Islam; the Holy Prophet only
wanted them to be faithful believers.

The following citation of Dr. Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib disproves the
justification of \`Umar as regards the deprivation of the *al-Mu’allafah
Qulubuhum* of their shares from the zakat:

“On the Makakh Conquest day, the Holy Prophet ordered his companions and
army to uncover their shoulders and trot so that the polytheists would
notice their power and toleration that would express the power of Islam.

During his reign, \`Umar thought that the purpose of this act had been
no more existent. Yet, he said: For which reason are we now uncovering
our shoulders and trotting? Allah has fortified Islam and defeated
atheism and its people. Nevertheless, we must never neglect anything
that we used to do during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah.”[^3]

This is irony! According to this text, \`Umar complied with the sacred
texts; therefore, he can be added to the group of those who followed the
sacred texts completely. According to the previously cited narrations
and discussions, he was at the top of those who followed Ijtihad,
adopted personal opinions in the issuance of religious verdicts, and
identified the advantages that were unknown for the sacred texts!

Had he abided by the sacred text, he would have certainly followed the
Holy Prophet as regards the share of the *al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*; and
had he been a mujtahid, he should have pointed out the matters upon
which he rested in preferring a ruling to another!

It is worth mentioning that Dr. Nadiah al-\`Umariy, in her book of
*Ijtihad al-Rasul*, has thoroughly discussed the issue of the three-time
divorce in the course of citing examples on the scholars’ disagreement
about the Ijtihad. In this regard, she says:

Originally, the validity of divorce is materialized when it is said on
three different occasions. In this respect, the Holy Qur'an reads,

***‘Divorce must be pronounced twice and then (a woman) must be retained
in honor or released in kindness.’ (Holy Qur’an: 2/229)***

The purpose beyond the separation of the divorce is that a husband will
be given an opportunity to think deeply over the marital bond that the
Almighty has confirmed the significance of its continuity. After the two
times of divorce, Almighty Allah says,

***‘And if he hath divorced her (the third time), then she is not lawful
unto him thereafter until she hath wedded another husband.’ (Holy
Qur’an: 2/230)***

This is the divorce as has been explained in the Holy Qur'an; it is
valid only when it is separated (i.e. repeated on different occasions).

What should the ruling be if a husband wastes the opportunity and
pronounces the form of divorce three times on one occasion? As a matter
of fact, you cannot find in the Holy Qur'an any text that treats this
question; yet, the Holy Sunnah has something about it.

It has been narrated that after Rukanah ibn \`Abd had pronounced the
form of divorce in his wife’s face three times on the same situation, he
was deeply grieved; he therefore referred the question to the Holy
Prophet. ‘How did you divorce her?’ asked the Holy Prophet.

‘I pronounced the form of divorce three times,’ answered Rukanah.

‘Were the three times on the same situation?’ asked the Holy Prophet.

‘Yes, they were,’ answered Rukanah.

‘Well,’ said the Holy Prophet, ‘These three utterances are regarded as
one. You thus can take your wife back.’ Rukanah therefore take his wife
back.[^4]

Nevertheless, the people, during the reign of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab,
underrated the divorce that most of them pronounced the form of divorce
three times on the same situation. \`Umar therefore considered what was
advantageous for them and decided to regard the three-time divorce that
was said on the same occasion as valid.[^5]

However, have the Muslim jurisprudents, throughout ages, agreed to what
\`Umar had done? The majority have agreed to \`Umar while others have
not![^6] In my conception, the judgment in this matter relies upon the
people’s advantages; if the men in authority consider, as \`Umar did,
that the advantage requires deciding the three-time divorce as valid,
they should then do; but if they consider that the public advantage
requires regarding it as one only, they should also do it.

Yet, up to two years after the reign of \`Umar, the three-time divorce
was regarded as one. On this account, Ibn al-Qayyim has decided that to
regard such divorce as one (i.e. not final) is more corresponding to the
public advantage in the late ages as it will block the path before any
social corruption.[^7]

Ibn al-Qayyim then makes a comparison among the various ages and the
difference in the public advantages that is the result of the public’s
circumstances.[^8]

Undoubtedly, the Ijtihad of \`Umar has influenced the Muslim
jurisprudence. The Malikiyyah School[^9] and the Hanbaliyyah School[^10]
have decided him who pronounces divorce three times on the same
situation as sinful because he has wasted the opportunity granted to him
by the Islamic Legislation.

The Shafi\`iyyah School,[^11] as well as Ibn Hazm, have decided it as
opposite to the most preferred; yet it is not banned because the text
appertained is general. The Hanafiyyah School[^12] have decided it as
heretic when its utterance is the same or when it is said in the same
interval between two periods of menstruation of the wife.[^13]

Dr. Mustafa al-Bagha, after quoting \`Umar’s opinion about the divorce,
says,

“This matter is one of these whose rulings have changed according to the
change of the time. As they recognized \`Umar’s excellent policy of
disciplining his subjects, the Muslim jurisprudents have agreed to him
on this point and carried out his decision.”[^14]

As a matter of fact, there is a number of questions that must be
provided in this respect: How did \`Umar identify the advantage and
understand the spirit of the Islamic legislation in the question of the
shares of the *al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*? Yet, the refutations of Ibn
Qudamah and the Rashid Rida have been previously cited.

Is it acceptable that \`Umar, alone, recognized what is good for the
publics while neither the Holy Prophet nor did Abu-Bakr recognize it?

Is it rational that Abu-Bakr and the Holy Prophet, who is connected to
the Divine Revelation, might ignore what is good for the publics? If it
is allowable for mortals, save the divinely commissioned leaders of the
ummah (namely, the holy Infallibles), to change the religious laws
according to the change of time and place, what are the extents of such
permission?

It is possible that some of the secondary rulings may be changed when
they compete with matters that are more important, or when their titles
are, in a general manner changed; but how can we accept the claims of
those who violate the religious rulings claiming the change of their
titles although we do realize that the principles and purposes of the
religious rulings are originated by Almighty Allah and are known by the
Infallibles only?

In case one of the Infallibles informs us about the change of a
religious ruling, we must then accede to him because the Infallibles are
the divinely commissioned leaders of this ummah whose mission is to
convey the instructions and ordains of Almighty Allah.

However, when such a change is made on bases of guesswork and
conjecture, it cannot be acceptable. The same thing can be applied to
the purposes beyond the religious rulings; in most cases, they involve
wisdoms rather than causes.

For instance, it is said that the purpose beyond the forbiddingness of
adultery is that the semen of two, or more, men will not be confused and
then a baby may be ascribed to a man by mistake.

This is in fact the wisdom, not the purpose, of forbidding adultery.
According to many narrations, the decision of defining a term of waiting
for divorcees and widows has been made for the very aforesaid wisdom.

Yet, if the womb of a woman is removed by a surgical operation or if a
woman is decisively recognized as barren, will it be obligatory upon
such women to observe the terms of waiting defined by the Islamic
legislation? The answer is yes; because Almighty Allah has imposed such
periods on women for an advantage recorded in the Preserved Tablet
(*al-Lawh al-Mahfudh*) and not allowed for people to see.

Hence, it is impulsive to exclude such women from observing the term of
waiting decided by the code of the religious law on the claim of the
nonexistence of the cause of the decision. In any event, some of the
religious rulings are dependent upon definite causes. For instance, wine
is forbidden so long as it intoxicates; and when intoxication is absent,
it is legal to have it. On this account, the rule that “the much amount
of a drink the little of which is intoxicating is forbidden” has been
decided.

However, the case is very different with the rulings invented by
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar; they contrived rulings that are nonexistent in the
Islamic legislation or are opposite to rulings that are openly mentioned
in the sacred texts.

Besides, they stretched and shrank rulings as they claimed advantage
while it is known for everybody that unless all-inclusive knowledge with
the principles and purposes of the religious laws is attained and unless
there is a divine commission, none is permitted to act freely with the
religious rulings.

For the above mentioned discussion, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar did not enjoy
such knowledge and were not commissioned for such positions. Besides, as
he decided the three-time divorce as final, canceled the share of the
*al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*, and prohibited the temporary marriage, \`Umar
wanted for his decisions to be perpetual, not subject to the advantage.
Thus, he blocked the way in the face of anyone who would claim that
\`Umar’s decisions were secondary or subject to his authorities as
caliph.

Even if we yieldingly accept the change of the religious laws according
to the change of advantages; what was the advantage of canceling those
religious rulings? Who is authorized to identify such advantages? Were
the substitute rulings based upon personal passions and opinions or upon
observance of the religious laws and proofs? If there were a proof and a
sacred text; what are they?

Alluding to the stipulations of the satisfactory advantages, Shaykh
Khallaf says,

“There are three stipulations for the achievement of advantage;

(1) an advantage must be actual, not illusory. In plain words, it must
be confident that the issuance of a verdict will truly achieve advantage
and prohibits damage. In case it is only conjectured that an advantage
can possibly be achieved without comparing it to the damage that can
possibly be drawn, advantage is thus not actual rather illusory.

(2) An advantage must be general, not specific or personal. It must be
confident that the issuance of a verdict will achieve advantage to or
deter damage from the largest number of people, not an individual or a
small group of individuals. Thus, when the issuance of a verdict
achieves a personal advantage apart from the publics, it will not be
acceptable.

(3) The issuance of such a verdict must not be contradictory to a
religious ruling or principle that is openly mentioned in a sacred
text.”[^15]

On the light of the aforementioned stipulations, let us ask whether
\`Umar’s decisions have achieved advantage to or deterred damage from
the largest number of the publics taking into consideration the problems
and confusions of life along with all of its pressures that make it
difficult to go against one’s habit.

For instance, if a husband wastes the opportunity of returning his wife,
through pronouncing the utterance of divorce three times on the same
occasion, will it be obligatory upon him to succumb to \`Umar’s ruling
and lose his wife?

In the word of Dr. Nadiah, “the wisdom of separating the utterances of
divorce is to give the husband the opportunity to think deeply about the
matter. This is the divorce as has been explained in the Holy Qur'an; it
is valid only when it is separated (i.e. repeated on different
occasions).”

What can we say to those who confess that the wisdom of specifying the
pronouncing of the utterances of divorce on different occasions as the
stipulation of its validity is to give the husband the opportunity to
think deeply about the matter and then, falling in irony, they
themselves claim that it was the public advantage that made \`Umar
decide the three-time divorce that is said on one occasion as final?

Undoubtedly, it is fanaticism that has made them fall in such irony! It
is definitely irrational to say that it is advantageous to regard the
three-time divorce as one but the breaking of this issue was based upon
advantage! Unfortunately, Dr. Nadiah has said such while she was fully
aware that it was \`Umar, neither the Holy Qur'an nor the Sunnah, who
violated the law and decided its opposite.

It is now absolutely impossible to accept the claim that \`Umar’s
decisions were derived from the Holy Qur'an or that his decisions were
not in violation of the sacred texts although the advantage that he
adopted was completely opposite to the Holy Qur'an.

Of course, uttering the word ‘three’ after the form of the divorce does
not validate it. It is as same as saying ‘*Allahu Akbar five times*’
instead of repeating the statement five times or saying ‘*SubhanAllah
one hundred times*’ instead of repeating it one hundred times! Many of
the scholars have decided divorce twice is enough for the
materialization of divorce. Going over the holy verse,

***“Divorce must be pronounced twice,” (Holy Qur’an: 2/229)***

al-Jassas says that a two-time divorce definitely validates the divorce,
because one who utters the form of divorce twice cannot be regarded as
two divorces. In the same manner, one who pays two dirhams cannot be
regarded as paying twice unless each dirham is given on a definite
occasion.

The same thing is applicable to the divorce; therefore, the verse
indicates that in order to validate the divorce, it must be said on two
different occasions. In addition, the verse carries warning against
gathering the two divorces on the same occasion.[^16]

\`Umar’s personal jurisprudence has affected the religious rulings; and
it is known to everybody that he subjugated the religious laws to the
advantage that he, personally, considered or supposed to be the perfect
cause upon which a ruling must rest.

He therefore modified the rulings according to what he would consider as
suitable or advantageous and canceled the actual advantages that are
realized by none save Almighty Allah.

About the proof of seeking the advantage, Dr. Mustafa al-Bagha says,

“The Sahabah, as is indicated by too many incidents, decided definite
rulings for the incidents according to their personal consideration of
the advantages that bring about benefit and prohibit damage depending
upon their own thoughts. They then regarded such considerations as
sufficient for the issuance of religious rulings.”[^17]

Hinting at the same point, al-Wafi al-Mahdiy says,

“When the Islamic conquests continued incessantly, especially during the
reign of \`Umar, various nations of various civilizations were included
to the Islamic authority. As a result, the Muslims had to encounter
complicated problems, whether in the military, financial, personal, or
penal affairs, that they had not known before.

They therefore had to use analogy when they could not find related texts
neither in the Holy Qur'an nor in the Holy Sunnah. Before that, they
used to rest upon Ijtihad through the Holy Qur'an and then the Holy
Sunnah. When they could not find anything in these two sources, they
would consult the experienced Sahabah.

When they also could not find anything with those, they would use
personal opinions. \`Umar, for instance, used to ask whether the
involved issue had been treated by Abu-Bakr or not. Analogy (*Qiyas*),
Equitable Preference (*Istihsan*), advantage (*Maslahah*), and blockade
of excuses (*Sadd al-Dhara’i\`*)—all these matters were well-organized
in the opinions on which they depended. In this age, consensus
(*Ijma\`*), which is a new source of the Islamic Legislation since it
was not present in the first age of Islam, has emerged.

When he could not find a solution neither in the Holy Qur'an nor in the
Sunnah, Abu-Bakr would refer the matter to a legislative body. \`Umar
did the same thing, too. Any decision that was made by that legislative
body would be regarded as issued by all of them…[^18]

To sum it up, when the Holy Prophet was among them, the Sahabah used to
refer to him in the religious questions in most cases. Yet, when he
departed life, they lost their religious authority. Therefore, their
Ijtihad entered upon a more serious stage.

In the words of Mr. Mustafa al-Zarqa’, the Sahabah’s custom, during the
Holy Prophet’s lifetime, was to listen to and follow him and to refer to
him in any question that would face them.

In other words, they depended totally upon him in the understanding and
guidance as regards each and every matter. By his demise, they suddenly
moved to the stage of Ijtihad since the authority had left them and his
constitutional heritage, namely the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah, replaced his
oral elucidations. Since then, it has been unavoidable to resort to
Ijtihad, in an unlimited way, for solving the emergent questions.”[^19]

Ijtihad was thus the shield of the first generations and, at the same
time, has been the justification of the next generations for their
ancestor’s deeds. A deep investigation of the so-called acceptable
advantages (*al-Masalih al-Mursalah*) proves that they all were invented
for correcting the Sahabah’s deeds.

They have regarded Abu-Bakr’s nominating \`Umar as his successor—while
they have claimed that the Holy Prophet did not nominate any
successor—as acting upon the advantage of the ummah and the protection
of the Muslims’ unity.[^20]

Similarly, they have justified \`Uthman ibn \`Affan’s setting the copies
of the Holy Qur'an to fire as he had only intended to make all the
people follow the same copy[^21] so as to save them from disagreement.
For fear of lengthiness, the other innumerable examples on such
justifications will be avoided.

To have a look at the general fundamentals of the Islamic jurisprudence
proves that the so-called *al-Masalih al-Mursalah* have not been among
the subjective fundamentals as is confirmed by all the Muslim schools of
law except that of Malik ibn Anas who regard them as independent
fundament.

The advantages have been classified as canceled, acceptable, and
considerable and the latter has been further classified into necessary,
exigent, and preferable. Resting upon these classes, the rulings and
branches of the Islamic jurisprudence have been defined.

Items Of Ijtihad
----------------

Let us throw more light on \`Umar’s situation about the religious
rulings to see whether his personal judgments stopped at this level or
pushed their way to include other religious affairs. Although we can
dispense with the details of this topic, our elucidation of the issue of
prohibiting reporting and recording the Hadith forces us to give a
thorough idea about the jurisprudential side of \`Umar’s personality and
the items and major issues of the Islamic jurisprudence form which he
benefited in the formation of his personal opinions and judgments.

\`Umar ibn al-Khattab legislated the *Salat al-Tarawih* (the recommended
nightly prayers during Ramadan) describing it as “the best heresy.”[^22]
As he liked the statement of *“al-Salatu Khayrun mina’l-Nawm* (Prayer is
better than sleeping)” after he had heard it from a Sahabiy, \`Umar
added it to the adhan (declaratory call to prayers) of the Fajr
(morning) Prayer and canceled the statement of *“Hayya \`Ala Khayr
al-\`Amal* (Come to the best of deeds)” which was used during the Holy
Prophet’s lifetime claiming that such a statement would prevent the
Muslims from jihad![^23]

He also prohibited the weeping for the dead,[^24] decided that the sign
of attaining maturity is to be six spans tall[^25] while it has been
authentically narrated that the Holy Prophet said, “Maturity is attained
when wet dreams occur.”[^26] \`Umar decided to deprive the non-Arabs of
any share of the legacies and excluded those whom are born in the Arab
lands[^27] while the Holy Prophet is authentically reported to have
said, “Except by means of piety, no Arab individual should be preferred
to a non-Arab,”[^28] and, likewise, Almighty Allah says in the Holy
Qur'an,

***“Verily, the most honored of you in the sight of Allah is (he who is)
the most righteous of you.” (Holy Qur’an: 49/13)*** [^29]

Regarding the doctrinal provision (Hadd) of the drinkers of intoxicants,
\`Umar issued various rulings; he once decided to sentence them to
eighty-lash punishment[^30] and, at other times, made them sixty only.
He also ordered to omit twenty lashes of the sentence for fear of
pain.[^31] It has been also narrated that \`Umar, while leading a
congregational prayer, omitted the Reciting[^32] in the Maghrib
(Sundown) Prayer.

After he had finished the prayer, he was reminded that he had omitted
the Reciting. “Were the Genuflection and Prostration good?” asked he.
“Yes, they were,” he was answered. “Well, it does not matter!” answered
he.[^33] Yet, it has been authentically narrated that the Holy Prophet
said,

“The prayer of him who neglects reciting the Surah of al-Fatihah (The
Opening Chapter; No. 1) is invalid.”[^34]

\`Umar is also reported to have whipped his two sons because they had
the surnames “Abu-\`Īsa (father of Jesus)” and “Abu-Yahya (father of
Jonah)” claiming that Prophet Jesus and Prophet Jonah had no
fathers![^35]

Husham ibn \`Urwah has narrated on the authority of his father that
\`Umar, one Friday, recited the Surah of al-Sajdah (Prostration; No. 32)
and after reciting the Verse of Prostration,[^36] he descended the
minbar and prostrated himself. People, of course, followed him.

On another occasion, he recited the same verse, but when people prepared
themselves to prostrate, he said, “Calm down! It is not obligatory upon
us to prostrate ourselves at the reciting of these verses; rather it is
optional.” He therefore prevented people from prostration.[^37]

This violation of the religious rulings has left its effects on the
schools of Islamic law causing the Muslim jurisprudents to give
different rulings regarding the obligatoriness or optionality of the
prostration after reciting the Verses of Prostration.

Thus, the Malikiyyah scholars,[^38] the Shafi\`iyyah scholars,[^39]and
the Hanbaliyyah scholars [^40] have decided such prostrations as
*Sunnah* (a norm that has been done by the Holy Prophet) while the
Hanafiyyah[^41]have decided them as obligatory.

Explaining Malik’s *al-Muwatta’*, al-Zarqaniy says, “The most famous
jurisprudential opinions as regards the prostration after reciting the
Verses of Prostration are that they are *Sunnah* and highly recommended
(*Fadhilah*).”[^42]

Yet, it has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that the
Messenger of Allah, while reciting the Surah of al-Najm (the Star; No.
53), prostrated himself and thus all the attendants prostrated except
two men.[^43]

Zayd ibn Thabit yet narrated that the Messenger of Allah, while reciting
the Surah of al-Najm, did not prostrate.[^44] It has been further
narrated that the Holy Prophet said,

“Prostration is obligatory upon him who hears and recites the Verses of
Prostration.”[^45]

Many similar narrations have been fabricated for the sake of justifying
\`Umar’s decision and the opinions of the various Sunnite
jurisprudential schools. The matter will be more obviously understood if
an investigation is made to the effects of the Sahabah’s personal
opinions on the Islamic law.[^46]

For instance, Malik ibn Anas, the founder of the Malikiyyah
jurisprudential school, argues that because \`Umar neglected prostrating
himself in the presence of the Sahabah none of whom objected to him or
was reported to have opposed, his act can be taken as valid.

On this account, Malik decided the prostration as recommended since the
Sahabah, in his conception, were the most knowledgeable with the
religious laws![^47]

Referring to the narrations that report the permissibility of Ijtihad
during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime, Dr. Madkur says,

“As a matter of fact, none of these narrations can ever prove that
anyone other than the Holy Prophet, who received directly the Divine
Revelation, did ever enjoy any legislative authority in that age.

These narrations have discussed partial issues some of which were
adopted only after it had been impossible to refer to the Holy Prophet
directly owning to long distance or fear of missing the opportunity;
others were issued practically not legislatively. We thus can argue that
the Holy Prophet did not require Ijtihad in this very sense.

After the departure of the Holy Prophet and, more precisely, during the
age of the Sahabah that ends with the elapse of the first century after
the Hijrah, the Sahabah, because of the expansion of the Islamic State
and the conquests, had to encounter new questions that they had never
known before.

They therefore had to experience the jurisprudential questions,
especially after the cessation of the Divine Revelations, so as to find
solutions for the first-time issues that occurred to their cursorily
incremental state that comprised miscellaneous countries and
races.”[^48]

From the above, we can conclude that \`Umar rested upon pure personal
opinions in issuing religious laws without referring to the Holy Qur'an
or the Holy Prophet’s practices and confirmations.

Moreover, he, on several occasions, violated the clear-cut texts of the
Holy Qur'an -such as in the case of the divorce-[^49] and the Holy
Sunnah -such as in the case of killing the man who was engaged in
offering prayers[^50] and the case of the Disastrous Thursday,[^51]
which is preventing from carrying out the Holy Prophet’s order of
bringing him a pen and a paper so as to record his final will- because
he thought that the advantage would be achieved on the violation of
these orders.

Even if we consider the personal opinions of the Sahabah as sources of
the Islamic legislation and even if we consider all the Sahabah as
ultimately decent, it is still unfeasible to violate the clear-cut texts
of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah. The Sahabah who violated the sacred texts
should have at least freed the others from following their personal
opinions and, such being the case, they would possibly be excused.

Although Ijtihad is defined as doing one’s utmost and exerting all
efforts for the sake of deducing a religious ruling from the Holy Qur'an
and Sunnah, \`Umar used to issue verdicts before he would skim through
the pages of the Holy Qur'an or review the Holy Sunnah. A little
ponderation over the question of the woman who was pregnant only six
months after marriage would have made \`Umar deduce the possibility that
her pregnancy was illegal. Yet, he immediately sentenced her to the
doctrinal provisions (*Hudud*) that must be undergone by the
fornicatresses!

Likewise, had he weighed up the question of depriving the Holy Ka\`bah
of its share, he would not have decided to seize that share. Without the
intrusion of Shaybah ibn \`Uthman and Ubayy ibn Ka\`b who told him that
the Holy Prophet and Abu-Bakr did not seize the fortunes of the Holy
Ka\`bah although they needed these fortunes more than he did, \`Umar
would have proceeded in his decision.  
 Similarly, all the aforementioned issues prove that \`Umar used to
issue religious verdicts without any ponderation over the Holy Qur'an
and Sunnah. Nevertheless, he wanted the Sahabah to follow his personal
opinions and violate what they had personally seen and heard from the
Holy Prophet!

Had the Sahabah’s opinions been added to the sources of the Islamic law,
it should have been obligatory upon \`Umar himself to adopt the
Sahabah’s opinions, especially in the questions that they had directly
heard from the Holy Prophet. Similarly, it should have been obligatory
upon him to accept their verdicts and opinions for they acted as
arguments against him and he, thus, should not have forced them to
follow his personal opinions.

It is now permissible to wonder how it was possible for \`Umar to
threaten \`Ammar, Ubayy ibn Ka\`b, Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy, and others. In
this respect, he said to Abu-Musa, “You must prove your claim or I will
hurt you.”[^52] To Ubayy, \`Umar said, “You must retreat what you have
said,” he then pulled him to the Masjid… etc.[^53] To \`Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud, \`Umar said, “You are reporting too much from the Messenger of
Allah.”[^54] To Abu-Hurayrah, he said, “If you do not stop reporting
from the Messenger of Allah, I will banish you to Dus.”[^55] \`Umar also
whipped Tamim al-Dariy for the same reason.[^56]

In order to find excuses for \`Umar and belittle the influence of the
Sahabah’s objections to him, Sunnite scholars have decided that the
foremost Sahabah are not bound to follow each other![^57]

In view of the abovementioned narrations, it seems that the decision
that the foremost Sahabah are not bound to follow each other is
effective only on the Sahabah who objected to \`Umar; yet Sunnite
scholars have projected sanctity on the Sahabah who agreed to him and
criticized any objection to the caliphs and their fans. They have even
regarded the conducts of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar as an indisputable source
of the Islamic law although they have not decided the inerrancy of those
Sahabah.

As he concentrated on analogy, \`Umar only wanted to fix his personal
opinions; and as he insisted on resting upon personal views, he only
wanted to find himself a higher standing in the Islamic State. He
therefore used to behave as if he was the legislator whose decisions
must not be broken. Yet, when he was objected by a deep-seated
intellectual trend depending upon a unanimous proof cited from the Holy
Qur'an or Sunnah, \`Umar would have to submit and retreat.

Hence, the arguments that the Sahabah’s opinions are regarded as sources
of the Islamic legislation and that the caliph has the right to issue
verdicts depending upon his consideration of the advantage—these two
arguments were the base and purpose of the Caliphate School of
Jurisprudence.

So far, our conclusions can be defined in the following points:

1) Abu-Bakr and \`Umar were not characterized by any feature that would
distinguish them from the others.

2) The Muslims separated into two intellectual trends after the
departure of the Holy Prophet.

3) \`Umar ibn al-Khattab worked painstakingly for forcing the others to
accept and act upon his personal opinions.

4) The Sahabah’s opinions cannot be taken as sources of the Islamic law
because they violated \`Umar’s opinions and he violated theirs in
numerous issues.

5) The conception of the Sahabah’s ultimate decency is proved as
unfounded since \`Umar often belied and distrusted the Sahabah’s claims
and vice versa.

6) The arguments that it is possible for the Sahabah to dispute with
each other but it is impermissible to refute their opinions—these
arguments were fabricated for the purpose of justifying their
disagreements in issuing religious verdicts in the first age of Islam.
Sarcastically, such disagreement has been decided as constructive!

7) The fundamentals of Ijtihad, such as analogy, Equitable Preference,
and advantage, have been proven untrue because they were founded later
on owing to temporal necessities and because they are found neither in
the Holy Qur'an nor in the Holy Sunnah.[^58]

Such being the case, the Sahabah escalated their objections to the
adoption of personal views and Ijtihad through means of reporting from
the Holy Prophet since much reporting of the Holy Prophet’s heritage
would naturally prove the disagreement between the Holy Prophet’s school
and the school of Ijtihad.

Moreover, the Holy Prophet’s school comprises edificatory truths that
are opposite to the intents of the Ijtihadists. These truths can be
manifestly shown through any investigation to the books of Hadith and
Islamic history.

In this manner, a group of the Sahabah objected to the adoption of
personal views and Ijtihad, called for the derivation of the religious
laws from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah only and rejected the baseless
opinions and conducts of the Sahabah in general and Abu-Bakr and \`Umar
in particular. The other group of the Sahabah argued the legitimacy of
\`Umar’s opinions regarding them as sources of the Islamic law that must
be followed.

In brief, reporters and recorders of the Hadith lined themselves with
the group of the pure compliance with the sacred texts and thus
corresponded to the spirit of the Islamic law, which encourages
learning, and to the instructions of the Holy Prophet who concentrated
on recording the items of knowledge.

Thus, they reported and recorded the Hadith as much as they could. On
the other side, those who prohibited reporting and recording the Hadith
lined themselves with the group of Ijtihad and personal opinions,
following the ruling authorities.

Unfortunately, reporters and records of the Hadith had to suffer
humiliation and disparagement during the ages of the caliphs to the
degree that al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafiy, the governor of Iraq during
the regin of \`Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan the Umayyad ruler, stamped on the
hand of Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansariy and the necks of Sahl ibn Sa\`d
al-Sa\`idiy and Anas ibn Malik so as to mark them as unwelcomed persons
and ordered the people to leave them and not to listen from them.[^59]

[^1]: Khalid Muhammad Khalid: al-Dimuqratiyyatu Abada (Democracy
forever) 155.

[^2]: Ibn Qudamah: al-Mughni 2:526.

[^3]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 86 as quoted
from Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:297 H. 317 with authentic series of
narrators. Also, Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:178 H. 1887.

[^4]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:265 H. 2387; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 7:339 H. 14764; Ibn Rushd al-Qurtubiy: Bidayat al-Mujtahid
2:50; Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: A’lam al-Muwaqqi’in 3:32; al-Shawkaniy:
Nayl al-Awtar 7:16-20.

[^5]: Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 240.

[^6]: Al-Qurtubiy: Tafsir 3:129.

[^7]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: A’lam al-Muwaqqi’in 3:48.

[^8]: Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 242.

[^9]: One of the four major Sunnite jurisprudential schools founded by
Malik ibn Anas.

[^10]: One of the four major Sunnite jurisprudential schools founded by
Ahmad ibn Hanbal.

[^11]: One of the four major Sunnite jurisprudential schools founded by
Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi\`iy.

[^12]: One of the four major Sunnite jurisprudential schools founded by
Abu-Hanifah.

[^13]: Dr. Muhammad Sallam Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam 177.

[^14]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 277. The majority of the Sunni jurisprudents have
accepted \`Umar’s decision in this regard.

[^15]: \`Abd al-Wahhab Khallaf: \`Ilm Usul al-Fiqh 86-9.

[^16]: Al-Jassas: Ahkam al-Qur'an 1:378.

[^17]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 54.

[^18]: See Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: al-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 46.
As a matter of fact, \`Umar used to join Abu-Bakr with the Holy Prophet
as being one of the sources of the Islamic legislation. He thus said to
the one who warned him against seizing the money paid to the Holy
Ka\`bah because neither the Holy Prophet nor did Abu-Bakr do such,
“These two men must be followed.” See Sahih al-Bukhariy 6:2655 H. 6847;
Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:410; Usd al-Ghabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 3:8
(Biography of Shaybah ibn \`Uthman al-\`Abdariy). Apparently, it was
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab who was the first to give a value to the opinions
of Abu-Bakr after his death. This was in fact the first step that he
took in order to guarantee that his personal opinions would be given a
value after his death. From such a step and its likes, the so-called
‘Sirat al-Shaykhayn (Conducts of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar)’ was invented as a
substitute for the Holy Prophet’s traditions (Sunnah) that \`Umar
prohibited.

[^19]: Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: al-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 69-70.
The words of Dr. Mustafa al-Zarqa’ have been quoted from al-Fiqh
al-Islami fi Thawbihi’l-Jadid 1:167.

[^20]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:353; Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 3:200;
Ibn al-Jawziy: al-Mutadham 4:126.

[^21]: Ibn al-Athir: al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 3:7-8; Abu-Bakr al-Maliqiy:
al-Tamhid wa’l-Bayan 1:62-63; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 7:218.

[^22]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 2:707 H. 1906; Malik ibn Anas: al-Muwatta'
1:114 H. 250; Ibn Shibbah: Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawwarah 2:713;
al-Tabariy: al-Riyad al-Nadirah 1:309; al-Ya\`qubiy: Tarikh 2:140; Ibn
Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 5:59.

[^23]: Of course, there are other reasons and motives that made \`Umar
add this statement to the adhan and to cancel the original statement. In
an independent survey, I, the author of the book, have explained all
these aspects under the title of “al-Adhan Bayna al-Asalah wa’l-Tahrif
(The Adhan Between Genuineness and Distortion).” This study has taken
three volumes the first of which has been published under the title of
“Hayya \`Ala Khayt al-\`Amal al-Shar\`iyyah wa’l-Shi\`ariyyah.”

[^24]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:432 H. 1226 (In this reference book of
Hadith, it is written that \`Ā'ishah condemned for his having narrated
such a Hadith, saying, “By Allah I swear, the Messenger of Allah has
never said that Almighty Allah would torture the dead believer when his
family weep for him! Rather, the Messenger of Allah said that Almighty
Allah would increase His torture upon the disbelievers even if their
family members weep them.” \`Ā'ishah then said, “(In order to prove the
falsity of \`Umar’s claim) you may listen to the Holy Qur'an that reads,
‘And no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another.”) Sahih
Muslim 2:238; Sunan al-Nassa'iy (al-Mujtaba) 4:18 H. 1858); Musnad Ahmad
ibn Hanbal 1:237 H. 2127, 1:335 H. 3103 (In this book, it is written
that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab beat the women who wept for the demise of
Ruqayyah, the Holy Prophet’s daughter, but the Holy Prophet warned him
against so.) al-Zarkashiy: al-Ijabah… 67; Ibn Shabbah: Tarikh al-Madinah
al-Munawwarah 2:676, 3:905.

[^25]: Al-Aminiy: al-Ghadir 6:171 as quoted from al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy:
Kanz al-'Ummal (on the authority of Ibn Abi-Shaybah, \`Abd al-Razzaq,
Musaddad and Ibn al-Mundhir as is recorded in al-Tabaraniy’s al-Mu’jam
al-Awsat.)

[^26]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 6:100-101; al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak
\`Ala’l-Sahihayn 2:59.

[^27]: Malik ibn Anas: al-Muwatta’ 2:502 H. 14; al-Mudawwanah al-Kubra
8:338.

[^28]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 5:411.

[^29]: Al-Haythamiy: Majma’ al-Zawa’id 3:273.

[^30]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:318-319 as quoted from Ibn Hazm:
al-Muhalla; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 11:42.

[^31]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:317-318; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah 12:137; al-Fa’iq 3:229.

[^32]: The Reciting (of the Surah of al-Fatihah and another optional
one) is one of the chief parts of the obligatory prayers. All Muslim
jurisprudents have decided that any omission of the Reciting invalidates
a prayer.

[^33]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 2:347-381.

[^34]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:241 H. 7289, 2:478 H. 10201; Sunan
Abi-Dawud 1:217 H. 822; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 1:194 H. 247; Sunan
al-Nassa’iy 2:137 H. 38; Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:63 H. 723; Sahih Muslim
1:297 H. 395; Sunan al-Darimiy 1:213 H. 1242.

[^35]: \`Abd al-Razzaq: al-Musannaf 11:42; Sunan Abi-Dawud 4:291 H.
2963; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 9:310; al-Shaybaniy: Taysir
al-Wusul 1:47 H. 7; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 12:44. The
following narration is quoted from Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 5:69:
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab, once, summoned all the boys who carried the names
of the Prophets and detained them in a room so as to change their names.
Yet, the boys’ fathers could prove that most of those boys were named by
the Holy Prophet himself. \`Umar therefore had to release them.

[^36]: According to Islamic jurisprudence, it is obligatory to prostrate
oneself after reciting the Four Verses of Sajdah (namely, 32:15, 41:37,
53:62 and 96:19). Hence, there are other verses of prostration at the
reciting of which prostration is optional.

[^37]: Dr. Turkiy: Munadharat if Usul al-Shari’ah bayna Ibn Hazm
wa’l-Bajiy 297; Malik ibn Anas: al-Muwatta' 1:206 H. 484; Sharh Ma\`ani
al-Āthar 1:354; al-Bayhariy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 2:321 H. 3574, 3:312 H.
5587; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 19:128.

[^38]: Ibn Qudamah: al-Mughni 1:688 and al-Sharh al-Kabir 1:816;
al-Nawawiy: al-Majmu’ 4:61.

[^39]: Al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab al-Umm 1:119; al-Shashiy: Hilyat al-\`Ulama'
2:122; al-Nawawiy: al-Majmu\` 4:69.

[^40]: Al-Nawawiy: al-Majmu’ 4:61.

[^41]: Al-Nawawiy: al-Majmu’ 4:61; al-Sarakhsiy: al-Mabsut 2:4; Nur
al-Īdah 1:80; al-Hidayah fi Sharh al-Bidayah 1:87.

[^42]: Sharh al-Zarqaniy 2:27.

[^43]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 355; Sunan al-Darimiy 1: 342; Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:59
H. 1406; Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:363 H. 1017 (In this reference book, it is
written that \`Abdullah said that the Holy Prophet recited Surah of
al-Najm in Makkah and, on reciting the Verse of Prostration therein,
prostrated himself. Following him, the others also prostrated themselves
except one old man who took a sum of stones in his hand and raised it to
his forehead claiming that it was sufficient to do such. Yet, this man
was then killed as infidel.”) Similar narrations are recorded in Sahih
Muslim 1:405 H. 576, Sunan al-Darimiy 1:407 H. 1465, al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab
al-Umm 1:135; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 2:321 H. 3572.

[^44]: Sunan al-Nassa’iy 2:160; Sunan al-Darimiy 1:343; Sunan Abi-Dawud
2:58 H. 1404; Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:364 H. 1022.

[^45]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 355; al-Sarakhsiy: al-Mabsut 2:4; Bada'i\`
al-Sana’i\` 1:180; Nasb al-Rayah 2:178.

[^46]: For instance, see Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar
al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 353-433.

[^47]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 355 as quoted from Ibn Qudamah: al-Mughni 1:446;
Ibn Rushd al-Qurtubiy: Bidayat al-Mujtahid 1:214; al-Zarqaniy: Sharh
al-Muwatta’ 2:194-196.

[^48]: Dr. Muhammad Sallam Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam 43-44.

[^49]: Sahih Muslim 3:130 H. 1417. It has been narrated that \`Abdullah
ibn \`Abbas said, “During the age of the Holy Prophet, the reign of
Abu-Bakr, and the first two years of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s reign, the
three-time divorce was decided as one. Yet, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab said,
‘People are rushing in a matter for which they have been given respite;
therefore, we will oblige them to this decision.’ He thus did.” See
al-Durr al-Manthur 1:668.

[^50]: Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 484;
Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat al-Awliya' 3:227; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:15.

[^51]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:54 H. 114, 6:2680 H. 6932; Sahih Muslim
3:1259 H. 1637; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:324 H. 2992, 1:336 H. 3111.

[^52]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 5:2305 H. 5891; Sahih Muslim 3:1694 H. 1203;
al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 8:339; Ibn Hajar: al-Wuquf \`Ala’l-Mawquf
1:114 H. 148.

[^53]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 4:21; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh Madinat
Dimashq 26:371; Jalal al-Din al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 5:231.

[^54]: Al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 3:378 H. 3449; al-Haythamiy:
Majma\` al-Zawa'id 1:149; al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’ 7:206,
11:555.

[^55]: Al-Sarakhsiy: al-Usul 1:341; al-Muhaddith al-Fasil 1:554;
al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’ 2:601; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah
wa’l-Nihayah 8:106; Ibn Shabbah: Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawwarah 3:800.

[^56]: Bughyat al-Bahith \`An Zawa'id Musnad al-Harith 1:328 H. 214;
al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 8:49 H. 21810; Al-Dhahbiy: Siyar
A’lam al-Nubala’ 2:248.

[^57]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 339.

[^58]: All the points that the have lately presented as proofs on the
legality of Qiyas, Istihsan, and the like invented principles are
refutable and baseless.

[^59]: Ibn al-Athir: Usd al-Ghabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 2:336 (Biography
of Sahl ibn Sa\`d al-Sa\`idiy); Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Isti\`ab 2:664 No.
1089; al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal 12:189.


