Models Of The Perpetuity Of The Two Trends
==========================================

Let us cite some examples on the continuity of the two trends for the
purpose of making the matter more obvious:

Ibn Sa\`d has recorded that \`Abdullah ibn al-\`Ala’ asked al-Qasim to
dictate to him some of the Hadiths. Al-Qasim said,

During the age of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, the records of Hadith increased
vastly that \`Umar ordered people to bring any record they had kept.
When all the records were brought before him, \`Umar set them to fire
and said, “This is a Mishna just like that of the Christians and the
Jews.”[^1]

In view of such incidents, many questions that search for convincing
answers jump to the mind of the readers: Why did the records of the
Hadith increase in the reign of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, not any other
caliph? What is the significance of such an occurrence? Why did \`Umar
set them to fire, instead of erasing them with water of burying them?
Why did \`Umar do in hurry without investigation or thorough
examination? Why did both Abu-Bakr and \`Umar select the same method of
annihilating the records of the Hadith, which is setting them to fire?

Although the intellectual trend of the majority of the Sahabah was
against wiping out the records of the Hadith, the other trend of
Ijtihad, having been the executive authority, insisted on its opinion
and hence wiped out these records. What for was such belittlement and
indifference to the Sahabah’s opinions that were congruent to the Holy
Prophet’s Hadith and conducts as well as the spirit of the Islamic
legislation?

The gentle readers will certainly conclude the answers of these
questions from the previous as well as the coming narrations. First of
all, let us cite the following narration:

Sa\`id ibn Jubayr narrated that \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said that the
Holy Prophet permitted the temporary marriage. Yet, \`Urwah ibn
al-Zubayr intruded to say that Abu-Bakr and \`Umar prohibited it. Having
been very resentful of \`Urwah’s answer, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said,

“I see coming that you shall certainly perish! While I say to you that
it was the Messenger of Allah who deemed it lawful, you answer me that
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar prohibited it!”[^2]

According to another narration narrated by \`Abd al-Barr and Ibn Hazm,
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said,

“I am sure that you will not stop such things until you are chastised by
Allah! I am reporting to you from the Prophet and you are reporting to
me from Abu-Bakr and \`Umar!”[^3]

According to a third narration, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said,

“I am reporting to you from the Prophet and you are bringing to me what
was said by Abu-Bakr and \`Umar!”

According to a fourth narration, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said,

“I see coming that you shall be inflicted by stones from the
heavens!”[^4]

Yet, \`Urwah answered, “I swear by Allah that Abu-Bakr and \`Umar were
more knowledgeable than you are as regards the Sunnah of the Messenger
of Allah.”[^5]

On this statement, al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy commented,

“\`Urwah was right. Yet it is unacceptable to follow anybody in
violating what has been authentically proven as said by the Messenger of
Allah.”[^6]

It has been also narrated that \`Abdullah, son of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab,
learnt people that Almighty Allah has revealed the temporary marriage
and the Holy Prophet passed it. Some objected to him that he was
disagreeing with his father. His answer was “You should have followed
the Holy Prophet’s Sunnah, not \`Umar’s!”[^7]

According to another narration, he answered, “Whose commandment should I
follow? The Holy Prophet’s or my father’s? Indeed, the Holy Prophet did
it.”[^8]

 It has been narrated on the authority of \`Abd al-A\`la that Zayd ibn
Arqam, while leading a Deceased Prayer, repeated the *Takbir* (the
statement of *Allahu Akbar*) five times. Hence, Abu-\`Īsa \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn Abi-Layla, the official jurisprudent of the State, hurried
towards Zayd, took him from the hand, and said, “Have you forgotten (the
number of the *Takbir*)?” “No, I have not,” answered Zayd, “I personally
followed my dear, the Holy Prophet, in such a prayer when he repeated
the *Takbir* five times only. I therefore shall never leave it.”[^9]

A similar narration has been narrated from \`Īsa, the manumitted slave
of Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, who confirmed that his master reported to him
that the Holy Prophet repeated the *Takbir* five times only while he was
offering a Deceased Prayer.[^10]

Wabrah ibn \`Abd al-Rahman narrated that a man came to \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar and asked whether it is valid to circumambulate the Holy Ka\`bah
while being *Muhrim* (entering into *Ihram*: putting the pilgrimage
uniform and entering the state of being performing the obligatory rites
of the ritual Hajj). “Nothing prevents you from it,” answered \`Abdullah
ibn \`Umar. The man added, “We have been told by so-and-so that it is
unlawful to do so before the pilgrims’ return to the *Mawqif*. Yet, I do
not like that man since you seem to be more pious than he is.” Giving
details of the question, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar answered, “The Messenger
of Allah, while being *Muhrim*, performed a pilgrimage, circumambulated
the Holy Ka\`bah and roamed between the Safa and Marwa. If you are
truthful, you should then follow the practice of Messenger of Allah
rather than so-and-so.”[^11]

He is also reported to have said that the Messenger of Allah instructed
not to prevent the bondmaids from offering their prayers in mosques.
Yet, one of his sons expressed that they were preventing them from such.
This statement made \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar very angry that he said, “I am
reporting to you from the Messenger of Allah and you say that you are
preventing!”[^12]

According to another narration, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar chided him saying,
“I have said that the Messenger of Allah instructed and you insist on
violating him!”[^13]

It has been narrated that \`Umar hit Tamim with his rod because he was
offering a two-Rak\`ah supererogatory prayer although \`Umar had warned
them against such. Tamim, as having been in the prayer, pointed to
\`Umar to sit down and \`Umar did. When he finished his prayer, Tamim
asked \`Umar why he had hit him. “You know that I have prohibited you
from offering such a prayer,” answered \`Umar. But Tamim said, “I
offered such a prayer while I was with the Messenger of Allah who is
certainly superior than you are.” \`Umar commented, “Well, I have not
meant you and your likes; but I anticipate that the coming generations
will offer prayers in the period between the \`Asr (afternoon) Prayer
and the Maghrib (sundown) Prayer passing by the very hour during which
the Holy Prophet warned against offering any prayer; hence, they will
connect the two obligatory prayers in the same way as they have
connected the Dhuhr (noon) and \`Asr Prayers.”[^14]

It has been also narrated that Abu-Ayyub al-Ansariy, after the demise of
\`Umar, returned to offering a supererogatory prayer between the \`Asr
and Maghrib Prayers after he had stopped during the reign of \`Umar.
When he was asked about the reason, he answered, “\`Umar used to hit
with his rod anyone who would offer such a prayer.”[^15]

It has been narrated on the authority of Zayd ibn Thabit that Abu-Bakr,
after his campaign against the people of Yamamah, ordered him to allow
the alive to inherit their shares from the deads’ legacies and to cancel
the shares of the deads. \`Umar also ordered Zayd to do the same thing
with the individuals of the \`Amwas tribe whom were plagued.[^16]

The abovementioned narrations hint at the points of disagreement among
the Sahabah. The majority of such disagreements were in the issues of
the Islamic jurisprudence and the secondary rulings of the religion. By
the application of his new policy, \`Umar wanted all the Sahabah to
follow his opinions without dispute.

They therefore rejected that because his opinions were contradictory to
what they had witnessed from the Holy Prophet, such as in the case of
the *Takbir* of the Deceased Prayer, the supererogatory prayer between
the \`Asr and Maghrib Prayers, the temporary marriage… etc.
Nevertheless, \`Umar, after he had not been able to impose his opinions
on them, justified that he did not mean them; rather he meant the coming
generations!

The obligation of acting upon the personal verdicts of \`Umar was one of
the fundamentals of the his new policy; as a result, \`Ammar ibn Yasir
said to him, “If you wish, I will not tell it to anyone else.”
Similarly, Ubayy ibn Ka\`b loathingly said, “If you want me to confine
myself to my house, I will do it and will then never say anything more
in this respect.”

All such narrations confirm the existence of pressure and threat, which
has been manifestly presented in abovementioned narrations, such as
\`Umar’s threatening \`Ammar and Abu-Musa with whipping as well as his
actual hitting Tamim and Abu-Hurayrah. This threat, too, proves that a
clash between the two trends actually occurred during that period.

It is now unfeasible for anyone to deny that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab did
prohibit reporting and recording the Hadith. Similarly, any attempt to
arouse doubts around the narrations that reported \`Umar’s prohibiting
the spread of the Hadith and detaining some of the grand Sahabah is
refuted by the clear-cut historical events and reports about \`Umar’s
practical and conceptual issues.

All such historical texts have supported and confirmed the prohibition
of the recordation and reporting of the Hadith and, at the same time,
decided as worthless all the justification of Ibn Hazm, al-Dhahbiy, and
their likes who claimed that the decision of the prohibition and the
detainment of the Sahabah were not compatible to \`Umar’s psychology and
standing!

For more confirmation, let us cite the following example concerning the
distribution of the lands in Iraq and Egypt that were conquered by the
Muslim warriors by force during the reign of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab. As
has been confirmed by the Holy Qur'an, one-fifth of such spoils of war
must be deposited in the public treasury and then expended on the
categories defined by the holy verse,

***“And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah
and for the Messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans and the
needy and the wayfarer.” (Holy Qur’an: 8/41)***

The other four-fifths must be distributed among the warriors as is
declared in the holy verse and was practiced by the Holy Prophet in
Khaybar.

As usual, the warriors came to \`Umar asking for distributing the
one-fifth and giving them their shares. Yet, \`Umar said, “What shall we
say to the other Muslims who will find these lands distributed,
inherited, and seized? This is indeed not accurate!”

\`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf asked, “What is the accurate opinion, then?
The lands and the non-Muslims therein are within the spoils of war that
Almighty Allah has given exclusively to the warriors.”

“This is true, but I do not think so,” answered \`Umar.

The warriors then talked very much with \`Umar about the matter showing
that it would not be fair to give the lands that they could occupy by
their own swords to others who neither participated nor even saw these
lands. Whatever they said, \`Umar answered with “This is my opinion!”

Finally, they had to succumb and say, “It is up to you.”[^17]

Of course, such a furious clash between the Sahabah, about one of the
simplest jurisprudential terms, would have never occurred during the
Holy Prophet’s lifetime where there was an authority to whom all the
Muslims would refer as regards any issue.

Hence, because the Muslims did not gather around the divinely
commissioned authority, their personal opinions and disagreements in the
religious affairs increased causing dispute and even fighting.
Immediately after the departure of the Holy Prophet, the negative
consequences of the Muslims’ negligence of the divinely commissioned
authorities appeared although the Holy Prophet had warned them against
such in many traditions, such as the famous Hadith of *Arikah* and the
other Hadiths of the warning against personal opinions.

Imam \`Ali and the honest Sahabah not only were depressed for the
seizure of the political leadership of the Muslims but also they felt
greater pains for the occurrence of such disagreements, separation, and
violations of the unity and religious authority of the Muslims.

For this very reason, the complaints of Imam \`Ali, Anas, \`Ammar, and
many other Sahabah increased during that period. Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman,
the keeper of the secret regarding the names of the hypocrites among the
companions of the Holy Prophet, warned so sorrowfully against
disagreements and contradictions of opinions that occurred after the
waste of the actual authority of Islam and the foundation of ungrounded
leaderships.

In this respect, it has been narrated on the authority of al-Barra’ ibn
\`Āzib immediately after the departure of the Holy Prophet, Hudhayfah
ibn al-Yaman, in the presence of al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, \`Abadah ibn
al-Samit, Salman al-Farisiy, Abu-Dharr, and Abu’l-Haytham ibn al-Tayhan,
said,

“I swear by Allah that my prediction shall take place. I have not told
lies and I will not be belied. Those people are intending to restrict
the matter (of the leadership) to the Muhajirun. You can ask Ubayy ibn
Ka\`b about it. He has also have knowledge of this.”

They therefore went towards Ubayy’s house. As they knocked the door,
Ubayy stood behind the door and asked whom it was. Al-Miqdad talked to
him, but Ubayy asked him why he had come.

“Open the door! The matter for which I am here is more serious than
being discussed through closed doors,” said al-Miqdad.

Yet, Ubayy said, “I will not open my door. Now, I know exactly why you
are here. You have come asking about the matter of the Meeting (in
Saqifah). Have you not?”

“Yes, we have,” answered they.

“Is Hudhayfah with you?” asked Ubayy.

“Yes, he is,” answered they.

Here, Ubayy said,

“The matter is as exactly as informed by Hudhayfah. I therefore will
never open the door of my house until the predicted thing will occur.
What will come next will be more catastrophic! I have nothing to do
other than complaining about it to Almighty Allah!”[^18]

It has been also narrated that Ubayy ibn Ka\`b said,

“The parties of that Meeting (of Saqifah) have destroyed themselves. I
swear it by the Lord of the Ka\`bah. Yet, I am not lamenting over them;
rather I lament over the Muslims who shall perish for such.”[^19]

A third narration reads that Hudhayfah said,

“I will say such a great word about it that I do not care whether you
will keep me alive or kill me.”[^20]

Hence, the following names can be added to the list of the Sahabah who
disagreed with \`Umar as regards jurisprudential issues:

1. Zayd ibn Arqam,

2. Al-Barra ibn \`Āzib,

3. \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar,

4. Salman al-Farisiy,

5. Abu-Hurayrah,

6. Tamim al-Dariy,

7. Al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad,

8. Abu-Dharr al-Ghifariy, and

9. The warriors to whom Almighty Allah has restored[^21] among the
Sahabah and others.

The Sahabah Objecting To Opinionism
-----------------------------------

To be surer about our claim and discussions, more investigation in the
situations of the forecited Sahabah is required since it is insufficient
to mention a single incident or situation; rather it is necessary to
study the general features of those Sahabah’s religious and
jurisprudential trends.

As I examined thoroughly the personalities of those Sahabah, I found
that most of them had compiled books or, in other words, the majority of
the authors of the first age of Islam disagreed with the Opinionists and
the adopters of Ijtihad. In fact, the compilations of those Sahabah
acted as frank objections against the policies of \`Umar. Let us now
refer to those Sahabah in brief:

### (1) Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (martyred in AH 40)

None can ever deny the fact that Imam \`Ali used to write down the
Divine Revelations and the dictations of the Holy Prophet. Ummu-Salamah,
the Holy Prophet’s wife, narrated that Imam \`Ali, once, was with the
Holy Prophet when the latter asked for a piece of leather (to write on).
He then dictated to Imam \`Ali who filled the face, back, and even edges
of that leather with the Holy Prophet’s dictations.[^22]

As has been confirmed by more than ten of his disciples, Imam \`Ali used
to keep a paper comprising dictations of the Holy Prophet in the sheath
of his sword.[^23] Previously, many situations of Imam \`Ali’s
disagreement with the opinions of \`Umar have been cited.

### (2) Ubayy ibn Ka\`b al-Ansariy (died in AH 22)

Abu’l-\`Āliyah narrated that Ubayy ibn Ka\`b had compiled a big book
about the exegesis of the Holy Qur'an.[^24] It has been previously
proven that Ubayy disagreed with \`Umar and declared that he did not
enjoy a distinctive knowledgeability of the religious affairs and that
he did not agree to his decision of prohibiting reporting and recording
the Hadith.

### (3) Mu\`adh ibn Jabal (died in AH 18)

When the Holy Prophet sent Mu\`adh to the Yemen, he gave him a book in
which he dictated the rulings of the alms as well as many Hadiths.[^25]
Musa ibn Talhah kept that book or a copy of it.[^26] In addition, Ibn
\`Ā’idh kept copies of Mu\`adh’s books.[^27]

All these reports prove that Mu\`adh ibn Jabal recorded many books that
could survive in spite of \`Umar’s decision of setting all the records
to fire after he had prohibited and threatened Mu\`adh. Yet, examples on
Mu\`adh’s situations against \`Umar have been previously cited.

### (4) Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman (died in AH 36)

Examples on Hudhayfah’s situations with \`Umar have been previously
cited, especially his words with \`Umar ibn al-Khattab in which he said
that he hated the right, liked the seductions... etc. Hudhayfah ibn
al-Yaman used to write down the Holy Prophet’s dictations about the alms
of dates,[^28] the taxes of Hijaz,[^29] and the taxes on date-palm
trees.[^30]

Al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam was the Holy Prophet’s clerk of the alms, but
when he would be absent, Jahm ibn al-Salt and Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman
would replace him[^31] according to the order of the Holy Prophet
himself.[^32]

### (5) \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud al-Hudhaliy (died in AH 32)

Juwaybir has narrated on the authority of al-Dahhak that \`Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud said: “During the age of the Messenger of Allah, we used to
record nothing of the Hadith except those appertained to the *Tashahhud*
(a major section of the obligatory prayer) and *Istikharah* (Seeking
goodness from Almighty Allah).[^33] It has been also narrated on the
authority of Ma\`an that \`Abd al-Rahman, son of \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud,
showed him a book and swore that it had been written by his father
personally.[^34]

Yet, it has been narrated that \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud prohibited the
recordation of the Hadith. This is in reality a fabrication and is
refuted by the aforesaid reports, as well as many others, and by the
fact that he was detained by \`Umar for his having violated the decision
of prohibiting reporting and recording the Hadith.

Other narrations have affirmed that \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud erased the
contents of some papers that comprised narrations. On the assumption
that these narrations are authentic, it is possible that these papers
comprised narrations of the Jews and Christians, as has been previously
proven.[^35]

It has been also narrated that \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud disagreed with
\`Umar on many issues or, as is quoted from Ibn al-Qayyim, on one
hundred questions.[^36] This fact proves that he joined the group of the
thorough compliance with the sacred texts and proves the falsehood of
the narration reporting his having said,

“If all the people enter upon a certain path but \`Umar enters upon
another, I will surely take the path of \`Umar!”[^37]

### (6) \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf (died in AH 31)

Later on, we will discuss in details the role that \`Abd al-Rahman
played in sketching the conducts of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar and his standing
in the view of \`Umar in particular. Yet, nothing has been reported from
him concerning the recordation of the Hadith.

### (7) Abu-\`Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah

This man died before the caliphate of \`Umar and did not record any
book.

### (8) Zayd ibn Thabit (died in AH 45)

It has been narrated that Zayd was the first to compile a book about the
rulings of inheritance. Ja\`far ibn Burqan narrated that he had heard
al-Zuhriy saying,

“Unless Zayd ibn Thabit compiled a book on the rulings of heritage, they
would be unknown by the people.”[^38]

Zayd, however, disagreed with \`Umar on the issues of the share of
grandmothers (from the heritage), the retaliation of Muslims who kill
Dhimmis, and other issues.

### (9) \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas (died in AH 68)

It has been reported from Salma that she saw \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas
carrying tablets that comprised the writings of Ibn Abi-Rafi’ about some
of the Holy Prophet’s deeds.[^39] It has been also narrated that he left
numerous books after his demise.[^40] Many narrations have been reported
from him confirming the necessity of recording knowledge.[^41]

Yet, the narration of Tawus that \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas disliked
recording the knowledge requires thorough investigation because it
opposes many other narrations. Previously, we have cited his
disagreement with \`Umar regarding the issue of the lady that became
pregnant only six months after her marriage.

### (10) Al-Dahhak ibn Sufyan al-Kilabiy

The Holy Prophet wrote a message to al-Dahhak instructing him to give
the widow of Ashyam al-Dibabiy her due from the legacy of her
husband.[^42] Al-Dahhak, then, sent a message to \`Umar telling him
about the contents of that message.[^43]

### (11) Shaybah ibn \`Uthman al-\`Abdariy (died in AH 57)

Al-Muzziy, in *Tahdhib al-Kamal* 12:604, has written the biography of
Shaybah without mentioning that he had compiled a book. Yet, he referred
to the aforementioned narration concerning his disagreement with \`Umar
on the issue of the fortune of the Holy Ka\`bah.

### (12) A woman that found fault with \`Umar

It is probable that this woman was Fatimah bint Qays, al-Dahhak’s elder
sister, about whom Abu-Salamah reported some narrations. Muhammad ibn
\`Amr narrated that Abu-Salamah reported that Fatimah bint Qays compiled
a book in which she related her story…[^44] According to one of her
narrations, \`Umar said to her, “We should not neglect the Book of our
Lord and the Sunnah of our Prophet because of a statement said by a
woman whom we cannot tell whether she is honest or not!”

### (13) \`Ammar ibn Yasir (martyred during the Battle of Siffin)

\`Ammar is one of the excellent and grand Sahabah. Having been one of
the adherents to Imam \`Ali, he was martyred during the Battle of
Siffin. The Holy Prophet predicted his martyrdom at the hands of the
despotic party.

Although any compilation of \`Ammar cannot be found, he joined the
school of reporting the Hadith since he, in the issuance of religious
verdicts, thoroughly complied with the sacred texts, he objected to the
caliphs’ adoptions of personal views and imitated the jurisprudential
course of Imam \`Ali.

### (14) Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy (died in AH 42)

It has been narrated that Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy, replying to the message
of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, wrote that the Holy Prophet used to…
etc.[^45] Abu-Zayd Bakr ibn \`Abdullah said, “The Shahid \`Ali Library
in Turkey keeps a manuscript compiled by Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy.”[^46]

It has been also narrated that he defended the recordation of the Holy
Sunnah. Later on, we will discuss in details the jurisprudential course
of Abu-Musa to prove whether he backed the Opinionists or the compliers
with the sacred texts.

### (15) Sa\`d ibn Malik; Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy (died in AH 74)

Abu-Sa\`id is reported as saying, “Except the Holy Qur'an and Hadiths
concerning the *Tashahhud*, we used not to record anything.”[^47]
Al-A\`dhamiy says: “It is probable that Abu-Sa\`id wrote down some of
the Hadiths for \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas.”

Yet, these reports are contradictory to the narration that Abu-Sa\`id
reported the Holy Prophet’s saying: “Do not record anything of my words
and deeds. Now, anyone who has recorded anything other than the Qur'an
must erase it.”[^48]

### (16) Zayd ibn Arqam (died in AH 66)

Zayd recorded some of the Hadith and sent them to Anas ibn Malik, such
as the Holy Prophet’s praying to Almighty Allah to forgive the Ansar and
their descendants.[^49] He also objected to some of \`Umar’s verdicts
and narrated too much about the merits of Imam \`Ali.

### (17) Al-Barra ibn \`Āzib (died in AH 72)

Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib has recorded that al-Barra ibn \`Āzib used to
report and record the Hadith.[^50] It has been also narrated from Waki\`
on the authority of his father that \`Abdullah ibn Hanash said that he
had seen them (seekers of knowledge) recording al-Barra'’s lectures on
the palms of their hands using canes.[^51] Besides, al-Barra' narrated
numerous traditions about the merits of Imam \`Ali. Yet, his situation
concerning the meeting of *Saqifah* has been previously cited.

### (18) \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar ibn al-Khattab (died in AH 74)

It has been narrated that \`Abdullah used to record the Hadith. Ibrahim
al-Sa'igh narrated on the authority of Nafi\` that \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar
kept many books which he used to read.[^52] Later on, we will discuss
\`Abdullah’s situation against his father and arguments about the
necessity of the thorough compliance with the sacred texts, although he
himself violated this trend on definite occasions.

### (19) Salman al-Farisiy (died in AH 32)

Ibn Shahrashub has recorded that Imam \`Ali followed by Salman
al-Farisiy were the first to compile books in Islam.[^53] About Salman,
Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr says, “He recorded the conversation the Roman
Catholicos whom were sent by Caesar after the Holy Prophet’s
departure.”[^54] Al-A\`dhamiy has also recorded that Salman seemed to
write some of the Hadiths for Abu’l-Darda’.[^55]

Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in *al-Musnad*, has recorded a number of narrations
reported by Salman indicating that he followed the trend of the thorough
compliance with the sacred texts. As a matter of fact, a deep look in
the life account of Salman demonstrates that he was one of the chief
adopters of the School of Through Compliance with the Sacred Texts. This
is not strange, since he was, in the words of the Holy Prophet, one of
the Ahl al-Bayt in honor, not reality.[^56]

### (20) Abu-Hurayrah al-Dusiy (died in AH 59)

Al-Fadl ibn Hasan ibn \`Umar ibn Umayyah al-Dumayri has narrated that
his father said that Abu-Hurayrah denied a Hadith after he had heard
from him. Yet, his father said, “I have heard this Hadith from you
personally!” Abu-Hurayrah replied, “If you have heard this Hadith from
me, this means that it is written with me.”[^57]

Generally, some of Abu-Hurayrah’s statements indicate that he followed
the trend of the thorough compliance with the sacred texts and others
indicate that he supported the Opinionists.

### (21) Tamim al-Dariy

Previously, Tamim’s objection to \`Umar’s having prohibited him to offer
a prayer after the \`Asr (obligatory) Prayer has been cited.

### (22) Al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad

Al-Miqdad has not been reported as having compiled or recorded the
religious knowledge. Yet, he is well-known for his following Imam \`Ali
in everything. He must thus have been following the trend of the
thorough compliance with the sacred texts.

### (23) Abu-Dharr al-Ghifariy

Ibn Shahrashub has added Abu-Dharr’s name to the list of the foremost
compilers in Islam.[^58] It is also well-known for everybody that
Abu-Dharr disagreed with the Opinionists and the ruling authorities in
general and \`Uthman ibn \`Affan in particular. Besides, he was one of
the sincere disciples of Imam \`Ali.

Conclusions
-----------

On the strength of the previous simple inventory, we conclude that the
Sahabah who objected to the Opinionists were either the compilers of the
Islamic knowledge or the disciples of Imam \`Ali who participated in his
campaigns.[^59]

As regards the earlier, the compilers of books on the Islamic knowledge
are those who thoroughly complied with the sacred texts. They are also
not reported to have narrated any item revealing the prohibition of
reporting and recording the Hadith. Rather, the Sahabah who thoroughly
complied with the sacred texts encouraged on reporting and recording the
Hadith.

They thus disagreed with the other party whose members practiced Ijtihad
and prohibited the reporting, writing down, and recording of the Holy
Sunnah.

In other words, there is inherence between the recording of the Hadith
and the thorough compliance with the sacred texts. Similarly, there is
inherence between the prohibition from recording the Hadith and the
practice of Ijtihad and Opinionism.

For instance, \`Ammar ibn Yasir followed the School of Thorough
Compliance with the Sacred Texts, as will be proven in the coming
chapters, although he did not write down any book in the field of the
religious knowledge. On the other side, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab and Zayd
ibn Thabit followed the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism although they
did write down some books.

However, ponderation over their books proves that these books comprised
nothing more than their personal views and opinions and that all the
narration mentioned therein supported their trend. As a result, the
compilers of books on Islamic knowledge are those who followed the
School of Thorough Compliance with the Sacred Texts.

The following points can also be concluded in this respect:

1) The claim that the Holy Prophet had prohibited from recording his
traditions is unsubstantiated.

2) The recordation of the items of knowledge started during the Holy
Prophet’s lifetime and under his commandment. This trend then extended
with the Sahabah who believed in the sacredness of the texts of the Holy
Qur'an and Sunnah.

3) During the reign of \`Umar, there were records comprising the Holy
Prophet’s Hadith. From this cause, he ordered such records to be brought
to him.

4) The prohibition of recording the Hadith was issued during the reigns
of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar and under their commandment. Thus, the decision
did not acquire any legitimacy from the Holy Prophet’s texts.

In this regard, al-Mu\`allimiy says:

“Had the Holy Prophet prohibited the recordation of the Hadith, Abu-Bakr
would not have recorded some Hadiths and, likewise, \`Umar would not
have had the intention to record, too.”[^60]

Since the records of the Hadith were available, why did \`Umar have an
aversion to spread them and why did he declare that the Book of Allah
was sufficient? Similarly, why have Ibn Hazm and his likes found it
improbable for \`Umar to detain some of the Sahabah?

To answer these questions, we say that the reporting and recordation of
the Hadith were the basic barriers against the acceptability of the
personal opinions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar. Hence, the first step on their
course of the adoption of personal opinions was directing the people to
depend upon the Holy Qur'an alone, reduce reporting the Hadith, and stop
recording it.

Such directions created a huge gap between ordinary people and their
Prophet’s traditions and paved the way for the new substitute, which was
the Ijtihad of the Sahabah. The following step was therefore the
presentation of the Ijtihad as the substitute of the Hadith.

As a matter of fact, the Holy Prophet anticipated openly the imminent
happening of such and declared his displeasure with it as he confirmed
that his words are as sacred as Almighty Allah’s Words.

In the conception of \`Umar, the prohibition of spreading the Hadith was
a social necessity imposed upon him by the surrounding circumstances. It
was tantamount to the reaction of his ignorance with the Holy Prophet’s
traditions as well as the reminiscence that he had kept in his mind when
the Holy Prophet prohibited him from recording the distorted heritage of
the Christians and Jews when he had written sections from the distorted
Torah.

By the prohibition of recording the Hadith, \`Umar only wanted to apply
the Holy Prophet’s prohibition from recording the heritage of the Ahl
al-Kitab. Yet, the difference between the two is totally clear. Finally,
had Abu-Bakr and \`Umar recognized the instructions of the Holy Prophet,
they would not have violated his orders and invented contradictory
courses.

Detainment Of The Reporters Of Hadith
-------------------------------------

It has been narrated on the authority of Sa\`d ibn Ibrahim on the
authority of his father that \`Umar detained three individuals in the
charge of much reporting from the Holy Prophet. These three were
\`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, Abu’l-Darda' and Abu-Mas\`ud al-Ansariy.[^61]

Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy, in *Sharaf Ashab al-Hadith*, has recorded that
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab, once, summoned \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud,
Abu’l-Darda' and Abu-Mas\`ud and said to them, “Why are you reporting so
much from the Messenger of Allah?” He then detained then in al-Madinah.

It has been narrated on the authority of Sa\`d ibn Ibrahim on the
authority of his father that \`Umar reproached \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud,
Abu’l-Darda', and Abu-Dharr for they have reported too much from the
Holy Prophet. He then detained them in al-Madinah until his death.[^62]

\`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf is reported as saying, Before his death,
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab ordered the companions of the Messenger of Allah,
namely \`Abdullah (ibn Mas\`ud), Hudhayfah, Abu’l-Darda', Abu-Dharr, and
\`Uqbah ibn \`Āmir, to be present before him although they lived in
remote countries. He then reproached them for having spread the
traditions of the Messenger of Allah in these countries.

“Are you now preventing us from such?” asked they.

“No, I do not,” answered \`Umar. “Yet, you will reside here, and you
will never depart me so long as I am alive. I am more knowledgeable. I
will hear from you and reply.” Hence, they could not leave the capital
until the death of \`Umar.[^63]

In \`Umar’s statements of reproach, he used the words ‘too much
reporting’ and ‘spread of the Hadith’. This obviously indicates that the
‘too much’ reporting from the Holy Prophet would create comprehension of
the Muslims and embarrassment of \`Umar on definite circumstances.

Yet, \`Umar did not accuse them of fabrication or forgery; rather they
were accused of too much reporting and spreading of the Hadith since
spreading of the Hadith was harmonious to the finding faults with
\`Umar’s decisions and verdicts, especially when the Hadith carries a
clear-cut statements of the Holy Prophet. This fact can be much more
understood through the following narration:

When \`Umar summoned Ubayy ibn Ka\`b and ordered him to reduce reporting
from the Holy Prophet, Ubayy answered, “Does this mean that you are
accusing me of forgery against the Messenger of Allah?”

“No, it does not,” answered \`Umar. “Yet, I dislike seeing the reporting
from the Messenger of Allah such expansive.”[^64]

On other occasions, \`Umar ordered the Sahabah to reduce reporting from
the Holy Prophet except in common questions.[^65]

The purpose beyond the prevention in the earlier narration is too clear
to require explanation; \`Umar disliked seeing the Hadith expansively
widespread so that the errors and jurisprudential defects of his
government and him would not be known to everybody. In the latter
narration, \`Umar permitted reporting the Hadiths that discuss common
questions that are known to all Muslims.

Alternatively, it is impermissible to report Hadiths unknown for the
people and, perhaps, for \`Umar himself since such Hadiths would
possibly be contrary to his personal opinions and Ijtihad and thus a
problem would occur to the ruling system, which is seen as the religious
authority of the Islamic community. From this cause, \`Umar ordered the
Sahabah to reside near him and never depart so long as he would be alive
for he was more knowledgeable… etc.

The aforesaid discussions prove that \`Umar disliked reporting from the
Holy Prophet and the Sahabah disliked such. This is of course opposite
to the claims that \`Umar prohibited only the recordation of the Hadith!

It is now possible to add other names to the list of those who objected
to \`Umar. These are Abu’l-Darda', Abu-Mas\`ud al-Ansariy, and \`Uqbah
ibn \`Āmir.

Details about the personalities, manners, and courses of those Sahabah
will be postponed to other occasions;[^66] yet the point to be aroused
hereby is that the Sahabah who objected to \`Umar were not only
thirteen, as has been claimed by Ibn Hajar, or only seven, as has been
claimed by Musa Jarullah; rather they were more and more. It is thus
sufficient to mention that too many were the Sahabah whose
jurisprudential opinions were congruous with the Ahl al-Bayt’s
jurisprudence.

Conflicting Opinions
--------------------

It has been narrated that a man, once, asked (\`Abdullah) Ibn \`Abbas
about the legal share of a daughter from her father’s legacy when there
is also his full sister. Ibn \`Abbas answered, “The share of the
testator’s sister is nothing. The whole inheritance must be given to the
daughter who receives a half of it in the form of her legal share and
the other half in the form of the nonexistence of other heirs.”

“But \`Umar decided something else,” said the asker.

“Are you more knowledgeable that Allah?” answered Ibn \`Abbas with
annoyance.

The asker then went to Ibn Tawus al-Yamaniy because he could not
understand Ibn \`Abbas’s statement. Explaining the question, Ibn Tawus
said to the asker, “My father has told me that he had heard Ibn \`Abbas
saying, Almighty Allah says (in the Holy Qur'an),

“***If it is a man that dies leaving a sister but no child, she shall
have half the inheritance.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/176)***;

while you are deciding that such a sister shall have half the
inheritance even if she has children!”[^67]

In the aforesaid question, \`Umar distributed equally the inheritance
between the testator’s daughter and full sister. In his opinion,
daughters are not included when the word ‘son’ is used.[^68] This is in
fact a concept that was used in the pre-Islamic era. Yet, this opinion
is obviously opposite to the Holy Qur'an that reads,

***“Allah (thus) directs you as regards your children's Inheritance: to
the male, a portion equal to that of two females. (Holy Qur’an:
4/11)”***

Accordingly, the word ‘children’ in the holy verse indicates both sons
and daughters. Hence, the children’s testator prevent the brothers and
sisters (i.e. their uncles and aunts) from receiving anything from the
inheritance. In this respect, the Holy Qur'an reads,

***“If it is a man that dies leaving a sister but no child, she shall
have half the inheritance: If such a deceased was a woman, who left no
child, her brother takes her inheritance. If there are two sisters, they
shall have two-thirds of the inheritance between them. If there are
brothers and sisters, they share the male having twice the share of the
female. Thus doth Allah make clear to you His law lest ye err; and Allah
hath knowledge of all things.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/176)***

Ibn \`Abbas also objected to another decision of \`Umar as regards the
shares of inheritances. When he was asked to distribute an inheritance,
\`Umar did not recognize how the shares should be distributed; he
therefore had to confess, saying, “In fact, I do not know which category
of you (the heirs) has been preferred according to the law of Allah. The
best solution that I can see is that to distribute the inheritance among
you in equal shares.”

Objecting to this opinion, Ibn \`Abbas said, “I swear by Allah that if
you had followed the instructions of Allah in this regard, the shares of
the inheritances would never have been imperfect.”[^69]

On a third occasion, \`Umar issued two different verdicts for the same
question. About the shares of the inheritance of a lady who had a
husband, mother, two half (maternal) brothers, and two full brothers,
\`Umar decided to give the husband half the inheritance, the mother the
sixth, and the two half brothers the remainder, which is the one third.
Hence, the two full brothers were given nothing because no shares
remained.

A similar question was provided before \`Umar and he decided to follow
the same previous distribution. But one of the full brothers objected to
him saying, “We share with the testator in the father while they only
share with a mother.

Hence, if you will deprive us of shares because of our father, you
should give us a share through our mother in the same way as you have
decided a share for these half brothers through their mother. Even if
our father was a donkey, we and they lived in the same womb!”

Having been convinced of their pleading, \`Umar decided to make them
partners in the remainder, which is the one-third of the
inheritance.[^70] When he was reminded that his decision about a similar
case had not been this one, \`Umar said, “Well, that decision was for
that case and this decision is for this!”[^71]

Al-Shafi\`iy, in *al-Risalah*, Abu-Dawud and al-Bayhaqiy have recorded
on the authority of Tawus that \`Umar, once, asked the attendants
whether they had heard anything from the Holy Prophet about the blood
money for fetuses. Haml ibn Malik ibn al-Nabighah stood up and said,
“One of my bondmaids, once, hit another pregnant one on the abdomen that
she aborted her fetus.

In this case, the Holy Prophet decided a coot as the blood money for the
fetus.” \`Umar thus said, “If I have not heard this story from you, I
would decide another thing. In fact, I was about to depend upon my own
opinion in this question**.**”[^72]

\`Ubaydah al-Salmaniy is reported as saying, “I have memorized one
hundred different rulings that \`Umar had decided as regards the share
of grandfathers from inheritances!”[^73]

Dr. Muhammad Madkur, commenting on \`Umar’s various opinions about the
share of grandfathers from inheritances, says,

“\`Umar insisted on making grandfathers precede brothers as regards the
shares of inheritance. He used to say, ‘If I have the right to decide, I
will give the whole inheritance to the grandfather.’ He then changed his
mind and said, ‘I am afraid that I will disappoint them. They all may be
right.’

He then again changed his mind and decided to distribute it among them
provided that the share will not be less than one-sixth. Again, he
changed his mind and decided to distribute it among them provided that
the share will not be less than one-third.

Such contradiction and instability occurred only because the question
was not explained by any sacred text at all; therefore, personal
opinions must have been the judge. From the dialogue between Zayd ibn
Thabit and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, we can conclude that Zayd used a style
of simile making his opinion logic and acceptable.”[^74]

After citing the statement of \`Ubaydah al-Salmaniy and the holy verse,

***“For parents, a sixth share of the inheritance to each, if the
deceased left children; if no children, and the parents are the (only)
heirs, the mother has a third.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/11)***

Dr. Qal\`achiy says,

“From this verse, we can conclude that the remainder is the share of the
grandfather. In fact, \`Umar noticed his instability as regards the
share of the grandfather with the existence of brothers of the testator;
he therefore consulted the Sahabah more than once. Yet, he could not
reach at a decisive resolution.

A little time before his death, \`Umar wanted to find a positive
solution for the question so that the matter would not be left
unsettled. He consequently wrote an epistle in this regard and prayed to
Almighty Allah saying: ‘O Allah! If this matter is correct, I please you
to bring it to an end.’

When he was stabbed, he erased that epistle so that none would realize
what had been written therein. He then declared: ‘I have written a book
about the share of the grandfather and the Kalalah and I have prayed to
Almighty Allah to guide me in this matter. Yet, I think that I would
better leave you in the state in which you were.”[^75]

Al-Suyutiy, in *al-Ashbah wa’l-Nadha'ir*, commenting on \`Umar’s various
opinions about the question of the grandfathers’ share of inheritances,
says,

“The reason of such variation is that the second Ijtihad was not better
than the first. This means that he could not determine anything. This of
course would bring about intense hardship since if a decision is
canceled, the other will be canceled and so on.”[^76]

The following issue proves unfalteringly that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab used
to practice Ijtihad in questions the rulings of which have been
previously decided by the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah:

The Holy Prophet, once, told him that he would never understand the
ruling regarding the share of grandfathers from inheritances.
Nevertheless, \`Umar exceeded that prediction and acted upon his
personal opinions in this issue. In this connection, it has been
narrated on the authority of Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab that \`Umar, once,
asked the Holy Prophet, “How are the shares of grandfathers from
inheritances counted?”

The Holy Prophet answered, “Why are you asking about this, \`Umar? I see
coming that you will die before you understand this issue.”

Truly, \`Umar departed life before he could understand that
question.[^77]

Al-Salihiy al-Dimashqiy, in *Subul al-Huda wa’l-Rashad* 9:287, has
recorded that Ibn Rahawayh and Ibn Mardawayh narrated on the authority
of Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab that \`Umar asked the Holy Prophet about the
shares of the *Kalalah* from inheritances.

“Has Almighty Allah, in the Holy Qur'an, not explained it (saying,

***And if a man or a woman leaves property to be inherited by neither
parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a brother or a sister, then
each of them two shall have the sixth, but if they are more than that,
they shall be sharers in the third after (payment of) any bequest that
may have been bequeathed or a debt that does not harm (others); this is
an ordinance from Allah: and Allah is Knowing, Forbearing (Holy Qur’an:
4/12)***)?”

\`Umar yet did not understand the verse; therefore, Almighty Allah
revealed his Saying,

***“They ask you for a decision of the law. Say: Allah gives you a
decision concerning the person who has neither parents nor offspring; if
a man dies (and) he has no son and he has a sister, she shall have half
of what he leaves, and he shall be her heir she has no son; but if there
be two (sisters), they shall have two-thirds of what he leaves; and if
there are brethren, men and women, then the male shall have the like of
the portion of two females; Allah makes clear to you, lest you err; and
Allah knows all things. (Holy Qur’an: 4/176)***”

Again, \`Umar did not yet understand the verse. He thus asked his
daughter Hafsah, one of the Holy Prophet wives, to ask the Holy Prophet
to explain the question for her when she would find him relaxed and
pleased. When she did, the Holy Prophet said, “It was your father who
asked you to do such. I see that your father shall never understand this
question.”

As a result, \`Umar used to say, “I shall never understand this
question. It was the Messenger of Allah who said so.”[^78]

In conclusion, it is not improbable to say that Imam \`Ali’s famous
saying, ‘One who likes throwing oneself in the depths of Hell may issue
a verdict about the grandfather’s share of inheritance,’[^79] arose from
the innumerable contradictory verdicts of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, in
particular, as regards the matter involved about which they openly
violated the Holy Qur'an.

The Claim Of The Holy Prophet’s Adoption Of Personal Opinions
-------------------------------------------------------------

In the light of the preceding discussion, the caliphs had to adopt
Ijtihad as a starting point through which the difference between the
Sahabah’s religious opinions, or the caliph for one side and the Sahabah
for the other, can be justified since it is the shelter to which the
Opinionists and their fans can resort for solving any opposition noticed
in the Sahabah’s religious opinions.

Yet, the subject must be investigated from its roots with rationality so
that it will be proven whether the Holy Prophet used his personal views
in the issuance of religious rulings or this claim has been fabricated
against him for the sake of giving good reason for the Sahabah’s
Ijtihad.

At the outset, it is illogic that the Messenger of Allah whose divine
mission is to convey the laws of Almighty Allah to all the peoples on
this planet could betake personal views as method of identifying the
divine laws.

Had he been allowed to use his personal outlooks, he would not have
waited for the Divine Revelation so as to judge in the questions of the
*li\`an* (oath of condemnation between spouses),[^80] the shares of
maternal and paternal aunts from inheritance, and others.[^81]

Since the Holy Prophet was able to obtain certainty through waiting for
the Divine commandments, it should be illogic for him to depend upon
hypothetical decisions that are the natural outcomes of Ijtihad.
Furthermore, the Holy Qur'an has confirmed the necessity of the
commitment to the Holy Prophet’s words, such as in the holy verses:

***“And whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever
he forbids you, keep back. (Holy Qur’an: 59/7)”***

***“But no, by the Lord, they can have no real faith until they make
thee judge in all disputes between them, and find in their souls no
resistance against thy decisions, but accept them with the fullest
conviction. (Holy Qur’an: 4/65)”***

It is thus impossible for Almighty Allah to order us to commit to words
that are grounded upon conjectures and are mistakable, while He, the
Almighty, has taught us that

***“conjecture avails nothing against Truth. (Holy Qur’an: 53/28)”***

It is now obvious that the insistence on the argument that the Holy
Prophet rested upon his personal views in the issuance of religious
rulings has been invented in order to find acceptable excuses for the
Sahabah’s Ijtihad in general and the personal opinions of Abu-Bakr and
\`Umar in particular and to grant such Ijtihad and opinions a legal
mark.

A thorough, yet impartial, investigation of history and Hadith proves
this fact. Again a thorough investigation of the proofs on the Holy
Prophet’s supposed Ijtihad that the Opinionists have provided shows that
their one and only purpose has been the meaning that he made mistakes in
the field of issuing religious rulings. They therefore attempted to find
solution for this complicated problem through the invention of Ijtihad
and Opinionism.

Even if we succumb to the idea that the Holy Prophet’s words and deeds
were originated from his personal opinions that are, according to the
Opinionists’ supposition, allowable, why do most of their statements and
intimations suggest that he broke the commandments of Almighty Allah on
many occasions, such as the famous narration of offering prayer for a
hypocrite, and also failed to meet the humanitarian restraints, such as
in the story of the blind when he frowned and turned away, to the degree
that al-Zamakhshariy has been so impolite that he claimed that Almighty
Allah’s saying “*Allah pardon you*” stands for the happening of a felony
since pardon is always associated with felonies; therefore the
interpretation of the verse is that ‘you have made a mistake and very
bad was your deed!’[^82] It is extremely impudent to dare say such a
thing about the Holy Prophet.

The Opinionists who prohibited the recording and reporting of the Hadith
have dared to say such things about the Holy Prophet while they have
confirmed that the Divine Revelation agreed to \`Umar in all the
questions in which the Holy Prophet was wrong! Then, the Holy Prophet
submitted to \`Umar!

The gentle reader is now dispensing with further explanation and can
easily understand the mystery beyond such contradiction and the secret
beyond their ascribing mistakes to the Holy Prophet while \`Umar’s
situation was always so accurate that even the Divine Revelation
testified for him!

Again, even if we yieldingly accept that the Holy Prophet was no more
than an ordinary mortal who enjoyed divine talents; most of his worldly
affairs and decisions had nothing to do with the Divine Revelation; even
in military affairs he used to consult the Sahabah, such as in the truce
with the Ghatafan tribe during the Battle of al-Ahzab,[^83] the decision
of fighting during the Battle of Uhud,[^84] the adoption of Salman
al-Farisiy’s opinion about the digging of a trench around the city of
al-Madinah during the Battle of al-Ahzab,[^85] the adoption of Habbab’s
opinion about choosing the place of residence just before the Battle of
Badr, and the adoption of Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh’s opinion concerning the
establishment of an arbor[^86] and many other occasions.

Even if we overlook the fact that all the words and deeds of the Holy
Prophet, throughout his holy lifetime, were on the instructions of
Almighty Allah and that he consulted his companions only to appease them
and teach them experience and management since his final decisions were
all received from the Heavens—even if we overlook all theses fact, still
the Holy Prophet’s issues were unlike \`Umar’s Ijtihad and adoption of
personal views all of which were in the field of the religious rulings,
not in worldly affairs. Besides, even if we accept to them as regards
the personal opinions of the Holy Prophet, he (the Holy Prophet) is
still unlike others, for his opinions were based upon sound grounds
since he had full acquaintance with the actual advantages,
disadvantages, overtures, and results of all subjects. On this account,
his supposed Ijtihad is not like the others’ Ijtihad.

Back to the main topic, the Opinionists have just intended, by the
invention of the conception of the Holy Prophet’s having rested upon his
personal views, to argue that the Sahabah were only imitating the Holy
Prophet; hence, they must not be blamed for such.

To rest upon the explicit circumstances of an issue does not denote the
Ijtihad as a term. The Holy Prophet is reported to have said,

“My judgments are based upon the explicit circumstances of an issue that
is filed before me. While you are making me the judge in your disputes,
some of you may err in providing his case or his evidences.”[^87]

This statement denotes that a judge must give a verdict on the light of
the presented proofs and claims, not the actuality that may be hidden or
unknown unless awareness of the unseen is obtained. Although the
Prophets, Messengers, and their Successors can be acquainted with the
unseen, they have been ordered to judge according to the explicit claims
and proofs except in special cases, such as the story of al-Khidr with
Prophet Moses.

It has been also familiar that the Holy Prophet used to judge according
to the regulations and laws known to everybody so that the human
regulations and legal laws will not be infringed. On account of his
connection with the Divine Revelation, the Holy Prophet recognized the
actuality of each issue because he has been full acquainted with the
Preserved Tablet (*al-Lawh al-Mahfudh*).

In this regard, all Muslims agree unanimously that the Holy Qur'an was
revealed twice; the first complete revelation occurred on the Grand
Night (*Laylat al-Qadr*)[^88] and in the second time, the Qur'an was
revealed in sections on definite involved occasions.

It is now not unacceptable to claim that some of the Holy Prophet’s
judgments were issued on the grounds of his previous knowledge of the
unseen -of course, only when the situation requires such- before the
second partial revelation of a verse in this regard.

Another example that supports our discussion is the Holy Prophet’s
having wished had the Kiblah[^89] been turned to the Sacred Masjid. Had
he been permitted to rest upon his personal views, he would certainly
have decided the Sacred Mosque as the new Kiblah and would not have
turned his face towards the holy Mosque of Jerusalem (for prayer) for
more than six months. Only when the holy verse,

***“We see the turning of thy face for guidance to the heavens: now
Shall We turn thee to a Kiblah that shall please thee. Turn then Thy
face in the direction of the Sacred Masjid. (Holy Qur’an: 2/144)”***

was revealed, he turned his face towards the new Kiblah. This is of
course a clear-cut proof that the Holy Prophet waited for and firmly
observed the commandments of Almighty Allah, unlike the claim that he
might have rested upon personal opinions as regards the religious
issues.

Then, the Opinionists have argued that the following holy verse
encourages Ijtihad and deems legal for the Holy Prophet to rest upon it:

***“We have sent down to thee the Book in truth, that thou mightest
judge between men, as guided by Allah: so be not (used) as an advocate
by those who betray their trust. (Holy Qur’an: 4/105)”***[^90]

The statement ‘as guided by Allah’ comprised by the holy verse has been
interpreted into ‘by means of your view and personal efforts in the
field of deducing the religious rulings’. This is indeed contrary to the
actual meaning of the verse, since in its first part, Almighty Allah
tells that ‘Book’ must be the reference in the deduction of rulings.

The fans of the School of Opinionism has intended to validate their
personal views even in the field of the religious schools. During the
Holy Prophet’s lifetime, they used to prefer the rulings to be derived
from the Holy Qur'an and the words of the Holy Prophet who prohibited
them to rest upon their opinions since he was the authority that
protected against committing mistakes. Yet, as soon as he departed this
world, they applied their personal views to all the issues, whether
there were sacred texts in this respect or not.

During the reign of \`Umar, this trend attained its climax after the
Opinionists and the ordinary people had been influenced by this trend.

The Sahabah’s reference to and receipt from the Holy Prophet indicated
that their opinions might have been acceptable due to the approval of
the Holy Prophet, not the personality of the owner of the opinion.

Incidents prove that resting upon personal opinions in the issuance of
religious rulings was definitely rejected during the Holy Prophet’s
lifetime: It has been narrated that when Usamah ibn Zayd was the
commander of a brigade, he ordered to raid on a group of people among
whom was Mirdas who had already converted to Islam.

Having seen the attacking horsemen of Usamah’s brigade, Mirdas drove his
sheep towards a corner in the mountain so as to save them. When the
horsemen caught him, he received them with statements of *Allahu Akbar*
and the two creeds of Islam; but Usamah ibn Zayd killed him and took his
sheep. When the Holy Prophet heard of this incident, he was terribly
depressed. He then said to them, “You have killed him only because you
wanted to seize his sheep!” He then recited Almighty Allah’s saying,

***“And do not say to any one who offers you peace: You are not a
believer. Do you seek goods of this world's life! (Holy Qur’an:
4:94)”***[^91]

The Holy Prophet then ordered Usamah to undergo the blood money for the
man.

Because Usamah rested upon his personal view in the issue, the Holy
Prophet reproached him and regarded his decision as invalid.
Accordingly, he ordered Usamah to undergo the blood money.[^92]
Similarly, the Holy Prophet said about the crime of Khalid ibn al-Walid,
“O Allah! I am releasing myself before You from the deed of
Khalid.”[^93]

For shedding more light on the subject, let us re-quote Dr. Madkur as
saying:

“We thus can argue that the Holy Prophet did not require Ijtihad in this
very sense. After the departure of him and, more precisely, during the
age of the Sahabah that ends with the elapse of the first century after
the Hijrah, the Sahabah, because of the expansion of the Islamic State
and the conquests, had to encounter new questions that they had never
known before.

They therefore had to experience the jurisprudential questions,
especially after the cessation of the Divine Revelations, so as to find
solutions for the first-time issues that occurred to their cursorily
incremental state that comprised miscellaneous countries and
races.”[^94]

Dr. al-Dawalibiy also says,

“During the Holy Prophet’s lifetime, the Ijtihad did not play any
considerable role; rather it was restricted to certain issues.”[^95]

Dr. Nadiah al-\`Umariy says,

“Even during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime, \`Umar used to suggest
verdicts that he considered in agreement with virtue, right, and
advantage.”[^96]

All the aforecited quotations support our confirmation that Ijtihad, as
a current term, was not regarded as valid during the Holy Prophet’s
lifetime; rather it became a meaningful term at the hands of Abu-Bakr
and \`Umar and their fans because they required the issuance of ruling
verdicts with which they had not had acquaintance.

Back to the main topic, which is \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s situation with
the Sahabah and their opinions about him, we have previously cited his
situation with a Sahabiy, namely \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, about him he
said to the people of al-Kufah when he decided to send him there along
with \`Ammar ibn Yasir to teach them religious affairs: “These two are
among the most excellent companions of the Holy Prophet and among the
warriors of the Battle of Badr. You should thus follow and listen to
them. Be it known to you that I have preferred you to myself as I sent
to you \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud.”[^97]

Despite such praise and appreciation, \`Umar detained and settled an
account with \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud because he had spread and reported
very much of the Hadith. Because of this very situation, \`Uthman, later
on, durst prevent \`Abdullah from reporting the Hadith and reciting his
own copy of the Holy Qur'an although the Holy Prophet has been reported
as instructing his people to rest upon \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud’s copy of
the Holy Qur'an, and durst lash him forty whips causing some of his ribs
to be broken and forcing him to emigrate and die away from his hometown.

\`Umar had to resort to violence as having dealt with the Sahabah
because he knew that they had been unsatisfactory with his
jurisprudential opinions and had objected to his views that were against
the Holy Sunnah. Nevertheless, the Sahabah did not change their
situations; they insisted on following what they had received from the
Holy Prophet to the degree that one of them directed embarrassing
questions to \`Umar, in the presence of people, in order to inform that
his personal views had been always inaccurate and far away from the
Sunnah.

The Sahabah’s Frequent Inquiries To The Caliph
----------------------------------------------

The following citations are sufficient for proving such questionings:

Al-Harith narrated that \`Abdullah ibn Aws came to \`Umar and asked him
about the ruling appertained to a lady who menstruates during
circumambulating the Holy Ka\`bah.

“Such a lady must postpone the Circumambulation to be the last of her
rituals,” answered \`Umar.

“This is true,” said al-Harith, “The Holy Prophet also said the same
answer.”

As he heard this statement, \`Umar said to the man, “Damn you! You have
asked me a question that you had put before the Holy Prophet so that I
would contradict him.”[^98]

Husham ibn Yahya al-Makhzumiy narrated that a man came to \`Umar and
asked about the ruling concerning a lady that, during the season of the
ritual Hajj, menstruated on the Nahr (Immolation) Day.

\`Umar answered, “It is impermissible for such a lady to continue unless
she is clean.”

The man objected saying, “The Holy Prophet gave me a ruling other than
this.”

\`Umar immediately hit the man with the rod he had in his hand and
reproached, “Why do you ask me about a matter that the Holy Prophet had
already decided?”[^99]

It is worth mentioning that there is a big difference between the
decisions of the Holy Prophet as regards religious questions and the
verdicts of \`Umar. The Holy Prophet’s decisions are unrepealable since
their source is the Divine Revelation, while \`Umar’s verdicts, like any
other verdict, can be generally repealed.[^100]

\`Umar thus aimed at canceling any difference that could be cited
between the Holy Prophet’s decisions and his verdicts so that he would
be able to find a legal feature to his personal views to take them to
the level of the Holy Prophet’s words.

Yet, he had to pass by many stages before he could attain such a rank.
He therefore claimed that the Holy Prophet rested upon his personal
opinions in some religious rulings and thus his words might descend to
the rank of the ordinary Opinionists and might be compared to any other
verdict and then rejected! This is of course one of the most anomalous
opinions!

A thorough investigation in the Sahabah’s objections to \`Umar’s
opinions proves obviously that the Sahabah doubted the accuracy of
\`Umar’s views. Yet, presentation of the aforesaid narrations does not
authorize testing the capacities of a Muslim since this matter has been
largely condemned through many traditions. Imam \`Ali is reported as
saying,

“When you ask, you must intend for learning something, not for
embarrassing the addressee, for an ignorant is similar to a
knowledgeable and, thus, an arbitrary scholar is similar to an obstinate
ignorant.”[^101]

He has also said,

“People are generally imperfect and self-important. The asker is
obstinate and the answerer is conceited.”[^102]

The Sahabah, although they were acquainted with the abomination of
putting question for the purpose of test and obstinacy, tended to ask
\`Umar in order to embarrass him since they thought that such
embarrassment would save them from their troubles and would make the
others understand that \`Umar’s opinions were not always compatible to
the religious instructions and the Holy Prophet’s jurisprudential
questions most of which were ignored by \`Umar.

They also intended to inform the Muslims that \`Umar had not possessed a
distinctive capacity of inferring the religious rules from the sources
(namely, the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah).

In my conception, the Sahabah, by presenting such issues before \`Umar
in order to embarrass him, did not mean to criticize the personality of
\`Umar; rather they only intended to defend the Islamic legislation and
to prevent the personal views from finding a place in the sacred field
of the issuance of religious issues.

Many are the narrations that prove that the Sahabah did not belittle or
criticize the personalities of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, even when they
disagreed with them, since the two held the leadership of the Islamic
nation. The ordinary Sahabah who were not experts in the religious
issues, however, adopted the opinions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar because
they used to refer to the supreme leader in these questions.

It is now clear that the Sahabah disagreed with \`Umar on various
questions and he himself gave different opinions on the same question
and such disagreements would affect the religious laws in the coming
ages.

On this account, a big number of Muslim jurisprudents, in order to evade
confusion between the Holy Prophet’s decisions and the personal opinions
that were issued after his noble lifetime, have made great efforts in
the field of differentiating between the two since the Holy Prophet’s
decisions rested upon the Divine Revelations; therefore the Holy
Prophet’s decisions were called ‘Sunnah’ while the personal opinions
were called ‘Ijtihad’. In this respect, Dr. Madkur says,

“Naturally, the Ijtihad of the Sahabah created disagreement in
viewpoints and contradiction in religious verdicts. Having not stopped
at analogy, the Ijtihad of the Sahabah included all the aspects of
opinions on bases of intuition, sound nature, and the spirit of Islamic
legislation in addition to full awareness of the rational ground on
which opinions were founded and its role in issuing religious
questions.”[^103]

Influence Of Opinionism On Muslim Jurisprudence
-----------------------------------------------

Some authors have argued that the reason beyond the Sahabah’s having
issued disagreeing religious rulings was the difference in their
intellects, awareness, and courses. Yet, those authors have absolutely
pretended to forget the actual motives that made \`Umar and his fans,
who rested upon their personal opinions since the Holy Prophet’s
lifetime, adopt Opinionism in addition to the requirements of the
general situation of the Islamic State.

Everybody knows that the Muslims’ disagreements were not about whether
the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah can be accepted as sources of the Islamic
legislation or not; rather they disagreed about the point whether the
words that were reported from Holy Prophet were actually said by him so
that they would be included with the Sunnah or they were only fabricated
for personal interests.

It seems that discrepancy in the reports from the Sahabah as regards the
religious laws had a conception other than the claim of its having been
a natural result of resting upon Ijtihad. This is because such
discrepancy signifies disagreement about the intellectual trends that
ruled at that time in addition to the fact that not every discrepancy
can be justified as being personal Ijtihad.

Let us take the *Basmalah* (the phrase *Bism-illahir-rahmanir-rahim*: In
the Name of Allah; the All-compassionate, the All-merciful) as an
example: reference books of Hadith and biography of the Holy Prophet
comprises a variety of opinions regarding this statement even in the
opinions of a definite Sahabiy.

In a narration, Anas ibn Malik is narrated as having recited the
*Basmalah*, during the obligatory prayers, in audible voice; and in
another narration he is narrated as having instructed not to recite it
audibly since Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, when he had followed them in
congregational prayers, did not recite it audibly; and in a third
narration he is narrated as having issued another ruling about this very
issue.

Referring to the four discrepant opinions of Anas ibn Malik as regards
the *Basmalah*, al-Fakhr al-Raziy says,

“Three reports from Anas support the opinion of the Hanafiyyah School
and three others contradict it: First, it has been narrated from Anas
that when Mu\`awiyah neglected the *Basmalah* in a prayer, the Muhajirun
and Ansar objected to him.

This narration proves that reciting the *Basmalah* in the obligatory
prayers was such a ordinary thing that all the Sahabah knew and
practiced. Second, Abu-Qulabah narrated on the authority of Anas that
the Holy Prophet, Abu-Bakr, and \`Umar recited the *Basmalah* during the
prayers. Third, when he was asked whether it is obligatory to recite the
*Basmalah* audibly or not, Anas answered that he did not know.

Hence, reports from Anas as regards this question have been immensely
confusing and contradictory. It is thus imperative to investigate the
other indications. There is also another accusation concerning the same
question; it has been narrated that \`Ali used to recite the *Basmalah*
in audible voice during the prayers and he also emphasized on it; yet
when the Umayyad dynasty came to power, they emphasized on neglecting it
so that they would cancel all the traditions of \`Ali. Anas might have
feared the Umayyad ruling authorities and therefore his verdicts became
contradictory and confusing.

In my conception, whatever contradiction occurs between the verdicts of
Anas and Ibn al-Mughaffah from one side and \`Ali from the other, we
will certainly accept \`Ali’s verdict, which is more acceptable under
all circumstances. This is in fact a decisive solution for the
question.”[^104]

The aforesaid discussion of al-Fakhr al-Raziy proves the intrusion of
the ruling authorities in the religious laws. \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas is
also reported as saying,

“Have the people comprehended a verse that was not given to any Prophet
other than our Holy Prophet and Prophet Solomon, son of David? This
Verse is *Bism-illahir-rahmanir-rahim* (In the Name of Allah; the
All-compassionate, the All-merciful).”[^105]

It has been also narrated that Muhammad ibn Mansur said,

“I have heard Ja\`far saying that people have neglected one of the
grandest Names (of Almighty Allah). This is
*Bism-illahir-rahmanir-rahim*.”[^106]

Although many religious laws have been exposed to such discrepancy and
contradiction, let us cite another example on the ruling regarding
extending the arms during the prayers (instead of folding them).

Some narrators have reported that the Holy Prophet used to extend his
hands during prayers and accordingly Malik ibn Anas decided this method
as the Sunnah (the Holy Prophet’s actual deed)[^107] while others
reported the opposite.

A third group of narrators have reported that he put one hand on the
other without specifying the very place and a fourth group reported that
he put his hands above the navel and so on. Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad was
reported as saying,

“If I neglect the audible reciting in the prayers, some men of authority
did neglect it, and if I do it, also some men of authority did do
it.”[^108]

This narration proves that the two trends were followed by two groups of
grand Sahabah each of which was followed by people.

It is now obvious that the expansive reports of the Sahabah, especially
in the questions were the Ahl al-Bayt’s opinions were opposed, establish
the existence of two trends as regards the Islamic law:

The first trend included the Ahl al-Bayt and a few of the Sahabah who
confirmed the *Basmalah* being a part of the Surahs and thus it is
obligatory to recite it audibly in prayers. The second trend included
others who opposed this ruling. The same thing is applicable to the
question whether it is obligatory to extend one’s arms in prayers or to
put them one on the other.

Hence, discrepancy among the Sahabah was deep-rooted and based upon
adopted fundamentals. A group rested upon the authentic traditions of
the Holy Prophet while another group depended upon the verdicts of grand
Sahabah who decided their personal views, according to definite
criteria, even if such would oppose the Holy Prophet’s words and deeds.

In other words, one who decided the impermissibility of adding ‘Amen’ to
the Surah of al-Fatihah had depended upon a fundamental of the Muslim
jurisprudence while he who decided the *Basmalah* as being a part of the
Surahs had also depended upon a fundamental in which he believed.

The same thing can be said about all the religious laws that were
opposite to the words of the Ahl al-Bayt. From this cause, it can be
confirmed that the discrepancies of the Sahabah were originated from
their personal tendencies and trends that they had decided as
fundamental pillars of the code of Islamic law; therefore, not all of
them were pure Ijtihad, especially in the questions in which they have
agreed with the Ahl al-Bayt that prove that some of the Sahabah observed
certain fundamentals despite everything. It is thus quite inaccurate to
claim that such narrations are doubtful because they were added by the
miscreants to the Muslim jurisprudence as well as other unfounded
claims.

As they inferred the religious rulings from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah,
the Sahabah wanted to attract people’s attention to the existence of
some people who issued personal views in the questions about which there
were sacred texts just because those people were not full acquainted
with all the indications of such sacred texts. Hence, people should
follow either those who rested upon their personal opinions or those who
committed themselves to the sacred texts.

Let us have another look at the aforementioned narration about the
ruling appertained to a lady who menstruates during circumambulating the
Holy Ka\`bah. According to \`Umar’s verdict, such a lady must postpone
the Circumambulation until she would be pure and only then she would be
permitted to perform the Circumambulation.[^109]

It is yet well-known that Zayd ibn Thabit and \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar,
having been influenced by \`Umar’s verdict, also decided the same thing.
However, both Zayd[^110] and \`Abdullah[^111] changed their verdicts
later on. It has been also narrated that \`Umar himself retreated
perhaps after he had been informed about \`Ā’ishah’s famous report that
when Safiyyah menstruated after she had performed the *Ifadah* (one of
the rituals of the Hajj), the Holy Prophet permitted her to
continue.[^112]569

It has been also narrated that \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, answering the
message of Zayd ibn Thabit in which he confessed of his inaccuracy in
the question involved, said,

“I know better what the Holy Prophet said about (the rulings concerning)
women. Yet, I desired to provide the proof on my claim from the Holy
Qur'an that reads:

***‘Then let them complete the rites prescribed for them, perform their
vows, and (again) circumambulate the Ancient House. (Holy Qur’an:
22/29)’***

Such a lady did complete the rites, perform the vows, and
circumambulated the House. Nothing thus remained.”[^113]

The previous words of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas demonstrate that the Holy
Prophet’s decision was based upon the Holy Qur'an to which \`Umar
himself invited people by his famous saying, “Sufficient for us is the
Book of Allah.” Hence, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, after Zayd ibn Thabit had
informed him that \`Umar contradicted the Holy Qur'an, wanted to bind
\`Umar with his own claim.

Imam \`Ali and \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas presented the Holy Qur'an’s texts,
conceptions, and indications as their evidences on the actual rulings of
the Islamic law in face of the personal views of the other Sahabah. Such
presentations occurred so repeatedly that they undoubtedly indicate the
following points:

First, they intended to prove to the Muslims that the majority, if not
all, of the religious rulings can be deduced from the Holy Qur'an though
the matter requires a little investigation, ponderation, inference, and
sound rationality. Hence, it is unnecessary to resort to innovated
sources of deduction, such as analogy and its likes, establishment of
new fundamentals, and thorough dependence on Ijtihad and personal
opinions.

Second, because scandalous discrepancies and contradictions occurred in
the reports of the Sahabah, and even in the reports of a single Sahabiy,
in addition to the imperfect conveyances from the Holy Prophet that
they, in many cases, did not receive directly from him—these matters and
others would make it unfeasible to rest upon the Sunnah in the issuance
of religious rulings. Besides, not all the reporters have understood the
very signification of the Holy Prophet’s words.

If we add to the previous the ruling authorities’ having prohibited the
reporting and recording of the Hadith and the Sahabah’s having been
afraid of breaking this decision, we conclude that thorough resting upon
the Sunnah would be unconvincing except in a few cases when reports
support each other in a definite matter. Hence, reference to the Holy
Qur'an would be inevitable taking into consideration the fact that an
inference from the Holy Qur'an cannot be denied or refuted.

Third, Imam \`Ali and \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas aimed at binding those who
claimed the sufficiency of the Holy Qur'an in solving all the problems
with their claim. Such binding would show clearly the inconsistency
between those Sahabah’s claim and their theoretical and practical
failure in the deduction of rulings from the Holy Qur'an.

On the other hand, the Sahabah who complied with the sacred texts
comprehensively and who believed in the necessity of joining the Holy
Sunnah to the Holy Qur'an were proven as the most experienced in
deducing the religious rulings from these two sources.

To sum it up, the Islamic jurisprudence has unfortunately been
influenced by the personal opinions of \`Umar and thus the religious
rulings have been affected by the discrepant and contradictory opinions
of the Sahabah. This is because \`Umar exerted all efforts in binding
people with his decisions making them as sacred as the Holy Sunnah.

Similarly, some of the Sahabah pursued him in this regard causing
discrepancy to the Islamic law. For instance, Abu-Hanifah, his two
disciples, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Zufar, and Ibn Abi-Layla—all these master
scholars of Sunnite jurisprudence have decided that full brothers must
be deprived of the heritage of their sister who had a husband, a mother,
and two half (maternal) brothers in addition to these two full brothers
as has been decided by \`Umar in an earlier issue. Malik and
al-Shafi\`iy, however, have decided shares to those full brothers as has
been decided by \`Umar on another occasion.

Yet, the most astonishing matter in this respect is that those master
scholars have decided the accuracy of \`Umar’s both decisions although
the question was the same! Moreover, they have decided that \`Umar was
not inerrant; that he might have committed mistakes! To support their
claims, each has searched for other ‘evidences’.

As a consequence, none should ever blame one who wonders whether
Almighty Allah has decided the earlier or the later opinions of \`Umar
in this very issue! If the earlier decision was the correct, why did
\`Umar give the two full brothers shares of the heritage on the second
occasion despite the fact that he knew that heritage is a financial
right; and if such a right is violated, one will be responsible for the
shortage in the shares of the others? Correspondingly, if those two full
brothers should have enjoyed certain shares from their sister’s legacy,
why did \`Umar deprive them of their shares in the earlier case?

Because of their intense emphasis on following the manners of Abu-Bakr
and \`Umar, the Holy Sunnah has been overlooked in such cases and none
has recognized it save its real people. Unfortunately, such Ijtihad that
violated the sacred texts found a large area in the field of the Muslim
jurisprudence and thus became the ruler. Hence, in that age, the
fabricated reports that claimed the prohibition of reporting and
recording the Hadith were the prevalent.

In plain words, the manners of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar became the dominant
over the code of the Islamic law; and the Sahabah’s questions that were
directed to the caliphs became a common feature of their relationship
with the ruling authorities.

It has been narrated that when Sa\`id ibn Sufyan asked him about a
religious question, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan interrogated him whether he had
asked anyone else about the same question. When Sa\`id answered
negatively, \`Uthman said: “Well, I will certainly behead him whom you
ask about the very question and give you an answer dissimilar to
mine!”[^114] Commentary on this incident is left for the gentle readers.

Acquiescence With \`Umar On The Justification o The Prohibition
---------------------------------------------------------------

The fans of \`Umar undertook the mission of conveying \`Umar’s
justifications for his decision of the prohibition of reporting and
recording the Hadith as extensively as they could. Thus, \`Umar’s
justifications could not be distinguished from the justifications of the
other Sahabah who followed him. This manifestly demonstrates an
undeniable political fact that was invented by \`Umar and his fans.

\`Umar ibn al-Khattab ordered people to neglect the Holy Sunnah because
he feared that it would be confused with the Holy Qur'an or that people
would adhere to the Sunnah and disregard the Qur'an. Abu-Hurayrah also
repeated the same justifications on more than one occasion. According to
*al-Mahki*y, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy, and Abu-Musa
al-Ash\`ariy, too, repeated the same justifications. It has been
narrated on the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Zayd ibn Aslam on the
authority of his fathers on the authority of \`Ata' ibn Yasar that
Abu-Hurayrah reported,

One day, the Messenger of Allah came to us while we were recording the
Hadith. He asked, “What are writing down?”

“These are Hadiths that we have heard from you,” answered we.

“Do you want to depend upon a book other than the Book of Allah (the
Holy Qur'an)?” reproached the Messenger of Allah. “The nations who came
before you were misled only when they recorded books besides the Book of
Allah.”

Then I (Abu-Hurayrah) asked him, “O Allah’s Messenger: May we report
your words?”

“Yes, you may,” answered the Messenger of Allah. “Anyone who forges lies
against me deliberately must find himself a place in Hellfire.”[^115]572

It has been also narrated from Ibrahim al-Tamimiy that when \`Abdullah
ibn Mas\`ud was informed about the existence of a book that they had
with them, he came to them and insisted on seeing that book. They
finally brought it to him. He then erased it and said,

“The peoples of the Divine Books who existed before you perished only
because they attended to their scholars’ books and neglected the Book of
Allah.”[^116]

According to another narration, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud said,

“The past nations attended to the books of their scholars and monks and
neglected the Torah and Gospel so casually that they and the knowledge
therein were lost.”[^117]574

Abu-Nadrah narrated that when Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy was asked to dictate
the Hadith, he said,

“We must not dictate for you! You must take it from us in the same way
as we took from our Prophet.”[^118]

According to their narrations, Abu-Sa\`id said,

“Do you intend to betake such books as Qur'an? When your Prophet was
talking to us, we memorized.”[^119]

Abu-Nadrah also narrated that he once said to Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy,
“You are reporting to us from the Holy Prophet astounding things and we
fear lest we will not memorize them as exactly as they are.”

Abu-Sa\`id answered, “So, you want to make it as Qur'an! No, you must
receive from us in the same way as we have received from the Messenger
of Allah.’[^120]

It has been also narrated that Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy said,

“When they wrote down a book with their own hands, the Israelites
followed that book and neglected the Torah.”[^121]

All these texts have a common justification, which is that the
Israelites followed their scholars’ books and neglected the Torah. The
same justification was presented by \`Umar. Moreover, the same
justification has been ascribed to Imam \`Ali and \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas. Again, all these prove that there has been a trend confirming
and supporting \`Umar’s opinion although we have previously discussed in
details the inaccuracy of \`Umar’s justifications for his decision.

As a conclusion, such contradiction between the Hadiths that confirmed
the Holy Prophet’s permission to write down his traditions and the
Hadith that confirmed his warning against so is meaningless unless a
comparison will be made between the two.[^122]

Yet, the comparison involved has acted as supporter for my own
conception about the issue because the claim that the recordation of the
Hadith was permitted only for the acquainted Sahabah while the ordinary
people were not permitted to record—this claim is contrary to the deeds
of \`Umar with the grand Sahabah as regards this issue when he ordered
them, without exception, to bring to him all their records of the Hadith
and none has ever narrated that he accepted a single record.

Likewise, it has been argued that the prohibition of recording the
Hadith was issued in the first Islamic age when the Qur'an was still
revealed and thus the purpose behind such prohibition is to evade any
confusion that would occur between the Holy Qur'an and the Hadith.

Yet, when the Holy Qur'an was completed and fully recognized by the
Sahabah, only then were they permitted to write down the Hadith. This
argument proves that the Holy Prophet, in the last of his holy lifetime,
permitted the recordation of the Hadith and such permission was thus
active.

Again, this proves my discussion that the decision of the prohibition
was based upon a personal view of \`Umar himself, not a religious
ground. Even if we accept the contention that the Holy Prophet ordered
not to write down his words and to erase anything that they had recorded
as regards his traditions,[^123] the Sahabah would have certainly known
these orders and applied it; and these orders should have been the main
justification adopted by Abu-Bakr and \`Umar for the issuance of their
decision of prohibiting the recordation of the Hadith. The clear-cut
conclusion that can be inferred here is that the Holy Prophet never
warnws against recording the Hadith.

If we suppose that the Holy Prophet did prohibit recording the Hadith,
then why did Abu-Bakr record these five hundred Hadiths and thus break
the Holy Prophet’s order? Why did \`Umar consult the Sahabah about this
issue?

Moreover, why did he pass over their advice of permitting the
recordation of the Hadith? Finally, how come that they advised him to
permit the recordation of the Hadith while they had heard the Holy
Prophet prohibiting it?

In addition, \`Umar’s orders of erasing all records of Hadith and
bringing to him all such records prove the existence of many records and
books that had been written down before his reign.

Besides, their justification cannot support their claim; this is because
the past nations went astray after they had tended to the books of their
monks and rabbis and neglected the Torah and the Gospel but they did not
tend to the records of their Prophets.

The difference between the words of the monks and rabbis from one side
and the Holy Prophet’s words from the other is too large to be ever
compared. The Muslims recorded the words, deeds, and confirmations of
the Holy Prophet and nothing else, while the past nations went astray
when they distorted the words of their Prophets and the concepts of the
Divine Books.

On the contrary, the scholars of the Muslim nation maintained the
religion and explained the Holy Qur'an and the Holy Prophet’s traditions
and laws.

Such a justification can be acceptable only when such records comprised
personal opinions and inferences. The prohibition of recording such
items would be reasonably satisfactory since personal opinions are
exposed to errancy and inaccuracy and books of such opinions could be
authored by nonbelievers or deviants who might cause confusion in the
religious rulings for the coming generation. Conversely, the prohibition
from recording the traditions of the Holy Prophet can never be justified
through such ill excuses.

Some of those who regarded the prohibition of recording personal
opinions of the scholars as same as the prohibition of recording the
Holy Sunnah might have accepted \`Umar’s decision from this angle after
they had not understood the big difference between the scholars’
personal judgments and the Holy Prophet’s traditions. In consequence,
such prohibition was accepted by the next generations until it was
canceled during the reign of \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz, the Umayyad
ruler.

In any event, all proofs confirm that the recordation of the Hadith was
permitted during the Holy Prophet’s age and the prohibition was invented
afterwards under certain circumstances. It has been also confirmed that
some of the Sahabah attempted to consolidate \`Umar’s prohibition of
reporting and recording the Hadith in the Muslims’ mentalities for
nothing other than \`Umar’s disliking it.

Yet, when \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz canceled the prohibition and
decided the recordation of the Hadith as commendable matter, those
individuals changed their minds and liked the matter. Al-Zuhriy says,

“We disliked the recordation of the knowledge until we were forced by
those rulers. We thus decided not to prevent any of the Muslims from
it.”[^124]

According to another narration, al-Zuhriy said,

“… until the ruler compelled us to do it.”[^125]

According to a third narration, he said,

“The kings ordered me to write down these items of knowledge; I
therefore wrote them down. Then I saw it is shameful to write down for
the kings and deprive the people of these items. So, I decided to write
them down for the people.”[^126]

Abu-Malih was reported as saying,

“We despaired of writing down any item of knowledge from al-Zuhriy. But
when Husham, the Umayyad ruler, compelled him to write down for his sons
and al-Zuhriy did, people could record.”[^127]

In my book entitled *Wudu’ al-Nabiy* (The Ablution of the Prophet) *the
Introduction*, I have set forth in details the influence of the rulers
on the recordation of the Holy Sunnah and the secrets behind their
showing interest in this respect.

I also established that the scientific shortage from which they suffered
pushed them to prohibit the recordation of the Hadith and then for the
same reason to make it public since the Sahabah used to object to them
through Hadiths; they therefore had to lock this door in order to fill
this gap and not to expose their educational weakness in face of a
strong trend that refuted the ruling authorities’ decisions through
traditions of the Holy Prophet.

The matter then expanded so largely that the trend of Ijtihad invented
the law of considering consensus as source of the Islamic legislation so
that they will bind the publics with the decisions of the caliph that
would naturally take the quality of the ummah’s consensus.

They thus decided that the verdicts of the Private Committee that was
founded by \`Umar would replace all the Sahabah and would be considered
as consensus that nobody is allowed to transgress or breach.

About the age of the Sahabah, al-Wafi al-Mahdiy says,

“In this age, consensus, which is a new source of the Islamic
Legislation since it was not present in the first age of Islam, has
emerged. When he could not find a solution neither in the Holy Qur'an
nor in the Sunnah, Abu-Bakr would refer the matter to a legislative
body. \`Umar did the same thing, too. Any decision that was made by that
legislative body would be regarded as issued by all of them…”[^128]

In practice, \`Umar formed a committee for administrating the affairs of
the Muslims and meeting their legislative requirements and appointed
some individuals whom he had trusted as issuers of verdicts so that he
would be able to administrate other affairs. It has been narrated on the
authority of \`Ali ibn Rabah al-Lakhmiy that \`Umar delivered to the
people the following address,

“One who has a question about the Qur'an must refer to Ubayy ibn Ka\`b.
one who has a question about what is lawful and what is not must refer
to Mu\`adh ibn Jabal. One who has a question about the legal shares of
inheritances must refer to Zayd ibn Thabit. One who has a financial
question must refer to me, for I am the treasurer.”[^129]

This text corroborates that \`Umar needed to establish a foundation for
protecting himself from danger and for rooting his personal inventions,
such as *Ra’y* (Opinionism) and *Istihsan* (Equitable Preference).

It is worth mentioning that it was not \`Umar who betook personal
opinions as a course for the issuance of religious verdicts; rather
Abu-Bakr preceded him in this respect when he neglected carrying out the
Holy Prophet’s order to kill that pious man who was offering prayers and
also when he declared openly the principle of adoption of personal views
and Ijtihad in his first speech to people when he said,

“I have been chosen for your leadership while I am not the best of you.
Hence, if I am right, you should then help me; and if I am wrong, you
thus lead me to the right.”[^130]

In addition, Abu-Bakr said about Khalid ibn al-Walid who had killed a
Muslim individual deliberately and married his widow on the same night,

“As Khalid tried to infer the ruling (i.e. use *Ta’wil*:
interpretation), he missed the right.”[^131]

This very statement was used by Khalid himself when he wanted to find an
excuse for his deed.[^132]

[^1]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra: 5:188; Al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala’ 5 :59.

[^2]: Al-Jawziy: Zad al-Ma’ad 1:212-213; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:327;
al-San’aniy: Irshad al-Nuqqad Ila Taysir al-Ijtihad 24-25.

[^3]: Al-Jawziy: Zad al-Ma’ad 1:213; Ibn Hazm al-Andalusiy: Hijjat
al-Wada\` 1:353; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 8:208.

[^4]: Ibn al-Athir, in al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:141, has recorded that
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, when some people objected to him because he had
violated the opinion of his father as regards the temporary marriage,
said, “I fear lest a stone from the heavens will inflict you.”

[^5]: Al-Jawziy: Zad al-Ma’ad 2:206; Ibn Hazm al-Andalusiy: Hijjat
al-Wada\` 1:353-354.

[^6]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm.

[^7]: Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 2:159 H. 823; al-San\`aniy: Irshad al-Nuqqad
25; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:214 H. 2978.

[^8]: Al-San’aniy: Irshad al-Nuqqad 25.

[^9]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:370; Al-Tahawiy: Sharh Ma’ani al-Āthar
1:494 H. 2827.

[^10]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:406 H. 23495; al-Tahawiy: Sharh Ma’ani
al-Āthar 1:494 H. 2828; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Tarikh Baghdad 11:142
No. 5840; al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa'id 3:34.

[^11]: Sahih Muslim 2:905 H. 1233; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:56 H. 5194;
al-Musnad al-Mustakhraj \`Ala Sahih Muslim 3:331 H. 2863; Sunan
al-Darimiy 5:224; Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin
90; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 5:75 H. 9028; Ibn Hajar
al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhariy 3:478.

[^12]: Sahih Muslim 1:327 H. 442; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 3:147 H.
5107; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:151; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:8 H. 16; Muhammad
\`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 88.

[^13]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:127; Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy:
Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i) 2:195.

[^14]: Al-Haythamiy: Majma’ al-Zawa'id 2:222-223; al-Tabaraniy:
al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 8:296 H. 8684; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir
2:58 H. 1281.

[^15]: \`Abd al-Razzaq: al-Musannaf 2:433; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-'Ummal 11:23 H. 30468; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 6:222 H. 12030;
Ibn Hazm: al-Muhalla 3:3; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 13:37.

[^16]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-'Ummal 11:25 H. 30479;
al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 6:222 H. 12031; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq
10:288.

[^17]: Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: al-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 111;
Sayid Murtada al-\`Askariy: Ma\`alim al-Madrasatayn 2:286; al-Madkhal
Ila \`Ilm al-Usul 90-95.

[^18]: Ahmad ibn \`Abd al-Aziz al-Jawhariy: al-Saqifah wa Fadak 46-47;
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 2:51-2.

[^19]: Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat al-Awliya' as quoted from Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal 5:140 H. 21301; Musnad al-Tayalisiy 1:75 H. 555; Musnad
Abu’l-Ju\`d 1:197 H. 1291; Musannaf Ibn Abi-Shaybah 7:468 H. 37295. All
these reference books have recorded this narration on the authority of
Ubayy ibn Ka\`b; but Mu\`ammar ibn Rashid, in his book of al-Jami\`
11:322, has alone recorded it on the authority of Hudhayfah ibn
al-Yaman.

[^20]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 3:501; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 2:229, 303; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh Dimashq
7:340; al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal 2:270; al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A\`lam
al-Nubala' 1:399.

[^21]: This is an indication to the holy verse that reads, “Whatever
Allah has restored to His Messenger from the people of the towns, it is
for Allah and for the Messenger, and for the near of kin and the orphans
and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it may not be a thing taken by
turns among the rich of you, and whatever the Messenger gives you,
accept it, and from whatever he forbids you, keep back, and be careful
of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is severe in retribution (evil).
59/7”

[^22]: Al-Sam’aniy: al-Imla’ wa’l-Istimla’ 21 (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy:
Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 127); al-Muhaddith al-Fasil 601.

[^23]: Abu-Bakr ibn \`Abdullah: Ma\`rifat al-Nusakh wa’l-Suhuf
al-Hadithiyyah 207.

[^24]: Muhammad Husayn al-Dhahbiy: al-Tafsir wa’l-Mufassirun 1:115
(Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 100).

[^25]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 8862, 956; Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat
al-Awliya’ 1:240; Abu-‘Ubayd: al-Amwal 27, 37.

[^26]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 5:228 H. 22041; Sunan al-Darqutniy 2:96
H. 8.

[^27]: Dr. Imtiyaz Ahmad: Dala’il al-Tawthiq al-Mubakkir li’l-Kitab
wa’l-Sunnah (Evidences on the early documentation of the Holy Qur'an and
Sunnah) 418; al-Muhaddith al-Fasil 498.

[^28]: Al-Taratib al-Idariyyah 1:398.

[^29]: Al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf 245; Ibn \`Abd-Rabbih: al-\`Iqd al-Farid
4:147.

[^30]: Al-Taratib al-Idariyyah 1:124; Subh al-A\`sha 1:125.

[^31]: Makatib al-Rasul 1:177 as quoted from Ibn Hazm’s Jawami\`
al-Siyar.

[^32]: Subul al-Huda wa’l-Rashad 11:381. The administrative structure of
the Holy Prophet’s governmental system reveals that it was the Holy
Prophet, not \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, who founded the offices (Diwans).

[^33]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal: al-‘Ilal wa Ma\`rifat al-Rijal 1:323; Ibn
Abi-Shaybah: al-Musannaf 45.

[^34]: Ibn \`Abd al-Barr al-Qurtubiy: Jami\` Bayan al-\`Ilm wa Fadlih
1:72.

[^35]: It seems that \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud erased the al-Sahifah
al-Yamaniyyah out fear of the ruling authorities and because he believed
that dispute is evil. He had done the very same thing when he offered
the prayer at Mina.

[^36]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: A’lam al-Muwaqqi’in 2:218.

[^37]: Ibn Abi-Shaybah: al-Musannaf 1:100; Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah:
A’lam al-Muwaqqi’in 1:20.

[^38]: Al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’ 2:312; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh
Madinat Dimashq 5:448; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 6:21 H. 11966.

[^39]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 2:123 (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy:
Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 116).

[^40]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 5:216; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy:
Taqyid al-\`Ilm 136 (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith
al-Nubawiy 116).

[^41]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 92; Ahmad ibn Hanbal:
al-‘Ilal wa Ma\`rifat al-Rijal 1:42; Abu-Khaythamah: al-‘Ilm 124
(Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 117).

[^42]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:452; al-Shafi\`iy: al-Risalah; Jamal
al-Din al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal 13:262.

[^43]: Sunan Ibn Majah 12 H. 2642; Sunan Abi-Dawud H. 2927; Sunan
al-Tirmidhiy H. 1415.

[^44]: Sahih Muslim 39:1114, 21:1; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 6:413; Ibn
Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 8:200.

[^45]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:396 H. 414; Jami’ al-Usul 8:47;
al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 1:93; Sunan Abi-Dawud 1:1 H. 3.

[^46]: Abu-Bakr ibn \`Abdullah: Ma\`rifat al-Nusakh wa’l-Suhuf
al-Hadithiyyah 182.

[^47]: Sahih Muslim, Kitab al-Imarah (Leadership) 10, Kitab al-Fada’il
(Merits) 45; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 5:89.

[^48]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 29-32; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal 3:12-21; Sahih Muslim, Kitab al-Zuhd (Asceticism) 72; Ahmad ibn
Hanbal: al-‘Ilal wa Ma\`rifat al-Rijal (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun
fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy).

[^49]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:370-374; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 2:230;
Jamal al-Din al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal, 3:394 (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy:
Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 107).

[^50]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 320.

[^51]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:73; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 105; Sunan
al-Darimiy 1:128; Abu-Khaythamah: al-‘Ilm; Ahmad ibn Hanbal: al-‘Ilal wa
Ma\`rifat al-Rijal 1:42.

[^52]: Al-Bukhariy: al-Tarikh al-Kabir 1:3201; al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala’ 3:160 (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy
120).

[^53]: Ibn Shahrashib: Ma'alim al-'Ulama' as quoted from Sayyid
Sharafuddin: al-Muraja'at No. 110.

[^54]: Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr: Ta’sis al-Shi’ah li-‘Ulum al-Islam (The
Shi\`ah: the Founders of the Islamic Sciences) 280 as quoted from Shaykh
al-Tusiy: al-Fihrist.

[^55]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:74; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhariy 1:215; al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:511; Ibn
Wahab: al-Musnad 66; Ahmad ibn Hanbal: al-‘Ilal wa Ma\`rifat al-Rijal
120 (Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 96).

[^56]: It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet said, “Salman
(al-Farisiy) is one of us; the Ahl al-Bayt.” This Hadith is too famous
to need documentation.

[^57]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:74; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhariy 1:215; al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:511.

[^58]: Ibn Shahrashib: Ma'alim al-'Ulama' 1.

[^59]: Later on, we will add the jurisprudence of the Ansar to prove
that the trend of the thorough compliance to the sacred texts included
these three categories in general.

[^60]: Sayyid Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy: Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah
264, 273 as quoted from al-Mu\`allimiy: al-Anwar al-Kashifah 38.

[^61]: Al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:7; \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd
al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 395; al-Muhaddith al-Fasil 1:553.

[^62]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1: 110;
al-Dhahbiy: al-Talkhis; Musannaf Ibn Abi-Shaybah 5:294 H. 26229;
al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala' 2:345.

[^63]: Ibn Mandhur: Mukhtasar Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 17:101; al-Muttaqiy
al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 10:293 H. 29479.

[^64]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy as quoted
from Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 4:21-22.

[^65]: Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:107; Mu\`ammar ibn Rashid:
al-Jami\` 11:262.

[^66]: The author promises the readers to present further details about
the Sahabah who objected to \`Umar in a study entitled ‘al-Sunnah Ba\`d
al-Rasul (The Sunnah after the Messenger).

[^67]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 4: 339;
al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 6:233; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-'Ummal 11:44 H. 30588.

[^68]: To explain it, the Holy Qur'an, in the verse involved, judges
that a testator’s full sister will have half the inheritance in case the
testator does not have a ‘walad’ (son). In Arabic, the word ‘walad’ is
mainly denoting boys, not girls. \`Umr therefore understood that when a
testator does not have a boy (walad), half the inheritance will be the
legal share of his full sister. Yet, by ‘walad’, the Holy Qur'an means
both sons and daughters.

[^69]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 6:253 H. 12237; al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 4:378 H. 7985.

[^70]: Al-Jassas: Ahkam al-Qur'an 2:111.

[^71]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-'Ummal 11:25 H. 30481; Al-Jassas:
Ahkam al-Qur'an 2:111.

[^72]: \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 344-347;
Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: Ma’l-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 451.

[^73]: \`Abd al-Razzaq: al-Musannaf 10:262 H. 19043-5; Muhammad Rawwas
Qal\`achiy: Mawsu'at Fiqh \`Umar ibn al-Khattab (Encyclopedia of
\`Umar’s jurisprudence) 53.

[^74]: Dr. Muhammad Sallam Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam 172.

[^75]: Muhammad Rawwas Qal\`achiy: Mawsu'at Fiqh \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
53-54.

[^76]: Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: Ma’l-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 452
as quoted from al-Suyutiy: al-Ashbah wa’l-Nadha'ir 101.

[^77]: This narration has been recorded by al-Tabaraniy, in his
al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 4:295 H. 4245. The series of narrators has been also
decided as authentic. See also Tabaqat al-Muhaddithin bi-Isbahan 3:564;
al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa'id 4:227; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-\`Ummal 11:58 H. 30611.

[^78]: Al-Jassas: Ahkam al-Qur'an 3:18; Tafsir Ibn Kathir 1:595; Jalal
al-Din al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 2:754.

[^79]: Sunan al-Darimiy 2:450 H. 2902; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra
6:245 H. 12196; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 10:262; Musannaf Ibn
Abi-Shaybah 6:268.

[^80]: Tafsir al-Tabariy 18:83; Musnad Ahmad 1:238 H. 2131; Sunan
Abi-Dawud 2:277 H. 2256; al-Wahidiy: Asbab al-Nuzul 213; al-Suyutiy:
Lubab al-Nuqul fi Asbab al-Nuzul 153.

[^81]: This incident has been narrated by Abu-Dawud, in al-Sunan,
al-Nassa’iy, in al-Sunan (on the authority of Zayd ibn Aslam), al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy, in al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn, and al-Tabaraniy, in
al-Mu’jam al-Saghir.

[^82]: Al-Zamakhshariy: Tafsir al-Kashshaf 2:274.

[^83]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah; Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad
al-Rasul 95.

[^84]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 3:64. (Al-Bukhariy, Muslim, Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, al-Nassa’iy and other historians have also referred to this
event.)

[^85]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 3:235.

[^86]: Ibn Husham: al-Sirah 2:271. For more details about the aforesaid
events, refer to Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 83-146.

[^87]: Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 97.

[^88]: The Holy Qur'an Surah of al-Qadr (No. 97).

[^89]: Kiblah is the direction towards which Muslims must turn their
faces during prayers (in the past, the holy Mosque of Jerusalem; and now
the Holy Ka’bah).

[^90]: Of course, the matter will be more obvious in the origin text of
the holy verse.

[^91]: Tafsir al-Fakhr al-Raziy 11:3, Al-Zamakhshariy: Tafsir
al-Kashshaf 1:552 and Tafsir Ibn Kathir 1:851-2.

[^92]: Al-Jassas: Ahkam al-Qur'an 3:223.

[^93]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 4:1577 H. 4084; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:150
H. 6382; Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 2:148; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Isti\`ab 2:428.

[^94]: Dr. Muhammad Sallam Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam 43-44.

[^95]: Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: Ma’l-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 32 as
quoted from al-Dawalibiy, in al-Madkhal ila ‘Ilm Usul al-Fiqh 78.

[^96]: Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 259.

[^97]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 6:13; al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat
al-Huffadh 1:41; Abu’l-Mahasin: Mu\`tasar al-Mukhtasar 2:314.

[^98]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:416; Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:208 H. 2004;
al-Āhad wa’l-Mathani 3:228 H. 1589; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir
3:262 H. 3353; \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 358.
A similar narration is recorded by Sayyid Muhsin al-Aminiy, in al-Ghadir
6:112.

[^99]: Al-Madkhal Ila’l-Sunan al-Kubra 1:104 H. 34; al-Suyutiy: Miftah
al-Jannah 1:44; Īqadh al-Himam 1:8; \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq:
Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 372 as quoted from Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: A’lam
al-Muwaqqi’in; Sunan Abi-Dawud.

[^100]: Refer to Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul
352-353.

[^101]: Nahj al-Balaghah 3:320.

[^102]: Nahj al-Balaghah 3:234.

[^103]: Dr. Muhammad Sallam Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam 80.

[^104]: Tafsir al-Fakhr al-Raziy al-Kashshaf 1:206.

[^105]: Jalal al-Din al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 1:7; al-Itqan 1: 268
as quoted from al-Bayhaqiy: Shi’ab al-Īman.

[^106]: Ra’b al-Sad’ 1:255 H. 353.

[^107]: Bada’i al-Sana’i\` 1-2:201.

[^108]: Dr. Muhammad Sallam Madkur: Manahij al-Ijtihad fi’l-Islam 128.

[^109]: Muhammad Rawwas Qal\`achiy: Mawsu'at Fiqh Zayd ibn Thabit 107 as
quoted from Ibn Qudamah: al-Mughni 3:461 and al-Majmu’ 8:229.

[^110]: Muhammad Rawwas Qal\`achiy: Mawsu'at Fiqh Zayd ibn Thabit 107.

[^111]: Muhammad Rawwas Qal\`achiy: Mawsu'at \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar 285.

[^112]: Muhammad Rawwas Qal\`achiy: Mawsu'at Fiqh \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
333 as quoted from Ibn Hazm: al-Muhalla 7:170.

[^113]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan 5:163 as is written in Mustafa
al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy, 136.

[^114]: Tahdhib Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 1:54; Hayat al-Sahabah 2:390-391
as is in al-'Āmiliy: al-Sahih 1:89.

[^115]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:12-13; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid
al-\`Ilm 33; al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa'id 1:151.

[^116]: Sunan al-Darimiy 1:122; Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm
56, 53, 55.

[^117]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 12:101-102 Sermon No.
223; Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 56.

[^118]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 36-37.

[^119]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 37.

[^120]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 38.

[^121]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 56.

[^122]: Such a comparison has been made by many scholars, such as Dr.
Subhiy al-Salih, in ‘Ulum al-HAdith 11, Dr. 'Ajjaj al-Khatib, in
al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 306-309, 316, and Sayyid Muhammad Rida
al-Jalaliy, in Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah 302-314 as well as many
other scholars.

[^123]: Sahih Muslim 4:2298 H. 3004; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:12 H.
11100; Sunan al-Darimiy 1:130 H. 450.

[^124]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 107; Ibn Sa\`d:
al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 2:389; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 9:341;
Mu\`ammar ibn Rashid: al-Jami\` 11:258; al-Madkhal Ila’l-Sunan al-Kubra
1:409 H. 739.

[^125]: Sunan al-Darimiy 1:110.

[^126]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:77.

[^127]: Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat al-Awliya’ 3:363; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah
wa’l-Nihayah 9:345 (as quoted from al-Riwayah al-Tarikhiyyah 107.).

[^128]: Al-Wafi al-Mahdiy: al-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari’ah al-Islamiyyah 46.

[^129]: Al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:272.

[^130]: Ibn Habban: al-Thuqat 2:157; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubiy 2:127;
al-Iktifa’ bi-ma Tadammanahu Maghazi Rasuli’llah 2:446; Ibn Kathir:
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:248, 6:301; Takhrij al-Dalalat al-Sam\`iyyah
1:43; al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:483.

[^131]: Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 3:357;
Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:273.

[^132]: For more details, refer to Tarikh al-Tabariy, Tarikh
al-Ya\`qubiy 2:132, and many other reference books of Islamic history.


