The Perpetuity Of Opinionism And Ijtihad During The Reign Of Mu`awiyah
======================================================================

Let us now pursue the perpetuity of the trend of Opinionism and
Ijtihad—the trend invented by Abu-Bakr and \`Umar—during the reigns of
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan and the rulers who came after him. We have
previously cited, as has been recorded in *Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal*,
that it has been narrated that Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan (during his
reign) said, “O People: reduce reporting from Messenger of Allah; and
when you do, you must report traditions that were known during the reign
of \`Umar.”[^1]

It has been also narrated that al-Yahsubiy said that he once heard
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan saying to the publics, “Beware of spreading
the Hadith except those that were known during the reign of \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab for this man used to threaten people for the sake of Almighty
Allah.”[^2]

Similarly, it has been narrated on the authority of Ibn \`Adiy that
Isma\`il ibn \`Ubaydullah confirmed that Mu\`awiyah (ibn Abi-Sufyan)
warned people against circulating any tradition that is reported from
the Holy Prophet excluding these which were known during the reign of
\`Umar and admitted by him.[^3]

It has been narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah that
during the season of the Hajj attended by Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan,
Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, and al-Dahhak ibn Qays[^4] discussed the issue of
connecting the Hajj to the \`Umrah. Al-Dahhak said, “Only those who have
no knowledge in the rulings of Almighty Allah will connect the Hajj to
the \`Umrah.”

Answering him, Sa\`d said, “You are totally wrong, brother.”

Al-Dahhak replied, “Indeed, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab prevented such!”

Sa\`d said, “But the Messenger of Allah did it, and we followed him on
it.”[^5]

Narrating the same report, al-Darimiy confirmed that Sa\`d ibn
Abi-Waqqas answered al-Dahhak ibn Qays by saying, “\`Umar is better than
I am; but the Holy Prophet did it; and certainly he is better than
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab.”[^6]

Al-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fihiry al-Qirashiy, the tyrant, imitated \`Uthman
ibn \`Affan in the prevention from the temporary marriage, and \`Uthman
had imitated \`Umar ibn al-Khattab. Exceeding them, Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan insisted on the cancellation of this matter so importunely
since he believed in the necessity of founding an independent code of
law that would be characterized by independent dimensions and
foundations in order to be contradictory to the religious laws adopted
and followed by the descendants of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and the
other Sahabah who followed them.

The code of law enacted by Abu-Bakr and \`Umar was the ground on which
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan rested in the enactment of his independent
code of law. Having been extremely cunning, Mu\`awiyah could understand
the necessity of locking the door to the circulation of the Holy
Prophet’s Hadith. He therefore strengthened the personal decisions of
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab so that he would be able to construct the
substitutive code of law.

In my book entitled *Wudu' al-Nabiy*, I have focused much light on the
fact that the Muslim rulers, whether the Umayyads or the \`Abbasids,
feared the descendants and followers of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib very much;
they therefore planned to eradicate them; they therefore decided to
sketch for the people a code of law opposite to that of \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib so that they would realize the followers of \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib and discriminate them.

Hence, those rulers, in the admission of the religious laws, once
followed the opinions of \`Umar, and at other times they followed the
opinions of \`Ā'ishah and then the opinions of Abu-Hurayrah and then the
opinions of \`Uthman and so on. The most important aim that they worked
for attaining it was to oppose the sayings of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib
and only then would they be able to force all the peoples to follow
their decisions.

Whenever they intended to eradicate any of the followers of Imam \`Ali,
they would declare that he had mutinied against the will of the ummah
since the laws that he practiced had been opposite to these issued by
the ruling authorities and the methods that he followed in the practice
of the religious duties had been different from these practiced by the
publics.

For instance, he rubbed, not washed, his feet in the ritual ablutions,
or he extended his hands rather than crossing them in the ritual
prayers, and he recited the verses audibly instead of quietly… etc.

As he prohibited the recording and reporting of the Hadith, \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab granted Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan the best opportunity to
establish the substitute code of law in the same way as he strengthened
the role of the storytellers and the dishonest reporters and encouraged
them to fabricate narrations corroborating Mu\`awiyah’s personal
opinions and attacking the positions of his enemies. Hence, he ordered
those dishonest reporters to fabricate narrations concentrating on the
“unfounded” merits of Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, and \`Uthman.

For example, it has been narrated that \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās swore before
people that he heard the Messenger of Allah saying, “You should recite
(the Holy Qur'an) in the same way suggested by \`Umar (ibn al-Khattab)
and should carry out any command that he would issue!”[^7]

Instructing his officials, Mu\`awiyah wrote the following message, “Try
to find the followers, fans, and adherents of \`Uthman (ibn \`Affan) as
well as those who circulate narrations about his merits and virtues. If
you find them, you should show favor to them, approach, and honor them.
Write back to me the narrations that they report in this regard as well
their names and the names of their fathers and their tribes.”[^8]

When fabricated narrations about the merits of \`Uthman circulated among
people terribly, Mu\`awiyah wrote to his officials, “Narrations about
\`Uthman have spread out so excessively that it cover each and every
province, city, and down.

Hence, after you read this message, I order you to call people to
circulate narrations about the merits of the other Sahabah and the first
two caliphs (namely Abu-Bakr and \`Umar). About all the reports that the
Muslims narrate about the merits of Abu-Turab (i.e. Imam \`Ali), you are
ordered to contradict all these reports by fabricating opposing ones
about the Sahabah.”[^9]

This narration has demonstrated the policy of Mu\`awiyah who accepted
all the Sahabah except Abu-Turab—Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. The matter
did not stop at the fabrication of Hadith in the field of the Sahabah’s
merit; rather it crept into the field of the jurisprudence. The
following narration, reported by al-Bayhaqiy and Abu-Dawud, proves this
matter:

Once, Mu\`awiyah said to a group of the Sahabah, “Did the Messenger of
Allah prohibited riding on saddles made of skins of tigers?”

“Yes, he did,” answered they.

“I also testify it,” commented Mu\`awiyah who further asked, “Do you
know that the Prophet prohibited putting golden things (for men only)?”

“Yes, we know,” answered they.

He then asked, “Do you know that the Prophet prohibited joining the
\`Umrah to the Hajj?”

“No, we do not,” said they.

He commented, “By Allah, this is indeed with the prohibited
matters.”[^10]

This is Mu\`awiyah’s method in inducement and depending upon the
familiar rulings in sticking fabricated ones to them for purpose of
deluding the others.

As he comments on this narration, Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah said,

“We swear by Almighty Allah that this is a delusion fabricated by
Mu\`awiyah or might have been fabricated against him since the Holy
Prophet had never prohibited the joining of the \`Umrah with the
Hajj.”[^11]

As a matter of fact, Ibn al-Qayyim has been also mistaken. Like the
majority of the Muslims, Ibn al-Qayyim had a favorable idea about
Mu\`awiyah and though of him as having been deluded, while delusion is
impracticable in such a clear-cut ruling that had been practiced by the
Holy Prophet and the Muslims before disagreement about it took place
during the reign of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab who prohibited the Muslims to
join the \`Umrah to the ritual Hajj. It is therefore far-fetched to
believe that Mu\`awiyah did not know the actual rulings.

Secondly, instead of claiming that the matter was fabricated against
Mu\`awiyah, Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah should have decided it as having
been fabricated against the Holy Prophet and should have expected it to
be a preplanned plot the purpose of which is to found a new code of law
opposite to that of Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet.

Mu\`awiyah conspired for enlivening the method of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
in issuing personal opinions in the religious questions and repealing
other laws commissioned by Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet, but he
did not expect that days would expose his lies and reveal his
trickeries. In this respect, al-Bukhariy and Muslim have narrated on the
authority of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas that Mu\`awiyah once asked him, “Do
you know that I have cut the hair of the Holy Prophet (during the Hajj)
with an arrowhead?”[^12]

\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas answered, “Although I do not know this piece of
information, it acts as an argument against you!”[^13]

As he fabricated that incident, Mu\`awiyah wanted to prove that he was
so close to the Holy Prophet that he shaved his head personally, yet he
forgot that his claim had been contradictory to his decision of the
prohibition of joining the \`Umrah to the Hajj.

In *Sahih* *Muslim*, it has been narrated that Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas,
when was asked about the legality of the temporary marriage, said, “We
practiced the temporary marriage when this one had no faith in the Lord
of the Divine Throne (\`Arsh) (or: this one was faithless in
Makkah).”[^14] The narrator of this report mentioned that Sa\`d, by
saying “this one” meant the house of Makkah, but another reporter
confirmed that he meant Mu\`awiyah.[^15]

The fans of Mu\`awiyah[^16] distorted the pronunciation of the word
*“\`arsh*” into *“\`urush*” so that it would mean “houses of Makkah”
instead of “the Divine Throne.”

Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas—the grand Sahabiy, the conqueror of Iraq, and one
of the members of the Shura Committee whom were nominated by \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab for the caliphate—opposed Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan on more
than once occasion. This Sahabiy and those who enjoyed the like of his
position could object to Mu\`awiyah’s personal opinions, while the other
people could not stand in his face.

Yet, even those grand Sahabah, such as \`Imran ibn al-Husayn, and
\`Abadah ibn al-Samit, feared the oppression of the rulers, like \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab and \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, in general and Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan, the well-known of his cunning and trickeries, in particular
whenever they objected to them.

It has been narrated that \`Imran ibn al-Husayn had to expose a secret
that suppressed him during the reigns of Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, and \`Uthman.
When he was in the last sparks of his life, he conveyed that secret to
Mutrif. Let us now present the whole story as has been narrated by
Muslim and other Hadithists on the authority of Mutrif:

As he was in his final ailment, \`Imran ibn Husayn summoned me. When I
was present before him, he said to me, “I will convey to you some facts
hoping that Almighty Allah will make you benefit by them after me. If I
live, I want you to keep them secret, but I will die, you may circulate
them. Be it known to you that the Prophet of Allah joined the \`Umrah to
the Hajj and this act has not been repealed in the Holy Qur'an, and the
Holy Prophet did not prohibit it at all. Yet, someone expressed his
personal opinion in this regard.”[^17]

According to another form of the narrative, Mutrif said that \`Imran ibn
al-Husayn said to him, “I will convey to you a matter hoping that
Almighty Allah will make you benefit by it in the future. Be it known to
you that the Messenger of Allah performed the \`Umrah during the season
of the Hajj, and this act has not been repealed by a verse from the Holy
Qur'an and the Messenger of Allah himself did not prohibit it. Yet, when
he passed away, some men followed their personal opinions in the
question.”[^18]

\`Imran ibn al-Husayn conveyed this matter while he was afraid of the
inconvenience of this conveyance; he therefore asked Mutrif to retain
the matter so that it may help him in the next days. He also ordered
Mutrif to keep it secret if he (\`Imran) would recover. This state of
fear and suspect proves manifestly that most of the Sahabah did not
admit the deeds of Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, \`Uthman, and Mu\`awiyah.

Discourse Of Ibn Qayyim About Temporary Marriage
------------------------------------------------

Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah has attempted to bring into agreement the
contradictory narrations about the temporary marriage. He says,

Some people argue the legality of the temporary marriage through citing
the following two reports as their evidence:

(First) Muslim (al-Nisapuriy), in *al-Sahih*, has recorded that Jabir
ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansariy said, “During the lifetime of the Messenger of
Allah and the reign of Abu-Bakr, we used to practice the temporary
marriage and the dowries were even a handful of dates and a handful of
flour. This lasted until \`Umar (ibn al-Khattab) prohibited the
temporary marriage in the issue of \`Amr ibn Hurayth.”

(Second) It has been authentically narrated that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
said, “The temporary marriage and the performance of the \`Umrah during
the Hajj season (*Mut\`at al-Hajj*) are two permissions that were
practiced during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, but I now
declare them as prohibited!”

Answering this argument, people have had two replies:

(First) Some people argue that it is true that it was \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab who prohibited these two legal matters, but the Messenger of
Allah ordered us to follow the *sunnah* of the Rashidite Caliphs!
Nevertheless, this group of people have not decided the authenticity of
the report of Sabarah ibn Mu\`in entailing that the temporary marriage
was prohibited in the year of the Conquest of Makkah, because it has
been reported by \`Abd al-Malik ibn al-Rabi\` ibn Sabarah on the
authority of his father on the authority of his grandfather.

Ibn Mu\`in, a biographer, has criticized this reporter. Besides,
although al-Bukhariy was in need for the report of \`Abd al-Malik, he
has evaded recording it in his book.

This means that had al-Bukhariy deemed authentic this report, he would
have certainly recorded it and used it as his proof. It has been also
said that had the report of Sabarah been true, it would have been known
by \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud who narrated that the Muslims during the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet practiced the temporary marriage and
provided the holy verse[^19] as the proof on his claim.

In addition, had the report of Sabarah been authentic, \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab would have said, in the declaration of his prohibition of the
temporary marriage, that the Holy Prophet prohibited and warned against
it; rather he said that these two practices (i.e. the temporary marriage
and the *Mut\`at al-Hajj*) were legally practiced during the lifetime of
the Holy Prophet but he, \`Umar, would prohibit them and sentence to
punishment those who would practice them.

It has been also said that had the report of Sabarah been authentic, the
temporary marriage would not have been practiced legally during the
reign of Abu-Bakr which is considered the continuity of the reign of the
Messenger of Allah.

(Second) Another group of people have deemed authentic the report of
Sabarah for it is supported by the report of (Imam) \`Ali that reads,
“The Messenger of Allah has prohibited the temporary marriage.”

Accordingly, we have to decide that Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansariy did
not know about the prohibition because this decision was not circulated
among the people up to the reign of \`Umar when disputations about the
temporary marriage floated noticeably. The previous discussion has thus
removed any contradiction in the reports regarding the prohibition of
the temporary marriage.[^20]

Remark
------

The previous discussion of Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah must be exposed to
some notices. He should have informed us how the prohibition of the
temporary marriage has been declared by the Holy Prophet and reported by
Imam \`Ali. Only then would it be acceptable for Ibn Qayyim to cite Imam
\`Ali’s report as his proof on the prohibition of the temporary
marriage.

It is well-known for everybody that Imam \`Ali and his cousin,
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, were on the top of those who encouraged the
temporary marriage; and the Holy Imams defended it all over
history.[^21]

Hence, it is completely ironic that while Imam \`Ali is reported to have
prohibited the temporary marriage, the rulers disputed with his sons and
asked for proofs on the legality of the temporary marriage as well as
many other religious issues.

Besides, the adherents of Imam \`Ali are being criticized fiercely
because they argue the legality of the temporary marriage and,
similarly, the Shi\`ite Muslims are being attacked for this point in
particular.

On the other side, the reference books of Hadith of both the Sunnite and
Shi\`ite Muslims have reported from Imam \`Ali various narrations about
the legality of the temporary marriage through miscellaneous ways of
narration.

The followers of the trend of the thorough compliance with the sacred
texts have unanimously agreed upon this fact, while the aforementioned
report of the prohibition and its likes have been reported by the fans
of the School of Opinionism and Ijtihad only.

As has been previously confirmed, the ruling authorities and their fans
exerted all possible efforts in ascribing the decisions that they
personally issued and favored to the grand Sahabah who objected to the
caliphs openly in order that the baseless judgments of the caliphs would
be corroborated, yet falsely, by the sayings of great personalities like
Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas,
and others.

This is the explanation of one of the phenomena of the contradiction in
the reports of the Opinionists from a Sahabiy, especially those who
opposed the Ijtihad and personal judgments of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar. Such
contradiction is the reporting from a Sahabiy indicates to the existence
of an extension of another course as regards the Islamic laws.

From this cause, I have more than once concentrated on the necessity of
investigating the confusables in the reporting of the Hadith since such
investigations will acquaint us with the rulers (i.e. caliphs) who
adopted these opinions and the personalities whom were given the biggest
role in the enactment of Islamic laws, such as \`Ā'ishah and whether
those were objected by the Sahabah or not.

Such being the case, it will be possible to be on familiar terms with
the hidden threads of the enactment of the religious laws as well as the
place and time of the issuance of these laws and the confusables of
verdicts and opinions.

If the issue of the temporary marriage is taken for instance, the
extension of the two trends will manifest itself. \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, Imam \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib, Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy, and many other Sahabah—all these did
not accept \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s decision of the prohibition of the
temporary marriage that was based upon nothing other than that \`Umar
did not like it!

It is thus natural that the fans of \`Umar, in order to strengthen the
trend of the ruling authorities, have ascribed the prohibition of the
temporary marriage to \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, Imam \`Ali, and even
\`Abdullah son of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab.

As a result, a researcher has to investigate methodically all the
sayings as regard the rulings of the temporary marriage especially after
studying \`Umar’s decision of the prohibition of the temporary marriage.
A researcher is also required to study whether the law of the legality
of the temporary marriage was actually repealed or Imam \`Ali and
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas did really prohibit it in addition to the other
matters that were fabricated for purpose of backing the opinion and
decision of the ruler.

All the historical, traditional, Sunnite, and Shi\`ite texts have
manifestly proven the falsehood of such reports. For instance, let us
cite the following narration:

It has been narrated that \`Urwah ibn al-Zubayr, once, came to
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and asked him, “You have very frequently misled
the people!”

“How is that, \`Urwah?” asked Ibn \`Abbas.

“You claim that a man who enters into the state of Ihram will have it
accomplished after he performs the ritual circumambulation of the
Ka\`bah. Abu-Bakr and \`Umar prohibited this.”

Ibn \`Abbas answered, “Woe is you! Do you regard Abu-Bakr and \`Umar as
preferred to the texts of the Book of Allah and the Holy Prophet’s
instructions to the Sahabah and the Muslims?”

\`Urwah replied, “Abu-Bakr and \`Umar were more knowledgeable in the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet than you are and I
am.”[^22]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Ayyub that \`Urwah said to
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, “Will you not fear Allah as you are deciding the
legality of the temporary marriage?”

\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas answered, “You may ask you mother about this!”

\`Urwah said, “Abu-Bakr and \`Umar did not allow it.”

\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas commented, “By Allah I swear that you will not
stop this until Almighty Allah will chastise you! I convey to you the
decision of the Holy Prophet and you say that Abu-Bakr and \`Umar did
so-and-so!”[^23]

In the aforementioned narration, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas asked \`Urwah to
ask his mother, Asma' daughter of Abu-Bakr, about the legality of the
temporary marriage because al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam, \`Urwah’s father,
had married her the temporary marriage and thus she gave birth of
\`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr. This matter is recorded by al-Raghib in his
famous book of *Muhadarat al-Udaba'*.[^24]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Abu-Nadrah that one day a
man came to Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansariy and asked him why \`Abdullah
ibn \`Abbas and \`Urwah ibn al-Zubayr had disagreed about the ruling
appertained to the temporary marriage.

Replying him, Jabir said, “When we were with the Holy Prophet, we
practiced the temporary marriage, but when it was prohibited by \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab, we stopped.”[^25]

The presentation of the aforementioned narrations of \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas is aimed at acquainting the gentle readers with the fact that
the narrations ascribed to \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and the other grand
Sahabah about the illegality of the temporary marriage have been
fabricated, since such narrations would support the trend of the caliphs
and contradict the opinions of those who objected to the caliphs and
their trend of Opinionism and Ijtihad.

It has been well known that Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan was the first to
nourish the spirit of malice against the Ahl al-Bayt since he publicly
and formally decided that Imam \`Ali and \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas would be
cursed during the sermons of the Friday Prayers as well as the other
religious occasions.

In the same course, Mu\`awiyah exerted all efforts in distorting the
religious laws because \`Ali called for and followed the genuine
religious laws as exactly as have been revealed from Almighty Allah.

In plain words, Mu\`awiyah changed the Islamic laws out of his malice
against Imam \`Ali. Accordingly, it is natural that the opinions of
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib are opposite to those
decided by the ruling authorities since all the rulers of the Islamic
State, such as the Umayyad and the \`Abbasid dynasties, adopted the
opinions of Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, \`Uthman, and \`Ā'ishah as well as the
opinions of anyone who would violate the true religious laws that were
adopted by Imam \`Ali so long as the descendants and adherents of Imam
\`Ali were the opposition.

[^1]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-'Ummal 1:291.

[^2]: Sahih Muslim 2:718 H. 98.

[^3]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:99; al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh
1:7; Ibn \`Adiy: al-Kamil.

[^4]: Al-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fihiry al-Qirashiy was the commander of the
constabularies of Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan. He was born seven years
before the demise of the Holy Prophet. As he was chosen for this office,
he participated in the campaigns led by Mu\`awiyah. He therefore
attacked Iraq and the caravans of the Hajjis and robbed their luggage.
He performed the funeral of Mu\`awiyah. He then swore allegiance to
\`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr after he had sworn allegiance to Yazid, son of
Mu\`awiyah. As he fought against Marwan ibn al-Hakam, he was killed in
Marj-Rahit in AH 64.

[^5]: al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 5:17; Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyyah: Zad
al-Ma\`ad 1:179.

[^6]: Sunan al-Darimiy 2:35-36.

[^7]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 12: 593 H. 35844.

[^8]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:44.

[^9]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Nahj al-Balaghah 11:44-45.

[^10]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 5:20; Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:913 H.
209.

[^11]: Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah: Zad al-Ma\`ad 1:189.

[^12]: Among the rituals of the Hajj is the having one’s hair cut. In
this regard, the Holy Qur'an reads: “And complete the Hajj or \`Umrah in
the service of Allah. But if ye are prevented from completing it, send
an offering for sacrifice, such as ye may find, and do not shave your
heads until the offering reaches the place of sacrifice. 2/196”

[^13]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 2:214; Sahih Muslim 2:913 H. 209.

[^14]: Sahih Muslim 2:898 H. 1225.

[^15]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:181 H. 1568; al-Musnad al-Mustakhraj
\`Ala Sahih Muslim 3:324 H. 2841; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari
fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhariy 3:566.

[^16]: Among those fans are al-Khattabiy, in Islah Ghalat al-Muhaddithin
338, and al-Suyutiy, in al-Tatrif fi al-Tashif 31. For further details,
refer to Abu-\`Ubayd: Gharib al-Hadith 4:20-21; al-Mashariq 2:79;
al-Nawawiy: Sharh Sahih Muslim 8:204 and Ibn al-Jaqziy: al-Gharib 2:81.

[^17]: Sahih Muslim 2:899; al-Nawawiy: Sharh Sahih Muslim 7:456.

[^18]: Al-Nawawiy: Sharh Sahih Muslim 8:455.

[^19]: This holy verse is: “And all married women are forbidden unto you
save those captives whom your right hands possess. It is a decree of
Allah for you. Lawful unto you are all beyond those mentioned, so that
ye seek them with your wealth in honest wedlock, not debauchery. And
those of whom ye seek content by marrying them, give unto them their
portions as a duty. 4/24”

[^20]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah: Zad al-Ma\`ad 2:184.

[^21]: For instance, see Shaykh al-Saduq: \`Uyun Akhbar al-Rida 1:132.

[^22]: Al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa'id 3:234; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam
al-Awsat 1:11 H. 21.

[^23]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah: Zad al-Ma\`ad 1:213; Ibn Hazm
al-Andalusiy: Hijjat al-Wada\` 353 H. 391; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid
8:208.

[^24]: Al-Raghib al-Isfahaniy: Muhadarat al-Udaba' 3:213; Ibn
\`Abd-Rabbih al-Andalusiy: al-\`Iqd al-Farid 2:139.

[^25]: Sahih Muslim 2:914 H. 1249, 2:1023 H. 1405; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 7:206 H. 13947; Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh
Sahih al-Bukhariy 9:174.


