The Rulers And The Jurisprudential Normalization
================================================

Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi\`iy, in his book of *Kitab al-Umm*, has
recorded on the authority of \`Ubayd ibn Rafa\`ah that when Mu\`awiyah
ibn Abi-Sufyan, the ruler, came to al-Madinah, he led the congregational
prayer in which he neither recited “*Bism-illahir-rahmanir-rahim* (In
the Name of Allah, the All-compassionate the All-merciful)” nor said
*“Allahu-Akbar*” whenever he prostrated himself or stood up.

When he finished the prayer, the Muhajirun and Ansar shouted at him,
“Mu\`awiyah! Have you stolen your prayer? Where is the *Basmalah* and
the *Takbir*?”

He therefore led another prayer in which he performed the things that he
had missed in his first prayer.

He then said, “Now, this prayer comprises the things for the missing of
which they have criticized me!”[^1]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Anas ibn Malik that when
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan visited the holy city of al-Madinah, he led a
congregational prayer in which he recited the *Basmalah* for the Surah
of al-Fatihah but did not recite it for the other Surah.

He also did not recite *Takbir* when he prostrated himself and when he
stood for the other Rak\`ahs. When he finished, all the Muhajirun
shouted from everywhere, “Mu\`awiyah! Have you stolen the prayer or you
forgotten it?” Hence, when he led another prayer, he recited the
*Basmalah* and the *Takbir*.[^2]

It has been narrated that al-Zuhriy, a grand Sunnite jurisprudent and a
founder of a school of Sunnite jurisprudence, said, “\`Amr ibn Sa\`id
ibn al-\`Ās was the first to recite the *Basmalah* with inaudible voice
(during the ritual congregational prayers) in al-Madinah.”[^3]

Commenting on al-Zuhriy’s previous narration, al-Fakhr al-Raziy says,

\`Amr ibn Sa\`id ibn al-\`Ās became the governor of al-Madinah during
the reign of Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah. Hence, many people followed him in
the matter of canceling the *Basmalah* in the ritual prayers. In this
respect, Yahya ibn Ju\`dah, referring to the cancellation of the
*Basmalah*, says, “Satan could steal a verse from the leaders of the
congregational prayers.”

Al-Zuhriy has also said about the same matter, “The people have
neglected a verse from the Holy Book of Almighty Allah.” Mujahid has
also said about the same matter, “The people have forgotten the actual
matter that was followed in the past. All the matters that were
innovated after the age when the act of Mu\`awiyah was denied by the
Muslims are worthless.

Because people have no longer denied them, the innovated things have
become circulating and become commonly acceptable. Hence, one must
depend upon the deeds of the scholars, not the rulers and their
officials.”

It may be said that had this matter been baseless, the scholars would
have denied it. To answer this, the scholars did deny this matter when
it was practiced by Mu\`awiyah who, as a consequence, retreated. But
when the authority became in the hands of other tyrannical governors who
presided over the holy city of al-Madinah—such as al-Ashdaq, al-Hajjaj,
Hubaysh ibn Dalajah, and their likes—the scholars could no longer object
to them for fear of their persecution, or other scholars might have
objected to such matters but nobody listened to them.

As a result, the others accepted the matter as they though of it as
permissible. Although such matters are considered negligence of the Holy
Prophet’s instructions, it is lawful to neglect them. Hence, the
scholars accepted it in order to avoid sedition.[^4]

Commenting on the following words of \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, “Nothing
but arrogance has prevented the governors of al-Madinah from reciting
the *Basmalah* in the prayers,” al-Fakhr al-Raziy further said,

\`Amr ibn Sa\`id ibn al-Ashdaq, the first ruler of al-Madinah who
canceled the *Basmalah* in the congregational prayers, did that because
he wanted to violate Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, who decided it, in
everything including this act. Having imitated al-Ashdaq, all the rulers
of al-Madinah whom were appointed by the Marwanids canceled the
*Basmalah*.

It is thus not unacceptable that \`Amr ibn Sa\`id al-Ashdaq who besieged
Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr[^5] in Makkah and negotiated with him through
messengers wanted to violate him in everything including the
cancellation of the *Basmalah* in the congregational prayers. The same
thing is applicable to al-Hajjaj who also besieged him in Makkah after
he had demolished the Holy Ka\`bah and taken out the sacred Black Stone
from there.

Moreover, the question of reading the *Basmalah* audibly or inaudibly is
argumentative. In this respect, it has been narrated that Bakr ibn
\`Abdullah al-Muzaniy said, “As I followed \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr in a
congregational prayer, he recited the *Basmalah* audibly.”

According to another narration, “\`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr used to recite
the *Basmalah* in the congregational prayers audibly and used to say
that nothing but arrogance has prevented you from reciting it
audibly.”[^6]

Before the aforesaid presentation, al-Fakhr al-Raziy has cited the
following narration:

It has been narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ishaq
al-Musayyabiy that his father, once, recited the *Basmalah* audibly in a
prayer that he had offered in al-Madinah. Immediately, al-A\`sha
Abu-Bakr, the nephew of Malik ibn Anas, came to him and said, “Malik ibn
Anas sends his compliments to you and say that you have been the last
one that he expects to violate the religious rituals followed by the
people of al-Madinah.”

Ishaq al-Musayyabiy asked, “What for has he said this to me?”

Al-A\`sha answered, “This is because you have recited the *Basmalah*
audibly in the prayer.”

Ishaq answered, “Well, send my compliments to Malik in the same way as
he has done and say to him that I have very frequently heard him
ordering us not to follow the scholars of Iraq as regards the religious
laws since he claimed that none of our master scholars have ever
followed them.

Yet, it is Hamid al-Tawil, the Iraqi scholar, who canceled the audible
recitation of the *Basmalah* in prayers. Hence, if he (i.e. Malik ibn
Anas) wants us to follow the scholars of Iraq, we will follow them in
this question as well as others, otherwise we will neglect this very
question and the others. Hence, Malik’s claim against me is rejected.
Besides, I have very frequently heard him ordering us to take a field of
knowledge from its people.

Depending upon this instruction, I have asked Ibn Abi-Nu\`aym, the most
experienced in the knowledge of the Holy Qur'an in al-Madinah, about the
question and he ordered me to recite the *Basmalah* audibly in the
prayers, saying, ‘I swear that the *Basmalah* is one of the verses of
the Surah of al-Fatihah and I swear that Almighty Allah has revealed it.
Nafi\`, the manumitted slave of \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, narrated to me
that \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar used to recite the *Basmalah* at the
beginning of each Surah.’”[^7]

From the aforecited narration, we conclude that the trend of Opinionism
and Ijtihad and the trend of thorough compliance with the sacred texts
both influenced the jurisprudents of the other ages. Malik ibn Anas, the
jurisprudent of the ruling authorities, did not recite the *Basmalah*
before reciting the verses of the Holy Qur'an while Ishaq al-Musayyabiy
believed that the Holy Prophet and the Sahabah did recite it before the
recitation of any Surah.

It is worth mentioning in this respect that the majority of the
jurisprudents of al-Madinah violated the Ahl al-Bayt in the issuance of
religious rulings, while the majority of the jurisprudents of Iraq
agreed with them.

It is also well-known that Malik ibn Anas was, once, summoned by
al-Mansur, the \`Abbasid ruler, who ordered him, saying, “Write down
your knowledge of the religious laws in a book and to avoid the
‘improper’ opinions of \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud and the ‘permissions’ of
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and the ‘rigid’ verdicts of \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar.

You must also follow the middle opinion in each issue as well as the
opinions that were proven by the master jurisprudents and the Sahabah so
that we will order the people to follow and act upon your knowledge and
books, to distribute them in the provinces of the state, and to order
them not to violate your verdicts and not to issue anything else.”

Answering the ruler, Malik said, “The people of Iraq do not accept my
knowledge and do not accept my opinions.”

According to another narration, Malik ibn Anas was summoned and asked by
al-Mansur to unify ‘one’ (i.e. unified) knowledge. Malik answered,
“Because the companions of the Messenger of Allah scattered in various
countries, each one issued judgments out of his own personal deduction.
Consequently, the people of Makkah have had their own laws, the people
of al-Madinah have had their own laws and so have the people of Iraq.”

Al-Mansur commented, “As for the people of Iraq, I do not accept any
item from them, while the actual knowledge is found with the people of
al-Madinah. Accordingly, you must now begin founding the ‘knowledge’
(that would be imposed upon people to follow)!”[^8]

As has been previously mentioned and proven by many words said by the
Holy Imams, the jurisprudence of the people of al-Madinah is generally
opposite to the jurisprudence of the Ahl al-Bayt, whereas the
jurisprudence of the people of Iraq is generally agreeing with the Ahl
al-Bayt although the people of Iraq accepted personal opinions in the
issuance of religious laws and were influenced by the reports that were
fabricated and circulated by the ruling authorities. From this cause,
al-Mansur, the \`Abbasid ruler, said the aforementioned words about
them.

In his missive to Layth ibn Sa\`d the master jurisconsult of Egypt,
Malik ibn Anas said,

“May Allah have mercy upon you! Be it known to you that I have been
informed that you are issuing verdicts opposite to the laws followed by
the people in our country. Although we trust you and confess of your
virtuousness… etc.”[^9]

Undoubtedly, the ruling authorities, both the Umayyads and the
\`Abbasids, exerted all efforts for opposing the jurisprudence of the
Ahl al-Bayt. The aforesaid narrations are clear-cut proofs on this fact.

However, not all the situations of the Umayyad and the \`Abbasid rulers
about the rulings appertained to the *Basmalah* were quoted from
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar; rather some of these situations were quoted from
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan, \`Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, al-Mansur, and
others. This matter and its likes must be recognized by the researchers
in this field.

It has been narrated that Ja\`far ibn Muhammad (Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq)
has said,

“The Household of Prophet Muhammad agreed unanimously on the reciting of
the *Basmalah* audibly in prayers.”

Similarly, Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad ibn \`Ali (Imam Muhammad al-Baqir) has
said,

“It is improper to follow in a congregational prayer an imam who does
not recite the *Basmalah* audibly.”[^10]

Imam \`Ali al-Rida is reported to have said,

“All the descendants of Prophet Muhammad have agreed unanimously on the
ruling that the *Basmalah* must be recited audibly (in prayers).”[^11]

Imam al-Sajjad is reported to have said,

“We, the descendants of (Lady) Fatimah, have agreed unanimously on the
ruling that the *Basmalah* must be recited audibly (in prayers).”[^12]

It has been also narrated that the Holy Messenger of Allah, Imam \`Ali,
Imam al-Hasan, Imam al-Husayn, Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, Imam Muhammad
ibn \`Ali, and Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad—all recited the *Basmalah*
audibly during the prayers in the beginning of the Surah of al-Fatihah
and the other one that comes next at each Rak\`ah.[^13]

Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq is reported as saying,

“*Taqiyyah* is the religion of my fathers and me. Yet, I do not use it
in three matters… in the audible recitation of the *Basmalah*.”[^14]

It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that the Holy
Prophet used to recite the *Basmalah* audibly, but people neglected that
after him.[^15]

Al-Tabaraniy and Ahmad ibn Hanbal have recorded on the authority of
\`Abbad ibn \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr that \`Uthman ibn \`Affan used to
offer the Dhuhr (midday), \`Asr (afternoon), and \`Isha' (evening)
obligatory Prayers in the complete form (i.e. four Rak\`ahs for each).

Only when he would be at Mina and on Mount \`Arafat, he would offer the
prayers in the shortened form. Then, when he would accomplish the Hajj
rituals and reside in Mina, he would again offer the prayers in the
complete form until he would leave Makkah.

When Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan, having been the ruler, visited Makkah,
he led the Dhuhr congregational Prayer therein and offered it in the
shortened form (i.e. in two Rak\`ahs only). When he finished, Marwan ibn
al-Hakam and \`Amr ibn \`Uthman said to him, “None has ever dishonored
your cousin (\`Uthman ibn \`Affan) in a way more disgraceful than what
you have just done!”

“How is that?” asked Mu\`awiyah.

They said, “You should have known that \`Uthman used to offer the
prayers in the complete form at Makkah.”

Mu\`awiyah replied, “Woe to you! I have done the correct thing! When I
followed the Messenger of Allah, Abu-Bakr, and \`Umar in the
congregational prayers like this one, they offered them in the complete,
not shortened, form.”

They answered, “Nevertheless, your cousin offered the like of this
prayer in this place in the complete form; and to violate him is
dishonor!”

Accordingly, Mu\`awiyah led the \`Asr congregational Prayer in the
complete form!”[^16]

At all times, the ruling authorities followed this very policy. They
always retreated from doing what they had known from the Holy Prophet
and followed their own caprices whenever the compliance with the
instructions of the Holy Prophet would oppose their sectarian or tribal
regulations!

It has been narrated on the authority of al-Hasan (al-Basriy) that while
he was in Damascus, \`Abadah ibn al-Samit, one of the companions of the
Holy Prophet, saw the people of Syria sell silver vessels in a usurious
manner.

He therefore went towards those sellers and shouted, “O People: I
introduce myself to those who do not know me. I am \`Abadah ibn
al-Samit. I heard the Messenger of Allah once saying, while he was
sitting with a group of the Ansar on a Thursday night that was just
before the beginning of the holy month of Ramadan: Gold is for gold in
everything, be it in measure or in barter, and whatever addition is
made, it will be usury.” As a result, people scattered.

When Mu\`awiyah was informed about this incident, he summoned \`Abadah
ibn al-Samit and said to him, “If you actually accompanied and heard
from the Messenger of Allah, we also accompanied and heard from him.”

\`Abadah answered, “I did accompany and hear from him.”

Mu\`awiyah said, “Keep this Hadith secret and do not mention it any
more.”

\`Abadah replied, “I will not. I will keep spreading this Hadith in
defiance of Mu\`awiyah.” He then left.

Mu\`awiyah commented, “As for the companions of Muhammad, I cannot find
anything better than pardoning them.”[^17]

A little ponderation over this narration demonstrates that \`Abadah ibn
al-Samit enjoyed remarkable perspicacity. As he had recognized the
unfounded justifications of the Opinionists and the adopters of Ijtihad
who claimed the cancellation of any religious law that they would
violate, he assured that he had heard the Holy Prophet directly and in
the last of his holy lifetime deciding such deals as forbidden since
they are usurious.

Accordingly, the claim that such ruling was repealed would be
impracticable because the laws that were decided in the last of the Holy
Prophet’s lifetime are final and not subjected to cancellation. From
this cause, \`Abadah ibn al-Samit mentioned the very day on which the
Holy Prophet declared the ruling.

Recording the same report, al-Bayhaqiy and al-Qurtubiy have narrated
that when Mu\`awiyah was informed of \`Abadah’s report, he summoned the
people and delivered a speech in which he said,

“What is the matter with some people who are spreading reports from the
Messenger of Allah that we have not heard from him although we were
accompanying him and witnessing his actions?”

On hearing this, \`Abadah ibn al-Samit stood up and repeated the same
story, saying,

“I will most certainly report all that which I have heard from the
Messenger of Allah even if Mu\`awiyah will not like this, and I do not
care if this will cause me to accompany his policemen at a gloomy
night.”[^18]

Hence, Mu\`awiyah could not accuse \`Abadah ibn al-Samit of telling lies
directly because the latter mentioned the very time and place when and
where the Holy Prophet declared that ruling. Rather, Mu\`awiyah claimed
that he had not heard this report and its likes from the Holy Prophet
after he had been unable to claim that the report was repealed and could
not belie the reporter.

In the same respect, al-Wafi al-Mahdi, quoting Malik ibn Anas in
*al-Muwatta'*, has narrated that Marwan ibn al-Hakam decided the
three-time divorce that was said on the same occasion as valid.
Likewise, al-Zarqaniy has narrated that the Holy Prophet decided the
invalidity of the divorce that is said one time only and also decided
the invalidity of the divorce that is said three times on the same
occasion. Rather, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab decided the three-time divorce
that was said on the same occasion as valid.[^19]

It has been also narrated that Marwan ibn al-Hakam, once, summoned
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and said to him, “How do you issue the verdict
that the blood money for the fingers is ten dirhams for each, while you
know that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab had issued the verdict that the blood
money for the thumb is fifteen (or thirteen) dirhams, and for the index
finger is twelve (or ten) dirhams, and for the middle finger is ten
dirhams, and for the ring finger is nine dirhams and for the little
finger is six dirhams?”

Answering him, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas said, “May Allah have mercy upon
\`Umar! Whose verdict should I follow; the Holy Prophet or \`Umar?”[^20]

In the same way as Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan imitated \`Uthman ibn
\`Affan in the question of the performance of the \`Asr Prayer, Marwan
ibn al-Hakam imitated \`Umar ibn al-Khattab in the validity of the
three-time divorce that is said on the same occasion and the blood money
for the fingers.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal has narrated on the authority of Abu’l-Nataj on the
authority of Hamran ibn Aban that Mu\`awiyah once saw some people
offering supererogatory prayers after the \`Asr Prayer; he therefore
said to them, “You are offering a prayer that we have never seen the
Prophet offering it throughout our company with him; rather he
prohibited this two-Rak\`ah prayer that is offered after the \`Asr
Prayer.”[^21]

Earlier in this book, we have cited narrations about \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab’s prohibiting the offering of such a prayer.

This was the method of the ruling authorities. The majority of the
narrations that they ascribed to the Holy Prophet was fabricated to suit
their own opinions, especially those adopted by Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, in
the various religious and political fields.

This was the general policy of the social life and the administrative
system of the Islamic caliphate beginning with the *Salat al-Tarawih*
and continuing to include other personal judgments.

Discussing the *Salat al-Tarawih*, Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy says
that narrations have confirmed that it was invented in AH 14. On the
same year, \`Umar, through missives, ordered the Muslims in the various
countries to perform it and ordered that two leaders—one for men and
other for women—must be appointed for leading this congregational
prayer.[^22]

Similarly, Dr. Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy, quoting the words of some Pakistani
scholars who have criticized and denied the adherence to the Holy Sunnah
completely and as a source of the Islamic legislation, says,

Those scholars have claimed that the basic error in which the Muslims
have fallen since the Rashidite Caliphate and up to now is that they did
not understand Islam and its spirit. Islam is in reality a social system
based upon consultancy (*Shura*).

The Qur'an orders us of general matters leaving its details to the
Muslims’ Consultative Council whose mission is to decide the way of
performing the prayer and the rate of the Zakat according to
spatio-temporal circumstances.

As they understood this very meaning, Abu-Bakr, \`\`Umar, and the other
Rashidite Caliphs used to seek advice from the Sahabah; whenever they
realized that the (divine) commission, any commission, required an
addition, they would decide that addition, and whenever they realized
that change would not be necessary, they would keep the (divine)
commission as it is. Had the Sunnah of the Prophet been perpetual, the
Prophet would have given us a written form of it. The verse that reads,

***“Obey Allah and obey the Messenger,” (Holy Qur’an: 4/59)***

does not mean that we should obey the Sunnah of the Messenger since his
Sunnah does not carry the elements of perpetuity and survival; rather
the verse means that we should obey the system to which the Qur'an
referred and which was represented by the Messenger during his lifetime.
This system is the establishment of the Caliphate according to the
Prophethood.

This system continued during the reigns of the Rashidite Caliphs; but
when the Umayyad dynasty emerged as the rulers and politicians, the
situation was changed, because those rulers put a separating boundary
between the religion and policy.

In as much as people did not understand the actual meaning of the
obedience to the Messenger, they went towards the Hadiths because the
Qur'an comprised a few laws only while the necessities of life increased
to a great extent.

Hence, one of the duties of the caliphate that followed the method of
the Prophethood was the meeting of all the social necessities in the
innovated issues. However, the nonexistence of a state in this very
concept made people depend upon the Hadiths, and when the Hadiths were
insufficient, the situation became increasingly more complicated![^23]

It is probable that the motivation of the utterance of such words has
been the prohibition of recording the Hadith that was issued by Abu-Bakr
and \`Umar and then their calls for the practice of Ijtihad and the
stopping at the Book of Almighty Allah –“Sufficient unto us is the Book
of Allah”- and the like personal decisions that are too much to be
covered in this book.

Had the rulers (i.e. the caliphs) submitted to the right and avoided
intruding themselves in the Islamic legislation, this would have
certainly saved the Muslims from discrepancies about the Hadith and the
religious laws and they would not have required *Ra’y* (Opinionism),
*Qiyas* (analogy) and their likes which caused, in some causes, the
changing of the lawful into unlawful and the unlawful into lawful.
Moreover, Islam would have been stable and saved from multiplicity in
trends and notions.

The one and only purpose of those caliphs was to prevent the Ahl al-Bayt
from practicing their divinely commissioned role in the issuance of
religious laws and the elucidation of Almighty Allah’s rulings. This is
because those caliphs thought that such functions, if practiced by the
Ahl al-Bayt, would pave the way for taking them (i.e. the caliphs) away
from their positions.

If some of the Muslims have pretended, for achieving political
interests, to neglect the Hadiths appertained to the divinely
commissioned leadership of the Holy Imams and their succeeding of the
Holy Prophet, they will not be able to pretend that they have not heard
of the Holy Prophet’s famous saying about Imam \`Ali:

“I am the city of knowledge, and \`Ali is the door to that city.”[^24]

Similarly, they cannot deny the unparalleled relationship of Imam \`Ali
to the Holy Prophet and they cannot deny Imam \`Ali’s unprecedented
truthfulness in conveying the sayings of the Holy Prophet about whom
Imam \`Ali has said,

“The Messenger of Allah taught me one thousand fields of knowledge; and
each field takes to other one thousand fields of knowledge.”[^25]

If truth be told, the Muslims should have referred to Imam \`Ali and the
other grand Sahabah who retained, safeguarded, and recorded the Holy
Sunnah in private comprehensive books so that they would refer to them
in the religious questions.

Everybody knows for sure that Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, after the
departure of the Holy Prophet, dedicated all his time and efforts to the
study of the religious knowledge. He therefore recorded the Holy Qur'an
and the traditions of the Holy Prophet in the tablets that he kept for
recording whatever was revealed to the Holy Prophet and whatever the
Holy Prophet had said about the explanation of these revelations.

[^1]: Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab al-Umm 1:108; al-Rafi\`iy:
al-Tadwin fi Akhbar Qazwin 1:154; Sunan al-Daraqutniy 1:311; al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1:233; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
2:50.

[^2]: Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab al-Umm 1:108; al-Bayhaqiy:
al-Sunan al-Kubra 2:49; al-Suyutiy: Tarikh al-Khulafa' 200;
al-Shawkaniy: Nayl al-Awtar 2:266. (According to this reference book,
Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab, a grand Sahabiy, said, ‘Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan was the first to violate the Takbir in the ritual prayers.’)

[^3]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 2:50 H. 2240; Siyar A\`lam
al-Nubala' 5:434.

[^4]: Al-Fakhr al-Raziy: Ahkam al-Basmalah 76.

[^5]: \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr led a mutiny against the Umayyad rulers
in Makkah and then he was murdered therein.

[^6]: Al-Fakhr al-Raziy: Ahkam al-Basmalah 76; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 2:49.

[^7]: Al-Fakhr al-Raziy: Ahkam al-Basmalah 74-75; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 2:48.

[^8]: Sayyid \`Ali al-Shahristaniy: Wudu' al-Nabiy 354 as quoted from
Malik ibn Anas: al-Muwatta' 133 and al-Qadi \`Ayyad: Tartib al-Madarik
30-33.

[^9]: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha: Athar al-Adillati’l-Mukhtalafi fiha
fi’l-Fiqh al-Islamiy 1:36 as quoted from

[^10]: Al-Fakhr al-Raziy: Ahkam al-Basmalah 40 as quoted from
al-Bayhaqiy: al-Khilafiyyat.

[^11]: Abu’l-Futuh al-Raziy: Tafsir 1:20 as quoted from al-Mirza
al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il 4:189 H. 15.

[^12]: Al-Qadi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribiy: Da\`a'im al-Islam 1:160.

[^13]: Al-Qadi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribiy: Da\`a'im al-Islam 1:160.

[^14]: Al-Qadi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribiy: Da\`a'im al-Islam 1:110, 2:132;
Yahya ibn al-Husayn al-Zaydiy: Usul al-Ahkam fi’l-Halal wa’l-Haram
2:410.

[^15]: Al-Fakhr al-Raziy: Ahkam al-Basmalah 45 as quoted from Sunan
al-Daraqutniy and al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn
1:232-233.

[^16]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:94; Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhariy 2:457; al-Shawkaniy: Nayl al-Awtar 3:240-241.

[^17]: Ibn Asakir: Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 26:199.

[^18]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra 5:277; al-Qurtubiy: Tafsir 3:350.

[^19]: Al-Wafi al-Mahdi: al-Ijtihad fi’l-Shari\`ah al-Islamiyyah 191.

[^20]: Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi\`iy: Kitab al-Umm 1:58 & 134,
Ikhtilaf al-Hadith and al-Risalah 113; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan al-Kubra
8:93.

[^21]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:100.

[^22]: Dr. Nadiah Sharif al-\`Umariy: Ijtihad al-Rasul 285.

[^23]: Dr. Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 33-34.

[^24]: Al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 11:65 H. 11061; al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:137 H. 4637, 3:138 H.
4639; al-Firdaws bi-Ma’thur al-Khitab 1:44 H. 106; Fayd al-Qadir 1:36.

[^25]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 13:114 H. 36372; Rawdat
al-Wa\`idhin 75; Jawahir al-Matalib 75; Nudhum Durar al-Simtayn 113;
Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah 1:231.


