Practical Examples On The Sahabah’s Violation Of The Hadith
===========================================================

Dr. \`Abd al-Karim ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Namlah, in his book
entitled *Mukhalafat al-Sahabiy li’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy al-Sharif Dirasah
Nadhariyyah Tatbiqiyyah* (The Sahabiy’s Violation of the Holy Hadith of
the Prophet; A theoretical and practical study) which has been published
in Riyadh, AH 1415, al-Rushd Library, has cited some practical examples
on the Sahabah’s violation of the Holy Prophet’s traditions and
instructions.

Before that, the author has defined the Arabic word *“Mukhalafah*
(violation)” as opposition, disobedience, disagreement, and
distortion.[^1] He has also defined the verbal and terminological
meanings of *Sahabah*.[^2] In this respect, he has cited the opinions of
the Muslim scholars which can be mainly classified into two beliefs:

1) A group of scholars have argued that a Hadith keeps its provability
even if it is violated by an opinion of a Sahabiy no matter how strong
that violation be. Accordingly, it is impracticable to stop acting upon
a Hadith that is violated by an opinion of a Sahabiy.[^3]

2) The other group have argued that an opinion of a Sahabiy must be
assumed when it violates a Hadith. Accordingly, the sayings of the Holy
Prophet must be thrown away when they are opposed by an opinion of a
Sahabiy.[^4]

Referring to practical examples on the Sahabah’s thorough violation of
the Hadith that they themselves had reported from the Holy Prophet and
the effects of such violation, Dr. al-Namlah says,

After the demonstration of the scholars’ opposing opinions about this
question, which belongs to the principles of the Muslim jurisprudence,
and the demonstration of each group’s evidences, it seems necessary to
mention, seeking the guidance of Almighty Allah, some practical examples
on the Sahabah’s absolute violation of the Hadith that they themselves
reported from the Holy Prophet in order that the question will be
clearer and that the dear readers will comprehend the question more
obviously:

First Example
-------------

Al-Bukhariy, in (his book entitled) *al-Sahih*; Muslim, in *al-Sahih*;
Abu-Dawud, in *al-Sunan*; al-Tirmidhiy, in *al-Sunan*; al-Nassa'iy, in
*al-Sunan*; Ibn Majah, in *al-Sunan*; al-Darimiy, in *al-Sunan*; Malik
ibn Anas, in *al-Muwatta'*, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in *al-Musnad*—all these
have recorded on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah that the Prophet said,
“If a dog licks a vessel, you should wash that vessel seven times and in
the eighth time it should be smeared with dust.”[^5]

As has been mentioned, although this Hadith has been narrated by
Abu-Hurayrah, he did not act upon it; rather he violated it and washed a
vessel that had been licked by a dog three times only! Al-Tahawiy, in
*Sharh Ma\`ani al-Āthar*; al-Darqutniy, in *al-Sunan*; ibn al-Jawziy, in
*al-\`Ilal al-Mutanahiyah*—all these have recorded that Abu-Hurayrah
used to wash a vessel that had been licked by a dog three times
only.[^6]

Thus, this Sahabiy violated the Hadith that he himself reported from the
Prophet.

The adopters of the first belief, who are the majority, have believed
that a vessel that is licked by a dog must be washed seven times. They
have thus provided the Hadith as their evidence and neglected
Abu-Hurayrah’s violation of it.

The adopters of the second belief have clung to their belief that
entails that when a Hadith is violated by an act of a Sahabiy, the
Hadith should be neglected and the act of the Sahabiy should be adopted
as true.[^7]

They therefore decided that a vessel that is licked by a dog must be
washed three, not seven, times. In other words, they have assumed the
act of Abu-Hurayrah and rejected that which he had reported from the
Prophet.

Furthermore, the adopters of the second belief of the rejection of a
Hadith that is violated by a Sahabiy’s act and the acceptance of that
Sahabiy’s act as true have disagreed about the point whether such a
violated Hadith should be considered repealed or should be interpreted
that to wash a vessel seven times is only recommended. In this regard,
they have had three different opinions:

**The first opinion** has decided that such a Hadith must have been
repealed. This opinion has been firstly said by al-Kamal ibn al-Humam in
his book of *al-Tahrir* and then adopted by Amir Badshah in his book of
*Taysir al-Tahrir* and Ibn Amir al-Hajj in his book of *al-Taqrir
wa’l-Tahbir*.

**The second opinion** has decided that such a Hadith was not repealed;
rather its connotation must be regarded as recommendation rather than
obligation. In plain words, the washing of a vessel that is licked by a
dog should be washed three times obligatorily, but it is recommended to
wash it seven times. This opinion has been first adopted by
al-Samarqandiy, in *Badhl al-Nadhar* and al-Samarqandiy, in *al-Mizan*.

**The third opinion** has decided that it is probable that such a Hadith
was repealed and it is probable that it meant recommendation, not
obligation. This opinion has been first adopted by al-Sarakhsiy, in
*al-Usul* and al-Nasfiy, in *Kashf al-Asrar*.

At any rate, the most acceptable opinion, Dr. al-Namlah goes on, is the
first one, which entails that the Hadith, not the act of the Sahabiy who
reported that Hadith, must be accepted. This argument can be proven by
the following discussions:

**First Discussion:** The aforesaid Hadith that is reported by
Abu-Hurayrah has been proven as authentic. Moreover, nothing else can
stand against it.

**Second Discussion:** The obligation of washing a vessel in which a dog
licks seven times has been proven to be said by the Holy Prophet from
another way of narration. Muslim, in *al-Sahih*; Abu-Dawud, in
*al-Sunan*; al-Nassa'iy, in *al-Sunan*; Ibn Majah, in *al-Sunan*;
al-Darimiy, in *al-Sunan*; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in *al-Musnad*—all these
have recorded on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn Mughaffal that the
Messenger of Allah said, “If a dog licks a vessel, you must wash that
vessel seven times and then smear it with dust.”[^8]

Even if we polemically accept that an act of a Sahabiy affects the
Hadith that he himself has reported from the Prophet, such an act will
not affect the Hadith that is reported by another one.

**Third Discussion:** The adopters of the second belief have argued that
a vessel that is licked by a dog must be washed three times only because
Abu-Hurayrah was reported to have washed such vessels three times only.
This justification cannot stand as a reliable proof because reports from
him in this respect have been different.

Some have narrated that Abu-Hurayrah issued the verdict that such a
vessel must be washed seven times, while others have reported that he
himself washed such vessels three times only… etc.

Second Example
--------------

Abu-Dawud, in *al-Sunan*; al-Tirmidhiy, in *al-Sunan*; al-Darimiy, in
*al-Sunan*; al-Darqutniy, in *al-Sunan*; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy, in
*al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn*; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in *al-Musnad*;
al-Tahawiy, in *Sharh Ma\`ani al-Āthar*—all these have recorded on the
authority of \`Ā'ishah that the Prophet said, “Any matrimonial contract
that is made by a woman before obtaining the permission of her guardian
is invalid.”[^9]

Although \`Ā'ishah reported this Hadith from the Holy Prophet, she did
not act upon it; rather she violated it when she gave in marriage her
niece, Hafsah bint \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakr, to al-Mundhir ibn
al-Zubayr, \`Ā'ishah’s nephew, while the father of the woman, \`Abd
al-Rahman, was absolutely absent from the matter since he was in
Syria.[^10]

Thus, scholars have disagreed about the interpretation of this
violation. The adopters of the first belief, namely those who act upon
the Hadith and reject the Sahabah’s violation of it, have decided that
it is obligatory to act upon the connotation of the Hadith and have
neglected \`Ā'ishah’s violation of it.

They thus have decided that it is impermissible for women to give
themselves in marriage before they obtain the permission of their
guardians. The adopters of this belief are the majority of the Muslims.

On the other hand, the adopters of the second belief have accepted
\`Ā'ishah’s violation of the Hadith and neglected the connotation of the
Hadith and they have thus decided the permissibility of women’s giving
themselves in marriage without need for obtaining their guardians’
permission.

Expressing the Hanafiyyah scholars’ viewpoint about this question, \`Abd
al-\`Aziz al-Bukhariy, in his book of *Kashf al-Asrar*, says, “As
\`Ā'ishah believed that to give her niece in marriage without seeking
the permission of her father was permissible and believed that such a
matrimonial contract is valid that she even gave the right of
possession, which cannot be given unless a contract is valid, it is
impossible that she did so while she believed in the authenticity of the
Hadith that she had reported from the Prophet.”

The author then mentioned another denotation to the question, saying,
“As \`Ā'ishah gave her niece in marriage, she did permit women’s giving
themselves in marriage without obtaining their guardians’ permission. If
a matrimonial contracts were decided as valid due to the statement of
unmarried women, it would be better that such contracts are validated
due to the statement of \`Ā'ishah herself and, thus, this is opposite to
that which she had reported from the Prophet.”

Adding another denotation to the question, the author further says, “As
\`Ā'ishah gave her niece in marriage, she must have believed in the
permissibility of giving women in marriage before obtaining their
guardians’ permissions as a preferable manner… etc.”

However, some Hanafiyyah scholars, such as al-Sarakhsiy in *al-Usul* and
al-Nasfiy in *Kashf al-Asrar* have argued that the Hadith must have been
repealed, because its reporter, namely \`Ā'ishah, had violated and
opposed it.[^11]

In addition, Ahmad ibn Hanbal believed that the Hadith must have been
repealed. On the authority of Harb ibn Isma\`il, Ahmad ibn Hanbal is
reported to have said, “The ascription of this Hadith to \`Ā'ishah is
unacceptable, because \`Ā'ishah herself gave in marriage her nieces.”

According to the narration of al-Maruziy, Ahmad ibn Hanbal further said,
“This Hadith is inauthentic, because \`Ā'ishah had violated it.”

The most preferable opinion in this respect, Dr. al-Namlah comments, is
the one adopted by the majority. This is because of the following two
reasons:

**First Reason:** Al-Bukhariy, in *al-Sahih*; Abu-Dawud, in *al-Sunan*;
al-Tirmidhiy, in *al-Sunan*; Ibn Majah, in *al-Sunan*; Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
in *al-Musnad*—all these have recorded on the authority of \`Ā'ishah
that the Prophet said, “Any matrimonial contract is invalid unless the
guardian (of the woman) is present.”[^12]

Moreover, the same Hadith was reported by \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and
Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy. The Hadith is authentic. In this regard,
al-Maruziy says, “When I asked them about the authenticity of this
Hadith, Ahmad and Yahya assured its authenticity.”[^13] The
abovementioned texts corroborate the question.

**Second Reason:** \`Ā'ishah’s violation of the Hadith is not manifest.
Even if we claim so, the act of \`Ā'ishah or any other one should never
invalidate a Hadith after it has been proven as authentic. Moreover, no
reliable master Hadithist has ever doubted the Hadith.

Third Example
-------------

Al-Bukhariy, in *al-Sahih*; Muslim, in *al-Sahih*; Abu-Dawud, in
*al-Sunan*; al-Tirmidhiy, in *al-Sunan*; al-Nassa'iy, in *al-Sunan*; Ibn
Majah, in *al-Sunan*; Malik ibn Anas, in *al-Muwatta'*, Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, in *al-Musnad*—all these have recorded on the authority of
al-Zuhriy on the authority of Salim that his father, \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar, reported that he witnessed the Messenger of Allah, whenever he
commenced the ritual prayer, raising his hands until they extend
parallel to his shoulders.

He used to do the same thing and whenever he wanted to genuflect and
whenever he stood erect after genuflection (*Ruku\`*). Nevertheless, the
Messenger of Allah did not do this when he would be in the prostration
(*Sujud*).[^14]

Although this Hadith was reported by him, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar did not
practice it; rather he violated it since he never raised his hands at
the commencement of the prayers. In his book of *al-Musannaf*, Ibn
Abi-Shaybah has narrated that Mujahid said, “I have never seen
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar raising his hands (in the ritual prayers) except
when he begins his prayer.” This very narration has been also recorded
by al-Tahawiy, in *Sharh Ma\`ani al-Āthar*, with a reliable series of
narrators.[^15]

As this Sahabiy, namely \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, violated a Hadith that he
himself had reported, scholars have had disagreeing opinions about it.
The adopters of the first belief, namely those who act upon the Hadith
and reject the Sahabah’s violation of it, have decided that hands must
be raised at the commencement of the prayer, at the genuflection and at
the standing erect after the genuflection. This has been however the
opinion of the majority.

The adopters of the second belief, namely those who have clung to their
belief that entails that when a Hadith is violated by an act of a
Sahabiy the Hadith should be neglected and the act of the Sahabiy should
be adopted as true, have imitated the act of \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar,
which is raising the hands at the beginning of the prayers only, and
neglected acting upon the Hadith. This has been the opinion of the
majority of the Hanafiyyah scholars.

In his book entitled *al-Fusul al-Muhimmah*, Abu-Bakr al-Jassas says,
“As \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar neglected raising his hands during the prayers
although he himself had reported that the Prophet had done so, this
means that he had known the cancellation of the Hadith otherwise he
would not have violated it. It is impermissible to believe that a
Sahabiy, like \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, would violate an act of the Prophet
while he himself was its reporter. Hence, there must have been another
interpretation of this act.”

The majority of the Hanafiyyah scholars have also positively concluded
the same result said by Abu-Bakr al-Jassas—which entails that so long as
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar violated acting upon the Hadith that he himself
had reported, the Hadith is proven to be repealed—such as Abu-Zayd
al-Dabbusiy in his book of *al-Asrar fi’l-Usul wa’l-Furu\`*,
al-Sajistaniy in his book of *al-Ghunyah fi’l-Usul*, al-Sarakhsiy in his
book of *al-Usul*, al-Kamal ibn al-Humam in his book of *al-Tahrir*,
\`Abd al-\`Aziz al-Bukhariy in his book of *Kashf al-Asrar*, Amir
Badshah in his book of *Taysir al-Tahrir*, Ibn Amir al-Hajj in his book
of *al-Taqrir wa’l-Tahbir*, al-Nasfiy in his book of *Kashf al-Asrar*
and Mullajeun in his book of *Nur al-Anwar fi Sharh al-Manar*.

On the other hand, other Hanafiyyah scholars—such as al-Buzdawiy in his
book of *al-Usul* and al-Khabbaziy in his book of *al-Mughni*—have
argued that the Hadith that is narrated by \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar cannot
stand as evidence because its narrator violated it. Yet, those scholars
have not argued that the Hadith must have been repealed.

For the following reasons, Dr. al-Namlah comments, the most preferable
and acceptable opinion in this regard is that adopted by the majority of
the scholars, which is that the hands must be raised at the *Takbirat
al-Ihram* (the statement of *Allahu-Akbar* that indicates the
commencement of a ritual prayer), at the genuflection and at the
standing erect after the genuflection:

**First Reason:** The matter that must be followed is the act of the
Prophet, not the act of any of the Sahabah, be it \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar
or anyone else.

**Second Reason:** The Hadith intended was practiced by the other
companions of the Prophet. In this regard, al-Hasan (al-Basriy) says, “I
saw the companions of the Prophet raising their hands whenever they
commenced their prayers, genuflected, and stood erect after the
genuflection.”[^16]

Al-Bukhariy also says, “Ibn al-Madiniy, the most knowledgeable scholar
of his age, says that according to this Hadith, it is obligatory upon
all the Muslims to raise their hands (in the ritual prayers at these
positions).”[^17]

**Third Reason:** Mujahid has narrated that he did not notice \`Abdullah
ibn \`Umar raising his hands (during the prayer) except when he would
begin the prayer. This saying opposes the narration of Tawus who
reported that he had seen \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar acting upon the very
Hadith that he had reported from the Prophet. Similarly, when he was
asked about the raising of the hands during the prayers, Ahmad ibn
Hanbal is reported to have answered, “I swear that raising the hands

is a part of the prayers. Who can ever doubt it! Whenever he noticed
that a performer of a prayer had not raised his hands, \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar would reproach and order to raise the hands.”

I prefer the reports of Tawus and Ahmad ibn Hanbal to that of Mujahid
since these two reports agree with the narration of \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar; and reason and good sense support the matter that a reporter of
a commission should act upon it.

In his book of *Kashf al-Asrar*, \`Abd al-\`Aziz al-Bukhariy says that
it is probable that \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar used to raise his hands at the
commencement of the prayer, the genuflection, and at standing erect
after the genuflection before he knew that the Hadith that he reported
had been repealed, but when he knew of that, he neglected acting upon
the Hadith and thus began to raise his hands only at the beginning of
the prayers.

The aforesaid wording of \`Abd al-\`Aziz al-Bukhariy is no more than a
probability that wants evidence and proof; and so long as it is
unfounded, we should not discuss it. On the other hand, we should act
upon the certain wording, which is the Messenger of Allah’s Hadith and
the act of the majority of the Sahabah who are reported to have raised
their hands at the *Takbirat al-Ihram*, the genuflection, and the
standing erect after the genuflection. Finally, Almighty Allah is the
most knowledgeable.

The aforesaid presentations have been some practical examples on the
Sahabah’s violation of the Hadiths that they reported. For further
details in this regard, the readers are recommended to refer to the
books specialized in the Muslim jurisprudence.[^18]

Conclusion
----------

The presentation of these examples has been aimed at confirming the fact
that the rulers’ concern is in most cases to grant their personal
opinions a legal color more than to commit themselves to the commissions
of Almighty Allah or to comply thoroughly with the texts of the Divine
Revelation.

To have a discerning look into the innovated opinions of \`Uthman ibn
\`Affan and Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan proves that their method was no
more than an extension to the method invented by \`Umar ibn al-Khattab.

Even if they on certain occasions violated the method of Abu-Bakr and
\`Umar—such as \`Uthman ibn \`Affan’s having offered the prayers in the
complete form at Mina and preceded the *khutbah* (the ritual sermon) and
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan’s having decided that the *adhan* would be
declared and the *khutbah* of the *Salat al-\`Īd* (The Feast Prayer)
would be preceded—this did not mean that they had violated the opinions
of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar in everything; rather this meant that they had
adopted new opinions according to the rules defined by Abu-Bakr and
\`Umar that reads that a ruler (i.e. caliph) has the right to enact in
the Islamic legislation a law that he personally sees beneficial and
preferable.

Naturally, their own opinions must have been considered preferable to
the opinions of the rulers who preceded them. Generally, \`Uthman ibn
\`Affan and Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan imitated the course of those who
preceded them. In this course, they adopted Opinionism and Ijtihad as an
extension of the method of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar who had invented
Opinionism and Ijtihad.

By that means, the Muslims have followed one of two trends; the first
adopts the sacred texts and accepts not substitute for the commission of
Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet. Even the Holy Prophet himself was
the servant and messenger of Almighty Allah from Whom he received the
laws directly without subjecting the issues to personal judgments or
analogy. In this regard the Holy Qur'an reads,

***“We have sent down to thee the Book in truth, that you might judge
between men as guided by Allah.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/105)***

***“Nor does he say aught of his own desire. It is no less than
revelation that is revealed to him.” (Holy Qur’an: 53/3-4)***

These holy verses indicate that the Holy Prophet complied thoroughly
with the revelation that was revealed to him without any inclination to
his own judgments. The Holy Imams have also concentrated on this
denotation of the thorough compliance with the sacred texts. They all
have confirmed that their sayings will never be issued out of their own
judgments; rather they are the laws that they have inherited from one
another up to the Holy Prophet.

On the other side there emerged another trend that we have called
Opinionism and Ijtihad. The basic roots of this trend was in fact
adopted by some of the Sahabah during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet
as has been proven through the situations of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar as
regards the incident of the pious man whom they did not kill, although
the Holy Prophet had ordered them to do so, because they had seen him in
states of piety and religiousness.

Similarly, the trend was followed by other Sahabah who observed
continuous fasting although the Holy Prophet prohibited such a kind of
fasting. As those Sahabah and their fans demanded with the legality of
Opinionism, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, during his reign, responded to them
after he had realized that he lacked acquaintance with the religious
laws.

Hence, Opinionism and Ijtihad were allowed, and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
frequently objected, publicly, to the Sahabah who had disagreed about
the religious laws. These two incidents mean that Abu-Bakr and \`Umar
intended to restrict the issuance of personal opinions and the reliance
upon Ijtihad to them only while the other Sahabah would follow all their
opinions without any disputation.

Yet, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar could not achieve so because the adoption of
the legality of Opinionism and Ijtihad is too extensive, flexible, and
streamlined to be dedicated to an individual or a certain group.

Because of the adoption of the legality of Opinionism, the Muslim
community has been engaged in such discrepancies. Referring to this
fact, Abu-Bakr himself said, “People who will come after you will be
more discrepant that you are.” \`Umar ibn al-Khattab also said a similar
thing, as has been cited within the aforementioned narration of
al-Bayhaqiy.

As for Imam \`Ali, he has clarified the matter very obviously through
his famous sermon of *al-Shaqshaqiyyah* wherein he says,

“This one put the Caliphate in a tough enclosure where the utterance was
haughty and the touch was rough. Mistakes were in plenty and so also the
excuses therefore. One in contact with it was like the rider of an
unruly camel. If he pulled up its rein, the very nostril would be slit,
but if he let it loose, he would be thrown. Consequently, by Allah
people got involved in recklessness, wickedness, unsteadiness and
deviation. Nevertheless, I remained patient despite length of period and
stiffness of trial… etc.”[^19]

On the famous Disastrous Thursday, the Holy Prophet ordered the
attendants to bring him a pen and an inkpot so that he would write down
for them a document that would save them from going astray forever.
Similarly, in the famous Hadith of Thaqalayn (the two weighty things),
the Holy Prophet says,

“If you adhere to these two (namely the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl
al-Bayt), you will never go astray after me.”

In addition to the many Hadiths of the Holy Imams wherein they prohibit
the adoption of Opinionism in the issuance of religious laws since such
opinions are nothing more than turning away from the Holy Sunnah, the
two aforesaid texts of the Holy Prophet, if considered thoroughly, prove
that the reporting and the recordation of the Hadith were related to the
Islamic legislation, but the rulers of the Islamic State, especially
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, used them for achieving their personal interests
and validating their unfounded judgments; the rulers therefore issued
the decision of the prohibition from recording and reporting the Hadith
when they realized that it was necessary to issue such a decision and
they then opened wide the reporting of the Hadith when it was necessary
to do such.

As a matter of fact, as long as the Muslims go away from the Ahl
al-Bayt, they go away from the right and miss the Right Path. This fact
disturbed the Holy Prophet as he anticipated the Muslims’ turning away
from the Ahl al-Bayt. In other words, when the Muslims turn away from
the Ahl al-Bayt politically through the forbearance from giving them a
share in the affairs of the leadership of the Muslim community, the
Muslims will certainly go away from the true Sunnah of the Holy Prophet
and thus they will miss the right course. This truth can be strikingly
concluded from the Holy Prophet’s saying, “If you adhere to these two
(namely the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt), you will never go astray
after me.”

This means that the Muslims are ordered to followe and adhere to the Ahl
al-Bayt and if they do not abide by the sayings of those Holy Imams as
regards the religious laws, they will certainly miss the right course
and depart the Holy Sunnah. Moreover, if the Muslims do not select the
Ahl al-Bayt as their leaders, this will not cancel the Holy Prophet’s
commission of the adherence to them.

Too many were the occasions on which the Holy Prophet declared to the
Muslims that the Ahl al-Bayt are the guides of the ummah and the
explainers of any matter about which the Muslims would disagree after
him. In this regard, he is reported to have said,

“I am the one who warns, and \`Ali is the one who guides. O \`Ali: only
through you will those who are guided to the right path be guided after
me.”[^20]

“He who is pleased to live the like of my life and to die on the same
principles on which I die and to be entered the paradise of eternity of
which my Lord has promised me, must be loyal to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, for
he will never take you out of the door of right guidance and will never
take you to a door of deviation.”[^21]

According to many other texts, the Holy Prophet ensured on referring to
the Ahl al-Bayt, and none else, in the religious laws. For instance, he
is reported to have said,

“The nations who existed before you were annihilated just because they
created a contradiction in the Book of Almighty Allah, while it was
revealed confirming each other, not opposing each other. If you know
something about the Book of Almighty Allah, you should declare, but if
you know not, you should refer it to those who know it best.”[^22]

“Slow down! The nations who existed before you were annihilated for the
same reason you are now in; it is their discrepancies about their
prophets and creating contradiction in the Holy Books. Verily, the Holy
Qur'an was revealed not to oppose each other, but to confirm each other.
Hence, if you know something about it, you should act upon it, but if
you know not, you should refer it to those who best know it.”[^23]

It has been also narrated that when the people disagreed about the
mutiny and assassination of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, they asked Ubayy ibn
Ka\`b about the solution. He answered,

“The solution is the Book of Almighty Allah and the Sunnah of His
Prophet. You should thus act upon the matters that are clear for you and
should refer the matters that are ambiguous to those who know them
best.”[^24]

In al-\`Ayyashiy’s book of *Tafsir*, it has been narrated that Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq said,

“Those people thought that they were so experienced in the religious
affairs that they comprehended anything needed by the ummah. Yet, they
did not learn all the instructions of the Holy Prophet nor did he convey
to them his knowledge.

When issues of the religious rulings were referred to them, they would
not have its knowledge or the Holy Prophet’s instructions in that
respect. Moreover, they would be embarrassed if people would accuse them
of ignorance or if they could not find answers for the people’s
questions and, as a result, the people would refer their issues to the
sources of knowledge.

They therefore used opinions and analogy in the religion of Almighty
Allah, abandoned the Holy Prophet’s knowledge, and adhered to heresies
about which the Holy Prophet said, ‘All innovated things are heresies.’
Had they referred the questions that they ignored to Almighty Allah, His
Messenger, and those of authority among them, those of authority among
them who can search out the knowledge of it, namely the Household of
Muhammad, would have certainly known it.”[^25]

The abstention from carrying out the Holy Prophet’s order of bringing
him a paper and an inkpot so as to write down a document that would save
the Muslims for deviation forever; the prohibition from recording the
Holy Sunnah; the prohibition from reporting the Holy Prophet’s
traditions; the raising of the slogan of “The Book of Allah is
sufficient for us!”; the adoption of the legality of Opinionism and
analogy in the issuance of religious laws; the permissibility of the
multiplicity of opinions in a certain religious law; the decision that
the word of a Sahabiy incapacitates the Holy Qur'an and the Holy
Sunnah—all these were stages by which the Muslim community had passed
and due to the acceptance of which the Muslims have missed the right
path and turned away from the commissions of the Divine Revelation.

The aforementioned presentation has been an expression of the total
ordeal of the Holy Prophet’s texts as well as the predominance of
Opinionism on the Islamic legislation. Any further discussion may take
us away from our aim; therefore, it seems suitable to stop at this
point.

The ruling authorities deemed true all the opinions and adopted all the
words of all the Sahabah except the words and laws said by \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib and his adherents who complied thoroughly to the sacred texts
and recorded the Holy Sunnah and Hadith. In this regard, the ruling
authorities regarded the words of Imam \`Ali as alien that must be
removed from the Muslims’ jurisprudence.

A little ponderation over our jurisprudential and Hadithic heritage will
demonstrate obviously the predominance of the spirit of sectarianism on
it. The Hadiths that are reported from Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib in the
most comprehensive and most reliable Sunnite reference books of Hadith
have been no more than a few tens.

Nevertheless, the Sunnite jurisprudents have not depended upon these few
Hadiths in the issuance of a religious law except when they have had to.
Moreover, they are too fearful and too negligent to report all the
narrations that Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib received directly from the Holy
Prophet. On the other side, the Hadiths that are reported by
Abu-Hurayrah, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, and \`Ā'ishah are innumerable that
upon which the religious laws rest and are founded. Let us now put the
following questions:

What was the purpose beyond such irony? Is it because Abu-Hurayrah,
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, and \`Ā'ishah preceded Imam \`Ali in embracing
Islam or in abundance of religious knowledge or in precedence to the
Holy Prophet… etc.?

Why has Malik ibn Anas not recorded any Hadith reported from Imam
\`Ali?[^26]

Why can we not see any item referring to the jurisprudence of the Ahl
al-Bayt in the reference books of Sunnite jurisprudence whereas these
books have comprised even the deviant opinions of the extinct factions?

What do all these facts mean?

Why can the remnants of sectarian ideology be seen clearly in the Muslim
heritage while the researchers and seekers of knowledge are prevented
from looking into matters the study of which will clarify many facts;
and even if a researcher has the courage to uncover such matters, he
will be accused of dispersing discrepancy among the Muslims?

It is extremely surprising to regard the elucidation and the discovering
of the unknown facts as dispersion of discrepancy and seditious matters!

Significant Items
-----------------

The method of the rulers in the issuance of the religious laws can be
shown in the following narration:

In his book of *Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy fi Sharh Jami\` al-Tirmidhiy*,
al-Mubarakfuriy has recorded that Shu\`ayb ibn Jarir, once, asked Sufyan
al-Thawriy to summarize for him the Holy Sunnah. Hence, Sufyan dictated:
“In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful; the Qur'an
is the words that are not created… Listen Shu\`ayb! All that which you
have written down will not do good to you unless you believe in the
legality of the rubbing on the sandals (in the ritual ablution), and you
believe in the verdict that to recite *Bism-illahir-rahmanir-rahim*
(during the prayers) inaudibly is preferred to reciting it audibly, and
you believe that everything (including our acts) is predestined, and you
believe that it is lawful to follow in a congregation prayer any
individual whether righteous or wicked, and you believe that it is
obligatory to act upon patience under the pennon of any ruler whether
unjust or fair.”[^27]

Shu\`ayb asked, “Does this ruling of following any leader of a
congregational prayer include all the ritual prayers?”

Sufyan answered, “No, it does not. It only includes the Friday Prayer
and the Feast Prayers. In the performance of two prayers, you may follow
anyone, but in the other (obligatory) prayers, you have the right to
choose the one whom you follow. Hence, you should follow only him whom
you trust and whom you know as being Sunnite.”[^28]

The inaudible recitation of the *Basmalah*, rubbing the sandals in the
ritual ablution, and the permissibility to follow any imam in the
congregational prayers—all these are within the laws that were enacted
by the ruling authorities in order to serve their interests.

On the other hand, it goes without saying that the Ahl al-Bayt decided
that the *Basmalah* should be recited audibly during the prayers and
thus it is one of the indications to faithfulness. This situation has
been supported by a big number of the Sahabah who are too many to be
listed in this discussion for fear of lengthiness.

However, the most important point in this regard is that the dear
readers should know that all these questions have been opposite to the
jurisprudence of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas as
well as the grand Sahabah and have been congruent with the jurisprudence
of the pro-rulers scholars. This is of course a sufficient indication
and proof on the rulers’ having deliberately opposed the Ahl al-Bayt.

As some of the principles of the policy adopted by the rulers of the
Islamic State have been previously cited, let us now refer to the secret
of the concentration on the conducts of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab who
threatened people with punishment if they would report any of the
traditions of the Holy Prophet.

One of the texts that have been forged against the Holy Prophet is the
saying, “Follow those who will come after me; Abu-Bakr and \`Umar.”[^29]
This text demonstrates that it was fabricated in the first days of
\`Uthman ibn \`Affan’s reign.

This is because \`Umar ibn al-Khattab and \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf had
mainly feared the happening of two things; first, they feared that one
who rejects the personal views of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar that took the form
of religious laws would come to power, and, second, they feared that
Ijtihad would spread uncontrollably.

If the multiplicity in the centers of the issuance of religious laws and
the acceptability of the personal opinions of the all were given free
ways, especially during that period of the history of Islam, none would
be able to stand against them. From this cause, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
\`Awf objected to \`Uthman ibn \`Affan for having invented matters that
were not known during the reigns of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar and demanded him
not to exceed the opinions that they had issued. Yet, \`Uthman ibn
\`Affan neither responded to that demand nor did he accept \`Abd
al-Rahman’s claims because \`Uthman had regarded himself no less than
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar in position and prestige; hence, it would not be
practical for him to imitate them and follow their methods in Ijtihad.

Furthermore, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar did not enjoy any unique characteristic
due to which their opinions and decisions would be preferred to
\`Uthman’s. If both Abu-Bakr and \`Umar were connected to the Holy
Prophet by means of marriage affiliation since they both gave their
daughters in marriage to him, \`Uthman were connected to him in a
stronger link, since he married two daughters of the Holy Prophet and
thus he was called *“Dhu’l-Nurayn* (the one with two lights).”

Naturally, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan asked himself why he would not practice
Ijtihad so long as Ijtihad had been validated for everybody! He must
have also asked himself why those people compelled him to follow the
opinions of and imitate Abu-Bakr and \`Umar while these two had not
complied with the commissions of the Holy Prophet; rather they rested
upon and practiced their personal views in front of him. Similarly,
\`Uthman must have asked himself if Ijtihad was forbidden, why these two
had been allowed to practice it while it was regarded as forbidden for
him.

This very ‘double-dealing’ was subject to various viewpoints; \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn \`Awf and his likes believed that it was possible to
dedicate the circle of Ijtihad and Opinionism to the conducts of
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar; as a result, they demanded \`Uthman ibn \`Affan to
fulfill his pledges. On the other hand, Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib had
realized the inaccuracy of such ‘double-dealing’.

He believed that the ‘door’ of Ijtihad is always open and thus this
right must not be given to certain individuals and forbidden to others.
For that reason, Imam \`Ali said to \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf, “Almighty
Allah may disperse enmity among you.”[^30] Although Imam \`Ali said this
statement in the form of supplication, he in reality had anticipated the
end result of their plot; and his prediction came true.

Nevertheless, the Umayyad rulers added the name of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan
to the list of the rulers (i.e. caliphs) whom must be obeyed and whose
conducts must be imitated. Through their campaigns, the Umayyad rulers
paid very much for fabricating “Hadiths” comprising the names of
Abu-Bakr, \`\`Umar, and \`Uthman as the three “caliphs” whom had been
predicted by the Holy Prophet.

Yet, the name of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib was added to the list at the
beginning of the \`Abbasid dynasty when they were in need for any
opposition to the Umayyad rulers, and since Imam \`Ali was one of the
Hashimites, they needed his name to achieve victory over their enemies.

In the same way, the “Hadiths” of “The Rashidite Caliphs after me” were
invented during that period of the Islamic history, while the “Hadiths”
of “Follow those who will come after me” and their likes were invented
during the period after the establishment of the Shura Committee when
the ruling authorities needed concentration on the conducts of Abu-Bakr
and \`Umar.

\`Umar Ibn \`Abd Al-\`Aziz And The Prohibition Of Recording The Hadith
----------------------------------------------------------------------

It was the politicians who played the greatest role in the fabrication
of many “Hadiths” like “the ten individuals of Paradise” and “the
ultimate decency of all the Sahabah”—the Hadiths that shed light on the
course of the legality of the multiplicity of opinions that was
originated by Abu-Bakr and \`Umar when they prohibited the reporting and
recordation of the Hadith.

The circulation of the events of the adoption of the Hadiths by some of
the Sahabah and the acting upon the personal opinions by another group
and the mixture of the two trends by a third group—these events caused
the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet to be confused with the traditions of the
Sahabah.

Accordingly, confusion covered everything; the authentic was confused
with the suspicious and the Sunnah with the general traditions. However,
when \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz came to power, he methodized the
traditions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar in the form of an undiscussable law
imposed upon the Muslims.

It has been narrated that \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz wrote a missive to
Abu-Bakr ibn \`Amr ibn Hazm ordering him to write down all the Hadiths
of the Messenger of Allah as well as any active tradition and all the
narrations recorded by \`Amarah (daughter of \`Abd al-Rahman), for he
anticipated that knowledge would be wiped out and the scholars would be
extinct.[^31]

According to another narration, \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz added the
traditions of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab to the materials that should be
written down,[^32] and according to a third narration, he ordered
Abu-Bakr ibn \`Amr ibn Hazm to write down the items of knowledge and
collect them from \`Amarah bint \`Abd al-Rahman and al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad.[^33]

It has been narrated on the authority of Hatib ibn Khalifah al-Burjumiy
that \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz, having been the caliph, said in a
speech, “Surely, All that which the Messenger of Allah and his two
companions (i.e. Abu-Bakr and \`Umar) decided should be a law that we
will follow and at which we stop; rather anything that was enacted by
anyone else will be adjourned by me.”[^34]

It has been also narrated that he, once, wrote a missive to the people
of al-Madinah ordering them to write down the Hadiths of the Messenger
of Allah since he anticipated their loss.

According to another form of the narration as reported by \`Affan,
\`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz added that he anticipated that the knowledge
would be wiped out and the scholars would be extinct.[^35]

It has been also narrated that he, in one of his missives to his
officials, wrote down, “The Sunnah was in fact enacted by Him Who knows
that error, flaw, idiocy, and exaggeration is the result of any
violation of it. Hence, you should satisfy yourself with matters with
which those people satisfied themselves, for they have for sure had
knowledge and deep discerning.

Additionally, they were better than you are in the exposition of the
matters and thus it is more preferable to adopt the consequences that
they have adopted. If the truth is that upon which you are acting, then
you have surely preceded them to it, but if you claim that the
unfavorable matters occurred after them, then these matters must have
been done by those who followed a way other than theirs and shunned
their course.

In fact, they were the foremost and they discussed these matters
adequately and described them effectively. They thus were neither
negligent nor exaggerators. When some peoples else neglected, they
became ruthless, and when other peoples exaggerated, they became
extremists. Hence, those people followed the right guidance… etc.”[^36]

It has been also narrated that \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz said, “The
Messenger of Allah and the men in authority who came after him enacted
certain laws. To adopt these laws is to believe in the Book of Almighty
Allah, to be at His service, and to have power for the sake of the
religion of Allah. None is ever allowed to change, distort, or consider
the opinions that violate these laws.

Furthermore, he who works upon these laws will have been guided (to the
right) and one who uses them for achieving victory will surely have been
given victory, but he who violates them and follows a way other than
that of the believers… etc.”[^37]

\`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz then issued the order that these collections
would be followed by all the provinces of the Islamic State as religious
laws. However, these collections comprised the personal opinions of the
rulers as well as all that which \`Amarah bint \`Abd al-Rahman and
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad reported from \`Ā'ishah and the others while all
these reports were within the jurisprudence that the ruling authorities
had desired to impose on the people as a substitute of the original
religious laws that have been carried by the Ahl al-Bayt.

In this regard, It has been narrated that Ibn Shihab al-Zuhriy said,
“When \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz ordered us to record the traditions, we
compiled them in books. He then sent a copy to each province that was
under his predominance.”[^38]

We have earlier proved that the recordation of the traditions and the
Holy Sunnah was on the commissions of the rulers. In this regard, it is
worth mentioning that the \`Abbasid rulers played the biggest role in
the consolidation of the four major Sunnite schools of law.

It is now clear that \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz did not collect the Holy
Sunnah and the traditions of the Holy Prophet only, but he also founded
and consolidated the personal opinions and decisions that were issued by
the rulers who preceded him, especially Abu-Bakr and \`Umar. In plain
words, \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz established the origins of the trend
of Opinionism and Ijtihad, which is the trend of the ruling authorities
and their fans, although the religious laws that are adopted by these
rulers and their fans had been separated from the genuine origins and
principles of the Muslim jurisprudence causing the religious knowledge
to be lost by the Muslim community for a century or even more.

It goes without saying that it is impracticable to trust the recordation
of the Hadith under circumstances the distinctive feature of which is
sectarianism and tribalism, especially after the forging of lies against
the Holy Prophet was very common.

In this respect, it is worth mentioning that the existence of some
Hadiths that are unaccepted by the general trend of the ruling
authorities does not mean that the rulers were sincere in the recording
and reporting of the Hadith or in the ambition to safeguard the Islamic
legislation; rather this is an indication to the extension of the both
trends of Opinionism and Ijtihad and of the thorough compliance with the
sacred texts to the reigns of these rulers as well as the existence of
individuals who defended the Holy Sunnah.

The governmental distortion cannot stand against the genuine
intellectual trend because the stumbling of the trend of the ruling
authorities and its confusion can be easily exposed by the other
authentic narrations and the Holy Qur'an and is opposed by the pious
Sahabah and the sound logic.

For that reason, the hugeness and genuineness of the trend of thorough
compliance with the sacred texts can obviously be noticed in the
reference books of Hadith and the most reliable series of narrators that
are supported by the rulers and their fans. In spite of all
circumstances and confusables, these narrations have found their way to
the jurisprudence of all the Muslims.

Moreover, as these reference books are characterized by expansion and
comprehensiveness of all the jurisprudential sections, this predicts the
existence of two intellectual trends the first of which calls for
Opinionism and issues verdicts that are compatible to the personal
opinions and Ijtihad of the Sahabah while the other trend acts upon the
sacred texts and whatever has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an and the
Sunnah only.

It has been narrated that Salih ibn Kaysan said, “I, once, met with
al-Zuhriy for seeking religious knowledge and then we both decided to
write down the traditions. We therefore wrote down whatever was reported
from the Prophet. When he suggested that he would write down the
traditions of the Sahabah considering them with the Sunnah, I objected
and declared the Sahabah’s traditions having been not within the Sunnah.
Hence, al-Zuhriy wrote down the traditions of the Sahabah while I did
not and thus I lost.”[^39]

Shaykh Muhammad Abu-Zuhrah says, “We found Malik ibn Anas depending upon
the verdicts of the Sahabah as if they were part of the Sunnah.”[^40]

Musa Jarullah says, “We, the Sunnite master jurisprudents, consider the
traditions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar sources of the Islamic legislation
that are as significant as the Sunnah of the Prophet. In addition, we
consider them sources in the provability of the religious laws that are
appertained to the life of the ummah and the administration of the
Islamic state. We also confirm that the Rashidite Caliphate is as
sinless as the Divine Mission (of the Holy Prophet).”[^41]

It is natural that the adorers of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar regard their
governments as sacred as the government of the Holy Prophet since these
governments were the founders of the trend of Opinionism and Ijtihad
which was followed by all the rulers and thus the heads of these
governments, namely Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, decided laws that they desired
and canceled the religious laws that they did not like since these laws
would violate their personal interests. As a confirmation of this fact,
read the following narration:

Abu-Bakr al-San\`aniy narrated that he, accompanied by a group, visited
Malik ibn Anas who began talking about Rabi\`ah, Malik’s mentor and
instructor. As he frequently talked about his mentor, we used to ask him
for more.

One day, he said to us, “What do you want from Rabi\`ah while he is
sleeping under that arch?”

We therefore hurried toward Rabi\`ah and wondered how Malik had knew
everything about him while he himself did not know.

Rabi\`ah answered, “You should have known that a ‘gram’ of a
governmental authority is better than a ‘ton’ of knowledge!”[^42]

This narration reveals that the two trends extended to cover both the
Umayyad and the \`Abbasid ages causing a complicated confusion to the
traditions that it became so difficult to discriminate the authentic
from the fabricated. This very result was intended by the rulers of the
Islamic state to occur to the next generations.

Wonderments And Irony
---------------------

The declaration of the names of ten individuals among the Sahabah as
being within the inhabitants of Paradise[^43] is contradictory to the
practical behaviors of these individuals. For instance, it is ironic to
decide this Hadith as authentic while Talhah and al-Zubayr, who are
within the list of those whom were given the good tidings of entering
Paradise, fought against Imam \`Ali who was the legal ruler of the
Islamic State at that time and who was also within the same list. It
goes without saying that the right is indivisibly one; if Imam \`Ali was
the right party, then Talhah and al-Zubayr would be the wrong and vice
versa.

Secondly, if we accept the Hadith of “The Ten Individuals of Paradise”
we should then reject the following Hadith that has been recorded by
al-Bukhariy, in his *al-Sahih,* and reported from the Holy Prophet,
“When two Muslims face each other with swords, both the killer and the
killed will be in Hellfire.” When he was asked why the killed would also
be in Hellfire, the Holy Prophet answered, “This is because the killed
would kill the other if he could.”[^44]

This irony and its likes confuse the researchers who attempt to study
these topics since it arouses the wonderments whether these two will be
included with the inhabitants of Paradise or Hellfire; and whether a
Sahabiy should have fought against the transgressing party until it
complies with the command of Almighty Allah[^45] or he should follow the
party that would triumph, as has been decided by \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar.[^46]

If those ten individuals of Paradise could have done anything they
desired in view of the decision that they would be included with the
inhabitants of Paradise, then why would not they themselves have
realized this truth and thus left each other without quarrel or lived
without enmity due to which hundreds of Muslims were killed? If such
logic is true, why are we now rejecting intellectual anarchism? As a
matter of fact, this very logic stands for underestimating the souls,
fortunes, and honors of the Muslims.

In his command to Abu-Bakr \`Amr ibn Hazm, \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz
asked him to collect and write down the Hadith of the Holy Prophet and
the traditions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab in addition to the
collections of \`Amarah or the reports from \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, as
has been decided in other narrations.

This fact motivates us to arouse the question: What did \`Umar ibn \`Abd
al-\`Aziz mean by such? Why did he decide the traditions of Abu-Bakr and
\`Umar as the religion that should be adopted and to which it should be
referred, while he decided the traditions of anyone else as must be
subjected to discussion? Why did \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz suspend the
traditions of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan and Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib?

Does this mean that he had not decided them with the Rashidite Caliphs
about whom the Messenger of Allah was reported to have said, “Adhere to
my Sunnah as well as the Sunnah of the Rashidite Caliphs who will come
after me”?

Accordingly, is the “Sunnah” that is currently circulated the ver Sunnah
of the Holy Prophet or that of the Sahabah? All these questions, if not
ironies, must be studied and investigated within the Muslim
jurisprudence and history and thus their texts must never be accepted as
they are.

The principles of the assessment of the narrators and Hadiths were in
fact established, after the departure of the Holy Prophet, at the hands
of the ruling authorities and under the supervision of the rulers taking
into consideration the fact that the spirit of tribalism and
sectarianism in the establishment of these principles overcame the
spirit of seriousness and sincerity.

The ascriptions of deviation, doctrinal corruption, fabrication, and the
like vices to the adherents of Imam \`Ali were the distinctive features
of the principles of the assessment of the narrators of Hadiths. As a
result, the ruling authorities and their fans spared no effort in
fabricating “Hadiths” that would be contradictory to the reports of the
adherents of Imam \`Ali.

Unfortunately, these unfounded principles have left sorrowful
inconveniences on our conducts and behaviors to such a degree that it
has become very difficult to get rid of or go away from them. On the
strength of this fact, it has become very imperative to investigate and
study thoroughly the historical and jurisprudential roots of these
principles since it is unquestionable that such investigations and
studies will open new horizons of knowledge whose honesty and accuracy
have not been tasted so far. Throughout my studies and theses, I always
concentrate on this point and invite the dear researchers and
specialists to study these topics and their likes thoroughly.

In this topic, as well as my study entitled *al-Sunnah Ba\`d al-Rasul*
(the Sunnah after the Holy Messenger), I have proven that the “Sunnah”
that is currently circulated is not the actual traditions of the Holy
Prophet; rather it is the traditions of certain men in a huge quantity
of its sections and topics.

The Ahl Al-Bayt And The Circulating Sunnah
------------------------------------------

By both means of insinuation and open statements, the Holy Imams of the
Ahl al-Bayt used to refer to the fact that the circulating “Sunnah” was
not the traditions of the Holy Prophet; rather it stood for the
traditions of certain men who held the political authority after the
Holy Prophet. In order to demonstrate the big difference between the
method of the Holy Imams and the School of Opinionism and Ijtihad, I,
hereinafter, will refer to some of the innumerable statements of the
Holy Imams appertained to the aforesaid fact:

It has been narrated that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, once, said to Jabir,

“If we give religious verdicts out of our desires and personal opinions,
we would certainly be of those who shall perish; rather we give people
verdicts derived from the traditions of the Messenger of Allah and from
principles that we have inherited from our great fathers. We have
hoarded up these principles in the same way as those people have hoarded
up their fortunes of gold and silver.”[^47]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Qutaybah that after Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq answered the questions of a man, the latter said, “What
if the answer is such-and-such, what will you say about it?”

Imam al-Sadiq, reproachfully, answered, “Shut up! Any answer that I give
to you must be taken from the Messenger of Allah. We are not of those
who say ‘what if’ at all.”[^48]

It has been narrated on the authority of Sa\`id al-A\`raj that he once
said to Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, “Some of those who claim being
jurisprudents say that they are using their personal opinions in the
questions that they cannot infer from the Holy Qur'an or the Sunnah.”

The Imam answered, “They have certainly lied. The laws of all things are
present in the Holy Qur'an and have been explained by the Holy
Sunnah.”[^49]

It has been narrated that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, once, was asked a
about question appertained to the religious laws. The Imam answered and
then the asker commented, “In fact, the other *fuqaha* (jurisprudents)
say something else about this question.”

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir replied, “Woe to you! Have you ever seen a true
*faqih* (jurisprudent)? Verily, the true *faqih* is only he who abstains
from the worldly pleasures, desires for gaining the rewards of the
Hereafter, and adheres firmly to the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet.”[^50]

According to another form of this narration, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
replied to that man, saying:

“Certainly, the most horrible people in the manner of forging lies
against Almighty Allah and His Messenger are those who belie or forge
lies against us, the Ahl al-Bayt. This is because all our sayings are
only copies of the sayings of the Messenger of Allah, and all the
sayings of the Messenger of Allah are only copies of the saying of
Almighty Allah; consequently, if we are accused of telling lies, then
this will mean that it is Almighty Allah and His Messenger whom are
accused of telling lies.”[^51]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir is also reported to have said,

“If we issue verdicts out of our personal opinions, we will certainly
miss the right path in the same way as those who had existed before us
missed the path; rather we always speak on a proof from our Lord Who has
shown to His Prophet and then the Prophet has shown to us.”[^52]

According to another form of the same narration, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
said,

“If we issue verdicts out of our personal opinions, we will certainly
miss the right path in the same way as those people have done…
etc.”[^53]

It has been also narrated that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said,

“As Almighty Allah has taught the knowledge of the Revelation and the
interpretation of the divinely revealed texts to His Messenger, the
Messenger taught it to \`Ali, and then \`Ali taught us the (knowledge of
the) Hadith.”[^54]

Ibn Hazm has narrated on the authority of Ibn Shabramah that Ja\`far ibn
Muhammad ibn \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, al-Sadiq, said to Abu-Hanifah,

“Fear Allah and do not depend upon analogy. On the morrow, we, as well
as those who have violated us, shall stand before Almighty Allah. We say
that the Messenger of Allah and Almighty Allah have said, while your
companions and you say, ‘we have heard and seen.’ Hence, Almighty Allah
will do to you and us what He pleases.”[^55]

Abu-Na\`im, in his book of *Hilyat al-Awliya'*, has narrated that Ibn
Shabramah and Abu-Hanifah, once, visited Ja\`far ibn Muhammad who asked
Ibn Abi-Layla, “Who is this one accompanying you?”

“This is a man who enjoys discernment and skillfulness in the religious
affairs,” answered he.

Al-Sadiq said, “Perhaps, this is the one who analogizes the affairs of
the religion by his own opinions!”

“Yes, he is,” answered he.

Al-Sadiq said, “Nu\`man: Have you analogized your head, too?”

“How can I analogize my head?” asked Abu-Hanifah.

Al-Sadiq said, “I see that you can master nothing at all. Do you know
what the word whose first part is infidelity and whose last part is
faith is?”

“You then tell me about that word whose first part is infidelity and
whose last part is faith,” replied Abu-Hanifah.

Al-Sadiq said, “When a servant (of Almighty Allah) says, ‘There is no
god...’ he will then declare infidelity; but when he continues, saying,
‘but Allah’, he will then declared faithfulness.”

Al-Sadiq then turned to Abu-Hanifah and said, “Listen, Nu\`man! My
father has reported to me from my grandfather that the Messenger of
Allah said, ‘The first to analogize (i.e. compare) in the affairs of the
religion was Iblis (Satan) who said,

***‘He said: What hindered you so that you did not prostrate when I
commanded you? He said: I am better than he: Thou hast created me of
fire, while him Thou didst create of dust.’ (Holy Qur’an: 7/12)***

Hence, one who analogizes any of the affairs of the religion by his own
opinion will be joined to Iblis on the Resurrection Day, since the
latter has been more skilled in the field of analogy!’”

Al-Sadiq then asked Abu-Hanifah, “Which one of these two sins are more
serious; murder or commitment of adultery?”

“It is murder,” answered Abu-Hanifah.

Al-Sadiq said, “However, Almighty Allah has accepted two witnesses only
for murder but has not accepted less that four witnesses for the
commitment of adultery!”

Al-Sadiq then added, “Which one of these two is more important; the
prayer or the fasting?”

“It is the prayer,” answered Abu-Hanifah.

Al-Sadiq said, “Why is it then that a woman must settle the fasting that
she misses due to menstruation while it is not obligatory upon her to
settle the prayers that she misses due to the same?”

Al-Sadiq then added, “Woe to you! How do you then depend upon analogy?
Fear Allah and never compare the religious laws out of your own
opinions.”[^56]

It has been narrated on the authority of Ibn Shaybah that Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq said,

“Indeed, Ibn Shabramah[^57] has gone astray. We (the Ahl al-Bayt) have
in possession the *Jami\`ah* (Comprehensive Document) that comprises the
dictations of the Messenger of Allah in the handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali.
Verily, the *Jami\`ah* has refuted the sayings of the all. It comprises
the knowledge of whatever is decided lawful and whatever is decided
unlawful. Indeed, the adopters of *Qiyas* (analogy) have sought the
religious knowledge through analogy; but they have been increased
nothing but remoteness from the right. Certainly, the religion of Allah
cannot be attained by analogy.”[^58]

Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq is also reported to have said,

“As Almighty Allah appointed Muhammad as His Messenger, He has made him
the seal of the Prophets; therefore, no prophet will exist after him.
Almighty Allah has also revealed to him a Book that He decided to be the
seal of the (divine) Books; therefore, no Book will exist after it (i.e.
the Holy Qur'an)… The Holy Prophet then made the knowledge perpetual
with his successors, but the people deserted them. Those successors are
thus the witnesses on the people of every age.

Moreover, the people have opposed everyone who would declare his loyalty
to the actual authorities of the ummah (namely, the Holy Imams) or
attempted to seek their knowledge; they therefore have created
contradiction in the Holy Qur'an and have taken the repealed verses as
their proofs misinterpreting them while they have neither considered the
preludes and the epilogues of these verses nor have they known their
sources and purposes because they have not taken the knowledge of these
from their actual people. They have thus missed the right path and
misled the others.”[^59]

It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet has said,

“One who gives religious verdicts to people without having knowledge
with it or without having the ability to discriminate the repealing
verses from the repealed ones or the decisive verses from the
allegorical ones will have perished and caused others to perish.”[^60]

It has been narrated that Muhammad ibn Hakim told Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
that a group of his companions had studied jurisprudence, learnt some
knowledge, and reported Hadiths in this respect; but when they are asked
for verdicts about questions that they had not experienced before, they
would give their personal opinions. On hearing this, Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq said, “No, this is not acceptable. The peoples who had existed
before you were destroyed only because of such acts and their
likes.”[^61]

The like of the aforesaid narrations has been narrated in al-Muttaqiy
al-Hindiy’s *Kanz al-\`Ummal*, that the Holy Prophet is reported to have
said,

“This ummah will act upon the Book of Allah (i.e. the Holy Qur'an) for a
while; and will then act upon the Sunnah (of the Prophet) for a while;
and will then act upon their opinions. When they act upon their
opinions, they will certainly miss the right path and mislead the
others.”[^62]

It has been narrated on the authority of Ibn Abi-\`Umayr on the
authority of many reporters that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq said,

“Curse of Allah be upon the adopters of analogy (*Ashab al-Qiyas*); they
have distorted the Words of Almighty Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger and have accused the truthful ones in the Religion of
Allah.”[^63]

Similarly, it has been narrated that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir was once
informed that \`Ubaydah al-Salmaniy reported, falsely, that Imam \`Ali
permitted the vendition of the bondmaids that had given birth of babies
from their masters.[^64] On hearing this, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said,

“They have certainly forged lies against \`Ubaydah or perhaps \`Ubaydah
has forged lies against (Imam) \`Ali. Whatever we report to you from
(Imam) \`Ali is actually his saying, and whatever we deny is actually
forgery against him. We know for sure that *Qiyas* has never been within
the beliefs of (Imam) \`Ali. Only will those who lack knowledge with the
Holy Qur'an and Sunnah resort to *Qiyas*. Thus, let their narrations not
deceive you, for they will certainly mislead… etc.”[^65]

It has been also narrated that Abu-Basir asked Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
whether it is lawful to depend upon one’s opinion in the questions whose
answers cannot be known from the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah. The Imam
answered,

“No, it is not lawful! If you do so and give the true verdict, you will
not be rewarded; and if you give a wrong judgment, you will be regarded
as forging lies against Almighty Allah.”[^66]

It has been narrated that Imam \`Ali al-Sajjad said,

“Verily, the religion of Almighty Allah cannot be obtained by the
intellects that are deficient, the opinions that are false, or the
analogies that are baseless. The religion of Almighty Allah can be
attained only through the submission.

Hence, he who submits to us will have been saved; he who follows our
direction will have been guided (to the right path); he who acts upon
*Qiyas* and *Ra’y* will have destroyed himself; he who doubts in any
amount anything of our sayings or judgments will have surely disbelieved
in Him Who has revealed the Seven Oft-Repeated verses and the Grand
Qur'an while he does not know.”[^67]

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said,

“Beware of the adopters of their own opinions (*Ashab al-Ra’y*), for
they have resorted to their opinions only when they were too imperfect
to retain the (true) traditions. They therefore used their own opinions
to decide what is lawful and what is forbidden. On doing so, they have
deemed unlawful that which Almighty Allah has deemed lawful and have
deemed lawful that which Almighty Allah has deemed unlawful. They thus
missed the right path and misled the others.”[^68]

Imam \`Ali is also reported to have said,

“O the Shiites who profess loyalty to us and love for us! Beware of the
adopters of their personal opinions, for these are the enemies of the
true traditions. As they have been too weak to retain the Hadiths and
too feeble to understand the Sunnah, they…

When they were asked about questions that they did not know, they were
too arrogant to confess that they did not know the answers; they
therefore opposed the religion through resting upon their personal
opinions. They thus missed the right path and misled the others.”[^69]

It has been narrated on the authority of Habib that Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq said to his companions,

“You all are the most beloved to me. As people have taken miscellaneous
courses—some of them have followed their caprices and others have
followed their own opinions—you have followed a founded course.”[^70]

This saying can be another meaning of Imam \`Ali’s saying about the
dispersion of people after the departure of the Holy Prophet. It has
been narrated on the authority of Ishaq al-Subay\`iy that Imam

\`Ali Amir al-Mu’minin said,

“After the departure of the Messenger of Allah, people have scattered
into three categories of people: The first category is represented by
the true knowledgeable individuals whom are guided by Almighty Allah and
who, through the knowledge that Almighty Allah has given to them, have
dispensed with the knowledge of the others.

The second category is represented by those ignorant people who claim
knowledgeability while they have nothing. They are self-conceited for
what they have in possession and are charmed by the worldly pleasures
and thus they have misled the others.

The third category is represented by those who learn from the
knowledgeable so as to attain guidance and redemption of Almighty Allah.
Finally, away with those who claim falsely; and frustration be for the
forgers!”[^71]

Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq is reported to have said,

“We (the Ahl al-Bayt) do possess things that suffice us from the people,
while the peoples it is they who are in need for us. We have books
dictated by the Messenger of Allah and written by Imam \`Ali personally.
One of these books comprises all that which is deemed lawful and all
that which is deemed unlawful. Verily, when you ask us a question, we
know whether you will accept it from us or you will desert it.”[^72]

Imam \`Ali has classified the Hadiths that are circulated among people
and he has then demonstrated the reason beyond discrepancy, saying,

“Certainly what is current among the people is both right and wrong,
true and false, repealing and repealed, general and particular, definite
and indefinite, exact and surmised. Even during the Holy Prophet’s days,
false sayings had been attributed to him so much so that he had to say
during his sermon that ‘Whoever attributes falsehoods to me makes his
abode in Hell.’

Those who relate traditions are of four categories, no more: The
hypocrite is a person who makes a show of faith and adopts the
appearance of a Muslim; he does not hesitate in sinning nor does he keep
aloof from vice; he willfully attributes false things against the
Messenger of Allah—may Allah bless him and his descendants. If people
knew that he was a hypocrite and a liar, they would not accept anything
from him and would not confirm what he says.

Rather they say that he is the companion of the Prophet, has met him,
heard (his sayings) from him and acquired (knowledge) from him. They
therefore accept what he says. Allah too had warned you well about the
hypocrites and described them fully to you. They have continued after
the Holy Prophet. They gained positions with the leaders of misguidance
and callers towards Hell through falsehoods and slanderings.

So, they put them in high posts and made them officers over the heads of
the people, and amassed wealth through them. People are always with the
rulers and after this world, except those to whom Allah affords
protection. This is the first of the four categories.

Then there is the individual who heard (a saying) from the Holy Prophet
but did not memorize it as it was, but surmised it. He does not lie
willfully. Now, he carries the saying with him and relates it, acts upon
it and claims that: ‘I heard it from the Messenger of Allah.’ If the
Muslims come to know that he has committed a mistake in it, they will
not accept it from him, and if he himself knows that he is on the wrong
he will give it up.

The third man is he who heard the Prophet ordering to do a thing and
later the Prophet prevented the people from doing it, but this man did
not know it, or he heard the Prophet refraining people from a thing and
later he allowed it, but this man did not know it.

In this way, he retained in his mind what had been repealed, and did not
retain the repealing tradition. If he knew that it had been repealed, he
would reject it, or if the Muslims knew, when they heard it from him,
that it had been repealed they would reject it.

The last, namely the fourth man, is he who does not speak a lie against
Allah or against His Prophet. He hates falsehood out of fear for Allah
and respect for the Messenger of Allah, and does not commit mistakes,
but retains (in his mind) exactly what he heard (from the Prophet), and
he relates it as he heard it without adding anything or omitting
anything. He heard the repealing tradition, he retained it and acted
upon it, and he heard the repealed tradition and rejected it. He also
understands the particular and the general, and he knows the definite
and indefinite, and gives everything its due position.

The sayings of the Prophet used to be of two types. One was particular
and the other common. Sometimes, a man would hear him but he would not
know what Allah, the Glorified, meant by it or what the Messenger of
Allah meant by it. In this way, the listener carries it and memorizes it
without knowing its meaning and its real intention, or what was its
reason.

Among the companions of the Messenger of Allah all were not in the habit
of putting him questions and ask him the meanings, indeed they always
wished that some Bedouin or stranger might come and ask him—peace be
upon him—so that they would also listen.

Whenever any such thing came before me, I asked him about its meaning
and preserved it.I used to visit the Messenger of Allah once a day and
once a night. He then would be alone with me and I would follow him
wherever he went. The companions of the Messenger of Allah have known
for sure that he did not do this with anyone except me.

The Messenger of Allah might have visited me in my house more than I
visited me in his house. Whenever I visited him in one of his houses, he
would be alone with me and would ask his women to leave so that none
except me would be with him. But when he used to visit me in my house,
neither Fatimah nor any of my sons would leave.

Whenever I asked him, he would answer me and whenever I kept silent for
my questions would be finished, he would open a discussion with me. He
would recite for me and ask me to write down any (holy) verse that was
revealed to him.

He would then teach me the interpretation and the explanation of that
verse and would teach me whether it is repealing or repealed, decisive
or allegorical, particular or common… Since the Messenger of Allah
supplicate to Almighty Allah for me, I have never forgotten any item of
the knowledge that he dictated to me and that I wrote down.

He had taught me, and I have learned, all the items of knowledge as
regards what is lawful and what is unlawful as well as all the commands
and the warnings, whether past or future, and any act of obedience and
act of disobedience to Almighty Allah that had been written in any Book
that had been revealed (from Almighty Allah); and I have never forgotten
a single letter of what he had taught me.

The Messenger of Allah then put his hand on my chest and prayed to
Almighty Allah to fill in my heart with knowledge, understandability,
wisdom and illumination.”[^73]

By means of this methodical and objective categorization, Imam \`Ali
acquaints us with the school of the Ahl al-Bayt as regards the reception
of the Sahabah and the actuality of their reporting from the Holy
Prophet and their position in his view as well as the role of the people
of Quraysh in the enactment of the Islamic legislation. For more
explanation, let us cite the following text of Imam \`Ali:

“Now, look at the various favors of Allah upon them, that He deputed
towards them a prophet who got them to pledge their obedience to him and
made them unite at his call. Look how Allah’s bounty spread the wings of
its favors over them and flowed for them streams of its blessing, and
the whole community became wrapped in blissful prosperity.

Consequently, they were submerged under its bounty and enjoyed its lush
life. Their affairs were settled under the protection of a powerful
ruler, and circumstances offered them overpowering honor, and all things
became easy for them under the auspices of a strong country.

They became rulers over the world and kings in the various parts of the
earth. They became masters of those who were formerly their masters, and
began issuing commands over those who used to command them. They were so
strong that neither did their spears need testing nor did their weapons
have any flaw.

Beware! You have shaken your hands loose from the rope of obedience, and
broken the divine fort around you by (resorting to) pre-Islamic rules.
Certainly, it is a great blessing of Allah, the Glorified, that He has
engendered among them unity through the cord of affection in whose shade
they walk and take shelter. This is a blessing whose value no one in the
whole world realizes, because it is more valuable than any price and
higher than any wealth.

You should know that you have again reverted to the position of the
Bedouin Arabs after immigration (to Islam), and have become different
parties after having been once united. You do not possess anything of
Islam except its name, and know nothing of belief save its show. You say
‘The Fire’ Yes. but no shameful position,’ as if you would throw down
Islam on its face in order to defame its honor and break its pledge (for
brotherhood) which Allah gave you as a sacred trust on His earth and (a
source of) peace among the people.

Be sure that if you incline towards anything other than Islam. the
unbelievers will fight you. Then there will be neither Gabriel nor
Michael, neither muhajirun nor Ansar to help you, but only the clashing
of swords, till Allah settles the matter for you.

Certainly, there are examples before you of Allah’s wrath, punishment,
days of tribulations and happenings. Therefore, do not disregard His
promises, ignoring His punishment, making light His wrath and not
expecting His violence, because Allah, the Glorified, did not curse the
past ages except because they had left off asking others to do good acts
and refraining them from bad acts. In fact Allah cursed the foolish for
committing sins and the wise because they gave up refraining others from
evils. Beware! You have broken the shackles of Islam and have
transgressed happenings. Therefore, do not disregard His pr

Beware! Surely Allah has commanded me to fight those who revolt, or who
break the pledge, or create trouble on the earth. As regards
pledge-breakers, I have fought them, as regards deviators from truth, I
have waged holy war against them, and as regards those who have gone out
of the faith, I have put them in (serious) disgrace.

As for Satan of the pit, he too has been dealt with by me through the
loud cry with which the scream of his heart and shaking of his chest was
also heard. Only a small portion of the rebels has remained. If Allah
allows me one more chance over them I will annihilate them except a few
remnants that may remain scattered in the suburb of the cities.

Even in my boyhood I had lowered the chest of (the famous men) of
Arabia, and broken the horn points (i.e., defeated the chiefs) of the
tribes of Rabi\`ah and Mudhar. Certainly, you know my position of close
kinship and special relationship with the Prophet of Allah—peace and
blessing of Allah be upon him and his descendants.

When I was only a child he took charge of me. He used to press me to his
chest and lay me beside him in his bed, bring his body close to mine and
make me smell his smell. He used to chew something and then feed me with
it. He found no lie in my speaking, nor weakness in any act.

From the time of his weaning, Allah had put a mighty angel with him to
take him along the path of high character and good behavior through day
and night, while I used to follow him like a young camel following in
the footprints of its mother. Every day he would show me in the form of
a banner some of his high traits and commanded me to follow it. Every
year he used to go in seclusion to the hill of Hira', where I saw him
but no one else saw him.

In those days Islam did not exist in any house except that of the
Prophet of Allah—peace and blessing of Allah be upon him and his
descendants—and Khadijah, while I was the third after these two. I used
to see and watch the effulgence of divine revelation and message, and
breathed the scent of Prophethood.

When the revelation descended on the Prophet of Allah—peace and blessing
of Allah be upon him and his descendants—I heard the moan of Satan. I
said ‘O Prophet of Allah, what is this moan?’ and he replied, ‘This is
Satan who has lost all hope of being worshipped. O Ali, you see all that
I see and you hear all that I hear, except that you are not a Prophet,
but you are a vicegerent and you are surely on (the path of) virtue

I was with him when a party of the Quraysh came to him and said to him
‘O Mohammad, you have made a big claim which none of your fore-fathers
or those of your family have made. We ask you one thing; if you give us
an answer to it and show it to us, we will believe that you are a
prophet and a messenger, but if you cannot do it, we will know that you
are a sorcerer and a liar

The Messenger of Allah said: ‘What do you ask for?’ They said: ‘Ask this
tree to move for us, even with its roots, and stop before you.’ The
Prophet said ‘Verily, Allah has power over everything. If Allah does it
for you, will you then believe and stand witness to the truth?’ They
said ‘Yes. Then he said ‘I shall show you whatever you want, but I know
that you wont bend towards virtue, and there are among you those who
will be thrown into the pit, and those who will form parties (against
me).’

Then the Holy Prophet said: ‘O tree, if you do believe in Allah and the
Day of Judgement, and know that I am the Prophet of Allah, come up with
your roots and stand before me with the permission of Allah.’ By Him who
deputed the Prophet with truth, the tree did remove itself with its root
and came with a great humming sound and a flapping like the flapping of
the wings of birds, till it stopped before the Messenger of Allah while
some of its twigs came down onto my shoulders, and I was on the right
side of the Holy Prophet.

When the people saw this they said by way of pride and vanity ‘Now you
order half of it to come to you and the other half of it remain (in its
place).’ The Holy Prophet ordered the tree to do the same. Then half of
the tree advanced towards him in an amazing manner and with greater
humming. It was about to touch the Prophet of Allah.

Then they said, disbelieving and revolting ‘Ask this half to get back to
its other half and be as it was.’ The Prophet ordered it and it
returned. Then I said ‘O Prophet of Allah, I am the first to believe in
you and to acknowledge that the tree did what it did just now with the
command of Allah, the Sublime, in testimony to your Prophethood and to
heighten your word.

Upon this all the people shouted ‘Rather a sorcerer, a liar; it is
wonderful sorcery, he is very adept in it. Only a man like this
(pointing to me) can stand testimony to you in your affairs

Certainly, I belong to the group of people who care not for the reproach
of anybody in matters concerning Allah. Their countenance is the
countenance of the truthful and their speech is the speech of the
virtuous. They are wakeful during the nights (in devotion to Allah), and
over beacons (of guidance) in the day. They hold fast to the rope of the
Qur’an. Revive the traditions of Allah and of His Prophet. They do not
boast nor indulge in self-conceit, nor misappropriate, nor create
mischief. Their hearts are in Paradise while their bodies are busy in
(good) acts.”[^74]

Unfortunately, the Muslim community did reach such a lowly level. In
this regard, al-Dahlawiy says,

“With the elapse of the reign of the Rashidite Caliphs, the caliphate
went to a people who overpowered the Muslim community unworthily while
they were not acquainted with the knowledge of the religious laws. As a
result, these rulers had to seek the aid of the fuqaha (jurisprudents)
and to have them accompanied them on all occasions. The remainders of
the genuine scholars attempted to escape and reject whenever they were
summoned for undertaking this mission.

As the peoples of these ages, save the religious scholars, witnessed how
the genuine scholars escaped whenever they were summoned for such tasks,
they (the ordinary people) sought to learn the religious knowledge no
matter what the price would be so that they would attain such positions.

Hence, the new religious scholar began to inquire about such position
after the genuine scholars had been urgently called for holding them
and, similarly, the new generations of the scholars became so humiliated
owing to their advancing to the rulers after the genuine scholars had
been honorable owing to their turning away from the rulers… etc.”[^75]

Anticipation And Consolidation
------------------------------

The Holy Prophet anticipated the predominance of a tribal authority on
the Islamic legislation while the Holy Qur'an has warned against such an
authority. In this regard, the Holy Prophet frequently concentrated on
the fact that \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib was the one and only individual who
had full acquaintance with the interpretation and explanation of the
holy verses and Hadiths entirely and that he was very far away from the
tribal spirits and the unsubstantiated opinions.

In this respect, it has been narrated that Abu-Sufyan ibn Harb said to
Imam \`Ali after Abu-Bakr had been formally chosen as the leader of the
Muslim community, “What for has the affair of the leadership been in the
hands of the least valued clans of Quraysh? \`Ali: Extend your hand so
that I will pay homage to you! I swear by Allah that, if you want, I can
encompass this Abu-Fasil[^76] with horses and men of war.”

Nevertheless, Imam \`Ali did not accept his offer.[^77]

According to other narrations, Imam \`Ali said to Abu-Sufyan, “You have
antagonized Islam and its people for long ages; yet, all your deeds have
not injured it at all.”

It has been narrated on the authority of Rab\`i ibn Harrash that \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib told us that, after the conclusion of the Truce of
Hudaybiyyah, some polytheist chiefs and individuals, including Suhayl
ibn \`Amr, came to the Holy Prophet and said, “O Allah’s Messenger! Some
of our sons, brethren, and slaves joined you. They had claimed falsely
that they wanted to learn their religion. They only want to get rid of
their jobs. Repatriate them and we will teach them their religion if
they are honest.”

The Holy Prophet answered, “O people of Quraysh! If you keep up such
demands, Almighty Allah will send a man whose heart is filled up with
faith to behead you with his sword for sake of this religion.”

They, as well as Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, asked the Holy Prophet to identify
that man.

“He is that repairer of the sandal,” the Holy Prophet referred to \`Ali
between whose hands was the sandal of the Holy Prophet.[^78]

Many other texts of Hadith and incidents of the Islamic history have
assured that the Holy Prophet already knew that discrepancy would
indisputably be dissipated among the individuals of his ummah after him.
It was Archangel Gabriel who foretold him of that. The Holy Prophet is
reported to have said,

“One day, Archangel Gabriel came to me and said, ‘Muhammad: your ummah
will be engaged in discrepancy after you.’”[^79]

It has been narrated on the authority of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab that as
soon as the Messenger of Allah approached me, I could recognize sadness
in his face. He subsequently took hold of my beard and said,

“To Allah we do belong, and to Him is our return.[^80] Archangel Gabriel
has just come to me and said, ‘To Allah we belong and to Him is our
return.’ I replied, ‘This is true; To Allah we belong and to Him is our
return. What for have you said so, Gabriel?’

Archangel Gabriel answered, ‘Your ummah will be exposed to ordeals in a
short time after your departure.’ I asked, ‘Will these ordeals be
related to atheism or to deviation?’ The archangel answered, ‘The
ordeals will be related to all these.’ I then wondered, ‘How will all
these occur while I am leaving behind me the Book of Almighty Allah for
them?’

Archangel Gabriel said, ‘They will go astray by means of the Book of
Almighty Allah! The first of that will be at the hands of the reciters
(of the Holy Qur'an) and the rulers. The rulers will deprive the people
of their rights and consequently they will kill each other. The reciters
will carry out the caprices of the rulers and consequently they will
plunge them deeper into error and will never relax their efforts.’

I then asked, ‘Gabriel: By which means will redemption be attained?’ He
answered, ‘By means of seclusion and patience. If those whom will be
saved will be given their rights, they will take them, and if they will
be deprived of their rights, they will leave demanding with them.’”[^81]

The ordeals and trials of the Muslim community are related to the amount
of the people’s compliance with the sayings of the Ahl al-Bayt. In this
regard, it has been narrated on the authority of Khalid ibn \`Arfatah
that the Holy Prophet said:

“Verily, you shall be tested through my household after me.”[^82]

Similarly, It has been narrated on the authority of Zayd ibn Arqam that
in a place between Makkah and al-Madinah called “Khumm”, the Messenger
of Allah once delivered a speech to us. After statements of praising and
thanking Almighty Allah, as well as statements of preach and reminding
of Him, the Holy Prophet said,

“O people, I am no more than an ordinary person, and the messenger of my
Lord (i.e. angel of death) will shortly come to me and then I will
respond. Among you, I have left two weighty things: first, the Book of
Allah that includes right guidance and illumination. Preserve in the
Book of Allah and hold fast on it. Second, my household; remember Allah
concerning my household, remember Allah concerning my household,
remember Allah concerning my household.”[^83]

It has been also narrated that the Holy Prophet said,

“A servant of Allah shall not be faithful believer unless he loves me
more than he loves himself, loves my household more than he loves his
household, loves my family more than he loves his family, and loves my
soul more than he loves his soul.”[^84]

The Holy Prophet is also reported as saying,

“I am leaving among you two successors; the Book of Allah and my
household. They will never leave each other until they join me on the
Divine Pool. Consider how you will regard me as regards these two.”[^85]

Commenting on the above-mentioned Hadith, the author of *al-Fath
al-Rabbaniy* says,

“By this Hadith, the Holy Prophet meant that if you carry out the
commands of the Holy Qur'an and keep yourselves away from the matters
that are forbidden therein, and follow the path of his Household and
imitate the conducts of him, you will never miss the right path.”[^86]

Commenting on the Holy Prophet’s saying “Consider how you will regard me
as regards these two,” the author of *Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy* says,

To consider means to think deeply and to ponder. In this regard, the
Holy Prophet’s saying “consider” means that you should ponder over the
question and think deeply how you will deal with these two things that I
am leaving for you in the form that whether you will be decent or
indecent generation.[^87]

Al-Zarqaniy, in *Sharh al-Mawahib*, says,

The Messenger of Allah has mentioned the Holy Book since it is the core
of the religious sciences, secrets, and wisdoms as well as the treasures
of the facts and the hidden items of the precise affairs.

He has also mentioned the Household for the fact that when the race of
an individual is excellent, this will help in thorough understanding of
the religion. Excellency of the race results in high morality,
pure-heartedness, decency, and purity.

From this cause, the Messenger of Allah, on many occasions, concentrated
on the obligation of following the Ahl al-Bayt and on their being the
most authoritative in the custody of the Muslim community’s affairs. He
therefore decided them as same as the Ark of (Prophet) Noah; one who
embarks it will have certainly been delivered but he who leaves it will
have been drowned.[^88]

Commenting on the same Hadith, Mr. Mansur \`Ali Nasif, in his book
entitled *al-Taj al-Jami\` li’l-Usul fi Ahadith al-Rasul*, says,

In this Hadith, the Prophet says: Succeed me excellently as regards
these two (the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt) through respecting them
and acting upon the Book of Almighty Allah and the knowledge of the Ahl
al-Bayt other than the others.[^89]

Commenting on the Hadith of Thaqalayn (the two weighty things),
al-Nawawiy says,

These two things (namely the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt) have been
called “the two weighty things” because of their greatness and high
regard. Other scholars have said that because the acting upon these two
is weighty (i.e. heavy), they have been called such.[^90]

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah al-Tayyibiy, in his book of
*al-Kashif \`An Haqa'iq al-Sunnah al-Nubawiyyah*, says,

The Holy Prophet’s saying, “I am leaving among you” denotes that these
two things are the twin successors of him.[^91]

Nur al-Din al-Samhudiy, in his book of *Jawahir al-\`Aqdayn*, says,

In conclusion, because both the Grand Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt have
been the source of the religious sciences, the legal precious secrets
and wisdoms, the treasures of the religious precise affairs, and the
obtainers of the religion’s facts, the Holy Prophet Allah named them
“the two weighty things.” This fact invites the attentions to the Holy
Prophet’s importunate instruction of the adherence to and the learning
from the Ahl al-Bayt.[^92]

Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy, in his book of *al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah*,
says,

The Messenger of Allah has called the Holy Qur'an and his Household as
the two weighty things. This is because “weighty” is said to describe
every precious, significant, and preserved thing, and so are these two
since both of them are the sources of the religious sciences, the
elevated secrets and wisdoms, and the legal rulings.

The Holy Prophet has therefore insisted on following, adhering to, and
learning from both of them. In this respect, he has said, “All praise be
to Allah Who has made us, the Ahl al-Bayt, the source of wisdom.” Other
scholars have said that these two have been called “weighty” because the
compliance with and the preservation of their rights are heavy.

Explaining the meaning of “the weighty things”, al-Azhariy, in *Tahdhib
al-Lughah*, Ibn Mandhur, in *Lisan al-\`Arab*, al-Zubaydiy, in *Taj
al-\`Arus*, Ibn al-Athir, in *al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah*, al-Suyutiy, in
*al-Durr al-Manthur*, and other Arab linguists have confirmed that the
Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt have been called “weighty” because the
compliance with them is heavy and the acting upon them is heavy, too.

In his book of *Nasim al-Riyad*, Shihab al-Din al-Khafajiy, displaying
the many opinions about the explanation of the Hadith of Thaqalayn,
says,

*Thaqalayn* is the dual form of *“Thaqal* (weighty thing)” the opposite
of which is lightness. The “*Thaqalayn*” mainly stands for human beings
and jinn. Because of their high regard, human beings and jinn have been
called “the two weighty things”.

Furthermore, in the same way as the religion is constructed by human
beings and jinn, the world cannot exist without them. They have also
been called such because of the preponderance of their positions since a
preponderance of a thing is up to its weightiness. Perhaps, they have
been called such because of the difficulty of the observance of their
rights.

Another opinion is that the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt have been
called “weighty” since each of them is preserved against flaw, error,
inadvertence, and fault and because they are purified from uncleanness,
impurity, wrong, and fabrication.

Certain statements of the Hadith of Thaqalayn confirm this fact, and the
lexical meanings of it also do, since “a weighty thing” lexically means
the precious and preserved thing.

It goes without saying that the Holy Qur'an is pure and preserved, since
its source is Almighty Allah, the All-knowledgeable, and in the presence
of Him, it is high in dignity and full of wisdom; therefore, no
falsehood can approach it from before or behind it.

The purity of the honorable Household of the Holy Prophet is originated
from the fact that Almighty Allah has removed impurity from them and
purified them thoroughly. They neither say nor do nor enjoin the wrong.
They are the truthful ones; Almighty Allah has ordered the believers to
be with them. Had they not been such, Almighty Allah would not have
matched them to the Holy Qur'an that must be touched by none except
those who are clean.[^93]

In *al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah*, Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy, after recording
a Supplication (*Du\`a'*) of Imam al-Sajjad, says,

To whom will this generation resort whereas the signs of this community
have been obliterated and the ummah have been engaged in discrepancies
and disagreements and have accused each other of atheism while Almighty
Allah says,

***“Be not like those who are divided amongst themselves and fall into
disputations after receiving clear signs.” (Holy Qur’an: 3/105)***?

None is reliable in the conveyance of the claim and the interpretation
of the laws except the matches of the Holy Qur'an, the sons of the
leaders to the true guidance, and the lanterns in the gloom. It is they
by whom Almighty Allah has provided His claims against His servants
since He shall not leave the creatures uncontrolled without providing a
claim against them.

These are recognized as the branches of the blessed tree (of
Prophethood) and the remainders of the choice ones from whom Almighty
Allah has removed impurity and whom He has purified thoroughly and
released from defects and has made the love for them obligatory in the
Holy Qur'an.[^94]

From the previous, we can conclude that the Holy Prophet, as he used to
concentrate on the adherence to the Ahl al-Bayt, meant that the Muslims
should learn their beliefs and the religious laws as well as all the
various aspects of life from his descendants who are quietly conversant
with his traditions and instructions.

He further anticipated that his people would deviate and would miss his
way and traditions because rulership and its inconveniences, such as the
sectarian and tribal affairs, would definitely influence the religious
laws and take the people away from the Ahl al-Bayt, which would
certainly mean going away from the true source of the Islamic
legislation.

Unfortunately, the Holy Prophet’s anticipations came true, and the
Muslim community fell in the very matters from which he had warned them
importunately.

A deep look in the texts said by the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imams
shows that the word of *“dalal* (going astray)” have been repeatedly
mentioned since it meant going away from the right path of Islam. For
instance, in the famous incident of the Disastrous Thursday, the Holy
Prophet ordered the attendants to bring him a pen and an inkpot so that
he would write down a document that would save them from “going astray”
forever.[^95]

During the Farewell Hajj,[^96] he put the Muslims under the obligation
of adherence to the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt so that they would
never “go astray” after him.[^97] Once, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab brought a
book comprising sections of the Torah to the Holy Prophet who commented,

“I swear by Him Who has full control over my soul: If Prophet Moses
lives again now then you follow him and leave me, you will be certainly
regarded as going astray.”[^98]

In the words of the Ahl al-Bayt too, this conception has been repeated
though the most obvious word in this regard can be found in the speeches
and words of Lady Fatimah al-Zahra'.

Shaykh Muhammad al-Hanafiy, in *Sharh al-Jami\` al-Saghir* and *Sharh
al-\`Aziziy* 2:417, says,

By saying, “\`Ali is the chest of my knowledge,”[^99] the Holy Prophet
meant that \`Ali is the carrier of his knowledge. \`Ali is in fact the
door to the Holy Prophet’s city of knowledge. Consequently, the Sahabah
resorted to him whenever problems inflicted them.

Even during the conflicts between them, Mu\`awiyah used to ask Imam
\`Ali about the solutions of the problems that he had faced, and Imam
\`Ali was answering him. Having seen this situation, the party of Imam
\`Ali asked him why he would answer his enemy, and Imam \`Ali answered,
“It is actually adequate for us that our enemy is in need for us.”

Similarly, Imam \`Ali solved the problems that were faced by \`Umar (ibn
al-Khattab). Thus, \`Umar said, “May Allah not keep me alive to a day on
which I will not see Abu’l-Hasan among my people.” Hence, \`Umar prayed
not to live after Imam \`Ali… etc.

Al-Mannawiy, in *Fayd al-Qadir* 4:356, says about the aforementioned
Hadith,

A “chest” is the box in which one stores his precious possessions. Ibn
Durayd says: This (Hadith) is one of the brief words of the Holy
Prophet. None has preceded him in using such an exemplification on the
peculiarity of the esoteric affairs that none should know except him.
Moreover, this Hadith is the utmost praising of (Imam) \`Ali.

The aforesaid discussion has demonstrated some of the fundamental
disagreements between the jurisprudential school of the Ahl al-Bayt and
the ruling authorities’ method as regards the issuance of religious
laws.

The biggest disagreements between the two have been the intellectual
fundamentals since the Ahl al-Bayt sought the position of the leadership
of the Muslim community in order to achieve the goals of the Islamic
legislation and the Holy Prophet’s Sunnah since they (the Ahl al-Bayt)
have been too elevated to hold such a position for achieving personal
purposes or pleasures.

It has been narrated that \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, once, visited Imam
\`Ali who was engaged in repairing his shoes. Imam \`Ali then asked
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, “What do you think the value of this shoe is?”

He answered, “It is valueless.”

Imam \`Ali then declared, “I swear by Allah that this shoe is more
favorable to me than holding the leadership of you all, unless I give
one’s due or prevent an evildoing.”[^100]

It is worth mentioning that the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt have not
accepted reporting anything from them before that item is compared to
the Holy Qur'an; if it would be congruent with it, they order us to act
upon it, but if it would not, they ordered us to throw it away.

Of course, this rule shows their interest in clarifying the regulations
on the basis of which a Hadith is accepted or rejected. Rather, having
good opinion about the Sahabah and the like matters cannot be decided as
regulations in the evaluation of a Hadith. This matter has been
previously discussed with a demonstration of proofs on it.

This is the meaning of unionism in intellectuality and principles. The
words of the Ahl al-Bayt interpret the Holy Qur'an, and the Holy Qur'an
praises the Ahl al-Bayt. In this regard, the Holy Prophet has declared,

“\`Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with \`Ali.”

Accordingly, the words of the Ahl al-Bayt should never be inconsistent
with the Holy Qur'an.

On the other hand, the method of the ruling authorities and their fans
is absolutely opposite to the previous. The supporters of the caliphs
have never accepted to compare the opinions and judgments of the caliphs
to the Holy Qur'an; rather they have decided such a procedure as one of
the acts of the miscreants![^101]

This is because those scholars have been sure of the existence of
contradiction between the Holy Qur'an and the words, opinions, and
judgments of the caliphs. Having exceeded all limits, those scholars
have decided that the words and deeds of the caliphs and the Sahabah
must be preceded to the Holy Qur'an! In this regard, Shaykh Muhammad
Abu-Zuhrah says,

The Hanafiyyah and Hanbaliyyah scholars have decided that the deeds of
the Sahabah restrict the Holy Qur'an, justifying this decision by saying
that the Sahabah would not neglect acting upon the general sense of the
Holy Qur'an unless they had a proof on this; hence the Sahabah’s
violations of the Holy Qur'an must be proofs of the restriction of the
sense of it. Moreover, the Sahabah’s words are as important as their
deeds.[^102]

Commenting on this, Shaykh Abu-Zuhrah adds,

“This is the strangest matter I have ever seen!”

\`Umar Ibn Al-Khattab And The Umayyads
--------------------------------------

In order to prove our abovementioned discussions, it seems necessary to
disclose the role of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab in consolidating the opinions
of the Umayyad rulers as regards the religious laws. As he nominated
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan as the ruler of Syria after Yazid,[^103]
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab fastened the steps of the Umayyads and helped them
have control over the Muslim community. In the same way, he suggested to
Abu-Bakr that he would allow Abu-Sufyan to keep the taxes that he had
levied for himself and that he would appoint Yazid ibn Abi-Sufyan as the
commander-in-chief of the Muslim army of Syria.[^104]

Moreover, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab likened Mu\`awiyah to Khosrow, the
emperor of Persia, and said in this regard, “How do you mention Khosrow
while Mu\`awiyah is among you?”[^105] Furthermore, \`Umar said about
Mu\`awiyah, “Do not criticize the hero of Quraysh and the son of
Quraysh’s master. Surely, he is one of those who smile at rage, and
those who cannot be convinced unless when he is satisfied, and those who
cannot be overcome.”[^106]

Other narrations have confirmed that when Mu\`awiyah was nominated by
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab as the ruler of Syria, he received two messages
from his parents. His father’s message reads, “O Son! In fact, these
groups of the Muhajirun preceded us while we lagged behind.

Hence, their precedence has elevated them while our lagging behind has
delayed us. They therefore have become the leaders and the masters while
we have become only fellows. As they have nominated you for a great
matter, you must not violate them, for this is the outset of a perpetual
authority. You should thus compete on this matter, and if you attain it,
you should dedicate your intellect to it.”

In her message, Mu\`awiyah’s mother said, “O Son! In fact, it is rarely
that a free lady can give birth of one like you. As this man (namely
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab) has chosen you for this matter, you must obey him
in all matters, whether you like or dislike.”[^107]

It has been also narrated that when \`Umar ibn al-Khattab visited Syria,
Mu\`awiyah said to him, “I will carry out any order that you make to
me.” \`Umar answered, “I will never order you to do or not to do
anything.”[^108]

Through this policy of “I will carry out any order that you make to me,”
Mu\`awiyah could occupy \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s heart. As a result,
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab appointed other Umayyad individuals in other
governmental offices; he appointed \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās as the governor of
Palestine and Jordan,[^109] al-Walid ibn \`Aqabah, who was one his
dearest men,[^110] as the tax collector of Banu-Taghlib,[^111] Ya\`liy
ibn Umayyah as the governor of a part of the Yemen,[^112] al-Mughirah
ibn Shu\`bah as the governor of Kufah,[^113] \`Abdullah ibn Abi-Sarh,
\`Uthman ibn \`Affan’s foster-brother, as the governor of Egypt,[^114]
and so on.

Obviously, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, during his reign, depended upon the
Umayyads in the distribution of the offices. Meantime, he opposed the
Hashimites absolutely. In this regard, it has been narrated that when
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab wanted to appoint \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas as the
governor of Hims, he said to him, “Listen, son of \`Abbas! I am afraid
that death will take me while you are still in this position, and then
you will call people to follow you, the Hashimites, and to leave the
others.”[^115]

The same thing can be said about the stipulation that \`Abd al-Rahman
ibn \`Awf imposed upon Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib when he said, “I will
swear allegiance to you on the condition that you will not appoint
anyone from the Hashimites in a position of leadership”’[^116] It goes
without saying that \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf was no more than a
practicer of the policy of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar.

When objections to \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s decision of nominating
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan as the governor of Syria increased, \`Umar
said to the masses, “Do not mention Mu\`awiyah save in words of praise,
for I have heard the Messenger of Allah saying about him: O Allah, guide
him.”[^117]

I cannot tell whether this narration was fabricated by the Umayyads and
their fans in order to justify the wrong policies of Mu\`awiyah when he
was both governor and ruler or by \`Umar ibn al-Khattab in order to stop
the people’s objections to his decision.

Of course, the Holy Prophet’s “fabricated” supplication of guidance for
Mu\`awiyah is absolutely contradictory to the many narrations that have
authentically reported the Holy Prophet’s having cursed Mu\`awiyah,
Abu-Sufyan, and Yazid ibn Abi-Sufyan.

At any rate, Mu\`awiyah benefited very much by the support of \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab. Supporting this, it has been narrated that Mu\`awiyah said
to Sa\`sa\`ah ibn Sawhan, “I enjoy a priority to Islam although others
have preceded me in this matter.

However, none has been better than I am in holding this matter during my
age. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab noticed this. Had any other individual been
more powerful that I was in holding this position, \`Umar would have
certainly chosen him… etc.”[^118]

Correspondingly, Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr wrote a message to Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan mentioning the unmatched merits and virtues of Imam \`Ali,
saying,

“Woe to you! How dare you compare yourself to \`Ali who is the inheritor
and successor of the Messenger of Allah and the father of his sons and
the first to follow him and the closest to him… etc.”

Replying to this message, Mu\`awiyah wrote,

“You have advanced as an argument against me the merit of one other than
you and you have taken pride in one other than you. I thus thank the
Lord Who has taken this merit away from you and made it to someone esle.
Your father and I, during the lifetime of our Prophet, knew that the
right of son of Abi-Talib (i.e. Imam \`Ali) incumbent upon us and knew
that he was distinguished from us.

However, when Allah chose for His Prophet what He has in possession, and
fulfilled His promise to him, and caused his promulgation to prevail,
and proclaimed his argument and then took his soul to Him—when Allah did
such to His Prophet, it was your father and his “*faruq*” (i.e. \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab) who preceded anyone else in usurping the right of \`Ali
and in violating him.

They had already agreed on and planned to do this... It was your father
who paved the way for him and established this realm. If that which we
are experiencing is proved as true, then it is your father who started
it; but if it is injustice, then it is your father who overwhelmed it
and we are only his partners, since we have followed his path and
pursued his example.

Had it not for the past deeds of your father, we would not have mutinied
against the son of Abu-Talib and we would have certainly submitted to
him. But as we saw your father committing that before us, we followed
his example and took his deed as pattern for us. You should thus
disgrace your father as you like or stop it. Peace be upon him who
regrets and repents from errors.”[^119]

Similar words have been comprised by the missive of Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah
to \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar who objected to him in the killing of Imam
al-Husayn ibn \`Ali. Yazid, in this missive, said,

“Listen, idiot! We have come to upholstered houses, furnished fixtures,
and stuffed pillows. We therefore fought for these. If we are right,
then we will have fought for the sake of our rights; and if the other
party is right, then it was your father who began such violation and
usurped these people their due.”[^120]

All these materials confirm the considerable role of \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab in the strengthening of the Umayyad jurisprudence through
making a large room for \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan,
and their likes to lead a course opposite to the trend of pure
compliance with the sacred texts, and to establish a new jurisprudential
trend with innovative principles in the Islamic legislation.

Acceptability Of The Sahabah’s Sayings
--------------------------------------

In his book of *al-Mustasfa*, al-Ghazzaliy talks about the acceptability
of the Sahabah’s sayings[^121] as proof and presents the various
opinions in this regard. He says that some scholars have argued that the
Sahabah’s sayings are generally and without any exception decided as
acceptable proofs; other scholars have argued that they are decided as
acceptable proofs even if they violate the principle of *Qiyas*; other
scholars have argued that only can the sayings of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar be
decided as acceptable proofs because the Holy Prophet said, “Follow
those who will come after me!”; other scholars have argued that only the
sayings of the Rashidite caliphs can be taken as acceptable proofs in
the questions about which they agree.

After the presentation of these arguments, al-Ghazzaliy refutes them
all, saying that it is illogic to accept as irrefutable proofs the
sayings of those who are exposed to erring and inadvertence, since their
sinlessness has not been proven.

Furthermore, it is illogic to claim the sinlessness of such individuals
without resting upon any uninterrupted evidence and it is also illogic
to believe in the sinlessness of people who are exposed to disagreement!
The Sahabah agreed upon the permissibility of violating the Sahabah’s
opinions. For instance, Abu-Bakr and \`Umar did not criticize those who
disagreed with them in matters of Ijtihad; rather they deemed obligatory
upon each mujtahid to follow his personal conclusions.

The absence of evidences on the sinlessness of the Sahabah, the
incidences of disagreements among the Sahabah, and the Sahabah’s
statements of the permissibility of violating them in opinions—these are
three decisive evidences on the invalidity of deciding the Sahabah’s
sayings as binding proof.

Mr. Abu-Zuhrah says,

If truth be told, it is untrue to decide the Sahabah’s sayings as
binding proofs, for Almighty Allah has not sent in this ummah anyone
except our Holy Prophet, Muhammad—peace be upon him and his family—, and
we, the Muslims, have only one Messenger. The Sahabah, following the
Holy Prophet, are in the same degree commissioned with following the law
of Almighty Allah as found in the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.

Anyone who claims that a proof concerning a religious affair may be
found in other than these two sources has in reality said an unproven
thing about the religion of Almighty Allah and has also confirmed a
matter that has not been decided by Almighty Allah.[^122]

Dr. Husayn al-Hajj Hasan has written down nice words in this respect,

The companions of the Holy Prophet are ordinary human beings just like
the others. Some of them were seduced by this world and its pleasures.
The social values left influences on their behaviors. Anyone who claims
that the Sahabah are angels and sinless is in reality... It was nothing
but bad luck that caused Abu-Jahl to be killed during the Battle of Badr
while having been in the line of the polytheists.

Had serendipity helped him, in the same way as it had helped others like
him, and saved him from being killed during that battle to stay alive up
to the day of the conquest of Makkah and to embrace Islam, he would
certainly have been one of the grand Sahabah or the first-class Muslim
leaders who claimed having raised the pennon of Islam.

Thus, the question was no more than serendipity. Nothing but luck that
played in the destinies of men so hugely. The examples of such
serendipities are being openly experienced by us every day. We have very
often seen how men belonging to the same class of Abu-Jahl are taken to
the highest ranks by their lucks and are surrounded by reporters and
traditionists who encompass them with haloes of greatness.[^123]

Ibn Hazm says after quoting the following verses of the Holy Qur'an,

***“And they say: We believe in Allah and the messenger, and we obey;
then after that a faction of them turn away. Such are not believers. And
when they appeal unto Allah and His messenger to judge between them, lo!
a faction of them are averse. But if right had been with them they would
have come unto him willingly. Is there in their hearts a disease, or
have they doubts, or fear they lest Allah and His messenger should wrong
them in judgment? Nay, but such are evil-doers. The saying of (all true)
believers when they appeal unto Allah and His messenger to judge between
them is only that they say: We hear and we obey. And such are the
successful. He who obeyeth Allah and His messenger, and feareth Allah,
and keepeth duty (unto Him): such indeed are the victorious. They swear
by Allah solemnly that, if thou order them, they will go forth. Say:
Swear not; known obedience (is better). Lo! Allah is informed of what ye
do. Say: Obey Allah and obey the messenger. But if ye turn away, then
(it is) for him (to do) only that wherewith he hath been charged, and
for you (to do) only that wherewith ye have been charged. If ye obey
him, ye will go aright. But the messenger hath no other charge than to
convey (the message) plainly.” (Holy Qur’an: 24/47-54)***

\`Ali said, “These decisive verses have not left any opportunity to
anyone to riot about them. Through these verses, Allah has exposed the
characteristics of the people of our time. They claim that they are the
only believers in Allah and His Messenger and they are the only obedient
to them, but a party of them violates this confession and opposes what
has been revealed to them from Almighty Allah and His Messenger.

In the words of the law of Almighty Allah, these are surely not
believers. When they are called to apply to themselves verses from the
Holy Qur'an or a Hadith from the Messenger that violate their accursed
imitation, they will certainly loath it. Some of them will claim that
they are not included with these verses, others will claim that these
verses are dedicated to a certain occasion, others will claim that
acting upon these verses has been decided as repealed, others will claim
that so-and-so has not acceded to these, and others will claim that
these verses violate *Qiyas*.

But as soon as they find in the Hadith or the Holy Qur'an a matter that
conforms to what they follow, they propagate it to all sides and come to
it willingly, as has been exactly described. Woe to them! What has
happened to them? Is their hearts full of disease and doubt?

Or do they fear lest Almighty Allah and His Messenger would wrong them?
Most certainly, these are the actual wrongdoers as has been described by
Allah, Lord of the worlds. Away with those who do wrong![^124]

However, Ibn Hazm then attempts to justify the deeds of the grand
Sahabah who violated the Hadith of the Holy Prophet and claims that lies
have been fabricated against them as regards these deeds. This is
because Ibn Hazm has carried for these Sahabah enormous haloes of
greatness. He further says,

Abu-Muhammad says that some people argue that groups of the Sahabah and
Tabi\`un neglected carrying out many of the instructions that they had
known from the Hadith of the Holy Prophet; hence, they neglected these
Hadiths either on account of having belittled them or because they had
an amount of knowledge due to which they knew the actual purpose of
these Hadiths.

Of course, it is better to think of them excellently and choose for the
second option. \`Ali says that this argument is inaccurate for many
reasons.

First, if one claims that it is probable that the Hadith whose
instruction was neglected by the Sahabah has been forged or made-up,
this can be answered that it is also probable that the narration, which
reported the Sahabah having not carried out the instruction of a Hadith
has been made-up.

Nothing gives preference to the claim that forgery occurred to the
reporting from the Holy Prophet over the claim that the Sahabah
neglected acting upon the contents of these Hadiths.

Similarly, some of the Sahabah acted upon a Hadith while others
neglected. He also differentiated between those who claim that the
Sahabah who neglected acting upon a Hadith must have had knowledge due
to which they neglected and those who claim that the Sahabah who acted
upon a Hadith must have had knowledge due to which they acted upon that
Hadith.

In fact, any claim that is not supported by a proof is worthless. As has
been previously cited, do not feel an aversion for him who neglects
acting upon the right, whether his neglect has been due to an excused
idea or to an act of disobedience; and do not care about him who carries
out the right deed no matter who that person was and whether he carried
out or did not carry out that deed. At any rate, it is obligatory upon
anyone who hears about it to carry it out.

Similarly, the Hadiths which have been reported that some of the past
generation neglected acting upon them are, in most cases, not the same
as those Hadiths neglected by those who objected to the Sahabah for
having neglected acting upon them; rather these objectors neglected
acting upon the Hadiths which had been adopted by those Sahabah and
acted upon the Hadiths which had been neglected by those Sahabah.

Hence, the previous Sahabah’s having neglected acting upon a certain
Hadith cannot be accepted as proof for these objectors, because they
have been the first to violate the acts of these Sahabah and the first
to decide the Sahabah’s negligence as unacceptable. Nothing is worse
than presenting as a pretext that which does not materialize that
pretext; rather it annuls it in the same way, or even tenser, of
annulling the one who presents it as pretext.

Also, if their forgery that the Sahabah neglected carrying out the
instructions mentioned in some Hadiths because they had had knowledge
due to which they neglected acting upon that Hadith; we seek Almighty
Allah’s protection against such forgery and seek Him to protect all
those who think well of Him against any response to such false
ascriptions to the most virtuous people of this sacred ummah—if this
forgery had been true, all those who hid such knowledge would have been
accursed by Almighty Allah Who says:

“***Those who conceal the clear Signs We have sent down, and the
Guidance, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book,-on
them shall be Allah's curse, and the curse of those entitled to curse.”
(Holy Qur’an: 2/159)***

Our answer is that may Almighty Allah curse him whoever carries
knowledge from Him and His Messenger but conceals it from people. Anyone
who ascribes such a thing to the Sahabah—may Allah’s pleasure be with
them—has in fact ascribed them to forging lies against the religion and
planning plots against the Islamic legislation. Of course, such matter
are more catastrophic than infidelity.

Using similar conception, I have objected to the words of al-Layth ibn
Harfash al-\`Abdiy in the session of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad ibn
Bishr—may Allah have mercy upon him—during a great celebration of the
Malikkiyyah jurisprudents; yet, none of them could answer me with any
word; rather they all kept silent except a few number of them who showed
acceptance to my argument. During that session, I said to al-Layth,

“You have ascribed to Malik ibn Anas a matter that would make him the
most wicked of all people if your words were true. You are claiming that
Malik presented to the people the doubtful, uncertain, and repealed
narrations and concealed the authentic, sound, and repealing narrations
and he departed life without telling anybody about these narrations.

Of course, this thing can be done by none except those who intend for
ruining Islam and cheating its people. Almighty Allah has protected
Malik against such. In our conception, he is surely one of the master
scholars who guided this nation to the right path although he sometimes
made mistakes in the same way as he had been right.

Like the other scholars, he exerted his efforts in the conclusion of
religious laws. Almighty Allah has imposed promulgation for Him upon all
scholars. The Holy Prophet said, ‘Verily, one who conceals any item of
(religious) knowledge about which he is asked shall be bridled with a
rein of fire on the Resurrection Day.’...etc.”[^125]

The abovementioned discussion reveals that pluralism in opinions opposes
the unity of doctrine. Similarly, the conception of the Sahabah’s
ultimate decency opposed the deeds of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab with Sa\`d
ibn \`Abadah when he shouted, “Kill Sa\`d! May Allah kill Sa\`d,”[^126]
and with Tamim al-Dariy when he whipped him,[^127] and with \`Amr ibn
al-\`Ās when he accused him of treason and of having stolen the spoils
of war,[^128] and with Khalid ibn al-Walid when he decided that he must
be sentenced to stoning penalty.[^129]

All these incidents prove that the conception of the Sahabah’s ultimate
decency was not found during the reigns of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar and even
\`Uthman; rather it was invented afterwards. In fact, this conception is
baseless and is not supported by any tradition.

All the reports that were ascribed to the Holy Prophet in this respect
are carrying more than one sense and can be easily refuted. The same
thing is applicable to the unfounded haloes of sacredness that were
given to the Sahabah in addition to their having been regarded as
sinless experts of the Holy Qur'an. If truth be told, all such things
were invented by the rulers and their fans.

Elaborately, let us quote the following text from al-Taftazaniy’s *Sharh
al-Maqasid*:

The disputes, disagreements, and arguments that occurred between the
Sahabah, as is written in the books of history, indicate undoubtedly
that some of them went astray and exceeded all limits in oppression and
licentiousness whose motives must have been malice, stubbornness, envy,
enmity, seeking of authorities and official positions, and tendency
towards lusts and whims.

Of course, not all the Sahabah are sinless and not all those who met the
Holy Prophet are virtuous. Nevertheless, due to their good opinions
about the companions of the Holy Prophet, the scholars have had to find
excuses and justifications for them.

They have also believed these Sahabah as having been divinely protected
against deviation and wickedness so as to preserve the Muslims’
doctrines from deviation and movement away as regards the personalities
of the grand Sahabah, especially the Muhajirun and the Ansar as well as
those predicted to be rewarded on the Resurrection Day.

However, after the age of the Sahabah, the Household of Allah’s
Messenger (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt) were oppressed and persecuted so
harshly that none can deny and none can find any justification. Even the
inanimate and the deaf can witness the oppression that was inflicted
upon the Ahl al-Bayt—such an insensitive oppression that even the
heavens and the earth wept for them; and even the mountains and the
rocks were about to split.

The evil of these deeds shall incessantly chase those who committed it
all over ages. May the curse of Almighty Allah be upon all those who
practiced and participated in these crimes and those who accepted it.

***“And certainly the chastisement of the hereafter is severer and
more.” (Holy Qur’an: 20/127)***

In any case, it may be said that some master scholars have not permitted
cursing Yazid although they have known for sure that Yazid deserved more
than mere cursing. We answer that those scholars have decided so in
order that the other Sahabah would not be cursed, as is done by the
Rafidah.[^130]

The most important reason of the invention of such erroneous and
baseless principles and fundamentals has been the decision of the
prevention from reporting and recording the Hadith. This decision
granted a big room for the authorities who adopted Opinionism to rule
over the sacred texts.

In his *Sharh al-Arba\`in*, Sulayman ibn \`Abd al-Qawiy, a Hanbalite
scholar died in AH 716, says,

The reason of disputes among the scholars is the contradiction of the
narrations and reported texts. Some people allege that the reason beyond
such dispute was \`Umar ibn al-Khattab; when the Sahabah asked him to
permit them writing down the Holy Sunnah, he prevented them although he
knew that the Holy Prophet had ordered the Muslims to record the Hadith
for Abu-Shat and had said, “Record the knowledge by means of writing
it.”

Had \`Umar let the Sahabah record what they had heard from the Holy
Prophet, the Sunnah would have certainly been verified and no barrier
would have stopped between the last generation of the Islamic nation and
the Holy Prophet except the Sahabah whose narrations would have been
written down because these records were uninterruptedly reported from
the Sahabah in the same way as they were uninterruptedly narrated by
al-Bukhariy.[^131]

Shaykh Muhammad Abu-Zuhrah says,

Some of the Sahabah refrained from recording the Hadith and prevented
the others from recording it not because the Holy Prophet warned them
against writing down his traditions, for the traditions that are
reported from the Sahabah as regards the prevention of or the refraining
from recording the Hadith have not carried this justification at all;
rather they used to present as pretext that they anticipated that people
would occupy themselves with these traditions and disregard the Holy
Qur'an... etc.[^132]

In so doing, many of the Holy Prophet’s traditions wiped out and many
more fabricated matters were ascribed to him and the Prophetic heritage
was confused with the personal opinions and conclusions. In view of
that, al-Bukhariy decided to pick for his book from among six hundred
thousand Hadiths. A similar thing was decided by Muslim, al-Nassa'iy,
and other compilers of Hadith.

The previously mentioned discussions have been lengthy, explicative
presentation of the ordeal of the Holy Prophet’s reported texts as well
as the inconveniences of the decision of preventing the reporting and
recording of the Hadith so as that the gentle reader will be acquainted
with the confusions of the Islamic legislations as well as some of the
reasons of disagreement among the Muslims. Nothing but truth has been
our purpose—the truth that has been concealed from the Muslims for long
ages and that has been besieged for about fourteen centuries.

[^1]: Dr. \`Abd al-Karim ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Namlah: Mukhalafat
al-Sahabiy li’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy al-Sharif Dirasah Nadhariyyah
Tatbiqiyyah 22-29.

[^2]: Dr. \`Abd al-Karim ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Namlah: Mukhalafat
al-Sahabiy li’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy al-Sharif Dirasah Nadhariyyah
Tatbiqiyyah 30-86.

[^3]: Dr. \`Abd al-Karim ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Namlah: Mukhalafat
al-Sahabiy li’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy al-Sharif Dirasah Nadhariyyah
Tatbiqiyyah 87-105.

[^4]: Dr. \`Abd al-Karim ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Namlah: Mukhalafat
al-Sahabiy li’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy al-Sharif Dirasah Nadhariyyah
Tatbiqiyyah 106-123.

[^5]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:75 H. 170; Sahih Muslim 1:234 H. 279; Sunan
Abi-Dawud 1:19 H. 71; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 1:151 H. 91; Sunan al-Nassa'iy
1:52 H. 63, 64; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:130 H. 363, 364; Malik ibn Anas:
al-Muwatta' 1:52 H. 65; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:460 H. 9931.

[^6]: Sharh Ma\`ani al-Āthar 1:23; Sunan al-Darqutniy 1:66 H. 17;
al-\`Ilal al-Mutanahiyah 1:333 H. 544.

[^7]: For instance, refer to Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy 2:78.

[^8]: Sahih Muslim 1:235 H. 280; Sunan Abi-Dawud 1:19 H. 74; Sunan
al-Nassa'iy 1:177 H. 337; Sunan al-Darimiy 1:104 H. 737; Musannaf Ibn
Abi-Shaybah 1:59 H. 1831; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:30 H. 366; al-Tabaraniy:
al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 12:365 H. 13307.

[^9]: Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:229 H. 2083; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 3:407 H. 1102;
Sunan al-Darimiy 2:185 H. 2184; Sunan al-Darqutniy 3:221 H. 10; al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 2:182 H. 2706; Musnad Ahmad
ibn Hanbal 6:47 H. 24251, 6:66 H. 24417; Sharh Ma\`ani al-Āthar 3:7.

[^10]: Al-Muhalla 9:455; Bada'i\` al-Sana'i\` 2 :249; Ibn Hajar
al-\`Asqalaniy: Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhariy 9:225.

[^11]: Al-Sarakhsiy: al-Usul 2:6.

[^12]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 5:197; Sunan Abi-Dawud 2:229 H. 2085; Sunan
al-Tirmidhiy 3:307 H. 1101, 1102; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:605 H. 1880; Musnad
Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1:250 H. 2261.

[^13]: Al-Mughni 6:7, Kashf al-Qina\` 5:48.

[^14]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:257 H. 702; Sahih Muslim 1:292 H. 390; Sunan
Abi-Dawud 1:191 H. 721; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 2:35 H. 255; Sunan
al-Nassa'iy 2:182 H. 1025; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:279 H. 858; Malik ibn Anas:
al-Muwatta' 1:75 H. 163; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:8 H. 4540.

[^15]: Musannaf Ibn Abi-Shaybah 1:214 H. 2452; Sharh Ma\`ani al-Āthar
1:227; al-Dirayah fi Takhrij Ahadith al-Hidayah 1:149.

[^16]: Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 9:217; al-Mughni 1:295; al-Dirayah
fi Takhrij Ahadith al-Hidayah 1:155; Nasb al-Rayah 1:416.

[^17]: Al-Tahqiq fi Ahadith al-Khilaf 1:331, H. 419; al-Mughni 1:295;
Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy 2:88 S. 77.

[^18]: Dr. \`Abd al-Karim ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Namlah: Mukhalafat
al-Sahabiy li’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy al-Sharif Dirasah Nadhariyyah
Tatbiqiyyah 124-145.

[^19]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 3.

[^20]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:130; Ibn
Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Lisan al-Mizan 2:199 H. 904; Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat
al-Awliya’ 1:64; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 2:417 H. 915-916;
al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 11:612; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Isti\`ab fi Ma\`rifat al-Ashab Part III 1114 H. 1855.

[^21]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 11:611; al-Kulayniy:
al-Kafi 1:209 H. 5; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 5:194 H. 5067;
al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:139 H. 4642.

[^22]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 11:192 H. 970; Musnad
Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:185 H. 6741; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 3:227
H. 2995; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Madkhal Ila’l-Sunan al-Kubra 1:429 H. 790;
al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:343 H. 5321.

[^23]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 11:193 H. 978; Musnad
Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:181 H. 6702, 2:300 H. 7976; Sahih Ibn Habban 1:275;
al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 8:307 H. 8715; I\`tiqad Ahl al-Sunnah
1:117 H. 183.

[^24]: \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 358;
al-Bukhariy: Khalq Af\`al al-\`Ibad 63; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:343 H. 5321; al-Suyutiy: Miftah
al-Jannah 70.

[^25]: Al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir 2:331-2; al-Hurr al-'Āmiliy: Wasai’l
al-Shi’ah 27:61; al-Burhan 2:476 H. 6; al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar
5:297. Nu’man the judge, in Ikhtilaf Usul al-Madhhab, Dar al-Andalus
Press, 1973, records the same narration.

[^26]: The number of the Hadiths that Malik ibn Anas, in his book of
al-Muwatta', narrated on the authority of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib is
eight only! While he narrated on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah about one
hundred and seventy Hadiths.

[^27]: One of the beliefs that the rulers of the Islamic States imposed
upon the publics is that it is forbidden to mutiny or revolt against any
ruler even if that ruler is unjust, miscreant, irreligious… etc.

[^28]: Al-Mubarakfuriy: Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy fi Sharh Jami\` al-Tirmidhiy
Introduction 352. See also I\`tiqad Ahl al-Sunnah 1:52-153 (where the
compiler has replaced the statement ‘The Qur'an is not created’ with the
statement ‘The Qur'an is created’); Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:206.

[^29]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 5:382 H. 23293; Sunan Ibn Majah 1:37 H.
97; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:609, 610 H. 3662, 3663; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:80 H. 4455.

[^30]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:188, 9:55.

[^31]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 105-106; Sunan al-Darimiy
1:126; Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:36 and al-Tarikh al-Saghir 105.

[^32]: Sunan al-Darimiy 1:126.

[^33]: Al-Raziy: al-Jarh wa’l-Ta\`dil 1:21.

[^34]: Al-Suyutiy: Tarikh al-Khulafa' 241; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-\`Ummal 1:332; Sayyid Ja\`far Murtada: al-Sahih 8:11.

[^35]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 106; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh
Madinat Dimashq 3:175.

[^36]: Al-Ghamidiy: Haqiqat al-Bid\`ah wa-Ahkamuha (The Reality and
Rulings of Innovations)’ 1:74 as quoted from Abu-Dawud: al-Sunnah, Kitab
al-Sunnah and Muhammad ibn Waddah: al-Bida\` wa’l-Nahy \`Anha 30.

[^37]: Al-Ājury: al-Shari\`ah 48; \`Abdullah ibn Ahmad: Kitab al-Sunnah
1:357 as has been cited in Al-Ghamidiy’s Haqiqat al-Bid\`ah wa-Ahkamuha.

[^38]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:76.

[^39]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:76-77; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 106-107.

[^40]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 251; Malik ibn Anas: al-Muwatta' 290.

[^41]: Musa Jarullah: al-Washi\`ah fi Naqd \`Aqa\`id al-Shi\`ah 77.

[^42]: Abu-Ishaq: Tabaqat al-Fuqaha’ 67; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Tarikh
Baghdad 8:424. For further details, refer to Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul
al-Ahkam 1:246 and on.

[^43]: One of the famous traditions that have been falsely ascribed to
the Holy Prophet is that he had nominated ten individuals as having been
given the good tidings of entering Paradise. Those individuals are thus
called ‘al-\`Asharah al-Mubashsharah (the ten individuals of Paradise)’
and they are Abu-Bakr, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, Imam
\`Ali, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas, Talhah ibn Ubaydullah, al-Zubayr ibn
al-\`Awwam, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf, Abu-\`Ubayday ibn al-Jarrah and
Sa\`id ibn al-Nufayl.

[^44]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:13, Dar al-Fikr – Beirut.

[^45]: This is an indication to the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:
“And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them;
but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that which
acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command; then if it returns,
make peace between them with justice and act equitably; surely Allah
loves those who act equitably. 49/9”

[^46]: \`Abdus ibn Malik al-\`Attar, one of the Sunnite master scholars
and trditionists, is reported to have said, “If anyone, be it righteous
or licentious, overcomes the Muslim community and declares himself the
caliph (ruler) and is thus given the title ‘Amir al-Mu’minin’, it will
be then obligatory upon anyone who believes in Allah and the Hereafter
to regard such a person as the imam (the legal supreme authority).” This
‘ruling’ has been derived from the deed of \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar during
the campaign of al-Harrah when he had been neutral, but when a party
overcame, he declared his loyalty to the prevalent party.

[^47]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 299-300.

[^48]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:58 H. 21.

[^49]: Al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il
17:258; Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Ikhtisas 281.

[^50]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:70.

[^51]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:181.

[^52]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 299.

[^53]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 301.

[^54]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:184 as quoted from
al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi.

[^55]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 8:513 S. 38.

[^56]: Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat al-Awliya' 3:196-197.

[^57]: \`Abdullah ibn Shabramah was a famous master jurisprudent.

[^58]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:57.

[^59]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:220 as quoted from
al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir.

[^60]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:153.

[^61]: Al-Barqiy: al-Mahasin 212.

[^62]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 1:180 H. 915.

[^63]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Amaliy 52.

[^64]: According to the Islamic legislation, bondmaids are as lawful as
wives for their masters. Hence, when a bondmaid gives birth of a baby,
it will be unlawful for her master to sell her.

[^65]: Al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il
17:254.

[^66]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:56.

[^67]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:334.

[^68]: Al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il
17:256.

[^69]: Al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il
17:309.

[^70]: Al-Barqiy: al-Mahasin 156.

[^71]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:33.

[^72]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:241-242 H. 6; Muhammad ibn Hasan
al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 154.

[^73]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:62. Similar sermons can be found in Nahj
al-Balaghah and the book of Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilaliy.

[^74]: Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^75]: Al-Dahlawiy: Risalat al-Insaf.

[^76]: Abu-Fasil is a humiliating nickname said to Abu-Bakr.

[^77]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:221; Musannaf \`Abd
al-Razzaq 5:451 H. 9767; Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:237; al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy:
al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:83 H. 4462; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Isti\`ab 3:974, 4:1679.

[^78]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 13:173 H. 36518, 13:107 H.
36351, 13:115 H. 36372; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:634 H. 3715.

[^79]: Ahmad ibn \`Abd al-Rahman

[^80]: This statement (Inna Li’llahi wa-Inna Ilayhi Raji\`un) that is
derived from Almighty Allah’s saying in the Holy Qur'an, “They say, when
afflicted with calamity, ‘To Allah We belong, and to Him is our return.’
2/156” is said on occasions of misfortunes.

[^81]: Al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 3:155 as quoted from Sunan
al-Tirmidhiy.

[^82]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 11:124 H. 30877.

[^83]: Sahih Muslim 7:123; Sunan al-Darimiy 2:432; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal 4:367.

[^84]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 1:41 H. 93.

[^85]: Al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa'id 9:193; Al-Sa\`atiy: al-Fath
al-Rabbaniy fi Tartib Musnad Ahmad 22:105; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz
al-\`Ummal 1:173 H. 873.

[^86]: Al-Sa\`atiy: al-Fath al-Rabbaniy 22:104.

[^87]: Al-Mubarakfuriy: Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy fi Sharh Jami\` al-Tirmidhiy
10:290.

[^88]: Al-Zarqaniy: Sharh al-Mawahib 2:8.

[^89]: Mansur \`Ali Nasif: al-Taj al-Jami\` li’l-Usul fi Ahadith
al-Rasul 1:48.

[^90]: Al-Nawawiy: Sharh Sahih Muslim 15: 189 Kitab al-Fada'il (Section
of Merits), Fada'il \`Ali (Merits of Imam \`Ali).

[^91]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; Introduction 1:79-83.

[^92]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; Introduction 1:79-83.

[^93]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; Introduction 1:83 as
quoted from Shihab al-Din al-Khafajiy: Nasim al-Riyad 3:409.

[^94]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; Introduction 1:84 as
quoted from Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah 150.

[^95]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 4:1612 H. 4168; Sahih Muslim 3:1259 H. 1637.

[^96]: The Farewell Hajj is the final ritual collective pilgrimage led
by the Holy Prophet.

[^97]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:59 H. 11578; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:662
H. 3786; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 5:89 H. 4757; al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:118 H. 4577.

[^98]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: al-Asma’ al-Mubhamah 8:189 H. 95;
al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa'id 1:74; al-Rawdaniy: Jam\` al-Fawa'id
12:30; \`Abd al-Razzaq: al-Musannaf 10:313; Abu-Nu\`aym: Dala'il
al-Nubuwwah 1:50; Ibn al-Athir: Usd al-Ghabah fi Ma\`rifat al-Sahabah
3:127.

[^99]: Ibn Shahrashub, in Manaqib Āli Abi-Talib 1:312, has recorded that
the Holy Prophet said, “\`Ali is the chest of my knowledge.”

[^100]: Nahj al-Balaghah 76, Sermon 33.

[^101]: For example, see Ibn \`Abd al-Barr al-Qurtubiy: Jami\` Bayan
al-\`Ilm wa Fadlih and Ibn Abi-Shaybay: al-Musannaf Introduction.

[^102]: Shaykh Muhammad Abu-Zahrah: Abu-Hanifah 304.

[^103]: Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 5:456 H. 9770; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Isti\`ab 2:625 H. 988; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:21; al-Isabah fi
Tamyiz al-Sahabah 5:152 No. 8074.

[^104]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 2:44 as quoted from
al-Jawhariy’s Kitab al-Saqifah.

[^105]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 6:184; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Isti\`ab fi Ma\`rifat al-Ashab 3:396.

[^106]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 13:587; Ibn Kathir:
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:125; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Isti\`ab fi
Ma\`rifat al-Ashab 8:397.

[^107]: Ibn al-Athir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:118.

[^108]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 6:184; Ibn al-Athir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah
8:125.

[^109]: Tarikh Khalifah 1:155; Futuh al-Buldan 1:145; Tarikh Dimashq
46:157, 59:111.

[^110]: Al-Muntadham 6:5; Tahdhib al-Kamal 31:54; Tahdhib al-Tahdhib
11:126; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:214.

[^111]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 5:59; Ibn al-Athir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah
8:214.

[^112]: Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Isti\`ab fi Ma\`rifat al-Ashab 3:664.

[^113]: Tarikh Khalifah 1:154; Futuh al-Buldan 1:297; Tarikh al-Tabariy
2:516; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:350-351.

[^114]: Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala' 3:43; al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah
4:110.

[^115]: Al-Mas\`udiy: Muruj al-Dhahab 2:353 H. 454.

[^116]: Ibn Qutaybah: al-Imamah wa’l-Siyasah 1:31; Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat
al-Kubra 3:344; Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:560; Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 5:481
H. 9776; Musannaf Ibn Abi-Shaybah 7:439 H. 37071; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 8:151.

[^117]: Ibn al-Athir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 8:123. Ibn \`Asakir, in
Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 59:85, has narrated on the authority of al-Sa'ib
that when \`Umar ibn al-Khattab appointed Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan as
the governor of Aleppo, some people objected, for the latter was still
young. On hearing this, \`Umar said to them, “How dare you blame me for
this, while I have heard the Messenger of Allah saying (about
Mu\`awiyah), ‘O Allah! Make him guide and truly guided and guide him and
make others be guided through him.’”

[^118]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:638; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah
2:133; Ibn al-Athir: al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 3:35.

[^119]: Ahmad Zaki Safwat: Jamharat Rasa'il al-\`Arab 1:447 as quoted
from al-Mas\`udiy: Muruj la-Dhahab 2:600; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah 1:284.

[^120]: Al-Anwar al-Nu\`maniyyah 1:53; Bihar al-Anwar 45:328;
al-Mahuziy: Kitab al-Arba\`in 104.

[^121]: Qawl al-Sahabiy (the Sahabah’s sayings): According to some
Sunnite jurisprudential schools, Qawl al-Sahabiy is one of the
principles and sources upon which these schools depend in the deduction
of religious laws from their sources.

[^122]: Shaykh Muhammad Abu-Zahrah: al-Hadith wa’l-Muhaddithun 102.

[^123]: Dr. Husayn al-Hajj Hasan: Naqd al-Hadith 1:350-351. The quoted
words have been originally quoted from Dr. \`Ali al-Wardiy: Wu\`\`adh
al-Salatin, pp. 118.

[^124]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 1:100-101.

[^125]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 2:251.

[^126]: Musannaf \`Abd al-Razzaq 5:444 H. 9758; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
1:55 H. 391; Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 3:616; Tarikh al-Tabariy
2:235.

[^127]: Al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 2:58 H. 1281; Ibn Hazm:
al-Muhalla 2:274.

[^128]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 20:21.

[^129]: Tarikh al-Tabariy 2:274; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 6:323; Ibn
Habban: al-Thuqat 2:169.

[^130]: Al-Taftazaniy: Sharh al-Maqasid 5:310.

[^131]: This statement has been quoted by Asad Haydar in his famous book
of ‘al-Imam al-Sadiq wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah (Imam al-Sadiq and the
Four Schools of Muslim jurisprudence)’.

[^132]: Shaykh Muhammad Abu-Zahrah: al-Hadith wa’l-Muhaddithun 234.


