Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah, the All-compassionate, the All-merciful**

All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds. Endless blessings and
peace be upon Muhammad—seal of the Prophets and head of the Messengers
(of Allah), and upon his immaculate family and choice companions.

All the Heavenly revealed religions are undoubtedly based upon
intellectual grounds, legislative bases, and theoretically and
practically positive principles for sake of the religion and humankind’s
goodness. Islam, too, has been at the top of the Heavenly revealed
religions, and has been in contact with life more than any other
religion.

Moreover, it has been the most successful in the field of applying the
principles to the practical life since it has been the leader of many
nations throughout many successive generations. It is thus logic that
such a religion enjoys the largest amount of principles, grounds, and
bases of thought. The Holy Qur’an and Sunnah have been the first and
most fundamental sources of the Islamic statements and rulings. Another
distinctive feature of Islam is that the Almighty has undertaken
protecting the Holy Qur’an against extinction and distortion. In this
regard, Almighty Allah says,

***“Surely, We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian” (Holy Qur’an: 15:9)***

As a result, the Holy Qur’an has not encountered the same fate of the
Torah and the Gospel as well as the other distorted Heavenly revealed
Books. Nevertheless, the second source of the Islamic legislation,
namely the Holy Sunnah, has been unfortunately exposed to distortion and
fabrication since the lifetime of the Holy Prophet who attracted
attentions to this point by saying,

“Anyone who attributes false reports to me must certainly find himself a
place in Hellfire.”[^1]

From this cause, as well as so many other causes, the Holy Sunnah is
described as presumptive. Distortions and forgeries against the Holy
Sunnah have influenced the other sources of legislation and, thus, each
group has interpreted the Qur'anic texts -Āyahs- according to its
narrations of the Sunnah claiming the objective.

Other groups have exceeded all limits when they argued that the
individually codified principles and rulings dispense with the reported
heritage and replace its contrasts. Thus, discrepancies have branched
out to include most of the principles and secondary affairs of Islam.

In the same way, the ummah (i.e. Muslim community) has branched out
forming various sects and schools, each claiming following the guidance
of the Holy Qur’an and the course of the Holy Prophet as well as having
the right to its side and the Sunnah in its purest form.

Is it then possible to believe that all the different Islamic sects and
schools are true and receiving their genuineness from Almighty Allah and
the Holy Prophet, although the right path is singly one and it is
necessary to search for it? Likewise, should we believe all the
accusations that all the Islamic sects and schools have charged with
each other?

In this manner, disputations of the various sects and schools have
revolved upon vicious circle of reciprocal accusations, while the one
and only thing to be adopted by a sound reason with regard to such
discrepancies is to give preference to a sect over the others since it
is unreasonable to decide all of them as true or decide all of them as
false.

This is because the right takes only one form, and the true sect is only
one. On this account, it is inescapably obligatory upon all Muslims to
take individual endeavors for hitting upon the genuine norm that takes
to the reality of what the Holy Prophet had conveyed from Almighty
Allah.

Because the issue of regarding the Sunnah as the second authoritative
principle in Islam is unanimously acceptable by all Muslims, the study
should be consecrated to identifying the methods of proving a saying’s
ascription to the Holy Prophet. In other words, which item of the
heritage attributed to the Holy Prophet should be regarded as
authoritative?

To answer, it is perhaps claimed that the true Hadiths are only those
authenticated according to the rules of *\`Ilm al-Rijal* (The study of
the manners and history of the narrators of a Hadith in order to attain
reliability), while those not authenticated must be thrown away and
neglected.

At first blush, the previous claim may seem to be true; but the
well-versed in the affairs of the Islamic law recognize that the
reliability on a definite Hadith does not depend on the *isnad*[^2]
only; rather there are certain standards and regulations to be
necessarily observed in this regard.

Nevertheless, some principles and criteria of the *\`Ilm al-Rijal* have
been submitted to certain regulations; and neither logic criteria nor
have Qur'anic principles been set as the judges in such issues.
Discrepancy and contrast are therefore obvious in the judgment of a
certain narrator. Moreover, the founders of the major School of Sunnite
Muslim jurisprudence have been also exposed to such campaigns of
criticisms and vilifications.[^3]

Thus, a researcher will inspect nothing but a huge pile and dense mist
of criteria prevailed by political senses inclining to certain sects or
schools. Therefore, many untrustworthy narrators have been decided as
reliable and decent, and many trustworthy have been decided as weak and
doubtful.

By the same token, the isnad of many narrations that are contradictory
to the reality has been decided as sound, while the isnad of many others
that are soundly applicable to the reality has been decided as doubtful
or even ill.

For the previous reasons, it has become inevitable that we study the
Sunnah as thoroughly as possible depending upon a more series method and
founding on the invariable fundamentals of Shari\`ah, history, reason,
and nature through investigating all the aspects, circumstances, and
aims associated with a Hadith.

On the other hand, we do not intend to cancel the role of the isnad in
the evaluation of a Hadith rather to have recourse to other proofs and
presumptions the purpose of which is to rectify the trends of some
reports that have not been duly studied.

At any rate, the matter has winded up with the result that we, at
present, see a great sect of Muslims devotionally follow definite
reference books of Hadith that they call *al-Sihah al-Sittah* (the six
most reliable reference books of Hadith) and, on the other hand,
another, yet big, group follow other reference books of Hadith that they
call *al-Kutub al-Arba\`ah* (the four books) regarding them as the most
authenticated and the furthest from distortion and fabrication.

Thus, the following questions should be necessarily answered, at least
after exposing the roots of the studied issue through historical and
reported texts:

Which is the most authenticated, and where can it be found?

Are all the Hadiths recorded in *al-Sihah al-Sittah* wholly
authenticated, or there lie some weak, doubtful, or even false reports?

What about the narration on the authority of the Ahl al-Bayt[^4]; is it
wholly authenticated, or there lie some interpolated or forged
statements?

The most important and noteworthy event that has left the greatest
influence on the Sunnah, in both text and significance, was the
prohibition of recording and narrating the Holy Prophet’s heritage. The
application of this decision, taken by the two Shaykhs (namely, Abu-Bakr
ibn Abi-Quhafah and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab), extended to the reigns of
\`Uthman ibn \`Affan and Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu-Sufyan up to the reign of
\`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz who canceled it and ordered people to record
the Sunnah.

Nevertheless, a group of the grand Sahabah (the Holy Prophet’s
companions)[^5] and Tabi’un (the followers of the Sahabah—the generation
that came after the Sahabah) considered the recordation of the Hadith
the one and only method that they followed even during the reign of
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab whose cruelty and severity with anyone who would
oppose him were the distinctive features of his reign. \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib, Mu\`adh ibn Jabal, Ubayy ibn Ka\`b, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud,
Anas ibn Malik, Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra’, and
Abu-Dharr, as well as many others, were among those Sahabah who recorded
the Hadith.

Such great Islamic figures recorded and spread the Hadith as they
regarded the decision of the prohibition as baseless and neglected the
personal opinions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, as well as those who followed
them, and emptied them of any sanctity due to which they might be
indisputable.

Furthermore, those Sahabah did not fear what others did. This was the
origin of the discrepancy between the two methods; one is recording and
narrating the Sunnah, while the other prohibiting the reporting,
recordation, and writing; or ordering to reduce it. Thus, each method
has had its own intellectual principles.

On this account, it is inevitable to study carefully the two schools in
order to make out which is the nearest to the reality and furthest from
personal motives. Away from calumniation and fabrication, this study
must be dedicated to analyzing the prevalent circumstances at that time
as well as the characters of the individuals involved on the different
levels of their lives.

The study will also not be sufficed with a Hadith’s being classified as
authenticated (Sahih), trustworthy (muwaththaq), good (hasan), or weak
(da’if); rather it will comprehend all the aspects involved.

This is because most of the Sahabah stated that they had no knowledge
whether the contents of a report they themselves narrated had been
repealed or not, or whether a text said by the Holy Prophet had been his
own saying or quoted from the Holy Qur’an, or the ruling appearing in
the Holy Prophet’s saying had been general or dedicated to definite
individuals.

Likewise, they affirmed on various occasions that the verdicts they
issued had not been based upon any reference of legislation; if it
therefore was true, this would be originated from Almighty Allah’s
guidance, but if it was not, it would be Satan’s, as well as their,
fault.

For the previous reasons, it has become necessary to make a wide-ranging
study for shedding light on the general and the obscure matters that
enclosed the Sunnah and its transmitted heritage in accordance with the
new scientific methodology for the purpose of distinguishing the true
for the false, since such study will surely bring forth many new facts.

In addition to too many affairs respecting the Islamic legislation, the
knowledgeability of the Sahabah, the jurisprudential trends that
prevailed in that age, and the motives of such various trends, the study
will show the contrast between the reports of those who prohibited the
recordation of the Hadith and those who challenged the decision and thus
recorded and narrated it.

Additionally, the study will give a perfect idea about the way of
deducing the authentic reports from the *sihah* and the Four Books plus
the other reliable reference books of Hadith.

Let us now begin our investigation in order to set eyes on the effect of
the decision of prohibiting the recordation and narration of the Sunnah
along with its numerous, yet negative, consequences that contributed in
the formation of the past and present structures of the Islamic schools
of law.

Sayyid Ali al-Shahristani  
[www.shahrestani.org](http://www.shahrestani.org)  
<shahrestani@imamreza.net>

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:52, H. 107, 108; Sahih Muslim 1:10 H. 2,3,4.

[^2]: Isnad is a list of authorities who have transmitted a Hadith of a
statement, action, or approbation of the Holy Prophet; its reliability
determines the validity of a Hadith. The isnad precedes the actual text
(matn) and takes the form, “It has been related to me by A on the
authority of B on the authority of C on the authority of D that the Holy
Prophet said…”

[^3]: Ibn Mu’in and Ahmad ibn Salih found fault with al-Shafi\`iy; the
founder of an Islamic school of law that took his name. (See Tahdhib
al-Kamal; the footnote 24:380.) Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy has recorded the
names of thirty-five men who found fault with Abu-Hanifah; the founder
of an Islamic school of law that took his name. (See Tarikh Baghdad
13:370). Al-Raziy, in his thesis about the preference of al-Shafi\`iyyah
School of Sunnite Jurispruence, recorded that al-Bukhariy placed
Abu-Hanifah with the weak reporters (i.e. those whose narration is
unreliable) at the same time as he did not refer to al-Shafi\`iy at all.
Al-Sibkiy, in Tabaqat al-Shafi\`iyyah 1:251, recorded that Abu-\`Ali
al-Karabisiy used to vilify at Ahmad ibn Hanbal; the founder of an
Islamic school of law that took his name. al-\`Iraqiy, the mentor of Ibn
Hajar, also doubted Ahmad ibn Hanbal and his famous book entitled
al-Musnad. (see Fayd al-Qadir 1:26) Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy, in Tarikh
Baghdad 1:224, has mentioned a number of scholars who criticized Malik
ibn Anas; the founder of an Islamic school of law that took his name.
(see Tahdhib al-Kamal 24:415 and Tabaqat al-Shafi\`iyyah 1:189).
Al-Bukhariy, al-Nassa’iy, and many other master scholars have been also
the target of criticism and vilification.

[^4]: The Ahl al-Bayt (People of the House) is a term dedicated to the
family of the Holy Prophet. More precisely, it is dedicated to definite
individuals; namely, Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, Fatimah al-Zahra’ (the
Holy Prophet’s daughter and Imam \`Ali’s wife), al-Hasan ibn \`Ali, and
al-Husayn ibn \`Ali. The nine Immaculate Imams (namely, \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn al-Sajjad, Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir, Ja\`far ibn Muhammad
al-Sadiq, Musa ibn Ja\`far al-Kadhim, \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida, Muhammad
ibn \`Ali al-Jawad, \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi, al-Hasan ibn \`Ali
al-\`Askariy, and al-Mahdi the Awaited) are also within the Ahl al-Bayt.

[^5]: Although Sahabah terminologically refer to the Holy Prophet’s
companions, it has included other individuals with definite
qualifications. To know more about Sahabah and their qualifications, see
Ahmad Husayn Ya\`qub: The Conception of the Sahabah’s Ultimate Decency,
translated by Badr Shahin, Ansariyan Publications, I. R. Iran – 1999.


