General Summary
===============

Two major issues can be inferred from the abovementioned discussions:

First Issue
-----------

The warning against writing down the Hadith was not legal; and all the
narrations that are ascribed to the Holy Prophet in this respect have
been totally forgeries. Actually, the decision of the prohibition of
recording the Hadith was originated from a political situation adopted
by \`Umar ibn al-Khattab and the rulers who came to power after him (of
course, except Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib). It was natural that false
Hadiths had been fabricated for the sake of justifying \`Umar’s
attitudes towards the reporting and recordation of the Hadith.

If there had been authenticated narrations revealing that the Holy
Prophet had warned against and prohibited from writing down his heritage
and Hadiths and the Muslims had known about such Prophetic decisions,
Abu-Bakr would not have written down five hundred Hadiths that he had
received from people that he trusted; and he would not have sent a
message comprising the sayings of the Holy Prophet about the rulings of
the almsgiving and other topics to \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās and Anas ibn Malik;
and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab would not have summoned the Sahabah so as to
discuss with them and seek their advices concerning the question of
writing down the Hadith and they then advised him to carry out; and he
would not have ordered the people to bring him all the papers and books
in which they had recorded the Hadith... etc.

All these facts indicate and prove the legality of writing down the
Hadith. Later on, I will present a detailed thesis about the
jurisprudential trend of the Sahabah who kept the Holy Sunnah in written
form, the Ansar, and the Sahabah who participated in the battles led by
Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.

Such a thesis will expose how these Sahabah had disagreed to the trend
of the ruling authorities who prohibited recording the Sunnah. In
addition, these Sahabah and Ansar supported the trend of the thorough
compliance with the sacred texts.

After the second caliph, namely \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, had been
acquainted with the existence of records comprising the traditions of
the Holy Prophet with the Sahabah, he ordered them to bring these
records to him. While they had believed that the caliph just wanted to
investigate these records and choose the most authentic among them, a
surprise was waiting for them! The caliph collected these records and
set fire to them!

A deep contemplation over the texts of the fabricated reports exposing
that the Holy Prophet had warned against and prohibited from writing
down his traditions and instructions divulges that such a prohibition
had been preceded by the permissibility of recording the Hadith.

In other words, according to the claims of those who prohibited the
recordation of the Hadith, the Holy Prophet had first permitted the
people to write down his traditions, but he then prohibited them from
such. He thus said, “Anyone who had already written down anything should
now erase it!”[^1]

Thus, this fact proves false the claims of Dr. Subhiy al-Salih and other
scholars that the Holy Prophet had prohibited the Muslims from writing
down his Hadiths so that they would not be confused with the Holy
Qur'an, but when the Holy Qur'an was recorded in papers, the Holy
Prophet allowed recording his traditions![^2]

Once again, the decision of the prohibition of recording the Hadith was
a pure governmental resolution that was free from any legal form derived
from the Holy Sunnah. on the contrary, the Holy Prophet, through
numerous narrations and instructions, confirmed on the learning of
writing and reading; in the issue of the prisoners of the Battle of
Badr, he decided to release any prisoner who would learn ten of the
Muslim individuals how to write and read; and he, on more than one
occasion, confirmed the necessity of spreading his Hadith.

Nevertheless, Dr. Subhiy al-Salih and other scholars have claimed that
the Holy Prophet allowed the Muslims to write down his Hadiths after he
had prevented them from such, while the abovementioned authentic
narrations have manifestly confirmed the opposite.

As a consequence, we can conclude that the decision of the prohibition
had two dimensions; the first was political and the other was related to
the Muslim legislation and jurisprudence. The details of these two
dimensions have been previously cited. In addition to the Muslim
sectarian factors, the discrepancies about the traditions of the Holy
Prophet were within the outcomes of the decision of prohibiting the
reporting and recordation of the Hadith.

Thus, the claim of Goldtzeher that all the Hadiths that comprised the
warning against writing down the Holy Sunnah was fabricated by the
Opinionists and all the Hadiths that comprised the confirmation on the
recording was fabricated by the Hadithists—this claim has been also
proven false.[^3]

Nevertheless, it is undeniable that the foremost Opinionists, during the
reigns of the Holy Prophet and the first three caliphs, had played a
role in the fabrication of Hadiths calling for stopping recording the
Holy Sunnah, while the reporting and recordation of the Hadith were
practiced by the grand Sahabah and were deemed legal by the Holy Prophet
himself; rather these Hadiths were not fabricated by the Hadithists, as
has been claimed by Goldtzeher.

In view of that, I do not regard as necessary that some authors join
between the Hadiths comprising the warning against recording the Hadith
and those comprising the confirmation on it, since, in my conception,
the motives of the emergence of such two trends had been purely
political. The details of this matter have been earlier in this book
discussed. The exposition of these motives is the most important effort
that is exerted in this regard.

Yet, some scholars have attempted to make comparisons between these two
categories of Hadiths, claiming that some of them can be categorized as
*Marfu\`* (related to the Holy Prophet without mentioning the
intermediate series of narrators) while the others as *Mawquf*
(Discontinued Hadith; a narration that is related to one of the Sahabah
but the latter had not related it to the Holy Prophet), and thus the
*Marfu\`* must be preferred to the *Mawquf*... etc.

It has been narrated that a number of the Sahabah and Tabi\`un warned
against and loathed writing down the Hadith. As a matter of fact, these
are personal impressions that were originated from their feelings
towards the decision of the prohibition of recording the Hadith.
Besides, they stand for personal opinions.

These Sahabah and Tabi\`un did not want for the Hadiths to be documented
in written forms so that they would not be confused with other
materials; rather they intended that their contradictory items ensued
from their personal opinions and their practice of Ijtihad as well the
contradiction between their personal opinions and the Holy Prophet’s
Sunnah would not come to view.

Nevertheless, they used to note down their personal views so that any
contradiction between these views would be avoided. When they did not
like publicizing these notes, they set fire to them. In this respect, it
has been narrated that al-Shi\`biy told that Marwan, once, ordered a man
to sit behind a curtain so that he would write down any word said by
Zayd ibn Thabit who was present there. As he noticed the situation, Zayd
said, “Excuse me, Marwan! I am just expressing my personal
opinions!”[^4]

Dr. Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib says,

The Tabi\`un disliked writing down the knowledge very much especially
after their personal opinions had been circulated among the publics.
They therefore anticipated lest their students would write down these
personal opinions with the Hadith and thus confusion would occur.

It is now easily inferable that those who disliked writing down the
religious knowledge had done such because they, most certainly, did not
want their personal opinions to be written down. In this respect, our
master scholar, Dr. Yusuf al-\`Ishsh, says, “It has been narrated that
this generation (i.e. the Tabi\`un) disliked writing down the religious
knowledge.

The one and only reason behind such was that because they all were
jurisprudents (*fuqaha*) not reporters of Hadith, and a jurisprudent
usually speaks out both a Hadith and his personal view, they anticipated
that their personal views would be written down besides the traditions
of the Holy Prophet. They therefore disliked the recordings.”

Demonstrating examples on this fact, Dr. al-\`Ishsh further says,
“Actually, there are traditions revealing that the Sahabah disliked
their personal opinions to be kept in written forms. For instance, Zayd
ibn Thabit refused that Marwan would write down his words.

It has been also narrated that Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab, one the scholars
whom are reported to have disapproved of writing down the religious
knowledge, answered the man who had asked him about a question.

The man then asked Sa\`id’s personal opinion about another question, and
Sa\`id answered. The man then wrote down Sa\`id’s opinion. One of the
companies of Sa\`id asked, “Are you going to let him write down your
personal opinions?” Hence, Sa\`id asked the man to give him that paper,
and he then tore it out.[^5] According to another narration, Jabir ibn
Zayd said to those who were writing down his opinions, “You are writing
materials that I may change tomorrow.”[^6]

Dr. Subhiy al-Salih says,

They hated the writing of the religious knowledge more and more after
their personal opinions had been publicized. They anticipated that
people would write down these personal opinions next to the traditions
of the Holy Prophet. Many narrations have confirmed this truth. However,
the most obvious narration in this regard is that concerning the saying
of Jabir ibn Zayd when those... etc.[^7]

It has been further narrated that Ibn \`Awf said, “I believe that these
records will certainly mislead the people.”[^8]

It has been narrated that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab refrained from
accomplishing the book that he had written about the shares of
grandmothers from inheritances. Accordingly, it is probable that such
refraining was because he anticipated that such book, which comprised
his personal views about the question, would be confused with Holy
Sunnah.

The same thing can be said about the Sahabah and Tabi\`un who ordered
their heirs to erase their books and terminate them by water. In plain
words, these books and their likes must have comprised the authors’
personal views rather than the Hadith of the Holy Prophet. Dr. Muhammad
\`Ajjaj al-Khatib further says,

Historians have reported that these master scholars disliked writing
down the religious knowledge. Manifestly, these reports have meant that
the scholars disliked writing down their personal opinions, not the
Hadith and traditions of the Holy Prophet.

Similarly, all the reports that carry the warning against and the
prohibition from writing down in general have meant the writing down of
the personal views. Those very scholars and Tabi\`un are authentically
reported to have allowed and urged their students to write down the
Hadiths that they mentioned. This fact supports my previous idea.[^9]

In view of that, Zayd ibn Harith disliked writing down his speech,
because it was his personal opinions rather than reports from the Holy
Prophet; and Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab did the same thing for the same
reason. Moreover, reference books of Hadith and biography have comprised
many texts in this regard.[^10] It is now evident that the deeds of
these Sahabah cannot be presented as evidence on the discommendation of
writing down the Holy Sunnah.

As long as this topic is being discussed, it seems suitable to refer to
another issue; it has been narrated that the Sahabah used to write down
the Hadith in order to memorize it, and when they memorized, they used
to erase it. Such narrations have been mentioned in the book of *Taqyid
al-\`Ilm* and other reference books.

To accept and to add this report to the many reports that revealed the
Sahabah’s having issued religious verdicts in most cases out of their
personal inferences lead us to the result that the personal opinions
were mixed with the Hadith in such a way that it became too confusable
to discriminate between the two.

For that reason, much of the Holy Prophet’s verbal heritage is in fact
the words and understandings of the Sahabah, especially when we believe
that Abu-Bakr and \`Umar brought to existence the decision of the
prohibition of reporting and recording the Hadith and that the decision,
which was never deemed legal by any of the texts of the Holy Sunnah, was
a personal situation imposed by certain circumstances. In this regard,
Shaykh Muhammad Abu-Zahw, in his book of *al-Hadith wa’l-Muhaddithun*
pp. 126, says that the decision was a personal view of \`Umar.

Yahya ibn Ju\`dah is reported to have said, “\`Umar ibn al-Khattab had
wanted to write down the (Holy) Sunnah but he changed his mind
afterward. He then wrote a missive to all the Islamic provinces ordering
them to erase any written item of the Sunnah.”

The words of “had wanted”, “changed his mind”, and “wrote a missive to
all the Islamic provinces” clearly indicate that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
had done so out of his personal desire and private volition.

The following is quoted from the book of *Dala'il al-Tawthiq
al-Mubakkir*:

“All those who stood against recording the Hadith had actually had their
personal reasons. Moreover, even al-Faruq (i.e. \`Umar) who is
considered the head of those who objected to the recordation of the
Hadith had not presented even a single report from the Holy Prophet to
support his viewpoint that opposed the recording.”[^11]

Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr is also reported to have said,
“\`Umar, after he had received news confirming that people started to
hold (or write) books, denied and disliked the matter... etc.”

This narration indicates that it was \`Umar, not the Holy Prophet, who
had denied and disliked the matter before his eyes fell on these
documents. Of course, such a question is terribly noteworthy.

To sum it up, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab adopted the policy of prohibiting
the reporting and recordation of the Hadiths including those comprising
the merits of certain people and the religious laws. This policy was
originated from his personal opinion, as it had never obtained legality
from the Holy Prophet. For these reasons, we have not made any
comparison between the narrations comprising the warning against the
recordation of the Hadith and those comprising the encouragement on it.

Second Issue
------------

The issuance of laws deduced from the sources of the Islamic legislation
(*Shari\`ah*) took two trends opposite to each other in principles and
fundaments. Some Muslims have argued that personal opinions and fancies,
as the opposites of the decisive evidences, are legal matters in the
issuance of religious laws; and have also argued that the personal views
of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab in many issues, such as that of the share of
the *al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*, should be considered legal.

On the other side, some of the Sahabah rejected such personal opinions
unless they would be deduced from the sacred texts (of the Holy Qur'an
and Sunnah). They also believed that the Holy Prophet had been
thoroughly compliant with the sacred texts and had never issued his
personal opinions or fancies; rather he used to wait for the divine
revelation in order to judge in the questions that were raised before
him. In this respect, the Holy Qur'an has declared:

***“Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed.” (Holy Qur’an: 53:3-4)***

***“We have sent down to thee the Book in truth, that thou mightest
judge between men, as guided by Allah.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/105)***

***“It is not fitting for a believer, man or woman, when a matter has
been decided by Allah and His Messenger to have any option about their
decision: if any one disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he is indeed on a
clearly wrong path.” (Holy Qur’an: 33/36)***

Most likely, these sacred texts of the Holy Qur'an have proposed the
acts of those practisers of Ijtihad who intended to recognize the actual
interest, out of their personal opinions, while they were in the
presence of the Holy Prophet who was the one and only to convey the
instructions and laws of Almighty Allah.

Hence, these sacred texts have carried clearly the illegality of such
acts, since Almighty Allah has perfected His laws in His Book and
commissioned His Prophet to explain them to the people. In his
refutation of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab’s claims in the question of the
divinely commissioned leadership (Imamate) of the Holy Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas cited the third holy verse as his
evidence.[^12]

Not only do Ijtihad and dependence upon personal views in the issuance
of religious verdicts and in the judgment of religious affairs lack any
decisive evidence from the Divine Revelation, but they are also
considered violation against the Owner of the Shari\`ah and deciding
laws opposite to what Almighty Allah has revealed. In this regard, the
Holy Qur'an reads,

***“Say: Hath Allah indeed permitted you, or do ye invent (things) to
attribute to Allah?” (Holy Qur’an: 10/59)***

These Sahabah disallowed the resting upon personal opinions as regards
the religious affairs, because they knew for sure about the presence of
certain individuals who had full acquaintance with the revelation and
exact interpretation of the sacred texts, and they knew for sure that
Almighty Allah has conferred upon these individuals with exclusive
understanding and comprehension of the affairs of His religion.

As everybody knows, the Sahabah also knew that it was permissible to
neglect the personal inferences of the Sahabah since their words would
be no more than personal views that lack any binding value in the Divine
Legislation.

The preference of the opinions of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar to the words of
the Holy Prophet; the adoption of their personal views before comparing
them to the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah to see whether they are corresponding
to these two or not; and the claim that \`Umar being more knowledgeable
than the others as regards the logics for the religious laws—these
matters cannot stand before the facts.

\`Umar ibn al-Khattab intended to achieve an essential matter in the
religious legislation; he wanted for his personal opinion-based
decisions not to be criticized and objected after his death; rather he
wanted for them to be included with the Islamic legislation.

For this very matter, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf specified, as
stipulation of holding the position of the leadership of the Islamic
State, that \`Uthman ibn \`Affan should rule according to the Book of
Allah, the Sunnah of His Messenger, and the conducts of the two
Shaykhs—Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, because any violation of the conducts of
the two Shaykhs would strengthen and support the opposite party (of the
objection to the personal views and the thorough compliance with the
sacred texts).

As he agreed to these stipulations, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan had decided to
act upon them, but in the last six years of his reign, he exceeded this
red line since he regarded himself as qualified as the two Shaykhs to
practice Ijtihad.

On the other hand, Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib neither accepted the
practice of Ijtihad in issues about which sacred texts are available nor
agreed to the last stipulation, proposed by \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf,
of acting upon the conducts of the two Shaykhs; rather he only agreed to
act upon the Book of Almighty Allah and the Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet.[^13]

Thus, two opposite trends came into view as regards the Islamic
legislation; one trend was represented by Imam \`Ali and his followers,
such as \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, \`Ammar ibn Yasir, Abu-Dharr
al-Ghifariy, Salman, and many others and, from the next generations,
al-Hasan ibn \`Ali, al-Husayn ibn \`Ali, \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, Muhammad
ibn \`Ali, Ja\`far ibn Muhammad, Musa ibn Ja\`far and the other Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt and their followers and disciples.

The other trend was represented by the rulers and their followers, such
as Abu-Bakr, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan, \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās, \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr, Abu-Hurayrah,
Samarah ibn Jundub, Husham ibn \`Abd al-Malik, Abu-Ja\`far al-Mansur,
and Harun al-Rashid as well as the other Umayyad and \`Abbasid rulers.

Surely, those who adopted the dependence upon personal opinions in the
issuance of religious laws used Ijtihad and Ta’wil (individual
interpretation) in order to save themselves from flagrant embarrassments
among which were that they wanted to find excuses for \`Abd al-Rahman
ibn Muljim for he murdered Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib although that
murderer was not included with the Sahabah; they wanted to find excuses
for Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah for he killed Imam al-Husayn ibn \`Ali; they
wanted to find excuses for Abu’l-\`Ādiyah for he killed \`Ammar ibn
Yasir; they wanted to find excuses for Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan for he
poisoned Imam al-Hasan to death; they wanted to find excuses for
\`Uthman ibn \`Affan for he set fire to the copies of the Holy Qur'an;
they wanted to find excuses for \`Umar ibn al-Khattab for he set fire to
the books of Hadith; and they wanted to find excuses for Abu-Bakr for he
justified Khalid ibn al-Walid’s crimes of killing Malik ibn Nuwayrah and
committing fornication with his widow at the same night!

Again, as a result of the caliph’s enactment of laws in the Islamic
legislation, the idea of preferring the less virtuous to the most
virtuous came to light. Accordingly, Mu\`awiyah, Yazid, Marwan ibn
al-Hakam, and his sons—all these are less virtuous than others are.
Nevertheless, the public interest necessitated that they should sit on
the chair of the leadership of the Islamic State.

Imam \`Ali’s Attitude
---------------------

Let us now cite some of the oppressions that were practiced against the
Ahl al-Bayt owing to their having adhered to their beliefs and insisted
on keeping the religion pure from any innovative matters and heresies.

Describing the harm that the people of Quraysh had inflicted upon the
Hashimites, Imam \`Ali said,

“As Almighty Allah grasped the soul of His Prophet, the people of
Quraysh took hold of the matter (of caliphate) against us. We were thus
taken away from the right that we are the worthiest of having it among
all the peoples.

Yet, I found that endurance thereon was better than separating the word
of the Muslims and shedding their blood, especially the people had just
converted to Islam and the religion had just been so fresh that the
least feebleness would spoil it and the least discrepancy would turn it
over.”[^14]

In his missive to his brother \`Aqil, Imam \`Ali further said,

“Certainly, the Arabs are today backing each other in waging war against
your brother in the same as they backed each other in waging war against
the Messenger of Allah in the past.”[^15]

On other occasions, Imam \`Ali said,

“O Allah! I beseech Thee to take revenge on the Quraysh and those who
are assisting them, for they have cut asunder my kinship and over-turned
my cup and have joined together to contest a right to which I was
entitled more than anyone else.

They said to me: “If you get your right, that will be just, but if you
are denied the right, that too will be just. Endure it with sadness or
kill yourself in grief.” I looked around but found no one to shield me,
protect me or help me except the members of my family.[^16]

When Allah took the Prophet (to Himself) a group of men went back on
their tracks. The ways (of misguidance) ruined them and they placed
trust in deceitful intriguers, showed consideration to other than
kinsmen, abandoned the kin whom they had been ordered to love, and
shifted the building from its strong foundation and built it in other
than its (proper) place.”[^17]

In one of his sermons that he delivered before his disciples, Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir said,

“Before he was taken by Almighty Allah, the Messenger of Allah had
informed that we are the worthiest of leading the people. Nevertheless,
the people of Quraysh began to back one another until they swerved the
matter (of the leadership) from its original place.

Although they presented our due and our privilege as their pretexts
against the Ansar, they alternated one another in seizing our right.
When it returned to us, their allegiance to us was breached and wars
were waged against us, and the holder of the matter was kept in
increasing difficulty until he was killed.

Then, allegiance and pledges were sworn and given to al-Hasan but he was
then betrayed and disappointed before the enemies. The people of Iraq
further revolted against him until he was stabbed with a dagger in his
flank, and his camp was stolen, and even the anklets of his bondwomen
were about to be robbed. He therefore had to make peace with Mu\`awiyah
in order to spare the lives of his adherents, who were very very few,
and him.

Then, twenty thousand persons from the people of Iraq swore allegiance
to al-Husayn but they then betrayed, fought against, and slew him
although their allegiance to him were still hanged to their necks.

After that, we, the Ahl al-Bayt, have been still humiliated, oppressed,
exiled, contemned, deprived (of our rights), slain, and terrified; and
thus we have not experienced any security over the souls of our
adherents and us...

The fabricators and the deniers have thus found an excellent field for
practicing their fabrications and denial in order to flatter their
masters, wicked judges, and evil governmental officials in each and
every city; they therefore forged lies against us and spread them to
these individuals reporting from us that which we did not say or do so
as to make people hate us.

This situation was in its highest level during the reign of Mu\`awiyah
after the demise of al-Hasan. Accordingly, our adherents decreased in
number, hands and legs were severed for the least doubt, and anyone who
mentioned us or declared loyalty to us would be imprisoned, or his
properties would be confiscated, or his house would be demolished. These
misfortunes and ordeals increasingly perpetuated until the reign of
\`Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, the killer of al-Husayn.

As al-Hajjaj came afterward, he massacred them (i.e. the adherents to
the Ahl al-Bayt) so violently and persecuted them for the least doubt or
accusation to the degree that people preferred to be accused of
infidelity and atheism to being accused of adherence to \`Ali (i.e.
being Shiites). Moreover, the situation reached such a gravely dangerous
state that a man who was known as virtuous, pious, and truthful would
narrate fabulously strange reports and events showing the merits and
most virtuousness of some of the past rulers, while all such reports
were definitely fabricated and such events had never occurred.
Nevertheless, that man thought of them as true because they had been
narrated by reporters known as truthful and pious.”[^18]

Referring to the fact that the Muslims had not carried out the
instructions of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah; rather they were prevailed
by several trends, Imam \`Ali says,

“I wonder, and there is no reason why I should not wonder, about the
faults of these groups who have introduced alterations in their
religious pleas, who do not move on the footsteps of their Prophet nor
follow the actions of the vicegerent. They do not believe in the unknown
and do not avoid the evil. They act on the doubts and tread in (the way
of) their passions.

For them good is whatever they consider good and evil is whatever they
consider evil. Their reliance for resolving distresses is on themselves.
Their confidence in regard to dubious matters is on their own opinions
as if every one of them is the Leader (Imam) of himself. Whatever he has
decided himself he considers it to have been taken through reliable
sources and strong factors.”[^19]

On another occasion, he said,

“Certainly the Qur’an is with me. I never forsake it since I adopted its
company. We have been with the Prophet in battles wherein those killed
were fathers, sons, brothers and relations of one another. Nevertheless,
every trouble and hardship just increased us in our belief, in our
treading on the right path, in submission to (divine) command and in
endurance of the pain of wounds.

We now had to fight our brethren in Islam because of entry into Islam of
misguidance, crookedness, doubts and (wrong) interpretation. However, if
we find any way by which Allah may collect us together in our disorder
and by which we may come near each other in whatever common remains
between us we would accept it and would give up everything else.”[^20]

In a sermon that he delivered on return from the Battle of Siffin, Imam
\`Ali further said,

“At that time people had fallen in vices whereby the rope of religion
had been broken, the pillars of belief had been shaken, principles had
been sacrileged, system had become topsy turvy, openings were narrow,
passage was dark, guidance was unknown and darkness prevailed. Allah was
being disobeyed, Satan was given support and Belief had been forsaken.
As a result the pillars of religion fell down, its traces could not be
discerned, its passages had been destroyed and its streets had fallen
into decay.”[^21]

On another occasion, he said,

“I always apprehended from you consequences of treachery and I had seen
you through in the garb of the deceitful. The curtain of religion had
kept me hidden from you but the truth of my intentions disclosed you to
me. I stood for you on the path of truth among misleading tracks where
you met each other but there was no leader and you dug but got no
water.”[^22]

Indications
-----------

Without doubt, the people of Quraysh exerted all possible efforts to
boycott the Hashimites in the beginning of the Divine Mission.
Nevertheless, the Hashimites endured and withstood the three-year siege
imposed by the Arabs in the Abu-Talib Col. Then all the Arabs agreed to
participate in killing the Holy Prophet so that the Hashimites would not
be able to take revenge.

For this reason, the Holy Prophet praised the Hashimites saying, “They
never let me down neither in the pre-Islamic era (i.e. Jahiliyyah) nor
in Islam. In fact, they and we are inseparably the same.” On saying this
statement, the Holy Prophet intertwined his fingers.[^23]

The Hashimites thus never separated or disappointed the Holy Prophet;
rather they acted as his shelter and armor as they defended him to the
last spark of his lifetime.

In the same way as the Arabs allied with each other against the Holy
Prophet, they allied with each other to contend and annihilate his
household. The schemes for which they had planned during the lifetime of
the Holy Prophet were practically expanded and established after him.

Except for the Ahl al-Bayt, the people of Quraysh decided the legality
of dependence upon personal views in the issuance of religious laws, the
legality of personal identifications of the public interest, the
legality of exerting efforts for realizing the logics of the religious
laws, and the prohibition of recording the Hadith as well as any issue
that would contribute in the spread of the Holy Prophet’s heritage and
traditions. Moreover, they decided many such baseless matters.

As is known by everybody, all these decisions were carried out
practically afterward; the appointment of a successor (in the sense of
crown prince) in the Islamic government became legal because they
claimed the Holy Prophet’s having not nominated any individual as his
successor and because Abu-Bakr nominated his successor; the recordation
of the Hadith became abominable and hateful because \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab did not like it and then became permissible because \`Umar
ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz practiced it; and it was decided that Prophethood
and leadership of the Islamic State (i.e. Imamate) must not be joined
for the same clan and the Messenger of Allah had not left any
inheritance because Abu-Bakr and \`Umar believed in such. In this
respect, it seems possible to quote the following narration,

When \`Uthman ibn \`Affan was decided as the caliph after \`Umar,
al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib said to Imam \`Ali, “Did I not tell you
(that this would happen)?”

Imam \`Ali answered, “O Uncle: You have forgotten a matter! You should
have considered the saying of \`Umar (ibn al-Khattab) -that he declared
from the minbar (i.e. publicly)- that Almighty Allah would not allow the
members of this family (i.e. the Hashimites) to hold both the
Prophethood and the caliphate!

I only wanted him to belie his claim with his own words so that the
people would realize that \`Umar’s claim had been false and untrue and
that we (i.e. the Hashimites) can hold the position of the caliphate.”

Thus, al-\`Abbas kept silent.[^24]

Had it been true that the Holy Prophet are ordered not to leave any
inheritance, why did Abu-Bakr say, “I have handed over the properties,
sword, and mule (i.e. riding animal) of the Messenger of Allah to
\`Ali.”?[^25]

Why did the widows of the Holy Prophet demanded Abu-Bakr with giving
them their shares of the Holy Prophet’s inheritance?

These questions require urgent answers. In my conception, the
misapprehensions have led to common beliefs that are still present in
the history and daily lives of the Muslims.

I cannot find a reasonable justification why it was astoundingly
surprising that Almighty Allah bestowed upon the family of Muhammad the
Book, Wisdom, and a great kingdom while it was not surprising that He
had bestowed upon the family of Prophet Abraham these things! In this
respect, Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Qur'an,

***“Or do they envy ‘THE PEOPLE’ for what Allah hath given them of His
bounty? But We had already given the people of Abraham the Book and
Wisdom, and conferred upon them a great kingdom.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/54)***

Imam \`Ali has said,

“By Allah I swear; the people of Quraysh have hated us for nothing other
than that Almighty Allah has preferred us to them and ordered them to
follow us.”

As has been previously cited, in his reply to the message of Muhammad
ibn Abi-Bakr, Mu\`awiyah said,

“It was your father and his *faruq* (i.e. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab) who
preceded anyone else in usurping the right of \`Ali and in violating
him. They had already agreed on and planned to do this...”

In any event, the most important point in this discussion is that the
Muslim jurisprudence was certainly inflicted by political motives, and
the actual religious laws became ambiguous because of private
atmospheres that were fashioned by the ruling authorities and the
Opinionist caliphs.

Supporting this fact, Ibn al-\`Arabiy, as is recorded in the book of
*al-I\`tisam*, says,

Our master scholar, Abu-Bakr and Fihriy, used to raise his hands (to the
level of the ears) during the genuflection (*Ruku\`*) of the ritual
prayers and when he raised his head after it. This manner has been
decided by the Malikiyyah and Shafi\`iyyah Schools of Muslim
jurisprudence. Also, it has been decided by the Shi\`ite Muslims.

One day, he visited me in the place where I used to deliver my lectures
and the time for the Dhuhr Prayer was about to commence. He went forward
until he stood in the first line (of the followers of the congregational
prayer) while I was sitting on the seashore breathing the pure air due
to the hot weather. Abu-Tamnah, a captain, sat next to me along with his
sailors waiting for the prayer and looking at the ships there.

When Shaykh al-Fihriy raised his hands in the *Ruku\`*, Abu-Tamnah said
to his companions, “See how you let this man enter our mosque! Stand up,
kill him, and throw him in the sea before anybody would see you.”

As I heard this order, I was terribly terrified. I thus said, “How
strange this is! This is al-Tartushiy! He is a jurisprudent!”

They asked me, “If he is such, why is he raising his hands (during the
prayer)?”

I answered, “Thus did the Holy Prophet! And thus has decided the
scholars of the Malikiyyah School according to the narration of the
people of al-Madinah!”

I then tried to keep them quite until the Shaykh finished his prayer. I
immediately hurried towards him. When he noticed the pale color of my
face, he asked me about the reason and I told him of the whole story.

He then laughed saying, “I will be very lucky if I am killed because of
my adherence to one of the traditions of the Holy Prophet!”

I said, “Is it lawful for you to do such? You are among the people who
may shed your blood if you do it.”

He then changed the subject.[^26]

In this narration, Ibn al-\`Arabiy advised his teacher to act upon
Taqiyyah (pious dissimulation), while his teacher preferred to be slain
for practicing one of the traditions of the Holy Prophet.

It is also appropriate to quote the following words of \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab,

“During the time of the Messenger of Allah, people were called to
account in the light of the Divine Revelations. Now, because the Divine
Revelation has stopped, I will call you to account according to your
external deeds.

Hence, we will secure and show favor to him who shows us good deed, and
we will not consider that which he conceals at all since it is only
Almighty Allah Who calls to account for the hidden deeds. In the same
way, we will neither secure nor believe him who shows us ill deed even
if he claims the virtuousness of his inner self.”[^27]

As one of the examples on the political motives’ influence, al-Bukhariy,
as well as Muslim, wrote down, in their books of *al-Sahih*, the reports
of Marwan ibn al-Hakam, Abu-Sufyan, Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan, \`Amr ibn
al-\`Ās, al-Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah, \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās, and
Nu\`man ibn Bashir, but they did not write down a single narration from
Imam al-Hasan or Imam al-Husayn, the grandsons of the Holy Prophet; and
they did not write down a single narration from Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
although they lived in the same age of him.

Herein, the names of those whose narrations were written down by
al-Bukhariy more than others are listed: Abu-Hurayrah, \`Ā'ishah, \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, and \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn
al-\`Ās. More detailed, al-Bukhariy wrote down 446 narrations from
Abu-Hurayrah, 270 from \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, and 442 from \`Ā'ishah.
From Lady Fatimah al-Zahra', the daughter of the Holy Prophet,
al-Bukhariy narrated one narration only; and from Imam \`Ali, he
narrated twenty-nine narrations only. Let us thus put the following
question:

Why has the al-Bukhariy’s book of *al-Sahih* included a very little
number of Imam \`Ali’s narrations (29 only) if compared with the
narrations of Abu-Hurayrah (446)? Were Abu-Hurayrah or \`Abdullah ibn
\`Amr ibn al-\`Ās closer and more favorite to the Holy Prophet than
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib? Was \`Ali one of the Sahabah whom were described by
Abu-Hurayrah as having been engaged in making deals in the marts rather
than attending the sessions of the Holy Prophet?

Naturally, the answer is no.

In fact, the reason is something else. The reason is that the Qurayshite
spirit held sway over the religious laws!

It has been narrated that, after accomplishing the matter of the new
leadership on the Shura Day, al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad said to \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn \`Awf, “You have neglected \`Ali while he is most
certainly one of those who judge with the right do justice in the light
of truth.”

\`Abd al-Rahman answered, “By Allah, I have only exerted all my efforts
for the sake of the Muslims’ good.”

Al-Miqdad replied, “I have never seen anybody given the like of what has
been given to this Household after their Prophet. I am very surprised by
the people of Quraysh! They have neglected the man who is the most
knowledgeable and the fairest judge. By Allah, if only I could find
supporters in this matter!”

\`Abd al-Rahman said, “Fear Allah, Miqdad! I only anticipate that you
are leading a mutiny.”

One of the attendants asked al-Miqdad, “May Allah have mercy upon you!
Who are the members of that Household? And who is that man?”

Al-Miqdad answered, “The Household are the descendants of \`Abd
al-Muttalib; and the man is \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.”[^28]

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said during the sermon of the
Farewell Hajj:

“O People: Take the (governmental) donations so long as they are actual
donations; but when the people of Quraysh fight each other for coming to
power and give you such donations as bribes, then you should not
take.”[^29]

Comparison Between The Two Trends
---------------------------------

On balance, the separating edge between the two trends was the
negligence of the Hadith and the reference to the Holy Qur'an alone.
Declaring this decision, Abu-Bakr said, “Do not report anything from the
Messenger of Allah. If one asks you about it, you should say: only does
the Holy Qur'an stand between you and us.”

The following points demonstrate some of the points of difference
between the two schools:

1) The School of Ijtihad has believed that the Holy Prophet had the
right to practice Ijtihad and decide verdicts depending upon his
personal views, while the School of Thorough Compliance (or the School
of the Ahl al-Bayt) denied such claim since it has been based upon
fancy; and there is a great difference between fancy and conjecture on
one side and certitude and conviction on the other.

2) The School of Ijtihad has claimed that the Holy Prophet did not
nominate any successor, while the School of Thorough Compliance confirms
that he nominated \`Ali and his progeny as his successors and divinely
commissioned leaders of the Muslim community.

3) The School of Ijtihad and the people of Quraysh prohibited the
Muslims from writing down the traditions of the Holy Prophet, while the
School of the Ahl al-Bayt practiced and called for it despite all the
circumstances.

4) The School of Ijtihad has claimed that the Holy Qur'an should be
alone adopted and should not be confused by any other material, while
the School of the Ahl al-Bayt confirmed that each text of the Holy
Qur'an can carry more than one meaning and can be interpreted into more
than one sense; therefore, its facts and details cannot be comprehended
except through the Holy Sunnah as well as the exegesis of those whom
Almighty Allah has given exclusively the knowledge of the Holy Qur'an.

5) The School of Ijtihad has not accepted resting upon the Holy Qur'an
in examining the opinions and words of the Sahabah; rather it has
believed the Sahabah’s words’ being restricting the general meanings of
the Holy Qur'an! On the other hand, the School of the Ahl al-Bayt has
called for the obligatory necessity of resting upon the Holy Qur'an in
deciding the acceptability of the Sahabah’s words and then whatever
opposes the Holy Qur'an must be thrown away. In this regard, the Holy
Infallibles are reported to have said, “If I relate to you anything, you
should first ask me for a proof from the Holy Qur'an.”

6) “Refer all my word to the Holy Qur'an; if they conform to it, then
you should accept it, but if it does not, you should then throw it
away.”

7) The School of Ijtihad has believed that all the religious laws
deduced by the mujtahids must be decided as valid, while the School of
the Ahl al-Bayt has believed that a mujtahid may be right or wrong.[^30]

8) The School of Ijtihad has canceled decency and justness as one of the
stipulations in many religious laws, such as judicature, and even acts
of worship. It has thus decided that it is lawful to follow, in a
congregational prayer, any imam (leader) whether he is pious or wicked!
On the other hand, the School of the Ahl al-Bayt has not acceded to such
laws.

[^1]: This form has been mentioned in the report ascribed to Abu-Sa\`id
al-Khidriy. See al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 30-31; Sahih
Muslim—Kitab al-Zuhd 16:3 H. 21, 39.

[^2]: Subhiy al-Salih: Ulum al-Hadith wa Mustalahuh 7-9; Muhammad
\`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 53.

[^3]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy, 82.

[^4]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 2 :361.

[^5]: The entire narration is written down in Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb
al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i) 2:144.

[^6]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i)
2:31. The words of Dr. Muhammad al-Khatib are quoted from his book of
‘al-Sunnah Qabl al-Tadwin 323-324.

[^7]: Subhiy al-Salih: Ulum al-Hadith wa Mustalahuh 34.

[^8]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 57.

[^9]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 324.

[^10]: For instance, refer to Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u
Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i) 1:74, and al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid
al-\`Ilm 64.

[^11]: Dala'il al-Tawthiq al-Mubakkir 239 as mentioned in Sayyid
Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy: Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah 288.

[^12]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 12:53.

[^13]: Al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 31:371.

[^14]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:249.

[^15]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 3:67.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 216.

[^17]: Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 149.

[^18]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 11:43-44.

[^19]: Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 88.

[^20]: Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 121.

[^21]: Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 2.

[^22]: Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon No. 4.

[^23]: Sunan al-Nassa’iy 7:131; Sunan Abi-Dawud 3:146, H. 2980.

[^24]: Shaykh al-Saduq: \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` 171, Chapter: 134, H. 1;
Shaykh al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 31:355.

[^25]: For details, see, for instance, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah 16:240.

[^26]: Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad: al-I\`tisam bi-Habl-illah al-Matin 1:358.

[^27]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 403 as
quoted from al-kifayah 78.

[^28]: Tarikh al-Tabariy; Ibn al-Athir: al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 3:37 (Story
of the Shura).

[^29]: Sunan Abi-Dawud 3:137 H. 2958.

[^30]: The majority of the Muslim jurisprudents, especially the Shi\`ah
Imamiyyah scholars, have adopted th conception of the ‘Mukhatti’ah’,
which means that a mujtahid may be right or wrong; when his conclusion
is right (i.e. conforming to the actual law of Almighty Allah), he will
be awarded a double reward, and when his conclusion is wrong, he will be
awarded once only. The adopters of this conception also believe that the
Islamic legislation comprises rulings for each and every event and a
proof on such rulings can be found in sources other than the Holy Qur'an
and Sunnah. On the other hand, those who belong to the School of Ijtihad
have adopted the conception of Taswib. In the terminology of the Muslim
jurisprudence and the Principles of the Muslim Jurisprudence (\`Ilm
al-Usul), al-Musawwibah (the adopters of Taswib) are those who argue
that Almighty Allah has referred the rulings in the questions about
which no sacred text (from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah) can be found to
the mujtahids and thus whatever is decided by the mujtahids should be
decided as the law of Almighty Allah.


