The Establishment Of The Two Trends During The Umayyad Reign
============================================================

When they noticed that the adopters of the thorough compliance with the
sacred texts would not stop recording the Hadith despite of the many
endeavors to wipe out the features of this matter, the Opinionists and
the adopters of the legality of Ijtihad understood the necessity of
humoring this trend and providing something for them in this regard so
that they would not face any future problem as regards the legislation,
since the postponement of the recordation of the Hadith would result in
its loss and extinction.

As a consequence, the supporters of the School of Ijtihad exerted all
efforts in finding the substitute by which they would face the School of
the Thorough Compliance. Husham ibn \`Abd al-Malik (or \`Umar ibn \`Abd
al-\`Aziz), the Umayyad ruler, ordered Ibn Shihab al-Zuhriy (died in AH
124) to write down the Holy Sunnah.

The Caliphs And The Recordation Of Hadith
-----------------------------------------

It has been narrated on the authority of Mu\`ammar that Ibn Shihab
al-Zuhriy said,

“We disliked recordation of the knowledge (of Hadith) until we were
forced by those rulers. We thus decided not to prevent any of the
Muslims from it.”[^1]

According to another narration, al-Zuhriy said,

“As the kings ordered me to write down the Sunnah, I did. I then felt
embarrassed before Almighty Allah and thus decided to write it to the
others in the same way as I had written to the kings.”[^2]

According to a third narration Abu’l-Malih said,

“We had not have the courage to write down the knowledge of the Hadith
before al-Zuhriy until he was compelled to write down for Husham (ibn
\`Abd al-Malik, the Umayyad ruler). As al-Zuhriy wrote for the sons of
Husham, the people could write down the Hadith.”[^3]

It has been also narrated that after he had opposed Husham ibn al-Hakam,
Ibn Shihab al-Zuhriy became his clerk; he thus accompanied him to the
Hajj and became the teacher of his sons.[^4]

It is undeniable that all those who prohibited the recordation of the
Hadith during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet belonged to the tribe of
Quraysh. This fact makes us doubt the soundness, spontaneity, and
sincerity of the caliphs’ intentions as regards this matter. In the
past, those people of Quraysh prevented \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās
from writing down the words of the Holy Prophet during his lifetime.

Their situations from the Hadith during the reigns of \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, and Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan were
very clear; they, without any hesitation, backed these rulers as regards
the prohibition from recording the Hadith.

In addition, the situations of Abu-Sufyan and Mu\`awiyah, his son,
against the Holy Prophet and the Divine Message encourages us to doubt
the rulers’ intentions as regards the recordation of the Hadith.

As soon as \`Uthman ibn \`Affan came to power, Abu-Sufyan visited the
tomb of Hamzah -the Holy Prophet’s uncle and the master of martyrs- and
kicked it with his foot saying,

“See, Abu-\`Imarah! The matter for which you had unsheathed your sword
against us has now become in the hands of our boys who are playing with
it as they like!”[^5]

The following narration has been reported by al-Mughirah:

When Mu\`awiyah visited al-Kufah, al-Mughirah pleased him to stop
persecuting the Hashimites lest he would be mentioned badly in the
future. Answering him, Mu\`awiyah said,

“Too far and impossible is this! What sort of mention that I wish for
myself in the future? When the son of (the tribe of) Taym (namely
Abu-Bakr) came to power, he ruled justly and did what he had done; but
as soon as he perished, his mention died with him, except that there may
exist an individual who says, ‘Abu-Bakr was so-and-so!’ Then the son of
(the tribe of) \`Adiy (namely \`Umar ibn al-Khattab) came to power,
tried his best, and ruled for ten years. As soon as he perished, his
mention died with him, except that there may exist an individual who
says, ‘\`Umar was so-and-so!’

On the contrary, the name of the son of Abu-Kabshah (i.e. the Holy
Prophet) is declared loudly five times a day! (i.e. *I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah*) Which deed will then perpetuate and
which mention will remain after that? Woe to you! Work on burying this
mention!”[^6]

It has been also narrated that when Mu\`awiyah arrived in al-Kufah, he
declared,

“I have not fought you to make you perform the prayers, observe the
fasting, carry out the Hajj, or defray the Zakat! I have already known
that you are doing these deeds; rather I have fought you in order to
domineer over you.”[^7]

How is it then logic to refer in the religious laws to such a source
about whom the Holy Prophet had a bad impression or such people who had
taken such a unenthusiastic situation from the Divine Message? Moreover,
some of these people had been accursed by the Holy Prophet by names!

These individuals had endeavored to sow the seeds of dispersion among
the Muslims and had led many conspiracies and trickeries against the
Holy Prophet; how is it then logic to trust their reports or to put in
their hands the treasuries of the Holy Sunnah?

It has been narrated that Bashir al-\`Adawiy came to \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas and reported many Hadiths one after another, while the latter
neglected him totally. Having found that very strange, he asked Ibn
\`Abbas, “What for are you paying no attention to my words. I am
reporting to you from the Messenger of Allah and you are ignoring me!”

\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas answered, “In the past, we used to open our eyes
and ears to listen to any word reported from the Messenger of Allah.
However, when people from all classes and levels broke into this field,
we listened to none except those whom we know (as trustworthy).”[^8]

Because the policy of the Umayyad rulers was based upon distortion and
terrorism, the reporters of Hadith and the Prophetic traditions could
not open their mouths with the facts, which were obviously apparent
before everybody. For instance, it has been narrated that Husham ibn
\`Abd al-Malik ordered Ibn Shihab al-Zuhriy to claim that the verse of
the Holy Qur'an that reads,

***“And to him who took on himself the lead among them will be a penalty
grievous,” (Holy Qur’an: 24/11)***

was revealed about \`Ali! On the other side, it has been also narrated
that the same Ibn Shihab al-Zuhriy, having related to Mu\`ammar a Hadith
about the virtue and merits of Imam \`Ali, asked him to conceal this
Hadith as much as he could, for the Umayyad ruling authorities would
never excuse anyone revealing one of the merits of Imam \`Ali. Mu\`ammar
then wondered, “So long as you know this fact about them, why have you
supported them and stood in their line against the other party?”

Al-Zuhriy answered, “Stop this! The Umayyad rulers have given us shares
in their fortunes and thus we have had to accede to their fancies.”[^9]

In his missive to Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Zuhriy, Imam \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn (Zayn al-\`Ābidin) presented the actual manner of the man who
had fallen in the trap of the ruling authorities bringing about many
impasses to himself. This immortal missive reads,

Allah save you and us from seditious matters and guard you against the
Fire (of Hell) out of His mercy. You have been enjoying a state due to
which it is serving for anyone who knows you to show compassion to you.
You have been overburdened with the graces of Allah Who has given you a
good physical health and a long age.

Furthermore, He has constituted His claims against you when He charged
you with the responsibility of His Book, made you understand His
religion, introduced to you the traditions of His Prophet Muhammad. He
has also imposed upon you a responsibility in every favor that He has
done to you and every claim that He has instituted against you. He has
tested your gratitude in every matter that He has done to you and every
grace through which He has shown His favors to you. He says:

***‘If you give thanks, I shall give you greater favors, but if you show
ingratitude, know that My retribution is severe.’ (Holy Qur’an: 14:7)***

Consider to which party you will be added when you will (inevitably)
stand before Allah Who will ask you about His graces; how you acted upon
them, and about His claims; how you treated them.

Never think that Allah will accept your unjustifiable excuses or will be
satisfied with your negligence. Too far is that! Too far is that! It is
definitely not in that manner. Allah has ordered the scholars to convey
His knowledge to people and not to hide any part of it in His Book when
He said:

***‘When Allah made a covenant with the People of the Book saying: Tell
the people about it without hiding any part?’ (Holy Qur’an: 3:187)***

You should know that the least of concealing knowledge and the lightest
burden is to entertain the estrangement of an unjust person and pave the
way of seduction to him through responding to him when he sought your
nearness and called upon you.

I am too afraid that you will acknowledge your sins with the betrayers
tomorrow and will be asked about whatever you have gotten due to your
supporting the unjust in oppression, since you have taken the gift that
was not yours, you have been close to him who did not give back anyone’s
right, you have not rejected a wrongdoing when he approached you, and
you have responded to him who antagonized Allah.

As the unjust ones invited you, they make you the axis of the hand-mill
of their wrongdoings, the bridge on which they cross to their
misfortunes, and the stairs to their deviation. You have been the
propagandist of their temptation when you took their courses.

They have employed you as the means through which they aroused doubts
against the scholars and dragged the hearts of the ignorant to them. The
best one in their government and the most powerful of them could not
achieve success like that which you have attained through showing their
corrupt affairs as honest and attracting the attentions of the
celebrities as well as the ordinary people to you.

If you compare what you have done to them with what they have given to
you, you will find it too little.

Likewise, they have built for you very trivial thing while they ruined
your great things.

Look in yourself, for no one will look in you except you yourself, and
maintain judgment with yourself as if you are the judge.

Look into your gratitude to Him Who nourished you with His graces when
you were little and when you became old. I am too afraid you will be one
of those about whom Allah says in His Book:

***‘Their descendants who inherited the Book gained by bribery only
worthless things from the worldly life saying, We shall be forgiven for
what we have done.’ (Holy Qur’an: 7:169)***

You are not living in a permanent abode; you are in a temporary house
that you will leave soon. How does a man stay after the departure of his
matches? Blessed be those who are fearful of this world. How miserable
those who die and leave their sins after them are!

Beware; you have been told. Take the initiative; you have been respited.
You are dealing with Him Who is never ignorant. He who counts your deeds
is never remiss. Supply yourself (with the necessary provisions); the
long journey is approaching you. Correct your guilt; it has been
inflicted by a cureless malady.

Do not think that I wanted only to censure, reproach, and dishonor you.
I only wanted Allah to revive the opinions that you have missed and give
you back your religious affairs that you have lost. This is because I
remembered Allah’s saying:

“***Keep on reminding them. This benefits the believers.” (Holy Qur’an:
51:55)***

You neglected the reference to your old men and friends who passed away
while you remained after them like a hornless sheep.

See whether they had suffered what you suffered or faced what you faced.
Had they neglected a good-deed that you did or had they been unaware of
something that you retained?

The only difference between you and them is that you have occupied a
distinctive standing in people’s minds that they have been pursuing your
opinions and carrying out your orders. They deem lawful anything that
you deem lawful and deem unlawful anything that you deem unlawful. You
are not fit enough for so.

It is, in fact, the departure of their scholars, the prevalence of
ignorance upon them and you, the fondness of leadership, and the seeking
of the worldly pleasures that they, as well as you, enjoy—these matters
made them overcome you through their desire to gain what you have in
possession.

Can you not feel the ignorance and deception that you live, while people
are indulging into misfortunes and sedition? You have exposed them to
misfortunes and tempted them by precluding them from their earnings
because of what they have seen from you.

Hence, they longed for attaining the level of knowledge that you have
attained or obtaining, through it, what you have obtained. They
therefore have drowned in a bottomless ocean and an immeasurable
misfortune. May Allah give you and us. He is the One Whose help is
sought.

So then, leave all that in which you are engaged so that you may catch
up with the virtuous ones whom were buried with their tatters while
their bellies were stuck to their backs. No screen was put between Allah
and them. The worldly pleasures could not charm them and they paid no
attention to them (such pleasures). They longed for (Allah), sought
(Him), and soon caught up (with Him).

If this world makes you in such a manner, while you are attaining such
an age, enjoying such a deep-rooted knowledge, and being so near of
death, how can then a juvenile be saved (against the worldly pleasures),
while he is ignorant, weak-minded, and brainless? We are Allah’s and to
Him we will return. Upon whom should we depend? Whom should we blame? We
should only complain of our grief and what are we suffering to Allah. We
only charge our misfortune about you to Allah’s account.

Look into your gratitude to Him Who nourished you with His graces when
you were little and when you became old, your magnifying Him Who makes
you handsome among people through His religion, your preserving the
dress of Him Who covered you up among people through His dress, and your
closeness or remoteness from Him Who ordered you to come near and be
modest to Him.

Why do you not wake up from your slumber, and reform yourself after your
stumble? You should have said: By Allah I swear, I have not done any act
for the sake of Allah and for stimulating one of the rites of His
religion or terminating one of the wrong customs.

Do you show gratitude to Him Who settled all your needs in this way?

I am too afraid you are one of those about whom Allah the Exalted says:

***‘They neglected their prayers and followed their worldly desires.
They will certainly be lost.’ (Holy Qur’an: 19:59)***

Allah has ordered you to carry His Book and deposited His knowledge with
you, but you have wasted them both. We thank Allah Who has saved us from
that with which He has inflicted you.”[^10]

It has been also narrated that Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan bribed Samarah
ibn Jundub with four hundred thousand dirhams for he had fabricated a
report that the verse of the Holy Qur'an that reads,

***“And there is the type of man who gives his life to earn the pleasure
of Allah: And Allah is full of kindness to (His) devotees,” (Holy
Qur’an: 2/207)***

was revealed to express the manner of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljim, the
murderer of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib![^11]

In view of that, the fabrication of reports was not an offensive deed
during the reign of Mu\`awiyah nor did the people at that time fear
Almighty Allah or observe their duties to Him as they had gone on
fabricating reports and accusing other authentic ones of being
fabricated. In this respect, al-Mada'iniy says,

“Too many fabricated reports and circulated awful calumny came to
surface. Unfortunately, the jurisprudents, judges, and governmental
officials accepted and pursued these fabricated narrations. The
hypocritical *qurra'* (reciters of the Holy Qur'an) and the poor people
who had pretended themselves pious and religious were the foremost in
fabricating and ascribing reports falsely to the Holy Prophet in order
to gain prizes from the ruling authorities, to be honored by them, and
to gain money, lands, and houses as gifts from the government.

Unfortunately, such fabricated reports reached at the hands of pious men
who—although they had never accepted fabrication and calumny—
acknowledged and spread them thinking of them as true. Had they known
the falsity of these reports, they would certainly have never related or
adhered to them.”[^12]

Al-Dahlawiy says,

“With the elapse of the reign of the Rashidite Caliphs, the caliphate
went to a people who overpowered the Muslim community unworthily while
they were not acquainted with the knowledge of the religious laws. As a
result, these rulers had to seek the aid of the fuqaha (jurisprudents)
and to have them accompanied them on all occasions.

The remainders of the genuine scholars attempted to escape and reject
whenever they were summoned for undertaking this mission. As the peoples
of these ages, save the religious scholars, witnessed how the genuine
scholars escaped whenever they were summoned for such tasks, they sought
to learn the religious knowledge no matter what the price would be so
that they would attain such positions.

Hence, the new religious scholar began to inquire about such position
after the genuine scholars had been urgently called for holding them
and, similarly, the new generations of the scholars became so humiliated
owing to their advancing to the rulers after the genuine scholars had
been honorable owing to their turning away from the rulers… etc.”[^13]

Al-Makkiy, in *Manaqib al-Imam Abu-Hanifah* 1:171, has narrated the
following,

Abu-Hanifah said, “I, once, was summoned by one of the Umayyad family
(or ruling authorities) to answer a jurisprudential question. In this
very question, I believe that the most authentic answer was the saying
of \`Ali—may Allah be pleased with him—and I myself have acted upon this
saying in my religious affairs.

Hence, I began to ask myself what I should do to save myself from that
trouble! I finally decided to be honest with that Umayyad individual and
give him the very answer in which I believed.” Of course, this was
because the Umayyads had neither issued verdicts according to \`Ali’s
sayings nor had they accepted him... In that age (i.e. the Umayyad
reign), the name of \`Ali was not mentioned at all.

The master scholars used to say, “the Shaykh says” as an indication to
him. The Umayyad ruling authorities prevented the people from calling
the name of \`Ali to their newborns otherwise, misfortune would inflict
anyone who would violate such order.[^14]

It has been also narrated that Yunus ibn \`Ubayd asked al-Hasan
al-Basriy how he always ascribed sayings to the Holy Prophet while he
had not lived in his age. Al-Hasan al-Basriy answered,

“You are asking me about a matter that nobody before you had ever asked.
Except for your close relationship with me, I should never answer you.
We are living in an age that you know (It was the reign of al-Hajjaj).
Therefore, whenever you hear me saying ‘The Holy Prophet said,’ you
should know that I mean \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. This is because we are
living in an age when I cannot mention the name of \`Ali.”[^15]

Al-Shi\`biy is also reported as saying,

“We have actually suffered very much because of the family of Abu-Talib;
if we love them, we will be slain, and if we hate them, we will be in
Hellfire!”[^16]

Shaykh Abu-Ja\`far al-Iskafiy is also reported as saying,

“Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan employed a number of the Sahabah and another
number of the Tabi\`un to fabricated offensive reports against (Imam)
\`Ali in order to encourage people to speak evil of him and to disavow
him.

For achieving so, Mu\`awiyah gave those terribly seductive prizes. They
therefore fabricated many reports that pleased Mu\`awiyah. Among these
Sahabah were Abu-Hurayrah, \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās, and al-Mughirah ibn
Shu\`bah; and from the Tabi\`un was \`Urwah ibn al-Zubayr.”[^17]

Ibn \`Arafah, known as Niftawayh, is also reported as saying,

“The majority of the Hadiths declaring the merits of the Sahabah were
fabricated during the reigns of the Umayyad rulers. Those who had
fabricated such reports intended to curry favor with these rulers
through such fabricated matters thinking that they would put down the
Hashimites.”[^18]

These situations and their likes made Imam Muhammad al-Baqir declare,

“The peoples are causing us a great misfortune! If we invited them (to
join us), they would not respond; and if we leave them, they will never
be guided to the right through anyone except us.”

Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn is also reported as saying,

“You kept fabricating forgeries against us until the people began to
hate us.”

In one of his famous Supplications, Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn says,

“O Allah, this station belongs to Thy vicegerents, Thy chosen, while the
places of Thy trusted ones in the elevated degree which Thou hast
singled out for them have been forcibly stripped! But Thou art the
Ordainer of that —Thy command is not overcome, the inevitable in Thy
governing is not overstepped! However Thou willest and whenever Thou
willest! In that which Thou knowest best, Thou art not accused for Thy
creation or Thy will!

Then Thy selected friends, Thy vicegerents, were overcome, vanquished,
forcibly stripped; they see Thy decree replaced, Thy Book discarded, Thy
obligations distorted from the aims of Thy laws, and the Sunnah of Thy
Prophet abandoned!”[^19]

Explaining the discrepancy of the Muslims, Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn
said,

“What will they (i.e. the Muslim community) do after they have violated
those who (legally) issue orders, and they have missed the age of the
true guides, and they have been following their own impressions,
plunging into deviant matters in the midst of murks?

Some sects of this ummah have adopted for themselves (as belief) the
violation of the leaders (i.e. Imams) of the Religion and the Tree of
Prophethood -the choicest of the religious-. They have thus deceived
themselves with the trickeries of monkery, and have exaggerated in the
sciences (of the religion), and have described Islam with its best
qualities, and have decorated themselves with the best Sunnah; but when
the time was prolonged for them and the distance seemed too far for them
and they were tried by the same ordeals of the truthful ones, they
turned back on their heels missing the path of true guidance and the
emblem of redemption.

Other sects went as far as underestimating us, making excuses for the
Qur'anic verses which seem to them to be alike (i.e. the allegorical
verses), giving their own interpretation thereof, and casting doubts
about the transmitted narrations in our honor.

They thus hurled themselves into the depths of the spurious matters and
the darkest spots of gloom without any torch from the illumination of
the Book (i.e. the Holy Qur'an) or any tradition from the cores of
knowledge.

Nevertheless, they have claimed following the very true guidance. With
whom shall people in this nation seek refuge, since the pillars of this
creed have been forgotten and the nation has divided upon itself with
dissension, each party accusing the other of atheism, while Almighty
Allah says,

***‘Do not be like those who became divided and disagreed with each
other even after receiving the Clear Evidences.’ (Holy Qur’an: 3:104)***

Who can be trusted to convey the Divine proofs and interpret the
Judgment other than the peers of the Qur’an and the descendants of the
Imams of Guidance, the lamps amidst the darkness, those whom Allah made
as His Arguments against His servants?

He has never left His creation alone without a Proof. Do you know them
or find them except from the branches of the Blessed Tree, the remnant
of the Elite from whom Allah has removed all impurity, purifying them
with a perfect purification, clearing them from sinning and decreeing
their love in His Book?”[^20]

When a man disputed with him about the ruling of a religious question,
Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn said to him,

“Listen! If you come with me to my house, I will show you the traces of
(Archangel) Gabriel on our furniture. Will there be anyone more
knowledgeable with the Prophet’s traditions more than we are?”[^21]

He is further reported to have said,

“Verily, the religion of Almighty Allah cannot be understood through the
imperfect intellects, the fake opinions, and the baseless analogies.
Rather, it is only understood through the thorough submission (to
Almighty Allah).

Hence, he who submits to us will have been saved, and he who follows us
will have been guided to the true path, while he who acts upon analogies
and personal opinions will have perished.”[^22]

Indeed, distortion has been one of the ordeals of the Islamic community.
In his book of *Tarikh al-Madhahib al-Islamiyyah* pp. 285-286, Ibn
Zuhrah writes down the following,

“The Umayyad ruling authorities must have had a hand in the
disappearance of the majority of (Imam) \`Ali’s verdicts and judgments.
It is unreasonable that while they cursed (Imam) \`Ali publicly from the
minbars and, in the same time, they allowed the scholars to mention his
knowledge or to report his verdicts and sayings especially those related
to the basis of the Islamic government.”

To dive into the details of this fact requires many big books and
volumes; rather let us be sufficed with the following statement of Ibn
al-Athir in order to be acquainted with what had happened to those who
wrote down the religious knowledge, or the heritage of the Holy Prophet,
during the age of al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafiy,

“Al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafiy, the governor of Iraq in the Umayyad
dynasty, stamped on the arm of Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansariy and on
the necks of Sahl ibn Sa\`d al-Sa\`idiy and Anas ibn Malik in order to
humiliate them and to make the publics stay away and not to hear from
them.”[^23]

The Ahl Al-Bayt And The Recordation Of Hadith
---------------------------------------------

It has been uninterruptedly narrated that the Ahl al-Bayt allowed the
recordation of the Hadith. Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib recorded the
seventy-cubit book of *al-Jami\`ah*, which included the dictations of
the Holy Prophet and has been reported in the narrations of the Holy
Imams.[^24] In a book entitled *The Book of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib as
reported from the Messenger of Allah; A Muslim Jurisprudential
Documentative Thesis*, Dr. Rif\`at Fawziy \`Abd al-Muttalib has
collected all the narrations of that *al-Jami\`ah* that are dispersed in
the jurisprudential reference books.[^25]

This *Sahifah* (i.e. book) was kept by the Imams—the descendants of Imam
\`Ali. They handed it over in heritage from one to another and preserved
it to the greatest extent. In this respect, Imam al-Hasan ibn \`Ali is
reported to have said,

“Verily, the (true) knowledge is with us, and we are its people. The
entire knowledge is elaborately collected with us. Indeed, we have all
the things that shall take place up to the Resurrection Day, including
matters that are as minute as the retaliation of scratching, collected
in a book dictated by the Messenger of Allah with the handwriting of
\`Ali.”[^26]

When he was asked about his father’s opinion about the right of option,
Imam al-Hasan ordered a box to be brought to him. He then opened it and
took out a yellowish book that comprised the opinions of Imam \`Ali
about that matter.[^27]

This book was kept by Imam al-Husayn, then Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn,
then Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, then Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq... etc.[^28]

It is thus obvious that the descendants of Imam \`Ali cared about this
book so incomparably that in spite of all the horrible circumstances
that surrounded him, Imam al-Husayn was not distracted by anything from
depositing that book to his elder daughter, Fatimah, and ordering her to
give it to his son, Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn. This is because this book
has been one of the treasures of the Holy Prophet’s Household and his
deposit with them.

Moreover, this book was so precious in the view of Lady Fatimah
al-Zahra', the daughter of the Holy Prophet, that when she once missed
it, she said to Fiddah her bondmaid, “Woe to you! Look for that book
because it is as precious as al-Hasan and Husayn in my view.”[^29]

This great interest in the book was neither aimless nor originated from
personal desire. In point of fact, to equalize this *Sahifah* to
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, the one and only delight of the Holy Prophet in
this world, is a matter that requires thorough consideration.

On the face of it, the knowledge that is comprised by that *Sahifah* is
equivalent to the knowledge carried by al-Hasan and al-Husayn from the
Holy Prophet and, similarly, that *Sahifah* can supply the Muslims with
the same amount of knowledge that can be given to them by Imam al-Hasan
and Imam al-Husayn.

On the other side, this ever-increasing attention to the books in
general and to the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali in particular cannot be found
with the adversary school of Ijtihad and Opinionism. Abu-Bakr is
reported to have set fire to the books in which he had written down the
instructions of the Holy Prophet; and \`Umar ibn al-Khattab is reported
to have set fire to the books in which the people had recorded the
Hadith; and \`Uthman ibn \`Affan is reported to have set fire to the
copies of the Holy Qur'an; and Mu\`awiyah is reported to have ordered
the publics not to narrate the heritage of the Holy Prophet except the
Hadiths that were widespread during the reign of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab.
The same thing is applicable to the other rulers.

Nevertheless, the Ahl al-Bayt continued recording the heritage of the
Holy Prophet and preserved these records since the beginning of the
Islamic legislation and the divine revelation up to a recent time.

It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet ordered Imam \`Ali to write
down, saying, “Write down what I will dictate.”

Imam \`Ali asked, “Do you anticipate that I may forget?”

The Holy Prophet answered, “No, I do not. But I want you to write down
so that your partners will benefit from it.”

“Who are my partners?” asked Imam \`Ali.

The Holy Prophet answered, “They are the Imams who will come after
you.”[^30]

This narration confirms that the Holy Prophet wanted to preserve, with
his Household and others, the divine legislation that he conveyed by
means of writing down so that these records would be maintained as
scientific heritage from which all the Muslim generations would benefit.
Hence, as the Ahl al-Bayt used the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali, looked in
it, and asked the others to witness its existence, they intended to give
proof on the authenticity of their reportings from the Holy Prophet and
on the fact that whatever they said had never been personal views or
baseless suggestions; rather they had been originated by the Holy
Prophet.

It has been narrated on the authority of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq that
whenever Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn studied the *Sahifah* of \`Ali, he
would say, “Who can do all these?”[^31]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
that his father, Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, once asked him, “Get me these
papers comprising the acts of worship of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.”

When he did so, his father read a few lines of these papers and then
left them with tedium, saying, “Who can stand the worship of
\`Ali!”[^32]

These two narrations make us ask whether the *Sahifah* of \`Ali
comprises explications of the religious laws and duties only or includes
other fields of knowledge. According to the abovementioned texts, the
book of Imam \`Ali comprises the major and supererogatory acts of
worship as it embraces all the fundaments and principles of Islam as a
perfect, cognate unit in addition to all matters required by the
Muslims.

As Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-\`Ābidin (the best of the
worshippers) who is well-known of his unparalleled worship[^33] studied
the recommended, supererogatory, and preferable acts of worship
mentioned in the *Sahifah* of \`Ali, he said, “Who can do all these?”

While the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt and their adherents continued
ceaselessly recording the Holy Prophet’s heritage and worked for
preserving these records, the other School of Opinionism and Ijtihad set
fire to and erased such records and prohibited the reporting and
recordation of the Hadith.

This great incongruity undoubtedly proves the most authenticity and most
accuracy of the proofs of the Ahl al-Bayt and the trend of the thorough
compliance with the sacred texts, unlike the other trend of Opinionism
and Ijtihad, which carries a confused heritage that is influenced by
various factors and personal opinions beginning with the enactment of
the personal opinions and interpretations disregarding the sacred texts,
passing by the ratification of analogy and other innovative and invented
principles, and ending up with endless personal opinions and trends.

To have a deeper look at the narrations of the *Sahifah* (book) that
were held by Imam Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far ibn
Muhammad al-Sadiq opens our eyes on the fact that these holy Imams had
increasingly concentrated on and cared for that *Sahifah*. It has been
narrated that \`Adhafir al-Sayrafiy said that he, accompanied by
al-Hakam ibn \`Utaybah, visited Abu-Ja\`far (i.e. Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir) and asked him many questions. Although the Imam honored them
considerably, they disagreed about a certain question.

Settling the dispute, Abu-Ja\`far asked his son to bring him the Book of
\`Ali. Having been kept in a drawer, it was a handsome book through
which Abu-Ja\`far began to skim until he reached at the question
involved. Referring to the book, Abu-Ja\`far said, “This is the
handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali and the dictation of the Messenger of
Allah.”

He then turned his face towards al-Hakam and said,

“Wherever Salamah, Abu’l-Miqdam, and you go, you shall never find any
people carrying the most authentic knowledge other than the people to
whom (Archangel) Gabriel used to ascend (from the heavens).”[^34]

According to another narration, al-Hakam ibn \`Utaybah, once, asked Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir about the parts of the blood money for the teeth.
Answering him, Imam al-Baqir said,

“Thus have we found it (i.e. the question) in the Book of \`Ali.”[^35]

It has been also narrated that Zurarah ibn A\`yun once asked Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir about the share of grandfathers from inheritances...
Zurarah said that Imam al-Baqir then asked his son, Ja\`far,[^36] to
recite the *Sahifah* of the shares of inheritances before me. He
therefore brought out a book that was as huge as a camel’s thigh and
threw its edge before me.

As Zurarah looked in it, it was obvious that it must have been written
in an ancient age. The next morning, Imam al-Baqir asked Zurarah whether
he had read the chapter of the shares of inheritances in that book. He
then added,

“By Allah I swear, what you have seen is verily the very truth. What you
have seen was the dictation of the Messenger of Allah and the
handwriting of \`Ali. My father told me on the authority of his father
that Amir al-Mu'minin told him of such.”[^37]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Abu-Ayyub al-Khazzaz that
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq said that it has been written down in the Book of
\`Ali that he who has relatives... etc.[^38]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Sulayman ibn Khalid that
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq said that it has been written down in the Book of
\`Ali that one of the Prophets complained to Almighty Allah about...
etc.[^39]

The Book Of \`Ali Again
-----------------------

As has been previously said, the Book of Imam \`Ali was so comprehensive
that its contents cannot be dedicated to questions of the religious laws
of inheritance and judicature since the Holy Imams have referred to this
book during discussing all the life affairs as well as the various
fields of the Muslim jurisprudence, such as the following questions:

Cats’ leftover;[^40] performing the ritual ablution as a part of the
bathing of the major ritual impurity;[^41] the rulings of the funerals,
the best time of offering the Dhuhr and \`Asr Prayers, and the
*Tashahhud* in the prayers;[^42] the ruling regarding what to do with a
dead *Muhrim*;[^43] performing the prayer while putting a garb made of
the hair of an animal the meet of which is forbidden to eat;[^44] the
*Tashahhud* in the prayers;[^45] the fact that Almighty Allah rewards
those who very much offer prayers and observe fasting;[^46] the decency
of the imam of congregational prayers;[^47] the etiquettes of
supplication (*Du\`a'*);[^48] the forbiddance from defraying the
Zakat;[^49] some questions about Enjoining the Right (*al-Amr
bi’l-Ma\`ruf*), the outbreak of adultery, and rupture of family
ties;[^50] the observance of fasting when the new moon is, personally,
seen;[^51] the *Muhrim*’s putting on pallium;[^52] the *Muhrim*’s
hunting;[^53] doubt in the times of the ritual Circumambulation
(*Tawaff*);[^54] granting security to those who voluntarily join the
Muslim community;[^55] the properties of one’s son;[^56] the meaning of
‘thing’ in a will;[^57] a number of questions appertained to
matrimony;[^58] the oaths;[^59] eating the meat of falcons and
hawks;[^60] some questions appertained to game and legal slaughtering of
animals;[^61] the parts to be cut from the fat tails of sheep;[^62] the
forbiddingness from eating the catfish, the eel, the fish that die
inside the water and then float on its surface,[^63] the pipefish,[^64]
the spleen, the wastes of the sea,[^65] the hagfish,[^66] and the meat
of domestic donkeys;[^67] rulings appertained to the lands;[^68] laws
and statutory shares of inheritance;[^69] judicature;[^70] doctrinal
provisions (*Hudud*);[^71] blood money (*Diyah*);[^72] rulings of
adultery;[^73] the major sins;[^74] devouring the wealth of
orphans;[^75] the punishments for acts of disobedience (to Almighty
Allah);[^76] painstakingness in acts of worship;[^77] divine tests for
the faithful believers;[^78] the likeness of the worldly life;[^79]
having a good opinion about Almighty Allah;[^80] respect for the
neighbor;[^81] well-manneredness;[^82] the violators of the
Sabbath;[^83] the encouragement on seeking knowledge;[^84] the blood
money for the damaged teeth;[^85] and many other issues that are derived
from the primary religious questions and fields of knowledge.

Although I have not been very accurate in the inventory of the
narrations in the Imamiyyah Shi\`ite reference books of Hadith, the
aforesaid topics have been no more than various examples on the subjects
comprised by the Book of \`Ali.

My purpose beyond this has been only to demonstrate the difference
between the two schools—Sunnite and Shi\`ite—in jurisprudence and to
prove the fact that the Muslims, after they had disagreed about the
political leadership, disagreed about jurisprudence. It is worth
mentioning that the School of Thorough Compliance with the Sacred Texts
adhered to the Book of \`Ali in order to prove its genuineness and
derivation from the Holy Prophet and the Divine Revelation.

Consequently, those who issued the decision of prohibiting the reporting
and recording of the Hadith blacked out this book and, as a result, some
people received the rulings mentioned therein very astonishingly because
they had never heard of them before.

All these narrations prove that the “Book of \`Ali” has been so
comprehensive that it comprises all the worldly and religious sciences
that the Holy Prophet conveyed from Almighty Allah. One of the
abovementioned narrations has confirmed that the “Book of \`Ali”
comprises the recounting of the previous Prophets and the ancient
nations that Imam \`Ali took directly from the tongue of the Holy
Prophet. Moreover, the narratives of the ancient beliefs and peoples
have reached us from the Book of \`Ali... etc.

Imam \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib
------------------------

Besides the writing down of the famous *Sahifah* from the Holy Prophet,
Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, according to reference books of history,
recorded other books the materials of which were derived from the
knowledge of the Holy Prophet. Sharif al-Murtada (died in AH 436) has
ascribed the book of *al-Muhkam wa’l-Mutashabah fi’l-Qur'an* (The
Decisive and Allegorical Verses in the Qur'an) to Imam \`Ali.[^86]
Al-Ash\`ariy al-Qummiy (died in AH 301) has ascribed the book of *Nasikh
al-Qur'an wa-Mansukhuh* (The Repealing and the Repealed Verses of the
Qur'an) to Imam \`Ali.[^87] al-Hafidh ibn \`Uqdah al-Kufiy (died in AH
333) has confirmed that Imam \`Ali wrote in about sixty items of the
knowledge of the Holy Qur'an.[^88]

Patterning the pioneer of the Islamic recording, Imam \`Ali’s
descendants and disciples wrote many books in all fields of religious
knowledge. It has been narrated that al-Harith al-A\`war
al-Hamadaniy[^89] and Abu-Rafi\`[^90] each reported from Imam \`Ali an
entire book. Rabi\`ah ibn Sumay\` has narrated the rulings of the Zakat
that Imam \`Ali wrote down with his handwriting when he appointed him as
the Zakat collector.[^91]

Muhammad ibn Qays al-Bujaliy has narrated the suits in which Imam \`Ali
issued judgments. He then presented these narrations before Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir, who attested them.[^92] Maytham ibn Yahya al-Tammar
wrote down a famous book, which was circulating up to the seventh
century (of Hijrah). Directly from this book, al-Tabariy quoted many
paragraphs.[^93]

Asbagh ibn Nubatah al-Mujashi\`iy has reported from Imam \`Ali the
section of the suits in which he issued judgments. These reports have
been published in a book entitled *Aqdiyat al-Imam \`Ali* (The Judgments
of Imam \`Ali) and *\`Aja’ib Ahkam Amir al-Mu'minin* (The Amazing
Verdicts of Amir al-Mu'minin). Sulaym ibn Qays has also written down a
book from whom Aban ibn \`Ayyash narrated.

In addition, many other Sahabah and Tabi\`un wrote down many books whose
materials were quoted or reported from Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. In this
respect, al-Suyutiy, in his book of *al-Ashbah wa’l-Nadha'ir*, has
written down on the authority of Ibn \`Asakir that some of the
Grammarians used to refer to the thesis of Abu’l-Aswad al-Du'aliy that
he had received from Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.[^94]

It has been also narrated that Imam \`Ali wrote an epistle to Malik
al-Ashtar when he appointed him as the governor of Egypt. This epistle
has been published with the famous book of *Nahj al-Balaghah* and in an
independent book. Master scholars have written down many commentaries
and explanations of this famous epistle that comprises the significant
and unparalleled concepts of Imam \`Ali in the fields of policy,
management, unity, and rights of the leaders and the subjects.[^95]

It has been narrated on the authority of al-A\`mash, on the authority of
Ibrahim, that his father once said, “One day, (Imam) \`Ali delivered a
sermon in which he said,

Verily, liar is he who claims that we (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt) hold
anything from which we read except the Book of Almighty Allah (i.e. the
Holy Qur'an) and this *Sahifah*.

The *Sahifah* was a book hanged to his sword comprising some laws of the
blood money for breaking the teeth of camels as well as details of the
blood money for some wounds.[^96]

It has been also narrated that Tariq said that he once heard Imam \`Ali
saying from the minbar,

“We have no book to recite before you except the Book of Almighty Allah
and this *Sahifah*.”[^97]

These two narrations and their likes reveal significant features about
the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali and the recordation of the Hadith.
Accordingly, a part of the Muslims found it strange that Imam \`Ali kept
a book, or a number of books, comprising the knowledge of Islam.

Of course, such astonishment was the result of their accumulative
ignorance with the recordation of the religious knowledge in general and
in its benefits; with the reporting of the Hadith and with its good
results; with the divine revelation; and with the true interpretations
of the sacred texts... etc.

Moreover, these Muslims accused Imam \`Ali of having held a book
“besides the Book of Almighty Allah” or another “Qur'an.” Unfortunately,
some of the modern Muslim scholars and writers who lack any knowledge
with the minute details of the recording and the records that were
present in the first age of Islam have falsely claimed that Imam \`Ali
held a book of the Holy Qur'an different from the existent one.

Through the aforementioned texts, Imam \`Ali wanted to explain the
matter for the Muslims; he had nothing other than the Holy Qur'an and a
book (*Sahifah*) in which he had written down the dictations of the Holy
Prophet.

This *Sahifah* is a comprehensive exegesis and interpretation of the
Holy Qur'an and the divine revelations with all of their dimensions and
purports. Thus, the *Sahifah* comprises nothing further than these two
basic sources of the Islamic legislation.

Once again, Imam \`Ali’s words in the aforesaid narrations stood for
refuting a spurious argument or a false accusation of the existence of a
book matching or opposing the Holy Qur'an; therefore, the narrator has
mentioned in particular the laws of the blood money for breaking the
teeth of camels as well as details of the blood money for some wounds,
because these laws had been known for them since the lifetime of the
Holy Prophet. The *Sahifah* had not comprised materials that they had
never heard of; rather it comprised the details of such materials.

Furthermore, the narrations have mentioned the *Sahifah* in particular;
and this does not mean that Imam \`Ali did not write down or hold other
books; rather it has been proven that the Ahl al-Bayt kept other books.
Later on in this book, details in this respect will be presented.

To put it briefly, by his saying, “and this *Sahifah*” Imam \`Ali
intended to declare that all his sayings are originated from the Holy
Prophet.

If truth be told, the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali was the head of all items
of knowledge and the loftiest book in the view of the Ahl al-Bayt;
therefore, Imam \`Ali and his descendants concentrated on it so
confirmatively that Ibn Sirin wished had he seen or obtained that book,
saying,

“Had I obtained that Book (i.e. the *Sahifah*), I would have certainly
obtained the knowledge entirely.”[^98]

Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib was the foremost caller to the recordation of
the religious knowledge in general and the heritage of the Holy Prophet
in particular. He immeasurably confirmed and supported this process. In
this regard, it has been narrated on the authority of al-Harith that
Imam \`Ali once declared, “Who will purchase knowledge from me with one
dirham!” I thus went to him and bought some papers with one dirham.[^99]

In addition, too many are the narrations that demonstrated Imam \`Ali’s
having encouraged and declared the legality of recording the religious
knowledge. For instance, he is reported to have said,

“Write down the knowledge, Write down the knowledge!”[^100]

“Handwriting is a signal; therefore, the clearer the better.”[^101]

To his clerk \`Ubaydullah ibn Abi-Rafi\`, Imam \`Ali once said,

“Prepare your ink-pot, extend the edges of your pen, expand the distance
between the lines, and reduce the distance between the letters (of one
word).”[^102]

He is also reported to have said,

“Lengthen and fatten up the tip of your pen, sharpen it, make me hear
the drone of the ‘n’, roll the ‘h’, stuff the ‘s’, crisscross the ‘\`’,
rend the ‘k’, intensify the ‘f’, well-arrange the ‘l’, lighten the ‘b’,
‘t’, and ‘th’, stand up the ‘z’ and raise its tail, and always put your
pen behind your ear so as to remember it.”[^103]

These excellent instructions in the Arabic calligraphy are considered
among the important pillars of the process of recording. Up to the
present time, these instructions have been applied by the calligraphists
in order to show their skillfulness in bettering the Arabic handwriting.

The Ahl al-Bayt cared for the recordation of the religious knowledge
very much; they therefore guided their disciples in particular and the
clerks in general to the minutest details of writing. Additionally, the
above-mentioned narrations prove false all the claims that Imam \`Ali
warned against the compilation of books on religious knowledge and the
keeping of such records. They also confirm our discussions about the
role of the ruling authorities in the fabrication and forgery against
the Holy Prophet and the Ahl al-Bayt.

For more clarification, let us cite the following narration that was
reported by Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafiy (died in AH 283) in the
book of *al-Gharat*:

Having quoted Imam \`Ali’s epistle to Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr and the
people of Egypt -regarding religious affairs-, the writer narrated on
the authority of \`Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn \`Uthman on the authority
of \`Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Abi-Sayf on the authority of the companions of
Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr that when the epistle of Imam \`Ali reached him,
he used to read it carefully, learn from it, and apply it to his affairs
and judgments.

When Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr was attacked and murdered, \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās
seized all of the epistles and books that he had kept and sent them to
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan. As he read this very epistle of Imam \`Ali,
he liked it very much. Al-Walid ibn \`Aqabah, who accompanied
Mu\`awiyah, suggested to him to set all these books and epistles to
fire.

“Shut up, son of Abi-Ma\`it! Your opinions are always worthless!”
shouted Mu\`awiyah.

Al-Walid answered, “It is you who lacks good opinion! Is it reasonable
that all the people know that you keep the words of Abu-Turab (i.e. Imam
\`Ali), learn from them, and judge according to them? If such, why do
you then fight against him?”

Mu\`awiyah said, “Woe to you! Do you want me to burn such knowledge? By
Allah I swear that I have never heard of or seen any item of knowledge
more comprehensive, more sagacious, and clearer than this one.”

Al-Walid asked, “If you do admire his knowledge in such a wonderful
manner, what for then are you fighting against him?”

Mu\`awiyah answered, “Unless Abu-Turab killed \`Uthman, we would accept
and adopt his judgments.”

Mu\`awiyah then paused for a while, gazed at the attendants, and said,
**“We will not say that these epistles were from \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib;
rather we will declare that these were Abu-Bakr’s epistles that he had
sent to his son Muhammad. We thus can accept and adopt them.”**[^104]

Abu-Ishaq (i.e. Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafiy, the author of
*al-Gharat*, narrated on the authority of Bakr ibn Bakr on the authority
of Qays ibn al-Rabi\` on the authority of Maysarah ibn Habib on the
authority of \`Amr ibn Murrah on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn Salamah
that Imam \`Ali, having led a congregational prayer, expressed great
sorrow -in a form of a poetic verse- and when he was asked about the
reason, he said, “When I appointed Muhammad ibn Abi-Bakr as the governor
of Egypt, he told me about his lack of knowledge concerning the
religious laws. I therefore wrote to him an epistle comprising these
laws, but he was then killed and that book was taken.”[^105]

This narration demonstrates the scope of Imam \`Ali’s anticipation that
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan would distort the Holy Sunnah.

Fatimah Al-Zahra'; Daughter Of The Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

Both Sunnite and Shi\`ite narrators have confirmed that Lady Fatimah
al-Zahra' had a book that she had received from her father. As for the
Sunnite reference books of Hadith, al-Khara'itiy has recorded on the
authority of Mujahid that when Ubayy ibn Ka\`b visited Fatimah, the
daughter of Muhammad (peace be upon him and his family), she showed him
a *kurbah* (a part of the trunk of date-palm trees) on which it was
written that one who has believed in Almighty Allah and in the Hereafter
must be kind to his neighbor.[^106]

It has been narrated on the authority of al-Qasim ibn al-Fudayl that
Muhammad ibn \`Ali narrated that \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz, the Umayyad
ruler, once sent him a missive in which he ordered him to copy the will
of (Lady) Fatimah. One of the paragraphs of that will was the claim that
she put a curtain before her, and when the Messenger of Allah saw that
curtain, he returned while he had intended to visit her... etc.[^107]

As for the Shi\`ite reference books of Hadith, Ibn Babawayh al-Qummiy
has recorded that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq said,

“As I was reading in the Book of Fatimah, I found that all the kings
(i.e. rulers) that would rule on this earth are written in that book by
their fathers’ and their names.”[^108]

It has been also recorded in *al-Kafi* that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
answered a question depending upon the contents of the Book of
Fatimah.[^109]

Because the Book of Fatimah has been well-known as *al-Mushaf*,[^110]
the enemies have used this point to malign the disciples of the Ahl
al-Bayt School although the word *Mushaf* was used in the first age of
Islam to denote any book and it has been never dedicated to referring to
the Holy Qur'an alone.

To support this fact, Shaykh Tahir al-Jaza'iriy has written down that as
soon as the Holy Prophet departed life, the Sahabah hurried to compile
all that which he had written in his will in one book that they named
*al-Mushaf*.[^111]

Imam Al-Hasan Ibn \`Ali Al-Mujtaba
----------------------------------

Imam al-Hasan kept his father’s *Sahifah* from which he learnt the
knowledge of the Holy Prophet. It has been narrated that \`Abd al-Rahman
ibn Abi-Layla asked Imam al-Hasan about Imam \`Ali’s verdict about the
right of option. Imam al-Hasan ordered a box to be brought to him. He
then opened it and took out a yellowish book that comprised the opinions
of Imam \`Ali about that matter.[^112]

This narration reveals two facts the first of which is that the Sahabah
had disagreed about the ruling of the right of option; therefore, \`Abd
al-Rahman ibn Abi-Layla asked Imam al-Hasan about Imam \`Ali’s opinion
in the question. Secondly, it was commonly known that Imam \`Ali’s
religious rulings (i.e. jurisprudence) was the most genuine; therefore,
\`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Layla asked for these rulings from Imam al-Hasan
since he believed that the Book of \`Ali had been with him.

More than once, Imam al-Hasan ibn \`Ali concentrated on the significance
of spreading the genuine knowledge and the necessity of the
responsibility that the Ahl al-Bayt and their descendants should
undertake in preserving the genuine Islamic legislation by means of
reporting and recording the Hadith. In this regard, it has been narrated
on the authority of Shurahbil ibn Sa\`d that Imam al-Hasan, once,
summoned his sons and nephews and said to them,

“My sons and nephews: As you are now the infants among this people, you
will soon be the adults of others. You should thus learn the (religious)
knowledge. Any of you who cannot report it must write it down and keep
it in his house.”[^113]

Thus, Imam al-Hasan instructed his sons and nephews to learn the
religious knowledge since infancy so that they will benefit by it and
teach it to others. Of course, this instruction was resulted from the
fact that the genuine knowledge was on the edge of loss and in the
danger of falling in abyss. One can now imagine what the fate of the
Islamic legislation be if these records would not be preserved for the
next generations.

Although records and reference books are existent and easily obtainable
in the present time, disagreements and waste of the actual religious
rulings are in full swing; what would be our manner if recordation of
the religious knowledge was not practiced at all?

It has been narrated on the authority of Abu-\`Amr ibn al-\`Ala’ that
Imam al-Hasan answered those who asked him his opinion about an eighty
year old man who was still writing down the Hadith, “This man is making
good living.”[^114]

Imam Al-Husayn Ibn \`Ali, The Martyr
------------------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt and their adherents believe
indisputably that the Book of Imam \`Ali moved to Imam al-Husayn after
the martyrdom of Imam al-Hasan. According to the book of *Basa'ir
al-Darajat*, when Imam al-Husayn had to encounter the enemy, he summoned
his elder daughter, Fatimah, and gave her a folded book.[^115]

According to another narration, when Imam \`Ali advanced to Iraq (for
fighting), he trusted the books that he had kept to Ummu-Salamah, the
Holy Prophet’s widow. These books were kept by Imam al-Hasan after the
demise of Imam \`Ali. After the demise of Imam al-Hasan, these books
were kept by Imam al-Husayn and then by Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn...
etc.[^116]

These books were different from the book that the Holy Prophet had
trusted to Ummu-Salamah and asked her not to hand it over to his
successor provided that the successor himself would ask her for it.
Ummu-Salamah maintained that book, and when the publics elected and
swore allegiance to Imam \`Ali as their leader, he came and asked her
about the book, and she gave it to him.[^117]

It has also been narrated on the authority of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn
that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, Imam \`Ali’s son, came to Imam
al-Husayn and asked him something from their father’s heritage.

“Your father left nothing more than seven hundred dirhams that remained
from his gifts. However, the people came to me asking, and I have to
answer them,” answered Imam al-Husayn.

Muhammad then said, “Well, give me from the knowledge of my father.”

Hence, Imam al-Husayn brought a book that is four fingers longer or
shorter than one span (of the hand). That book was filled up with
knowledge.[^118]

To sum it up, the book that the Holy Prophet had trusted with
Ummu-Salamah was different from the one that he had dictated to Imam
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. The earlier one comprised materials needed by the
ruler for managing the governmental affairs, while the latter comprised
the religious laws, the history of the ancient nations, and so on.

Owing to the incomparable significance of that book, Imam al-Husayn,
having encountered the worst circumstances, exerted all efforts for
conveying the knowledge of that book to his successor. It is thus
undeniable that Ummu-Salamah was one of the foremost Muslim women who
preserved the recordation of the religious knowledge and realized the
menace of preventing it. For that reason, this righteous lady was highly
respected by the Holy Imams of the Ahl a-Bayt who trusted with her the
records of the genuine legislation of the Holy Prophet.

Having been one of the supporters and heralds of the necessity of
reporting and recording the Hadith, Imam al-Husayn said in a sermon that
he had delivered at Mina,

“You have seen, realized, and witnessed what this tyrant is doing to us
and to our adherents. I therefore want to carry out a matter; and if you
believe it as true, then you should carry it out. Listen to my words and
write down my sayings; and when you go back to your districts and
tribes, call those whom you trust and believe to our right that you
know, for I fear lest this matter will be wiped out and thus the right
would vanish.”[^119]

It has been also narrated on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn Sinan that
he once asked Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq what should be done to a *Muhrim*
(entering into *Ihram*: putting the pilgrimage uniform) who departs
life.

The Imam answered that when \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Ali died at al-Abwa'
(while having been *Muhrim*), Imam al-Husayn who was accompanied by
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and \`Abdullah ibn Ja\`far did the same
procedures that are done to the other dead people and then covered his
face without letting any scent touch his body. He then commented, “I
found this way written down in the Book of \`Ali.”[^120]

It has been also narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah wrote down a
reference book of Hadith.[^121] This indicates that all the sons of Imam
\`Ali wrote books on the religious knowledge and concerned themselves
with the recording out of their care for preserving the Holy Sunnah and
documenting all that which they reported from the Holy Prophet.

Imam \`Ali Ibn Al-Husayn Al-Sajjad
----------------------------------

Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn is reported to have written down many epistles
the most famous of which are *Risalat al-Huquq* (The Treatise on Rights)
and *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah* commonly known as “The Psalms of
Islam.”[^122] It has been narrated that Abu-Hamzah al-Thamaliy said, “As
I recited an epistle that comprised the words of (Imam) \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn on asceticism, I copied it. I then showed my copy to \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn who confirmed and corrected it.”[^123]

It is probable that Abu-Hamzah al-Thamaliy had read a part of the
*al-Sahifah al-Kamilah al-Sajjadiyyah* because this epistle comprises
many topics besides asceticism. It is also probable that the book was a
part of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib’s Book since Imam al-Sajjad had that
book with him. It has been narration, in this respect, that when he was
asked about an issue, he answered that in the Book of \`Ali, it is
written... etc.[^124]

Shaykh al-Kulayniy, too, has narrated on the authority of Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq that whenever Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn read the Book of Imam
\`Ali, he would say, “Who can do all this?” He would then act upon
it.[^125]

In addition, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, Zayd ibn \`Ali (the martyr), and
al-Husayn al-Asghar are reported to have narrated from their father an
epistle on the rulings of the ritual Hajj.[^126]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Zayd ibn \`Ali, sons of Imam \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn, are also widely known as having cared for the documentation
of the religious knowledge. Shaykh Ahmad Muhammad Shakir, the editor of
the book of *Mafath Kunuz al-Sunnah*, has considered the book of Zayd
ibn \`Ali entitled *al-Majmu\`*—on the assumption that the book is truly
ascribed to him—the oldest among the books of the ancient master
scholars.[^127]

Mr. Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib says,

“In view of that, the book of *al-Majmu\`* is considered the most
important historical document proving that the compilation and writing
down of books began at the beginning of the second century (of Hijrah).
This fact has been concluded through our presentation of many books and
compilations without putting our hand on any material model representing
the foremost of these books except for Malik ibn Anas’s *al-Muwatta'*
which was accomplished before the middle of the second century.
Accordingly, the book of *al-Majmu\`* was written down thirty years
before *al-Muwatta'*. Obviously, the book of *al-Majmu\`* comprised
inseparably the two collections of the Muslim jurisprudence and the
Hadith.”[^128]

From the book of *Tamhid(un) Li-Tarikh al-Falsafah al-Islamiyyah*, Asad
Haydar quotes the following:

“Zayd ibn \`Ali wrote a jurisprudential record, which has been
discovered among the ancient manuscripts in the Biblioteca Ambrosiana,
Milan; section of the Southern Arab lands. This manuscript is considered
the most ancient collection on the Muslim jurisprudence. In any case,
this book should be taken into consideration as regards the compilation
of the Muslim jurisprudence.”[^129]

The books has been published under the title of *Musnad al-Imam Zayd ibn
\`Ali*.

Nevertheless, since the time of the Holy Prophet, many records were
written down and these are surely more ancient than the collection of
Zayd ibn \`Ali. Moreover, the material model of the Islamic records
belongs to the first century (of Hijrah) as represented by *Risalat
al-Huquq* and *al-Sahifah al-Kamilah al-Sajjadiyyah*, which were put in
written forms by Abu-Hamzah al-Thamaliy and others. These two books are
two lively material models that are still surviving.

It is worth mentioning that the books of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, in
their major significance, betook themselves a new trend in the Muslims’
documented culture and opened new fields, which are still huge in the
heritage of the Muslims. These fields are the *Du\`a'* (Supplication)
and the *Huquq* (Rights).

As a matter of fact, these two fields are considered the most important
and ancient culture ever known by the Muslims, because they treated the
two most necessary matters needed by the Muslim community during the
lifetime of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn after the Islamic ethics and the
individual and social rights had been about to be wiped out during the
reigns of Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah and the rulers who followed him.[^130]

As a result, the recordation of the treatments of these issues stood for
the documentation of the diseases and remedies of that period of the
Islamic history, as well as the history of an important stage of the
Islamic legislation and fresh Islamic knowledges.

On the assumption that the book of *al-Majmu\`* is truly ascribed to
Zayd ibn \`Ali, the records of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn confirm the
authenticity of the books of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Zayd ibn \`Ali,
for their books comprised materials that they had received on the
authority of their father from their ancestors.

It has been also narrated on the authority of Ibn al-Safwan that Zayd
ibn \`Ali wrote another book entitled *al-Qillah wa’l-Jama\`ah* upon
which he depended in disputing against his rivals.[^131]

In the introduction of his revision of the book of *al-Safwah* that is
ascribed to Zayd ibn \`Ali, Naji Hasan writes down that more than ten
epistles on various topics, such as theology, *Tafsir*, Muslim
jurisprudence, and narrations are ascribed to Zayd ibn \`Ali.[^132]

Sayyid al-Mu’ayyidiy al-Hasaniy has also listed some titles of the books
written by Zayd ibn \`Ali,[^133] yet I have not been acquainted with any
further information about these books.

Mr. \`Abd al-Halim al-Jundiy has also quoted that \`Amr ibn Abi’l-Miqdam
compiled a comprehensive reference book on the Muslim jurisprudence that
he had reported from Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-\`Ābidin.[^134]

Recently, Sayyid Muhammad Jawad al-Jalaliy has revised the book of
*Gharib al-Qur'an* that is ascribed to Zayd ibn \`Ali. The book has been
published by the Islamic Propagation Organization - Iran.

It is now noticeable that the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt gave
considerable attention to the process of recording and reporting the
religious knowledge in general and the heritage of the Holy Prophet in
particular. In addition, they themselves used to record the Hadith,
instruct their sons to do it, and encourage their disciples on writing
down.

The age of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn should be considered exclusively; it
was the most critical age by which the Scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt
passed since it followed the Incident of al-Taff (the martyrdom of Imam
al-Husayn). By virtue of the documentation of the Holy Prophet’s
heritage, precious books during that age of the Islamic history came to
light. This was in fact one of the miracles in the history of the Muslim
culture.

Imam Muhammad Ibn \`Ali Al-Baqir
--------------------------------

The age of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq is
considered the golden age as regards the spread of the rulings of the
School of Recordation. During that age, Almighty Allah prepared certain
political circumstances—that resulted in the collapse of a state (i.e.
the Umayyad) and the emergence of another (i.e. the \`Abbasid)—in which
the ruling authorities were engaged. This matter opened wide the door
for the followers of the School of Recordation to write down, report,
and present all that which they had without any fear.

It was also natural that the Book of \`Ali and the other books of the
Ahl al-Bayt, in the capacity of their being the most ancient and the
most authentic reference books on the Islamic knowledges, held the
highest position and played the greatest role, because they were written
during the age and on the order of the Holy Prophet who dictated them
while Imam \`Ali handwrote them, and Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Hasan,
from whom Almighty Allah has removed uncleanness and purified
thoroughly, retained them. Such characteristics cannot exist in any
recording save the Holy Qur'an and the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali.

Pursuant to and in view of this, we can understand the secret behind the
fact that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq showed the
Book of Imam \`Ali to their disciples, to the adherents of the trend of
prohibiting the recordation of the Hadith, and to the askers in
generals. Mostly, the holy Imams used to present the *Sahifah* of Imam
\`Ali when disputes about controversial questions flared up.

Nevertheless, they also referred to and presented the *Sahifah* even on
ordinary occasions in order to increase the faith of their disciples. Of
course, when such disciples would see with their own eyes the
handwriting of Imam \`Ali and the dictation of the Holy Prophet, their
belief in their intellectual trend, that is originated from the Holy
Sunnah, would increase.

Yet, the most important point in this discussion is that the age of Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq was characterized by the
launch of scientific activities and the existence of large quantity of
scholars, scientists, jurisprudents, and intellectuals. It has been
narrated that there were, in the age of the origination of the Islamic
jurisprudential schools, four hundred narrators each of whom used to
say, “(Imam) Ja\`far ibn Muhammad narrated to me... etc.”

Thus, the holy Imam deemed necessary to refute the opposite opinion and
to give greater value to the trend of the thorough compliance with the
sacred texts over the other trend of Opinionism and Ijtihad. Such
preponderating could be done through the written evidence that
perpetuated from the age of the Holy Prophet since the authenticity of
such evidence is not exposed to any sort of criticism or refutation.

For this reason, the holy Imams presented the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali on
many occasions so as to prove false the opposite opinions and to confirm
that all what they were reporting from the Holy Prophet had never been
distorted, changed, or influenced by the political factors.

In this respect, it has been narrated that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said
to Zurarah:

“O Zurarah: Beware of those who act upon analogy in the religious
affairs. They have neglected the knowledge that they were commissioned
to learn and have engaged themselves in learning the knowledge that has
been already given to them. They are interpreting the traditions and
forging fabrications against Almighty Allah since they are depending
upon their fancies. Almighty Allah has said in this respect,

***‘Say: Has Allah commanded you, or do you forge a lie against Allah?’
(Holy Qur’an: 10/59)***

I see coming that when one of these (who act upon analogy) is called
from ahead, he answers from behind and when he is called from behind
him, he answers from ahead. Thus have they strayed off and been confused
in the lands and in the religion.”[^135]

As has been previously cited, it has been narrated that \`Adhafir
al-Sayrafiy said that he, accompanied by al-Hakam ibn \`Utaybah, visited
Abu-Ja\`far (i.e. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir) and asked him many questions.
Although the Imam used to honor him considerably, they disagreed about a
certain question.

Settling the dispute, Abu-Ja\`far asked his son to bring him the Book of
\`Ali. Having been kept in a drawer, it was a handsome book through
which Abu-Ja\`far began to skim until he reached at the question
involved. Referring to the book, Abu-Ja\`far said, “This is the
handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali and the dictation of the Messenger of
Allah.” He then turned his face towards al-Hakam and said,

“Wherever Salamah, Abu’l-Miqdam, and you go, you shall never find any
people carrying the most authentic knowledge other than the people to
whom (Archangel) Gabriel used to ascend (from the heavens).”[^136]

The aforementioned narration proves that because al-Hakam ibn \`Utaybah,
Salamah ibn Kuhayl, and Abu’l-Miqdam were master scholars, Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir used to honor them considerably. Supposing this, Muslim
biographers have written nicely about these personalities. Likewise, the
Imam took out the *Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali after they had disagreed about
a question in order to clarify it for them.

The statement, “it was a handsome book” confirms that the Book of Imam
\`Ali was very big and was considered an encyclopedia on the Islamic
knowledge. The Ahl al-Bayt cared very much for that book; they therefore
kept it in a drawer in order to maintain it and procure its safety.

According to another narration, Muhammad ibn Muslim is reported to have
said,

Abu-Ja\`far (i.e. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir) opened before me a book
(*Sahifah*), and the first sentence that caught my eyes was that “When a
legator’s heirs are his nephew and his grandfather, the inheritance is
divided between them equally.” I said to him, “May Allah accept me as
ransom for you! Judges are not deciding anything of an inheritance to
the nephew (of a legator) when the grandfather is existent.” Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir answered, “Verily, this book is written with the
handwriting of \`Ali according to the dictation of the Messenger of
Allah.”[^137]

So, the attention of Muhammad ibn Salamah was attracted to the religious
ruling as he noticed that it had not been carried out by the judges whom
were appointed by the ruling authorities. He therefore wanted to know
the secret beyond that.

Answering him, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir confirmed that the ruling on which
his eyes fell was not recently recorded and thus it might have been
exposed to oblivion, errancy, or distortion; rather it was found in a
paper dictated by the Holy Prophet with the handwriting of Imam \`Ali.
As a result, the ruling was decisively free from distortion or mistake.

According to another narration, it has been narrated that Ibn \`Uyaynah
al-Basriy said that he was present when the following issue was put
before Ibn Abi-Layla, the judge: Before his demise, a man had endowed
one of his relatives a house without determining the time of the
transfer of the possession.

When the man departed life, his heirs as well as the man to whom that
house was endowed attended before the judge, Ibn Abi-Layla, who
commented, ‘I think that the matter should be left as it had been during
the lifetime of the legator.’ Rather, Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafiy
intruded saying, ‘Verily, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib had decided the opposite
of your decision in this very mosque.’

‘What you do you know about this issue?’ asked Ibn Abi-Layla.

Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafiy said, ‘I have heard Abu-Ja\`far (i.e.
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir) saying that (Imam) \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib decided
to cancel the retention and carry out the inheritances.’

Ibn Abi-Layla asked, ‘Can you prove this in a written form?’

‘Yes, I can,’ answered Muhammad.

‘You should thus bring me that written form,’ Ibn Abi-Layla said.

‘I will do provided that you will not read except the paragraph
intended,’ stipulated Muhammad.

‘I will observe this,’ agreed Ibn Abi-Layla.

Hence, Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafiy showed the judge that narration
in the book. He therefore objected the lawcase.[^138]

From the above-mentioned narration, we can conclude that Ibn Abi-Layla,
the judge, used to examine matters before issuing judgments; he knew
that the wording of Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafiy was not enough proof
in itself and in the same way as Muhammad was jurisprudent, Ibn
Abi-Layla was also jurisprudent in the same level; he therefore asked
him, “What do you know about this issue?”

Although the answer came that it was Imam Muhammad al-Baqir who had said
so, the judge was not convinced with this answer; he therefore demanded
with seeing that judgment in a written form (i.e. in a book) because he
had, firstly, realized the significance of the reconditions and,
secondly, he had heard about the *Sahifah* of \`Ali and that was the
best opportunity to be sure of the existence of such a book when his
eyes would fall on it.

Furthermore, Muhammad ibn Muslim specified as a condition of seeing that
book that Ibn Abi-Layla would not see any other item except that
question involved. He thus confirmed that the disciples of the Ahl
al-Bayt had been too careful to let that book or its contents and
narrations fall in untrustworthy hands and it would thus be confused
with personal opinions and then such opinions would be falsely ascribed
to the Book of Imam \`Ali causing the original narrations to be wasted
and lost by people.

If truth be told, Ibn Abi-Layla had submitted to the right, retracted
his previous judgment, and issued a new judgment congruent with what had
been mentioned in the *Sahifah* of \`Ali. This case demonstrates the
significance and benefit of the recordation of the Hadith. Had all the
narrations and religious laws been recorded in this form, no difference
between the Muslims would have ever been noticed except in a scanty
amount.

It has been narrated on the authority of \`Abd al-Malik that Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir, once, ordered the Book of Imam \`Ali to be brought to
him. Having been folded like a thigh, the book was brought by Ja\`far
(i.e. Imam al-Sadiq).

In the book it was written down that wives must have no share of their
husbands’ estates that are left as inheritance. Commenting on this, Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir said, “I swear by Allah that this is the dictation of
the Messenger of Allah and the handwriting of \`Ali.”[^139]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Abu-Basir that he, once,
asked Abu-Ja\`far (Imam Muhammad al-Baqir) whether the testimony of
adultery is permissible or not. The Imam’s answer was negative.
Abu-Basir, however, answered that al-Hakam ibn \`Uyaynah claimed the
opposite. The Imam thus said,

“O Allah! Do not forgive him! Almighty Allah has not said to al-Hakam,

***‘And most surely it is a reminder for you and your people.’ (Holy
Qur’an: 43/44)***

Let al-Hakam go left and right! By Allah I swear that (true) knowledge
cannot be obtained from anyone save us, the Ahl al-Bayt, to whom
Archangel Gabriel used to ascend (from the Heavens).”[^140]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said,

“Verily, each and every item of truth and reality that is kept by any of
the people must have been taken from us, the Ahl al-Bayt. Similarly,
Amir al-Mu'minin \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib is certainly the clue, source,
basis, and spring of each and every decent and just issue that is
decided by any of the people. However, when matters are confused for the
people, it must be their own fault; and when they are right, the source
of this right must be \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib.”[^141]

In addition, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir kept many other books that he had
received from his forefathers as well as the choicest companions of the
Holy Prophet. He also dictated very much of this knowledge to his
students who wrote them down in books. In this respect, Muhammad \`Ajjaj
al-Khatib says,

“Muhammad al-Baqir, son of \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, (AH 56-114) wrote down
many books some of which were received and spread by his son, Ja\`far
al-Sadiq.”[^142]

\`Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn \`Aqil ibn Abi-Talib is reported to have
said,

“Abu-Ja\`far (Imam Muhammad al-Baqir) and I used to visit Jabir ibn
\`Abdullah carrying clays on which we would write down.”[^143]

Obviously, the Holy Prophet must have ordered Jabir ibn \`Abdullah to
convey some of his instructions to Imam Muhammad al-Baqir.

It has been also narrated on the authority of Abu’l-Jarud al-\`Abdiy
that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir had a book on the exegesis (*Tafsir*) of the
Holy Qur'an[^144] as his disciples kept many other books that they had
received from him.[^145] Furthermore, the majority of his disciples
wrote down his narrations and sayings.[^146]

Imam Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad Al-Sadiq
----------------------------------

As for Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, he concentrated on the recordation of the
religious knowledge as he, from time to time, used to show the Book of
Imam \`Ali to his companions and those who put religious questions
before him as well as whenever a controversial question would be
discussed.

In this regard, it has been narrated that Abu-Basir al-Muradiy, once,
asked him about a question concerning the laws of inheritance. The Imam
said, “Should I show you the question in the Book of \`Ali?”

“Has the Book of \`Ali been still existent?” wondered Abu-Basir.

Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq answered, “The Book of \`Ali shall never be
obliterated.”

The Imam then took out a handsome book in which the following statement
was written: “When the heirs of a man are his paternal and maternal
uncle, the paternal uncle’s share is two thirds of the inheritance while
the maternal uncle’s is one third.”[^147]

Although he was one of the intimate friends and the devoted adherents of
the Ahl al-Bayt, Abu-Basir believed that the Book of Imam \`Ali had been
obliterated due to Abu-Bakr’s decision of the prohibition of the
existence of the recordations, or the book would have been burnt with
the other books of the Sahabah that had been set to fire at the hands of
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab, or Mu\`awiyah would have wiped the book out after
the martyrdom of Imam \`Ali.

Nevertheless, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq answered Abu-Basir unfalteringly,
“The Book of \`Ali shall never be obliterated.” This statement
demonstrates that the Book of \`Ali has been the most precious thing for
the Ahl al-Bayt; it is therefore impossible that it would be wiped out
or lost; rather it is preserved with them as it is transmitted by
inheritance from one to another.

Obviously, it was Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq who suggested to Abu-Basir that
he would show him the Book of \`Ali. This fact confirms that the Imam
desired that the Book would occupy its proper place in the Muslim
jurisprudence; he therefore very frequently showed and cared for it.

Owing to his very much interest in the recordations and books, Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq was called *Suhufiy*, which means bookish or one who is
interested in books. This title was loved by the Imam who used to say,
“Yes, it is true! I am bookish. I have read the books of my
forefathers—Abraham and Moses.”[^148]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Abu-Basir that Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq said,

“One day, some people from al-Basrah visited and asked me about
narrations that they had written down. What is the thing that prevents
you from writing down? Verily, you shall not learn unless you write
down.”[^149]

Supporting the aforesaid fact that the Holy Imams paid great attention
to the questions of the laws of inheritance, judicature, and legal
testimonies, it has been narrated that Muhammad ibn Muslim asked Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq about the amount of the knowledge that has been
inherited whether it is general items of knowledge or the interpretation
of all the matters about which people are talking, such as the laws of
divorce and the shares of inheritance. The Imam answered,

“Verily, (Imam) \`Ali had written down all the items of knowledge
including the laws of divorce and the shares of inheritance...
etc.”[^150]

As noticed in this narration, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, having referred to
the entire knowledge, mentioned in particular the laws of divorce and
the shares of inheritances. In other words, the Imam mentioned the
particular cases after the general. This is an obvious indication to the
fact that big distortion and deformation had occurred to these two
sections of the Muslim jurisprudence.

As has been previously cited, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab ignored the majority
of the religious laws in general and the laws of the share of
grandmothers and the *Kalalah* (those who leave no descendants or
ascendants as heirs) in particular.

He also used to rest upon the judgments of the others, such as Imam
\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. The Holy Imams thus cared for showing the Book of
Imam \`Ali especially in the field of the religious laws appertained to
the shares of inheritance and divorce because distortion and confusion
had occurred to these two fields.

Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq took pride in his having in possession the
*Sahifah* of Imam \`Ali and the *al-Jafr* that comprised the hidden
knowledge of the Holy Prophet. It has been narrated on the authority of
\`Abdullah ibn Sinan that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq said when we mentioned
before him the activities of the descendants of Imam al-Hasan and also
the *al-Jafr*:

“By Allah I swear; we keep two papers made of skins of goat and sheep.
These two papers comprise the dictation of the Messenger of Allah with
the handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali. We also keep a paper that is seventy
cubit length comprising the dictations of the Messenger of Allah with
the handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali. It includes all that which may be
needed even matters that are as minute as the retaliation of
scratching.”[^151]

By virtue of the abovementioned, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq was the pyramid
head in the recordational construction of the Holy Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt. Likewise, he mainly depended upon the Book of Imam \`Ali and
the books of his forefathers that they had received from the Holy
Prophet as well as the books of the Prophets and Messengers that they
had obtained in inheritance.

Surprisingly, the followers of the other school of the prohibition of
recording the Hadith criticized the school of the Ahl al-Bayt until
recent ages regarding the dependence upon the previous generations as
the true knowledge while the dependence upon the sacred texts as
dishonor. In this regard, Abu-Hanifah used to criticize Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq for his having rested upon the recorded knowledge, while the
latter used to say,

“What do they want from you and what for are they criticizing you? By
Allah I swear; we have in possession the thing that makes us dispense
with all the people while they are in need for us. Verily, we have the
book that comprises the dictations of the Messenger of Allah written
with the handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali; a paper that is seventy cubit
length in which all the lawful and the unlawful are written.”[^152]

Both the Sunnite and Shi\`ite Muslims knew about the books that Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq had had in inheritance from his father and forefathers
and then dictated to his disciples. Ibn \`Adiy says,

“Ja\`far kept many Hadiths and copies of books. He is one of the
trustworthy people in the words of Yahya ibn Mu\`in.”

\`Amr ibn Abi’l-Miqdam also says,

“If you look at him, you will realize that Ja\`far ibn Muhammad belongs
to the lineage of the Prophets.”[^153]

Quoting the words of Ibn Hajar in *Tahdhib al-Tahdhib*, Muhammad \`Ajjaj
al-Khatib says,

“Ja\`far al-Sadiq, the son of Muhammad al-Baqir, (AH 80-148) kept many
epistles, Hadiths, and copies of books. He was one of the most
trustworthy reporters of Hadith.”[^154]

As a matter of fact, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq represents the most excellent
mentality among the Muslims during that time. Out of his unparalleled
dexterity, he realized the menacing danger that threatened the Muslims
as regards the significance of the recordation of the religious
knowledge. In this respect, he said to al-Mufaddal ibn \`Umar
al-Ju\`afiy,

“Write down and spread your knowledge among your brethren-in-faith.
Before you die, give your books in inheritance to your sons, for I see
coming that an age will come upon people during which nothing will
entertain them save their books.”[^155]

This is the very interconnection and continuity that are found with the
Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt; in the same way as Imam al-Hasan
al-Mujtaba ordered his followers to write down the religious knowledge
when they would be prevented from reporting the Hadith as a result of
the Umayyad intellectual terrorism, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq carried the
same idea urging on paying very much attention to the recordations since
he lived in an age that was similar to that of the Umayyad dynasty and
the same tragedy would be about to take place again though in another
form.

The prohibition of the Hadith was about to reach its climax during the
reigns of the \`Abbasid rulers, but those rulers had to build good
relations with the neighboring nations, such as the Persians, the Turks,
and others, and they lived in noticeable opulence, especially during the
reigns of al-Mansur and al-Rashid.

These reasons diverted the people from paying considerable attention to
the religious knowledge; rather they devoted themselves to the fields of
amusement and impudence as well as other secondary items of knowledge.
Moreover, the psychological and doctrinal connections became difficult
and the attainment of the genuine knowledge with the existence of such
choppy waves was hardly possible.

In view of that, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq gave attention to the necessity
of keeping the recordations of the religious knowledge so that people
would seek the light of these books during the murks of policy and
controversies.

Moreover, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq and his disciples are reported to have
never wasted any moment that would be used for recording the religious
knowledge. It has been narrated that he once asked one of his disciples,
“I know that you cannot memorize; where is your friend who writes down
for you?” The man answered that his friend might have been engaged in a
matter that prevented him from presence there. The Imam thus asked
another man to write down for him.[^156]

All the words of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq were written down by his
disciples who kept them in books. He also wrote down many epistles
refuting the false claims of the atheists,[^157] and answering the
questions of \`Abdullah al-Najashiy (the governor of al-Ahwaz, southern
Iran).[^158] He also wrote down an elucidation of the religious laws
entitled *al-Ja\`fariyyat* or *al-Ash\`athiyyat* because the reporter
was ibn al-Ash\`ath. It has been also narrated that Yahya ibn Sa\`id
said that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq dictated to him a lengthy Hadith
concerning the rulings of the ritual Hajj.[^159]

Imam Musa Al-Kadhim
-------------------

Following the course of his forefathers, Imam Musa al-Kadhim paid great
attention to the question of recording the religious knowledge and
safeguarding such recordations in general and the Book of Imam \`Ali in
particular. However, the recording of the Hadith during the age of the
Imam took another form. The Imam, from behind the bars of al-Rashid’s
jail, had to use the form of the secret correspondence that he sent to
his disciples answering their questions concerning religious affairs.

According to narrations, Imam Musa al-Kadhim, remained in prison for
seven years on the order of \`Abbasid ruler, Harun al-Rashid. Other
narrations defined fifteen years as the period spent by Imam Musa
al-Kadhim in the prison.

At any rate, such a long period of imprisonment naturally necessitated
the style of correspondence; therefore, the Imam used to exchange
letters with his disciples some of whom used to visit him secretly and
ask him about religious affairs although the style of correspondence was
dangerous because the ruling authorities could have found such letters
and investigated about the matter.

On the other hand, the intellectual and material luxury during the reign
of al-Rashid caused the majority of the righteous and pious people to
confine themselves to their houses and betake the methods of Sufism and
seclusion. In no time did these practical methods change into
intellectual aspects producing dangerous notions in Islam.

Consequently, Imam Musa al-Kadhim had to concentrate on this field and
show the actual meaning of asceticism as well as the genuine trend of
Islam. One of the Imam’s efforts caused Bishr al-Hafi (the barefooted)
to convert from the state of ultimate luxury and corruption into a
superior state of asceticism and piety by virtue of the Imam’s sound
presentation.

The prison, the attempts of amending the deviations, and the sound
treatments of the innovative schools—all these matters caused the
religious course of Imam Musa al-Kadhim to slightly stand behind the
lights that concentrated on the abovementioned aspects.

In spite of the presence of all these trends, the features of the
recordation of the religious knowledge can be obviously seen in the
conduct of Imam Musa al-Kadhim. Nevertheless, these features are less
than they are with Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq.

In this respect, Musa ibn Ibrahim Abu-\`Imran al-Maruziy al-Baghdadiy
narrated that he heard from Imam Musa al-Kadhim, during his having been
in the prison of the \`Abbasid ruler, some questions that the Imam
narrated on the authority of his father on the authority of his
forefathers on the authority of the Holy Prophet. These questions have
been recorded by Shaykh al-Tusiy[^160] and al-Najashiy.[^161]

It has been also recorded by al-Halabiy, in his book of *Kashf
al-Dhunun*, who says, “It has been also narrated by Abu-Na\`im
al-Isfahaniy.” Depending upon al-Halabiy, Musa ibn Ibrahim also narrated
these questions.[^162] This book has been reprinted many times.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim had the Book of Imam \`Ali with him. Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq introduced him to al-Mufaddal ibn \`Umar as “the holder of the
Book of \`Ali.” Al-Nu\`maniy, in his book of *Kitab al-Ghaybah*, has
narrated on the authority of \`Abd al-Wahid, on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Rabah, on the authority of Ahmad ibn \`Ali al-Himyariy,
on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ayyub, on the authority of \`Abd
al-Karim ibn \`Amr al-Khath\`amiy that al-Sa'igh said that he heard
al-Mufaddal ibn \`Umar asking Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, “Is it possible
that Almighty Allah imposes upon us to obey one of His servants but He
does not acquaint him with the news of the Heavens (i.e. the hidden
knowledge)?”

The Imam answered, “Be it known to you that Almighty Allah is too
elevated, too generous, to merciful to his servants, and too
compassionate to order of obeying a servant but He then conceals the
hidden knowledge from that servant; rather Almighty Allah acquaints him
with the hidden every day and night.”

Meanwhile, Abu’l-Hasan (Imam Musa al-Kadhim) attended that conversation.
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, hence, asked al-Mufaddal, “Would like to see the
holder of the Book of \`Ali?”

Al-Mufaddal said, “Nothing will ever delight me more than seeing that
one.”

Imam al-Sadiq, pointing to Imam al-Kadhim, said, “This is the holder of
the Book of \`Ali.”[^163]

Ahmad ibn \`Īsa al-Ash\`ariy, in his book of *al-Nawadir*, has narrated
that he heard Ibn Abi-\`Umayr saying that \`Ali ibn Yaqtin asked Imam
Musa al-Kadhim about the temporary marriage.

The Imam answered, “Why do you ask about such a matter while Almighty
Allah has saved you from it?”

\`Ali ibn Yaqtin answered, “I just want to learn its ruling.”

The Imam answered that in the Book of Imam \`Ali, it is written...
etc.[^164]

It is worth mentioning that \`Ali ibn Ja\`far learned at the hands of
his brother Imam Musa al-Kadhim and then recorded that knowledge in a
book entitled *Masa'il \`Ali ibn Ja\`far*. This book was reprinted
several times and finally it has been published by The *Mu’assasat Āl
al-Bayt li-Ihya’ al-Turath* (The Āl al-Bayt Foundation for Heritage
Revivification) in Qumm - Iran.

In addition, his disciples have narrated many other books and epistles
from Imam Musa al-Kadhim who, also, objected to the innovative
principles (*Usul*), such as analogy and Opinionism. These objections
can be clearly found in his addresses to Suma\`ah ibn Mahran[^165] and
Muhammad ibn Hakim.

It has been narrated that Muhammad ibn Hakim said to Imam Musa
al-Kadhim, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! We have learned the
questions of our religion and by means of you, Almighty Allah has made
us in no need for the people to the degree that we know the answer of
each question that is ever put in any session that we attend.

This is of course out Almighty Allah’s grace to us as a result of your
presence among us. However, it happens that we face some questions the
answers of which have not been known by us because we have not received
anything from you or your forefathers in this respect. We therefore have
to choose the best answer that jumps to our minds and select the answer
that best suited the narrations that we have received from you.”

Answering him, Imam Musa al-Kadhim said, “Far away is this! Son of
Hakim! Because of such (baseless verdicts), perdition has afflicted
people.”[^166]

It has been reported that Abu-Yusuf, once, asked Imam Musa al-Kadhim
whether it is legal for a *Muhrim* to shade himself (or herself) under
matters that should be avoided by the *Muhrims*.

The Imam answered no.

Abu-Yusuf then asked whether it is lawful for a *Muhrim* to sit under
the shade of a wall, a howdah, or enter a house or a tent.

The Imam answered yes.

Abu-Yusuf thus laughed mockingly, but the Imam said to him,

“Abu-Yusuf! The religion cannot be exposed to analogy like yours and
your teachers! Certainly, Almighty Allah, as is in His Holy Book, has
enacted the law of divorcement and confirmed such with two witnesses
stipulating that these two being decent. As is in His Book too, He has
enacted the marriage but without witnesses.

Nevertheless, you have stipulated the existence of two witnesses in the
matter about which Almighty Allah has not stipulated witnesses and
canceled the stipulation of two witnesses in matters about which
Almighty Allah has stipulated the existence of witnesses.

Moreover, you have made lawful for the insane and the drunk to divorce.
Similarly, when the Messenger of Allah went on the Hajj, he did not use
the shade of anything nor did he enter a house or a tent; rather he
shaded himself with a howdah and a wall. We are thus doing the same as
the Messenger of Allah did.”

This answer muted Abu-Yusuf.[^167]

It is now obvious that the Book of Imam \`Ali was kept by Imam Musa
al-Kadhim who acted upon it and showed before his disciples and others,
especially in the controversial questions. In this respect, it has been
narrated that Hammad ibn \`Uthman asked Imam Musa al-Kadhim about the
ruling appertained to the shares of inheritance of a man whose heirs are
only his mother and brother.

The Imam asked, “Do you want me to judge according to the Book of
\`Ali?”

“Yes,” answered the man.

The Imam then said, “(Imam) \`Ali used to give the inheritance according
to the degrees of kinship.”

The man said, “This means that the brother’s share is nothing.”

The Imam commented, “I have told you that \`Ali used to give the
inheritance according to the degrees of kinship.”[^168]

The Imam’s answer in the abovementioned narration was the elucidation of
the general rule without plunging into the details. The addressee
understood the Imam’s intention although the latter could not state the
ruling openly for fear of the leverage of the ruling authorities and
their fans who used to lurk each and every word that would be said by
the Imam as reported from his forefathers and the Holy Prophet.

It is also noticeable that Imam al-Kadhim, in the previous narration,
documented his answer by showing that it would be quoted from the Book
of Imam \`Ali so that the asker would be certain of the accuracy of the
answer and that the Imam would never answer out of his own conjecture as
the others used to do.

A deep look into the presence of the Book of \`Ali with the Holy Imams
demonstrates that the book slowly graduated until it manifested itself
clearly during the ages of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq. But it then began to abate during the age of Imam Musa
al-Kadhim then began to graduate again, yet slowly, after the age of
him.

This is because the genuine Muslim jurisprudence and the narrations from
the Holy Prophet that were conveyed by his Household (i.e. the Ahl
al-Bayt) who informed all the Muslims of the existence of the Book of
\`Ali with them and that all their reports are from this book as well as
other not less important books—all these matters were perfected to form
an independent school of clear features during the ages of these three
holy Imams.

Accordingly, the intensive manifestation of the Book of \`Ali was
purposed for consolidating and spreading the true knowledge of Islam. As
a result, the majority of such intensive manifestation of the genuine
Muslim jurisprudence happened during the ages of these three Imams.

Remark
------

It is evidently noticeable that the holy Imams used to refer to the Book
of \`Ali particularly in matters appertained to the religious laws of
inheritance, judicature, and testimonies; what is the secret beyond such
particularization?

To trace the march of the history of the Muslim jurisprudence leads us
to a serious reality that confirms the fact that has been
documentatorily demonstrated in this book. This reality is that because
the caliphs were in need for the religious authority while they failed
to accomplished it, they had to prohibit the reporting and recordation
of the Hadith.

What is more is that because the elasticity in Opinionism and Ijtihad
would greatly contribute in achieving their aims especially in hard
times, they adopted and enacted it. To prove this fact, it is easily
noticeable that the majority of the reports from the Book of Imam \`Ali
were in the fields of the laws of inheritance, judicature, and
testimonies.

As a matter of fact, the first jurisprudential controversy that occurred
after the demise of the Holy Prophet was that which occurred between
Lady Fatimah al-Zahra', the Holy Prophet’s daughter, and Abu-Bakr, the
caliph. This controversy aroused an enormous noise the sound of which
has been heard all over ages up to the current day.

The issue in brief is that when Abu-Bakr, having become the ruler of the
Muslim community, confiscated the garden of Fadak from the attorney of
Lady Fatimah al-Zahra', she came to him demanding with her property. In
the presence of the Muslims, she asserted that her father, the Holy
Prophet, had donated that area to her exclusively.

Yet, Abu-Bakr asked her to present witnesses supporting her claim. She
therefore presented Imam \`Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Ummu-Ayman, and
Ummu-Salamah.

In that session, Abu-Bakr had to reject the testimonies of these people
presenting excuses that were unacceptable for Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' for
they were contradictory to the texts of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.
Correspondingly, this was the first controversial issue in the Muslim
history.

When Abu-Bakr rejected these testimonies, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra',
condescendingly, argued with him that if Fadak was not her father’s gift
to her, it should be within her inheritance from him. She then provided
a number of verses from the Holy Qur'an as her evidence. In her
fabulous, excellent address, she said,

“You are now claiming that I should not have any of my father’s
inheritance;

***‘Is it then the judgment of the times of ignorance that they desire?
And who is better than Allah to judge for a people who are sure?’ (Holy
Qur’an: 5/50)***

Son of Abu-Quhafah; is it mentioned in the Book of Allah that you
inherit your father while I am prevented from inheriting my father?

***‘Surely you have done a strange thing!’ (Holy Qur’an: 19/27)***

Has it been deliberately that you have neglected the Book of Allah and
thrown it away behind you back, while it reads,

***‘And Solomon was David’s heir,’ (Holy Qur’an: 27/16)***

and also reads, within the story of Prophet Jonah son of Prophet
Zachariah,

***‘Therefore, grant me from Thyself an heir who should inherit me and
inherit from the children of Jacob,’ (Holy Qur’an: 19/5-6),***

and also reads,

***‘And the possessors of relationships are nearer to each other in the
ordinance of Allah,’ (Holy Qur’an: 8/75)*** and also reads, ***‘Allah
enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have the equal of
the portion of two females,’ (Holy Qur’an: 4/11)***

and also reads,

***‘If he leaves behind wealth for parents and near relatives, according
to usage, a duty incumbent upon those who guard against evil.’ (Holy
Qur’an: 2/180)***

As you have neglected all these and claimed that I should not have of my
father’s inheritance?”[^169]

Abu-Bakr thus had to claim, alone, that he had heard the Holy Prophet
saying, ‘We, the Prophets, do not leave as inheritance a single dirham
or dinar.’ This in fact was the second controversial issue, because Lady
Fatimah al-Zahra' refuted this claim using the general Qur'anic texts
concerning the question of inheritance and that Prophet Solomon did
inherit his father, Prophet David.

However, the best evidence on the falsehood of Abu-Bakr’s claim is that
he himself gave al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam, the husband of his daughter
Asma’, and Muhammad ibn Muslimah and others their shares from the
inheritance of the Holy Prophet![^170]

In view of that, it is easy to conclude that these two fields of the
Muslim jurisprudence experienced distortion and ignorance more than the
other fields did.

The extension of changes in these two fields is another proof on this
fact; the issue of Khalid ibn al-Walid’s having murdered Malik ibn
Nuwayrah and committed fornication with his fresh widow was an extension
of the policy of ignorance and opening wide the door of Opinionism in
the field of Muslim judicature.

In order to find himself an exit from this judicial confusing issue,
Abu-Bakr had to invent the question of “As Khalid tried to infer the
ruling (i.e. practice *Ta’wil*: interpretation), he missed the
right,”[^171] although Khalid himself could not deny the perpetration of
fornication because all the army had been the witnesses. Naturally,
decent, trusty people must have existed among the individuals of that
army.

A similar issue took place during the reign of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab;
Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib litigated
before \`Umar, although some narrations confirm that this issue was
filed before Abu-Bakr, as regards the issue of the inheritance of the
Holy Prophet.

As \`Umar ibn al-Khattab judged that the riding animal, the weapon, and
the ring of the Holy Prophet should be kept by \`Ali, objections were
aroused against him before he had previously supported the claim of
Abu-Bakr that the Prophets do not leave inheritances; therefore, it was
improper for him to judge that \`Ali and al-\`Abbas would inherit the
Holy Prophet!

As a result, \`Umar had to chide them and declared nonintervention in
the solving of that issue. This was of course an escape from plunging in
the fields of the shares of inheritance, judicature, and testimonies
that caused the doctrinal provisions to be violated.

During that period too, another similar issue took place. Al-Mughirah
ibn Shu\`bah committed fornication, and three witnesses testified so;
rather the ruling authority colluded with the last witness in order to
save al-Mughirah from the doctrinal punishment of committing such a
crime.

Yet, according to the Muslim jurisprudence the testimonies of three
witnesses, although they are not sufficient to materialize the crime of
fornication, achieve the provision that the committer should be
sentenced to the censure punishment for his having secluded himself with
a married lady. Nevertheless, none of these punishments or procedures
was carried out by the caliph. On the contrary, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
threw aside all the religious laws appertained to this issue justifying
that he had practiced Ijtihad in the fields of judicature, testimonies,
and the violation of the doctrinal provisions.

During the reign of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, a similar issue took place.
Al-Walid led a congregational prayer while he was drunk, and a complete
number of witnesses testified such. Rather, \`Uthman desired to save
al-Walid from the punishment of that act but Imam \`Ali, as well as the
other Muslims, insisted on implementing that religious provision.

A look at the proofs of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan that he presented for
justifying the act of the accused as well as his efforts of threatening
the witnesses confirms the topic of this discussion. In fact, \`Uthman
exceeded all limits in this respect until \`Ā'ishah declared that he had
violated the doctrinal provisions and threatened the witnesses.[^172]

Distortion in the issues of the laws of inheritance continued and
attained its climax when \`Uthman ibn \`Affan gave Fadak and al-\`Awaliy
in possession to Marwan ibn al-Hakam violating the allegation of Lady
Fatimah al-Zahra' that these areas had been donated to her by her father
or that they had been within her share of her father’s inheritance.
\`Uthman’s deed is also a violation to the claims of Abu-Bakr that these
areas were for all the Muslims.

Having not stopped at this edge, this state reached a crisis when Yazid
violated all the religious laws, committed all forbidden crimes, and
drank intoxicants publicly while his father, Mu\`awiyah, neither
sentenced him to the doctrinal punishments of committing such crimes nor
warned him against corruption and libertinism, publicly at least,
although the Umayyads in general and Mu\`awiyah in particular fought
against Imam \`Ali under the pretense of inheritance and that his having
been the heir of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan for nothing more than that both of
them meet in the upper lineage while \`Uthman’s son was alive and he,
not Mu\`awiyah, was legally authorized in judging about the issue of his
killed father.

Nevertheless, Mu\`awiyah distorted the facts appertained to the laws of
inheritance and could deceive the Muslims of Syria convincing them to
fight and be killed depending upon this distorted presentation of the
inheritance.

However, this distortion was preceded by a similar one, which was
declared on that day during the meeting of the *Saqifah* when the people
of Quraysh took the leadership (caliphate) from the Ansar under the
pretense of kinship to the Holy Prophet, while they neglected Imam \`Ali
on the pretext that they were the clan of the Holy Prophet and were more
powerful than Imam \`Ali in the administration of the new state since
they were old men while \`Ali was still young!

The greatest calamity accompanied the coming of the \`Abbasid rulers to
power; because the rivals of the \`Abbasid rulers, namely the
descendants of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, were closer to the Holy Prophet
than the \`Abbasids and they are thus worthier of holding the position
of the leadership of the Islamic state, the \`Abbasids distorted and
misused the religious laws of inheritance, judicature, and testimonies.

As they realized that this fact would invalidate all their claims, the
\`Abbasids spared no single effort in distorting the religious laws of
inheritance, misrepresenting all the concepts and texts of the Holy
Qur'an and Sunnah. In this respect, they urged a poet, named Marwan ibn
Abi-Hafsah, to poetize the following:

How can it be? And it can never be

Descendants of daughters inherit instead of uncles!

Though some reference books confirm that it was Imam \`Ali ibn Musa
al-Rida who refuted such distortion, a Shi\`ite poet replied,

Why can it not be? Verily, it can be

Descendants of daughters inherit instead of uncles

A daughter has a whole half of the heritage

And the uncle’s share is nothing

What the Released one’s relationship with the heritage[^173]

While he only prostrated for fear of sword![^174]

It has been also narrated that Harun al-Rashid, the \`Abbasid ruler,
once visited the holy city of al-Madinah. When he passed by the tomb of
the Holy Prophet, he greeted him saying, “Peace be upon you, cousin!”
Imam Musa al-Kadhim who also attended that situation greeted the Holy
Prophet saying, “Peace be upon you, father!” This answer enraged the
\`Abbasid ruler very much.

According to another narration, it has been narrated that Harun
al-Rashid, once, asked Imam Musa al-Kadhim, “How do you claim that you,
rather than us, are the sons and heirs of the Messenger of Allah while
we are all cousins?”

Answering the ruler, Imam Musa al-Kadhim asked, “Let us suppose that the
Holy Prophet will ask for your daughter’s hand, will you agree?”

Harun al-Rashid answered, “Definitely I will; and I will certainly take
pride in this over all the Arabs and non-Arabs.”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim commented, “But if the Holy Prophet asks for my
daughter’s hand, it will be unlawful for me to agree, because he is my
father.”

This answer confuted the \`Abbasid ruler who could not find any
answer.[^175]

A similar situation occurred between the same \`Abbasid ruler and Yahya
ibn \`Abdullah ibn al-Hasan.[^176] These situations and their likes were
among the reasons that made the \`Abbasid ruler persecute Imam Musa
al-Kadhim, Yahya, and many other members from the Holy Prophet’s
offspring.

On the other hand, the \`Abbasid rulers’ attempts to distort the
religious laws of inheritance, judicature, and testimonies continued
ceaselessly. The best example on this fact is the following incident:

One day, Harun, the \`Abbasid ruler, summoned Abu-Yusuf, the famous
judge, to find a solution for the issue that Harun was entrapped in an
ethical trouble when the Muslims as well as Harun himself saw his son,
al-Amin, drinking wine in the royal palace.

Harun did not know what to do; if he neglected the matter, it would be
circulated among the Muslims who would no longer believe him as the
commander of the believers, and on the other hand he did not want his
crown prince and son to be sentenced to the legal punishment of
consuming intoxicants.

He therefore sought the help of Abu-Yusuf, the judge, who did not
disappoint the ruler when he presented so ridiculous pretexts in order
to save the ruler’s son. Thus, Harun prostrated himself as an expression
of gratitude to Almighty Allah for such (baseless) solution and
conferred upon the judge a good wealth.[^177]

From the abovementioned presentation we can realize why the Holy Imams
focused exclusively on the religious laws of inheritance, judicature,
and testimonies among the other sections of the Muslim jurisprudence.

Besides, the most common acts of the rulers obliged them to distort and
misrepresent the laws of inheritance as well as the financial laws since
such laws, if preserved as exactly as they are, would prevent them from
usurping the public funds and misusing the fortunes of the Muslim
community.

Similarly, in order that the rulers’ parties of entertainment, singing,
and impudence would continue, there should be found excuses for saving
them from the doctrinal provisions of committing such acts. They
therefore distorted the laws of testimonies and judicature.

In the same way as the true divine law of Islam refutes the false claim
that the ruler of the Muslim community is above the law and that all of
his crimes and misdeeds are forgiven, it refutes all the distortions of
these rulers.

Imam \`Ali Ibn Musa Al-Rida
---------------------------

As has been previously cited, reference books of the Ahl al-Bayt—the
most important of which was the Book of Imam \`Ali, *al-Jafr*, and
*al-Jami\`ah*—was transferred from one Imam to another. It thus reached
Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida from his father.

As regards, the *al-Jafr*, al-Kishiy in his famous book of biography
(i.e. *al-Rijal*) has recorded that Nasr ibn Qabus was in the house of
Imam Musa al-Kadhim when he saw his son \`Ali (i.e. Imam al-Rida)
reading in a book. Imam al-Kadhim commented, “This is my son \`Ali, and
the book he is reading is *al-Jafr*.”[^178]

It has been also narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn Ibrahim, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn \`Īsa, on the authority of Yunus, on the
authority of Abu’l-Hasan (i.e. Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida), and on the
authority of his father that Ibn Faddal said, “As I showed him the Book
of \`Ali, Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida confirmed it, saying: Amir
al-Mu'minin issued a verdict about the blood money for the wounds of the
organs.”[^179]

It has been also narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn Ibrahim on the
authority of Muhammad ibn \`Īsa on the authority of Yunus on the
authority of Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida, and on the authority of his
father on the authority of Ibn Faddal that he said, “I showed the Book
(i.e. *Kitab al-Fara'id*) before Abu’l-Hasan (Imam al-Rida) as
investigation of its authenticity.”[^180]

It has been also narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn Ibrahim on the
authority of his father that Ibn Faddal, Muhammad ibn \`Īsa both
narrated that Yunus said, “As we presented before him the *Kitab
al-Fara'id* that is reported from Amir al-Mu'minin, Imam al-Rida
confirmed its authenticity.”[^181]

It is true that in the age of Imam al-Rida, a new era commenced. It was
the era of compilation, foundation, and documentation of the records
that are claimed or supposed to have quoted the materials of the Book of
Imam \`Ali as well as the religious laws reported by the Ahl al-Bayt.
During this era, their disciples used to compile and present these books
before the holy Imams in order to document them.

This course began noticeably during the age of Imam \`Ali ibn Musa
al-Rida. In this respect, it has been narrated that Ibn Faddal and Yunus
ibn \`Abd al-Rahman said, “As we showed him *Kitab al-Fara'id* (The Book
of Laws of Inheritance) that is reported from Amir al-Mu'minin, Imam
al-Rida confirmed it.”[^182]

It has been also narrated that \`Abdullah al-Ju\`afiy said: I, once,
visited Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida carrying with me a sheet of paper on
which it was written, “It is reported that (Imam) Ja\`far (al-Sadiq)
said that this world has been represented for the Owner of this Matter
(i.e. Imam al-Mahdi) like a half of a walnut that is split.” Imam
al-Rida commented, “This is unquestionably true. Copy it to a sheet made
of leather.”[^183]

In this narration, a Hadith that was reported from Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
is presented before Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida in order to investigate
whether it is authentic or nor. Imam al-Rida, of course, would either
check for the Hadith from the Book of Imam \`Ali or, more generally,
from the Hadiths that he had received from his father and forefathers.

At any rate, the aim of presenting the Hadiths before Imam al-Rida was
to document these narrations that were reported from the three holy
Imams—Muhammad al-Baqir, Ja\`far al-Sadiq, and Musa al-Kadhim.
Naturally, these narrations were mainly reported from Imam \`Ali who had
reported from the Holy Prophet.

It has been also narrated on the authority of Hamzah ibn \`Abdullah
al-Ja\`fairy that Abu’l-Hasan said, “I, once, wrote down on a sheet of
paper (the Hadith) that this world has been represented for the Imam
(i.e. al-Mahdi) like a half of a walnut that is split, and I presented
it before Imam al-Rida saying, ‘May Allah accept me as ransom for you!

Our companions have reported a Hadith that I could not deny; rather I
would like to hear it from you.’ As the Imam looked in the paper, he
folded it until I thought that he could not stand the matter. He then
said, ‘This is true. Write it down on a sheet of leather.’”[^184]

Out of his extensive interest in the recordation of the religious
heritage, Imam al-Rida used to offer an inkpot to everyone who would
write down for the sake of knowledge and the religion. In this respect,
it has been narrated that \`Ali ibn Asbat said that Imam al-Rida, once,
said, “The treasure about which Almighty Allah, in the Holy Qur'an,
says,

***‘And there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them...’ (Holy
Qur’an: 18/82)***...”

On hearing this, I said to the Imam that I would like to write down his
saying. He immediately extended his hand to take the inkpot and put
before me. But I hurried to his hand, kissed it, took the inkpot, and
wrote down the saying.[^185]

In addition, Imam al-Rida used to confirm that all that which he would
say was the pure truth that was inherited from the Holy Prophet and that
the genuine heritage of Prophethood was held by none except him.

In this respect, it has been narrated that Ya\`qub ibn Ja\`far said that
he was accompanying Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida in Makkah when a man
said to him, “You are interpreting the texts of Allah’s Book (i.e. the
Holy Qur'an) in an unprecedented way.” Answering the man, Imam al-Rida
said,

“Before it was revealed to the people, the Qur'an had been revealed to
us; and before it was explained to the people, it had been explained to
us. We thus know best what is lawful and what is unlawful therein...
This is the knowledge of what I have conveyed to you so long as I am
bound by this duty. If you accept from me, you should then thank; and if
you neglect, then it is Almighty Allah Who witnesses all things.”[^186]

It has been also narrated that \`Abd al-Salam ibn Salih al-Harawiy said
that on hearing Imam al-Rida saying, “May Allah have mercy upon him who
enlivens our Matter,” I asked, “How is your Matter enlivened?” The Imam
answered,

“It is enlivened by learning our knowledge and conveying it to the
people. Had the people been acquainted with our excellent wording, they
would certainly have followed us.”[^187]

It has been also narrated that Abu-Nasr said to Imam al-Rida, “May Allah
accept me as ransom for you! Some of our companions claim that they hear
the traditions that are reported from your fathers and you and then
analogize and act upon them!” The Imam answered,

“How strange this is! Nay, by Allah! This does not belong to the
religion of Ja\`far (al-Sadiq)! These people have nothing to do with us.
They have neglected the obedience to us and occupied our positions.
Where is the submission that they have shown to Ja\`far and the father
of Ja\`far? Ja\`far has said: Act not upon analogy. Nothing matches
analogy except analogy that breaks it.”[^188]

About those who were entrapped by spurious arguments and were confused
as regards the religious affairs, Imam al-Rida says,

“They have been deceived by spurious matters; therefore, the fact of
their religion was confused for them. As they wanted to be guided to the
right path of their own accord, they asked why, when, and how. As a
result, perdition came upon them from the very place of their
expectation. That was because of what their own hands have committed;
verily, ‘*And thy Lord is not at all a tyrant to His slaves.*’

They have not been ordered to do such; rather in such situations what is
obligatory upon them is only to stop at situations of perplexity and
refer what they have ignored to the learned ones who can infer it (from
the Holy Qur'an), for Almighty Allah says in His Book,

***‘Whereas if they had referred it to the messenger and to such of them
as are in authority, those among them who are able to infer the matter
would have known it’ (Holy Qur’an: 4/83)***

These are certainly the Family of Muhammad. It is they who can infer it
from the Qur'an, and it is they who know best what is lawful and what is
unlawful, and it is they who are Almighty Allah’s arguments against His
creatures.”[^189]

Imam al-Rida is also reported to have written a book entitled *Sahifat
al-Rida* that he reported from his forefather. This *Sahifah* has been
frequently published.

He also wrote down the *al-Risalah al-Dhahabiyyah* (the Golden Epistle)
for al-Ma'mun, the \`Abbasid ruler, who ordered this epistle to be
written with liquid gold and thus it took the title of the Golden
Epistle. Yet, other historians have mentioned other reasons for this
title. This epistle has been published many times.

It is also narrated that the book of *al-Ahlilijiyyah* (The Ellipse) was
written by Imam al-Rida. About this book, Sayyid al-Amin says, “It
comprises effective arguments and excellent topics concerning theology.”

Furthermore, Imam al-Rida dictated to his disciples as well as the
Muslim jurisprudents and students of jurisprudence numerous items of
knowledge, since his sessions were dedicated to teaching and dictations
of knowledge.

It has been narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn \`Ali al-Khuza\`iy
(brother of Di\`bil, the famous poet) that Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida,
in the city of Tus in the year AH 198, dictated to us a narration that
he reported from his father, Musa ibn Ja\`far.[^190]

This narration clearly demonstrates that Imam al-Rida, having been
interested in the recordation and the records of the religious
knowledge, used to dictate Islamic knowledge to the scholars and
students of religious knowledge who used to attend his sessions.

Imam Muhammad Ibn \`Ali Al-Jawad
--------------------------------

Imam Muhammad al-Jawad continued to take an interest in the recordation
of the religious knowledge and to preserve the books and records in this
field through exerting all possible efforts in amending and keeping them
in safety.

For his having been too young, the rulers held many sessions of debate
in order to confute or belittle Imam al-Jawad, but all their attempts
failed. Moreover, the scholars and jurisprudents, as well as the
publics, who attended these sessions were astonished by the unmatched
scientific capacities of him.

In addition to his interest in the Muslim jurisprudence and the
recordation of the religious knowledge, Imam al-Jawad was known of his
having paid much attention to the doctrinal questions owing to the
circumstances by which he passed.

Not only were the Imam’s efforts dedicated to the sessions of debate and
arguments but also he continued the march of recordation and
documentation of the Islamic heritage. He therefore had full
acquaintance with the Book of Imam \`Ali and the reports from Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq.

In this respect, it has been narrated that Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn
Abi-Khalid asked Imam al-Jawad, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you!
Our master scholars have reported from Abu-Ja\`far (Imam al-Baqir) and
Abu-\`Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq) when it was very recommended to practice
*Taqiyyah*; therefore, they concealed their books and no longer were
they narrated. When these scholars passed away, their books have become
in our hands. Are the contents of these books authentic that we
permitted to spread them?”

The Imam answered, “You all should spread the knowledge of these books,
for they are the truth.”[^191]

This narration demonstrates the intellectual persecution, especially in
the field of the recordation of the religious knowledge, that was
practiced by the Umayyad and \`Abbasid rulers to the degree that one of
the intimate disciples of Imam al-Jawad doubted, or wanted to be sure,
whether the contents of these narrations had been authentic or not.

Of course, such doubt was the natural result of the intellectual and
doctrinal persecution that were practiced against the Muslims. In such
situations did the actual role of the Imam manifest itself. The Imam is
in fact the most accurate criterion of discriminating the authentic from
the dubious as regards the recorded and reported heritage of Islam.

Most probably, the Imam had already seen such narrations in the Book of
\`Ali as well as the books of his forefathers; he therefore said to the
asker, “You all should spread the knowledge of these books, for they are
the truth.”

Although the asker was single, the Imam answered using the form of
plural. This indicates that this misfortune was encountered by all the
disciples of the Imam and that the majority of the recorded and reported
narrations were not yet documented as a result of political suppression,
persecution, and terrorism.

As he had known for sure the recordations of his father in form and
content, the Imam wept when he put the handwriting on his eyes and swore
its having been his father’s in order to refute any probability that the
book might have been distorted or falsely ascribed to Imam al-Rida.

It has been narrated that Ibrahim ibn Abu-Mahmud said that he once
visited Abu-Ja\`far (Imam al-Jawad) carrying some of his father’s books.
The Imam took them, read them, and then moved the book closer to his
eyes, saying, “This is my father’s handwriting. I swear it by Allah.” He
then wept heavily that his tears flew on his cheeks.[^192]

Al-Arbaliy, in *Kashf al-Ghummah*, has also narrated on the authority of
Imam Muhammad al-Jawad that it is written in the Book of \`Ali that son
of Adam is similar to a scales; he is either preponderant due to
knowledge (or reason) or low-grade due to ignorance**.**[^193]

The Imam also confirmed the significance of recording the religious
knowledge since it is more influential than reporting and even more
authentic in the view of the receiver of the narration, especially when
some of the readers of these records had known the handwriting of the
Imam.

In this connection, it has been narrated that \`Abd al-\`Aziz ibn
al-Muhtadiy asked Imam al-Jawad about the manner of Yunus ibn \`Abd
al-Rahman. In a written form, Imam al-Jawad answered, “I love him and
ask Almighty Allah to have mercy upon him although he disagreed with the
people of your town.”[^194]

The Imam wrote a number of epistles and missives to his disciples. It
has been narrated that Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn \`Īsa said that
Abu-Ja\`far (Imam al-Jawad) sent him a missive with his slave in which
he asked him to pay him a visit... Give him this missive of mine and
order him to send me the money... etc.[^195]

It has been also narrated that al-Hasan ibn Sham\`un said that he read
the following missive written by Imam al-Jawad personally to \`Ali ibn
Mahziyar: “In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful; O
\`Ali! May Allah reward you excellently... **etc.”**[^196]

The Imam sent another missive to \`Ali ibn Mahziyar who was in
Baghdad[^197] and a third one while the latter was in al-Madinah.[^198]
He is also reported to have said that he sent a missive to Imam al-Jawad
asking him what to do with a thing that belonged to him, and the Imam
answered... etc.[^199] It has been also narrated that Muhammad ibn Ahmad
ibn Hammad al-Maruziy said that Imam Muhammad al-Jawad wrote a missive
to his father... etc.[^200]

In a long narration, it has been narrated that \`Abd al-Jabbar
al-Nahawandiy saw a missive sent from Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Hashimiy
(i.e. Imam al-Jawad) to \`Abdullah ibn al-Mubarak... etc.[^201]

Shaykh \`Azizullah al-\`Ātaridiy has compiled the narrations of Imam
Muhammad al-Jawad in a book entitled *Musnad al-Imam al-Jawad*.

Imam \`Ali Ibn Muhammad Al-Hadi
-------------------------------

Like his holy forefathers, Imam \`Ali al-Hadi kept the Book of Imam
\`Ali from which he reported the traditions and blessed Sunnah of the
Holy Prophet. Out of his incomparable interest in the Book of \`Ali,
Imam \`Ali al-Hadi reported from that book while he was bed-ridden due
to the poison that was put to him.

It has been narrated that Abu-Du\`amah said: I visited \`Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn \`Ali ibn Musa in his final ailment because of which he
departed life. When I was about to leave, he said to me, “Abu-Du\`amah!
It is now incumbent upon us to honor you. May I inform you of a
narration that will please you?”

“I am terribly needful for such a narration, son of Allah’s Messenger!”
I said. He said,

“My father Muhammad ibn \`Ali (Imam al-Jawad) reported to me from his
father \`Ali ibn Musa (Imam al-Rida) that his father Musa ibn Ja\`far
(Imam al-Kadhim) reported to him from his father Ja\`far ibn Muhammad
(Imam al-Sadiq) that he reported from his father Muhammad ibn \`Ali
(Imam al-Baqir) that his father \`Ali ibn al-Husayn (Imam Zayn
al-\`Ābidin) reported to him from his father (Imam) al-Husayn ibn \`Ali
that his father (Imam) \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib reported to him that the
Messenger of Allah asked him to write down. ‘What should I write down,’
asked \`Ali. The Holy Prophet answered, ‘Write down: In the Name of
Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful; Real faith is that which is
confirmed by hearts and substantiated by deeds. Islam is that which is
said by tongues and by which marriage is deemed lawful.”

(Abu-Du\`amah added) I then said, “Son of Allah’s Messenger! I cannot
tell whether the contents of the Hadith or its series of narrators are
the best!”

Imam al-Hadi answered,

“This is taken from a *Sahifah* that is handwritten by \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib and dictated by the Messenger of Allah. We are inheriting this
*Sahifah* from one another.”[^202]

This narration reveals that all or the majority of the narrations said
by the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt are quoted from the Book of Imam
\`Ali even if they would not declare so in each and every saying; rather
they declared it in general.

Unfortunately, some ignorant people had not realized this fact; they
therefore accused Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq of having been ‘bookish’ since
they could not understand that he depended upon the books that comprised
the dictations of the Holy Prophet and were handwritten by Imam \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib.

In order that the Hadiths would reach the next generations as purely and
authentically as possible, Imam \`Ali al-Hadi continued the process of
the documentation of the narrations and records that are reported from
his father and forefathers.

It has been narrated that Muhammad ibn \`Īsa said: Dawud ibn Farqad
al-Farisiy read to me his missive to Abu’l-Hasan III (i.e. Imam \`Ali
al-Hadi) who answered that missive with his own handwriting. In this
missive, Dawud had asked him, “We would like to ask you about the
knowledge that is reported to us from your father and forefathers;
controversy occurred to such narrations and we do not know what to do
about it. Should we refer such contradictory items to you?”

Answering him, Imam \`Ali al-Hadi wrote down,

“As regards the items that you are sure of their being authentically
ascribed to us, you must adhere to them. But as for the items about
which you are not sure, you must refer them to us.”[^203]

In the abovementioned narration, the Imam made incumbent on his
disciples to refer the dubious and ambiguous narrations, as well as
those whose ascription to the Holy Imams is suspected, to the Holy Imams
in order to document the authentic and reject the forged and the
erroneous.

Some of his disciples have narrated that Imam \`Ali al-Hadi wrote down a
book on the exegesis (*Tafsir*) of the Holy Qur'an entitled *al-Amaliy
fi Tafsir al-Qur'an*. This book has been frequently reprinted although
some scholars have doubted its having been written by Imam \`Ali
al-Hadi.

Sayyid al-Amin has also mentioned that Imam \`Ali al-Hadi wrote another
book about the laws of the religion (*Ahkam al-Din*) refuting the
spurious arguments of the Fatalists (*Ahl al-Jabr*) and the
Indeterminists (*Ahl al-Tafwid*).[^204]

Copies of this book were kept by Abu-Tahir,[^205] \`Īsa ibn Ahmad ibn
\`Īsa,[^206] \`Ali ibn al-Rayyan,[^207] and \`Ali ibn Ja\`far
al-Hamaniy.[^208]

Shaykh \`Azizullah al-\`Ātaridiy has compiled the Hadiths reported from
Imam \`Ali al-Hadi in a book entitled *Musnad al-Imam al-Hadi*.

Imam Al-Hasan Ibn \`Ali Al-\`Askariy
------------------------------------

Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy dedicated his efforts to two chief tasks; he
first exerted all efforts in informing his intimate disciples everything
related to his son, Muhammad al-Mahdi, as being the next Imam.

Secondly, he concerned himself with the matter of the recordation and
the documentation of the records comprising the religious knowledge
through comparing them to the contents of the Book of Imam \`Ali as well
as the heritage that he had received from his father and forefathers. In
this discussion, we will deal exclusively with the second task for it is
related to the main topic of this book.

It has been narrated on the authority of Sa\`d ibn \`Abdullah
al-Ash\`ariy that Ahmad ibn \`Abdullah ibn Khanibah showed a book to our
master Abu-Muhammad al-Hasan ibn \`Ali ibn Muhammad (al-\`Askariy) who,
having read that book, declared its authenticity and ordered to act upon
it.[^209]

After it had been confirmed by Imam al-\`Askariy, the book became a
reference for the seekers of the genuine knowledge and the authenticated
narration. They therefore investigated the narrations that they had
taken from other sources to this book.

It has been narrated that al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn al-Wajna’
Abu-Muhammad al-Nusaybiy said that when they wrote a missive to Imam
al-\`Askariy asking him to write down or supply them with a book upon
which they would act, the Imam gave them such a book.

Al-Safwaniy said that he copied it and compared it to the book of Ahmad
ibn \`Abdullah ibn Khanibah and found out that they were almost the same
with a little difference in a few number of letters.[^210]

Apparently, Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy gave them a book that comprised
the major and most important religious questions. This fact demonstrates
the Imam’s great attention to the recordation of the religious
knowledge. Although he was among them, the Imam realized the
significance, comprehensiveness, and common benefit of the recorded
knowledge; he therefore wrote a book for his disciples.

Like their master, the disciples of Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy took a
great interest in the recordation and the documentation of the recorded
knowledge; therefore, al-Safwaniy, according to the aforesaid narration,
copied the book of Imam al-\`Askariy and then compared it to the book of
Ahmad ibn \`Abdullah ibn Khanibah, which had been already documented by
the Imam.

As a conclusion, the process of documenting the reported and recorded
narrations was very important in the view of the Ahl al-Bayt who also
conveyed it to their disciples and taught them to preserve such records.

When they asked him what they should do about the books of the sons of
Faddal that were filling their houses, Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy
answered, “You should accept their narrations and neglect their
opinions.”[^211]

Sons of Faddal had been Shi\`ites and had recorded the Hadiths of the
Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt before they deviated doctrinally and
adopted erroneous concepts about Imamate. Accordingly, the people
doubted the narrations that they had recorded although their houses were
full of such records.

This is an indication to the fact that the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt
took a great interest in and benefited from the records that comprised
the religious knowledge in the same way as they used to investigate the
authenticity of the contents of such records.

The Imam thus answered that the reports of the sons of Faddal had been
authentic and they therefore should be adopted, but their opinions and
concepts that violated the genuine beliefs of the true course of the Ahl
al-Bayt should be neglected.

It has been narrated that Dawud ibn al-Qasim al-Ja\`fary showed the book
of *Yawm(un) wa-Laylah* to Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy who asked, “Who
compiled this book?”

“Yunus, the slave of the Yaqtin did,” I answered.

The Imam commented, “May Allah confer upon him, on the Resurrection Day,
with illumination for each letter that he had written.”[^212]

Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy is reported to have written down a book on
the exegesis of the Holy Qur'an. This book has been many times reprinted
under the title of *Tafsir al-Imam al-\`Askariy*.

It has been reported that some books reported to have been written by
Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy were kept by Ibn Mu\`adh al-Huwaymiy,[^213]
Abu-Tahir al-Raziy—grandfather of Abu-Ghalib—, Muhammad ibn al-Rayyan
ibn al-Salt, and Muhammad ibn \`Īsa al-Qummiy. These books comprised
many questions which were reported by these disciples.[^214]

It has been also reported that when his disciples sent messages asking
about questions in the religious laws and doctrines, Imam al-Hasan
al-\`Askariy used to answer all these questions. Historians have
mentioned the names of some of those who exchanged letters with the
Imam, such as Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar,[^215] \`Abdullah ibn
Ja\`far,[^216] Ibrahim ibn Mahziyar,[^217] \`Ali ibn Muhammad
al-Husayniy,[^218] Muhammad ibn al-Rayyan,[^219] al-Rayyan ibn
al-Salt,[^220] \`Ali ibn Bilal,[^221] Hamzah ibn Muhammad,[^222] and
Muhammad ibn \`Abd al-Jabbar.[^223]

Imam Muhammad Ibn Al-Hasan Al-Mahdi
-----------------------------------

Imam al-Mahdi inherited the knowledge of his forefathers including the
Book of Imam \`Ali and the others that they had kept. Before that, the
Holy Imams had stated that the Book of Imam \`Ali, the *Mushaf* of
Fatimah, and the others books that were written during the age of the
Holy Prophet would be found with Muhammad al-Mahdi, the last Imam, and
that he would not issue any judgment unless it would be corresponding to
the contents of these books.

In this connection, it has been narrated on the authority of Hamran ibn
A\`yun that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (Abu-Ja\`far) pointed at a big house
and said,

“O Hamran! In this house there is a *Sahifah* of seventy cubit length.
It was handwritten by (Imam) \`Ali with the dictations of the Messenger
of Allah. If we rule over the people, we would judge between them
according to what Almighty Allah has revealed and thus we would never
exceed the contents of this *Sahifah*.”[^224]

The Holy Imams had also stated that the Book and the *Sahifah* of Imam
\`Ali would be kept by them forever and they would never be exposed to
obliteration; rather they (i.e. the Holy Imams) would inherit them from
one another.

As has been previously cited, Abu-Basir is reported to have said that
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir showed him a *Sahifah* comprising all that which
is deemed lawful and unlawful as well as the laws of inheritance.

“What is this?” asked Abu-Basir.

The Imam answered, “This *Sahifah* comprises the dictations of the
Messenger of Allah with the handwriting of (Imam) \`Ali.”

“Will this *Sahifah* be exposed to extinction?” asked Abu-Basir.

Imam al-Baqir answered, “What is the thing that will cause it to be
extinct?”

“Will it be exposed to obliteration?” asked Abu-Basir.

Imam al-Baqir answered, “What is the thing that will cause it to be
obliterated?”[^225]

In the famous narration about his meeting with Imam al-Mahdi in Samarra'
(a city northern Baghdad, Iraq), al-Hasan ibn Wajna’ an-Nusaybiy said
that the Imam gave him a book comprising the *Du\`a' al-Faraj*
(Supplication of asking Almighty Allah for hastening His relief to Imam
al-Mahdi by permitting him to reappear in this world) and a statement
about the way of sending blessings to him (i.e. Imam al-Mahdi).

The Imam then taught him to say these supplications whenever he wanted
to pray to Almighty Allah to send His blessings to the Imam. He also
asked him not to give this book except to the intimate disciples...
etc.[^226]

It has been also narrated that Imam al-Mahdi once asked one the
disciples of his father and him to show him a ring that had been given
to him by Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askariy (Imam al-Mahdi’s father). When the
man showed him the ring, the Imam wept and kissed it. He then began to
read the inscription on that ring, which reads, ‘*Ya-Allah, Ya-Muhammad,
Ya-\`Ali.*’ He then said to the ring, “Sacrificed be the hand in which
you were placed for long time.”[^227]

Because he disappeared from visions for about seventy years, Imam
al-Mahdi could not spread the religious laws and encourage the
recordation of the religious knowledge openly; rather he was exchanging
letters with his intimate disciples who used to ask him about the major
religious questions and he thus answered by sending them messages
containing his signature so that they would not be distorted or
counterfeited.

Accordingly, these messages have been called *al-Tawqi\`at* (The
Signatures). In the past as well as in the current time, many scholars
have compiled these *al-Tawqi\`at* in books. Abu’l-\`Abbas al-Himyariy,
one of Imam al-Mahdi’s disciples who died in AH 299, was the first to
compile these *al-Tawqi\`at* in a book.

Recently, a book comprising the majority of Imam al-Mahdi’s messages and
written instructions has been compiled by Shaykh Muhammad al-Gharawiy
under the title of *al-Mukhtar min Kalimat al-Imam al-Mahdi* (Selected
Words of Imam al-Mahdi). This book has been recently published.

From the aforecited discussion, we can conclude that the Holy Imams’
continuity in the field of the recordation of the religious heritage
began with Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib’s writings and then continued
throughout the generations up to the age of Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi.
After that, the disciples of the Holy Imams and the scholars have
compiled these records.

Distinctive concentration and confirmation was given to the question of
the documentation of the records of the religious knowledge after the
Imamate of Imam Musa al-Kadhim. However, the process of the
documentation was originally very old since the Holy Imams confirmed and
practiced it and documented all the texts that their disciples used to
show to them. At any rate, during the age of Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida
and afterward, the process of documenting the religious records
noticeably increased.

As we are coming to the conclusion of this part of our thesis, it is
important to attract attentions to a significant factor that stood
behind the slow down of the recordations and records for the followers
of the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism. Some of those who surrounded
the Holy Prophet used to treat with him as if he had been an ordinary
person, without making any difference between any other person and him.

They therefore called out to him from behind the private chambers;[^228]
and annoyed him by sitting with him for very long times;[^229] and
believed his having been an ordinary person that was exposed to errancy
in the very same way as he might be correct; and believed that when he
was enraged, he might say things that he would not say if he was
pleased.[^230]

It has been narrated that \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās said: I used
to write down each and every item that would be said by the Messenger of
Allah so that I would memorize it, but the people of Quraysh warned me
against such, saying, “Do you really write down each and every item that
is said by the Messenger of Allah while his sayings are influenced by
his manners; that is when he is enraged, he may say things that he does
not say when he is pleased?” I therefore stopped writing down his
sayings. When I mentioned this matter before him, the Messenger of Allah
said to me,

“Write down (everything I say); for, I swear by Him Who grasps my soul,
nothing comes out of my mouth except the truth.”[^231]

According to the abovementioned narration, it was the people of Quraysh
who ordered \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās to stop writing down the
Holy Prophet’s words, claiming that he might say untrue things when he
would be angry!

The Holy Prophet is too great to pronounce any untrue word.

It has been also narrated on the authority of \`Amr ibn Shu\`ayb on the
authority of his father that his grandfather, once, asked the Holy
Prophet whether he might write down everything that he would hear from
him.

“Yes, you may,” the Holy Prophet answered.

“In both manners of anger and pleasure?” asked the man.

“Yes, in both manners. Verily, I say nothing but the truth whatever my
manner be,” answered the Holy Prophet.[^232]

This very idea was also common and prevalent, and even effective, during
the ages of the Holy Imams. Accordingly, some people imagined that the
Imam, being enraged, might report a matter or say something that he
would not say it when he would be pleased.

Unfortunately, such people believed that the Holy Imams were just like
the other fuqaha, scholars, and Ijtihadists whose opinions are exposed
to change according to the circumstances by which they pass or according
to the proofs on which their eyes might fall in a certain period of
their lifetimes.

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt always answered and said the same
words of the Holy Prophet; as a result, none of the Muslim master
scholars dared to say so save them, since they enjoyed the highest
degree of self-confidence and they believed indisputably in the
authenticity of their reports as regards the religious affairs and laws.
They therefore ordered their disciples to write down these reports
because they were conclusively true.

It has been narrated on the authority of Hamzah ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib
that \`Abdullah al-Ju\`afiy said: I, once, visited Imam \`Ali ibn Musa
al-Rida carrying with me a sheet of paper on which it was written, “It
is reported that (Imam) Ja\`far (al-Sadiq) said that this world has been
represented for the Owner of this Matter (i.e. Imam al-Mahdi) like a
half of a walnut that is split.” Imam al-Rida commented, “O Hamzah! This
is unquestionably true. Copy it to a sheet made of leather.”[^233]

Many uninterrupted narrations have been reported concerning the fact
that the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt say nothing but the truth and
that they have never issued verdicts out of personal Ijtihad or given
their own notions or opinions as regards a religious question. In this
respect, it has been narrated on the authority of al-Fudayl ibn Yasar
that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir said,

“If we speak out of our own opinions, we will certainly miss the right
way in the same way as those, who were before us, had missed the right
way when they spoke out of their own opinions. Rather we speak depending
upon a proof of our Lord that He has explained to His Prophet and His
Prophet has explained it to us.”[^234]

Similarly, it has been narrated on the authority of Dawud ibn Abu-Yazid
al-Ahwal that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq said,

“If we give religious verdicts out of our desires and personal opinions,
we will certainly be of those who shall perish; rather we give people
verdicts derived from the traditions of the Messenger of Allah and from
principles that we have inherited from our great fathers. We have
hoarded up these principles in the same way as those people have hoarded
up their fortunes of gold and silver.”[^235]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Qutaybah that after Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq answered the questions of a man, the latter said, “What
if the answer is such-and-such, what will you say about it?”

Imam al-Sadiq, reproachfully, answered, “Shut up! Any answer that I give
to you must be taken from the Messenger of Allah. We are not of those
who say ‘what if’ at all.”[^236]

Without doubt, such continuity in the recordation of the religious
affairs and such ultimate confidence that all these records are the same
as what have been said by the Messenger of Allah—such continuity and
confidence cannot be found with any other Muslim School except the
School of the Ahl al-Bayt that is the basis of the recordation of the
religious knowledge and the foundation of the structure of the School of
Thorough Compliance with the Sacred Texts. The matter is now too clear
to be misunderstood; therefore, one may choose any narration that he/she
likes.

Finally, it seems appropriate to quote the wording of Dr. Mustafa
al-A\`dhamiy about the Shi\`ite Muslims:

“As for the Shi\`ite Muslims the majority of whom belong to the
Ithna\`ashariyyah (Twelvers) School in the recent times, they believe in
the Holy Sunnah as a source of the religion. Rather, the difference
between them and us lies in the method of proving the authenticity of
the Sunnah itself.”[^237]

[^1]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 107; Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat
al-Kubra 2:389; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 9:341.

[^2]: Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i)
1:77.

[^3]: Abu-Na\`im: Hilyat al-Awliya’ 3:363; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah
wa’l-Nihayah 9:345 as is mentioned in al-Riwayah al-Tarikhiyyah 107.

[^4]: Mahmud Abu-Rayyah: Adwa’un \`Ala’l-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah 260.

[^5]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 16:136.

[^6]: Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar: al-Muwaffaqiyyat 576-577; al-Mas\`udiy:
Muruj al-Dhahab 3:454; Muhammad ibn \`Aqil: al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiyah 116;
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 9:338; Al-Nawawiy: Commentary on
Muslim’s al-Sahih 1:81; al-Tabariy: al-Mustarshid 174.

[^7]: Ibn al-Maghaziliy: Manaqib \`Ali 142 No. 186.

[^8]: Al-Nawawiy: Commentary on Muslim’s al-Sahih 1:81.

[^9]: Ibn al-Maghaziliy: Manaqib \`Ali 124 H. 186.

[^10]: Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harraniy: Tuhaf al-\`Uqul 198.

[^11]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 4:73.

[^12]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 4:59.

[^13]: Al-Dahlawiy: Risalat al-Insaf.

[^14]: This statement has been quoted by Asad Haydar in his famous book
of ‘al-Imam al-Sadiq wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah’ 1:396.

[^15]: Jamal al-Din al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal, 6:124.

[^16]: Ibn Qutaybah: \`Uyun al-Akhbar 2: 112 as mentioned in al-Imam
al-Sadiq wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah by Asad Haydar 1:397.

[^17]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 4:63; al-Basyawiy:
al-Ma\`rifah wa’l-Tarikh (Chapter: Biography of Abu-Hurayrah).

[^18]: Muhammad ibn \`Aqil: al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiyah 89; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid:
Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 11:46.

[^19]: Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah, Du\`a' No. 8.

[^20]: Al-Arbaliy: Kashf al-Ghummah 2:98-99.

[^21]: Al-Halawaniy: Nuzhat al-Nadhir 45.

[^22]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Ikmal al-Din 9:31 H. 324

[^23]: Ibn al-Athir: Usd al-Ghabah fi Ma\`rifat al-Sahabah 2:472
(Biography of Sahl ibn Sa\`d).

[^24]: Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin: A\`yan al-Shi\`ah 1:330.

[^25]: This book (Sahifat \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib \`An Rasulillah; Dirasatun
Tawthiqiyyatun Fiqhiyyah) was published in AH 1406 in Aleppo, Dar
al-Salam Publications.

[^26]: Al-Tabrisiy: al-Ihtijaj 155; al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 44:100.

[^27]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal: al-\`Ilal 1: 104 (Ankara University Press).

[^28]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 165/12.

[^29]: Al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 413 H. 22; al-Tusiy: al-Ghaybah
118.

[^30]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 167.

[^31]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Rawdat al-Kafi 8:136 H. 172.

[^32]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Irshad 2:142; Ibn Shahrashub: Manaqib Āli
Abi-Talib 4:149; Shaykh al-Tabrisiy: I\`lam al-Wara bi-A\`lam al-Huda
245; al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 46:74 H. 65.

[^33]: Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn is also called ‘Dhu’l-Thafanat’, because
his knees were callous due to his very frequent and long prostrations
for Almighty Allah. He is also called ‘al-Sajjad’, which means the one
who very frequently prostrates himself for Almighty Allah.

[^34]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 360 No. 966.

[^35]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:329 H. 1.

[^36]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:77 H. 1.

[^37]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:94 H. 3.

[^38]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:77 H. 1.

[^39]: Al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:414 H. 3 and 4.

[^40]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:227 H. 665/38, 9:86 H. 364/9;
Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 3:9 H. 4.

[^41]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:339 H. 398.

[^42]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:23 H. 64/15; Shaykh al-Tusiy:
al-Istibsar 1:261 H. 27; \`Allamah al-Hilliy: Muntaha al-Matlab 1:207;
al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 4:144 H. 4754/14, 147 H.
4766/26.

[^43]: About this topic, there are four narrations; the first is
reported on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn Sinan (see Shaykh al-Tusiy:
Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5: 383 H. 13337/250), the second is reported on the
authority of Ibn Maryam (see Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\` (Secondary
Subjects) al-Kafi 4:368 H. 3), the third and the fourth are reported on
the authority of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu-\`Abdullah (Shaykh al-Tusiy:
Tahdhib al-Ahkam 1:329 H. 963/136; Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\` al-Kafi
3:175 H. 6; and Shaykh al-Tusjiy: al-Istibsar 1:472 H. 1826/7).

[^44]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\` al-Kafi 3:397 H. 1; Shaykh al-Tusiy:
Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:209 H. 818/26; al-Istibsar 1:383 H. 1; Ibn Abi-Jumhur
al-Ihsa'iy, in \`Awali al-La’ali 3:74 H. 34.

[^45]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 165 H. 14.

[^46]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 185 H. 11;
al-Hurr al-'Āmiliy: Wasai’l al-Shi’ah 4:103 H. 4630/4, 10:407 H.
13714/42.

[^47]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 3:28 H. 96/8.

[^48]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 2:484 H. 2, 485 H. 7; al-Hurr
al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 7:80 H. 8784/3.

[^49]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\` al-Kafi 3:505 H. 17; al-Hurr
al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 7:80 H. 11431/12.

[^50]: Shaykh al-Saduq: \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` 2:584 H. 26; Shaykh
al-Tusiy: al-Amaliy 1:131.

[^51]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 4:158 H. 441/13; al-Istibsar
2:64 H. 208/10; al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 10:255 H.
13349/11.

[^52]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\` al-Kafi 4:340 H. 7; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 2:217 H. 21; Shaykh al-Saduq: \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\` 2:408 H. 1.

[^53]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5:344 H. 1190/103, 1191/104,
355 H. 1233/146; al-Istibsar 2:203 H. 3; Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\`
al-Kafi 4:389 H. 5, 4:390 H. 9; Ibn Abi-Jumhur al-Ihsa'iy, in \`Awali
al-La’ali 3:173 H. 86, 88.

[^54]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5:152 H. 502/27; al-Istibsar
2:240 H. 835/5; al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 13:366 H.
17966/10, 367 H. 17972/16.

[^55]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Furu\` al-Kafi 5:31 H.5.

[^56]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 6:343 H. 961/82.

[^57]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:40 H. 1; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 4:151 H. 1; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam
9:211 H. 836/3; Shaykh al-Saduq: Ma\`ani al-Akhbar 217 H. 1.

[^58]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 3:263 H. 37, 286 H.6;
Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 5:135 H. 5, 452 H. 1; Shaykh al-Tusiy:
Tahdhib al-Ahkam 7:432 H. 1723/34, 481 H. 1932/140; al-Istibsar 3:48 H.
158/1.

[^59]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 2:347 H. 4; Furu\` al-Kafi 7:436
H. 9; Shaykh al-Saduq: al-Khisal 1:124 H. 119; Thawab al-A\`mal 270 H.
8.

[^60]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 6:202 H. 1, 207 H. 1; Shaykh
al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9:22 H. 88/88; al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir 1:294 H.
28, 295 H. 30.

[^61]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 6:232 H. 1, 3; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 3:210 H. 61; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam
9:57 H. 237/237; al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 24:23 H.
29891/6, H. 29892/7, 65 H. 30010/44, 136 H. 30175/21.

[^62]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 6:254 H. 1; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 3:209 H. 57.

[^63]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9:5 H. 12/12; al-Istibsar 4:590
H. 5; Ibn Abi-Jumhur al-Ihsa'iy: \`Awali al-La’ali 3:464 H. 9.

[^64]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 6:219 H. 1; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib
al-Ahkam 9:2 H. 1/1.

[^65]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9: 9 H. 18/18; al-Hurr
al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 24: 134 H. 30170/16.

[^66]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9:4 H. 9/9, 10/10; al-Istibsar
4:58 H. 201/2, 59 H. 3.

[^67]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 9:40 H. 169/169.

[^68]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 1:407 H. 1; Furu\` al-Kafi 5:279
H. 5; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 7:152 H. 674/23; al-Istibsar
3:108 H. 383/5; al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir 2:25 H. 66; al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy:
Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 25:414 H. 32246/2; al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak
al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il 17:112 H. 1.

[^69]: See, for instance, the narration of Abu-Ayyub al-Khazzaz recorded
by Shaykh al-Kulayniy in al-Kafi 7:77 H. 1, Shaykh al-Tusiy in Tahdhib
al-Ahkam 9:269 H. 976/3; the narration of Abu’l-Rabi\` recorded in
Shaykh al-Saduq’s Man-la-Yahduruhu’l-Faqih 4:306 H. 13; the narration of
al-Qasim ibn Sulayman recorded in Shaykh al-Tusiy’s Tahdhib al-Ahkam
9:308 H. 1103/24; the narration of \`Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj
recorded in Shaykh al-Kulayniy’s Furu\` al-Kafi 7:136 H. 1 and Shaykh
al-Saduq’s Man-la-Yahduruhu’l-Faqih 4:225 H. All these narrations were
reported from Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq. Ibn Abi-Jumhur al-Ihsa’iy, in
\`Awali al-La’ali 2:152 H. 424; and al-Qadi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribiy, in
Da\`a'im al-Islam 2:381 H. 1361; and Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar, in
Basa'ir al-Darajat 185—all these have reported that Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir ordered the Book of \`Ali to be brought to him, and thus
Ja\`far (i.e. Imam al-Sadiq) brought it.

[^70]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:414 H. 3, 415 H. 7; Shaykh
al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 6:228 H. 550/1, 551/2 on the authority of
Abu-Basir and Muhammad ibn Muslim and Zurarah. See also Muhammad ibn
Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 163 H. 7.

[^71]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 4:53 H. 14; Al-Barqiy:
al-Mahasin 1:273 H. 377; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 10:146 H.
579/10; Ibn Abi-Jumhur al-Ihsa'iy: \`Awali al-La’ali 3:549; Shaykh
al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:200 H. 12, 214 H. 4, 216 H. 11; Shaykh al-Tusiy:
Tahdhib al-Ahkam 10:55 H. 203, 90 H. 348/5, 345/2, 108 H. 421/38.

[^72]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:316 H. 1, 329 H. 1; Usul al-Kafi
1:238 H. 1; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 10:251 H. 996/29, 70 H.
21063/8, 277 H.9, 254 H. 1005/38; al-Istibsar 4:266 H. 1004/8, H. 72,
630 H. 55; Shaykh al-Saduq: al-Khisal 2:539 H. 9; Muhammad ibn Hasan
al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 171 H. 3.

[^73]: Al-Barqiy: al-Mahasin 1: 107 H. 93; Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi
5:541 H. 4.

[^74]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 2:278 H. 8; al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy:
Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 15:321 H. 20631/4.

[^75]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Thawab al-A\`mal 277 H. 1; al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir
1:223 H. 39; al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat
al-Masa’il 13:190 H. 3; al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 1: 91 H.
215/18.

[^76]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Thawab al-A\`mal 298 H. 2; al-Amaliy 253 H. 2.

[^77]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Rawdah Min al-Kafi 8:129 H. 100, 163 H.
172; Ibn Shahrashub, in Manaqib Āli Abi-Talib 2:125; al-Hurr
al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 1:91 H. 215/18.

[^78]: Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Iskafiy: Kitab al-Tamhis 44 H. 55; Shaykh
al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 2:259 H. 29; Shaykh al-Saduq: \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\` 1:44 H. 1.

[^79]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 2:136 H. 22; Warram ibn
Abi-Firas: Tanbih al-Khawatir wa-Nuzhat al-Nawadhir 2:194.

[^80]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Ikhtisas 227; Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul
al-Kafi 2:71 H. 2.

[^81]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: Usul al-Kafi 2:666 H. 2.

[^82]: Al-Qummiy: Tafsir 1:36; al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir 1:26 H. 2;
al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 11:103 H. 10.

[^83]: Al-Qummiy: Tafsir 1:244; al-\`Ayyashiy: Tafsir 2:33 H. 93;
al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 14:52 H. 5.

[^84]: Shaykh al-Kulyniy: Usul al-Kafi 1:41 H. 1; Al-Himyariy al-Qummiy:
Qurb al-Isnad 44; al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 1:106 H. 2, 2:76 H. 14,
227 H. 5; al-Arbaliy: Kashf al-Ghummah 2:346.

[^85]: The Holy Imam has explained this question to al-Hakam ibn
\`Uyaynah. See Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:329 H. 1; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 4:104 H. 12; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam
10:254 H. 1005/38; al-Istibsar 4:288 H. 1089/1; Shaykh al-Mufid:
al-Ikhtisas 254.

[^86]: Sharif al-Murtada: al-Dhari\`ah 2:154-155.

[^87]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 177 No. 467; Sharif al-Murtada:
al-Dhari\`ah 4:276, 8:24; al-Majlisiy: Bihar al-Anwar 1:15, 32, 84: 382,
92: 40, 66.

[^88]: Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin: A\`yan al-Shi\`ah 1:321; al-Majlisiy:
Bihar al-Anwar 3:93.

[^89]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 7 No. 2; Shaykh al-Tusiy: al-Fihrist 62 No.
119.

[^90]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 6 No. 1; Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr: Ta’sis
al-Shi’ah li-‘Ulum al-Islam 280; al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Tarikh Baghdad
8:449.

[^91]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 7&8 No. 3; al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi (Kitab
al-Zakat).

[^92]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 333 No. 881; Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr: Ta’sis
al-Shi’ah li-‘Ulum al-Islam 284.

[^93]: Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr: Ta’sis al-Shi’ah li-‘Ulum al-Islam 283.

[^94]: Al-Suyutiy: al-Ashbah wa’l-Nadha'ir 1:12-14; al-Qaftiy: Anba’
al-Ruwat 1:39; al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A’lam al-Nubala’ 4:84.

[^95]: This epistle has been published by Ansariyan Publications under
the title of ‘The Epistle; Imam \`Ali’s Famous Epistle to Malik
al-Ashtar’.

[^96]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 88; Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb
al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm wa-Fadlih(i) 1:71; Ibn Sa\`d:
al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 6:168; Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:40.

[^97]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 89.

[^98]: \`Abd al-Halim al-Jundiy: al-Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq 199.

[^99]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 90, Tarikh Baghdad 8:357.

[^100]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 89-90.

[^101]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 10:312 H. 29562.

[^102]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 10:312 H. 29563. A
similar narration is recorded in Ibn Abi’l-Hadid’s Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah.

[^103]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 10:313 H. 29564. Of
course, this narration demonstrates the best way of handwriting the
Arabic letters mentioned therein.

[^104]: This narration is also recorded in Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah and
Bihar al-Anwar with a little difference in expressions.

[^105]: Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Thaqafiy: al-Gharat 1:251-254.

[^106]: Al-Khara'itiy: Makarim al-Akhlaq 43 No. 317.

[^107]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 6:283; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir
5:127; al-Khara'itiy: Makarim al-Akhlaq 37.

[^108]: Ibn Babawayh al-Qummiy: al-Imamah wa’l-Tabsirah min’al-Hayrah
180 H. 34.

[^109]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 3:507 H. 2.

[^110]: In the present time, the word ‘Mushaf’ is mainly used to refer
to the Holy Qur'an.

[^111]: Shaykh Tahir al-Jaza'iriy: Ma\`rifat al-Naskh 31, 145; Tawjih
al-Nadhar 6.

[^112]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 107 as
reported from Abu-Hatam: al-Ilal 1:104.

[^113]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 64 :98 (Biography of Imam
al-Hasan); Ibn \`Abd al-Rabb al-Qurtubiy: Jami\`u Bayan al-\`Ilm
wa-Fadlih(i) 1:82; al-Ya\`qubiy: al-Tarikh 2:227; al-Khatib
al-Baghdadiy: al-Kifayah fi \`Ilm al-Dirayah; al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy:
Kanz al-\`Ummal 5:229; Ibn ‘Asakir: Tarikh Madinat Dimashq (Biography of
Imam al-Hasan).

[^114]: Abu-Bakr al-Khatib: Sharaf Ashab al-Hadith 69 No. 146.

[^115]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 148/9, 163/3,
164/6.

[^116]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 162/1, 167/21.

[^117]: Ibn Shahrashub: Manaqib Āli Abi-Talib 2:37; Muhammad ibn Hasan
al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 163/4, 168/23.

[^118]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 160/29.

[^119]: Kitab Sulaym ibn Qays 165.

[^120]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 5:383 (Kitab al-Hajj)

[^121]: Asad Haydar: al-Imam al-Sadiq wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah 1:550 as
quoted from Mustafa \`Abd al-Razzaq: Tamhid(un) Li-Tarikh al-Falsafah
al-Islamiyyah.

[^122]: These two famous epistles have been frequently published, and
many explanations have been written for them. They have been also
translated into many languages.

[^123]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 8:14, 17; Shaykh al-Tusiy:
al-Fihrist 68 No. 138.

[^124]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:40 H. 1, 2; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhu’l-Faqih 4:204 H. 5473; Ma\`ani al-Akhbar 217 H. 1.

[^125]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 8:163 H. 172.

[^126]: This epistle has been published (in its origin language) by
al-Furat Press—Baghdad with an introduction by Sayyid Hibat al-Din
al-Shahristaniy, yet it has been ascribed to Zayd ibn \`Ali rather than
his father.

[^127]: Mafath Kunuz al-Sunnah, edited by Shaykh Ahmad Muhammad Shakir
4.

[^128]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 371.

[^129]: Asad Haydar: al-Imam al-Sadiq wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah 1:550 as
quoted from Mustafa \`Abd al-Razzaq: Tamhid(un) Li-Tarikh al-Falsafah
al-Islamiyyah 200.

[^130]: Details of this fact have been previously cited in this book.
Shaykh al-Kulayniy, in al-Kafi 2: 600, has recorded a narration on the
authority of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq explaining this issue.

[^131]: Sayyid Majd al-Din al-Mu’ayyidiy al-Hasaniy: al-Tuhaf Sharh
al-Zulaf 30; Naji Hasan: Thawrat Zayd ibn \`Ali 35.

[^132]: Naji Hasan: al-Safwah 9.

[^133]: Sayyid Majd al-Din al-Mu’ayyidiy al-Hasaniy: al-Tuhaf Sharh
al-Zulaf 30.

[^134]: \`Abd al-Halim al-Jundiy: al-Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq 202.

[^135]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Amaliy 12:51 as mentioned in al-Hurr
al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 27:59, H. 43.

[^136]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 360 No. 966.

[^137]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:112.

[^138]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Ma\`ani al-Akhbar 219-220.

[^139]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 165.

[^140]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:400; Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar:
Basa'ir al-Darajat 9.

[^141]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Amaliy 64.

[^142]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 354-355.

[^143]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 104.

[^144]: Ibn al-Nadim: al-Fihrist 36; Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr: Ta’sis
al-Shi’ah li-‘Ulum al-Islam 327; Asad Haydar: al-Imam al-Sadiq
wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah 1:552.

[^145]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 151 No. 396, 397—pp. 178 No. 468; Sayyid
Hasan al-Sadr: Ta’sis al-Shi’ah li-‘Ulum al-Islam 285.

[^146]: For example, refer to Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harraniy: Tuhaf al-\`Uqul.

[^147]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:119; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib
al-Ahkam 9:324.

[^148]: Shaykh al-Saduq: \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` 5:89. It is well known that
the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt had acquaintance with the knowledge of
the Prophets as they kept their books. (See Muhammad ibn Hasan
al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat)

[^149]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:298; Kitab \`Āsim
ibn Hamid al-Hannat 33.

[^150]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 164.

[^151]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 165.

[^152]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 149.

[^153]: Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib 2:104.

[^154]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 358.

[^155]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:42 H. 11.

[^156]: Al-Tabariy: Dala'il al-Imamah 308.

[^157]: Āgha Buzurg al-Tahraniy: al-Dhari\`ah 2:484. These epistles have
been recorded by Shaykh al-Majlisiy in Bihar al-Anwar 3:152-196.

[^158]: This epistle has been recorded by Ibn Zahrah al-Halabiy in
al-Arba\`in 46 H. 6.

[^159]: Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib 2:103.

[^160]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: al-Fihrist 191 No. 721.

[^161]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 407 No. 1082.

[^162]: Al-Halabiy: Kashf al-Dhunun 1682.

[^163]: Al-Nu\`maniy: Kitab al-Ghaybah 327 H. 4. A similar narration is
recorded in Khatimat al-Mustadrak 4:113.

[^164]: Ahmad ibn \`Īsa al-Ash\`ariy: al-Nawadir 78 H. 199. Shaykh
al-Kulayniy has also recorded this narration in his book of al-Kafi
5:452, under the title that one must not practice the temporary marriage
so long as he can avoid it.

[^165]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Ikhtisas 281; Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar:
Basa'ir al-Darajat 302; al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il
wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il 17:258.

[^166]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:56.

[^167]: Al-Mirza al-Nuriy: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il
1:386.

[^168]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:91; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib
al-Ahkam 9:270.

[^169]: Al-Tabrisiy: al-Ihtijaj 1:138. See also Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah 16:209-253.

[^170]: For more details, see al-Risalah al-Misriyyah Magazine; Issue
No. 517, Eleventh Year, pp. 457. Also, refer to Sayyid \`Abd al-Husayn
Sharaf al-Din: al-Nass wa’l-Ijtihad (Text and Interpretation) 124.

[^171]: Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy: al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah 3:357.

[^172]: Al-Buladhiriy: Ansab al-Ashraf 5:34; as quoted from Sayyid \`Ali
al-Shahristaniy: Wudu' al-Nabiy 1:134.

[^173]: To explain, the descendants of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib are the
sons of the Holy Prophet’s daughter, namely Lady Fatimah al-Zahra',
while the \`Abbasids are the cousins of the Holy Prophet since their
forefather is al-\`Abbas, son of \`Abd al-Muttalib. They therefore claim
that uncles should inherit a man who has no male children. This is of
course a distortion in the religious laws of inheritance that decide
that uncles’ shares of an inheritance is nothing when the inherited
leaves a child, be it male or female. Accordingly, the descendants of
Imam \`Ali inherit the Holy Prophet while his uncles, including
al-\`Abbas, inherit nothing. The second point presented in the poetic
verses involved is that al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib, to whom the
\`Abbasids belong, converted to Islam only for fear of being killed
after the conquest of Makkah. He is thus one of the Tulaqa’ (the
released ones). The story of the Tulaqa’ (the released ones) is as
follows: The people of Quraysh—the tribe to whom the Holy Prophet
belongs—allied each other against him and showed him various sorts of
bitterness that obliged him to flee his hometown. When Almighty Allah
gave him victory against them and enabled him to conquer their capital,
they were quite sure that he would revenge himself upon them. He thus
gathered them and said, ‘What do you think that I am going to do with
you?’ ‘Only the good, for you are a noble brother and the son of a noble
brother,’ answered they. He said, ‘I will repeat the same wording of my
brother Joseph the prophet: (Today, you are not condemned.) Go, you are
released.’

[^174]: Shaykh al-Saduq: 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida 2:147.

[^175]: Shaykh al-Saduq: 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida 1:66 H. 9.

[^176]: Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahaniy: Maqatil al-Talibiyyin 473-474.

[^177]: The details of this story can be found in al-Tanukhiy: Nashwar
al-Muhadarah 1:252, and Ibn Khallakan: Wafiyyat al-A\`yan.

[^178]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 382.

[^179]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 10: 292 H. 1135.

[^180]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:327 H. 7.

[^181]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:330 H. 1.

[^182]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 7:33 H. 1.

[^183]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 408 H. 2.

[^184]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 408 H. 4.

[^185]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 2:59 H. 9.

[^186]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 198 H. 4.

[^187]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Ma\`ani al-Akhbar 180; \`Uyun Akhbar al-Rida
1:307.

[^188]: Al-Himyariy al-Qummiy: Qurb al-Isnad 356 H. 1275.

[^189]: Al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 27:171 H. 56 as written
in al-\`Ayyashiy’s book of Tafsir 1:260 H. 206. See also Al-Borujerdiy:
Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:232.

[^190]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: al-Amaliy 1:370-382; al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 277
No. 727.

[^191]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:53 H. 15.

[^192]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 475.

[^193]: Al-Arbaliy: Kashf al-Ghummah 2:346.

[^194]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 413.

[^195]: Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Ikhtisas 87; Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal
al-Kishiy 497.

[^196]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: al-Ghaybah 211.

[^197]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 460-461.

[^198]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 460-461.

[^199]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 427.

[^200]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 468.

[^201]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Rijal al-Kishiy 476.

[^202]: Al-Mas\`udiy: Muruj al-Dhahab 4:85-86.

[^203]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 545.

[^204]: Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin: A\`yan al-Shi\`ah 1:380.

[^205]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 460 No. 1256.

[^206]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 297 No. 806.

[^207]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 278 No. 371.

[^208]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 280 No. 740.

[^209]: Sayyid Ibn Tawus al-Hasaniy: Falah al-Sa'il 183.

[^210]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 244.

[^211]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Kitab al-Ghaybah 239-240.

[^212]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 447 No. 1208; Shaykh al-Majlisiy: Bihar
al-Anwar 2:150 H. 25.

[^213]: Āgha Buzurg al-Tahraniy: al-Dhari\`ah 24:152 No. 777.

[^214]: Al-Najashiy: al-Rijal 347 No. 937, pp. 370 No. 1009, and pp. 371
No. 1010.

[^215]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 3:499 and 508; Shaykh
al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 7:150.

[^216]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 6:35, Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 3:488, 3:476; Al-Khara'itiy: Makarim al-Akhlaq
263; Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 5:447.

[^217]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 4:310; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 2:444.

[^218]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 4:310; Shaykh al-Saduq:
Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 2:445.

[^219]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:409.

[^220]: Shaykh al-Tusiy: Tahdhib al-Ahkam 4:139.

[^221]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Man-la-Yahduruhul-Faqih 4:179.

[^222]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 4:181.

[^223]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 3:399; Shaykh al-Tusiy: al-Istibsar
1:385, Tahdhib al-Ahkam 2:207.

[^224]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 163. In
addition, there are many narrations carrying the same meaning.

[^225]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar: Basa'ir al-Darajat 164.

[^226]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah 444.

[^227]: Shaykh al-Saduq: Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah 445.

[^228]: This is an indication to the following verses of the Holy
Qur'an: “(As for) those who call out to you from behind the private
chambers, surely most of them do not understand. And if they wait
patiently until you come out to them, it would certainly be better for
them, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 49/4-5”

[^229]: This is an indication to the following verses of the Holy
Qur'an: “O you who believe! Do not enter the houses of the Prophet
unless permission is given to you for a meal, not waiting for its
cooking being finished-- but when you are invited, enter, and when you
have taken the food, then disperse-- not seeking to listen to talk;
surely this gives the Prophet trouble, but he forbears from you, and
Allah does not forbear from the truth. 33/53”

[^230]: Al-Haythamiy, in Majma\` al-Zawa'id 1:178, writes down that the
Holy Prophet said in an incident, “...I am no more than a human being
just like you. When I convey to you things from Allah, you should
believe me; but when I say to you things out of my own self, then I am a
human being that may err or hit the target.” For the Shiite Muslims, the
Holy Prophet, as well as the Holy Imams, are divinely guided all the
time and are not exposed to errancy at all. (Translator)

[^231]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1:105-106;
Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:162. A similar narration is recorded by Ibn
Abi-Jumhur al-Ihsa'iy, in \`Awali al-La’ali 1:68 H. 120.

[^232]: Ibn Abi-Jumhur al-Ihsa'iy: \`Awali al-La’ali 1:68 H. 120.

[^233]: Al-Borujerdiy: Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah; 1:290 as quoted from
Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar, in Basa'ir al-Darajat. A similar narration
is reported from Hamzah ibn \`Abdullah al-Ja\`fairy who narrated it from
Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida.

[^234]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar, in Basa'ir al-Darajat 299 H. 2.

[^235]: Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Saffar, in Basa'ir al-Darajat 299 H. 3.

[^236]: Shaykh al-Kulayniy: al-Kafi 1:58 H. 21.

[^237]: Dr. Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 25.


