Motives Of Distortion And Deviation For Both The Trends
=======================================================

In the previous chapters, some of the major differences between the two
trends have been cited. Having been influenced by the decision of the
prohibiting of reporting and recording the Hadith, these differences saw
light and expanded until they reached us to fruitful and unquestionably
valid conclusions about the foundations of the two trends that represent
the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism and the School of Thorough
Compliance with the Sacred Texts.

Obviously, we have also seen the positive impact that the recordation of
the Hadith has left on the jurisprudence of those who recorded the
Hadith and, at the same time, the negative impact that it has left on
the jurisprudence of those who prohibited it. We thus have realized the
actual value of the jurisprudential stock of both the schools.

Let us now try to present our outcomes and to evaluate them with another
criterion so as to recognize the scope of each trend’s conformity with
the natural progression of the historical conventions and the rules of
sociology and ethics and the scope of their harmony and accord with the
various circumstances that encompassed the both trends. Through such
presentation and evaluation, we will conclude which of the two is remote
from distortion and deviation and which is in close proximity.

Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib is reported to have said in one of his sermons,

“I have been informed of your saying, ‘\`Ali is telling lies!’ May Allah
destroy you! Against whom have I told lies? Is it against Allah? It is I
who was the foremost to have faith in Him. Is it against His Prophet? It
is I who was the foremost to believe him.”[^1]

This text carries the most accurate and excellent connotations of
argument and viewing. In this text, the Imam introduced the aggravation
of a socio-ethical epidemic that inflicted an entire society or at least
a large section of it. Unfortunately, the publics accused of fabrication
and poured their anger on a personality of the most elevated ranks of
decency and clarity.

Refuting the baseless accusations of these peoples, Imam \`Ali declared
that a liar must have motives, whether internal or external, encouraging
him to betake fabrication as his means for achieving his aims and goals.
A liar is one of the following cases:

1) Being stricken by blind-heartedness and preoccupation in illegal
matters, acts of disobedience to Almighty Allah, and rebellion against
Him and, as a result, such a person will find sweet and feasible to tell
lies and will not be immunized enough to stop committing any offense;

2) being one of those who look forward to gaining a pleasure or a
worldly affair that he cannot reach by way of truth and thus he has to
tell lies in order to attain that goal;

3) being coward, in the sense that he fears the outcome of a bad deed he
had done and fears that the worldly punishment will chase him; he
therefore resorts to telling lies in order get rid of that trouble; or

4) trying to save himself from an embarrassing question addressed to him
but he could not find the appropriate answer; hence, he betakes lying as
the cover under which he conceals his feebleness... etc.

To browse the pages of the Islamic history puts on view that the
majority of those who fabricated lies against Almighty Allah and the
Holy Prophet had immature psychological tendencies or scandalous
intellectual feebleness. In most cases, such individuals had converted
to Islam out of fear of being killed or had found themselves a place
among the Muslims, while they were not, such as those who had to join
Islam at the Conquest of Makkah, the hypocrites, and the like.

Indisputably, all such motives and their likes are nonexistent in the
personality of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib. He is the sincere Sahabiy who
has enjoyed the most prominent characteristics and has had the most
excellent situations. None of the Muslims would ever deny this fact.

Also, he belongs to a family that is too exalted to require praising or
telling lies that are said in order to meet a social imperfection caused
by such matters. Imam \`Ali has thus said, “Against whom have I told
lies? Is it against Allah? It is I who was the foremost to have faith in
Him. Is it against His Prophet? It is I who was the foremost to believe
him.”

He has said the very truth, since there does not exist any motive
drawing him to tell lies. It is \`Ali, and none else, about whom, as
well as his family, many verses from the Holy Qur'an were revealed, such
as the Verse of Purification (*Tathir*),[^2] the Verse of Invoking the
Curse (*Mubahalah*),[^3] the Verse of Love for the Relatives
(*al-Mawaddah fi’l-Qurba*),[^4] and the Surah of *al-Dahr* (or
*al-Insan* No. 76). Besides, the following holy Qur'anic texts were
revealed to express the situations of Imam \`Ali or to refer to him:

***“And hold fast by*** ***the Rope of Allah*** ***all together and be
not disunited.” (Holy Qur’an: 3/103)***

***“O you who believe: Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with***
***the true ones.” (Holy Qur’an: 9/119)***

***“And (know) that this is*** ***My path, the right one; therefore,
follow it, and follow not (other) ways, for they will lead you away from
His way.” (Holy Qur’an: 6/153)***

***“O you who believe: Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and*** ***those
in authority from among you.” (Holy Qur’an: 4/59)***

***“So, ask*** ***the Followers of the Reminder*** ***if you do not
know.” (Holy Qur’an: 16/43)***

***“And whoever acts hostilely to the Messenger after that***
***guidance*** ***has become manifest to him, and follows other than the
way of the believers, We will turn him to that to which he has (himself)
turned and make him enter hell; and it is an evil resort.” (Holy Qur’an:
4/115)***

***“You are only a warner and there is*** ***a guide*** ***for every
people.” (Holy Qur’an: 13/7)***

***“Only Allah is your Guardian and His Messenger and*** ***those who
believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow
down in prayer. And whoever takes Allah and His messenger and those who
believe for a guardian, then surely the party of Allah are they that
shall be triumphant.” (Holy Qur’an: 5/55-56)***[^5]

There is then no motive or justification for Imam \`Ali to fabricate
lies against Almighty Allah.

To fabricate lies against the Holy Prophet is the affair of the
flatterers, the keepers of caprices and coveted objects, and the enemies
of Islam who deceptively found themselves places among the Muslims,
annoyed the Holy Prophet, belied him so that their concealed goals would
not be exposed, threw sweepings at him, put thorns in his path, ... etc.

As for \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, he is the cousin of the Holy Prophet; and
the one who defended him with his soul and heart; and the first human
being who believed in his Prophethood and Messengership; and the one who
replaced him in his bed so as to save him from the danger of
assassination; therefore, it is quite unreasonable that a man of such
situations would ever fabricate lies against the Holy Prophet. Besides,
there are tens of statements of praise said by the Holy Prophet about
Imam \`Ali; such as,

“You are the chief (*Imam*) of the pious people and the leader of the
white-forheaded, handsome individuals.”[^6]

“You are the chief of the reverent ones and the slayer of the irreverent
ones. He whoever supports you shall be victorious and he whoever
disappoints you shall he disappointed (by Almighty Allah).”[^7]

“I am the city of knowledge and \`Ali is the gate to that city; hence,
one who intends to get knowledge should come to the gate first.”[^8]

“After me, you will explicate for my people the matters about which they
may dispute.”[^9]

“I am the ‘warner’ and \`Ali is the ‘guide’.[^10] After me, only by
means of you will the guided to the right path find the right
path.”[^11]

“Verily, the ummah will betray you after me. You shall keep following my
religion, and you shall be killed following my tradition. Anyone who
loves you will have in fact loved me; and anyone who hates you will have
in fact hated me. Certainly, your beard will be dyed by the blood of
your head.”[^12]

Ahmad ibn Hanbal has recorded, through an authentic series of narrators,
on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar; and al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy
that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab said,

“\`Ali ibn Abi-Talib has been given three peculiarities; were I given
only one of these, it would be more favorable to me than having the best
kind of camels... These are (1) \`Ali’s having been married to Fatimah,
daughter of Allah’s Messenger, (2) his having been allowed to live in
the Masjid with Allah’s Messenger and to do whatever he likes therein,
and (3) his having been given the pennon to lead the Muslim army in the
conquest of Khaybar.”[^13]

Muslim, in his book of *al-Sahih*, has recorded on the authority of
Sa\`d ibn Waqqas[^14] and \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas a narration similar to
the abovementioned one.[^15]

Imam \`Ali is reported to have said,

“One of the Holy Prophet’s predictions to me was that the ummah shall
betray me after his departure.”[^16]

\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas is reported to have said that the Messenger of
Allah said to (Imam) \`Ali,

“Surely, you shall face fatiguing troubles after me.” Imam \`Ali asked,
“Shall my religion be kept purely sound while facing these troubles?”
The Holy Prophet answered, “Yes, your religion shall be kept purely
sound while facing these troubles.”

It is thus quite unreasonable to even imagine that such a unique man
about whom such sacred texts—and so many others—from Almighty Allah and
the Holy Prophet are said to fabricate lies against Almighty Allah and
the Holy Prophet.

This fact can be utterly realized if we take a deep look into the
following text said by al-Dhahbiy—no matter it was said intentionally or
unintentionally—about Imam al-Mahdi, in his book of *Siyar A\`lam
al-Nubala'*:

“Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Mahdi, the Awaited, is the seal of the Twelve
Masters whose inerrancy (i.e. *\`Ismah*) is claimed by the Imamiyyah
sect. They further claim that Muhammad ibn al-Hasan is being the
Successor (*al-Khalaf*: the awaited successor of the Holy Prophet and
Imams), and the Argument (*al-Hujjah*: the Argument of Almighty Allah
against His creatures), and the Patron of the Age (*Sahib al-Zaman*: the
one who will live for long ages and finally carry out Almighty Allah’s
orders on the entire earth); and that he is alive, and he shall not die
before he appears again to fill in the earth with justice and fairness
after it would be filled up with injustice and discrimination. We are
looking forward to this, indeed.

Our Master, \`Ali, is one of the Orthodox Caliphs (*al-Khulafa’
al-Rashidin*).

And his sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, are the grandsons of Allah’s
Messenger and the masters of the youth of Paradise. Had they been
selected for the leadership (caliphate), they would have certainly
deserved it.

And Zayn al-\`Ābidin was highly regarded, and was one of the chief
worshippers and scholars, and he was worthy of holding the position of
leadership.

And his son, Abu-Ja\`far al-Baqir, was also sayyid (i.e. lord), master
scholar, jurisprudent, and he was qualified for the leadership.

And his son, Ja\`far al-Sadiq, was highly regarded, and was one of the
master scholars, and was worthier than Abu-Ja\`far al-Mansur (the
\`Abbasid ruler) of holding the leadership of the Muslim community.

And his son, Musa, was also highly regarded, well-versed, and was
worthier than Harun (al-Rashid: the \`Abbasid ruler) of holding the
leadership.

And his son, \`Ali ibn Musa al-Rida, was highly regarded, and he enjoyed
much knowledge and eloquence, and was widely loved by people, and, out
of al-Rida’s grandeur, al-Ma'mun (the \`Abbasid ruler) appointed him as
his crown prince.

And his son, Muhammad al-Jawad, was one of the chiefs of his people.

And his son, nicknamed al-Hadi (i.e. the Guide), was also reputable and
of excellent standing.

And the same thing is said about his son, al-Hasan ibn \`Ali
al-\`Askariy. May Allah, the Exalted, have mercy upon them all.”[^17]

Such are the Holy Imams and more! They are the matches of the Holy
Qur'an, as is in the Hadith of the Two Weighty Things (*Hadith
al-Thaqalayn*), and they are the security of the inhabitants of this
earth from drowning, as is in the Hadith of *al-Safinah* (the Ark),[^18]
and they are the security of the Muslim community against divergence, as
is mentioned by al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy, in *al-Mustadrak
\`Ala’l-Sahihayn* 3:149.[^19]

Differences Between The Two Schools
-----------------------------------

### First Difference

As for the Imams of the School of Thorough Compliance with the Sacred
Texts (i.e. the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt), the proportion of
distortion is nil when compared to the others. This is because they are
\`Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn... and they are the thoroughly purified ones
and veracious in the words of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.

On many occasions, the Holy Prophet praised those who adhered to and
followed the course of these Holy Imams very laudably, such as
\`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas, \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, Abu-Dharr, \`Ammar ibn
Yasir, and many others. These personalities have been well-known for
their decency and for their steadfastness against fancies and other
trends. None of them has ever been accused of telling lies or forging
fabrications against the Holy Prophet.

On the other hand, many of the followers of the School of Ijtihad and
Opinionism have been charged of inventing false Hadiths and spreading
made-up narrations, such as Abu-Hurayrah, Samarah ibn Jundub, Ka\`b
al-Ahbar... etc. As a matter of fact, this difference between the two
schools is obviously unmistakable.

It is necessarily noteworthy that those who thoroughly complied with the
sacred texts insisted on reporting what they had known even if this
would cause them to lose their lives. They never compromised in matters
appertained to the religion.

The best example on such is Imam \`Ali’s situation in the meeting of the
so-called Shura Committee when he rejected to comply with the conducts
of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar as one of the stipulations of selecting him as
the ruler of the Islamic State. Of course, Imam \`Ali took this
situation unwaveringly because he believed that that stipulation was in
violation of the Holy Prophet’s instructions (Sunnah).

Among the many other examples is the situation of Imam al-Husayn against
Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah. Quite the reverse, the Ijtihadists and Opinionists
advised Imam \`Ali, during his reign when some people mutinied against
him, to give in, to cajole, and to flatter and thus would he achieve
practicability and benefit for the Muslims!

The same Ijtihadists and Opinionists also advised Imam al-Husayn to
swear allegiance to Yazid and to keep silent as the others did since, in
their conception, divergence is evil and Allah’s act can be interpreted
into another form... etc.

### Second Difference

Induction and the investigation of the historical course of the Holy
Qur'an prove that all the divine doctrines grew and fruited in the labs
of the poor and the oppressed people. Referring to this fact, Almighty
Allah, in the Holy Qur'an, says,

***“They (i.e. the people of Prophet Noah) said: Shall we put faith in
thee, when the lowest (of the people) follow thee?” (Holy Qur’an:
26/111)***

***“The chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: We see thee but a
mortal like us, and we see not that any follow thee save the most abject
among us, without reflection. We behold in you no merit above us - nay,
we deem you liars.” (Holy Qur’an: 11/27)***

Relating the objections of the unbelievers to the Holy Prophet, the Holy
Qur'an further reads,

***“A likely thing, that thou wouldst forsake aught of that which hath
been revealed unto thee, and that thy breast should be straitened for
it, because they say: Why hath not a treasure been sent down for him, or
an angel come with him? Thou art but a warner, and Allah is in charge of
all things.” (Holy Qur’an: 11/12)***

These holy verses bear out that it was the feeble, or ‘the lowest’,
people who hurried to believe in the divine doctrines. The Prophets were
also poor people; no treasure was sent down for them and they did not
bring with them gold, silver, pleasures, or lusts; rather they came with
simplicity, modesty, and moderation.

The unbelievers and the infidels, on the other hand, always belonged to
the class of the rich, luxurious people who never went with the spirit
and concepts of the divine doctrine that would restrict and deprive them
of any distinctive feature or point of arrogance against the others. Of
course, they would never like or accept this.

Again, the Holy Qur'an reads,

***“Beautified for mankind is love of the joys (that come) from women
and offspring; and stored-up heaps of gold and silver, and horses
branded (with their mark), and cattle and land.” (Holy Qur’an: 3/14)***

Objecting to the divine selection of the Prophets, the luxurious said,

***“Why, then, have armlets of gold not been set upon him, or angels
sent along with him?” (Holy Qur’an: 43/53)***

Having realized the reality of his community, the Holy Prophet took
pride in and concerned himself with the poor. In return, those poor
people who abstained from the worldly pleasures followed him, such as
\`Ammar ibn Yasir, al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, Salman al-Farisiy (the
Persian), Abu-Dhar, Bilal al-Habashiy (the Abyssinian), Suhayb al-Rumiy
(the Roman), and their likes.

As for the rich and wealthy people, such as Abu-Lahab, Abu-Jahl, and
Abu-Sufyan, they harmed the Holy Prophet so terribly that they even
threw thorns in his road. This is one of the undeniable facts.

If we take into consideration this Qur'anic tradition and apply it to
the two Schools, we will conclude that the overwhelming majority of the
followers of the School of Thorough Compliance were the poor people.

For instance, Abu-Dhar spend his whole lifetime in poverty. He was also
stranger, banished, and exiled until he departed life in his exile.
Likewise, \`Ammar ibn Yasir lived in poverty until he was martyred
leaving nothing of the worldly vanities behind him. So did the rest of
the major personalities of this school.

In contrast, luxury and lavish expenditure were the most distinctive
features of the lives of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, Marwan ibn al-Hakam,
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan, and \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās. Historians have
mentioned the large wealth and properties that these persons left
behind.

Naturally, such extravagance and lavishness would have never
complemented with the religious logic and laws. The caliphs and rulers
knew for sure this fact. In this respect, it has been narrated on the
authority of al-\`Abbas ibn Salim that \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz, once,
summoned Abu-Salam al-Habashiy whom was asked to ride a saddled mule.
When he was present before the caliph, he said to him, “O Commander of
the Faithful: I was awfully exhausted due to riding that mule.”

“I did not intend exhaustion for you, Abu-Salam,” said \`Umar. “But I
only summoned you because I was informed that you have memorized the
Hadith reported by Thawban, the (manumitted) slave of the Holy Prophet,
about the Divine Pool; I therefore wanted to listen to the Hadith from
your mouth directly.”

Abu-Salam narrated, “I heard Thawban, the slave of Allah’s Messenger,
saying that he had heard Allah’s Messenger, saying,

“Verily, my Pool is as spacious as the distance between Aden and Amman.
Its water is whiter than pure milk and sweeter than honey. Its cups are
as numerous as stars. To have a single drink from it saves from thirst
forever. The first to reach at it shall be the poor.”

Then, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab asked, “Who are these, Allah’s Messenger?”
and he was answered,

“These are the unkempt-haired, the dirty-clothed, who cannot marry
luxurious ladies, and for whom doors are not opened.”

Commenting on the Hadith, \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz said, “Assuredly,
all closed doors are opened for me, and I have married a luxurious lady,
namely Fatimah daughter of \`Abd al-Malik. I thus hope for nothing
except the mercy of Allah. Assuredly, I will not put oil on my head
until it becomes unkempt and I will not wash my dress that I put on
until it becomes unclean.”[^20]

The meaning of this Hadith is that those whose hairs are unkempt are the
true strugglers for the sake of Almighty Allah and the true worshippers
of Him. They have not been distracted by the pleasures of this world. In
other words, owing to their engagement in jihad, acts of worship, and
indifference to the worldly pleasures, these poor people are
unkempt-haired and dirty-clothed.

However, \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz confessed his being excluded from
such a sort of people; he therefore wanted to join them but he missed
their path. He thought that dirtying the hair and the clothes would be
the way to Paradise. He could not perceive that the actual meaning of
being unkempt-haired and dirty-clothed is the indifference to the charms
of the worldly life that take away from struggle for the sake of
Almighty Allah and from worshipping Him with the sole purpose.

When Sufyan al-Thawriy objected to al-Mansur, the \`Abbasid ruler, that
he was excessively squanderer and spendthrift, the later answered him,
“You just want me to be like you, do you not?”

Sufyan answered, “Do not be like me; rather be less than your current
manner and higher than my manner.”

This word made the ruler dismiss Sufyan al-Thawriy.[^21]

A look into the history shows scandalously the gluttony, squandering,
and extravagance in food and amusement sessions that were held by
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan, Yazid, Marwan ibn al-Hakam, \`Abd al-Malik
ibn Marwan, al-Walid ibn \`Abd al-Malik, al-Mansur, al-Mahdiy,
al-Rashid, and the other Umayyad and \`Abbasid rulers who bravely
distorted the Holy Qur'an and forged lies against the Holy Sunnah.
Ironically, those very rulers called for recording the Holy Sunnah,
later on, and decided to cancel all the Sunnite jurisprudential schools
and to adopt the Four Schools exclusively.

Moreover, it was they who embraced and supported Ijtihadism and
Opinionism and called the jurisprudents to act upon the so-called
*Maslahah* (advantage). As a consequence, the proportion of distortion
and deviation for such people would naturally be very big if compared to
the other school whose followers were poor and satisfied with the
religion of Almighty Allah and thus they were in no need for changing or
distorting the religious laws and then inventing personal
interpretations.

### Third Difference

Sycophancy and currying favor with the rulers have been one of the
incurable diseases of human beings. The luxurious ruling authorities
have used bribes and patronage as the only means for showing favor to
some individuals and provoking the hostility of others. Such matters
have been the biggest reason for attracting the weak-willed who always
seek the pleasure of mortals even if such would cause them to enrage the
Creator. This meaning has been mentioned in the following Hadith:

“The most vicious of the people is he who has sold his Next Life with
his transitory life. Even more vicious than the previous is he who has
sold his Next Life with the transitory life of others.”[^22]

This phenomenon manifested itself seriously during the age of \`Uthman
ibn \`Affan, after it had been limited to some extent during the ages of
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar. This is because \`Uthman paved the way to changing
the Islamic caliphate into hereditary kingdom when he assigned his close
relatives to the senior governmental offices and conferred upon them
with abundant fortunes and properties to the degree that one of his
relatives is reported to have left behind him such an enormous quantity
of gold that required axes to break it up.

It has been authentically narrated that \`Uthman donated the one-fifth
of Africa and Fadak to \`Abdullah ibn Abi-Sarh and Marwan ibn al-Hakam.
Similar donations are reported to have been given by \`Uthman to his
relatives in order to defend him, his principles, and his opinions that
resulted in the mutiny of the Muslims who then attacked and killed him.

As a matter of fact, manifestations of such tribal discrimination first
appeared during the reign of Abu-Bakr when he allowed Khalid ibn
al-Walid to wear silk and put on a turban stabbed with arrows as a sign
of arrogance and pride. It is worth mentioning that \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab took out these arrows from Khalid’s turban, broke them, and
threatened him with stoning for he had murdered Malik ibn Nuwayrah and
slept with his widow at the same night.

As for \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, he named Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan as the
Khosrow (i.e. the king) of the Arabs and permitted him to dress any garb
he would like because he was in the vicinity of the Romans.

To sum it up, the phenomenon of flattering the rulers has been always
one of the characteristics of the weak-hearted individuals.

On the other hand, Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib always took pride in the
epithet of “Abu-Turab (father of dust)” that the Holy Prophet had said
to him. About his garment, he said,

“I have patched my garment so frequently that I felt embarrassed before
the patcher.”

He further used to eat dry bread with salt or laban (i.e. coagulated
milk) and he never ate them together for he wanted to meet Almighty
Allah while being tiny-punched.

Having holding the leadership, Imam \`Ali exerted all efforts in
confiscating the public assets that \`Uthman ibn \`Affan had donated to
his relatives and restoring them to the public treasury. He, once,
heated an iron bar and put it on the hand of his brother, \`Aqil,
because the latter had asked him for an amount more than his due.

As for Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan and his likes, he made use of the
taletellers and those who were well-known of forging lies against the
Holy Prophet. He thus paid them enormous amounts of money in order to
invent lies against Imam \`Ali. For instance, Mu\`awiyah gave Samarah
ibn Jundub forty thousand dinars in order to relate that the following
holy verse expressed the manner of \`Ali, Allah forbid!

***“And among men is he whose speech about the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries.” (Holy Qur’an:
2/204)***

He also seduced \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās under promise of appointing him as the
ruler of Egypt if the latter would support him in his war against Imam
\`Ali.

He also distorted the famous Hadith, “O \`Ammar: You shall be killed by
the transgressing party.” He falsely claimed that \`Ali was meant by the
transgressing party because he threw \`Ammar in the battle and caused
him to be killed by the party of Mu\`awiyah.

The situations of Mu\`awiyah in the field of distorting the religion and
forging lies against Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet are too
numerous to be contained by this book.

However, we can conclude that the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism was
managed by the rich, luxurious people while the School of Thorough
Compliance was headed by the poor, oppressed people. Accordingly, it is
unimaginable that the oppressed might distort while all the matters are
in the hands of the rulers. Muhammad ibn al-Wazir al-Yamaniy, a famous
researcher, investigated the “Hadiths” narrated by Mu\`awiyah ibn
Abi-Sufyan, \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās, and al-Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah and found
out that all these “Hadiths” were the same.[^23]

This investigation is another confirmatory proof on my conclusion that
the jurisprudential method of these individuals was the same since it
flew to the same river. It also substantiates that these individuals and
their party were of the same trend.

In like manner, I believe that the Umayyad and \`Abbasid rulers used to
betake religious judicature as their means to defaming the personalities
of their dissidents and betake the jurisprudents’ verdicts for achieving
their personal interests.

In this connection, it has been narrated that Harun al-Rashid, one
night, summoned Abu-Yusuf, the chief judge, who hurried to him with
terror. When he entered the palace, he found \`Īsa ibn Ja\`far sitting
to the right of the ruler who said to him, “Abu-Yusuf: it seems that I
have terrified you, does it not?”

“Yes, indeed. You have terrified me,” answered the chief judge.

When he restored calmness, the ruler said to him, “I have summoned you
to witness that \`Īsa ibn Ja\`far refused to answer to my will when I
asked him to donate or sell his bondmaid to me.”

\`Īsa ibn Ja\`far said, “I am under an oath of divorce, manumission, and
giving all my possessions in alms if I will never sell or donate that
bondmaid.”

Al-Rashid thus asked the chief judge to find him a solution for this
problem, and the chief judge found it, saying, “He can donate the half
of her to you and sell you the other half!”

Al-Rashid further said, “I cannot wait until she will be clean from her
period of menstruation, as is decided by the religious law, since she is
a chattel slave-girl. If I will not sleep with her tonight, I fear lest
I will be injured.”

Abu-Yusuf said, “It is easy, Commander of the Faithful! Manumit her and
then marry her in this moment.”

By means of this trick could al-Rashid seize that slave-girl from her
master and marry her at the same night.[^24]

This afore-prepared puzzle was purposed for testing the obedience of
Abu-Yusuf to the ruler and the scope of his readiness to distort the
religious laws and change the opinions for the sake of pleasing the
ruler who, though would not comply with or even need such odd
jurisprudential distortions, knew for sure about the invalidity of these
distortions; rather he wanted to betake the jurisprudents as legal cover
under which he would do whatever he liked.

Al-Mas\`udiy has narrated that Zubaydah, al-Rashid’s wife, wrote a
message to Abu-Yusuf, the chief judge, asking his verdict about a
certain issue and telling that it would be nice for her if the judgment
would be such-and-such. The chief judge therefore issued a judgment
corresponding with her wish.

In return, she sent him as gifts gold, silver, receipts, riding-animals,
dresses, and other precious things. Those who attended the situation
said to him, “The Holy Prophet is reported to have said that when a gift
is sent to somebody, those who sit with him should have a share of it.”

He answered, “This is only when the gift is dates and laban!”[^25]

Thus were the connotations of the clear-cut Hadiths distorted to refer
to other things.

History has kept for us innumerable examples on such distortions. A good
number of Muslim authors and intellectuals, ancient and modern, have
discovered that the main reason behind the extinction of the majority of
the Muslim jurisprudential schools—such as the Schools of Awza\`iy,
Rabi\`ah al-Ra’y, and Sufyan al-Thawriy—was that the ruling authorities
had not supported them for a certain reason while these authorities
encouraged, supported, and embraced the founders or students of the Four
Schools; therefore, they expansively spread all over the Muslim regions.
Ibn Hazm says,

“Two of the Four Schools spread out by virtue of governmental offices
and ruling authorities. The School of Abu-Hanifah were widely known only
when Abu-Yusuf was appointed as the chief judge. He thus admitted for
the office of judiciary none but his mates and those who belonged to the
Hanafiyyah School. the second is the Malikiyyah School...”[^26]

Al-Dahlawiy also says,

“Only a jurisprudential school whose followers were widely known, and to
whom the offices of judiciary and legal authority, and whose books
spread among people and could be studied openly—only would such a
jurisprudential school become widespread and would keep circulation
throughout ages.

Conversely, a jurisprudential school whose followers were not on good
terms with the ruling authorities and were not given governmental
offices of judiciary and legal authority and were not liked by
people—such a jurisprudential school would cease to exist.”[^27]

### Fourth Difference

As has been proven in the previous pages of this book, not only did the
caliphs disagree with the course of Imam \`Ali but they also opposed him
and resorted to the tribal disputes throughout their behaviors with him.
The governmental recordation of the Hadith appeared lately and after one
century, during the reign of \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz or Husham ibn
\`Abd al-Malik.

In this respect, al-Zuhriy says, “We disliked the recordation of the
(Holy) Sunnah, but the rulers compelled us to do such.” In addition, the
recordation of the Hadith was done in the light of the memorized, nor
recorded, items of it.

In conclusion, the distortion of the Holy Sunnah should be initially
conceived to exist in the records of these rulers rather than the
records of the others. This is because of these rulers’ national
tendencies and because they had the power in their hands and because
their recordation of the Hadith was far away from the Holy Prophet’s
time. As for the Ahl al-Bayt, it is inconceivable to distort the Hadith
due to the opposite of the aforesaid factors.

### Fifth Difference

The belief of the legality of Opinionism and multi-opinionism is in
reality inviting its fans to distort, in the sense that they, in order
to support their masters, commit themselves to invent false Hadiths or
to misinterpret Hadiths. For that reason, they have considered
sectarianism one of the divisions of the invention of false Hadiths.

On the other hand, it is unnecessary for the adopters of the Thorough
Compliance with the Sacred Text to invent false Hadiths, because the
Hadiths that they narrate have been reported from its fundamental
recordations. Thus, the Imam says, “My father’s Hadith is the same as my
Hadith, and my Hadith is as same my father’s.”

In this way, it is unfeasible for them to distort Hadiths or invent
others because their narrations have never been contradictory and
because they all take from the same source and consider the Holy Qur'an
the original reference and arbiter that decides the authenticity and
genuineness of any narration reported from or ascribed to them.

### Sixth Difference

Unlike the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism, the jurisprudential
principles of the School of Thorough Compliance are the same. This is
because the Holy Imam of the Ahl al-Bayt always concentrated on the
necessity of deriving the religious laws from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah
only, whereas the trend of Ijtihad and Opinionism legalized personal
opinions and views in the face of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah.

Basically, such belief results in disagreement in the jurisprudential
principles. A party of them thus depends upon analogy in the inference
of religious laws, and another party warns against analogy, and a third
party depends upon the so-called *al-Masalih*... etc.

Because each Sunnite jurisprudential school tried to prove its
congruence with the actuality while the others are not, a noticeable
state of additions and interpretations as a result of such disputes have
clearly manifested itself. Moreover, some of them have accused others of
unreal charges and have misunderstood others.

In brief, the four Sunnite jurisprudential schools, as well as the other
schools that ceased to exist, were engaged in reciprocal intellectual
conflicts that augmented until they decided each other as infidels and
miscreants. This is of course the strongest motive of distortion and
deviation in an attempt to support each one’s trend and school.

### Seventh Difference

Biographers belonging to the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism have
widely disagreed about the trustworthiness or unreliability of narrators
of Hadith due to the multiplicity of the trends of that school.
Moreover, biographers have disagreed about the trustworthiness, decency,
and acceptability of certain biographers. A look into the biographies of
the biographers of the both Schools proves this fact unambiguously.

For instance, contradictory opinions about the trustworthiness and
acceptability of results of Ibn Mu\`in, the master biographer and critic
of the narrators of Hadith, have been said, because, like all the other
biographers, he must have criticized a person who belonged to a school
other than his or because he disagreed with him on a certain point.

Similarly, he must have deemed trustworthy a certain person because the
latter belongs to the same school or trend to which Ibn Mu\`in belongs.
Moreover, he criticized even Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafi\`iy, the
founder of the Shafi\`iyyah School, and decided him as untrustworthy.

In the same way as many scholars have criticized and decided Ibn Mu\`in
as untrustworthy, many others have absolutely depended upon his
judgments to the degree that they have never compared his findings to
any other judgments although the all belonged to the School of Ijtihad
and Opinionism.

The same thing can be said about the other biographers. \`Abd al-\`Aziz
al-Majishun, Ibn Abi-Hazim, and Muhammad ibn Ishaq, as well as many
others, have censured Malik ibn Anas, the founder of the Malikiyyah
School.[^28] Al-Darqutniy compiled a booklet containing the traditions
recorded by Malik ibn Anas, in *al-Muwatta'*, and other books, that were
contradictory to the Holy Sunnah. This booklet is kept at al-Dhahiriyyah
Library in Damascus.[^29]

Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy has mentioned the names of more than thirty-five
persons who defamed Abu-Hanifah, the founder of the Hanafiyyah
School.[^30] Similarly, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, the founder of the Hanbaliyyah
School, was defamed by many biographers.

Besides, some biographers might have decided a certain narrator as
highly trustworthy but, due to a personal, neither religious nor
sectarian, disagreement, they criticized and threw him from the elevated
position to which they had raised him.

If we want to accept the statements of a biographer, we should first
believe in his trustworthiness and decency. Only then can we understand
the disagreement in such assessment. Of course, it is illogic to depend
upon the opinions of a person who is personally untrustworthy.

Under the title of “The Trustworthy in Criticism”, al-Dhahbiy has
written an epistle comprising the principles of criticism, the classes
of critics, and the methods of depending upon their words.[^31]

On the other hand, as regards the biographers of the School of the Ahl
al-Bayt, all the scholars have unanimously agreed upon their decency and
trustworthiness; therefore, one cannot find any word of dispraise said
against Abu’l-\`Abbas al-Najashiy, al-Kishiy, al-Tusiy, or any other
biographer belonging to the School of the Ahl al-Bayt. This is an
obvious indication to their unity in ideology and trend.

The aforesaid points have contained some of the factors of deviation and
distortion at both the Schools. An investigation in this respect
requires a huge volume, if not many volumes, be filled up. However, the
results will be astounding if all the factors are studied thoroughly.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah 1:119.

[^2]: Verse of Purification: “Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you—O Ahl al-Bayt (people of the House)—and to purify
you a (thorough) purifying. 33/33”

[^3]: () The holy verse of Mubahalah (i.e. Invoking the curse of
Almighty Allah) is number 61 of the holy Surah of al-Ma'idah No. 6. This
holy verse reads, “If any one disputes in this matter with thee, now
after (full) knowledge Hath come to thee, say: ‘Come! Let us gather
together our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and
yourselves, then let us earnestly pray and invoke the curse of Allah on
those who lie! 3/61” Let us now quote the story of the holy verse from
al-Muwaffaq al-Khawarizmiy’s famous book entitled al-Manaqib, page 159:
(´Abdullah) ibn ´Abbas, al-Hasan, al-Shi’bi, and al-Siddi; all these
have reported the incident of Mubahalah as follows: As the delegation of
the Christians of Najran attended before the Prophet , the archbishop
advanced and asked, “O Abu’l-Qasim (the Prophet’s nickname), who was the
father of (Prophet) Moses?” “It was ´Imran,” answered the Prophet . The
archbishop then asked, “Who was the father of (Prophet) Joseph?” The
Prophet answered, “It was (Prophet) Jacob?” The archbishop then asked,
“Who was your father?” The Prophet answered, “I am the son of ´Abdullah
ibn ´Abd-al-Muttalib” The archbishop then asked, “What about (Prophet)
Jesus? Who was his father?” The Prophet kept silence waiting for the
Divine Revelation. It was no longer until Archangel Gabriel descended
with God’s saying (The Holy Qur´an, Surah of Āl-´Imran 3:59-60):
“Surely, the likeness of Jesus is with Allah as the likeness of Adam; He
created him from dust, then said to him, Be, and he was. (This is) the
truth from your Lord, so be not of the disputers.” The archbishop
commented, “What was revealed to us does not involve such information.”
Hence, Archangel Gabriel revealed to The Prophet God’s saying (The Holy
Qur´an, Surah of Āl-´Imran 3:61): “If any one disputes in this matter
with thee, now after (full) knowledge Hath come to thee, say: ‘Come! Let
us gather together,- our sons and your sons, our women and your women,
ourselves and yourselves: Then let us earnestly pray, and invoke the
curse of Allah on those who lie!’” The archbishop commented, “This is
truly fair. When shall we meet to invoke God’s curse on the lying
party?” The Prophet answered, “Let it be tomorrow, God willing.” The
Christian delegation then left. They advised each other, “If he will
accompany some of his companions for the meeting tomorrow, then you
should compete with him, for, in such case, his claim is false. But if
he will accompany some members of his family, then do not compete with
him, for, in such case, he is truly a prophet, and if he will invoke
God’s curse upon us, we will certainly be perished.” Some of them
however declared, “We do know that he is the very prophet we are
expecting, and if he invokes God’s curse on us, we will surely be
perished and will never go back to our families or fortunes.” The other
Jews and Christians asked, “What should we do, then?” Abu’l-Harth, the
bishop, suggested, “Since he is a generous man, we may visit him and ask
him to accept our withdrawal for this competition of invocating God’s
curse on the lying party.” The next morning, The Prophet invited all the
people of al-Madinah and the neighboring villages to attend that
meeting. All the people responded. The Prophet went out, ´Ali was before
him, al-Hasan was to his right (and he was catching his arm), al-Husayn
was to his left, and Fatimah was behind them. He then said, “Let us
begin. These (al-Hasan and al-Husayn) are our sons, these (´Ali and I)
are ourselves, and this (Fatimah) is our women.” As they saw this
situation, the individuals from the other party attempted to hide
themselves behind any pillar they could find or behind each other,
because they anticipated that The Prophet would begin invocating God’s
curse on them. They therefore moved towards him, knelt down before him,
and besought, “Please, accept our withdrawal from this matter.” The
Prophet accepted their withdrawal after they had had to pay him one
thousand garments as recompense. (See, also, Jalal-al-Din al-Suyutiy’s
al-Durr al-Manthur, Ibn al-Maghaziliy’s al-Manaqib, Muhammad ibn ´Ali
al-Tabariy’s Bisharat al-Mustafa, Ibn Kuthayr’s al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah,
al-Ya’qubiy’s al-Tarikh, Ibn Shabbah al-Numayriy’s Tarikh al-Madinah and
many others.)

[^4]: This verse reads, “Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but
love for my near relatives. 42/23”

[^5]: Refer to the many reference books of Hadith, Islamic history, and
Tafsir all of which confirm that these sacred texts were revealed to
express manners of Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and his Household. For
instance, see \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din: al-Muraja\`at No. 12.

[^6]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:138.
Abu-Na\`im, in his book of ‘Hilyat al-Awliya'’ has recorded this Hadith
on the authority of Anas. It is further written down in Ibn
Abi’l-Hadid’s Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^7]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:129.

[^8]: Al-Tabaraniy, in ‘al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir’ has recorded this Hadith on
the authority of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas. It is also recorded by
al-Hakim, in ‘Manaqib \`Ali’, and al-Suyutiy, in ‘al-Jami\` al-Saghir’.

[^9]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:122.

[^10]: This is an exegesis of the verse of the Holy Qur'an that reads,
“You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every people. 13/7”

[^11]: According to al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy’s Kanz al-\`Ummal, this Hadith
has been recorded by al-Daylamiy on the authority of \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas.

[^12]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:137. In
‘al-Talkhis’, has decided this Hadith as authentic. A similar one has
been reported by Shi\`ite series of narrators and recorded in Shaykh
al-Saduq’s ‘Ikmal al-Din wa-Itmam al-Ni\`mah’ in the following form: It
has been narrated... on the authority of Ibn Samarah that the Messenger
of Allah said to him, “Son of Samarah: When fancies will be various and
opinions will separate, you should adhere to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib; for he
is truly the chief (Imam) of my ummah and my representative over them
after my departure.”

[^13]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 2:26; Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak
\`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:125; Al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa’id 9:120; Ibn
Abi-Shaybah: al-Musannaf 6:372; Al-Mubarakfuriy: Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy fi
Sharh Jami\` al-Tirmidhiy 10:136.

[^14]: Sahih Muslim 4:1871; Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:638.

[^15]: Al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat 8:212; Al-Haythamiy: Majma\`
al-Zawa’id 6:120; Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn
3:111; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Isti\`ab 3:1090; Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh
Madinat Dimashq 1:161.

[^16]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 3:147. In
‘al-Talkhis’, al-Dhahbiy has decided this narration as authentic.

[^17]: Al-Dhahbiy: Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala' 13:119-121.

[^18]: The Hadith of al-Safinah reads, “the example of Ahl al-Bayt is
Noah’s Ark; anyone who embarks on it will be certainly saved while those
who abstain will certainly fall and drown.” (Al-Suyutiy: al-Jami\`
al-Saghir 2:533 No. 8126 and Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak
'ala'l-Sahihayn 3:150-1.)

[^19]: Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabariy, in ‘al-Mustarshid’ 579, has
recorded the following: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy has recorded that Mukrim
ibn Ahmad al-Qadi related on the authority of Ahmad ibn \`Ali al-Ābar on
the authority of Ishaq ibn Sa\`id ibn Arkun al-Dimashqiy on the
authority of Khulayd ibn Di\`lij Abu-\`Amr al-Sadusiy (perhaps) on the
authority of Qatadah on the authority of \`Atta' that \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas said that the Holy Prophet said, “Stars are acting as security
for the inhabitants of the earth from drowning. Similarly, my Household
(Ahl al-Bayt) are acting as security for my ummah from divergence. When
any tribe from the Arabs oppose them, it will have rejected the truth
and, thus, become with the party of Iblis (Satan).” (Al-Hakim
al-Nisapuriy commented) Although this Hadith is of authentic series of
narrator, they (i.e. al-Bukhariy and Muslim) have not recorded it.

[^20]: Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Baghandiy: Musnad \`Umar ibn \`Abd
al-\`Aziz 116.

[^21]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Tarikh Baghdad 9:152-153. See also the
introduction of Tafsir Sufyan al-Thawriy.

[^22]: Al-Hurr al-\`Āmiliy: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah Chapter 71, H. 11.

[^23]: For further details, refer to the following books: Nur al-Din
\`Itr: al-Sunnah al-Muttahharah wa’l-Tahaddiyat; Muhammad ibn Isma\`il
al-San\`aniy: Tawdih al-Afkar 2:453-463; Muhammad ibn al-Wazir
al-Yamaniy: al-Rawd al-Basim 2:113-129.

[^24]: Dr. Muhammad Yusuf: Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islamiy 168.

[^25]: Dr. Muhammad Yusuf: Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islamiy 168.

[^26]: Ibn Khallakan: Wafiyyat al-A\`yan 6:144.

[^27]: Asad Haydar: al-Imam al-Sadiq wa’l-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah 2:11 as
quoted from al-Dahlawiy: Hujjat Allah al-Balighah 1:151.

[^28]: Jamal al-Din al-Muzziy: Tahdhib al-Kamal, the Biography of
Muhammad ibn Ishaq.

[^29]: Mahmud Abu-Rayyah: Adwa’un \`Ala’l-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah 299.

[^30]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Tarikh Baghdad 13 :349, 370.

[^31]: A version of this epistle is found in Ayasofya, Istanbul, Turkey,
under the number 2953.


