The Effects Of The Prohibition Of Recording The Hadith
======================================================

In the previous pages of this book, the six justifications for the
prohibition of reporting and recording the Hadith have been proven
untrue, the seventh justification has been proven imperfect, and finally
the actual reason has been demonstrated.

After all this, we can conclude that a number of important effects were
ensued from that decision, which badly influenced the Islamic
legislation. The most important of these effects will be hereinafter
listed:

**FIRST:** The Muslims separated into two ideological trends that, later
on, resulted in the appearance of two independent schools each of which
had its own beliefs, principles, and attitudes.

**SECOND:** The concepts of those who supported the prohibition of
recording the Hadith found themselves a spacious area in the Islamic
culture. In addition, various justifications and a range of excuses have
been invented for validating that prohibition.

**THIRD:** The slogans of “The Book of Allah is sufficient for us” and
“The Book of Allah is the arbitrator between us” were raised as a first
step in the way of covering the caliphs’ jurisprudential insufficiency
of comprehending the traditions of the Holy Prophet. As a second step,
they began to neglect their slogans and violate the Book of Allah. As an
example, Abu-Bakr disputed with Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' and disregarded
her proof that she had picked from the Holy Qur'an. Similarly, \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab violated the Holy Qur'an in the questions of the
three-time divorce, the *al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*, ... etc. Finally,
some biased people made use of this slogan in order to deny any issue
that cannot be openly found in the Holy Qur'an.

**FOURTH:** In order to meet the gap created by the decision of the
prohibition of recording the Hadith, the so-called Ijtihad was allowed
to be extremely practiced, yet through a number of stages as follows:

1) Those who actually held the position of the leadership after the Holy
Prophet had many times violated the Holy Prophet’s instructions, during
his lifetime and in his presence, and followed their own opinions, which
were the opposite of his instruction.

2) Abu-Bakr, the first caliph, practically put into effect the idea of
Ijtihad.

3) \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, the second caliph, opened extremely wide the
doors for giving practical effect to his personal views and opinions, as
is clearly shown in the issues of the three-time divorce, the
*al-Mu’allafah Qulubuhum*, the temporary marriage... etc.

**FIFTH:** In an early period of the age of the official application of
the prohibition of recording the Hadith, the concepts of “This is my own
opinion” and “As he tried to infer the ruling, he missed the right” came
into view and caused the invention of new principles that have been,
afterward, widely used in the Sunnite jurisprudence, such as analogy
(*Qiyas*), Equitable Preference (*Istihsan*), and the like.

**SIXTH:** The decision of the prohibition and the allowance of personal
views (i.e. Ijtihad) gave rise to the occurrence of serious
contradictions and disputes among the verdicts and opinions of the
Sahabah or even in the verdicts of a certain Sahabiy. This phenomenon
resulted in the following:

1) The claim of the legality of disputes among the Muslims, the legality
of Opinionism and multi-opinionism and thus the acceptability of the
divergent opinions of all the Sahabah, and the conception of the
ultimate decency of the Sahabah—all these concepts were the first
outcomes of the contradictions and disputes among the Sahabah.

2) Scholars belonging to the School of Ijtihad and Opinionism have
argued that Almighty Allah has referred the rulings in the questions
about which no sacred text (from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah) can be
found to the mujtahids and thus whatever is decided by these mujtahids
should be decided as the law of Almighty Allah. This conception is
called *Taswib*.

3) In order to find excuses for the flaws of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, it was
claimed that the Holy Prophet himself practiced Ijtihad and that he was
no more than an ordinary mortal who may be right or wrong and that his
sayings were influenced by his manners; that is when he is enraged, he
may say things that he does not say when he is pleased!

4) The verbal traditions of the Holy Prophet were interpreted according
to personal tastes and interests. The best example is the false
interpretations of the famous Hadith that reads, “The ‘*Ikhtilaf*’ of my
ummah is mercy.”[^1]

**SEVENTH:** \`Umar ibn al-Khattab presented the idea of his being the
most knowledgeable in the religious laws at least. Before that, he used
to confess of the existence of personalities that were more
knowledgeable than he was.

This idea evolved to the belief of the most knowledgeability of the
caliphs as regards the religious laws and their being the worthiest of
issuing verdicts. In view of that, it became acceptable for the caliphs
to do the following:

1) The caliph whipped anyone who declared opinions opposite to his or
anyone who asked him about matters he did not like.

2) He detained the grand Sahabah because they had reported too many
Hadiths.

3) He decided that the Sahabah must wait for his permission before they
would issue any verdict as regards the religious laws.

**EIGHTH:** Innovative ideas emerged in the life of the Muslims; such as
the obligation of complying with the ruler (They say, “The men in
authority have said their opinion about this issue,” “Discrepancy is
evil,” and “Follow the ruler even if he whips your back!”), and not
specifying decency as stipulation in many issues, such as the office of
judicature, and even acts of worship, and thus they have deemed lawful
to follow in congregational prayers any imam, whether pious or sinful!

**NINTH:** The personal views of the Sahabah, or the conducts of the two
Shaykhs; Abu-Bakr and \`Umar, were considered a third principle and as
important as the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah in the religious legislation.
The most obvious application of this principle was practiced in the
meeting of the so-called Shura Committee.

**TENTH:** The attempt to restrict Ijtihad to the views of Abu-Bakr and
\`Umar and to dedicate the religious practices to their opinions failed,
by reason of the availability of the objective circumstances and
conditions of the comprehensiveness and generality of Ijtihad for the
other caliphs.

As a consequence, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan and Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi-Sufyan
expanded the practice of Ijtihad to such a notorious extents that made
the Muslims became unable to stand the innovatives of \`Uthman.

However, when he realized that a revolution was led against him, he
subjugated Sa\`id ibn Zayd ibn Nufayl[^2] to invent the false Hadith of
“The Ten Individuals of Paradise” so as to evade, yet uselessly, the
Muslims’ objections against him. In no time was that fabricated Hadith
exploited so wickedly that it influenced the beliefs and jurisprudence
of the Muslims.

**ELEVENTH:** The records of Hadith that were lately compiled generally
comprised a great sum of the opinions of the adopters of Ijtihad and
concentrated on recording the conducts of Abu-Bakr and \`Umar
exclusively.

Therefore, the recorded opinions of these two were distinguished and
preferred to the other opinions. This of course means that the attempt
to restrict the Ijtihad to the two Shaykhs, though generally failed,
succeeded in reflecting a halo of sanctity and priority on their
conducts rather than the others.

**TWELFTH:** Lights were focused on the jurisprudential trend of those
who stood against the recordation of the Hadith and the Thorough
Compliance with the Sacred Texts. Even the jurisprudential trend of the
adopters of the other school was rejected. The standing of the
Qurayshite individuals was strengthened, and the most important roles,
politically and legislatively, were given to the minor Sahabah.

**THIRTEENTH:** Attempts to create and enlarge a gap between the publics
and the recordations of the Hadith and those who recorded it, especially
the Ahl al-Bayt and their records, were continuously made. In this
connection, many steps were taken:

1) The idea that prophethood and leadership must not be joined to the
Hashimites was officially adopted.

2) False Hadiths about the merits of those who prohibited the
recordation of the Hadith were largely fabricated. In the same time,
fictitious flaws were invented against the adopters and practicers of
the recordation and, as a second step, calls were made to follow the
jurisprudential trend of those who prohibited the recordation.

3) The idea that Abu-Bakr and \`Umar was preferred to all human beings
was fabricated. Later on, \`Uthman was added to the list while \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib was kept in a position not different from the ordinary
people’s.

4) The majority of the jurisprudential opinions that had been resulted
from the prohibition of recording the Hadith were falsely ascribed to
those who practiced and adopted the recordation whom were actually
reported to have adopted other authentic opinions inferred from the
trend of the recordation of the Hadith.

**FOURTEENTH:** As a result of the prohibition of reporting and
recording the Hadith for about a whole century, a big number of
religious laws disappeared and another part of them was lost until the
traditions of the Holy Prophet became out of mind or semi-forgotten. The
prohibition took such a long period that when it was permitted, it was
official, governmental, imperfect, confused with other material, and
full of personal views and opinions.

**FIFTEENTH:** Justifications were sought for the late generations to
add to the religious laws any article that they liked and to cancel any
article that they would not like and then to issue it in an official
form and impose it on the publics. This demeanor made it easy for the
opportunists to adopt ways of cunning and false induction through which
they would issue for the sake of the rulers any verdict they required.
The results of such can be hereinafter listed:

1) Ijtihad was unrestrainedly allowed in matters about which there is no
sacred text as well as matters about which there is a sacred text.

2) The alleged, not actual, advantage was practiced to block the sacred
texts.

3) It became unnecessary to compare the personal opinions of the Sahabah
to the Holy Qur'an, in order to investigate their validity; rather some
scholars have argued that the Sahabah’s opinions should be decided as
absolute proofs and that their deeds should restrict the Holy Qur'an!

**SIXTEENTH:** Owing to the divergent trends and opinions originated
from the decision, the prohibition from recording the Hadith created
discrepancy about the reporting from the Holy Prophet.

**SEVENTEENTH:** Because the Ahl al-Bayt were purposely taken away from
the Muslim community, especially in the jurisprudential and political
fields, the Holy Imams insisted relentlessly on recording the Hadith and
safeguarding the scientific heritage received from their fathers since
they feared lest that heritage would be wasted.

For this reason, the Shi\`ite heritage of the Hadith is vastly wider
than the Sunnite. It is well-known that al-Nassa'iy’s reference book of
Hadith (entitled *al-Sunan*) excels the other Sunnite reference books of
Hadith in the manner that it comprises Hadiths concerning the religious
laws. In his message to the people of Makkah, the compiler of the book
says,

“These Hadiths (comprised by the book) are totally about the religious
laws. As for the other Hadiths on asceticism, merits, and other topics,
I have not recorded them although they are big in number.”

Nevertheless, this collection has comprised 5274 Hadiths. The proportion
will be nil if this number is compared to the Hadiths of the religious
laws written in the book of *Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah* that amount to 35850,
and the Hadiths mentioned in the book of *Mustadrak al-Wasa’il
wa-Mustanbat al-Masa’il* that amount to 23000. Experts have confirmed
that the Hadiths reported by the Shi\`ite narrators are two fold more
than the Hadiths written in the Sunnite reference books of Hadith.

**EIGHTEENTH:** The sanctity of the Holy Prophet was nonexistent in the
mentalities of the Caliphs, yet to various extents. It began when they
called out to him from behind the private chambers and then pulled him
from his dress. They then said that he was hallucinating. They then
said,

“Two issues were allowed during the age of Allah’s Messenger, but now I
deem them forbidden and will punish anyone who will violate this
prohibition. These are the temporary marriage and the allowable period
during the Hajj.”[^3]

When he was reminded that the Holy Prophet warned against usury,
Mu\`awiyah said, “But I do not see any harm in it!” Finally, Yazid ibn
Mu\`awiyah quoted the poetic verses of Ibn al-Zuba\`riy[^4] and al-Walid
ibn Yazid tore into pieces a copy of the Holy Qur'an.

**NINETEENTH:** Owing to the previous, disorder in the jurisprudential
and doctrinal results has been undeniably obvious in the history of the
Islamic legislation. The late recordation of the Hadith could not meet
this gap; rather it made it more complicated and perplexed when the
various opinions and personal views were confused with the authentically
reported traditions of the Holy Prophet. For that reason, it is
difficult to bring the Sunnite jurisprudential schools into agreement
with each other as regards the majority of the religious laws.

**TWENTIETH:** The prohibition of recording the Hadith was falsely
ascribed to the Holy Prophet in order to release the actual issuers of
this decision from responsibility, to cast the blame on the Messenger of
Allah, and to make comparison between the narrations of the prohibition
and these of the recordation of the Hadith, although all the narrations
that support the prohibition are doubtful and unconvinced, because they
were fabricated later on in order to justify the decision issued by
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar as well as the deeds of those who followed them as
regards the reporting and recordation of the Hadith.

**TWENTY-FIRST:** The prohibition of recording the Hadith has become the
best means utilized by the Orientalists in order to prejudice Islam and
criticize the Islamic ideology and genuine culture under the claim of
the religion’s being the origin of retardation and the barrier against
cultural progress.

**TWENTY-SECOND:** The authors and writers who supported the School of
Ijtihad and Opinionism seized the opportunity to fabricate lies as they
liked and to invent various justifications aimed at releasing the rulers
from the consequences of the decision of the prohibition. Besides, these
men of letters were not brave enough to demonstrate the rulers’ flaws
and to present the facts in this regard.

[^1]: To explain it, the Arabic word ‘Ikhtilaf’ carries at least two
meanings the most famous of which is ‘difference’ while the other
meanings are ‘frequenting to a certain place’ and ‘separation in
countries’... etc. The word ‘Ikhtilaf’ thus may carry any of these
meanings. (Translator)

[^2]: Al-Bukhariy, in his book of ‘al-Sahih’ 7:118 Kitab al-Dhaba’ih
(Section of Slaughtered Animals), has recorded on the authority of Salim
that \`Abdullah reported that the Holy Prophet, before the beginning of
his divine mission, met Zayd ibn \`Umar ibn Nufayl in Baldah (a place
near Makkah) and served him a meal of meat. He refused to eat, saying,
“I do not eat the meat of the animals that you immolate unto idols and
also I do not eat the meat of animals that you do not mention the name
of Allah on it!” This narration requires deep investigation!

[^3]: It was \`Umar ibn al-Khattab who declared this decision. See
al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:366.

[^4]: After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn, his head was cut and
brought before Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah. As his sight fell on that sacred
head, he recollected these bitter days of his father and grandfather who
had led campaigns against al-Husayn’s grandfather, namely the Holy
Prophet, and recollected the failure that chased them even in their own
homes until they were humiliated and regarded as manumitted slaves.
Yazid showed his great rejoicing at the current situation as the family
of the Holy Prophet were captives between his hands and the heads of the
Holy Prophet’s grandsons were thrown before him. He then quoted poetic
verses said during the Battle of Uhud by al-Zuba\`riy, with suitable
changes, saying: I wish my forefathers at Badr had witnessed How the
Khazraj are by the thorns annoyed, They would have been very much
delighted, Then they’d have said, “May your hands, O Yazid, never be
paralyzed We have killed the masters of their chiefs And equated it with
Badr, and it has been so, indeed The Hashemites played with the dominion
so indeed, While no news from the Heaven had come, nor was there
anything revealed I will disavow the Khandaf if I will not seek revenge
From Ahmed’s children for what he did to us!


