Epilogue
========

In conclusion, this thesis presented before the hands of the gentle
readers has been aimed at putting forward a survey on the issue of the
prohibition of recording the traditions of the Holy Prophet. It has been
also intended to be analytical, deliberate study that follows up the
topics, discourses, inquires about the issue, and concludes results.

The dear readers have joined us in this historical journey step by step
and we certainly appreciate their broadmindedness all over this
critical, necessary survey. We thus hope that they have personally
touched the lineaments of the objective reality and comprehended, in the
course of the study, a number of facts that will increase their
acquaintance with certain matters and will help them hit upon the
straightforward discernment.

We also hope that our noble scholars, teachers, and experts in the field
of the Muslim jurisprudence and the Hadith will take their time before
they accept or reject our discussions and claims with an honest
scientific spirit far away from partisanship or sectarianism.

This is in fact the one and only way by which we all may reach at the
best way and the most excellent method so as to be able to discriminate
the right from the wrong and the fact from the untruth. This call is
principally addressed to the master scholars at the al-Azhar University
in Cairo, the Islamic University in the holy city of al-Madinah, the
Islamic World League in the holy city of Makkah, and the al-Zaytunah
Mosque in Tunis.

The call is also addressed to the honorable Shaykhs and Sayyids in the
holy cities of al-Najaf and Qumm, as well as the virtuous scholars of
Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and the entire Islamic homeland including all the
scientific faculties and Islamic universities.

On the grounds of the Holy Prophet’s instruction that, “May Allah have
mercy upon him who shows me my faults,” I hope that my brethren will
confer upon me with the benefit of their judicious opinions on this
study through which I will attain more accuracy and precision so long as
our main purpose is to demonstrate, search for, investigate, and defend
the word of truth even if this will cause us to lose every precious
thing we have.

This is because we are facing an issue that is related to the sources of
our Islamic knowledge and, more importantly, to our situations in the
Eternal Life when we shall be stopped before our Lord, the Almighty, for
account.

We pray to Almighty Allah to manifest the truth before our eyes so
clearly that we follow it, and to show us the wrong so clearly that we
avoid it. The last of our prayer is “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.”


