First Reason: Justifications Of Abu-Bakr
========================================

Abu-Bakr’s justifications can be concluded from the following two texts:

(1) It has been narrated that \`Ā\`ishah said, My father collected the
Hadith (of the Messenger of Allah), which was five hundred texts. He
spent that night so sleeplessly and restlessly that I was sad for him. I
therefore asked, ‘Are you moving restlessly due to an ailment or
information that you received?’

In the morning, he asked me to fetch him the collection of Hadith that
he had put with me. When I fetched them, he set fire to them. As I asked
for the reason, he replied, ‘I anticipated that I would die while I
still have this collection among which there might be reports of a man
that I deemed trustworthy while he was the opposite; therefore, I would
be the narrator of such false reports.’[^1]

(2) The following report has been within Ibn Abi-Mulaykah’s incompletely
transmitted Hadiths (*mursal)*:

After the demise of the Holy Prophet, Abu-Bakr gathered people and said,
‘You are reporting about the Messenger of Allah inconsistent narrations.
People coming after you will be engaged in more intense discrepancy.

Therefore, do not report anything about the Messenger of Allah, and if
anyone asks you, you should refer to the Book of Allah as the
arbitrator. You should thus deem lawful whatever is lawful therein and
deem unlawful whatever is unlawful therein.’[^2]

Before discussing the two previous texts, two questions must be
answered:

**First:** Did Abu-Bakr collect the five hundred texts during the life
of the Holy Prophet and by his commandment, or did he collect them after
that as a consequence of the political circumstances and the social
exigency?

**Second:** Was the decision of prohibiting the recordation and
reporting of the Sunnah issued in a late period, or was it the Holy
Prophet who prohibited recording it during his lifetime.

It has been related to Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy that the Holy Prophet said,
‘You must erase anything that has been recorded about me except the Holy
Qur’an.’[^3]

From the expression of the first text ‘My father collected the Hadith,’
it can be noted that Abu-Bakr recorded the Hadith after the Holy
Prophet’s demise, especially the text affirmed that he had quoted them
from other narrators, ‘I anticipated that I would die while I still have
this collection among which there might be reports of a man that I
deemed trustworthy while he was the opposite; therefore, I would be the
narrator of such false reports.’

Abu-Bakr’s anticipation that such texts would be falsely related to the
Holy Prophet does not agree with the supposition that the Hadith had
been collected during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime; otherwise he could
show the collected texts to the Holy Prophet for scrutiny.

If it is claimed that the idea of showing such texts to the Holy Prophet
for scrutiny had just slipped away from Abu-Bakr’s mind, the answer
should be that, firstly, it is unreasonable for Abu-Bakr to miss such a
thing, especially that he had a close position to the Holy Prophet in
addition to the fact that doubt regarding these collections was rooted
in his mind.

Secondly, it is unlikely that Abu-Bakr had overlooked neglectfully such
an important issue until a time close by his death, whereas the Sahabah
used not to neglect asking the Holy Prophet about even the most trivial
questions and whenever they had felt any suspicion.

The question of setting fire to the collections of Hadith and Abu-Bakr’s
concern about attributing them to the Holy Prophet and that he ‘would be
the narrator of such false reports,’ since death was about to knock his
door—this question proves that Abu-Bakr had collected the Hadith in the
last of his reign and that he had never heard even one Hadith directly
from the Holy Prophet; lest it would be extremely odd for him to set
fire to Hadiths that he had heard from the Holy Prophet directly!

What is more is that had Abu-Bakr collected such Hadiths during the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet, historians and biographers would have
certainly referred to this issue and he would never have spent that
night restlessly plus \`Ā’ishah would have narrated that her father had
collected the Hadith during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet or any
alike statement.

The reports that Abu-Bakr had written down the laws of almsgiving in the
missive that he sent to Anas ibn Malik;[^4] the governor of Bahrain at
that time, and \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās[^5] do not contradict the reports
narrating his setting fire to the collections of Hadith, because the
points that he had recorded to Anas ibn Malik were no more than the laws
of almsgiving and taxation upon which a state relies, and a caliph must
not forget for the good of his state.

It has been also narrated that \`Amr ibn Hazm had recorded the laws of
almsgiving as quoted from the Holy Prophet orally. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
also had such a recording kept by Hafsah, his daughter, and then his
family. Hence, the recordation of an issue upon which a state relies is
a matter very different from the prohibition of recording something
else.

The second question can be easily answered through the acts of Abu-Bakr
and \`Umar as well as the general conduct of the Muslims. Abu-Bakr’s
collecting five-hundred Hadiths is a sufficient proof on the Holy
Prophet’s having not prohibited the recordation of the Hadith. If such a
decision of prohibition had been really issued, Abu-Bakr would not have
had such collections of the Hadith recorded.

The same thing can be said about \`Umar; had a decision of prohibiting
the recordation of the Hadith been already issued, he would not have
gathered the Sahabah, who advised him to record the Hadith,[^6] to
discuss the matter.

Even if we give up our opinion and accept the claim that the Holy
Prophet had prevented people from recording anything in general and his
Hadith in particular, we would not find any persuasive meaning to the
authentically narrated report that ‘the Holy Prophet ordered the Muslims
to record the laws that he said on the day of conquering Mecca,’[^7] or
the report that after his migration to al-Madinah, he had ordered to
record the laws of the Zakat and their amounts, which were accordingly
written in two papers and kept in the house of Abu-Bakr, the caliph, and
Abu-Bakr ibn \`Amr ibn Hazm,[^8] or the authentic report that he said
‘Feel free to record’ as well as the other clear statements urging to
record the laws and the Holy Prophet’s conducts.

It is thus proven that the recordation was not prohibited in the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet and that neither Abu-Bakr nor did \`Umar
record the Hadith during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime; rather, Abu-Bakr
recorded it after the Holy Prophet’s departure. The Holy Qur’an has
urged writing and recording the knowledge upon Muslims as is in the
following Verses:

***“Noon. I swear by the pen and what the angels write.” (Holy Qur’an:
68:1)***

***“…Who taught (to write) with the pen.” (Holy Qur’an: 96:4)***

***“O you who believe! when you deal with each other in contracting a
debt for a fixed time, then write it down.” (Holy Qur’an: 2:282)***

***“And be not averse to writing it (whether it is) small or large.”
(Holy Qur’an: 2:282)***

***“He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a book.” (Holy
Qur’an: 20:52)***

The Arabs used to revere the writers and desire to learn it. Ibn Habib
al-Baghdadiy has listed the names of the famour personalities who could
write in the pre-Islamic as well as the Islamic eras.[^9] Ibn Sa\`d has
said that the Arabs in the pre-Islamic and the early Islamic eras used
to regard as perfect anyone who could write Arabic, swim, and
shoot.[^10]

Lessons of learning how to write used to be held in Makkah,[^11]
al-Madinah,[^12] al-Ta’if,[^13] al-Anbar,[^14] al-Hirah,[^15] and Dawmat
al-Jandal.[^16] It has been also narrated that the Holy Prophet
established a class in his Masjid (mosque) where \`Abdullah ibn Sa\`id
ibn al-\`Ās used to learn writing and calligraphy to all comers.[^17]

Dr. Ahmad Amin says,

“Illiteracy of the Arabs was not as common as presented by some authors
and Orientalists. Because of their neighborhood to the Persians and
Romans for ages, their surrounding circumstances, and the stages by
which they passed with such civilized nations, it was not difficult for
the Arabs, especially those lived in al-Hirah as well as the nomads of
Syria, to learn how to write and acquire sciences and customs that would
contribute in achieving a better living for them.”[^18]

The Holy Qur’an has thus prescribed writing and recording, and the Holy
Sunnah has also cared for the issue of writing to a considerable extent
that a prisoner of the war of Badr was released after he would teach ten
Muslim children how to read and write.[^19]

On that account, the claim that the Holy Prophet prohibited recording
the Holy Sunnah is definitely meaningless, since his conduct generally
attracts attentions to the fact that he very much encouraged on culture,
thinking, and learning.

Furthermore, he reproached some people saying, ‘Why have some people
neither educated, nor taught, nor admonished their neighbors; nor have
they enjoined them to do good nor forbidden them from doing evil? And
why have some people neglected learning from their neighbors or received
their knowledge and instructions?’[^20] From this reproach, we must
understand a clear point as regards our topic.

It has been also narrated that the Holy Prophet once asked the
delegation of the tribe of \`Abd-Qays, saying, ‘How was your brethren’s
hospitality?’

‘They have been the best brethren,’ answered they, ‘they offered the
best beds and food and taught us the Book of our Lord and the conduct of
our Prophet night and day.’

This answer pleased the Holy Prophet who asked each one of them about
what they had learned and what they had been taught.[^21]

It has been also narrated on the authority of Hudhayfah that the Holy
Prophet once ordered them to write down the names of everyone who
declared being Muslim orally. They therefore wrote down the names of one
thousand and five hundred men.’[^22] Finally, biographers have recorded
that twenty-six, forty-two, or forty-five men used to record the Divine
Revelation under the supervision of the Holy Prophet.

By adding the previous proofs of the Holy Prophet’s emphasis on learning
reading and writing to the previous narrations of the Holy Prophet’s
issuing the order of recording the Sunnah and the Sahabah’s carrying out
this order during his lifetime up to a period after his death -when
Abu-Bakr prohibited recording the Holy Sunnah-, it becomes clear that
the ascription of the prohibition of recording the Hadith to the Holy
Prophet is no more than a fallacy aimed at deforming the sheer figure of
Islam.

Likewise, such a fallacy gives reason for the enemies of Islam to claim
Muslims’ being in opposition to science, because they first decided that
their Prophet had prevented them from narrating and recording the Sunnah
while they, later on, violated their situation and went on recording it!
If the recordation of the Hadith was permissible, why did they prohibit
it; and if it was prohibited, why did they record it?

If true be said, the claim of the Holy Prophet’s prohibition from
recording the Hadith is contradictory to his famous sayings, ‘write
down,’[^23] ‘record,’[^24] ‘I swear by Him Who has full control over my
soul, my mouth has never said anything other than the truth,’[^25] ‘Use
your right hand to help you learn,’[^26] as well as so many similar
sayings not to be mentioned at this point for fear of lengthiness.

Let us now discuss the first text that shows Abu-Bakr’s justification of
issuing the decision of preventing recording the Holy Sunnah, putting
the following questions:

Why did Abu-Bakr spend that night restlessly and sleeplessly? Was it
because of an ailment, or was it because of a serious affair of
caliphate and Muslims?

We have previously mentioned \`Ā’ishah’s wonderment, ‘Are you moving
restlessly due to an ailment or information that you received?’ and
Abu-Bakr’s reply.

Would we accept his justification that ‘I anticipated that I would die
while I still have this collection among which there might be reports of
a man that I deemed trustworthy while he was the opposite; therefore, I
would be the narrator of such false reports’?

Does such a justification allow him to set fire to the collections of
the Hadith?

Why did he treat the Hadith with fire, not water or burying in the
ground?

To answer the first question, we say that the reason beyond Abu-Bakr’s
restlessness and sleeplessness was, as is proven by \`Ā’ishah’s words,
‘In the morning, he asked me to fetch him the collection of Hadith that
he had put with me. When I fetched them…’ not an ailment or a matter
respecting the campaigns or the like political affairs; it was rather
because of the Hadiths contained by these papers to the degree that he
thought that the reporting of the Holy Prophet’s words and deeds would
be the main cause of disagreement among Muslims, without making any
distinction between the different kinds of the reported items or between
the direct and the indirect reports. Abu-Mulaykah reports that Abu-Bakr
said, ‘Do not report anything,’ while in the beginning he had not
adopted such a situation.

Abu-Bakr’s excuse for setting fire to the Hadiths, —‘I anticipated that
I would die while I still have this collection among which there might
be reports of a man that I deemed trustworthy while he was the opposite;
therefore, I would be the narrator of such false reports,’— is subject
to a number of objections:

**First:** how did the trustworthy man (whom Abu-Bakr accepted his
narration) change into untrustworthy? Did Abu-Bakr—who lived near the
Holy Prophet in the holy city of al-Madinah—require mediation in
narrating the Hadith of the Holy Prophet?

The news of Abu-Bakr’s close association with the Holy Prophet are
inconsistent with the existence of mediation between the Holy Prophet
and him, especially for those who claim Abu-Bakr’s having been the first
to embrace Islam.

**Second:** Once a reporter is trustworthy; for Abu-Bakr says, ‘…reports
of a man that I deemed trustworthy,’ how is it acceptable to reject such
an individual’s reports because they are probably fabricated or
originated from inadvertence?

According to such a rule, the authority of the reports of the
trustworthy must unquestionably be invalid and it is not viable to
depend upon the report of any narrator because it contains any amount of
probability of fabrication.

Rafi\` ibn Khudaykh reported that the Holy Prophet, once, passed by them
while they were having a discussion and asked about it. “We are
mentioning what we have heard from you, Allah’s Messenger,” answered
they.

“Yes, mention it; but one who forges lies against me must find himself a
place in Hellfire,” said the Holy Prophet as he went on.

They therefore kept silence.

“Why have they stopped talking?” asked the Holy Prophet.

“Because of what we have just heard from you,” one answered.

“I have not meant that you should not discuss what you hear from me,”
explained the Holy Prophet, “But I have only meant one who forges lies
against me deliberately.” We then resumed our discussion.

“O Allah’s Messenger,” one asked, “Can we record the matters that we
hear from you?”

“Yes, you can,” replied the Holy Prophet, “Record, and feel free to
record.”[^27]

The previous report supports openly our claim that practice of reporting
and recording the Hadith was not prohibited during the Holy Prophet’s
lifetime; rather it was totally legal. Besides, the phrase ‘yes, mention
it,’ confirms the permissibility to relate the Holy Prophet’s Hadith but
with verification in order to avoid forging lies against the Holy
Prophet.

Likewise, it confirms that the probability of a reporter’s being liar or
the fear of forging lies does not allow Abu-Bakr to neglect the Hadith.
Focusing on being careful in the narration of a report in order to make
distinction between the true and the false, the Holy Prophet never
issued any order preventing from reporting and recording the Hadith.

As a sequence, Abu-Bakr should have examined these Hadiths; if there
were inaccurate ones, he would correct them; if there were forged ones,
he would delete them; if there were ambiguous ones, he would explain
them; and if there were hidden themes, he would expose them. He should
have never annihilated all the collections for the reason that he
suspected or supposed falsity.

Generally speaking, any item of science must never be erased, especially
when it is said by the Holy Prophet! Reported items must not be burnt
under any circumstance, especially when most of them contain the Sacred
Name of Almighty Allah and His laws, while it is impermissible to insult
them at all. As an Islamic ruling, when such items are decided to be
damaged, they must be erased by water, buried in the ground, or
destroyed by any other unproblematic method.

Out of their cognizance and education, Muslims realized the fundamental
correlation between reporting and recording the Hadith; they therefore
asked the Holy Prophet permission to record his sayings since they
expected that the Hadith would be prohibited or put under conditions.
The Holy Prophet’s answer came: ‘Record, and feel free to record.’

This answer cancelled any problem that may be expected from recording
the Hadith and gave full freedom to report it. A Muslim must be sure
before he relates something to the Holy Prophet and must avoid recording
the forged. These are the only conditions of reporting and recording the
Hadith, and there is nothing more.

**Third:** If we agree with Abu-Bakr’s opinion that the likelihood of
fabrication in the reports invalidates a narration’s consideration, this
will require all the Holy Prophet’s narrated reports be unacceptable
even if they are recorded in reliable reference books of Hadith, for the
reason that they all are exposed to the likelihood of forgery; and if
such an opinion is accepted, it will certainly overthrow one of the two
major principals of the Islamic legislation, eradicate the Holy Sunnah
completely and terminate all the secondary rulings that have been
derived from the Hadith. Abu-Bakr’s opinion is thus completely
unacceptable.

We should then wonder how he adopted it. Did he close his eyes to the
fact that the Holy Prophet used to entrust the decent Sahabah with
affairs like these of the campaigns and battles in order that they would
convey them to the others? He should have understood that the Holy Verse
regarding the instruction of looking carefully into any news that is
conveyed by an evil-doing, lest others would be harmed ignorantly[^28]
as well as many other Verses in this regard.

Furthermore, Muslims used to follow the reports of the decent ones and
avoid those of the indecent. Likewise, reason judges that the report of
a decent one must be believable, while the likelihood of fabrication,
unintentional mistake, inadvertence and the like matters must be passed
up due to the rule of the originally nonexistence of fabrication.

Consequently, Ibn Hajar’s claim that Almighty Allah has purified the
Sahabah of all vices, including lying, negligence, suspicion, arrogance
and the like, has been proven as contradictory to Abu-Bakr’s previous
testimony when he had only suspected some of the Sahabah to have all the
previous vices up to forging lies. Undeniably, Abu-Bakr knew the Sahabah
better than Ibn Hajar did.

Even if we accept the notion that suspicion and likelihood of forgery
may invalidate the authority of a report in the view of the one
suspecting, we must not consider such invalidity in the view of the
others who neither suspect nor suppose the probability of forgery.

Abu-Bakr should thus have reported such narrations and presented his
suspicion in certain reporters as well as the reasons beyond such
suspicion. Then, the recipient of such narrations will have the freedom
to accept or reject as maintained by the laws of the religion.

The most unquestionable issue that is concluded from Abu-Bakr’s
justification, in the event of its acceptability, is that it never
imposes upon others to stop reporting or recording the Hadith.
Nevertheless, his one and only purpose beyond his justification has been
to prohibit reporting and recording the Hadith as a general rule; he
therefore ordered people, as in the second text, not to report the Holy
Prophet’s Hadith at all.

As long as it has been proven that reporting and recording the Hadith
had been permissible during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime, what is then
the meaning of its prohibition? And if it was really prohibited by the
Holy Prophet, why did Abu-Bakr compile five-hundred items of
Hadith?[^29]

As a conclusion, Abu-Bakr’s having prohibited Muslims from reporting the
Hadith and having set fire to the collections of Hadith that he had
compiled are not founded on any Islamic law.

The second text sheds light on the real situation of the ummah after the
departure of the Holy Prophet. Abu-Bakr however referred the
disagreement and discrepancies of the Islamic community to their
disagreement in the narration of the Hadith and Sunnah. In this regard,
he says,

‘You are reporting about the Messenger of Allah inconsistent narrations.
People coming after you will be engaged in more intense discrepancy.’

Although it is incompletely transmitted, the narration of Ibn
Abi-Mulaykah expressed the opinion of the master scholars who objected
to the decision of the prohibition of recording the Hadith. It also
indicates that the insistence on the recordation of the Hadith became
one of the means of opposing the caliphs. Muslims who felt the necessity
of protecting the Holy Sunnah against waste and spreading the religious
laws publicly began, soon after the departure of the Holy Prophet, to
report his sayings so as to achieve the goals that they deemed
necessary.

In their capacity as being the first generation of Islam, the Sahabah
were bound by the explanation of the religious laws for people and the
reporting of every single word that they had heard from the Holy Prophet
to the new generation who were in urgent need for the acquaintance with
the religious laws whose major source was the Holy Prophet’s words and
deeds. This was, of course, unfeasible except through the decent Sahabah
who represented the thriving archives of the Holy Prophet’s lifetime.

Having realized the new generation’s urgent need for the religious data
and the first generation’s duty to answer, Abu-Bakr used the expression,
‘and if anyone asks you…’ in the decision of the prohibition of
recording the Hadith.

In any event, the urgent need for reporting the Hadith and the existence
of discrepancies in the narrations were two serious issues that required
solutions by all means.

As a solution for the crisis that augmented dangerously after the Holy
Prophet’s decease, Abu-Bakr opted for prohibiting the reporting and
recordation of the Hadith and the restriction to the Holy Qur’an in
order to get rid of the contradictory narrations that he seemed not to
be skillful enough to bring them into agreement. He therefore had to ban
them all unexceptionally, especially after he had anticipated that the
problem would increasingly be bigger and bigger for the coming
generations. All the same, Abu-Bakr’s decision of the prevention of
recording the Hadith arouses a number of questions to be presented
hereinafter:

**First:** It has been proven that the Holy Prophet used to order the
grand Sahabah to spread in the different areas so as to teach people and
invite them to the religion. Also, he used to order people to learn and
listen to those instructors. These procedures became more binding after
the revelation of Almighty Allah’s saying:

***“And it does not beseem the believers that they should go forth all
together; why should not then a company from every party from among them
go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious.” (Holy Qur’an: 9:122)***

To prevent the Sahabah from reporting and applying to themselves what
they had directly heard from the Holy Prophet has no meaning other than
canceling the religious function of the well-versed in the religious
affairs whose main task is to teach and edify the people; while the
events of some of the Sahabah’s having fabricated lies against the Holy
Prophet must have been encountered by means of preventing the very
fabricating ones from reporting the Hadith, not preventing everybody and
for good!

It was also possible to refer to the Holy Prophet personally during his
lifetime regarding the questions that were unsolvable and to check the
matter with the Sahabah, after the Holy Prophet’s departure, if they had
heard something respecting the question involved in order to attain
peace of mind or verification of the authenticity of the reporting. As a
matter of fact, such conferences have been actually adopted by some of
the Sahabah.

**Second:** In order to compile the reports of the Hadith, Abu-Bakr
should have established a committee comprising the grand Sahabah for
listening to the reports and then confirming the sound and rejecting the
doubted.[^30] For Abu-Bakr, this was easy, because they had not yet been
engaged in the campaigns and conquests nor scattered in the remote
countries.

Furthermore, they had soon departed the Holy Prophet and consequently
their memories were still powerful and flaws were hardly expected from
them. Hence, it was actually an excellent opportunity to easily unify
the reports of the Hadith, and it was also easy to identify the actual
reality of a narrator before the multiplication of the media of
narration, since most of them were still alive and living in al-Madinah.

**Third:** The prevention of recording the Hadith would, with elapse of
time, increase the number of the religious laws unknown by Muslims. They
therefore would have to extract them from the general and the undeniable
narrations. As a result, the ways of extraction would vary and the
viewpoints would multiply. All such variant viewpoints would have been
nonexistent had the reporting and recordation of the Hadith been
operative.

Because Abu-Bakr had notified of the fact that the coming generations
would be engaged in bigger discrepancies, he should not have left the
people rolling about ignorance in the religious laws or sinking in
bitterer discrepancies owing to the rise of the variant personal
viewpoints of the many investigators.

One of the results of such prohibition was that Abu-Bakr, despite his
precedence to Islam and close relation with the Holy Prophet, reported
no more than one hundred and forty two narrations, as Ibn Hazm
claims.[^31]

If the compiled narrations are compared to the collections which had
been damaged, the result will be that great numbers of the Hadith were
unfortunately damaged.

**Fourth:** It is impracticable to prohibit the reporting of the Hadith
when it is known for sure that such reports included the major questions
that Muslims would urgently require in their daily, worldly, and
religious, activities. On this account, the eradication and intentional
loss of such questions, including the religious laws, is considered
forbidden, since it results in the loss of the fundamentals and laws of
the religion.

The most proper situation to be taken in this regard should have been
that all the reports would be decided according to a definite criterion
adopted by Abu-Bakr, the fabricators would be forbidden from reporting
the Hadith and the outward contrast between the reports would be removed
by means of the Holy Qur’an or the other trustworthy Sahabah as well as
other ways of checking up and adopting the authentic reports of the
Hadiths in order that Muslims would successively follow.

Abu-Bakr’s having instructed the Sahabah to answer the askers, whatever
their questions would be, by referring them to the Book of Allah is
obviously out of the question, since it is impossible to infer a
question respecting a religious law from the Holy Qur’an alone without
the reference to the Holy Sunnah.

Furthermore, a single statement in the Holy Qur’an may hold so many
different notions; some are general, private, decisive, allegorical,
common, odd, repealed, or repealing. How is it then possible to specify
what is allowable and what is forbidden from the Holy Qur’an alone?
Similarly, how is it possible for Abu-Bakr to order people to refer to
the Holy Qur’an alone while he himself had said about the *kalalah*,

‘I will say my own opinion; if it be true, this will be Allah’s, but if
be untrue, I alone should be responsible for it’?[^32]

If the Holy Qur’an has sufficiently covered all the questions of the
religious laws, why did he wish had he asked the Holy Prophet, before he
had departed life, about the amount of the inheritance of grandmothers
and grandfathers, about the Ansar whether they should be given any
position of leadership, and about the inheritance of nephews and
paternal aunts?[^33]

If his claim about the possibility to refer to the Holy Qur’an alone in
the religious questions was true, what would we say about the unanimous
agreement of the Muslims on the necessity of referring to the Holy
Sunnah in order to acquaint ourselves with the religious laws?

What would we say about the Holy Prophet’s having nominated the Holy
Qur’an and the Ahl al-Bayt, or the Holy Sunnah according to other
narrations, as the only two principals of the Islamic legislation in the
famous Hadith of al-Thaqalayn (the two weighty things)?

Unquestionably, this meant that the two aforementioned principals would
persist among the Muslims; therefore, the Holy Prophet said, ‘I have
left among you… etc.’ It also meant that an interpreter for the Holy
Qur’an, whether in a form of the Holy Sunnah or one of the Ahl al-Bayt,
must be present among the Muslims since the Words of Almighty Allah
cannot be individually comprehended. Hence, the Holy Sunnah or the Ahl
al-Bayt to whom the Holy Prophet had referred his people after his
departure must be clear enough in order that people would follow.

The Hadith Of Arikah (The Couch)
--------------------------------

The previous instruction of Abu-Bakr draws our attentions to the famous
Hadith that has been related to the Holy Prophet through different
series of narrators. Ahmad,[^34] Ibn Majah,[^35] Abu-Dawud,[^36]
al-Darimiy, al-Byhalia[^37] and many others[^38] have recorded that the
Holy Prophet once said,

*“I see coming very soon that a man from you will be leaning on a couch
and as my Hadith is said to him, he will answer, ‘the Book of Allah is
the decisive judge; I will deem lawful only what I find lawful in it and
deem unlawful only what I find unlawful in it.’”*

According to other forms of the same narration, the Holy Prophet then
say, ‘Verily, I have been given the Holy Qur’an and its like,’[^39] or
‘Verily, I have been given the Holy Book along with its like,’[^40] or
‘I see coming that a man from you will be leaning on a couch and as a
matter that I have enjoined or forbidden is presented before him, he
will answer: I do not know! I will follow only what I find in the Book
of Allah.’[^41]

In *al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm al-Dirayah*, al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy records on
the authority of Jabir ibn \`Abdullah that the Holy Prophet said,

*“One of you will be leaning on a couch and as he receives one of my
Hadiths, he will say: Do not mention that! I will follow only what I
find in the Book of Allah!”*[^42]

Ibn Hazm, on the authority of al-\`Irbas ibn Sariyah, have recorded that
the Holy Prophet, once, delivered a speech to people saying,

*‘One of you will be leaning on his couch thinking that Almighty Allah
has not deemed unlawful anything other than what is mentioned in the
Holy Qur’an! I swear by Allah that I have verily enjoined you to do
good, warned you against immoral things, and forbidden you from evil.
These things are surely like the Qur’an.’*

Commenting on this Hadith, Ibn Hazm says, ‘The words of the Holy Prophet
have been utterly true. His verdicts are similar to the Holy Qur’an; no
difference is seen between both respecting all that which is obligatory
upon us.’

The Holy Prophet’s saying has been verified by Almighty Allah Who says,

***“And whatever the Messenger gives you, (then you should) accept it;
and from whatever he forbids you, keep back.” (Holy Qur’an: 59:7)***

The Holy Prophet’s instructions are also similar to the Holy Qur’an
since the source of both is the Divine Revelation. In this regard,
Almighty Allah says,

***“Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed”. (Holy Qur’an: 53:3-4)***[^43]

Before we leave the Hadith of Arikah, let us read the following
quotation:

As long as the Arabic ‘arikah’ stands for a well-upholstered couch found
in a house,[^44] or any couch,[^45] the ruler who governs the affairs of
people must be the first one for whom an ‘arikah’ is arranged. If the
phrase ‘very soon’ that appeared in the Holy Prophet’s words of the
Hadith is taken in consideration, it will be clear that the ruler who
governed the people’s affairs directly after the Holy Prophet was
Abu-Bakr who actually said the very words predicted by the Holy Prophet.

Al-Dhahbiy has recorded that Abu-Bakr, immediately after the demise of
the Holy Prophet, gathered people around him and said to them, ‘You are
reporting about the Messenger of Allah inconsistent narrations. People
coming after you will be engaged in more intense discrepancy.

Therefore, do not report anything about the Messenger of Allah, and if
anyone asks you, you should refer to the Book of Allah as the
arbitrator. You should thus deem lawful whatever is lawful therein and
deem unlawful whatever is unlawful therein.’[^46]

Consequently, it has become obvious that Abu-Bakr is the very ‘a man
from you’ intended in the Hadith of Arikah and whom the Holy Prophet had
predicted that he would oppose the Hadith saying, ‘The Book of Allah is
the arbitrator. You should thus deem lawful whatever is lawful therein
and deem unlawful whatever is unlawful therein.’

This fact has been one of the greatest points of evidence on the
soundness of the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet.[^47] Historically,
Abu-Bakr and \`Umar were the closest rulers to the lifetime of the Holy
Prophet who opposed the Hadith.

Therefore, the Hadith of Arikah has meant them personally, none else.
Those who came after them and adopted their decision of the prohibition
of reporting and recording the Hadith were only following their examples
and were not as strict as Abu-Bakr and \`Umar in the application of the
prohibition.[^48]

Which Decision Preceded The Other?
----------------------------------

Having covered almost all the aspects of Abu-Bakr’s prevention of
reporting and recording the Hadith, another question floats on the
surface. Did Abu-Bakr prohibited the reporting of the Hadith and the
recordation of it at the same time? Or were the two separate decisions
that a period of time occurred between them?

It seems that Abu-Bakr prohibited the reporting of the Hadith after he
himself had recorded it. The reason beyond such procedures will be
mentioned later on within the discussion of the last reason. Abu-Bakr
might have anticipated that the prohibition of reporting the Hadith
would facilitate him to practice the legislation and hold the
legislative authority besides the political one. In other words, he
might have intended to put the two administrative and legislative
authorities under the same cover so that the Islamic caliphate would be
easily governed.[^49]

Because of the departure of the Holy Prophet, the issuance of the
prohibition of reporting the Hadith and the emergence of the movement
that called for the adaptation of individual opinions—because of the
three aforementioned matters, some of the Sahabah had to record the
Hadiths that they had directly heard from the Holy Prophet in order to
preserve them for the coming generations. Hence, Abu-Bakr issued the
second decision of the prohibition of recording the Hadith.

Such sequence in the issuance of the decisions of the prohibition are
not so important if compared to the historical influence of the events;
because the two decisions were issued in a period of four years only,
and formed the first seed that produced other decisions issued by \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab as well as the other rulers, except Imam \`Ali, until it
was canceled in a late time of the Umayyad State.

Although Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, and \`Uthman achieved great success in the
prohibition of recording the Hadith, they could not achieve such success
in the field of the reporting of it. Neither the Sahabah nor did the
Tabi’un observe the prohibition even if they pretended that they had
nothing to do with the recordation of it; and this manner lasted until
\`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz opened the door of recording the Hadith.

Even when the doors were opened for the ‘governmental’ recordation of
the Hadith during the Umayyad State, it unfortunately acted as
introduction to the currency of the phenomenon of recording false
Hadiths so publicly that the rulers, especially during the first days of
the era, could induce big numbers of writers to record for them the
Hadiths that they liked.[^50]

For instance, Mu\`awiyah, the founder of the Umayyad State, ordered
Ka\`b al-Ahbar to sit in the Masjid and narrate for people the relations
that Mu\`awiyah would like and to prove the falseness of other Hadiths
that he would not. On that account, many fabrications were forged
against the Holy Prophet.

To sum it up, Abu-Bakr’s opinion about the reporting and the recordation
of the Hadith was the same, since he had already decided to ban both
even though he justified the prohibition of reporting the Hadith by
saying that he had anticipated discrepancy in the narrations.

He therefore ordered people to accept the Book of Allah only. Because of
the anticipated discrepancy that urged him to issue the decision of the
prohibition, Abu-Bakr’s heart was filled in with suspicion that included
even those whom he had deemed trustworthy; therefore, he rejected all
the reported items, including those whom he himself had collected, and,
having been more intense, prohibited the recordation of the Hadith, too.

In a reference to the origination of the Hadith, Dr. Husayn al-Hajj
Hasan, in his book entitled *Naqd al-Hadith* (Critique of the Hadith),
says,

“If we move to the age of the Sahabah, we will find most of them dislike
recording the Hadith but like reporting it. This is in fact out of the
ordinary and in need for search and interpretation.”[^51]

On the surface, this can be understood from the justification of
Abu-Bakr, whereas the reality imposes that there were other reasons,
save the two justifications that he had presented and we have beforehand
proven their impracticability through many critiques, beyond the
prohibition. Forthcoming in the chapter of the last justification, the
actual reasons of the prohibition will be discussed thoroughly.

In abstract, we have previously proven that Abu-Bakr’s justifications
for the decision of the prohibition of reporting and recording the
Hadith have been neither convincing nor conclusive when they were
exposed to discussion and investigation.[^52]

[^1]: Al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:5, Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad (died
in 1029 AH): al-I\`tisam bi-Habl-illah al-Matin 1:30, and \`Abd
al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 394.

[^2]: Al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:32 and \`Abd al-Ghaniy Abd
al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 394.

[^3]: Al-Nawawiy: Sharh Sahih Muslim 17-8, Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 3:12,
21 and 39, and al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 29.

[^4]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 87; al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan
al-Kubra 4:84.

[^5]: Malik ibn Anas: al-Mutta’ 1:5 as quoted from Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy:
Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy 94.

[^6]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 49 and Abd al-Ghaniy Abd
al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 395.

[^7]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:39 Chapter: Recording the Items of Knowledge.

[^8]: Dr. Muhammad Yusuf: Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islamiy 173.

[^9]: Muhammad ibn Habib al-Baghdadiy: al-Muhabbar 475-7.

[^10]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 91-3.

[^11]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy, 44 as
quoted from Nasir al-Din al-Asad: Masadir al-Shi\`r al-Jahiliy
(Reference books of the poetry of the pre-Islamic era) 52 and Ibn Abd
al-Barr: al-Qasd wa’l-Umam 22.

[^12]: Al-Buladhiriy: Futuh al-Buldan 583.

[^13]: Al-Buladhiriy: Futuh al-Buldan 579.

[^14]: Shaykh al-Saduq: 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida 1:43 and Ibn \`Abd al-Barr:
al-Qasd wa’l-Umam 22.

[^15]: Al-Buladhiriy: Futuh al-Buldan 579 and Ibn Abd al-Barr: al-Qasd
wa’l-Umam 22.

[^16]: Muhammad ibn Habib al-Baghdadiy: al-Muhabbar 475.

[^17]: Ibn \`Abd al-Barr: al-Isti\`ab 2:374.

[^18]: Ahmad Amin: Fajr al-Islam (The Dawn of Islam) 13-4.

[^19]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 2:22, Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
1:247.

[^20]: Al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib 1:71; Al-Haythamiy: Majma\` al-Zawa’id
1:164.

[^21]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:206.

[^22]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 3:1114 H. 2895.

[^23]: Sahih al-Bukhariy 1:53 H. 112; Sahih Muslim 2:988 H. 1355; Sunan
al-Tirmidhiy 5:29 H. 2667.

[^24]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1:188 H.
362.

[^25]: Al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1:187 H.
359; Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 80-81.

[^26]: Sunan al-Tirmidhiy 5:39 H. 2666; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam
al-Awsat 1:245 H. 801, 3:169 H. 2825.

[^27]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 73; al-Tabaraniy:
al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 4:276 H. 4410; Ibn \`Adiy: al-Kamil 1:36.

[^28]: This is an indication to the Holy Verse, “O you who believe: if
an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look carefully into it, lest
you harm a people in ignorance, then be sorry for what you have done.
49:6”

[^29]: See the previous narration of \`Ā’ishah regarding her father’s
having set fire to the collections of Hadith.

[^30]: Of course, this is at worst; rather, if truth be told, it is
impermissible to reject even the doubted narration because there is a
probability that it was truly said by the Holy Prophet. In view of that,
Shi\`ite and Sunnite Hadithists have not neglected recording even the
doubted narrations in their reference books of Hadith.

[^31]: See Ibn Hazm al-Andalusiy: Asma’ al-Sahabah, where he has
mentioned the number of narrations reported by each one of the Sahabah.

[^32]: Sunan al-Darimiy 2:462 H. 2972; Ta’wil Mukhtalaf al-Hadith 1:20.

[^33]: Ibn \`Asakir: Tarikh Dimashq 30:430; al-Haythamiy: Majma\`
al-Zawa'id 203; al-Tabaraniy: al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir 1:63 H. 43;
al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 5:631 H. 14113; Tarikh al-Tabariy
2:620.

[^34]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:132.

[^35]: Sunan Ibn Majah 1:6, H (Hadith).12.

[^36]: Sunan Abi-Dawud 4:200, H.4604.

[^37]: Al-Bayhaqiy: al-Sunan 9:331.

[^38]: Isma’il al-Isbahaniy: Dala’il al-Nubuwwah 1:25 and 6:549, Ibn
Hazm: al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 2:161 and al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy:
al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm al-Dirayah 9.

[^39]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:131 and al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy:
al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm al-Dirayah 8-10.

[^40]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal 4:131 and Sunan Abi-Dawud 4:200, H.4604.

[^41]: Sunan Ibn Majah 1:6, H.13, al-Hakim al-Nisapuriy: al-Mustadrak
\`Ala’l-Sahihayn 1:108, al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm
al-Dirayah 10 and al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: al-faqih wa’l-Mutafaqqih 1:88.

[^42]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm al-Dirayah 10.

[^43]: Ibn Hazm: al-Ahkam 1:159.

[^44]: Ibn al-Athir: al-Nihayah 1:40.

[^45]: Al-Shafi\`iy: al-Risalah 89-91, al-Bayhaqiy: Manaqib al-Shafi\`iy
1:330 and al-Hazimiy: al-I\`tibar 7.

[^46]: Al-Dhahbiy: Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:2-3.

[^47]: Al-Bayhaqiy: Dala’il al-Nubuwwah 1:24 and 6:549.

[^48]: Quoted, not literally, from Sayyid Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy:
Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah 356-7.

[^49]: Later on, during the discussion of the final justification, more
details will be given to this claim.

[^50]: More details can be found in \`Ali al-Shahristaniy’s Wudu’
al-Nabiy 256.

[^51]: Dr. Husayn al-Hajj Hasan: Naqd al-Hadith 1:142.

[^52]: For more details and a clearer explanation of the idea, refer to
the author’s book ‘Tarikh al-Hadith al-Nubawiy; al-Mu’aththirat fi \`Ahd
Abi-Bakr (History of the Hadith; Motives in the Reign of Abu-Bakr)’.


