Second Reason: Justifications Of `Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
=====================================================

\`Umar’s justifications can be concluded from the following texts:

(1) It has been narrated on the authority of \`Urwah ibn al-Zubayr that
when \`Umar had intended to record the Holy Sunnah, he consulted the
companions of the Holy Prophet, and they advised him to record. For
about a month, \`Umar set to seek Almighty Allah’s proper guidance in
this regard. One morning, after Allah had decided for him, \`Umar said,

‘I had intended to record the Holy Sunnah, but I remembered some past
nations who applied themselves completely to the items they had written
and, as a result, neglected the Book of Almighty Allah. By Allah I
swear! I will never allow anything to interfere with the Book of
Allah.’[^1]

Yahya ibn Ju\`dah narrated that after \`Umar ibn al-Khattab had intended
to record the Holy Sunnah, he changed his mind and distributed a missive
in the countries ordering people to erase any item of the Holy Sunnah
that they might have recorded.[^2]

(2) It has been narrated on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn
Abu-Bakr that \`Umar, after he had received news confirming that people
started to hold (or write) books, denied and disliked the matter saying,

‘O people: I have been informed that you have started to hold books.
Allah’s most beloved books must be the fairest and the straightest. Now,
I order you all to bring me all the books that you hold so that I will
decide about them.’

Thinking that \`Umar wanted to correct and submit the books to a certain
criterion, all people brought their books to him. Instead, he set them
all to fire and said,

‘This is a false wish just like that of the Christians and the
Jews.’[^3]

According to Ibn Sa\`d, in his *al-Tabaqat al-Kubra*, \`Umar said, ‘This
is a Mishna[^4] just like that of the Christians and the Jews.’[^5]

From the previous text, we understand that the justifications that
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab presented for the prohibition of recording the
Holy Sunnah can be summed up in the following points:

1. The anticipation that the Holy Qur’an would be abandoned and replaced
by other things.

2. The apprehension that other things would be mixed with the texts of
the Holy Qur’an.

The earlier justification can be refuted by the following points:

**First:** It is clear that this justification was based upon previous
convictions and special circumstances, because he said, ‘as I remembered
some past nations…’ and, ‘This is a false wish just like that of the
Christians and the Jews.’

Details will be given about the backgrounds of this justification during
the discussion of the last reason.

Furthermore, \`Umar should not have had such a conception about the
grand Sahabah whom must not be subjected to such convictions and cases.

**Second:** The justification is ambiguous to a great extent; therefore,
we doubt its being the direct reason beyond Umar’s decision of
prohibition. No Muslim would ever deny the fact that to abandon and
ignore the Holy Qur’an so as to attend to something else is unlawful and
is forbidden by the Shari\`ah, but the claim that to attend to something
other than the Holy Qur’an results in the abandonment of it is obvious
confusion and inaccurate wording.

Undoubtedly, what is actually resulting in the abandonment of the Holy
Qur’an is only what contradicts it, such as the adoption of the other
Scriptures along with the doctrines written therein; but to regard the
attention to the interpreter of the Holy Qur’an; namely the Sunnah of
the Holy Prophet about whom Almighty Allah says,

***‘And We have revealed to you the Reminder that you may make clear to
men what has been revealed to them, 16:44’***

to regard such attention as the main cause beyond the negligence of the
Holy Qur’an is definitely delusion and confusion between the right and
the wrong. Logically, to attend to the Hadith is to attend to the Holy
Qur’an, since the Hadith interprets and reveals the true meanings of the
Holy Qur’an.

**Third:** Umar’s justification implies that the Sahabah are accused of
their incapacity to make distinction between the Words of Almighty Allah
that they memorized and reported and the words of the Holy Prophet that
stood for the interpretation and explanation of the Holy Qur’an.
Everybody knows that the Holy Qur’an enjoys such an incomparable style
of typical eloquence, unique phraseology, and spiritual attraction that
it cannot be confused with the Hadith.

The Qur’anic verses enjoy such a special motif and coherence that they
cannot be confused with any other speech. If \`Umar anticipated the
occurrence of confusion between the Holy Qur’an and the Sunnah, like
that which occurred to some of the Sahabah who confused a few words of a
verse with the Holy Prophet’s words, he could deal with the matter by
ordering the narrators to be sure of a text, before reporting it, by
asking the other experts who were many in that period. When he compiled
the scattered papers of the Holy Qur’an, Abu-Bakr did the same
thing.[^6]

However, such a simple question does not require general prohibition of
the reporting and recordation of the Hadith. Having taken notice of this
point, Abu-Bakr did not claim such confusion as the justification for
the prohibition after he had solved this problem and dispensed with the
method that was later on taken by \`Umar in his dealing with the issue.

Umar’s justification might have found a ground if the Holy Qur’an and
Sunnah had been written in the same papers. However, none of the Muslims
had ever mixed the texts of the Holy Qur’an with those of the Holy
Sunnah in the same paper. Despite the passage of long ages, the earliest
books of Tafsir (Exegesis of the Holy Qur’an) reached at our hands
without having any single confusion between the texts of the Holy Qur’an
and those of the Holy Sunnah.

The latter justification adopted by \`Umar ibn al-Khattab can be refuted
by the following points:

**First:** As far as style and eloquence are concerned, indisputable
characteristics have distinguished between the Qur’anic and the
narrative texts. The Qur’anic texts have been revealed in the form of
inimitability, challenging all the Arab polytheists, who were masters of
eloquence, to produce the like of it. More than once and in different
eloquent and reproachful styles, the Holy Qur’an challenged the
unbelievers to bring its like. Listen to the following Qur’anic texts,

***“Say: Then bring some (other) book from Allah which is a better guide
than both of them, (that) I may follow it, if you are truthful.” (Holy
Qur’an: 28:49)***

***“Say: If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of
this Qur’an, they could not bring the like of it, though some of them
were aiders of others.” (Holy Qur’an: 17:88)***

***“Or, do they say: He has forged it. Say: Then bring ten forged
chapters like it and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful.” (Holy Qur’an: 11:13)***

***“And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, then produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses
besides Allah if you are truthful. But if you do (it) not and never
shall you do (it), then be on your guard against the fire of which men
and stones are the fuel; it is prepared for the unbelievers.” (Holy
Qur’an: 2:23-4)***

The articulacy, fluency, and expressiveness of the Holy Qur’an
astonished the polytheists shockingly that they found nothing to say
about it except being ‘transient magic’. On the other hand, the Hadith
has not been challenging the eloquence of the polytheists.

**Second:** The main topic of the Holy Prophet’s words was to explain
the religious laws, aside from the eloquence of his language. Moreover,
some of the narrations that are reported from the Holy Prophet conveyed
only the meaning, not the very words spoken by him. In the meantime,
Muslims have recognized, favored, and memorized the Holy Qur’an since it
has occupied a special position in each and every Muslim’s heart. For
instance, they should never touch its letters unless they are pure, for
their compliance with Almighty Allah’s saying,

<span
id="“none-shall-touch-it-save-purified-ones”-holy-qur’-5679">[“None
shall touch it save the purified ones”. (Holy Qur’an:
56:79)](#%E2%80%9Cnone-shall-touch-it-save-purified-ones%E2%80%9D-holy-qur%E2%80%99-5679)</span>Finally,
they have been always observing and reciting the Holy verses day and
night.

Inasmuch as Muslims used to care for the Holy Qur’an to such a great
extents, it is illogical to anticipate its confusion with the Holy
Sunnah! Likewise, the Sahabah were too aware to lack distinction between
what is divinely revealed and what is said for mere explanation.

Nevertheless, everybody admits to the fact that the Holy Prophet’s
articulation was so expressive that it was easily distinguished from
ordinary people’s diction, since he was the most eloquent of the Arabs.
It is thus claimed that not all people were talented enough to tell
apart between the Holy Qur’an and the Holy Prophet’s words.

However, such a claim is too far from the truth; in addition to the
aforementioned differences between the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah, the
latter embodies words, deeds, and confirmations half of which have been
ordinary statements that never promote to the level of the Holy Qur’an.
Moreover, even if the previous claim is accepted, yet supposedly, it
should apply only to some of the verbal part of the Holy Sunnah. In
addition, we have previously cited that some of the narrations that were
reported from the Holy Prophet conveyed only the meaning, not the very
words spoken by him.

**Third:** Supposing the aforementioned claim is accurate, it does not
necessitate the desertion of the Holy Sunnah in order to observe the
maintenance of the Holy Qur’an, because the Hadith is the explanatory
body of the Holy Qur’an and, as a result, to report, record, and study
it achieves a big service for Muslims to understand the Holy Qur’an
without making any contradiction with it.

What must be verified and checked is the reporting from the Holy
Prophet. In this regard, the Holy Prophet said,

“Anyone who attributes false reports to me must certainly find himself a
place in Hellfire.”

A deep look at this Prophetic statement shows that the Holy Sunnah,
unlike the Holy Qur’an, can be exposed to forgery.

Let us now wonder how \`Umar ibn al-Khattab had been so ignorant that he
could not appreciate such clear-cut facts and, consequently, claimed
matters revealing the absence of differences between the texts of the
Holy Qur’an and those of the Holy Sunnah in aspects of eloquence and
perspicuity!

In addition, let us wonder how it is possible that none paid attention
to the clear-cut question that such confusion leads to disbelief and
that one who claims confusion between the Holy Qur'an and the Holy
Sunnah must be regarded as belying Almighty Allah’s saying—in the Holy
Qur'an,

***“And indeed it is a Book of exalted power. No falsehood can approach
it from before or behind it: It is sent down by One Full of Wisdom,
Worthy of all Praise.” (Holy Qur’an: 41:41-42)***

***“We have, without doubt, sent down the Message; and We will assuredly
guard it (from distortion).” (Holy Qur’an: 15:9)***

It is not unlikely that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, in order to find
foundations for his own opinions, had to resort to various
justifications, such as the anticipation of confusion between the Holy
Qur'an and Sunnah, or that he recalled the manners of peoples of bygone
times who dedicated all their efforts to studying the books of their
doctors of laws and rabbis and left the Book of their Lord, or that he
intended to be sure of the authenticity of the reports ascribed to the
Holy Prophet as being within his Sunnah... etc.

Due to such justifications, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab reduced the reporting
of the Holy Prophet’s traditions and tightened the grip around the
throat of anyone who had kept a report from the Holy Prophet.

In any case, as \`Umar ibn al-Khattab prohibited the reporting and
recording of the Hadith, he violated the unanimous consensus of the
Muslims on the acceptability of the single-reporter narration (*khabar
al-wahid*). He also violated the majority of the Sunnite Muslims who
believe in the ultimate decency of all the Sahabah.

Moreover, he violated the rational principle of respecting the report of
the trustworthy. Such being the case, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, the caliph,
caused a large number of the Holy Prophet’s traditions to be lost and
aroused suspicions around the principles of the Islamic legislation
since the majority of the Sahabah heard, from the Holy Prophet, what
many others had not heard; while the caliph’s determination decided the
impermissibility of such reports unless a witness and proofs on their
having been said by the Holy Prophet would be presented.

Of course, such proofs could not be presented by most of the Sahabah
except in a few cases such as that of Abu-Musa al-Ash\`ariy, which
happened by chance.

From the above, we reach the conclusion that the justifications of
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab for prohibiting the reporting and recordation of
the Hadith have not been sufficiently convincing. We therefore have to
search for other justifications, hoping that we may find a persuasive
answer!

[^1]: Mu\`ammar ibn Rashid: al-Jami\` 11:257; \`Abd al-Razzaq:
al-Musannaf 11:258 H. 484; al-Madkhal Ila’l-Sunan al-Kubra 1:407;
al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 49 and \`Abd al-Ghaniy Abd
al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 395 as quoted from al-Bayhaqiy and Ibn
\`Abd al-Barr.

[^2]: Al-Muttaqiy al-Hindiy: Kanz al-\`Ummal 10:292 H. 29476; Al-Khatib
al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 35 and Abd al-Ghaniy Abd al-Khaliq:
Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 395.

[^3]: \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 395.

[^4]: Mishna is the collection of precepts and customs which form the
basis of the Talmud and is held to embody the contents of Jewish oral
law. Hence, Umar likened the Holy Sunnah that had been recorded by the
major Sahabah who received it directly from the mouth of the Holy
Prophet to the collections of the Jewish oral laws that were neither
revealed to nor said by Prophet Moses. Of course, such likening is aimed
at belying and despising the Holy Sunnah that included innumerable
Hadiths respecting the Ahl al-Bayt’s merits and true positions as well
as the divine commissions that they must succeed the Holy Prophet and
must be unconditionally obeyed by all Muslims. (See Abu-Na’im: Dala’il
al-Nubuwwah 638, Sayyid Ja\`far Murtada al-\`Āmiliy: al-Sahih min Sirat
al-Nabi al-A’dham 1:59, The Simplified Arabic Encyclopedia: 543
(Talmud), Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy: Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah 340 and
The Encyclopedia of al-Mawrid 4:199)

[^5]: Ibn Sa\`d: al-Tabaqat al-Kubra 1:140.

[^6]: Jalal al-Din al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 4:332;
Al-Mubarakfuriy: Tuhfat al-Ahwadhiy fi Sharh Jami\` al-Tirmidhiy 8:408;
al-Itqan fi \`Ulum al-Qur'an 1:162-163.


