Third Reason: Justifications Of Ibn Qutaybah And Ibn Hajar
==========================================================

Ibn Qutaybah[^1] and Ibn Hajar,[^2] as well as other historians,[^3]
have attributed the reason for the prohibition of reporting and
recording the Hadith to the matter that most of the Sahabah had not
mastered writing.

As faced by criticism and scrutiny, this opinion has proven its
inaccuracy. Further, it has been opposed by many objections and
refutations, such as that of Mr. Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib who says,

“Having found out that there were more than thirty clerks recording the
Revelation for the Holy Prophet and many others were in charge of other
clerical affairs, we cannot accede to the opinions of Ibn Qutaybah and
Ibn Hajar. Also, we cannot believe in the scarcity of those who could
write in that period; therefore, Ibn Hajar’s generalization is
unproven.”[^4]

In his book entitled *al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin* (The Holy Sunnah before
the recordation), Mr. Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib says,

“In such a deep thesis, we should not submit to the traditional reasons
the authors used to use for justifying the refraining form recording the
Holy Sunnah. Furthermore, we cannot accept their claim that the paucity
of the records of the Holy Sunnah during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime was
due to the irregularity of recording in general and the small number of
those who were able to write as well as the miswriting that was common
at that time.

We should not accept such false claims after we have found out that
there were more than thirty clerks recording the Revelation for the Holy
Prophet, and many others were in charge of the other clerical affairs.

We should not also agree to the claim of the fewness of people who could
write and the miswriting in that era, because we know for certain that
there were proficient writers in that period, such as Zayd ibn Thabit
and \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn al-\`Ās. Supposing we accept the claim of
the scarcity and unavailability of the writing tools, how could Muslims
record the Holy Qur’an without difficulties?

If they had had the desire to record the Hadith, they would have easily
done it in the same way as some individuals had asked the Holy Prophet’s
permission to record the Hadith, and he permitted them. Therefore, there
must have been other reasons… etc.”[^5]

Dr. Mustafa Al-A\`dhamiy has said,

“If we accept the charge that people who lived in the time of the Holy
Prophet did not master writing, how can we accept the reports telling
that the Holy Qur’an was recorded in that period? We all know that the
Sahabah used to record the holy verses as soon as they were revealed.
What is the meaning of the Holy Prophet’s instruction, ‘Record not
anything about me except the Holy Qur’an?’

Such an instruction would be unnecessary if people in that time could
not write. Nevertheless, the previous report itself bears out that they
used to record the Holy Qur’an as well as other things. The existence of
a big number of clerks who worked for the Holy Prophet violates the
aforementioned claim; and the administration of a big state, like that
reigned by the Rashidite caliphs,[^6] required the presence of people
mastering writing, arithmetic, and similar basic sciences.

As a result, it is inescapable to admit to the fact that a big number of
people, including the Sahabah themselves, could read and write in that
time. Furthermore, the Holy Prophet’s educational policy brought forth
its initial fruits during his lifetime, and consequently, the fruits
must have increased manifold afterwards. On this account, albeit that
most of people in the Holy Prophet’s time could not read and write,
there were many others who could read and write and could meet the
clerical requirements of that time.”[^7]

Aiming at identifying a convincing reason beyond the prohibition of
recording the Hadith, Mr. al-Khatib returned to some of the traditional
reasons by which he fell upon others, saying,

“The reason beyond the official prohibition of recording the Hadith
during the Holy Prophet’s lifetime was not the Muslims’ having been
illiterate; rather some of them could read and write and, thus, they
recorded the Holy Revelations.

As a matter of fact, there were other reasons, such as the fear that the
Holy Qur’an would be confused with the Hadith and that Muslims would
engage themselves with the recordation of the Holy Sunnah and
consequently would ignore the recording, study, and memorization of the
Holy Qur’an.”[^8]

Dr. \`Abd al-Khaliq has fallen in the same mistake; refuting the words
of Ibn Qutaybah, he says,

“The narration of Abu-Sa\`id al-Khidriy seems to be the basic evidence
on the prohibition of recording the Hadith. However, the narration
confirms that the Holy Prophet permitted the recordation of the Holy
Qur’an in the same time as he prohibited the recordation of the Hadith.
Providing the reason beyond the prohibition was the fear of miswriting,
how did he permitted recording the Holy Qur’an?”[^9]

Mr. Ma\`ruf also has his own opinion,

“As a result, it has been proven that writing was not as scarce as
described by al-Buladhiriy who says, in *Futuh al-Buldan*, that only
seventeen Qurayshite men could read and write when Islam emerged, and
only eleven from the tribes of al-Aws and al-Khazraj could learn from
their neighbors. Since the literate persons among people of Quraysh and
people of Yathrib (later al-Madinah) were as few as the aforementioned
numbers, one could hardly find a single literate person among the people
of the other tribes and towns.”[^10]

Ahmad Amin’s opinion has been previously cited.[^11]

Dr. Subhiy al-Salih says,

“As long as the Sahabah, regarding the preservation of the Holy Sunnah,
depended upon the hearts of those who had memorized it, not documents,
it has been necessary to find another reason rather than the traditional
ones to which everybody has referred whenever this topic is concerned.

It is impracticable to accept the claim that the reason beyond the
prohibition of recording the Hadith had been the scarcity of the tools
of writing during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet, because such tools
were not as scarce as they described.

However, they might have been one of the factors, and undoubtedly not
the one and only factor, which resulted in the negligence of recording
the Hadith, because such a factor had not precluded the companions of
the Holy Prophet from exerting all efforts for sake of recording the
Holy Qur’an entirely on rocks, leaves of date-palm trees, shoulders of
animals, and other tools.

Had their psychological motives towards the recordation of the Hadith
been as enthusiast and strong as the motives they had had towards the
recordation of the Holy Qur’an, they would have certainly found the
proper tools.

Rather, they, having followed the instructions of the Holy Prophet as
well as their own desires, compiled the Hadith in a way completely
different from that used in the compilation of the Holy Qur’an.”[^12]

Sayyid al-Jalaliy, commenting on Ibn Hajar’s opinion, has said,

“It is very odd that a Hadithist, a biographer, and a historian as
weighty as Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy had missed such an apparent fact,
claiming that the reason beyond the prohibition of recording the Hadith
was that people were illiterate!

By such a phrase, it is understandable that Ibn Hajar meant all the
people of that time. Taking notice of such a flaw, al-Suyutiy had to put
the situation in order and thus say that most of the people in that time
could not read and write!”[^13]

From the previous quotations and comments, we realize that the
generalization of illiteracy on all of the companions of the Holy
Prophet has been unsound, because it is illogical to warn an illiterate
against recording! The Holy Prophet’s forged prohibition from recording
the Hadith is in itself a proof on the existence of those who could read
and write or, more precisely, on the actual occurrence of the recording,
otherwise to warn intensely against a nonexistent thing is meaningless.

Explaining the Hadith of ‘Do not write anything from my wording except
the Holy Qur'an, and anyone who has written any material must erase it,’
the reviser of the book of ‘*Thabt al-Baladiy*’, comments,

“The words of this Hadith proves that the Hadith was written down during
the lifetime of the Holy Messenger...”[^14]

[^1]: Abu-Muhammad Abdullah ibn Muslim ibn Qutaybah (died in AH 376):
Ta’wil Mukhtalaf al-Hadith 366. For further details, see Shaykh Tahir
al-Jaza’iriy: Tawjih al-Nadhar 10.

[^2]: Ahmad ibn \`Ali ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalaniy (died in AH 852): Huda
al-Sari4.

[^3]: Such as al-Dhahbiy, in Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala' 18:541; Tadhkirat
al-Huffadh 3:1183 (Biography of Abu’l-Walid Sulayman ibn Khalaf
al-Bajiy).

[^4]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: Usul al-Hadith wa Ulumuhu wa
Mustalahuh 146.

[^5]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 301-2.

[^6]: The Rashidite caliphs are respectively Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, \`Uthman
and Imam \`Ali who governed the ummah before the sovereignty of the
Umayyad rulers.

[^7]: Mustafa al-A\`dhamiy: Dirasatun fi’l-Hadith al-Nubawiy, 73.

[^8]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 340.

[^9]: Abd al-Ghaniy Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 430 and 444.

[^10]: Hashim Ma’ruf: Dirasat fi’l-Kafi wa’l-Sahih 14.

[^11]: For more details: see Ahmad Amin: Fajr al-Islam 13-4.

[^12]: Subhiy al-Salih: Ulum al-Hadith wa Mustalahuh 6.

[^13]: Sayyid Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy: Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah
392-3. Al-Suyutiy’s saying has been quoted from his book entitled Tadrib
al-Rawi 1:88.

[^14]: Thabt al-Baladiy 77.


