Fourth Reason: Justifications Of Abu-Zahw And `Abd Al-Ghaniy
============================================================

Mr. Abu-Zahw says,

“There was another thing that urged the Holy Prophet to prohibit them
from recording the Hadith; it was the maintenance of their talents of
memorization! Had they recorded the Hadith, they would have depended
upon the records completely and neglected their capacities of
memorization. With the elapse of time, such great capacities would
certainly vanish.”[^1]

Shaykh \`Abd al-Ghaniy says,

“The Holy Prophet prohibited the recordation of the Hadith for fear that
they (the Sahabah) would entirely depend upon the records and neglect
the memorization, which was their nature and innate disposition and, as
a result, their talents would be exposed to weakness.

Therefore, the Holy Prophet’s prohibition was dedicated to those whose
memories were too strong to be affected by oblivion.”[^2]

Before the above-mentioned text, Shaykh \`Abd al-Ghaniy has said,

“Memorization and recording alternate in the protection of the
Shari\`ah, yet in most cases one faints when the other grows stronger.
On this account, we can understand the causes that incited the Sahabah
to urge their disciples to depend upon their memories and neglect their
pens; they understood that writing would certainly weaken the talent of
memorization, which was in their natures, and as a general rule, human
soul always tends to whatever nourishes the nature and avoids whatever
opposes or weakens it.”[^3]

Dr. al-Khatib says,

“They refused that the students of Hadith would devote themselves to
their records, making them the stores of their knowledge. They also did
not want to violate the Sahabah in the question of the compliance with
memorization and the complete dependence upon the memory, since to
depend upon the records results in the weakening of the memory and the
negligence of the memorization.”[^4]

Commenting on the words of Shaykh \`Abd al-Ghaniy, Sayyid al-Jalaliy
says.

“Except its oratory purpose, the wording is empty of any scientific or
conclusive matter. Moreover, it is far away from subjectivity since the
main topic of the study is the prohibition of the recording, while the
wording is only agreeable to personal desires!

How can an epidemic that affects the memory or the probability of
oblivion necessitate the negligence of a major source of the Islamic
law, namely the Holy Sunnah, which accordingly was left without
verification, documentation, or even recording?”[^5]

In any event, two more points must be added to the critique of this
justification:

**First:** It might have been acceptable if the prohibition of recording
the Hadith had been issued by the Holy Prophet. In fact, the false
Hadiths of the prohibition were fabricated under certain political
circumstances and preceding convictions of definite individuals who
insisted on narrowing the reporting and recordation of the Hadith in a
restricted zone. Hence, the decision of the prohibition was neither
legal nor issued by the Holy Prophet, as will be detailed later on.

**Second:** Supposing this justification is acceptable, it does not
reveal the illegality of recording the Hadith, since to dislike
depending upon the records does not indicate its illegality; rather it
means to desire not to do it.

Had the process of recording been illegal, some of the Sahabah would not
have recorded anything of the Hadith. It has been narrated on the
authority of \`Ayyad, the judge, that some of the Sahabah used to record
the Hadith and that they would erase after memorizing.[^6]

Furthermore, this justification is contradictory to great extent! It is
unimaginable to think that a teacher who persistently urges his pupils
to learn and safeguard the items of knowledge that they would study—such
a teacher will at last instruct his pupils not to record or note down
the items of knowledge that they learnt! Indisputably, to record and
write down the knowledge is better for preserving it than memorizing it.

An Arabic proverb says, ‘Whatever is recorded will be established, and
whatever is memorized will flee.’ What is then the reason beyond the
emphasis on the memorization of the Hadith, and what is the reason
beyond the claim that the prohibition of recording the Hadith will
protect the memory? What is the use of a memorizer’s recollection after
his death? Although the angels have been more capable of memorization
than man has, Almighty Allah has ordered them to record. Listen to the
following holy verse:

***“But verily over you (are appointed angels) to protect you; kind and
honorable, writing down (your deeds).” (Holy Qur’an: 82:10-1)***

It may be true that the talent of memory becomes stronger through
training just like the sense of hearing for the blind, which is usually
stronger than it for the endowed with eyesight, because the earlier use
it as a substitute for the sight. The same thing can be said about the
illiterate merchant whose memory is usually stronger than that of the
literate for the same reason.

Albeit the previous fact is undeniable, it cannot be applied to the
Sahabah whom Almighty Allah has chosen for protecting and conveying the
religious laws to the next generations. If the reason beyond the
prohibition of the recording was to keep the Sahabah’s brilliant
memories as strong as they were, we have to find appropriate
interpretation for the following narration:

Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy, al-Bayhaqiy, in *Dala’il al-Nubuwwah*, and
al-Qurtubiy have narrated on the authority of authenticated series of
narrators that \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar said,

“Umar ibn al-Khattab required twelve years to memorize the Surah of
al-Baqarah.[^7] When he did, he slaughtered a sheep on that
occasion.”[^8]

Accordingly, we have to condemn Shaykh \`Abd al-Ghaniy and Mr. Abu-Zahw
as well as the other scholars who have adopted the same opinion,
otherwise we have to belie Ibn al-Jawziy, al-Dhahbiy, and al-Qurtubiy as
well as the other narrators of the previous report.

As a result, there must have been a reason other than the preservation
of the talents of memorization. Such a reason will be exposed in the
coming chapters of this book.

In the preface to *Taqyid al-\`Ilm*, Mr. Yusuf al-\`Ishsh says,

“The memories of most of people are too weak to load a whole material of
a science and safeguard it from waste. Naturally the capacity of
memorization is different among people; as it be strong for some people,
it will surely be weak for others and, consequently, it will not always
help them and keep its material forever.”[^9]

Biographers have listed the names of the Sahabah who used to confuse the
narrations by interfering.

The question is thus not as accurate as conceived by some scholars.

Another point must be aroused in this regard; to accept the
justifications of Shaykh \`Abd al-Ghaniy and Mr. Abu-Zahw who have
claimed that the Arabs enjoyed brilliant memories, we must believe that
the Holy Sunnah has been dedicated to the Arabs exclusively. History has
told that there were many non-Arab Sahabah who also intended to record
the Holy Sunnah. Thus, how should the justifiers come back with this
fact?

If it had been obligatory to memorize a thing, that thing would
certainly have been the Holy Qur’an. And if the brilliant memory and the
good memorization required the memorized material not be recorded, why
would the memorization of the Holy Qur’an not stop against recording it,
taking into consideration that many of the Sahabah did memorize the Holy
Qur’an.

What is more is that the memory, which was claimed that the decision of
the prohibition from reporting and recording the Hadith would maintain
it, could not meet the Muslims’ need for the Holy Prophet’s traditions;
therefore, Abu-Bakr ibn Abi-Quhafah, the fist caliph, stated that the
Sahabah reported from the Messenger of Allah narrations about the
reporting of which they had disagreed. Undoubtedly, lack of memory was
one of the active reasons beyond such disagreement.

Having realized the new generation’s urgent need for the religious data
and the first generation’s duty to answer, Abu-Bakr used the expression,
‘and if anyone asks you…’ in the decision of the prohibition of
recording the Hadith.

In the same speech, Abu-Bakr said, ‘You are reporting about the
Messenger of Allah inconsistent narrations.’ From this statement we
understand that the reason beyond the inconsistency in the secondary
questions was the different reports of the Sahabah,[^10] meaning that
either some of them did forge lies against the Holy Prophet who, having
predicted this question, said,

‘After my departure, forging lies against me will increase’;[^11]

or others were exposed to oblivion, inattention, or mistake and as a
result, inconsistency in the narration occurred; or the narratives were
too contradictory for the well-versed in the religious laws to educe a
conclusion.

Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib has had a nice explanation regarding the
inconsistency in the reports from the Holy Prophet. Later on in this
book, this explanation will be cited.

As a conclusion, in order to learn with certainty about a Hadith, one
must take precautions in the adoption of a narration; but if the
authenticity of a Hadith is doubted, verification must be made so as to
discriminate between the forged and the sound.[^12]

But, under any circumstances, it is unacceptable to issue orders of
erasing and setting fire to the recorded Hadiths because of a mere,
refutable probability. Such being the case, the orders would certainly
cause waste and abuse, not precaution and accuracy.

In this connection, it is important to cite that there are many issues
confirming the invalidity of the memorizer’s wording, such as the
narrations telling the Sahabah’s reporting and accepting narrations and
the narrations telling the anticipation of Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas and
\`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud, as well as others, from reporting the Hadith...
etc.[^13]

[^1]: Muhammad Muhammad Abu-Zahw: al-Hadith wa’l-Muhaddithun 123.

[^2]: \`Abd al-Ghaniy Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 428. See also
al-Suyutiy: Tadrib al-Rawi 150.

[^3]: \`Abd al-Ghaniy \`Abd al-Khaliq: Hijjiyyat al-Sunnah 405.

[^4]: Muhammad \`Ajjaj al-Khatib: al-Sunnah qabl al-Tadwin 333. This
opinion has been beforehand said by the following scholars: Al-Sam\`aniy
in ‘Adab al-Imla’ wa’l-Istimla'' 146, al-Qadi \`Ayyad in ‘al-Ilma\`’
149, Ibn al-Athir in ‘Jami\` al-Usul’ 1:40, Ibn al-Salah in
‘al-Muqaddimah’ 301 and ‘\`Ulum al-Hadith’ 192 and others.

[^5]: Sayyid Muhammad Rida al-Jalaliy: Tadwin al-Sunnah al-Sharifah 370.

[^6]: \`Āsim ibn Damarah (as recorded in al-Ramhurmuziy: al-Muhaddith
al-Fasil), Khalid al-Hadhdha’ (as recorded in al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy:
Taqyid al-\`Ilm) and Ubaydah (as recorded in Ibn \`Abd al-Barr
al-Qurtubiy: Jami\` Bayan al-\`Ilm wa Fadlih) were among the Sahabah who
recorded the Hadith.

[^7]: Chapter 2 (The Cow) of the Holy Qur’an.

[^8]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 12:66, Jalal al-Din
al-Suyutiy: al-Durr al-Manthur 1:21, Ibn al-Jawziy: Sirat \`Umar 165,
al-Qurtubiy: al-Tafsir 1:40 and al-Dhahbiy: Tarikh al-Islam 267.

[^9]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadiy: Taqyid al-\`Ilm 8: Preface by Mr. Yusuf
al-\`Ishsh.

[^10]: For more details and a clearer explanation of the idea, refer to
the author’s book ‘Tarikh al-Hadith al-Nubawiy; al-Mu’aththirat fi \`Ahd
Abi-Bakr (History of the Hadith; Motives in the Reign of Abu-Bakr)’
111-124.

[^11]: Al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilliy: al-Mu\`tabar 1:29. In Sahih al-Bukhariy
1:52 H. 16, it is narrated on the authority of \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib that
the Holy Prophet’s said, “Do not forge lies against me; for anyone who
forges lies against me shall be led to Hellfire.”

[^12]: According to the previously cited narration of Rafi\` ibn
Khudayj, the Holy Prophet ordered to discriminate between the forged and
the sound.

[^13]: Mahmud Abu-Rayyah: Adwa’un \`Ala’l-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah 55-58.
These narrations can be read in Sunan Ibn Majah 1:11 H. 25, Musnad Ahmad
ibn Hanbal 4:370 H. 19323, 19324...


