The Publisher's Word
====================

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE COMPASSIONATE, THE MERCIFUL

All praise is due to Allah Whose mercy is not desponded and forgiveness
is not despaired of. The best blessings and peace be upon the keeper of
His revelation, the seal of His messengers, the foreteller of His mercy,
and the warner against His punishment-the Prophet Mohammed. The
blessings and peace be, too, upon his family and household through whom
the right has regained its proper place and the wrong has been
overthrown. Curse be on their enemies among the people of disagreement
and hypocrisy who have brought to themselves the sins and made
themselves the subject of Hell.

The Imamite Shia are still known of their faithful loyalty to the
Prophet's household, peace be upon them all, since the glorious Prophet
had unearthed his immortal mission to mankind. He, however, kept on
giving credit to the lofty standings and the qualities by which the Shia
should be characterized. In view of that, they were the matter of the
glorious Prophet's glad tidings that he (s) carried. He said:

The Shia of Ali will be the true winners.1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to Kunouz ul-Haqaaiq; 82.

O Ali, Allah has forgiven you, your progeny, your sons, your household,
our Shia -adherents-, and the adorers of your Shia.1 These three
books -namely, al-Mawaaizh, Sifat ush-Shia, and Fadhaa'il ush-Shia- that
are at the hands of the dear reader are indeed precious moral gems
presented to the adherents of the Prophet's household. They are the
works of the master Sheikh as-Saduq, Allah have mercy upon him, who
compiled them in different times.

The translator has depended, in his work, on the copy that is published
by Al-Maarif Al-Islamiyya Foundation - Qum, and revised by Mr. Mahmoud
Al-Badri who exerted remarkable efforts for advancing these precious
compilations in such a noteworthy form.

In addition to the original texts of the books, most of the
information, notes, and comments that the reviser has added are
translated for the purpose of expanding the scope of information and
making the contents more understandable and more accessible to all.
Furthermore, a brief biography of the compiler Sheikh as-Saduq (r) is
added so as to introduce this unique personality to the readers.

Ansariyan Publications, undertaking the mission of propagandizing for
the sect of the Ahl ul-Bayt (a) and

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa; 96.

publicizing the precious immortal works of the master scholars of
Shiism, is pleased to advance these three precious works, all in one
book, to the dear readers and the seekers of the truth. We hope the dear
reader would find this work convenient and guide to the human perfection
and we implore to Allah, Exalted is He, to grant us success to keep on
offering the dear readers with the valuable gems of the Islamic
heritage. ANSARIYAN PUBLICATIONS, 2001

**THE REVISER'S WORD**

All praise is due to Allah, the lord of the worlds. All blessings and
peace be upon Mohammed and his family-the pure and immaculate. All mercy
and content be upon all their adorers and adherents. The content of
Allah be upon the Prophet's companions who honestly followed him. It is
well known that Shiism, as a sect and belief, was not the fruit of the
political circumstances that took place after the death of the glorious
Prophet (s) when some people usurped the leadership from its legal
master in the Saqifa of the Banu Saaida.

It was also not the product of the political circumstances that came
about during the reign of Imam Ali (a) when the Prophet's widow (Aisha)
mutinied, calling for the revenge on those who shed the blood of the
killed caliph after she had provoked all people against that very killed
caliph in his lifetime, and history has kept her famous call, 'Kill
Naathat1 , for he has converted to atheism.'

Shiism, also, was not the product of the political circumstances that
occurred when Muawiya mutinied,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The Prophet's widow; Aisha said the name of Naathal to Othman bin
Affan when she rallied people against him and accused him of atheism.
The name Naathal, however, refers to a Jewish person who lived in that
time.

carrying the shirt of Othman1 and calling for the revenge on his
killers. That event, however, was the reason beyond the founding of the
Khawarij2 one of whose members killed Amir ul-Mu'minin (a) while he was
offering a prayer in his mihrab. Shiism, too, is not the product of the
political circumstances that the Muslims had to encounter after the
savage massacre of Karbala, which was committed against the Prophet's
household (a) at the hands of the Umayyad ruling authorities.

It is quite true that Shiism was not the product of any of the previous
circumstances, as some please to say. Shiism came to light and appeared
on the theater of the political and religious life since the first
sparks of the Islamic history. The embracers of Shiism raised the slogan
of the love and loyalty to the Prophet's household, peace be upon them
all, adopted their goals, and believed

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The shirt of Othman was bloodstained because he put it on when he was
killed.

2 Some people deserted Ali bin Abi Talib ( a ) who was the caliph and
fought against him, accusing him of having committed a grave sin in
submitting his claim to the caliphate to arbitration after the battle of
siffin. Those deserted formed the trend; which later was called
Khawarij. The word Kharaju, from which Khariji is derived, means " to
withdraw " and Khawarij were, therefore, secedes who believed in active
dissent or rebellion against a state of affairs they considered to be
gravely impious.

purely that they are the most meritorious of taking the position of the
Prophet, peace be upon him and his family. They also believed that Imam
Ali bin Abi Talib -Amir ul-Mu'minin, the head of the religion, the
leader of the white-forheaded honorables, the husband of the pure lady,
the father of the two grandsons (of the Prophet) al-Hasan and
al-Hussein- is the true successor of the Prophet (s) the door to the
city of his knowledge, and the keeper of his wisdom. They also believed
that the immaculate Imams are the true successors of the Prophet (s) the
leaders of his community, and the conveyers of his divine mission.

The dawn of Shiism broke since the first days of the blessed prophetic
mission. It was the Prophet (s) who planted this blessed seed,
cultivated, and supervised it all over the stages of his noble lifetime.
This can be proved through the many hadiths that attached the quality of
Shiism to the followers of Imam Ali (a) praised them, and revealed to
them the glad tidings of having the highest ranks in the Supreme
Paradise. The Prophet (s) said:

O Ali, you, as well as your Shia, will join me on the Divine Pool.1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to Majmaa uz-Zawaaid; 9:131, Kunouz ul-Haqaaiq; 188, and
Alisteeab; 2:457

O Ali, your Shia and you will come to Allah with content and pleasure.
Your enemies will come with anger and will be unable to bend their heads
to find their ways.1

On the Day of Resurrection, Ali and his Shia will be the winners.2

O Ali, Allah has forgiven you, your progeny, your sons, your household,
your Shia, and the adorers of your Shia. 3 The Shia of Ali will be the
true winners. 4

Moreover, the hadith that is called 'Hadith ud-Dar' is one of the
strongest irrefutable evidences on our claim. ((At-Tabari, in his book
of history, records that Ibn Abbas narrated that Ali bin Abi Talib (a)
said:

After the revelation of the Verse, "And warn your nearest relations,"
the Prophet (s) summoned me and said: "O Ali, Allah had ordered me to
warn my near relatives, but I was unable to bear this order because I
knew that they would show me detestable things if I would approach such
a matter with them. I therefore kept it secret until the Archangel
Gabriel came to me and said that my Lord would punish me if I would shun
that order. Now, I want you to make some food with meat of a

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa; 93 and Majmaa uz-Zawaaid; 9:131
2 Refer to Kunouz ul-Haqaaiq; 92
3 Refer to as-Sawaaiq ul-Muhriqa; 96.
4 Refer to Kunouz ul-Haqaaiq; 82

ewe and bring a jar of milk for us, then gather the sons of
Abdul-Muttalib so that I will speak to them and convey the matter that I
was ordered to convey."

I did as he asked me and invited them. They were about forty men among
whom there were his uncles-Abu Talib, Hamza, al-Abbas and Abu Lahab.
When they all attended, he asked me to fetch that food and I did. When I
put it before them, the Prophet (s) took a piece of the meat, tore it
with his teeth, threw its pieces around the bowl, then said: "Here you
are, by the Name of Allah." Each one of them took his sufficiency
completely and I could see only the places of their hands. I swear by
Allah, each one of them ate the quantity that I served to all of them.
The Prophet (s) then asked me to serve milk to them. I fetched that jar
and they all drank from it. By Allah I swear, each one of them drank the
quantity that I served to all of them.

When the Prophet (s) tried to speak, Abu Lahab overtook and prevented
him from speaking. He said: "This man has bewitched you." Hence, they
left without letting the Prophet (s) speak to them.

On the next day, the Prophet said to me: "O Ali, that man overtook me
and said the statement that you had heard. They left before I could
speak to them. Make for us food like that which you did then gather them
to me."

I did and invited them all. He then asked me to serve them the food. I
served it for them and he repeated the same thing that he had done the
previous day. Each one of them had his sufficiency completely. He then
asked me to serve them with the milk. I fetched the same jar and

they all drank from it to their sufficiency. Then, the Prophet (s)
spoke:

"O sons of Abdul-Muttalib, I do not know any young Arab man who has
brought to his people a thing that is better than that which I have
brought to you. I have brought to you the goodness of this world as well
as the world to come. Allah, Exalted is He, has ordered me to call you
to accept this matter. Which one of you will support me in this regard
and he will be my brother, successor, and representative among you?"
They all kept silent except me. I said, while I was the youngest among
them, "O the Prophet of Allah, I will be your supporter in this matter."
I repeated this statement three times.

The Prophet (s) then took me from the neck and said: "This is my
brother, successor, and representative among you. You thus should listen
to and obey him."

They left him laughing and saying to Abu Talib: "He has ordered you to
listen to and obey your son!"))1

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

1 This narration is recorded in the following reference books:
At-Tarikh; at-Tabari 2:319-21, Al-Kamil fit Tarikh; Ibn ul-Athir 2:22,
As-Sirat un-Nabawiyya; al-Halabi ( the Shafiite ) 1:311-2, kenz
ul-Ummal; al-Muttaqi ( the Hanafite ), Mustadrak us-Sahihayn; Al-Hakim
an-Nisapuri ( the Shafiite ) 3:133, Ad-Durr ul-Manthour: As-Suyoutti (
the Shafiite ) 5:79, Al-Musnad; Ahmed bin Hanbal ( the founder of
Habalites ) 1:111, Al-BIdaya wan-Nihaya; Ibn Kuthari 3:39, Tarikh; Abu
al-Fidaa 1:119, Shawahid ut-Tanzil; Al-Hasakani 1:485 H.514 and 580,
Tarikh Dimashq: the life account of Imam Ali bin Abi Talib; Ibn Asakir (
the Shafiite ) 1:97-105 H.133-40, and Sharhu Nahj ul-Balagha; Ibn Abi
al-Hadid ( the Mutazilite ) 13:210 and 244.

A deep look in this holy hadith proves that the Prophet (s) asked his
near relatives, according to the order of Allah, to confess of the
oneness of Allah the Exalted and his divine mission, and then ordered
them to listen to and obey his brother, successor, and representative
Ali bin Abi Talib, peace be upon him. In other words, the Prophet (s)
ordered them to follow and comply with Ali-to be his Shia. The meaning
of Shiism is to listen to, obey, and follow.

As a result, the seed of Shiism and the seed of Islam were planted on
the same day in the same time at the same hand. All the Muslims who were
with the Prophet (s) believed in his prophesy and mission, committed
themselves to that which he ordered, listened to him, obeyed him, and
listened to and obeyed the one whom he ordered to obey. That one was his
cousin, brother, successor, and representative Ali bin Abi Talib, peace
be upon him. They were considered as listeners and obedient to the
Prophet (s) only when they carried out his order of

listening to and obeying Ali, peace be upon him. It was the same order
that Allah gave. Consequently, their compliance with the order of the
Prophet means their adherence, i.e. Shiism, to Ali, because Shiism means
to listen to, obey, and follow.

The light of Shiism, then, glared along with the light of Islam in the
Arab Peninsula. The grand companions who believed in the oneness of
Allah and the divine message of the Prophet accepted, in the same time,
the obligatory loyalty to Ali. Meanwhile, others, among those who turned
on their backs just after the death of the Prophet, stood against him.

This work is in fact three books whose topics are connected to each
other. One of them, namely Sifat ush-Shia, focuses the lights on the
qualities that the Shia should have within their moralities. Without
such qualities, the Shia would not have won such abundant merits to
which the second book, namely Fadhaa'il ush-Shia, refers. The third
book, namely al-Mawaaizh, compiles the maxims and words of wisdom that
are said by the Prophet and the Imams, peace be upon them all, on
various occasions. It is necessary for the Shiite, before others, to
apply such maxims to himself, because they are surely great masterpieces
and moral principals.

A deep look into these maxims and qualities proves the fact that the
embracement of Shiism is not mere words that everyone can say or
ordinary love for Amir ul-Mu'minin, as some think. The true Shiite is
only he who commits himself to those qualities and applies them to his
conducts. The true Shiite is only that whom Imam al-Baqir (a) describes
in the following words:

O Jabir, do you think that it is sufficient for those who claim being
Shia to say that they cherish us; the Prophet's household? By Allah I
swear, our adherents -Shia- are only those who fear and obey Allah.
Their signs are modesty, submission, fulfillment of the trusts, very
much reference to Allah, fasting, offering prayers, piety to (their)
parents, aiding the neighbors especially the poor, the destitute, the
indebted, and the orphans, truth, reciting the Quran, and avoiding
mentioning people except for praising. In addition, they are the most
trustful of the people of their tribes.

Do not misunderstand the matter. It is enough for a man to claim that
he loves and follows Ali, peace be upon him. As a matter of fact, if he
claims that he loves the Prophet (s) who is preferable to Ali (a) but he
does not follow the Prophet's traditions and does not act upon his
instructions, such claim of love will be definitely useless. Hence, you
should fear Allah and work for the cause of obtaining that which He has
in possession.

There is no relation between Allah and anybody. The most favorable and
honorable servants of Allah are the most God-fearing and the most pious.
O Jabir, the only means through which a servant seeks to gain Allah's
favor is the obedience to Him. We -the Prophet's household- do not carry
a patent for saving from Hell. Likewise, none of you has a claim

against Allah. He whoever obeys Allah is only our disciple and whoever
disobeys Him is our enemy. The loyalty to us cannot be gained except by
means of diligent work and piety.

O Allah, make my life copy the lives of Mohammed and his family. When
You seize my soul, make me carry the same beliefs that Mohammed and his
family carried. Make me a true adherent of Amir ul-Mu'minin. I, also,
implore to You to record for me success, for the efforts that I have
exerted in this regard, and reward on the Day of Judgment. I implore to
You to save us from the pursuance of passions and the making of errors
and endow upon us with righteousness and appositeness.

All praise is due to Allah, Who guided us to this. Without his
guidance, we would not have been right. Mahmoud al-Badri, 2000

**THE REVISION**

**(1) AL-MAWAAIZH**

Al-Mawaaizh (The Sermons) is the first book in this collection. In 1392
A.H., it was first printed, with its Persian translation of Azizullah
Attaridi, in reliance on the only documentary copy that is found in the
Library of An-Nassiriyya in Lakanhu, India. Mr. Attaridi mentioned that
he had found that copy during his journey to India in 1386 A.H. He also
added that the copier chose the title Sheikh As-Saduq's Al-La'aali
al-Ghawali -The Dear Pearls- for the copy that carried the same title in
the indexes of that library.

It seems that the copier took this title from the introduction of the
compiler who records in its beginning, "So then, these are dear pearls
and bright jewels…" This copy seems to be the only available one that
was handwritten in 1235 A.H. by Feda Ali al-Musawi of Lakanhu. In the
last of that copy, the following is written:

"On Saturday, the first of Rabi I, 1235 of the hegira, All peace and
blessings be upon him who made the hegira and upon his immaculate and
pure household, this holy copy titled 'Al-La'aali al-Ghawali' that is
compiled by the lofty Sheikh, the most pious, the decent, the master of
the sect, the grand, the trustworthy of the Imams, the head of the
narrators, the product of the praying of the Sinless, the superior
knowledgeable, our master Mohammed bin Babawayh al-Qummi (r). I am the
poor servant Feda Ali son of Sayyid Ali al-Musawi of Nisapur, Lakanhu,
and Dahlu."

In addition to the following evidences, we can prove through the
previous statement that this book belongs to Sheikh as-Saduq. Most of
the biographists who referred to Sheikh as-Saduq (r) stated that he
compiled a book titled al-Mawaaizh -The Sermons-.1 Besides, the contents
of the book are almost sermons, advices, and maxims.

In the last of his book titled Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; Chapter:
An-Nawadir -The Extraordinary Reports-, Sheikh as-Saduq (r) records the
text of this book.2

In the revision of this book, the previously mentioned copy of the book
and the last chapter of Men La Yahdhuruh al-Faqih, since it is the same
as the book of al-Mawaaizh, are relied upon.

**(2) SIFAT USH-SHIA**

About this book, Sheikh at-Tehrani says:

"The book titled Sifat ush-Shia (The Qualities of the Shia) is compiled
by Sheikh as-Saduq Abu Ja'far Mohammed bin Ali bin al-Hussein bin Musa
bin Babawayh al-Qummi. Ad-Dam'at us-Sakiba, Al-Majlisi's Bihar ul-Anwar,
Al-Hurr Al-Aamili's Wassail ush-Shia, and Al-Mustadrak-all these
reference books quoted from Sifat ush-Shia. In Tehran, there is a copy
of this book,

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 Refer to Ath-Thareea; Sheikh Agha Buzurg at-Tehrani 22:225 No. 8729
2 Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:352-420 H.5762-5920.

which is handwritten with an old and big script, is found with the
Doctor. Other copies are found with Mr. Al-Urdubadi in Najaf and the
Library of At-Tehrani in Samarra that is written by our Sheikh an-Nuri
and, now, kept by his grandson Mirza Ali Behzadi in Tehran. The book
titled Fadhaa'il ush-Shia is within this copy.

In the revision of this book, two copies are depended:

The first copy is documentary and stored in Fayziyya School within
Group: 1764 No. 4. It is a clear copy, which is ended with the following
paragraph: "This is the end of the book titled Sifat ush-Shia and
compiled by Sheikh as-Saduq Mohammed bin Ali bin Babawayh al-Qummi; the
resident in Ray. All praise is due to Allah primarily, finally, openly,
and secretly. The poor servant Hussein bin Mohammed Taqi an-Nuri
at-Tabirsi wrote it himself in Najaf… on the seventh of Shawal, 1271
A.H."

The second is the copy that is found in the Library of At-Tehrani of
Samarra to which it was referred in the book title Ath-Thareea. This
copy was printed in Najaf by Allama Najmuddin ash-Sharif al-Askari in
1380 A.H. -1958 A.D.- and was attached to his book titled Ali wash-Shia.
In the end of this book, he writes down:

"This book was copied by ash-Sharif al-Askari Najmuddin, the son of the
late scholar Sheikh Mirza

Mohammed ash-Sharif al-Askari (of Tehran) in Samarra at the night of
Saturday, the twenty-first of Thu'l-Qa'da. Allah may bless Mohammed and
his immaculate family."1

**(3) FADHAAIL USH-SHIA**

About this book, Sheikh at-Tehrani says:

"This book is also called Fadhl ush-Shia (The Merits of the Shia).
Al-Majlisi quotes from this one as well as the previous. This means that
he had them both. Al-Hurr Al-Aamili, also, quotes from them and had them
in possession. In the fourth appendix of Wassail ash-Shia, he states the
previous fact. The two books, now, are found in Isfahan and Mashhad at
the hands of Sheikh Hussein (al-Muqqaddas al-Mashhadi). Mirza Mohammed
at-Tehrani took these copies to put them in his library in Samarra."2

For this revision, two copies of the book are depended:

The first one is the documentary copy that is found in the library of
Ayatollah al-Mar'ashi an-Najafi (without bearing any number). It is a
good copy.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1 The other printed copy of the book, which is attached to the book
titled Fadhaa'il ush-Shia was carefully printed in Tehran: Kanune
Intisharate Aabdi.

2 Refer to Ath-Thareea; Sheikh Agha Buzurg at-Tehrani 16:260 No.
1056.

The second is printed. It is the same copy of Sifat ush-Shia to which
we have previously referred and found in the Library of At-Tehrani in
Samarra. In the end of this copy, the following is written:

"Thanks to Allah the Exalted, the book titled Fadhaa'il ush-Shia and
compiled by Sheikh as-Saduq (r) has come to its end on the hands of
Najmuddin ash-Sharif al-Askari (of Tehran), the son of the late scholar
Sheikh Mirza Mohammed al-Askari at-Tehrani on the eighth of Shaban, 1380
A.H. Allah may bless Mohammed and his immaculate household."

For the sake of providing the texts as accurate as possible, the
reviser did not depend on a single definite copy of the book. He moved
between all of the available copies, in addition to the other reliable
reference books, including the compilations of Sheikh as-Saduq himself,
such as Al-Amali, At-Tawhid, Me'aani al-Akhbar, and the other reference
books such as Bihar ul-Anwar, Wassail ush-Shia and many others. The
other tasks that the reviser did are as follows:

He compared the Quranic texts that are mentioned in these books with
the holy Quran.

He referred to the same narrations that are mentioned in other
reference books.

He added to the texts of series of relaters the statements that are
found in other reliable reference books.

He referred to only some differences between the copies of the books
intended and the other reference books.

He added some important comments that are considered necessary.

He used guide titles for each narration so as to enable the dear reader
and the searcher to benefit by them.

In the end of each book, he attached a number of useful indexes.


