Supplement 6
============

(96) وروى الحسن بن موسى الخشّاب، عن غياث بن كلوب، عن إسحاق بن عمّار، عن
الصادق، عن آبائه عليهم السلام: أنَّ عليّاً عليه السلام كان يقول: ما من
أحد ابتلى وإن عظمت بلواه أحقّ بالدعاء من المعافى الّذي لا يؤمن البلاء.
(97) وروى عليّ بن مهزيار، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن الحرث بن محمد بن النعمان
الأحول صاحب الطاق، عن جميل بن صالح، عن أبي عبد الله الصادق، عن آبائه
عليهم السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلّى الله عليه وآله: من أحبَّ أن يكون
أكرم الناس فليتّق الله، ومن أحب أن يكون أتقى الناس فليتوكّل على الله.

(96) Al-Hasan bin Musa al-Khashab narrated from Ghiyath bin Kalub from
Ishaq bin Ammar that As-Sadiq (a) related on the authority of his
fathers that Imam Ali (a) used to say:

The afflicted people -no matter how intense their afflictions are- are
not worthier of praying to Allah than those who live peacefully but they
do not know when an affliction will befall them.125

(97) Ali bin Mahzyar narrated from al-Hussein bin Saeed from al-Harth
bin Mohammed bin Annuman al-Ahwal (Sahib ut-Taq) from Jamil bin Salih
that Abu Abdullah As-Sadiq (a) related on the authority of his fathers
that the Prophet (s) said: He who wants to be the most generous should
fear Allah. He who wants to be the most God-fearing should depend upon
Allah.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

125. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:399 H.5857, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 265 H.5, Tanbih ul-Khawattir; 2:166, Mekarim ul-Akhlaq; 217,
Oddat ud-Da'ee; 16, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 327, Bihar ul-Anwar; 93:380
H.2.

<p dir="rtl">
ومن أحب أن يكون أغنى الناس فليكن بما عند الله عزّ وجلّ أوثق منه بما في
يده. ثمّ قال صلّى الله عليه وآله: ألا انبّئكم بشرّ من هذا؟ قالوا: بلى يا
رسول الله. قال: من أبغض الناس وأبغضه الناس. ثمّ قال: ألا اُنبّئكم بشرٍّ
من هذا؟ قالوا: بلى يا رسول الله. قال: الذي لا يقيل عثرة، ولا يقبل معذرة،
ولا يغفر ذنباً. ثمّ قال: ألا انبّئكم بشرّ من هذا؟ قالوا: بلى يا رسول
الله.
</p>

He who wants to be the wealthiest of people should trust in what is in
Allah's hand more than what is in his own hand. May I inform of the
evilest people?

The attendants said: "Yes, you may, Allah's Messenger." He (s) said:

The evilest people are those who hate people and people hate them. May
I inform you of the people that are eviler than the previous? The
attendants said: "Yes, you may, Allah's Messenger." He (s) said:

The people that are eviler than the previous are those who do not
pardon others, do not accept any excuse, and do not forgive. May I
inform you of the people that are eviler than the previous? The
attendants said: "Yes, you may, Allah's Messenger." He (s) said:

قال: مَن لا يؤمن شرّه ولا يرجى خيره. إنَّ عيسى بن مريم عليه السلام مرَّ
في بني إسرائيل فقال: يا بني إسرائيل، لا تحدّثوا بالحكمة الجهّال
فتظلموها، ولا تمنعوها أهلها فتظلموهم، ولا تعينوا الظالم على ظلمه فيبطل
فضلكم. الاُمور ثلاثة: أمر بيّن لك رشده فاتّبعه، وأمر بيّن لك غيّه
فاجتنبه، وأمر اختلف فيه فردّه إلى الله عزّ وجلّ. (98) روى الحسن بن عليّ
بن فضّال، عن الحسن بن الجهم، عن الفضيل بن يسار، قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن
محمد عليهما السلام: ما ضعف بدن عمّا قويت عليه النيّة.

The people that are eviler than the previous are those whose favor is
not expected and whose evil is not secured.

Once, Jesus (a) orated before the Israelites. He said: O children of
Israel, do not speak words of wisdom before the ignorant so that you
will not wrong these words. Do not prevent the wise people from
receiving the wisdom; lest, you will wrong those people. Do not help the
unjust ones otherwise, your favors will be null. Matters must be one of
three: a clearly right matter that you should follow, a clearly wrong
matter that you should avoid, or a confused matter that you should
commend to Allah."126

(98) Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Faddhal narrated from al-Hasan bin al-Juhm
from al-Fudhayl bin Yessar that Ja'far bin Mohammed As-Sadiq (a) said:
If the intention is powerful (to do any matter), the body will not be
weak.127

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

126. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:400 H.5858, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 305 H.11, Me'aani al-Akhbar; 196 H.2, Tanbih ul-Khawattir;
1:222, Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 27, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 426, Ibn Abi al-Hadid's
Sharhu Nahj ul-Balagha; 19:216, Ghurar ul-Hikam wa Durar ul-Kelim; 89
H.1507, Bihar ul-Anwar; 71:138 H.2, 72:203 H.1, 73:177 H.20 and 77:126
H.30.

127. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:400 H.5859, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 27 H.6, Bihar ul-Anwar; 70:25 H.14.

(99) وروى الحسن بن فضّال، عن غالب بن عثمان، عن شعيب العقرقوفي، عن
الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام قال: مَن ملك نفسه إذا رغب وإذا رهب،
وإذا اشتهى وإذا غضب، فإذا رضي حرّم الله جسده على النّار.

(100) وسئل الصادق عليه السلام عن الزّاهد في الدنيا قال: الّذي يترك
حلالها مخافة حسابه، ويترك حرامها مخافة عذابه.
(101) وروى محمد بن سنان، عن عبد الله بن مسكان، عن أبي عبد الله الصادق
عليه السلام قال: إنّ أحقّ النّاس بأن يتمنّى للناس الغنى البخلاء لأنّ
الناس إذا استغنوا كفّوا عن أموالهم.,

(99) Al-Hasan bin Faddhal narrated from Ghalib bin Othman from Shuaib
al-Aqarqoufi that Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said:

As for those who possess themselves in situations of desire, fear,
appetite, and rage until they feel pleased, Allah will prevent the fire
(of Hell) from consuming their bodies.128

(100) As he was asked about the abstinent in this world, Imam As-Sadiq
(a) answered: The true abstinent is he who neglects the legal matters
out of fear of the judgment (of it) and neglects the illegal matters out
of fear of the torture (of it).

(101) Mohammed bin Sinan narrated from Abdullah bin Meskan that Abu
Abdullah As-Sadiq (a) said:

The misers should be the worthiest of hoping for richness to people,
because people will not ask from them if they become rich.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

128. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:400 H.5859, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 270 H.6, Thawab ul-A'maal; 159, al-Qummi's Tafsir; 2:277, Jami
ul-Akhbar; 180, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 380, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 247-307,
Bihar ul-Anwar; 71:395 H.7.

وإنَّ أحقّ النّاس بأن يتمنّى للناس الصلاح أهل العيوب، لأن النّاس إذا
صلحوا كفّوا عن تتبّع عيوبهم، وأنَّ أحقّ الناس بأن يتمنّى للنّاس الحلم
أهل السفه الّذين يحتاجون أن يعفى عن سفههم. فأصبح أهل البخل يتمنّون فقر
النّاس، أصبح أهل العيوب يتمنّون معايب الناس وأصبح أهل السفه يتمنّون سفه
النّاس، وفي الفقر الحاجة إلى البخيل، وفي الفساد طلب عورة أهل العيوب، وفي
السّفه المكافاة بالذنوب.
(102) وروي عن أبي هاشم الجعفري أنّه قال: أصابتني ضيقة شديدة فصرت إلى
أبي الحسن عليّ بن محمد فاستأذنت عليه فأذن لي، فلّما جلست قال: يا أبا
هاشم، أي نِعم الله عليك تريد أن تؤدّي شكرها؟ قال أبو هاشم: فوجمت فلم أدر
ما أقول له.

The faulty people should be the worthiest of hoping for perfection to
people, because people will not inspect their defects when they are
perfect. The foolish should be the worthiest of hoping for clemency to
people, because they need for being treated clemently. Unfortunately,
the misers, now, hope for poverty to people, the faulty hope for defects
to people, and the foolish hope for foolishness to people. In fact,
poverty requires stinginess, faultiness requires inspecting people's
defects, and foolishness requires the commitment of sins.129

(102) Abu Hashim al-Ja'fari related: I went to Abu al-Hasan Ali bin
Mohammed (Imam al-Jawad) (a) after I had been inflicted by harsh
poverty. When he permitted me and I sat before him, he (a) said: "O Abu
Hashim, which one of Allah's graces do you want to thank?" I could say
no single word after I heard this statement.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
129. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:400 H.5862, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 3870 H.2, al-Khissal; 152 H.188, Tanbih ul-Khawattir; 2:149,
Bihar ul-Anwar; 73:300 H.5 and 78:91 H.3.

فابتدأني عليه السلام فقال: إنّ الله عزّ وجلّ رزقك الإيمان فحرّم به بدنك
على النّار ورزقك العافية فأعانك على الطاعة، ورزقك القنوع فصانك عن
التبذّل. يا أبا هاشم، إنّما ابتدأتك بهذا لأنّي ظننت أنّك تريد أن تشكو لي
مَن فعل بك هذا، قد أمرت لك بمائة دينار فخذها. (103) وروى محمد بن سنان،
عن طلحة بن زيد قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله الصادق عليه السلام يقول: العامل
على غير بصيرة كالسائر على غير الطريق فلا تزيده سرعة السير من الطريق إلاّ
بُعداً.
(104) وقال الصادق عليه السلام: النوم راحة للجسد، والنطق راحة للرّوح،
والسكوت راحة للعقل.

He (a) then added: "Allah, Powerful and Majestic is He, has bestowed
upon you with faith due to which He will prevent your body from being in
Hell, bestowed upon you with good health to help you obey Him, and
bestowed upon you with satisfaction to protect you from degradation. O
Abu Hashim, I have said this to you initially because I understood that
you would complain to me about your current poverty; hence, I will give
you one hundred dinars."130

(103) Mohammed bin Sinan narrated from Talha bin Zaid that Abu Abdullah
as-Sadiq (a) said: He who acts indeliberately is as same as him who
takes a wrong way; the hastier he is the remoter from his purpose
be.131

(104) Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: Sleep is the rest of the body, speaking
is the rest of the soul, and silence is the rest of the mind.132

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
130. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:401 H.5863, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 412 H.11, Bihar ul-Anwar; 5:129 H.7.
131. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:401 H.5864.
132. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:402 H.5865.

(105) وروى محمد بن سنان، عن المفضّل بن عمر قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن محمد
عليهما السلام: من لم يكن له واعظٌ من قلبه وزاجر من نفسه، ولم يكن له قرين
مرشد استمكن عدوّه من عنقه.

(106) وروى جعفر بن محمد بن مالك الفزاريّ الكوفيّ قال: حدّثنا جعفر بن
محمد بن سهل، عن سعيد بن محمد، عن مسعدة قال: قال لي أبو الحسن موسى بن
جعفر عليهما السلام: إنَّ عيال الرجل اُسراؤه، فمن أنعم الله عليه نعمة
فليوسّع على اُسرائه، فإن لم يفعل أوشك أن تزول تلك النعمة.

(107) وروى صفوان بن يحيى، عن أبي الصباح الكناني قال: قلت للصادق جعفر بن
محمّد عليهما السلام: أخبرني عن هذا القول قول من هو؟

(105) Mohammed bin Sinan narrated from Al-Mufaddhal bin Omar that
Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said: As for anyone who lacks
heart-preaching, self-reproving, and a guide friend, his enemy will
surely control him.133

(106) Ja'far bin Mohammed bin Malik al-Fazari al-Kufi (of Kufa)
narrated from Ja'far bin Mohammed bin Sahl from Saeed bin Mohammed from
Mas'ada that Abu al-Hasan Musa bin Ja'far (Imam al-Kadhim) said to
him:

Man's dependants are his prisoners. Anyone upon whom Allah confers with
graces should be generous towards his prisoners. If he does not, he will
soon be deprived of these graces.134

(107) Safwan bin Yahya narrated that Abu as-Sabah al-Kinani said: I
asked Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) to name the sayer of the
following preach:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

133. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:402 H.5866.

134. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:402 H.5867.

<p dir="rtl">
"أسأل الله الايمان والتقوى، وأعوذ بالله من شر عاقبة الاُمور، إنَّ أشرف
الحديث ذكر الله تعالى، ورأس الحكمة طاعته، وأصدق القول وابلغ الموعظة
وأحسن القصص كتاب الله. وأوثق العرى الإيمان بالله وخير الملل ملّة إبراهيم
عليه السلام، وأحسن السنن سنّة الأنبياء، وأحسن الهدى هدى محمّد، وخير
الزَّاد التقوى، وخير العلم ما نفع، وخير الهدى ما اُتّبع، وخير الغنى غنى
النفس، وخير ما اُلقي في القلب اليقين، وزينة الحديث الصدق، وزينة العلم
الإحسان، وأشرف الموت قتل الشهادة، وخير الاُمور خيرها عاقبة، وما قلَّ
وكفى خيرٌ ممّا كثر وألهى، والشقيُّ من شقي في بطن اُمّه.
</p>

"I implore to Allah to grant me faith and piety. I seek His guard
against the bad results. The best saying is the mention of Allah,
Exalted is He. The head of wisdom is the obedience to Him. The most
truthful, the most effective preach, and the best storyteller is the
Book of Allah. The firmest handle is the believing in Allah. The best
creed is the creed of Abraham (a). The best norm is the norm of the
prophets. The best guidance is the guidance of Mohammed (s). The best
supplies is God-fearing. The best knowledge is the most advantageous.
The best guidance is the pursued guidance.

The best richness is the self-sufficiency. The best thing that is
thrown in the heart is the conviction. The embellishment of speaking is
truthfulness. The embellishment of knowledge is benevolence. The best
death is martyrdom. The best matters are these whose results are good.
The sufficient fewness is better than the diverting muchness. The true
unhappy is that who was unhappy since he was in his mother's womb.

<p dir="rtl">
والسعيد من وعظ بغيره، وأكيس الكيس التقي، وأحمق الحمق الفجور، وشرّ
الروايا روايا الكذب. وشرّ الاُمور محدثاتها، وشرّ العمى عمى القلب. وشرّ
الندامة ندامة يوم القيامة، وأعظم المخطئين عند الله عزّ وجلّ لسان
الكذَّاب، وشرّ الكسب كسب الرِّبا. وشرّ المآكل أكل مال اليتيم ظلماً،
وأحسن زينة الرَّجل السكينة مع الإيمان، ومن تتبّع المَشمَعة يُشَمّع الله
به، ومن يعرف البلاء يصبر عليه، ومن لا يعرفه ينكره، والرَّيب كفر، ومن
يستكبر يضعه الله، ومن يطع الشيطان يعص الله، ومن يعص الله يعذِّبه الله،
ومن يشكره يزده الله.
</p>

The true happy is he who learns lessons from others. The wittiest
people are the God-fearing. The most foolish thing is libertinism. The
evilest intentions are the false intentions. The evilest matters135 are
the most recently invented ones. The worst blindness is the heart
blindness. The worst regret is the regret on the Day of Resurrection.
The worst sinful thing in the sight of Allah is the tongue of the liars.
The worst gain is the gain of usury. The worst consuming is the wrong
consuming of the orphan's wealth. The best embellishment of a man is
tranquility with faith.

As for those who pursue mocking at people, Allah will make them the
subject of people's mocking. He who identifies the misfortunes136 will
stand them. Likewise, those who do not identify the misfortunes will not
stand them. Suspect is disbelief. The arrogant will be humiliated by
Allah. He who complies with the Shaitan will disobey Allah, and Allah
will torment him who disobeys Him. Allah, likewise, will increase (His
graces to) those who thank Him.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
135. 'Matters', in this regard, stands for every new heresy that is
added to the religion.

136. To identify a misfortune means to believe in the compensation that
will be gained due to suffering it or to know that the source of
misfortunes is God the Exalted Who offers only the good.

<p dir="rtl">
ومن يصبر على الرزَّيّة يغنيه الله، ومن يتوكّل على الله فحسبه الله، ومن
يتوكّل على الله يؤجره الله، لا تسخطوا الله برضا أحد من خلقه، ولا
تتقرَّبوا إلى أحد من الخلق بتباعد من الله، فإنَّ الله عزَّ وجلَّ ليس
بينه وبين أحد من الخلق شيءٌ فيعطيه به خيراً أو يصرف به عنه سوءاً إلاّ
بطاعته وابتغاء مرضاته، إنَّ طاعة الله تبارك وتعالى نجاح كلِّ خير يبتغى
ونجاة من كلِّ شرٍّ يتّقى. وإنَّ الله عزَّ وجلَّ يعصم من أطاعه، ولا يعتصم
منه من عصاه، ولا يجد الهارب من الله مهرباً فإنَّ أمر الله تعالى ذكره
نازل باذلاله ولو كره الخلائق، وكلّما هو آت قريب. ما شاء الله كان، وما لم
يشأ لم يكن.
</p>

Allah will help him who behaves steadfastly against misfortunes. Allah
is Sufficient for the needs of whoever trusts in Him. Allah will reward
them who depend upon Him. Do not enrage Allah for the purpose of seeking
the favors of any of His creatures. Do not curry favors with anybody
through means that take you away from Allah.

Allah accepts no means other than the obedience to Him and the seeking
of His satisfaction through which He confers a good matter or saves from
an evil. The obedience to Allah, Blessed and Exalted is He, is the
prosperity of all of the expected welfares and the salvation from all of
the dangerous evils. Allah will surely guard whoever obeys Him. As for
those who disobey Allah, they will never find any shelter against Him
nor can any fugitive be saved against Him since the act of Him will
befall and humiliate that fugitive whether the creatures are pleased or
not. Everything that will be inevitably falling is imminent. Only will
that which Allah wants occur, and that which He does not want will never
occur.

<p dir="rtl">
تعاونوا على البرِّ والتقوى ولا تعانوا على الإثم والعدوان واتّقوا الله
إنّ الله شديد العقاب". فقال الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: هذا قول
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله.
</p>

(108) وقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: قال الله جلّ جلاله: أيّما عبد
أطاعني لم أكله إلى غيري، وأيّما عبد عصاني وكلته الى نفسه ثمَّ لم اُبال
في أيّ واد هلك.

(109) وروى محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عيسى الفرّاء، عن عبد الله بن أبي يعفور
قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: قال أبو جعفر الباقر عليه
السلام: من كان ظاهره أرجح من باطنه خفّ ميزانه.

Help each other in fields of piety and God-fearing, not sin and
aggression, and fear Allah, for He is tense in punishment." Ja'far bin
Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said: This saying is the Prophet's.137

(108) The Prophet (s) said: Allah, Exalted is He, says: For the
servants who obey Me, I will not commend their affairs to anyone other
than Me. For those who disobey Me, I will commend their affair to
themselves and I will not care where they will perish.138

(109) Mohammed bin Abi Umair narrated from Easa al-Ferra from Abdullah
bin Abi Yafur from Abu Abdullah (a) that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (a) said:
As for those whose appearances are preferable to their realities, their
good deeds will be light139 (on the scale of the Day of
Resurrection).140

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

137. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:402 H.5868.

138. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:403 H.5869, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 489 H.2, Jami' ul-Akhbar; 100, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 75, Rawdhat
ul-Wa'idheen; 420, Bihar ul-Anwar; 71:178 H.22.

139. This is an indication to God's saying: Those whose good deeds will
weigh heavier (on the scale) will live a pleasant life, but those whose
good deeds will be lighter (on the scale) will have hawiyah as their
dwelling. Would that you knew what hawiyah is. It is a burning Fire.
(101:8-11).

140. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:404 H.5870, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 492 H.8, Irshad ul-Quloub; 188, Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 294, Mishkat
ul-Anwar; 321, Bihar ul-Anwar; 71:365 H.9, 78:173 H.5 and 78:188 H.38.

(110) وقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم: قال الله جلّ جلاله: إذا
عصاني من خلقي من يعرفني سلّطت عليه من خلقي من لا يعرفني.

(111) وروى ابن أبي عمير، عن إسحاق بن عمّار قال: قال الصادق عليه السلام:
يا إسحاق صانع المنافق بلسانك، واخلص ودّك للمؤمن، وإن جالسك يهودي فاحسن
مجالسته.

(112) وروى المفضّل بن عمر، عن الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام، عن
أبيه، عن جدّه عليهم السلام قال: قيل للحسين بن عليّ عليه السلام: كيف
أصبحت يا بن رسول الله؟ قال: أصبحت ولي ربّ فوقي والنار أمامي، والموت
يطلبني والحساب محدّق بي، وأنا مرتهن بعملي.

(110) The Prophet (s) said: Allah, Exalted is He, says: If anyone of my
creatures, who acknowledges Me, disobeys Me, I will subjugate him to the
absolute control of one of my creatures that does not acknowledge
Me.141

(111) Ibn Abi Umair narrated from Ishaq bin Ammar that Imam as-Sadiq
(a) said to him: O Ishaq, use kind words with the hypocrite, love the
faithful believer sincerely, and regard your association with (even) the
Jew who sits with you.142

(112) Al-Mufaddhal bin Omar narrated that Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq
(a) related the following on the authority of his fathers: Al-Hussein
bin Ali was asked, "How is your morning, son of Allah's Messenger?" He
answered: I begin this day while my Lord is higher than I am, fire (of
Hell) is in front of me, death is pursuing me, the Judgment is waylaying
me, and I am subject to my deeds.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
141. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:404 H.5871, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 229 H.12, Irshad ul-Quloub; 83, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 419,
Bihar ul-Anwar; 73:343 H.27 and 73:347 H.35.

142. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:404 H.5872, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 628 H.8, Alikhtisas; 230, A'lam ud-Din; 301, Az-Zuhd; 22,
Mishkat ul-Anwar; 82, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 371, Bihar ul-Anwar; 72:152
H.11, 72:161 H.22, 78:172 H.5, and 78:188 H.42.


