Supplement 7
============

لا آخذ ما أحبّ ولا أدفع ما أكره، والاُمور بيد غيري، فإن شاء عذّبني وإن
شاء عفا عنّي، فأيّ فقير أفقر مني. (113) وروى المفضّل، عن الصادق عليه
السلام إنّه قال: وقع بين سلمان الفارسي رحمة الله عليه وبين رجل خصومة
فقال الرجل لسلمان: من أنت وما أنت؟ فقال سلمان: أما أوّلي وأوّلك فنطفة
قذرة، وأما آخري وآخرك فجيفة منتنة، فإذا كان يوم القيامة ونصبت الموازين
فمن ثقلت موازينه فهو الكريم، ومن خفّت موازينه فهو اللّئيم. (114) قال
المفضّل: وسمعت الصادق عليه السلام يقول:

I cannot gain that which I like and I cannot guard myself against that
which I dislike. After all, all my affairs are in the hand of the One
Who is other than me. He may torment me and may forgive me if He wills.
Is there anyone who is poorer than I am, then?143

(113) Al-Mufaddhal narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (a) related: A quarrel
broke out between Salman al-Farsi (r) and a man who addressed to him:
"Who are you and what are you?"

Salman answered: The first of you and me is a dirty sperm. The last of
you and me is a stinking carrion. On the Day of Resurrection, the scales
will be maintained. Those whose good deeds will weigh heavier on the
scale will be the true noble men, but those whose good deeds will be
lighter on the scale, will be the true inglorious."144

(114) Al-Mufaddhal said: I heard Imam as-Sadiq (a) saying:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
143. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:404 H.5873, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 609 H.3, al-Odad ul-Qawiyya; 35, Jami' ul-Akhbar; 90, Bihar
ul-Anwar; 76:415 H.2 and 78:113 H.7.

144. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:404 H.5874, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 609 H.7, Ilal ash-Sharaayi'; 2755 H.3, Me'aani al-Akhbar; 207
H.1, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 412, Bihar ul-Anwar; 22:355 H.1, 70:291 H.28,
and 73:211 H.24.

<p dir="rtl">
بليّة الناس علينا عظيمة، إن دعوناهم لم يجيبونا، وإن تركناهم لم يهتدوا
بغيرنا.
</p>

(115) وقال أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام: جمع الخير كلّه في ثلاث خصال:
النظر والسكوت والكلام. فكلّ نظر ليس فيه اعتبار فهو السهو، وكلّ كلام ليس
فيه ذكر فهو لهو، وكلّ سكوت ليس فيه فكرة فهو غفلة. فطوبى لمن كان نظره
عبراً، وسكوته فكراً، وكلامه ذكراً، وبكى على خطيئته، وأمن الناس شرّه.
(116) وقال الصادق عليه السلام: أوحى الله عزّ وجلّ إلى آدم: يا آدم إني
أجمع لك الخير كلّه في أربع كلمات واحدة لي وواحدة لك، وواحدة فيما بيني
وبينك، وواحدة فيما بينك وبين النّاس.

The ordeal of people with regard to us is really great: if we call
them, they do not respond, and if we leave them, they will not be guided
by anyone else."145

(115) Amir ul-Mu'minin (a) said: The good, as a whole, is gathered in
three things: consideration, silence, and wording. Every consideration
that lacks learning lessons is inattention, every silence that lacks
thinking is inadvertence, and every wording that lacks the mention of
Allah is nonsense. Blessed are those whose consideration teaches them
lessons, whose silence causes them to think, whose wording is mention of
Allah, who weep for their sins, and save people from their evil.146

(116) Imam as-Sadiq (a) said that Allah, Powerful and Majestic is He,
revealed to Adam: O Adam, I will gather the good, as a whole, in four
words: one is for Me, one is for you, one is between you and Me, and one
is between people and you.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
145. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:405 H.5875, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 609 H.7, Alihtijaj; 331, Kenz ul-Fawa'id; 2:37, Bihar
ul-Anwar; 266:253 H.25 and 46:288 H.11.

146. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:405 H.5876, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 27 H.2 and 109 H.6, al-Khissal; 98 H.47, Me'aani al-Akhbar;
344 H.1, Thawab ul-A'maal; 177, al-Mahaasin; 5 H.10, al-Irshad; 297,
Alikhtisas; 231, Tanbih ul-Khawattir; 2:158, Kenz ul-Fawa'id; 2:83,
Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 215, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 37, 55, and 176. Keshf ul-Yaqin;
181, Ma'dan ul-Jawhar; 34, Bihar ul-Anwar; 71:275 H.2 and 77:408 H.37.

<p dir="rtl">
فأمّا التي لي: فتعبّدني لا تشرك بي شيئاً، وأمّا الّتي لك: فأجازيك بعملك
أحوج ما تكون إليه. وأمّا الّتي فيما بيني وبينك: فعليك الدعاء وعليَّ
الإجابة، وأمّا الّتي فيما بينك وبين النّاس فترضى للنّاس ما ترضى لنفسك.
</p>

(117) وقال الصّادق عليه السلام: العافّية نعمة خفية، إذا وجدت نسيت وإذا
فقدت ذكرت.
(118) وروى السكوني عن جعفر بن محمد عن أبيه عن آبائه قال: قال رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وآله: كلمتان غريبتان فاحتملوها؛ كلمة حكمة من سفيه
فاقبلوها، وكلمة سفه من حكيم فاغفروها.

The word that is for Me is that you should worship only Me without
associating anything (or anyone) with Me. The word that is for you is
that I will reward you in your most critical need (for the compensation
of your acts). The word that is between you and Me is that you should
supplicate to Me and I will answer. The word that is between people and
you is that you should accept for yourself whatever you accept for
people.147 (117) Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: Good health is a secret
favor-it is forgotten if it is present, and missed if it is absent.148

(118) As-Sakuni narrated that Ja'far bin Mohammed (a) related on the
authority of his fathers that the Prophet (s) said: Two words are
strange: a word of wisdom that is uttered by a foolish. You should
accept it. The other is a foolish word that is uttered by a wise man.
You should pardon it.149

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
147. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:405 H.5877, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 608 H.1, al-Khissal; 243 H.98, Alikhtisas; 239, Fiqh ur-Ridha;
353, Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Sharhu Nahj ul-Balagha; 18:157, Ar-Rawandi's
Qassas ul-Anbiyaa; 69 H.50, Bihar ul-Anwar; 11:215 H.1 and 75:26 H.8.

148. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:405 H.5878, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 229 H.13, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 472, Mekarim ul-Akhlaq; 327,
Bihar ul-Anwar; 78:243 H.108 and 81:172 H.5.

149. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:405 H.5879, al-Khissal; 33
H.3, Me'aani al-Akhbar; 367 H.1, al-Mahaasin; 230 H.170, Tanbih
ul-Khawattir; 2:75, Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 59, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 134, Bihar
ul-Anwar; 2:42 H.7 and 77:119 H.12.

(119) وروى عمر بن شمر، عن جابر بن يزيد الجعفي، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن عليّ
الباقر، عن أبيه، عن جدّه عليهم السلام أنّ أمير المؤمنين سلام الله عليه
قال في خطبة خطبها بعد موت النبيّ صلى الله عليه وآله:
أيّها النّاس، إنه لا شرف أعلى من الإسلام، ولا كرم أعلى من التقوى، ولا
معقل أحرز من الورع، ولا شفيع أنجح من التوبة، ولا كنز أنفع من العلم، ولا
عزّ أرفع من الحلم، ولا حسب أبلغ من الأدب، ولا نصب أوضع من الغضب، ولا
جمال أزين من العقل، ولا سوءة أسوء من الكذب، ولا حافظ أحفظ من الصمت، ولا
لباس أجمل من العافية، ولا غائب أقرب من الموت.

(119) Omar bin Shemr narrated from Jabir bin Yazid al-Ju'fi that Abu
Ja'far Mohammed bin Ali al-Baqir (a) related on the authority of his
fathers that Amir ul-Mu'minin (a) delivered a sermon after the death of
the Prophet (s) in which he said:

O people, there is no honor higher than Islam, no generosity more
glorious than God-fearing, no fortress more protective than piety, no
interceder more successful than repentance, no treasure more beneficial
than knowledge, no power loftier than clemency, no ancestry nobler than
good manners, no fatigue humbler than rage, no beauty more handsome than
intelligence, no defect worse than untruth, no keeper more preserving
than silence, no dress more good-looking than good health, and no absent
more imminent than death.

( 171 ) أيّها الناس، إنّه من مشى على وجه الأرض فإنه يصير الى بطنها.
والليل والنهار مسرعان في هدم الأعمار، ولكلّ ذي رمق قوّة، ولكلّ حبّة أكلٌ
وأنت قوت الموت، وإن من عرف الأيام لن يغفل عن الاستعداد، لن ينجو عن الموت
غنيٌّ بماله، ولا فقير لإقلاله. أيها الناس، مَن خاف ربّه كفّ ظلمه، ومن لم
يرع في كلامه أظهر هجره، ومن لم يعرف الخير من الشرّ فهو بمنزلة البهيم، ما
أصغر المصيبة مع عظم الفاقة غد! وهيهات هيهات! وما تناكرتم إلاّ لما فيكم
من المعاصي والذنوب. فما أقرب الراحة من التعب، والبؤس من النعيم.

O people, you should know that everyone who walks on the surface of
this earth will eventually go beneath it. Night and day are expediting
in ruining the ages. Every breath of life has a provision and every seed
has an eater. You are the food of death. He who realizes the
(vicissitudes of) time truly will not bypass readiness. Neither the
wealth of the rich nor will the poverty of the poor save them from
death.

O people, he who fears his Lord will stop his wrongdoings. Anyone who
does not care for his wording will cause his raving to appear. He who
cannot distinguish good from evil is as same as an animal. The worldly
misfortunes are so scanty if compared with the huge neediness of
tomorrow. Your enmity is surely the reason of your much commitment of
sins and many acts of disobedience to Allah. Rest is very close to
fatigue, and misery is very close to bliss.

وما شرّ بشرّ بعده الجنّة، وما خير بخير بعده النّار، وكلّ نعيم دون
الجنّة محقور، وكلّ بلاء دون النار عافية.
(120) وفي رواية إسماعيل بن مسلم قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:
ثلاث أخافهن على اُمّتي من بعدي: الضّلالة بعد الهدى، ومضلاّت الفتن، وشهوة
البطن والفرج.

(121) ومرّ رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله بقوم يتشائلون حجراً فقال: ما
هذا وما يدعوكم إليه؟ قالوا: لنعرف أشدّنا وأقوانا. قال: أفلا أدلّكم على
أشدّكم وأقواكم؟
قالوا: بلى يا رسول الله.

Any evil that is followed by Paradise is not a true evil, and any
welfare that is followed by Hell is not a true welfare. Every comfort
other than Paradise is valueless, and every misfortune other than Hell
is a good health.150 (120) Ismaeel bin Muslim related that the Prophet
(s) said: For my umma, I am only afraid of three things-deviation after
the pursuance of the right guidance, the misleading seditions, and the
food and the sexual appetites.151

(121) One day, the Prophet (s) saw some people trying to roll a rock as
a competition of power. He (s) asked them about that game. They answered
that it was a competition to identify the most powerful.

He asked: "May I identify the most powerful among you?" "Yes, you may,
Allah's Messenger," they answered.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
150. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:407 H.5880, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 320 H.8, At-Tawhid; 72 H.27, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen; 489, Ghurar
ul-Hikam; 159 H.3046, Bihar ul-Anwar; 77:382.

151. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:407 H.5881, al-Mufid's
al-Amali; 111 H.1, Sahifat ur-Ridha; 44 H.166, Bihar ul-Anwar; 10:168
H.15, 22:451 H.7, 71:269 H.5, 71:272 H.16 and 72:196 H.22.

<p dir="rtl">
قال: أشدّكم وأقواكم الّذي إذا رضي لم يدخله رضاه في إثم ولا باطل، وإذا
سخط لم يخرجه سخطه من قول الحقّ، وإذا ملك لم يتعاط ما ليس له. وفي خبر
آخر: إذا لم يتعاط ما ليس له بحقّ.
</p>

(122) روى الحسن بن محبوب، عن أبي ولاّد الحنّاط قال: سألت أبا عبد الله
الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام عن قول الله عزّ وجلّ:
(وَبِالْوَالِدِيْنِ إحْسَاناً) ما هذا الإحسان؟ فقال: الإحسان أن تحسن
صحبتهما، وأن لا يكلّفا أن يسألاك عن شيئاً ممّا يحتاجان إليه إن كانا
مستغنين، إنّ الله عزّ وجلّ يقول: (لَنْ تَنَالُوا الْبِرَّ حَتّى
تُنْفِقُوا مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ).

He (s) said: The most powerful of you are those whose satisfaction does
not lead them to the commitment of sins or the wrong, whose displeasure
does not take them out of the right, and whose ability does not lead
them to seize what is not theirs.152 (Or "what is not rightful for them
to seize" according to other ways of narration)153

(122) Al-Hasan bin Mahboub narrated that Abu Wallad al-Hennat said: I
asked Abu Abdullah Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) about the sort of
kindness that is mentioned in Allah's saying, "You must be kind to your
parents." (17:23)

He answered: The kindness to the parents (that is intended in the
previous Quranic text) is to treat them properly and not let them ask
you to settle any of their needs even if they can cover all of their
needs sufficiently. Allah says: "You can never have extended virtue and
righteousness unless you spend part of what you dearly love for the
cause of Allah." (3:92)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
152. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:407 H.5882, Me'aani
al-Akhbar; 366 H.1, Tanbih ul-Khawattir; 2:76, Rawdhat ul-Wa'idheen;
379, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 32 and 218, Bihar ul-Anwar; 75:28 H.16.

153. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:407 H.5882, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 2 H.3, Bihar ul-Anwar; 67:298, 67:300 H.28, 71:358 H.4 & 5,
75:28 H.18.

ثمّ قال عليه السلام: (إِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِنْدَكَ الكِبَرَ أحَدُهُمَا
أَوْ كِلاَهُمَا فَلاَ تَقُلْ لَهُمَا اُفّ - إن أضجراك - وَلاَ
تَنْهَرْهُمَا - إن ضرباك - وَقُلْ لَهُمَا قَوْلاً كَرِيماً - والقول
الكريم أن تقول لهم: غفر الله لكما فذاك منك قول كريم - وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا
جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِنَ الرَّحْمَةِ،) وهو أن لا تملأ عينيك من النظر
إليهما. وتنظر إليهما برحمة ورأفة، وأن لا ترفع صوتك فوق أصواتهما، ولا يدك
فوق أيديهما، ولا تتقدّم قدامهما.
(123) روى الحسن بن محبوب، عن مالك بن عطيّة، عن عابد الأحمسي، عن أبي
حمزة الثّمالي قال: قال زين العابدين عليّ بن الحسين عليهم السلام:

Regarding Allah's saying, "If either or both of your parents should
become advanced in age, do not express to them words which show your
slightest disappointment," this includes the situations when they weary
you. "Never yell at them," means even if they beat you. "But always
speak to them with kindness." The kind speaking to them is to say: Allah
may forgive you both. "Be humble and merciful towards them," means that
you should never look at them sharply. You should look at them with the
looks of mercy and compassion. You should never raise your voice above
theirs, you should not raise your hand above theirs, and you should not
precede them.154

(123) Al-Hasan bin Mahboub narrated from Malik bin Atiyya from Aabid
al-Ahmasi from Abu Hamza at-Themali that Zayn ul-Aabidin Ali bin
al-Hussein (a) said:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
154. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:407 H.5883, al-Ayyashi's
Tafsir; 2:285 H.39, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 163, Bihar ul-Anwar; 74:39, H.3
74:97 H.79.

ألا إنّ أحبّكم إلى الله عزّ وجلّ أحسنكم عملاً، وإنَّ أعظمكم عند الله
حظّاً أعظمكم فيما عند الله رغبة، وإنَّ أنجى النّاس من عذاب الله أشدّهم
لله خشية، وإنَّ أقربكم إلى الله أوسعكم خلقاً، وإن أرضاكم عند الله أسبغكم
على عياله، وإن أكرمكم عند الله أتقاكم. (124) روى الحسن بن محبوب، عن سعد
بن أبي خلف، عن أبي الحسن موسى بن جعفر عليهما السلام انّه قال لبعض ولده:
يا بُنيّ، إيّاك أن يراك الله عزّ وجلّ في معصية نهاك عنها، وإيّاك أن
يفقدك الله تعالى عند طاعة أمرك بها، وعليك بالجدّ، ولا تخرجنّ نفسك عن
التقصير من عبادة الله، فإنَّ الله عزّ وجلّ لا يعبد حقّ عبادته.

Certainly, the most favorable of you to Allah are the best good-doers,
the gainers of the best rewards of Allah are the most desirous for
gaining what He has in possession, the safest from Allah's punishment
are the most fearful of Him, the closest to Allah are the best
well-mannered, the most pleased in the sight of Allah are the most
generous towards the dependants, and the best of you in the sight of
Allah are the most God-fearing.155 (124) Al-Hasan bin Mahboub narrated
from Sa'd bin Abi Khalaf that Abu al-Hasan Musa bin Ja'far (al-Kadhim)
(a) said to one of his sons: O son, let not Allah see you committing an
act of disobedience against which He warned you, and let Him not miss
you in an act of obedience to Him of which He ordered you. Keep serious
and do not convince yourself that you are worshipping and obeying Allah
perfectly, because no one can achieve perfection in the fields of
worshipping Allah.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
155. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:407 H.5884, al-Ja'fariyat;
238, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 74, A'lam ud-Din; 90 & 222, Bihar ul-Anwar;
69:395 H.79 and 78:319 H.3.

<p dir="rtl">
وإيّاك والمزاح فإنّه يذهب بنور إيمانك ويستخفّ بمروّتك، وإيّاك والكسل
والضجر فإنّهما يمنعاك حظّك من الدّنيا والآخرة.
</p>

(125) روى عليّ بن الحكم عن هشام بن سالم، عن الصادق عليه السلام قال:
الدّنيا طالبة ومطلوبة، فمن طلب الدّنيا طلبه الموت حتى يخرجه منها، ومن
طلب الآخرة طلبته الدنيا، حتىّ توفيه رزقه.

(126) وقال الصادق عليه السلام: حسب المؤمن من الله نصرة أن يرى عدوّه
يعمل بمعاصي الله عزّ وجلّ.
(127) وقال نبيّ الله صلّى الله عليه وآله: بادروا إلى رياض الجنّة.

Beware of joking because it extinguishes the illumination of your faith
and disgraces your personality. Beware of indolence and laziness because
they both prevent you from receiving your shares of the pleasures of
this world and the world to come.156 (125) Ali bin al-Hakam narrated
from Husham bin Salem that Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said:

This world is seeking and is sought. He who seeks it will be sought by
death, which will take him out of it. He who seeks the world to come
will be sought by this world to give him his (decided) shares of
sustenance.157

(126) Imam as-Sadiq (a) said: To see the enemy plunge in the acts of
disobedience to Allah is a sufficient victory that Allah bestows upon a
believer.158

(127) The Prophet (s) said: Take the initiative to the gardens of
Paradise.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

156. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:408 H.5885, Bihar ul-Anwar;
69:395 H.79 and 78:319 H.3.

157. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:409 H.5886.

158. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:409 H.5887, Bihar ul-Anwar;
70:386 H.47.

قالوا: يا رسول الله، وما رياض الجنّة؟ قال: حلق الذكر. (128) وروى محمد
بن أحمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن آدم، عن أبيه، عن أبي الحسن الرضا، عن آبائه
عليهم السلام، عن عليّ عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم لعليّ: يا عليّ، لا تشاورنّ جباناً فإنّه يضيق عليك المخرج، ولا
تشاورنّ بخيلاً فإنّه يقصر بك عن غايتك، ولا تشاورنّ حريصاً فإنّه يزيّن لك
شرّها. واعلم أنَّ الجبن والبخل والحرص غريزة يجمعها سوءُ الظّن. (129) روى
الحسن بن محبوب، عن الهيثم بن واقد قال: سمعت الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما
السلام يقول:

'What are the gardens of Paradise, O Allah's Messenger?' some asked. He
(s) answered: The gardens of Paradise are the shaving of the pubes.159
(128) Mohammed bin Ahmed bin Yahya narrated from Mohammed bin Adam from
His father that Abu al-Hasan ar-Ridha (a) related on the authority of
his fathers that the Prophet (s) said to Ali (a):

O Ali, do not consult the coward, for he shows your exits as narrow. Do
not consult the stingy, for he frustrates you against your goal. Do not
consult the acquisitive, for he garnishes the evils for you. You should
know that cowardice, stinginess, and acquisitiveness are instincts that
are contained by mistrust.160

(129) Al-Hasan bin Mahboub narrated from al-Haitham bin Waqid that
Ja'far bin Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
159. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:409 H.5888, As-Saduq's
al-Amali; 38 H.3 & 366 H.13, al-Khissal; 27 H.96, Sifat ush-Shi'a; H.58,
Bihar ul-Anwar; 1:202 H.12 and 93:155 H.20.

160. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:409 H.5889, al-Khissal; 101
H.57, Ilal ush-Sharayi; 5559 H.1, Bihar ul-Anwar; 70:386 H.47.

<p dir="rtl">
من أخرجه الله عزّ وجلّ من ذلّ المعاصي إلى عزّة التقوى أغناه الله بلا
مال، وأعزّه بلا عشيرة، وآنسه بلا أنيس، ومن خاف الله عزّ وجلّ أخاف الله
منه كلّ شيء، ومن لم يخف الله عزّ وجلّ أخافه الله من كلّ شيء، ومن رضي من
الله عزّ وجلّ باليسير من الرّزق رضي الله عنه باليسير من العمل، ومن لم
يستح من طلب المعاش خفّت مئونته ونعم أهله، ومن زهد في الدنيا أثبت الله
الحكمة في قلبه، وأنطق بها لسانه، وبصّره عيوب الدنيا داءها ودواءها،
وأخرجه من الدنيا سالماً إلى دار السلام.
</p>

(130) وروى أبو حمزة الثمالي قال: قال لي أبو جعفر عليه السلام:

As Allah moves some people from the humility of the acts of
disobedience to Him, to the honor of acts of obedience to Him, He
enriches them without need of wealth, supports them without need of a
clan, and entertains without need to a bosom friend. For him whoever
fears Allah, Allah will make everything fear him, and will make him who
does not fear Him fear everything. Allah accepts the few deeds of those
who satisfy themselves with few earnings from Him. For those who have
the courage of seeking legal earnings, their provisions will be easily
obtainable and their dependants will be luxurious. For those who abstain
from pursuing the worldly pleasures, Allah will fix wisdom in their
minds, make it glide on their tongues, show them the malady and remedy
of the worldly defects, and move them from this world to the Eternal
Abode safely.161

(130) Abu Hamza ath-Themali narrated that Abu Ja'far (Imam al-Baqir)
(a) said:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
161. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:410 H.5890, Mustatrafat
us-Saraa'ir; 593, A'lam ud-Din; 293, Keshf ul-Ghumma; 2:135, Tanbih
ul-Khawattir; 1:65 & 2:89, Bihar ul-Anwar; 69:604 H.114.

<p dir="rtl">
لمّا حضرت أبي عليه السلام الوفاة ضمّني إلى صدره ثمَّ قال: يا بُنيّ،
اصبر على الحقّ وإن كان مرُّاً يوف إليك أجرك بغير حساب.
</p>

(131) وروى ابن مسكان، عن عبد الله بن أبي يعفور قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن
محمد عليهما السلام لرجل: اجعل قلبك قريناً تزاوله، واجعل علمك والداً
تتبعه، واجعل نفسك عدوّاً تجاهده، واجعل مالك كعارية تردّها.

(132) وقال عليه السلام: جاهد هواك كما تجاهد عدوّك.

(133) روى الحسن بن راشد، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام
قال:

When my father (a) was dying, he embraced me to the chest and said:

O son, go through the right, even if it is bitter, so that your rewards
will be given to you completely without judgment."162

(131) Ibn Meskan narrated from Abdullah bin Abi Yafur that Ja'far bin
Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said to a man: Consider your mind as a kinsman
whose opinion you seek, consider your knowledge as the father that you
follow, consider your self as the enemy that you fight, and consider
your wealth as the loan that you should defray.163

(132) He (a) also said: Strive against your self in the same way as you
fight your enemy.164
(133) Al-Hasan bin Rashid narrated from Abu Hamza ath-Themali that Abu
Ja'far (Imam al-Baqir) (a) related:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
162. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:410 H.5891, Tanbih
ul-Khawattir: 1:17, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 22, Bihar ul-Anwar; 71:76 H.10.

163. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:410 H.5892, al-Kafi; 2:454
H.7, Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 304, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 244, Bihar ul-Anwar; 78:283
H.1.

164. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:410 H.5893, Wassail
ush-Shi'a; 15:28 "32" H.20513.

أتى رجل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فقال: علّمني يا رسول الله شيئاً.
فقال صلى الله عليه وآله: عليك باليأس ممّا في أيدي النّاس، فانّه الغنى
الحاضر.
قال: زدني يا رسول الله.
فقال صلّى الله عليه وآله: إيّاك والطمع، فإنّه الفقر الحاضر.
قال: زدني يا رسول الله.
فقال صلّى الله عليه وآله: إذا هممت بأمر فتدبّر عاقبته، فإن يكُ خيراً أو
رشداً اتّبعته، وإن يكُ شرّاً أو غيّاً تركته.
(134) وروى الحسين بن يزيد، عن عليّ بن غراب قال: قال الصادق جعفر بن محمد
عليهما السلام:

A man came to the Prophet (s) and said: "O Allah's Messenger, instruct
me." He (s) said:

Cling to the despair of everything that is at peoples' hands. This is
surely the present richness. As the man asked for more, the Prophet (s)
said:

Beware of greed, for it is surely the present poverty. As the man asked
for more, the Prophet (s) said:

Before you want to do a matter that you intend, you should consider its
result. If the result is good or represents the right guidance, you
shall then follow. If it is evil or misleading, you should leave it.165
(134) Al-Hussein bin Yazid narrated from Ali bin Ghurab that Ja'far bin
Mohammed as-Sadiq (a) said:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
165. Refer to Men La Yahdhuruh ul-Faqih; 4:410 H.5894, al-Mahaasin; 16
H.46, Ar-Rawandi's Ad-Da'awat; 40 H.98, Mishkat ul-Anwar; 145, Ibn Abi
al-Hadid's Sharhu Nahj ul-Balagha; 3:163, Bihar ul-Anwar; 77:131 H.36.


