Preface
=======

**In the name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful.**

All praise is for Allah, who created mankind, and made for them an
example to follow throughout their fierce battle with evil.

Prophet Muhammad (S) was the last apostle sent by Allah to communicate
to mankind Allah’s Divine code (i.e. Islam). Because this code was a
comprehensive one, it also dealt with the needs of women throughout
history, and assigned a perfect example for them to prove beyond doubt
that what Islam preaches is practical, and if properly followed, leads
to everlasting felicity. This example set by Islam to women was
manifested in the person of Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa), daughter of
Allah's Messenger.

Yet, the English Library lacks a comprehensive book in regard to her
life; so I was asked to take upon myself the duty of translating the
work of a profound Shiite speaker - Muhammad Kazim Qazwini- entitled
“Fatima az-Zahra Min Al-Mahde Ila al-Lahd”, into English.

As I was translating, I found the book to be in the form of speeches
regarding the successive events of Fatima's life; therefore I decided to
depend mainly on the said book for recording Fatima's biography until
the time of the Prophet's death. Because of the extremely sensitive
period which followed the prophet’s death, and the everlasting effects
which the events thereafter left upon the Islamic ideology and the
structure of various Muslim sects, and issues, I deemed it necessary to
study various historical books, especially those which dealt with Lady
Fatima Zahra's life, to come up with the most accurate information
regarding the prime of the period after the Prophet's death.

Moreover, various sermons, which were delivered during those events,
were intentionally included in the book-special “Fatima's speeches”, to
allow researchers to study the presented historical events
independently.

The main books on which I depended in bringing about the book at hand
were:

1. Fatima Zahra Min al-Mahde Ila al Lahd, written in Arabic, by Muhammad
Kazim Qazwini: pp.680

2. Fatima Zahra (sa) Banou-ya Namoune-ye Islam, written in Persian, by
Ibrahim Amini: pp. 246

3. Fatima Zahra (sa) Umm Abiha, written in Arabic, by Fadhl Husayni
Milani: pp. 203

4. Fadak Fi al-Tarikh, written in Arabic, by Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad
Baqir Sadr: pp. 152

5. The Message, written in English, written in Persian, by Allama Ja'far
Subhani: pp. 781

6. The Early History of Islam, written in English, by Sayyid Safdar
Husayn: pp.358

7. Al-Mizan, English translation, written by Allama Syed Muhammad Husayn
Tabatabai: v. 1

8. Nahjul Balagha, composed by Sheikh Razi on Imam ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib
(as).

In conclusion, it is most accurate to state that this book will be very
useful not only to inquisitive readers, but also to researchers and
history students.

I am grateful to Br. Muhammad Taqi Ansariyan for giving me the
opportunity to serve the cause of this Great Lady of all times.

I beseech Allah to bless us all with his abundant mercy, which
overwhelms every living thing, and to guide all truth seekers to Allah’s
right path. May His peace, blessings, and grace be upon Muhammad, and
his righteous progeny.

Abu - Muhammad Ordoni (Jordanian)

Qum, Zulhijja 20, 1407 A.H. August 16, 1987


