Chapter 8: Al-Siddiqah
======================

We have already mentioned that one of Fatima's names was Siddiqah. This
word means a woman with scrupulous honesty and sincerity.

“Siddiqah” differs from the word “Sadook”, in that the first is
scrupulous and precise in telling facts. Furthermore, several other
meanings have been given to the word Siddiqah; among them are:

A. She who is a truth-teller.

B. She who never lies.

C. She whose deeds conform to her words.

D. She who never lied, because she is used to truthfulness.

E. A woman with scrupulous speech and beliefs, and whose deeds conform
to her words.

F. She who believes in the commands of Allah, and His Prophet's, without
doubting any of them.

This last opinion is supported by the following Qur’anic verse:

'and those who believe in Allah and His apostles; they are the
truthful..." (57: 19)

Although these various meanings have been given to "Siddiqah," it is
unanimously agreed upon that the various verses and traditions, counted
"Siddiqun" among the apostles and martyrs, who will enjoy special
treatment. This becomes apparent when looking at the following Qur’anic
verses:

'All who obey God, and the Apostle, are in the company of those on whom
is the Grace of God, - of the Prophets. (Who teach) the Sincere (lovers
of Truth), the Witnesses (who testify), and the righteous (who do good):
Ah! What a beautiful fellowship!" (4: 69)

"(Also) mention in the Book (the story of) Ibrahim: He was a man of
truth, a prophet." (19: 41)

'Also mention in the Book the case of Idris: He was a man of truth (and
sincerity), (and) a prophet." (19: 56)

"Christ the son of Mary was no more than an apostle; many were the
apostles that passed away before him. His mother was a woman of truth."
(5: 78)

When interpreting "His mother was a woman of truth", it was said that
Mariam was called "Siddiqah" because she believed in the signs of the
Lord, her son's position, and that which He preached to her. This point
is supported by the verse:

"And she believed in the words of her Lord."

Another meaning, which is given to this verse, is that Mariam was called
"Siddiqah" for her truthfulness, and the greatness of her position.

After reviewing the verse, we can easily conclude that some people say
they believe in Allah, the apostles, the divine books and religious
rules, but act contradictorily. This becomes clear when some people
claim they believe that Allah watches them, yet they disobey and violate
His rules; while knowing of Allah's prohibition of liquor, usury,
adultery, and that He decreed some rules and assigned certain duties to
them, which if they perform, He will grant them paradise; and those who
violate them will be subjected to Hell. These people have not reached
the level of realising their words and claims into actions.

On the other hand, "Siddiqun" are those who believe in truth, and
righteousness, and practice what they believe. Their number is small at
any given place, or, time; in fact, a survey might show that in some
town there is not even one Siddiqah.

Finally, it is easily recognized that Lady Fatima (sa) reached this
level of "Siddiqun." She was given the title Siddiqah by Allah's
Apostle, Prophet Muhammad (S), as was mentioned in Ryad An-Nadherah v.2,
p.202. and in Sharaf An Nubuwwah; he (as) said to ‘Ali (as):

"You have been given three things which have been given to no one else,
not even me, (they are):

You have been given a father-in-law like me and my father-in-law was not
like me.

You have been given an honest (Siddiqah) wife like my daughter, and 1
have not been given the like of her as a wife.

And, you have been given Hasan and Husayn from your loin, and 1 was not
given two sons like them.

But you are from me, and 1 am from you."

Also, Mufadhdhal Ibn Amr said:

"I asked Imam Sadiq (as): Who gave major ablution to Fatima (Ghusl
Mayyet)?

He answered: 'Amir Al -Mu’mineen (as) (‘Ali)'

I reacted in such a way that made it appear as if I could not believe he
(as) would do so.

Thus, Imam Sadiq (as) said: It appears as if you feel uncomfortable
about what I told you?

I said: May I be your sacrifice, I indeed do.

He then said: Do not be annoyed by this, for Fatima was a \`Siddiqah'
and no one save a \`Siddiq' can give her ablution. Don't you know that
no one gave ablution to Mariam save Isa (as)."


