Chapter 9: Al-Mubarakah
=======================

Barakah means: multiplication, felicity and abundance; as Taj al-Arous
clarifies. Also, Ragheb said: Because divine goodness springs from an
ever - continuous source in an unlimited manner, it is said that
anything which noticeably multiplies or, increases is Mubarak, or,
blessed.

Allah Almighty gifted Fatima with abundant blessings, and made her the
Mother of the Prophet's descendants on whom Allah has bestowed ever -
lasting benevolence.

Upon reviewing the history of Fatima's offspring, we find that when she
died, she left behind two sons and two daughters, who are: Imam Hasan
(as) (son), Imam Husayn (as) (son), Zainab (as) (daughter), and Umm
Kulthum (as) (daughter). But, when the event of Karbala occurred, Imam
Husayn (as), and his children achieved martyrdom, and ‘Ali Ibn Al-
Husayn (as) (Imam Zain Al-Abedeen) was the only surviving child of Imam
Husayn. Also, seven of Imam Hasan's (as) children, and two of Zainab's
(as) sons achieved martyrdom. Umm Kulthum (as) had no children at that
time.

After the events of Karbala, inflictions successively befell the
Prophet's descendants. Torture and massacres continued against them
starting with the battle of Harra, Zaid Ibn ‘Ali's and Fakh, and going
through the agony they suffered throughout the Umayyad era. But, when
the Abbass-ides came to power, they went beyond the Umayyad record of
eradicating, and annihilating Fatima's offspring (more details about the
sufferings they encountered can be found in Maqatel al Talibeen).

The struggle continued for two centuries until Imam Al-Hasan Al-Askari
(as) died in Samera (Iraq) as a result of eating poison, which was
placed in his food. Furthermore, Salah Ad-Din al-Ayobi was as savage as
the Abbassides in massacring the Prophet's descendants and followers. He
committed mass murders and brutal crimes, which bring chills in the
spine.

Nonetheless, Allah Almighty bestowed benevolence and blessings upon
Fatima az-Zahra's descendants. He implemented abundant multiplicity in
them.

The interpretation of the verse:

***"To thee have we granted Kauthar"*** (108:1) varies according to
interpreters. The most popular viewpoint of the meaning of Kauthar is a
famous fountain, or, domain, which will be given to the Last Prophet on
the Day of Resurrection; the literal meaning of Kauthar is abundance,
or, abundant benevolence.

Suyuti in al-Durr al-Manthur, regarding the meaning of Kauthar, writes:
"Buhkari, Ibn Jarir and Al-Hakim reported on the authority of Abu Bishr
Ibn Said Ibn Jubair that Ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

\`Al-Kauthar is abundant goodness which Allah gave the Apostle.'

Abu Bishr said:

I told Ibn Jubair that some people claim that it is a river (fountain)
in Paradise, he said:

\`The fountain in Paradise is part of the abundant benevolence which He
(Allah) gave him [the last Prophet] (as)'

Razi's interpretation of the above-mentioned verse is more appropriate.
He held the view that what is meant by Kauthar is Fatima az-Zahra (sa).
In Majma' al Bayan, Tabarsi writes regarding this subject:

"It was said that Kauthar means abundant benevolence, it has also been
said that it means the multiplicity of a given person; and the
descendants of Fatima have enormously multiplied in a way that they will
exist until the Day of Resurrection."

Fakhr Razi made the following comment in his Interpretation of the
Qur’an regarding this verse:

"In reference to the third viewpoint which advocates the meaning of
descendants to "Kauthar," some scholars say:

"Since this chapter was revealed to refute the claim of an infidel who
attempted to denounce the Prophet (S) for not having sons, it becomes
clear that the meaning given here is that Allah gave the Prophet (S)
offspring, which will be everlasting. We must keep in mind that numerous
massacres have been committed against Ahlul-Bayt, yet still the world is
full of them [their progeny]; while the Umayyads have vanished save a
few who are worthless. Besides this, prominent scholars have descended
from Fatima's sons, such as Al-Baqir, Al-Sadiq, Al-Kadhim, Al-Ar-Ridha’
(as), Al Nafs Al-Zakyyah and others."

This explanation correlates to the following: An infidel denounced the
Prophet when one of his [prophet’s] children died, and said Muhammad is
now without offspring, therefore when he dies his name will die with
him. It was because of this incident that Allah revealed this chapter to
His Apostle assuring him; it is as He (Glory be to Him) said:

"You have lost your son, but We have given you Fatima; although she is
just one, Allah will make that one many."

A survey of the world's population attests to this conclusion; for
Fatima's descendants (who are also the Prophet's descendants) are spread
around the globe as follows: Iraq-one million, Iran-three million,
Egypt-five million, Morocco-five million, Algeria, Tunis, Libya, Jordan,
Syria, Lebanon, Sudan, the Persian Gulf countries including Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Indonesia-approximately
twenty million descendants of the Prophet of Islam.

An Islamic country in which descendants of Fatima az-Zahra do not live
is hard to find. Their number is estimated to be thirty - five million;
however, if precise and accurate statistics are taken, their number
could be much higher.

Included among the Prophet's descendants are kings, princes, ministers,
scholars, writers, prominent characters, and geniuses. Some are honoured
by their lineage, and others ignore it and give no importance to it.
Some follow Ahlul-Bayt, while others violate their doctrine. I have even
heard of some descendants of Fatima (sa) who live in Indonesia, and are
enemies of Ahlul-Bayt (as)!

More amazing is the fact that some Muslims refuse to accept their
lineage of Fatima az-Zahra’s (sa), and ‘Ali (as); rather they claim that
such a lineage is forged, and unacceptable. These people ferociously
fought this idea up to the point that they shed innocent blood to
implement their ideas.

Hajjaj, Mansour Dawaniqi, Haroon Al-Rashid, and others are known
advocates of this idea.

It was mentioned in volume ten of Bihar that Amr Al-Shube said:

"One night Hajjaj summoned me to his palace; this horrified me, so I
performed ablution and wrote my will; then went to meet him. When 1
entered his room, I saw a sword, and a leather mat (usually used for
executions). I greeted him and he replied to me, and said: Do not fear
anything, for I pardon you throughout the night, and until tomorrow
noon.' He then ordered me to sit next to him; meanwhile a tied and
shackled man was brought to him;

Hajjaj said: \`This old man claims that A1-Hasan and Al-Husayn are the
Prophet's children; he shall prove this from the Qur’an, or, I will cut
his head off.'

I said: 'He should be freed from his chains, because if he proves his
claim, he will surely be freed, and if not, a sword cannot break those
chains.'

They freed the man of his shackles, but kept his hands cuffed; I was
grieved when I saw that he was Sa'id Ibn Jubair, and said: How can he
bring proof from the Qur’an in this regard?

Hajjaj said: \`Bring me proof from the Qur’an, or, will behead you.'

He said: \`Wait.' He waited for a while when Hajjaj repeated his demand,
and Sa'id asked for more time to think. When Hajjaj repeated his demand
for the third time, Sa'id said:

\`I seek refuge in Allah from the cursed devil, in the Name of Allah the
Beneficent, the Merciful.

We gave him Isaac, and Jacob; all (three) We guided; and before him, We
guided Noah; and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses,
and Aaron; thus do We reward those who do good.' (6: 84)

Then he stopped and said to Hajjaj: \`Read the following verse, And
Zakariya and John and Isa.'

Then Sa'id said: \`How does Isa fit in here?'

Hajjaj replied: \`He is one of Ibrahim's offspring.'

Sa'id said: \`Isa did not have a father, yet he was Ibrahim's descendant
because he was his daughter's (Maryam) son, therefore Hasan and Husayn
are more worthy of being called the Prophet's children especially that
they are closer to him (the Prophet) than Isa was to Maryam.'

When Hajjaj heard this, he granted him ten thousands dinars, and set him
free.

Shube added:

"In the morning I said to myself. \`It is incumbent upon me to visit
that old man and learn the meaning of the Qur’an, which I thought I know
but really do not.' I entered the Mosque, and found that old man giving
everyone ten dinars; I then heard him say: All this is because of the
blessings of Hasan and Husayn (as). We were grieved once but cherished a
thousand times; we also pleased Allah and His Apostle. "

Another narration which shows the extent of arrogance and insistence on
discrediting Ahlul-Bayt and depriving them of the honour of relationship
to the Prophet (S) says:

Sheikh Majlisi reported on the authority of Ihtijaj, and Tafsir ‘Ali Ibn
Ibrahim in Bihar that Abu Al-Jaroud said:

'Abu Ja'far Al-Baqir (as) said to me:

'Abu Jaroud, what do they (followers of other than Ahlul-Bayt) say about
Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn (as)?'

I said: 'They deny the fact that they are sons of Allah's Apostle.'

He then said: 'So with what do you debate them?'

I said: 'With Allah's saying about Isa Ibn Maryam:

"And among his progeny David and Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron;
thus, do we reward those who do good," (6: 84) and that Allah Almighty
made Isa a descendant of Ibrahim."

He said: 'Then what do they say?'

I said: 'They say: 'A daughter's son can be called a son but he is not
actually a real descendant.'

He said: 'How do you argue with them?'

I said: 'We quote the following verse for them':

'Say: Come! Let us gather together, our sons and your sons, our women
and your woman.' [^1]

Then he said: 'Then what do they say?'

I replied: 'They say: "It is common in Arabic for a man to call another
man's children Our children while they are really others' children."'

Imam Baqir (Abu Ja'far (as)) then said:

'By Allah, Abu Al-Jaroud, I shall quote a verse from the Book of Allah
which shows that Hasan and Husayn are his[Prophet Muhammed’s (S)] direct
children (form his loins); proof that can only be denied by infidels.'

I said: \`May I be your sacrifice, what verse are you speaking of?' He
answered: \`When Allah said:

"Prohibited to you (for marriage) are your mothers, daughters... until
(those who have been) wives of your sons proceeding from your loins".

Ask them, Abu A1 Jaroud, was it permitted for Allah's Messenger to marry
Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn's wives (had they been divorced)?

If their response is affirmative, then they have lied and sinned; and if
their answer is negative, it is because they are his children proceeding
from his loins. "'

In another debate, which took place between Haroun Al-Rashid and Imam
Musa Ibn Ja'far (as) mentioned by Bihar Majlisi on the authority of
'Oyun Akhbar Al-Ar-Ridha’, Haroun said to the Imam:

"Why did you permit people to trace your ancestry back to Allah's
Messenger (as) and call you sons of Allah's Apostle while you are
descendants of ‘Ali? Men are traced to their fathers; Fatima was not but
a vessel and her father, the Prophet your maternal grandfather!"

The Imam (as) replied: "Had the Prophet been brought back to life, and
asked you for your daughter's hand in marriage, would you fulfill his
wish?"

Rashid answered: "Glory be to Allah! Why wouldn't I fulfill his wish?
Indeed I would be honored among the Arabs, non Arabs, and Quraish to do
so."

The Imam then said: "But he would not ask to marry my daughter, nor
could I give her to him in marriage."

Rashid exclaimed: *"Why not?"*

The Imam said: "For he has begotten me, and has not begotten you".

Rashid then said: "You are right, Musa (as);" and added: "but why do you
claim to be the Prophet's offspring while he did not beget sons? And,
since offspring are sons not daughters, and you are Fatima's children,
she did not have offspring."

Upon hearing this, the Imam apologized to Rashid and asked to be
excused; he did not want to answer him in observance to the law of
prudence (taqiya). Nevertheless, Rashid insisted on hearing his
arguments, and said: *"You* *are obligated to bring me your arguments
from the* *Qur’an, you children of ‘Ali (as), and you are their Imam of
the time and chief, as I was told, I will not excuse you until you bring
me proof from Allah's Book, from which you know the interpretation of
every letter, as has been written in this verse:*

\`Nothing have We left unattended from the Book.'

Furthermore, you dispensed with the opinions of other scholars, and
\`qiyas' (inference)."

The Imam then said: 'am I permitted to give you the answer?"

Rashid said: *"Indeed you are."*

The Imam then said: "I seek refuge in Allah from the cursed devil. In
the name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful:

And among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron;
thus, do We [Allah] reward those who do good;

"And Zakariya, and John, and Jesus (Isa)".

The Imam continued, *"Who is Isa's Father?"*

The Imam then said: "Therefore, he is considered among the Prophet's
offspring through Maryam; likewise, we are the offspring of the Holy
Prophet (S) through our Mother, Fatima (sa)..."

These were some of the verses that Ahlul-Bayt (as) used as proof of
their lineage to Allah's Apostle through Fatima az-Zahra (sa).

There are a great number of narrations, which declare the same thing;
among them are:

1. Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi v.1, p.316, in Tarikh Baghdad reported that
Ibn Abbas said:

"I was in the company of my father, A1-Abbas Ibn Abdul Muttalib, sitting
in the presence of Allah's Messenger (as) when ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (as)
entered, and greeted us. The Prophet(as) returned his Salam, stood up
and while smiling, embraced him and kissed his forehead. The Prophet
then asked him to sit near to him."

Al-Abass asked: "Messenger of Allah, do you love him?"

The Prophet replied: "Uncle of Allah's Messenger! By Allah, Allah loves
him more than I do. Surely, Allah made every Prophet's progeny proceed
from him, and made my progeny proceed from this one."

2. Also, Khawarazmi in Manaqib p.229, narrates the following:

Allah's Apostle declared: "Surely Allah made every Prophet's progeny
proceed from his [the prophets’] own loins, and made my progeny proceed
from ‘Ali's loins."

This narration was reported by the following writers:

Muhib Ad-Din-Tabari in Dhakhaer al-Uqbi, Hamueeni in Faraed As-Semtain,
Dhahabi in Mizan al-Etedal, Ibn Hajar in al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa p.74,
Mirza Hindi in Muntakhab Kanz al-Umal, Zarqani in Sharh Mawahib
Ladonyyah, and Qandouzi in Yanabi' al-Mawaddah p.138.

Nisaee also mentioned in Khasaes Amir Al-Mu’mineen on the authority of
Muhammad Ibn Usama Ibn Zaid, that his Father said:

Allah's Messenger said: “As for you ‘Ali, you are my son-in-law, and the
father of my offspring; you are from me, and I am from you.'"

The same narrator reported that Usama said:

"I went to visit the Prophet of Allah one night; he (as) came out
carrying something that I didn't recognize under his cloak. When I
finished my work with him I said. \`What do you have under your cloak?'
When he opened his cloak, I saw Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn on his lap. The
Prophet then said:

\`These are my children and my daughter's sons; O Allah, you surely know
that I love them, therefore love them".

Despite the large number of traditions, which declare that Al-Hasan and
Al-Husayn are the Prophet of Allah's children, some ignorant writers try
to deny this fact. These writers quote the Qur’anic verse:

"Muhammad is not the Father of any of your men,"

In order to prove that he [Prophet Muhammad (S)] was not anyone's
Father. These writers use this verse even though it is an uncontested
fact that it was revealed to prove that Zaid, the Prophet's adopted son,
is not related to the Prophet (S). The Apostle gave him (Zaid) in
marriage to his cousin Zainab; but when Zaid divorced her, he [Prophet
Muhammad (S)] married her in obedience to Allah's command, and to prove
that he (S) was not Zaid's Father, which would make Zainab prohibited as
a wife to him.

"Then when Zaid had dissolved (his marriage) with her, with the
necessary formalities, We joined her in marriage to thee: In order that
(in the future) there may be no difficulty to the Believers in (the
matter of) marriage with the wives of their adopted sons, when the later
have dissolved with necessary formalities (their marriage) with them.
And, Allah's command must be fulfilled." (32: 39)

Thus, prohibiting marriage with the previous wives of a son depends on
proving their actual lineage to the father; if such a lineage cannot be
proved, then marrying the previous wives is not prohibited. It is for
this reason that Allah Almighty said:

"Of any of your men."

If this was not the case, then what about Ibrahim, Al-Qasim, Al-Taeeb
and Al-Mutahhar who were all his [Prophet Muhammed’s (S)] sons.

Furthermore, it has already been verified that the Prophet (S) said to
Imam Hasan (as):

"This son of mine is a Master."

He also said:

"Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn, these two sons of mine, are Imams whether they
rise, or, forebear."

and:

"Every daughter's children are called to their Father, save Fatima's
children; for I am their Father."

In another interpretation of "of any of your children," some scholars
say: "What He meant by "Men", was the mature ones; and none of his
children were mature at that time."

In conclusion, whatever has been said about the Apostle's sons, can be
said to include Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn. They were the Prophet of Allah's
sons.

[^1]: The Prophet (S) chose Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn to represent his
sons, Fatima for "women," and himself and ‘Ali (as) for "ourselves."
(Translator's note)


