Chapter 10: At-Taherah
======================

As we have already mentioned, one of Fatima az-Zahra’s (sa) names was
"At Taherah" (the virtuous, or, pure). This meaning is related to the
verse:

***"And, Allah only wished to remove all abomination from you, ye member
of the Family, and to*** ***make you pure, and spotless."*** (33: 33)

The above-mentioned verse is of great importance because of its subtle
meaning and significance.

This verse is considered the main source of virtues granted to
Ahlul-Bayt (as); around it various debates, and many writings took
place. It might be more appropriate to say that this verse was the
fulcrum of debates, contradicting viewpoints and inconsistent opinions.
This is especially true when it comes to who was meant by "the Family,"
or, “Ahlul-Bayt”.

Nevertheless, it is indisputable that this verse, known as "the verse of
purification" concerns Fatima At-Taherah (as), and both Shiite and Sunni
scholars agree on this, except a very small number. This established
fact has been reached in light of the traditions, which unanimously
state that the said verse includes ‘Ali, Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn
(as). Yet, some hold the viewpoint that the verse includes the Prophet's
wives-because of the word "Family", and the sequence of the surrounding
verses that include a speech to them; however, he [Prophet Muhammad (S)]
prohibited even his wife, Umm Salama, from joining them under the cloak
prior to the revelation of this verse.

Although the number of narrators who report that the "verse of
purification" was revealed regarding ‘Ali, Fatima, Al-Hasan and
Al-Husayn (as) amounts to several hundreds, it will be useful to include
narrations and sources which are reported by prominent Sunni scholars
about this subject. I would like to point out that this list should be
satisfying for any clear conscience.

1. Baghdadi in his history book Tareekh Baghdad, v. 10, mentioned that
Abu Sa'id Al-Khudari remarked regarding the verse:

'And, Allah only wished to remove all abomination from you, ye members
of the Family and to make you pure and spotless,"

The Messenger of Allah gathered ‘Ali, Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn
under a cloak, and said:

"These are my Ahlul-Bayt (i.e., Family), O Allah; remove all
abominations from them and make them pure, and spotless".

Umm Salama, who was standing near the door, said:

"Am I not one of them, O Messenger of Allah?"

He said: "You are (up to a) good ending."

2. Zamakhshari in Al-Kashaf, v.1, p. 193 narrated on the account of
Aisha, that Allah's Messenger came out wearing an embroidered,
ornamented cloak of woven black hair, when Al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali came to
him, and went under it; then Al-Husayn followed him, then Fatima, then
‘Ali. At that moment [Prophet Muhammad (S)] quoted the verse:

"And Allah only wished to remove all abominations from you, ye Members
of the Family, and to make you pure, and spotless."

3. Razi in his interpretation of the Qur’an v. 2, p. 700, (printed in
Istanbul), writes:

"When he (the Prophet) came out wearing the black cloak and A1 Hasan
came under it and Al-Husayn, and Fatima and ‘Ali the Prophet said: 'And
Allah only wishes......"

4. Ibn Al-Athir Al-Jazari reported in his book Usd al-Ghaba Fi Maarefat
As-Sahabah v. 2, p. 12, that Omar Ibn Abu Salamah, the Prophet's
stepson, said:

When the verse “And, Allah only wishes...” was revealed to the Prophet
(S), he had gathered Fatima, Hasan and Husayn under his cloak, while
‘Ali was behind him, and said:

\`This is my family, therefore, remove all abomination from them, and
make them pure and spotless.'

Umm Salama said: Am I one of them, Messenger of Allah?' He said: 'You
will be in good condition."

5. Sebt Ibn al-Jawzi reported in Tazkerah al-Aemah, p.244, that Wathelah
Ibn Asqa' said:

"I went to ask Fatima (sa) about ‘Ali (as); she told me to go to the
Messenger of Allah (S), and ask him, so I went and sat down to wait for
him; I then saw the Prophet coming in the company of ‘Ali, Al-Hasan and
Al-Husayn (as). He held their hands until they entered the room. He then
sat Al-Hasan on his right leg and Al-Husayn on his left leg, and ordered
‘Ali and Fatima to sit near him. The Prophet (S) covered them with his
cloak (or garment) and read: And, Allah only wishes... then the Prophet
(S) supplicated to Allah, and said:

"O Allah, truly these are my Ahlul-Bayt (Family)."

6. Imam Wahedi reported in his book Asbab An-Nozul that Umm Salama, the
Prophet's wife, narrated that Allah's Messenger (as) was present in her
house when Fatima (sa) brought him an earthenware pot filled with wheat
cooked with milk. The Prophet (S) said: *"Call in your husband and two
sons for me."* Thus, ‘Ali, Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn came and joined him in
eating the food. Meanwhile, the Prophet (S) sat on a bench, covered with
a Khairban cloak.

Umm Salama added: "I was in my room performing prayers when the
Arch-Angel Gabriel revealed:

"O Allah, these are my Family and Kin; therefore, remove all abomination
from them and make them pure and spotless."

Upon hearing that, I looked in the house, and said: *"Am I one of them,
O Apostle of Allah?'*

Moreover, Tirmadhi reported in his "Sahih" that Allah's Messenger since
the time this verse was revealed, and for six months thereafter, stood
by Fatima’s (sa) house (door), and said:

"(Time for) prayers Ahlul-Bayt; Allah only wished to remove all
abomination from you and make you pure and spotless."

7. Ibn Sabagh al-Maliki in his book al-Fosoul al-Muhemah p.7, narrated a
tradition similar to the one already mentioned by Wahidi; but he added:
*Some poets said the following in this regard:*

Surely Muhammad and his successor, and

Their two sons, and his virtuous, and pure daughter

Are the people of the cloak who in adhering to them, I long for

peace and success on the Last Day.

8. Abu Bakr Suyuti narrated this tradition on the authority of Umm
Salama, Aisha, Abu Sa'id Al-Khudari, Zeid Ibn Arqam, Ibn Abbas, Dahak
Ibn Muzahim, Abu al-Hamra, Omar Ibn Salama and others in his books:
al-Durr al-Manthur v. 5, p. 198, Al-Khasaes al-Kubra v. 2, p. 264, and
Al-Itqan v. 2, p. 200.

They all reported that the Prophet (S) gathered Fatima, ‘Ali, Al-Hasan
and Al-Husayn (as), when the verse *'And, Allah only wishes to
remove...* ", and covered them with a cloak.

He then said: "By Allah, these are my Ahlul-Bayt, therefore remove all
abomination from them pure and spotless."

9. Tabari in Dhakhaer al-Uqbi p. 21, declared that this verse was
revealed in regard to the purified five (the Prophet, ‘Ali, Fatima,
Hasan, Husayn), relying on Omar Ibn Abu Salama's narration.

He also reported that Umm Salama said:

"Allah's Messenger covered Fatima, ‘Ali, Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn (as),
including himself with a garment, and read this verse:

***"And, Allah only wished to remove all abomination from you, ye
Members of the Family, and to make you pure and spotless."*** (33: 33)

She then added: "So, I came to join them when the Prophet (S) said:
'Stay where you are, you will have a good conclusion."

In another narration, she was quoted as saying:

"Allah's Messenger said to Fatima: 'Bring your bright cloak; and put his
hands on them and said:

'O Allah, these are the progeny of Muhammad (S); thus, bless and praise
them for surely you are praiseworthy and Exalted."'

Umm Salama added:

"I then lifted the cloak to join them, but he pulled it away and said:
You are alright ".

10. Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Al-Ghoutroubi reported that this verse was
revealed in regard to Ahlul-Bayt (as) in his book Al-Jame' Li Ahkam
al-Qur’an v.14, p.182.

11. Ibn al-Arabi in his book Ahkam al-Qur’an v. 2, p. 166*.*

12. Ibn Abd al-Bir al-Ondolosi in his book al-Esti'ab v. 2, p. 460.

13. Al-Bihaqi in his book As Sunan al-Kubra v., p. 149*.*

14*.* Al-Hakim al-Nishaburi in his book al-Mustadrak al- Sahihain v.2,
p.416.

He narrated a tradition on the authority of Umm Salama similar to what
has already been mentioned and...

He (as) said: "O Allah, this is my family (Ahlul-Bayt)."

Umm Salama then said:

"Messenger of Allah, am I not from Ablul-Bayt?"

The Prophet answered:

"You are alright, but these are my Ahlul-Bayt..."

15. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in Musnad v. 1, p. 331.

16. Nisaee in Khasa'es p. 4.

17. Muhammad Ibn Jarir At Tabari in his interpretation of the Qur’an, v.
22, p. 5.

18. A1-Khawarazmi in Kitab al-Manaqib p. 35.

19. Al-Haithami in Majma' al-Zawaed v. 9, p. 166.

20. Ibn Hajar al-Haithami in al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa p. 85.

It is necessary to further elaborate on this subject, since the verse of
purification declares, beyond doubt, that Fatima az-Zahra (sa) is pure.
Nevertheless, it may be beneficial to explain the meaning of the word
"Rijs" or abomination mentioned in the verse.

"Rijs" means that Allah purified her from the monthly menstruation in
addition to all abomination and depravities. "Rijs" is all that is
deemed impure by human nature, refers to evil doings, deserves
punishment, detracts from one's good reputation, brings about sins,
rejected by nature, and mars any of the knightly virtues.

Ibn Al-Arabi also said in Al-Futouhat al-Makkiah, Chapter 29, “Rijs” is
*"anything which detracts from one's character."*

The definition that Al-Arabi gave for the word “Rijs” is the definition
for the word "infallible" which the Shiites believe is an inseparable
character of all Prophets, Imams, and Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa). It is
indeed an excellent virtue, and a great honour that Allah has bestowed
upon some of his servants.

It is worthy to mention that infallibility is an inseparable trait of
those who propagate divine laws; yet, because infallibility is a
prerequisite for prophets, and Imams in their roles of propagating
divine rules. However, it does not mean that others, who also propagate,
are safeguarded from sins.

Imam ‘Ali (as) proved Fatima's infallibility using the verse of
purification in his argument with Abu Bakr.

The Imam (as) said: "Abu Bakr, do you read Allah's book?"

He answered: *"yes"*

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: "Then tell me about whom was the following verse
revealed?

'And. Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye Members
of the Family, and make you pure and spotless.'

"Was it not revealed in regard to us, Ahlul-Bayt?"

Abu Bakr said: "Yes, it was revealed regarding you".

‘Ali (as) said: "If some men testify that Fatima, the Messenger's
daughter, committed an abomination what would you do?"

He answered: "I would administer the legal punishment to her, just like
any other Muslim woman!'

‘Ali (as) said: "If you did so, you would be an infidel in the eyes of
Allah."

Abu Bakr said: *"Why?"*

Imam ‘Ali (as) replied: "Because you would have rejected Allah's
testimony of her purity, and virtue (infallibility), and surpassed
people's testimony over it..." [^1]

A manifestation of this purity, is safeguarding the person from impurity
upon death, regardless of the fact that any human being-no matter how
pious, and obedient to Allah, becomes intensely impure once deceased,
making it obligatory to perform ablution (Ghusl) when touching the dead
body. The dead person, himself, only becomes pure after being washed by
others.

Contrarily, the infallibles are purified before, and after death.
Al-Hasan Ibn Ubaid said in Al-Wasa'el:

I wrote to Imam Sadiq (as) asking him:

"Did the Commander of the Faithful perform ablution (Ghusl) after
performimg the bathing of the Messenger of Allah (S) upon his death?"

Imam (as) answered:

"The Prophet was pure and safeguarded all impurities; yet the Commander
of the Faithful (as) did so [cleanse himself], and this became a
customary practice (Sunnah)."

We will elaborate on Fatima’s (sa) ablution at the end of the book if
Allah wills.

[^1]: Al-Bihar: v.10.


