Chapter 11: The Event of Cloak
==============================

A famous event known as the "Event of the Cloak" was reported in the
Shiite books regarding "the verse of purification." The context of the
event is as follows:

Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari (Allah be pleased with him) narrates from the
authority of Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa), the beloved daughter of the Holy
Prophet (peace be on her) that she said:

"One day when my beloved father, the Holy Prophet (S), visited me in my
house,

he (as) said: \`O Fatima! Peace be on you.'

I replied: \`O father! Peace be on you too.'

He (as) then said: \`I am feeling some weakness within me.'

I [Fatima az-Zahra (sa)] said: 'Allah forbid that you may be sick.'

Then he (as) said: 'Fatima! Fetch me a Yemenite cloak and wrap it round
me.' I brought the Yemenite cloak, and covered my dear father with it. I
then noticed that his face was glowing like a full moon.

A moment later, my beloved son, Hasan (as) came and said: 'O my dear
mother! Peace of Allah be on you.'

1 replied: 'O my loving son, the apple of my eyes, the delight of my
heart! Peace be on you too.'

He [Hasan (as)] then said: 'O my dear mother! I am smelling the
fragrance of my loving grandfather!'

I said, \`Yes, your beloved grandfather is here under the cloak.'

Hasan (as) then went towards his grandfather, and said: \`O my
grandfather! Peace be on you. May I enter “the cloak.”

My loving father [Prophet Muhammad (S)] replied: \`O my son, the owner
of my fountain (of Kauthar)! Peace be upon you too. Yes; you may enter.'

Thus Hasan (as) entered the cloak. Soon, after my loving son, Husayn
(as) came, and said: \`O my dear mother! Peace be upon you.'

1 [Fatima az-Zahra (sa)] replied: \`O my loving son, the apple of my
eyes, the delight of my heart! peace be upon you too'.

He [Husayn (as)] then said: \`O my dear mother! I am smelling the
fragrance of my affectionate grandfather!' I replied: 'Yes, your loving
grandfather(as), and your elder brother Hasan (as), are inside the
cloak.'

Husayn (as) then went near the cloak, and said: \`O my dear grandfather,
the chosen Prophet of Allah! Peace be upon you. May I also come inside
the cloak to be with both of you.'

My loving father replied: \`O my son, the interceder of my Ummah! Peace
be on you too. Yes you may enter.'

Thus Husayn (as) too entered the cloak.

Then ‘Ali-Ibn Abu Talib (as) came, and said: \`O beloved daughter of the
Holy Prophet! peace be on you.'

1 [Fatima az-Zahra (sa) replied: \`O Abul-Hasan, Commander of the
Faithful! peace be upon you too.'

He [‘Ali (as)] then said: 'Fatima! I am smelling the fragrance of my
brother, the son of my Uncle.'

I [Fatima az-Zahra (sa)] replied: 'Yes! He along with your two sons is
inside the cloak'

‘Ali (as) then proceeded towards the cloak, and said: \`O Prophet of
Allah! peace be upon you. May I also come to you inside the cloak!'

My beloved father [Prophet Muhammad (S)] replied: 'Peace be upon you
also my brother, my vicegerent, my successor, my standard bearer! You
may also come inside.'

Thus ‘Ali (as) also went inside the cloak

Then I [Fatima az-Zahra (sa)] went near the cloak, and said: \`Peace be
upon you, O my loving father! O Prophet of Allah! May I also come to you
inside the cloak.'

My loving father [Prophet Muhammad (S)] replied: 'Peace of Allah be upon
you also, my beloved daughter! All dear heart! You too have my
permission.'

Thus, I also went inside the cloak. Now when all of us got assembled
inside the Cloak,

my affectionate father [Prophet Muhammad (S)] held the two corners of
the cloak, and raising his right hand towards the sky said:

'O Allah! These are my Ahlul-Bayt.

They are my confidants, and my supporters.

Their flesh is my flesh and their blood is my blood.

Whoever hurts them, hurts me.

Whoever displeases them, displeases me.

Whoever makes peace with them, will make peace with me.

Whoever has enmity against them, will have enmity against me.

Whoever is a friend to them, is a friend of mine. It is because they
belong to me, and I belong to them.

O Allah! Bestow Your peace, Benevolence, Mercy, forgiveness, and Your
Pleasures on me, and on them. And, keep them aloof from uncleanliness,
and keep them pure, and thoroughly purified.'

Then the Lord, Almighty Allah said:

\`O my Angels! O inmates of the heavens!

I created this solid firmament, well-stretched earth,

well-lighted moon, shinning sun, rotating planets, rippling oceans,
floating boats,

And all other things for the sake, and love of these five persons who
are inside the cloak.'

At this, the Archangel Gabriel asked:

\`O Lord! Who are they inside the cloak?'

The Lord said:

\`They are Ahlul-Bayt of the Prophet, and the assets of the Prophethood.
They are Fatima az-Zahra, her father, her husband, and her two sons.'

Gabriel said:

\`O Lord! Permit me to descend to earth, and join them as the sixth
inside the cloak.'

The Lord said: 'You are permitted.'

Thus Gabriel, the Archangel came down to earth, and said:

\`O Prophet of Allah! peace be on you. The Gracious Lord, the Almighty
Allah sends His Greetings to you to bestow on you His Grace, and Mercy,
and says:

"By My Grace, and Grandeur! I have created this solid

Firmament, well-stretched earth, well-lighted moon,

Shining sun, rotating planets, rippling oceans, floating boats and

All other things for the sake, and love of you and

Your chosen people."

And, the Lord, Almighty has given me the permission to join you inside
the cloak

O Prophet of Allah!

May I come in, and be with you?'

The Holy Prophet replied:

'O Bearer of the Divine revelations! Peace be upon you also. Yes, you
may come in.'

Then Gabriel too came inside the cloak

Thereafter, he spoke to my affectionate father:

'Allah sends His revelation to you people, and says:

"Surely, Allah has decided that He should keep you, and your Ahlul-Bayt
clean of all pollution, and purify you people with a thorough
purification."'

Then ‘Ali (as) said to my loving father [Prophet Muhammad (S)]:

'Tell me! What merit the coming under this cloak has before Allah ?'

The Holy Prophet (S) replied:

\`By that Being, Who made me His Prophet and Who [Allah (SwT)], for the
salvation of mankind appointed me to Prophethood! When any of our
Shiites and supporters will assemble in a

Gathering of the inmates of this earth, and narrate this Hadith, Allah
will bestow on them His Blessings and Mercy; angels will encircle them,
and as long as they do not disperse,

The angels will pray for the forgiveness of their sins.'

At this, ‘Ali (as) said:

\`By Allah! We and our Shiites have now become triumphant.'

Then the Holy Prophet (S) said:

'O ‘Ali! By that Being, Who made me the righteous prophet and appointed
me to the prophet-hood for the sake of people's salvation, whenever in
the gathering of the inmates of this earth our Shiites and friends will
assemble and narrate this Hadith of ours, and if some-one amongst them
will be in agony, Allah will remove his trouble; and if someone was
sorrowful, Allah will relieve him of his sorrows; will answer his
needs.'

Then ‘Ali (as) said:

\`By Allah! At this moment we have been crowned with success, and
Blessings; and by the Lord of Kaabah, in the same way our Shiites too
have become triumphant, and blessed in this world, and the Hereafter.'

Note: (We have depended on the good translation of our brothers in the
Islamic Seminary of Pakistan to include this event in the book)


