Fatima’s (sa) Dowry
===================

Although Fatima's dowry was modest, because of the Messenger's wish to
set an example for the Muslims, and for other implicit reasons, Fatima
az-Zahra (sa) did not ignore her greatness and exalted identity to
obtain a fantastic gift for her wedding. Fatima’s (sa) drive for
excellence, and perfection motivated her to ask for the right of
intercession. If Allah willed for the sinners among the Muslims.

Ahmad Ibn Yusuf Ad-Dimashqi in his book Akhbar al-Doual Wa Ath-tha
al-Uwal reported the following:

"It was narrated that when she (Fatima) learnt about her marriage and
that her dowry was a small number of dirhams, she said:

\`O Messenger of Allah, lay girls take money for dowries; what is the
difference between me and them (if my dowry was to be money too)? I
kindly ask you to give it back and supplicate to Allah, the Exalted, to
make my dowry the right to intercede for the sinners among Muslims (on
the Day of Rising).' It was then that Gabriel descended with a label on
which the following statement was written:

'Allah ordained Fatima Zahra's dowry to be intercession for the sinners
among Muslims.'

When Fatima (sa) was on her deathbed, she asked that the label be put on
her chest under the coffin. Thus, it was done so. Fatima (sa) said:

"When I am raised on the Day of Resurrection, I will present this label
with my hand to intercede for the sinners from among my Father's
nation."

It is apparent that the narration mentioned above illustrates the
greatness, honor, and excellence Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) enjoyed. The
Messenger's supplication was answered, so Fatima az-Zahra (sa) will
present the label on the day when it is most needed. Nasfi said:

"Fatima (may Allah be pleased with her) asked the Prophet (S) that her
dowry would be intercession for his nation on the day of Resurrection.
So, when she passes the path, she will ask for her dowry."

It is worthy to mention that many narrations have been reported on the
account of Ahlul-Bayt (as) to the effect that intercession is part of
Fatima az-Zahra’s (sa) dowry.


