Preparations for The Wedding
============================

A non-planned period of time elapsed between the engagement and the
wedding ceremony, because Imam ‘Ali (as) was too shy to ask the Prophet
to assign a day for the wedding, while he wanted to protect Fatima’s
(sa) pride by refraining from asking ‘Ali to do so.

A month, or, more passed when Imam ‘Ali (as) said nothing about the
wedding. Aqeel (‘Ali's brother) asked him about the reason for the delay
in holding the wedding ceremony, and encouraged him to prepare for the
wedding, and to ask the Prophet to assign a date for it. Despite ‘Ali's
humbleness, he accompanied Aqeel to the Prophet's house to fulfill his
wishes. On their way to the Prophet's house, they met Umm Ayman who,
when told the reason for their visit, asked them to leave the matter to
her. She, in turn, informed Umm Salama, and the Prophet's wives who
gathered in Aisha's house, where the Prophet was, and said:

"May our parents be your sacrifice! We are gathered here in regard to
that, had Khadija been alive would have brought happiness to her
life!!!"

When hearing Lady Khadija's (as) name, the Prophet (S) cried, and said:

"Surely Khadija believed me when men did not, and helped in establishing
Allah's religion, and granted me her belongings in its path.
Allah-Exalted is His Name-commanded me to bring the good news to Khadija
that (she has) a house in Paradise made of brocade, and emeralds, where
there is not roaring, nor, strain."

Umm Salama said:

"May our parents be your sacrifice, O Messenger of Allah!! Surely
everything you have praised Khadija for is true, but she departed to her
Lord! May He bring happiness to her and gather us with her in the
Paradise of His satisfaction and Mercy. Messenger of Allah! Your brother
from among the people of the world who is also your cousin, ‘Ali Ibn Abu
Talib, wished that you specify a day for the wedding so that he may be
united with his wife Fatima."

The Prophet answered: "Why doesn't ‘Ali ask me to do so?"

She replied: "Shyness prevents him!'

He said: "Umm Ayman, go call ‘Ali for me."

When Umm Ayman came out, she found ‘Ali (as) waiting for the answer.
Upon her request he, entered the house, and shyly sat near the Prophet
who said to him:

"Do you wish to be wedded to your wife?"

‘Ali replied: "Alright, it is to your honor!! If you wish, the wedding
can take place tonight or tomorrow night, if Allah wills."

The Prophet (S) said: "*So prepare a house for Fatima."*

‘Ali (as) then said: "The only house I can acquire is Harithah Ibn
al-Numan's."

The Prophet said: "Surely we are shy for Harithah Ibn al-Numan, for we
have taken the majority of his houses!"'

When Harithah heard about this, he proceeded towards the Prophet (S) and
said:

"Messenger of Allah, I and my property belong to Allah and His
Messenger. By Allah, there is nothing more beloved to me than that which
you take; it surely is more desirable to me (that you take it) than if
you leave it (for me)!!"

Consequently, Harithah, motivated by his strong faith and belief in good
deeds, granted ‘Ali (as) one of his houses. Imam ‘Ali (as) furnished one
of the rooms by spreading sand on the floor, and erecting a pole for
hanging the water container. In addition to some gifts that were given
to him by some companions, he also purchased a jug and jar, and laid a
piece of wood between two walls for hanging clothes, and placed a ram's
skin on the floor, and put a pillow made of fiber on it.

The Prophet (S) ordered ‘Ali (as) to hold a dinner because Allah, the
Exalted, is pleased with those who do so; for the social good it does is
bring people together and implement love, and harmony among them.

It is noteworthy that Lady Fatima Zahra (sa) excelled in giving on the
path of Allah; she possessed generosity that no other woman can claim to
be equality.

Al-Asfouri wrote in his book Nuzhat al-Majalis v.2, p.226, on the
authority of Ibn al-Tawous:

"The Prophet had a new dress made for Fatima (as a gift) for her
wedding; she had just one old patched dress. On her wedding night,
someone knocked on the door and said:

"I ask the household of Prophethood to give me an old dress." At first,
Fatima was going to give him her old dress, but then remembered the
Qur’anic verse:

\`By no means shall ye attain righteousness unless ye give (freely) of
that which ye love (prefer)'

She then gave the poor man her new dress. Consequently, Gabriel
descended, and said:

"O Muhammad! Allah sends Him peace upon you; He commanded me to greet
Fatima and (give her the gift He sent her) which is a dress from
Paradise, made of silk brocade etc."

Regarding the feast, when the food had been prepared, the meat cooked,
the bread baked and the dates and butter obtained, the Prophet (S)
started spitting the dates, and mixing them with the butter to replace
sweetmeat for the wedding.When everything was ready, he asked ‘Ali (as)
to invite the people to the feast.

When ‘Ali (as) reached the Mosque, he found it crowded with people who
were at the Mosque, from the poor immigrants who lived there to the
Ansars. Nevertheless, ‘Ali's (as) generosity and noble-heartedness did
not allow him to invite some people, and exclude others, especially
since everyone wanted to be invited to the Prophet's (as) daughter's
wedding feast.

‘Ali's (as) belief in Allah's power, and the Prophet's (as) blessed
heart, motivated him to call out loud:

"O people, answer the call for the feast of Fatima Bint Muhammad"

Men and women from all around Medina gathered in the house. They ate,
drank and even took food to their homes. The blessings of the Prophet
(S) were obvious on that day, for not only the food was enough to feed
everyone, but also it did not decrease at all. The Prophet (S) asked for
food containers to be brought, and filled them, and sent them to his
wives, and left a special container for Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and her
husband.

By sunset, the wedding night had begun; it was time for Fatima az-Zahra
to depart to her new home.

Everything went well, for the Prophet had made all the necessary
preparation for the wedding. Despite the simplicity and modesty of her
wedding, Fatima's marriage ceremony was surrounded by signs of
greatness, excellence, and beauty. Al-Haithami wrote in Majma' Az-Zawaed
that Jabir said:

"We were present at Fatima and ‘Ali's (may Allah be pleased with them)
wedding ceremony, and indeed we have not seen any ceremony better than
that one..."

The Messenger of Allah (S) ordered his wives to embellish Fatima
az-Zahra (sa) before the wedding; they perfumed, and dressed her with
jewellery. They all helped to ready Fatima az-Zahra (sa); some combed
her hair while others embellished, and dressed her in the dress brought
by Angel Gabriel from Paradise.

Allah's Messenger (as) paid special attention to Fatima az-Zahra (sa),
which he did not bestow on his other daughters for the following
reasons:

A. Her special characteristics and noble traits.

B. Her husband is ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (as), who is known for his talents
and longstanding service to Islam, besides being the Prophet's cousin.

C. The Prophet (S) also knew that his daughter was going to be included
in the verse of purification, the verse of Mubahelah (supplication), and
the verse of Kinship.

D. Fatima az-Zahra (sa) is the mother of the Holy Imams who will lead
humanity until the Day of Resurrection.

The night of Fatima’s (sa) wedding arrived. Because every girl needs her
mother on her wedding night, Fatima missed Lady Khadija (as), and felt
very much like an orphan. With his noble and special attention to Fatima
az-Zahra (sa), the Prophet wished to fill Lady Khadija's (as) space; the
Prophet called ‘Ali (as), and Fatima az-Zahra (sa), who proceeded
towards him. Fatima az-Zahra (sa) was in her long heavenly dress
overtaken with shyness. He [‘Ali (as)] brought his gray horse, and asked
Fatima az-Zahra (sa) to ride it, and ordered Salman to lead while he
(as) followed them.

Yes, indeed, Fatima’s (sa) wedding was attended by heavenly creatures as
well as people, for she is a human huri.

Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi in Tareekh Baghdad v.5, p.7, Al-Hamvini in
Duraral-Simtain,

Al-Dhahabi in Mizan al-Etedal, Garani in Akhbar al-Dowal, and Qandouzi
in Yanabi' al-Mawaddah have narrated that Ibn Abbas said:

"When Fatima was taken to ‘Ali's house on her wedding night, the Prophet
proceeded her, Gabriel was on her right, and Michael on her left, and
seventy thousand angels followed her. These angels praised and glorified
Allah until dawn!!

The Hashemit men, Abdul Muttalib's daughters, and Muhajerin and Ansar's
women all accompanied Fatima's caravan that night. The Prophet's wives
joyfully led the caravan; they were also the first to enter the house.

Upon arriving, the Prophet placed Fatima's hand in ‘Ali's hand and said:

"May Allah bless his Messenger's daughter;

‘Ali this is Fatima, you are responsible for her (or, I entrust her to
you)

‘Ali, what an excellent wife Fatima is!!

Fatima, what an excellent husband ‘Ali is!!

O Allah, bless them, bless their lives, and bless their children

O Allah, surely they are the most beloved to me from among your
creatures, so love them too, and assign for them a guardian

I place them and their progeny under.Your protection from the curse
devil."

The Prophet then asked for a jug of water; he sipped a small amount of
the water, and after gargling with it, placed it back in the jug. He
then called for Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and sprayed her head and shoulders
with that water and did the same thing to ‘Ali (as). Thereafter, he
ordered the women to leave the house. They all left except Asma Bint
Umais. When he (as) noticed that she had stayed behind, he exclaimed:
*'Didn't I ask you to leave?'*

She answered: \`Indeed, O Messenger of Allah! May my parents be your
sacrifice; I did not intend to disobey you, but I promised Khadija to
take her place on this night.'

The Prophet (S) was moved by this; he cried, and said to Asma: *'By
Allah, this is the reason that made you stay behind?'*

She said: 'Yes, by Allah!'

He [Prophet (S)] then said: 'Asma, may Allah fulfillfor you the needs of
this world and the Hereafter.'


