Fatima's House
==============

The contemporary civilized world realizes the importance of paying due
attention to certain spots and structures, which are connected to
identified noble people, or, valuable entities. Thus, laws related to
this matter have been legislated, such as diplomatic immunity for
specific individuals, and buildings, and laws which regulate the use of
public places, universities, temples, and so on, that are related to
science, religion, and culture.

The importance of these actions and laws was known to Allah, the Exalted
and His chosen worshippers from the beginning. Rules and regulations
which govern entering mosques, especially the Sacred Mosque in Mecca,
such as preventing certain groups of people like the infidels, “the
junub, and menstruating women from entering them, are a reflection of
this fact. Other examples of such laws are: the necessity to keep these
places pure; the importance of respecting the sanctity of mosques; the
forbiddance of hunting in and around Mecca during certain periods of
time.

Fatima’s (sa) house is certainly one of these places, which is
surrounded by sanctity, holiness and exaltation. It was built on
respect, honor, and righteousness. Those who realize know the value of
her house.

Sheikh Majlisi (may Allah bless his soul) reported on the authority of
Anas Ibn Malik that Buraidah said:

***"Allah's Messenger read the verse: "In houses, which Allah hath
permitted to be raised to honor; for the celebration in the, of His
name: In them is He glorified in the mornings and in the evenings."***
(24: 36)

A man then exclaimed: "Whose houses are these, O Messenger of Allah?"

The Prophet (S) answered: *"Prophet's houses."*

Abu Bakr said: "Messenger of Allah, is this one of these houses (He
meant Fatima's house)?"

The Prophet (S) replied: "Yes, it is among the best of them!!"

Ibn Abbas also said: "I was in the Prophet's mosque when someone read:

\`In houses which Allah hath permitted to be raised in honor;...'

So, I said: \`Messenger of Allah; which houses?'

He (Ibn Abbas) said: \`Prophet's houses;' and pointed to Fatima's
house."

It has been narrated in Al-Kafi that Abdullah Ibn Ja'far al-Ansari said:

"Once, the Prophet of Allah proceeded towards Fatima's house while I was
with him; when we reached the door, he pushed the door (slightly) and
said:

'Assalamu Alaikum'

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) answered: 'Alaik as-Salam, Messenger of Allah.'

The Prophet (S) then said: *\`May I come in?'*

She said: 'I do not have my veil on, O Messenger of Allah.'

He (Prophet Muhammad (S)) said: 'Fatima, cover your head with your
cloak'

When she (Fatima az-Zahra (sa)) had done so, he said: *'Assalamu
Alaikum'*

She answered: 'Alaik-as-Salam, Messenger of Allah.'

He (Prophet Muhammad (S)) repeated the request for permission to enter
the house with me, and she gave us permission."


