Fatima 's (as) Marital Life
===========================

Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) moved from the home of Prophethood to the
house of Imamate, successorship and guardianship. This turn in Fatima’s
(sa) life, allowed her to become the companion of the Father of the
Imams.

As days passed, Fatima’s (sa) life became more beautiful, and splendid,
for she lived in an atmosphere of sanctity and chastity, surrounded by
modesty and humbleness. She aided her husband in his worldly and
religious affairs, and cooperated with him in achieving his exalted
goals. This harmony in their life was preferred by the ideological
tranquility they both enjoyed, and the respect and glorification they
held for each other. Fatima az-Zahra (sa) realized the great rank her
husband enjoyed. She respected him in the best manner as a Muslim woman
should respect her Imam, for she recognized that ‘Ali (as) was:

The dearest person to Allah's Messenger (as); The holder of the great
guardianship;

The possessor of absolute Imamate;

The Prophet's (as) brother, successor and heir; The possessor of
excellent talents;

His long-standing service to Islam was also apparent to everyone.

Likewise, ‘Ali (as) respected Fatima az-Zahra (sa), not only because she
was his wife, but also because she was:

The most beloved to Allah's Messenger (as); “the mistress of all women”;
And, her sanctity was part of the Prophet's (as).

Indeed, Fatima az-Zahra (sa) enjoyed noble traits which had any woman
held even one of them, she would be worthy of respect, and exaltation.

In view of such characteristics, you can imagine the great marital
happiness ‘Ali (as) and Fatima az-Zahra (sa) enjoyed. We can also
realize that their life was not disturbed by poverty or material
deprivation.

It is written in Al-Bihar, on the authority of Manaqeb that Imam ‘Ali
(as) said:

"By Allah, I never angered Fatima, or forced her to do something (she
did not like), up to the day she died; nor did she ever anger or disobey
me. In fact, when I looked at her, depression and sadness would be
removed from my (heart)."

Al-'Ayyashi, in his Tafsir (interpretation) of the Holy Qur’an, reported
that Imam Baqir (as) said:

"Fatima vouched to take care of the household work, make dough, bake
bread, and clean the house; in return, ‘Ali vouched to take care of the
outside work (such as) gathering firewood, and bringing food."

It is not exactly known how long ‘Ali (as) and Fatima az-Zahra (sa)
resided in Harithah's house; but it is a given fact that Allah's
Messenger constructed a house for them, which had a door to the mosque
just like his own house.


