Historical Distortions Regarding ‘Ali's (as) Right
==================================================

We have previously spoken of the unjustified slandering and distortion
of ‘Ali (as) and his noble life with Fatima az-Zahra (sa).We have also
stated that Imam ‘Ali's (as) marriage to Fatima az-Zahra (sa) caused
many people to show their hidden resentment, and envy to them, by
following every possible means to disturb Fatima’s (sa) life with her
husband.

Among the many fabricated stories told against Imam ‘Ali (as) was that
he had asked for Abu Jahl's (the chief of infidels) daughter's hand in
marriage. When this news reached Fatima az-Zahra (sa), she rushed to her
father who found out the falsity of the story.

Yet, let us review how some writers used this story to put down the
Commander of the Faithful (as), and their attempt to tarnish his
reputation.

An Egyptian writer, for instance, considered this story to be
undoubtedly authentic, and wrote the following in her book, The
Prophet's Daughters, p.167.

"‘Ali intended to marry a second wife besides Fatima... without bearing
in mind that such action would be resented by the daughter of the
Prophet of Islam."

The invalidity of this statement is obvious, for there is not a man in
the world who does not realize that his wife prefers to be the only
woman he marries.

The writer adds:

*"It would have been better if ‘Ali had been satisfied with one wife,"*
and filled up the pages of her book trying to show Abu Jahl's bad deeds,
and his long-standing enmity to Islam. She then made a comparison
between the Prophet's (as) daughter, and Abu Jahl's daughter with the
intention of showing the disadvantages of the fabricated would-be
marriage.

Strangely enough, the writer also made clear her resentment, and
disapproval of fanatic Christian Orientalists who distorted the history
of Islam, especially the famous Christian missionary-La Manze. However,
unfortunately, she herself was heedless of the need to verify such a
story, and instead considered its revelation undisputed. So, she used
her imagination and fictitious style of writing for this story, just as
fable writers would do.

Sayid Hasan al-Ameen in v.3 of his book, The Shiite Islamic
Encyclopedia, refuted such a story and wrote:

"It has been written in Dhakhaer al-Uqbithat ‘Ali wanted to marry Abu
Jahl's daughter, and that the Prophet was angered by this act and
ascended the minbar to speak with resentment and rejection about this
matter."

The book also elaborates on the story in such a manner, which not only
discredits ‘Ali (as), and Fatima az-Zahra (sa), but the Prophet (S)
himself.

This story makes Prophet Muhammad (S) appear as someone who refuses to
practice what he preaches, or, feel above the Islamic law to himself,
and those related to him while requesting others to abide by them. For
instance, he (Prophet (S)) deems it lawful for others to marry more than
one wife, but refuses this law when it comes to his daughter. This
indeed is a disastrous fabrication against the Prophet (S) that the
enemies of Islam were able to insert in the pages of our history books,
depending on unscruent narrators who report such stories without
reflecting upon them.

The story also defames ‘Ali (as) by showing him as someone who angered
both Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and her father, and defames Fatima az-Zahra
(sa) for refusing to practice Allah's commands, which He revealed to her
father.

I shall not verify the discredibility of the authority on which the
narration was based, for it within itself proves its own discredibility.
Yet, it is inevitable to ask: Why have the narrators, who fabricated
this story, insisted on saying that he (‘Ali (as)) wanted to marry Abu
Jahl's daughter, and not any other woman?! How come they did not claim
that ‘Ali (as) attempted to marry another woman? Surely, Abu Jahl's
daughter did not enjoy beauty and perfection, which no other Arab girl
enjoyed!

The fact is that they wanted their defamation of ‘Ali (as) to be graver
and more effective; for in their story, ‘Ali (as) specifically chose the
daughter of the chief of the enemies of Islam.

This plot exposed itself, and those who perpetuated it, when they
praised themselves while discrediting Prophet Muhammad (S), his daughter
(Fatima az-Zahra (sa)), and his cousin (‘Ali (as)). They claimed in the
same story that he mentioned his other son-in-law, who is a young man
from Bani Abd Shams, and praised him as "a noble son-in-law"; they claim
that the Prophet said:

"He, the young man from Bani Abd Shams was truthful in his speech and
executed his promises to me."

They want us to believe that the Prophet praised his Umayyad son-in-law
(the Umayyads belong to the tribe of Bani Abd Shams), which in turn
means that he was trying to discredit his first son-in-law [‘Ali (as)]
who, according to the story, lied to the Prophet, and violated his
promises to him by being an unfaithful husband to his daughter!!

Another aim for fabricating this story was to divert the attention from
the actual people who angered Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and put ‘Ali (as)
under the spotlight as if he was the one who did so. It was for this
reason that they mentioned the following tradition at the beginning of
the story:

"The Prophet (S) said:

"Fatima is part of me, discomforts me that which discomforts her, and
harms me that which harms her."

They interpret it as:

The meaning of this tradition is that Allah prohibited ‘Ali from
marrying another woman besides Fatima, which would harm Allah's
Messenger!!


