The Birth of Imam Husayn (as)
=============================

Six months after Al-Hasan (as) was born, Fatima az-Zahra (sa) became
pregnant with her second child.

Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) started noticing the signs that childbearing
was near; but, the Prophet (S) had already foretold of Imam Husayn's
(as) birth.

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

"Once, Umm Ayman's neighbors came to the Prophet and said:

"Messenger of Allah, Um Ayman did not sleep last night because of
crying; she surely cried until morning. "

The Prophet (S) summoned her and said:

"Umm Ayman, your neighbors say that you spent the night crying, may
Allah not cause your eyes to cry!! What made you cry?"

She (Umm Ayman) answered: "Messenger of Allah, I had a fearful dream
which caused me to cry all night long."

The Prophet (S) said: "Tell me your dream, for surely Allah and His
Messenger are most knowledgeable.

She said: "Last night I saw a dream as if one of your limbs was thrown
in my house!!"

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: "Your eyes have slept, but you visioned
a good thing. Umm Ayman, Fatima will give birth to Al-Husayn, and you
will bring him to me. So, one of my limbs will be in your house."

When Al-Husayn (as) was born, Umm Ayman brought him to the Prophet (S)
who said:

"Both the carrier and he who is being carried are welcome. Umm Ayman,
this is the interpretation of your dream."

Umm al-Fadhl, Al-Abbas's wife, had a similar dream.

Safia Bint Abdul Muttalib, Asma Bint Umais, and Umm Salama were present
when Imam Husayn (as) was born. When the Prophet (S) asked Safia (his
aunt) to bring him the newborn child, she said: *"We have not cleaned
him yet."*

When the Prophet (S) heard this, he said: "You clean him?! Surely Allah
the Exalted has cleaned and purified him."

After Al-Husayn (as) was born, Gabriel again descended to the Prophet
(S), and revealed to him to give the new baby the name Al-Husayn (as).
Al-Husayn (as) is the Arabic version of the old Hebrew name Shabbir,
which was Haroun's second son's name. When Gabriel descended to the
Prophet, scores of angels accompanied him to congratulate and console
the Prophet (S) for Husayn's (as) birth, and expected martyrdom.

Imam Husayn (as) was not nursed by any woman, including his mother
(Fatima az-Zahra) (as); instead he suckled the Prophet's tongue until he
grew old enough to eat. Because of this, his characteristics were
exactly as those of the Prophet (S)*.*

Seven days after the birth the, Messenger of Allah (S) shaved Husayn's
(as) head and gave the weight of his hair as charity for him.


