Fatima az-Zahra (sa) in Surah Al-Insan (76)
===========================================

Allah the Exalted has said:

***"Verily the Good shall drink of a Cup (of wine) mixed with Kafur. A
fountain where the Devotees of God do drink, making it flow in unstinted
abundance. They perform (their) vows, and they fear a Day whose evil
lies far and wide. And, they feed, for the love of God, the indigent,
the orphan and the captive. Saying, \`We feed you for the sake of God
alone; no reward do we desire from you, nor thanks.' \`We only fear a
Day of distressful Wrath from the side of our Lord.' But, God will
deliver them from the evil of that day, and will shed over them a light
of Beauty, and a (blissful) Joy. And, because they were patient and
constant, He will reward them with a Garden and (garment of) silk.
Reclining in the (Garden) on raised thrones, they will see there neither
the sun's (excessive heat), nor, (the moon's) excessive cold. And, the
shades of the (Garden) will come low over them, and the bunches (of
fruit), there, will hang low in humility. And, amongst them will be
passed round vessels of silver, and goblets of crystal; Crystal clear,
made of silver. They will determine the measure thereof (according to
their wishes). And, they will be given to drink there of a Cup (of wine)
mixed with Zanjabil. A fountain there, called Salsabil.***

***And around about them will (serve) youths of perpetual (freshness):
if thou seest them, thou wouldst think them scattered Pearls. And when
thou lookest, It is there thou wilt see a Bliss and a Realm Magnificent.
Upon them will be green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, and
they will be adorned with Bracelets of silver; and their Lord will give
to them to drink of a Wine pure and Holy. Verily this is a Reward for
you, and your Endeavor is accepted and recognized."*** (76: 5-22)

These verses were revealed after ‘Ali (as), Fatima az-Zahra (sa), Hasan
(as), and Husayn (as) gave charity to needy people; this story is stated
in the book Al-Kashaf by Zamakhshari; it goes as follows:

*"*Ibn Abbas said:

\`Once Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn (as) were ill, the Messenger of Allah and
a group went to visit them. The visitors suggested to Imam ‘Ali (as) to
make a vow to Allah: if He were to relieve them, he would perform some
good action. Therefore, Imam ‘Ali together with Fatima and their servant
Fidhdha vowed to Allah that they would fast for three days if He would
relieve Hasan and Husayn.'

'When Allah had relieved them, Imam ‘Ali (as) borrowed three (3) aswu (a
cubic measure) of barley from a Jew known as Shimon. Fatima ground one
(1) sa'a (singular of aswu) of the barley and baked five loaves of bread
for her family's meal at sunset. As sunset approached, a needy man
knocked on the door and said: Assalamu Alaikum, Family of Muhammad. I am
a needy man from among the Muslims, feed me, may Allah feed you from the
food of Paradise.' The holy family preferred the needy man over
themselves and spent the night with nothing in their stomachs save
water.'

'They fasted the second day, and again at sunset, when they were waiting
for their food, an orphan asked them for help and they again preferred
him over themselves. The third evening a captive (prisoner of war) asked
them for help and they repeated their preference for the needy above
themselves.'

'The following morning, Imam ‘Ali (as) took Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn to
the Messenger of Allah (S) who said the following when he saw them
shaking like little chicks from hunger:

"The Prophet (S) said: It displeases us to see you in this condition.'

Then he went with them, for he wanted to see Fatima. When they arrived,
Fatima (sa) was in the Mehrab (prayer place), and her condition was such
that it further displeased the Prophet (S). At this time, Gabriel
descended and said:

\`Take this chapter Muhammad, - Allah surely congratulates you for
having this family. "

It is worthy to state that the Good ones mentioned here are ‘Ali (as),
Fatima az-Zahra (sa), Hasan (as), and Husayn (as); who deserve Paradise
because of their act of feeding the needy, the orphan, and the captive.

Another point to keep in mind here is that despite the detailed
description of Paradise given in the verses, Allah, the Exalted, does
not mention the “huris”. This understood to be in honor and exaltation
of Fatima az-Zahra (sa) the wife of Imam ‘Ali (as), and the mother of
Hasan (as) and Husayn (as).


