Fatima’s (sa) Glorification of Allah (SwT)
==========================================

It is reported in Bihar that ‘Ali (as) said to a man from Bani Sae'ed:

"Should I speak to you about Fatima and Myself?

She was my spouse who was the most beloved to the Prophet. Once, she
carried water using a waterskin until it scarred her chest, she ground
(grain) using a hand mill until blisters appeared on her hands, she
swept the floor until her clothes became dusty and lit the fire under
the cooking pot until her clothes became mud colored from the smoke.

Fatima was inflicted by great pain as a result of this, so I said to
her:

\`Why don't you ask your father for a servant to relieve you from these
jobs?'

When Fatima (sa) went to the Prophet she found that he had company; and
was too shy to talk to him, so she left the house. But, the Prophet (S)
knew that she had come for something."

Imam ‘Ali (as) continued:

"The next morning, the Prophet came to the house while we were still
under our quilt and said:

'Assalamu Alaikum!'

Yet, because we were ashamed (of being under the quilt), we preferred to
remain silent.

The Prophet (S) once again said:

'Assalamu Alaikum!'

Once again we remained silent. Then for the third time the Prophet said
*'Assalamu Alaikum'.* Now we feared that he would depart, for it was the
prophet's habit to say Assalamu alaikum three times and then wait for
permission to enter, or, leave.

So, I said:

\`Wa Alaik As-Salam, Messenger of Allah! Come in.'

He (Prophet (S)) sat near our heads and said: 'Fatima, what was your
need when you came to Muhammad yesterday?'

Imam ‘Ali (as) added: "I was afraid that she (Fatima) would not tell
him, so I pulled my head from under the cover and said:

"I will inform you, Messenger of Allah!

Surely she carried water using a water skin until her chest was scarred,
she ground (grain) using a hand mill until blisters appeared on her
hands, she swept the floor until her clothes became dusty and lit the
fire under the cooling pot until her clothes were mud colored from the
smoke. So, 1 said to her:

\`Why don't ask your father for a servant to relieve you form these
jobs?'"

The Prophet (S) upon hearing this, said:

\`Shall I teach you something that is better for you than a servant and
a world with everything in it? After every prayer say: Allahu Akbar
thirty four (34) times, Alhamdulillah thirty three (33) times and Subhan
Allah thirty three (33) times then conclude that with la illaha ila
Allah. Surely this is better for you than that which you wanted and the
world and its belongings.'

Thus, Fatima adhered to this glorification after every prayer; and it
came to be known as \`Tasbih Fatima.'

'Abu Haroun, surely we command our children to adhere to \`Tasbih
Fatima' the same way we command them to perform prayers. So perform the
tasbih, for whoever adheres to it shall never be miserable.'"

In reference to Fatima’s (sa) beads, it was reported in Makarim
al-Akhlaq that it was made of woven wool threads which had knots by the
number of Takbir (Allahu Akbar), until when Hamza Ibn Abdal Muttalib
(as) was martyred, she made them from the mud of his grave.

Since the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as), people have been using the mud
surrounding his tomb for making beads for the great blessings, which lie
in it.

Imam Sadiq (as) said: "Beads should be made with blue thread and thirty
four (34) beads, which was the way Fatima's beads were made after
Hamza's martyrdom."

There are various narrations, which were reported about "Tasbih
Fatima's" importance and order. Yet, the most famous order on which our
jurisprudents agree is to start with Allahu Akbar, then Subhan Allah,
and end with Al-Hamdulillah.

When we review the aforementioned narrations, it becomes clear that Lady
Fatima az-Zahra (sa) performed her housework by herself, despite her
honor and nobility, and that ‘Ali (as) helped her to do the housework.

It has been reported in Bihar that Imam ‘Ali (as) said:

"Once, the Messenger of Allah came to us while Fatima was sitting near
the pot and I was cleaning some lentils; when the Prophet saw us he
said:

'Abu Al-Hasan!'

I said: 'At your service! O Messenger of Allah!'

He (Prophet (S)) then said: \`Listen to me, for I say not save that
which is the word of Lord: There is not a man who helps his wife in her
housework, save that with very hair on his body a whole year of
worship-during which he fasted the days and kept up the nights in prayer
is counted for him....'


