Fatima’s (sa) Knowledge
=======================

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) acquired her divine knowledge from the clear spring
of Prophethood and received the excellence of truth from the house of
revelation. So her attentive heart was embellished with wisdom and her
brilliant reason together with her brightness realized to the fullest
extent the real meaning of every fact.

Yet, despite the fact that Fatima az-Zahra (sa) heard an abundant volume
of narrations from her father what has been reported on her authority is
limited to certain issues. The reason for this will be explained later.

Among the narrations reported on Fatima’s (sa) account are:

1. Bihar, Chapter--Knowledge.

Imam Askari (as) said: "A woman came to Fatima Zahra (sa) and said: \`I
have a weak mother who has become confused about a matter related to her
prayer; she sent me to inquire from you about it.'

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) answered her; the woman repeatedly came with
questions for Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and she (sa) kindly answered her
every time. One day the lady approached Fatima az-Zahra (sa) with
another question from her mother, and said to Fatima az-Zahra (sa):

\`I shall not inconvenience you (any more), daughter of Allah's
Messenger.'

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) replied: 'Ask me regarding anything, which comes to
your mind. Because if a man had been hired to transport a heavy load to
the top of a mountain for a reward of one thousand dinars, do you think
it would bother him?'

The woman said: *\`No'*

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) continued: \`My reward for (answering) every
inquiry is more than that which fills (the space) between the ground and
the Throne with pearls; thus, I should be more apt to answer your
questions. Surely, I heard my father say:

\`When the scholars of our Shiite (followers) are gathered (on the Day
of Resurrection), they will be bestowed with garments of honor equal in
quantity to their knowledge and struggle to guide Allah's worshippers,
up to the point that anyone of them will be gifted with one million
garments of light.' Then the caller of our Exalted and Glorified Lord
will say:

\`O you guardians of the orphans of Muhammad. (You) who inspire them
when they are separated from their fathers, who are their Imams; these
are your pupils and the orphans whom you guarded and inspired, therefore
bestow them with garments of knowledge in life. Thus, they will bestow
each orphan with that which corresponds to the amount of knowledge he
received from them (the scholars); up to the point that some orphans are
bestowed with one million garments. Like-so, the orphans bestow those
who learnt from them.' Then Allah, the Exalted said:

\`Repeat upon these scholars, the guardians of the orphans, the
bestowment and double and complete it for them and for those who follow
them"

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) then added:

\`Worshipper of Allah, surely a thread of those garments is better than
that on which the sun rises. "'

*2.* Bihar v.10:

Yazid Ibn Abdulmalik (Nawfali) quoted his father, who quoted his
grandfather as saying:

"Once, I entered the house of Fatima (sa) who was the first to greet me;
she then said:

\`What brings you here?'

I said: "I have come in search of blessing."

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) then said: "My father (who was present) said: 'He
who greets him or me for three consecutive days, will be granted
Paradise by Allah.'

I said: \`While you are living?'

She answered: 'yes, and after we are dead.'"

3. Kashf al Ghumma:

Imam ‘Ali (as) quoted Fatima az-Zahra (sa) as saying:

"The Messenger of Allah (S) said: 'Fatima, he who praises you, will be
forgiven by Allah; Who will make him my companion where ever in Paradise
I may be."

4. Da'awat Ar Rawandi:

Swaid Ibn Ghafla said:

"Once, ‘Ali (as) was inflicted with hardship; so Fatima (sa) knocked on
the Messenger of Allah's door, who said:

\`I hear the movement of my beloved one near the door, Umm Ayman get up
and see!'

Umm Ayman opened the door and Fatima az-Zahra (sa) entered the house.

The Prophet (S) then said: 'You have come to us at a time that you have
not previously come!'

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) said: \`Messenger of Allah, what is the angels’
food near our Lord?'

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: \`By Him Who holds my soul in His hand,
fire has not been lit (in our house) for a whole month; yet, I will
teach you five statements which Gabriel taught me.'

She (sa) said: \`Messenger of Allah, what are these five statements?'

The Prophet (S) said: \`O Lord of the First and Last;

O You Possessor of Might, and Strength;

O You Who is Merciful with the poor;

O You most Beneficent, most Merciful. "'

(Note: It appears as if the fifth statement has been mistakenly erased.)

Thereafter Fatima az-Zahra (sa) returned and ‘Ali (as) saw her, and
exclaimed:

"May my father and mother be your sacrifice, Fatima; what have you to
tell me?"

She (Fatima az-Zahra (sa)) said: "I went seeking worldly things, but
have returned (with the goodness of) the hereafter."

‘Ali (as) then said: "Expect goodness, expect goodness!"

5. Bihar v.10: It is reported in Al-Kafi that Imam Sadiq (as) said:

'Once, Fatima approached Allah's Messenger with a problem. The Prophet
listened to her problem and gave her a wrapped piece of material and
said: \`Learn that which is written in it.' (When she opened it) she
found written in it:

"He who believes in Allah and the Last Day, shall not harm his neighbor.

He who believes in Allah and the Last Day, shall honor his guest.

He who believes in Allah and the Last Day shall say that which is useful
or keep silent.'"


