Chapter 2: The Prophet's Marriage
=================================

The Messenger of Allah (S) married Lady Khadija at the age of
twenty-five, while Khadija herself was forty years old. Yet some
historians allege that she was twenty-five, and still others claim that
she was twenty-eight years old.

It is also said that she had two previous marriages before marrying the
Prophet (S) some historians dispute this and indicate that she was a
virgin when the Last Prophet (S) married her. This last claim is not
common.

The Prophet's marriage to Khadija was not a usual one. It was a unique
marriage because it was not initiated as a result of a love
relationship, nor, was there a material, or, political motive behind it,
which was commonplace among the elite classes. In fact, there was no
correlation between the Prophet's economical position and that of the
Lady Khadija's. On one hand, the Messenger was sponsored by his poor
uncle, Abu Talib, and on the other hand, Khadija was the wealthiest lady
in Mecca. Thus, there was an evident gap between them in this
peculiarity.

Khadija heard that the Prophet had a bright and sacred future ahead of
him; perhaps she heard this from her servant Maisarah, who informed her
of what had happened to the Messenger during a commercial trip to Syria
in which he had worked for her. Or perhaps he conveyed to her what the
monk in Busra said about the future of the Prophet-upon learning this,
Lady Khadija suggested that prophet Muhammad (S) marry her, and urged
him to ask for her hand from her Father, Khuwaylid (according to some
historians it was her uncle).

The Prophet, who preferred to marry a poor woman from his own economical
class, apologized to Khadija and refused her request. But, she being a
wise, reasonable, and honorable woman informed him that she was ready to
grant him herself, and that property was not a difficult thing to put at
his disposal. So, she once again urged him to send his uncles to ask for
her hand from her Father, Khuwaylid.

The Prophet's uncles and aunts were astonished at this news; a very
wealthy lady who sponsors hundreds of people, and tens of men work for
her in her property and trade for her throughout the summer and winter
seasons, between Yemen, Mecca and Syria; a great Lady whom the noblemen
had asked to marry, but she had refused them all, giving herself to a
poor Quraishan young man, sponsored by his poor uncle, Abu Talib!! Could
she have been honest in doing so?! Could this news be true? Safiya bint
Abdul Muttalib (the Prophet's aunt) rushed to Khadija's house to
validate the news. She was warmly welcomed by Khadija who informed her
of her earnest desire to do so.


