The Prophet Muhammed’s (as) Death
=================================

It was eleven years after Hijra. Allah's Messenger (as) was about to
conclude establishing the main pillars on which the Islamic law, which
was ordained to be everlasting for being the final faith, was to depend.
His noble soul was compelled to return with satisfaction and comfort to
the One Who Created it; after it had attained the goal of bringing about
the greatest change in the history of mankind. Yes, indeed it was
inevitable for the Prophet's soul to depart towards Him who it truly
knew, since the beginning of creation called mankind to worship, and
courageously struggled in the path of elevating His Word. And, as it is
said:

"Death was written to fit man just as a necklace was made to fit a
girl's neck"

The Prophet (S) along with the Muslim(s), had performed his final
morning prayer. It was the last time they (the people) were to see the
Divine light come upon them. By the time the sun had reached the middle
of the sky, the Prophet's (as) sun had made its eternal set.

By noon he was lying dead between his kin; they could do nothing save
shed tears of sorrow for the biggest affliction of history.

What a day it was. Greatness, perfection, honor and exaltation had been
lost. Muslims were so saddened that whenever they were afflicted with
great sorrow thereafter they said:

"Surely this is a day like when the Messenger of Allah died."

The house was crowded with crying people; but Fatima’s (sa) weeping was
the greatest. She had lost her great father, and with him went her
happiness and joy; with his death came sadness and pain.

When the Muslims heard of the Prophet's (as) death, they rushed towards
the Mosque. The people were overwhelmed, and did not realize what had
actually happened. They became like scattered sheep on a rainy night
without their shepherd. What were they to do? ‘Ali (as) was busy
attending to washing the Prophet's (as) body, and could not speak to
them in details.

It was undoubtedly true! He (as) had died! Yet, Umar Ibn al-Khattab
refused to allow people to believe what had happened. He began shouting
in their faces and threatening them by saying:

'Allah's Messenger did not die, nor will he die until his religion
reigns over all other religions. He shall return to amputate the hands
and legs of the men who believed in his death. I will not hear a man
say: \`The Messenger of Allah died save that I will cut off his head."

Umar's call was decisive and rebellious. He, being an adept orator, used
the most effective method of speech to persuade his listeners to believe
him.

Umar had sparked hope in their hearts that the Prophet (S) was still
alive.

He put fear in the hearts of the Muslims by telling them that the
Prophet (S) would come to amputate the hands and legs of those who
believed in his death.

Furthermore, Umar threatened them by saying:

"I will cut off the neck of anyone who says: Allah's Messenger died."

Fear and hope were the tools that Umar used to control the nerves of the
Muslims. Because of the people's great love for the Prophet (S), the
call to refuse accepting his death, easily found its way into their
minds. Hence, no one objected to Umar and the misbelief that the
Messenger had not died; this overtook all other news.

The Muslims suffered several hours in total suspense and confusion. They
were prevented from believing in the Prophet's (as) death until Abu Bakr
returned from a nearby village.

As soon as Abu Bakr returned, he proceeded towards the Prophet's (as)
house and uncovered his face to make sure that he was actually dead. He
then went to the Mosque and found Umar still stating that the Prophet
had not died. Abu Bakr ordered Umar to sit down; Umar refused until he
ordered him three times; yet, Umar still refused. Thus, Abu Bakr stood
in another corner of the Mosque and addressed the people:

"He who worships Muhammad should be informed that Muhammad has died. He
who worships Allah should know that Allah is ever-living and does not
die."

Abu Bakr then recited the following verse:

"Muhammad is no more than a Prophet: many were the Apostles that passed
away before him. If he died or was slain, will ye then turn back your
heels?"

When the Muslims heard this, they submitted to the fact. Even Umar
believed that he had actually died, and as Umar himself said:

"I only believed that he died after I had made sure that the verse was
from the Holy Qur’an."

Abu Bakr, and Umar's story was sad!! Right?! Yet even the simplest minds
cannot be convinced that these events can be plainly interpreted.

LOOK!

Umar shouted, swore, threatened those who say that the Messenger of
Allah has actually died. But, when Abu Bakr recites a verse from the
Qur’an, which Umar himself did not recognize!! Then Umar suddenly
collapses; and believes that Muhammad really died!!

How did Umar know that the Prophet (S) will not die until his religion
reigns over all other religions?!

Did he inform Umar that he will return to cut off the arms and legs of
those who said he was dead?

Didn't Umar really know that the verse recited by Abu Bakr was a
Qur’anic verse, so that he could claim to believe in the Prophet's
death?!

But, surely "Still waters run deep"!!

Actually, by behaving in such a way, Umar was able to suspend the
Muslims and hold them back for several hours until Abu Bakr returned. It
was then that they, Abu Bakr and Umar, immediately started the execution
of their premeditated plan to seize power.

Can't you see that Umar was over-reacting to the Prophet's death; but,
simultaneously with Abu Bakr's speech, he turned around forgetting all
about his supposedly broken heart to announce his allegiance to Abu Bakr
as the new leader of the Muslims!!

At any rate, Abu Bakr's and Umar's success in seizing power from ‘Ali
(as) after the Prophet's (as) death, can only be the first of previous
planning to do so long before the death of Allah's Messenger (as). Thus,
this show, which was put on, by Umar and Abu Bakr can only be part of
this planning. The authenticity of this statement can be verified when
minds are set free to search the pages of history books.


