After The Prophet's (as) Death
==============================

After the Prophet's (as) death, precarious events continued to occur.
When studying the era following the Prophet's (as) death, history speaks
of the wonders, which occurred.

Indeed, history tells us about "Apostasy" which included the majority of
Muslims who objected to Abu Bakr's seize of power from its righteous
candidate, ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (as).

It also tells us how Fatima's rights were usurped. notably Fadak, and
how ‘Ali (as) was dragged to the Mosque to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr!!

History tells us how Fatima’s (sa) house was set on fire by him (Umar)
who yesterday pretended not to believe in her father's death.

Yes, history tells us how the Prophet (S) died, and with him died his
repeated warnings to those who would oppress his family members, and
that they will be met with the wrath of Allah. It also tells us of Lady
Fatima’s (sa) sadness and misery which she suffered after the death of
her dear father.

Fidhdha, Fatima’s (sa) helper, spoke of Fatima’s (sa) sadness; she said:

"It was on the eighth day after the Prophet's death that Fatima revealed
the extent of her sadness and inability to bear life without her father.
She (sa) came to the Mosque and while crying said:

\`Oh! Father

Oh! My sincere friend

Oh! Abu Al-Qasim

Oh! The helper of the widowed and the orphans

Who do we have for Kaaba and the Mosque?

Who does your saddened and grieved daughter have?"

Fidhdha added:

"Fatima (sa) then proceeded towards the tomb of the Prophet; it was
difficult for her to walk because her tears covered her eyes. When she
saw the Mizaneh, she passed out; so the women rushed to rescue her;
after putting water of her face, she regained consciousness; Fatima then
said:

\`My strength has been eradicated

My endurance has betrayed me

My enemies have rejoiced at my misfortune

And my grief will kill me

Father! I remain bewildered and lonely

Confused and lonesome

My voice is subdued

My back is broken

My life is disturbed

I find no one, Father, after you to attend to my loneliness

Neither to stop my tears

Nor to support me in times of weakness

Surely precise revelations, the place of Gabriel's descendence and
Michael's location have vanished after you

Father,

Motives (of others) have changed

And gates have been shut in my face

Thus, I detest this world after you

And my tears shall be shed for you as long as breath continues to exist
in me

My longing for you shall not cease

My sadness for (being separated from) you shall not vanish

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) then cried out loudly:

Father!!

With you went the light of the world

Its flowers wither away after blossoming in your presence

Father!!

I will forever be sorrowful for you until we are reunited

Father!!

Sleeping has left me since we have been separated

Father!!

Who is there for the widows and the orphans

Who will we have for the Ummah until

The Day of Rising?!

Father!

We became-after you-among the oppressed

Father!!

People shun us after you

After we were glorified by your presence among men

Thus, what tear shall not spill on your departure?

What sadness (after you) shall not continue to exist?

Which eyelid shall be smeared with slumber?

You are the spring of faith and the light of Prophets

So how can mountains not sway?

And seas not dry out?

How can the Earth not tremble?

Father! I have been afflicted with the greatest sorrow, and my disaster
is not minor!

Father!!

I have been inflicted with the greatest misfortune and the biggest
calamity

Angels cry for you, and stars cease to move because of you

Your minbar (after you) is gloomy, Your minbar is empty

Of your secret conversation (with your Lord)

Your grave is joyful for holding you

And Paradise is delighted with your presence

Supplication and prayers

Father!!

How gloomy are your meeting places (without your presence)!!

How pained I am for you, until I soon join you!!

How bereaved is Abu Al-Hussan, The entrusted one!!

The Father of your two sons, Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn; your beloved one

He whom you brought up as a youth, and made your brother as a man (Abu
Al-Hasan)

The most beloved of your companions to you

Abu Al-Hasan, who was the first to immigrate and help you

Sadness has overtaken us; Crying will kill us

And distress will always accompany us.'

Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) then returned to her house and lived in misery
and sadness until she joined her beloved father not long after he passed
away*.*"


