Abu Bakr Versus Fatima az-Zahra (sa)
====================================

Fatima az-Zahra (sa), the only surviving child of the Prophet, his most
beloved, claimed inheritance of the property which could be apportioned
to her in the lands of Medina and in Khaibar, also known as Fadak, which
having been acquired without the use of force, the Prophet (S) had given
her for her maintenance, in accordance with the commands of Allah (SwT).
[^1]

Yet, Fadak became an arena for political games when Abu Bakr refused to
transfer it to Fatima az-Zahra (sa). It is appropriate here to speak
about Fadak before clarifying the corresponding events which occurred in
its regard:

Fadak was a village located at a two-day walking distance from Medina.
Apparently, it was inhabited by Jews who refused to submit to Islam at
the beginning, but when the later realized the might of the Muslims,
especially after they, led by ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (as) conquered Khaibar,
the Jews decided to yield to the Messenger of Allah (S) without
fighting. So, he took possession of the village.

The village was valued at 100,000 dirhams by Umar's appraisers when he
expelled its inhabitants to Syria. Umar took possession of the village
and paid half of the price to the Jews.

Fadak Becomes the Prophet's (as) Personal Property
--------------------------------------------------

Since the reason that motivated the inhabitants of Fadak to transfer its
possession to Allah's Messenger (as) was fear of the Muslims after they
had conquered Khaibar, this property became the sole possession of the
Prophet (S). This conforms to Allah's decree in the Holy Qur’an:

***"What Allah has bestowed on His Apostle (and taken away) from them
for this (which) ye made no expedition with either calvary or camelry:
But Allah gives power to His Apostles over any He pleases: and Allah Has
power over all things."*** (59: 6)

There was no dispute between the Muslims that Fadak belonged to the
Prophet (S); rather, the disagreement was related to how much Fadak had
the Jews granted him as part of the peace settlement. Thus, it is
strange to hear Abu Bakr narrate a tradition from the Prophet saying:

"We the group of Prophets do not inherit, nor are we inherited; what we
leave is for alms!!"

Because, had the Prophet actually said so (which is doubted), how did
Abu Bakr understand from this saying that Fadak did not belong to him.
There is clear contradiction in Abu Bakr's arguments.

Therefore, after realizing beyond doubt that Fadak was the personal
property of Allah's Messenger (as), it is appropriate to inquire as to
what he did with it? But the answer is clear. He granted it to Fatima
az-Zahra (sa) before his death. In other words, Fadak became the
personal property of Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa). Moreover, it is not for
anyone to object to the Prophet for granting his own property to any
person he wished-including his daughter.

Moreover, the following factors can be cited as proofs that the Prophet
(S) granted Fadak to his noble daughter (as):

1. Fatima's saying to Imam ‘Ali (as):

"This is Ibn Abu Quhafa snatching away my father's grant to me."

2. Fatima az-Zahra’s (sa) saying to Abu Bakr

"Surely Fadak was granted to me by my father, the Messenger of Allah
(S)."

Especially in light of the fact that her infallibility prevents her from
uttering falsehood, and from demanding anything, which does not
rightfully belong to her.

3. ‘Ali (as), the infallible Imam, would not allow his wife to demand
something, which did not belong to her.

4. Imam ‘Ali (as) wrote in his letter to Uthman Ibn Hunaif:

"Yes! Fadak was the only land from that which was under the heavens, in
our hands; but the inclinations of certain men lusted for it and the
souls of others relinquished it."

Hence, had it been part of the Prophet's (as) inheritance, he (as) would
not have said that it belonged to them (‘Ali (as) and Fatima az-Zahra
(sa)).

5. Imam ‘Ali (as) together with Um Ayman testified to the fact that
Allah's Messenger (as) granted it to Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa), when Abu
Bakr requested Fatima az-Zahra (sa) to summon witnesses to prove that he
(Prophet (S)) had granted it to her.

Yet, despite these undisputable proofs, Abu Bakr denied Fatima az-Zahra
(sa) the possession of Fadak and brought the following as proof of the
correctness of his action:

1. According to Abu Bakr, Fadak did not belong to the Messenger of Allah
(S); it rather was the property of all Muslims.

2. Besides, according to Abu Bakr, even if it belonged to the Prophet of
Allah (S)*,* he had heard him saying:

"We the group of prophets do not inherit nor are we inherited."

3. Abu Hurairah narrated that the Prophet (S) said:

"My inheritance is not to be divided after me, even if it is one dinar
or dirham. That which I leave is alms, save what is to maintain my wives
and dependents."

However, when these hypothetical points made by Abu Bakr are put on the
board of discussion, free from ideological, or, emotional prejudgments,
and far from blind sanctification of the early followers of Islam, we
can record the following points against them:

1. It is true that he denied the Prophet's (as) ownership of Fadak, but
all the Muslims, whether early Muslims, or, contemporary ones,
unanimously agree that Fadak was the sole possession of Allah's Prophet
(S) This fact is also supported by the Qur’anic verse which we have
already mentioned. Therefore, Abu Bakr's claim is invalidated for being
a mere endeavor to null the effect of the Qur’an.

2. Abu Bakr claimed that he heard the Prophet of Allah (S) say:

"We the group of prophets do not inherit, nor are we inherited; what we
leave is for alms,"

This can be disputed as follows:

A. This narration is irrelevant regarding this issue; because we have
already stated that Fadak was a grant from the Prophet (S) to his
daughter before he died. So, it is inappropriate to quote a narration
related to the issue of inheritance with the purpose of denying Lady
Fatima (sa) her property.

B. This narration was only reported by one man, who is Abu Bakr,
himself. And, the Holy Qur’an stated a general rule concerning
inheritance, where the Prophets and their heirs are included in this
rule. So, Abu Bakr's claim cannot be taken as proof versus the Holy
Qur’an, nor, can it be proof for excluding the prophets, and their
families from the Qur’anic rule.

C. Yet, the real reasons which provoke Abu Bakr, and his followers to
deprive Fatima az-Zahra (sa) from her own property, despite the fact
that the Prophet (S) said:

"Fatima is part of me, he who loves her loves me, and he who angers her
angers me, "'

This had more implicit motives behind them, and was directly related to
the political events of that time.

3. As for Abu Hurairah's narration; it is sufficient for us to keep in
mind that he was famous for forging Prophetic traditions. Even he,
himself, admitted this; and anyone wishing to study more about his life,
should refer to Sheikh al-Madhirah - Abu Hurairah Dowsi, written by
Mahmoud Abu Raieh.

The Real Motives Which Lead Abu Bakr to Usurp Fadak from Fatima az-Zahra
(sa)

The history books at hand need thorough examination and revision, for
they have been recorded according to the wishes and satisfactions of
despotic rulers throughout history. In view of this, and in light of the
fact that Lady Fatima Zahra (sa) was a strong supporter of her husband
in his quest to regain Caliphate, and that her views were proofs that
the followers of Imam ‘Ali (as) can use it to easily verify his claims
against Abu Bakr; we can easily understand how Abu Bakr was successful
in depriving Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) of her rights, and how his moves
corresponded to his adopted political thinking. So, not only was Abu
Bakr able to persuade the Muslims to dismiss Fatima’s (sa) stands as
those of a woman who can be depended upon even in such a secondary issue
like Fadak, but also he aimed at convincing them that since she (sa) was
not to be believed in such a matter, she (sa) was also to be deserted
when it comes to the most important issue of that time (i.e.,
Caliphate).

Yet, there are more motives that can be spotted to have led Abu Bakr to
usurp Fatima az-Zahra’s (sa) property. Among them are:

1. Since Fadak brought large profits to its owners, ‘Ali (as) could use
this profit in his fight against Abu Bakr just as Lady Khadija (as) used
her wealth against the infidels.

2. The political challenge which Abu Bakr created, was aimed at proving
to ‘Ali (as) and Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) that the nation was not ready
to aid them in an emotional issue in which he was successful in
downgrading ‘Ali (as) and Fatima az-Zahra (sa) by controlling and
directing the public opinion. Listen to Abu Bakr as he speaks to the
people after Fatima’s (sa) speech in the Mosque:

"O people!

What is this attentiveness to every aimless speech?!

Where were these claims at the time of Allah's Messenger (as)?

He who heard something should say so!

He who witnessed anything should speak out!

Surely they are (‘Ali (as) and Fatima (sa), like foxes who have no
witnesses save their tails!

They instigate every dissension!

And say: Renew (trouble) after it has cooled down

They seek help from the weak and acquire support from women

They are like Umm Tahal (a woman who was a prostitute during the era of
ignorance) whose family chose prostitution for her

Surely if I wish 1 can say a lot; and

had I said (something), would have revealed (much).

But, I will remain silent as long as I am left alone."

3. Abu Bakr's drive to deprive Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) of her property
had another underlying motive. Had Abu Bakr admitted Fatima’s (sa) words
in regard to Fadak as undisputable facts, she could also claim her
husband's right to leadership, which would force Abu Bakr to hand it
back to ‘Ali (as).

Ibn Abil-Hadid said: I asked ‘Ali Ibn Fareqi, a distinguished teacher of
Madrassa-Gharbia, Baghdad: *"Was Fatima truthful in making the claim
(regarding Fadak)?"*

He answered: *"Yes!"*

I said: "Did Abu Bakr know that she [Fatima az-Zahra (sa)] was a
truthful woman?"

Again he answered: *"Yes."*

I then asked: "Then why did the Caliph not give that which she [(as)]
was entitled to back to her?"

At that moment the teacher smiled, and said with great dignity:

"If he had accepted her word on that day and had returned Fadak to her
on account of her being a truthful woman and without asking for any
witnesses, she could very well use this position for the benefit of her
husband on the following day and say:

\`My husband, ‘Ali is entitled to the Caliphate,' and then the Caliph
would have been obliged to surrender the Caliphate to ‘Ali on account of
his having acknowledged her to be a truthful woman. However, in order to
obviate any such claim, or, dispute, he deprived her of her undisputed
right!"

4. Moreover, there were several emotional factors, which lead Abu Bakr
to refuse Fatima, Khadija's daughter, her rights. Some of these factors
are:

Once, the Prophet of Allah (S) sent Abu Bakr to the Muslims, during Hajj
season, to recite for them the newly revealed Surah al-Tawbah, but
before reaching his destination AbuBakr was stopped by ‘Ali Ibn Abu
Talib who informed him that the Messenger commanded him to deliver the
Surah himself; because according to the Prophet (S):

"No-one can take the Messenger's place save he (Messenger himself), or,
someone from him."

This surely creates a feeling of envy in a man's heart!! A cause that
could be said to have influenced Abu Bakr to be spiteful to ‘Ali (as).

B. When the Prophet (S) was too ill to lead the prayers, Abu Bakr was
asked by his daughter, Aisha, to do so. But, as soon as Allah's
Messenger (as) learned what was going on, he, supported by Imam ‘Ali and
Abbas, came out and removed Abu Bakr, and led the prayers himself. The
author of 'Fatima Umm Abiha' says in this regard:

"This event might have led Abu Bakr to think that Fatima az-Zahra (sa)
was the one who informed the Prophet (S) of Abu Bakr's actions, just as
Aisha told him (Abu Bakr) to lead the prayers!!"

C. Aisha, the Prophet's wife and Abu Bakr's daughter, had uncalled for
feelings towards Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and her mother, Lady Khadija
(as).

For instance, Aisha said:

"Despite the fact that Lady Khadija (as) died three years before the
Prophet (S) married me, I did not have a feeling of envy" for anyone as
much as I had for her. This was because he (the Prophet) used to mention
her name constantly, and he was ordered by HIS Almighty Lord to give her
the good news of a house made of brocade in Paradise. He also used to
slaughter sheep, and distribute their meat among her (Lady Khadija's
(as)) friends."

This undoubtedly led Abu Bakr to join his daughter in her feelings
towards Lady Khadija (as), her daughter (Fatima az-Zahra (sa)) and her
son-in-law (‘Ali (as)).

D. Aisha, Abu Bakr's daughter was sterile. Yet Lady Khadija (as) was the
only wife of the Prophet who had children that survived. Moreover, that
child of Lady Khadija (as) was Aisha's main adversary, Fatima az-Zahra
(sa). So, the Messenger of Allah's (as) descendants would only come from
his daughter, and her husband, ‘Ali (as). This surely was an unwelcomed
fact to Aisha and her father, Abu Bakr.

Fatima's Protest Against Abu Bakr's Actions
-------------------------------------------

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) felt grieved by Abu Bakr's actions, and was so
displeased with him that when she knew of his attempt to seize Fadak,
she accompanied a group of women to the mosque. There she sat down and
delivered the following speech:

“Praise be to Allah for that which He bestowed (upon us); And thanks be
to Him for all that which He inspired; and commended in His Name for
that which He Provided: Form prevalent favors which He created, And
abundant benefactions which He offered and perfect grants which He
presented; (such benefactions) that their number is much too plentiful
to compute; Bounties too vast to measure; Their limit was too distant to
realize; He recommended to them (His creatures) to gain more (of His
benefaction) by being grateful for their continuity; He ordained Himself
praiseworthy by giving generously to His creatures; I bear witness that
there is no God but Allah Who is One without partner, a statement which
sincere devotion is made to be its interpretation; hearts guarantee its
con­tinuation, and illuminated in the minds is its sensibility. He Who
can not be perceived with vision; neither be described with tongues; nor
can imagination surround His state.

He originated things but not from anything that existed be­fore them,
and created them with­out examples to follow. Rather, He created them
with His might and dispersed them according to His will; not for a need
did He create them; nor for a benefit (for Him) did He shape them, But
to establish His wisdom, Bring attention to His obedi­ence, manifest His
might, lead His creatures to humbly vene­rate Him, and to exalt His
decrees. He then made the reward for His obedience, and punishment for
his dis­obedience, so as to protect His creatures from His Wrath and
amass them into His Paradise.

I too bear witness that my Father, Muhammad, is His Slave and Messenger,
Whom He chose prior to sending him, named him before sending him; when
creatures were still concealed in that which was transcendental, guarded
from that which was appalling, and associated with the termination and
nonexistence. For Allah the Exalted knew that which was to follow,
comprehended that which will come to pass, And realized the place of
every event. Allah has sent him (Muhammad) as perfection for His
commands, a resolution to accomplish His rule, and an implementation of
the decrees of His Mercy. So, he found the nations to vary in their
faiths; Obsessed by their fires, Worshipping their idols, And, denying
Allah (SwT) despite their knowledge of Him. Therefore, Allah (SwT)
illuminated their darkness with my Father, Muhammad (S), uncovered
obscurity from their hearts, and cleared the clouds from their insights.
He revealed guidance among the people; so, he delivered them from being
led astray, led them away from misguidance, guided them to the proper
religion, and called them to the straight path.

Allah (SwT) then chose to recall him back in mercy, love and
pre­ference. So, Muhammad (S) is in comfort from the burden of this
world, he is surrounded with devoted angels, the satisfaction of the
Merciful Lord, and the nearness of the powerful King.

So, may the praise of Allah be upon my Father, His Prophet, Trusted one,
the chosen one

from among His creatures, and His sincere friend, and may peace and
blessings of

Allah be upon him.'

Fatima (sa) then turned to the crowd, and said:

'Surely you are Allah's (SwT) slaves at His command Prohibition; You are
the bearers of His religion and revelation; You are Allah's trusted ones
with yourselves; and His messengers to the nations. Amongst you does He
have righteous authority; A covenant He brought unto you, and an heir He
left to guard you; That is The eloquent book of Allah; The truthful
Qur’an; The brilliant light; The shining beam; Its insights are
indisputable; Its secrets are revealed; Its indications are manifest;
and its followers are blessed by it. (The Qur’an) leads its adherents to
goodwill; and Hearing it leads to salvation; with it are the bright
divine authorities achieved, His manifest determination acquired, His
prohibited decrees avoided; His manifest evidence recognized; His
satisfying proofs made apparent, His permissions granted, and His laws
written.

So Allah (SwT) made belief to be purification for you from poly­theism.

He made Prayer, An exaltation for you from conceit.

Alms -A purification for the soul and a (cause of) growth in
subsistence.

Fasting an implantation of devotion.

Pilgrimage -A construction of religion.

Justice -A harmony of the hearts;

obeying us (Ahlul-Bayt)­Management of the nation.

Our leadership (Ahlul-Bayt), Safeguard from disunity.

Jihad (struggle)­ a strengthening of Islam.

Patience -A helping course for deserving (divine) reward.

Ordering goodness (Amr Bil Maruf)­ Public welfare.

Kindness to the parents­ A safeguard from wrath.

Maintaining close relations with one's kin -A cause for a longer life
and multiplying the number of descend­ants.

Retaliation (Qesas)-For sparing blood (souls).

Fulfillment of vows-subjecting oneself to mercy.

Completion of weights and measures -A cause for preventing the neglect
of others' rights. Forbiddance of drinking wines an exaltation from
atrocity.

Avoiding slander -A veil from curse.

Abandoning theft-a reason for deserving chastity.

Allah (SwT) has also prohibited polytheism so that one can devote
himself to His Lordship.

Therefore; Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not except in a
state of Islam;

Obey Allah in that which He has commanded you to do and that which He
has forbidden, for surely those truly fear among His servants, who have
knowledge.'

Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) then added:

'O People! Be informed that I am Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and my father is
Muhammad (S) I say that repeatedly, and initiate it continually; I say
not what I say mistakenly, nor, do I do what I do aimlessly.

Now, hath come unto you an Apostle from amongst yourselves; It grieves
him (Prophet (S)) that you should perish; ardently anxious is he over
you; To the believers he is most kind and merciful. Thus, if you
identify and recog­nize him, you shall realize that he is my father and
not the father of any of your women; the brother of my cousin (‘Ali
(as)) rather than any of your men. What an excellent identity he was,
may the peace, and blessings of Allah (SwT) be upon him, and his
descendants.

Thus, he propagated the Message, by coming out openly with the warning,
and while inclined away from the path of the polytheists, (whom he)
struck their strength and seized their throats, while he invited (all)
to the way of his Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching. He destroyed
idols, and defeated heroes, until their group fled and turned their
backs.

So, night revealed its dawn; righteousness uncovered its genuineness;
the voice of the religious authority spoke out loud; the evil discords
were silenced; the crown of hypocrisy was diminished; the tightening of
infidelity and desertion were untied.

So, you spoke the statement of devotion amongst a band of starved ones;
and you were

on the edge of a hole of fire;(you were) the drink of the thirsty one;
the opportunity of the desiring one; the fire brand of him who passes in
haste; the step for feet; you used to drink from the water gathered on
roads; eat jerked meat. (Lady Fatima (sa) was stating their lowly
situation before Islam). You were despised outcasts always in fear of
abduction from those around you. Yet, Allah rescued you through my
father, Muhammad after much ado, and after he was confronted by mighty
men, the Arab beasts, and the demons of the people of the Book Who,
whenever they ignited the fire of war, Allah extinguished it; and
whenever the thorn of the devil appeared, or, a mouth of the polytheists
opened wide in defiance, he would strike its discords with his brother
(‘Ali (as)), who comes not back until he treads its wing with the sole
of his feet, and extinguishes its flames with his sword. (‘Ali is)
diligent in Allah's affair, near to the Messenger of Allah (S), A master
among Allah's worshippers, setting to work briskly, sincere in his
advice, earnest and exerting himself (in service to Islam); While you
were calm, gay, and feeling safe in your comfort­able lives, waiting for
us to meet disasters, awaiting the spread of news, you fell back during
every battle, and took to your heels at times of fighting. Yet, When
Allah chose His Prophet from the dwell of His prophets, and the abode of
His sincere (servants); The thorns of hypocrisy appeared on you, the
garment of faith became worn out, The misguided ignorant(s) spoke out,
the sluggish ignorant came to the front and brayed. The he camel of the
vain wiggled his tail in your courtyards and the your courtyards and the
Devil stuck his head from its place of hiding and called upon you, he
found you respon­sive to his invitation, and observing his deceits.

He then aroused you and found you quick (to answer him), and invited you
to wrath, therefore; you branded other than your camels and proceeded to
other than your drinking places. Then while the era of the Prophet was
still near, the gash was still wide, the scar had not yet healed, and
the Messenger was not yet buried. A (quick) undertaking as you claimed,
aimed at preventing discord (trial), surely, they have fallen into trial
already! And, indeed Hell surrounds the unbelievers. How preposterous!
What an idea!

What falsehood! For Allah's Book is still amongst you, its affairs are
apparent; its rules are manifest; its signs are dazzling; its
restrictions are visible, and its commands are evident. Yet, indeed you
have casted it behind your backs! What! Do you detest it? Or, according
to something else you wish to rule? Evil would be the exchange for the
wrongdoers! And, if anyone desires a religion other than Islam
(submission to Allah (SwT)), it never will it be accepted from him; and,
in the hereafter, he will be in the ranks of those who have lost. Surely
you have not waited until its stampede seized, and it became obedient.
You then started arousing its flames, instigating its coal, complying
with the call of the misled devil, quenching the light of the manifest
reli­gion, and extinguished the light of the sincere Prophet. You
concealed sips on froth and proceeded towards his (the Prophet) kin and
children in swamps and forests (meaning you plot against them in
deceitful ways), but we are patient with you as if we are being notched
with knives and stung by spearheads in our abdomens, Yet, now you claim
that there is not inheritance for us! What! "Do they then seek after a
judgment of (the Days of) ignorance? But, how, for a people whose faith
is assured, can give better judgment than Allah? Don't you know? Yes,
indeed it is obvious to you that I am his daughter.

O Muslims! Will my inheritance be usurped? O son of Abu Quhafa! Where is
it in the Book of Allah that you inherit your father and I do not
inherit mine? Surely, you have come up with an unprecedented thing. Do
you intentionally abandon the Book of Allah and cast it behind your
back? Do you not read where it says: And Sulaiman inherited Dawood'?

And, when it narrates the story of Zakariya and says: \`So, give me an
heir as from thyself (One that) will inherit me, and inherit the
posterity of Yaqoob.' And, ‘But kindred by hood have prior rights
against each other in the Book of Allah'

And: Allah (thus) directs you as regards your children's (inheritance)
to the male, a portion equal to that of two females.' And, if he leaves
any goods, that he make a bequest to parents and next of kin, according
to reasonable usage; this is due from the pious ones.' You claim that I
have no share! And, that I do not inherit my father! What! Did Allah
reveal a (Qur’anic) verse regarding you, from which He excluded my
father? Or, do you say: \`These (Fatima and her father) are the people
of two faiths, they do not inherit each other?!' Are we not, I and my
father, a people adhering to one faith? Or, is it that you have more
knowledge about the specifi­cations, and generalizations of the Qur’an
than my father, and my cousin (Imam ‘Ali (as))? So, here you are! Take
it! (Ready with) its nose rope and saddled! But, if shall encounter you
on the Day of Gathering; (thus) what a wonder­ful judge is Allah, a
claimant is Muhammad, and a day is the Day of Rising. At the time of the
Hour shall the wrongdoers lose; and it shall not benefit you to regret
(your actions) then! For every Message, there is a time limit; and soon
shall ye know who will be inflicted with torture that will humiliate
him, and who will be confronted by an everlasting punishment. (Fatima
az-Zahra then turned towards the Ansars, and said: “O you people of
intellect! The strong supporters of the nation! And, those who embraced
Islam, what is this short-coming in defending my right? And, what is
this slumber (while you see) injustice (being done toward me)? Did not
the Messenger of Allah (S), my father, used to say: A man is upheld
(remembered) by his children'? O how quick have you violated (his
orders)?! How soon have you plotted against us? But you still are
capable (of helping me in) my attempt, and powerful (to help me) in that
which I request and (in) my pursuit (of it). Or, do you say: "Muhammad
has perished;"

Surely this is a great calamity; its damage is excessive its injury is
great, its wound (is much too deep) to heal.

The Earth became darkened with his departure; the stars eclipsed for his
calamity; hopes were seized; mountains submitted; sanctity was violated,
and holiness was encroached upon after his death. Therefore, this, by
Allah, is the great affliction, and the grand calamity; there is not an
affliction, which is the like of it; nor, will there be a sudden
misfortune (as surprising as this).

The Book of Allah, excellent in praising Him, announced in the
courtyards (of your houses) in the place where you spend your evenings,
and mornings; A call, A cry, A recitation, and (verses) in order. It had
previously came upon His (Allah's) Prophets and Messengers; (for it is)
A decree final, and a pre­destination fulfilled: "Muhammad is not but an
Apostle: Many were the apostles that passed away before him. If he died
or was slain, will ye then turn back on your heels? If any did turn back
on his heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah; but Allah (on the
other hand) will swiftly reward those who (serve Him) with gratitude." O
you people of reflection; will I be usurped the inheritance of my father
while you hear and see me?! (And while) You are sitting, and gathered
around me? You hear my call, and are included in the (news of the)
affair? (But) You are numerous and well equipped! (You have) the means,
and the power, and the weapons and the shields. Yet, the call reaches
you but you do not answer; the cry comes to you but you do not come to
help? (This) While you are characterized by struggle, known for goodness
and welfare, the selected group (which was chosen), and the best ones
chosen by the Messenger for us: the Ahlul-Bayt. You fought the Arabs,
bore with pain and exhaustion, struggled against the nations, and
resisted their heroes. We were still, so were you in ordering you, and
you in obeying us. So that Islam became triumphant, the accomplishment
of the days came near, the fort of polytheism was subjected, the
outburst of was subjected, the outburst of infidelity calmed down, and
the system of religion was well-ordered. Thus, (why have you) become
con­fused after clearness? Conceal matters after announcing them? Turned
on your heels after daring? Associated (others with Allah) after
believing? Will you not fight people who violated their oaths? Plotted
to expel the Apostle, and became aggressive by being the first (to
assault) you? Do ye fear them? Nay, it is Allah Whom ye should more
justly fear, if you believe!

Nevertheless, I see that you are inclined to easy living; dismissed he
who is more worthy of guardianship (‘Ali (as)); you secluded yourselves
with meekness and dismissed that which you accepted. Yet, if you show
ingratitude, ye and all on earth together, yet, Allah (SwT) free of all
wants, worthy of all praise. Surely, I have said all that I have said
with full knowledge that you intent to forsake me, and knowing the
betrayal that your hearts sensed. But, it is the state of soul, the
effusion of fury, the dissemination of (what is) the chest and the
presentation of the proof. Hence, here it is! Bag it (leadership and)
put it on the back of an ill she­ camel, which has a thin hump with
everlasting grace, marked with the wrath of Allah, and the blame of ever
(which leads to) the Fire of (the wrath of Allah kindled (to a blaze),
that which doth mount (right) to the hearts; For, Allah witnesses what
you do, and soon will the unjust assailants know what vicissitudes their
affairs will take! And, I am the daughter of a warner (the Prophet) to
you against a severe punishment. So, act and so we will too, and wait,
and we shall wait.'

(the end of Lady Fatima’s (sa) speech).

It appears from recorded historical events, that Lady Fatima az-Zahra
(sa) was successful at the beginning in persuading. Abu Bakr to hand
back Fadak to her; listen to part of a speech he (according to some
historians) delivered after hearing Fatima’s (sa) speech. He said:

"O daughter of the Messenger of Allah... Surely the Prophet is your
father, not anyone else's, the brother of your husband, not any other
man's; he surely preferred him over all his friends and (‘Ali) supported
him in every important matter, no one loves you save the lucky and no
one hates you save the wretched. You are the blessed progeny of Allah's
Messenger, the chosen ones, our guides to goodness our path to Paradise,
and you-the best of women-and the daughter of the best of prophets,
truthful is your sayings, excelling in reason. You shall not be driven
back from your right...But, I surely heard your father saying: \`We the,
group of prophets do not inherit, nor, are we inherited. Yet, this is my
situation and property, it is yours (if you wish); it shall not be
concealed from you, nor, will it be stored away from you. You are the
Mistress of your father's nation, and the blessed tree of your
descendants. Your property shall not be usurped against your will, nor,
can your name be defamed. Your judgment shall be executed in all that
which I possess. This, do you think that I violate your father's
(will)?"

Fatima az-Zahra (sa) then refuted Abu Bakr's claim that the Prophet had
stated that prophets cannot be inherited, and said:

"Glory be to Allah!! Surely Allah's Messenger did not abandon Allah's
Book nor did he violate His commands. Rather, he followed its decrees
and adhered to its chapters. So do you unite with treachery justifying
your acts with fabrications? Indeed this-after his departure-is similar
to the disasters which were plotted against him during his lifetime. But
behold! This is Allah's Book, a just judge and a decisive speaker,
saying:

***\`One that will (truly) inherit Me, and inherit the posterity of
Yaqub,'*** (19:6)

and

***'And Sulaiman inherited Dawood.'*** (27: 16)

Thus, He (Glory be to Him) made clear that which He made share of all
heirs, decreed from the amounts of inheritance, allowed for males and
females, and eradicated all doubts, and ambiguities (pertaining to this
issue which existed with the) bygones.

Nay!

But, your minds have made up a tale (that may pass) with you, but (for
me) patience is most fitting against that which ye assert; it is Allah
(alone) whose help can be sought."

It is apparent that Abu Bakr chanced the mode with which he addressed
Lady Fatima az-Zahra (sa) after delivering her speech. Listen to his
following speech; which is his reply to Fatima’s (sa) recently delivered
speech.

Abu Bakr said:

"Surely Allah (SwT) and His Apostle are truthful, and his (the
Prophet's) daughter told the truth. Surely, you are the source of
wisdom, the element of faith, and the sole authority. May Allah (SwT)
not refute your righteous argument, nor, invalidate your decisive
speech. But these are the Muslims between us, who have entrusted me with
leadership, and it was according to their satisfaction that I received
what I have. I am not being arrogant, autocratic, or, selfish, and they
are my witnesses."

Upon hearing Abu Bakr speak of the people's support for him, Lady Fatima
–az-Zahra (sa)

turned towards them, and said:

"O people, who rush towards uttering falsehood, and are indifferent to
disgraceful, and losing actions!”

Do you not earnestly seek to reflect upon the Qur’an, or, are your
hearts isolated with locks? But, on your hearts is the stain of the
evil, which you committed; it has seized your hearing, and your sight,
evil is that which you justified cursed is that which you reckoned, and
wicked is what you have taken for an exchange! You shall, by Allah, find
bearing it (to be a great) burden, and its consequence disastrous. (That
is) on the day when the cover is removed, and appears to you what is
behind it of wrath. When you will be confronted by Allah (SwT) with that
which you could never have expected, they will perish, there and then,
those who stood on falsehoods." (The end of her speech).

Although parts of Abu Bakr's speeches cannot be verified with authentic
evidence, and despite the fact that we have already mentioned part of
the actual speech, which Abu Bakr delivered after Lady Fatima’s (sa)
arguments, it appears certain that Abu Bakr was finally persuaded to
submit Fadak to her.

Nevertheless, when Fatima az-Zahra (sa) was leaving Abu Bakr's house,
Umar suddenly appeared, and exclaimed:

"What is it that you hold in your hand?"

Abu Bakr replied: 'A decree I have written for Fatima az-Zahra (sa) in
which I assigned Fadak and her father's inheritance to her."

Umar then said: "With what will you spend on the Muslims if the Arabs
decide to fight you?!"

Umar then seized the decree and tore it up!!!

Fadak in The Political Arena
----------------------------

In addition to being a reason encouraging others to be unjust to
Ahlul-Bayt, the usurping of Fadak by Abu Bakr ignited political unrest
throughout history. Sheikh Ja'far Subhani, a leading historian, wrote
the following in his book The Message p.601 regarding Fadak throughout
history:

"The foundation of the deprivation of the descendants of Fatima’s (sa)
claim of Fadak was laid in the time of the First Caliph. After the
martyrdom of ‘Ali (as), Mu'awiyah assumed the reins of government and
divided Fadak amongst three persons (Marwan, Amr bin Uthman and his own
son, Yazid). During the period of the Caliphate of Marwan, all three
shares were assumed by him and he gifted them to his son, Abdul Aziz.
He, in turn, gave the same to his son, Umar. On account of the fact that
Umar Bin Abdul Aziz was an upright person from amongst Bani Umayyah, the
first heresy which he removed was that he returned Fadak to the
descendants of Fatima. After his death, however, the succeeding Umayyad
Caliphs again took away Fadak from the Bani Hashim and it continued to
remain in their possession till their rule came to an end.

During the Caliphate of Bani Abbas, the question of Fadak vacillated in
a strange manner. For example, Saffah gave it to Abdullah Bin Hasan, and
after him Mansur Dawaniqi took it back, but his son Mahdi (as) returned
it to the descendants of Zahrah (as). After him Musa and Harun took it
away from them on account of some political considerations. When Ma'mun
assumed the office of caliph, he handed it over formally to its owner.
After his death, the conditions of Fadak vacillated once again and it
was returned at one time to the descendants of Fatima az-Zahra (sa), and
then taken away from them again.

During the periods of the Caliphate of Bani Umayyah, and Bani Abbas,
Fadak assumed largely a political aspect as compared with its pecuniary
aspect. And, even if the First Caliphs were in need of income from Fadak
the later Caliphs and nobles were so rich that they did not stand in any
need of income from it.

Hence, when Umar Bin Abdul Aziz handed over Fadak to the descendants of
Fatima az-Zahra (sa), Bani Umayyah reproached him, and said; \`By this
act of your, you have found fault with the two venerable men (viz. Abu
Bakr and Umar).' They, therefore, persuaded him to distribute the income
from Fadak among the descendants of Fatima az-Zahra (sa), but to keep
its ownership with himself."

[^1]: Man La Yahdharhu al-Faqih.


