Chapter 3: On the Way to a Blessed Life
=======================================

When Safiya returned home and informed her brothers (the Prophet's
uncles) of the authenticity of the news, happiness mixed with amazement,
and astonishment overtook them.

Khadija who refused to marry the princes and lords of the Arabs, because
she deemed them unworthy to marry, chose to be the wife of a poor man
who owned nothing of the ephemeral things of this world, of even a foot
of land!!

This was the wonder of wonders!!

The Prophet's uncles proceeded towards Khadija's house, and asked for
her hand from her father (or her uncle as some historians report), who
at first rejected them; but, later agreed to the proposal.

Inevitably, an appropriate sum of money had to be presented to Khadija
as her dowry; how could it be obtained? And, who would donate it?

This was a difficult question at hand, until Khadija once again
surprised everyone by giving four thousand dinars as a gift to the
Prophet, and urged him to pay it to her father as her dowry. Although
according to another historical finding, it was Abu Talib who paid the
dowry from his own money.

Even though Khadija was a woman of high standards who sacrificed
material gains to achieve honor, her father, Khuwaylid, possessed
contradicting values. This difference between Khadija and her father is
not rare between parents and their children; in fact, this ideological
difference can also be found between various classes of people,
brothers, spouses, and parents.

Khadija's payment of the dowry was a unique, amazing and unforeseen act;
for the Arabs were not acquainted with women giving dowries to their
husbands. Thus, it was not unexpected of Abu Jahel to incite an envious
commotion and say:

"O people, we have thus seen men paying dowries to women; we are not
used to women giving dowry to men" In answer to this, Abu Talib angrily
replied:

"What is the matter with you? O you wicked man! Men like Muhammad are to
be given gifts and grants, but your likes give gifts that people always
reject."

or he said:

"If it was a man like my nephew then the greatest dowries are to be
granted to him, but men like you cannot get married save by paying large
sums of money."

The blessed wedding took place in the best possible way. The Messenger
(as) moved in with Lady Khadija who felt that she was going through the
happiest period of her life, because she had attained her best wishes
and sweetest dreams.

Khadija gave birth to several children of whom only four daughters
survived: Zainab, Umm Kulthum, Ruqiya, and Fatima az-Zahra who was the
youngest and most exalted of them all.

There is a difference between historians regarding the first two
daughters, for some claim that they were the Prophet's step-daughters;
but the fact is that they were his direct daughters. This fact will be
explained in the coming pages, if Allah wills. [^1]

[^1]: The story of Khadija's marriage was summarized and carried on from
Bihar al-Anwar: v.6.


