Chapter 4: Transcendental Events
================================

The previous paragraphs spoke of Lady Khadija's excellent and noble
characteristics, which should be a fantastic example for mankind to
follow. She is the lady who gave birth to Fatima az-Zahra, and brought
her up with talents and virtues.

Fatima az-Zahra was a descendant of two great people; we have briefly
spoken about her parents, lives and virtues, and have drawn a picture
through which we can look at Fatima's genius, and a corner of her life
in light of genetic inheritance becomes clear to us.

Furthermore, there are undisputed facts that have been declared by the
Sacred Messenger, and Ahlul-Bayt (as) that neither science, nor,
contemporary discoveries have been able to discern the deep meanings,
despite the scientific achievments. Because these facts are beyond the
reach of machines and telescopes, photographers' advanced lenses cannot
capture their rays, nor, can natural or, logical senses realize them.

Actually, the truth goes beyond material and logical realisation, for
the five senses is unable to define it. So, you may if you wish, call
these facts "The Transcendental Facts."

Before elaborating on these facts, it is incumbent upon us to make a
brief introduction, as we say:

The sperm (male reproductive cell), which is formed in the gonads,
eventually fuses with the ovum (female reproductive cell) to become an
embryo (later foetus and a baby), developed from the blood which is
produced from digesting the food by various organs of the body. Hence,
there is no doubt that sperm which is a product of eating pork, or,
drinking liquor differs from that which is produced from lamb (halal)
meat; because of the difference in composition between various types of
foods. In addition, food has peculiar effects on the human psyche and
spirit; there are some foods that bring happiness to the heart and calm
the nerves, while others do exactly the opposite.

Permissible and pure food(s) have beneficial effects on man; contrary to
this, impure (haraam) food such as liquor, or, impermissible food like
stolen, or, usurped meat harm the men. The influence of the food we eat
becomes apparent in the sperm. Elaboration on this subject by procuring
proof, and evidence takes special effort, which would lead us away from
our original subject.

In conclusion, the food, which is eaten by the parents, has an enormous
effect on the future development of the child, because it is from this
food that the sperm is formed, and carried on to the womb to grow, and
become a human being.

Furthermore, the psychological state of the parents during sexual
intercourse has a great effect on the child's state of mind, and his
psychological behaviour in the future. Besides, the persistent want and
earnest desire to have sexual intercourse are influential on the
appearance, and intelligence of the child.

In light of these two points (the nutritional and psychological effects
upon children), we move on to elaborate on the subject by verifying it
through a selection of narrations mentioned in Volume 6 of Bihar
al-Anwar.

Gabriel descended to the Messenger of Allah (S), and told him: "O
Muhammad! The Most Exalted sends His peace upon you, and commands you to
refrain from (coming close to) Khadija for forty days."

The Prophet, who loved, and adored Khadija (in obedience to Allah's
command), spent forty days fasting, and praying nights. When it was
close to the end of the forty days, he summoned Ammar Ibn Yasser and
asked him to go to Khadija and tell her:

"O Khadija! do not assume that my separation from you means abandoning,
or, forsaking you, rather my Lord commanded me to do so, so expect
nothing save benevolence, for surely Allah (exalted is His Name) praises
you to His most honorable angels several times a day. Therefore, with
nightfall, close the door and lay down to sleep; for I will be staying
at Fatima Bint Asad's house."

This brought sad tidings to Lady Khadija (as) who missed having the
Prophet by her side.

At the end of the forty days, Gabriel once again descended to Allah's
Messenger, and said:

"O Muhammad! The Most Exalted sends His peace upon you, and commands you
to be prepared for His salutation, and a gift."

The Prophet said:

"Gabriel! What is the Lord of the world’s gift and what is His
salutation?"

Gabriel said: "I have no knowledge of it."

At that moment, Angel Michael (Mikaeel) descended with a plate covered
with a handkerchief made of brocade or sarcenet, and presented it to the
Prophet! Gabriel said to him (S):

"O Muhammad, your Lord commands you to break your fasting with this food
tonight."

Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abu Talib (as) said in this regard:

"The Prophet (S) used to order me to open the door to whoever wanted to
join him when he came to break his fast, but that night he ordered me to
guard the door of the house, and said to me: \`O son of Abu Talib! this
food is forbidden to everyone save me. "

Then he (‘Ali) (as) said:

"I sat at the door, and the Prophet (S) uncovered the plate, in privacy,
to find a cluster of dates and a bunch of grapes; he ate until
satisfied, and drank his need of water. He then extended his hands to be
washed, so Gabriel poured the water, Michael washed his hands, and
Israfil dried them. Thereafter, the remaining food with the plate
ascended to heaven. Then he (as) started to prepare himself for prayers
when Gabriel said to him:

"Prayer is forbidden to you until you go to Khadija's house, and perform
coition with her; for Allah (Glory be to Him) ordained upon Himself to
create noble progeny from you tonight.' So, he rushed to Khadija's
house."

Khadija said:

"I had gotten used to seclusion by that time, so when night arrived I
covered my head, put down the curtains, locked the doors, performed my
prayers, put out the lantern, and retired to my bed. That night while I
was between the states of sleeping, and being awake, the Prophet knocked
on the door; so I exclaimed: Who is knocking on the door that only
Muhammad knocks on?"

The Prophet gently and politely replied:

"Open the door Khadija, I am Muhammad"

Khadija said:

"I cheerfully got up, and opened the door for the Prophet to come in. He
(as) usually requested the water jug to perform ablution, and two short
prayer prostrations before he retired. On the contrary, that night he
(as) did not request the jug, nor, did he perform prayers... instead,
what occurs between a woman and her husband occurred between us; and by
Allah, who created the heavens, and caused water to come out of springs,
before the Prophet left me, I felt Fatima's weight in my womb..."

It can be concluded from the above mentioned narration that:

1. Allah Almighty commanded His Messenger to abandon Khadija a period of
time so that his longing, and wanting her increased.

2. The Prophet (S) performed more worship so as to achieve a higher
level of spirituality, and sacredness, as a result of being in constant
contact with the heavenly world.

3. He (as) broke his fast on the pure heavenly gift, which was quickly
transformed into sperm because of its delicateness.

4. The sperm was produced from eating a delicate heavenly food that
differs from material nutrition.

5. The Prophet (S) immediately proceeded to Khadija's house in order to
transfer the sperm to her womb after the previously mentioned
preparations.

This narration was mentioned by the following Sunni scholars with minor
variations between some of their accounts of it:

1. Khawarazmi in his book Maqtal al- Husayn p. 63, 68.

2. Dhahabi in al-Etedal v.2, p. 26.

3. Talkhees al-Mustadrak v. 3, p. 156.

4. Asqalani in Lisan al-Mizan v. 4, p. 36.

In addition, there are various traditions with minor verbal differences,
and the same fundamental meaning that Fatima az-Zahra (sa) was created
from a sperm produced from heavenly food. We mention herein some of
these narrations, and restrict ourselves to the part which are related
to our subject in observance of briefness, and omit the rest:

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said: "The Prophet (S) said:

"On the night of my ascension to Heaven, Gabriel took my hand and led me
into Paradise, then he handed me dates from which 1 ate; those dates
were formed into sperm. When I descended to Earth, I came unto Khadija
who became pregnant with Fatima; thus, Fatima is a human huri, whom
whenever I long for Paradise I smell." [^1]

Imam Baqir (as) on the account of Jabir Ibn Abdullah, said:

"It was said to the Messenger of Allah: Surely you kiss, embrace and
bring Fatima close to you... and treat her better than your other
daughters!"

Imam Baqir (as) commented:

"Indeed, for Gabriel brought me an apple from heaven, which I ate and it
was transformed into sperm that I placed in Khadija who later bore
Fatima. Hence, I smell paradise's fragrance in her." [^2]

Ibn Abbas said:

"Aisha entered the house while the Messenger of Allah was kissing
Fatima, so she said: Do you love her, O Messenger of Allah?'

He replied: 'Indeed, by Allah if you knew the extent of my love for her,
your love would increase for her. When I was in the forth heaven...
(until he said) that I found these dates softer than butter, more
pleasant than musk, and sweeter than honey. So when I descended to
earth, I came unto Khadija, and she bore Fatima. Thus, Fatima is a human
huri, whenever I long for paradise I smell her. "' [^3]

This last narration was also mentioned with variations by:

1. Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi in Tarikh Baghdad v. 5, p. 87.

2. Khawarazmi in Maqtal al-Husayn p. 63.

3. Muhammad Ibn Ahmad al-Demashqi in Mizan al-Etedal v.1, p. 38.

4. Az Zarandi in Nazm Durar As Simtain.

5. Asqalani in Lisan al Mizan v.5, p. 160.

6. Qanduzi in Yanabi' al-Mawaddah.

7. Muhib-Ad-Din At-Tabari in Dhakhaer al-Uqbi p. 43.

These narrations are mentioned on the accounts of Aisha, Ibn Abbas, Saed
Ibn Malik, and Umar Ibn al-Khattab.

8. Sheikh Shua'b al-Misri in Ar-Rawd al-Faeq p. 214 writes:

"Some noble narrators mentioned that one day Lady Khadija (as) (may
Allah be pleased with her) asked the Master of creatures (the Prophet
(S)) to show her a fruit from the Dwell of Peace (Paradise). Thus,
Gabriel brought him who was chosen above all two apples from Paradise
and said:

'O Muhammad, He who appointed a due proportion for all things says to
you:

"Eat one apple, and give the other to Lady Khadija, then come unto her,
for I will create from you (both) Fatima az-Zahra. "The Chosen One did
what The Guardian (Gabriel) told him to do, and.. (Until he said):
'Thus, whenever the Chosen One longed for Paradise, and its greatness,
he would kiss Fatima and smell her beautiful fragrance and say: 'Fatima
is a human huri.'"

There are successive narrations in this regard, but we satisfy ourselves
with what has been mentioned.

There remains a point here on which elaboration is rather important; it
is noticeable that the narrations clearly state that Khadija bore Fatima
immediately after the Prophet's Ascension to heaven, which took place in
the second or third year after revelation.

Nevertheless, there is a collection of narrations from the Holy Imams of
Ahlul-Bayt (as), which state that Fatima was born five years after the
first revelation to the Prophet This indicates that she stayed in her
mother's womb for more than two years, which is definitely incorrect.
How can the contradictions between the narrations be explained?!

There are several probabilities, which can be given as answers to this
question; they are:

1. The Messenger of Allah ascended to heaven more than once, as was
stated in the Book of Kafi. This, in my opinion, is the most accurate
account of this affair.

2. Taking into account some narrations which state that Fatima (sa) was
born in the second, or, third year after the first revelation (as will
be mentioned together with the historians' opinions who claim that
Ascension took place in the third year of revelation); this
contradiction can be explained especially in light of the various
sayings regarding the month during which Ascension occurred.

Among the unique merits of Fatima Zahra was that she spoke to her mother
while she was still in her mother's womb. Shiite scholars are not alone
in reporting this merit of Fatima; several Sunni scholars and narrators
also support this fact. For instance, Abdur Rahman Shafe'i narrated in
his book Nuzhat al-Majalis v. 2, p. 227, that Khadija (may Allah be
pleased with her) said:

"When I was pregnant with Fatima az-Zahra, which was an easy pregnancy,
she would speak to me from inside my womb."

Also, Dahlawi in Tajhiz al-Jaish quoted the author of Madh al-Khulafa
Ar-Rashidin as saying:

"When Khadija (as)was pregnant with Fatima, she (Fatima) used to speak
to her from her womb, but Khadija (as) kept this from the Prophet.

One day, the Prophet entered the house, and found Khadija (as) speaking
to someone while no one was in the room with her. He inquired as to whom
she was speaking; she replied:

'That which in my womb, surely it speaks to me.'

Then the Prophet said:

'Rejoice Khadija, for this is the girl whom Allah has made to be the
mother of eleven of my successors who will come after me and after their
father. "'

Shuab Ibn Saad al-Misri mentioned the following in Ar-Rawd al-Faeq, p.
214:

"At the time when Lady Khadija's (as) pregnancy had become apparent, the
infidels asked the Prophet to show them the splitting of the moon; upon
hearing this Khadija declared:

"O what a disappointment it would be! Had Muhammad lied while he is the
best Messenger of my Lord?"

It was then that Fatima called Khadija from her womb, and said:

"O Mother, do not be grieved, nor, sorrowful, surely Allah is with my
father."

When Fatima was born, the skies became illuminated from the brightness
of her face.

Likewise, the narration, which states that Khadija spoke of Fatima
az-Zahra's talking while still in her womb, has already been mentioned
at the beginning of this chapter.

[^1]: Amali As-Sadouq.

[^2]: Elal Ash-Sharaye'.

[^3]: Bihar: v.6.


