Chapter 6: Naming Fatima az-Zahra (sa)
======================================

Naming newborn children is considered a principle divine rule. Allah
Almighty named Adam, and Eve the first day He created them; He also
taught Adam all names. Man, too, has followed this rule and practiced it
ever since. Naming is an essential rule for civilized people.

People's names vary according to different times, generations, and
languages. There may also be a relationship between the name and it's
meaning; although, this is not always true. Thus, some names can be
derived from entities other than lingual material.

Nevertheless, advocates of Allah's religion give names special
importance. This practice has a significant meaning, for a human being
is called by his name; hence, a good or, bad name leaves its effect on
the holder. Indeed, there is special importance in good names; it is
noteworthy to mention that when Prophet Imran's (as) wife gave birth to
a daughter she said:

"And I therefore call her Mariam".

Furthermore, Allah chose the name for His prophet Yahya (as) before he
was conceived. Allah Almighty says that Zakariya, Yahya's Father, said:

"So give me an heir as from Thyself. "(One that) will (truly) represent
me, and represent the posterity of Jacob; and make him, O my Lord! One
with whom Thou art well pleased!"

(His prayer was answered):

"O Zakariya! We give thee good news of a son: His name shall be Yahya:
On none by that name have we conferred distinction before." (19: 5-7)

It is also clear from His saying, *"On none by that name have we
conferred distinction before;"* that Allah (Glory be to Him) assigns the
names of His special worshippers, such as prophets and Imams, in place
of their parents.

Let's take a look at a large group of narrations which discuss naming
Fatima az-Zahra, plus the reason for giving her this name; also, state
that her name was given to her because of certain incitements, not
offhand, nor, as a result of admiring of preferring such a name; rather,
it is the relationship between the name, and the person which was
considered.

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

"Fatima has nine names near Allah (Exalted be His Name), they are:
Fatima, Siddiqah (the honest), Al-Mubarakah (the blessed one),
At-Tahirah (virtuous), Az-Zakiyah (the chaste), Ar-Radhiatul Mardhiah
(she who is gratified and who shall be satisfied), Al-Muhaddathah (a
person, other than a prophet, that the angels speak to), and Az-Zahra
(the splendid)."


