Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صل على محمد و آل محمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

We take pride in Shi‘a Islam as preserved by the Imams of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), the Islam wherein justice is part of the fundamentals of our
faith. We believe that the Prophet and the Imams of Ahlul Bayt were
infallible *(ma‘ṣūm)* in all situations of their lives, they never
committed injustice even when dealing with their bitter enemies.

We take pride in the fact that our contemporary mujtahideen and senior
marãji‘, as true servants of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), have maintained that
sense of justice and have refused to stoop to the level of the takfīri
Salafis. They still stand firm on their views about peaceful
co-existence with the Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘at and even with the
non-Muslims on basis of mutual respect and justice.

The painful situation of the contemporary Muslim world –from Pakistan
and Afghanistan to Bahrain and Iraq– demands extreme patience and
insightful understanding from the Shi‘as of Ahlul Bayt. Let us not allow
the Salafis to use our words to add to the fuel of the fire lit by
*their* hatred to the Ahlul Bayt.

The views of our leading mujtahideen, compiled in this booklet, are
guidelines for us to follow the example of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). In our
interaction with the fellow Muslims, the question is not about **what to
say** and not to say, the question is about **how to say** it and how
not to say it. ***“Repel ill (conduct) with that which is the best.”***
**(23:96)**  
 \*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لا تَسُبُّوا الَّذينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَسُبُّوا اللَّهَ عَدْواً بِغَيْرِ عِلْم
  </p>
</blockquote>

> (الأنعام : 108)

***Do not abuse those whom they call***  
***[in their worship] besides Allah,***  
***lest they should abuse Allah out of hostility, without any
knowledge.***  
***(The Qur’ãn 6:108)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اور یه (مشرکین)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله كے سوا جن کی عبادت کرتے هيں
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انهيں تم برا نه کها کرو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و رنه یه لوگبھی الله کو بےسمجھے دشمنی ميں برا کهه بیٹھیں گے.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> (قرآن، سورة انعام آيت 108)


