(1) On Harmony & Peaceful Co-existence Between the Muslims
==========================================================

**by the Grand Ayatullah Sayyid ‘Ali Sistani**

**In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

***“And hold on to the rope of Allãh altogether***

***and do not be divided.”*** **[3:103]**

The Muslim *ummah* is going through difficult circumstances, and facing
great tribulations and serious challenges that affect its present and
endanger its future. Under such situations, all realize an urgent need
for closing the ranks, eliminating the disunity, distancing ourselves
from sectarian slogans and refraining from inciting religious
differences—the differences which have lasted for centuries and there
seems to be no way of solving them in a way that would be liked and
accepted by all.

**Therefore, there is no need to stir up the debate on them outside the
respectable scholarly discussion,** especially when it does not involve
the matters of the principals of faith and fundamental beliefs.

All believe in the only One God, in the messengership of the chosen
Prophet (s.a.w.), in the hereafter, and in the noble Qur’an –which
Almighty Allãh has protected from interpolation– and the noble Prophetic
sunnah as sources for the religious laws, and in the love for the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.); and many similar matters which are generally common among
Muslims such as the pillars of Islam in the form of prayers, fasting,
hajj, etc.

These common points are the strong basis for Islamic unity, and so they
should be the focus in order to strengthen the bonds of love and
friendship between the children of this *ummah;* at least by acting on
peaceful co-existence between them based on mutual respect, and by
keeping away from sectarian hatred and abuse in whatever shape or form
may it be.

**So everyone who wishes for the advancement of Islam and the progress
of Muslims should put their utmost effort in bringing them together and
in reducing levels of tension that rise from some political leanings so
that it does not lead to further division and separation, since that
will give way to fulfillment of the goals of the enemies who intend to
control the Muslim lands and capture their resources.**

Unfortunately, it has been observed that some individuals and entities
act in an opposite manner and try to fortify the differences and
divisions, to increase the gulf of sectarian differences amongst the
Muslims. They have multiplied their efforts in recent times after the
escalation in political struggles in the region and increase in the
fight for dominance and influence therein.

They have renewed their attempts by highlighting the sectarian
differences and publicizing them, rather adding in them from themselves
by using methods of deceit and accusation, in order to further vilify a
specific sect, to curtail the rights of its followers and to frighten
other among them.

As part of this scheme, some media outlets –satellite channels, internet
websites, magazines, etc.– occasionally circulate strange fatwas
insulting some sects and schools of Islam, and associate that with the
respected Sayyid in a clear attempt to tarnish the status of the
religious leadership and to increase the sectarian tension for their
specific goals.

The fatwas of the respected Sayyid can be obtained from their reliable
sources –such as his well-known fatwa manuals certified by his signature
and seal– and there is nothing in them that offends the Muslims from
other sects and schools of thought. Anyone with even the slightest
knowledge of those sources knows the baselessness of these statements
and what is being circulated falsely.

Additionally, the stand of the respected marja‘ and the statements
issued from him during the past years about the tribulations that the
wounded Iraq is going through, and how **he has advised his followers
and his muqallidin about interacting with their Sunni brethren on basis
of love and respect, and what he has repeatedly emphasized on the
sanctity of the life of every Muslim, Sunni or Shi‘a, and on the
sanctity of his honour, his property, and disassociation with whosoever
spills blood from whatever sect he may be** – all this clearly
demonstrates the stand of the religious leadership about interaction
with followers of other sects and their views about them.

If all act according to this method with those who are opposed to them
from other sects, things would not be what we see today in form of
indiscriminate violence afflicting every location and horrible killings
which do not even spare small children, the elderly, and pregnant women.
To Allāh is our complaint!

We pray to Almighty Allāh to guide all to what is best for this ummah
and its interest; for He has power over everything.

Office of As-Sayyid As-Sistani  
 An-Najaf al-Ashraf [Iraq]  
 14 Muharram 1428 / 3 February 2007


