Preface
=======

All praise is to God, who bestowed on us the grace of loyalty to his
Prophet and his progeny (Peace be upon them all) whom God intended them
to be the rising suns, the enlightening moons, the shining stars, the
signs of the religion and the essence of knowledge, whose succession
counted a pious descendant after a pious ascendant, a true hearted
following his virtuous ascendant, and a right path after another.

Praised be God who awarded us the salvation Ark, the light of guidance,
Imam Hussain Bin Ali (Q), whom we were commanded to commemorate his
martyrdom, and to continuously abide by the Islamic rules in order to
honor his cause.

Thus far, the renaissance of Imam Hussain (Q) was and still constitutes
a vast field of research and studies to extract crucial morals. Though
more than thirteen centuries elapsed after this immortal battle, the
generations of freemen around the world, are still getting inspired by
the Karbala’s essence to set their route and enlighten their path.

Yet, since each era has its own Yazeed and own Imam Hussain (Q), getting
to know the heroes of the immortal battle of Karbala, as well as the
course of events and facts preceding it, using both logical and
emotional language,

and provided with accurate and deep analysis of such events whether
having preceded, accompanied, or followed the tenth day of Mouharram ,
61 He, is an essential introduction to pave the way to understanding the
requisites of such renaissance, in addition to its circumstances,
effects and results.

The Institute of the Master of Martyr, Imam Hussain (Q), is glad to
fulfill the promise it made in the preface of its previous book (The
Journey of Martyrdom), which is to provide you with a new episode of the
historical documentary series that deals with the events and the facts
following the martyrdom of Imam Hussain (Q), the take off of the
captivity journey crowned with pain and sadness, and ending with the
return of the Prophet’s convoy to the Holy Medina.

We are eager to draw your attention, to the following:

1- We relied on a set of highly considered and recommended historical
references to compose this issue. Yet, some of the important ones are:

"Bihar Al-Anwar" - for the Scholar Almajlesy

"Yanabeea Al-Mawadda" - for the Qandozi

"Al-Bedaya wa Al-Nehaya Fi Attareikh" - for Abu Alfedaa Ismaeil Bin
Katheir Al-Demashqi

"Tareikh Bin Asaker"- Tarjamatu Imam Hussain (Q) - for Al-Mahmoudi

"Tareikh Al-Tabari" - for Muhammad Bin Jareer Al-Tabari

"Tareikh Al-Yaaqoubi" - for the Yaaqoubi

"Tathkerat Al-Khawas" - for Sebt Bin Al-Jouzi

"Al-Fottouh" - Bin Al-Aatham Al-Kufi

Al-Kamel Fi At-Tareikh" - for Bin Al-Atheir Al-Jazri

Al-Lohoof Ala Qatla Al-Tofoof" - for Raddi Al-Dein Bin Tawoose

"Mutheir Al-Ahzan" - for Bin Nama

"Mukhtasar Tareikh Demashq" - for Bin Manthour

"Morooj Al-Thahab" - for Al-Masoudi

"Maqtal Al-Hussain (Q) - for Al-Khawarezmi

2- Regarding some of the cases, requiring a high level of analytical
narration, we provided the results that most renowned bibliographers
have adopted without getting into the details of their analysis.

3- This edition is composed using simple and easy terminologies. The non
professional reader may easily understand it, while preserving its
scientific and historical value.

As for us, we ask Allah (SW) to make this edition a knowledge linking
bridge between us and the Lord of emancipated freemen, steering to the
heart and emotional fondness, hoping thus to be amongst those comprised
within his intercession on the Judgment Day!

And Allah’s consent is our intention


