The Depart of the Rest of the Hussain Convoy from Karbala to Kufa
=================================================================

Bin Saad spent the remainder of that day in Karbala till the noon of the
second day. Then, he headed to Kufa along with whoever is left from the
family and children of Imam Hussain (Q). He made the ladies of the Imam
(Q) ride on the camelsâ€™ backs with no cover or saddles, while their
faces were exposed to the enemies even though they were the sacred
ladies of the family of the best of Prophets (P). Yet, they were driven
and treated just like the captives of Turkish or Rome in such tragic and
distressing captivity.

Bin Saad (May Allah Curse Him) gave his orders to pass by the dead
bodies, in order for them to see their brothers and sons and say good
bye to them. So, the soldiers made them go through the battle field.
When the ladies saw the dead bodies, they started to weep and hit their
cheeks (a way to show deep distress).

Just then Sayyeda Zeinab (O) started saying:

"Alas Muhammad, May the King of Heavens bless you, this is Hussain,
covered with blood and dirt, while his body parts are cut off, while
your descendants are killed, left alone under the bad, hot wind". So she
caused for every one cry whether an enemy or a friend.

Thus the historical resources did not mention what happened to the
Hussain convoy in their way from Karbala to Kufa.

The army of Bin Saad, along with the remainder of the Hussain Convoy,
reached the borders of Kufa on the night of the eleventh day of
Muharram. They spent that night in one of the houses on the roads that
were very close to Kufa or near its borders. Thus they entered Kufa on
the twelfth day of Muharram during day light, which was an important
publicity factor to shed the lights on their triumph and to show off
their victory.


