Kufa’s Reception of the Rest of the Hussain Convoy
==================================================

All the people of Kufa went to the streets to witness the celebration of
Bin Ziad welcoming his victorious army!

Yet the streets, roads, and passages of Kufa got full of all the men,
women and children, and when the women saw the state of the captivated
women, how they were riding on camels’ backs with no saddles, they
started to weep and hit their cheeks. Just then, Imam Zein El-Abedeen
(Q) said to them with a faint voice, while the chain was around his neck
and his hands were tied up: "These ladies are weeping! So, who did kill
us?!"

One of the ladies of Kufa looked from her roof and asked the ladies:
"To which families do you belong?" They answered: "We are the families
of the progeny of Muhammad (P)”.

So, the woman came down of her house to gather some veils, covers and
clothes, and she gave them to the ladies, and they covered themselves.

Muslim Al-Jassas had narrated that while he was mending the Imamate
Castle, he heard loud screams from Kufa, so he asked about the reason
and he was told that the army had brought the head of a repellent who
did not obey Yazeed. When he learned that it was the head of Imam
Hussain Bin Ali (Q) he started slapping his face until his eyes almost
popped out. He also saw ladies, women, and the children of Fatima O,
while Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q) was on a camel’s back with no saddle while
blood was coming out of his veins. He went on saying:

O bad nation, may your lands never be watered

O nation that did not care for our Grandfather’s sanctity when dealing
with us.

The people of Kufa started to hand the children who were on the camels’
backs some dates, bread and walnuts. Yet, the daughter of the Prince of
believers (Q) yelled at them saying: "O people of Kufa, charity is
prohibited to us!" And she started taking the food away from the
children’s hands and mouths and said: "Quiet O people of Kufa, your men
kill us, and your women weep for us!  Allah shall be the Judge between
you and us on the Judgment Day".

She (O) intended from returning the charity of the people of Kufa to let
the people know that the captives of this convoy are not ordinary
people, indeed they are the family of the Messenger of Allah (P), whom
love and obedience were imposed by Allah (SW).


