The Speeches of the Family of Prophecy (R) in the Streets of Kufa
=================================================================

The Speech of Sayyeda Zeinab, the Daughter of Ali (L)
-----------------------------------------------------

When Al-Aqeela Zeinab (O) saw that the huge crowds of the people of Kufa
had filled up the streets, she precipitated explaining what had happened
to the family of the Prophet, and she held them responsible for breaking
their promise and allegiance and causing the killing of the beloved
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (P). She was prickling their
conscious and grieving their hearts by pointing out the magnitude of the
sin they have committed. She gesticulated to the people to be silent, so
they all held their breaths and the bells stopped ringing, and then she
said:

"Thank God, and Peace be upon my Grandfather, Muhammad, and his kind and
pure progeny, then…

O people of Kufa, O you people of treachery and deceit. Are you crying?!
May your tears never stop!  And your weeping shall never be stilled.
Indeed you are just like that lady who untied her yarn after she had
worked hard knitting it.

You take your oaths to deceive and cheat each other. Is there any one
among you but a shameful arrogant, repugnant and revolting, who speaks
what he does not mean, who is the aim of the enemies (proverb), like
sheep feeding from adung, or like silver on a dead body!4 Oh how bad is
what you made for yourselves, that brought Allah’s wrath upon you and
you shall forever be in torment!

Are you crying and weeping?!! Indeed by God, do cry a lot and laugh a
little, since you have gained its shame and disgrace, and you will never
be able to wash it away, how can you wipe off killing the descendant of
the last Prophet, the core of the prophecy, the master of the Heaven’s
youths, the haven for good people, the refuge from calamities, the light
for your arguments, and the core of the Sunna (rules set by the
Prophet). How bad is what you are baring, demise and distraction are for
you. As your striving had failed, your hands are tied, and the deal was
lost, as you came out with the rage of Allah, and humiliation and
degradation shall be your destiny!

Woe to you O people of Kufa! Are you aware which liver of the Messenger
of Allah you had torn?! Which dignified granddaughter you had exposed?!
Which of his blood you had shed, and which sanctity of his you have
revoked?! Indeed you have done it, loud and clear, black and dark,
enough to fill the earth and the sky of your bad deeds.

Is it a wonder to you that the sky rained blood?!! Indeed the torture of
the afterlife is more degrading and you shall not be helped! Do not be
taken by the awaiting time, as God might hasten to punish you, and He
shall take the revenge and your God is watching!"

Thus people were puzzled and crying while had put their hands in their
mouths.

An old man cried until his beard got soaked, while he was saying: "You
are worthier to me than my father and mother, your old men are the best
seniors, your young men are the best youth, your ladies are the best
women,

and your offspring is the best offspring, which shall not be defeated or
distressed"

The Speech of Fatima Bint Al-Hussain Q:
---------------------------------------

Then, Fatima Bint Al-Hussain (Q) had lectured saying: … "Then, O people
of Kufa, O people of cunning, treachery and hauteur. Indeed God had
afflicted us, Ahlu El-Bayt, by you, and had tested you by us. So, He
made our performance good, He gave us His knowledge and apprehension. We
are the depositary to His knowledge, the container for His wisdom and
apprehension, and His proof on earth in His lands for His worshipers. He
dignified us with His dignity, and He vividly distinguished us from many
of his creations with his Prophet, Muhammad (P). So, you accused us of
lying and disbelieving! And you considered your fight against us to be
legitimate! And our money is for you to plunder! …. As you have murdered
our Grandfather before, the Prince of believers, Ali (Q), your swords
are soaked with our blood being the family of the Prophet (R) due to an
old animosity!!

Your eyes are rested for that and your hearts are pleased, out of
calumny to Allah, and you plotted conspiracies and Allah is the Best of
those who plot…".

So, the cries got louder and the people said: "That is enough, O
daughter of the kind people! Indeed, you have burned our hearts, hurt
our throats, and flamed up our souls". So, she stopped.

The Speech of Um Kalthoum Bint Ali Q:
-------------------------------------

Um Kalthoum had raised her crying voice and addressed the people saying:
"O people of Kufa, shame on you! You let Hussain down and murdered him;
you plundered his money and inherited him?! And you captivated his women
and harmed him?! So demise and perish shall be for you… You had killed
the best of men after the Prophet P! Thus mercy had been removed from
your hearts. Indeed, the party of Allah will be the victorious and the
party of Satan will be the losers".

So the people cried louder and started to whimper and groan, the women
spread their hairs (sign of distress) and started putting dirt on their
heads, they scratched their faces and hit their cheeks, and wished for
torment and destruction. And the men cried as it was never seen people
crying more than that day.

While the people were crying loudly, Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) signaled
to them to be quiet, so they did. Then he got up, thanked and praised
Allah, and he mentioned the Prophet Muhammad (P) and praised him, then
he said:

"O people! For he who knows me, I do not need to introduce myself to
him, and for he who does not know me, Indeed I am Ali the son of Hussain
the son of Ali Bin Abi Taleb (Q), I am the son of whose sanctity was
breached, whose boon was robbed, whose money was stolen, and whose
family was captivated. I am the son of who was slaughtered on the
Furat’s docks for no personal hatred or revenges! I am the son of who
was killed unjustly, which by itself is enough to be proud of!

O people! I do ask you By Allah, do you know that you have written to my
father and deceived him?! And you pledged to him your allegiance and you
assured him with your lives, to then fight against him!

How bad is what you brought to yourselves! And what a bad decision! How
are you going to face the Messenger of Allah (Q) when he tells you: You
killed my progeny and violated my sanctity, so you are not of my
Nation?!!"

So, the voices became louder coming from all directions, while people
were saying to each other: you are doomed and you do not know it!


