The Holy Head between the Hands of Bin Ziad
===========================================

Bin Ziad sat in the ruling castle, and called for the public to come to
him. He ordered for the Holy head to be put in front of him, and started
looking at it while smiling! He also was hitting its parts with a stick
he held in his hands!

The Hussain Convoy’s Confrontation with Bin Ziad
------------------------------------------------

The Hashim’s women were taken to the ruling castle while the children of
Imam Hussain (Q) were taken to Bin Ziad. Sayyeda Zeinab (O) entered
along with them disguised in non attracting clothes, and she sat in one
of the corners of the castle.

So Bin Ziad said: "who is this lady that went aside with her women?"

And he repeated the question about her a second and a third time.

Then some of the ladies said to him: "This is Zeinab the daughter of
Fatima, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah, May Allah’s peace be
upon them all"

Thus Bin Ziad approached her and said to her: "Thank is to God that he
exposed and killed you; and he proved you wrong!"

Then Sayyeda Zeinab (O) said:

"Thank God who had honored us with his Prophet Muhammad Peace be upon
him and his Progeny, and He had purified us from all wrong doing
thoroughly. Indeed, only a dissolute can be exposed, and only an
extravagant shall be proved wrong, and both are not us, thank God!"

So, Bin Ziad said: "How did you see what God had done to your family?"

She (O) said: "I only saw what is good! These are people that God had
destined them to be killed, so they emerged to their resting places. God
shall confront you with them and you will discuss and argue, and you
will see who will be the loser then, may your mother mourn you, son of
Murjana!"

This made Bin Ziad angry and flared him up.

Then Amro Bin Hareeth said: "My Prince, she is just a woman, and women
are not blamed for what they say, and are not disparaged for their
speeches"

Bin Ziad said: "God pleased my soul with what he had done to your tyrant
and the rebellions of your family!!"

So, she (O) cried and said: "Indeed, you killed my elderly, finished my
family, cut off my branch, and uprooted my origin, if this pleases you,
then you shall be pleased!"

Obayd Allah said: "This rhymes! Indeed your father was a good rhyming
poet".

So she (O) answered: "What a woman has to do with rhyming?! I have other
important things than rhyming to occupy me…".

Imam Sajjad’s Confrontation with Bin Ziad

They brought Imam Zein El-Abedeen before him, so he said: "Who are you?"

He (Q) said: "I am Ali the son of Hussain".

Then he said: "didn’t God kill Ali Bin Hussain?!"

So he (Q) said: "I had a brother called Ali, and the people killed him".

Bin Ziad said: "Indeed, God had killed him".

Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) said: "God is who terminates the life of people
when they die".

Bin Ziad got angry and said: "and you dare to talk back to me! Are you
still able to answer me? Go, and cut off his neck".

Then, Sayyeda Zeinab (O) held on to him and said: "O Bin Ziad, enough of
our blood!"

She hugged him and said: "By Allah, I shall not leave him, if you want
to kill him, do kill me with him!"

Bin Ziad looked at her and said: "How strange is kinship! By Allah, I do
believe that she wanted me to kill her with him! Leave him".

Afterwards, Bin Ziad asked that they reside next to the Great Mosque.


