Indications in the Stances of the Ahlu El-Bayt R
================================================

1 - The supreme courage that is enjoyed by Ahlu El-Bayt (R) in many of
the responses that were shown in their speeches. Amongst them is what
Sayyeda Zeinab (O) had said: "Indeed, only a dissolute can be exposed,
and only an extravagant shall be proved wrong…" "I only saw good
doing!", and in the saying of Sayyeda Um Kalthoum: "O Bin Ziad, do
prepare an answer for his Grandfather, as he is your opponent tomorrow!"

2 - The strong believe in Allah The Only and the loving of The Almighty
are shown in the stance of our lady Sayyeda Zeinab (O) and her answer to
Bin Ziad: "I only saw what is good!", and she did not say I only saw
good doing in Karbala, but declared the absolute viewing of goodness!
That means since she began to see, she only saw good doings from Allah,
in Karbala, before it and after it. And in this is the ultimate
acceptance of God’s destiny, the ultimate thanking for Him, and a way to
view the results of the situations without getting confused with the
current details.

As for her redemption and sacrifice O they were embodied by her
continuous willingness to die in the many situations where she was
defending Hujjatu Allah,5 Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q).

3- To clearly show that the immolation of God and the one being murdered
in Karbala is the heart of the Messenger of Allah (P), so his murderer
is the killer of the Messenger of Allah (P) and the latter will be his
opponent on the Day of Resurrection.

4- Denying the fatalism logic that the Umayyad propagated, while Bin
Ziad had insisted on inculcating it in the people’s minds in his parlor.
This is shown in his saying to Sayyeda Zeinab O: "How did you see what
God had done to your family?" and his saying to Imam Zein El-Abedeen Q:
"Didn’t God kill Ali Bin Hussain?!" And what we mean by the fatalism
logic is that the Umayyad wanted to delude the people into believing
that everything that was happening, all the incidents, events,
oppression and killing were due to the Willing of Allah and to the
fulfilling of His orders and no one has the right to object His Will.
And to face this logic, Ahlu El-Bayt (R) were determined to popularize
another doctrine, which states that everything that is happening by the
hands of the oppressing tyrants from killing, oppression, injustice, and
corruption do not represent the Will of Allah, because Allah the
Almighty, as He had stated in His Wise Book, does not want oppression,
corruption, or injustice. Allah the Almighty had asked his good
believers to order the good doing, forbid the wrong doing and restraint
the oppressors from committing injustice.

Thus Sayyeda Zeinab (O) had replied to Bin Ziad’s claim that everything
that happened to her family was of Allah’s (SW) doing by saying: "These
are people that God had destined them to be killed" which means they
were obeying the legitimate rule of Allah to rise against the Umayyad
ruling, and if this uprising had lead to their martyrdom, they would
have went to their resting places in compliance to the legitimate
ruling.

Oppression and rejoice have always been signs of tyrants, and this was
clearly shown in Bin Ziad’s parlor when he said, while deploring Imam
Zein El-Abedeen’s courage and bravery in answering back to him: "And you
dare

to talk back to me?"… "God had pleased my soul with what he had done to
your tyrant and the rebellions of your family!!"


