The Uprising of Abdu Allah Bin Afeef Al-Azdi
============================================

The head of Imam Hussain (Q) was put up the door of the Governing
castle, Then Bin Ziad called the people to gather in the Greatest
Mosque, then he went out, entered the mosque, and went up the rostrum to
thank Allah and praise Him, and part of what he said was: "Thank God who
elevated the truth and its people, who helped the prince of believers
(referring to Yazeed) and his parties, who killed the liar, the son of a
liar!"

It was said that he did not add a word to this till Abdu Allah Bin Afeef
jumped on him, he was among the companions of the Prince of believers
(Q), and he also was among the best of the leaders of Shia. His left eye
was blinded during "Yaoum Al-Jamal" battle, and his right eye was
blinded during the battle of Seffeen. He used to stay in the Greatest
Mosque and pray till night time, and then he would go to his home.

So, when he heard what Bin Ziad had said he jumped on him and said: "O
son of Murjana, Indeed the liar and the son of a liar are you and your
father! And he who used you and his father! O enemy of Allah and his
Messenger, Do you dare to kill the children of the prophets and then
speak such words on the rostrum of the Muslims?!"

Obeid Allah Bin Ziad got angry and asked: "Who said that?"

So he said: "I am the speaker O enemy of Allah! Do you dare to kill the
pure progeny whom Allah had cleansed them from all wrongdoings and then
claim that you are a Muslim?! God help us! Where are the descendents of
Muhajereen7 and Ansar8 to take revenge from this cursed tyrant, the son
of a person who was cursed by the Messenger of Allah and the Lord of
humanity?!"

Bin Ziad’s anger fumed up till his arteries swelled up and said: "Bring
him to me!"

The guards hurried to get him, so he called with the Azd’s slogan: "O
Mabroor!"

Abdu Al-Rahman Bin Makhnaf Al-Azdi was in the mosque, so he said: "Woe
to yourself, you killed it and killed your people!"

On that day, seven hundred fighters from the People of Azd came to Kufa,
so they jumped to help him, snatched him from their hands and hastened
with him to his house.

Bin Ziad, after had returning to the castle, he sent after Amro Bin
Al-Hajjaj Al-Zubaidi, Muhammad Bin Al-Ashath,

Shebith Bin Rubei, and a group of his friends, then he said to them: "Go
to that blind man whom God had blinded his heart as he had blinded his
eyes and bring him to me".

So, they went to get Abdu Allah Bin Afeef, and the news reached the
people of Azd. So they gathered and some tribes from Yemen joined them
to defend their relative.

Bin Ziad was notified about that, so he gathered the tribes of Mudar and
he made them join Muhammad Bin Al-Ashath, and he commanded him to go and
fight those people.

So, the tribes of Mudar went and fought heavily till a group of the Arab
was killed, and the people reached the house of Abdu Allah Bin Afeef, so
they broke the door and attacked him.

Then his daughter screamed: "O father, the people are attacking you from
the place you feared!"

So he said: "Don’t worry my girl, just hand me my sword".

She gave him the sword and he started defending himself, then his
daughter said to him: "I wish I was a man so I could have fought these
dissolute people".

The people started attacking him from all sides and he was defending
himself with his sword while saying:

I swear if I would have my sight back

You will never be able to get me.

So no one was able to overpower him, and every time they would attack
him from a certain direction, his daughter used to tell him: "They are
attacking you for that direction!" till they outnumbered him and
surrounded him from all sides, then his daughter said to him: "What a
humiliation! They surrounded my father and no one to support him!"

They took him to Obayed Allah Bin Ziad and when he was brought before
him, he said to Bin Afeef: "Thank God who had degraded you!"

So, Bin Afeef replied: "O enemy of Allah, how did He degrade me? By
Allah if he would just bring me back my sight…"

Then Bin Ziad said to him: "What do you say of Othman?"

Bin Afeef answered: "O son of Murjana, O son of Sumayyah, O you servant
of the people of Elaj, what do you want with Othman?! Whether he did
good or bad? Whether he reformed or corrupted? God is the judge of the
people, he rules between them with the truth and just. But do ask me
about you and your father, about Yazeed and his father!"

So, Bin Ziad said: "I shall not ask you about anything till you die"

Bin Afeef then said: "Thank God the Lord of humanity, I have been asking
Allah to grant me martyrdom before your mother, Murjana, gave birth to
you, and I asked to make my death to be by the hands of his worst and
meanest creatures whom He despises the most, and when I lost my sight I
lost the hope of martyrdom. But now, I do thank God who gave it to me
after the despair of achieving it, and he accepted my old supplication!"

So, Obayed Allah said: Cut of his head!" so he was beheaded and
crucified!

After that, Bin Ziad tried to gain the trust of the people of Azd along
with other tribes that had a social influence in Kufa and tried not to
aggrevate them against him by not killing some of their leaders who were
in allegiance to the Prophet’s progeny (R).


