The Hussain Convoy Heading to Sham
==================================

When the letter of Bin Ziad reached Yazeed Bin Muawiya, he read it and
then replied by ordering him to send the head of Imam Hussain (Q) and
the heads of those who were killed with him, along with his women,
children and belongings.

And when the people were done roving with the Holy Head, Bin Ziad gave
it to Zuhr Bin Qaeis with the heads of his companions as well, and he
sent him off to Yazeed Bin Muawiya. He also sent with him Aba Baradah
Bin Awf Al-Azdi and Tareq Bin Abi Thubian with a group of the people of
Kufa till they reached Yazeed in Damascus.

Thus, they took the captives of the Prophet’s progeny (R) from women and
children on boney camels while the soldiers were surrounding them, if
one of them would have a tear in his eyes, they would hit his head with
a spear! They were wandered with from one place to another just like
they would do with the captives from Rome or Daylam (non- Islamic
countries). Ahead of them was the Master of Sajjadeen, Ali Bin
Al-Hussain (Q), while they had chains on his neck and hands; he was
riding on a boney camel with no saddle.

It was narrated that Sayyeda Zeinab (O) said: "Thus, God knew what
happened to us, as the best of us was killed, we were wandered by like
animals, and we rode on the camel’s back".

The people traveled with the head of Imam Hussain (Q) and the captives,
and when they got close to Damascus, Sayyeda Um Kalthoum approached
Shamer and said: "I need to ask you something?"

So he said: "What do you need?"

She said: "If we are to enter the city, do take us from

a way where only few people can see us, and ask them to take out the
heads from between our rides and carry them away from us, as we are
humiliated from all the looks we are getting while we are on this
situation!"

So, the cursed man answered to her request by placing the heads that
were on the spears in the middle of the women’s rides and he went
through the staring crowds while in their bad situation till they
reached the gate of Damascus. They stopped on the stairs of the
Gathering Mosque where captives usually stay.

Thus, the Hussain convoy entered Damascus during day time while its
people had hung the decorations everywhere happily and excitedly, at the
time where their women were playing the tambourines as if it was their
greatest Eid (festival).

It was narrated about Sahl Bin Saad Al-Saedy (the Prophet’s companion)
that he had said: "I was going to Jerusalem and when I reached the Sham,
I found myself in a city with long rivers and heavy trees, while its
people had hung the decorations everywhere happily and excitedly, and
their women were playing the drums and the tambourines, so I said to
myself: maybe the people of Sham has an Eid (festival) that we are not
aware of it! I saw some people talking among themselves, so I said: do
you have an Eid that we do not know?  They said: O old man, we see that
you are a stranger, I said: I am Sahl Bin Saad, I had seen the Messenger
of Allah (P) and narrated his Hadith (Sayings). So they said: O Sahel,
it is a wonder that the sky does not

rain blood, and the earth does not swallow its people! I said: why is
that? They said: this is the head of Hussain, the grandson of the
Messenger of Allah (P), it is being carried as a gift from Iraq to Sham
and it is almost here. So I said: It is a wonder! As the head of Hussain
is given as a gift and the people are pleased?!!


