Yazeed Patting the Head of Imam Hussain (Q) for the Second Time
===============================================================

Yazeed put the head of Imam Hussain (Q) between his hands, while he had
the women seated behind it so they do not see it. The two daughters of
the Imam were stretching their necks trying to view the head, but Yazeed
tried to hide it with his body so they could not see it, as he was
patting it with a stick in his hand while reciting some verses from a
poem for Hussayne Bin Al-Hamam Al-Mary:

We split the heads of dear men, while

They were ungrateful to us and more oppressing.

Then he said: "I have never seen a better looking face than his!"

It was said to him: "He used to look like the Messenger of Allah (P)”

So he kept quiet, and no one was left in that sitting without blaming
and leaving him. One of the people was Abu Baraza

Al-Aslami who was one of the Prophet’s companions, he resided in Medina
and then in Basra, so he said to him: "Woe to you O Yazeed, do you bat
the mouth of Hussain (Q), the son of Fatima O?! I do testify that I have
seen the Prophet (P) kissing his mouth and that of his brother Hassan
(R) while saying:  You are both the Masters of the people of Heaven, God
shall kill and curse your killer and prepare Jahannam (Hell) for him as
it is the worst destiny".

So, Yazeed got fumed up and he ordered the guards to take him out, and
he was dragged outside.

The stand of that companion was at the most critical time and in the
most dangerous place, and that is why Yazeed did not tolerate it.

Then Abdu Al-Rahman Bin Al-Hakam, brother of Marwan Bin Al-Hakam, was
among the people in the public assembly, and when he saw what Yazeed had
done to the head of Imam Hussain (Q) and heard the verses he recited, he
said:

Sumayya’s  pedigree has become15

As many as pebbles (countless),

While the daughter of the Messenger of Allah

Does not have any pedigree

Just then, Yazeed, out of fear that things might turn against him,
hastened to say: "Indeed, may Allah curse the son of Murjana (Obayd
Allah, since he killed Hussain the son of Fatima) if I was in his place
I would have fulfilled all his requests and conditions, and would have
done all what I could to push away his death even if I had to lose some
of my children! But Allah had destined this and that’s why no one could
have stopped it".

Then, he turned to Abdu Al-Rahman and said: "Praised be Allah! Can you
not be quiet! What do you have to do with this issue?!"

Thus Yazeed falsely and untruthfully showed regret in some of his words,
while blaming the murdering of Imam Hussain (Q) on Bin Ziad. His regret
was a result of his dishonesty and his fear to lose his kingdom, and to
be in line with the general situation and the people’s condemnation to
that act. And what proves that he was lying is that he did not punish
Obayd Allah Bin Ziad, and he did not depose him from his position, but
indeed he

invited him to his castle where they drank wine together and he gave him
a big reward.


