Yazeed and the Clear Deception
==============================

Yazeed had changed his tone during the presence of the Prophet’s convoy
in Sham. As after he was showing his pleasure for killing Imam Hussain
(Q), he was compelled to change his attitude due to the hidden yet
strong condemnation of the people that was expressed most of the time
with weak remarks.

In the context of him showing his joy he said in his parlor: "Do you
know what killed Abu Abdullah?" They said: "No" so he answered: "from
the jurisprudence and the interpretation! he was too proud of Ali, he
used to say: "my father is better than Yazeed’s father, my mother is
better than his mother, my Grandfather is better than Yazeed’s
grandfather, and I am better than Yazeed". And this is what killed him!
As for his saying that "indeed my father is better than Yazeed’s father"
thus my father had debated his father and God destined for my father to
win over his father, as for his saying: "my mother is better than
Yazeed’s mother" I swear he is telling the truth, indeed Fatima the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (P) is better than my mother, and as
for his saying: "my Grandfather is better than Yazeed’s grandfather"
there is no one among the believers of Allah and the Judgment Day who
would claim that he is better than Muhammad (P), and for his saying: "I
am better than Yazeed" I do swear he did not read the verse that says:
(Say O Allah the Owner of Sovereignty) "16

Yazeed did take this position to delude the people that even though he
had killed the son of the daughter of the Prophet (P), he is still a
Muslim, ending his speech by mentioning Allah’s will, His fatalism and
predestination to give his abominable crime a religious aspect, by
instilling the predestination principle that the tyrants used to hold on
to it to silence the voices of those who oppose them as well as the
naïve people.


