Yazeed Gets Close to Killing Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q)
=====================================================

As Yazeed’s position, from what happened in Karbala, was fluctuating
between the joy for what occurred and trying to escape the
responsibility for it, Yazeed’s stances from Imam Sajjad (Q) did
fluctuate between the gloating, trying to kill him, or implying that he
was honoring him.

Yazeed, may Allah curse him, tried during his arguments with Imam Zein
El-Abedeen (Q) to drive him to say something that would allow Yazeed to
kill him, and the Imam (Q) used to answer him in accordance with his
speech while holding a small chaplet and turning it with his fingers as
he was speaking.

So, Yazeed said to him: "I am speaking to you, and you are answering me
while turning your fingers over the chaplet that is in your hand! How
appropriate is that?"

So, He (Q) said: "My father had narrated to me about my Grandfather P:
that he used to hold a chaplet in his hands and not talk to anyone after
finishing his noon prayer and say: "God I woke up this morning while
praising you, thanking you, acclaiming you, and glorifying you by the
count of the beads I am turning on my chaplet", then he used to hold the
chaplet in his hands while speaking of whatever he wants, without saying
the glorifying words, and he mentioned that it is all counted to him as
good deed and it would protect him till he goes to bed. When he went to
bed, he used to say the same thing and then put the chaplet under his
head, so he would get all the good deeds as if he was repeating them
till he gets up", so I only acted this way to follow the steps of my
Grandfather (P)”.

Then, Yazeed, may God curse him, said: "I am not able to speak to any of
you without him confounding me with a strong comeback!"

Yazeed consulted his counsels in regards to the captives’ issue in an
assembly that was on last days of the presence of Ahlu El-Bayt (R) in
Sham, so they advised him to kill the Imam and they said: "Do not take
in a puppy from a bad dog"

So, the Imam (Q) accosted Yazeed by thanking God and glorifying Him then
he said: "Indeed, these people had advised you against what the
councilors of Pharaoh had advised him when he consulted them about
Prophets Moses and Aaron, as they had said: let go of him and his
brother, while these people advised you to kill us".

Then Yazeed kept quiet.


