Sayyeda Zeinab Bint Ali (O) In Yazeed’s Parlor
==============================================

She is the hero of the battle in Yazeed’s parlor; she stands to face his
tyranny with utmost solidity while talking to him with full courage
since she can view the actual reality with Allah. That is why we see
that she speaks the logic of her father who was the soul of the beloved
Mustafa (chosen one), in a way that makes the Sham and its Umayyad
Castle an extension to the fields of Karbala, the rise of the Master of
martyrs, and a perfect embodiment for its noble values and dignified
objectives.

Here she is saying to Yazeed: "O Yazeed, do you not fear Allah and his
Messenger for killing Al-Hussain Q? As if

that was not enough for you, till you brought the daughters of the
Messenger of -Allah (P) from Iraq to Sham, and it was not enough either
till you brought us here the way you bring slaves on rides with no
saddles! Indeed no one killed my brother Al-Hussain (Q) but you, and if
it was not for your orders, the son of Murjana would have never been
able to kill him, since he has less men and he does not have the courage
to do it. Did you not fear Allah for killing him when the Messenger of
Allah (P) had said about him and his brother: "Al-Hassan and Al-Hussain
are the masters of the youth in heaven among all people"? If you say
"No", you would be lying, and if you say "Yes", you would have opposed
yourself and admitted your bad mistake…"

So, Yazeed said: "A pedigree each one follows the other…"

Thus Sayyeda Zeinab (O) focused in this speech on three points:

1 - The kinship to the Messenger of Allah (P).

2 - To hold Yazeed responsible for killing Imam Hussain (Q) to
invalidate all his attempts to repudiate that.

3 - To prove that Yazeed does not relate to Islam, neither from near nor
from far.


