The Speech of Sayyeda Zeinab (O)19
==================================

It is the documented script of Mohammad, Ali, Fatima, Hassan and
Hussain, which took its place along the speech of the beloved Mustafa on
the Ghadir Day, the speech of her mother the Great Siddiqa, the Martyr,
in the Prophet’s mosque, and the speech of her father that is known by
the name "Al-Shaqshaqiyya" in a way for all these speeches to form the
most prominent proofs for whoever had a heart and paid attention while
witnessing this.

Thus she (O) delivered this speech after Yazeed had recited the verses
of Al-Zubary poem:

"O Yazeed, God and his Messenger had said the truth (Then it was the
worst ramification for those who have done evil; for that they rejected
the signs of Allah, and used to ridicule it)20 . O Yazeed, did you
think, since we are overpowered on that side of earth and under the
fringes of the sky till we were treated the way the captives are
treated, that God does not care for us while He cares for you?!! And
that is due to your superiority, so you lifted your nose and looked upon
your shoulder (sign of acting arrogance), cheerful and happy when you
viewed this life as it belongs to you, and things are going your way,
indeed your punishment just being delayed and put off and that is clear
from the words of Allah the Exalted, the Almighty: (Let not the
Unbelievers think that our respite to them is good for themselves: We
grant them respite that they may grow in their iniquity: but they will
have a shameful punishment)21 . Is it fair, O son of the freedmen, that
you dignify your ladies and slaves while the daughters of the Messenger
of Allah (P) were brought to you, after you had exposed them, caused
their voices to be husky due to their grief, you made them ride on weak
camels, their enemies were yelling at them while taking them from one
country to another, they were not cared for or sheltered. Everyone, near
or far, was staring at them, they did not have any of their men to
protect them. And how is it possible for someone to ask us not to hate
him while he is looking at us with hatred, antagonism, implacability,
and resentment, do you say: "I wish that my grandparents from Bader had
witnessed…" without feeling guilty or sorry while batting the lips of
Abu Abdu Allah in your parlor? Why wouldn’t you behave like this, when
you have already poked the ulcers and cauterized the tumor by shedding
the blood of the pedigree of the Messenger of Allah (P) and the earth’s
stars from the family of Abdu Al-Muttaleb, you will soon go back to
Allah as they did, and then you would wish if you had been blinded or
muted before you said: "They would have cheered and shouted happily". O
God, do punish them for our rights, and take our revenge from those who
have wronged us. I swear to God, you only abraded your skin, and did not
cut but your own flesh, you will surely, despite your will, be brought
in front of the Messenger of Allah (P), his family, and his supporters
in Heaven, on the Day when Allah will reunite them after having been
scattered, and that is the saying of Allah the Exalted, the Almighty:
"Think not of those who are killed in the Way of Allah as dead, but
indeed they are alive, finding their sustenance in the presence of their
Lord. "22 Thus, the one who enabled you to rule the believers shall
know, especially if the Judge is Allah, your opponent is Muhammad (P),
and your limbs are the

witnesses against you, this is the worst ending for the wrong doers, he
shall know who of both of you is in a weaker position with less
supporters. Even though, I swear to God O enemy of Allah and the son of
His enemy, I do not

have any respect for you even to reprimand you, but the fact is that the
eyes are tearful, and the hearts are sorrow and all this does not make
up for our loss, as Al-Hussain (Q) was killed, and the party of Satan is
handing us over to the party of fools to be rewarded from the Money of
Allah for rending the sanctities of Allah! As these hands are soaked
with our blood, these mouths are fed from our flesh, and those blessed
corpses are being eaten by the wild animals. So, if you consider this a
victory for you, you would indeed be gaining a chastisement at the time
when you do not find but what your hands had already committed, you
would cry for help from the son of Murjana and he would cry for your
help as well, you and your followers will howl for each other at the
weighing scale, where you would find that the best provision Muawiya had
provided you is your killing of Muhammad’s (Q) Pedigree. Indeed, I have
only feared Allah, and to him only is my compliant. So, plot your
machination, strive all you want, and do your best, but, By Allah, you
would never be able to eradicate the disgrace you earned for what you
did to us. And Thank God for sealing the ending of the Masters of
heavens with happiness and forgiveness so that He enjoined them to go to
Heaven. I do ask Allah to elevate their ranks, and to enjoin them with
many of His Merit, as He is the Powerful Protector".

This speech hit Yazeed like a thunder on his head, so he said:

O what a beautiful outcry better than others,

How easy it is to cry over tribulations.

Bafflement had overwhelmed Yazeed, and he did not know what to say, so
all he did was to recite a poet’s verse, while there is no link between
what this tyrant had heard, of the many thunders that had hit him and
the Umayyad people, reminding

him with each and every word of the hits of Thu Al-Fiqar (Imam Ali’s
sword) between the hands of the Messenger of Allah (Q), and between the
poetry he recited by announcing that the outcry is a good one among
others! And that it is easy to weep over catastrophes! Indeed it is a
failed attempt of a muted person to hide behind gloating.

A Quick Glance of the Contents of the Great Speech

1- Starting from a central theme in the Islamic knowledge which is the
reprieving time Allah the Al-Mighty gives to the oppressing tyrants and
the dissolute disbelievers, and clarifying that this was only to
complete the proofs against them and to increase their iniquity.

2- To expose the unfair ruling of Yazeed, even though he claimed to be
the Caliph.

3- Stressing the point of preserving the woman’s status and the
importance of the ardor for her protection.

4- Stressing the fact that what Yazeed had done was a result of his
infidelity, and that what he had committed was to revenge the killing of
his disbelieving relatives by the Messenger (P) during the Badr Battle,
by raising the swords against the Messenger of Allah fifty years after
the death of the Prophet (P).

5- Confirming that the Reign and ruling is for the Progeny of Muhammad
and no one else, and that shows in her saying: "…and when took control
of our reign and kingdom…"

6- Pointing to the responsibility of the person who had enabled the
tyrant to control the Muslims, this was the reply to those who wanted to
refer this to God’s fate and destiny.

7- Declaring that neither Yazeed nor his followers were able to erase
the history of the Prophet’s progeny, as this is something no one is
able to do.

8- Illustrating the great rank of the martyr and the exalted value of
martyrdom in the Islamic culture.

9- Blaming the major responsibility for killing Imam Hussain (Q)
directly on Yazeed.


