The Stance of Sayyeda Zeinab (O) from the Request of the Man from Sham
======================================================================

It was narrated about Sayyeda Fatima Bint Al-Hussain (Q) that she had
said: "When we were sitting before Yazeed, a man from the people of Sham
got up and said: O prince of believers, grant me this odalisque, meaning
me, so I was terrified thinking that it is allowed for him to do that,
so I held to my aunt Zeinab’s clothes, and she knew that it is not
permissible.

So, my aunt (O) said to the man from Sham: "You are a despicable liar;
By God neither you nor he has the right to do that!"

Then Yazeed got angry and said: "You are the liar, indeed it is my right
and if I wanted to do it, I would have done it!"

She said: "I swear by God, Allah did not allow you do this unless you
renounce from our denomination and believe in another religion".

So, Yazeed was flared up and said: "Are you saying this to me? Indeed
who had renounced the religion are your father and your brother!"

Sayyeda Zeinab (O) said: "By the religion of my God, my Father and my
brother you were guided along with your grandfather and father that is
if you are a Muslim!"

He said: "You are a liar, O you enemy of Allah!"

She (O) said to him: "You are a prince who wrongfully scorns and
overpower with your authority…" As he was ashamed so he kept quiet…

Then the man from Sham said again: "Grant me this odalisque".

So, Yazeed said to him: "Stop, may God grant you an eliminating death".

Thus, Sayyeda Zeinab (O) had accomplished a decisive victory over the
tyrant while he was at the peak of authority and had the apparent power,
as she had confuted him one time after another.

Thus, she was able to expose the ignorance of the person claiming to be
the Caliph of the people, as she also had revealed his lack of knowledge
of the religious rules and regulations, as it is not permissible to
consider the Muslim women as captives of the wars and they should not be
treated as captives either. So how is it when these women are the
daughters of the Messenger of Allah Q?


