The Role of the Ladies of the House of the Prophet (R) at Yazeed’s Parlor
=========================================================================

The rest of the ladies of the Hussain’s convoy followed the steps of
Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) and Sayyeda Zeinab (O) to accomplish the same
goals. They intended to expose the unjust authority, while presenting
themselves as captives from Ahlu El-Bayt (R) in each and every
situation, which caused things to turn against Yazeed Bin Muawiya. This
is what Sayyeda Sukaina, the daughter of Imam Hussain (Q), did when she
presented to the people that these captives are from the family of
Muhammad (P) in order to control the media’s poisoned atmosphere.

As it was narrated by Imam Jaafar Bin Muhammad Al-Sadiq that his father
(Q) had said: "When Yazeed brought the women of Imam Hussain, they
entered during day time while their faces were uncovered, then the harsh
people of Sham said: We have never seen better looking people than
these! Who are you? So, Sukaina Bint Al-Hussain (Q) said: "We are the
captives from the family of Muhammad!"

When the head of Imam Hussain (Q) was placed in front of Yazeed, Sayyeda
Sukaina said to him: "I swear to God I have never seen a harsher heart
than that is of Yazeed, nor a disbeliever or an infidel more evil or
more ruthless than him".

This is also what Fatima Bint Al-Hussain (Q) had done, and she was older
than Sukaina, when the women of Imam Hussain (Q) were brought before
Yazeed, the women of Yazeed and the daughters of Muawiya and his family
started to weep and cry, then Fatima Bint Al-Hussain (Q) said: "Is it
possible for the daughters of the Messenger of Allah to become captives,
O Yazeed?"


