The Speech of Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q)
======================================

Yazeed gave his orders to bring a rostrum and a speaker to mention to
the people the flaws of Imam Hussain (Q) and of his father Imam Ali (Q),
so the speaker went up the podium and started by thanking Allah and
praising Him, and he started to excessively slander Ali and Hussain (L),
and exaggerated in praising Muawiya and Yazeed. So, Imam Zein El-Abedeen

Q yelled at him saying: "Woe to you O speaker, did you buy the approval
of the creature with the exasperation of the Creator! Do await your
place in Hell then". Then He (Q) said: "O Yazeed, allow me to climb up
these sticks to say few words that would please God and grant these
people good reward and compensation…"

Yazeed denied him that, but the people said: "O prince of believers,
give him the permission to speak, maybe we can hear something good from
him". So he told them: "if he goes up that rostrum, he shall never come
down before humiliating me and the whole family of Abi Sufian…"

Then they said: "How much could this one know?!"

He said: "He is from a family that was fed the knowledge from birth…"

They kept arguing till he allowed him to speak, so he climbed the
rostrum, thanked God and praised him then he delivered a speech that
caused the eyes to cry and the hearts to be terrified, and that is what
he said:

"O people, we were awarded six and distinguished by seven, we were
awarded the knowledge, the tolerance, the indulgence, the eloquence, the
courage, and the love in the hearts of the believers. And we are
distinguished as one of us is the Chosen Prophet Muhammad (P), the
Siddiq (Imam Ali), the Tayyar (Q) (meaning Jaafar Al-Tayyar), the lion
of Allah and the lion of the Messenger of Allah (P), the Lady of all the
women of the worlds Fatima Al-Batoul O, and from our family come the two
grandsons of this nation and the two Masters of the youth in Heaven.

Who had met me he should know me, and for he who does not know me I
shall inform him of my parentage and lineage. O people, I am the son of
Mecca and Mena, I am the son of Zamzam and Safa, I am the son of who
carried the Zakat within his clothes, I am the son of the best person
who ever wore clothes, I am the son of the best person who wore shoes or
walked barefooted, I am the son of the best person who performed Tawaf
and Saei (duties of Hajj) I am the son of the best person to perform
Hajj and answer the call of Allah, I am the son of the person who rode
on Buraq (special horse) in space, I am the son of the one who travelled
at night from the Sacred Mosque to the Aqsa Mosque, Praised be who made
him travel, I am the son of he who travelled with Gabriel till he
reached Sudrat Al-Montaha (special tree in the seventh heaven), I am the
son of who approached and came close, and was at a distance of the
length of two bows or even nearer, I am the son of who had led the
prayer for the angels of the skies, I am the son of the person whom
Al-Jaleel (The Exalted) had revealed to him the revelation, I am the son
of Muhammad Al-Mustafa, I am the son of Ali Al-Murtada, I am the son of
who fought the people till they admitted that there is no God but Allah
(believed in God), I am the son of he who fought before the Messenger of
Allah with two swords, stabbed with two spears, migrated two times,
pledge allegiance in both times, prayed towards

the two Qiblah, fought in Bader and Honain, and did not ever disbelieve
in God not even for a glance, I am the son of the best of believers, the
heir of Prophets, the suppressor of infidels, the Chief of Muslims, the
light of fighters (Mujahedeen), and the beauty of worshipers, the crown
of the weepers (out of fear of Allah), the most patient of all, and the
best one of the family of Yaseen, the Messenger of the Lord of the
worlds, I am the son of who is assisted by Gabriel, and supported by
Michael, I am the son of the defender of the Muslims’ sanctities, the
killer of the promise breakers, the cheaters and the hypocrites, who
strove against his eminent enemies, the best person ever to walk among
all of Quraish people, the first believer to answer and respond to the
call of Allah, the first of the first believers, the crusher of the
aggressors, the demolisher of the polytheists, an arrow of the bows of
Allah against the hypocrites, the speaker for the wisdom of the
worshipers, the supporter for Allah’s religion, the guardian for Allah’s
orders, the garden for Allah’s wisdom, the vantage point for Allah’s
knowledge, pliable and generous, smiley, pure and the outgoing, pleasing
and pleased by God, brave and courageous, patient who fasts during the
days, polite who stays up late to pray, valiant and giving, the backs’
breaker, the parties divider, who has the bravest heart of all, who has
the utmost self control of all, who does not speak too soon, with the
strongest determination of all, the most powerful of all, a valiant
lion, a torrential raining storm, who grinds his enemies in a close
compact where swords and riding horses join together the way that a
quern would grind the wheat, then he will toss them the way the wind
would throw ashes in the air, the lion of Hijaz, the owner of miracles,
the ram of Iraq, he is an Imam stated in the authentic text and by
worthiness, from Mecca and Medina, from Bathaa and Tuham, from Khaifa
and Aqaba, from Bader and Uhud, among the people of the Shajara (Tree
treaty) and the migrants, among the Arab he is the leader and the lion
of the battles, the heir of the poets, the father of the two grandsons
Hassan and Hussain, the presenter of wonders, the splitter of troops,
the shooting star, the dominant light, the victorious lion of God, the
desideratum  of every seeker, and the predominant of every dominant,
that is my grandfather, Ali Bin Abi Taleb.

I am the son of Fatima Al-Zahra, I am the son of the Lady of all women,
I am the son of the pure Batoul,23 I am the son of the daughter of the
Prophet, I am the son of Ali Al-Murtada, I am the son of Fatima
Al-Zahra, I am the son of Khadija Al-Kubra, I am the son of the one who
was unjustly murdered, I am the son of the one who is slaughtered from
the back, I am the son of the one who was thirsty till he died, I am the
son of the fallen in Karbala, I am the son of the one whose turban and
clothes were plundered, I am the son of who was cried over by the angels
of the skies, I am the son of who was wept for by the Jinn in the ground
and the birds in the air, I am the son of whose head was given as a
present on spears, I am the son of whose women were captivated and
brought from Iraq to Sham, O people, indeed Allah the Almighty, and
thank is to him, had tested us, Ahlu El-Bayt, with a good test by
placing the banner of guidance, just and pious with us, and had placed
the banner for deception and killing on others…"

Then people started to cry and weep loudly, which made Yazeed fear from
sedition, so he ordered the muezzin to call for prayer, and to interrupt
his speech and silence him.

When the muezzin said "God is Great" Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q) said: "You
glorified the Great God who could not be measured or realized with the
senses, and no one is greater than Allah".

And when he said: "I testify that there is no God but Allah". The Imam
(Q) said: "My hair, skin, flesh, blood, brain and bones all had
testified that it is true".

When he said: "I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah" the
Imam (Q) turned to Yazeed and said: "O Yazeed, is this Muhammad my
grandfather or yours? If you claim he is your grandfather, then you
would have lied, and if you say he is my grandfather, so why did you
kill his progeny?"

Then the Muezzin finished the call for prayer and Yazeed got up and
performed the noon prayer.


