A Glimpse at the Speech of Imam Al-Sajjad (Q) and its Resonance
===============================================================

The Imam (Q) had confined in this speech to the identification of his
family and himself and did not go near other subjects, and perhaps the
secret behind that is his previous knowledge that the Sham’s community
did not know anything about Ahlu El-Bayt (R) and their high status,
since they were raised in the arms of the authority of the Umayyad
tyrants who had concealed the truth away from them, and fed them the
allegiance towards the descendants of the cursed tree and the hatred
towards the family of the Messenger of Allah (P). From this point of
view, we see that he (Q) dealt with the issue from an emotional
perspective, because its effect in this situation is stronger than any
other approach, and the content of the speech indicates that the
audience were from the general public and not limited to the nobles and
dignitaries, as the atmosphere of the assembly differed from the
atmosphere of Yazeed’s general assembly that was crowded with nobles,
dignitaries, senior Christian and Jewish scholars, and representatives
of the top countries of that time. That is why we see that the Imam (Q)
lists the merits of Ahlu El-Bayt (R) and he talks in particular about
some men among them who have no substitute or anyone even comparable to
them. So, he (Q) says: among us is the Chosen Prophet, and among us is
the Siddiq - meaning Ali Bin Abi Taleb (Q) - and he lists many of the
characteristics without stating at the beginning whom he meant by these
traits, like being truthful, the two Masters of the youth of Heaven, and
…, till he lists many of their traits that shows some of their merits
and virtues to have a stronger impact on people, as this what had
happened indeed.

After that, the Imam states his roots and origin as to his lineage and
homeland, so that everyone shall know that he is the branch of the tree
of the Prophet, the fruit of Ali, the jewel of Fatima and the pearl of
Hussain, and that he is from the heart of Mecca and Medina, and how the
oppressing authority and the autocratic government had distorted the
reality for the people and spread the lies and the authority introduced
them to the nation as being rebels against the prince of the dissolute,
Yazeed!

Thus the Imam (Q), after having stated the characteristics of his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (P), like the revelation and the
ascension, he starts to indicate the attributes of his grandfather, the
Prince of believers Ali (Q), while the Sham community hears descriptions
of him that they hear for the first time. As he is the one who fought
with the Messenger of Allah with two swords and stabbed with two spears…

Then he (Q) mentions the merits of his grandmother, the Grand Siddiqa
and the human angel, Sayyeda Fatima Al-Zahra (O). Then he had reached
the peak of his speech when he said: "…I am the son of the one who is
slaughtered from the back, I am the son of the one who was thirsty till
he died, I am the son of the fallen in Karbala, I am the son of the one
whose turban and clothes were plundered…".

This is what happened in Karbala, and this is the reality of the killing
of Imam Hussain (Q). But as for the current issue that the heedless and
lost people of Sham must pay attention to is that even though the pure
body of

Imam Hussain (Q) was in Karbala, but his holy head and his women were in
Sham.

Thus Yazeed did not find an escape other than to recourse to the muezzin
by using the call for prayer as an excuse, as he had known from the
beginning that if the Imam (Q) would climb the rostrum, he (Q) would
turn things against him, but he did not know that he might reach to this
level, otherwise he would have never allowed it.

The speech of the Imam had a strong impact on the Sham’s community, as
people started to look at each other and speak secretly to each other
about their bad situation of failure and disappointment till they
changed their attitude towards Yazeed and started to look at him with
disgrace and contempt.


