The Most Important Meetings of Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) in Sham
===============================================================

The first meeting was when Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) went down from the
rostrum and sat at a corner of the mosque, so Bin Makhoul from Sham met
with him, and he was the Imam for Sham, a companion of the Messenger of
Allah (P), and an averse to the Prince of the believers Ali (Q), so he
said to him: "How did you become O son of the Prophet?"

He (Q) said: "We have become among you like the Bani Israel among the
people of Pharaoh, they were killing their children and captivating
their women, and that is a great ordeal for you from your God".

As for the second meeting for the Imam Zein El-Abedeen, it was with
Menhal Bin Omar Al-Asdi in one of the markets of Damascus, when he said
to him: "How did you become O the son of the Prophet?" he (Q) said: "Woe
to you, isnâ€™t time for you to know how did we become? We have become
among our people like Bani Israel among the people of Pharaoh, they are
killing our children, and captivating our

women, the best person of all human after Muhammad is being cursed
publicly on the rostrums, our enemy is being granted money and dignity,
and he who loves us has become disgraced and taken advantage of, as the
situation of the believers, and the non-Arabs became respectful of Arabs
since Muhammad was from them, and Quraish has become proud over the Arab
since Muhammad was from it, and the Arab are paying respect to Quraish
since Muhammad was from it, and the Arabs are proud over the non Arab
since Muhammad was from them, and we, being the family of the Prophet,
no one knows our right!! So, this is how we have become O Menhal".

And we point out that the incident and the conversation was repeated
with Makhoul and Menhal and it was not the same one. Especially as it
was narrated that the conversation with Makhoul was on a corner of the
mosque, and the conversation with Menhal was in the market of Damascus,
and it is not strange to repeat and have a similar answer for the same
question.


