The Imprisonment of the Rest of the Hussain Convoy in Sham
==========================================================

It was narrated about Fatima, the daughter of Ali (Q) that she said:
"then Yazeed, may Allah curse him, had ordered for the women of Hussain
(Q) to be jailed with Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q) in a prison that does not
protect them from heat or cold, till their faces were pealed of".

The house was in a bad shape, as it was feared it would fall on them, it
was narrated about Abi Abdu Allah Al-Sadiq (Q) that he had said: "Ali
Bin Al-Hussain (Q) was brought to Yazeed Bin Muawiya along with the
women who were with him as captives, so they put them in a house and
they put some non-Arab people, who do not speak Arabic, to guard them.
So they said to each other: they have put us in this house to have it
fall on us and kill us all in it. Then Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q) said to
the guards in their language: do you know what these ladies are saying?
They are saying this and that…, so the guards said: they told us that
you are going to be taken out tomorrow to be killed, so Ali Bin
Al-Hussain (Q) said: no indeed, Allah will never allow that, then he
approached them and started teaching them using their language".

Commemorating Imam Hussain (Q) in the House of Yazeed was for Misleading
and Deceiving Purposes

When the Hussain’s convoy was brought to Yazeed, and the head was placed
in front of him, Hind Bint Amer, the wife of Yazeed, heard the dialogue
that went on in the castle hall, so she covered her face with her
clothes, went out to Yazeed and asked him: "O prince of believers, is
this the head of Al-Hussain the son of Fatima the daughter of the
Prophet?"

So he answered her: "Yes, do weep for him and mourn for the son of the
daughter of Allah’s Messenger (P) and the cry of Quraish, as Bin Ziad
had hastened in killing him, may Allah kill him".

Then she tore her clothes out of grief, so Yazeed jumped and covered
her.

Then the Hashim’s women were brought to Yazeed’s house, and no woman was
left from the family of Yazeed but had approached them and expressed
their grief and sorrow for what happened to them and what was inflicted
on them.

Yazeed did send after the lady captives of the prophetic house (R) and
said to them: "Which one do you prefer, to stay in my castle, or go back
to Medina? And you shall be rewarded generously!"

They said: "First, we need to mourn over Hussain (Q)”

He said: "Do whatever you want".

Then the rooms and houses in Damascus were emptied for them, and no lady
from Hashim or Quraish was left without wearing black clothes for the
Imam (Q) and they wailed over him during all the time they had spent in
Sham, and the people of Sham cried till their voices became really loud.

So Yazeed, may Allah curse him, felt compelled to pretend crying in
front of the people due to his fear from their strong anger towards him.
Then he feared sedition or a revolution, so he started to apologize,
condemn the act of Bin Ziad and began to show glorification and
dignifying of Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q). Then, he moved the women of the
Messenger of Allah to

his private house, and he refused to eat lunch or dinner without the
presence of the Imam (Q).


