The Medina of the Prophet (P) Meeting the Returnees
===================================================

Preparing the Captives of Ahlu El-Bayt (R) to Return to Medina
--------------------------------------------------------------

The media of the Hussain Convoy had succeeded in fulfilling their
missionary duties in Sham, and the speeches that were delivered by the
family of the Prophet (R) the main subject in all the groupsâ€™ meetings
and the sittings. Thus the people of Sham got to know the cruelty of
Yazeed and his slyness, and the Sham community became like the boiling
lava against the oppressing regime. Yazeed feared from seditions, the
instability of the public opinion, and that things might get out of his
hands, as no one of the people anywhere in the world was pleased with
what he had done, so he thought seriously of a way to get rid of the
problem of the presence of Ahlu El-Bayt (R) in Sham. Thus he said when
offering Sayyeda Um Kalthoum some money: "O Um Kalthoum take this money
as a consolation for what happened to you".

So she (O) answered: "O Yazeed, how shameless you are and how ignorant!
Do you kill my brother and my family and then offer me a consolation?!"

Then he called for Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) and said to him: "If you
like you can stay with us where we keep in contact with your kinship and
respect your rights, or if you rather we can send you back to your home
country".

So, Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) said: "rather you send me back to my home
country..".

Thus Yazeed ordered Al-Noueman Bin Bashir to prepare the captives with
everything they needed, and he asked him to send with them a good and
trustworthy person from Sham to accompany them to Medina.

So, he chose Mehrez Bin Hareeth Al-Kalbi to escort them, and he was one
of the best people of Sham. Thus, he used to accompany the convoy from
far along with his riders, and he placed the women in the forefront to
make sure they do not get lost, when they stepped down to rest, he and
his soldiers used to stay away from them to give them some space, they
were around them acting like guards, he also used to ask about their
situation and was nice to them in all aspects, and he did not make the
travel hard for them, till they reached Medina.

It is very strange someone might say, for Yazeed to send people like
these just to protect them, even though it is the apparent side of this
issue, however, in reality it was to first protect them and secondly to
control the situation. And most likely the second reason was the
intended one, as it is normal for Yazeed to fear a mutiny or a rebellion
against him in some of the countries located in their path. Thus the
authority thought of this, so they sent to Medina after some of the
elderly who were loyal to the family of Hashim and for the children of
Ali to accompany the convoy.

Hence, the departure day of the Hussain convoy from Sham was on the
twentieth of the month of Safar, accordingly they have stayed in Sham
for twenty days.


