The Remaining of the Hussain Convoy in Karbala
==============================================

When the ladies of Imam Hussain (Q) had left Sham and reached Iraq, they
said to the guide: "We ask you by the lord you worship to show us the
way that leads to Karbala"

So he did. And they held memorial processions in the land of Taff for
three consecutive days, and accordingly it became a good tradition that
continued from that time until now.

As for the Majlis (reciting of the Karbala stories) that they did in
Karbala, which was witnessed by Jaber Bin Abdu Allah Al-Ansari, a group
of Bani Hashim and some men from the family of Prophet (P) who came to
visit the grave of the Imam (Q), it was not performed when they (R)
reached Karbala coming from Sham, but in a different period of time, as
they were continually visiting the graves.

Indeed, the first one to visit Imam Hussain (Q) was the respectful
companion, Jaber Bin Abdu Allah Al-Ansari (VI)25 , who had left from the
Holy Medina to Karbala in order to visit the Master of martyrs (Q). Yet,
he reached Karbala on the twentieth of Safar, which was the first
fortieth memorial of Imam Hussain (Q), along with Atteiah Bin Saad Bin
Abi Janada Al-Awfy,26 and it was the same day on which the Husain convoy
had left the Sham; which made it impossible for them to meet in the
first visit, as the Hussain convoy did not return to Karbala on the
first fortieth memorial of Imam Hussain (Q) and not on the second
memorial either but during the period in between.

Then Ahlu El-Bayt (R) had left Karbala heading to Medina, after having
performed the memorials for the Master of martyrs (Q)

O city of our Grandfather do not welcome us,

As we came with grieves and sorrows.

Do tell the Messenger of Allah on our behalf that,

We were shocked with the loss of our father.

And that our men are all, in the Taff, dead

Headless, while they had slaughtered our children.


