The Soil of Imam Hussain (Q)
============================

It was narrated that Um Salama had said: "One day, The Messenger of
Allah (P) was sitting in my house and he said: Do not let anyone come
into my room, so I waited, and then Hussain (Q) did go in. Later I heard
the loud cry of the Prophet (P), so I looked and saw Hussain sitting in
his lap while the Prophet is wiping his forehead and crying, so I said:
By Allah I did not see him when he entered, so he said: "Indeed Gabriel
(Q) was present in our home and he said to me: "do you love him?" I
said: "Yes, as for this worldly life", then he said: "Your nation will
kill this one in a land called Karbala, and then Gabriel (Q) grabbed
some of its soil and showed it to the Prophet (P)”.

Thus, Sayyeda Um Salama was not the only one who had narrated the news
about Gabriel’s bringing the soil of Imam Hussain (Q) to his Grandfather
the Great Messenger (P), but there were many people who had narrated
that story and the Prince of believers Ali (Q) was on the top of the
list:

1 - It was narrated by the Prince of Believers Q: "One day, I entered
the room of the Prophet (P) and saw that his eyes were full of tears so
I said: Did any one bother you O Prophet of Allah? Why am I seeing your
eyes full of tears? So he said: "Gabriel had just left and he had told
me that my nation shall kill my grandson, Al-Hussain", then he said: "do
you want me to show you some of his soil?" I said: "Yes", so he
stretched his arms and grabbed some of it and when I saw it I could not
hold my tears".

2 - Abu Baker, Omar, Huthaifa, Ammar, and Abu Thar: One day, the
Messenger of Allah (Q) came out to his friends while crying, so they
said: "why are you crying O Messenger of Allah?" so he (P) said:
"Gabriel had told me that my son, Hussain, will be killed after my
demise on the land of Taff and he brought this soil to me and said that
he will rest in it".


