The Speech of Amro Bin Saeid Bin Al-Ass
=======================================

Amro Bin Saeid climbed up the rostrum, so he spoke to the people and
then mentioned Imam Hussain and what happened to him and said: "it was a
strike after a strike, a shock after a shock, and an advice after the
other "Perfect wisdom (the Quran), but (the preaching) of warnings
benefit them not"27 , By Allah, I would have loved for Hussainâ€™s head to
be with his body and for his soul and body to be alive and he would
insult us and we would praise him, he would cut us off and we would stay
in touch with him as it was our habit and that was his habit, rather
than seeing this happens to him. But what should we do to who had drawn
his sword wanting to kill us? We had no choice but to defend ourselves".

So Abdu Allah Bin Al-Saeb stood up and said to him: "If Fatima was alive
and had seen the head of Hussain, she would have cried for him". So Amro
Bin Saeid answered him and said: "We are more close to Fatima than you!
Her father and her husband were like our brothers, and her son was like
our son, indeed if Fatima was alive, her eyes would have cried and her
heart would have felt sad, but she would not have blamed who had killed
him while defending himself".

A person who thinks about this speech while being aware of its
conditions would not find it strange, as he would know that it was
delivered on unstable conditions after the arrival of the news to Medina
and the arrival of the holy head to it. That is why we see this spiteful
person who used to hate the Prince of Believers, Ali (Q), the most, is
now backing down in his speech and showing himself in the place of a
touched defender.


