The Return of the Rest of the Hussain Convoy to Medina
======================================================

They are close to the Medina… the city of their Grandfather… the
migration place of their father… the haven of their mother… their birth
city…and the home land for their beloved ones, how hard is it to enter
it while being in such condition. They had left with Imam Hussain (Q)
and today they are back without Al-Hussain (Q)…

And it is only normal for the journey to take an emotional curve more
than anything else, as the people of Medina had lived with Imam Hussain
(Q), got used to him, and they felt that his presence represents the
presence of his Grandfather in his knowledge, his grace, his manners,
his braveness, his caring and all of his good morals. Thus today they
hear of the arrival of his family members near his home land, the family
members who had left with him and came back alone, but still carrying
his message.

From this point, we see that the journey did not stop at the influence
of the emotional aspect only, but it paid more attention to the ethical
and methodical aspects. It continued this way using different means,
whether by performing the mourning processions where they narrate the
Karbala stories, the continuous crying, the delivery of speeches, or by
broadcasting the supplications with valuable contents, or other means.

Thus, the purpose from all this is to enlighten the thoughts and to
awaken the society from the deep sleep that had been dominating all its
members, except for whoever had embraced the Quran and the Progeny of
Mohammad (R).


