The Greif of Um Al-Baneen, the Wife of the Prince of Believers, Ali (Q)
=======================================================================

Um Al-Baneen,30 the wife of the Prince of believers (Q), started the
mourning processions (Funeral) for Imam Hussain (Q), and all the ladies
of the Hashim’s family did gather in her house to mourn the Imam (Q) and
his family.

Thus what shows her strong belief, is that when Bashir delivered to her
the death news of her four sons after he came to Medina, she used to ask
about Imam Hussain (Q), so when he told her about the death of her four
sons, she said: "Indeed you had torn the veins of my heart, my children
along with everyone under the sky are all a sacrifice for the sake of
Abu Abdul Allah Al-Hussain (Q)”

As Um Al-Baneen used to go out to the Baqie and mourn her sons in a very
sad and heart breaking way, while carrying Obaydu Allah the son of
Al-Abbas (Q). So people used to gather around her to listen to her, and
Marwan Bin Al-Hakam was one of the people who used to come, so he used
to listen to her mourning and cry.

And some of what she said was:

Do not call me Um Al-Baneen any more,

As it reminds me of the Lions of the Den.

They were sons for me, to be called by them

Thus they reached death and were killed.

The Grief of Al-Rabab, the Daughter of Imreo Al-Qeiss and her Weeping
and Mourning

Al-Rabab, the wife of Imam Hussain (Q), had joined the convoy to
Karbala, and she is the mother of Sukaina and Abdu Allah Al-Radeae (the
infant). She was among the captives of his (Q) family who were taken to
Sham and then came back to Medina. Many of the Quraish nobles had
proposed for her, so she said: "I would never accept a father-in-law
other than the Prophet (P)”.

And she stayed alive for one year after the death of Imam Hussain (Q),
during which she had never stayed inside a house, till she died out of
distress.


