The Continuous Crying of Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) and his Grief
===============================================================

It was narrated that Abdu Allah, Jaafar Bin Mohammad Al-Sadiq (Q) had
said: "The weepers are five, Adam, Jacob, Joseph, Fatima the daughter of
Mohammad (P), and Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q). As for Adam, he did cry over
the heaven till his cheeks had wrinkles like valleys. As for Jacob, he
did cry over Joseph till he lost his sight and it was said to him: (They
said: By Allah! You will never cease remembering Yusuf (Joseph) until
you become weak with old age, or until you be of the dead)31 , As for
Joseph, he did cry over Jacob till the people of the prison got annoyed
with him and said to him: You either cry during the day and be quiet at
night, or cry at night and be quiet during the day, so he picked one of
the two choices. As for Fatima the daughter of Mohammad (P), she cried
over the death of the Messenger of Allah (P) till the people of Medina
were annoyed by her crying, and they said to her: You are hurting us
with your continuous crying, so she started to go to the grave yard of
the martyrs and keep crying till she feels satisfied and then go back.
And as for Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q) he cried over Al-Hussain (Q) Twenty or
forty years, and whenever they used to put food in front of him, he used
to cry, until a servant of him once told him: May I be sacrificed for
your sake O son of the Prophet! I do fear that you might become among
the dead. So he (Q) said: Indeed I do complain to God my unbearable
grief and sorrow, and I do know of Allah what you all do not know, I do
remember the demise of the children of Fatima and I cannot but feel that
I am choked with tears".

Abu Hamza Al-Thamali had said: "Imam Zein El-Abedeen

was asked about his excessive crying so he said: "Indeed Jacob did lose
one of Sebt of his sons, so he kept crying over him till his eyes turned
white that is while his son was still alive in this world and did not
know for sure that he was dead, but I did see my father and seventeen
ones of my family all killed in one hour, so do you expect for their
grief to leave my heart?..".


