The Role of Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) in the Continuation of the Message
=======================================================================

Indeed Imam Zein El-Abedeen had performed his role in the best way
possible in regards to the continuance of the Hussain’s Message,
strengthening its foundations and its results, and using it to train the
people’s souls, and that is through many things:

1 - Confirming the aspect of Imamate: Thus the oppressive authority
wanted to see everything settled down after the killing of Imam Hussain
(Q), but Imam Zein El-Abedeen (Q) with the role he played, had proofed
that the Imamate is something that is more powerful than the
determination of humans, and that it is a divine commandment that is
guarded and protected by a special divine care.

2 - Educating the people: Thus Imam Zein El-Abedeen started educating
the people through his speeches and advices, which probably was
delivered on Fridays and in the Mosque of the Prophet (P), and it is
known that the attendance of people on Fridays differs from other days.

3 - Broadcasting the Divine knowledge: Since the Imam (Q) was living in
a very hard political conditions, it was normal that he was not able to
be present in the fields as needed, and that is why we see that he had
presented a great wealth of knowledge in the form of supplications,
which had dealt with many issues with different aspects like the
disciplinary, the spiritual, the societal and the political aspects….

4 - The Imam (Q) and the issue of taking revenge from the killers of
Imam Hussain Q: There are many proofs and evidences of the leading role
of the Imam (Q) in regards to taking revenge from the killers of Imam
Hussain (Q), as judge Noeman said: Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q) used to pray
every day and night for God to enable him to see the killer of his
father dead. And when Mukhtar Al-Thaqafi killed the killers of Imam
Hussain (Q) he sent the head of Oubayd Allah Bin Zeiad and the head of
Amro Bin Saad with his messenger to Ali Bin Al-Hussain (Q). When Ali Bin
Al-Hussain (Q)


