Allamah (knowledgeable in Many Fields of Knowledge)
===================================================

Now what can I say about that! These guys are only trying to go one
better than the Ulamas. Slightly more knowledge in a few more fields of
knowledge, and hey presto! One is an Allamah.

There are unknown number of sciences and branches of knowledge that
cannot even be imagined. Why do these guys think that they are
knowledgeable in many fields of knowledge, when the total sum of their
knowledge is not even a drop in the ocean?

From history, this was first displayed from the School of the Holy Imam
Ja'far Al Sadiq (a.s.). Numerous subjects were taught including
mathematics, physics, chemistry, astronomy etc. Try questioning the
Allamahs of today on any of these and see for yourself what answers you
get. The Holy Imam (a.s.) only displayed a drop of the knowledge that he
(a.s.) had. These Allamahs only have a drop from this drop, and that is
all they have.

AL KAFI - H 44, Ch. 2, h1

Muhammad ibn al-Hassan has narrated from Ali ibn Muhammad from Sahl ibn
Ziyad from Muhammad ibn 'Isa from 'Ubayd Allah al-Dihqan from Durust al
Wasiti from Ibrahim ibn 'Abd al-Hamid from abu al-Hassan Musa ,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following: "Once
the Holy Prophet, recipient of divine supreme covenant, entered the
Mosque and found a group of people gathered around a man. He asked, 'Who
is he?' It was said that he was an Allama.

Then he asked, 'What is that?' They replied that he is an expert in
genealogy, chronology, and the history of the pre-Islamic days of
darkness and poetry of Arabs. The Holy Prophet, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, then told them, 'There are only three kinds of
Knowledge: A decisive Verse, a justly enjoined obligation or an
established tradition. Other than these are only something extra.'"

Historically there have been some good Mullahs who have been caught up
in this name game. One such example is the famous Mullah Muhammad Baqir
Al Majlisi of the Bihar Ul Anwar fame. The reference of Allamah was
allocated to him after his death.

This is a very serious trend that has come up recently that all those
Sheykhs and Mullahs of old are now being referred to with these titles
in the new publications. Sheykh Kulayni, Sheykh Toosi, Sheykh Sadouq etc
are now been referred to as Ayatullahs, whereas historically they have
always been known simply as Sheykhs.

QUESTIONS

How many fields of knowledge are there? How many is 'many' out of all
the fields of knowledge?

Can having a small amount of knowledge of a small number of them make
one an Allamah?

How come these Allamahs do not have the knowledge of the subjects that
were taught by the Holy Imam Ja'far Al Sadiq (a.s.)? Are they experts in
the genealogy, chronology, pre-Islamic history and the poetry of the
Arabs?


**A'alam (The Most Knowledgeable)**

Whatever that can possibly be learnt in matters of religion, this guy
is supposed to know it. He is regarded as the most knowledgeable among
all the Ulamas and is a step ahead of the Allamahs.

So he just sits there basking in the glory of being referred to as the
A'alam on the presumption that no one is more knowledgeable that him.
Maybe someone should remind him that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) is still around
and that he (a.s.) has only gone into occultation.

But it is common knowledge among the Shiites that their Holy Imam
(a.s.) is still alive and is their Divine Guide whose return from
occultation is eagerly awaited. And so I have no choice but to conclude
that 'the most knowledgeable one' is surely aware of this. He has
therefore deliberately adorned himself with this title despite being
aware that there is the person of the Holy Imam (a.s.) who is actually
the A'alam.

QUESTIONS

If the Ulamas are not the Ulamas, then what does that make the most
knowledgeable of them all?

Why has this 'A'alam' deliberately ignored the fact that in actual fact
Imam Mahdi (a.s.) is more knowledgeable that he will ever be? Is he
trying to tell us that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) does not actually exist and
therefore he is now the A'alam?

ALAM UL HUDA (THE BANNER OF GUIDANCE)

Give me a break! This was one of the titles used by Imam Ali (a.s.).
How can anyone else use this title for himself I shall never know.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: O Ali! You are the Banner of Guidance
and the Light of Religion and that is the Light of Allah (s.w.t.) -
Bihaar Ul Anwaar Vol 22 Incidentally this title is commonly used for
Syed Murtadha, the pioneer Mujtahid of over a thousand years ago. He was
a student of the Mu'tazilite teacher Asadabadi and started Ijtihad using
the principles of Imam Shafei. His brother Syed Razi (compiler of Nahj
Ul Balagah) did not agree with him and refused to pray behind him.

QUESTIONS

As the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) used this title for Imam Ali (a.s.), then
where is the justification of using it for ordinary people?

How can anyone possibly justify using this title for someone other than
a Holy Infallible (a.s.).


