Ayatollah Al Uzma (the Great Sign of Allah)
===========================================

Does this not remind you of Me'raj?


ÙŽ the greatest signs of his Lord.

[Shakir 53:17-18] The eye did not turn aside, nor did it exceed the
limit. Certainly he saw of Somehow it does not compute in my brain that
when the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) arrived at his (s.a.w.) destination in
Me'raj, there was one of these people who go around calling themselves
the 'great sign of Allah', sitting there waiting for him. And in
Ziyarat, the Holy Imam (a.s.) is referred to as the great sign of Allah
(s.w.t.). BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL. 97 H 5

Peace be upon you o Doyen of the Martyrs, Peace be upon you of Great
Sign of Allah (s.w.t.).

BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL. 54 H 26

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: If I make the intention to see the wonders of the
earth and the seven heavens in the twinkling of an eye, then I can do so
for I have the Great Name and I am the Great Sign and the magnificent
Miracle.

QUESTIONS

What happens when one of these 'great sign of Allah' declares the
playing of Chess to be permissible when it has been clearly forbidden?
When two of these 'great sign of Allah' oppose each other, does it mean
that they are both signs of different Allahs? But there is only one
Allah (s.w.t.).


**Faqih (Man Of Understanding)**

You are probably surprised at the heading where you expected a Faqih to
be described as one who is a Jurist. This is the common understanding of
most people that a Faqih is a person who is an expert in the principles
of jurisprudence (Usool E Fiqh). But the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have
described a Faqih as a person who understands their position.

For example when Imam Husayn (a.s.) wrote a letter to Habib Ibn Mazahir
to invite him for help he addressed it as 'From Abu Abdillah Al Husayn
to a man of understanding (Rajool Un Faqih) Habib Ibn Mazahir'.

Can someone now tell me as to which Usool E Fiqh did Habib Ibn Mazahir
study or whether he used to issue any verdicts (Fatwas)? When you study
the whole of Imam Husayn (a.s.)'s letter you will realize the
connotation of the epitaph 'Man of Understanding' that he (a.s.) used
for Habib Ibn Mazahir (a.r.).

He (a.s.) says in his letter 'O Habib! You are aware of our station and
position, therefore come to our help'. It is now established that
according to Imam Husayn (a.s.) the 'Faqih' is one who understands the
position and the station of the Imam (a.s.). This word has no
relationship with the branches (Furoo) of religion.

This is the reason why the Holy Imams (a.s.) never recognized these so
called Faqihs as Faqihs.

Wasaail Us Shia Vol 11 H 27; Bihar Ul Anwaar Vol. 82 H 2; Rijal Kashi
Vol 3.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said: Understand the status of our Shias according to
the good reports from us for we do not recognise the Faqih from among
them to be a Faqih unless he becomes a Muhaddith (Narrator of
traditions) What! Our heroes spend their entire lives learning Fiqh,
then how come the Holy Imams (a.s.) refuses to recognise them as such?
Is it because they base their Ijtihad on the Usool E Fiqh taken from the
enemies of the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.)? Think again about what I have
just said!

Al KAFI - H 206, Ch. 22, h8 (EXTRACT)

It is reported that: A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad
ibn uhammad ibn Khalid from 'Isma'il ibn Mihran from abu Sa'id al-Qammat
and Salih ibn Sa'id from Aban ibn Taghlib who has said the following:
"Once a man asked a question from Imam abu Ja'far, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, who replied to it, and then the man said, 'The Fuqaha
do not say this.' "The Imam then said, 'It is a pity. Have you ever seen
a Faqih? Look at the question here. Have you ever seen a Faqih? So what
were those guys who used to walk around with turbans on their head
posing as Faqihs? Maybe it is because of this Hadeeth. AL KAFI - H 167,
Ch. 19, h11

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from Muthanna al-Hannat from abu Basir who has said the
following:"Once I asked (Imam) abu 'Abd Allah, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, saying, 'We may face an issue about which there is
nothing said in the book of Allah or in the Sunnah, tradition of the
Holy Prophet, recipient of divine supreme covenant, can we use our own
opinion in such matters?' The Imam replied, 'No, you must not do that.
If you, in this way, find the truth you will receive no rewards for it,
and if you missed the truth you have forged lies against Allah, the
Majestic, the Glorious.'"

So it does not matter whether he gets it right, as there is no reward
for him for that. And if he gets it wrong? Imagine spending you entire
life in a Madrassah in a far away land, publishing your own book of
emulation for people to follow, answering thousand of questions posed by
them, and then find out there is no reward waiting for you on the Day of
Judgment for all your right answers. For all your wrong answers you will
be classified as a forger of lies and be deserving of Hell. What a waste
of life that would be.

The forger of lies against Allah (s.w.t.) will end up in Hell as he is
the most unjust.

[Shakir 6:144] Who, then, is more unjust than he who forges a lie
against Allah that he should lead astray men without knowledge? Surely
Allah does not guide the unjust people. Not only that, they have been
regarded as evil people by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). 23

AL KAFI - VOL 8 H 479

Ali Bin Ibrahim heard from his father from Nawfil from Sakuni from Abu
Abdillah (a.s.) who said: 'The Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) said
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "A time will come upon the people
when the Quran will only remain as a custom and Islam will only remain
in name and the mosques will be full of people but they will be bereft
of guidance and the Fuqaha of that period will be the most evil Fuqaha
under the shadow of the sky; evil will emanate from them and return
towards them"'.

After this Hadeeth if I were to write any more on this topic then I
would probably end up getting killed.

Anyhow, let me tell you about a funny argument which I received from
someone about this. He claimed that the Fuqaha referred to here are the
ones from the Sunnis, and not from among the Shiites. Honestly, every
time I remember this, it brings a smile to my face.

The reason being, that the Sunnis do not have any Fuqaha. In their
entire history they only ever had four of them who all died over a
thousand years ago. The entire Sunni population are the Muqallideen
(emulators) of these four - Imam Shafei, Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam Malik and
Imam Ahmad Bin Hanbal.

QUESTIONS

If the Fuqaha are not being recognized by the Holy Imams (a.s.) as
Fuqaha then why are we recognising them as such?

If the only Fuqaha being recognised by the Holy Imams (a.s.) are the
Muhaddith, the narrators of Hadeeth, then how come we are unaware of any
of them these days? If the Fuqaha of the end times are the most evil
people then what does that make their followers?


