Na'ib E Imam (representive of the Imam)
=======================================

Nice title eh? As soon as Shiites look at this title their hearts
simply fall for the guy who uses it. This is due to their love for Imam
Mahdi (a.s.). The only problem is that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) never allocated
this title to be used by any of these guys. Let me explain.

Historically, this term was used to denote the four representatives of
the Twelfth Holy Imam (a.s.) who were the residents of Baghdad, during
the minor occultation. All the Holy Imams (a.s.) from the first Holy
Imam (a.s.) to the eleventh Holy Imam (a.s.) had their own
representatives in different areas but the had never used this title for
them. What was the reason for labelling these four as such when they
themselves never used this title nor did anyone else ever used it for
them during their time and there is no reference for this in history
books?

The colossal Al Kafi of Sheykh Kulayni which was written during the
minor occultation has no mention of this. In fact, none of the four
canonical books of the Shiites has any reference to this. Yes, the only
one who claimed to be the representative was Shamalghani, who was
immediately reprimanded by way of a Holy letter.

The Shiites then used to go in front of his house and send curses upon
him. He is being referred to as the accursed one even today. (Maybe the
Shiites of that time comprehended the weight of this title).

There is only one reason that comes to the fore as to why this label
was stuck to the four representatives, and that is to profit from it
during the time of occultation so that a parallel system of rule can be
established. They then classified the four as special representatives
and themselves as general representatives. But this is an invalid act as
the special representation has yet to be proven and so how can you prove
general representation. Even if the special representation is somehow
proven, that still does not prove their general representation
because:-

None of the four representatives were Mujtahids which these people have
now become.

None of them ever used the weapon invented by the Sunnis (Usool E Fiqh)
in order to refute the Hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). None of
them has ever issued a Fatwa.

None of them had ever considered the people to be ignorant, placed a
collar of Taqleed on their necks, published any of their Tawzeehs, or
created their own respective group of emulators. None of them ever tried
to equate themselves with the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

None of them ever played the drum that: 'Without their Taqleed none of
your deeds are acceptable'.

All of them were just contact points between the people and the Holy
Imam (a.s.). Their job was just to take questions to the Holy Imam
(a.s.) and bring back the answers from him (a.s.). They never answered
any of the questions of their own accord.

The system of representation was ended by the Holy Imam (a.s.) in his
last letter to the fourth of them which has been recorded by Sheykh
Sadouq. Take a look at the last letter of our Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.).
IKMAL UD DEEN WA TAMAAM UN NE'MAT - VOL.2 H44

It is narrated from Abu Muhammad Al Hassan Bin Ahmad Al Maktab who
said: I was in the same city in the year when Sheykh Ali Bin Muhammad Al
Samiri May Allah purify his soul I was with him before he died. During
that time a letter arrived from Imam Mahdi (a.s.).

'In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. O Ali Bin Muhammad
Al Samiri may Allah give great reward to your brothers, you are going to
die in six days, So, wind up your affairs, but appoint no one in your
place, because from the day of your death the period of my second
occultation (Gaibat e Kubra) will begin. Hence forth, I will not
reappear, unless and until with the permission of Allah (s.w.t.). My
reappearance will take place after a very long time when people's hearts
will have hardened the world will be full of injustice and sins.

Among my Shiites will be those who will claim to have seen me. Beware!
Anyone who makes such a claim before the coming out of Sufyani and the
sound from heaven announcing my reappearance, is a liar and imposter.
There is no Might nor Strength except in Allah the High the Grea't. I
made a copy of this letter and came back.

On the sixth day I returned and found him in a coma. People who were
there asked him (Ali Bin Muhammad Al Samiri) who his successor is after
him. He said: 'This matter is in the hands of Allah (s.w.t.) and He will
fulfill it'. And then he died. These were the last words heard from
him.

In this letter, the Holy Imam (a.s.) has advised him to wrap up his
affairs and not to appoint anyone else. The Holy Imam (a.s.) put an end
to this chain of contact points once and for all did not differentiate
between the special and the general representatives nor did he say that,
if, from now on anyone wearing a turban on his head were to come to you
then you should accept him.

He also said that from now on if anyone claims to have seen me is a
liar and an imposter. Therefore, today, if someone makes the claim that
the Holy Imam (a.s.) comes to him and explains the solutions to the
problems has surely forged a lie against the Holy Imam (a.s.). How can
it be when there is no contact?

The main reason for making the claim of being the Holy Imam (a.s.)'s
representative is so that all his (a.s.) affairs should get transferred
unto him and no one would be able to challenge him as the Holy Imam
(a.s.) will no longer be reprimanding him by way of a letter. People
should consider the orders of the 'representatives' orders to be the
orders of the Holy Imam (a.s.).

Since, without being in the Taqleed of the Holy Imams (a.s.) none of
our deeds are acceptable, the same would now be the case for them as
they now represent him. They would now be handling the affairs of
religion and if he (a.s.) were not to make his (a.s.) appearance, then
there is no problem as all the affairs are taken care of. The reason for
awaiting his (a.s.) appearance has just been negated by these guys.

QUESTIONS

Who appointed these general representatives during the major
occultation? Who classified the representation between special and
general?

Are any of the acts and claims of these self-appointed general
representatives valid? What about those of them who claim to have met
Imam Mahdi (a.s.) during their lifetime? Why are we regarding them as
saints when the Holy Imam (a.s.) has referred to these claimants as
liars and imposters?


