Imam (divine Guide)
===================

Wow! This is the big one.

The first time I heard this title being used by anyone other than the
twelve Holy Imams (a.s.) was after the revolution in Iran in 1979. The
Iranians declared Agha e Khomeini as their Imam. This led to the people
of Iraq to start referring to Agha e Khoie as Imam Al Khoei.

Then the Kuwaitis decided not to be left behind and started referring
to Agha e Shirazi as Imam Shirazi. Then Agha e Khamenei was declared as
an Imam. In fact they have gone further and declared him as Vali Ul Amr.
I wonder where this will end? There is certainly no limit to desires.

It is quite clear from the Book of Allah (s.w.t.) that every one will
be called on the Day of Judgment with their respective Imams. I wonder
where the followers of these Imams will be on that Day?

One day Imam Ali (a.s.) was with some people, when eight of them asked
to leave as they had something urgent to do. They agreed to meet him
(a.s.) again on Friday.

When they walked away they saw a lizard and they jokingly said to each
other, 'Let us pay allegiance to this lizard'. So they caught it and
placed their hands on it as a symbol of allegiance and then they let it
go. When they went to the Mosque on Friday, Imam Ali (a.s.) was
delivering a speech in which he (a.s.) was explaining the verse :

ٍَْْ [Shakir 17:71] (Remember) the day when We will call every people
with their Imam; then whoever is given his book in his right hand, these
shall read their book; and they shall not be dealt with a whit
unjustly.

When he (a.s.) saw them he stopped and said: 'I am currently looking at
eight people who will be called on the Day of Judgment with a lizard as
that is their Imam'.

Let us think about this for a moment. What will happen to those who
listen to and obey every command of a claimant of this title and yet
think that they will be raised with the Holy Imam (a.s.)? Quite frankly,
I think they are suffering from delusion.

The Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.) has guided us through numerous written
replies of his to the questions posed by the Shiites during the minor
occultation. Approximately two hundred of these Holy letters have been
preserved in books. I for one, am not aware of anyone among my people
who is aware of the contents of these Holy letters and yet I know of
many who are experts in recalling the statements of their 'Imams' from
their Twazeeh Ul Masaail (Book of Emulation).

AL KAFI - H 951, Ch. 85, h 1

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad fromMuhammad
ibn Sinan from abu Salam from Sawra ibn kulayb who has said the
following: "Once I asked abu Ja'far, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
Gracious: 'On the Day of Judgment you will see the faces of those who
had invented falsehood against Allah blackened. . . .' (39:60) The Imam
said, 'It refers to those who claim to be the Imam but in fact, are not
the Imam.

' "I then asked, 'Even if he is of the descendents of Ali, recipient of
divine supreme covenant?' He replied, 'Yes, even if he is of the
descendents of Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant.' I then asked,
'Even if he is of the sons of Ali ibn abu Talib, recipient of divine
supreme covenant?' He said, 'Yes, even if he is as such.'"

This is also found in Tafseer Qummi, Tafseer Ayyashi and Tafseer Saafi
for these Verses:

[Shakir 28:41] And We made them Imams who call to the fire, and on the
day of resurrection they shall not be assisted.

[Shakir 28:42] And We caused a curse to follow them in this world, and
on the day of resurrection they shall be of those made to appear
hideous. AL KAFI - H 952, Ch. 85, h 2

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from 'Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn 'Isa
from Ali ibn al- Hakam from Aban from al-Fudayl from abu 'Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:
"Whoever claims to be the Imam and, in fact, is not the Imam is
considered an unbeliever."

He has narrated from Hisham ibn Salim from Habib al-Sajistani from abu
Ja'far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the
following: "Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,

has said, 'I will cause to suffer punishment all those (citizens) who
live a religious life in Islam with belief in and acknowledgement of the
guardianship of unjust 'A'immah (leaders without Divine Authority) who
do not possess authority from Allah, even though such followers are
(apparently) virtuous and pious in their deeds. I will forgive all those
(citizens) who live a religious life in Islam with belief in and
acknowledgement of the guardianship of an Imam who is just in his
dealings and possesses authority from Allah, even though such followers
in their dealings are unjust sinners.'"

AL KAFI - H 956, Ch. 85, h 6

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from Talha ibn Yazid from abu 'Abd Allah, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following: "Whoever
considers someone who has no Divine Authority as a partner in the
Leadership of a Leader with Divine Authority, is considered a
polytheist." AL KAFI - H 962, Ch. 85, h 12

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from abu
Dawud al- Mustariqq from Ali ibn Maymun from ibn abu Ya'fur who has said
the following: "Once I heard abu 'Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, say, 'There will be three kinds of people to whom Allah will
not look on the Day of Judgment.


He will not purify them and they will suffer painful punishments. They
are those who claim to be the Imam but without authority from Allah,
those who reject the Imam (Leader with Divine Authority), and those who
think that for the 'two' there is a share in Islam.'"


