The Years of Spiritual and Intellectual Formation in Qum, 1923 to 1962
======================================================================

   
 After his arrival in Qum in 1922 or 1923, the Imam first devoted
himself to completing the preliminary stage of madrasa education known
as *sutuh*; this he did by studying with teachers such as Shaykh
Muhammad Riza Najafi Masjid-i Shahi, Mirza Muhammad Taqi Khwansari, and
Sayyid ‘Ali Yasribi Kashani. However, from his early days in Qum, the
Imam gave an indication that he was destined to become more than another
great authority on Ja’fari jurisprudence.

He showed an exceptional interest in subjects that not only were usually
absent from the madrasa curriculum, but were often an object of
hostility and suspicion: philosophy, in its various traditional schools,
and Gnosticism (‘*irfan*). He began cultivating this interest by
studying the *Tafsir*-i Safi, a commentary on the Qur’an by the
Sufistically-inclined Mullah Muhsin Fayz-i Kashani (d.1091/1680),
together with the late Ayatullah ‘Ali Araki (d. 1994), then a young
student like himself. His formal instruction in gnosticism and the
related discipline of ethics began with classes taught by Hajji Mirza
Javad Maliki-Tabrizi, but this scholar died in 1304/1925.

Similarly, the Imam was not able to benefit for long from his first
teacher in philosophy, Mirza ‘Ali Akbar *Hakim* Yazdi, a pupil of the
great master Mullah Hadi Sabzavari (d.1295/1878), for Yazdi passed away
in 1305/1926. Another of the Imam’s early instructors in philosophy was
Sayyid Abu ‘l-Hasan Qazvini (d. 1355/1976), a scholar of both
peripatetic and illuminationist philosophy; the Imam attended his circle
until Qazvini’s departure from Qum in 1310/1931.  
    
 The teacher who had the most profound influence on Imam Khomeini’s
spiritual development was, however, Mirza Muhammad ‘Ali Shahabadi (d.
1328 Sh. /1950); to him the Imam refers in a number of his works as
shaykhuna and ‘*arif*-I kamil, and his relationship with him was that of
a murid with his murshid. When Shahabadi first came to Qum in 1307 Sh.
/1928, the young Imam asked him a question concerning the nature of
revelation, and was captivated by the answer he received.

At his insistent request, Shahabadi consented to teach him and a few
other select students the *Fusus al-Hikam* of Ibn ‘Arabi. Although the
basis of instruction was Da’ud Qaysari’s commentary on the Fusus, the
Imam testified that Shahabadi also presented his own original insights
on the text. Among the other texts that Imam Khomeini studied with
Shahabadi were the *Manazil al-Sa’irin* of the Hanbali Sufi, Khwaja
‘Abdullah Ansari (d.482/1089), and the *Misbah al-Uns* of Muhammad b.
Hamza Fanari (d. 834/1431), a commentary on the *Mafatih al-Ghayb* of
Sadr al-*Din* Qunavi (d. 673/1274).  
    
 It is conceivable that the Imam derived from Shahabadi, at least in
part, whether consciously or not, the fusion of gnostic and political
concerns that came to characterize his life. For this spiritual master
of the Imam was one of the relatively few *ulama* in the time of Riza
Shah to preach publicly against the misdeeds of the regime, and in his
*Shadharat al-Ma’arif*, a work primarily gnostic in character, described
Islam as “most certainly a political religion.”[^1]  
    
 Gnosis and ethics were also the subject of the first classes taught by
the Imam. The class on ethics taught by Hajji Javad Aqa Maliki Tabrizi
were resumed, three years after his death, by Shahabadi, and when
Shahabadi left for Tehran in 1936, he assigned the class to Imam
Khomeini. The class consisted in the first place of a careful reading of
Ansari’s Manazil al-Sa’irin, but ranged beyond the text to touch on a
wide variety of contemporary concerns. It proved popular to the extent
that the townsfolk of Qum as well as the students of the religious
sciences attended, and people are related to have come from as far a
field as Tehran and Isfahan simply to listen to the Imam.

This popularity of the Imam’s lectures ran contrary to the policies of
the Pahlavi regime, which wished to limit the influence of the *ulama*
outside the religious teaching institution. The government therefore
secured the transfer of the lectures from the prestigious location of
the Fayziya madrasa to the Mullah Sadiq madrasa, which was unable to
accommodate large crowds. However, after the deposition of Riza Shah in
1941, the lectures returned to the Fayziya madrasa and instantly
regained their former popularity. The ability to address the people at
large, not simply his own colleagues within the religious institution,
which the Imam displayed for the first time in these lectures on ethics,
was to play an important role in the political struggles he led in later
years.  
    
 While teaching ethics to a wide and diverse audience, Imam Khomeini
began teaching important texts of gnosis, such as the section on the
soul in *al-Asfar al-Arba’a* of Mullah Sadra (d. 1050/1640) and
Sabzavari’s Sharh-I Manzuma, to a select group of young scholars that
included Murtaza Mutahhari and Husayn ‘Ali Muntaziri, who subsequently
became two of his principal collaborators in the revolutionary movement
he launched some three decades later.  
    
 As for the earliest writings of the Imam, they also indicate that his
primary interest during his early years in Qum was gnosis. In 1928, for
example, he completed the *Sharh Du’a’ al-Sahar*, a detailed commentary
on the supplicatory prayers recited throughout Ramadan by Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir; as with all Imam Khomeini’s works on gnosis, the terminology
of Ibn ‘Arabi is frequently encountered in this book. Two years later,
he completed *Misbah al-Hidaya ila ‘l-Khilafa wa ‘l-Wilaya*, a dense and
systematic treatise on the main topics of gnosis. Another product of the
same years of concentration on gnosis was a series of glosses on
Qaysari’s commentary on the Fusus.  
    
 In a brief autobiography written for inclusion in a book published in
1934, the Imam wrote that he spent most of his time studying and
teaching the works of Mullah Sadra; that he had for several years been
studying gnosis with Shahabadi; and that at the same time he was
attending the classes of Ayatullah Ha’iri on *fiqh*.[^2]  
    
 The sequence of these statements suggests that *fiqh* was as yet
secondary among his concerns. This situation was to change, but gnosis
was for the Imam never simply a topic for study, teaching, and writing.
It remained an integral part of his intellectual and spiritual
personality, and as such infused many of his ostensibly political
activities in later years with an unmistakably gnostic element.  
    
 The Imam did not engage in any overt political activities during the
1930’s. He always believed that the leadership of political activities
should be in the hands of the foremost religious scholars, and he was
therefore obliged to accept the decision of Ha’iri to remain relatively
passive toward the measures taken by Riza Shah against the traditions
and culture of Islam in Iran.

In any event, as a still junior figure in the religious institution in
Qum, he would have been in no position to mobilize popular opinion on a
national scale. He was nonetheless in contact with those few *ulama* who
did openly challenge Riza Shah, not only Shahabadi, but also men such as
Hajji Nurullah Isfahani, Mirza Sadiq Aqa Tabrizi, Aqazada Kifai, and
Sayyid Hasan Mudarris. He expressed his own opinions of the Pahlavi
regime, the leading characteristics of which he identified as oppression
and hostility to religion, as yet only allusively, in privately
circulated poems.[^3]  
    
 He assumed a public political stance for the first time in a
proclamation dated 15 Urdibihisht 1323/ 4 May 1944 that called for
action to deliver the Muslims of Iran and the entire Islamic world from
the tyranny of foreign powers and their domestic accomplices. The Imam
begins by citing Qur’an, 34:46:

***“Say: ‘I enjoin but one thing upon you, that you rise up for Allah,
in pairs and singly, and then reflect’”***.

This is the same verse that opens the chapter on awakening (bab
al-yaqza) at the very beginning of Ansari’s Manazil al-Sa’irin, the
handbook of spiritual wayfaring first taught to the Imam by Shahabadi.
The Imam’s interpretation of “rising up” is, however, both spiritual and
political, both individual and collective, a rebellion against lassitude
in the self and corruption in society.  
    
 The same spirit of comprehensive revolt inspires the first work written
by the Imam for publication, Kashf al-Asrar (Tehran, 1324 Sh. /1945). He
is said to have completed the book in forty-eight days from a sense of
urgency, and that it indeed met a need is proven by the fact that it
went through two impressions in its first year. The principal aim of the
book, as reflected in its title, was to refute ‘Ali Akbar Hakamizada’s
*Asrar-i Hazarsala*, a work calling for a “reform” of Shi’i Islam.
Similar attacks on Shi’i tradition were being made in the same period by
*Shari’a*t Sanglaji (d.1944), an admirer of Wahhabism despite that
sect’s marked hostility to Shi’ism, and Ahmad Kasravi (d. 1946),
competent as a historian but mediocre as a thinker.

The Imam’s vindication of such aspects of Shi’i practice as the mourning
ceremonies of Muharram, pilgrimage (ziyara) to the tombs of the Imams,
and the recitation of the supplicatory prayers composed by the Imams,
was therefore a response to the criticisms made by all three. Imam
Khomeini connected their assaults on tradition with the anti-religious
policies of Riza Shah and bitterly criticized the Pahlavi regime for
destroying public morality.

He stopped short, however, of demanding the abolition of the monarchy,
proposing instead that an assembly of competent mujtahids should choose
“a just monarch who will not violate God’s laws and will shun oppression
and wrongdoing, who will not transgress against men’s property, lives,
and honor.”[^4]  
    
 Even this conditional legitimacy of monarchy was to last “only so long
as a better system could not be established.”[^5] There can be no doubt
that the “better system” already envisaged by Imam Khomeini in 1944 was
*vilayat-i faqih*, which became the constitutional cornerstone of the
Islamic Republic of Iran established in 1979.  
    
 When Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karim Ha’iri died in 1936, the supervision of the
religious institution in Qum had been jointly assumed by Ayatullah
Khwansari, Ayatullah Sadr, and Ayatullah Hujjat. A sense of lack was
nonetheless felt. When Ayatullah Abu ‘l-Hasan Isfahani, the principal
*marja’-i taqlid* of the age residing in Najaf, died in 1946, the need
for a centralized leadership of Shi’i Muslims became more felt more
acutely, and a search began for a single individual capable of
fulfilling the duties and functions of both Ha’iri and Isfahani.

Ayatullah Burujirdi, then resident in Hamadan, was seen to be the most
suitable person available, and Imam Khomeini is said to have played an
important role in persuading him to come to Qum. In this he was no doubt
motivated in part by the hope that Burujirdi would adopt a firm position
vis-a-vis Muhammad Riza Shah, the second Pahlavi ruler. This hope was to
remain largely unfulfilled. In April 1949, Imam Khomeini learned that
Burujirdi was engaged in negotiations with the government concerning
possible emendations to the constitution then in force, and he wrote him
a letter expressing his anxieties about the possible consequences.

In 1955, a nationwide campaign against the Baha’i sect was launched, for
which the Imam sought to recruit Burujirdi’s support, but he had little
success. As for religious personalities who were militantly active in
the political sphere at the time, notably Ayatullah Abu ‘l-Qasim Kashani
and Navvab Safavi, the leader of the Fida’iyan-i Islam, the Imam’s
contacts with them were sporadic and inconclusive.

His reluctance for direct political involvement in this period was
probably due to his belief that any movement for radical change ought to
be led by the senior echelons of the religious establishment. In
addition, the most influential personage on the crowded and confused
political scene of the day was the secular nationalist, Dr. Muhammad
Musaddiq.  
    
 Imam Khomeini therefore concentrated during the years of Burujirdi’s
leadership in Qum on giving instruction in *fiqh* and gathering round
him students who later became his associates in the movement that led to
the overthrow of the Pahlavi regime, not only Mutahhari and Muntaziri,
but younger men such as Muhammad Javad Bahonar and ‘Ali Akbar
Hashimi-Rafsanjani. In 1946, he began teaching usul al-*fiqh* at the
kharij level, taking as his text the chapter on rational proofs from the
second volume of the *Kifayat al-Usul* of Akhund Muhammad Kazim
Khurasani (d. 1329/1911).

Initially attended by no more than thirty students, the class became so
popular in Qum that five hundred were in attendance the third time it
was offered. According to the reminiscences of some of those who took
the class, it was distinguished from other classes taught in Qum on the
same subject by the critical spirit the Imam instilled in his students,
as well as his ability to connect *fiqh* with all the other dimensions
of Islam - ethical, gnostic, philosophical, political, and social.  
  

[^1]: Shadharat al-Ma’arif, Tehran, 1360 Sh./1982, pp. 6-7.

[^2]: Sayyid ‘Ali Riza Yazdi Husayni, Aina-yi Danishvaran, Tehran,
1353/1934, pp. 65-7.

[^3]: Sayyid Hamid Ruhani, Barrasi va Tahlili az Nahzat-I Imam Khomeini,
I, Najaf, n.d., pp. 55-9.

[^4]: Kashf al-Asrar, p. 185.

[^5]: Kashf al-Asrar, p. 186.


