The Years of Struggle and Exile, 1962-1978
==========================================

   
 The emphases of the Imam’s activity began to change with the death of
Burujirdi on March 31, 1961, for he now emerged as one of the successors
to Burujirdi’s position of leadership. This emergence was signaled by
the publication of some of his writings on *fiqh*, most importantly the
basic handbook of religious practice entitled, like others of its genre,
*Tauzih al-Masa’il*. He was soon accepted as *marja’-i taqlid* by a
large number of Iranian Shi’is. His leadership role was, however,
destined to go far beyond that traditional for a *marja’-i taqlid* and
to attain a comprehensiveness unique in the history of the Shi’i
*ulama*.  
    
 This became apparent soon after the death of Burujirdi when Muhammad
Riza Shah, secure in his possession of power after the CIA-organized
coup of August 1953, embarked on a series of measures designed to
eliminate all sources of opposition, actual or potential, and to
incorporate Iran firmly into American patterns of strategic and economic
domination. In the autumn of 1962, the government promulgated new laws
governing elections to local and provincial councils, which deleted the
former requirement that those elected be sworn into office on the
Qur’an.

Seeing in this a plan to permit the infiltration of public life by the
Baha’is, Imam Khomeini telegraphed both the Shah and the prime minister
of the day, warning them to desist from violating both the law of Islam
and the Iranian Constitution of 1907, failing which the *ulama* would
engage in a sustained campaign of protest. Rejecting all compromise
measures, the Imam was able to force the repeal of the laws in question
seven weeks after they had been promulgated. This achievement marked his
emergence on the scene as the principal voice of opposition to the
Shah.  
    
 A more serious confrontation was not long in coming. In January 1963,
the Shah announced a six-point program of reform that he termed the
White Revolution, an American-inspired package of measures designed to
give his regime a liberal and progressive facade. Imam Khomeini summoned
a meeting of his colleagues in Qum to press upon them the necessity of
opposing the Shah’s plans, but they were initially hesitant. They sent
one of their number, Ayatullah Kamalvand, to see the Shah and gauge his
intentions.  
    
 Although the Shah showed no inclination to retreat or compromise, it
took further pressure by Imam Khomeini on the other senior *ulama* of
Qum to persuade them to decree a boycott of the referendum that the Shah
had planned to obtain the appearance of popular approval for his White
Revolution. For his own part, Imam Khomeini issued on January 22, 1963 a
strongly worded declaration denouncing the Shah and his plans. In
imitation, perhaps, of his father, who had taken an armored column to
Qum in 1928 in order to intimidate certain outspoken *ulama*, the Shah
came to Qum two days later. Faced with a boycott by all the dignitaries
of the city, he delivered a speech harshly attacking the *ulama* as a
class.  
    
 On January 26, the referendum was held, with a low turnout that
reflected the growing heed paid by the Iranian people to Imam Khomeini’s
directives. He continued his denunciation of the Shah’s programs,
issuing a manifesto that also bore the signatures of eight other senior
scholars.

In it he listed the various ways in which the Shah had violated the
constituent, condemned the spread of moral corruption in the country,
and accused the Shah of comprehensive submission to America and Israel:
“I see the solution to lie in this tyrannical government being removed,
for the crime of violating the ordinances of Islam and trampling the
constitution, and in a government taking its place that adheres to Islam
and has concern for the Iranian nation.”[^1] He also decreed that the
Nauruz celebrations for the Iranian year 1342 (which fell on March 21,
1963) be cancelled as a sign of protest against government policies.  
    
 The very next day, paratroopers were sent to the Fayziya madrasa in
Qum, the site where the Imam delivered his public speeches. They killed
a number of students, beat and arrested a number of others, and
ransacked the building. Unintimidated, the Imam continued his attacks on
the regime.

On April 1, he denounced the persistent silence of certain apolitical
*ulama* as “tantamount to collaboration with the tyrannical regime,” and
one day later proclaimed political neutrality under the guise of
*taqiya* to be *haram*.[^2] When the Shah sent his emissaries to the
houses of the *ulama* in Qum to threaten them with the destruction of
their homes, the Imam reacted contemptuously by referring to the Shah as
“that little man (mardak).”

Then, on April 3, 1963, the fortieth day after the attack on the Fayziya
madrasa, he described the Iranian government as being determined to
eradicate Islam at the behest of America, Israel, and himself as
resolved to combat it.  
    
 Confrontation turned to insurrection some two months later. The
beginning of Muharram, always a time of heightened religious awareness
and sensitivity, saw demonstrators in Tehran carrying pictures of the
Imam and denouncing the Shah in front of his own palace. On the
afternoon of ‘Ashura (June 3, 1963), Imam Khomeini delivered a speech at
the Fayziya madrasa in which he drew parallels between the Umayyad
caliph Yazid and the Shah and warned the Shah that if he did not change
his ways the day would come when the people would offer up thanks for
his departure from the country.[^3]

This warning was remarkably prescient, for on January 16, 1979, the Shah
was indeed obliged to leave Iran amidst scenes of popular rejoicing. The
immediate effect of the Imam’s speech was, however, his arrest two days
later at 3 o’clock in the morning by a group of commandos who hastily
transferred him to the Qasr prison in Tehran.

As dawn broke on June 3, the news of his arrest spread first through Qum
and then to other cities. In Qum, Tehran, Shiraz, Mashhad and Varamin,
masses of angry demonstrators were confronted by tanks and ruthlessly
slaughtered. It was not until six days later that order was fully
restored. This uprising of 15 Khurdad 1342 (the day in the Iranian
calendar on which it began) marked a turning point in Iranian history.
Henceforth the repressive and dictatorial nature of the Shah’s regime,
reinforced by the unwavering support of the United States, was
constantly intensified, and with it the prestige of Imam Khomeini as the
only figure of note - whether religious or secular - willing to
challenge him.

The arrogance imbuing the Shah’s policies also caused a growing number
of the *ulama* to abandon their quietism and align themselves with the
radical goals set forth by the Imam. The movement of 15 Khurdad may
therefore be characterized as the prelude to the Islamic Revolution of
1978-79; the goals of that revolution and its leadership had already
been determined.  
    
 After nineteen days in the Qasr prison, Imam Khomeini was moved first,
to the ‘Ishratabad military base and then to a house in the Davudiya
section of Tehran where he was kept under surveillance. Despite the
killings that had taken place during the uprising, mass demonstrations
were held in Tehran and elsewhere demanding his release and some of his
colleagues came to the capital from Qum to lend their support to the
demand. It was not, however, until April 7, 1964 that he was released,
no doubt on the assumption that imprisonment had tempered his views and
that the movement he had led would quietly subside.

Three days after his release and return to Qum, he dispelled such
illusions by refuting officially inspired rumors that he had come to an
understanding with the Shah’s regime and by declaring that the movement
inaugurated on 15 Khurdad would continue. Aware of the persisting
differences in approach between the Imam and some of the other senior
religious scholars, the regime had also attempted to discredit him by
creating dissension in Qum. These attempts, too, were unsuccessful, for
early in June 1964 all the major *ulama* put their signatures to
declarations commemorating the first anniversary of the uprising of 15
Khurdad.  
    
 Despite its failure to sideline or silence Imam Khomeini, the Shah’s
regime continued its pro-American policies unwaveringly. In the autumn
of 1964, it concluded a status of forces agreement with the United
States that provided immunity from prosecution for all American
personnel in Iran and their dependents.

This occasioned the Imam to deliver what was perhaps the most vehement
speech of the entire struggle against the Shah; certainly one of his
close associates, Ayatullah Muhammad Mufattih, had never seen him so
agitated.[^4] He denounced the agreement as a surrender of Iranian
independence and sovereignty, made in exchange for a $200 million loan
that would be of benefit only to the Shah and his associates, and
described as traitors all those in the *Majlis* who voted in favor of
it; the government lacked all legitimacy, he concluded.[^5]  
    
 Shortly before dawn on November 4, 1964, again a detachment of
commandos surrounded the Imam’s house in Qum, arrested him, and this
time took him directly to Mehrabad airport in Tehran for immediate
banishment to Turkey. The decision to deport rather than arrest Imam
Khomeini and imprison him in Iran was based no doubt on the hope that in
exile he would fade from popular memory. Physical elimination would have
been fraught with the danger of an uncontrollable popular uprising. As
for the choice of Turkey, this reflected the security cooperation
existing between the Shah’s regime and Turkey.  
    
 The Imam was first lodged in room 514 of Bulvar Palas Oteli in Ankara,
a moderately comfortable hotel in the Turkish capital, under the joint
surveillance of Iranian and Turkish security officials. On November 12,
he was moved from Ankara to Bursa, where he was to reside another eleven
months.

The stay in Turkey cannot have been congenial, for Turkish law forbade
Imam Khomeini to wear the cloak and turban of the Muslim scholar, an
identity which was integral to his being; the sole photographs in
existence to show him bareheaded all belong to the period of exile in
Turkey.[^6]

However, on December 3, 1964, he was joined in Bursa by his eldest son,
Hajj Mustafa Khomeini; he was also permitted to receive occasional
visitors from Iran, and was supplied with a number of books on *fiqh*.
He made use of his forced stay in Bursa to compile *Tahrir al-Wasila*, a
two-volume compendium on questions of jurisprudence. Important and
distinctive are the fatwas this volume contains, grouped under the
headings of *al-amr bi ‘l-ma’ruf wa ‘l-nahy ‘an al-munkar* and *difa’*.

The Imam decrees, for example, that “if it is feared that the political
and economic domination (by foreigners) over an Islamic land will lead
to the enslavement and weakening of the Muslims, then such domination
must be repelled by appropriate means, including passive resistance, the
boycott of foreign goods, and the abandonment of all dealings and
association with the foreigners in question.” Similarly, “if an attack
by foreigners on one of the Islamic states is anticipated, it is
incumbent on all Islamic states to repel the attack by all possible
means; indeed, this is incumbent on the Muslims as a whole.”[^7]  
    
 On September 5, 1965, Imam Khomeini left Turkey for Najaf in Iraq,
where he was destined to spend thirteen years. As a traditional center
of Shi’i learning and pilgrimage, Najaf was clearly a preferable and
more congenial place of exile. It had moreover already functioned as a
stronghold of *ulama* opposition to the Iranian monarchy during the
Constitutional Revolution of 1906-1909. But it was not in order to
accommodate the Imam that the Shah arranged for his transfer to Najaf.

First, there was continuing disquiet among the Imam’s followers at his
forced residence in Bursa, away from the traditional milieu of the Shi’i
madrasa; such objections could be met by moving him to Najaf. Second, it
was hoped that once in Najaf, the Imam would either be overshadowed by
the prestigious *ulama* there, men such as Ayatullah Abu ‘l-Qasim Khu’i
(d. 1995), or that he would challenge their distaste for political
activism and squander his energies on confronting them.

He skirted this dual danger by proffering them his respect while
continuing to pursue the goals he had set himself before leaving Iran.
Another pitfall he avoided was association with the Iraqi government,
which occasionally had its own differences with the Shah’s regime and
was of a mind to use the Imam’s presence in Najaf for its own purposes.
The Imam declined the opportunity to be interviewed on Iraqi television
soon after his arrival, and resolutely kept his distance from succeeding
Iraqi administrations.  
    
 Once settled in Najaf, Imam Khomeini began teaching *fiqh* at the
Shaykh Murtaza Ansari madrasa. His lectures were well attended, by
students not only from Iran but also from Iraq, India, Pakistan,
Afghanistan, and the Persian Gulf states. In fact, a mass migration to
Najaf from Qum and other centers of religious learning in Iran was
proposed to the Imam, but he advised against it as a measure bound to
depopulate Qum and weaken it as a center of religious guidance.  
    
 It was also at the Shaykh Murtaza Ansari madrasa that he delivered,
between January 21 and February 8, 1970, his celebrated lectures on
vilayat-i *faqih*, the theory of governance that was to be implemented
after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution. (The text of these lectures
was published in Najaf, not long after their delivery, under the title
*Vilayat-i Faqih ya Hukumat-i Islami*; a slightly abbreviated Arabic
translation soon followed).

This theory, which may be summarized as the assumption by suitably
qualified *ulama* of the political and juridical functions of the
Twelfth Imam during his occultation, had already been put forward,
somewhat tentatively, in his first published work, Kashf al-Asrar. Now
he presented it as the self-evident and incontestable consequence of the
Shi’i doctrine of the Imamate, citing and analyzing in support of it all
relevant texts from the Qur’an and the traditions of the Prophet (S)[^8]
and the Twelve Imams (A)[^9]

He emphasized also the harm that had come to Iran (as well as other
Muslim countries) from abandoning Islamic law and government and
relinquishing the political realm to the enemies of Islam. Finally, he
delineated a program for the establishment of an Islamic government,
laying particular stress on the responsibilities of the *ulama* to
transcend their petty concerns and to address the people fearlessly: “It
is the duty of all of us to overthrow the *taghut*, the illegitimate
political powers that now rule the entire Islamic world.”[^10]  
    
 The text of the lectures on vilayat-i *faqih* was smuggled back to Iran
by visitors who came to see the Imam in Najaf, as well as by ordinary
Iranians who came on pilgrimage to the shrine of Hazrat ‘Ali (A) The
same channels were used to convey to Iran the numerous letters and
proclamations in which the Imam commented on the events that took place
in his homeland during the long years of exile.

The first such document, a letter to the Iranian *ulama* assuring them
of the ultimate downfall of the Shah’s regime, is dated April 16, 1967.
On the same day he also wrote to prime minister Amir ‘Abbas Huvayda
accusing him of running “a regime of terror and thievery.”[^11] On the
occasion of the Six Day War in June 1967, the Imam issued a declaration
forbidding any type of dealing with Israel as well as the consumption of
Israeli goods.

This declaration was widely and openly publicized in Iran, which led to
the ransacking of Imam Khomeini’s house in Qum and the arrest of Hajj
Sayyid Ahmad Khomeini, his second son, who had been living there. (Some
of the unpublished works of the Imam were lost or destroyed on this
occasion). It was also at this time that the Shah’s regime contemplated
moving the Imam from Iraq to India; a location from which communications
with Iran would have been far more difficult, but the plan was thwarted.

Other developments on which the Imam commented from Najaf were the
extravagant celebrations of 2500 years of Iranian monarchy in October
1971 (“it is the duty of the Iranian people to refrain from
participation in this illegitimate festival”); the formal establishment
of a one-party system in Iran in February 1975 (the Imam prohibited
membership in the party, the *Hizb-i Rastakhiz*, in a *fatwa* issued the
following month); and the substitution, in the same month, of the
imperial (shahanshahi) calendar for the solar Hijri calendar that had
been official in Iran until that time.

Some developments were met with fatwas rather than proclamations: for
example, the Imam rejected as incompatible with Islam the Family
Protection Law of 1967 and classified as adulteresses women who
remarried after obtaining a divorce under its provisions.[^12]  
    
 Imam Khomeini had also to deal with changing circumstances in Iraq. The
Ba’th Party, fundamentally hostile to religion, had come to power in
July 1967 and soon began exerting pressure on the scholars of Najaf,
both Iraqi and Iranian. In 1971, as Iraq and Iran entered a state of
sporadic and undeclared war with each other, the Iraqi regime began
expelling from its territory Iranians whose forebears had in some cases
been residing there for generations. The Imam, who until that point had
scrupulously kept his distance from Iraqi officialdom, now addressed
himself directly to the Iraqi leadership condemning its actions.  
    
 Imam Khomeini was, in fact, constantly, and acutely aware of the
connections between Iranian affairs and those of the Muslim world in
general and the Arab lands in particular. This awareness led him to
issue from Najaf a proclamation to the Muslims of the world on the
occasion of the hajj in 1971, and to comment, with special frequency and
emphasis, on the problems posed by Israel for the Muslim world.

The Imam’s strong concern for the Palestine question led him to issue a
*fatwa* on August 27, 1968 authorizing the use of religious monies
(*vujuh-i shar’i*) to support the nascent activities of *al-Asifa*, the
armed wing of the Palestine Liberation Organization; this was confirmed
by a similar and more detailed ruling issued after a meeting with the
Baghdad representative of the PLO.[^13]  
    
 The distribution in Iran, on however limited a scale, of the
proclamations and fatwas of Imam Khomeini was in itself enough to ensure
that his name not be forgotten during the years of exile. Equally
important, the movement of Islamic opposition to the Shah’s regime that
had been inaugurated by the uprising of 15 Khurdad continued to develop
despite the brutality unhesitatingly dispensed by the Shah. Numerous
groups and individuals explicitly owed their allegiance to the Imam.
Soon after his exiling there came into being an organization called
*Hay’atha-yi Mu’talifa-yi Islami* (the Allied Islamic Associations),
headquartered in Tehran but with branches throughout Iran.

Active in it were many who had been students of the Imam in Qum and who
came to assume important responsibilities after the revolution, men such
as Hashimi-Rafsanjani and Javad Bahunar. In January 1965, four members
of the organization assassinated Hasan ‘Ali Mansur, the prime minister
who had been responsible for the exiling of the Imam.  
    
 There were no individuals designated, even clandestinely, as Imam
Khomeini’s authorized representatives in Iran while he was in exile.

However, senior *ulama* such as Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahhari, Ayatullah
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Bihishti (d. 1981), and Ayatullah Husayn ‘Ali
Muntaziri, were in contact with him, directly and indirectly, and were
known to speak on his behalf in important matters. Like their younger
counterparts in the *Hay’atha-yi Mu’talafa-yi Islami*, all three went on
to perform important functions during and after the revolution.  
    
 The continued growth of the Islamic movement during Imam Khomeini’s
exile should not be attributed exclusively to his abiding influence or
to the activity of *ulama* associated with him. Important, too, were the
lectures and books of ‘Ali Shari’ati (d. 1977), a university-educated
intellectual whose understanding and presentation of Islam were
influenced by Western ideologies, including Marxism, to a degree that
many *ulama* regarded as dangerously syncretistic.

When the Imam was asked to comment on the theories of Shari’ati, both by
those who supported them and by those who opposed them, he discreetly
refrained from doing so, in order not to create a division within the
Islamic movement that would have benefited the Shah’s regime.  
    
 The most visible sign of the persisting popularity of Imam Khomeini in
the pre-revolutionary years, above all at the heart of the religious
institution in Qum, came in June 1975 on the anniversary of the uprising
of 15 Khurdad. Students at the Fayziya madrasa began holding a
demonstration within the confines of the building, and a sympathetic
crowd assembled outside.

Both gatherings continued for three days until they were attacked on the
ground by commandos and from the air by a military helicopter, with
numerous deaths resulting. The Imam reacted with a message in which he
declared the events in Qum and similar disturbances elsewhere to be a
sign of hope that “freedom and liberation from the bonds of imperialism”
were at hand.[^14] The beginning of the revolution came indeed some two
and a half years later.  
  

[^1]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 27.

[^2]: Kauthar, I, p. 67; Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 39.

[^3]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 46.

[^4]: Interview with the present writer, Tehran, December 1979.

[^5]: Kauthar, I, pp. 169-178.

[^6]: See Ansari, Hadis-I Bidari, p. 67.

[^7]: Tahrir al-Wasila, I, p. 486.

[^8]: For maintaining readability, (S) which is an acronym for “Salla
(a)llahu alayhi wa aalihi wa sallam”is used throughout the book to
denote “May peace and benedictions of God be upon him and his family.”
It is used for Prophet Muhammad.

[^9]: For maintaining readability, (A) which is an acronym for “Alayhi
(alayhim) al-salaam”is used throughout the book to denote “May peace of
God be upon him/her/them.” It is used for the Prophets, Imams, and
saints.

[^10]: Vilayat-i Faqih, Najaf, n.d., p. 204.

[^11]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, pp. 129, 132.

[^12]: Imam Khomeini, Risala-yi Ahkam, p. 328.

[^13]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, pp. 144-5.

[^14]: Sahifa-yi Nur, I, p. 215.


