1979-89: first decade of the Islamic Republic, last decade of the Imam’s life
=============================================================================

   
 Imam Khomeini’s role was also central in shaping the new political
order that emerged from the revolution, the Islamic Republic of Iran. At
first it appeared that he might exercise his directive role from Qum,
for he moved there from Tehran on February 29, causing Qum to become in
effect a second capital of Iran.

On March 30 and 31, a nationwide referendum resulted in a massive vote
in favor of the establishment of an Islamic Republic. The Imam
proclaimed the next day, April 1, 1979, as the “first day of God’s
government.”[^1] The institutionalization of the new order continued
with the election, on August 3, of an Assembly of Experts (*Majlis*-*i
Khubragan*), entrusted with the task of reviewing a draft constitution
that had been put forward on June 18; fifty-five of the seventy-three
persons elected were religious scholars.  
    
 It was not however to be expected that a smooth transition from the old
regime would prove possible. The powers and duties of the Council of the
Islamic Revolutionary, which was intended to serve as an interim
legislature, were not clearly delineated from those of the provisional
government headed by Bazargan.

More importantly, significant differences of outlook and approach
separated the two bodies from each other. The council, composed
predominantly of *ulama*, favored immediate and radical change and
sought to strengthen the revolutionary organs that had come into being -
the revolutionary committees, the revolutionary courts charged with
punishing members of the former regime charged with serious crimes, and
the Corps of Guards of the Islamic Revolution (*Sipah-i Pasdaran-i
Inqilab-i Islami*), established on May 5, 1979. The government, headed
by Bazargan and comprising mainly liberal technocrats of Islamic
orientation, sought as swift a normalization of the situation as
possible and the gradual phasing out of the revolutionary institutions.

Although Imam Khomeini encouraged members of the two bodies to cooperate
and refrained, on most occasions, from arbitrating their differences,
his sympathies were clearly with the Council of the Islamic Revolution.

On July 1, Bazargan offered the Imam his resignation. It was refused,
and four members of the council l- Rafsanjani, Bahunar, Mahdavi-Kani,
and Ayatullah Sayyid ‘Ali Khamna’i - joined Bazargan’s cabinet in an
effort to improve the coordination of the two bodies. In addition to
these frictions at the governmental level, a further element of
instability was provided by the terrorist activities of shadowy groups
that were determined to rob the nascent Islamic republic of some of its
most capable personalities.

Thus on May 1, 1979, Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahhari, a leading member of
the Council of the Islamic Revolution and a former pupil close to the
Imam’s heart, was assassinated in Tehran. For once, the Imam wept in an
open display of grief.  
    
 The final break between Bazargan and the revolution came as a
consequence of the occupation of the United States embassy in Tehran on
November 4, 1979 by a coalition of students from the universities of
Tehran. Despite declarations of willingness to “honor the will of the
Iranian people” and its recognition of the Islamic Republic, the
American government had admitted the Shah to the United States on
October 22, 1979.  
    
 The pretext was his need for medical treatment, but it was widely
feared in Iran that his arrival in America, where large numbers of
high-ranking officials of the previous regime had gathered, might be the
prelude to an American-sponsored attempt to restore him to power, on the
lines of the successful CIA coup of August 1953. The Shah’s extradition
to Iran was therefore demanded by the students occupying the embassy as
a condition for their liberating the hostages they were holding there.  
    
 It is probable that the students had cleared their action in advance
with close associates of Imam Khomeini, for he swiftly extended his
protection to them, proclaiming their action “a greater revolution than
the first.”[^2] Two days later, he predicted that confronted by this
“second revolution,” America would be “unable to do a damned thing
(*Amrika hich ghalati namitavanad bukunad*).”[^3]

This prediction seemed extravagant to many in Iran, but a military
expedition mounted by the United States on April 22, 1980 to rescue the
American hostages and possibly, too, to attack sensitive sites in
Tehran, came to an abrupt and humiliating end when the American gunship
crashed into each other in a sandstorm near Tabas in southeastern Iran.

On April 7, the United States had formally broken diplomatic ties with
Iran, a move welcomed by Imam Khomeini as an occasion of rejoicing for
the Iranian nation.[^4] It was not until January 21, 1981 that the
American hostages were finally released.  
    
 Two days after the occupation of the US embassy, Bazargan once again
offered his resignation, and this time it was accepted. In addition, the
provisional government was dissolved, and the Council of the Islamic
Revolution temporarily assumed the task of running the country.

This marked the definitive departure of Bazargan and like-minded
individuals from the scene; henceforth the term “liberal” became a
pejorative designation for those who questioned the fundamental
tendencies of the revolution. In addition, the students occupying the
embassy had access to extensive files the Americans had kept on various
Iranian personalities who had frequented the embassy over the years;
these documents were now published and discredited the personalities
involved.

Most importantly, the occupation of the embassy constituted a “second
revolution” in that Iran now offered a unique example of defiance of the
American superpower and became established for American policymakers as
their principal adversary in the Middle East.  
    
 The enthusiasm aroused by the occupation of the embassy also helped to
ensure a large turnout for the referendum that was held on December 2
and 3, 1979 to ratify the constitution that had been approved by the
Assembly of Experts on November 15. The constitution, which was
overwhelmingly approved, differed greatly from the original draft, above
all through its inclusion of the principle of vilayat-i *faqih* as its
basic and determining principle. Mentioned briefly in the preamble, it
was spelled out in full in Article Five:  
    
 “During the Occultation of the Lord of the Age (Sahib al-Zaman; i.e.,
the Twelfth Imam)… the governance and leadership of the nation devolve
upon the just and pious *faqih* who is acquainted with the circumstances
of his age; courageous, resourceful, and possessed of administrative
ability; and recognized and accepted as leader (rahbar) by the majority
of the people. In the event that no *faqih* should be so recognized by
the majority, the leader, or leadership council, composed of *fuqaha*’
possessing the aforementioned qualifications, will assume these
responsibilities.”

Article 109 specified the qualifications and attributes of the leader as
“suitability with respect to learning and piety, as required for the
functions of mufti and marja’.” Article 110 listed his powers, which
include supreme command of the armed forces, appointment of the head of
the judiciary, signing the decree formalizing the election of the
president of the republic, and – under certain conditions - dismissing
him.[^5]  
    
 These articles formed the constitutional basis for Imam Khomeini’s
leadership role. In addition, from July 1979 onwards, he had been
appointing Imam Jum’a’s for every major city, who not only delivered the
Friday sermon but also acted as his personal representatives. Most
government institutions also had a representative of the Imam assigned
to them. However, the ultimate source of his influence was his vast
moral and spiritual prestige, which led to him being designated
primarily as Imam, in the sense of one dispensing comprehensive
leadership to the community.[^6]  
    
 On January 23, 1980, Imam Khomeini was brought from Qum to Tehran to
receive treatment for a heart ailment. After thirty-nine days in
hospital, he took up residence in the north Tehran suburb of Darband,
and on April 22 he moved into a modest house in Jamaran, another suburb
to the north of the capital. A closely guarded compound grew up around
the house, and it was there that he was destined to spend the rest of
his life.  
    
 On January 25, during the Imam’s hospitalization, Abu’l-Hasan Bani
Sadr, a French-educated economist, was elected first president of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. His success had been made possible in part by
the Imam’s decision that it was not opportune to have a religious
scholar stand for election. This event, followed on March 14 by the
first elections to the *Majlis*, might have counted as a further step to
the institutionalization and stabilization of the political system.  
    
 However, Bani Sadr’s tenure, together with the tensions that soon arose
between him and a majority of the deputies in the *Majlis*, occasioned a
severe crisis that led ultimately to Bani Sadr’s dismissal. For the
president, his inherent megalomania aggravated by his victory at the
polls, was reluctant to concede supremacy to Imam Khomeini, and he
therefore attempted to build up a personal following, consisting largely
of former leftists who owed their positions exclusively to him.

In this enterprise, he inevitably clashed with the newly formed Islamic
Republic Party (*Hizb-i Jumhuri-yi Islami*), headed by Ayatullah
Bihishti, which dominated the *Majlis* and was loyal to what was
referred to as “the line of the Imam” (*khatt-i Imam*). As he had
earlier done with the disputes between the provisional government and
the Council of the Islamic Revolution, the Imam sought to reconcile the
parties, and on September 11 1980 appealed to all branches of government
and their members to set aside their differences.  
    
 While this new governmental crisis was brewing, on September 22, 1980,
Iraq sent its forces across the Iranian border and launched a war of
aggression that was to last for almost eight years. Iraq enjoyed
financial support in this venture from the Arab states lining the
Persian Gulf, above all from Saudi Arabia.

Imam Khomeini, however, correctly regarded the United States as the
principal instigator of the war from the outset, and American
involvement became increasingly visible as the war wore on. Although
Iraq advanced territorial claims against Iran, the barely disguised
purpose of the aggression was to take advantage of the dislocations
caused in Iran by the revolution, particularly the weakening of the army
through purges of disloyal officers, and to destroy the Islamic
Republic.

As he had done during the revolution, Imam Khomeini insisted on an
uncompromising stance and inspired a steadfast resistance, which
prevented the easy Iraqi victory many foreign observers had confidently
foretold. Initially, however, Iraq enjoyed some success, capturing the
port city of Khurramshahr and encircling Abadan.  
    
 The conduct of the war became one more issue at dispute between Bani
Sadr and his opponents. Continuing his efforts at reconciling the
factions, Imam Khomeini established a three-man commission to
investigate the complaints each had against the other. The commission
reported on June 1, 1981 that Bani Sadr was guilty of violating the
constitution and contravening the Imam’s instructions. He was
accordingly declared incompetent by the *Majlis* to function as
president, and the next day, in accordance with Article 110 section (e)
of the constitution, Imam Khomeini dismissed him. He went into hiding,
and on July 28 fled to Paris, disguised as a woman.  
    
 Toward the end of his presidency, Bani Sadr had allied himself with the
*Sazman-i Mujahidin-i Khalq* (Organization of People’s Strugglers;
however, the group is commonly known in Iran as munafiqin, “hypocrites,”
not mujahidin, because of its members’ hostility to the Islamic
Republic). An organization with a tortuous ideological and political
history, it had hoped, like Bani Sadr, to displace Imam Khomeini and
capture power for itself.

After Bani Sadr went into exile, members of the organization embarked on
a campaign of assassinating government leaders in the hope that the
Islamic Republic would collapse. Even before Bani Sadr fled, a massive
explosion had destroyed the headquarters of the Islamic Republic Party,
killing more than seventy people including Ayatullah Bihishti.

On August 30, 1981, Muhammad ‘Ali Raja’i, Bani Sadr’s successor as
president, was killed in another explosion. Other assassinations
followed over the next two years, including five Imam Jum’a’s as well as
a host of lesser figures. Throughout these disasters, Imam Khomeini
maintained his customary composure, declaring, for example, after the
assassination of Raja’i that the killings would change nothing and in
fact showed Iran to be “the most stable country in the world,” given the
ability of the government to continue functioning in an orderly
manner.[^7]

The fact that Iran was able to withstand such blows internally while
continuing the war of defense against Iraq was indeed testimony to the
roots the new order had struck and to the undiminished prestige of Imam
Khomeini as the leader of the nation.  
    
 Ayatullah Khamna’i, a longtime associate and devotee of the Imam, was
elected president on October 2, 1981, and he remained in this position
until he succeeded him as leader of the Islamic Republic on his death in
1989. No governmental crises comparable to those of the first years of
the Islamic Republic occurred during his tenure. Nonetheless, structural
problems persisted.

The constitution provided that legislation passed by the *Majlis* should
be reviewed by a body of senior *fuqaha*’ known as the Council of
Guardians (*Shaura-yi Nagahban*) to ensure its conformity with the
provisions of Ja’fari *fiqh*. This frequently led to a stalemate on a
variety of important legislative issues.

On at least two occasions, in October 1981 and January 1983, Hashimi-
Rafsanjani, then chairman of the *Majlis*, requested the Imam to
arbitrate decisively, drawing on the prerogatives inherent in the
doctrine of vilayat-i *faqih*, in order to break the deadlock. He was
reluctant to do so, always preferring that a consensus should emerge.

However, on January 6, 1988, in a letter addressed to Khamna’i, the Imam
put forward a far-reaching definition of vilayat-i *faqih*, now termed
“absolute” (*mutlaqa*), which made it theoretically possible for the
leadership to override all conceivable objections to the policies it
supported. Governance, Imam Khomeini proclaimed, is the most important
of all divine ordinances (*ahkam-i ilahi*) and it takes precedence over
secondary divine ordinances (*ahkam-i far’iya-yi ilahiya*).

Not only does the Islamic state permissibly enforce a large number of
laws not mentioned specifically in the sources of the *shari’a*, such as
the prohibition of narcotics and the levying of customs dues; it can
also suspend the performance of a fundamental religious duty, the hajj,
when this is necessitated by the higher interest of the Muslims.[^8]

At first sight, the theory of *vilayat-i mutlaqa-yi faqih* might appear
to be a justification for unlimited individual rule by the leader
(rahbar). One month later, however, Imam Khomeini delegated these
broadly defined prerogatives to a commission named the Assembly for the
Determination of the Interest of the Islamic Order (*Majma’-i Tashkhis-i
Maslahat-i Nizam-i Islami*.) This standing body has the power to settle
decisively all differences on legislation between the *Majlis* and the
Council of Guardians.  
    
 The war against Iraq continued to preoccupy Iran until July 1988. Iran
had come to define its war aims as not simply the liberation of all
parts of its territory occupied by Iraq, but also the overthrow of the
regime of Saddam Husayn. A number of military victories made this goal
appear attainable.

On November 29, 1981, Imam Khomeini congratulated his military
commanders on successes achieved in Khuzestan, remarking that the Iraqis
had been obliged to retreat before the faith of the Iranian troops and
their eagerness for martyrdom.[^9]

The following year, on May 24, Khurramshahr, which had been held by the
Iraqis since shortly after the outbreak of war, was liberated, and only
small pockets of Iranian territory remained in Iraqi hands. The Imam
marked the occasion by condemning anew the Persian Gulf states that
supported Saddam Husayn and describing the victory as a divine
gift.[^10]

Iran failed, however, to follow up swiftly on its surprise victory and
the momentum, which might have made possible the destruction of Saddam
Hussein’s regime, was lost as the tide of war flowed back and forth. The
United States was, in any event, determined to deny Iran a decisive
victory and stepped up its intervention in the conflict in a variety of
ways.

Finally, on July 2, 1988, the US navy stationed in the Persian Gulf shot
down a civilian Iranian airliner, with the loss of 290 passengers. With
the utmost reluctance, Imam Khomeini agreed to end the war on the terms
specified in Resolution 598 of the United Nations Security Council,
comparing his decision in a lengthy statement issued on July 20 to the
drinking of poison.[^11]  
    
 Any notion that the acceptance of a ceasefire with Iraq signaled a
diminution in the Imam’s readiness to confront the enemies of Islam was
dispelled when, on February 14, 1989, he issued a *fatwa* calling for
the execution of Selman Rushdie, author of the obscene and blasphemous
novel, The Satanic Verses, as well as those responsible for the
publication and dissemination of the work.

The *fatwa* received a great deal of support in the Muslim world as the
most authoritative articulation of popular outrage at Rushdie’s gross
insult to Islam. Although its demand remained unfulfilled, it
demonstrated plainly the consequences that would have to be faced by any
aspiring imitator of Rushdie, and thus had an important deterrent
effect.

Generally overlooked at the time was the firm grounding of the Imam’s
*fatwa* in the existing provisions of both Shi’i and Sunni
jurisprudence; it was not therefore innovative. What lent the *fatwa*
particular significance was rather its issuance by the Imam as a figure
of great moral authority.  
    
 The Imam had also gained the attention of the outside world, albeit in
a less spectacular way, on January 4, 1989, when he sent Mikhail
Gorbachev, then general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, a letter in which he predicted the collapse of the Soviet Union
and the disappearance of communism: “Henceforth it will be necessary to
look for communism in the museums of political history of the world.”

He also warned Gorbachev and the Russian people against replacing
communism with Western-style materialism: “The basic problem of your
country has nothing to do with ownership, the economy, or freedom; it is
the lack of a true belief in God, the same problem that has drawn the
West into a blind alley of triviality and purposelessness.”[^12]  
    
 Internally, however, the most important development in the last year of
Imam Khomeini’s life was, without doubt, his dismissal of Ayatullah
Muntaziri from the position of successor to the leadership of the
Islamic Republic.

Once a student and close associate of the Imam, who had gone so far as
to call him “the fruit of my life,” Muntaziri had had among his
associates over the years persons executed for counterrevolutionary
activity, including a son-in-law, Mahdi Hashimi, and made far-reaching
criticisms of the Islamic Republic, particularly with regard to judicial
matters.

On July 31, 1988, he wrote a letter to the Imam questioning what he
regarded as unjustified executions of members of the Sazman-i
Mujahidin-I Khalq held in Iranian prisons after the organization, from
its base in Iraq, had made a large-scale incursion into Iranian
territory in the closing stages of the Iran-Iraq war. Matters came to a
head the following year, and on March 28, 1989, the Imam wrote to
Muntaziri accepting his resignation from the succession, a resignation
that under the circumstances he was compelled to offer.[^13]  
    
 On June 3, 1989, after eleven days in hospital for an operation to stop
internal bleeding, Imam Khomeini lapsed into a critical condition and
died. The outpouring of grief was massive and spontaneous, the exact
counterpoint to the vast demonstrations of joy that had greeted his
return to Iran a little over ten years earlier.

Such was the press of mourners, estimated at some nine million that the
body ultimately had to be transported by helicopter to its place of
burial to the south of Tehran on the road leading to Qum. A still
expanding complex of structures has grown up around the shrine of the
Imam, making it likely that it will become the center of an entire new
city devoted to ziyara and religious learning.  
    
 The testament of Imam Khomeini was published soon after his death. A
lengthy document, it addresses itself principally to the various classes
of Iranian society, urging them to do whatever is necessary for the
preservation and strengthening of the Islamic Republic. Significantly,
however, it begins with an extended meditation on the *hadith-i
thaqalayn*: “I leave among you two great and precious things: the Book
of God and my progeny; they will never be separated from each other
until they meet me at the pool.”

The Imam interprets the misfortunes that have befallen Muslims
throughout history and more particularly in the present age as the
result of efforts precisely to disengage the Qur’an from the progeny of
the Prophet (S).  
    
 The legacy of Imam Khomeini was considerable. He had bequeathed to Iran
not only a political system enshrining the principles both of religious
leadership and of an elected legislature and head of the executive
branch, but also a whole new ethos and self-image, a dignified stance of
independence vis-à-vis the West are in the Muslim world.

He was deeply imbued with the traditions and worldview of Shi’i Islam,
but he viewed the revolution he had led and the republic he had founded
as the nucleus for a worldwide awakening of all Muslims. He had sought
to attain this goal by, among other things, issuing proclamations to the
hujjaj on a number of occasions, and alerting them to the dangers
arising from American dominance of the Middle East, the tireless
activity of Israel for subverting the Muslim world, and the subservience
to America and Israel of numerous Middle Eastern governments.

Unity between Shi’is and Sunnis was one of his lasting concerns; he was,
indeed, the first Shi’i authority to declare unconditionally valid
prayers performed by Shi’is behind a Sunni imam.[^14]  
    
 It must finally be stressed that despite the amplitude of his political
achievements, Imam Khomeini’s personality was essentially that of a
gnostic for whom political activity was but the natural outgrowth of an
intense inner life of devotion. The comprehensive vision of Islam that
he both articulated and exemplified is, indeed, his most significant
legacy.

[^1]: Sahifa-yi Nur, V, p. 233.

[^2]: Sahifa-yi Nur, X, p. 141.

[^3]: Sahifa-yi Nur, X, p. 149.

[^4]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XII, p. 40.

[^5]: Qanun-i Asasi-yi Jumhuri-yi Islami-yi Iran, Tehran, 1370 Sh./1991,
pp. 23-24, 53-58.

[^6]: Suggestions that the use of this title assimilated him to the
Twelve Imams of Shi’i belief and hence attributed infallibility to him
are groundless.

[^7]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XV, p. 130.

[^8]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XX, pp. 170-71.

[^9]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XV, p. 234.

[^10]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XVI, pp. 154-5.

[^11]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XXI, pp. 227-44.

[^12]: Ava-yi Tauhid, Tehran, 1367 Sh./1989, pp. 3-5.

[^13]: Sahifa-yi Nur, XXI, p. 112.

[^14]: Istifta’at, I, p. 279.


