Foreword
========

**From the frying pan of the ‘Narrow-Minded, Dry, Holy Ones’** ***“tang
nazari khoshk muqaddasan”*** **into the fire of Hick’s Religious
Pluralism**

Some years ago, in Brampton Canada, my Muharram majālis provoked the
question: *Where will Mother Teresa* *go – Heaven or Hell*? This was in
reaction to my submission challenging the notion of religious pluralism,
which seemed to have found favour amongst members of the congregation,
who as a result of their intellectual discussions within academia,
appeared to have concluded that ‘all roads lead to Rome’.

My deliberations with a number of such academic members of our community
revealed their unawareness that the original concept of religious
pluralism was a subtle defence to the doctrine of salvation through
Christ.

Thereby, providing in Christianity, toleration for other religions.
Essentially, the roots of religious pluralism lie in the development of
political liberalism in eighteenth century Europe, which was reeling
from the horrible tales of religious persecution.

The Enlightened European thinkers of the time were reacting to religious
intolerance, which had resulted in the history of sectarian wars to be
avoided by all means.

Having witnessed the consequences of religious intolerance, the
eighteenth century European Christians were anxious to recover through
an ideology that was entrenched in religious principles and thereby
securing its permanent effect of ensuring peace and progress in Europe
both politically and philosophically - whilst preserving the sanctity of
Christianity.

The principal advocate, Professor John Hick, devised the convoluted
concept of religious pluralism by incorporating the Christian doctrine
of salvation, allowing almost anyone to enter heaven.

Ironically, to make his case, Hick used amongst other arguments Rūmī’s
fable of the blind men describing an elephant. Thus suggesting that in
our visualization of the ultimate reality, we are in the position of the
blind men describing the elephant.

Our ultimate reality is limited by the structures of the various
religions. In other words, be it through the trunk, or the leg or the
ear, it was sufficient to conceptualize the elephant.

While Rūmī used the parable to demonstrate our limitations in knowing
the ultimate reality, Hick expounded religious pluralism by suggesting
that the world’s numerous faiths had reconcilable differences in
striving for the ultimate reality.

It is indeed a sorry state of affairs that when we are blessed with far
more profound answers to the issues of rigid exclusivity, that Muslim
intellectuals should be impressed by Hick’s weak defence supported only
by marginalised Christian thinkers.

This timely translation of the Persian essay on *Islām and Religious
Pluralism* by Āyatullāh Shahīd Muťahharī is a much needed contribution
to further this debate, so as to enable us to better understand the
Islāmic perspective on religious pluralism.

This work is yet another example of this deceased scholar’s ingenious
foresight, for decades ago, he undertook to address the topical
questions that vex Muslim youths exposed to Western academia today.

This book offers rational answers to questions such as: will the great
inventors and scientists, despite their worthy services for humanity, go
to Hell? Will the likes of Pasteur and Edison go to Hell whilst indolent
people who have spent their lives in a corner of the Masjid go to
Heaven? Has God created Heaven solely for the Shī\`as?

In contrast to Hick’s compromising view, Shī\`ī scholars generally agree
that God’s damnation does not arbitrarily apply to all who lack faith in
His revelations. For instance, exceptions are made for those who are
incapable (*qāsir*) such as children and adults who are intellectually
impaired.

The scholars of the school of Ahlul Baīt (as) make a distinction between
the *incapable (qāsir)* and the *negligent* (*muqassir*) who have
misplaced convictions despite having access to Islām. Shahīd Muťahharī’s
enquiry into the problem of religious pluralism elaborates the
distinction of these two categories.

What is interesting however, is that he defines the category of the
*incapable* to include those for whom Islām has not been accessible. For
instance, a remote residence where Islām has not been propagated or
those living in an Islāmaphobic environment which has resulted in
ill-founded misconceptions.

Shahīd Muťahharī’s brilliant rationale of the incapable *(qāsir)*
establishes that heaven has not been reserved for a minority within a
minority.

Thus, boldly answering the dogmatism actively promoted by those he has
identified as “narrow minded dry holy ones” *(tang nazari khushk
muqaddasan)*. The impact of such dogmatism is manifested in many
superstitions of the Shī\`ī masses.

To illustrate, I can do no better than to quote one such example by
Āyatullāh Muťahharī:  
*“Will (we) make a will that a large sum out of the money that we have
acquired through wrong means or that we should have spent in our
lifetime in good causes – but didn’t – should be given to the caretakers
of one of the holy shrines in order for us to be buried near the graves
of God’s saints, so that the Angels don’t dare punish us.” Such people
should know that they have been blinded and the curtain of negligence
has covered their eyes.”*

I conclude that to seek other means to satisfy intellect curiosities on
this discussion inevitably results in falling from the frying pan of the
*tang nazari khoshk muqaddasan* into the fire of Religious Pluralism.

Hasnain Walji  
 Plano Texas  
 May 7th 2004 – 17th Rabiul Awwal 1425


