Biography of the late Ayatullah Murtadha Mutahhari
==================================================

Ayatullāh Murťadhā Muťahharī, one of the principle architects of the new
Islāmic consciousness in Iran, was born on February 2nd, 1920, in
Farīmān, then a village and now a township about sixty kilometres from
Mashhad, the great centre of Shī\`a pilgrimage and learning in Eastern
Iran.[^1]

His father was Muhammad Ĥusaīn Muťahharī, a renown scholar who studied
in Najaf and spent several years in Egypt and the Hijāz before returning
to Farīmān. The elder Muťahharī was of a different caste of mind then
his son, who in any event came to outshine him.

The father was devoted to the works of the celebrated traditionalist,
Mullāh Muhammad Bāqir Majlisī; whereas the son’s great hero among the
Shī\`a scholars of the past was the theosophist Mullā Sadrā.

Nonetheless, Āyatullāh Muťahharī always retained great respect and
affection for his father, who was also his first teacher, and he
dedicated to him one of his most popular books, Dastān-e-Rastān (“The
Epic of the Righteous”), first published in 1960, and which was later
chosen as book of the year by the Iranian National Commission for UNESCO
in 1965.

At the exceptionally early age of twelve, Muťahharī began his formal
religious studies at the teaching institution in Mashhad, which was then
in a state of decline, partly because of internal reasons and partly
because of the repressive measures directed by Ridhā Khān, the first
Pahlavī autocrat, against all Islāmic institutions.

But in Mashhad, Muťahharī discovered his great love for philos­ophy,
theology, and mysticism, a love that remained with him throughout his
life and came to shape his entire outlook on religion:

*“I can remember that when I began my studies in Mashhad and was still
engaged in learning elementary* *Arabic, the philosophers, mys­tics, and
theologians impressed me far more than other scholars and scientists,
such as inventors and explorers. Naturally I was not yet acquainted with
their ideas, but I regarded them as heroes on the stage of
thought.*”[^2]

Accordingly, the figure in Mashhad who aroused the greatest devotion in
Muťahharī was Mīrzā Mahdī Shahīdī Razavī, a teacher of philosophy.

But Razavī died in 1936, before Muťahharī was old enough to participate
in his classes, and partly because of this reason he left Mashhad the
following year to join the growing number of students congregating in
the teaching institution in Qum.

Thanks to the skillful stewardship of Shaykh \`Abdul Karīm Hā’irī, Qum
was on its way to becoming the spiritual and intellectual capital of
Islāmic Iran, and Muťahharī was able to benefit there from the
instruction of a wide range of scholars.

He studied Fiqh and Uŝūl - the core subjects of the traditional
curriculum - with Āyatul­lāh Ĥujjat Kuhkamarī, Āyatullāh Sayyid Muhammad
Dāmād, Āyatullāh Sayyid Muhammad Ridhā Gulpāyagānī, and Ĥajj Sayyid Ŝadr
al-Dīn as-Ŝadr. But more important than all these was Āyatullāh
Burujerdī, the successor of Ĥā’irī as director of the teaching
establishment in Qum. Muťahharī attended his lectures from his arrival
in Qum in 1944 until his departure for Tehran in 1952, and he nourished
a deep respect for him.

Fervent devotion and close affinity characterized Muťahharī’s
relationship with his prime mentor in Qum, Āyatullāh Rūhullāh Khumaynī.
When Muťahharī arrived in Qum, Āyatullāh Khumaynī was a young lecturer,
but he was already marked out from his contem­poraries by the
profoundness and comprehensiveness of his Islāmic vision and his ability
to convey it to others.

These qualities were manifested in the celebrated lectures on ethics
that he began giving in Qum in the early 1930s. The lectures attracted a
wide audience from outside as well as inside the religious teaching
institution and had a profound impact on all those who attended them.
Muťahharī made his first acquaintance with Āyatullah Khumaynī at these
lectures:

*“When I migrated to Qum,* *I found the object of my desire in a
personality who possessed all the attributes of Mīrzā Mahdī (Sha­hīdī
Razavī) in addition to others that were peculiarly his own. I realized
that the thirst of my spirit would be quenched at the pure spring of
that personality. Although I had still not completed the preliminary
stages of my studies and was not yet qualified to embark on the study of
the rational sciences (ma\`qulāt), the lectures on ethics given by that
beloved personality every Thursday and Friday were not restricted to
ethics in the dry, aca­demic sense but dealt with gnosis and spiritual
wayfaring, ­and* *thus, they intoxicated me. I can say without
exaggeration that those lectures aroused in me such ecstasy that their
effect remained with me until the* *following Monday or Tuesday. An
important part of my intel­lectual and spiritual personality took shape
under the influence of those lectures and the other classes I took over
a period of twelve years with that spiritual master (ustād-i ilahī)
[meaning Āyatullāh Khumaynī].*”[^3]

In about 1946, Āyatullāh Khumaynī began lecturing to a small group of
students that included both Muťahharī and his roommate at the Fayziya
Madressah, Āyatullāh Muntazarī, on two key philosophical texts, the
Asfar al-Arba\`a of Mullā Ŝadra and the Sharh-e-Manzuma of Mullā Hādī
Sabzwārī. Muťahharī’s participation in this group, which continued to
meet until about 1951, enabled him to establish more intimate links with
his teacher.

Also in 1946, at the urging of Muťahharī and Muntazarī, the Āyatullāh
Khumaynī taught his first formal course on Fiqh and Uŝūl, taking the
chapter on rational proofs from the second volume of Akhund Khurāsānī’s
Kifāyatal Uŝūl as his teaching text. Muťahharī followed his course
assiduously, while still pursuing his studies of Fiqh with Āyatullāh
Burūjerdī.

In the first two post-war decades, Āyatullāh Khumaynī trained numer­ous
students in Qum who became leaders of the Islāmic Revolution and the
Islāmic Republic, such that through them (as well as directly), the
imprint of his personality was visible on all the key developments of
the past decade.

But none among his students bore to Āyatullāh Khumaynī the same
relationship of affinity as Muťahharī, an affinity to which the
Āyatullāh Khumaynī himself has borne witness to.

The pupil and master shared a profound attachment to all aspects of
traditional scholarship, without in any way being its captive; a
comprehensive vision of Islām as a total system of life and belief, with
particular importance ascribed to its philosophical and mystical
aspects.

An absolute loyalty to the reli­gious institution, tempered by an
awareness of the necessity of reform; a desire for comprehensive social
and political change, accompanied by a great sense of strategy and
timing; and an ability to reach out beyond the circle of the
traditionally religious, and gain the attention and loyalty of the
secularly educated.

Among the other teachers whose influence Muťahharī was exposed in Qum,
was the great exegete of the Qur’ān and philosopher, Āyatullāh Sayyid
Muhammad Ĥusain Ťabā’ťabā’ī. Muťahharī participated in both Ťabāťabā’ī’s
classes on the Shifā\` of Abū \`Alī Sīnā from 1950 to 1953, and the
Thursday evening meetings that took place under his direction.

The subject of these meetings was materialist philosophy, a remarkable
choice for a group of traditional scholars. Muťahharī himself had first
conceived a critical interest in materialist philosophy, especially
Marxism, soon after embarking on the formal study of the rational
sciences.

Ac­cording to his own recollections, in about 1946 he began to study the
Persian translations of Marxist literature published by the Tudeh party,
the major Marxist organization in Iran and at that time an important
force in the political scene.

In addition, he read the writings of Taqī Arānī, the main theoretician
of the Tudeh party, as well as Marxist publications in \`Arabic
emanating from Egypt.

At first he had some difficulty understanding these texts because he was
not acquainted with modern philosophical terminology, but with continued
exertion (which included the drawing up of a synopsis of Georges
Pulitzer’s Elementary Principles of Philosophy), he came to master the
whole subject of materialist philosophy.

This mastery made him an important contributor to Ťabā’ťabāī’s circle
and later, after his move to Tehran, an effective combatant in the
ideological war against Marxism and Marxist-influenced interpretations
of Islām.

Numerous refutations of Marxism have been essayed in the Islāmic world,
both in Iran and elsewhere, but almost all of them fail to go beyond the
obvious incompatibilities of Marxism with reli­gious belief and the
political failures and inconsistencies of Marxist political parties.

Muťahharī, by contrast, went to the philosophical roots of the matter
and demonstrated with rigorous logic the contra­dictory and arbitrarily
hypothetic nature of key principles of Marx­ism. His polemical writings
are characterized more by intellectual than rhetorical or emotional
force.

However, for Muťahharī, philosophy was far more than a polemi­cal tool
or intellectual discipline; it was a particular style of religios­ity, a
way of understanding and formulating Islām. Muťahharī belongs, in fact,
to the tradition of Shī\`a philosophical concern that goes back at least
as far as Nasīr ad-Dīn Ťuŝī, one of Muťahharī’s personal heroes.

To say that Muťahharī’s view of Islām was philo­sophical is not to imply
that he lacked spirituality or was determined to subordinate revealed
dogma to philosophical interpretation and to impose philosophical
terminology on all domains of religious con­cern,

Rather it means that he viewed the attainment of knowledge and
understanding as the prime goal and benefit of religion and for that
reason assigned to philosophy a certain primacy among the disciplines
cultivated in the religious institution.

In this he was at variance with those numerous scholars for whom Fiqh
was the be-all and end-all of the curriculum, with modernists for whom
philos­ophy represented a Hellenistic intrusion into the world of Islām,
and with all those whom revolutionary ardour had made impatient with
careful philosophical thought.[^4]

The particular school of philosophy to which Muťahharī adhered was that
of Mullā Ŝadra, the “sublime philosophy” (hikmat-i muta\`āliya) that
seeks to combine the methods of spiritual insight with those of
philosophical deduction.

Muťahharī was a man of tranquil and serene disposition, both in his
general comportment and in his writings. Even when engaged in polemics,
he was invaria­bly courteous and usually refrained from emotive and
ironical word­ing.

But such was his devotion to Mullā Ŝadrā that he would passionately
defend him even against slight or incidental criticism, and he chose for
his first grandchild - as well as for the publishing house in Qum that
put out his books - the name Ŝadrā.

Insofar as Ŝadrā’s school of philosophy attempts to merge the methods of
inward illumination and intellectual reflection, it is not surprising
that it has been subject to varying interpretations on the part of those
more inclined to one method than the other.

To judge from his writings, Muťahharī belonged to those for whom the
intel­lectual dimension of Ŝadrā’s school was predominant; there is
little of the mystical or markedly spiritual tone found in other
exponents of Ŝadrā’s thought, perhaps because Muťahharī viewed his own
inward experiences as irrelevant to the task of instruction in which he
was engaged or even as an intimate secret he should conceal.

More likely, however, this predilection for the strictly philosophical
dimension of the “sublime philosophy” was an expression of Muťahharī’s
own temperament and genius. In this respect, he dif­fered profoundly
from his great mentor, Āyatullāh Khumaynī, many of whose political
pronouncements continue to be suffused with the language and concerns of
mysticism and spirituality.

In 1952, Muťahharī left Qum for Tehran, where he married the daughter of
Āyatullāh Rūhānī and began teaching philosophy at the Madressah Marwi,
one of the principal institutions of religious learning in the capital.

This was not the beginning of his teaching career, for already in Qum he
had begun to teach certain subjects - logic, philosophy, theology, and
Fiqh - while still a student himself.

But Muťahharī seems to have become progressively impatient with the
somewhat restricted atmosphere of Qum, with the factional­ism prevailing
among some of the students and their teachers, and with their remoteness
from the concerns of society. His own future prospects in Qum were also
uncertain.

In Tehran, Muťahharī found a broader and more satisfying field of
religious, educational, and ultimately political activity. In 1954, he
was invited to teach philosophy at the Faculty of Theology and Islāmic
Sciences of Tehran University, where he taught for twenty-­two years.

First the regularization of his appointment and then his promotion to
professor was delayed by the jealousy of mediocre colleagues and by
political considerations (for Muťahharī’s closeness to Āyatullāh
Khumaynī was well known).

But the presence of a figure such as Muťahharī in the secular university
was significant and effective. Many men of Madressah background had come
to teach in the univer­sities, and they were often of great erudition.

However, almost without exception they had discarded an Islāmic
worldview, together with their turbans and cloaks. Muťahharī, by
contrast, came to the university as an articulate and convinced exponent
of Islāmic science and wisdom, almost as an envoy of the religious
institution to the secularly educated. Numerous people responded to him,
as the peda­gogical powers he had first displayed in Qum now fully
unfolded.

In addition to building his reputation as a popular and effective
university lecturer, Muťahharī participated in the activities of the
numerous professional Islāmic associations (anjumanhā) that had come
into being under the supervision of Mahdī Bāzārgān and Āyatullāh
Taleqānī, lecturing to their doctors, engi­neers, teachers and helping
to coordinate their work. A number of Muťahharī’s books in fact consist
of the revised transcripts of series of lectures delivered to the
Islāmic associations.

Muťahharī’s wishes for a wider diffusion of religious knowledge in
society and a more effective engagement of religious scholars in social
affairs led him in 1960 to assume the leadership of a group of Tehran
\`Ulamā known as the Anjuman-e-Mahāna-yi Dīnī (“The Monthly Religious
Society”).

The members of this group, which included the late Āyatullāh Beheshtī, a
fellow-student of Muťahharī in Qum, organized monthly public lectures
designed simultaneously to demonstrate the relevance of Islām to
contempo­rary concerns, and to stimulate reformist thinking among the
\`Ulamā.

The lectures were printed under the title of Guftār-e-Māh (“Dis­course
of the Month”) and proved very popular, but the government banned them
in March 1963 when Āyatullāh Khumaynī began his public denunciation of
the Pahlavī regime.

A far more important venture in 1965 of the same kind was the foundation
of the Ĥusayniya-e-Irshād, an institution in north Tehran, designed to
gain the allegiance of the secularly educated young to Islām. Muťahharī
was among the members of the directing board; he also lectured at the
Ĥusayniya-e-Irshād and edited and contrib­uted to several of its
publications.

The institution was able to draw huge crowds to its functions, but this
success - which without doubt exceeded the hopes of the founders, was
overshadowed by a number of internal problems. One such problem was the
political context of the institution’s activities, which gave rise to
differing opinions on the opportuneness of going beyond reformist
lecturing to political confrontation.

The spoken word plays in general a more effective and immediate role in
promoting revolutionary change than the written word, and it would be
possible to compose an anthology of key sermons, addresses, and lectures
that have carried the Islāmic Revolution of Iran forward.

But the clarification of the ideological content of the revolution and
its demarcation from opposing or competing schools of thought have
necessarily depended on the written word, on the composition of works
that expound Islāmic doctrine in systematic form, with particular
attention to contemporary problems and con­cerns.

In this area, Muťahharī’s contribution was unique in its volume and
scope. Muťahharī wrote assiduously and continuously, from his student
days in Qum up to 1979 the year of his martyr­dom.

Much of his output was marked by the same philosophical tone and
emphasis already noted, and he probably regarded as his most important
work Uŝūl-e-Falsafa wa Ravish-e-Ri’ālism (“The Principles of Philosophy
and the Method of Realism”), the record of Ťabāťabāī’s discourses to the
Thursday evening circle in Qum, supple­mented with Muťahharī’s comments.

But he did not choose the topics of his books in accordance with
personal interest or predilection, but with his perception of need;
wherever a book was lacking on some vital topic of contemporary Islāmic
interest, Muťahharī sought to supply it.

Single handily, he set about constructing the main ele­ments of a
contemporary Islāmic library. Books such as \`Adl-e-Ilāhī (“Divine
Justice”), Nizām-e-Ĥuquq-e-Zan dar Islām (“The System of Women’s Rights
in Islām”), Mas’ala-yi Ĥijāb (“The Question of the Veil”), Ashnā’i ba
\`Ulūm-e-Islāmī (“An Introduction to the Islāmic Sciences”), and
Muqaddima bar Jahānbīnī-yi Islāmi (“An Introduc­tion to the Worldview of
Islām”) were all intended to fill a need, to contribute to an accurate
and systematic understanding of Islām and the problems in the Islāmic
society.

These books may well come to be regarded as Muťahharī’s most lasting and
important contribution to the rebirth of Islāmic Iran, but his activity
also had a political dimension that admittedly subordi­nate, should not
be overlooked.

While a student and fledgling teacher in Qum, he had sought to instill
political consciousness in his contemporaries and was particularly close
to those among them who were members of the Fida’iyan-i Islām, the
Militant Organization founded in 1945 by Nawwab Safawī.

The Qum headquarters of the Fida’iyan was the Madrasa-yi Fayziya, where
Muťahharī himself resided, and he sought in vain to prevent them from
being removed from the Madressah by Āyatullāh Burūjerdī, who was
resolutely set against all political confrontation with the Shah’s
regime.

During the struggle for the nationalization of the Iranian Oil Industry,
Muťahharī sympa­thized with the efforts of Āyatullāh Kāshānī and Dr.
Muhammad Musaddiq, although he criticized the latter for his adherence
to secular nationalism. After his move to Tehran, Muťahharī
collabo­rated with the Freedom Movement of Bāzārgān and Taleqānī, but
never became one of the leading figures in the group.

His first serious confrontation with the Shah’s regime came dur­ing the
uprising of Khurdad 15th, 1342/June 6th, 1963, when he showed himself to
be politically, as well as intellectually, a follower of Āyatullāh
Khumaynī by distributing his declarations and urging sup­port for him in
the sermons he gave.[^5]

He was accordingly arrested and held for forty-three days. After his
release, he participated actively in the various organizations that came
into being to maintain the momentum that had been created by the
uprising, most impor­tantly the Association of Militant Religious
Scholars (Jami\`a yi Ruhāniyāt-e-Mubāriz).

In November 1964, Āyatullāh Khumaynī entered on his fourteen years of
exile, spent first in Turkey and then in Najaf, and throughout this
period Muťahharī remained in touch with Āyatullāh Khumaynī, both
directly - by visits to Najaf - and indirectly.

When the Islāmic Revolution approached its triumphant climax in the
winter of 1978 and Āyatullāh Khumaynī left Najaf for Paris, Muťahharī
was among those who travelled to Paris to meet and consult with him. His
closeness to Āyatullāh Khumaynī was confirmed by his appointment to the
Council of the Islāmic Revolution, the existence of which Āyatullāh
Khumaynī announced on January 12th, 1979.  
 Muťahharī’s services to the Islāmic Revolution were brutally curtailed
by his assassination on May 1st, 1979. The murder was carried out by a
group known as Furqān, which claimed to be the protagonists of a
“progressive Islām,” one freed from the allegedly distorting influence
of the religious scholars.

Although Muťahharī appears to have been chairman of the Council of the
Islāmic Revolu­tion at the time of his assassination, it was as a
thinker and a writer that he was martyred.

In 1972, Muťahharī published a book entitled \`Illal-i Girayish ba
Maddigarī (“Reasons for the Turn to Materialism”), an impor­tant work
analyzing the historical background of materialism in Europe and Iran.

During the revolution, he wrote an introduction to the eighth edition of
this book, attacking distortions of the thought of Ĥafiz and Hallaj that
had become fashionable in some segments of Irānian society and refuting
certain materialistic interpretations of the Qur’ān.

The source of the interpretations was the Furqān group, which sought to
deny fundamental Qur’ānic concepts such as the divine transcendence and
the reality of the hereafter.

As always in such cases, Muťahharī’s tone was persuasive and solicitous,
not angry or condemnatory, and he even invited a response from Furqān
and other interested parties to comment on what he had written. Their
only response was the gun.

The threat to assassinate all who opposed them was already con­tained in
the publications of Furqān, and after the publication of the new edition
of \`Illal-e-Girayish ba Maddigarī, Muťahharī apparently had some
premonition of his martyrdom.

According to the testi­mony of his son, Mujtabā, a kind of detachment
from worldly concerns became visible in him; he augmented his nightly
prayers and readings of the Qur’ān, and he once dreamed that he was in
the presence of the Prophet (S), together with Āyatullāh Khumaynī .

On Tuesday, May 1st, 1979 Muťahharī went to the house of Dr. Yadullāh
Sahābī, in the company of other members of the Council of the Islāmic
Revolution. At about 10:30 at night, he and another participant in the
meeting, Engineer Katira\`i, left Sahābī’s house.

Walking by himself to an adjacent alley where the car that was to take
him home was parked, Muťahharī suddenly heard an unknown voice call out
to him. He looked around to see where the voice was coming from, and as
he did, a bullet struck him in the head, entering beneath the right
earlobe and exiting above the left eyebrow.

He died almost instantly, and although he was rushed to a nearby
hospi­tal, there was nothing that could be done but mourn for him. The
body was left in the hospital the following day, and then on Thursday,
amid wide­spread mourning, it was taken for funeral prayers first to
Tehran University and then to Qum for burial, next to the grave of
Shaykh \`Abdul Karīm Hā’irī .

Āyatullāh Khumaynī wept openly when Muťahharī was buried in Qum, and he
described him as his “dear son,” and as “the fruit of my life,” and as
“a part of my flesh.” But in his eulogy Āyatullāh Khumaynī also pointed
out that with the murder of Muťahharī neither his personality was
diminished, nor was the course of the revolution interrupted:

*“Let the evil-wishers know that with the departure of Muťahharī - his
Islāmic personality, his philosophy and learning, have not left us.
Assassinations cannot destroy the Islāmic personality of the great men
of Islām…Islām grows through sacrifice and martyrdom of its cherished*
*ones. From the time of its revelation up to the present* *time, Islām
has always been accompanied by martyrdom and heroism.”*[^6]

The personage and legacy of Āyatullāh Muťahharī have certainly remained
unforgotten in the Islāmic Republic, to such a degree that his
posthumous presence has been almost as impressive as the attainments of
his life. The anniversary of his martyrdom is regularly commemorated,
and his portrait is ubiquitous throughout Iran.

Many of his unpublished writings are being printed for the first time,
and the whole corpus of his work is now being distributed and studied on
a massive scale. In the words of Āyatullāh Khamene’ī, President of the
Republic, the works of Muťahharī have come to constitute “the
intellectual infrastructure of the Islāmic Republic.”

Efforts are accordingly under way to promote a knowledge of Muťahharī’s
writings outside the Persian-speaking world as well, and the Ministry of
Islāmic Guidance has sponsored translations of his works into languages
as diverse as Spanish and Malay.

In a sense, however, it will be the most fitting memorial to Muťahharī
if revolutionary Iran proves able to construct a polity, society,
economy and culture that are authentically and integrally Islāmic. For
Muťahharī’s life was oriented to a goal that transcended individual
motivation, and his martyrdom was the final expression of that
effacement of self.

[^1]: This sketch of the life and works of Āyatullāh Muťahharī is based
chiefly on Muhammad Wa'izzāda Khurāsānī’s, “Sayrī dar Zindagi-yi \`Ilmī
wa Inqilābiīyi Ustad Shahīd Murtadhā Muťahharī,” in Yadnāma-yi Ustād
Shahīd Murtadhā Muťahharī, ed. \`Abdul Karīm Surūsh, Teh­ran, 1360
Sh./1981, pp. 319-380, an article rich in information on many aspects of
the recent history of Islāmic Irān. Reference has also been made to
Mujtabā Muťahhari, “Zindagi-yi Pidaram,” in Harakat (journal of the
students at the Tehran Faculty of Theology), no. 1 (n.d.), pp. 5-16; M.
Hoda, In Memory of Martyr Muťahharī, a pam­phlet published by the
Ministry of Islāmic Guidance, Tehran, April, 1982; and Āyatullāh
Muťahharī’s autobiographical introduction to the eighth edition of
\`Ilal-i Girayish ba Maddīgarī; Qum, 1357 Sh./1978, pp. 7ff.

[^2]: \`Ilal-e-Girayish ba Maddīgarī, Page 9.

[^3]: \`Ilal-i Girayish ba Maddigari, Page 9.

[^4]: The authoritative statement of this view was made by Sayyid Qutb
in his Khasā’is al-Tasawwur al-Islāmī wa Muqawwimatuhu, Cairo, numer­ous
editions, which was translated into Persian and had some influence on
views toward philosophy.

[^5]: Muhahharī’s name comes ninth in a list of clerical detainees
prepared by the military prosecutor’s office in June, 1963. See
facsimile of the list in Dihnavi, Qiyam-e-Khunin-i 15 Khurdad 42 ba
Rivāyat-e-Asnād, Tehran, 1360 Sh./1981, Page 77.

[^6]: Text of Āyatullāh Khumaynī’s eulogy in Yādnama-yi Ustād-i Shahīd
Murtadha Muhahharī, pp. 3-5.


