Good Deeds of Non-Muslims
=========================

Outline of the Discussion
-------------------------

One of the issues which is discussed regarding “Divine justice” is the
issue of the good deeds performed by non-Muslims.

Today, the issue of whether the good deeds of non-Muslims are accepted
by God or not is under discussion amongst the different classes -
whether learned or unlearned, literate or illiterate. If they are
accepted, what difference does it make if a person is a Muslim or not;
the important thing is to do good in this world.

If a person is not a Muslim and practices no religion, he or she has
lost nothing. And if their actions are not acceptable and are altogether
void with no reward or recompense from God, then how is that compatible
with Divine justice?

This same question can be asked from a Shī\`a perspective within the
bounds of Islām: Are the actions of a non-Shī\`a Muslim acceptable to
God, or are they null and void? If they are acceptable, what difference
does it make if a person is a Shī\`a Muslim or a non-Shī\`a Muslim?

What is important is to be Muslim; a person who is not a Shī\`a and
doesn’t believe in the wilāyah (Divinely-appointed guardianship) of the
Ahlul Baīt (as) has not lost anything. And if the actions of such a
person are not acceptable to God, then how is that compatible with
Divine justice?

In the past, this issue was only discussed by philosophers and in the
books of philosophy. However, today it has entered into the minds of all
levels of society; few people can be found who have not at least
broached the subject for themselves and in their own minds.

Divine philosophers would discuss the issue from the aspect that if all
people who are outside the fold of religion are to face perdition and
Divine punishment, it necessarily follows that in the universe, evil and
compulsion are preponderant. However, the fact that felicity and good
have primacy in the universe not evil and wretchedness is an accepted
and definitive principle.

Humanity is the greatest of all of creation; everything else has been
created for it (of course, with the correct conception of this idea that
is understood by the wise, not the perception that the short-sighted
people commonly possess).

If humanity itself is to be created for the Hell-fire – that is, if the
final abode of the majority of humanity is to be Hell then one must
grant that the anger of God supersedes His mercy.

This is because the majority of people are strangers to the true
religion; and even those who are within the fold of the true religion
are beset by deviation and digression when it comes to practicing.This
was the background of the discussion amongst the philosophers.

It has been nearly half a century that, as a result of easier
communication among Muslim and non-Muslim nations, an increase in the
means of communication, and greater interaction amongst nations, the
issue of whether being a Muslim and a believer as a necessary condition
for the acceptability of good deeds is being discussed among all levels
of society, especially the so-called intellectuals.

When these people study the lives of inventors and scientists of recent
times who were not Muslim but who performed valuable services for
humanity, they find such people worthy of reward.

On the other hand since they used to think that the actions of
non-Muslims are altogether null and void, they fall into serious doubt
and uncertainty. In this way, an issue which for years was the exclusive
domain of the philosophers has entered the general conversations of
people and has taken the form of an objection with regard to Divine
justice.

Of course, this objection is not directly related to Divine justice; it
is related to Islām’s viewpoint about human beings and their actions,
and becomes related to Divine justice inasmuch as it appears that such a
viewpoint regarding human beings, their actions, and God’s dealing with
them is in opposition to the standards of Divine justice.

In the interactions that I have and have had with students and the
youth, I have frequently been faced with this question. Sometimes they
ask whether the great inventors and scientists, with all the worthy
services which they have done for humanity, will go to Hell.

Will the likes of Pasteur and Edison go to Hell while indolent holy
people who have spent their lives idly in a corner of the Masjid go to
Heaven? Has God created Heaven solely for us Shī\`as?

I remember that once an acquaintance from my city, who was a practicing
Muslim, came to Tehran to visit me, and he raised this issue.

This man had visited a lepers’ hospital in Mashhad and had been stirred
and deeply affected by the sight of the Christian nurses who were
sincerely (at least in his view) looking after the patients with
leprosy. At that time, this issue came up in his mind and he fell into
doubt.

You are aware that looking after a patient of leprosy is a very
difficult and unpleasant task and when this hospital was established in
Mashhad, very few doctors were willing to serve there, and similarly, no
one was willing to care for the patients.

Advertisements for the employment of nurses were taken out in the
newspapers; in all of Iran, not a single person gave a positive answer
to this invitation. A small group of so-called ascetic Christian women
from France came and took charge of nursing the lepers.

This man, who had seen the humanitarianism and loving care of those
nurses towards lepers, who had been abandoned by even their own parents,
had been strongly affected by these nurses.

He related that the Christian nurses wore long, loose clothes, and apart
from their face and hands, no part of their body was visible. Each of
them had a long rosary which had perhaps a thousand beads and whenever
they would find free time from work, they would busy themselves in their
recitations on the rosary.

Then the man asked with a troubled mind and in a disturbed tone whether
it was true that non-Muslims would not enter Heaven?

Of course, right now we are not concerned with the motives of those
Christian ladies. Was it truly for God, in God’s way, and out of pure
humanitarianism that they did what they did, or was another motive in
play?

Certainly, we don’t want to be pessimistic, just as we are not overly
optimistic; our point is that these incidents and events have introduced
our people to a serious question.

Several years ago, I was invited to an association to give a speech. In
that association, in accordance with their tradition, the participants
were requested to write down any questions they had so that they could
be answered at the appropriate time.

Those questions had been recorded in a notebook, and that notebook had
been given to me so I could choose the topic of my speech from amongst
those topics (noted in the book).

I noticed that the question that had been repeated more than any other
was whether God will send all non-Muslims to Hell. Will Pasteur, Edison,
and Kokh be amongst those who will be punished in the Hereafter?

It was from that time that I realized the importance of this issue
inasmuch as it had attracted people’s thoughts.Now, in this part of the
book, we will discuss this issue. But before we begin, we need to
clarify two points in order for the topic at hand to become completely
clear.

### 1. The General Aspect of the Discussion

The purpose of this discussion is not to clarify the status of
individuals, for example to specify whether Pasteur will go to Heaven or
Hell. What do we know about his true thoughts and beliefs? What were his
true intentions? What were his personal and moral traits; and in fact
what was the sum of all his actions? Our familiarity with him is limited
to his intellectual services, and that is all.

This doesn’t apply only to Pasteur. As a matter of principle, the status
of individuals is in the hands of God; no one has the right to express
an opinion with certainty about whether someone will go to Heaven or
Hell. If we were to be asked, “Is Shaykh Murtadhā al-Anŝārī , in view of
his known asceticism, piety, faith, and deeds, definitely among the
inhabitants of Heaven?”

Our answer would be, “From what we know of the man, in his intellectual
and practical affairs we haven’t heard of anything bad. What we know of
him is virtue and goodness. But as to say with absolute certainty
whether he will go to Heaven or Hell, that isn’t our prerogative.

It is God who knows the intentions of all people, and He knows the
secrets and hidden things of all souls; and the account of all people’s
actions is also with Him. We can only speak with certainty about those
whose final outcome has been made known by the religious authorities.”

Sometimes people discuss and debate amongst themselves about who was the
most virtuous and excellent among the \`Ulamā (scholars) in terms of
nearness to God. For example, was it Sayyid Ibn Ťāwūs , or Sayyid Bahrul
\`Ulūm ? Or Shaykh al-Anŝārī ? Or sometimes they ask about the most
eminent among the descendents of the A’immah.

For example, is Sayyid \`Abdul \`Adhīm al-Hasanīī (as) is superior in
God’s view, or Sayyidah Fāťimah al-Ma\`ŝūmah (as)?

Once, one of the Mujtahids was asked whether \`Abbās Ibn \`Alī (as) was
superior or \`Alī al-Akbar (as). In order to give the question the form
of a practical issue so the Mujtahid would be compelled to answer it,
they asked, “If someone vows to sacrifice a sheep for the most superior
of the Imāms’ descendents, what is his duty? Is \`Abbās Ibn \`Alī
superior, or \`Alī al-Akbar?”

It is obvious that such discussions are improper, and answering such
questions is neither the duty of a Faqīh (scholar of Islāmic law), nor
of anyone else. Specifying the rank of God’s creation is not our
responsibility. It should be left to God, and no one has any knowledge
about the matter except through God himself.

In the early era of Islām, there were instances when people expressed
such unjustified opinions, and the Prophet Muhammad (S) forbade them
from doing so.

When \`Uthmān Ibn Ma\`zūn died, a woman of the Anŝār named Umme \`Alī,
who apparently was the wife of the man in whose house \`Uthmān Ibn
Ma\`zūn was staying and whose guest he was, addressed his bier in the
presence of the Prophet Muhammad (S) and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَنِيئاً لَكَ الْجَنَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“May Heaven be pleasant for you!”*

Although \`Uthmān Ibn Ma\`zūn was an eminent man, and the Prophet
Muhammad (S) cried heavily at his funeral and threw himself over the
bier and kissed him, the inappropriate statement of that woman
displeased him.

He turned to her and with an unhappy look said, “How did you know? Why
did you make a statement out of ignorance? Have you received a
revelation, or do you know the accounts of God’s creation?”

The woman replied, “O Messenger of God, he was your companion and a
brave warrior!” The Noble Messenger (S) answered her with interesting
words that are worthy of attention, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ وَمَا أَدْرِي مَا يُفْعَلُ بِــي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I am the Messenger of God, yet I don’t know what will be done with
me.*”[^1]

This sentence is the exact purport of a verse of the Qur’ān:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مٌـا كُنْتُ بِدْعاً مِّنَ الرُّسُلِ وَ مٌا أَدْرِي مٌا يُفْعَلُ
بِي وَ لاٌ بِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘I am not a novelty among the apostles, nor do I know what will
be done with me, or with you*****.**”[^2] [^3]

A similar incident has also been related regarding the death of Sa\`d
Ibn Mu\`ādh. In that instance, when the mother of Sa\`d said a similar
sentence over his coffin, the Messenger (S) said to her, “Be silent;
don’t make a decision with certainty in God’s affairs.”[^4]

### 2. No Religion Except Al-Islām is Accepted

The other point that must be made clear before beginning the discussion
is that the topic of the non-Muslims’ good deeds can be discussed in two
ways and in reality, is two discussions:

First, is any religion other than Islām acceptable to God, or is Islām
the only acceptable religion? That is, is it necessary only for a person
to have some religion or at most follow a religion associated with one
of the Divine prophets, without it then making a difference which
religion that is, for example, whether one be a Muslim, Christian, Jew,
or even a Zoroastrian? Or is there only one true religion in each era?

After we have accepted that the true religion in each era is only one,
the other discussion is whether a person who doesn’t follow the true
religion but performs a good deed, one that is actually good and is also
sanctioned by the true religion, is worthy of reward or not? In other
words, is faith in the true religion a condition for one’s good deeds to
merit reward?

What will be discussed here is the second issue
-----------------------------------------------

With respect to the first issue, we can say briefly that there is only
one true religion in each era, and all are obligated to believe in it.

The idea that has recently become common among some so-called
intellectuals to the effect that all Divine religions have equal
validity in all eras is a fallacious one.

Of course, it is true that there is no disagreement or contradiction
among the prophets of God. All of the prophets of God call towards a
single goal and the same God. They have not come to create mutually
contradicting groups and sects among humanity.

But this doesn’t mean that in every era there are several true
religions, and thus people in each era can then choose whichever
religion they want.

To the contrary, it means that a person must believe in all of the
Prophets and affirm that each Prophet would give tidings of the Prophet
to come, especially the final and greatest of them; and likewise, each
Prophet would affirm the previous one.

Thus, the necessary consequence of believing in all of the Prophets is
to submit in every era to the religion of the Prophet of the time. And
of course, it is necessary that in the final era we act on the final
commands that have been revealed by God to the final Prophet. And this
is what necessarily follows from Islām, that is, submission to God and
acceptance of the missions of His Messengers.

Many people in our day have subscribed to the view that it is sufficient
for a person to worship God and be affiliated with and practice one of
the Divine religions that was revealed by God; the form of the
commandments is not that important.

\`Isa (Jesus) (as) was a Prophet, Muhammad (S) was also a Prophet; if we
follow the religion of \`Isa (as) and go to church once a week, that is
fine, and if we follow the religion of the final Messenger (S) and pray
five times a day, that is also correct. These people say that what is
important is for a person to believe in God and practice one of the
Divine religions.

George Jordac, author of the book, Imām \`Alī; Gibrān Khalīl Gibrān, the
well-known Lebanese Christian author; and others like them have such a
view.[^5] These two individuals speak of the Prophet Muhammad (S) and
Amīrul Mo’minīn \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťālib (as) and especially Amīrul Mo’minīn
(as) – just as a Muslim would.

Some people ask how these people, in spite of their belief in Amīrul
Mo’minīn \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) and the Prophet Muhammad (S), are
still Christian.

If they were truthful, they would have become Muslims, and since they
haven’t done so, it is clear there is something behind the curtain. They
are being deceptive, and they aren’t sincere in their expression of love
and belief in the Prophet Muhammad (S) and \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťālib (as).

The answer is that they are not without sincerity in their expression of
love and belief in the Prophet Muhammad (S) and Amīrul Mo’minīn \`Alī
Ibn Abī Ťalib (as). However, they have their own way of thinking
regarding practicing a religion.

These individuals believe that human beings are not held to a particular
religion; any religion is sufficient. Thus, at the same time that they
are Christians, they consider themselves admirers and friends of \`Alī
Ibn Abī Ťalib (as), and they even believe that he himself held their
view. George Jordac says, “\`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib declines to compel people
to necessarily follow a particular religion.”

However, we consider this idea void. It is true that there is no
compulsion in religion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ إِكْرٌاهَ فِي الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no compulsion in religion.***”[^6]

But this doesn’t mean that there is more than one religion in every age
that is acceptable to God, and we have the right to choose any one we
please. This is not the case; in every age, there is one true religion
and no more.

Whenever a Prophet was sent by God with a new religion, the people were
obligated to avail themselves of his teachings and learn his laws and
commandments, whether in acts of worship or otherwise, until the turn of
the Seal of the Prophets came.

In this (current) age, if someone wishes to come near God, he or she
must seek guidance from the precepts of the religion he brought.

The Noble Qur’ān says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الإِسْلاٌمَ دِيناً فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ وَ
هُوَ فِي الأَخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخٌاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever desires a religion other than Islām, it shall never be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be among the
losers.*****”**[^7]

If someone were to say that the meaning of “Islām” in this verse is not
our religion in particular; rather, the intent is the literal meaning of
the word, or submission to God, the answer would be that without doubt
Islām means submission and the religion of Islām is the religion of
submission, but the reality of submission has a particular form in each
age.

And in this age, its form is the same cherished religion that was
brought by the Seal of the Prophets. So it follows that the word Islām
(submission) necessarily applies to it alone.

In other words, the necessary consequence of submission to God is to
accept His commandments, and it is clear that one must always act on the
final Divine commandments. And the final commandment of God is what His
final messenger has brought.

[^1]: Usd al-Ghāba, under \`Uthmān ibn Maz\`ūn

[^2]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūratul Ahqāf (46), Verse 9

[^3]: The objection may come to mind that the purport of this verse is
contrary to what is accepted by Muslims as established fact, meaning
that the Prophet (S) was informed of his praiseworthy place on the Day
of Judgement and of his intercession for various sinners, and is rather
contrary to the purport of various verses, like “And verily your Lord
will grant you until you are pleased” (Sūratul Duhā (39), Verse 5) and
“For God to forgive that which has passed of your mistake and that which
is to come.” (Sūratul Fatĥ (49), Verse 2) The answer is that the purport
of the verse, as is also understood from the preceding tradition, is
that the end result of a person’s actions are not known with certainty
by anyone; only God has certain knowledge of the final result, and if
others come to know, it is only by Divine revelation. So the verse that
negates knowledge of the final end relates to the Prophet Muhammad (S)
or someone else making a forecast relying on his or her own actions; and
the verses that indicate that the Prophet Muhammad (S) has knowledge of
his own or other people’s final end are through Divine revelation.

[^4]: Bihārul Anwār, Volume 3, Page 165

[^5]: George Jordac’s words about the Prophet Muhmmad (S) indicate he
believed in his prophecy and receiving Divine revelation, and he also
believed firmly that \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib was a man of God and regarded
him as being like \`Īsā , but at the same time he did not abandon
Christianity. Gibrān Khalīl Gibrān says of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) وَ
في عقيدتـي أن علي بن أبـي طالب أول عربي جاو وَ الروح الكلية وَ سمارها
“In my view, \`Alī was the first Arab to have contact with and converse
with the universal soul [of the world].” He expresses greater love for
\`Alī Ibn Abī Tālib as than even the Prophet Muhammad (S). He has
unusual statements about \`Alī; for example, he says: مٌاتَ وَ
الصَّلاٌةَ بَيْنَ شَفَتَيهِ “He died while prayer was between his two
lips.” And he also says of \`Alī Ibn Abī Tālib as, “\`Alī was before
his time, and I don’t know the secret of why destiny sometimes brings
people to the world before their time.” Incidentally, this point is the
meaning of one of \`Alī Ibn Abī Tālib’s as own statements; he says:
غَداً تَرَوْنَ أَيٌّامِي وَ يَكْشِفُ لَكُمْ عَنْ سَرٌائِرِي وَ
تَعْرِفُونَنِـي بَعْدَ خُلُوٍّ مَكٌانِـي وَ قِيٌامِ غَيْرِي مَقٌامِي
“Tomorrow you will see my days and my secrets will be exposed to you,
and you will know me after my space has become empty and others take my
place.”

[^6]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūratul Baqarah (2), Verse 256

[^7]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūrat Āli Imrān (3), Verse 85


