The Sins of Muslims
===================

As for the sins of Muslims, this issue has the exact opposite form of
first issue (the good deeds of non-Muslims) and is the completion of the
previous discussion. The issue is whether the sins committed by Muslims
are similar to the sins of non-Muslims with regard to punishment or not.

Broaching the previous issue was necessary from the aspect of its being
a matter of intellectual belief; but broaching this issue is a practical
necessity, because one of the factors in the fall and ruin of Muslim
societies in the present age is the undue pride which in the latter days
has come into being in many Muslims, and also in many Shī\`as.

If these individuals are asked whether the good deeds of non-Shī\`as are
acceptable to God, many of them answer, “No.” And if they are asked what
ruling the evil deeds and sins of Shī\`as have, they answer, “They are
all forgiven.”

From these two sentences, it is deduced that actions have no value; they
have neither positive nor negative value. The necessary and sufficient
condition for felicity and salvation is for a person to name him or
herself Shī\`a, and that’s it.

Normally, this group argues as follows:  
 First, if our sins and those of others are to be accounted for in the
same way, what difference is there between Shī\`as and non-Shī\`as?

Second, there is a well-known tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ عَلِيٍّ بْنِ أَبِي طٌالِبٍ حَسَنَةٌ لاٌ تَضُرُّ مَعَهٌا
سَيِّئَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Love of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib is a good deed with which no evil deed can
bring harm.”*

In answer to the first argument, it must be said that the difference
between Shī\`as and non-Shī\`as becomes apparent when a Shī\`a acts on
the program his or her leaders have given him or her and the non-Shī\`a
also acts on the teachings of his or her own religion.

In such a case, the precedence of the Shī\`a, both in this world and in
the other, will become clear. That is, the difference should be sought
in the positive side, not the negative side. We shouldn’t say that if
the Shī\`a and non-Shī\`a put the teachings of their religion under
their feet, there must be some difference between them – and if there is
no difference in that case, then what difference is there between
Shī\`as and non-Shī\`as?

This is exactly as if two patients were to refer to a doctor, one
referring to an expert doctor and the other to a doctor with less
expertise, but when they receive the doctor’s prescription, neither of
them acts in accordance with it.

Then the first patient complains, saying, “What difference is there
between me and the patient who referred to the non-expert doctor? Why
should I remain sick like him, even though I referred to an expert
doctor and he referred to a non-expert doctor?”

Just as in the example of the two patients, it is not correct for us to
differentiate between \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) and others by saying that
if we don’t act according to his commands, we will see no harm, but for
them, whether they act according to the words of their leader or not,
they will be in loss.

One of the companions of Imām Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq (as) said to
the Imām: *“Some of your Shī\`as have gone astray and consider forbidden
actions to be permissible, saying that religion is recognition of the
Imām and no more; thus, once you have recognized the Imām, you may do
whatever you want.”*

Imām as-Ŝādiq (as) said:  
*“Verily we belong to God and to Him shall we return. These unbelievers
have interpreted that which they don’t know according to their own
ideas.”*

The proper statement is, *“Acquire recognition [of the Imām] and do
whatever good deeds you want, and they will be accepted of you, for God
does not accept actions without recognition.*”[^1]

Muhammad Ibn Mārid asked Imām Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq (as): *“Is
it true that you have said, ‘Once you have recognized (the Imām), do
what you* *please’?”* The Imām (as) replied, *“Yes, that is correct.”*
He said, *“Any* *action, even adultery, theft, or drinking wine?!”* The
Imām (as) replied: *“Verily we belong to God and to Him shall we return.
I swear by God, they have wronged us. We [the Imāms] ourselves are
responsible for our actions; how can responsibility be lifted from our
Shī\`as? What I said is that once you have recognized the Imām, do*
*what you wish of good deeds, for they will be accepted from you.*”[^2]

As for the tradition that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ عَلِيٍّ بْنِ أَبِي طٌالِبٍ حَسَنَةٌ لاٌ تَضُرُّ مَعَهٌا
سَيِّئَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Love of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) is a good deed with which no evil
deed will cause harm,”*

we must see what its interpretation is. One of the eminent scholars I
think it was Wahīd Bihbahānī has interpreted this tradition in a
noteworthy way. He says that the meaning of the tradition is that if
one’s love of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) is true, no sin will bring harm
to a person. That is, if one’s love of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) who is
the perfect example of humanity, obedience, servitude, and ethics – is
sincere and not out of self-centeredness, it will prevent the committing
of sins; it is like a vaccine that brings immunity and keeps sickness
away from the vaccinated person.

Love of a leader like \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as), who is the
personification of good deeds and piety, causes one to love \`Alī Ibn
Abī Ťalib’s character; it chases the thought of sin from one’s mind,
with the condition, of course, that one’s love be true.

It is impossible for one who recognizes \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) his
piety, his tearful prayers, his supplications in the heart of the night
and one who loves such a person, to act in opposition to his command, he
who always commanded others to be pious and do good deeds.

Every lover shows respect to the wishes of his or her beloved and
respects his or her command. Obedience to the beloved is a necessary
result of true love; thus it is not exclusive to \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib
(as); true love of the Prophet Muhammad (S) is the same way. Thus, the
meaning of the tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ عَلِيٍّ بْنِ أَبِي طٌالِبٍ حَسَنَةٌ لاٌ تَضُرُّ مَعَهٌا
سَيِّئَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Love of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) is a good deed with which no evil
deed can cause harm”*

Is that love of \`Alī (as) is a good deed that prevents evil deeds from
bringing harm; that is, it prevents their occurrence. It doesn’t
indicate the meaning that the ignorant have understood, which is that
love of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) is something alongside of which any sin
you may commit will not have an effect.

Some dervishes on the one hand claim to love God and on the other hand
are more sinful than all other sinners; these, too are false claimants.

Imām Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هٌذَا لِعَمْرِي فِي الْفِعٌالِ بَدِيعٌ , تُعْصِي الإِلٌهَ وَأَنْتَ
تُظْهِرُ حُبَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُحِبَّ لِمَنْ يُحِبُّ مُطِيعٌ , لَوْ كٌانَ حُبُّكَ صٌادِقاً
لَأَطَعْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You disobey God while claiming to love Him,*

*This by my life is an incredible deed.*

*If your love were true, you would obey Him;*

*Verily the lover shows obedience to the beloved.*

The true friends of Amīrul Mo’minīn \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) would
always abstain from sins; his patronage (wilāyah) would protect from
sin, not encourage it.

Imām Muhammad Ibn \`Alī al-Bāqir (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مٌا تَنٌالُ وِلاٌيَتُنٌا إِلاَّ بِالْعَمَلِ وَالْوَرَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Our patronage is not attained except through deeds and piety.*”[^3]

Now, some traditions in support of this point:

1. Ťāwūs al-Yamānī says: *“I saw \`Alī ibnil Ĥusain (as) perform the
circumambulation the House of God and busying himself in worship from
the time of \`Ishā prayers until the last part of the night. When he
found himself alone, he looked toward the sky and said, “O God! The
stars have disappeared in the horizon and the eyes of the people have
slept, and Your gates are open to those who seek…”*

Ťāwūs narrated many sentences in this regard from the humble and
worshipful supplications of the Imām (as) and has said {in regards to
the Imām(as)}: “*Numerous times in the course of his supplication, he
wept.”* He (Ťāwūs) then said:  
*“Then he (the Imām) fell to the earth and prostrated on the ground. I
approached and, putting his head on my knees, wept. My tears flowed and
fell on his face. He rose, sat, and said: “Who has busied me from the
remembrance of my Lord?” I said: “I am Ťāwūs, O son of the Messenger of
God. What is this agitation and disquiet? We, who are* *sinners and full
of shortcomings, should do thus. Your* *father is Ĥusain Ibn \`Alīī,
your mother is Fāťimah Zahrā, and your grandfather is the Messenger of
God (S) – that is,* *with such a noble ancestry and lofty link, why are
you in discomfort and fear?”* He looked to me and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَيْهٌاتَ هَيْهٌاتَ يٌا طٌاوُوسُ دَعْ عَنِّـي حَدِيثَ أَبِي وَأُمِّي
وَجَدِّي، خَلَقَ اللٌّهُ الْجَنَّةَ لِمَنْ أَطٌاعَهُ وَأَحْسَنَ وَلَوْ
كٌانَ عَبْداً حَبَشِيًّا، وَخَلَقَ النٌّارَ لِمَنْ عَصٌاهُ وَلَوْ
كٌانَ وَلَداً قُرَشِيًّا. أَمٌّا سَمِعْتَ قَوْلَ تَعٌالـى: فَإِذٌا
نُفْخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَلاٌ أَنْسٌابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلاٌ
يَتَسٌاءَلُونَ  وَاللٌّهِ لاٌ يَنْفَعُكَ غَداً إِلاَّ تَقْدِمَةٌ
تُقَدِّمُهٌا مِنْ عَمَلٍ صٌالِحٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Not at all, O’ Ťāwūs, not at all! Leave aside talk of my ancestry. God
created Heaven for those who obey Him and do good, even if he be an
Abyssinian slave, and He* *created Hell for those who disobey him, even
if he be a Qurayshī lad. Have you not heard the words of God: “So when
the trumpet shall be blown, there will be no relations among them, nor
shall they ask one another?” By God, nothing shall benefit you tomorrow
except what good deeds you send forth.*”[^4]

**2.** The Messenger of God (S), after the conquest of Makkah, ascended
the hill of al-Ŝafāāand called out: *“O* *sons of Hāshim! O sons of
\`Abdul Muťťalib!”* The descendents of Hāshim and \`Abdul Muťťalib
assembled; when they came together, the Messenger (S) addressed them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّـي رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ، إِنِّـي لَشَفِيقٌ عَلَيْكُمْ، لاٌ
تَقُولُوا إِنَّ مُحَمَّداً مِنٌّا، فَوَاللٌّهِ مٌا أَوْلِيٌائِي
مِنْكُمْ وَلاٌ مِنْ غَيْرِكُمْ إِلاَّ الْمُتَّقُونَ، فَلاٌ تَأْتُونِي
يَوْمَ الْقِيٌامَةِ تَحْمِلُونَ الدُّنْيٌا عَلى رِقٌابِكُمْ وَيَأْتِي
النٌّاسُ يَحْمِلُونَ الآخِرَةَ. أَلاَّ وَإِنِّـي قَدْ أَعْذَرْتُ
فِيمٌا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَفِيمٌا بَيْنَ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَّجَلَّ
وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَإِنَّ لِي عَمَلِي وَلَكُمْ عَمَلُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily I am God’s Messenger to you; verily I am your well-wisher.
Don’t say that Muhammad* *is from among us, for I swear by God, my
friends from among you and from among others are only the pious ones. So
do not let me see you come to me on the Day of Judgement carrying the
world on your shoulders, while the people come carrying the Hereafter.
Aye, I have left no excuse between myself and you, and between God the
Exalted and you. Verily, for me are my deeds and for you are your
deeds.*”[^5]

3. Books of history have written that the Noble Messenger (S), in the
last days of his life, went out alone at night to the cemetery of
al-Baqī\` and sought forgiveness for those buried in it. After that, he
said to his companions, *“Each year Jibrā’īl* *would show the Qur’ān to
me once, and this year he recited it for me twice. I think this is a*
*sign that my death has approached.”* The next day he went to the pulpit
and declared, *“The time of my death has approached. Whoever I have made
a promise to, let him come forward so that I may fulfil it, and whoever
is owed something by me, let him come forward so that I may give it.”*

Then he continued his words thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهٌا النٌّاسُ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ بَيْنَ اللٌّهِ وَبَيْنَ أَحَدٍ نَسَبٌ
وَلاٌ أَمْرٌ يُؤتِيهِ بِهِ خَيْراً أَوْ يَصْرِفُ عَنْهُ شَرًّا إِلاَّ
الْعَمَلُ. أَلاٌ لاٌ يَدَّعَيَنَّ مُدَّعٍ وَلاٌ يَتَمَنَّيَنَّ
مُتَمَنٍّ، وَالَّذِي بَعَثَنِي بِالْحَقِّ لاٌ يُنْجِي إِلاَّ عَمَلٌ
مَعَ رَحْمَةٍ وَلَوْ عَصَيْتُ لَهَوَيْتُ. أَللٌّهُمَّ قَدْ بَلَّغْتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O people! Verily there is no kinship between God and any person, nor
is there anything on account of which He will do good to a person or
cast away evil from him except deeds. Aye, let no one claim or wish
(otherwise). I swear by Him Who sent me with the truth, nothing will
give salvation save (good) deeds along with mercy, and if [even] I were
to disobey, I would perish. O God! I have conveyed.”* [^6]

4. Imām \`Alī Ibn Mūsā al-Ridhā (as) had a brother known as Zayd al-Nār.
The character of this brother of the Imām (as) was not very pleasing to
the Imām. One day, during the time that the Imām was in Marw, Zayd was
present in a gathering in which there was a large group of people who
were speaking to each other. While the Imām was speaking, he noticed
that Zayd was talking to a group of people and speaking of the station
of the Messenger’s family, and in a proud manner would constantly say,
“we this” and “we that.” The Imām (as) cut short his own words and said,
addressing Zayd: *“What are these things that you are saying? If what
you say is correct and the descendents of the Messenger of God* *(S)*
*have an exceptional status; that is, if God is not to punish their
evildoers and will reward them without their doing good deeds, then you
are* *more honourable near God than your father Mūsā Ibn Ja\`far* *(as),
because he would worship God until he attained the stations of Divine
proximity, whereas you think that without worship you can attain the
station of Mūsā Ibn Ja\`far (as).”*

The Imām (as) then turned to Ĥasan Ibn Mūsā al-Washshā’, one of the
scholars of Kūfah who was present in that gathering, saying, “*How do
the scholars of Kūfah recite this verse:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قٌالَ يٌا نُوحُ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْ أَهْلِكَ إِنَّهُ عَمَلٌ غَيْرُ
صٌلِحٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Nuh! Verily he is not of your family; he is a (doer) of unworthy
deeds.”*

He replied: *“They recite it thus:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ عَمَلُ غَــيـرِ صٌالِحٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“That is, he is not your son and is not from your seed; he is the son
of an unrighteous man.”*  
 The Imām (as) said, *“Such is not the case. They recite the verse
incorrectly and interpret it incorrectly. The verse is thus:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ عَمَلٌ غَيْرُ صٌلِحٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, your son himself is unworthy. He was actually the son of Nūh;
he was driven away from God and drowned because he himself was
unrighteous, even though he was the son of Prophet Nūh(as).

Thus, being descended from and related to the Prophet or Imām has no
benefit; good deeds are required.”[^7]

Creational Conditions and Conventional Conditions
-------------------------------------------------

Usually, people compare the Divine rules in creation, reward and
punishment, and salvation and perdition to the human societal rules,
even though these affairs are in accordance with creational and actual
conditions and are a portion of them, whereas social conditions and
rules follow conventional, man-made rules.

Social rules can follow conventional conditions, but the rules of
creation, and among them Divine reward and punishment, cannot follow
these conditions, and instead follow creational conditions. To clarify
the difference between a creational system and a conventional system, we
present an example:

We know that in social systems, every country has its own particular
rules and laws. Social rules, in some issues, differentiate between two
people who are equal in physical and creational conditions, but
different with respect to conventional conditions.

For example, when they wish to hire someone in Iran, if an Iranian and
an Afghani apply for the job and both are equal in terms of creational
conditions, it is possible that the Iranian will be hired rather than
the Afghani, simply because he is not an Iranian.

In this case, if the Afghani says that I am completely equal in terms of
physical conditions to the Iranian who was hired if he is healthy, I too
am healthy, if he is young, so am I, if he is a specialist in
such-and-such a field, so am I – he will be given the answer that
administrative rules do not permit us to hire you.

Based on a conventional and man-made decision, the position of this same
Afghani individual can change and become like others; that is, he can
apply for and receive Iranian citizenship. It is obvious that
citizenship papers have no effect on his actual personality; but from
the view of social rules, he has become another person.

Normally, the observance of conventional conditions is concurrent with a
lack of observance of equality in actual and creational conditions.

But in issues that do not follow social and conventional rules and
instead follow only creational conditions, the case is different.

For example, if God forbid an illness or an epidemic comes to Iran, it
will not differentiate between a citizen of Iran and that of another
country.

If an Iranian and an Afghani are equal with respect to temperamental,
environmental, and all other conditions, it is impossible for the
bacteria that cause illness to discriminate and say that since the
Afghani is not a citizen of Iran, I have nothing to do with him. Here,
the issue is of creation and nature, not society and societal
conventions; the issue pertains to creation, not to legislation and
rule-making.

The Divine rules with respect to reward and punishment and salvation and
perdition of individuals are subject to actual and creational
conditions. It is not the case that if someone claims, *“Since my name
is recorded in the* *register of Islām and I am Muslim by name, I must
have special treatment,”* it will be accepted of him or her.

Let there be no confusion; here we are concerned with the discussion of
reward and punishment, salvation and perdition, and the conduct of God
with His servants; we are not talking about the laws that Islām has
legislated in the Muslims’ social life.

There is no doubt that the laws of Islām, like all other legislations of
the world, are a series of conventional laws, and a series of
conventional conditions has been observed within them. And in these laws
which are related to their worldly life, human beings, out of necessity,
must follow a set of conventional conditions.

But the actions of God, and the operation of Divine will in the system
of creation – including the granting of salvation and leading to
perdition of individuals and rewarding and punishing them do not follow
social rules, and instead are of another type altogether.

God, in carrying out His absolute will, does not act on the basis of
conventional rules. Conventional matters which naturally have a major
effect on social systems have no role in the creational will of God.

From the viewpoint of the rules which Islām has legislated that pertain
to the social conduct of human beings, whenever a person recites the two
testimonies[^8], he or she will be recognized as a Muslim and will
benefit from the advantages of Islām. But with regard to the rules of
the hereafter and from the viewpoint of God’s conduct, the laws of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ تَبِعَنِــي فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّـي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever follows me, is from me…***”[^9]

and:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللٌّهِ أَتْقٌكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily the most honourable of you near God is the most pious of
you.***”[^10]

prevail.

The Messenger of God (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهٌا النٌّاسُ إِنَّ أَبٌاكُمْ وٌاحِدٌ، وَإِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ وٌاحِدٌ،
كُلُّكُمْ لآدَمَ وَآدَمُ مِنْ تُرٌابٍ، لاٌ فَخْرَ لِعَرَبِيٍّ عَلى
عَجَمِيٍّ إِلاَّ بْالتَّقْوى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O people! Verily your father is one, and your Lord is One. All of you
are from Adam, and Adam was from dust.* *There is no pride for an Arab
over a non-Arab, except through piety.*”[^11]

Salmān al-Fārisī , who strove to reach truth, reached such a station
that the Noble Messenger (S) said of him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلْمٌانُ مِنٌّا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Salmān is one of us, the People of the House.”*

There are some who have come under the influence of satanic whisperings
and have contented themselves with the thought:

*“Our name is among the names of \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib’s (as) friends.
However we may be, we are considered his subjects. Or we will make a
will that a large sum out of the money that we have acquired through
wrong means or that we should have spent in our lifetime in good causes
– but didn’t – should be given to the caretakers of one of the holy
shrines in order for us to be buried near the graves of God’s saints, so
that the Angels don’t dare punish us.”*

Such people should know that they have been blinded and the curtain of
negligence has covered their eyes. Their eyes will open when they will
find themselves drowned in Divine punishment and they will suffer from
such regret that if it were possible to die, they would do so a thousand
times. So let them awake from the slumber of carelessness today, repent,
and make up for what has passed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْذِرْهُمْ يَوْمَ الْحَسْرَةِ إِذْ قَضى الأَمْرُ وَ هُمْ فِي
غَفْلَةٍ وَ هُمْ لاٌ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And warn them (of) the day of regret, when the affair will be
decided while they are negligent and don’t believe.”***[^12]

From the point of view of the Qur’ān and the Islāmic traditions, it is
definite that the sinner, even if Muslim, will be punished by God. True,
since he or she has faith, he or she will in the end achieve salvation
and liberty from Hell, but it may be that this salvation will only come
after years of hardship and punishment.

Some people’s account of sins will be cleansed by the hardships of
dying; another group will pay the penalty for their sins in the grave
and barzakh (intermediary realm between this world and the next);
another group will get their retribution in the horrors of Resurrection
and difficulties of accounting for their deeds; and yet others will go
to Hell and linger there for years in punishment. It has been narrated
from the sixth Imām, Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq (as) that the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لٌبِثِينَ فِيهٌــآ أَحْقٌاباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…lingering therein for ages…***”[^13]

pertains to those who will attain salvation from Hell.[^14]

Here we mention some examples of traditions which talk of the
punishments of the time of death and after death so that they may help
us take notice, awaken, and prepare ourselves for the daunting and
dangerous stations which we have ahead of us.

1. Shaykh Kulaynīnarrates from Imām Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq (as) that
\`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) was once suffering from pain in the eye. The
Prophet Muhammad (S) went to visit him at a time when he was crying out
from the pain. He said, *“Is this cry from impatience, or because of the
severity of pain?”* Amīrul Mo’minīn \`Alī Ibn Abī Ťalib (as) replied,
*“O Messenger of God, I have not suffered any pain like this until
today.”*

• The Prophet (S) began to narrate the terrifying account of what
happens to unbelievers when they die. Upon hearing this, \`Alī (as) sat
up and said, *“Messenger of God, please repeat this account for me, for
it made me forget my pain.”* Then he (as) said, *“O Messenger of God!
Will anyone from your community face such a death?”* He replied, *“Yes:
a* *ruler who oppresses, one who usurpsthe property of an orphan, and
one who bears false witness.”*[^15]

2. Shaykh Ŝadūq narrates in the book ‘Man Lā Yah°uruhu al-Faqīh’ that
when Dharr, the son of Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī , died, Abu Dharr stood by
his grave, put his hand on the grave, and said: *“God have mercy on you;
I swear by God that you were good to me and now that you have left me I
am pleased with you. I swear by God* *that I am not worried because of
your leaving; nothing has been diminished from me, and I am in need of
none but God. And were it not for the fear of the time of notification,
I would wish that I had gone in your place. But now I wish to compensate
for what has passed and* *prepare for the next world, and verily my
grief for your sake has prevented my grief over you. [That is, I am*
*absorbed in thinking about doing something that could benefit you, and
so I have no time to grieve at being separated from you.] I swear by God
that I have not* *wept on account of your separation, but I have cried
thinking about how you are and what you have gone through. I wish I knew
what you said and what was said to you! O God! I have forgiven the
rights that You had made obligatory on my son for me, so You too forgive
him Your rights over him, for magnanimity and generosity are more
befitting of You.*”[^16]

3. Imām Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq (as) narrates from his noble
ancestors that the Prophet Muhammad (S) said, *“The squeezing in the
grave for a believer is an* *atonement for the shortcomings he or she
has committed.*”[^17]

4. \`Alī Ibn Ibrāhīm narrates from Imām Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad as-Ŝādiq
(as) regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنْ وَرٌآئِهِمْ بَرْزَخٌ إِلـى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and beyond them is a barrier until the day they shall be
resurrected.”***[^18]

that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللٌّهِ مٌا أَخٌافُ عَلَيْكُمْ إِلاَّ الْبَرْزَخَ فَأَمٌّا أِذٌا
صٌارَ الأَمْرُ إِلَيْنٌا فَنَحْنُ أَوْلـى بِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I swear by God, I fear nothing for you except barzakh; as for when the
affair is committed to us, we are more worthy of you.**”***[^19]

That is, our intercession is related to after barzakh; there is no
intercession in barzakh.

In general, there are so many Qur’ānic verses and clear traditions
regarding the punishment for sins such as lying, backbiting, false
accusation, treachery, oppression, usurping other’s property, drinking,
gambling, tale-bearing, defaming, abandoning prayer, abandoning fasting,
abandoning pilgrimage, abandoning Jihād, and so forth that it is beyond
reckoning; none of them are exclusive to the unbelievers or non-Shī\`as.

In the tradition of the Mi\`rāj (Prophetic ascent to Heaven), we find
many examples where the Prophet Muhammad (S) says: *“I saw various
groups of my community, men and women, in different forms of punishment,
who were being punished on account of various sins.”*

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, Volume 1, Page 24

[^2]: al-Kāfī, Volume 2, Page 464

[^3]: Bihārul Anwār, Volume 12 (Kumpānī print)

[^4]: Ibid., Volume 11, Page 25, “Chapter on the Noble Morals of the
Fourth Imām”

[^5]: Bihārul Anwār (Ākhūndī print), Volume 21, Page 111, from
Attributes of the Shī\`a by Shaykh Ŝadūq.

[^6]: Sharh (Commentary) of Nahjul Balāgha by ibn Abil Ĥadīd, Volume 2,
Page 863

[^7]: Bihārul Anwār (old print), Volume 10, Page 65

[^8]: Meaning that the person bears witness that there is no creature or
entity worthy of worship except for Allāh and that Muĥammad is His
Prophet and Messenger. (Tr.)

[^9]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūrat Ibrāhīm (14), Verse 36

[^10]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūratul Ĥujurāt (49), Verse 13

[^11]: Tārīkh al-Ya\`qūbī, Volume 2, Page 110

[^12]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūrat Mariam (19), Verse 39

[^13]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūratul Nabā' (78), Verse 23

[^14]: Bihārul Anwār (Kumpānī print), Volume 3, Page 376-7

[^15]: Shaykh \`Abbās Qummī , Manāzilul Ākhirah (Islāmiyya print), Page
5-6

[^16]: Ibid., Page 24-25

[^17]: Bihārul Anwār (Kumpānī print), Volume 3, Page 153, from Thawābul
A\`māl and al-Amālī of Shaykh Sadūq

[^18]: Al-Qur'ān, Sūratul Mu'minūn (23), Verse 100

[^19]: Bihārul Anwār (Kumpānī print), Volume 3, Page 151, from Tafsīr
\`Alī ibn Ibrāhīm


