Summary and Conclusion
======================

From all that has been said in this section about the good and bad deeds
of Muslims and non-Muslims, the following conclusions can be reached:

1. Both salvation and perdition have degrees and levels; neither the
people of salvation are all at the same level, nor are those of
perdition. These levels and differences are called *darajāt* “levels of
ascent” with regard to the people of Heaven and *darakāt* “levels of
descent” with regard to the inhabitants of Hell.

2. It is not the case that all of the dwellers of Heaven will go to
Heaven from the beginning, just as all of the people of Hell will not be
in Hell for eternity. Many dwellers of Heaven will only go to Heaven
after suffering very difficult periods of punishment in barzakh or the
hereafter. A Muslim and a Shī\`a should know that, assuming he or she
dies with sound faith, if God forbid he or she has committed sins,
injustices, and crimes, he or she has very difficult stages ahead, and
some sins have yet greater danger and may cause one to remain eternally
in Hell.

3. Individuals who don’t believe in God and the hereafter naturally
don’t perform any actions with the intention of ascending towards God,
and since they don’t perform good deeds with this intent, by necessity
they do not embark on a journey towards God and the hereafter. Thus,
they naturally don’t ascend towards God and the higher realm and don’t
reach Heaven. That is, because they were not moving towards it, they
don’t reach that destination.

4. If individuals believe in God and the hereafter, perform actions with
the intention of seeking nearness to God, and are sincere in their
actions, their actions are acceptable to God and they deserve their
reward and Heaven, whether they are Muslims or non-Muslims.

5. Non-Muslims who believe in God and the hereafter and do good deeds
with the intention of seeking nearness to God, on account of being
without the blessing of Islām, are naturally deprived of benefiting from
this Divine program. That proportion of their good deeds is accepted
which is in accordance with the Divine program, such as forms of favours
and services to God’s creation. But invented acts of worship that
without base are naturally unacceptable, and a series of deprivations
resulting from unavailability of the complete program apply to and
include them.

6. Accepted good deeds, whether of Muslims or otherwise, have certain
afflictions which may come about afterwards and corrupt them. At the
head of all of these afflictions is rejection, obstinacy, and deliberate
unbelief. Thus, if non-Muslim individuals perform a great amount of good
deeds with the intention of seeking nearness to God, but when the truths
of Islām are presented to them show bias and obstinacy and set aside
fairness and truth-seeking, all of those good deeds are null and void,
“like ashes caught in a strong wind on a stormy day.”

7. Muslims and all other true monotheists, if they commit indecencies
and transgressions and betray the practical aspect of the Divine
program, are deserving of long punishments in barzakh and the Day of
Judgement, and occasionally because of some sins, like intentionally
murdering an innocent believer, may remain in eternal punishment.

8. The good deeds of individuals who don’t believe in God and the Day of
Judgement and perhaps may ascribe partners to God will cause their
punishment to be lessened and, occasionally, be lifted.

9. Felicity and perdition are in accordance with actual and creational
conditions, not conventional and man-made conditions.

10. The verses and traditions that indicate that God accepts good deeds
do not look solely to the action-related goodness of actions; in Islām’s
view, an action becomes good and worthy when it possesses goodness from
two aspects: action-related, and actor-related.

11. The verses and traditions that indicate that the actions of those
who deny Prophethood or Imāmate are not acceptable are with a view to
denial out of obstinacy and bias; however, denial that is merely a lack
of confession out of incapacity (quŝūr) – rather than out of culpability
(taqŝīr) – is not what the verses and traditions are about. In the view
of the Qur’ān, such deniers are considered musta°\`af (powerless) and
murjawn li’amr illah (those whose affair is referred to God’s command).

12. In the view of the Islāmic sages such as Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā) and
Mullāh Ŝadrā , the majority of people who haven’t confessed to the truth
are incapable and excusable rather than culpable; if such people do not
know God they will not be punished – though they will also not go to
Heaven – and if they believe in God and the Resurrection and perform
pure good deeds with the intention of seeking nearness to God, they will
receive the recompense for their good deeds. Only those will face
perdition who are culpable, not those who are incapable.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اخْتِمْ لَنٌا بِالْخَيْرِ وَ السَّعٌادَةِ وَ تَوَفَّنٌا
مُسْلِمِينَ، وَ أَلْحِقْنٌا بِالصٌّالِحِينَ بِمُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ
الطٌّاهِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O God! Seal (our fate) for us with goodness and felicity, and cause us
to die as Muslims, and join us with the righteous, Muhammad* *and his
noble Progeny (may Peace be upon all of them).*


