Philosophy of Ihram
===================

Donning of ihram is leaving the material world behind and migrating to
the elevated presence of Allah (swt). It is a reminder of shrouds which
every human has to wear after death. It also reminds us that this is a
practice session for the Day of Judgment.

The pilgrim must shed her pride and dress in the clothes which will take
her closer to Allah (swt). Those waiting for lmam al-Zamana (ajtf) are
awaiting a Reformer and so should be obedient and patient. Likewise
those entering the Haram of Allah (swt) should be in ihram.

Philosophy of the Color "White"
-------------------------------

The color of ihram is white which represents purity. We came to the
world pure and should endeavor to leave it in the same condition.

Two faults are always associated with Muslims: One, that they are not
peace loving and the other that they are not neat and tidy. Both these
issues are answered by the rituals of ihram.

"Cleanliness is half faith" Reality of this tradition can be observed in
pilgrimage.

Why has Islam selected white color out of so many available?

White represents purity as well as peace and tranquility. That is why
this color is recommended for daily prayers, for ihram and even for
shroud.

White color keeps away bugs and insects. That is why patients beds are
covered with white sheets and doctors and nurses wear white uniforms.
Islam emphasized on this color from the beginning.

This color not only helps in outer cleanliness it also encourages inner
purity. It forces n person to think that as this dress is pure and clean
so should our inner self be. We should try to keep all negative thoughts
away from our minds and keep them pure like our dress.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

Q1**.** If a lady sees blood while wearing ihram or after wearing it and
has no idea when it will end; will her obligatory pilgrimage be
Hajj-ut-Tamatu or Hajj al-Ifraad?

**Ans:** If the lady sees the blood while wearing ihram then whichever
pilgrimage she was planning on doing, that is, Tamatu or Ifraad, she
should do niyyat (intention) for that. Then if her bleeding ends she can
perform ghusl (purifying bath) and if possible perform Umra otherwise
she will have to perform Hajj al-Ifraad. But lf she sees the blood after
wearing ihram then she should keep her intention, that is, not change it
to Hajj al-Ifraad. Then if she is-able to perform ghusl in time she can
perform Umra otherwise change her intention to Hajj al-Ifraad.

Q2. If a lady dons ihram with the intention of Hajj al-Ifraad thinking
that she could not possibly perform Hajj-ut-Tamatu, but on reaching
Makkah realizes that it is possible for her to perform Umra-ut-Tamatu.
Then what should she do?

**Ans:** She can change her intention to Hajj-ut-Tamatu.

**Q3**. If a lady enters Masjid-ush-Shajarah during her period, wears
ihram and leaves from the same door, is her ihram correct?
**Ans:** Yes her ihram is correct. However entering the mosque in her
condition is considered a haram act.

**Q4**. ls it obligatory for a lady to wear socks when in ihram?
**Ans**: Yes it is obligatory, because she is not allowed to expose her
feet in front of na mehram men.

**Q5.** A lady wears ihram during her period. After doing ghusl she
performs Umra-ut-Tamatu**.** Then in Arafaat (9th of Dhil Hajjah) she
again spots blood (which normally ends before the ten days of
menstruation, what should she do?)

**Ans:** She has performed her Umra-ut-Tamatu between two cycles of
menstruation. There is a difference of opinion between scholars about
this situation, the majority say that this short period between the two
cycles is also considered part of the menstrual period. But there is a
group who think that this is a paak (lslamically Clean) period.

Thus according to the majority of scholars, because the woman was still
in her menses, her obligatory pilgrimage changes to Ifraad and after
completing her pilgrimage rites she must perform Umra al-Mufrida.

According to the second group of scholars however, because the woman was
considered paak between the two cycles, her umra is valid and she can
continue with Hajj-ut-Tamatu.

According to precaution she should follow the decree given by an Islamic
Jurist whom she follows.

Obligatory Acts for Ihram
-------------------------

1. *Niyyat:* “I am wearing the ihram for Umra al-Tamatu qurbatan ilallah
(To be near Allah swt).

2. Reciting *Talbiyah* (Response to God's command).That is, to utter the
following: "Labbaik, Allahumma labbaik, labbaik, la sharika laka
labbaik", meaning (Here I am! at Your service, O Lord! Here I am! at
Your service, You have no partner. Here I am at Your service).

It is highly recommended to add the following: "Innal hamda wanni’mata
laka wal mulka, la sharika laka”. It is also permissible to add to this
"labaik" and say, "la sharika laka labaik", meaning (All the praise is
Yours; so is the bounty, and to You belongs the property; there is no
partner to You. Here I am! at Your service).

One may question if a lady can recite Talbiyah out loud? Shari'ah says
she can and there is no harm in doing so.

Recommended Acts for Ihram
--------------------------

1. Having a ghusl for ihram before wearing it. Even ladies having
menstruations should have a bath.

2. The ihram should not be made of pure silk. Infact it is better to
avoid all garments of pure silk during ihram. But if there is no other
choice then it can be used.

3. Cutting one's nails or removing underarm or bikini line hair.

4. Wearing one's ihram after Zohr (Afternoon) prayers. If this is not
possible then it is better to wear it after any obligatory prayer.
Otherwise one can pray six Raka'at (Unit) recommended prayers or two
Raka'at Salaat al-Nafla and then wear the ihram. In the first Raka'at
one should recite Sura Fatiha followed by Sura Ikhlas from the Qur'an
and in the second one recite Sura Fatiha and then Sura Hajj.

5. Recitation of special duas is recommended while having a bath, donnng
ihram and after offering Salaat.

Undesirable Acts During Ihram
-----------------------------

1. Using black cloth for the ihram.

2. Using yellow colored pillow cases and bed sheets.

3. Using dirty clothes as one's ihram. .

4. Applying henna shortly before wearing ihram, so that the smell and
color are still there when one wears the ihram.

5. Dipping one's body in water.

6. To answer someone else's call with Labbaik.


