Philosphy of Circumambulation (Tawaf)
=====================================

Oneness of Allah (swt) {Tawhid}
-------------------------------

Circumambulation around Kaba does not mean that the body goes around in
circles. The real reason for this rite is that the heart and soul of the
pilgrim should move around the House of Allah (swt) and his love for
Allah (swt) should become so great that no worldly attraction should
distract him from this path. Neither east nor west should distract him
only Tawhid should attract him.

Unity
-----

The pilgrims were residing in different countries of the world. They all
gathered in Makkah then moved to Masjid al-Haram and with great love and
enthusiasm started circumambulating around Kaba. This makes them realize
that they were like a drop of water but now this gathering has made them
part of a huge ocean.

Act of Angels
-------------

The angels circumambulate in the heavens likewise pilgrims do it on the
earth. Earth dwellers are compared to heaven dwellers, because pilgrims
circumambulate around Kaba on the earth and exactly above this is
Bait-ul-Mamur in the heavens where angels are doing the same.

During circumambulation it is a must that Kaba should be towards ones
left side. The reason might be that the heart is also on the left side
of the body. Heart is the House of Allah (swt) so it should always be
completely attentive to House of Allah.

Rules of Circumambulation
-------------------------

Circling seven times around Kaba is called one Tawaf. There are several
conditions for tawaf.

1. **Niyyat:** Tawaf is invalid if there is no intention to perform it
for the purpose of attaining closeness and obedience to Allah (SWI). In
addition one must mention for which Umra or Hajj tawaf is being
performed and whether it is an obligatory or recommended tawaf.

2. **Taharah (Cleanliness):** Cleanliness both major (such as jinabat,
haidh and nifas) and minor causes of impurities (such as urine and
excrement) is compulsory. If one performs tawaf despite such
uncleanliness, whether deliberately, out of ignorance, or inadvertently,
the tawaf is invalid.

If in the course of tawaf, the pilgrim who is in a state of ihram,
passes wind, urine or stool, the following rules must be taken into
consideration:

• If he does so before completing the fourth round, the tawaf is invalid
and he must repeat it after performing Wudhoo (Ablution);

• If it occurs involuntarily after completing the fourth round, he must
interrupt the tawaf, perform Wudhoo, and complete the tawaf from where
he had interrupted it;

• If the occurrence, after completing the fourth round was by choice, as
a matter of precaution he must complete the tawaf after performing
Wudhoo, and repeat the tawaf for a second time as well.

Rules for a Menstrual Lady during Circumambulation
--------------------------------------------------

If a lady begins her menstrual cycle during tawaf and sees blood before
the fourth round then her tawaf is invalid. But if she sees it after the
fourth round then the tawaf is valid and after her ghusl of haydh she
can complete the remaining rounds. As a precaution she should complete
the rounds and do another tawaf if there is enough time. But if her
schedule is tight then she should perform Sa'ee, cut her hair and wear
the ihram for Hajj, and on return from Mina before performing the tawaf
for Hajj she should do her Umra tawaf with Qadha (Delayed performance)
intention.

After performing the tawaf and its prayers, a lady finds out that she is
having menstruation but has no idea when it started, that is:

A - Before the tawaf.
B - Before the special prayers for the tawaf.
C- During tawaf
D - During the prayers.
E - After the prayers.

ln such a case she should take it as definite that the tawaf and its
special prayers were performed in acceptable conditions. If she has
definite knowledge that her menstruations started before or after her
prayers then she should perform ghusl of haidh and say her special
prayers. But if there is not enough time then before performing the
tawaf of Hajj she should offer delayed prayers.

After completing tawaf but before offering its prayers, if the
menstruation starts then the tawaf will be considered correct and she
will offer its prayers after her menstruation cycle ends and she has had
her ghusl. But again if there is not enough time then she should perform
Sa'ee between Safa and Marwa and have her hair cut and offer the tawaf
prayers with delayed intention before doing the tawaf for Hajj.

If a lady at the time of Umm-ut-Tamatu spots blood before wearing ihram
or while wearing it or after having done so, but before performing
tawaf, then if there is sufficient time then she should wait for her
cycle to end, do her ghusl, and then perform all the rites of
Umra-ut-Tamatu. But if there is not enough time then she has two
choices.

1. If she spotted blood before donning ihram or while donning it then
her Hajj-ut-Tamatu will be changed to Hajj al-Ifraad and if possible she
should perform Umra al-Mufrida after completing the pilgrimage rites.

2. If she spots blood after donning ihram then as a compulsory
precaution she should change her intention of Hajj-ut­Tamatu to Hajj
al-Ifrad. But she should perform Sa'ee of Safa and Marwa and cutting of
hair which are part of Umra­ut-Tamatu, wear ihram for Hajj per form her
Mina rites, then perform tawaf and its prayers for Umra-ut-Tamatu with
delayed Intention, before performing the tawaf for Hajj.

But if she knows for sure that her cycle will not end even after
completion of Mina rites then she should let an agent perform tawaf and
prayers but perform the Sa'ee and cutting of hair herself.

There is sufficient time for a woman to perform all the rites of
Umra-ut-Tamatu but she does not take the opportunity to do so, even
though she is sure that later she will not be able to perform the
Umra-ut-Tamatu rites because of lack of time and her menstrual cycle,
and then what she feared actually occurs. That is her menstrual cycle
begins and there is not sufficient time left to perform all the rites of
Umra, then her Umra is invalid and her ihram also becomes invalid.

She cannot change her Hajj-ut­Tamatu to Hajj al-Ifraad. But as a
precaution she should perform all rites of pilgrimage with the intention
of Hajj-e­Ifraad, keeping sincere hope in heart towards their
acceptance. Infact as a precaution she should perform tawaf, prayers for
it, Sa'ee and cutting of hair for both Umra al-Mufrida and
Hajj-e­Ifraad.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

Q1. During tawaf the area between Rukn al-Yamani and Maqam al-Ibrahim is
very crowded and there is a lot of contact with men, because of this is
it permitted to perform circumambulation on the outer side of Maqam
al-Ibrahim? (As contact with men is less likely in this area)

**Ans:** If the contact between men and women performing
circumambulation is the one which is unavoidable in a big crowd then it
is permitted. But If it becomes too intimate then it is not permitted.
So because of unavoidable contact one cannot perform circumambulation on
the outer side of Maqam-e­Ibrahim.

Q2. Is there any difference between covering the parts of body during
Prayers and during Tawaf?

**Ans:** Yes there is some difference. Those parts of the body which
must be covered in prayers, like one's hair, arms down to the wrists,
legs down to the ankles, if revealed during tawaf do not make the tawaf
invalid. But as a recommended precaution it is better to take care that
they are covered as in prayers like prayers.

As an obligatory precaution it is not permitted to cover ones face with
a veil while performing tawaf even if the lady is not in ihram. For
example when she performs the tawaf of Hajj after the rites in Mina on
the day of Eid-al-Adha, she should not use a veil. If he wants she can
pull down her head covering to hide her face but it should not touch her
face.

Q3. What happens if during tawaf, a lady's (beauty spots) are revealed
or a little hair is revealed?
**Ans:** Her tawaf is valid but she has committed a sin.

Q4. What happens if a lady spots blood after realizing that her
Urnra-ut-Tamatu circumambulation has become invalid?

**Ans:** In such a case the same rule applies as the one where blood is
spotted before starting circumambulation.

Q5. If a lady is using precautionary medication to stop her menstrual
cycle but sees some spots on her due date, which do not have the
properties of menstruations, what should she do? She is aware that
stopping the use of medication will start her cycle.

**Ans:** Such spotting will not be considered as menstruation. It will
be treated as istihaza (yellowish or brown spotting) and the rules of
istihadha will apply to her.

Q6. If a lady is unsure whether to use medication in order to be able to
perform tawaf and its prayers herself, or to assign the rites to an
agent is it a must for her to use medication?

**Ans**: If there is no danger of any harmful effect on her health then
use of medication is obligatory.

Q7. While performing recommended tawaf if there is a contact with men
and gaze falls on male bodies, is the tawaf valid?

**Ans**: Circumambulation is valid, but the lady should not touch or
gaze intentionally.

### Rules for a Lady Having Istehadha

There are three types of menstruations.

1. Qalila (Little blood)

2. Mutawassita (Medium blood)

3. Kathira (Excessive blood)

If a lady starts light bleeding of her menstrual cycle during
circumambulation after the fourth round then after washing her private
parts and performing wudhu she should complete her rounds. But if it
happens before the fourth round then the entire tawaf will have to be
performed again.

Only a lady having light bleeding can enter Masjid-ul-Haram without
ghusl.

### Conclusion

A woman with light bleeding should follow the rules that apply to one's
daily prayers, and wash the private parts for every tawaf, using fresh
sanitary towels and performing wudhu. Then for tawaf prayers she should
again perform wudhu.

A woman with medium bleeding should perform one ghusl for tawaf and its
prayers. But wudhu for both rites will be performed separately.

A woman with heavy bleeding should perform separate ghusls for tawaf and
its prayers. She does not have to do wudhu but if there is any act which
causes minor impurity then she has to do wudhu also.

Q. If a lady having menstruations who is supposed to perform ghusl and
wudhu before every tawaf and prayers for it, offers obligatory prayers
during tawaf with the same wudhu and continues her rounds after her
prayers again with the same wudhu, is her action valid?

**Ans:** In such a condition neither her tawaf nor her obligatory
prayers are valid.

Body and Clothes should be Free of all Impurities
-------------------------------------------------

As a compulsory precaution it is better to avoid even those impurities
which do not matter in obligatory prayers. For example a blood spot less
than a dirham size, cap, socks, handkerchief or ring which is not
ceremonially pure.

Body Covering
-------------

The whole body has to be covered except for face and hands up to wrists.

Q. What is the rule about performing circumambulation wearing dress or
outer covering made of see-through (transparent) cloth? ·

**Ans:** It is a sin to wear dress made from see-through or transparent
cloth; and complete covering is obligatory during circumambulation.

**Obligations in Cirumambulation**

There are eight obligations to be fulfilled in circumambulation.

1. It must be commenced at Hajar-ul-Aswad (The Black Stone).

2. At the end of the whole round, it should end here also.

3. At all times, during the circumambulation, the Holy Kaba must be to
the left of the pilgrim.

4. Hijr Ismail must be included in tawaf; that is to say, a pilgrim must
turn around the Hijr without entering it or climbing its wall.

5. One must circumambulate keeping clear of the Holy Kaba and its
protection is known as Shadharwaan.

6. One must circumambulate seven times continuously. Less than seven
rounds will invalidate the tawaf; if more than seven rounds are made
deliberately, the tawaf will be invalid too.

7. The seven rounds must follow each other without considerable
interruption between them.

8. The circumambulation must be performed by free movement of the
pilgrim. If he was made to move by being pushed by the crowd this will
not be acceptable.

As is widely held, circumambulations performed between the Holy Kaba and
Maqame (the station) of Ibrahim (A.S.) - a distance of twenty six and a
half arm lengths (about 12 meters). As one has to go around the wall of
Hijr Ismail, the distance is reduced to six and a half arm lengths
(about 3 meters). However, if one moves outside this ambit, it is
acceptable, though makrouh (Not desirable), particularly if one is
unable to remain within the limits, or harm could befall him, if he did
so.

Nevertheless, where possible, observing precaution is recommended.

As soon as a lady realizes that her menstruations have started she must
leave Masjid al-Haram. Rules for her circumambulation have been
mentioned before.

Prayers for Circumambulation
----------------------------

The third obligation in Umrat-ut-Tamatu consists of two units of prayers
to be said after circumambulation. It is performed like morning prayers
except that the worshipper has the option to say it aloud or in a
whispered way. It is obligatory to say it close to Maqam al-lbrahim
(as). Evidently, it must be said at its rear. If it is not possible to
do so then as a precaution one must offer two sets of prayers. One set
one may say on any of it both sides and in addition another set far from
the Maqam but at its rear.

If this is not possible, any of the two is sufficient. However, if this
is not possible, then one may, as a matter of precaution, say it
anywhere in the Mosque, and as close to the Maqam as possible. This is
so when the tawaf is obligatory, but when it is optional, one may pray
anywhere in the Mosque.

Sa'ee
-----

This is the fourth obligation in Umrat-ut-Tamatu. In sa'ee too,
intention to seek nearness to Allah (swt) is obligatory but there is no
obligation to cover the private parts, [although exposing one's genitals
in a public place is not allowed], or for purity from urine or
excrement, although it is preferable *(al awla)* to be ritually clean
during sa'ee.

Sa'ee is to be performed after circumambulation and its prayer. If it is
performed before the circumambulation or prayers, it is obligatory to
repeat it after performing both.

Niyyat (Intention) to attain closeness to Allah (swt) is essential in
sa'ee performed for Umrah or Pilgrimage, whichever is applicable. ·

Sa'ee consists of seven laps. The first round starts at Safa and ends at
Marwah. The second round is a reversal of the first; the third is like
the first, and so on until the seventh round ends at Marwah. One can
delay performance of sa'ee till night without any valid reason, but as a
precaution it is better not to delay. A lady having menstruation who
employs an agent for circumambulation and its prayers should perform the
sa’ee herself because this area is not part of mosque.

Q. If a lady after her purifying bath performs circumambulation and its
prayers, then starts sa'ee but between rounds realizes that she is still
having menstruations, is her sa'ee valid?

**Ans:** No it is invalid. She should perform her circumambulation again
offer its prayers and then perform sa'ee.

Taqseer (Cutting of Hair)
-------------------------

It is the fifth obligation in Umrat-ut-Tamatu. It must be embarked on
with the niyyat (Intention) of closeness to Allah (swt). It is
materialized by cutting some hair of the head.

• Cutting is a must, plucking is not valid.

• As it is widely held, it is accepted by cutting the nails of hand or
foot, as an alternative. However it should, as a matter of precaution
not be performed independent of cutting the hair first.

• A lady can only do taqseer for another if she has already done it for
herself.

• It is not obligatory to perform taqseer there and then. In fact if
there is a danger of exposing hair in front of men then it is better to
do it on reaching their accommodation.

• If a pilgrim, knowingly and deliberately, engage in a sexual act after
sa'ee, but before taqseer, he is liable to bear a kaffarah (Penalty) of
a camel. However, if she did so in ignorance of the rule, she should be
relieved of the penalty.

Change of Hajj al-Tamatu to Hajj al-Ifraad
------------------------------------------

One of the essential parts of Hajj·e·Tamatu is Umra al-Tamatu. A lady
who has to perform Hajj al-Tamattu but because of menstruation or lack
of time could not perform Umra al-Tamatu, then she should change her
intention to Hajj al-Ifraad, because for this type of pilgrimage Umrah
is not required. She should stay in Arafat with other pilgrims, go to
Muzdalfa and perform all rites of Mina. But sacrificing of sheep is not
obligatory for her. On return to Makkah she should perform
circumambulation of Ziarat (visit to Holy place) and its prayers, sa'ee
and Tawaf-un­ Nisa (The circumambulation which makes husband and wife
valid for each other) with its prayers. Then she can shed her ihram. She
should return to Mina spend night there and perform all rites which are
done on 10th, 11th and 12th of Dhil Hajjah.


