Hajj al-Tammatu
===============

For Hajj al-Tammatu, the First obligatory act is donning of ihram.

Ihram for Pilgrimage
--------------------

After completing Umrah rites every pilgrim has to don ihram for
Hajj-e·Tamattu. The only difference between Pilgrimage ihram and Umra
ihram is intention and place, rest is same.

Ihram can be donned anywhere in Makkah, but highly recommended place is
Masjid-e -Haram. Offer two units of prayers near Maqam al-Ibrahim or
Hajr al-Ismaeel and then don ihram.

Philosophy Behind Stay in Arafat Plain
--------------------------------------

The name Arafat has been derived from word **'**araf, which means
acquaintance, recognition or knowing. There are many different reasons
for the use of this name.

1. Prophet Adam (as) and Lady Eve (as) met each other after a long wait
at this plain.

2. Prophet Abraham (as) dreamed about offering sacrifice of Prophet
Ismaeel (as) at this plain.

3. Imam Jaffer al-Sadiq (as) said: Angel Gabriel (as) brought Prophet
Adam (as) to this plain and told Him, "After the sun set confess your
sins." So as Prophet Adam (as) became acquainted with His sins here that
is why it is called Arafat.

These are the few commonly held beliefs for why this place has been
given this name. Now we will discuss the philosophy behind the selection
of this particular plain.

This plain is very close to nature. No high rise building or material
wealth or comforts are found here. Therefore it presents the picture of
what we will have to face on the Day of Judgment when we are gathered in
front of Allah (swt) for question and answer.

Prophet Mohammad (S) said, "Day of 'Arafah is a very difficult day for
Satan."

When God's servants leave all the material life behind and become fully
focused on their creator, then why will not this day become a difficult
one for Satan.

Conditions for Stay in Arafat
-----------------------------

The second obligation in Hajj-ut-Tamatu is the stay at Arafat. The
objective of performing this act of worship has to be the intention of
attainment of closeness to Allah (swt). The requirement is the presence
in Arafat, regardless of whether the pilgrim is riding, walking, sitting
or moving.

Stay at Arafat should, as a matter of precaution, be from the beginning
of zawaal (Time when the sun set begins) on the ninth of Zil Hijjah till
sunset.

The stay there for this period is obligatory and whoever fails to do so;
by choice, commit a sin. However, it is not one of the fundamentals of
Pilgrimage, i.e. if one fails to be there for a portion of the required
time, one's Hajj is not invalidated.

There are two types of stays:

1. Wuquf al-Ikhtiari (Optional stay): Stay during the day time.

2. Wuquf al-lztirari (Compulsory stay): A short stay on the Eid night.

If for some valid reason or lack of knowledge one does not perform Wuquf
al-Ikhtiari then she must do Wuquf al-Iztirari and her Pilgrimage will
be valid.

Philosophy of Stay at Mash’ar
-----------------------------

Allah (swt) says in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا أَفَضْتُمْ مِنْ عَرَفَاتٍ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ عِنْدَ
الْمَشْعَرِ الْحَرَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**[Shakir 2:198]** “So ***when you hasten on from "Arafat", then
remember Allah near the Holy Monument.***

How to remember Allah (swt)?

The open plains and desert of Mash'ar, complete silence of night and sky
full of shining stars, makes one remember ones creator. There was a tent
city in the plain of Arafat, the artificial lights were shining, but
here it is just open space with dark of night on all sides.

Yes as one rite of Pilgrimage follows another, it becomes simpler. The
pilgrim starts feeling closer to nature closer to his Creator.
Meaningful thoughts and inner light make him aware of the meanings of
his creation. The meaning of Mash'ar is awareness or perception.

We can say that Arafat was one grade and Mash'ar is a higher grade. That
grade we attended in the day time and now we are in the night class.
Both classes are held in plains. In the first class there was roof to
sit under, food to eat and lights to brighten the surroundings. But the
second class is held in a plain where there is no food to eat no lights
to guide one. There is a danger of getting lost. Pebbles have to be
collected. The pilgrim is already very tired. Yesterday in the plain of
Arafat hands were holding supplication book, now hands are full of
pebbles which will be used for attacking the enemy.

Oh! The pilgrim of the House of Allah (swt) if you have been lacking in
deeds, do not stay behind in supplication.

If back home the world, friends and foes, neighbors and co­ workers,
teachers and class mates distracted you here there is no one to do so.
The Greatest Host has brought you to this land where the earth is full
of tears of all Holy Men of history. The atmosphere here is witness to
the grieving and crying of passionate followers of Allah (swt). Be
appreciative of this Holy place and wake up from your slumber.

Conditions for Stay at Mash'aril-Haram
--------------------------------------

The third obligation in Hajj-ut-Tamatu is stay at Muzdalifah which is
also known as Mash'aril-Haram.

When a pilgrim leaves Arafat, some part of the night of 10th Dhil Hajjah
she must spend in Muzdalifah. She should, as a matter of precaution,
stay till sunrise with the intention of closeness to Allah (swt).

Ladies can stay for a short period and before sunrise depart for Mina.

If someone cannot perform optional stay then compulsory stay is enough.

*Wuquf al-Ikhtiari* (Optional stay): It starts from 10th Dhil Hajjah
night and ends at sunrise.

*Wuqf al-Iztiari* (Compulsory stay): On the Eid day between sunrise to
sunset a short stay.


