Obligatory Acts in Mina
=======================

When a pilgrim departs from Muzdalifah, it is obligatory to proceed to
Mina to discharge one's obligations which are three:

1. Stoning Rami al-Jamrat (Symbol of Satan).

2. Sacrificing an animal at Mina.

3. Taqseer (Cutting of hair).

Philosophy Behind Rami al-Jamrat
--------------------------------

### Prophet Abraham (as) and Satan

Imam Musa al-Kazim (as) said, "At this place Satan appeared in front of
Prophet Abraham (as) and tried everything to put doubt in His mind. But
Prophet (as) threw stones at him which made him run away‚Äù***.*** This
deed became so popular with Allah (swt) that it was made a rite of
Pilgrimage.

At three different points Prophet Abraham (as) threw seven pebbles each
time to disappoint Satan.

### Lady Hager and Satan

The Satan came to Lady Hager (as) and said, "Today your son will be
killed." She replied, "A father can never kill his son." Satan said,
"Abraham thinks it is God's order to kill his son."
The brave lady answered, "If it is an order from God Almighty then I am
happy with it." This answer disappointed Satan very much.

Then Satan went to Prophet Ishmael (as) and tried to put doubts in His
mind. But the strong son of a brave mother stayed steadfast in His
resolution. The Satan again went back to Prophet Abraham (as), who again
threw pebbles at him.

This incident teaches us that Satan tries to misguide one sometimes
through the spouse, at others through offspring and sometimes approaches
directly. Only strong faith in Allah (swt) can save one from this evil
influence.

### Stoning Jamratil-Aqabtah (Big Satan)

This is the fourth obligation in Pilgrimage on the day of the Eid of
sacrifice. Certain conditions have to be observed:

1. The intention should be the attainment of nearness to Allah (swt).

2. Seven stones must be thrown, not more or less; it is not permitted to
throw anything other than stones.

3. The stones must be thrown one after the other and not two or more at
a time.

4. It is necessary that the stones hit the Jamrah***.***

5. The stones must reach the Jamrah by being aimed at it and not merely
deposited there. So any stones not thrown intentionally will not be
counted.

6. The throwing of the stones and hitting the Jamrah must be done by a
pilgrim himself. So, if the stone was in his hand but he was jostled
around, resulting in the stone reaching the Jamrah, the obligation is
not fulfilled. The same rule applies, if the Jamrah is obstructed by a
man, a woman, or an animal whose movements result in the stone hitting
the]amrah. However, there is no objection to its hitting something
before reaching the Jamrah.

7. The stone must be thrown by hand.

8. The throwing of stones must be carried out between sunrise and
sunset. Women and others who are permitted to leave Muzdalifah at night
may perform rami at the Jamrah at night during Eid. eve

### Conditions for Pebbles

1. They must have been picked within the boundaries of the Haram but not
from the Holy Mosque or the Mosque of Khief, and better still, they be
picked in Muzdalifah.

2. As a matter of precaution, they must not have been used for this
purpose before.

Ladies can throw stones during the day time as well as night time. It is
not obligatory to be not having menstruations for performing this rite.

Sacrifice of an Animal
----------------------

This is the fifth obligation in Hajj-ut-Tamatu. It is necessary to set
one's mind on performing this act of worship in the hope of attaining
closeness to Allah (swt).

The best sacrifice for a pilgrim performing Hajj-ut-Tamatu is a camel.
The second best is an offering of a cow or a bull, a sheep or a goat can
also be used.

Sacrifice cannot be offered before the Eid day. As a precaution it is
recommended to offer sacrifice after throwing pebbles at Satan.

It is obligatory that the offering be made at Mina. If it is not
possible, because of the rush, and because Mina is not capable of
accommodating the multitudes of pilgrims, it could be made at Wadi
Muhassar.

### Taqseer (Cutting of Hair)

It is the sixth obligation in the obligatory Pilgrimage. It is necessary
that the intention for carrying it out should be to attain nearness to
Allah (swt).

After cutting of hair all those acts which were prohibited in ihram will
be permitted - except for use of perfume and sexual relations. As a
precaution, hunting should also be avoided. In fact not only sexual
relations but also other physical contacts which were prohibited during
ihram will stay. But after cutting of hair a woman can have a nikah
pronounced (Matrimony) and she can even witness a nikah. It is
obligatory to perform cutting of hair in Mina.

Rites to be Performed in Makkah
-------------------------------

After performing all three rites of Mina it is obligatory to return to
Makkah and perfom following rites. These are seventh, eighth, ninth,
tenth and eleventh obligations of Pilgrimage.

1. Circumambulation of Pilgrimage.

2. Prayers for it.

3. Sa'ee between Safa and Marwa mountains.

4. Circumambulation of Nisa (Woman).

5. Prayers for it.

Circumambulation of Pilgrimage, prayers for it, Sa'ee, Circumambulation
of Nisa and its prayers are all to be performed in the same way as has
been explained in Umra chapter, the only difference is intention. Here
all intentions are done keeping Pilgrimage rites in mind for closeness
to Allah (swt).

Those ladies who are afraid of being in menstruation on return to
Makkah, and fear that they will not be able to extend their stay over
there, can on donning the Pilgrimage ihram and before departing for
Arafat perform these five rites mentioned above. As a precaution if it
is possibile they should perform these rites again before the end of
Dhil Hajjah.

A lady who is having menstruations and cannot extend her stay in Makkah
should use an agent for both circumambulations and their prayers, but
perform Sa'ee herself.

Use of perfume and sexual relations will remain prohibited for above
mentioned ladies till they have performed Taqseer.

After Pilgrimage circumambulation, its prayers and Sa'ee use of perfume
is permitted, but sex is still prohibited.

1t is recommended to perform Pilgrimage circumambulation on the day of
sacrifice. As a precaution it should not be delayed later than 11th of
Dhil Hajjah.


