Glossary
========

Abraham: The English name of Hazrat Ibrahim (as)

Arafaat: An area about 25 km away from Mecca, Saudi Arabia; to stay here
is one of the wajib ahkam of Hajj to stay on the 9th of Zilhajj between
noon and sunset.

Baitul Mamur: The House of Allah (swt) that exists up in the Heavens,
which is circumambulated by Angels.

Baitullah: The House of Allah (swt) in Makkah (The Holy Kaba)

Baligh: Reaching the stage of Buloogh which means, the appearance of one
of the signs of maturity in a human being

Circumambulation: To perform Tawaaf: Circling around the Holy Kaba
during Hajj or Umra. 7 rounds equals one Tawaaf

Dhuhr: The Afternoon prayer comprising of four units (rak'ats). The time
for it sets in when the Sun starts declining and ends a little before
sunset.

Eidul Adha: The Eid celebrated on 10th Zilhajj every year representing
the completion of Hajj as well as the acceptance of Sacrifice of Prophet
Ibrahim (as)

Fusouq: Outrage one of the prohibited acts in the state of Ihram

Hajarul Aswad: The Black Stone - a stone of Jannah, attached on one
comer of the Holy Kabah, which also marks the starting and ending line
for Tawaaf

Hajj: A wajib act for all Muslims; to go for Pilgrimage to the House of
Allah (swt) in the month of Zilhajj, with additional, significant rites
to perform.

Hajj al-Tamattu: The second part of hajj for those who are not living in
or nearby Makkah

Hajj al- lfraad: A type of hajj, which is applicable to those who live
in Makkah or at a certain distance from it.

Hajj al-Qiraan: The performance of hajj and umrah at the same time.

Hajjatul Islam: The first Wajib Hajj performed by a person - thus
fulfilling this Furoo' al-Deen for the sake of Allah's pleasure

Halaq: The act of shaving one's head, as part of rites performed in Mina
(for Men)

Haraam**:** Acts that are strictly forbidden in Islam

Haram: A Holy sanctuary

Harwala: The act of speeding up and jogging between the boundary with
green lights In Sa'ee (For men)

Haydh: Menstruation

Iddah: The waiting period of a woman who either becomes a Widow or
Divorcee

Ihram**:** The spiritual state of being prohibited from certain acts;
the physical state of adorning a white dress, representing purity and
unity - worn as part of Hajj and Umra

Infallible: The sinless; referring to the 14 Ma'sumeen

Ishmael: English name for Prophet Istmael (as)

Istihadha: A female bleeding which is neither nifas nor haydh and flows
for less than 3 days or more than 10 days

Jabalur Rahmah**:** The Mount of Mercy that is situated on the plains of
Arafaat

Jamaraat**:** The three stone pillars in Mina - representing Satan. To
stone these pillars is one of the rites of Hajj

Jamaratul Aqaba**:** The biggest stone pillar amongst the Jamaraat

Jamaratul Sughra: The smallest stone pillar amongst the Jamaraat

Jamaratul Wusta: The medium sized pillar amongst the Jamaraat

Kabah: The first house built by Hazrat Ibrahim and Ismail for the
worship of Allah in Mecca. Also the Muslims face this direction while
praying and this is known as the House of Allah (swt) centered in the
Masjidul Haraam in Makkah

Kaffarah: Penalty

Khalooq-ul-Kaba: The scent extracted from materials like saffron, and
applied on the cloth of the Holy Kabah

Khums: Islamic tax: 1/5 of one's annual savings

Lady Hager: English name for Bibi Hajra

Mahr: Dowry

Mahram: A male or female relative whom one cannot marry due to the
closeness of their relationship. Also, the people around whom one is not
obliged to observe Hijab

Makruh: Undesirable acts

Maqame Ibrahim: The standing place of Prophet Ibrahim (as), monumented
with a stone that retains his foot prints

Marwah: The second hill to walk between for Sa'ee (i.e. Sa'ee is
performed between Mount Safa and Mount Marwah). Also, the rounds of
Sa'ee ends on the Mount of Marwa

Mash'arul Haraam: Another name for the plains of Muzdalifah

Masjidul Haraam: The Holy mosque where the Holy Kaabah is situated. The
thawaab of reciting one unit of Salaat in this mosque is equivalent to
reciting 100,000 units salaat elsewhere

Masjidul Khief: A mosque that was the Musallah of many Prophets in
History; situated between
Muzdalifah and Mina

Masjidun Nabawi: The Mosque of the Holy Prophet (saws) in Madinah

Mina: The place outside Makkah on the way to Arafaat, where Hajj
pilgrims stay on the 1tth and 12th of Zilhajj; also where Rami of
Jamaraat is done, and qurbani of animal.

Miqat: A special place designated by the sacred rules of Islam for
wearing ihram

Muhrim: A person who is in the state of ihram

Mummayaz: Mentally and physically mature but not biologically
(transitional stage towards Buloogh)

Mustahab: Recommended acts in Islam

Muzdalifah: The place between Arafaat and Mina; one of the places where
Wuquf is Wajib on the night of the 10th of Zilhajj - during Hajj rites

Na Mahram: A person with whom one can get married and hijaab is to be
observed like cousin brother, etc.

Nisa: Arabic word for 'Women'

Niyaabat: The act of representing someone in an act - when being
appointed as a proxy (deputy)

Niyyat: Intention

Paak: Clean

Qadha: Delayed performance

Qurbatan Ilallah: Intention of Seeking Closeness to Allah (swt)

Rami: To stone

Sa'ee: The wajib act of Hajj and Umra which involves recalling and
imitating the act of Bibi Hajra (as) that of running between Mount Safa
and Marwah 7 times in search of water for Prophet Ibrahim (as)

Safa: The starting point from where one starts Sa'ee

Salatul Nafila: The recommended prayers that are performed before the
daily Day-Time Wajib prayers; and performed after the daily Evening
Wajib prayers

Sehm al-Saadaat: The descendants of the family of the Prophet (saws) and
the Aimmah (as)

Shi'a Ithna Asheri: The Shi'as who believe and follow in the 12 Holy
Vicigerents (imams) of the Holy Prophet (saws)

Surma: Antimony used for beautification of eyes

Taharah: Cleanliness and purity

Talbiyah: The call that Pilgrims make to Allah (swt) as a message or
plea for Acceptance of their venture (of pilgrimage); recited as
“Labbaik Allah humma Labbaik; innal hamda wan ne’mata, laka wul mulk, la
shareeka lak”

Taqseer: Act of clipping one’s nails and hair-ends after Sa’ee; also
performed by Ladies after Qurbani (whilst the men perform Halaq)

Taw'aaf: Circumambulation of the Holy Kabah such that one tawaf equals
seven rounds around the Kabah

Tawaaful Wida: The Farewell Tawaaf performed out of respect of bidding
farewell to the Holy House of Allah (swt) and returning from the
Spiritual world towards the Material world.

Tawaafun Nisa: Literally means: Circumambulation of Women; however it is
wajib on both men and women and it is the tawaf after which the
relations with the spouse of the person performing hajj return to
normal.

Tawhid: Oneness of God; this is the foundation of Muslim Belief

Umra: The minor Pilgrimage to the House of Allah (swt). This can be
performed anytime during the year and has less rites to be performed as
compared to the rites of Hajj.

Umra al-Mufrida: The Umra for people residing in Makkah or areas close
to it; this is also the Umra for which there is no Tawaafun Nisa

Umra ut Tamattu: The first stage of Hajj; the wajib Umra that acts as a
rehersal and stepping stone to the spirit of Hajj al-Baytullah

Wajib: Compulsory and Obligatory acts in Islam

Wajib al-Ayni: A Wajibat which is obligatory for every individual.

Wajib-e·Fawri: A Wajibnt which becomes obligatory as a result of
performing another Wajibat

Wajib al-Kifai: A Wajibat which is obligatory upon all present until one
person fulfils it

Wajib al-Takhiri: Translated as Optional Wajib

Wudhoo: The minor ablution; a process of cleansing ourselves
spiritually, and also a weapon to defend ourselves from the evils of
Satan

Wuquf: a period of stay

Wuquf al-Ikhtiyari: Optional stay

Wuquf al-lztirari: Compulsory stay

Zam Zam: The water flushed out by the foot of Hazrat Ismail when Hazrat
Hajra was not able to find water for him

Zawwal: Time when the sun begins to set

Ziarat: To make a visit to a Holy place


