Personality of Woman and Hajj
=============================

Hijr al-Ismael: The Hijr of Prophet Ishmael (AS) & Lady Hager
-------------------------------------------------------------

When circumambulating House of Kaba it is a must to pass outside Hijr
al-lsmael (as) otherwise Hajj will become invalid. This shows the
holiness of this Hijr.

This is a symbol for a great mother from the history. Lady Hager along
with her baby son stayed in this desert putting her trust in Almighty.
She wanted to be close to Allah (swt).

The son of this great lady was also willing to offer a great sacrifice.
Because of all her sacrifices and the son's for the love of Almighty,
Allah (swt) also made it compulsory to circumambulate from outside Stone
of Ishmael (as).

In a monotheist society a person is valued on the bases of purity; good
deeds and closeness to Allah (swt). Color, creed and sex do not count.
Whoever is willing to sacrifice everything for God like Hager, He also
elevates them near to His house.

Circumambulating the graves of both mother and son is a part of
pilgrimage rites. The reason is that steadfastness pays. They spent
their whole life in the service of Allah (swt) and as a reward they are
sleeping next to the House of Allah (swt).

2. Sa’ee: Between Safa & Marwa, and Lady Hager
----------------------------------------------

After circumambulating and offering Salaat for it the next rite is
*sa'ee* (Striving). Here again one is reminded of this lion hearted
lady. Allah (swt)'s words come to one’s mind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذكرونى اذكركم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"You think of me and I will not forget you."***

The Greatness of Allah (swt) made Lady Hager's action eternal. Now it is
our duty to remember her effort whenever we perform this rite and try to
follow in her footsteps.

3. Arafat: Recognition and Lady Eve
-----------------------------------

Arafat means acquaintance or recognition. The reason why this plain is
called Arafat is that when Prophet Adam (as) and Lady Eve came down from
heaven they met each other after a long wait at this place. They
recognized each other and redeveloped their acquaintance.

4. First Congregational Prayers: Salaatul Jama’at the Holy Mosque and Lady Khadijah
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Whenever the pilgrim views the impressive gathering of thousands in the
congregational prayers, he is reminded of the first such prayer in
Islam. The one where Mother of all *momineen* (True believers) along
with Imam of all *momineen* offered her prayers behind Prophet Mohammad
(saws).

The fruit of that small congregation can be seen in the gathering of
this huge congregation of thousands from all over the world.

5. Giving Birth to Imam Ali (as): Inside the Holy Kaba and Lady Fatima Bint al-Asad
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While circumambulating pilgrims try to kiss the walls of Holy Kaba. They
try to rub their sins away and make themselves pious by rubbing with its
walls. This site reminds one of a Great mother. *Kaba* is also like a
mother. Makkah is given the name of 'Umm-Ul-Qura' (Mother of all cities)
because of *Kaba*. Like a mother gathers all her children into her arms
without any distinction, so does Kaba welcomes all pilgrims without the
distinction of rich or poor, old or young, black or white, men or women.

The mother of whom we are reminded is the mother of our first lmam (as),
Lady Fatima Bint al-Asad. A lady of such high pity that she became a
guest of Allah (swt) in His own house. It was in preparation of
welcoming one of the greatest personalities on earth. A special door was
opened in the wall of Kaba for the arrival of Door of Knowledge.


