Conditions for Pilgrimage
=========================

The holy Quran and the traditions of the Ahlul Bayt (pbuth) say that any
mature person who fulfills certain conditions is required to perform
Hajj.

Hajj is a pillar of Islam. If all the conditions are fulfilled but still
pilgrimage is not performed then it is considered to be a major/great
sin. Not accepting it as an obligatory part of Islam is blasphemy.

Allah (swt) says in Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيهِ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ مَقَامُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ ۖ وَمَنْ دَخَلَهُ كَانَ
آمِنًا ۗ وَلِلَّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ
إِلَيْهِ سَبِيلًا ۚ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنِ
الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"In*** ***it*** ***are clear signs, the standing place of Abraham,
and whoever enters it shall be secure, and pilgrimage to the House is
incumbent upon men for the sake of*** ***Allah,*** ***(upon) everyone
who is able to undertake the journey to it; and whoever disbelieves,
then surely Allah is Self-sufficient, above any need of the worlds "
(Surah Ali-‘Imran, 3:97)***

Rules for Pilgrimage
--------------------

### Conditions

1. l. One should be mature (*baligh*).

2. On should be sane. Therefore an insane or under age person cannot
perform obligatory pilgrimage. If an underage child performs pilgrimage
then it will be valid but not considered "*Hajjut-al-Islam*''.

3. One should be free, that is a female slave cannot perform obligatory
pilgrimage even if she has the means.

4. Means:

a. Financial: Sufficient finances to fulfill one's needs.

b. Physical health: One should be healthy and strong enough to
perform all the rites without any difficulty.

c. Situation: One should have enough time to reach Makkah and
perform all the rites. If the previous conditions are fulfilled, but one
faces problems in this one, then pilgrimage does not become obligatory.

d. Peaceful situation: The conditions in all the Holy places to be
visited should be peaceful.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

Q1. Is a husband's permission needed for an obligatory pilgrimage?

**Ans:** lf a (house wife) has enough financial resources and she
fulfills all other conditions then for an obligatory pilgrimage the
husband's permission is not required and he does not have the right to
stop her from performing her religious duty. But for a recommended
pilgrimage the husband's permission is needed.

Q2. During the *iddah* (waiting period) of revocable divorce is it
necessary to get the husband's permission for an obligatory pilgrimage?

**Ans:** The husband's permission is not required for an obligatory
pilgrimage but it is required for a recommended one.

Q3. If a lady owns expensive jewels and gold is she supposed to sell
them and get funds to perform the obligatory pilgrimage?

**Ans:** lf she needs those items and the sale will cause problems for
her then she should not sell them to raise funds for the obligatory
pilgrimage.

Q4. Can a wife demand from her husband the payment of her *mahr* (Dowry
money) or return of a loan that she has given him for funds for her
obligatory pilgrimage?

**Ans:** Yes a wife can ask for her *mahr*. But if such a demand will
result in divorce or enmity then she should refrain from doing so. But
if the result is only mild displeasure then she must ask for her money.

Q5. If a wife received her *mahr* at the time of marriage, and spent the
money on buying clothes, jewelry and household goods, even though the
money was sufficient to make Hajj obligatory on her, is Hajj still
considered obligatory on her?

**Ans:** If the utilization of *mahr* for the obligatory pilgrimage
instead of above mentioned items will cause hardship then she cannot do
so. Otherwise she will be considered to have enough funds and therefore
capable of performing pilgrimage.

Q6. If a relative or son is willing to finance the obligatory Hajj but
the lady concerned finds it insulting, is it necessary for her to accept
the offer?

Ans: If it is very degrading then she should not accept the offer
otherwise she has to take up the offer.

Q7. A girl of marriageable age has enough funds to perform obligatory
pilgrimage but this will delay her marriage. Is it correct to go for
Hajj in such a case?

Ans: She should perform obligatory Hajj and delay the marriage. But in
case the consequences will be (far reaching) then marriage is more
important.

Q8. Someone fulfills all conditions required for Hajj, but has to sit
for an examination during the pilgrimage dates, and missing them will
affect her whole future. What should she do?

Ans: If she is sure she will be able to perform pilgrimage the following
year then she can delay her Hajj (Can anyone be sure of such a thing?)
But if missing examination will result in irreparable damage then she
can delay her obligatory pilgrimage.

Q9. If a husband gives his wife enough funds for pilgrimage and she
knows that no *khums* (1/5 of savings) has been paid on it, can she
accept it?

Ans: If a wife receives any funds from her husband for pilgrimage she
can use it even if she knows that *khums* has not been paid on it. The
same rule applies for funds she receives for· other expenses.

Q10. Is it permissible for a husband to give his Syeda wife a part of
*sehm al-sadat* for pilgrimage expenses?

Ans: He cannot do this. However if Hajj has become mandatory on his wife
for some reason, and he still has to pay her household expenses, and if
*sehm al-sadat* is due on the money which he has allocated for her
household expenses, only that he can give to her.

Q11. lf a husband puts away some money with his wife's pilgrimage in
mind, but she dies before going for the Holy trip, will pilgrimage
become obligatory on her (i.e. will someone else have to perform Hajj on
her behalf) even though the money was not her own?

Ans: Even if the money was her own but she could not go because the
opportunity to travel did not arise, then the conditions were not
fulfilled and obligatory Hajj never became mandatory upon her.

Q12. If a wife has enough funds but her husband passes away near the
time of Hajj, and she is in *iddah* is Hajj mandatory for her?

Ans: Yes Hajj will be mandatory for her if she fulfills all other
conditions.

Q13. Is it a must for a lady to travel with a *mahram* (male relative
whom she cannot marry) for pilgrimage?

Ans: If she considers it safe to travel without a *mahram* then she can
do so. If not, then she will have to pay for a *mahram* or someone else
to travel with her. If she cannot afford this then the conditions are
not fulfilled, and Hajj is not mandatory on her.

Q14. If a child provides funds for his mother's pilgrimage does she need
her husband's permission?

Ans: No she does not need to ask for husband's permission.

Q15. If a pregnant or breast feeding mother may harm herself or her
child during her journey, will she be considered as fulfilling the
conditions necessitating Hajj?

Ans: No she cannot go for Hajj in such a situation.

Q16. If one is in disagreement with the business partner over business
affairs, is it permissible to use funds from the business without the
partner's permission for Hajj?

Ans: No, one cannot do this.

Conclusion
----------

The following conditions will make it mandatory for a woman to perform
her obligatory Hajj.

**Finance**: She possesses sufficient wealth, because she has a right to
spend them the way she wants.

**Jewels:** If she possesses jewels of which she has no need. For
example because of old age if she does not use them then she can sell
them and perform pilgrimage.

**Mahr:** The amount of *mahr* is enough to meet the expenses of
pilgrimage or at the time of marriage the husband promised his wife to
take her for pilgrimage then it is mandatory on him to do so.

**Inheritance:** If she inherits money after the death of her husband or
any other relative then she is considered as having met the financial
condition.

**Gift:** If her husband, father or any other relative is willing to
provide funds then pilgrimage becomes obligatory.


