Hajj by Appointing a Deputy (Niyaabat)
======================================

If another person performs pilgrimage on someone else's behalf because
of some particular circumstances, it is called Hajj by Proxy and the
person is called a proxy, representative, agent or deputy.

Conditions for an Agent of a Hajj by Proxy
------------------------------------------

1. Baligh (adult): A child cannot be a proxy in an obligatory
pilgrimage. Even if he is mumayyaz (mentally and physically mature but
not biologically) he cannot be someone's representative. But in a
recommended pilgrimage if the guardian permits then a mumayyaz child can
be a representative.

2. He should be mentally sane.

3. He should be follower of twelve Imams.

4. He should be trustworthy.

5. The agent should not be under obligation to perform any other
pilgrimage.

6. He should be well versed in all the rites of pilgrimage or under
guidance of someone who is well versed.

Conditions for the One for Whom Hajj by Proxy may be carried out
----------------------------------------------------------------

1. He must be Muslim.

2. He must have either died.

3. Or he must be elderly or an invalid with no chance of recovery.

Conclusion
----------

It is not necessary for the agent to be of the same sex as the person on
whose behalf he is performing Hajj. Therefore a male can perform Hajj
for a female or vice versa.

Question and Answers
--------------------

Q1. If a lady is representing a man for *Hajj-ut-Tamatu* and there is a
chance that because of menstruation dates she might not be able to
perform *Umra-ut-Tamatu* and she will be forced to change the pilgrimage
to *Hajj al-Ifraad*, will such an agent be suitable?

**Ans:** If the person for whom she is proxy is sure that the lady is
capable of performing *Hajj-ut-Tamatu* then the representation is valid
and her act will be acceptable even if she was forced to perform *Hajj
al-Ifraad* because of her condition.

Q2. After the mandatory stop in Mash'ar can the agent leave Muzdalafah
at night?

**Ans:** Yes an agent can do so.

Q3. If a lady agent cannot perform the rite of *Rami of* *Jamarat*
(hitting Satan symbol with pebbles) can she ask someone else to do it
for her?

**Ans:** If she knew at the time when she took the responsibility of
proxy pilgrimage that she would not be able to perform this rite on 10th
of Dhil Hajjah (12th month of Islamic year), neither during the day nor
night, then her proxy on the basis of ehtyatÂ­e-wajib (obligatory
precaution) is considered to be void. But if she is unable to do so on
the 11th and 12th then her proxy is valid. Furthermore, if circumstances
arise that make her unable to do so after becoming the agent then her
proxy is valid.


