Philosophy behind Miqat
=======================

When the pilgrim leaves her home to travel to the place where she has to
wear her ihram she should fill her mind with the thoughts of Day of
Judgment and the terrible scenes that will be witnessed on that day.

As Allah (swt) says in the Holy Qur'an:

> ان يوم الفصل ميقاتهم اجمعينi

***"Surely the day of separation is their appointed term of*** ***all***
***of them."***

Miqat
-----

Miqat is a special place designated by the sacred rules of Islam for
wearing ihram (special dress for Pilgrimage). It differs according to
the landing city of pilgrims.

There are nine places which can be used as Miqat.
1. Masjid-ush-Shajarah: It is called Thul Hulaifah. It is the Miqat for
pilgrim coming into Makkah from Madina. Here the ihram is worn inside
the mosque. Ladies in menstruation and in jenabat can wear it while
passing through the mosque or even outside the mosque. Wearing ihram is
permitted for a woman during menstruation.

2. Waadil-Aqeeq: It is the miqat of pilgrims arriving from Iraq and
Najd.

3. Qarn-ul-Manaazil: This is used by pilgrims coming from Ta'if.

4. Yalamlam: This is a mountain and is miqat for pilgrims coming from
Yemen.

5. Johfa: This is for pilgrims arriving from Syria.

6. The proximity of any of the above quoted Miqats: if a person takes a
route which does not cross any of the mentioned Miqats, he or she must
wear ihram from any place which is parallel to the Miqat.

7. Makkah: This is the Miqat for *Hajj-ut-Tamatu*, as well as
*Hajj-ul-Qiraan* and *Ifraad* for the residents of Makkah, and its
neighborhood.

8. The pilgrim's home is the Miqat for those who are nearer to Makkah
than the Miqat as it is permissible for them to wear ihram from their
homes and are not obliged to return ·to a Miqat.

9. Adnal Hil like Hudaybiyyah, Ja'ranah, or Tan'eem: It is the Miqat for
*Umrat al-Mufradah* after the *Hajj-ul-Qiraan* or *Ifraad* and all *Umra
al-Mufradah* by those in Makkah.

If a lady having menstruations and not knowing the rule did not don her
ihram at the Miqat and entered the Haram, then as an obligatory
precaution she should return to one of the Miqat and wear her ihram. If
it is not possible to go to a Miqat then on the basis of precaution she
should go as far away as possible from the Haram and as a precaution
wear ihram there.


