Foreword
========

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم‌ اللّه‌ الرّحمن‌ الرّحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful***

The Islamic seminaries (*ḥawzah al-‘ilmiyyah*) are the inheritors of the
eternal heritage of the Divine knowledge and gnosis as well as the
vanguards of the frontage and domain of the Islamic law and doctrines.
This crucial mission has doubled the responsibility of the religious
scholars in the arena of training and education.

The persistent worries and concern of the committed scholars,
inquisitive researchers and sympathetic academics over the qualitative
and quantitative modification and improvement of educational methods,
texts and patterns toward the development, dynamism and efficiency of
the educational system in the Islamic seminaries highlight the need to
review, modify and present new, innovative and effective textbooks.

Of course, on one hand, the high standing and condition of the textbooks
in the Islamic seminaries and the availability of the priceless legacy
and valuable assets of the classical texts of our pious predecessors and
the integrity and credibility of their authors call for particular and
due efforts, accurateness and reflection in the rewriting, modification
and writing of textbooks.

On the other hand, the change and transformation in the orientations,
needs, expectations, methods, and models in training and education,
multiply the responsibilities of the administrators and officials
dealing with education and research affairs as well as academic planning
in the Islamic seminary, as they have to perform their functions
constantly by presenting new and original categories, patterns and
frameworks and by improving the substance of textbooks.

As such, on the basis of the abovementioned needs and concerns,
Al-Muṣṭafā International University has embarked on reviewing, modifying
and producing textbooks, thereby typesetting, compiling and publishing
hundreds of titles.

Along this line, while keeping the originality and substantial richness
of the surviving precious treasures of the past scholars and by
utilizing the educational technology and observing the modern
principles, standards and patterns, it strives to present texts
compatible with the objectives and within the framework of the approved
programs and subjects, intellectual level, and expectations of the
students.

Walking along this long and winding road necessitates the all-out
support and cooperation of the esteemed professors, experts, academic
directors, and students. By offering their suggestions, criticisms and
opinions, they could help us in correctly and successfully treading this
difficult and tortuous path.

We take this opportunity to express our utmost gratitude to those who
have done their best to bring this project to fruition, and in
particular, to Professor ‘Alī Rabbānī Gulpāygānī for writing the
book,[^1] and to Dr. Mansoor Limba for translating it. We do appreciate
all their sincere efforts.

**Seyed Hashem Moosavi**  
**Al-Muṣtafā International**  
**Makati City, Metro Manila, Philippines**  
**2013**

[^1]: ‘Alī Rabbānī Gulpāygānī, ‘Aqā’idi Istidlālī 1 (Qum: Research
Department of the Center of Management of the Qum Religious Academy for
Women, Autumn 1388 AHS (2009)), 276 pages.


