Lesson 9: The Unity of God in Creation
======================================

To create or originate is one of the attributes of God. This attribute
necessitates arguments to prove the existence of God, for the purport of
those arguments is that God is the Origin and Cause of causes of all
creatures. All beings, therefore, are His creation and construction.
Now, the discussion is that God has no partner in the act of creation
and there is no Creator of the universe other than Him.

Reason and the Divine Unity in Creation
---------------------------------------

Reason clearly testifies to the Oneness of the Creator and Originator of
the universe, for as dictated by the arguments proving the existence of
God – particularly the argument of possibility and necessity – all
beings are contingents, effects and creatures of the Necessary Being
(God) and as demanded by the arguments of the Essential Unity of God,
the Necessary Being by essence is One, and thus, the Creator and
Originator of the universe is no other than God.

The Qur’an and the Divine Unity in Creation
-------------------------------------------

In many verses, the Holy Qur’an has emphasized the Oneness of God in
creating the universe. For example, it has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلِ اللَّهُ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘Allah is the creator of all things, and He is the One, the
All-paramount’.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَكِيلٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is creator of all things, and He watches over all
things.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ذَلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ لا إِلَهَ إِلا هُوَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is Allah, your Lord, the creator of all things, there is no god
except Him.”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هَلْ مِنْ خَالِقٍ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is there any creator other than Allah?”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation and then guided
it.”***[^5]

Traditions and the Divine Unity in Creation
-------------------------------------------

The traditions (*aḥādīth*) also stipulate and emphasize the Divine Unity
in creation. In this regard, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has said [about the
creation of ant]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَشْرَكْهُ فِي فِطْرَتِهَا فَاطِرٌ، وَلَمْ يُعِنْهُ عَلَىٰ
خَلْقِهَا قَادِرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No other originator took part with Him in its origination and no one
having power assisted Him in its creation.”[^6]

The Imām (*‘a*) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا شَرِيكٍ أَعَانَهُ عَلَىٰ ٱبْتِدَاعِ عَجَائِبِ ٱلْأُمُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And He is without any partner who might have assisted Him in creating
wonderful things.”[^7]

Similar points are also mentioned in many other traditions.

The Interpretation of the Divine Unity in Creation
--------------------------------------------------

Muslims schools of thought have consensus of opinion on the Divine Unity
in creation, but in interpreting it three viewpoints have been put
forth.

### 1. Imāmiyyah Theologians and Muslims Theosophers

According to them, what is meant by the exclusiveness of God in creating
is that there is no essential and independent Creator or Originator
except God, but they do not deny natural and supranatural causes and
factors. In their view, the angels perform specific activities just as
the human being is the performer of his own activities, and natural
causes have also their own particular effects but none of them is an
essentially independent agent or cause.

This theory – apart from being concomitant with rational laws and
affirmed by the senses and experience – can clearly be deduced from
verses of the Qur’an, for in many verses the Qur’an has pointed out the
contribution of supernatural causes in the emergence of some natural
events as well as the human agency.

### 2. ‘Ashā‘irah

According to them, the act of creation is directly or indirectly
exclusive to God, and in the world of creation, there is no agent or
cause except God and those regarded as natural causes or factors are
called “God’s practice” (*ādat Allāh*).

That is, it has been God’s precedent (*sunnat Allāh*) that, for
instance, there is heat following the existence of fire and following
the rising of the sun, the horizon becomes bright. Yet, there is no real
or cosmic relationship between the causes and the originators of
existence. Even the human being is not the agent of his actions; the
human actions are also part of the Action of God.

### 3. Mu‘tazilah

They have acknowledged natural causes and factors but they do not regard
the human being’s voluntary actions as God’s creation (*makhlūq*); they
rather consider them as solely human actions. For this reason, they are
called *mufawwiḍah*; that is, those who believe that the human being’s
actions have been delegated (*tafwīḍ*) to him.

#### Examination and Criticism

None of the last two theories is correct. Apart from being in conflict
with rational (*‘aqlī*) and textual (*naqlī*) proofs regarding the
natural causes and factors as well as the human agency (*fā‘iliyyah*),
the first view necessitates human compulsion (*jabr*), and compulsion in
actions are inconsistent with the concepts of duty, retribution and
reward.

The theory of *mufawwiḍah* is also at loggerheads with the Divine Unity
in creation and the universality of the Divine Power. The source of
mistake of both groups is in supposing that the natural causes or human
actions are within the level of God’s agency and causality
(*sababiyyah*).

This is so while such an interpretation of the natural and supernatural
causes and factors is not correct. Their relationship with the agency
and causality of God is a vertical one; that is, God is the Independent
(*mustaqil*) and Essential (*bi ’dh-dhāt*) Agent while they are agents
and causes that are dependent (*ghayr mustaqil*) and subordinated
(*musakhkhar*) by God.

For this reason, in the Holy Qur’an an action may sometimes be
attributed to God and at other times the attribution is to natural and
supernatural causes. For instance, it says regarding the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God takes the souls at the time of their death.”***[^8]

It also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلْ يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ مَلَكُ الْمَوْتِ الَّذِي وُكِّلَ بِكُمْ ثُمَّ
إِلَى رَبِّكُمْ تُرْجَعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘You will be taken away by the angel of death, who has been
charged with you. Then you will be brought back to your Lord.’”***[^9]

And it thus says regarding the movement of clouds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُزْجِي سَحَابًا ثُمَّ يُؤَلِّفُ بَيْنَهُ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not regarded that Allah drives the clouds, then He omposes
them?”***[^10]

And the Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ الَّذِي يُرْسِلُ الرِّيَاحَ فَتُثِيرُ سَحَابًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is Allah who sends the winds. Then they raise a cloud.”***[^11]

The Dualists and the Misgiving of Evils
---------------------------------------

In the history of religions and sects, there is mention about the
dualists who believe in two creators, viz. the creator of good and the
creator of evils. The creator of good is called *Yazdān* (Light) and the
creator of evils *Ahrimān* (Darkness).

The source of this incorrect doctrine is their assumption that evils are
part of the reality of existence and against good, and since God
(*Yazdān*) is Pure Good, it is impossible for Him to be the origin of
evils. For this reason, there must be another source and originator of
evils.

In reply to them, the theosophers have argued that evil (*sharr*) is a
matter of absence (*‘adam*) and its relation to good (*khayr*) is that
of possession and non-possession, and not that of contradiction and
contrast. Ignorance which is regarded as evil, for example, is not an
existential matter; it is rather the absence of knowledge in something
which is knowable; so is the case of poverty, illness, death and other
things considered evils.

This is also the case of evil in relation to undesirable natural
happenings, fierce animals and biting creatures, for the existence of
these things for themselves is not evil or undesirable; it is rather in
comparison to other creatures that they are treated as harmful. For
instance, the snake or scorpion is not evil or undesirable by itself; it
is rather evil for the human beings and the like.

That is, its poison may lead to human illness or death and it is this
illness or death which is evil, and death and illness have the nature of
non-existence or absence. Illness means the absence of wellbeing while
death means the absence of life. In the words of Mawlānā [Rūmī],[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زهرِ مار، آن مار را باشد حيات گرچه باشد آدمی را مر ممات
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Snake-poison is life to the snake,*

*(But) it is death in relation to man.*[^13]

It is evident that what is in need of the Creator or Originator is
existence and not non-existence. Therefore, the world of creation is not
in need of a creator other than God, and that which He creates is good
and evils emanate from absences and non-existences, and they are not
realities alongside the good.[^14]

Reply to a Question
-------------------

If evil has the nature of absence, how come that it becomes a source of
suffering and trouble for the human being considering the fact that
absence cannot be the origin of any effect?

The reply is that evil is the absence of possession and absolute
absence; that is, the absence of a trait on something which it can ably
and duly possess. For this reason, the human being suffers from lack of
knowledge or sight but does not suffer from lacking a horn.[^15]

The Divine Unity in Creation and the Problem of Ascribing Evils to God
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The problem which is put forth here is that based on the principle of
the Divine Unity in creation, it necessitates that undesirable things
that happen to the human beings (and others) are attributed to God and
this matter is in contradiction to the principle that God is free from
undesirable acts. This problem leads to the Mu‘tazilīs’ belief in the
notion of *tafwīḍ*,[^16] and on the Ashā‘irah’s side, no acceptable way
of solving this problem has also been presented.

In the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), this problem has been solved
by arguing that human actions can be studied from three perspectives:

1. From the perspective that these actions are part of the events and
happenings of the world of creation, they are ascribed to God and no
evil or wickedness finds its way into them, for reality or existence
vis-à-vis absence or non-existence possesses the attribute of goodness
and beauty. The Holy Qur’an thus says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[It is He] who perfected everything that He created.”***[^17]

From the perspective of reality and existence, human actions are also a
creation of God (and what is meant by ‘good’ here is cosmic (*takwīnī*)
and not moral goodness.)

2. From the perspective that they emanate from the human being’s
freewill and volition and are ascribed to him, they shall be described
as morally good or bad. Honesty is good while lying is evil. Justice is
desirable while injustice is undesirable.

This kind of good and evil stems from conformity or non-conformity of
his actions to the rational laws and the religious commandments and
prohibitions, and since the human willpower and resolution determines
the said conformity or non-conformity, the said good and evil shall also
be ascribed to the human being.

3. It is true that God has endowed the human being with the power and
will to do good or bad, but on the other hand, through commandments and
prohibitions, promises and threats, good tidings and warnings, He has
encouraged him toward what is good and dissuaded him from what is evil.
As such, it is more appropriate to ascribe the human being’s good deeds
to God and his wicked acts to himself.

Review Questions
----------------

1. What is the argument to prove the Oneness of God in creation?

2. Write down two Qur’anic verses and a tradition (*ḥadīth*) about the
Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in creation.

3. State the three theories presented about the Divine Unity in
creation.

4. Write down the Ashā‘irah and Mu‘tazilī theories about the Divine
Unity in creation and state the proof of error of each of them.

5. Write down the problem of the dualists regarding evils along with the
refutation to this notion.

6. State the problem and refutation to the non-existence of evil.

7. Write down the principle of Divine Unity in creation and the problem
of ascribing evils to God along with a refutation to this notion.

[^1]: Sūrat ar-Ra‘d 13:16.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:62.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Ghāfir (or al-Mu’min) 40:62.

[^4]: Sūrat Fāṭir (or al-Malā’ikah) 35:3.

[^5]: Sūrat Ṭā Ḥā 20:50.

[^6]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 185.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 91.

[^8]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:42.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Sajdah 3:11.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Nūr 24:43.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:48.

[^12]: Mawlāwī or Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (1207-73): the greatest
mystic poet in the Persian language and founder of the Mawlawiyyah order
of dervishes (“The Whirling Dervishes”). He is famous for his lyrics and
his didactic epic, Mathnawī-ye Maḥnawī (Spiritual Couplets). [Trans.]

[^13]: Richard Nicholson (trans.), Mathnawī-ye Ma‘nawī, Book Four, p.
13. [Trans.]

[^14]: In this regard, Ḥakīm Sabziwārī has said: الشّرء أعدام فَكَمْ
قَدْ ضَلَّ مَنْ يَقولُ بِاليَزْدانِ، ثُمَّ الأهْرِمَن Evil is
non-existence, so how misguided they are Who believe in Yazdān and
Ahriman!

[^15]: In this regard, Ḥakīm Sabziwārī has said: وان عليك اعتاص تأثير
العدم من سلب قرن منك من سلب النّعم If understanding the effect of
‘absence’ is difficult for you, Distinguish your lack of a horn from the
absence of favors.

[^16]: Tafwīḍ: the belief that after creating all beings, God has left
them to administer their own affairs and follow their own wills. In
other words, it is the upholding of freewill [ikhtiyār] vis-à-vis
predestination. [Trans.]

[^17]: Sūrat al-Sajdah 32:7.


