Lesson 10: The Divine Unity in Lordship
=======================================

*Rubūbiyyah* or Lordship is one of the Attributes of Perfection of God.
*Rubūbiyyah* is derived from the word *rabb* and lexicographically an
infinite (*maṣdar*) which means *tarbiyyah* (nurture) but it is most
frequently used in the sense of the doer of action (*ism fā‘il*) meaning
‘nurturer’. This word, in the latter sense, is exclusively and
absolutely applied to God, but it is also applied sometimes to other
than God, as in the words *rabb al-dār* (head of the house), *rabb
al-firdaws* (doyen of the paradise), etc.[^1]

The word *tadbīr* (management) in the sense of *rubūbiyyah* (lordship)
has been used a lot in Qur’anic verses and traditions (*aḥādīth*).
*Tadbīr* means to put a thing next to another thing in a particular
order and arrangement in such a way that the intended purpose of each of
them could be attained.

For example, managing (*tadbīr*) home affairs is to put each thing in
its suitable place so that it could be used in the most appropriate
manner without wasting anything. Managing the affairs of the universe
means to create a particular order among the creatures in such a way
that every creature could attain its desired perfection.

This kind of management is a specific management which pertains to every
phenomenon but the general management in relation to the entire universe
is to let such an order govern the universe so that the world of
creation could reach its ultimate goal which is the return to God and
the emergence of the hereafter.[^2]

Cosmic and Legislative Lordship
-------------------------------

What has been discussed so far pertains to the cosmic (*takwīnī*)
Lordship and management of the universe, but with respect to some
creatures, legislative (*tashrī‘ī*) lordship and management are also
raised, and this pertains to the creatures which, in addition to the
instinctive guidance, also possess rational guidance.

For this reason, they have also rational responsibility but since their
reason is not that perfect and that capable in every aspect, they are
also in need of legislative guidance which has been provided by the
prophets of God (*‘a*) and the heavenly religion. This subject
constitutes the foundation of prophethood (*nubuwwah*) and heavenly
codes of law. Therefore, one of the manifestations of Lordship is the
legislative one.

Lordship in This World and the Hereafter
----------------------------------------

The scope of Lordship (*rubūbiyyah*) is not limited to this world as it
also extends to the Hereafter, and the issues such as forgiveness and
expiation of sins, permission to intercede (*shafā‘ah*) and granting it
and others related to the Hereafter are also among the myriad
manifestations of Lordship.

Hence, Lordship or Management (*tadbīr*) has numerous manifestations and
expressions, some of which are related to this world while others
pertain to the next world. Some concern the cosmic realm while others
are relevant to the legislative domain, and the concomitance of the
principle of the Divine Unity in Lordship is that all these
manifestations and expressions [of Lordship] emanate from Him and Him
alone. Of course, this exclusivity is related to the Independent and
Essential Lordship and not to lordship *per se*, for the Holy Qur’an has
also acknowledged indirect lordships emanating from God and and affirmed
the causes and intermediaries in the management of the universe. It has
even sworn by the managers of the affairs of the universe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَالْمُدَبِّرٰتِ أَمْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“By those who direct the affairs [of creatures]!”*[^3]

### The Proofs of the Divine Unity in Lordship

1. The concomitance between management (*tadbīr*) and creation
(*khalqiyyah*)

In terms of meaning and implication, management and creation are two
different things, just as in terms of applicability regarding the human
artifacts they can also be distinguished from each other. That is, it is
possible for a person to cause something to exist and for another person
to manage it, but this state of affairs is impossible with respect to
the creation and management of the universe, for management of all
phenomena in the universe cannot persist and be sustained except through
creation.

For instance, managing the plant is done in such a way that it is
constantly provided with air, heat and other elements of subsistence and
the process of life’s growth continues. In reality, they are
manifestations of the Divine creation which is reflected in the law of
nature. As such, the Holy Qur’an has mentioned creation and management
together. We shall mention here some examples of such verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَلا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالأمْرُ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Look! All creation and command belong to Him. Blessed is Allah, the
Lord of all the worlds.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation and then guided
it.”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ سَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الأعْلَى ٭ الَّذِي خَلَقَ فَسَوَّى ٭ وَالَّذِي
قَدَّرَ فَهَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Celebrate the Name of your Lord, the Most Exalted, who created and
proportioned, who determined and guided.”***[^6]

2. Harmony and concordance in the creation and management

Harmony and concordance in the natural phenomena is something
indisputable from the perspective of casual observations and scientific
studies. On the other hand, the involvement of two independent entities
in the creation and management of the universe necessitates chaos and
disorder in the order of nature. In view of these two premises, it can
be proved that the manager and controller of the universe is One. The
following holy verse supports this argument:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَوْ كَانَ فِيهِمَا آلِهَةٌ إِلا اللَّهُ لَفَسَدَتَا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Had there been gods in them other than Allah, they would surely have
fallen apart.”***[^7]

Hishām ibn al-Ḥakam asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) about the proof of the
Oneness of God. The Imām (*‘a*) replied, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إتِّصالُ التَّدْبيرِ وَتَمامُ الصُّنْعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The cohesion of the management and the harmony of creation [is the
proof of the Oneness of God].”[^8]

The Imām (*‘a*) then recited the holy verse quoted above.

### Human Being’s Deviation Relative to the Divine Unity in Lordship

It can be inferred from a study of the history of religions that many
deviations have been made relative to the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in
Lordship (*rubūbiyyah*) – be it cosmic or legislative Lordship. The Holy
Qur’an which is the most reliable source in this regard has mentioned
examples of polytheism in Lordship. Among them are the verses which give
the account of Prophet Ibrāhīm’s (Abraham) (*‘a*) debate with the
polytheists of his time. It can be deduced from the said verses that
they believed in the lordship of the sun and the moon.[^9]

Prophet Yūsuf (Joseph) (*‘a*) is also quoted in the Qur’an, addressing
his two companions in prison, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا صَاحِبَيِ السِّجْنِ أَأَرْبَابٌ مُتَفَرِّقُونَ خَيْرٌ أَمِ
اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O my prison mates! Are different masters better, or Allah, the One,
the All-paramount?”***[^10]

And Pharaoh is also quoted to have said, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الأعْلَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I am your exalted lord!”***[^11]

It also says about the polytheists during the time of the Holy Prophet
(*ṣ*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَاتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have taken gods besides Allah that they may be a [source of]
might to them.”***[^12]

Based on historical accounts, the polytheists used to regard their idols
as different manifestations of the natural forces, worshipping them in a
bid to benefit from these forces or to be immune from the threat and
danger they brought. For instance, *Ba‘l* was supposed to be the
embodiment of soul, fountains and underground water sources. Worship of
the *jinn* was also prevalent among them and they usually took refuge in
the goddess of the *jinn* in horrifying deserts.[^13]

The same point can also be deduced from an account of the beginning of
idol-worship in the Arabian Peninsula, for in one of his travels to
Shām,[^14] ‘Amr ibn Laḥī observed that the people there used to worship
idols. He asked them about their motive in worshipping idols. They told
him that they were doing so with the aim of seeking the idols’ help in
solving their problems. ‘Amr was convinced of their practice and brought
idols with him upon his return to Makkah. He then named one of these
idols as *Hubal* and put it on top of the *Ka‘bah* and called upon the
people to worship it.[^15]

It is worth mentioning that it is pointed out in some verses of the
Qur’an that the polytheists during the time of the Prophet (*ṣ*) only
believed in God’s Lordship and Management of the universe,[^16] but in
view of the earlier quoted verses and historical evidences, it must be
said that the management of the entire universe and the important and
basic issues of Lordship was considered exclusive to God. On issues,
however, like victory, success and warding off undesirable things
related to the individual and social life, they only believed in the
lordship of gods and goddesses, and thus, they were polytheists.[^17]

### The Divine Unity in Legislation

One of the manifestations and expressions of the Divine Unity in
Lordship is Oneness in legislation and law-making. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلا لِلَّهِ أَمَرَ أَلّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلا إِيَّاهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Sovereignty belongs only to Allah. He has commanded you to worship
none except Him.”***[^18]

Since legislation and determining the duties of individuals is a kind of
guardianship (*wilāyah*) on them and interference in their affairs and
that the guardianship and involvement in the affairs of the universe
(including the human beings and others) is exclusive to God on the basis
of the Divine Unity in Lordship, no one except Him has the right of
legislation and determining the rights and duties of others. One the
other hand, what shall be enacted as laws in the legislative houses are
actually declarations of the practical and executive ways of realizing
the Divine laws and decrees.

For this reason, these laws must be harmonious with the Islamic laws and
decrees without any conflict with them; otherwise, they shall be devoid
of legitimacy.

### The Divine Unity in Sovereignty

The right of sovereignty is primarily and essentially exclusive to God,
for sovereignty is a kind of guardianship and management which is
peculiar to God alone. On the other hand, governance is one of the
social needs of the human being and its realization depends on his
sovereignty and domination.

The outcome of these two principles is that some individuals are granted
the right of sovereignty by God so as to assume the leadership in
society and exercise the right of sovereignty by observing the rational
and legislative principles and rules. There is no dispute that the
prophets of God (*‘a*), in general, and the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*), in
particular, have enjoyed such a station.

From the Shī‘ah point of view, after the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) this station
has been entrusted to his infallible successors, viz. the Imāms from the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), just as it was during the Period of Occultation
(*ghaybah*), the just, pious and competent jurists (*fuqahā*) also have
such a right. In other words, the system of government in Islam is
founded on the concept of guardianship (*wilāyah*) and the guardianship
of the prophets, the Imāms and the jurists is a manifestation and
expression of it.[^19]

We will deal again with this issue in the discussions on Imamate.

### The Divine Unity in Obedience

The right to earn obedience (*iṭā‘ah*) is primarily and essentially
exclusive to God, for He is the Creator and Master of the universe and
the human beings. For this reason, obedience to God – so is servitude
(*‘ubūdiyyah*) to Him – is necessary for all beings. Meanwhile, God’s
bestowal of the right of sovereignty and leadership on specific
individuals (the prophets and the like) necessitates that obedience to
them is also essential for others; otherwise, their guardianship and
leadership shall be void and useless in practice.

The way of reconciling the two is to argue that obedience to other than
God *per se* is not obligatory on anyone, but obedience to those who are
granted guardianship by God on the human beings is obligatory on others
by the decree and commandment of God, as it is thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you.”***[^20]

And it is also stated, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلا لِيُطَاعَ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not send any apostle but to be obeyed by Allah’s
leave.”***[^21]

It is worth mentioning that the manifestations and expressions of the
Divine Unity in Lordship and Management are not limited to the
abovementioned cases, and they are only mentioned because of their
particular importance in the social life of the human beings.

Review Questions
----------------

1. State the meanings and types of lordship (*rubūbiyyah*).

2. Is the Lordship of God limited only to this world? Explain why.

3. State the proofs of the Divine Unity in Lordship while taking into
account the verses of the Holy Qur’an.

4. By taking into account the verses of the Holy Qur’an, explain human
beings’ deviation relative to the Divine Unity in Lordship.

5. Explain the Divine Unity in legislation.

6. Explain the Divine Unity in sovereignty.

7. Explain the Divine Unity in obedience while keeping in view of the
verses of the Holy Qur’an.

[^1]: Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī, Al-Mufradāt, under the word rabb.

[^2]: Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān, vol. 11, pp. 289-290.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Nāzi‘āt 79:5.

[^4]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:51.

[^5]: Sūrat Ṭā Ḥā 20:50.

[^6]: Sūrat al-A‘lā 87:1-3.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Anbiyā’ 21:22.

[^8]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) 36, ḥadīths 1-2.

[^9]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:76-78.

[^10]: Sūrat Yūsuf 12:39.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Nāzi‘āt 79:24.

[^12]: Sūrat Maryam 19:81.

[^13]: Jihān dar ‘Aṣr-e Bi‘thah (The World during the Prophet’s
Mission), p. 21.

[^14]: Shām: the land that included today’s Syria, Lebanon and parts of
Jordan and Palestine up until five centuries ago. [Trans.]

[^15]: Ibn Hishām, Al-Sīrat al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 1, p. 79.

[^16]: Sūrat Yūnus 10:31; Sūrat al-‘Ankabūt 29:63; Sūrat al-Mu’minūn
23:86-89.

[^17]: Sayyid Muḥsin Amīn, Kashf al-Irtiyāb, p. 170.

[^18]: Sūrat Yūsuf 12:39.

[^19]: For further information, see the book Dīn wa Dawlat (Religion and
Government) by the author.

[^20]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:59.

[^21]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:64.


