Lesson 12: The Attributes of God
================================

Name (ism) and Attribute (ṣifah)
--------------------------------

The word *ism* has different applications. In its broadest function, it
means any word which implies certain meanings. In this application,
*ism* is synonymous with *kalimah* (word) and it also includes *ḥarf*
(particle) and *fi‘l* (verb) in the parlance of the Arabic grammarians.

The second application of *ism* is that which is used in Arabic syntax,
and it is one of the types of *kalimah*, *ḥarf* and *fi‘l* being the
other types.

Its third application is that which is intended in the parlance of the
theologians (*mutakallimūn*) and it means any word which indicates the
very quiddity (*māhiyyah*) or essence (*dhāt*) of an attribute (*ṣifah*)
without considering its qualification (*ittiṣāf*); examples are the
words *samā’* (heaven), *arḍ* (earth), *rajul* (man), and *jidār*
(wall).

The word *ṣifah* has also different applications. The theosophers
(*ḥukamā’*) call the origins of derivatives (*mushtaqqāt*) as *ṣifah*
and the derivatives as *ism*. According to them, *‘ilm* (knowledge) and
*qudrah* (power) are *ṣifah* while *‘ālim* or *‘alīm* (knowledgeable)
and *qādir* or *qadīr* (powerful) are *ism*. Meanwhile, the theologians
call the derivatives as *ṣifāt* (*ṣifah*s or attributes) and the origins
of derivatives as *ma‘nā* (concepts). For this matter, *‘ilm* and
*qudrah* are *ma‘nā* while *‘ālim* or *‘alīm* and *qādir* or *qadīr* are
*ṣifāt*. In other words, whenever we take into consideration the essence
or quiddity in the sense that it is qualified by a specific quality
(*waṣf*) or meaning, the word *ṣifah* is used.[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلصِّفَةُ هِيَ الإسْمُ الدّالُّ عَلىٰ بَعْضِ أحْوالِ الذّاتِ، وَ
ذٰلِكَ نَحْوَ طَويلٍ وَ قَصيرٍ وَ عاقِلٍ وَ غَيْرِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Ṣifah* (attribute) is an *ism* (noun) which indicates some states of
the *dhāt* (essence), in the case of *ṭawīl* (long), *qaṣīr* (short),
*‘āqil* (intelligent), and the like.”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الصِّفَةَ فِي الْحَقيقَةِ ما أنْبَأَتْ عَنْ مَعْنى مُسْتَفادٍ
يَخُصُّ المَوْصوفَ وَ ما شارَكَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“In reality, *ṣifah* refers to the meaning which is exclusive to the
qualified (*mawṣūf*) and what shares with it [in the said description
(*waṣf*)].”[^3]

It must be noted that such technicalities are not much observed in
practice, and they (*ism* and *ṣifah*) are used interchangeably.

The only word which has no descriptive meaning and is known as the
exclusive Name of God is His Name of Glory (*ism jalāluh*), i.e.
*Allāh*, whereas other words such as *Al-‘ālim* (the All-learned),
*Al-qādir* (the All-powerful), *Al-ḥayy* (the Ever-living), *Al-rāziq*
(the Sustainer), *Al-bāqī* (the Everlasting), and the like are used both
as Names and Attributes of God. For instance, in well-known traditions
(*aḥādīth*), it is said that God has Ninety-nine Names. With the
exception of His Name of Glory, all are derivatives and attributes.

Classifications of the Divine Attributes
----------------------------------------

The Attributes (*ṣifāt*) of Allah are classified in various ways:

### 1. The Attributes of Beauty and the Attributes of Glory

The Attributes of Beauty (*ṣifāt al-jamāliyyah*) or the Positive
Attributes (*ṣifāt al-thubūtiyyah*) are attributes which indicate the
Perfect Being of God; examples are *‘ilm* (knowledge) and *Al-‘ālim*
(the All-knowing), *qudrah* (power) and *Al-qādir* (the All-powerful),
*khalq* (creation) and *Al-khāliq* (the Creator), *rizq* (sustenance)
and *Al-rāziq* (the Sustainer), and the like. The Attributes of Glory
(*ṣifāt al-jalāliyyah*) or the Negative Attributes (*ṣifāt
al-salabiyyah*) are attributes which indicate deficiency and lack of
perfection and are thus negated from God. Examples are compositeness
(*tarkīb*), corporeality (*jasmāniyyah*), space (*makān*), direction
(*jahat*), oppression (*ẓulm*), absurdity (*‘abath*), and the like. In
this regard, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn comments:

“These two terms (the Attributes of Beauty and Glory) are consistent
with the expression *dhū ’l-jalāli wa ’l-ikrām* (the Majestic and the
Munificent) in the holy verse, *“Blessed is the Name of your Lord, the
Majestic and the Munificent!”*[^4] for the Attributes of Glory (*ṣifāt
al-jalāl*) are those attributes which make the Essence of God immune
from similarities with others. And the Attributes of Munificence (*ṣifāt
al-akrām*) are those with which the Essence of God is adorned. Thus, God
is described with the Attributes of Perfection, and immune from
deficiency with the Attributes of Glory.”[^5]

The Negative Attributes have another function, and that is, they are
attributes which indicate God’s negation of deficiency; for example,
*Al-ghanī* (the Self-sufficient), *Al-wāḥid* (the One), *Al-quddūs* (the
All-holy), *Al-ḥamīd* (the Praiseworthy), and the like.[^6]

### 2. The Attributes of Essence and the Attributes of Action

In dividing the Divine Attributes into the Attributes of Essence and the
Attributes of Action, there are two terminologies and two views
involved:

1. In abstracting an attribute from the Divine Essence or describing the
Divine Essence with that attribute, whenever conception (*taṣawwur*) of
the Essence is sufficient and there is no need for any conception of
God’s agency (*fā‘iliyyah*), the said attribute is an Attribute of
Essence or Essential Attribute; examples are *ḥayāh* (life) and
*Al-hayy* (the Ever-living), *irādah* (will) and *murīd* (the Willing),
*‘ilm* (knowledge) and *Al-‘ālim* (the All-knowing), *qudrah* (Power)
and *Al-qādir* (the All-powerful). And whenever conception of God’s
agency is needed [in abstracting an attribute], that attribute is called
an Attribute of Action or Agency Attribute; examples are *khalq*
(creation) and *Al-khāliq* (the Creator), *rizq* (sustenance) and
*Al-rāziq* (the Sustenainer), *amātah* (death) and *Al-mumayyit* (the
Life-taker), *aḥyā’* (living) and *Al-muḥayyī* (the Life-giver),
*maghfirah* (forgiveness) and *Al-ghāfir* (the Forgiver), *intiqām*
(vengeance) and *Al-muntaqim* (the Avenger), and the like.

2. Whenever the opposite or reverse of an attribute can be attributed to
God, it is called an Attribute of Action and whenever the opposite or
reverse of an attribute cannot be attributed to God, it is called an
Attribute of Essence. Therefore, power, knowledge and life are among the
Attributes of the Divine Essence, because God cannot be described with
the opposites of these attributes as their opposites denote existential
deficiency. But will (*irādah*) is not one of the Attributes of Essence
because describing God with its opposite is not possible. For instance,
it can be said that God does not will any form of injustice toward His
servants:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ ظُلْمًا لِلْعِبَادِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah does not desire any wrong for (His) servants.”***[^7]

On this basis, justice (*‘adl*) is one of the Attributes of the Divine
Essence but according to the first terminology, it is one of the
Attributes of Action.

Of the two stated terminologies, the first is more popular and prevalent
in the books of philosophy and theology. In his *Al-Kāfī*, Muḥaddith
al-Kulaynī has adopted the second terminology.[^8]

The traditions which have regarded *irādah* (will or willpower) as one
of the Attributes of the Divine Action have been interpreted on this
basis. Sayyid Sharīf al-Gurgānī has also adopted this terminology in his
*Al-Ta‘rīfāt*.[^9]

### 3. The Real and the Relative Attributes

The Attributes of Essence have been divided into Real (*ḥaqīqī*) and
Relative (*iḍāfī*) Attributes. A Real Essential Attribute is that which
can really be ascribed to the Divine Essence; for example, knowledge and
power. A Relative Essential Attribute is that which can be abstracted
from the Real Attributes, but it is in itself not really one of the
Attributes of Essence; for example, the attributes of *‘ālimiyyah* (the
state of being the All-knowing) and *qādiriyyah* (the state of being the
All-powerful) which can be abstracted by taking into account the
relation of knowledge and power to the Essence, and they have no reality
beyond the Essence and the attributes of knowledge and power.

The Real Essential Attributes are divided into the Purely Real
(*ḥaqīqī-ye maḥḍ*) and the Relationally Essential Real (*ḥaqīqī-ye dhāt
al-iḍāfah*). The Purely Real is that which pertains to no other than
God; for example, the attribute of life. The Relationally Essential Real
is that which can also be applied to other than God; for example,
knowledge and power.

### 4. The Transmitted Attributes

Some attributes are called the Transmitted Attributes (*ṣifāt
al-khabariyyah*).[^10] They are the attributes which have been
transmitted in the Heavenly Account (the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*), and
if they were not mentioned in the Heavenly Account, they could not have
been established for God in a rational discourse. Meanwhile, if we
subscribe to their outward meaning, it will be tantamount to [the belief
in] anthropomorphism (*tashbiyyah*) and incarnation (*tajassum*).

In other words, such attributes are Attributes which are mentioned in
allegorical Qur’anic verses and traditions about the Divine Attributes;
for example, *wajh* (face), *yadd* (hand), *istiwā’* (to settle) and
*mujī’* (advent) which are mentioned in the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ كُلُّ شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلَّا وَجْهَهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Everything is to perish except His Face.”***[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَدُ اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The hand of Allah is above their hands.”***[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الرَّحْمَنُ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The All-beneficent settled on the Throne.”***[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَجَاءَ رَبُّكَ وَالْمَلَكُ صَفًّا صَفًّا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord and the angels arrive in ranks.”***[^14]

Are the Names of Allah Tawqīfī?
-------------------------------

The Names of Allah are said to be *tawqīfī* when we apply to God the
Names and Attributes which are mentioned in the religious sources (the
Qur’an and the *Sunnah*) and we do not apply other names and attributes.
Most Sunnī theologians and some of their Shī‘ah counterparts subscribe
to this view, but others do not believe in the Names and Attributes of
God to be *tawqīfī*, considering it permissible to apply any name or
attribute which denotes God’s existential perfection and does not
ascribe any deficiency or fault to God.

Even in cases, therefore, where a name or attribute is mentioned in the
Qur’an or traditions, yet its application to God without any
qualification or indication bespeaks defect or fault, these are not
permissible. For example, God is called *zāri‘* (planter or grower) in
this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَأَنْتُمْ تَزْرَعُونَهُ أَمْ نَحْنُ الزَّارِعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is it you who make it grow, or are We the grower?”***[^15]

This indicates God as the Originator of plantation and not its
conventional meaning in human usage. However, since the use of this term
without any qualification or indication suggests its conventional
meaning which is not suitable to God, it is not permissible to apply it
to Him. On the other hand, the use of such terms as ‘the Necessary Being
by essence’ (*wājib al-wujūd bi ’dh-dhāt*), ‘the Cause of causes’
(*‘illat al-‘ilal*) and the like which are terms in theosophy, is
permissible as they indicate the sense of God’s perfection and negate
any defect or fault in Him.

Here, one may demand for elaboration, and that is, if the application of
a name or attribute to God is in the context of an intellectual
discussion or discourse and not in supplication or any act of worship,
the contention of those who deny God’s Names and Attributes as being
*tawqīfī* is valid. In the context of supplication and any similar act
of worship, it is safer to use the Names and Attributes mentioned in the
Qur’an, traditions and transmitted supplications. In this regard, the
late ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī has some remarks which include the said
elaboration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلإحْتِياطُ فِي الدّينِ يَقْتَضى الإقْتِصارُ فِي التَّسْمِيَةِ بِما
وَرَدَ مِنْ طَريقِ السَّمْعِ، وَأَمّا مُجَرَّدُ الاِجْراءِ وِالإطْلاقِ
مِنْ دونِ التَّسْمِيَةِ فَالْأمْرُ فيهِ سَهْلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Precaution in religion necessitates restriction in calling [God] to
that which is received through transmission. However, if a name is
applied to God without calling Him by it, making decision in it is
easy.”[^16]

In another place, the ‘Allāmah has regarded naming (*tasmiyah*) and
calling (*nidā’*) as among the supplements of worship (*‘ibādah*): [^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالتَّسْمِيَةُ وَالنِّداءُ مِنْ لَواحِقِ الْعِبادَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

At any rate, a reliable proof on the Names of Allah being *tawqīfī* has
not been established. The main argument put forth by those who support
that view is the noble verse 180 of *Sūrat al-A‘rāf*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلِلَّهِ الأسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى فَادْعُوهُ بِهَا وَذَرُوا الَّذِينَ
يُلْحِدُونَ فِي أَسْمَائِهِ سَيُجْزَوْنَ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Allah belong the Best Names, so supplicate Him by them, and
abandon those who commit sacrilege in His names. Soon they shall be
requited for what they used to do.”***[^18]

That the noble verse implies how the Names of Allah are *tawqīfī*
depends on two things. One is that the letter *lām* in the phrase
*al-asmā’ al-ḥusnā* (the Best Names) is *lām ‘ahad*; these are the Names
which are mentioned in the Qur’an and the Prophetic traditions
(*aḥādīth*). Another is that *ilḥād* means violation of those Names and
applying other names to God although those names or attributes denote
perfection and do not imply any defect or fault.

Yet, none of these two points has been proved because the function of
the [definite article] *al* in the first case is absorption
(*istighrāq*) and not *‘ahad*. And its purport in the holy verse is that
all the names known to be the Best Names exclusively belong to God
because there is no being more perfect and superior to Him.

In every sort of perfection, therefore, its highest level belongs to God
and *ilḥād* (violation) here may possibly mean that the polytheists have
committed sacrilege with regards to the Names of God and through a
slight change of terminology, they would apply those Names to the idols.
For example, they would change the word *Allāh* into *Al-lāt* and name
one of their idols with it. They would alter the word *Al-‘aẓīz* (the
Most High) into *Al-‘uzzā* and call another of their idols with it.[^19]

Another possibility of committing sacrilege against the Names of Allah
is that some ignorant individuals would call God with names which are
below His Sublime Stations; for example, invocative phrases such as *Yā*
*aba ’l-makārim* (O father of generosities!) and *Yā* *abyaḍ* *al-wajh*
(O white-faced!).[^20]

Review Questions
----------------

1. Write down the meanings and applications of *ism* and *ṣifah*.

2. Elucidate the Attributes of Beauty and Glory of God.

3. Write down the remarks of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn regarding the
Attributes of Beauty and Glory of God.

4. Explain the two views regarding the division of the Divine Attributes
into the Attributes of Essence and the Attributes of Action.

5. State the Real and Relative Attributes of God.

6. What is meant by the Declarative Attributes (*ṣifāt al-khabariyyah*)?

7. Explain how the Divine Names are being *tawqīfī*.

[^1]: Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī, Sharḥ Asmā’ Allāh al-Ḥusnā, p. 27.

[^2]: Sayyid Sharīf Gurgānī, Al-Ta‘rīfāt, p. 95.

[^3]: Shaykh al-Mufīd, Awā’il al-Maqālāt, p. 61.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Raḥmān 55:78. [Trans.]

[^5]: Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 18.

[^6]: Amīn al-Islām al-Ṭabarsī, Majma‘ al-Bayān, vol. 3, p. 503.

[^7]: Sūrat Ghāfir (or al-Mu’min) 40:31.

[^8]: Muḥaddith al-Kulaynī, Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, section (bāb) on
willpower (irādah), p. 86.

[^9]: Sayyid Sharīf al-Gurgānī, Al-Ta‘rifāt, p. 95.

[^10]: ‘Abd al-Karīm Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 92.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Qaṣaṣ 28:88.

[^12]: Sūrat al-Fatḥ 48:10.

[^13]: Sūrat Ṭā Hā 20:5.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Fajr 89:22.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Wāqi‘ah 56:64.

[^16]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 8, p. 354.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 345.

[^18]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:180.

[^19]: Ṭabarsī, Majma‘ al-Bayān, vol. 3, p. 503.

[^20]: Zamakhsharī, Al-Kashshāf, vol. 2, p. 180.


