Lesson 13: The Knowledge of God
===============================

Knowledge is one of the attributes of beauty and perfection, and there
is no doubt at all that this attribute is confirmed for God. Muslim
philosophers and theologians (nay, all theists) have a consensus of
opinions on this issue, although there is a difference of views and
opinions on the quality and limits of the knowledge of God.

The knowledge of God can be discussed in three levels, viz.

(1) God’s knowledge of His Essence,

(2) God’s knowledge of the creatures prior to their creation (knowledge
about the things in the realm of essence, or essential knowledge), and

(3) God’s knowledge of the creatures after their being created
(knowledge about the things in the realm of action, or active
knowledge).

1. God’s Knowledge of His Essence
---------------------------------

God’s knowledge of His Essence is an intuitive knowledge or knowledge by
presence (*‘ilm-e ḥuḍūrī*); so is the human being’s knowledge of
himself. Basically, knowledge means the presence of the known (*ma‘lūm*)
before the knower (*‘ālim*).

If the creature is devoid of corporeality, the reality of that creature
is undoubtedly present to himself, for that which hinders the presence
of such a thing to himself is its corporeality and changeability, and
since God is free from corporeality and changeability, His Essence is
present in Himself and He has knowledge of His Essence.

2. God’s Essential Knowledge of the Creatures
---------------------------------------------

As to the nature of God’s Essential knowledge of the creatures,
different views have been transmitted. These views are related to three
issues. One is whether God’s Essential and prior knowledge of the
creatures is intuitive (*ḥuḍūrī*) or acquired (*ḥuṣūlī*). Another
[issue] is whether God’s prior knowledge of the things is general
(*ijmālī*) or detailed (*tafṣīlī*). And the third [issue] is whether
God’s prior knowledge pertains to the existence (*wujūd*) or the
quiddity (*māhiyyah*) of things.

### 2.1. Shaykh al-Ishrāq’s View

God’s prior knowledge of the creatures is intuitive (*ḥuḍūrī*) and
general (*ijmālī*) and pertains to their existence (*wujūd*). This view
has been adopted by Shaykh al-Ishrāq[^1] and his followers. According to
this view, since God is knowledgeable of His Essence, and on the other
hand, the Essence of God is the Cause behind the coming into existence
of the creatures and knowledge of the Cause leads to the knowledge of
the effect in general, it follows that God is essentially knowledgeable
of all the things in the universe and His knowledge is intuitive and
general.

The problem with this view is that detailed knowledge is superior to
general knowledge. In this case, based on the said view, God’s Essential
knowledge of the creatures cannot be the most perfect knowledge. This is
so while the Essence of God possesses all perfections in the highest
degree possible:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلِلَّهِ الأسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Allah belong the Best Names.”***[^2]

### 2.2. Mu‘tazilah View

God’s prior knowledge of the creatures is acquired (*ḥuṣūlī*) and
detailed (*tafṣīlī*) and pertains to their quiddity, because prior to
being created, their quiddity possesses a sort of subsistence (*thubūt*)
(*māhiyyāt-e ma‘dūmah* or non-existential quiddities) and subsistence
includes existence (*wujūd*). This view has been ascribed to the
Mu‘tazilah who subscribe to the notion of pre-eternity subsistents
(*thābitāt-e azaliyyah*).

In addition to the fact that as will be proved later, there is no place
for acquired knowledge in God, the problem with this view is that
subsistence (*thubūt*) is equal to existence (*wujūd*) and anything
which does not exist has no objective subsistence. Therefore, belief in
the pre-eternity subsistents is basically incorrect.

### 2.3. Ibn Sīnā’s View

God’s prior knowledge of the creatures is a detailed and acquired
knowledge which pertains to the mental existence of the quiddities. For
instance, when a person wants to do certain things, prior to their
realization, he has detailed knowledge of them and this knowledge
pertains to the mental existence of the quiddities of his actions. Ibn
Sīnā and his followers have adopted this view.

The problem with this view is that acquired knowledge is related to the
creatures which are in contact with matter in their essences or actions.
By means of their faculties of sensory perception, they develop
perception of the corporeal beings and present in themselves the
quiddities of those beings and have knowledge of them. And through those
mental quiddities, they also become knowledgeable of the actual
existence of the things.[^3] And since God is immune from corporeality
in terms of both Essence and Action, acquired knowledge has no place in
him. God’s knowledge of His Essence or His Actions is an intuitive
knowledge.

### 2.4. Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn’s View

God’s prior knowledge of the creatures is an intuitive knowledge and as
to whether it is general or detailed, it is general as well as detailed,
because in Essence, God is straightforwardly entitled to the existential
perfections of all the creatures. Since existence is a single reality
and has different levels, the highest level of existence is no other
than God’s Being. It is evident that every perfect [being] has deficient
existential levels in addition to a level of perfection which has no
deficiency.

Due to the fact, therefore, that God is not devoid of any of the levels
of existential perfection, He automatically and solely possesses all the
existential perfections which diversely and pluralistically exist in the
creatures. From this perspective, therefore, God’s Essential knowledge
of the creatures is a general (*ijmālī*) knowledge (*ijmāl* in the sense
of simplicity and oneness in contrast to *tafṣīl* in the sense of
multiplicity and plurality).

Meanwhile, after the coming into existence of the things, nothing shall
be added to the knowledge of God, because no change takes place in the
Divine Essence. From this perspective, God’s eternal knowledge of the
creatures is general as well as detailed.

If we assume that a person is knowledgeable of all the issues within a
field of science in the sense that he has mastery of that field in that
he has prior knowledge and answer to any question within that field and
that the answers he gives do not add anything to his knowledge, in this
case the existence of multiplicity with respect to the answers he gives
does not cause any change in his knowledge. He has knowledge of all the
issues before and after giving his answers.

That which changes is the existence of answers which have general
existence (simple and identical) in the essence of the knower, while
having detailed existence (multiple and diverse) in his action. Yet, no
change has found its way in the essence of the knower and his knowledge.
Once it occurs that such an assumption is possible in the case of the
human being, why is it not acceptable with respect to God who is the
Necessary Being in essence?

This view has been put forth by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and accepted by all
followers of the Transcendental School of Philosophy (*ḥikmat
al-muta’āliyah*), and it is the best interpretation ever presented to
explain God’s eternal knowledge of the creatures. Traditions (*aḥādith*)
also confirm this view. For instance, it is thus stated in some
traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِلمُهُ بِهِ قَبْلَ كَوْنِهِ كَعِلْمِهِ بِهِ بَعْدَ كَوْنِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“His knowledge of it prior to its existence is like His knowledge of it
after its existence.”[^4]

Ayyūb ibn Nūḥ asked Imām al-Ḥādī (*‘a*) in a letter, thus: “Was God
knowledgeable of the creatures prior to their creation, or not?”

The Imām (*‘a*) thus wrote in reply to him: “God was knowledgeable of
the creatures before creating them, just as He has knowledge of them
after their creation.”[^5]

As such, God’s knowledge of the creatures in the realm of essence prior
to their creation necessitates God’s knowledge of His Essence, just as
the existence of the creatures depends on the existence of the Divine
Essence:[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكانَ عِلْمُهُ بِجَميعِ ما عَداهُ لازِمًا لِعِلْمِهِ لِذاتِهِ، كَما
أنَّ وُجودَ ما عَداهُ تابِعٌ لِوُجودِ ذاتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

God’s Present Knowledge of the Creatures in the Present
-------------------------------------------------------

God’s knowledge of the creatures after creating them – or, God’s
knowledge of the creatures in the realm of action – is a detailed
intuitive knowledge, but it is not identical with God’s Essence because
the assumption is that this knowledge is in the realm of action and
action is outside the essence. Here, the reality of the creatures is
that they are God’s action and His knowledge as well.

As an analogy, it can be likened to the human being’s knowledge of the
mental forms he creates. The reality of these forms is also his action
as well as his knowledge. That is, the said mental forms by themselves
are present in him, and at the same time, they are his action and
effect. Interpreting God’s present knowledge of the creatures in this
way is one of the initiatives of Shaykh al-Ishrāq. On this basis, there
is no difference between the immaterial and material beings, for all of
them are an effect and action of God, and their reality is the link
itself to the Divine Being, and they are all in the presence of God.[^7]

### The Divine Proofs

From the explanation of the three levels of God’s knowledge, the proofs
of God’s knowledge can also be inferred. The proof of God’s knowledge of
His Essence is indeed the immunity of the Sacred Divine Essence from
materiality and physical properties. Since the immaterial being is the
very presence (*ḥudur*), whenever that Being is self-existent and does
not depend on other beings, His existence is present for Himself. The
reality of knowledge is also nothing except presence (*ḥudūr*) and
exposure (*inkishāf*).

The proof of God’s knowledge of the creatures in the realm of essence
(prior to their creation) is that the Essence of God is the Cause of the
creatures and He has knowledge also of His Essence. Therefore, He has
knowledge of the creatures and knowledge of the cause necessitates
knowledge of the effect; hence, God has knowledge of the creatures.

Moreover, the creatures are actions of God, the Exalted, and at the same
time, they have rules and stability, order and harmony, and once an
action has such characteristics, it is a proof of its agent’s knowledge
and awareness. The rules and stability of the universe, therefore, is a
proof of God’s prior knowledge of it [and its components].

The proof of God’s knowledge of the creatures in the realm of action
(knowledge after creating them) is that the creatures are actions and
effects of God, and the essence of action is nothing but the link and
attachment to the essence of its agent (*fā‘il*), and as a result, it is
present before its agent and cause. The reality of the universe,
therefore, is present before God and He has intuitive knowledge of it.

In his *Tajrīd al-I‘tiqād*, Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has expressed the said
argument in these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألأحْكامُ وَالتَّجَرُّدُ، وَإسْتِنادُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ إلَيْهِ دَلائِلُ
العِلْمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is to say that the laws and stability of the universe, the
immateriality of the Divine Essence and emanation of the existence of
all beings from God are proofs of God’s knowledge [of His Essence and
the creatures].[^8]

### The All-hearing, the All-seeing and the Perceiver

In many verses of the Qur’an, God is described as the All-hearing
(*al-samī‘*) and the All-seeing (*al-baṣīr*).[^9] These descriptions
have also been mentioned in the traditions as God’s Attributes of
Beauty. There are two views concerning the the meaning of *al-samī‘* and
*al-baṣīr*. One is that they refer to God’s knowledge of audible and
visible things, and the other is that they are separate Attributes.[^10]

The first view which is adopted by the philosophers and erudite
theologians is acceptable. And perhaps the reason why *al-samī‘* and
*al-baṣīr* have been specifically mentioned in the Qur’an and traditions
is that these two faculties of sensory perception have more prominent
role in the knowledge of human being and he who usually expresses his
knowledge by seeing and hearing. For this reason, once it is said that
God is All-seeing and All-hearing, one can imagine better the
all-pervasive knowledge of God in relation to himself and his actions,
and as a result, this will contribute much in his further training.

The attribute of *idrāk* (apprehension) or *al-mudrik* (the Perceiver)
has not been mentioned in verses of the Qur’an as an Attribute of God,
but in view of the holy verse, *“Yet He apprehends the sights,”*[^11]
which ascribes the action of apprehension to God,[^12] theologians have
abstracted from it the attribute *al-mudrik*. There is also a difference
of opinions on the meaning of *idrāk*. Some have considered it an
attribute distinct from *‘ilm* (knowledge) while others have interpreted
it to mean knowledge of the details. And the latter opinion is
acceptable.[^13]

Review Questions
----------------

1. Write down the three levels of God’s knowledge.

2. Is God’s knowledge of His Essence intuitive (*ḥudūrī*) or acquired
(*ḥuṣūlī*)? Why?

3. Write down the view of Shaykh al-Ishrāq about God’s prior knowledge
along with the criticism to it.

4. Write down the view attributed to the Mu‘tazilah about God’s prior
knowledge along with the criticism to it.

5. What is Ibn Sīnā’s view about God’s prior knowledge? And what is the
problem with it?

6. Write down Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn’s view about God’s prior knowledge.

7. Explain God’s eternal knowledge of the creatures by citing a
tradition (*ḥadīth*).

8. What type of knowledge is God’s knowledge of the creatures after
creating them?

9. Write down two proofs of God’s knowledge.

10. What is the meaning of God’s being the All-hearing (*al-sami‘*) and
the All-seeing (*al-baṣīr*)?

[^1]: Shaykh al-Ishraq refers to Shahāb al-Dīn Yaḥyā Suhrawardī (b.
1155), a towering figure of the Illuminationist (ishrāqī) School of
Islamic Philosophy. [Trans.]

[^2]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:180.

[^3]: Refer to the discussion on knowledge, knower and known in the
books of philosophy.

[^4]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, “Kitāb al-Tawḥīd,” section (bāb) on the
Attributes of the Essence, ḥadīth 2.

[^5]: Ibid., ḥadīth 4.

[^6]: Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 179. For
further information in this regard, see ‘Alī Rabbānī Gulpāygānī, Ayḍāḥ
al-Ḥikmah, vol. 2, pp. 544-547.

[^7]: Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī have made a
distinction between immaterial and material beings. Accordingly, the
presence of the immaterial beings is by themselves without any medium
while the presence of the material beings is through the medium of the
presence of their immaterial forms in the immaterial world. That which
is stated in the text is the pertinent viewpoint of Ḥakīm Sabziwārī
which seems to be stronger. See Ayḍāḥ al-Ḥikmah, vol. 2, pp. 547-548.

[^8]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 2, issue 2.

[^9]: The descriptions al-samī‘ and al-baṣīr as Attributes of God have
been mentioned 41 and 42 times, respectively, in the Qur’an.

[^10]: Qawā’id al-Murād, p. 90.

[^11]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:103.

[^12]: Fāḍil Miqdād, Irshād al-Ṭālibīn, pp. 206-207.

[^13]: Ibid.


