Lesson 14: God’s Power and Will
===============================

Power and ability are among the attributes of existential perfections,
and God who possesses all existential perfections has also the attribute
of power (*qudrah*). God, therefore, is All-powerful and All-mighty.
There is no dispute that God possesses this attribute, but there are
different views on the essence of power and the extent of God’s power.

The Essence of Power
--------------------

There are two views about the definition of power and who the powerful
(*qādir*) is:

1. *Qādir* is He who has an attribute through which it is possible for
Him to do or not to do a certain thing.[^1] This definition is
acceptable to a group of the theologians.

2. *Qādir* is He who does something if He wants to and refrains from
doing something if He wants to.[^2] This definition is acceptable to the
philosophers and another group of the theologians.

The meaning of both definitions is that the powerful is not concomitant
with an action or abandonment of an action. In other words, the powerful
agent (*fā‘il*) is he who is not compelled to do or not to do something;
rather, he is independent. Power, therefore, is equal to or a
concomitant of free-will (*ikhtiyār*). The opposite of the powerful and
independent agent is the compelled and unfree agent who has no ability
not to do something and whose action is certain and determined. The
differences between free and unfree agent are the following:

1. The free agent is aware of his action as making a choice necessitates
awareness, but the unfree agent is not aware of his action.

2. It is possible to separate action, in terms of the essence of the
agent, from the agent, but it is impossible to distinguish the action
from the unfree agent.

3. Since power is the same with respect to doing or not doing something,
the powerful and free agent wills for his action. Hence, free action is
tantamount to willpower (*irādah*), but the action of the unfree agent
is not tantamount to willpower (as it is an involuntary action).

It becomes clear from what has been said that after the materialization
of willpower, free action becomes incumbent and definite, but this
incumbency is subsequent to willpower and free-will, and it has no
contradiction with the independence of the agent.

It is to be noted that in philosophical parlance, God has eternal will
and providence in creating every being with total ability and since they
are creatures devoid of materiality – such as the intellects (*‘uqūl*) –
the essential possibility of their ability is absolute and not
restricted by specific potential possibility, time, place, and
relationship. Such beings are not temporally contingent and they
constantly receive the grace of existence from God. As a result, this
belief has no contradiction with the independence of God, for according
to their belief, God constantly bestows existence to them by His eternal
will. On account of this belief, therefore, the philosophers must not be
thought to be against the independence of God, as this attribution can
be seen in the remarks of many theologians.[^3]

The Proof of God’s Power and Will
---------------------------------

Agitation or compulsion in action can be imagined when the agent is
overtaken and compelled by a superior being. In this case, the agent can
be considered forced and agitated; that is, the superior being imposes
the action to the agent and influences him to do so contrary to his
desire.

In view of the fact that God is the most Superior Being and He is not
compelled and overpowered by any being, agitation and compulsion in
action cannot be imagined concerning Him. Therefore, He has created the
universe with power and will.

In other words, power and will are among the attributes of existential
perfection, and the human nature or disposition (*fiṭrah*) which leads
to the existence of God makes him recognize the Perfect and Supreme
Being who possesses all existential perfections.

In addition, the order and stability of the universe are a clear
tertimony to the power and will of a Creator, just as they indicate His
knowledge and cognizance. As such, whenever referring to the creation of
the heavens and the earth the Holy Qur’an calls to mind that their
creation guides the human being to the power and knowledge of the
Creator, as it has been stated, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ وَمِنَ الأرْضِ مِثْلَهُنَّ
يَتَنَزَّلُ الأمْرُ بَيْنَهُنَّ لِتَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ أَحَاطَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عِلْمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is Allah who has created seven heavens, and of the earth [a number]
similar to them. The command gradually descends through them, that you
may know that Allah has power over all things, and that Allah
comprehends all things in knowledge.”*[^4]

This argument has also been pointed out in the sayings of Imām ‘Alī
(*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرَانَا مِنْ مَلَكُوتِ قُدْرَتِهِ، وَعَجَائِبِ مَا نَطَقَتْ بِهِ
آثَارُ حِكْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He showed us the realm of His Might, and such wonders which speak of
His Wisdom.”[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقَامَ مِنْ شَوَاهِدِ ٱلْبَيِّنَاتِ عَلىٰ لَطِيفِ صَنْعَتِهِ،
وَعَظِيمِ قُدْرَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And He has established such clear proofs for His delicate creative
power and great might.”[^6]

The Extent of God’s Power
-------------------------

The proofs of God’s power indicate the vast expanse of His power. The
vast expanse of power has two meanings. One is that God is capable of
creating any essence (*dhāt*) or quiddity (*māhiyyah*) which is a
possible being (*mumkin al-wujūd*) although He has not created every
possible being according to His wisdom, knowledge and will.

Instead, He has created that which is necessitated by the system of what
is best and most wholesome. Another meaning is that all creatures are
linked with the power of God. From this perspective, there is no
difference between the physical and non-physical beings, human and
non-human. As a result, the human actions are also within the realm of
the vast expanse of God’s power.

The term “universality of God’s power” contained in books of theology
refers to the second meaning. This point is raised here because some
theologians have set limits on the scope of God’s power. For instance,
some of them have said that the power of God has nothing to do with the
undesirable actions done by human beings because they believe that such
a link between God’s power and those actions necessitates attributing
them to Him which is in conflict with the principle that God is free
from evil acts.[^7]

The reply to this is that the criterion for linking power to the
creatures also exists in the human actions, and that is their being
possible beings (*mumkin al-wujūd*). No possible being could exist
without the power of God. As Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعُمومِيَّةُ الْعِلَّةِ تَسْتَلْزِمُ عُمومِيَّةَ الصِّفَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the universality of the Cause necessitates the universality of the
Attribute [of Power].”[^8]

That is to say that the cause and criterion for linking God’s power to
the creatures (their essential contingence) is general. The link of
God’s power to the creatures, therefore, is also general and universal.

Meanwhile, an abominable act – on account of its being abominable –
cannot be ascribed to God, but rather from the perspective of its
existence and reality that it is encompassed by the power of God and in
this perspective, it is not abominable.

From the cosmic point of view, for example, honesty and lying are the
same and in this perspective, they are both ontologically ‘good’ but
moral goodness and evil are derived after the materialization of speech
(*takallum*) and judging them with the dictates of reason and religious
laws.

That which conforms to the laws of reason and religion is good,
otherwise it is bad. And the basis of this conformity or non-conformity
is indeed the freewill and desire of the human being; hence, moral
goodness or evil can be traced back to his action.

Power and Potentiality
----------------------

Power (*qudrah*) is a characteristic of the agent (*fā‘il*) while
potentiality (*imkān*) is a characteristic of action (*fi‘l*). In other
words, power is the attribute of the powerful (*qādir*) while
potentiality is the attribute of the possible (*maqdūr*). There is a
talk, therefore, about the link of power to action; potentiality (as
opposed to obligatoriness (*wujūb*) and refusal (*imtinā‘*)) has been
given as presumption on the issue or linkage of power, because the
obligatory (*wājib*) and impossible (*imtinā‘*) – on account of
concomitance with necessity (*ḍarūrah*) – cannot be subjected to or
bound by power.

Necessity in the Necessary by Essence (*wājib bi ’dh-dhāt*) means that
the *Wājib* is not in need of the link of an external power to His
existence. And necessity in the impossible by essence (*mumtani‘ bi
’dh-dhāt*) means that its absence it definite and its existence is
impossible. As such, it is will not be bound by power because the role
of power is to exert influence and bestow existence.

Reply to Some Misgivings
------------------------

At this juncture, one can easily reply to some misgivings in relation to
the universality of God’s power:

1. Can God create a being which He cannot annihilate after creating it?
If He cannot, it follows that His power is limited and if He can, it
follows that after creating it, His power is limited with respect to the
continuity of its existence.

The reply is that such a being is impossible by essence, because the
hypothetical being is possible by essence (*mumkin bi ’dh-dhāt*) and
necessary by essence (*wājib bi ’dh-dhāt*) at the same time. Being a
created one (*makhlūq*) it is possible by essence and being perishable,
it is impossible by essence. And this is contradiction in essence and
essential impossibility.

2. Can God create something similar to Himself? If He can, it follows
that the principle of His uniqueness is void and if He cannot, it
follows that His power is limited.

The reply to this is that such a being is impossible by essence, because
if he is similar to God, it follows that he is the Necessary Being by
essence, but since he is created, he is tantamount to non-being and
possible being by essence, and to be possible by essence and necessary
by essence at the same time is contradiction in essence, and it is
impossible.

3. Can God put the universe inside a chicken egg without making the
universe become smaller or the egg becoming bigger? If He can, it
follows that the law of proportionality of the container (*ẓarf*) and
the contained (*maẓrūf*) is invalid and if He cannot, it follows that
His power is limited.

The reply is that this assumption necessitates impossibility because as
hinted in the misgiving itself, the proportionality of the container and
the contained is a rational principle and denial of it necessitates
contradiction. That is, the contained is proportional and at the same
time not proportional to its container, and thus, not bound by power.

In reply to this question, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ تَبارَكَ وَتَعالىٰ لايُنْسَبُ إلَى الْعَجْزِ، وَالَّذي
سَأَلْتَني لايَكونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is to say that impotence or inability has no place in God, the
Blessed and Exalted, and that which is raised in the question is
impossible.[^9]

Review Questions
----------------

1. State the concept of power and write down the two views in this
regard.

2. State the difference between the free (*mukhtār*) and unfree
(*mawjib*) agent.

3. State the proof of God’s power while considering His being the
absolutely perfect.

4. Explain the proof of God’s power while considering the stable system
of the universe.

5. Write down the reason for the vast expanse of God’s power along with
its meaning.

6. What is the meaning of the term “universality of God’s power”?

7. Can the power of God be bound by things which are existentially
impossible by essence? Why?

8. Can God create a being which He cannot extinguish after creating it?

9. Can God create a being like Himself? Why?

[^1]: Talkhīṣ al-Muḥaṣṣil, p. 269.

[^2]: Qawā‘id al-Murād, p. 82.

[^3]: In this regard, see Talkhīṣ al-Muḥaṣṣil, p. 268; Qawā’id
al-‘Aqā’id, pp. 49-50; Irshād al-Ṭālibīn, p. 183.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Ṭalaq 65:12.

[^5]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 91.

[^6]: Ibid., Sermon 165.

[^7]: This notion has been attributed to the Mu‘tazilah school of
thought.

[^8]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 2, issue 2.

[^9]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) 9, ḥadīth 9.


