Lesson 15: Life, Pre-existence and Eternity
===========================================

Divine Life
-----------

One of the Attributes of Perfection of God is that of Life (*ḥayāh*), as
the name *Al-ḥayy* (the Ever-living) is one of the Most Beautiful Names
of God. The name *Al-ḥayy* has been applied to God in verses of the Holy
Qur’an, and in most cases, it is accompanied by the name or attribute
*Al-qayyūm* (the Self-existing). For example, it is thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللّهُ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah—there is no god except Him—is the Living One, the
All-sustainer.”***[^1]

In one verse, God has been described as the Living One who does not die:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى الْحَيِّ الَّذِي لَا يَمُوتُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Put your trust in the Living One who does not die.”***[^2]

In a verse quoted earlier, the expression of praise (*kalimah
al-tahlīl*) – *Lā ilāha illallāh* (There is no god but Allah) – comes
before the Name *Al-ḥayy*, but in other verses, the said Divine Name
comes before the expression of praise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُوَ الْحَيُّ لا إِلَهَ إِلا هُوَ فَادْعُوهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the Living One, there is no god except Him. So supplicate Him,
putting exclusive*** ***faith in Him.”***[^3]

This verse points to Eternal Life as exclusive for God, showing that
except Him, no one is ever-living, just as Godhood (*ulūhiyyah*) is
exclusive to God. What is meant, therefore, by *Al-ḥayy* in the verse
*“He is the Living One”* and the like is “the Living One by essence”
(*al-ḥayy bi ’dh-dhāt*). It means that there is no Living One by essence
except God and other beings receive the bounty of life from Him.

As such, God is the Living One by essence and the Origin of the lives of
other beings, and this is the meaning of His Self-existence
(*qayyūmiyyah*). *Al-qayyūm* (the Self-existing) means that God is the
Ever-standing and the Subsistence-bestower to the creatures, and since
His Life is essential and necessary, He knows no death and annihilation.

The Essence and Classifications of Life
---------------------------------------

*Ḥayāh* (life) has various functions:

1. It means existence and being. It is in view of this meaning of life
that the absolute existence is called ‘ever-flowing life’ (*ḥayāt
al-sāriyah*).[^4] In the Holy Qur’an, *aḥyā’* (to give life) is applied
to creation and origination. For instance, it is thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَحْيَاكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ إِنَّ
الإنْسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who gave life then He makes you die, then He brings you to
life. Indeed man is very ungrateful.”***[^5]

The phrase *aḥyākum* (He gave you life) is synonymous with the phrase
*khalqakum* (He created you) in this verse in which the opposite of
*ḥayāh* (life) is non-existence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ رَزَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ
يُحييکُم ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is Allah who created you and then provided for you, then He makes
you die.”***[^6]

2. *Ḥayāh* means derivation of the desirable effects from every thing,
and the opposite of *ḥayāh* in this function is non-derivation of the
desirable effects from every thing. For example, the revival of the
earth means the growing of plants in it and its fertility and
productivity, and the opposite is the ‘death of the earth’. The life of
the human being lies in taking a step toward innate guidance and thus he
must be a reasonable and religious person. For this reason, the Holy
Qur’an has considered religion the human being’s life, for the true
religion which is Islam is concomitant with the Divine disposition
(*fiṭrah*).[^7]

3. *Ḥayāh* means a salient feature of the existent which is the source
of performance of volitional acts. This kind of life can be found in the
various types of animals and through scientific studies, it has been
discovered that it also exists in plants (or at least some of them).
This kind of life has some salient features such as self-protection,
environmental adaptation, habit and disposition, nourishment, growth,
reproduction, objective-setting and selection, awareness and
potentiality. The last two features (awareness and potentiality) are the
most important and they manifest more in the human being. For this
reason, philosophers have defined life with these two salient features:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْحَياةُ هِيَ كَوْنُ الشَّيْءِ بِحَيْثُ يَصْدُرُ عَنْهُ الأفْعالُ
الصّادِرَةُ عَنِ الإَحْياءِ مِنْ آثارِ الْعِلْمِ وَالقُدْرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is to say that life means the existence of a thing in the form of
actions that emanate from living creatures – conscious actions on the
basis of power and freewill that emanate from them.[^8]

Let us elaborate [this aforesaid idea].. In studying the creatures, the
human being has found them to be of two types. One type consists of the
creatures which have only one state as long as they exist in terms of
sensory observation. Stones and similar objects belong to this type. The
second type consists of creatures whose powers and actions stop in many
cases although they exist and in terms of sensory observation, no defect
can be found in them. Examples of this type are the human beings and
various types of animals and plants.

In many instances, although their physical faculties and senses are
sound, they cannot make certain moves and turns. At this point, the
human being has arrived at the conclusion that this kind of creatures –
in addition to the sensory and physical faculties and powers – has a
distinctive feature which is the very source of feelings, mental
perceptions and actions anchored in knowledge and free-will. That
feature is called ‘life’. Therefore, life means a kind of existence from
which knowledge and power emanate: [^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْحَياةُ نَحْو وُجودٍ يَتَرَشَّحُ عَنْهُ العِلْمُ وَالْقُدْرَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Essence of Life with Respect to God
---------------------------------------

From the previous analysis, it becomes clear that *ḥayāh* (life) –
especially in its last meaning – is a degree of existential perfection
which is realized in every creature according to its capacity and level.
Knowledge, power and will can be regarded as among its properties and
effects. The essence of life with respect to God, therefore, is an
attribute which is concomitant with the said features and effects.

Of course, these features and effects are proportionate to the
existential level of God which is the very Necessity (*wujūb*) and Pure
Existence (*ṣirf al-wujūd*). Hence, although the meanings of the
Attributes and Names with respect to God – as well as to others – vary,
their manifestations point to an Indivisible (*basīṭ*) and Pure (*ṣirf*)
Being who is the very Life, Knowledge and Will, [and the ultimate source
of all who have life, knowledge and will].

The Proof of Divine Life
------------------------

Given the previous discussions, the proof of Divine Life also becomes
clear, for once an attribute is from the existential perfections in the
sense that it exists from the perfections of the Existent by Himself
(and not from the perfections of a specific natural, partial or similar
existent), no doubt, God is entitled to that perfection, for in the
Necessary Being by essence, there is no room for deficiency and
contingence. Any attribute which can be conceived for Him by general
possibility (in the sense that its materialization for Him is not
impossible), definitely exists in Him.[^10]

In his *Tajrīd al-I‘tiqād*, after proving [the existence of] power and
knowledge in God, Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ قادِرٍ عالِمٌ حَيٌّ بِالضَّرورِةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every powerful [and] knowledgeable [being] is necessarily living.”[^11]

That is, every powerful and knowledgeable creature is definitely alive,
and since God is Powerful and Knowledgeable, it follows that He has the
Attribute of Life.

Pre-existence and Eternity
--------------------------

All religious and theist personalities recognize God as Pre-existent
(*azalī*), Eternal (*abadī*), Everlasting (*qadīm*), Abiding (*bāqī*),
and Immortal (*sarmadī*). There are two viewpoints on the interpretation
of these attributes:

The first viewpoint which is popular and acceptable within the circle of
philosophers is that these attributes have been interpreted in relation
to time. On this basis, pre-existence (*azaliyyah*) and pre-eternity
(*qadam*) means that God has existed in all the past periods, nay even
before any earliest period that could be conceived, while eternity
(*abadiyyah*) and subsistence (*baqā*) means that God will exist at all
times to come. And immortality (*sarmadiyyah*) means that God’s Being
will exist at all times – both past and present. It is worth mentioning
that the scholastic theologians (*mutakallimūn*) have divided time
(*zamān*) into implied (*muqaddar*) and ascertained (*muḥaqqaq*) [of the
real and hypothetical time], and what they mean by time in interpreting
the abovementioned attributes is its general meaning.

This viewpoint is not free from controversy, for it is true that no time
does God not exist can be assumed but measuring pre-existence and
eternity on the basis of time necessitates treating God as a temporal
being. This is so while God is behind time as commonly acknowledged by
the theologians and theosophers. In reality, this interpretation stems
from a superficial and ordinary understanding of the existence of God.

The second viewpoint which is adopted by the theosophers maintains that
pre-existence and pre-eternity means that God’s Being is not preceded by
non-existence – whether non-existence by separation (*mafāriq*) or
non-existence by combination (*majāmi‘*) – as He is the Necessary Being
by essence, and eternity and subsistence imply that there will be no
non-existence (*‘adam*), posterior (*lāḥiq*) and accidental states
(*‘āriḍ*) in God’s existence as He is the Necessary Being by essence. In
other words, since God is the Necessary Being by essence, non-existence
or non-being – prior or posterior – has no place in Him.

Whenever we refer to prior non-existence, it is called pre-existence
(*azaliyyah*) and pre-eternity (*qadam*). Whenever we mean posterior
non-existence, it is named eternity (*abadiyyah*) and subsistence
(*baqā*). And whenever we imply both aspects, it is described as
immortality (*sarmadiyyah*). Sometimes *sarmadiyyah* is used as synonym
of *abadiyyah* and *baqā*, as in the following expression of Muḥaqqiq
al-Ṭūsī:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوُجُوبُ الْوُجودِ يَدُلُّ عَلىٰ سَرْمَدِيَّتِهِ وَنَفْيِ الزّائِدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And being the Necessary Being implies immortality and the negation of
added qualities.”[^12]

That is, being the Necessary Being proves that God is immortal and that
His immortality and subsistence are identical with His Essence and not
through the medium of a quality separate from His Essence (in contrast
to Abū ’l-Ḥasan al-Ash‘arī’s notion of God’s subsistence as separate
from His Essence).

The expression quoted above shows that the late Ṭūsī has measured
immortality on the basis of God’s being the Necessary Being by essence
and not on the scale of lack of temporal beginning and end.

Review Questions
----------------

1. State God’s Attribute of Life while keeping in view verses of the
Qur’an.

2. Explain briefly the different usages of *ḥayāh* (life).

3. Write down the definition of *ḥayāh* by the philosophers with
elaboration.

4. Explain the essence of life with respect to God.

5. Write down the proof of God’s life.

6. State the theologians’ viewpoint on pre-existence and eternity.

7. Write down the pre-existence and eternity of God from the viewpoint
of the theosophers.

[^1]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:255; Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:2.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Furqān 25:58.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Ghāfir (or al-Mu’min) 40:65.

[^4]: Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ al-Asmā’ al-Ḥusnā, p. 238.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Ḥajj 22:66.

[^6]: Sūrat ar-Rūm 30:40.

[^7]: ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 1, pp.
51-52.

[^8]: Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 417.

[^9]: ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 2, pp.
328-329.

[^10]: Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 418.

[^11]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 2, issue 3.

[^12]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 2, issue 7.


