Lesson 16: The Divine Will and Decree
=====================================

One of the Attributes of Perfection of God is that of will (*irādah*)
and decree (*mashiyyah*), as *Al-murīd* (the Desirous or Willing) is
considered one of the Divine Names. In the Holy Qur’an, the words
*mashiyyah*, *irādah* and *al-murīd* have not been used for God, but in
many verses the phrases *shā’ Allāh*, *yashā’ Allāh*, *arād Allāh*,
*aradnā*, *yurīd Allāh*, and *nurīd* have been used.

In view of these action words, the attributes of *mashiyyah* and
*irādah* and the nouns *shā’ī* (decree-giver) and *murīd* can be
abstracted and used as the Attributes and Names of God. In addition, the
usage of the said Attributes and Names can also be found in Prophetic
traditions.[^1]

Some theologians have regarded will and decree as an attribute while
others have treated them as two separate attributes, and something has
been transmitted regarding the dimensions of the difference between the
two.[^2] What can be inferred from the Qur’anic usages of these two
words is that *mashiyyah* is only used in cosmic (*takwīnī*) matters
while *irādah* is used in cosmic as well as legislative (*tashrī‘ī*)
matters. Keeping in view the totally of [relevant] verses of the Qur’an
and traditions, it can be argued that with respect to God, *irādah* and
*mashiyyah* refer to an attribute.

Some Views on the Essence of Will
---------------------------------

Different views have been expressed by philosophers and theologians on
the essence of will (*irādah*) with respect to God and whether it is one
of the Attributes of Essence or one of the Attributes of Action:

1. God’s will in relation to His Actions (cosmic will) is identical with
the origination of actions and His will in relation to human actions
(legislative will) is the command to execute the actions.

Shaykh al-Mufīd[^3] has subscribed to this view.[^4]

‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī who has also regarded the cosmic will of God as
one of His Attributes of Action has said, “The will which is attributed
to God is abstracted from His Action or from the Action itself which is
realized outwardly, or from the total realization of the Action.”[^5]

2. The cosmic will of God means His knowledge that the action which is
consistent with order is the best. This view is popular among the Muslim
philosophers.[^6]

3. The cosmic will of God means His knowledge that an action encompasses
what is good for the human beings and all other creatures. The
Mu‘tazilah and Imāmiyyah theologians who advocate this view call this
knowledge as *dā‘ī* (motive).[^7]

4. The will of God is an attribute separate from His knowledge, power,
and Attributes of Essence, and it is among the Essential and Eternal
Attributes of God. This view is acceptable to the Ashā‘irah.[^8]

5. The will of God is an Essential Attribute distinct from other
Essential Attributes, and at the same time, it is contingent (*ḥādith*).
Its state is either contingent in essence as claimed by the Karrāmiyyah
group,[^9] or contingent neither in essence nor other than essence
(*ḥādith lā fī maḥall*) as described by Abū ‘Alī and Abū Hāshim.[^10]

6. *Irādah* is one of the Attributes of the Divine Essence, but it has
negative sense; that is, the agency (*fā‘iliyyah*) of God is not based
on compulsion or forgetfulness (conscious and volitional).

This view has been adopted by Ḥusayn al-Najjār, a Mu‘tazilī
theologian.[^11]

7. The essence of *irādah* is exaltation (*ibtihāj*) and contentment
(*riḍā’*), and it is divided into two, viz. essential (*dhātī*) and
active (*fi‘lī*) *irādah*:

The essential exaltation and contentment is the essential will while the
active exaltation and contentment is the active will (*irādah-ye
fi‘lī*). Since God is Pure (*ṣirf*) and Absolute (*maḥḍ*) Being, He is
essentially elated (*mubtahij bi ’dh-dhāt*), and His Essence is being
Self-contented (essential contentment (*riḍā’ bi ’dh-dhāt* equals
essential will (*irādah-ye dhātī*)).

Meanwhile, essential exaltation and contentment necessitates exaltation
and contentment in the stage of action, for “Whoever loves something
loves its effects” (that is, exaltation and contentment in the stage of
action equals active will (*irādah-ye fi‘lī*)). Muḥaqqiq al-Iṣfahānī,
better known as Kampānī,[^12] has subscribed to this view.[^13]

Assessment of the Views
-----------------------

The first view which has regarded *irādah* as only an Attribute of
Action is consistent with some traditions transmitted from the pure
Imāms (*‘a*) about the Divine will and decree. We shall elaborate later.

The second and third views have consensus in interpreting *irādah* to
mean the eternal knowledge of God. Yet, they also differ [in the
detail]; in the second view, *irādah* is interpreted to mean knowledge
of the best order while in the third view, it refers to knowledge of the
exigency of the action. The second view is compatible with the criteria
of discursive intellect (*‘aql-e naẓarī*) while the third view is
harmonious with the standards of practical intellect (*‘aql-e ‘amalī*).
The discussion on the excellence of order belongs to the sphere of
theoretical intellect while the discussion on the exigency of an action
pertains to the domain of practical intellect. We shall review these two
views later.

No explanation or justification of the fourth view has ever been
transmitted, and it has been put forth as a mere claim. A review of it
shall be made after the following examination.

While considering *irādah* an Essential Attribute of God, the fifth view
has treated it as contingent (*ḥādith*). It is evident that
pre-existence (*azaliyyah*) and contingency (*ḥudūth*) cannot go hand in
hand.

The sixth view is also unacceptable because *irādah* is one of the
Positive Attributes (*al-ṣifat al-thubūtiyyah*) and not one of the
Negative Attributes (*al-ṣifāt al-salbiyyah*). Therefore, it must be not
identified as a Negative Attribute.

The point of strength of the seventh view is in interpreting *irādah* in
the realms of Essence and Action. Yet, the problem with this view is in
treating the concepts of exaltation (*ibtihāj*) and contentment
(*riḍā’*) as identical with those of will (*irādah*) and decree
(*mashiyyah*), and interchanging the two concepts is similar to
interchanging knowledge and power, which is inadmissible. In addition,
traditions stipulate that *irādah* is contingent and one of the
Attributes of Action, and not an Attribute of Essence.

An Examination and Analysis
---------------------------

The criterion for proving the Positive Attributes with respect to God is
that an attribute which exists from the perfections of the Being by
Himself (the Absolute Being) exists in God in the most perfect and
complete manner, for it is impossible for God who is the Necessary Being
to have no existential perfections.

However, some attributes are perfections of a particular being and not
by the Being that exists by Himself; for example, seeing by means of the
faculty of sight, ability to walk [by feet], and the like (from among
the perfections of the natural creatures). Such existential perfections
cannot be established for God because doing so necessitates corporeality
(*jasmāniyyah*), movement, change and other attributes of deficiency
which are concomitant with contingency (*imkān*) and insufficiency.

Meanwhile, the way of knowing whether an attribute is one of the
perfections of the Self-existent or one of particular existential
perfections (natural creatures) is to take away contingent (*imkānī*),
physical (*māddī*) and natural (*ṭabī‘ī*) traits from it. The concept
which remains after the purging is one of the Attributes of existential
perfection [of the Absolute Being].

However, if the essence of the said attribute also ceases to exist after
purging those traits, it follows that the said attribute is one of the
perfections of a particular being and not the Self-existent. For
example, knowledge in the human being has some characteristics and after
purging knowledge of those characteristics, nothing remains except
discovery (*inkishāf*) and presence (*ḥuḍūr*). That is, the reality of
the known (*ma‘lūm*) before itself is discovery and presence, and this
is the truth of knowledge. We can establish this truth for God.

Now, if we apply this method to *irādah*, we will find out that no other
attribute will remain except free-will (*ikhtiyār*). The essence of
*irādah* in the human being is a mental (*nafsānī*) state which is
derived from knowledge and desire (*shawq*). This mental state is only
necessary in relation to the actions of the limbs (*af‘āl-e jawāriḥī*),
and not necessary with respect to inward actions (*af‘āl-e jawāniḥī*)
which include *irādah*. That is, *irādah* is one of the voluntary
actions of the self (*nafs*) but it is not precedented by itself.
Meanwhile, once an action is materialized, *irādah* ceases to exist
whereas the attribute of free-will remains the same prior to, during,
and after, an action.

From the above analysis, it can be inferred that what is one of the
Attributes of Perfection for the Self-existent is the attribute of
*ikhtiyār* and not *irādah*, and that which is an Essential Attribute is
*ikhtiyār* and not *irādah*. It is true that *irādah* can be abstracted
from the stage of action, just as the attributes of *rizq* (sustenance)
and *al-rāziq* (the Sustainer) are abstracted from the stage of action.

The totality of the causes and preliminaries of the action are
attributed to God (relative to the agent or mover) as well as to action
(cause and effect relationship). In the context of the first
relationship, God is called *Al-murīd* (the Willing and Desirous One)
and the Divine Will is abstracted, while in the context of the second
relationship, the action is God’s object of will (*murād*).[^14]

It is worth mentioning that the present discourse pertains to the
derivation of the essence of *irādah* from knowledge or power, and not
the unity of its manifestations as the Divine Unity in the Attributes
demands. For example, the concept or essence of power is not identical
with the concept or essence of power, although they are the same for
being among the manifestations of the Divine Essence.

The Divine Will as Described in Traditions
------------------------------------------

As we have said earlier, *irādah* has been regarded in the traditions
(*aḥādīth*) as one of the Attributes of God’s Action, thereby
stipulating its being contingent (*ḥādith*). Interpreting it to mean
eternal knowledge is equally negated [in the traditions]. Now, we shall
quote below some examples of pertinent traditions:

1. Muḥammad ibn Muslim reported that Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألمَشِيَّةُ مُحْدَثَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The will [of God] is contingent.”[^15]

2. In a tradition transmitted by Ṣafwān ibn Yaḥyā from Imām al-Kāẓim
(*‘a*), after stating the characteristics of *irādah* in the human being
and that these characteristics are impossible with regards to God, the
Imām (*‘a*) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاِرادَةُ اللهِ هِيَ الْفِعلُ لا غَيْرُ ذلِكَ، يَقولُ لَهُ كُنْ
فَيَكونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The will of Allah is the action itself and nothing else. He say, ‘Be’
and it is.”[^16]

3. ‘Āṣim ibn Ḥamīd asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), thus: “Has God been the
Desirous (*al-murīd*) from eternity?” The Imām (*‘a*) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ المُريدَ لا يَكونُ إلاّ لِمُرادٍ مَعَهُ، بَل لَّمْ يَزَلْ عالِماً
قادِراً ثُمَّ أَرادَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed there cannot be the Desirous (*al-murīd*) without the object of
desire (*murād*). Instead, He has been all-knowing and all-powerful from
eternity and then He willed.”[^17]

4. Bakīr ibn A‘yan asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), “Are the knowledge and
will of Allah identical or distinct from each other?” The Imām (*‘a*)
replied:

“[His] knowledge is different from [His] will on account of which we
say, ‘I will do something if Allah *wills*,’ and we do not say, ‘I will
do something if Allah *knows*.’ Thus, that we say, “If Allah wills”
shows that He has not desired prior to this. Whenever He desires
something to materialize, it will materialize the way He wants it, and
the knowledge of Allah precedes His will.”[^18]

5. Imām al-Riḍā (*‘a*) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألْمَشِيَّةُ وَالْإرادَةُ مِنْ صِفاتِ الْأفْعالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The decree and will [of God] is among the Attributes of Actions.”[^19]

6. In his debate with ‘Imrān the Sabian, Imām al-Riḍā (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُ أَنَّ الْإِبْداعَ وَالْمَشِيَّةَ وَالْإِرادَةَ مَعْناها
وَاحِدٌ وَأَسْماؤُها ثَلاثَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And know that origination, decree and will have the same meaning and
they have three names.”[^20]

7. In a long debate between Imām al-Riḍā (*‘a*) and Sulaymān Marwazī,
the renowned Mu‘tazilī theologian of Khurāsān, that took place in the
court of [the ‘Abbāsid caliph] Ma‘mūn, one of the issues they disputed
on was whether the will of God is one of the Attributes of Essence or
the Attributes of Action and whether will is identical with knowledge or
a distinct attribute. Sulaymān has considered will one of the Essential
Attributes and interpreted it as knowledge (as the Mu‘tazilah do
subscribe) while Imām al-Riḍā (*‘a*) has regarded it as contingent and
an Attribute of Action.[^21]

Review Questions
----------------

1. Write down the difference between the will and the decree of God by
considering their Qur’anic usages.

2. State the views of philosophers and theologians about the Divine
will.

3. Write down the correct view about the essence of will with respect to
God along with its proof.

4. What is the criterion for establishing the Positive Attributes in
God?

5. What is the reply of Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) to the question of Bakīr
ibn A‘yan about God’s will?

[^1]: See Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Kitāb al-Tawḥīd, sections on the Attributes
of the Essence and Actions, and on the Divine will and decree.

[^2]: See Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī, Al-Mufradāt, under the words irādah and
mashiyyah.

[^3]: Shaykh al-Mufīd: the common designation of Abū ‘Abd Allāh Muḥammad
ibn Muḥammad ibn Nu‘mān al-Hārithī (d. 413 AH/1022) who was a great
Shī‘ah jurist (fiqh), traditionist (muḥaddith) and scholar of
scholasticism (mutakallim). Notable among his disciples were Sayyid
Murtaḍā ‘Alam al-Hudā, Sayyid ar-Raḍī, Shaykh al-Ṭūsī, and al-Najashī.
Around 200 works are attributed to him, from which Kitāb al-Irshād,
Ikhtiṣāṣ, Awā’il al-Maqālāt, Al-‘Amalī, and Al-Maqna‘ah can be cited.
See Shaykh al-Mufīd, Kitāb al-Irshād: The Book of Guidance into the
Lives of the Twelve Imāms, trans. I.K.A. Howard (London: The Muhammadi
Trust, 1981), introduction, pp. xxi-xxvii; Martin J. McDermott, The
Theology of al-Shaikh al-Mufīd (Beirut: Dar al-Mashreq, 1978),
introduction, pp. 8-45. [Trans.]

[^4]: Shaykh al-Mufīd, Awā’il al-Maqālāt, p. 58.

[^5]: ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Nihāyat al-Ḥikmah, stage (marḥalah) 12,
chap. 10.

[^6]: Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ Manzūmah, farīdah 2, discussion on will
(irādah); Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 317.

[^7]: Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī, Qawā’id al-‘Aqā’id, p. 57.

[^8]: Sayyid Sharīf Gurgānī, Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 8, pp. 81-87.

[^9]: Karrāmiyyah: followers of Muḥammad ibn Karrām Sijistānī (died 255
AH). This sect has subscribed to anthromorphism and incarnation.

[^10]: Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī, Qawā’id al-‘Aqā’id, p. 57; Sa‘d al-Dīn
Taftazānī, Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 4, p. 128.

[^11]: Abū ‘Abd Allāh Ḥusayn Najjār al-Rāzī (died 320 AH).

[^12]: Muḥaqqiq al-Iṣfahānī or Kampānī: the author of an important and
popular book entitled Nihāyat al-Dirāyah, which is a gloss to the
treatise Kifāyat al-Uṣūl by Muḥaqqiq Khurāsānī.

[^13]: Nihāyat al-Dirāyah, vol. 1, p. 116.

[^14]: ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Nihāyat al-Ḥikmah, stage 12, chap. 11;
Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, pp. 315-316, 353 (‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī’s
gloss to Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah).

[^15]: Shāykh al-Ṣadūq, Kitāb al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) on the Attributes
of Essence, ḥadīth 18.

[^16]: Ibid., ḥadīth 17.

[^17]: Ibid., ḥadīth 15.

[^18]: Ibid., ḥadīth 16.

[^19]: Ibid., section (bāb) on the Divine will and decree, ḥadīth 5.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 435.

[^21]: Ibid., pp. 445-454.


