Lesson 17: The Divine Speech and Word
=====================================

There is no dispute that speech (*takallum*) is one of the Positive
Attributes and Attributes of Perfection of God, as this point has been
mentioned in Qur’anic verses and traditions (*aḥādīth*). However,
different views have been put forth on the meaning of God’s word
(*kalām*) and whether God’s word is contingent or eternal, and whether
speech is one of the Attributes of Essence or Attributes of Action of
God.

1. The Ahl al-Ḥadīth and Ḥanbalīs
---------------------------------

The Ahl al-Ḥadith and Ḥanbalīs consider the word of God (*kalām Allāh*)
consisting of the letters and sounds (literal word). Yet, they are of
the opinion that *kalām* is eternal and an Attribute of God’s
Essence.[^1] There is no doubt in the incorrectness of this view. If
letters and sounds are physical things and contingent in time, how can
one consider *kalām* which is composed by them to be eternal?

2. Justice-Oriented Theologians
-------------------------------

The Mu‘tazilah and Imāmiyyah theologians regard the word of God as
verbal (*lafẓī*) and contingent (*ḥādith*). On this basis, attributing
speech to God is like ascribing an action to an agent (*isnād-e ṣudūrī*
or emanative attribution) and not like attributing an accidental quality
(*‘arḍ*) to an object of accident (*ma‘rūḍ*) (*isnād-e ‘arūḍī* or
accidental attribution). For example, *mun‘im* (benefactor) means the
provider of blessing (*ni‘mah*) to others; *rāziq* (sustainer) means the
bestower of sustainance (*rizq*); in the same manner, *mutakallim*
(speaker) means the originator of speech (*kalām*).[^2]

On this basis, the Holy Qur’an, as the word of God, is created and
contingent. Qur’anic verses clearly indicate the word of God is
contingent:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ مَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ ذِكْرٍ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ مُحْدَثٍ إِلا
اسْتَمَعُوهُ وَهُمْ يَلْعَبُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There does not come to them any new reminder from their Lord but
they listen to it as they play around.”***[^3]

What is meant by ‘reminder’ (*dhikr*) in this verse is the Holy Qur’an,
as another verse has thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have sent down the Reminder and indeed We will preserve
it.”***[^4]

The first verse implies that their Lord does not send for them a new
reminder (the Qur’an) except that they listen to it, but they do not
take it seriously as they are busy in amusement and entertainment. Also,
the second verse talks about the revelation of the Qur’an and guarantees
its preservation. Anything which is pre-existent and eternal is
indestructible, let alone having in need of any protection.

And in another place, it is thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِنْ أَحَدٌ مِّنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ اسْتَجَارَكَ فَأَجِرْهُ حَتَّى
يَسْمَعَ كَلاَمَ اللّهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If any of the polytheists seeks asylum from you, grant him asylum
until he hears the Word of Allah.”***[^5]

Characteristics such as “originated” (*muḥdath*), “listening to the
Reminder and Word of God,” “sending down” (*nuzūl*), and “protection”
(*ḥifẓ*) all point to the truth that the word of God consists of letters
and sounds; that is, it is a verbal speech which is created and
contingent.[^6]

3. The Ash‘arīs and Māturdīs
----------------------------

The Ash‘arīs and Māturdīs have classified word or speech (*kalām*) into
two, viz. verbal (*lafẓī*) and intrinsic (*nafsī*).

[Accordingly,] the Qur’an and other heveanly books which have been
revealed to prophets of God are verbal word and contingent, but the
verbal word is not the essence of the word (or the real word). The
essence of the word or the real word is the intrinsic word (*kalām-e
nafsī*); that is, the truth in the self or essence of the speaker which
is represented by the verbal word. The intrinsic word with respect to
God is the Attribute of Essence and is Eternal.

The main disagreement with the Ash‘arīs and Mārturdīs is in proving the
intrinsic word. Once it is proven, there will be no dispute that it is
essential and eternal. Similarly, there will be no doubt that a verbal
word cannot be without any source and that there is something in the
human being which the verbal word represents. But the bone of contention
is whether or not this truth is distinct from knowledge, or free-will
and compulsion.

The proponents of the intrinsic word maintain that sometimes a person
reports something which he knows to be the contrary or he doubts its
accuracy. Therefore, that which is the origin of the verbal word cannot
be knowledge.[^7]

This argument is not complete because in the above assumption, knowledge
is not assented to (*taṣdīqī*) yet there is conceptual (*taṣawwurī*)
knowledge. That is, a person who knows the incorrectness of a subject
makes a conception of it and relays this conception. The same is true
with doubt.

Their other argument is that sometimes a person commands to do a certain
thing or forbids it without having the will or abhorrence, as the case
may be, to do so. Therefore, the verbal word in the form of command and
prohibition cannot be considered originating from will or abhorrence;
rather, there is something in the human being which is the intrinsic
word.[^8]

This argument is also incorrect because in the above assumption, there
is no absolute will and abhorrence in relation to the action – to bid or
forbid. Without any doubt, in such an assumption the Bidder or Forbidder
has a motive, such as giving trial to His servant and the like.
Regardless of His motive, it is His desire or abhorrence, and it is the
origin of His command and prohibition.

Yet another argument of the proponents of intrinsic word (*kalām-e
nafsī*) is that in terms of verbal derivation, the speaker
(*mutakallim*) is the one from who the word or speech (*kalām*) emanates
and not the one who originates the word or speech, for the agent of
movement creates the movement in someone than himself and yet he is not
called the mover (*mutaḥarrik*); rather *mutaḥarrik* is that which the
movement emanates from. Meanwhile, since the verbal word’s emanation
from God is impossible, it must be said that beyond the verbal word is
another word which is no other than the intrinsic word.[^9]

The criticism to the above argument is that in terms of derivatives, one
cannot make an analogy. For example, a person is called “killer” who is
the agent of killing of another person; the beater is he who is the
agent of beating another person; the helper is he who is the agent of
helping another person. One can never consider killing, beating and
helping accidental to the agents of those actions. It is true that the
said actions originate from their respective agents, yet it is not
accidental existence (*qiyām-e ‘arūḍī*) but rather emanative existence
(*qiyām-e ṣudūrī*).

The existence of the origin of their derivatives, therefore, is
sometimes in the form of emanative existence as well as accidental
existence at other times. The existence of movement in the mover is an
accidental existence while the existence of beating in the beater is an
emanative existence. The existence of word or speech in the speaker is
of the latter case.

The following holy verse is also quoted to substantiate of the
“intrinsic word”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَيَقُولُونَ فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَوْلا يُعَذِّبُنَا اللَّهُ بِمَا
نَقُولُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they say to themselves, ‘Why does not Allah punish us for what
we say?!’”***[^10]

In this regard, they have also cited the couplet of Al-Akhṭāl[^11] below
[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْكَلامَ لَفِي الْفُؤادِ وَإنَّما جَعَلَ اللِّسانَ عَلَى
الْفُؤادِ دَليلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yet, such usages are metaphorical and not real and their implication is
nothing except mental conceptions and psychic perceptions, and in no way
do they prove the existence “intrinsic word” as a reality distinct from
conceptions and perceptions.

4. Muslim Philosophers
----------------------

According to the Muslim philosophers, it is true that the word *kalām*
has been coined for words which denote particular meanings, but the
motive or purpose for which a word is coined includes a verbal word as
it conveys and points to the motive behind coining the verbal word. This
point is not limited to verbal word. Sometimes, by means of signs and
the like, one may convey to others his or her message or point. In
conventional practice, this way of conveying message is called “speech”
or “speaking”.

Meanwhile, there is no doubt that in relation to its agent, an action
denotes two things. It denotes the existence of the agent as well as its
qualities. On this basis, it can be said that the universe which is an
Action and a creation of God expresses His existence and Attributes of
Perfection. Therefore, the universe is a Word of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْكُلُّ بِالذّاتِ لَهُ دِلالَةٌ حاكِيَةٌ جماله، جلاله
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So everything essentially denotes Him,*

*Expressing His Beauty and Glory.*[^13]

The Word of God in the Qur’an and the Traditions
------------------------------------------------

In the Qur’an and traditions, the word of God has broad meanings. We
shall only limit to the verbal word, active word and other types of
speech:

1. Some verses about the verbal word have been quoted earlier. We shall
quote here a Qur’anic verse about God’s interlocution with Prophet Mūsā
(Moses) (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَكَلَّمَ اللَّهُ مُوسَى تَكْلِيمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And to Moses Allah spoke directly.”***[^14]

In other verses of the Qur’an, examples of God’s interlocution with
Prophet Mūsā (*‘a*) have been mentioned. It is stated in those verses
that in the valley of Ṭuwā Prophet Mūsā (*‘a*) heard a voice from God,
and in this way, God imparted some truths to him.[^15]

2. The Holy Qur’an has named the Holy Messiah (*‘a*) “Word of Allah”
(*kalimat Allāh*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّمَا الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ
وَكَلِمَتُهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only an apostle of Allah, and
His Word.”***[^16]

3. The Divine decree is also another kind of God’s word:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَةُ رَبِّكَ الْحُسْنَى عَلَى بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ بِمَا
صَبَرُوا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord’s best word [of promise] was fulfilled for the
Children of Israel because of their patience.”***[^17]

4. Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has regarded the word of God as His action, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُ لِمَنْ أَرَادَ كَوْنَهَ: »كُنْ« فَيَكُونُ لاَ بِصَوْتٍ
يَقْرَعُ وَلَا بِنِدَاءٍ يُسْمَعُ وَإِنَّمَا كَلَامُهُ سُبْحَانَهُ
فِعْلٌ مِنْهُ أَنْشَأَهُ وَمَثَّلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When He intends to create someone He says, ‘Be’ and there he is, but
not through a voice that strikes [the ears] is that call heard. His
speech is an act of His creation.”[^18]

The Contingency of God’s Word
-----------------------------

The “word” (*kalām*) as God’s action – verbal or non-verbal word – is
contingent. If one can conceive of a word or speaker in the Divine
Essence in such a way that it is not traceable to the verbal and active
word, that word shall be deemed pre-existent (*qadīm*).

However, in view of the fact that the prevalent usage of “word” is the
verbal one and that the same meaning is intended whenever a word is used
without any exceptional context, it cannot be treated as uncreated. Be
that as it may, since the word *makhlūq* (creature or created being) is
sometimes used to mean artificial word or speech, some great religious
personalities have not permitted the application of the word *makhlūq*
to the Qur’an. For instance, Shaykh al-Mufīd has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقُولُ أَنَّ الْقُرْآنَ كَلَامُ اللهِ، وَاَنَّهُ مُحْدَثٌ كَمَا
وَصْفَهُ اللهُ تَعَالىٰ وَ اَمْنَعُ مِنْ أِطْلاقِ القَولِ عَلَيهِ
بِأَنّهُ مَخْلوقٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I say that the Qur’an is indeed the Word of Allah, and it is indeed
contingent as Allah, the Exalted, has described it, and I do not permit
the application of the word ‘created’ to it.”[^19]

The Immaculate Imāms (‘a) and the Issue of Contingency of God’s Word
--------------------------------------------------------------------

In the history of Islam, especially during the ‘Abbāsid period, the
discussion or dispute concerning the contingency (*ḥudūth*) or
pre-existence (*qadam*) of the Word of God among the various currents
had reached its zenith, going beyond the level of a purely academic
question and acquiring a political undertone. During that time, some
individuals would be severely persecuted, imprisoned and tortured for
simply believing that the Qur’an is pre-existent. For this reason, this
period is also named the “Period of Inquisition” (*dawrat al-maḥnah*).

The wise stance of the *Ahl al-Bayt* Imāms (*‘a*) on this issue was very
instructive. On one hand, they did not consider it permissible to enter
into a dispute which had political undertones and a source of discord
and violence against the Muslim *ummah*, urging their followers to
refrain from it. Notwithstanding this, they would subtly express their
view about the contingency of the Qur’an and the Word of God.

Rabbān ibn Ṣalt asked Imām al-Riḍā (*‘a*), “What do you say about the
Qur’an?” In reply, the Imām (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَامُ اللهِ لَا تَتَجَاوَزُوهُ وَلَا تَطْلُبُوا الهُدَى في غَيْرِهِ
فَتَضِلّوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is the Word of Allah. Do not violate it and do not seek guidance
from other than it for you will be misguided.”[^20]

Muḥammad ibn ‘Īsā ibn ‘Ubayd has reported that in a letter about the
contingency of the Qur’an, Imām al-Jawād (*‘a*) thus wrote to some of
his followers in Baghdad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْسَ الْخَالِقُ إلَّا اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَمَا سِوَاهُ
مَخْلُوقٌ، وَالْقُرْآنُ كَلَامُ اللهِ لَا تَجْعَلْ لَهُ اِسْمَاً مِنْ
عِنْدَكَ فَتَكُونَ مِنَ الضّالّينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no creator other than Allah, the Glorious and Exalted, and
anything other than Him is created, and the Qur’an is the Word of Allah.
Do not coin by yourself any name for it lest you will become one of the
misguided ones.”[^21]

In this letter, the Imām (*‘a*) has expressed in a subtle manner the
contingency of the Qur’an while prohibiting the description of it with
such modifiers as “created” and the like.

The Absence of Lie in God’s Word
--------------------------------

Honesty in words and deeds is intrinsically good while telling a lie is
intrinsically evil. And God is immune from any undesirable quality. In
other words, honesty and truthfulness are among the Attributes of
Perfection, and God is entitled to all the existential perfections. As
such, He is truthful. In this regard, the Holy Qur’an has thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَنْ أَصْدَقُ مِنَ اللَّهِ حَدِيثًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who is more truthful in speech than Allah?”***[^22]

Review Questions
----------------

1. State the point of view of the justice-oriented theologians regarding
the word of God.

2. Write down the view of the Ahl al-Ḥadīth and Ḥanbalīs concerning the
word of God along with the criticism to it.

3. State the basis of Qur’anic verses on the contingency of the word of
God.

4. Write down the opinion of the Ash‘arīs and Mārtudīs about the word of
God along with the criticism to it.

5. The proponents of the “instrinsic word” argue that in terms of verbal
derivation, the speaker (*mutakallim*) is the one from who the word or
speech (*kalām*) emanates and not the one who originates the word or
speech. Write down the problem with this opinion.

6. State the manifestations of the word of God in the verses of the
Qur’an and traditions (*aḥādīth*).

7. What is the basis of God’s truthfulness?

[^1]: Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, Uṣūl al-Dīn, p. 56; Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa
’n-Niḥal, vol. 1, p. 106.

[^2]: Qāḍī ‘Abd al-Jabbār, Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah, p. 367; Ibn Maytham
al-Baḥrānī, Qawā‘id al-Murād, p. 92.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Anbiyā’ 21:2.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Ḥijr 15:9.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā‘ah) 9:6.

[^6]: Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah, p. 360.

[^7]: Sharḥ al-Mawāfiq, vol. 8, p. 94.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 4, p. 147.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Mujādilah 58:8.

[^11]: Al-Akhṭal (Ghiyāth ibn Ghawth al-Taghlibī al-Akhṭal) (c. 640-710
CE): one of the most famous Arab poets of the Umayyad period and a
Christian belonging to the tribe of Taghlib in Mesopotamia. [Trans.]

[^12]: Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 4, p. 150.

[^13]: Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ al-Manzūmah. What has been said speaks of
the active word and speech of God. Philosophers have also conceived of
the essential word and speech for God. For further information, see
Ayḍāḥ al-Ḥikmah, vol. 2, pp. 585-586.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:164.

[^15]: Sūrat Ṭā Hā 20:11; Sūrat al-Qaṣaṣ 28:30.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:171.

[^17]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:137.

[^18]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 186.

[^19]: Awā’il al-Maqālāt, p. 53.

[^20]: Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) 3, ḥadīth 2.

[^21]: Ibid., ḥadīth 4.

[^22]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:87.


