Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم‌ اللّه‌ الرّحمن‌ الرّحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful***

Reflection, intellection and freewill are among the most manifest
peculiarities of the human being. Throughout his life, man engages in
the discovery of the universe by utilizing these features and on the
basis of which he chooses a particular way and order in a bid to give
answers to his material and spiritual needs. In other words, human
actions in both the individual and social realms of his life demand that
they emanate and must be patterned from a kind of attitude about the
universe.

The totality of these methods and attitudes is the same with what is
technically called “religion” which may vary according to the type of
worldview of individuals. In a broader classification, religion can be
divided into two, viz. theistic and atheistic religion. In the same
manner, theistic religion can be classified into monotheistic and
non-monotheistic, and monotheistic religion, in turn, can be grouped
into original (immune from distortion) and non-original (distorted).

On this basis, man has never been and will never be able to live without
religion. What is meant by those who technically have no religion is
that they have not accepted the theistic religion, and the great mission
of the prophets of God is primarily to introduce the original theistic
religion to mankind – the religion whose main slogan is total submission
to the One and Only God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللَّهِ الإِسْلامُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed, with Allah religion is Islam.”***[^1]

Submission to God means not to worship anyone or anything other than God
and to obey the Divine laws and decrees. These laws and decrees are what
are technically called *sharī‘ah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنْكُمْ شِرْعَةً وَمِنْهَاجًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For each [community] among you We had appointed a code [of law] and
a path.”***[^2]

According to what have been mentioned in the verses of the Qur’an and
Prophetic sayings (*aḥādīth*), the Divine *sharī‘ah* is limited to five,
viz. those of Prophet Nūḥ (Noah), Ibrāhīm (Abraham), Mūsā (Moses), ‘Īsā
(Jesus), and the Holy Prophet (*‘a*),[^3] the last one being the
final[^4] and known as the Islamic *sharī‘ah* and Islamic creed.

The heavenly *sharī‘ah*s are identical and the same in terms of the
foundations and principles of beliefs. The belief in the One and Unique
Creator who has the loftiest Attributes of Perfection – *“To Allah
belong the Best Names”*[^5] – and in the abode of the Hereafter in which
all human beings will receive the appropriate recompense of all their
good or bad deeds, as well as the belief in the Divine plans conveyed by
the prophets to the people so as for them to distinguish the right path
from the wrong one are ideological foundations of all heavenly
*sharī‘ah*s.

Yet, today, the only *sharī‘ah* which must be compatible with the Divine
beliefs and precepts is the *sharī‘ah* of Islam, because the other
*sharī‘ah*s have suffered from distortion and alteration, and incorrect
beliefs such as the Trinity and extremism with respect to the prophets
have crept in. The beliefs which are introduced, therefore, as the
spiritual doctrines in the religions with heavenly origin are devoid of
originality and credibility, and one must look for these spiritual
doctrines in the Islamic theology and not in those of Christianity and
others.

Islamic theology is nourished by two sources, viz. reason (*‘aql*) and
revelation (*waḥyi*). Firstly, by citing axiomatic and definitive
principles, reason proves the existence, knowledge, power, and wisdom of
God, and on the basis of these rational theological doctrines, it also
establishes the necessity for revelation and the infallibility of the
prophets. And through revelation and prophethood (*nubuwwah*), it
recognizes anew all the spiritual doctrines.

Once again, by utilizing logical thinking, it embarks on elucidating and
reinforcing those doctrines. On this basis, although Islamic theology is
also anchored in revealed (*wahyānī*) texts and facts, it utilizes the
method of reflection and intellection in all cases, because through a
certain medium revealed facts are also traceable to rational principles
and foundations.

Of course, the method of rational thinking can be demonstrative,
falsification-oriented or dialectical. This is a sort of mission which
is shouldered by the Muslim theologian and to which his endeavor and
rhetoric is related. Since he aims at acquiring formal and real
knowledge of the spiritual beliefs, nothing will be acceptable except
demonstrative proof, but if he aims at the enlightenment and teaching of
the truth-seekers or the commitment and failure of the obstinate
truth-evaders, he will adopt the methods of rhetoric and wholesome
disputation. This is what God has commanded the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) so as
to invite mankind to the Divine religion with wisdom and beautiful
preaching and argue with them in the best way.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ٱدْعُ إِلِىٰ سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ
الْحَسَنَةِ وَجَادِلْهُم بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good advice and
dispute with them in a manner that is best.”***[^6]

Throughout the history of Islamic theology, various schools of theology
and tendencies which have different views and varied approaches in
ideological discourse have come into being. In citing outward meanings
and texts of revelation or relying on reason and rational analyses, most
of these schools of theology have gone into extremes.

The *Ahl al-Ḥadīth*[^7] and Ḥanbalīs from among the Sunnīs and the
*Akhbārī*s[^8] have adopted extreme literalism, just as the
*Mu‘tazilī*s[^9] have extremely kept aloof from the literal implications
of revelation in their rational analyses and interpretations. In their
midst, there have been also figures and schools (*madhāhib*) that
assumed the middle way, as Abū ’l-Ḥasan al-Ash‘arī[^10] and Abū Manṣūr
al-Māturīdī[^11] had such an idea. As to whether they achieved their aim
or not, it is another thing which can be dealt with elsewhere.

If we fairly and meticulously reflect on this, we will find out that out
of these scholastic tendencies and schools of Muslim theology, the only
school (*madhhab*) which has correctly adopted the middle path is the
school of the Holy Prophet’s *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*). They are the ones
whom the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*)[^12] has called the Lesser of the Two
Weighty Things (*thiql al-aṣghar*) alongside the Qur’an which is the
Greater of the Two Weighty Things (*thiql al-akbar*), and clinging to
them as well as to the Qur’an is the source of salvation and freedom
from deviation.[^13]

In another statement, the Prophet (*ṣ*) has likened them to the Ark of
Noah[^14] and whoever embarks on it shall be saved from storm which does
not refer here to the storm of wind and drowning in the seas but the
storm of capricious and fallacious views and ideas. And anyone who turns
away from it will drown. Their approach – as Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has stated
– is to move along the middle way, and not to deviate toward the left or
right. It is in this way that the Book (Qur’an) and the *Sunnah* will
become immune from any type of distortion and alteration.[^15]

The Imāmiyyah theologians – whether those who had engaged in verbal
*jihād* in the presence of the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) or those who have
vigilantly defended the sanctity of the ideological beliefs during the
Period of Occultation (*‘aṣr al-ghaybah*)[^16] – have trodden the path
of the infallible Imāms (*‘a*). Because of their being not immune from
error, one cannot approve of each and every theoretical view and
practical approach that they have.

What is important, however, is that their strategic policy has been
designed and organized according to the fundamentals and principles of
the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*). In every period of time, they
have played their theological role according to the needs and
circumstances and in the arena of writing and compiling, they have been
able to produce valuable theological texts and now, Islamic thought and
conceptual civilization exists in a number of important sources.

It is evident that the precedence of change and development requires
that this approach must persist, and taking into account the changes and
needs of the time, the Muslim theologians must assume their theological
responsibility in the realm of speaking and writing.

The present book is a step toward this direction. It deals with a set of
ideological and scholastic questions based upon Islamic theology from
the perspective of Shī‘ah Imāmiyyah school of thought. Reason and
revelation (the Qur’an and *Sunnah*) have been the final reference and
arbiter in decisions and evaluations.

Meanwhile, the ideas and opinions of Islamic thinkers, Shī‘ah Imāmiyyah
scholars in particular, have been amply utilized. With the aim of
knowing the truth and exemplifying honest scholarship, the sources and
references of the views and opinions of others have been cited and
sometimes, their names or titles are even mentioned in the text or
footnote. As pointed out, the citation of the views and opinions of
others aims at knowing the truth and exemplifying honest scholarship as
well as to revive the names and profiles of the thinkers who have
suffered a lot in the way of religious pursuits and for whom blind
following and imitation have no meaning.

Structurally, the sections of this book have been arranged in textbook
style, and at the end of every lesson, related questions have been
selected, thus providing for a summary of the discussion, on one hand,
and an opportunity for self-test, on the other hand. Since brevity and
conciseness can be regarded as a principle in any textbook, this
approach has been taken into account in writing this book. It has been
tried, nevertheless, that the passage of the book be clear and fluent
and free from unfamiliar and obscure terms and complex or difficult
phrases. Be that as it may, the author does not regard his work as free
from any form of defect or error in terms of content and structure, and
he will most openly and sincerely welcome constructive criticisms of the
experts.

In closing, I deem it necessary to mention that in the cover of the
previous edition of this book, what was erroneously written as the title
is *Tarjumeh-ye Kitāb-e Muḥāḍirāt fī ’l-Ilāhiyyāt*. This state of
affairs had created ambiguities and amphibologies to the dear students
and seminarians. Henceforth, this is to note that this book entitled
*‘Aqā’id-e Istidlālī* (*Discursive Theology*) is an independent work and
it is neither a translation nor exposition of *Muḥāḍirāt fī
’l-Ilāhiyyāt*.

Of course, since both books are written by the same author and, on the
other hand, the present book has been written with the aim of replacing
the book *Muḥāḍirāt fī ’l-Ilāhiyyāt* for the Islamic seminaries for the
respected ladies, the discussions in the present work will have a
central role in understanding the subjects of the book *Talkhīṣ
al-Ilāhiyyāt* as many sections and topics of both books are similar or
the same. As such, it can be claimed that studying the book *I‘tiqādāt-e
Islāmī* is a means of understanding the subjects of the book *Muḥāḍirāt
fī al-Ilāhiyyāt*.

It is hoped that this work could strengthen and defend the Islamic
doctrines and elucidate them to the students of the genuine Islamic
beliefs.

‘Alī Rabbānī Gulpāygānī  
*The Islamic Seminary – Qum*  
*Farvardīn 21, 1384 AHS*  
*Rabī‘ al-Awwal 1, 1426 AH*

[^1]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:19. Unless otherwise stated, the translation in
this volume of Qur’anic passages is adapted from Sayyid ‘Alī Qulī
Qarā’ī’s The Qur’an with a Phrase-by-Phrase English Translation (London:
Islamic College for Advanced Studies, 2004). [Trans.]

[^2]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:48.

[^3]: “He has prescribed for you the religion which He had enjoined upon
Noah and which We have [also] revealed to you, and which We had enjoined
upon Abraham, Moses and Jesus, declaring, ‘Maintain the religion, and do
not be divided in it.’ Hard on the polytheists is that to which you
summon them” (Sūrat al-Shūrā 42:13). See also Al-Burhān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān, vol. 4, pp. 179-178. The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the
Arabic invocative phrase, ‘alayhi’s-salām, ‘alayhim’us-salām, or
‘alayhā’s-salām (may peace be upon him/them/her), which is mentioned
after the names of the prophets, angels, Imāms from the Prophet’s
progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^4]: Sūrat al-Aḥzāb 33:40; Ḥadīth on the Station of Guardianship
(ḥadīth al-manzilah) in Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, vol. 5, ḥadīth 56, p. 47
(English Translation); Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, vol. 4, ḥadīths 5913-15, pp.
1284-85 (English Translation).

[^5]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:180.

[^6]: Sūrat an-Nahl 16:125.

[^7]: Ahl al-Ḥadīth refers to many historical and modern Muslim
movements that emphasize the use of ḥadīth in matters of religious faith
and practices, as opposed to the Ahl al-Rayy or ‘the people of
rhetorical theology’. [Trans.]

[^8]: Akhbārī: follower of Akhbarism (akhbāriyyah), a movement, which
started within the Shī‘ah world about four hundred years ago. Its
originator was Mullā Muhammad Amīn ibn Muhammad Sharīf al-Astarābādī
(d. 1033 AH/1623-24). He openly attacked the Shī‘ah mujtahids in his
work al-Fawā‘id al-Madaniyyah, vehemently contesting the Usūlīs’ claim
that reason is one of the sources of fiqh. The Usūlīs’ hold the Qur’an,
the Sunnah, reason, and ijma‘ (consensus) as valid sources for deduction
of the rules of sharī‘ah. The Akhbārīs accepted the validity of only the
Sunnah and rejected the rest. Understanding the Qur’an, they claimed, is
beyond the capacity of a commoner, being restricted exclusively to the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). [Trans.]

[^9]: Mu‘tazilī: follower of Muʿtazilah, a Muslim school of
theology that flourished in the 8th-10th centuries Baṣrah and Baghdad,
which asserts that since knowledge is derived from reason (‘aql), the
injunctions of God are accessible to rational thought and inquiry, and
reason is the ‘final arbiter’ in distinguishing right from wrong.
[Trans.]

[^10]: Abū ’l-Ḥasan al-Ash‘arī (died 330 AH): the founder of Ash‘ariyyah
school of theology.

[^11]: Abū Manṣūr Māturīdī (died 333 AH): the founder of Māturīdī school
of theology.

[^12]: The abbreviation, “ṣ”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
ṣallallāhu ‘alayhi wa ālihi wa sallam (may God’s blessings and peace be
upon him and his progeny), which is mentioned after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muḥammad (ṣ). [Trans.]

[^13]: It alludes to the Tradition on Two Weighty Things (ḥadīth
al-thaqalayn) which is one of the uninterruptedly transmitted
(mutawātir) ḥadīths. See, inter alia, Muslim, Al-Ṣaḥīḥ, (English
Translation), Book 31, ḥadīths 5920-3; Al­Tirmidhī, Al-Ṣaḥīḥ, vol. 5,
pp. 621-2, hadīths 3786, 3788; vol. 2, p. 219; Al-Nasā’ī, Khaṣā’iṣ ‘Alī
ibn Abī Ṭālib, hadīth 79. [Trans.]

[^14]: It alludes to the Tradition on the Ark of Noah (ḥadīth
al-ṣafīnah) which is acceptable to and relied upon by ḥadīth scholars
(muḥaddithūn). See, inter alia, Al­-Ḥakim al­-Nayshābūrī, Al­-Mustadrak
‘alā ’ṣ-Ṣaḥīḥayn, vol. 3, p. 151; vol. 2, p. 343; Al-Ṣūyūṭī, Al-Dhurr
al-Manthūr, vol. 1, pp. 71-72; Ibn Ḥajar al-Makkī, Al-Sawā’iq
al-Muhriqah, p. 140. [Trans.]

[^15]: As recorded in Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 16, Imām ‘Alī (‘a) said:
الْيَمِينُ وَالشِّمَالُ مُضَلَّةٌ، وَالطَّرِيقُ الْوُسْطَىٰ هِيَ
ٱلْجَادَّةُ عَلَيْهَا بَاقي ٱلْكِتَابِ وَآثَارُ النُّبُوَّةِ. “On right
and left there are misleading paths. Only the middle way is the [right]
path which is the Everlasting Book and the traditions of the Prophet.”

[^16]: Minor Occultation (ghaybat al-ṣughrā): the period of about 70
years (260 AH/872 CE-329 AH/939 CE) when the Twelfth Imām Muḥammad
al-Mahdī was hidden from the physical plane but remained in
communication with his followers through a succession of four appointed
deputies, viz., ‘Uthmān ibn Sa‘īd, Muḥammad ibn ‘Uthmān, Ḥusayn ibn Rūḥ,
and ‘Alī ibn Muḥammad. At the death of the fourth deputies no successor
was named, and the Major Occultation (ghaybat al-kubrā) began, and
continues to this day. See Muhammad Bāqir as-Sadr and Murtadā Mutahhari,
Awaited Saviour (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications),
http://www.islam.org/saviour/index.htm; Jassim M. Husain, The
Occultation of the Twelfth Imām: A Historical Background (London:
Muhammadi Trust, 1982); Ibrāhīm Amīni, Al-Imām Al-Mahdī: The Just Leader
of Humanity, trans. ‘Abdul ‘Azīz Sachedina (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications), http://www.al-islam.org/mahdi/nontl/index.htm. [Trans.]


