Lesson 18: The Attributes of Khabariyyah
========================================

In an earlier discussion, we have pointed out that some of the Divine
Attributes are called “Transmitted Attributes” (*ṣifāt al-khabariyyah*).
These are Attributes of God which are mentioned in verses of the Qur’an
and Prophetic traditions, and if we believe in their outward meaning and
implication, we will succumb to the notion of anthromorphism and
incarnation.

Examples are “settling on the Throne” (*istawā’ ‘ala ’l-‘arsh*) in the
verse *“The All-beneficent settled on the Throne*,*”*[^1] “face”
(*wajh*) in the verse *“Yet lasting is the Face of your Lord, majestic
and munificent*,*”*[^2] and “hand” (*yadd*) in the verse *“The hand of
Allah is above their hands.”*[^3] In this regard, Shahristānī has said:

“A group of the predecessors (*ṣalaf*) used to affirm Transmitted
Attributes such as *yadayn* (hands) and *wajh* (face) for God, without
interpreting (*ta’wīl*) them, but they would say, ‘Since these
attributes have been transmitted in religious texts, we shall call them
‘transmitted attributes’’.”[^4]

Regarding the semantics of these attributes, different viewpoints and
approaches have been advanced. In this lesson, we shall state and
examine them:

Literalism and Anthropomorphism
-------------------------------

A group of the Ahl al-Ḥadīth who are labeled *Hashwiyyah*[^5] clings to
the outward meaning of such verses, and as a result, they likened God to
His creatures and believed in anthropomorphism and incarnation.
Regarding them, Shahristānī has said:

“A number of the Ahl al-Ḥadīth *Ḥashwiyyah* openly subscribed to
anthropomorphism and affirm limbs and dimensions, ascent and descent,
movement and transfer for God. Moreover, they attributed baseless
narrations to the Holy Prophet (*‘a*), most of which were taken from
Jews, and regarding the Qur’an, they believed that even its letters,
sounds and words are pre-existent and eternal.”[^6]

Regarding the notion of anthropomorphism, Ibn Khaldūn[^7] has also said:

“But there were a few innovators in their (*ṣaḥābah* and *tābi‘ūn*) time
who occupied themselves with the ambiguous verses and delved into
anthropomorphism. One group operated with the plain meaning of the
relevant verses. They assumed anthropomorphism for God’s essence, in
that they believed that He has hands, feet, and a face… Another group
turned to anthropomorphism with regard to the attributes of God. They
assumed direction, sitting, descending, voice, letter (sound), and
similar things [for God]… The [people who gave consideration to the
anthropomorphic verses] then tried to escape from the anthropomorphic
abomination by stating that [God has] ‘a body unlike [ordinary human]
bodies’ and ‘a direction unlike directions.’

By that, they meant: ‘[not as those things are used] in connection with
[human] bodies.’ This is no defense for them, because it is a statement
contradictory in itself and a combination of negation and assertion, if
both (negation and assertion) are used here for one and the same concept
of body. But if the two differ among themselves and [thus] disavow the
commonly accepted concept of body, those [people] rather agree with us
that God is devoid [of human attributes]. They consider the word ‘body
to be merely one of His names (used in a peculiar sense in connection
with Him). Things like that depend on [religious] permission.”[^8]

From the two statements above and similar views, it can be inferred that
those who believe in the outward meanings of the verses and traditions
related to the Transmitted Attributes are of two groups. One group is
concomitant with anthropomorphism and incarnation while another group is
not concomitant with the same and with such expressions as “a body
unlike [ordinary human] bodies,” they would declare themselves free from
the belief in anthropomorphism and incarnation although as Ibn Khaldūn
has mentioned, their offered solution does not solve the problem at all.
The second approach is prevalent among the present-day Salafīs
(Wahhābīs).[^9]

Ta’wīl Approach
---------------

In the area of Transmitted Attributes, many Muslim theologians and
exegetes (*mufassirūn*) have adopted the *ta’wīl* approach. *Ta’wīl*
with respect to the verses of the Qur’an has diverse meanings, one of
which is synonymous with *tafsīr* (exegesis). This meaning has been
widely intended among the earlier exegetes. For instance, ‘Abd Allāh ibn
‘Abbās is reported to have said, “I am among those who are firmly
grounded in knowledge (*al-rāsikhūn fi ’l-‘ilm*)[^10] and I know the
interpretation (*ta’wīl*) of the Qur’an.”

Another meaning of *ta’wīl* is to interpret a word contrary to its
outward meaning. This term is prevalent among the contemporary exegetes
and whenever the word *ta’wīl* is used without a particular context,
this is the intended meaning.

The third meaning for the term *ta’wīl* is for a verse to have numerous
meanings some of which are within some others. And one of them is the
outward meaning of the verse as understood by the common people, but its
other meanings are only known to God and those who are grounded in
knowledge.

The fourth application of *ta’wīl* regarding the Holy Qur’an is to trace
the roots or origins of words which do not belong in the category of
word or meaning but rather in the objective or external realities [of
the word]. Therefore, *ta‘wīl* is not exclusive to the allegorical
verses (*mutashābihāt*) and it is applicable to all verses of the
Qur’an.[^11]

Of the [different] meanings [of *ta’wīl* mentioned above], what is
intended or meant in theological discourses is the second meaning.
Mu‘tazilī, Imāmī, a number of Ash‘arī and Māturdī theologicans and those
of other schools of theology have adopted this method. Contrary to what
is sometimes thought of, this method is not exclusive to the
contemporary theologians. In fact, it had also proponents among the
predecessors (*salaf*). As Shahristānī has said, “Some of the
predecessors would interpret (*ta’wīl*) such attributes by taking into
account the compatibility of a word with its meaning.”[^12] Rashīd Riḍā
has also said, “The leading *salaf* scholars would sometimes interpret
the outward verses (*ẓawāhir*).”[^13]

Theological Foundation of Ta’wīl
--------------------------------

As a method of exegesis, *ta’wīl* has a special theological foundation,
and that is, in elucidating its sublime teachings, the Holy Qur’an uses
parables so as to make these teachings understandable to the common
people. As the Qur’an itself has stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الأمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah draws these parables for mankind so that they may take
admonition.”***[^14]

One of the main reasons behind the allegorical verses in the Qur’an is
this very principle.[^15] Yet, in order for the human mind not only to
dwell on the outward and metaphorical meanings and thus succumb to
anthropomorphism, there have been explicit and clear verses in the Holy
Qur’an that negate any kind of similitude between God and other beings.
It is thus stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nothing is like Him.”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor has He any equal.”***[^17]

Whenever one duly pays attention to these two points, he will neither
succumb to anthropomorphism nor fall prey to intellectual suspension.

On the basis of this rule, the correct method of *ta’wīl* can be
inferred, the meanings of the Transmitted Attributes can be found out
and it can be said that the word *wajh* (face) in connection with God
refers to the Divine Essence. When it is said, *“Everything is to perish
except His Face,”*[^18] it means that all essences and things will
perish except the Essence of God. The reason for describing the Essence
with the word *wajh* is that the face or countenance of every entity
symbolizes its essence or identity. For this reason, description of
their faces is used in order to determine the identity of individuals.

The word *yadd* (hand) or *yadayn* refers to the Divine Power. The verse
*“The hand of Allah is above their hands”*[^19] means that the Power of
God is superior to all powers and it is the bedrock of all powers. And
the verse *“I have created with My [own] two hands”*[^20] means that “I
have created Adam with My special power and Satan must not compare the
origin of creation of the human being which is earth (soil) with the
origin of his own creation which is fire and think of the superiority of
the fire to the earth as an obstacle to his prostrating before Adam.
Instead, he must take into account the superior power of the Creator of
Adam and show humility to that Infinite Power.

The word *istiwā* implies domination (*istīlā*) while *‘arsh* (throne)
denotes the Station of Control of the universe. Therefore, the verse
*“The All-beneficent, settled on the Throne”*[^21] implies domination
and supremacy of God in controlling the universe, just as the ‘throne’
in the human context is related to the position of authority and
administering a country.

Singular and Synthetic Appearance
---------------------------------

Concerning *ta’wīl*, this important point must be borne in mind that
whenever it is said that *ta’wīl* means giving meaning to a word in
contrast to to its outward meaning, this is true as long as this meaning
is intended in isolation and in a sentence or phrase. In the same
manner, a word is mentioned in isolation in dictionaries and its
meanings are stated.

But if we consider that word in a phrase or sentence, the metaphorical
or figurative meaning is not only not contrary to the apparent meaning
of the word but the same meaning can also be understood from the said
word, and conveying the real meaning needs a context; otherwise, it will
sometimes give the wrong meaning.

For example, whenever it is said that “The city is in the hand of a
mayor,” the word ‘hand’ is never understood to mean one of the bodily
limbs. In fact, anyone who can hear it will understand that it refers to
administering the city. Even if the mayor has no physical hands, the
same understanding will remain, and in principle, giving literal meaning
to the word is incorrect in such application.[^22]

Postponement (Tawaqquf) and Delegation (Tafwīḍ)
-----------------------------------------------

Another method which is used in connection with the allegorical verses
(*mutashābihāt*) and the Transmitted Attributes (*ṣifāt al-khabariyyah*)
is *tafwīḍ* (delegation). The outcome of this method is that one can
neither choose the outward meanings of the Transmitted Attributes as the
*mujassamah* and *mushabbahah* do nor can one apply the method of
*ta’wīl* as the *mu’awwalah* do. Some have claimed that the Companions
(*ṣaḥābah*) and the Followers (*tābi‘ūn*), nay the Muslims of the first
three centuries had adopted such method but historical evidence proves
otherwise.

No doubt, it could never be the method of the Imāms from the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and a number of the great Companions and Followers to
keep silence regarding the allegorical verses and to refrain from
expressing any opinion or view. In fact, they used to interpret and give
commentary on them through a different method.

We will explain this method of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) afterward.
Shahristānī has pointed out that a number of the predecessors (*ṣalaf*)
used to interpret the allegorical verses.[^23] Yes, it can be said that
most of the predecessors had adopted the method of delegation
(*tafwīḍ*).[^24] Shahristānīs have mentioned Mālik ibn Anas (died 179
AH), Sufyān al-Thawrī (died 161 AH), Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal (died 240 AH), and
Dāwud ibn ‘Alī al-Iṣfahānī (died 270 AH) as among the leading
predecessors who were proponents of *tafwīḍ*.[^25]

Bases of the Proponents of Tafwīḍ
---------------------------------

1. The Holy Qur’an has prohibited *ta’wīl* and considered pursuance of
the allegorical verses as a product of sedition-mongering and
*ta’wil*-orientedness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ في قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا
تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاءَ الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those in whose hearts is deviance, they pursue what is
metaphorical in it, courting temptation and courting its
interpretation.”***[^26]

And on the other hand, [belief in] anthropomorphism and incarnation is
also invalid. Therefore, the path of moderation is indeed that of
suspension (*tawaqquf*) and delegation (*tafwīḍ*).[^27]

This argument is incorrect because pursuance of the allegorical verses
can only be considered a sign of sickness of the heart and
sedition-mongering when it is in pursuance of the allegorical as it is,
but if the allegorical is correctly referred back to the definitive
(*muḥkam*) and interpreted in the light of the definitive, in this case
it cannot be blameworthy. In fact, it can be inferred from the sayings
and actions of the Prophet (*ṣ*), the Imāms from the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) and a number of leading Companions that such an action is
acceptable and permissible.

2. Useful *ta’wīl* is a conjecture and speculation, and not knowledge
and certainty, and concerning the Divine Attributes, one cannot rely on
conjecture and speculation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِنَّ الظَّنَّ لا يُغْنِي مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And indeed conjecture is no substitute for the truth.”***[^28]

This argument is also baseless because cases differ with each other.
Sometimes through discussion and determining the context, one can attain
knowledge and certainty. At other times, one cannot obtain anything
except conjecture and hypothesis. In the first case, we tend to believe
in the purport of a given verse with certainty, and as hypothetical in
the second case and this hypothetical belief is not legally (*shar‘ī*)
shunned because the said meaning – as stated in the discussion of
*ta’wīl* – is understood from the apparent meaning of the Word of God.

Furthermore, belief in the denotation of the apparent meaning of the
Word of God is necessary when the proof contrary to it is not obtained
because rejecting the outward aspects of the Religion without a reliable
context is not permissible. In other words, concerning the allegorical
verses, the preferable conjecture is a legal proof.[^29]

3. If the scope of *ta’wīl* is extended with respect to the allegorical
verses, the scope of *ta’wīl* will also be extended in all religious
laws and it will end up in esoteric interpretation (*ta’wīl bāṭiniyyah*)
which necessitates rejection of some religious laws.[^30]

It is evident that treating as one the esoteric interpretation and the
*ta’wīl* meant with respect to the allegorical verses has no logical
basis. On account of avoiding the esoteric (*bāṭinī*), one is not
supposed to deny the truth. Instead, by believing and acting upon the
truth, the esoteric must also be avoided.

Transmitted Attributes in the School of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
------------------------------------------------------------

In the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), anthropomorphism
(*tashbiyyah*) and incarnation (*tajsīm*) are vehemently considered
unacceptable, and at the same time, the method of delegation (*tafwīḍ*)
in the sense of keeping silence and not using the intellect in
discussing and scrutinizing the interpretation of the Attributes is not
approved also. Their method with respect to the Divine Attributes is
based upon negation and affirmation; that is, the salient features
related to the creatures (*makhlūqāt*) and contingent beings
(*mumkināt*) are negated from the Divine Attributes and their meanings
which are appropriate to the Divine Station.

Be that as it may, *tafwīḍ* in the sense that the human being is
incapable of comprehending the nature of the Essence and Attributes of
God and that he must make a pause at this point is affirmed and regarded
as one of the characteristics of those well grounded in knowledge
(*rāsikhūn bi ’l-‘ilm*).[^31]

In the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), *ta’wīl* is also a special
method and that is to determine the allegorical verses in the light of
the definitive verses, and to determine the use of every kind of
rational (*‘aqlī*) or textual (*naqlī*) hypothesis for elucidating the
definitive verses, and the use of every kind of rational or textual
hypothesis for elucidating the allegorical verses is not acceptable. The
acceptable *ta’wīl* is that which is done by referring to the definitive
verses of the Qur’an, authentic traditions or absolute rational
principles. Someone asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) concerning the meaning of
“God’s settlement on the Throne”. The Imām thus replied:

“This meaning cannot be denied because Allah has stipulated it. However,
it must not be imagined that the Throne of Allah is settled in a
particular place, on which He leans and sits. As a matter of fact, it is
Allah who looks after the Throne. His Throne is not located in a
particular place but rather encompasses the heavens and the earth. As He
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَسِعَ كُرْسِيُّهُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“His seat embraces the heavens and the earth.”***[^32]

“Therefore, we affirm the Throne or Seat which Allah affirms and we
reject that which He negates. That is, we never regard the Throne or
Seat as encompassing Allah and He as having in need of a place or
another being, but rather it is these creatures which are in need of
Him.”[^33]

Mālik ibn Anas (founder of the Malikī school of jurisprudence) was also
asked with the same question, but instead of explaining “God’s
settlement on the Throne,” he declared posing such questions as
innovation in religion (bid‘ah) – “And to ask about it is bid‘ah
(وَالسُّؤالُ عَنْهُ بِدْعَةٌ).” Meanwhile, by giving accurate answer,
Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) practically proved that to ask questions in order
to understand religious teachings is a natural and religious right of
individuals. What is important is that the motive behind asking is to
know what is unknown and not to engage in fruitless acrimonious
disputes.

Review Questions
----------------

1. Define the Transmitted Attributes (*ṣifāt al-khabariyyah*).

2. Who are these *ḥashwiyyah*?

3. As far as the Transmitted Attributes are concerned, which method has
been adopted by the majority of Muslim theologians (*mutakallimūn*) and
exegetes (*mufassirūn*)?

4. What are the meanings of *ta’wīl*? In theological discussions, which
meaning of it is intended?

5. What is meant by the theological basis of *ta’wīl*?

6. State the method of suspension (*tawaqquf*) and delegation (*tafwīḍ*)
with respect to the allegorical verses of the Qur’an and the Transmitted
Attributes (*ṣifāt al-khabariyyah*).

7. Write down two bases of argument for those who subscribe to *tafwīḍ*
along with the refutation to them.

8. What is the *Ahl al-Bayt*’s (*‘a*) approach to the Transmitted
Attributes?

9. Write down the special approach of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*)
concerning *ta’wīl*.

[^1]: Sūrat Ṭā Hā 20:5.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Raḥmān 55:27.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Fatḥ 48:10.

[^4]: Al-Milal wa ’n-Niḥal, vol. 1, p. 92.

[^5]: On the origin of their earning this name, it is said that they
were those who would attend the lecture sessions of Ḥasan al-Baṣrī and
they would sit in front rows. In the course of the lectures they would
sometimes interrupt and make incorrect expressions and undersirable
remarks. Ḥasan al-Baṣrī ordered them to sit at the fringes (ḥāshiyah).
As such, they became prominent with this appellation. See Muḥammad Zāhid
Kawtharī, introduction to Tabyīn Kidhb al-Muftarā, p. 20. Another
opinion on the origin of their name is that they would record at the
margins (ḥāshiyah) of their books every tradition they would learn
without scrutinizing its chain of transmission (sanad) or text (matn).
Ja‘far al-Sijistānī, Buḥūth fī ’l-Milal wa ’n-Niḥal, vol. 1, p. 123.

[^6]: Al-Milal wa ’n-Niḥal, vol. 1, pp. 105-106.

[^7]: Ibn Khaldūn (Abū Zayd ‘Abd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn Khaldūn
al-Ḥaḍramī) (1332/732 AH-1406/808 AH): a versatile Muslim scholar
considered to be a forerunner of several social science disciplines as
well as modern economics. [Trans.]

[^8]: Ibn Khaldūn, Al-Muqaddimah, pp. 423-424.

[^9]: In this regard, see the books written about the Salafīs and
Wahhābīs such as Āyatullāh Ja‘far Subhānī, Wahhabism (Tehran: Naba’
Organization, 1996), http://www.al-islam.org/wahhabism.

[^10]: See Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:7. [Trans.]

[^11]: ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 3, pp.
23-49.

[^12]: Al-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 92.

[^13]: Tafsīr al-Manār, vol. 1, p. 253.

[^14]: Sūrat Ibrāhīm 14: 25.

[^15]: For further information in this regard, see Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān, vol. 3, pp. 56-63.

[^16]: Sūrat ash-Shūrā 42:11.

[^17]: Sūrat al-Ikhlās (or at-Tawḥīd) 112:1-4.

[^18]: Sūrat al-Qaṣaṣ 28:88.

[^19]: Sūrat al-Fatḥ 48:10.

[^20]: Sūrat Ṣād 38:75.

[^21]: Sūrat Ṭā Hā 20:5.

[^22]: Abū Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī, Al-Jā’ al-‘Awām, p. 55; Āyatullāh Ja‘far
Subḥānī, Al-Ilāhiyyāt, vol. 1, pp. 327-328.

[^23]: Al-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, p. 92.

[^24]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 14, pp. 130-131.

[^25]: Al-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, p. 93.

[^26]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:7.

[^27]: Al-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, p. 104.

[^28]: Sūrat Yūnus 10:36; Sūrat an-Najm 53:28.

[^29]: Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī, Mafātīḥ al-Ghayb, vol. 7, p. 175.

[^30]: ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī has quoted this argument from Fakhr al-Dīn
al-Rāzī. See Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 14, p. 133.

[^31]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 90.

[^32]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:255.

[^33]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) on the rejection of
dualism (thanawiyyah) and atheism (zanādiqah), ḥadīth 1.


