Lesson 20: The Divine Justice and Wisdom
========================================

The Literal and Technical Meanings of Justice
---------------------------------------------

In Arabic lexicons, various meanings or usages of *‘adl* (justice) are
mentioned, and the most important of them are equilibrium and
proportionality, equality and fairness, balance or observance of
moderation in the affairs, equality and constancy.[^1] In any case, the
totality of the said meanings or usages is that every thing must be
located in its proper place such that it acquires its due and suitable
share from the universe and its excellences and it does not infringe
upon the right and share of others.

It can be said, therefore, that the statement of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) in
defining justice – “Justice puts things in their places”[^2] – is the
most accurate expression in this regard. The expression “to put all
things in their proper places and to grant rights to their owners” which
the philosophers have used in defining justice[^3] expresses the said
point.

Mawlawī [Rūmī] has expressed the above meaning in the following parable:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدل چه بود؟ وضع اندر موضعش‬ ظلم چه بود؟ وضع در ناموضعش
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدل چه بود؟ آب ده اشجار را ‬ ظلم چه بود؟ آب دادن خار را ‬ ‬
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What is justice? To put [a thing] in its [right] place.*

*What is injustice? To put it in its wrong place.*[^4]

*What is justice? Giving water to trees.*

*What is injustice? To give water to thorns.*[^5]

In analyzing the essence of justice, ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī has said:

“The essence of justice is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِقامَةُ المُساواةِ وَالمُوازَنَةِ بَيْنَ الأُمورِ بِأَنْ يُعْطىٰ
كُلُّ مِنَ السَّهْمِ ما يَنْبَغِى أَنْ يُعْطاهُ. فَيتساوى في أَنَّ
كُلّاً مِنْها واقِعٌ في مَوْضِعِهِ الَّذي يَسْتَحِقُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘[The essence of justice is] to strike a balance and equilibrium among
the things in such a way that the rightful share of each of them is
given. As a result, on account of being placed in their right places,
all of them are equal.’”[^6]

The ‘Allāmah has also added, thus:

“It becomes clear from what has been said that justice is concomitant
with goodness because goodness and beauty in the things mean that every
thing is such that a person is desirous of, and attracted to it. It is
evident that putting every thing in its proper place necessitates such
beauty.”[^7]

Justice in the Parlance of Theologians
--------------------------------------

The concept of justice in the parlance of theology is that it is God’s
Action, and its essence is goodness. That is, the actions of God are all
good and desirable, and He will never do anything wicked and
undesirable, and He will not abandon that which is necessary and good.

Qāḍī ‘Abd al-Jabbār Mu‘tazilī (died 415 AH) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ إِذا وَصَفْنَا القَديمَ تَعالىٰ بِأَنَّهُ عَدْلٌ حَكيمٌ،
فَالْمُرادُ بِهِ أَنَّهُ لا يَفْعَلُ القَبيحَ، أَو لا يَخْتارُهُ وَ لا
يُخِلَّ بِما هُوَ واجِبٌ عَلَيْهِ، وَأَنَّ أَفْعالَهُ كُلَّها
حَسَنَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whenever we describe the Eternal and Exalted as just and wise, we mean
that He does not do anything abominable. He does not abandon (through
bias and prejudice) that which is necessary for Him, and everything He
does is good.”[^8]

In this regard, Shaykh Sayyid al-Dīn al-Ḥamaṣī (died 6th century AH) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْكَلامُ فِي الْعَدلِ كَلامٌ في أَفْعالِهِ تَعالىٰ، وَأَنَّها
كُلَّها حَسَنَةٌ وَتَنزیهه عَنِ القَبائِحِ وَعَنِ الإِخْلالِ
بِالْواجِبِ في حِكْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The statement about justice is a statement about the actions of the
Exalted, and all of them are good and immune from the abominable things,
and He does not abandon that which is considered necessary by His
wisdom.”[^9]

Ḥakīm Lāhījī has also said:

“What is meant by justice is to describe the Essence of the Necessary
Being with the good and beautiful action and to free Him from an act of
injustice and abomination. In sum, just as the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*)
is the necessary perfection in the Divine Essence and Attributes, the
Divine Justice (*‘adl*) is the necessary perfection in the Divine
Actions.”[^10]

Other justice-oriented (*‘adliyyah*) theologians have also used similar
expressions in defining justice.

The justice-oriented theologians (Shī‘ah and Mu‘tazilah) acknowledge
that in matters related to the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) and justice
(*‘adl*), they are all indebted to Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*). The definition they
have given for the Divine justice is actually taken from the statement
of the Imām (*‘a*) in this regard. When the Imām (*‘a*) was asked about
the Divine Unity and justice, he replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْتَوْحِيدُ أَلَّا تَتَوَهَّمَهُ، وَٱلْعَدْلُ أَلَّا تَتَّهِمَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Unity means that you do not subject Him to the limitations of your
imagination and justice means that you do not lay any blame on
Him.”[^11]

Similar to this statement has been reported from Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*).
For example, he has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَمَّا التَّوْحيدُ فَاَن لّا تُجَوِّزَ عَلىٰ خالِقِكَ ما جازَ
عَلَيْكَ، وَأَمَّا العَدْلُ فَاَن لّاتَنْسُبَ إلىٰ خالِقِكَ ما لامَكَ
عَلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Unity means that you do not attribute to Him attributes of defect and
deficiency which are applicable to you and justice means that you do not
attribute to Him anything which is unacceptable for Him to do to
you.”[^12]

The Literal and Technical Meaning of Wisdom
-------------------------------------------

In lexical usages, *ḥikmah* (wisdom) is understood to mean firmness and
prevention of defect, damage and destruction. For instance, the rein of
the horse is called *ḥakamah* because it prevents the horse from
insubordination and inharmonious acts. The lawyer is called *mawlā* and
*ḥākim* because he prevents the legally responsible adult (*mukallaf*)
from doing unlawful acts. The judge is called *ḥākim* because he
prevents the abuse and violation of the rights of individuals.
Theoretical affirmation is called *ḥukm* because it removes doubt and
skepticism in the mind.

Whenever a thing has firmness and stability, it is immune from damage.
The word *ḥikmah* (wisdom), therefore, is concomitant with constancy,
firmness and strength – be it theoretically or practically.[^13]

Wisdom in the Parlance of Theologians
-------------------------------------

The word *ḥikmah* in theological discourses is used to mean both
theoretical and practical wisdom.

### 1. Theoretical Wisdom

Theoretical wisdom means the highest degree of knowledge about the most
sublime subject whose manifestation is the knowledge of God concerning
His Essence and Actions.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْحِكْمَةَ عِبارَةٌ عَنْ مَعْرِفَةِ أَفْضَلِ الْمَعْلوماتِ
بِأَفْضَلِ الْعُلومِ، فَالْحَكيمُ بِمَعْنَى الْعَليمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Wisdom is indeed to know the best of things to be known by the best of
knowledge. So, the wise (*ḥakīm*) means the knowledgeable
(*‘alīm*).”[^14]

### 2. Practical Wisdom

Wisdom in this sense has the following usages:

(1) Firmness in action. For instance, Al-Rāzī has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَعْنَى الإِحْكامِ في حَقِّ اللهِ تَعالىٰ في خَلْقِ الأَشْياءِ
إِتْقانُ التَّدْبيرِ فيها وَحُسْنُ التَّقْديرِ لَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the meaning of *iḥkām* with respect to Allah, the Exalted, in the
creation of the things is the firmness of control over it and the
excellence of decree for it.”[^15]

This holy verse provides this meaning of *ḥikmah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[It is He] who perfected everything that He created.”***[^16]

(2) The Agent’s immunity from abominable and undue acts. In this regard,
Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلثّالِثُ: اَلْحِكْمَةُ عِبارَةٌ عَنْ كَوْنِهِ مُقَدَّساً عَنْ فِعْلِ
ما لا يَنْبَغي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The third meaning of *ḥikmah* is to consider Him immune from any undue
act.”

He has then cited the following verses as his basis:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا
لا تُرْجَعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did you suppose that We created you aimlessly, and*** ***that you
will not be brought back to Us?”***[^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the sky and the earth and whatever is between them
in vain.”***[^18]

(3) The actions of God as having purposes. Ḥakīm Lāhījī has allocated
the fifth chapter of the discourses on the Divine justice to the
discussion on the Divine wisdom, saying thus:

“Know that if the actions of God, the Exalted, were without any purpose,
they must be futile and for anything futile to emanate from the
Necessary Being is impossible.”

Conclusion
----------

From what has been said about the essence of justice and wisdom in the
parlance of the theologians, we arrive at the conclusion that in
theology, the usages of wisdom (*ḥikmah*) are more common than the
usages of justice (*‘adl*) because wisdom also encompasses knowledge
while justice pertains to the actions of God.

Meanwhile, the third usage of wisdom in theology is equal to the meaning
of justice in theology because the implication of both is that the
actions of God are immune from any form of abomination and
repulsiveness. In other words, both meanings are related to the realm of
practical reason; that is, they encompass the realm of the do’s and
don’ts. As such, the usages of wisdom in the realm of the actions of God
are more common than the usages of justice in theology.

Yes, wisdom in the sense of firmness and constancy in action can somehow
be traced back to wisdom in the sense of immunity of action from
whatever is impermissible. This is because the lack of firmness and
constancy of action is also unacceptable to a knowledgeable, capable and
wise agent. For instance, wisdom in the sense of existence of purpose in
an action is also a manifestation of the third meaning (immunity from
any abominable action).

This relationship and attachment between justice and wisdom in theology
has prompted the theologians to usually use the two terms
interchangeably and to mention them together in the discourse on the
Divine justice. The expression *al-‘adl* (justice) is common and
prevalent among the theologians.

### Manifestations of the Divine Justice and Wisdom

The general manifestations of the Divine justice and wisdom are as
follows:

1. Justice and wisdom in the creation and management [of the universe]

This means that God has created every being by considering its essential
potential and capability, and according to the intended goal of each
creature, He has provided it with the necessary means and conditions to
attain that goal. This holy verse speaks of this point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation and then guided
it.”***[^19]

So is this holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي خَلَقَ فَسَوَّى ٭ وَالَّذِي قَدَّرَ فَهَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[It is He] who created and proportioned, who determined and
guided.”***[^20]

It is thus stated in a famous Prophetic tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالْعَدْلِ قامَتِ السَّماواتُ وَالْأَرْضُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The heavens and the earth were established by justice.”

2. Justice and wisdom in legislation

God has provided the creatures which are capable of receiving rational
and spiritual perfections with religious forms of guidance and taught
them the religious precepts, laws and teachings which guarantee their
needs and nourish their aptitudes through reason and revelation. Another
point is that legislation and lawmaking, the capability and potential of
the human being is taken into account and no obligation beyond the human
capability is imposed. These two points are also declared in Qur’anic
verses.

3. Justice and wisdom in giving recompense and penalty

That is, on the basis of justice and wisdom, God gives punishment and He
does not also deprive the good goers of their rewards in the least. He
bestows them whatever is due to them and He has promised to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَازِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ فَلا تُظْلَمُ
نَفْسٌ شَيْئًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We shall set up the scale of justice on the Day of Resurrection, and
no soul will be wronged in the least.”***[^21]

The word *qisṭ* (justice) in this holy verse encompasses all the
manifestations and expressions of *‘adl* and *qisṭ*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ شَهِدَ اللَّهُ أَنَّهُ لا إِلَهَ إِلا هُوَ وَالْمَلائِكَةُ وَأُولُوا
الْعِلْمِ قَائِمًا بِالْقِسْطِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah bears witness that there is no god but Him—and [so do] the
angels and those who possess knowledge—maintainer of justice.”***[^22]

For instance, one of the statements made by ‘Allāmah Ṭabarsī[^23] in
interpreting the said verse is that God takes control of the creation
(cosmically and legislatively) and gives reward for the deeds done on
the basis of justice.[^24]

What have been said are the general manifestations and expressions of
the Divine justice and in other perspectives such as that of the Holy
Qur’an on the concept of justice. Other cases which are within the
functions of the abovementioned manifestations can also be enumerated.
After quoting the verses of the Holy Qur’an pertaining to justice in the
different fields, Professor Muṭahharī has said:

“In the Qur’an, from the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) to the Resurrection
(*ma‘ād*); from prophethood (*nubuwwah*) to Imamate (*imāmah*) and
leadership; from personal ideals to social goals, all of these are
founded upon and revolve around the principle of justice. The Qur’anic
justice is the counterpart of *tawḥīd*, the cornerstone of *ma‘ād*, the
objective of the legislation of the prophets, the philosophy behind
leadership and Imamate, the criterion for individual perfection, and the
barometer of social wellbeing.”[^25]

### The History and Motive for Discussing Justice

In Islamic theology, the issue of the Divine justice has an ancient
history and it can be said that it has been discussed from the earliest
days of the Prophetic mission. In the traditions (*aḥādīth*) and conduct
(*sīrah*) of the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*), it has been given considerable
attention. Even dialogues about it between followers of other religions
and the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) had even taken place.

For instance, Shaykh al-Ṣadūq has narrated[^26] that one day a Jewish
man came to the Prophet (*ṣ*) and they discussed many things including
the justice of God. He asked the Prophet (*ṣ*), thus: “Does your God
commit injustice?” The Prophet (*ṣ*) replied, “No.” The Jew asked, “What
is the reason?” The Prophet (*ṣ*) retorted,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِعِلْمِهِ بِقُبْحِهِ وَاسْتِغْنائِهِ عَنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is because He knows the repulsiveness of injustice and He has no
need for it.”

The Jew asked again, “Has God revealed anything [to you] in this
regard?” The Prophet (*ṣ*) answered, “Yes.” He then recited the
following Qur’anic verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord is not tyrannical to the servants.”***[^27]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا يَظْلِمُ النَّاسَ شَيْئًا وَلَكِنَّ النَّاسَ
أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed Allah does not wrong people in the least; rather it is people
who wrong themselves.”***[^28]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ ظُلْمًا لِلْعَالَمِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah does not desire any wrong for the creatures.”***[^29]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ ظُلْمًا لِلْعِبَادِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah does not desire any wrong for (His) servants.”***[^30]

After the time of the Prophet (*ṣ*) (i.e. during the time of the
caliphs), the issue of the justice of God was also a subject of
discussions and discourses, and as the highest intellectual and
theological personality [during his time], Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) used to
reply to the questions in this regard and through his close supervision
and astute guidance, he would try to prevent any form of deviation from
this principle. His discourses on the questions of pretermination and
free-will are a testimony to these assertions.

After this period, a new chapter in the history of Islamic theology was
opened. The proliferation of different thoughts and ideas as a result of
the geographical expansion of the Muslim domain and their interaction
with different cultures, on one hand, and the atmosphere of political
strangulation during the Umayyad period which led to the severance of
communication between the people at large and the Household of
Revelation and Apostleship, on the other hand, resulted in the emergence
of various sects and the presentation of diverse viewpoints on
ideological issues including the justice of God. Ḥasan al-Baṣrī (died
110 AH), who at that time was known as one of the leading thinkers in
the Muslim world, was inclined toward the notion of *jabr* (fatalism or
compulsion) (in contrast to the notion of *tafwīḍ*),[^31] in a bid to
defend the justice of God. He said, “Everything is subject to the Divine
decree and predestination except sins.”[^32]

Qadariyyah (fatalists) also subscribed to this belief. After the
Qadariyyah it was the Mu‘tazilah’s turn. With the aim also of defending
the justice and wisdom of God, the Mu‘talizah advocated the notion of
*tafwīḍ*.

During this period, the Imāms from the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) –
notwithstanding the restrictions imposed upon them by the Umayyad
political establishment – embarked on correctly explaining the justice
of God, thereby refuting the notion of *tafwīḍ* as well as that of
*jabr*. Their outstanding students such as Hishām ibn al-Ḥakam[^33] and
others had also left no stone unturned in propagating the views of the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

In accordance with the approach and bases they had adopted the Sunnī Ahl
al-Ḥadith would also avoid entering in theological disputes, sufficing
themselves with criticism and indeterminism. In any case, they had no
specific theological position on the Divine justice, but after Abū
’l-Ḥasan al-Ash‘arī embarked on defending their beliefs, they adopted
certain theological approaches, and this led to a new development in
theological discussions including the issue of the justice of God.

In sum, the issue of the Divine justice has been always a focus of
attention and a subject of discussion, and the theological debates in
this regard has an ancient history, and the motive behind these
discussions is to purge the actions of God from abominable and undue
things.

### The Position of Justice in ‘Adliyyah Theology

Although all Muslims believe in the justice of God and regard this issue
as one of the essentials of Islam, the rationalists as well as the
literalists would interpret the justice of God in their own particular
way. The rationalists who have interpreted it on the basis of rational
good and evil would regard themselves as the real proponents and
defenders of the Divine justice and treat those who deny rational good
and evil as genuine deniers of justice. As such, they have set justice
as one of the principles of their respective schools of thought. Justice
is also considered one of the basic principles of the Religion by both
the Mu‘tazilah and the Imāmiyyah. For this reason, these two schools of
theology are called *‘adliyyah* (justice-oriented).

Regarding the importance of the principle of justice, ‘Allāmah
al-Ḥillī[^34] has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِعْلَمْ أَنَّ هٰذا أَصْلٌ عَظيمٌ تَبْتَنِى عَلَيْهِ الْقَواعِدُ
الإسْلامِيَّةُ بَلِ الأَحْكامُ الدّينِيَّةُ مُطْلَقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Know that this principle is an important principle on which the Islamic
rules as well as the religious laws absolutely stand.”[^35]

In this regard, Professor Muṭahharī has also said, thus:

“Although the principle of justice is part of the principles of beliefs
as it is one of the accepted concepts and essentials of religion, in the
sense that in the Mu‘tazilah and Shī‘ah schools of thought it is
considered part and parcel of their five principles, it is regarded as
the hallmark of their schools of thought.”[^36]

Review Questions
----------------

1. State the literal and technical meanings of *‘adl* (justice).

2. State the meaning of *‘adl* in the parlance of the theologians.

3. Explain *ḥikmah* (wisdom) from the literal and technical perspective.

4. For the theologians, what is the meaning of *ḥikmah*?

5. Briefly state the general manifestations of the Divine justice and
wisdom.

6. State the motive for discussing the justice of God.

7. Write down the status of justice in the justice-oriented
(*‘adliyyah*) theology.

[^1]: Al-Miṣbāḥ al-Munīr, pp. 51-52; Aqrab al-Mawārid, vol. 2, p. 753;
Al-Mufradāt fī Gharīb al-Qur’ān, p. 325.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Saying 437.

[^3]: Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ al-Asmā’ al-Ḥusnā, p. 54.

[^4]: Nicholson (trans.), Mathnawī-ye Ma‘nawī, Book 6, line 2596, p.
293.

[^5]: Ibid., Book 5, line 1089, p. 67.

[^6]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 12, p. 331.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Sharh Uṣūl al-Khamsah, p. 203.

[^9]: Al-Munqadh min al-Taqlīd, vol. 1, p. 150.

[^10]: Sarmāyeh-ye Īmān, section (bāb) 2.

[^11]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Saying 470. Regarding the commentary on this
saying of Imām ‘Alī (‘a), it is appropriate to refer to Ibn al-Ḥadīd and
Ibn Maytham al-Baḥrānī’s commentary on Nahj al-Balāghah.

[^12]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, p. 96.

[^13]: Al-Miṣbāḥ al-Munīr, vol. 1, p. 178; Al-Mufradāt fī Gharīb
al-Qur’ān, p. 136; Al-Munīr, vol. 7, p. 254.

[^14]: Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī, Sharḥ Asmā’ Allāhu ’l-Ḥusnā, pp. 279-280.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Sajdah 32:7.

[^17]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:115.

[^18]: Sūrat Ṣād 38:27.

[^19]: Sūrat Ṭā Ḥā 20:50.

[^20]: Sūrat al-A‘lā 87:2-3.

[^21]: Sūrat al-Anbiyā’ 21:47.

[^22]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:18.

[^23]: Abū ‘Alī Faḍl ibn Ḥasan al-Ṭabarsī (died 548 AH/1153): a great
Shī‘ah exegete (mufassir), man of letters, philologist and mathematician
of the sixth century AH. He studied under Shaykh Ḥasan ibn Shaykh
al-Ṭūsī and ‘Abd al-Jabbār al-Rāzī and trained many students including
his son Raḍī al-Dīn al-Ṭabarsī (the author of the book Makārim
al-Akhlāq), Ibn Shahr Āshūb, Shaykh Muntajab al-Dīn, and Quṭb al-Dīn
Rāwāndī. He is the author of more than 20 works including Majmā‘
al-Bayān lī ‘Ulūm al-Qur’ān (Compendium of Elucidations on the Exegesis
of the Quran), Jawāmi‘ al-Jāmī‘ and ‘Ilam al-Warā bi ‘Alam al-Hudā.
[Trans.]

[^24]: Majma‘ al-Bayān, vol. 1, p. 420.

[^25]: ‘Adl-e Ilāhī (Divine Justice), p. 42.

[^26]: Al-Tawḥīd, pp. 397-398.

[^27]: Sūrat Fuṣṣilat 41:46.

[^28]: Sūrat Yūnus 10:44.

[^29]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:108.

[^30]: Sūrat Ghāfir (or al-Mu’min) 40:31.

[^31]: Tafwīḍ: the belief that after creating all beings, God has left
them to administer their own affairs and follow their own wills. In
other words, it is the upholding of absolutist freewill (ikhtiyār)
vis-à-vis predestination. [Trans.]

[^32]: Quoted in Sayyid Murtaḍā, Al-Amālī, vol. 1, p. 106.

[^33]: Hishām ibn al-Ḥakam (died 199 AH) of Kūfah was a well-known
companion of Imām al-Ṣādiq and Imām Kāẓim (‘a) who would frequently
express their admiration for him. He was so strong in proving
theological subjects especially the ones related to the issue of Imamate
that many would avoid engaging in a debate with him. Moreover, he wrote
many books but none of which has survived. [Trans.]

[^34]: ‘Allāmah al-Ḥillī, more fully ‘Allāmah ibn al-Muṭahhar al-Ḥillī
(1250-1325): one of the prominent Shī‘ah scholars who lived in the
period of Mongol domination of Iran. [Trans.]

[^35]: Nahj al-Ḥaqq wa Kashf al-Ṣidq, p. 72.

[^36]: Āshinā’ī bā ‘Ulūm-e Islāmī (Kalām wa ‘Irfān), p. 25, with a
slight modification.


