Lesson 22: The Proofs of Divine Justice and Wisdom
==================================================

Philosophers and theologians have presented numerous proofs for the
Divine justice and wisdom, and we shall deal with them in this lesson.

1. The Proof of Essential Necessity
-----------------------------------

Some theologians have explained the Divine Attributes on the basis of
“essential necessity” (*wujūb bi ’dh-dhāt*) and the first theological
text in which this method has been used for the first time was the book
*Al-Yāqūt fī* *‘Ilm al-Kalām* written by Abū Isḥāq Nawbakhtī (a
theologian of the fourth century AH).[^1] After him, this method has
been used in a more lucid and extensive manner in the treatise *Tajrīd
al-I‘tiqād* by Khwājah Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī (died 672 AH). One of the
Attributes which he has derived from the principle of “essential
necessity” is wisdom (*ḥikmah*).[^2]

In light of this proof, the Necessary Being in essence has all the
existential perfections, and justice and wisdom are among these
existential perfections. God, therefore, is All-just and All-wise. This
proof establishes all the manifestations and expressions of the Divine
justice and wisdom.

2. The Proof of Special Attention (‘ināyah)
-------------------------------------------

In the jargon of Muslim philosophers, *‘ināyah* (special attention)
means God’s foreknowledge of the best order and that essential knowledge
is the source of materialization of the beings, and this system is
consistent with the pleasure (*riḍā*)[^3] of God. The *‘ināyah* of God,
therefore, includes three things:

1. The Divine Essence’s knowledge of the system of being which is the
best and complete system;

2. The Divine Essence as the cause (*‘illah*) of materialization of the
best system of existence; and

3. The Divine Essence’s pleasure for the materialization of the best
system.

These three things refer to the very Essence of God. As a result, the
system of being has been realized on the basis of knowledge of the
Divine Essence and His eternal special attention (*‘ināyah*). Since the
conceptual system of the universe is the best system and its objective
system is also the manifestion and expression of the same conceptual
system, its objective system must also be the best system, and this is
the justice and wisdom in the Divine Action.[^4]

**  
**

**  
**
وَالْكُلُّ مِنْ نِظامِهِ الْكِياني يَنْشَأُ مِنْ نِظامِهِ الرَّبّاني

  

[^5]

Although this proof has been presented by philosophers in a bid to prove
justice and wisdom in the cosmic actions of God, its criterion or
foundation also includes legislative and retributory justice. This is
because legislation and retribution are also an Action of God and will
be materialized on the basis of God’s essential and eternal knowledge.
The proof of special attention, therefore, encompasses all kinds and
manifestations of the Divine justice and wisdom.

3. The Omniscience and Self-sufficiency of God
----------------------------------------------

The most popular proof for the Divine justice and wisdom presented by
the theologians is based upon the absolute knowledge and
self-sufficiency of God. In this regard, Qāḍī ‘Abd al-Jabbār
al-Mu‘tazilī has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ تَعالىٰ عالِمٌ بِقُبْحِ القَبيحِ، وَمُسْتَغْنٍ عَنْهُ،
وَعالِمٌ بِاسْتِغْنائِهِ عَنْهُ، وَمَنْ كانَ هٰذِهِ حالُهُ لايَخْتارُ
القَبيحَ بِوَجْهٍ مِنَ الوُجوهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is to say, “God, the Exalted, knows the evil of the evil [act] and
He has no need of doing it, and He is also aware of His needleessness to
it. And anyone who has such a trait will never commit an evil act.”[^6]

The following words of Khwājah Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī are also an
expression of this proof:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتِغْناؤُهُ وَعِلْمُهُ يَدُلّانِ عَلىٰ اِنْتِفاءِ القُبْحِ عَنْ
أَفْعالِهِ تَعالىٰ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And His self-sufficiency and knowledge show the absence of evil in the
actions of the Exalted One.”[^7]

The initial point of this proof, which is God’s knowledge and
self-sufficiency, has been established in our previous discussions and
its second initial point is also one of the rationally self-evident
facts, as testified by experiences concerning human activities.

Criminological studies show that unwarranted acts usually originate from
emotional, economic, social, and similar needs, just as in other cases
also, unawareness of the evil and unwarranted acts is the cause of
commiting such acts. It may possibly be said that in any condition that
the human being is assumed to be in need, even the most learned of
people and the most pious of them such that he would never commit any
indecent act, it is not because he is aware of the indecency of the act
or he is not in need of it, but rather it is because he is in need of
abstaining from it; that is, abstaining from indecency is a source of
his spiritual perfection and earns the good pleasure of God.

In other words, need in the human being is something relative whereas
God is absolutely self-sufficient. Therefore, one cannot confirm the
above argument for the human being on the discourses related to
criminology.

In principle, the abovementioned argument cannot serve as a proof
because there is no way of proving that knowledge and self-sufficiency
are the sole cause of refraining from indecency, and to claim that this
point is rationally self-evident is also doubtful.

The reply to this is that even if there is only one instance when a
person does something good only for the sake of its being good and
refrains from going bad solely because of its evil, it is sufficient as
evidence and such an assumption regarding the human being is not an
impossible assumption. It is because although he is essentially needy
and perfection-seeker, no one can imagine that without paying attention
to the material or non-material benefits of a good deed, he would do it
simply because it is desirable, and without paying attention to the
material or non-material harm of a bad deed, he would refrain from doing
it simply because it is undesirable.

Such an assumption is not essentially impossible. Whenever such an
assumption regarding the human being is accepted, it will be accepted
through the primary way regarding God.

Qāḍī ‘Abd al-Jabbār has mentioned this objection in this way: this
argument is based upon the notion that the human being is absolutely
self-sufficient such that he could make a judgment about God on the same
basis. This is while the human being can never be absolutely sufficient.
Instead, the truth of the matter is that whenever he is situated between
telling the truth or a lie while having equal benefit to him,
undoubtedly he will not tell a lie.

This point shows that refraining from telling a lie in the said example
has no reason except that once a person knows the evil of an act and he
is not in need of doing it, he will not commit it, because in the said
example, his need can also be served by telling the truth. And whenever
relative self-sufficiency in a person hinders him from commiting
indecency, the absolute self-sufficiency in God through the primary way
will hinder the commission of indecency.[^8]

4. The Lack of Claimant and the Existence of Ṣārif
--------------------------------------------------

The origination of an action from a free agent depends on the existence
of a motive (*dā‘ī*) and the absence of dissuasion (*ṣārif*). Meanwhile,
there is no motive in God to do indecency, because He knows its evil and
is also needless of it. In other words, God’s self-sufficiency and
knowledge hinder and hold back the materialization of the motive for the
commission of an act of indecency, and the commission of an action by a
free agent is impossible without a motive. As such, origination of
indecency from God is impossible.[^9]

This proof is actually a paraphrase of the third proof and its keystone
is that since God is aware of the evil of an indecent act and He is not
in need of doing so, the motive for doing so will not be materialized in
God, and as a result, for an indecent act to originate from God will be
impossible.[^10]

Objection:

This explanation is based on the assumption that God is an Agent by
intention (*fā‘il bi ’l-qaṣd* or *fā‘il bi ’d-dā‘ī*), as the theologians
so believe. As proved in Islamic philosophy, however, God is not an
Agent by intention because this means that the essence of the agent and
his knowledge of the action are not enough for the materialization of
the action; it rather depends on a motive which is apart from the
essence and any motive apart from the essence is not applicable to God.
God is the Agent by attention (*fā‘il bi ’l-‘ināyah*) or manifestation
(*fā‘il bi ’t-tajallī*), and not agent by intention.[^11]

Reply:

The above evidence can also be expressed on the basis of the Agent by
attention or manifestation in this manner: God is neither in need of a
motive, nor ignorance has any place in Him. He is not an agent by
intention as such a motive does not exist in Him. In fact, since God is
not an agent by intention, and at the same time, He is immune from
ignorance and need. Therefore, God is immune from any indecent act.

5. Signs of the Divine Justice and Wisdom in Nature
---------------------------------------------------

The ontological justice and wisdom of God can also be proved by means of
studying the world of nature, for the signs of stability and firmness,
as well as innate goodness and beauty are evident in the system of
nature.

Since this method is based upon sensory perception and experience,
understanding it is easier is for the human being. For this reason, this
has been emphasized in the Holy Qur’an and traditions. Now, we will
mention some examples of pertinent verses and traditions. Then we will
also quote the statements of some scholars.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا مَّا تَرَى فِي خَلْقِ
الرَّحْمَنِ مِن تَفَاوُتٍ فَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ هَلْ تَرَى مِن فُطُورٍ ٭
ثُمَّ ارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ كَرَّتَيْنِ يَنقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ الْبَصَرُ
خَاسِئاً وَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He created seven heavens in layers. You do not see any discordance
in the creation of the All-beneficent. Look again! Do you see any flaw?
Look again, once more. Your look will return to you humbled and
weary.”***[^12]

Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألتَّفاوُتُ اَلْإِخْتِلافُ فِي الْأَوْصافِ كَأَنَّهُ يُفَوِّتُ وَصف
أحدهما الأخَر، أو وصف كلّ واحد مِنْهما الأخَر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Exegetes (*mufassirūn*) have interpreted this absence of discordance in
the verse to mean harmony and concordance of the creatures in accord and
order.[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ وَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِي تَجْرِي فِي الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنفَعُ
النَّاسَ وَمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِن مَّاءٍ فَأَحْيَا
بِهِ الأرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ دَآبَّةٍ
وَتَصْرِيفِ الرِّيَاحِ وَالسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخَّرِ بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ
وَالأَرْضِ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
alternation of night and day, and the ships that sail at sea with profit
to men, and the water that Allah sends down from the sky—with which He
revives the earth after its death, and scatters therein every kind of
animal—and the changing of the winds, and the clouds disposed between
the sky and the earth, are surely signs for a people who apply
reason.”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَهُوَ الَّذِي مَدَّ الأرْضَ وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْهَارًا
وَمِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ جَعَلَ فِيهَا زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ يُغْشِي
اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is He who has spread out the earth and set in it firm mountains and
streams, and of every fruit He has made in it two kinds. He draws the
night’s cover over the day. There are indeed signs in that for a people
who reflect.”*[^15]

There are many such verses, and those cited above are sufficient for our
purpose. Now, we will also cite some examples of pertinent traditions:

Imām ‘Alī has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَ فَلا يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَى صَغِيرِ مَا خَلَقَ كَيْفَ أَحْكَمَ خَلْقَهُ
وَ أَتْقَنَ تَرْكِيبَهُ وَ فَلَقَ لَهُ السَّمْعَ وَ الْبَصَرَ وَ
سَوَّى لَهُ الْعَظْمَ وَ الْبَشَرَ اُنْظُرُوا إِلَى النَّمْلَةِ فِي
صِغَرِ جُثَّتِهَا وَ لَطَافَةِ هَيْئَتِهَا لَا تَكَادُ تُنَالُ
بِلَحْظِ الْبَصَرِ وَ لَا بِمُسْتَدْرَكِ الْفِكَرِ كَيْفَ دَبَّتْ
عَلَى أَرْضِهَا وَ صُبَّتْ عَلَى رِزْقِهَا تَنْقُلُ الْحَبَّةَ إِلَى
جُحْرِهَا وَ تُعِدُّهَا فِي مُسْتَقَرِّهَا تَجْمَعُ فِي حَرِّهَا
لِبَرْدِهَا وَ فِي وِرْدِهَا لِصَدَرِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do they not see the small things He has created, how He strengthened
their system and opened for them hearing and sight and made for them
bones and skins? Look at the ant with its small body and delicate form.
It can hardly be seen in the corner of the eye, nor by the perception of
the imagination – how it moves on the earth and leaps at its livelihood.
It carries the grain to its hole and deposits it in its place of stay.
It collects during the summer for its winter, and during strength for
the period of its weakness.”[^16]

Elsewhere, the Imām (*‘a*) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقَامَ مِنَ الْأَشْيَاءِ أَوَدَهَا، وَنَهَجَ حُدُودَهَا، وَلاَءَمَ
بِقُدْرَتِهِ بَيْنَ مُتَضَادِّهَا، وَوَصَلَ أَسْبَابَ قَرَائِنِهَا...
بَدَايَا خَلاَئِقَ أَحْكَمَ صُنْعَهَا، وَفَطَرَهَا عَلَى مَا أَرَادَ
وَابْتَدَعَهَا!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“So He straightened the curves of the things and fixed their limits.
With His power He created coherence in their contradictory parts and
joined together the factors of similarity… All this is new creation. He
made them firm and shaped them accordingly as He wished and invented
them.”[^17]

In the same sermon, the Imām (*‘a*) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرَانَا مِنْ مَلَكُوتِ قُدْرَتِهِ، وَعَجَائِبِ مَا نَطَقَتْ بِهِ
آثَارُ حِكْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He showed us the realm of His Might, and such wonders which speak of
His Wisdom.”[^18]

In other places, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has pointed out the signs of God’s
wisdom in the creation of the bat, saying thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ لَطَائِفِ صَنْعَتِهِ، وَعَجَائِبِ خِلْقَتِهِ، مَا أَرَانَا مِنْ
غَوَامِضِ الْحِكْمَةِ فِي هذِهِ الْخَفَافِيشِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“An example of His delicate production, wonderful creation and deep
sagacity which He has shown us is found in these bats.”[^19]

Design and Perfection as Viewed by Scientists and Scholars
----------------------------------------------------------

Through scientific studies and investigations, mankind has been able
today to obtain considerable amount of information about the world of
nature and to reveal many instances of spectacular perfection and design
in the book of nature. For this reason, it can be said that “Science is
the harbinger of faith and the vanguard of the faithful.” Lord
Kelvin,[^20] a great physicist in the world, has left these immortal
words: “If you consider science very well, it will give you no option
but to have faith in God.”[^21]

Max Planck,[^22] a scientist who had knowledge of some secrets of the
atom, said, “Religion and natural sciences jointly fight against doubt,
atheism and superstition, and their stimulator has been always
God.”[^23]

Design in the Plant Kingdom
---------------------------

The materials used for growing plants are taken from the air and soil,
and fertile soil is composed of mineral substances which have great
amount of organiz materials which come from the remnants of the primary
plants and animals… The existence of water, air, light, and chemical
elements contributes as a whole in the growth of a plant, but this is
not enough. In fact, that which makes the growth of plant possible is a
mysterious energy which is hidden in the seed and begins to act at the
appropriate time. This energy’s action begins with a somehow complex yet
harmonious interaction.

At the initial stage, two tiny cells of seed, each of which consisting
of different elements and having diverse functions, jointly begin to
work but afterward, each of them will take its own way to growth and
development. The fruit of every seed which falls onto the ground and
grows is exactly similar to that of the plant from which the seed
originates. If a clear-sighted eye takes a look at these functions and
processes of growth and development of the seed, a world of beauty,
harmony, design, and order can be observed.

This design and order can also be observed in tall plants and giant
trees, and all plants – regardless of difference in outward forms – have
common functions. For example, one of them is that of a combination of
light through whose radiance the plants acquire food for themselves from
carbonic acid light and water. Another is the structure and function of
the root, stem, leaf, and flower. A third example is the reaction of
plants in facing external instigations. For instance, they will become
soft when exposed to light, or they will fade and become dry when they
are deprived of light and oxygen. These are laws which regulate the
plant kingdom.[^24]

Factors that Contribute to the Suitability of the Earth for Living
------------------------------------------------------------------

By enumerating the factors that contribute to the suitability of the
earth for living, Frank Allen,[^25] a bio-physicist professor, has
proved the baselessness of the notion of accident in the emergence of
the universe. The said conditions are as follows:

1. The earth is a planet which is freely in equilibrium in the
outerspace and rotates daily in its own orbit, thereby giving rise to
the day and night. At the same time, it revolves around the sun
annually. These movements cause the maintenance of equilibrium and
stability in the earth’s axis in the outerspace…

2. The atmosphere which consists of gases that protect the earth’s
surface is so thick and dense (approximately 800 kilometers) that it
could keep the earth safe from the deadly falling of twenty million
meteorites daily with a speed of approximately fifty kilometers per
second.

3. Moreover, the atmosphere keeps the temperature of the earth’s surface
suitable for life, and it also transfers very essential amount of water
and water vapor from the oceans to the arid parts of the earth. Without
this, all the continents would have turned into deserts not suitable for
living. As such, it must be said that the oceans and the atmosphere are
considered flywheels for the earth.

4. The remarkable properties of water have a significant role in making
life possible in oceans, seas and rivers during long winters. One of
these properties is the ability to draw large amounts of oxygen in low
temperature degrees. Another is that its density in four degrees of
temperature is freezing point, and for this reason, the water at the
bottom of the oceans and rivers remains liquid. The third [property] is
that the density of snow is less than that of water and thus it remains
on the surface of the water and does not sink. The fourth [property] is
that once the water becomes solid, it emits a large amount of heat.

5. The soil in itself has special mineral elements which are absorbed by
the plants and turn into edible materials needed by the animals.

6. The existence of metals just beneath the earth’s surface has made
possible the various arts which are products of human civilizations.

7. Regarding the size of the earth, if it were as big as the moon and
its diameter were only one-fourth of its present diameter, the
gravitational force would have been sufficient to keep its waters and
air on it and its temperature would have fatally done up. If our planet
were only as big as the sun while it could have still kept its density,
the gravitational force would have been 150 times stronger, the
atmosphere’s altitude would have been ten kilometers lower, boiling of
water would have been impossible, the air pressure would have reached
approximately 150 kilograms per square centimeter, a kilogram of worms
would have weighed 150 kilograms, and the human organ would have become
as small of that of a squirrel.

8. Concerning the distance of the earth from the sun, if the earth’s
distance from the sun were two times its present distance, its heat that
reaches the earth would have tremendously decreased, the speed of the
earth movement along its orbit would have been half, the length of
winter would have doubled, and therefore, all living creatures would
have been frozen.

If the earth’s distance from the sun were half [the present distance],
the temperature would have been four times, the speed of movement along
its orbit would have been doubled, and the length of seasons would have
been half [if ever it were possible to have any change in season] and
the earth would have been in burning temperature in which life will be
impossible.[^26]

These are examples of spectacular greatness, wonderful design and exact
laws that govern the world of nature. Many things have been said about
these and many examples of them have been presented in the book
*Ithbāt-e Wujūd-e Khudā* (*The Evidence of God in an Expanding
Universe*). In order to make the discussion brief, we will refrain from
mentioning those examples here. For the fair-minded and wise person,
what have been said so far, nay even less than these, are enough for him
to constitute a book of knowledge about the Origin of creation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
برگ درختان سبز در نظر هوشيار هر ورقش دفتريست معرفت كردگار
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For the conscious, each leaf of the green trees*

*Is a book of knowledge about the Creator*.

Review Questions
----------------

1. State the first proof of the justice of God.

2. State the proof of special attention (*‘ināyah*) about the justice of
God.

3. State the third proof of the justice of God.

4. Write down the fourth proof of the justice of God.

5. Write down the objection to the third proof of the justice of God,
and the refutation to it.

6. Write down the objection to the fourth proof and the refutation to
it.

7. How can the cosmic justice and wisdom of God be proved?

[^1]: Al-Yāqūt fī ‘Ilm al-Kalām, p. 43.

[^2]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 2.

[^3]: What is meant by the pleasure of the Essence of God toward the
best system of existence is that the system of being is the Divine
Action (fi‘l-e ilāhī), and the Action has the perfection of amenity and
harmony with its Agent (fā‘il). Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 7, pp. 56-57,
footnote provided by ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī.

[^4]: Ibn Sīnā, Sharḥ Ishārāt, vol. 3, p. 318; Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn,
Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 7, pp. 56-57.

[^5]: Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ-e Manẓūmah, “Ghurar fī Marātib ‘Ilmahu
Ta‘ālā.”

[^6]: Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah, p. 203.

[^7]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 3.

[^8]: Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah, pp. 205-206.

[^9]: Qawā‘id al-Murād fī ‘Ilm al-Kalām, pp. 111-112.

[^10]: ‘Allāmah al-Ḥillī has also considered it as distinct from the
previous proof. See Nahj al-Ḥaqq wa Kashf al-Ṣidq, p. 85.

[^11]: Al-Ilāhiyyāt ‘alā Hadā ’l-Kitāb wa ’s-Sunnah wa ’l-‘Aql, vol. 1,
p. 288.

[^12]: Sūrat al-Mulk 67:3-4.

[^13]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 19, p. 350.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:164. For the interpretation of this verse, see
Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 1, pp. 3, 6.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Ra‘d 13:3.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 185.

[^17]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 91.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Ibid., Sermon 155.

[^20]: Lord Kelvin, more fully William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (1824 –
1907): a Belfast-born British mathematical physicist and engineer who is
widely known for determining the correct value of absolute zero as
approx. -273 Celsius. [Trans.]

[^21]: John Clove Monsma (ed.), Ithbāt-e Wujūd-e Khudā (The Evidence of
God in an Expanding Universe), trans. Aḥmad Ārām, 4th ed., p. 39.

[^22]: Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck (1858-1947): a German physicist,
father of quantum physics, and winner of the 1918 Nobel Prize for
physics. [Trans.]

[^23]: Ithbāt-e Wujūd-e Khudā (The Evidence of God in an Expanding
Universe), p. 286.

[^24]: Ibid., pp. 228-230.

[^25]: John “Jack” Frank Allen (1908-2001): a Canadian-born physicist
who discovered, along with Pyotr Leonidovich Kapitsa and Don Misener,
the superfluid phase of matter in 1937 using liquid helium in the Royal
Society Mond Laboratory in Cambridge, England. [Trans.]

[^26]: Ithbāt-e Wujūd-e Khudā (The Evidence of God in an Expanding
Universe), pp. 19-22.


