Lesson 23: The Creation as Goal-oriented
========================================

We have said earlier that one of the meanings of *ḥikmah* (wisdom) is
the goal-orientedness of an action. The goal-orientedness of an action
is one of the characteristics of a wise agent (*fā‘il*). Those
theologians who believe in the principle of rational goodness and evil
and have interpreted the Divine justice and wisdom on the basis of this
principle have emphasized the goal-orientedness of creation, maintaining
that the actions of God are based upon a purpose. Those who reject the
[principle of] rational goodness and evil, however, do not believe in
the actions of God as being based upon a purpose.

The Justice-oriented Argument
-----------------------------

The basis of the justice-oriented (*‘adliyyah*) theologians in saying
that the actions of God have a purpose is that an action which is devoid
of any purpose[^1] and motive is futile and abominable, and God is
immune from any abominable action. As Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْيُ الْغَرَضِ يَسْتَلزِمُ الْعَبَث.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the negation of motive necessitates futility.”[^2]

This is countered by the argument that the agent that pursues a purpose
or motive in his action has a defect and through this purpose or motive,
he tries to recompensate for this defect, because purpose or motive
connotes that its existence is preferable to its non-existence for the
agent, and this signifies the agent’s desire for perfection
(*istikmāl*).[^3]

The justice-oriented [theologians] have given their reply by saying that
the existence of purpose in an action connotes the agent’s compensation
for his defect and desire for perfection when the purpose of action is
traceable to the agent. But if the purpose is not traceable to the
agent, this does not connote the agent’s compensation for his defect and
desire for perfection. As Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has said in continuation to
his earlier expression,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَلْزَمُ عَوْدُهُ إلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is to say that the motive for the actions of God is not necessarily
traceable to Him. In fact, the motive for His actions is related to the
creatures.[^4]

The Ash‘arī’s Objection
-----------------------

The Ash‘arīs have not accepted this reply, saying that tracing the
benefit and purpose behind an action to other than God is either of the
two cases. First is that for the action to benefit or not benefit others
is the same for God, and the other is that these two differ from each
other, and benefiting others takes precedence and more suitable to God.
The first assumption is invalid and giving preference to the less
preferable while the second assumption necessitates desire for
perfection (*istikmāl*) because for God to give priority to benefiting
others is a form of desire for perfection and desire for perfection, in
whatever form it takes, is impossible for God.[^5]

### Reply

Giving priority or preference does not necessitate desire for perfection
(*istikmāl*) but it is rather more general than that because the meaning
of the agent’s giving of preference to an action is that the action is
consistent with the traits and characteristics of the agent. Now, if the
Agent is the Self-sufficient by essence (*al-ghanī bi ’dh-dhāt*) and
All-wise (*al-ḥakīm*), what is priority for Him is that His action must
have a purpose and this purpose is meant for other than Him. And if the
agent is inherently indigent (*faqīr bi ’dh-dhāt*), what is priority for
him in his action is that which could compensate for his defect and
address his desire for perfection.

Another Objection
-----------------

For an action to have a purpose necessitates that apart from the agent
and his action, there must be another entity which is to be called
“purpose”. That is, the action is the medium for the materialization of
the purpose. This assumption cannot be applied to God and His actions
because all creatures are His actions, and for this reason, there is no
difference between them in that some are to be regarded as the medium
and others as the purpose. In fact, without any intermediary, they are
all creatures of God.[^6]

### Reply

First of all, this notion that without any intermediary all beings are
created by God, is not consistent with reason and experience, or clear
religious texts. The principle of causation or cause-and-effect
relationship which is one of the self-evident rational principles is
confirmed by both revelation and experience. Some creatures are means
for the emergence of other creatures, therefore, albeit the Creator by
essence is no other than God and the chain of causes and effects finally
ends up with Him.

Secondly, even if we do not accept the causality of some creatures for
others, that all beings are created by God is in no way contradictory to
the assumption that some of them serve as the purpose or motive of
others or some are in the service of others. It is true that from a
general perspective of the world that the universe is created by God,
there is no agent and goal in the universe except Him, but from a
specific or micro-level perspective, we can obviously find out that some
creatures or phenomena are the service of some others while some serve
as the goal of some others.

For instance, we can clearly see this reality by comparing the mother
and the child. Some emotionally and physically traits of the mother are
totally compatible with the needs of the child so much so that the
child’s survival depends on the existence of these traits. We can also
observe and discern such relationship between natural phenomena and
human life, and in essence, the ultimate design which governs the world
of nature has no other purpose except this.

The Goal of Action and the Goal of Agent
----------------------------------------

A point which may possibly be the source of mistake by the rejectors of
the goal-orientedness of the universe is to consider identical the goal
of action and the goal of the agent, treating them as concomitant to
each other, whereas this is not so. The goal-orientedness of an action
is more general than that of an agent.

That is, whenever the agent is goal-oriented, his action will also be
goal-oriented, but the opposite is not necessarily true. It can be
assumed that the Agent is the Self-sufficient by essence and His Being
has no goal beyond Himself but His action is goal-oriented. That is,
some of His actions serve as the goal of another set of His actions.
Although there may be no goal beyond Him for the totality of His
actions, the action is goal-oriented whether this goal is the Agent
Himself or something else.

The Third View
--------------

One of the Ash‘arī theologians has adopted a third view on this issue.
That is, he has accepted partly that the actions of God are caused by
certain goals but rejected the same in totality. In this regard, Sa‘d
al-Dīn al-Taftazānī has thus said that the truth is that explaining some
actions, particularly religious laws, through the lens of expediencies
and wisdom is something self-evident; for instance, the incumbency of
prescribed punishments (*ḥudūd*) and retributions (*kaffārāt*), and the
unlawfulness of intoxicants and the like, as also testified by religious
texts. The Holy Qur’an has stated, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I did not create the jinn and humans except that they may worship
Me.”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ مِنْ أَجْلِ ذَلِكَ كَتَبْنَا عَلَى بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is why We decreed for the Children of Israel.”***[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَلَمَّا قَضَى زَيْدٌ مِنْهَا وَطَرًا زَوَّجْنَاكَهَا لِكَيْ لا
يَكُونَ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ حَرَجٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when Zayd had got through with her, We wedded her to you, so that
there may be no blame on the faithful.”***[^9]

Continuing further, to make generalizations and establish the view that
none of the actions of God is devoid of a goal and motive is worthy of
discussion and reflection.[^10]

It is to be noted that the question of goal-orientedness of the actions
of God is not an issue pertaining to the acts of worship such that it is
sufficient that instances of it are mentioned in religious texts. It is
rather a rational question, and rational laws cannot be specified.

The View of Theosophers
-----------------------

The commentator of *Al-Mawāqif* has regarded the view of Muslim
theosophers as compatible with the Ash‘arī viewpoint on the question of
goal-orientedness of the actions of God, and thus said after quoting the
Ash‘arī viewpoint: [^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ وافَقَهُمْ عَلىٰ ذٰلِكَ جهابذةُ الْحُكَماءِ وَطَوائِفُ الإِلهين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This understanding of the words of theosophers is not correct. For
instance, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has said:

“The theosophers have not generally negated a goal or motive from the
actions of God. What they have rejected is the existence of goal or
motive apart from the Divine Essence for the Absolute Being and for His
first action. They have affirmed special goals, however, for special or
particular actions. For instance, their books are replete with
discourses about the utility and purpose behind the creatures.”[^12]

Motive and Exigency
-------------------

Concerning this issue, some researchers have made distinction between
motive (*gharaḍ*) and exigency (*maṣlaḥah*), saying that what can be
said about the actions of God is that they have benefits (*maṣāliḥ*) and
wisdom (*ḥikmah*) but these are not caused by motives.

The difference between motive and exigency is that motive is traceable
to the agent while exigency pertains to others. It is said, therefore,
that the actions of God are caused by motives; it is a kind of
figurative speech, likening the actions of God to those of humans. That
is, benefits and wisdom result from the actions of God and if they
result from the actions of man, they will be considered the motive and
goal of his actions.[^13]

It is to be noted that the result of this examination can be traced back
to the distinction between the goal-orientedness of the action and the
goal-orientedness of the agent which we have mentioned earlier. That is,
the actions of God – both cosmic and legislative – have certain
benefits, exigencies and wisdom for the creatures and not for God.

For this reason, God is not an agent by motive or goal (*fā‘il bi
’d-dā‘ī wa bi ’l-qaṣd*) but rather the Agent by satisfaction (*bi
’r-riḍā’*) or special attention (*bi ’l-‘ināyah*), as has been proved in
philosophy. And God’s agency (*fā‘iliyyah*) is not dependent on a motive
or intention which is separate from the Essence because if it is so, His
Agency will not be essential (*bi ’dh-dhāt*) and whatever pertains to
the essential knowledge of God is not an absolute action but rather an
action characterized by wisdom and expediency. In conclusion, while it
is not an action by motive, His action is goal-oriented.

The Qur’an and the Goal-orientedness of the Universe
----------------------------------------------------

Verses of the Qur’an explicitly support the goal-orientedness of the
universe, as it has thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلا
بِالْحَقِّ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatever is between
them except with reason.”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا لَٰعِبِينَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatever is between
them for play.”***[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ مَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلا
بِالْحَقِّ وَأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatever is between
them except with reason and for a specified term.”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the sky and the earth and whatever is between them
in vain.”***[^17]

The implication of these verses is that the world of nature has been
created with reason and vainness has no place in it, and its creation
has not been for play and futility. And this fact dictates that the
movement in the universe will one day come to an end and attain its
desired end or goal. That goal will be reflected in the other
world.[^18]

Apart from these quoted verses which signify the goal-orientedness of
the entire universe, other verses speak about the goal-orientedness of
the life of human being and other creatures. In many verses of the
Qur’an, man’s life and his culmination are regarded as the motive or
goal behind the creation of the earth and the bounties of nature. It
thus says for instance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي الأرْضِ جَمِيعًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who created for you all that is in the earth.”***[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِمَّا خَلَقَ ظِلالا وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ
الْجِبَالِ أَكْنَانًا وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ سَرَابِيلَ تَقِيكُمُ الْحَرَّ
وَسَرَابِيلَ تَقِيكُمْ بَأْسَكُمْ كَذَلِكَ يُتِمُّ نِعْمَتَهُ
عَلَيْكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْلِمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is Allah who has made for you shade from what He created, and
made for you retreats in the mountains, and made for you garments that
protect you from heat and garments that protect you from your [mutual]
violence. That is how He completes His blessing upon you so that you may
submit [to Him].”***[^20]

Regarding the fact that the creation of man is not in vain and the
purpose behind his creation will be realized in the other world, it thus
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا
لاَ تُرْجَعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did you suppose that We created you aimlessly, and*** ***that you
will not be brought back to Us?”***[^21]

Man’s attainment of the said ultimate goal depends on the realization of
other goals which include trial and test, worship and devotion to God,
submission and obedience to Him. The following verses express these
goals:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَا مَا عَلَى الأرْضِ زِينَةً لَهَا لِنَبْلُوَهُمْ
أَيُّهُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it
that We may test them [to see] which of them is best in
conduct.”***[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I did not create the jinn and humans except that they may worship
Me.”***[^23]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ كَذَلِكَ يُتِمُّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْلِمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is how He completes His blessing upon you so that you may
submit [to Him].”***[^24]

The Perfect Man as the Philosophy behind Creation
-------------------------------------------------

It can be deduced from the above verses that the human being is the
motive or goal behind the creation of the universe but not on the basis
of his material or physical life. That may be so for in this
perspective, it has no superiority to other creatures in that it is the
goal behind their creation. It is rather from the perspective of
spiritual life and special perfection which can be obtained through
devotion and servitude to God.

This point can be clearly inferred from the expression *“that We may
test them [to see] which of them is best in conduct”* for the
implication of this statement is that the purpose behind the creation of
the universe is through the excellence and superiority of action. For
instance, this Sacred Tradition (*ḥadīth al-qudsī*)[^25] which is
addressed to the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) speaks about this fact:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْلاكَ لَما خَلَقْتُ الأَفْلاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Had it not been for you, I would not have created the heavenly
firmaments.”*[^26]

Review Questions
----------------

1. Write down the argument of the justice-oriented (*‘adliyyah*)
theologians on the goal-orientedness of the actions of God.

2. Write down the first objection of the Ash‘arīs on the
goal-orientedness of the actions of God along with the refutation to it.

3. Write down the second objection of the Ash‘arīs on the
goal-orientedness of the actions of God along with the refutation to it.

4. What does it mean by the goal of the action and the goal of the
agent? Which one is meant by the goal-orientedness of the actions of
God?

5. What is the Muslim theosophers’ view on the goal-orientedness of the
actions of God?

6. Cite two verses of the Qur’an to substantiate the goal-orientedness
of the actions of God.

7. Write down three verses of the Qur’an about the goal-orientedness of
human life.

[^1]: The difference between purpose (ghāyah) and motive (gharaḍ) is
that motive is a specific purpose and it means the purpose behind the
action of an agent that has free-will. See Sharḥ al-Ishārāt, vol. 3, p.
149.

[^2]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 3.

[^3]: Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 8, pp. 202-203.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 203.

[^5]: Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 8, p. 203.

[^6]: Ibid., vol. 8, pp. 203-204.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Dhāriyāt 51:56.

[^8]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:32.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Aḥzāb 33:37.

[^10]: Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 4, pp. 302-303.

[^11]: Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 6, p. 202.

[^12]: Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 7, p. 84.

[^13]: Sarmāyeh-ye Īmān, p. 74.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Ḥijr 15:85.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Anbiyā’ 21:16.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Aḥqāf 46:3.

[^17]: Sūrat Ṣād 38:27.

[^18]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 16, p. 158.

[^19]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:29.

[^20]: Sūrat al-Nahl 16:81.

[^21]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:115.

[^22]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:7.

[^23]: Sūrat al-Dhāriyāt 51:56.

[^24]: Sūrat al-Nahl 16:81.

[^25]: Ḥadīth Qudsī (or Sacred Ḥadīth): a sub-category of ḥadīth, which
are sayings of God but differ from the Qur’an as they are expressed in
the words of Prophet Muḥammad (ṣ). [Trans.]

[^26]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 10, p. 152.


