Lesson 24: Evil and the Best Order
==================================

One of the perennial central discussions in theology is the question of
evil which is talked about in different topics. One of the topics in
which it is discussed is the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in creatorship
(*khāliqiyyah*) because the dualists believe in two creators, viz. the
creator of good and the creator of evil, and we have examined this
matter in our discourses on the Divine Unity.

Another topic in which it is discussed is the question of the Divine
justice which is approached from diverse perspectives. Sometimes it is
through the angle of the cosmic justice and the best order of existence
and at times through the outlook of the goal-orientedness of the
universe and that the philosophy behind the world of nature is that the
human being benefits from it while natural evils also inflict him.

Sometimes it is through the viewpoint that in the theistic worldview,
some of the undesirable happenings are a result of man’s actions while
these consequences usually affect not only the wrongdoers but the others
as well. These are various cases in which ‘evil’ is mentioned as
something in conflict with the justice of God (cosmic as well as
retributory justice), and the Muslim philosophers and theologians have
examined and resolved it through their respective ways.

In view of the broadness of the scope of this topic, we shall examine
and analyze it in two lessons.

The Skepticism on Evil and the Best Order
-----------------------------------------

We have mentioned in an earlier lesson the proof of the best order. The
skepticism on evil in this regard holds that evil – natural, moral or
human evil – is in conflict with the excellence of the order of nature
and that the best order demands that the universe must be free from
evil.

### Reply [to the Skepticism]

In reply to this skepticism on evil in relation to the best and most
perfect order, the theosophers have embarked on the examination of the
hypothetical kinds of the possible being (*mawjūd al-mumkin*) from the
perspective of good and evil, and on the basis of the Divine providence
(*‘ināyah*) and wisdom (*ḥikmah*), they have concluded that only two
kinds of it can be materialized; one is pure good while the other is the
dominant and much good, but the materialization of other assumptions
such as equal good and evil, dominant and much evil and pure evil is
impossible.

Meanwhile, since pure evil means pure non-existence and sheer nullity
and that the assumption of existence in this case is to assume two
contradictory things, the equality of its evil with its goodness or its
evil as more dominant than its goodness is in conflict with the Divine
providence which necessitates the best order. This is incompatible with
a being whose goodness is more dominant than its evil, for the
non-existence of more dominant goodness due to some evil is in itself a
manifestation of more dominant evil, and this is incompatible with the
Divine providence and wisdom.[^1]

The Non-discernment of Evil in the Realm of Nature
--------------------------------------------------

Apart from the Necessary Being by essence (*wājib al-wujūd bi ’dh-dhāt*)
what possess reality or existence are the two realms; one is the realm
of non-material (*mufāriq*) and incorporeal (*mujarrad*) beings, and the
other is the realm of nature and material beings. Manifestations of evil
(*shurūr*) surface in the realm of nature and material beings only
because the nature of evil is absence or non-existence (*‘adam*) – the
absence or non-existence of what is desirable and contingent for a thing
– and it is either the absence of the primary perfection (the archetype)
or that of the secondary perfection. In any case, non-existence is a
characteristic of a material thing and it pertains to matter and
possibility (dispositional possibility or *imkān-e isti‘dādī*).

Therefore, such non-existence which is the origin and source of evil has
no place except in the physical realm. In this regard, ‘Allāmah
al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī has said:

“Evil, corruption and their likes are all undesirable and unwanted
things which can be found in the physical realm; likewise, the concept
of “bad” or “undesirable” is a concept which arises in contrast to the
“good” or “desirable”. Had there been no wellbeing or good health which
our physical beings desire, we would have never regarded illness as bad,
and had there been no comfort and security and any of the carnal or
sensual pleasures, losing any of them would have never been painful for
us or be considered a misfortune, just as we never regard the evenness
of the number “four” or the oddness of the number “three” as good or
bad, good luck or bad luck because there is no point of comparison.

It thus becomes clear that “evil” is an analogical matter and a
non-existential concept in contrast to an attainable existential matter.
That is, regarding evil, there must be a subject with an existential
quality such that its desirability must be assumed and the absence of
this quality of desirability from it would be regarded as “evil”. For
instance, the human being’s possession of eyes is good. (Naturally, he
wants to have eyes and it is also possible for him not to have them.) On
the contrary, blindness is treated as “evil” for him.

And as a conclusion of this examination, we arrive at the point that
“evil” – wherever it is – first and foremost, is a non-existential
(*‘adamī*), and secondly, a potential (*imkānī*) matter.[^2]

To elaborate, physical existents are constituted by [certain] abilities
and potentials, and they gradually acquire the existential perfections
which may be possible for them. This gradual development depends on the
mutual interaction among the physical existents, for each of the natural
species has peculiar defects and perfections which are acquired through
many other natural phenomena, and it is here that a sort of clash or
conflict arises, and as a result, relative or subjective evil comes into
being.

In other words, the ability of matter to assume various forms, on one
hand, and the contradiction of one form with another, on the other hand,
are an element of destruction as well as construction, an agency for
both extinction and origination, [an instrument of] wiping out the past
as well as building the future, [a means of] taking out old forms and
images and bringing out new portraits. As long as the members and
elements do not clash with each other and do not influence each other,
no average disposition or new combination will emerge. Thus, it is
correct for us to say that “Contradiction is the source of good and the
balancer of the universe, and the order in the universe is based on
it.”[^3]

In a discussion on the manner of involvement of evil in the Divine
decree, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has thus said:

“The materialization of non-finite beings or existents which
necessitates the Divine providence necessitates the existence of
transubstantiation (*istiḥālāh*) and contradiction (*taḍād*) in the
world of generation and corruption (*‘ālam-e kawn wa fasād* or the realm
of nature), for without contradiction, generation and corruption will
not be materialized, and without generation and corruption, in turn,
non-finite animal and human existents and beings would not have existed.
Meanwhile, the contradiction of qualities and forms is one of the
properties of physical beings and is expedient for their interaction and
not the independent action of the agent (naturally and accidentally made
and not originally made). It is thus correct to say, thus:

“Had there been no contradiction, the emanation of existence would not
have continued from the Origin of existence; the Divine existence and
bestowal would have been suspended; the realm of nature would have been
in a standstill from possessing life through which it attains its goal;
and most of the existents which could possibly emerge in the ulterior of
possibility and non-existence would have remained.”[^4]

In Imām ‘Alī’s (*‘a*) sermon on the Divine Unity (*khutbat al-tawḥīd*),
he has also mentioned the principle of contradiction governing the realm
of nature:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَادَّ النُّورَ بِالظُّلْمَةِ، وَالْوُضُوحَ بِالْبُهْمَةِ،
وَالْجُمُودَ بِالْبَلَلِ، وَالْحَرُورَ بِالصَّرَدِ. مُؤَلِّفٌ بَيْنَ
مُتَعَادِيَاتِهَا، مُقَارِنٌ بَيْنَ مُتَبَايِنَاتِهَا، مُقَرِّبٌ
بَيْنَ مُتَبَاعِداتِهَا، مُفَرِّقٌ بَيْنَ مُتَدَانِيَاتِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He has made light the contrary of darkness, brightness that of gloom,
dryness that of moisture and heat that of cold. He produces affection
among inimical things. He fuses together diverse things, brings near
remote things and separates things which are joined together.”[^5]

In his *Mathnawī-ye Ma‘nawī*, Mawlānā Rūmī has mentioned the issue of
subsistence of natural life on the basis of contradiction, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين جهان جنگ است چون كل بنگري ذره ذره همچو دين با کافری
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن يکی ذره همی پرد به چپ و آن دگر سوی يمين اندر طلب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين جهان زين جنگ قائم می بود در عناصر در نگر تا حل شود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بس بنای خلق بر اضداد بود لاجرم جنگی شد اندر ضر و سود
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you consider, this world is all at strife,*

*Mote with mote, as religion with infidelity.*

*One mote is flying to the left,*

*And another to the right in search.*[^6]

*This world is maintained by means of this war:*

*Consider the elements, in order that it may be solved.*[^7]

*Hence the edifice of creation is upon contraries;*

*Consequently we are at war for well-being and woe.*[^8]

And Rūmī has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زندگانی آشتی ضدهاست‌ مرگ آن کاندر ميانشان جنگ خاست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلح اضداد است عمر اين جهان جنگ اضداد است عمر جاودان
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Life is the peace of contraries;*

*Death is the fact that war arose between them.*[^9]

Thus far, the conclusion of the discussion is that relative evil is
indispensable to the physical beings and caused by the contradiction
governing the realm of nature, and this contradiction is also a
necessary or essential requisite of development and required by the
Divine justice, wisdom and providence: [^10]

**  
**

إذ مُقتضى الْحِكْمَةِ وَالْعِنَايَةِ ايضال كُلَّ ممكن لِغَايَةِ

The Beauty of the Totality or the Perfect System
------------------------------------------------

Another point which must be given attention in reply to the misgiving on
evil from the perspective of excellence of the natural order is the
principle of the realm of nature’s organicness which has been given
attention by the theosophers since the ancient history of philosophy.
According to this [principle], the universe is an indivisible unit whose
components have ontological and real relationship with one another.

As a result, correct judgment on its excellence depends on the
examination of all beings and the whole system, and in the whole system
and overall equilibrium, the existence of inferior and superior, ups and
downs, darkness and light, suffering and pleasure is essential, and it
must be said that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خهان چون خط و خال و چشم و ابروست كه هر چيزي بجاي خويش نيكوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اگر نيك و بدي بيني مزن دم كه هم ابليس ﻣﻲبايد هم آدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is also right to say that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابروي كج ار راست بدي كج بودي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If your eyebrows were straight, you were defective.*

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
از شير حمله خوش بود و از غزال رم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What was pleasant in the lion was its attack and in the gazelle its
being scared*.[^11]

Objection
---------

In the physical beings, it is not correct to say that goodness dominates
over evil, for on top of them are the human beings, and on account of
committing undesirable acts and being afflicted with moral vices and
crooked beliefs, most of them are manifestations of severe wickedness.

Since the worldly life is temporary and the Hereafter is an eternal
abode and that the said individuals deserve to incur the Divine wrath
and be deprived of the everlasting felicity, the otherworldly outcome of
their lives is chastisement and evil. Though they may have lives of
animalistic pleasure in this world, they will become insignificant
compared to the punishment in the Hereafter.

### Reply

In terms of theoretical and practical perfections, the human beings are
of three types:

(1) those who have attained the highest level of perfection in both
aspects,

(2) those who are in the lowest level and lack any kind of theoretical
or practical perfection, and

(3) those who are situated between these two extremes and diverse levels
in both aspects.

It is obvious that most people belong to the third group. Relative to
the total number of people, the second group is lesser in number and the
eternal damnation in the final abode belongs to the second group, and
the rest, even if they incur punishment, will finally be admitted to the
vast door of the Divine mercy.[^12]

Second Objection
----------------

Why did God not create the world of nature in such a way that there is
not even a speck of atom in it and it is purely good?

### Reply

The said assumption is rationally impossible because its implication is
that the material being is both material and immaterial at the same time
for in terms of materialization of existential perfections possible for
it, there are only two possibilities for it. One [possibility] is that
the said perfections are acquired by it actually (*bi ’l-fi‘l*). This
refers to the absolutely immaterial being (such as non-material
intellect (*‘aql-e mafāriq*)). The other [possibility] is that its
perfections are not acquired actually. This type is either material
being or non-absolute non-material being (such as the spirit (*nafs*)).

The state of these two types of contingent being, therefore, is an open
circuit of creation and non-creation. But to assume that the second type
would exist while being gradually evolving (*tadrīj al-wujūd*) and
actually deserving its perfections – like the assumption that the first
type is gradually evolving and actually not deserving its perfections –
necessitates contradictions, and it is impossible.

Moreover, since non-creation of the second type which is the
manifestation of the dominant good necessitates dominant evil and giving
preference to dominant evil over dominant good is unthinkable for the
Wise Agent, creation of the realm of nature which necessitates less evil
is in itself concomitant to the Divine justice and wisdom.[^13]

Evil and the All-encompassing Power of God
------------------------------------------

A Western philosopher[^14] regards the existence of evil in the realm of
nature as incompatible with the all-encompassing power of God and His
absolute goodness and graciousness, saying that the question of evil in
its simplest form is as follows: (1) God is the Omnipotent; (2) God is
absolutely gracious; and (3) yet, evil exists. These three cases are in
conflict with the main components of most theological views. For
instance, if two of these cases are true, the third will be definitely
false. Then, in explaining the contradiction among them, he has thus
stated:

a. Good is the opposite of evil such that a well-wisher tries to remove
evil as much as he can, and

b. The powers of the Omnipotent Being know no bounds and limits.

These two premises necessitate that if one is absolutely gracious as
well as omnipotent, he will totally get rid of evil. As such, the two
cases – “There is the omnipotent” and “Evil exists” – are contradictory.

This misgiving is caused by the failure to consider a rational and
intrinsic principle, and that is the discussion about the ability or
inability of the agent and his being good or evil depends on whether the
subject is essentially and practically possible or essentially and
practically impossible; otherwise, the problem is with the other party
and not with the agent.

If we would not take this rational principle into consideration, the
misgiving cannot be confined on the question of evil as it will also be
applied to all cases of impossibility such as bringing two
contradictories together, law of non-contradiction, negation of a thing
by itself, the circle’s possession of four sides, etc. These will be
raised in comparison to the principle of God’s absolute power or
omnipotence.

Meanwhile the solution to the misgiving on contradictions in all these
cases is to pay attention to the said rational and intrinsic principle.
Definitely, Mr. Mackie does not consider the impossibility of a drawing
to be square and circle at the same time as the reason for his ability
to do so, and he will argue that he can draw both shapes. However, the
materialization of the said two shapes by means of a single agent at the
same time is essentially impossible, and impossibility is beyond the
sphere of ability.

Such is the discussion on the question of evil in the realm of nature. A
material being that is associated with contingence (*imkān*), capacity
(*isti‘dād*) and gradation (*tadrīj*) cannot be devoid of evil. As
explained earlier, the state of such a being is an open circuit of
existence and non-existence, and to assume an existence without evil is
tantamount to assuming two contradictory matters. ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī
has expressed this subject in this way:

“When analyzed, this notion is like asking, ‘Why did the God of matter
and nature not set matter and nature as immaterial?’ Any existent that
has no possibility of having or not having perfection cannot be a
material being. If this universe does not have the quality that each of
its components can transform into something else and under certain
conditions it can find its existential interests and without which it
would be miserable and static, it follows that this universe is not
material.”[^15]

It is appropriate here to cite Imām ‘Alī’s (*‘a*) statement in reply to
this question: “Can God who, according to the monotheists, is capable of
doing everything, place the world without making it small inside a
chicken egg without making it bigger?”

In reply to the said question, the Imām (*‘a*) said: [^16]

**  
**

إنّ اللهَ تَبارَكَ وَتعالى لايُنْسَبُ إلى العَجْزِ، وَالَّذي سَأَلْتَني
لايَكونُ.

It must be noted that the phrase “as much as he can” in Mackie’s first
premise is not correct. What is correct is “as much as possible” which
means that the Agent who is absolutely gracious will remove evil as much
as possible which is not tantamount to impossibility. It is clear that
no objection can be raised against this proposition.

Review Questions
----------------

1. Prove that evil has no contradiction with the excellence of the order
of nature.

2. Write down the reason why good is inseparable with evil in the realm
of nature.

3. Write down Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn’s statement concerning the nature of
evil’s place in the Divine decree.

4. Write down the statement of the Commander of the Faithful (Imām ‘Alī)
(*‘a*) regarding the principle of contradiction governing the realm of
nature.

5. Write down along with its refutation the objection on the inability
of good to dominate evil in the world of creation.

6. Why did God not create the realm of nature in such a way that there
is not the least evil and there would be absolute goodness?

7. Write down along with its refutation the notion of incompatibility of
the existence of evil in the realm of nature with the all-encompassing
power of God.

[^1]: See Nihāyat al-Ḥikmah, stage (marḥalah) 12, chap. 18.

[^2]: Uṣūl-e Falsafeh, vol. 5, p. 172; See also Nihāyat al-Ḥikmah, stage
(marḥalah) 12, chap. 18.

[^3]: ‘Adl-e Ilāhī (Divine Justice), 8th ed., p. 214.

[^4]: Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 7, p. 77.

[^5]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 186.

[^6]: Nicholson (trans.), Mathnawī-ye Ma‘nawī, Book 6, lines 36-37.

[^7]: Ibid., line 47.

[^8]: Ibid., line 50.

[^9]: Ibid., Book 1, line 1293.

[^10]: Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ-e Manẓūmah, “Al-‘Illāta wa ’l-Ma‘lūl,”
“Ghurar fī ’l-Mabḥath ‘An al-Ghāyah.”

[^11]: Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, ‘Adl-e Ilāhī (Divine Justice), 8th ed., pp.
179-183.

[^12]: Sharḥ al-Ishārāt, vol. 3, pp. 325-328; Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 7,
pp. 79-80.

[^13]: Sharḥ-e Ishārāt, vol. 3, p. 328.

[^14]: It refers to John Leslie Mackie (1917-81) in the article “Evil
and Absolute Power” in Kalām-e Falsafī, pp. 145-170.

[^15]: Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism, vol. 5, p. 173.

[^16]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) 9, ḥadīth 9, p. 130.


