Lesson 25: Evil and the Justice of God
======================================

In religious texts, it is asserted that God has created the realm of
nature for the benefits of humanity, as God says in the Holy Qur’an,
thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي الأرْضِ جَمِيعًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who created for you all that is in the earth.”***[^1]

In this regard, this objection is put forth: natural evils, i.e.
undesirable events such as earthquake, flood, typhoon, volcanic
eruption, and the like; predator and biting animals; plagues; and
viruses go against man’s interests and bring harm to him. If man’s
exploitation of nature were concomitant with the justice and wisdom of
God, why did He create nature as associated with evils? If nature’s
association with evils is inevitable, it follows that serving the
interests of man should be considered the philosophy behind the creation
of nature.

General Welfare and Public Good
-------------------------------

This objection is caused by a partial outlook on events, observation of
limited individual losses, and overlooking of the general welfare and
public good although rationally public interests and benefits prevail
over personal and particular interests. On this basis, gains and losses
in the realm of nature must be considered as a whole and the general
objectives and interests must be gauged. With this outlook, the problem
will be solved.

Regarding death which can be regarded as the most painful occurrence and
the most prominent manifestation of evil, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn said:

“If we reflect well on this undesirable phenomenon, it will become clear
that it is beneficial to the person who dies as well as to the others.
Its benefit for the one who dies is that he will become free from the
life in this world which is replete with miseries and afflictions, and
its benefit for the others is that had there been no death;
uncontrollable population explosion would have made life’s arena narrow
and human living impossible.

“In a tradition (*ḥadīth*) reported from Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), it is
said that some of the previous communities asked their prophet to
petition to God the removal of death from them.[^2] The said prophet
petitioned so and God granted it and took death away from them. As a
result, their generations multiplied and the usual flow of their lives
was suspended because each person had to attend only to the needs of
their ageing parents and grandparents and had no opportunity to perform
any constructive work. For this reason, they asked their prophet to
petition God for the return of the attribute of death to them.”[^3]

Unpleasant Things and Understanding the Sweetness of Doing Good
---------------------------------------------------------------

One of the utilities of the undesirable [things and happenings] is that
it makes a person perceive and enjoy the good and pleasant things. Had
it not been for illness, man would have never found out the blessing of
good health and felt its pleasure. Had there been no hunger, being full
would not have been understandable and satisfying. Without darkness,
light could not have been appreciated. Of course, this does not mean
that without considering individual capacities and potentials, God would
originate painful happenings and creatures that bring about evil so as
to teach the value of good and goodness.

This rather means that one of the benefits of what is called ‘evil’ is
to identify and perceive the pleasantness of good. In view of the fact
that God creates the creatures while considering their inherent
potentials, and the reply to the objection on why the [Arabic] letter
*alīf* is a straight line while the letter *dāl* is a curve is that
these traits are part of the corollaries of their nature. Each of them
is demanded by this type of existential designation and realization and
nothing else; all these differences are based upon the principle of
cosmic justice of God – “giving every right to its owner”: [^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعْطىٰ كُلَّ ذي حَقٍّ حَقَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Undesirables and the Blossoming of Talents
------------------------------------------

A study of human history and great personalities clearly shows that
undesirable events have a crucial role in the blossoming and coming to
fruition of talents, and the secret behind this is that as necessitated
by his instinctive desire to prevail over the undesirable things. In
order to emerge victorious in this confrontation, one would have to
strive hard to make use of all his natural talents and capabilities, and
this state of affairs leads to his personal growth and maturity.

Resistance against undesirable things strengthens and fortifies man’s
will-power and resolve, and causes the gem of his personality and
manliness to appear.[^5] One must endure all difficulties and
afflictions in order to discover what is due to him. The Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإنْسَانَ فِي كَبَدٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We created man in travail.”***[^6]

It also says, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا ٭ إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed ease accompanies hardship. Indeed ease accompanies
hardship.”***[^7]

What is interesting is that these two verses come after certain verses
which God has revealed as a consolation for the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) in
facing undesirable events. It thus states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَلَمْ نَشْرَحْ لَكَ صَدْرَكَ ٭ وَوَضَعْنَا عَنْكَ وِزْرَكَ ٭
الَّذِي أَنْقَضَ ظَهْرَكَ ٭ وَرَفَعْنَا لَكَ ذِكْرَكَ ٭ فَإِنَّ مَعَ
الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا ٭ إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did We not open your breast for you and relieve you of your burden
which [almost] broke your back? Did We not exalt your name? Indeed ease
accompanies hardship. Indeed ease accompanies hardship.”***[^8]

The verse *“Indeed ease accompanies hardship”* shows that the said
blessings bestowed by God upon the Prophet (*ṣ*) is the outcome of his
efforts and persistence in the way of playing his crucial sacred role as
well as his patience and fortitude in facing adverse conditions. It is
this *‘usr* (difficulty) which brings about the *yusr* (ease). Given
this, one must not remain passive for even a moment; rather, after
getting relief from every endeavour or pursuit, one must embark on
another struggle and turn his attention to his Lord by constantly
striving hard. As it is thus stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذَا فَرَغْتَ فَانْصَبْ ٭ وَإِلَى رَبِّكَ فَارْغَبْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when you are done, appoint, and turn eagerly to your
Lord.”***[^9]

In this regard, Mawlawī [Rūmī] has thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رنج گنج آمد كه رحمتها در اوست مغز تازه شد چو بخراشيد پوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اي برادر موضع تاريك و سرد‬ صبر كردن بر غم و سستي و درد‬
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چشمة حيوان و جام مستي است‬ كان بلنديها همه در پستي است‬
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن بهاران مضمر است اندر خزان‬ در بهار است آن خزان مگريز از آن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
همره غم باش و با وحشت بساز‬ ﻣﻲطلب در مرگ خود عمر دراز‬
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Pain is a treasure, for there are mercies in it:*

*the kernel becomes fresh when you scrape off the rind.*

*O brother, a dark and cold place,*

*to endure patiently sorrow and weakness and pain,*

*Is the Fountain of Life and the cup of intoxication,*

*for those heights are all in lowliness.*

*That spring is implied in autumn, and that autumn is in the spring:*

*do not flee from it*

*Be a fellow-traveller with grief, agree with desolation,*

*and seek long life in your death*.[^10]

Finding the way to paradise without enduring hardships and afflictions
while undertaking the humane-sacred mission is impossible. The Holy
Qur’an has emphatically and categorically mentioned this subject in this
manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَنْ تَدْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِكُمْ
مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ مَسَّتْهُمُ الْبَأْسَاءُ
وَالضَّرَّاءُ وَزُلْزِلُوا حَتَّى يَقُولَ الرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا مَعَهُ مَتَى نَصْرُ اللَّهِ أَلا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do you suppose that you shall enter paradise though there has not
yet come to you the like of [what befell]] those who went before you?
Stress and distress befell them and they were convulsed until the
apostle and the faithful who were with him said, ‘When will Allah’s help
[come]?’ Look! Allah’s help is indeed near!”***[^11]

Painful Incidents or Warning Signs
----------------------------------

From the perspective of man’s spiritual life, undesirable natural events
have also significant and considerable benefits on top of which is to
reprove and wake him up. Entertainment and attachment to the outward
manifestations of the corporeal world cause negligence of the spiritual
values, and as this attachment increases, his distance from spirituality
and real happiness also increases. In waking up man from the slumber of
negligence and drawing his attention to lofty values, God, the
All-merciful, has used many ways, among the most important of which are
painful and undesirable happenings. In this regard, the Holy Qur’an has
thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِّن نَّبِيٍّ إِلاَّ أَخَذْنَا
أَهْلَهَا بِالْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَضَّرَّعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not send a prophet to any town without visiting its people
with stress and distress so that they might entreat [for Allah’s
forgiveness].”***[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَقَدْ أَخَذْنَا آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ بِالسِّنينَ وَنَقْصٍ مِنَ
الثَّمَرَاتِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَذَّكَّرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We afflicted Pharaoh’s clan with droughts and loss of
produce, so that they may take admonition.”***[^13]

Istidrāj and Ibtilā
-------------------

*Istidrāj* and *ibtilā* are two Qur’anic concepts which refer to
material blessings and undesirable natural events. Whenever a person
sinks in the abyss of sins and disobedience to God while not facing
painful happenings and always living in comfort and material blessings,
he is afflicted with the punishment of *istidrāj*.

However, whenever he would experience difficulties and adversities after
committing sin and this would prompt him to repent for his sins and
return to the service of God, he is a recipient of God’s mercy and
through which the jewel of his faith will be purged of the dirts of
sins.

In his compiled book *Al-Kāfī*, the traditionist (*muḥaddith*)
al-Kulaynī has recorded Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) as saying:

“Whenever God desires for the wellbeing of His servant who commits a
sin, He would put him in difficulty, and whenever He desires evil for
His servant who commits a sin [as he himself chooses], He would give a
bounty to him so he will forget to seek forgiveness and will be amused
by the said bounty. This is what God refers to when He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا سَنَسْتَدْرِجُهُمْ مِنْ حَيْثُ لا
يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who deny Our signs, We will draw them imperceptibly
[into ruin], whence they do not know.”***[^14]**,** [^15]

It is thus stated in the pithy aphorisms of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمْ مِنْ مُسْتَدْرَج ٍبِالإِحْسَانِ إلَيْهِ، وَمَغْرورٍ بِالسَّتْرِ
عَلَيْهِ، وَمَفْتُونٍ بِحُسْنِ الْقَوْلِ فِيهِ! وَمَا ابْتَلَى اللهُ
أَحَداً بِمِثْلِ الإِمْلاَءِ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There are many persons for whom constant grants of His Bounties turn
them wicked and stand fit for His punishment and there are many more who
have become vain and self-deceptive because the Merciful Allah has not
exposed their weaknesses and vices to the world and other people speak
highly about them. All this is an opportunity. No trial of the Lord is
more severe than the time He allows (in which either you may repent or
get deeper into vices).”[^16]

For those who take admonition and do reflect, therefore, difficulties
and undesirable things are manifestations of goodness and reflection of
God’s grace and mercy. For these individuals, painful happenings are
like bitter pills that the doctor or guardians of the patient – out of
sympathy and compassion – would ask him to take these pills to save his
life. Now, if these individuals do not refrain from harmful foods and
because of their failure to observe the doctor’s instructions on taking
medicine, the bitter medicine fails to bring about the sweetness of good
health, the doctor can in no way be blameworthy and be at fault. The
undesirable thing is an outcome of the misuse of the patient’s will
power, and nothing else.

The Role of Sins in the Occurrence of Painful Incidents
-------------------------------------------------------

From the perspective of Qur’anic worldview, good and bad deeds of the
human beings have an influence on some of the natural pleasant and
painful happenings. In connection with the role of good deeds in the
multiplication of bounties, the Qur’an thus says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرَى آمَنُواْ وَاتَّقَواْ لَفَتَحْنَا
عَلَيْهِم بَرَكَاتٍ مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالأَرْضِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If the people of the towns had been faithful and God-wary, We would
have opened to them blessings from the heaven and the earth.”***[^17]

And it also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you are grateful, I will surely enhance you [in
blessing].”***[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اِسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا ٭ يُرْسِلِ
السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُم مِّدْرَارًا ٭ وَيُمْدِدْكُمْ بِأَمْوَالٍ
وَبَنِينَ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ أَنْهَارًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Plead to your Lord for forgiveness. Indeed He is all-forgiver. He
will send for you abundant rains from the sky, and aid you with wealth
and sons, and provide you with gardens and provide you with streams.
”***[^19]

Regarding the evil deeds’ contribution to undesirable events, it thus
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ظَهَرَ الْفَسَادُ فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِي
النَّاسِ لِيُذِيقَهُمْ بَعْضَ الَّذِي عَمِلُوا لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Corruption has appeared in land and sea because of the doings of the
people’s hands, that He may make them taste something of what they have
done, so that they may come back.”***[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فَبِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ
وَيَعْفُوا عَنْ كَثِيرٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands
have earned, and He excuses many [an offense].”***[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِظُلْمِهِمْ مَا تَرَكَ عَلَيْهَا
مِنْ دَابَّةٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Were Allah to take mankind to task for their wrongdoing, He would
not leave any living being upon it.”***[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ لَمْ يَكُ مُغَيِّرًا نِعْمَةً أَنْعَمَهَا
عَلَى قَوْمٍ حَتَّى يُغَيِّرُوا مَا بِأَنْفُسِهِمْ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is because Allah never changes a blessing that He has bestowed
on a people unless they change what is in their own souls, and Allah is
all-hearing, all-knowing.”***[^23]

On this basis, in interpreting evils, one must not overlook the role of
man in his undesirable actions. In fact, fairness in giving judgment and
conducting research dictates that instead of putting into question the
justice of God, one must first examine the ideological and practical
equilibrium (faith and good deeds) of the human beings. Yet, what can be
done when the egoistic man has no concern for exonerating himself even
from entertaining doubt and skepticism on the justice of wisdom of the
One who created him?!

The Saints of God’s Account as Separate
---------------------------------------

The principle is exclusive to those who do not have total protection
from sins as they are prone to commit sins and wrongdoings, and the
selected saints (*awliyā’*) of God and genuine believers are excluded
from this principle. The undesirable things that happen in their lives
have a different interpretation, and that is promotion of status,
elevation of perfection and getting closer to the Station of Divine
Proximity. For instance, Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) was reported to have said:

“In the sight of God, man has a station which he cannot reach through
[his] own good deeds. God will afflict him with misfortune in body,
wealth or offspring. Whenever he demonstrates patience, he attains such
station.”[^24]

The Imām (*‘a*) also said to Isḥāq ibn ‘Ammār:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا إسْحاقُ لا تُعَدَّنَ مُصيبَةً أُعْطِيَتْ عَلَيْها الصَّبْرَ و
أسْتَوْجَبْتَ عَلَيْها مِنَ اللهِ ثَوابًا بِمُصيبَةٍ، إنَّ المصيبَةَ
الَّتي يُحْرَمُ صاحِبُها أجْرَها وَثَوابَها إذا لَمْ يَصْبِرْ عِنْدَ
نُزولِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O Isḥāq! Do not regard as misfortune the undesirable happening which
you endure and for which you earn [spiritual] reward from Allah.
Misfortune is the undesirable happening which one cannot endure and from
whose reward one cannot earn.”*

From here, one can realize the incorrectness of the notion of those who
think that the undesirable events in the lives of the saints of God are
covered by this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فَبِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ
وَيَعْفُوا عَنْ كَثِيرٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands
have earned, and He excuses many [an offense].”***[^25]

For instance, after the attainment of martyrdom of Imām al-Ḥusayn (*‘a*)
and his companions, the criminal Yazīd cited the said verse in a bid to
manipulate public opinion with respect to his responsibility in what had
transpired in Karbalā. Yet, Imām al-Sajjād immediately confronted him
and gave his decisive reply:

“This verse of the Qur’an does not apply to us; what apply to us are
these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ مَا أَصَابَ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فِي الأرْضِ وَلا فِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ إِلا
فِي كِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ نَبْرَأَهَا إِنَّ ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
يَسِيرٌ ٭ لِكَيْلا تَأْسَوْا عَلَى مَا فَاتَكُمْ وَلا تَفْرَحُوا بِمَا
آتَاكُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No affliction visits the earth or yourselves but it is in a Book
before We bring it about – that is indeed easy for Allah -*** ***so that
you may not grieve for what escapes you, nor exult for what comes your
way.”***[^26]

What can be inferred from an examination of these two verses which were
cited by Imām al-Sajjād (*‘a*) in reply to Yazīd is that without
committing any sin or disobedience, some individuals will have painful
experiences so as to attain [the state of] submission and contentment on
account of their patience and endurance.

As a result, they would not accept anything except that which the souls
accept; neither do they get sad for losing worldly things nor do they
rush to acquire them. Imām al-Ḥusayn (*‘a*) and his companions were an
illustrious example of such personalities.

Evil and Retributory Justice
----------------------------

Out of this point, one can reply to the misgiving about evil in the
context of retributory justice. The misgiving is that the painful
experiences that serve as a retribution or punishment for the sinners
bring about disturbance, loss and harm to the innocent and righteous and
as a result, they are unjustly victimized.

The reply is that the misfortunes and painful experiences serve as means
of perfection and elevation for them, and although they have to suffer
and lose materially, they will earn great rewards in terms of the life
in the Hereafter. In order to attain these, every reasonable person
should wholeheartedly endure material afflictions, and in principle,
with this outlook, painful happenings turn sweet and desirable, and in
the words of Mawlawī [Rūmī],

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر بلا كز دوست آيد رحمت است آن بلا را بر دلم صد منت است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ای بلاهای تو آرام دلم حاصل از درد تو شد کام دلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نالم و ترسم که او باور کند وز ترحم جور را کمتر کند
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allāh ibn Mas‘ūd is reported to have said: “One day we were in the
company of the Prophet (*ṣ*) who was then smiling and we asked him the
reason for his smile. He (*ṣ*) said, ‘I was surprised at the believer’s
impatience for illness. If he only knows the extent of rewards given to
him for experiencing pain and illness, he would desire to be constantly
sick.’”[^27]

Pains and Rewards
-----------------

In their theological texts, the justice-oriented (*‘adliyyah*)
theologians have some discussions about suffering and recompense. First,
they have divided suffering into two groups, viz. preliminary
(*ibtidā’ī*) and meritorious (*istiḥqāqī*). They have then dealt with
the positive form of preliminary suffering and thereafter they have
mentioned that the justice of God necessitates that recompense must be
given to those who endure suffering. In this regard, Ibn Maytham
al-Baḥrānī has said:

“The positive form of preliminary suffering consists of two things. One
is that in exchange for it, God bestows ample rewards in such a way that
if one could choose between accepting the suffering and rewards, and the
absence of suffering and to be deprived of those rewards, he will choose
the former. Another is that the said suffering or undesirable thing
includes bounties due to him or others. The reason for the first case is
that the preliminary suffering without recompense is injustice, and the
reason for the second case is that suffering with recompense and without
motive is futile, and injustice and futility are impossible to apply to
God.”[^28]

The current theological discourse is the answer to all the misgivings
being raised in relation to the retributory justice of God and from the
perspective of non-meritorious sufferings and afflictions. And its
outcome is that such sufferings and afflictions, on one hand, are
manifestations and expressions of the Divine grace for humanity, and on
the other hand, God bestows so much reward to those who endure
sufferings and afflictions that any forethoughtful and realistic person
would voluntarily endure those sufferings and afflictions.

Concluding Points
-----------------

At the end of this lesson, we deem it necessary to mention the following
points:

1. The [existence of] influence of man’s good and bad deeds in natural
occurrences is one of the precepts, revelation and teachings of the
Qur’an, and rationally, the existence of such a relationship between man
and nature is possible, and since the authority of revelation is
affirmed by reason, it follows that reason dictates that it must be
accepted.

2. It is true that this relationship can be interpreted as natural and
on the basis of conventional cause-and-effect relationship, and it can
be said that what is meant by the effect of the good deeds of the human
beings – in the sending down of blessings, for instance – is that
whenever faith (*īmān*) and God-wariness (*taqwā*) are prevalent in
human society, the individual members are hopeful and optimistic, and
eagerly help one another in exploring and unraveling the secrets of
nature; unity and solidarity reign in society; and laws and regulations
are totally observed. On this basis, the causes and factors for
advancement will be provided, and thus, the bounties of life will
increase and thereafter the blessings of the Heaven and the earth will
descend upon them.

What can be understood, however, from the apparent meanings of the
Qur’anic verses and traditions (*aḥādith*) is that in addition to the
natural effects of faith, God-wariness and repentance (*tawbah*) in the
sending down of the Divine blessings, there is also a sort of
metaphysical effect, particularly the sins of those who are responsible
for some undesirable events, and this effect is beyond a sort of natural
effect.

3. The abovementioned subject is one of the universal principles and
laws of human life, and one must not pass judgment on it by merely
studying the personal lives of individuals. In many instances, in a
corrupt and wicked society there may be pious and impious individuals
who enjoy or are deprived of material bounties. There are reasons and
causes for it which are not hidden to the people of insight.

4. That some painful natural events are caused by the undue attitudes of
some individuals can in no way be a justification for a person not to do
something to stop them and to make use of his intellectual, theoretical
and physical ability to prevent the occurrence of undesirable events
such as earthquakes and floods. In fact, from the religious perspective,
saving a life is obligatory and laxity in facing critical events is not
permissible. This point is exactly true with regards to another
religious principle, i.e. admonition to patience and fortitude in facing
adversities and undesirable things.

5. Regarding painful states such as poverty, insecurity, illness, and
war which are caused by the egoism of the oppressors and criminals, the
following points must also be borne in mind. Firstly, committing sin and
disobeying God have a role in the occurrence of these conditions. For
instance, it is stated in a tradition (*ḥadīth*) that whenever the
members of society abandon the duty of enjoining what is good and
forbidding what is wrong (*amr bi ’l-ma‘rūf wa ’n-nahyi ‘ani
’l-munkar*), wickedness will prevail.

6. Secondly, after the occurrence of these events, the members of
society are duty-bound to stop and finally uproot the traces of these
events. Thirdly, those who are responsible for these undesirable states
shall be held responsible and condemned from the perspective of reason,
conscience and religion, and they must be punished accordingly.

Review Questions
----------------

1. Write down one of the benefits of undesirable things.

2. How can undesirable things cause the blossoming of talents?

3. What is meant by *istidrāj* and *ibtilā*?

4. Write down the role of sins in the occurrence of painful happenings.

5. What is the explanation for undesirable things that happen to the
saints (*awliyā’*), God’s elect and the faithful?

6. Write down the misgiving on the existence of evil in the context of
retributory justice along with the refutation to it.

7. What is meant by ‘suffering’ (*ālām*) and ‘recompense’ (*a‘wāḍ*)?

[^1]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:29.

[^2]: Most probably, it means some alteration in the law of nature and
the usual mode of death, and not abrogation of the law of death which is
definitive, universal and unexceptional.

[^3]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 260; Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, p. 401.

[^4]: See Ḥakīm Sabziwārī, Sharḥ al-Asmā’ al-Ḥusnā, p. 54; Murtaḍā
Muṭahharī, ‘Adl-e Ilāhī, pp. 188-191.

[^5]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Saying 217.

[^6]: Sūrat al-Balad 90:4.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Sharḥ 94:5-6.

[^8]: Sūrat al-Sharḥ 94:1-6.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Sharḥ 94:7-8.

[^10]: Mathnawī-ye Ma‘nawī, Book 2, lines 2261-2265.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:214.

[^12]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:94.

[^13]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:130.

[^14]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:182.

[^15]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 2, “Kitāb al-Īmān wa ’l-Kufr,” “Bāb
al-Istidrāj,” ḥadīth 1.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Saying 116/260.

[^17]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:96.

[^18]: Sūrat Ibrāhīm 14:7.

[^19]: Sūrat Nūḥ 71:10-11.

[^20]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:41.

[^21]: Sūrat ash-Shūrā 42:30.

[^22]: Sūrat an-Naḥl 16:61.

[^23]: Sūrat al-Anfāl 8:53.

[^24]: Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 71, p. 94.

[^25]: Sūrat ash-Shūrā 42:30.

[^26]: Sūrat al-Ḥadīd 57:22.

[^27]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) 62, ḥadīth 3.

[^28]: Qawwām al-Marām, p. 119.


