Lesson 26: Man and Freewill
===========================

One of the controversial issues in the justice and wisdom of God is the
question of man’s freewill (*ikhtiyār*) in actions which are within the
domain of obligation (*taklīf*) and for which he is either praised or
condemned. This is because obliging a person under compulsion, and
praising or condemning him for an action he does under such condition is
evil and incorrect, and as dictated by the principle of justice and
wisdom, God is immune from evil deeds.

In refuting the notion of those who regard the Divine decree and
providence as tantamount to the absence of freewill in the human being,
Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كانَ كَذٰلِكَ لَبَطَلَ الثَّوابُ وَالْعِقابُ، وَالأَمْرُ
وَالنَّهْيُ وَالزَّجْرُ وَلَسَقَطَ مَعْنَى الْوَعْدِ وَالْوَعيدِ،
وَلَمْ يَكُنْ عَلى مُسِىءٍ لائِمَةٌ وَلا لِمُحْسِنٍ مَحْمَدَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If it was such, reward and punishment, command and prohibition and
chastisement were false, and promise and warning baseless, and the
wrongdoer would not be condemned and the doer of good be praised.”[^1]

Muḥammad ibn ‘Ajlān asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), “Had God compelled [His]
servants in their actions?” The Imām (*‘a*) replied, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُ أَعْدَلُ مِنْ أنْ يُجْبِرَ عَبدًا عَلى فِعْلٍ ثُمَّ يُعَذِّبَهُ
عَلَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah is more just than that He would compel a servant to do something
and thereafter punish him.”[^2]

Ḥasan ibn ‘Alī Washshā’ asked Imām al-Riḍā (*‘a*), “Does Allah compel
[His] servants to commit sins?” The Imām (*‘a*) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُ أعْدَلُ وَأحْكَمُ مِنْ ذلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah is more just and wise than that (compelling His servants to
commit sins).”[^3]

In the said traditions (*aḥādīth*), predetermination’s inconsistency
with the justice and wisdom of God as well as with [the implication of]
duty, promise, warning, reward, and punishment has been pointed out and
emphasized.

The justice-oriented theologians have also regarded the notion of
predetermination (*jabr*) as contrary to the Divine justice, and by
citing the justice and wisdom of God, they have argued for the freewill
of man. For instance, Wāṣil ibn ‘Aṭā has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْباري تَعالى عَدْلٌ حَكيمٌ... وَلا يَجوزُ أنْ يُريدَ مِنَ
العِبادِ خِلافُ ما يَأمُرُ، وَيَحْتمُ عَلَيهِم شَيئاً ثمّ يُجازيهِمْ
عَليهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed God, the Exalted, is just and wise… It is not inconceivable [for
Him] to desire for [His] servants that which is contrary to what He
commands, and to compel them to do something and punish them afterward
[for doing so].”[^4]

After pointing out that the existence of freewill in man is something
axiomatic in that it requires no more proof, Ibn Maytham al-Baḥrānī has
mentioned forms of warning two of which are as follows:

1. Every reasonable person considers good to praise what is good and to
condemn what is evil, and this point depends on the fact that the doer
of good and the evildoer are the agents of their respective actions.

2. Our conscience can discern that our actions depend on our motives and
freewill has no meaning other than this.[^5]

Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has also considered self-evident the agency
(*fā‘iliyyah*) and freewill of man, saying thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالضَّرورَةُ قاضِيَةٌ بِاسْتِنادِ أَفْعالِنا إِلَيْنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Axiomatic perception testifies that our actions are traceable to
us.”[^6]

The Theologians’ Opinions on the Interpretation of Freewill
-----------------------------------------------------------

The abovementioned rational and textual proofs affirm the principle of
freewill for man. On this basis, belief in predeterminism in actions is
invalid. Now, let us see how the Muslim theologians have interpreted
freewill. On the interpretation of freewill, three views have been
advanced, viz. (1) *tafwīḍ* (total delegation), (2) *kasb*
(acquisition), and (3) *amr bayn al-amrayn* (position between two
positions).

Now, we shall examine these three views:

### 1. The Theory of Tafwīḍ

The outcome of the theory of *tafwīḍ* is that the voluntary action of
man is brought into being by himself alone and it is not a creation
(*makhlūq*) of God. The attribution of man’s action to God is not a real
attribution. It rather means that God had created man and has given him
the ability to do an action, but He has no involvement in the
performance or non-performance of any single human act. That is, his
action is ontologically delegated to him. The proofs presented by Qāḍī
‘Abd al-Jabbār al-Mu‘tazilī for this theory are as follows:

1. Man’s actions depend on his motive and intention. He does whatever he
intends. He does not do whatever he does not intend. Therefore, man is
the creator of his own work, and God has not created it in him.[^7]

2. God cannot be considered the creator of man’s actions because among
them are acts of injustice and oppression, and God is immune from
injustice and oppression.[^8]

3. Verses of the Qur’an also show that God is not the creator of man’s
action because according to the following verse, that which God creates
is good:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[It is He] who perfected everything that He created.”***[^9]

And it is free from blemish as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِي أَتْقَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[It is He] who has made everything faultless.”***[^10]

This is while some of the human actions are unacceptable and faulty. So,
God can never be the agent and creator of these actions. The Holy Qur’an
has thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَمَن شَاء فَلْيُؤْمِنْ وَمَن شَاءَ فَلْيَكْفُرْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let anyone who wishes believe it, and let anyone who wishes
disbelieve it.”***[^11]

### Examination and Criticism

1. From the proofs presented above, beyond the fact that man’s action is
truly traceable to him and he is real agent of his action and that he
does it out of his own freewill and volition cannot be inferred. But
that his action is not a creation of God cannot be inferred from the
same because good and evil are sometimes ontological and real, and at
times, they are relative and abstractive. Ontologically, whatever exists
in the universe has the attribute of goodness, and the verse *“[It is
He] who perfected everything that He created”* refers to this fact.

2. Relatively, good and evil are abstracted after the materialization of
action and in confirmation with the rational and religious rules. It is
this good and evil attributed to man that makes his choice the basis of
conformity or non-coformity of the action to the rational and religious
rules. But that man’s intention or motive has a role in his action or
that faith and unbelief are entrusted to his choice and will do not
suggest his independence in doing his action and negating the action as
being a creation of God.

3. *Tafwīḍ* is a kind of dualism and it is in conflict with the
principles of the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in creation (*khāliqiyyah*)
and management (*tadbīr*).

After citing the theory of *tafwīḍ* and the motive behind it which is to
defend the justice of God and to declare His immunity [from any false
attribution], Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has criticized it and thus said:

“They have overlooked the fact that their view necessitates affirmation
of so many partners of God. There is no doubt that belief in the
individuals as the creators of [their own] actions is worse than the
belief in the idols and stars as intercessors before God.”[^12]

It is for this reason that in some traditions (*aḥādīth*), Qadariyyah
(those who negate the Divine power in voluntary actions or those who
subscribe to *tafwīḍ*) are described as the Magians (*majūs*) of the
Muslim community (*ummah*). In *Thawāb al-A‘māl*, for instance, Shaykh
al-Ṣadūq recorded Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكُلِّ أُمَّةٍ مَجوسٌ، وَمُجوسُ هذِهِ الأُمَّةِ الَّذينَ يَقولونَ لا
قَدرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is a Magian for every community and the Magians of this community
are those who deny the Divine decree (*qadr*).”[^13]

Another problem with this theory is that it goes against the
universality of the absolute power and sovereignty of God. In the
traditions (*aḥādīth*) narrated from the pure Imāms (*‘a*) about the
refutation of the theory of *tafwīḍ*, this flaw has always been
mentioned. For instance, it is thus stated in a tradition narrated by
Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) from the Prophet (*ṣ*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَعَمَ أَنَّ الْخَيرَ وَالشَّرَّ بِغَيْرِ مَشيَةِ اللهِ فَقَدْ
أَخْرَجَ اللهَ عَنْ سُلطانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Anyone who imagines that good and bad are outside the will of Allah has
thrown Allah out of His sovereignty.”[^14]

In another *ḥadīth*, it is reported that Imām al-Bāqir (*‘a*) addressed
Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إيّاكَ أَنْ تَقولَ بِالتَّفويضِ فَإِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَمْ
يُفَوِّضِ الأَمْرَ إِلى خَلْقِهِ وَهْنًا مِنْهُ وَضَعْفًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Never say ‘delegation’ (*tafwīḍ*) for Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
has not delegated the affair of creation and control to His creatures
out of weakness and impotence.”[^15]

And Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ القَدَرِيَّةَ مَجوسُ هَذهِ الأُمَّةِ وَهُمُ الَّذينَ أَرادوا
أَنْ يَصِفوا اللهَ بِعَدْلِهِ فَأَخْرَجوهُ مِنْ سُلْطانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Qadariyyah are the Magians of this community. They are those who want
to describe God with justice but the consequence is that they got rid of
his sovereignty.”[^16]

2. The Theory of Kasb
---------------------

The majority of Ash‘arī theologians are of the opinion that the human
actions are only realized through the power of God, and man’s ability
and freewill have no role at all in their realization. The author of
*Al-Mawāqif* has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ أَفْعالَ الْعِبادِ الإخْتِيارِيَّةَ واقِعَةٌ بِقَدَرِ اللهِ
سُبحانَهُ وَتَعالى وَحْدَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed the voluntary actions of the servants are solely realized by the
power of Allah, the Glorious and Exalted.”[^17]

Their most important motive in advancing this theory is to defend the
principle of the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in Creatorship (*khāliqiyyah*).

Now, this objection can be raised: if the voluntary actions of man are
solely creations and caused by the power of God and that the ability and
freewill of man has no role at all in their realization, it follows that
he is an agent under compulsion, and as the Ash‘arīs have considered the
theory of *jabr* (compulsion) unacceptable, they regard the human being
as free (*mukhtār*).

In order to get out of this impasse and explain man’s freewill and that
his power and will have a sort of relationship with his voluntary
actions, they have put forth the theory of *kasb* (acquisition). As
Taftazānī has said,

“That man is a free agent has no meaning other than that he creates his
actions through [his] own motive and will, and on the other hand, God is
the free Agent of all things including man’s actions. And it is clear
that two independent powers cannot be associated with a single action.
In order to get free from this impasse, there is no escape except for us
to say that God is the creator of man’s action, and man is the one who
acquires it.”[^18]

### The Interpretation of Kasb

In interpreting *kasb*, Ash‘arī theologians have expressed different
views, but the most popular of them is that the connection between God’s
creation of the human action and man’s power and freewill – which are
also God’s creations – is called *kasb* (acquisition), and the said
connection is not that of cause-and-effect.

That is, man’s ability and freewill have no role in the realization of
its action; it is rather that of the connection between the receptacle
(*ẓarf*) and the utensil (*maẓrūf*), the dwelling (*ḥāll*) and the
dwelling place (*maḥall*). As Mīr Sayyid Sharīf Gurgānī and Fāḍil
Qawshchī have said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألمْرُادُ بِكَسْبِهِ إيّاهُ مُقارِنَتُهُ لِقُدْرَتِهِ وَإرادَتِهِ مِنْ
غَيرِ أنْ يَكونَ هُناكَ مَعَهُ تَأثيرٌ أو مَدْخَلٌ في وُجودِهِ كونه
مَحلاً لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“That man ‘acquires’ his own action means that his ability and will have
connection with the occurrence of the action without his ability having
any influence on the existence of the action except that man is the
locus of the action’s occurrence.”[^19]

### A Criticism of the Theory of Kasb

The theory of *kasb* is criticized and refuted not only by those who
oppose the Ash‘arīs (i.e. the justice-oriented theologians). In fact,
some Ash‘arī scholars have also considered it not enough to solve the
problem of predestination. For instance, Aḥmad Amīn al-Miṣrī has
regarded it as a new terminology for the theory of predestination,
saying thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ – كَما تَرَى – لا يُقَدّمُ في الموضوعِ وَلا يُؤَخّرُ، فَهُوَ
شِكْلٌ جَديدٌ في التَّعْبيرِ عَنِ الجبَرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And as you can see, it does not offer or suspend anything from the
subject as it is [just] a new form of the expression of
‘predestination’.”[^20]

In criticizing the theory of *kasb*, Shaykh al-Shaltūt has also said,
thus:

“The interpretation of *kasb* as a common symmetry between man’s action
and ability without his ability having any role in the realization of
the action – in addition to being inconsistent with its literal and
Qur’anic expression – is also beyond explanation of the question of duty
and the principle of Divine justice and man’s responsibility.

This is because the said connection is the outcome of the creation of
action by God within the receptacle of man’s ability, and not a creation
or affordable to man so as to be emender of the action’s relation to
man. Just as action has connection with man’s ability, it has also
connection with his hearing, sight and knowledge. In this case, ability
has such distinction that action’s connection with it makes attribution
of action to man be known!”[^21]

The Theory of the “Position between Two Positions” (amr bayn al-amrayn)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

It becomes clear from the above point that none of the two theories -
*tafwīḍ* and *kasb* – in relation to the interpretation and
justification of the principle of freewill can be accepted. The theory
of *tawfīḍ* is inconsistent with the explanation on God’s creatorship
and universality of His absolute power and sovereignty, and the theory
of *kasb* is no different from determinism except in expression or
terminology, and as a result, it is incompatible with the principle of
the Divine justice, duty and its functions.

Here, there is another theory which is well known as the “position
between two positions” (*amr bayn al-amrayn*). This theory was put forth
by the Imāms from among the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and was accepted by the
Imāmī theologians and Muslim philosophers.

### A Historical Survey of the “Position between Two Positions”

It can be inferred from the study of traditions (*aḥādīth*) that this
theory was first advanced by Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*). As narrated, Imām ‘Alī
(*‘a*) was talking about the wonders of the human soul and heart when
someone stood up and asked him to talk about predestination (*qadar*).
Because of the intricacy and profundity of the issue, the Imām (*‘a*)
considered it inappropriate to talk about it under such circumstances
and asked the person to refrain from raising the question. However, he
raised his question again while the Imām (*‘a*) kept on refraining from
dealing with the issue of *qadar*. When he repeated his question for the
fourth time, the Imām (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمّا أبَيْتَ فَإنَّهُ أمْرٌ بَيْنَ الأَمْرَينِ، لا جَبْرَ
وَلاتَفْويضَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Since you insist, [then be it known that] the position is between two
positions; there is neither predetermination (*jabr*) nor absolute
freewill (*tafwīḍ*).”[^22]

During the time of Imām al-Ḥasan, Imām al-Ḥusayn and Imām Zayn
al-‘Ābidīn – on account of the exceptional political conditions created
by the Umayyad rulers throughout the Muslim world of that ear, the
people’s link with the People of Revelation was severed and they were
not even referred to in matters relating to the religious laws and
ideological issues. For this reason, the traditions (*aḥādīth*)
concerning them are very few and the number of *aḥādīth* regarding the
“position between two positions” is also very insignificant.

During the time of Imām al-Bāqir and Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), however, the
atmosphere of suppression and persecution was somehow mitigated and the
people could then be able to refer to the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) on
matters pertaining to religious questions and teachings. The *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*), in turn, were able to initiate and strengthen a
profound and deep-rooted cultural movement. As such, ample traditions
(*aḥādīth*) in various aspects of the religious teachings have been
narrated by them. Among these *aḥādīth* are about the incorrectness of
predeterminism and absolute freewill, and the correct position is the
“position between two positions”. We shall now cite examples of these
traditions.

A Manifestation of the Divine Grace
-----------------------------------

Someone asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), thus: “Has God compelled [His]
servants to commit sins?” The Imām (*‘a*) said, “No.” The person asked,
“What is the truth then?” The Imām (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لُطْفٌ مِنْ رَبِّكَ بَيْنَ ذلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The grace emanating from your Lord is between that.”[^23]

[Regarding the word *luṭf* (grace), Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī thus writes:]

“In lexicon, the word *luṭf* or *liṭāfah* means *ẓirāfah* (elegance)
which is used for something abstract and subtle. *Luṭf* is one of the
Attributes of Divine Beauty and one of the Best Names (*asmā’ al-ḥusnā*)
of God. Sometimes, it is [meant as] an Attribute of the Divine Essence
and refers to His knowledge of the subtleties of things. At other times,
it is [meant as] an Attribute of the Divine Action and refers to the
special and judicious management on the basis of the Divine mercy.”[^24]

Of the said two meanings, the second meaning is suitable to the Station,
and as a result, what is meant by wisdom of the Divine grace which is
between predetermination and absolute freewill is that each
predetermination or each absolute freewill is in conflict with the
justice, wisdom and mercy of God which are considered the foundations of
God’s active grace. Between these two, therefore, there is a third way
which is based upon the Divine grace and reflects the wise, just and
compassionate management of God. This way which is the manifestation of
the Divine grace, and real at the same time, is elegant and subtle, and
to grasp them is beyond the common intellectual levels. And for this
reason, the Imām (*‘a*) would refrain from interpreting it to the one
who asked.

Known Only to the True Men of Learning
--------------------------------------

Someone asked Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) about predestination and absolute
freewill. The Imām (*‘a*) thus replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا جَبْرَ وَلا قَدَرَ وَلكِنْ مَنْزِلَةٌ بَينَهُما، فيهَا الحقُّ
الَّتى لا يَعْلَمُها إلّا العالِمُ أَو مَنْ عَلَّمَها إيّاهُ العالِمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is neither predestination nor absolute freewill, but between them
is a position in which is the truth, and no one knows it except the
learned person or one who is taught by a learned person.”[^25]

An Illustrious Example
----------------------

It is recorded in another *ḥadīth* that Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) was asked
about the truth of the “position between two positions” (*amr bayn
al-amrayn*). The Imām (*‘a*) said:

“Allegorically, the ‘position between two positions’ is like seeing
someone who is committing a sin. You dissuade him from doing so but he
does not pay attention to you. So, you leave him alone. In this case,
neither did you command him to commit a sin nor did you persuade him to
do so.”

In his commentary to this tradition, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has some
interesting remarks. He says:

“The [level of] thinking or intellect of so many theosophers and
scholars has failed to understand and grasp the truth of the ‘position
between two positions’, let alone the common people with a superficial
level of understanding.

And the allegory chosen by the Imām (*‘a*) for the guidance of people
with such ideas and the protection of their beliefs from deviation
toward predeterminism or absolute freewill is illustrious and rational,
because in this allegory two points have been highlighted, viz.
dissuading the sinner and the absence of compulsion in committing sin.

“The first point stresses that he is not totally left to himself and
thus the notion of *tafwīḍ* is invalid. Similarly, the second point
highlights someone’s not being compelled with respect to the sin he
commits.”[^26]

A Firm Principle
----------------

There was a discussion about predeterminism and absolute freewill in the
presence of Imām al-Riḍā (*‘a*). The Imām (*‘a*) addressed those who
were present by saying, “Regarding this issue, do you want me to teach
you a principle with which you will prevail over your opponents in a
debate? Those who were present expressed interest and the Imām (*‘a*)
thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَمْ يُطَعْ بِإِكراهٍ، وَلَمْ يُعْصَ
بِغَلَبَةٍ وَلَمْ يُهْمِلِ العِبادَ في مُلْكِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed Allah, the Almighty and Glorious, is not obeyed by compulsion
and not disobeyed by dominance, and He has not abandoned [His] servants
in His dominion.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ المالِكُ لمَاّ مَلَّكَهُمْ، وَالقادِرُ عَلى ما أَقْدَرَهُمْ
عَلَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He is the Master of the things to whom He is entitled, and He is
Omnipotent over the things on which He has power.”[^27]

These two statements speak of the truth of the “position between two
positions” (*amr bayn al-amrayn*) which combines the sovereignty and
omnipotence of God and man; that is, man is the owner of his own action
and has power over it and also his action is within the dominion of God
and predestined by Him. These two are parallel to each other and not
opposite to each other, thus requiring contradiction and opposition.

Imām al-Hādī (‘a) and the Interpretation of Amr Bayn al-Amrayn
--------------------------------------------------------------

There is a reported epistle of Imām al-Ḥādī (*‘a*) about predeterminism,
absolute freewill and *amr bayn al-amrayn*. This epistle has been quoted
by ‘Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn ibn Shu‘bah al-Ḥarrānī (one of the Shī‘ah scholars
during the fourth century AH) *Tuḥaf al-‘Uqūl* and Aḥmad ibn ‘Alī ibn
Abī Ṭālib al-Ṭabarsī (one of the Shī‘ah during the sixth century AH),
and except in some expressions, there is no difference between these two
quotations.

According to the narration of Ṭabarsī, the said epistle was a reply to
the letter of the people of Ahwāz.[^28]

It consists of an introduction and three general sections. One of these
sections is allocated to a commentary or interpretation of *amr bayn
al-amrayn*, and the axis of the discussion revolves around the *ḥadīth*
of Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) when he said, “There is neither predeterminism
nor absolute freewill but rather the [correct] affair is between the two
affairs.”[^29]

The said epistle contains subtle points in exegesis (*tafsīr*) and
theology (*kalām*), and to examine them requires a separate book and it
is beyond the scope of this discussion. It is sufficient for us to quote
only part of that section which is related to *amr bayn al-amrayn*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَسْنا نَدينُ بِجَبْرٍ وَلا تَفْويضٍ، لكِنّا نَقولُ بِمَنْزِلَةٍ
بَينَ المنزِلَتَينِ وَهُوَ الإمْتحانُ وَالإخْتبارُ بِالإسْتِطاعَةِ
الَّتي مَلَّكَنَا اللهُ وَتَعَبَّدَنا بِها عَلى ما شَهِدَ بِهِ الكتابُ
وَدانَ بِهِ الأئمَّةُ الأبرارُ مِن آلِ الرَّسولِ صَلَواتُ اللهِ
عَلَيهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the above line, by mentioning the essence of the Divine duty and test
Imām al-Hādī (*‘a*) has demonstrated the incorrectness of the notion of
predetermination (*jabr*), and by stating that the ability which man
possesses is a Divine grace which is bestowed upon him by God at every
moment, the Imām (*‘a*) has pointed out the incorrectness of the notion
of absolute freewill (*tafwīḍ*).

Then, in order to explain this subtle truth, the Imām (*‘a*) has cited a
parable which is as follows: someone has a servant and although he is
aware of his servant’s spiritual and mental condition, he wants to test
him. Accordingly, he gives him ownership of some of his properties and
mentions some points related to them. He reminds him that this ownership
is temporary and thereafter there shall be a longer life. If he
(servant) will utilize the properties in the way pleasing to him
(master), he will enjoy many rewards in the longer life. But if he will
act contrary to that, he will incur punishment.

During the time when the servant is the owner of the said properties,
the master always gives him advice and admonition. Then, after the end
of the term, he (master) takes absolute possession of the servant and
properties again (although during that term, he had not totally severed
his sense of ownership of them), acting upon his promises and threats.
The said servant is neither compelled by his master nor is he totally
abandoned alone. Neither predetermination nor absolute freewill is
applicable to him.

The application of this parable to the subject of our discussion is to
say that God is the Great Master and the servants are the Children of
Adam; the properties refer to the all-encompassing power of God and the
philosophy of test is the expression of God’s wisdom and power. The
temporary life refers to the life in this world.

Some of the properties whose ownership is given to the servant refer to
the ability endowed by God to His servants. The admonitions related to
the properties refer to the instructions of the prophets of God and the
things they prohibit are the ways of Satan. And the eternal life and
Divine promises refer to the abode in the Hereafter and the perpetual
blessings therein.[^30]

The Philosophical Interpretation of Amr Bayn al-Amrayn
------------------------------------------------------

The philosophical interpretation of *amr bayn al-amrayn* is based upon
two philosophical principles:

1. As dictated by the authenticity and unity of the essence of existence
(*wijūd*), existence in all its manifestations and levels has its
special traces, and as such, citation of the actions and effects of
beings – be they material and immaterial, animate or inanimate – is a
real citation. For instance, the cause-and-effect relationship among the
creatures can also be interpreted to be based upon the same principle;
that is, the existence of ontological relationship and existential
concomitance between the action and the agent, the effect and the cause.

2. Contingent existence is a dependent and wanting identity, and this
dependence and indigence is its very essence and identity, and not
something added and accidental to it; otherwise, it would have acquired
a sort of independence and self-sufficiency and it would have been rival
of and equal to the Necessary Being, and this is in conflict with the
essence of the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in Essence of God. And since
origination (*ījād*) is different from existence (*wujūd*), it follows
that the contingent existences have no independence in origination and
action, as they do in their very existence.

The clear outcome of these two principles is that man’s actions have
ontological and real relationship with his ability and freewill and he
is indeed the agent of his actions [and therefore the notion of
predeterminism is invalid]. However, since his existence is a creation
and product of God, his action – while having ontological and real
emanation from Him – is also connected to God.

Hence, the notion of *tafwīḍ* is also invalid, and since these two
citations are parallel to each other and not accidental, there will be
no contradiction to follow. This interpretation is one of the original
ideas of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn and has been adopted by the followers of
transcendental wisdom (*ḥikmat-e muta‘āliyah*) after him.[^31] Ḥakīm
Sabziwārī has brought out the said proof in this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لكِنْ كَما الوُجودُ مَنْسوبٌ لَنا فَالفِعْلُ فِعْلُ اللهِ وَهُوَ
فِعْلُنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Yet, as the existence is attributed to us,*

*The action is hence the action of Allah and it is our action*.[^32]

Imām al-Khumaynī (may his soul be sanctified) has also interpreted *amr
bayn al-amrayn* in the same way.[^33]

A Study of the Book of the Self
-------------------------------

The best guide in discerning this profound subject and the manner of
attributing man’s actions to God as well as to himself is no other than
the book of the self which is a microcosm of the world of creation. For
instance, it has been emphasized in the Holy Qur’an and traditions to
study and reflect on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَفِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَفَلا تُبْصِرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And in your own souls [are signs]. Will you not then
perceive?”***[^34]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَرَفَ نَفْسَهُ فَقَدْ عَرَفَ رَبَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever knows his self knows his Lord.”***

The actions done by the various bodily limbs and members of man – while
really and ontologically attributed to those limbs and are truly
considered actions of those limbs – are also those of the self (soul).
For instance, seeing and hearing are undoubtedly actions of the eyes and
ears respectively and at the same time, they are actions of the soul.

Although the soul is a reality, therefore, since it is beyond matter or
materiality, it is not confined to a particular place or direction, and
it schematically encompasses human bodily limbs and parts and none of
these limbs could function without the control of the soul.

The identity and unicity of the soul is a spark of the Identity and
Unicity of God, and the type of attribution and citation all of
contingent beings and their actions and effects to the One God is the
same with the attribution and unicity of the action and effects of man’s
bodily limbs and members to his soul.[^35]

In conclusion, it must be noted that the Māturdī theologians have
interpreted the theory of *kasb* (acquisition) in such a way that it is
identical to *amr bayn al-amrayn*. In fact, many of them have clearly
stated this point.[^36]

Review Questions
----------------

1. What is the statement of Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) regarding those who regard
the Divine decree and providence as concomitant to man being under
compulsion?

2. State the view of the justice-oriented (*‘adliyyah*) theologians
regarding man’s freedom.

3. How many views are put forth regarding the interpretation of
*ikhtiyār* (free-will)?

4. Write down and criticize the theory of *tafwīḍ* (delegation) in
brief.

5. Write down the theory of *kasb* (acquisition) along with the
refutation to it.

6. Explain concisely the theory of *amr bayn al-amrayn* (position
between two positions).

7. State the brief historical background of the theory of *amr bayn
al-amrayn*.

8. What did Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) said in reply to the question about the
Divine decree (*qadar*) and predeterminism (*jabr*)? State it along with
the exposition of Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn.

9. How did Imām al-Hādī (*‘a*) interpret *amr bayn al-amrayn*?

10. Write down the philosophical interpretation of *amr bayn al-amrayn*.

[^1]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) on the Divine decree and
providence, ḥadīth 28.

[^2]: Ibid., section on the negation of predestination and absolute
freewill, ḥadīth 6.

[^3]: Ibid., ḥadīth 10.

[^4]: Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 47.

[^5]: Qawā’id al-Marām, p. 108.

[^6]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 3.

[^7]: Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah, p. 226.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 231.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Sajdah 32:7.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Naml 27:80.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:29.

[^12]: Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 370.

[^13]: Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 5, p. 120, ḥadīth 58.

[^14]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) on the negation of
predestination and absolute freewill, ḥadīth 2.

[^15]: Ṭabarsī, Al-Iḥtijāj, p. 327.

[^16]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section on predestination and
freewill.

[^17]: Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 8, 146.

[^18]: Sharḥ ‘Aqā’id al-Nisfiyyah, pp. 115-117.

[^19]: Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 8, p. 146; Sharḥ Tajrīd al-‘Aqā’id, p.
445.

[^20]: Ḍuḥā ’l-Islām, vol. 3, p. 57.

[^21]: Buḥūth fī ’l-Milal wa ’n-Nihal, vol. 2, p. 153, as quoted in
Shaykh Shaltūt’s exegesis of the Holy Qur’an, pp. 240-242.

[^22]: Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 5, p. 57.

[^23]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, section (bāb) on predestination and
absolute freewill, ḥadīth 8.

[^24]: Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī, Al-Mufradāt, under the word luṭf.

[^25]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, section (bāb) on predestination and
absolute freewill, ḥadīth 10.

[^26]: Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, p. 416.

[^27]: Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, section (bāb) on the negation of
predeterminism and absolute freewill, ḥadīth 7.

[^28]: Ahwāz: city in southwestern Iran, the administrative center of
Khūzestān (Khūzistān) Province. [Trans.]

[^29]: In Tuḥaf al-‘Uqūl, instead of “but rather the [correct] affair is
between the two affairs,” what is stated is “but rather the [correct]
position is between the two positions.”

[^30]: Tuḥaf al-‘Uqūl (Qum: Baṣīratī, n.d.), pp. 341-356; Ṭabarsī,
Al-Iḥtijāj (Mashhad: Nashr al-Murtaḍā, n.d.), pp. 449-453.

[^31]: Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, pp. 373-378.

[^32]: Sharḥ-e Manẓūmah, station (madṣad) 3, singularity (farīdah) 2,
“ghurar fī ‘umūm qudratuh ta‘ālā.”

[^33]: Ṭalab wa Irādah, pp. 72-73.

[^34]: Sūrat al-Dhāriyāt 51:21.

[^35]: See Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, pp. 377-379; Ṭalab wa Irādah, p.
82; Jabr wa Ikhtiyār, p. 288.

[^36]: For information on their views, see ‘Alī Rabbānī Gulpāygānī,
Al-Kalām al-Maqārin.


