Lesson 27: Misgivings of the Predeterminists
============================================

In theological books, some misgivings on the issue of man’s free-will
have been mentioned and by citing them some individuals have been
inclined toward predeterminism (*jabr*). These misgivings have focused
on some theological and ideological teachings and principles. The
theological principles cited by the predeterminists are as follows:

1. The Divine decree and providence, or destiny;

2. The eternal knowledge and will of God;

3. The Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) in Creatorship;

4. The universality of God’s power; and

5. The Divine ways of guidance and misguidance.

Now, we shall scrutinize the predeterminists’ misgivings on the basis of
the said principles.

The Divine Decree, Predestination and the Eternal Knowledge of God
------------------------------------------------------------------

The common and deterministic interpretation of the Divine decree and
providence is that the web of destiny as an unseen or hidden factor
which puts under its sway every person, drawing him to whatever
direction it desires from the moment of birth up to the point of death.
The proponents of this theory would also cite reason and revelation to
support their views, saying thus:

Since all happenings are inevitable and predetermined prior to the
occurrence, their materialization is definite and unavoidable. The
voluntary actions of man are also not an exception to this general rule
and their materialization is definite and determined. The assumption of
definiteness and fixedness is in conflict with free-will. For instance,
the Holy Qur’an also explicitly declares, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ مَا أَصَابَ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فِي الأرْضِ وَلا فِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ إِلا
فِي كِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ نَبْرَأَهَا إِنَّ ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
يَسِيرٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No affliction visits the earth or yourselves but it is in a Book
before We bring it about—that is indeed easy for Allah.”***[^1]

The Correct Interpretation of Qaḍā and Qadr
-------------------------------------------

The word *qaḍā* literally means *faṣl* (separation), *qaṭ‘* (rupture)
and dispeller of ambiguity and doubt. Sometimes, it takes the form of
word (*qawl*) and in the form of action (*fi‘l*) at other times. It is
used to refer to God as well as to the human being.

*Qaḍā* in the following verse means the verbal *qaḍā* of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَقَضَى رَبُّكَ أَلا تَعْبُدُوا إِلا إِيَّاهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your Lord has decreed that you shall not worship anyone except
Him.”***[^2]

And in the following verse it refers to *qaḍā* of God’s action:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَقَضَاهُنَّ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then He set them up as seven heavens in two days.”***[^3]

Similarly, what is referred to in the expression “The judge decrees
(*qaḍā*) so-and-so” is the human verbal *qaḍā*. And what is meant by the
word *qaḍaytum* in the following verse is the *qaḍā* of a human action:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُمْ مَنَاسِكَكُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when you finish your rites...”***[^4]

And every definite utterance is also called *qaḍiyyah*.[^5]

In all cases where the word *qaḍā* is used, definiteness and certainty
are implied while ambiguity and doubt are dispelled. For instance,
before the judge issues his judgment, there is ambiguity and uncertainty
with respect to the guilt of the accused, but after the issuance of the
said judgment, this ambiguity and uncertainty disappear. In the same
manner, before a person decides to do something, its realization cannot
be determined and unclear but after he decides, it turns into something
definite.

Given this, the essence of the cosmic *qaḍā* of God can be inferred, for
all the contingent beings are created by God. On one hand, the wise will
of God is to create His creatures through specific causes and effects.
Accordingly, prior to the materialization of the complete cause of each
of the phenomena, it is vacillating between occurrence and
non-occurrence, but after the materialization of its complete cause, its
occurrence is definite.

It is evident that as long as there is no Divine will or desire for the
materialization of a phenomenon, its complete cause will not be
materialized. In conclusion, the Divine decree (*qaḍā*) is one of the
Attributes of God’s Action which can be abstracted from the Station of
Action of God on the basis of its complete cause.[^6]

Since God knows this certainty (*qaṭ‘iyyah*) from the beginning, His
essential knowledge of the said certainty is His essential decree.

The word *qadar* or *qadr* literally means the measurement or magnitude
of a thing, and with respect to the existing phenomena while considering
the principle of causation, it refers to the existential characteristics
and properties of each of the phenomena which are the effects of
characteristics and properties of its cause.[^7]

In other words, each of the parts of the cause provides its own suitable
measurement and form to the effect, and the occurrence of the effect is
consistent and concordant with the totality of measurements determined
for it by the complete cause.[^8]

What is meant by the Divine decree is that God has foreknowledge of the
limits and characteristics of each of the creatures and as such, they
will be materialized. For instance, the Holy Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلّا عِنْدَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ وَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ
إِلّا بِقَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is not a thing but that its sources are with Us, and We do not
send it down except in a known measure.”***[^9]

It is also stated, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قَدْ جَعَلَ اللَّهُ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدْرًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah has set a measure for everything.”***[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَاهُ بِقَدَرٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We have created everything in a measure.”***[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ عِنْدَهُ بِمِقْدَارٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And everything is by [precise] measure with Him.”***[^12]

It can thus be inferred that *qadar* (decree) has two stage: (1) the
stage prior to the existence of the thing (mental decree) and (2) the
stage parallel to the existence of the thing (actual decree).[^13]

In a tradition narrated by Yūnus ibn ‘Abd al-Raḥmān from Imām al-Riḍā
(*‘a*), *qaḍā* and *qadar* have been interpreted to mean the existential
fixedness and limits of the things. For instance, on the interpretation
of *qadar*, it is thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هِيَ الهَنْدَسَةُ وَوَضْعُ الحُدودِ مِنَ البَقاءِ والفَناءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is the geometry and determination of the limits [of a thing] in
terms of subsistence and extinction.”

And on the interpretation of *qaḍā*, it is thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الإبرامُ وَإقامَةُ العَينِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is to strengthen and build up a reality.”[^14]

Reinforcement of the Free-will on the Basis of the Principle of Qaḍā and Qadar
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The above analysis and interpretation of *qaḍā* and *qadar* is not only
not in conflict with man’s free-will but it even reinforces it, for as
stated earlier, *qaḍā* means *qaṭ‘iyyah* (finality or fixedness) of the
occurrence of an action which differs according to the realization of
its complete cause. And since the ontological peculiarity of human
actions is their being adherents and free, it follows that as demanded
by the realness and conformity of the Divine knowledge with the known
thing (*ma‘lūm*) as well as the fixedness and certainty of the Divine
will, the actions of human agents are volitional and voluntary and not
fatalistic and involuntary.

In reply to the misgiving regarding predeterminism on the basis of the
eternal knowledge of God, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn has said:

“Although the knowledge of God is a cause (*sabābiyyah*) with respect to
the materialization of man’s action, its being a cause is through the
agency of man’s ability and freewill, for his ability and freewill are
also among the causes of the materialization of his action. The
incumbency of the materialization of the action thus emanates from man’s
ability and free-will. Incumbency emanates from free-will and it is not
in conflict with it.”[^15]

A refutation is also given to this misgiving that if the knowledge of
the past is the source of the action’s fatalistic nature, God cannot
also be a free agent. Sa‘d al-Dīn al-Taftazānī has also mentioned these
two answers in refuting the notion of predeterminism on the basis of the
eternal knowledge and will of God.

Moreover, man’s conscience differentiates his voluntary actions although
they may be the same from the perspective of the foreknowledge of God.

God’s Will and Man’s Free-will
------------------------------

The notion of predeterminism on the basis of the will of God maintains
that as dictated by reason (*‘aql*) and revelation (*naql*), no
phenomenon will come into existence without the will and decree of God,
and on this basis, man’s actions are also linked with the will of God.
And since God’s will does not deviate from His purpose and that His
purpose will definitely happen, the materialization of man’s actions is
something inevitable and certain, and in this case, the human free-will
and desire are nothing but hypothetical and have no reality.

The reply to this objection becomes clear from the points stated above
and does not need further elaboration because God’s will and desire are
expressed through man’s ability and free-will, and as a result, they are
in no conflict with the voluntary nature of his action. In fact, if
man’s actions were not voluntary, these will become necessary for God’s
will to deviate from His purpose.[^16]

Is Will a Voluntary Action?
---------------------------

Here, there is a popular misgiving being raised and that is, since the
chain of causes of the events ends up with the will of God, the
emergence of man’s will also emanates from God’s will, and as dictated
by the inevitability of God’s will, the materialization of the will in
man is also a fixed and predetermined matter, and as a result, all his
voluntary actions are also predetermined.[^17]

The reply to this objection is that the criterion for man’s independence
is not that he is a free agent. Instead, the essence of free-will
regarding man is that he is naturally and innately a selector being, and
this is his innate and ontological nature. However, the essence of
free-will is in the actions of his bodily limbs and parts.

Awareness of the action is also regarded as one of the bases of
voluntary actions and it is said that voluntary action is that which is
derived from knowledge and will. That is, we become aware of man’s
nature as free and selector through the agency of knowledge and will,
but with respect to his internal or inward actions, knowledge (which is
acquired and apart from man’s essence) and will are not the key to
free-will. For instance, whenever numerous questions are posed on a
person who acquires expertise in one field of science, he would
instantly construct various mental forms and infer the suitable answers
from the abstract and simple mental forms.

There is no doubt that the said action is one of the voluntary actions
of man although they are not derived from [acquired] knowledge or will.
The element of will and other inward actions of a person are also like
that. Therefore, will is a voluntary action of the ‘self’ and it is not
derived from another will. And in view of this peculiarity, it emanates
from the will of God and its outcome, as stated earlier, is the
reinforcement of free-will.

This reply can be observed briefly in the words of Ṣadr
al-Muta’allihīn[^18] and can be found extensively and explicitly in the
words of Imām al-Khumaynī (*r*).[^19]

The Divine Unity in Creation and the Issue of Predetermination
--------------------------------------------------------------

One of the stages of the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*) is *tawḥīd* in
Creatorship (*khāliqiyyah*) which is supported by rational and textual
proofs. According to this rational and religious principle, human
actions are a creation of God. According to the determinists, to suppose
that man is the agent and originator of his voluntary actions is in
conflict with the stated principle. As such, defending the principle of
the Divine Unity in Creatorship demands that we must reject man’s agency
and influence in his voluntary actions and we must consider him
compelled.

### Reply

The attribution of Creatorship (*khāliqiyyah*) to God has two meanings.
One is that in the world of being, there is no creator and effector –
whether independent or dependent – except God. This assumption
necessitates negation of the principle of cause and effect, and as a
result, all created beings are direct creations of God and He is the
Direct Cause, as the Ash‘arīs do believe.[^20]

The other meaning is that there is no independent and self-existing
Creator and Cause except God, and although the order of creation is that
of cause and effect and that some creatures are agents while others are
actions and some are causes while others are effects, the agents and
causes – just as they are intermediaries of and in need of God for their
existence – they are intermediaries and dependent to God. According to
this assumption, man is the agent of his own actions and his ability has
an effect but not independently; rather, it is dependent on the power of
God and it is below it.

The Universality of the Divine Power and Man’s Freewill
-------------------------------------------------------

Another principle cited by the determinists is the universality of God’s
power although believing that man’s ability is a factor in the
materialization of his actions is in conflict with the said principle,
because since combining two effective powers in the creation of a thing
is impossible, whenever man’s ability is influential in the existence of
his action, the said action must be outside the domain of God’s
power.[^21]

This misgiving is caused by the assumption of the human ability’s
independence in causing something, because with this assumption, his
ability is rivals and at logger-heads with the power of God. And it is
evident that combining two independent powers in the materialization of
an action is impossible. As a result, defending the principle of the
universality of God’s power and its being effective in the
materialization of man’s action necessitates that we must consider man’s
ability devoid of any effect.

Such understanding or interpretation of man’s ability ignores man’s
innate indigence and dependence of his existence and attributes on God.
This error is exclusive to the Ash‘arī theologians. In fact, the
Mu‘tazilīs have also the same incorrect interpretation of man’s ability
and with the motive of defending the justice of God and proving the
free-will of man, they were thus inclined toward *tafwīḍ* (absolute
freewill) as stated earlier.

The fact of the matter is that man’s ability is below the power of God
and combining the two powers – one being independent and the other being
dependent – in the performance of an action is in no way impossible. In
other words, since the salient feature of power is to exert influence,
one must regard man’s ability as influential in his action (thereby
refuting the Ash‘arī view) and since man is dependent and not
independent in his existence and attributes, one must not suppose that
his ability is independent in exerting influence (thereby refuting the
Mu‘tazilī notion), and this is the position between two positions (*amr
bayn al-amrayn*) which has been explained earlier.

The Divine Guidance and Misguidance and Man’s Freewill
------------------------------------------------------

In some Qur’anic verses, it is clearly stated that God guides whoever He
wills and misguides whoever He wills. For instance, it is thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلا بِلِسَانِ قَوْمِهِ لِيُبَيِّنَ
لَهُمْ فَيُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَهُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not send any apostle except with the language of his
people,*** ***so that he might make [Our messages] clear to them. Then
Allah leads astray whomever He wishes, and He guides whomsoever He
wishes, and He is the All-mighty, the All-wise.”***[^22]

In a bid to prove their claim, the determinists maintain that such
verses convey the basic meaning, but such an argument is utterly weak
and baseless because in order to obtain the real meaning of the verses
of the Qur’an, it is necessary to employ the method of interpreting the
Qur’an by the Qur’an, and one must study a set of verses through another
set because as Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) said, some verses of the Qur’an are
interpretations of some other verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْطِقُ بَعْضُهُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيَشْهَدُ بَعْضُهُ عَلى بَعْضٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Some speak about some others and some testify to some others.”[^23]

While taking into account the said principle, we shall embark on
interpreting the verses quoted above so as to clarify the truth of the
matter concerning God’s guidance and misguidance and their connection
with the issue of man’s free-will.

First of all, in some verses of the Qur’an, guidance and misguidance
have been delegated to man’s free-will and desire, as it is thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَقُلِ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّكُمْ فَمَن شَاء فَلْيُؤْمِن وَمَن شَاء
فَلْيَكْفُرْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And say, ‘[This is] the truth from your Lord: let anyone who wishes
believe it, and let anyone who wishes disbelieve it’.”***[^24]

It is also said, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ هَذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَى رَبِّهِ سَبِيلا
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This is indeed a reminder. So let anyone who wishes take the way
toward his Lord.”***[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنْ هُوَ إِلّا ذِكْرٌ لِلْعَالَمِينَ ٭ لِمَنْ شَاءَ مِنْكُمْ أَنْ
يَسْتَقِيمَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is just a reminder for all the nations, for those of you who wish
to be steadfast.”***[^26]

Of course, in order to avoid thinking that man’s free-will or will power
acts independently, and thus, he himself is the independent agent of his
voluntary actions, there is a reminder that man’s free-will cannot be
formed except through the will of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But you do not wish unless it is wished by Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.”***[^27]

Secondly, in other verses of the Qur’an the guidance given to those who
are guided and the misguidance experienced by those who are misguided as
well as the reasons behind them which lie within man’s free-will and
ability have been stated.

### Elements of Guidance

1. Faith and clinging to Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَاعْتَصَمُوا بِهِ
فَسَيُدْخِلُهُمْ فِي رَحْمَةٍ مِنْهُ وَفَضْلٍ وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَيْهِ
صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who have faith in Allah, and hold fast to Him, He will
admit them to His mercy and grace, and He will guide them on a straight
path to Him.”***[^28]

2. Doing that which pleases Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُبِينٌ ٭ يَهْدِي بِهِ
اللَّهُ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَهُ سُبُلَ السَّلامِ وَيُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ
الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِهِ وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَى صِرَاطٍ
مُسْتَقِيمٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly there has come to you a light from Allah and a manifest
Book. With it Allah guides those who follow [the course of] His pleasure
to the ways of peace, and brings them out from darkness into light by
His will, and guides them to a straight path.”***[^29]

3. Struggle in the way of Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا وَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who strive in Us, We shall surely guide them in Our
ways, and Allah is indeed with the virtuous.”***[^30]

3. Repentance and humility to Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ يَجْتَبِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ
يُنِيبُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah chooses for it whomever He wishes and He guides to it whoever
returns penitently.”***[^31]

### Elements of Misguidance

1. Friendship with the enemies of God

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي
وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِم بِالْمَوَدَّةِ... وَمَن
يَفْعَلْهُ مِنكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Do not take My enemy and your enemy for
friends, [secretly] offering them affection (for they have certainly
defied whatever has come to you of the truth, expelling the Apostle and
you, because you have faith in Allah, your Lord)…*** ***and whoever
among you does that has certainly strayed from the right way.”***[^32]

2. Following the chiefs of corruption and arrogance

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّا أَطَعْنَا سَادَتَنَا وَكُبَرَاءَنَا
فَأَضَلُّونَا السَّبِيلا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they will say, ‘Our Lord! We obeyed our leaders and elders, and
they led us astray from the way.”***[^33]

3. Imaginary and delusive calculation

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اُنْظُرْ كَيْفَ ضَرَبُوا لَكَ الأمْثَالَ فَضَلُّوا فَلا
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَبِيلا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Look, how they coin epithets for you; so they go astray, and cannot
find a way.”***[^34]

4. Attachment to materialistic life

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَحِبُّونَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا عَلَى الآخِرَةِ
وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَيَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجًا أُولَئِكَ فِي
ضَلالٍ بَعِيدٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[They are] those who prefer the life of this world to the Hereafter,
and bar [others] from the way of Allah, and seek to make it crooked.
They are in extreme error.”***[^35]

5. Association with the deviants

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا وَيْلَتَى لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أَتَّخِذْ فُلانًا خَلِيلا ٭ لَقَدْ
أَضَلَّنِي عَنِ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَنِي وَكَانَ الشَّيْطَانُ
لِلإنْسَانِ خَذُولا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Woe to me! I wish I had not taken so and so as a friend! Certainly
he led me astray from the Reminder after it had come to me, and Satan is
a deserter of man.”***[^36]

A study of the verses quoted above clearly shows that man’s guidance and
misguidance – though this cannot be materialized without the cosmic will
and decree of God and not in an involuntary and fatalistic way – happen
through specific causes and factors which are within man’s control.
Given this, one can discern the real meaning of the verses “He guides
whomever He wishes” and “He leads astray whoever He wishes” and realize
that God’s will to guide or misguide people is consistent with what each
of them deserves.

Review Questions
----------------

1. What is the correct interpretation of *qaḍā* and *qadar*?

2. Are God’s decree and power in conflict with man’s free-will?

3. Write down the predeterminists’ misgiving by citing the will of God
along with the refutation to it.

4. What is the criterion for man’s free-will?

5. Present and criticize the predeterminists’ misgiving by citing the
Creatorship (*khāliqiyyah*) of God.

6. Present and criticize the predeterminists’ misgiving by citing the
universality of God’s power.

7. How are the Divine guidance and misguidance compatible with man’s
free-will?

8. Write down three examples of the elements of guidance and misguidance
while taking into account Qur’anic verses.

[^1]: Sūrat al-Ḥadīd 57:22.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Isrā’ (or Banī Isrā’īl) 17:23.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Fuṣṣilat 41:12.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:200.

[^5]: Rāghib al-Iṣfahānī, Al-Mufradāt, under the word qaḍā.

[^6]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 13, pp. 72-73.

[^7]: Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Nihāyat al-Ḥikmah, chap. 12.

[^8]: Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Shī‘ah dar Islām, p. 77.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Hijr 15:21.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Ṭalāq 65:3.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Qamar 54:49.

[^12]: Sūrat al-Ra‘d 13:8.

[^13]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 12, p. 144.

[^14]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, section (bāb) on the Divine decree and
predeterminism, ḥadīth 4.

[^15]: Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 385.

[^16]: Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, vol. 1, p. 109.

[^17]: One of the exponents of this misgiving in Christian Theology is
Spinoza (1632-1677), a famous predeterminist Jewish philosopher. See
Sayr-e Ḥikmat dar Orūpā (The Trend of Philosophy in Europe), vol. 2, p.
54.

[^18]: Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 6, p. 162.

[^19]: Ṭalab wa Irādah, p. 109; Jabr wa Irādah, pp. 204-207.

[^20]: Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 4, p. 105.

[^21]: Ibid., vol. 8, p. 148.

[^22]: Sūrat Ibrāhīm 14:4. The following verses have similar contents: ﴿
أَفَمَنْ زُيِّنَ لَهُ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ فَرَآهُ حَسَنًا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُضِلُّ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ فَلا تَذْهَبْ نَفْسُكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ حَسَرَاتٍ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا يَصْنَعُونَ ﴾ “Is
someone the evil of whose conduct is presented as decorous to him, so he
regards it as good [like one who is truly virtuous]?” (Sūrat Fāṭir (or
al-Malā’ikah) 35:8) ﴿ وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا صُمٌّ وَبُكْمٌ
فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ مَنْ يَشَأِ اللَّهُ يُضْلِلْهُ وَمَنْ يَشَأْ يَجْعَلْهُ
عَلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ ﴾ “Those who deny Our signs are deaf and dumb,
in a manifold darkness. Allah leads astray whoever He wishes, and
whomever He wishes He puts him on a straight path.” (Sūrat al-An‘ām
6:39) ﴿ وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَكِنْ
يُضِلُّ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَلَتُسْأَلُنَّ عَمَّا
كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ ﴾ “Had Allah wished, He would have made you one
community, but He leads astray whomever He wishes and guides whomever He
wishes, and you will surely be questioned concerning what you used to
do.” (Sūrat al-Naḥl 16:93)

[^23]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 133.

[^24]: Sūrat al-Kahf 18:29.

[^25]: Sūrat al-Muzzammil 73:19; Sūrat al-Insān (or al-Dahr) 76:27.
Sūrat al-Muddaththir 74:55 and Sūrat al-‘Abasa 80:12 have the same
contents.

[^26]: Sūrat al-Takwīr 81:29.

[^27]: Sūrat al-Takwīr 81:29.

[^28]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:175.

[^29]: Sūrat al-Mā’idah 5:15-16.

[^30]: Sūrat ‘Ankabūt 29:69.

[^31]: Sūrat al-Shūrā 42:13.

[^32]: Sūrat al-Mumtaḥanah 60:1.

[^33]: Sūrat al-Aḥzāb 33:67.

[^34]: Sūrat al-Isrā’ (or Banī Isrā’īl) 17:48.

[^35]: Sūrat Ibrāhīm 14:3.

[^36]: Sūrat al-Furqān 25:28-29.


