Lesson 29: The Necessity for Grace
==================================

One of the important principles and rules in the justice-oriented
(*‘adliyyah*) theology is that of *luṭf* (Divine grace) which is
considered the most important theological rule (*qā’idah*) after that of
the rational goodness and evil. The justice-oriented theologians have
proved many of the religious doctrines and beliefs on this basis.

The incumbency of religious obligations, the necessity for the mission
(*bi‘thah*) of the prophets, the incumbency of the infallibility of the
prophets, the Divine promises and warnings, the goodness of primary
suffering, and the incumbency of *imāmah* (post-prophetic Divine
leadership) are among the issues which are founded on this rule.

The overwhelming majority of the justice-oriented theologians have
supported this rule of *luṭf*. In this regard, none of the famous Imāmī
theologians has been reported to have any opposite view. Among the
Mu‘tazilī theologians, however, Bashar ibn Mu‘tamar (died 210 AH) and
Ja‘far ibn Ḥarb have been reported to have opposed this rule of
*luṭf*[^1] although it is said that the said two personalities have made
a recantation or disavowal of their opposition to *luṭf* and accepted it
later. The Ash‘arī theologians who denied the principle of rational
goodness and evil also considered unacceptable the rule of *luṭf*.

It can be inferred from various proofs and pieces of evidence that this
rule – like that of rational goodness and evil – is one of the earliest
questions in theology which had caught the attention of the
justice-oriented theologians. When dealing with the common Mu‘tazilī
beliefs, Shahristānī has made mention of the rule of *luṭf* (grace) and
*aṣlaḥ* (most expedient). It is also said that they have a consensus of
opinion that *taklīf* is a necessity of the Divine grace.[^2] In his
book *Al-Fihrist*,[^3] Shaykh al-Ṭūsī has mentioned the book *Al-Alṭāf*
as one of the treatises of Hishām ibn al-Ḥakam (died 179 or 199 AH).

The Definition and Classification of Luṭf (Grace)
-------------------------------------------------

In the lexicon, the word *luṭf* is used to mean kindness and compassion,
closeness and proximity, intricacy and subtlety, secrecy and
concealment, softness and openness, and in the science of *tajwīd*,[^4]
*talaṭṭaf* means deflection (*imālah*).[^5]

In the theological parlance, *luṭf* is one of the Attributes of Action
of God; that is, the Actions which are related to those who are obliged
(*mukallifīn*) and it means that God does for those who are obliged
whatever draws them to obedience [to Him] and keeps them away from sin.
And this matter is concomitant with His justice and wisdom, as we will
explain. The following expression is the popular definition of the rule
of *luṭf*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللُّطْفُ ما يُقَرِّبُ العِبادَ إلى الطّاعَةِ وَ يُبَعِّدُهُ عَنِ
المعصِيَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Grace is that which makes the servant closer to obedience [to God] and
keeps him away from commiting sin.”

The theologians have divided *luṭf* in two ways:

*First* is whether the one being obliged (*mukallaf*) benefits from the
said grace or not. Once he benefits from it and performs his obligation
under the auspices of the said grace, it is called ‘actualizing’
(*muḥaṣṣil*) grace; that is, the grace which reaches the stage of
materialization and actualization. Whenever the obliged person does not
make use of it, that grace is called ‘near-stationed’ (*muqarrib*) grace
because its role is only to pave the ground for guidance. In reality, it
brings the obliged person closer to obedience [to God] although this may
not be realized on account of a contrary choice of action in the obliged
person.

The sum of these two divisions is encouragement and motivation. As
Sayyid Murtaḍā has said,

“*Luṭf* has two types: one is that through its agency the obliged person
chooses to perform the act of obedience [to God] and without this *luṭf*
he will not choose so. Another [type] is that through its agency the
obliged person gets closer to the performance of the act of obedience,
and the sum of these two is that they play the role of motivator.”[^6]

Some have considered the difference between the *muqarrib* and
*muḥaṣṣil* grace in that the latter is measured with the motive behind
the obligation while the former is measured with the motive behind the
creation.[^7] However, first of all, this distinction cannot be found in
the utterances of the justice-oriented theologians. Secondly, the motive
behind the obligation is not the motive behind the creation by accident,
but rather these two are parallel to each other.

The second way of dividing *luṭf* is according to its agent (*fā‘il*)
and in this way there are three types of *luṭf*:

1. *Luṭf* is a direct action of God without any mediation; for example,
stipulating the religious obligations, sending of the prophets, endowing
them with miracle (*mu‘jizah*), and presentation and setting up of
ontological proofs of the Divine Unity (*tawḥīd*).

2. *Luṭf* is the direct action of the one who is the recipient; for
example, reflection and thinking on the proofs of the Divine Unity and
the miracles of the prophets, and abiding by the religious orders.

3. *Luṭf* is the action of other obliged persons. For instance,
promotion of the religious laws which is an action of the prophets is
grace for those who are obliged, and prohibition of whatever is evil,
which is a collective action of those who are obliged and whose outcome
is grace for the other obliged persons.

Regarding the first type, the action of grace is incumbent upon God, and
regarding the second type, it is incumbent upon God to oblige the action
of grace to the obliged person. Regarding the third type, it is
necessary to make it obligatory upon the other obliged persons. In this
type, it is necessary for the one upon whom grace is obligatory to
benefit from it somehow and to be a grace for himself, so that injustice
would not be necessary for him.[^8]

The Conditions of Grace
-----------------------

Some conditions have been mentioned for grace and they are as follows:

1. On the ability of the obliged person (*mukallaf*) to discharge the
obligation (*taklīf*), grace (*luṭf*) must have no role to play; that
is, the ability to discharge the obligation cannot be regarded as grace,
because grace differs according to the obligations, and ability is one
of the conditions of obligation. Thus, as long as there is no ability,
there is no obligation, and so long as there is no obligation, grace has
no meaning.

2. Grace must not lead to coercing or compelling the obliged person,
because grace differs according to the obligations, and in the absence
of free-will, there is no obligation. The following passage indicates
the said two conditions: [^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ حَظٌّ فِي التَّمْكينِ وَلَمْ يَبلُغْ حَدَّ
الإلجاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. There must be compatibility between grace and obligation, because
grace plays as a motivator and its being a motivator with respect to the
obligation depends on the existence of compatibility between them, and
there must be no disconnection [between them].

4. The obliged person must be aware of the grace because without such
awareness, grace cannot function as a motivator. Of course, in this
regard, synoptic knowledge is also enough. For example, he must be aware
that some hardships and afflictions he is experiencing are due to his
inattention to God and his continued indulgence in sins.[^10]

Reasons behind the Necessity for Grace
--------------------------------------

### The proof of wisdom

The most prominent rational proof of the incumbency of grace upon God is
the principle of the Divine wisdom in the sense that abandonment of
grace necessitates reversal of the motive which, in turn, is
incompatible with wisdom, and it is invalid. Acting upon grace is thus
incumbent. As Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللُّطْفُ واجِبٌ لِيَحْصُلَ الْغَرَضُ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Grace is incumbent so as to materialize the motive.”[^11]

To elaborate, God has made religious obligations incumbent upon the
human beings. Acting upon the obligations, therefore, is desirable and
pleasing to God. Meanwhile, He knows that if He does not act upon grace,
the necessary ground for the realization of obligations cannot be paved,
and God’s acting upon grace necessitates no warning.

In this case, abandonment of grace is rationally regarded as reversal of
motive. For instance, someone holds a party and he seriously wants a
certain person to be present in the said party. He knows that if he
follows a certain protocol in inviting him, the said guest will attend
the party, otherwise the latter will not accept the invitation. Now, if
he tries to invite him without observing the said protocol, it will
rationally be considered reversal of the motive to invite someone to
that party.[^12]

### God’s generosity and munificence

In his book *Awā’il al-Maqālāt*, Shaykh al-Mufīd has explained the
incumbency of grace on the basis of God’s generosity and munificence,
saying thus:

> إنَّ ما أَوْجَبَهُ أصْحابُ اللُّطفِ مِنَ اللُّطفِ إنَّما وَجَبَ مِنْ
> جَهَةِ الجودِ وَالْكَرَمِ.dcvi

That is to say that providing the means and conditions that encourage
those who are obliged to act upon the religious laws and keep them away
from sins is one of the manifestations of God’s generosity and
munificence on those who are obliged, and for God to abandon generosity
and munificence is a flaw and impossibility. As such, acting upon grace
is incumbent [upon Him].

Given this, the reply to this objection becomes clear: acting upon the
dictates of generosity and munificence is deigned and unnecessary,
whereas the action of *luṭf* is obligatory. So, how can it be possible
to explain an obligatory action on the basis of something not
obligatory?

The reply is that in the theological parlance, incumbency (*wujūb*) with
respect to the actions of God does not mean jurisprudential incumbency;
it rather means that concomitance between perfection in action and
perfection in the Divine Essence and Attributes of Essence. Once
generosity and munificence are among the existential perfections,
abandonment of it is impossible for God, as in the case of justice and
goodness.

What the theologians mean by the rational incumbency of actions upon God
is that any action whose agent is worthy of blame cannot come from God,
the Exalted.[^13]

In principle, regarding the stipulation of the religious obligations by
God, three assumptions can be thought of:

1. God stipulates the obligations and announces them to those who are
obliged, and He provides them with the necessary means and preliminary
grounds for discharging them.

2. In addition to what have been said, He puts those who are obliged in
certain conditions wherein they have no option but to discharge those
obligations.

3. Apart from announcing the obligations and giving ability to them, as
mentioned in the first assumption, He does certain things for them such
that even if He does not compel those who are obliged to discharge their
obligations, as mentioned in the second assumption, He plays a role in
encouraging and persuading them to discharge their obligations, for
example, by giving promise of rewards to the obedient and threat of
punishment and chastisement to the disobedient.

Among the abovementioned assumptions, the second is rationally
unacceptable as it is incompatible with the philosophy of obligation
which is providing of test to the servants [of God] and development of
their spiritual endowments. The first assumption is also inconsistent
with the generosity, munificence and wisdom of God.

The third assumption, therefore, is the correct one, and this is
harmonious with the rule of *luṭf*.[^14]

The Qur’an and the Rule of Grace
--------------------------------

It can be clearly inferred from a study of Qur’anic verses that the
sending down (*bi‘thah*) of the prophets, their unique attitude and
practical conduct, the revelation of heavenly books, declaration of the
Divine knowledge in the framework of simple and expressive parables and
expressions, the Divine warnings and glad tidings through the prophets,
difficulties and afflictions, material blessings and bounties, and
Unseen help and succor are all regarded as manifestations and
expressions of the Divine grace – some of which are concomitant with the
Divine wisdom while others are manifestations of generosity and
munificence of God.

The Holy Qur’an has regarded prophethood (*nubuwwah*) as a manifestation
of God’s mercy, as it says thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَهُمْ يَقْسِمُونَ رَحْمَةَ رَبِّكَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is it they who dispense the mercy of your Lord?”***[^15]

This verse was a reply to the narrow-minded people who said in protest
to the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*), “Why was the Qur’an not revealed to two
prominent men of Arabia (Walīd ibn Mughayrah and ‘Urwah ibn Mas‘ūd)?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَقَالُوا لَوْلا نُزِّلَ هَذَا الْقُرْآنُ عَلَى رَجُلٍ مِنَ
الْقَرْيَتَيْنِ عَظِيمٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they said, ‘Why was not this Qur’an sent down to some great man
from the two cities?”***[^16]

The Holy Qur’an has regarded the soft disposition and flexibility of the
Prophet (*ṣ*) and refraining from harsh treatment of the people as signs
of God’s mercy upon him and the people, stating thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ لِنتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنتَ فَظًّا
غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّواْ مِنْ حَوْلِكَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is by Allah’s mercy that you are gentle to them; and had you been
harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have scattered from around
you.”***[^17]

God thus admonishes Prophet Mūsā (Moses) and Prophet Hārūn (Aaron)
(*‘a*) in dealing with Pharaoh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ٱذْهَبَآ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَىٰ ٭ فَقُولاَ لَهُ قَوْلاً
لَّيِّنًا لَّعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يَخْشَىٰ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let the two of you go to Pharaoh. Indeed he has rebelled. Speak to
him in a soft manner; maybe he will take admonition or fear.”***[^18]

From the viewpoint of the Qur’an, the sending (*bi‘thah*) of the
prophets as bearers of good news and as warners has completed the
argument (*ḥujjah*) for the people, thereby giving no more room for
complaint:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رُسُلاً مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنْذِرِينَ لِئَلا يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَى
اللَّهِ حُجَّةٌ بَعْدَ الرُّسُلِ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…apostles, as bearers of good news and warners, so that mankind may
not have any argument against Allah, after the [sending of the]
apostles; and Allah is all-mighty, all-wise.”***[^19]

The phrase “all-mighty, all-wise” (*‘azīzan,* *ḥakīman*) indicates that
no one has any right or argument against God. Since He is all-wise,
however, wisdom necessitates guidance of the people in its most perfect
form. So, He has sent the prophets so that apart from conveying the
Divine laws to the people, they could encourage them by giving glad
tidings and warning to act upon those laws and to refrain from
disobeying God.

From the viewpoint of the Qur’an, the philosophy of some adversities and
afflictions in human life is to bring them to their senses and to
strengthen the spirit of submission to the Divine commands in them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِّن نَّبِيٍّ إِلاَّ أَخَذْنَا
أَهْلَهَا بِالْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَضَّرَّعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not send a prophet to any town without visiting its people
with stress and distress so that they might entreat [for Allah’s
forgiveness].”***[^20]

There are many other verses that talk about God’s wisdom, grace and
mercy and their manifestations in the life of man for his guidance
toward the Straight Path.

Divine Grace and Sayings of the Imāms (‘a)
------------------------------------------

A statement which has been transmitted from Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) regarding
the purpose behind the creation of man and the philosophy of obligation
has astounded many thinkers. As Jāḥiẓ (died 255 AH) has said, “This
utterance is the most comprehensive in this regard.” After affirming
this acknowledgment of Jāḥiẓ, Abū ‘Alī Jubbā’ī (died 303 AH) has also
said, “In terms of comprehensiveness, this utterance is in such a level
that knows no room for improvement or defect.”[^21]

Imām ‘Alī’s (*‘a*) utterance is as follows:

“Allah created the human beings and wanted them to have pleasant
attitude and character, and He knew that they will not be such unless He
informs them of the source of their gains and losses, and this depends
on command and prohibition (religious obligations). Command and
prohibition, in turn, necessitate promise and threat, hope and fear, and
their realization depend on [experiencing] adversities and prosperities.
For this reason, He has mixed the life in this world with pleasant and
unpleasant things so as to guide them toward the otherworldly pleasures
and sufferings.”[^22]

In the speech of the esteemed daughter of the Messenger of Allah (*ṣ*)
delivered after the demise of her beloved father in the grand mosque of
Madīnah, some of these manifestations of the Divine grace are pointed
out. At the outset, the said immaculate lady talked about the purpose
behind the creation and identified it as establishment of God’s wisdom
and reminding the people to obedience and servitude [to God]. She then
made mention of the philosophy behind the Divine rewards and punishments
as admittance of the obedient ones to paradise and keeping them out of
hell:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِبْتَدَعَ الأشْياءَ لا مِنْ شَيءٍ كانَ قَبْلَها... تَثْبيتاً
لحِكمَتِهِ، وَتَنْبيهاً عَلَى طاعَتِهِ... وَتَعَبُّدًا لِبَرِيَّتِهِ،
ثمّ جَعَلَ الثَّوابَ عَلى طاعَتِهِ، وَوَضَعَ العِقابَ عَلى
مَعصِيَتِهِ، زِيادَةً لِعِبادِهِ مِنْ نَقِمَتِهِ، وَحِياشَةً لهم إلى
جَنَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He created the things without anything there prior to them… in order to
establish His wisdom and remind them (people) of obedience to Him and
urge them to servitude [to Him]… Then, He set reward for obedience to
Him and punishment for disobedience to Him so as for His servants to be
wary of His vengeance and be drawn toward His paradise.”[^23]

Reply to the Objections
-----------------------

There are some objections to the rule of *luṭf* which we must mention
and refute here:

1. The rule of *luṭf* necessitates determining an obligation for God.
After pointing out the Mu‘tazilī viewpoint on the incumbency of
recompense and grace on God, Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī has said, “Ruling
(*ḥukm*) cannot be affirmed except through the Divine law (*shar‘*), and
there is no judge who is superior to the Law-giver in that he could
oblige Him to do something.”[^24]

The reply to this objection was given in the section related to the
rational goodness and evil, and its gist is that “incumbency upon Allah”
(*wujūb ‘alallāh*) in the theological parlance does not mean juristic or
legislative incumbency but rather rational incumbency. That is, the
materialization of what the essential perfections of God necessitate is
incumbent upon Him. In other words, perfection in His Essence and
Attributes necessitates perfection in His Action.

2. If *luṭf* were incumbent upon God, there would have been no more
unbeliever and sinner because God can express His grace to each of the
human race to such an extent that all will believe in Him and obey His
commands.[^25]

This objection is caused by not paying attention to one of the
conditions of the Divine grace (*luṭf*) and that is the absence of
compulsion or coercion. Once the principle of free-will is supposed to
be observed, *luṭf* cannot be the overall cause of faith and obedience;
it is rather the effect of *luṭf* through the man’s free-will or will
power.

Now, it is possible for a person who is under the sway of satanic
inclinations, instincts and insinuations not to pay attention to the
Divine grace and be inclined toward unbelief and sin by his own
free-will. Unbelief and sin, therefore, cannot be the proof for the
non-realization of grace by God.[^26]

3. The role of *luṭf* is not more than generating motive for having
faith and obedience on the obliged person (*mukallaf*) and to urge him
to obey God. This is also possible without the Divine grace and God has
also power on anything possible. In this case, the action of grace will
be vain and senseless and this is incompatible with the Divine
wisdom.[^27]

Once this objection is made about *luṭf*, it will also be applicable to
all matters related to the guidance of humanity. The goal of prophethood
(*nubuwwah*), for instance, is nothing but informing mankind of the
Divine laws and encouraging them to worship and render servitude to Him.
Without prophethood, this is also possible and God has also power on
anything possible. Hence, the sending of the prophets must be vain and
senseless.

The said objection, therefore, is applicable neither to the rule of
*luṭf* nor to other matters because the Divine guidance is full of
wisdom and based upon causation. Even if we deny the principle of
causation and replace it with “the habit of Allah” (*‘ādat Allāh*), as
the Ash‘arīs do, still the said objection is not justifiable because
there is no doubt that the Divine guidance has a specific system. Now,
this system is based either on the principle of causation or the
principle of “the habit of Allah”.

Review Questions
----------------

1. State the position of the rule of *luṭf* among the justice-oriented
(*‘adliyyah*) theologians.

2. Write down the meaning of *luṭf* (grace).

3. State the classifications of *luṭf*.

4. What are the conditions of *luṭf*.

5. What are the *muḥaṣṣil* and *muqarrab* *luṭf*?

6. Explain the classification of *luṭf* according to the agent
(*fā‘il*).

7. Write down the first proof of the incumbency of *luṭf*.

8. Write down the second proof of the incumbency of *luṭf*.

9. Concerning God’s stipulation of the religious obligations, how many
assumptions can be conceived of? Which of these assumptions is
compatible with the rule of *luṭf*?

10. How can the rule of *luṭf* be inferred from the verses of the
Qur’an?

11. Explain the rule of *luṭf* while taking into account the traditions
of the Infallibles (*ma‘ṣūmīn*) (*‘a*).

12. Write down Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī’s objection to the rule of *luṭf*
along with the refutation to it.

13. Write down the second objection to the rule of *luṭf* along with the
refutation to it.

14. Write down the third objection to the rule of *luṭf* along with the
refutation to it.

[^1]: Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa ’n-Niḥal, vol. 1, p. 65.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 45.

[^3]: Al-Fihrist, p. 175.

[^4]: Tajwīd (literally, elocution) refers to the rules governing
pronunciation during recitation of the Qur’an. [Trans.]

[^5]: Aqrab al-Mawārid, vol. 2, p. 1144; Al-Mufradāt fī Gharīb
al-Qur’ān, p. 450; Al-Miṣbāḥ al-Munīr, vol. 2, p. 226; Al-Mu‘jam
al-Wasīṭ, vol. 2, p. 826.

[^6]: Al-Dhakhīrah fī ‘Ilm al-Kalām, p. 186.

[^7]: See Al-Ilāhiyyāt, vol. 2, pp. 47-48.

[^8]: Shaykh al-Ṭūsī, Al-Iqtiṣād fī ’l-I‘tiqād, p. 78; Ibn Maytham
al-Baḥrānī, Qawā’id al-Marām, p. 118; ‘Allāmah al-Ḥillī, Kashf al-Murād,
station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 3, issue on grace.

[^9]: These two conditions are mentioned in most expressions of the
theologians. See Shaykh al-Mufīd, Al-Nukta ’l-I‘tiqādiyyah, p. 31; Kashf
al-Murād, topic on grace; Qawā‘id al-Marām, p. 117; Al-Iqtiṣād fī
’l-I‘tiqād, p. 77.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Kashf al-Murād, station (maqṣad) 3, chap. 3, topic on grace.

[^12]: Qawā’id al-Marām, pp. 117-118.

[^13]: Gawhar-e Murād, p. 247.

[^14]: Mīrzā Abū ’l-Ḥasan Sha‘rānī, Tarjumeh wa Sharḥ-e Kashf al-Murād,
p. 460.

[^15]: Sūrat al-Zukhruf 43:32.

[^16]: Sūrat al-Zukhruf 43:32.

[^17]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:159.

[^18]: Sūrat Ṭā Hā 20:43-44.

[^19]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:165.

[^20]: Sūrat al-A‘rāf 7:94.

[^21]: Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 5, p. 316.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: The utterance of Ṣiddīqah al-Ṭāhirah (Fāṭimah) (‘a) is very
similar to that of Imām ‘Alī (‘a) concerning the philosophy of creation
and the Divine bounties. The same is true with regards to the other
parts of her speech. This fact points to the correctness of the perfect
compatibility of this couple. As stated in the tradition (ḥadīth), had
there been no Imām ‘Alī (‘a), there could not have been found anyone who
could duly be her husband. See Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 43, section (bāb) 2,
ḥadīth 11.

[^24]: Talkhīṣ al-Muḥaṣṣil, p. 342.

[^25]: Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah, p. 352, quoting Bashar ibn Mu‘tamar.

[^26]: Kashf al-Murād wa Sharḥ Tajrīd Qawshajī, topic on grace.

[^27]: Talkhīṣ al-Muḥaṣṣil, p. 342 quoting Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī.


