Lesson 2: The Ways of Knowing God
=================================

Before embarking on the discussion about the proofs of the existence of
God and an examination of the Divine Attributes, it is necessary to
answer this important and key question: can the human being know God or
not? And in case he can, what is the way of doing so? This is because if
the answer to this question is negative, any sort of discussion and
discourse about theology is vain and useless.

Here, two general outlooks have been put forth, i.e. those of the
affirmatives and the negatives. The rationalists and intuitionists
regard God as knowable and the way of knowing Him as open to mankind.
The sensationalists and literalists give a negative reply, however, to
the above question and consider mankind incapable of knowing God. Now,
we shall examine and elucidate these outlooks.

The Rationalists
----------------

The rationalists refer to the group of thinkers who have accepted the
authority and credibility of reason or intellect (*‘aql*) in knowledge
[or the process of knowing], regarding the rational principles and
fundamentals as the foundations of knowledge. They are of the opinion
that without formally acknowledging the intellect and rational
principles, no knowledge can be attained about the human being and even
sensory and external pieces of knowledge are based on rational
foundations, let alone empirical scientific pieces of knowledge and
those pieces of information which are substantiated by the text and
outward meanings of the revelation (*wahy*).

Aristotle[^1] and his followers in Ancient Greece, Descartes[^2] and his
followers in the West, Fārābī,[^3] Ibn Sīnā,[^4] and all Imāmiyyah and
Mu‘tazilite theologians (*mutakallimīn*) have been proponents of this
outlook. Reason also occupies a high position in Māturīdiyyah theology.
For the Ash‘arites,[^5] however, reason (*‘aql*) is theoretically valid
to some extent but not so in practice.[^6]

At any rate, the philosophers and theologians in the Muslim world
believe that God can be known through rational thinking, although there
is a difference of opinions on the limit of the intellect’s capability.
For example, the proofs presented to prove the existence of God and the
methods adopted to discuss the Attributes of God are not the same.

The proponents of this viewpoint have emphasized that adopting the
rational way of attaining knowledge about God and understanding
metaphysical truths is not an easy job and it requires special skill,
talent and ability; otherwise, the desirable result will not be obtained
and in many instances, it may even lead to deviation.

In this regard, *Shahīd* Muṭahharī[^7] has said:

“The limitedness of the meanings of words and expressions, on one hand,
and the minds’ familiarity with tangible and physical concepts, on the
other hand, make it difficult to think and reflect on metahphysical
issues. In order to be prepared for metaphysical reflections, the mind
gradually undergoes certain processes… No doubt, when the meanings and
concepts of the Divine wisdom want to manifest in the realm of
philosophical intellects, it requires a particular mental acumen and
intellectual capacity which is totally different from literary,
technological, natural or mathematical acumen. The mind must develop in
a particular dimension or aspect so as to acquire acumen for such
ideas.”[^8]

The Holy Qur’an and traditions (*aḥādīth*) endorse this method, and the
proofs and pieces of evidence in criticizing the viewpoint of the
literalists will be stated. Here, we suffice ourselves with quoting the
following verse which regards reflection (*tafakkur*) on the system of
creation as one of the characteristics of those who possess intellects
(*ūli’l-albāb*) for which they are praised:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ لآيَاتٍ لِّأُوْلِي الألْبَابِ ٭ الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ
اللّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىَ جُنُوبِهِمْ وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي
خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَذا بَاطِلاً
سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of night and day, there are signs for those who possess
intellects. Those who remember Allah standing, sitting, and lying on
their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth
[and say] ‘Our Lord, You have not created this in vain! Immaculate are
You. Save us from the punishment of the Fire.”***[^9]

The Intuitionists
-----------------

The intuitionists are of the opinion that the existence of God and
metaphysical realities are knowable by the human being, but not through
the agency of reason and the method of reflection (*tafakkur*) and
intellection (*ta‘aqqul*); rather, through the agency of the heart and
the method of illumination (*ishrāq*) and inner intuition or witnessing
(*shuhūd-e durūnī*).

Some intuitionists have regarded reason as totally incapable of knowing
God, but other intuitionists do not consider it sufficient although they
have stressed its being essential and they have also acknowledged its
ability to some extent. Muslim and non-Muslim mystics advocate the
method of mystical intuition (*shuhūd-e ‘irfānī*) in knowing God. Some
modern Western philosophers and religious psychologists and
psychoanalysts have also opted for this method.

Assessment
----------

Although it is acceptable in knowing God and has an important function,
this method still needs the rational method. Firstly, in intuitive
perceptions, there is always the possibility of satanic tricks and
insinuations, and to detect them would require rational principles and
rules. Secondly, intuitive method is personal in nature and incapable of
being proved to others, except through rational method and philosophical
principles.

For this reason, great mystics and philosophers have highlighted the
mystical method’s need for rational and philosophical method which has a
higher and more perfect state. Regarding mysticism’s need for
intellection (*ta‘aqqul*) and reasoning (*istidlāl*), Ḥakīm Lāhījī has
said:

“The human being has two ways to [know] God, the Exalted. One is the
outward way and the other is inward. The outward way is the path of
reasoning (*istidlāl*) while the inward way is the path of spiritual
wayfaring (*sulūk*). The path of reasoning takes precedence over the
path of spiritual wayfaring, for as long as one does not know what
spiritual station (*manzil*) is, he will not be able to seek the way
leading to the spiritual station.”[^10]

Elsewhere, he has also said, “Prior to the stabilization of theosophy
(*ḥikmah*) and scholastic theology (*‘ilm al-kalām*), Sufi claims are
[nothing but] demagoguery and fraud.”[^11]

The Sensualists
---------------

The sensualists are those who regard the way of knowing realities as
limited to sensory observation and experiment. Sensualism has a long
precedence in the history of human thought. The Skeptics of Ancient
Greece upheld the primacy of experience and opposed rational philosophy.
The new form of empiricism can be traced to the 17th century.

Scholars and philosophers such as Thomas Hobbes,[^12] Pierre
Gassendi[^13] and David Hume[^14] were among the prominent proponents of
sensualism. The notion that sensory perception is the fountainhead and
criterion for knowledge has been the ultimate product of their
intellectual activity.[^15]

Since perception and sensory experience are only through the five
senses, the existence and Attributes of God cannot be proved or
disproved on the basis of the foundations of sensualism. As such, they
oppose both the theists and materialists, because according to them,
there is no way of proving or disproving for mankind the metaphysical
world.

### Assessment

Sensory empiricism (primacy of the sensory perception) is unacceptable
because there is a set of epistemological concepts and principles which
cannot be understood by sensory perception and at the same time, they
cannot be denied; that is, without them, sensory perceptions are also
impossible. Of the concepts used in scientific and non-scientific
discourses, the concepts of necessity or essential (*ḍarūrah*), refusal
or abstention (*imtinā‘*) and probable (*iḥtimāl*) play a vital role,
and none of them can be perceived by the senses.

The law of causation (causality) is another principle which the
sensualists have regarded as definite. This is so while the
cause-and-effect relationship – as Hume has also acknowledged – is not
something tangible or sensible. Causation means an existent’s dependence
on another existent, and not succession (*tawālī*) or symmetry
(*taqārun*) of phenomena.

The principle of non-contradiction[^16] is one of the most fundamental
intellectual principles of man, and no idea or opinion, no matter how
likely it may be, cannot be formulated without this principle. The said
principle can never be perceived by the senses. Felicien Robert
Challaye,[^17] who is himself a prominent empiricist, has regarded two
principles as the basis of inducement of empirical sciences:

1. Nature has order and law, and accident or chance does not happen in
them (law of causation), and

2. Every cause always brings about the same effect given a unified set
of conditions (the principle of harmony in nature or harmony between the
cause and the effect).[^18]

Moreover, it is true that every experiment depends on the observation of
particular steps, which is discussed by the likes of Francis Bacon[^19]
and Stuart Mill[^20] in a bid to know the real cause of every happening,
but the element of experiment has not guaranteed the correctness or
validity of those steps (methods). They thus have no option but to
establish the correctness or validity of those steps through a sort of
rational proof which they deny.[^21]

The Literalists
---------------

A group of Muslim traditionists (*muḥaddithūn*) does not regard reason
and rational thinking as authoritative and permissible bases in knowing
the religion, and they are of the opinion that the only means of knowing
religious facts – whether pertaining to the roots or branches of
religion – are the scriptural texts.

The Ḥanbalīs and *Ahl al-Ḥadīth* from among the Sunnīs and the
*Akhbarī*s from among the Shī‘ah have subscribed to this idea,
vehemently opposing rational (philosophical and theological) discussions
of the issues on beliefs.

There is a well known story that someone asked Mālik ibn Anas (93-179
AH) about the meaning of “Allah’s settlement on the Throne” as mentioned
in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ٱلرَّحْمَٰنُ عَلَى ٱلْعَرْشِ ٱسْتَوَىٰ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The All-beneficent, settled on the Throne.”***[^22]

In reply, Ibn Anas said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْاِسْتِواءُ مَعْلومٌ وَالْكِيْفِيَّةُ مَجْهولَةٌ وَالْايمانُ بِهِ
واجِبٌ وَالسُّؤالُ عَنْهُ بِدْعَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The settlement is known; how God settles on the Throne is unknown; to
believe in it is obligatory and to ask about it is *bid‘ah* (innovation
in religion).”[^23]

Sufyān ibn ‘Uyaynah[^24] (died 198 AH) is reported to have said that the
Attributes of God mentioned in the Qur’an must not be interpreted and a
study about their meanings must not be done. Instead, they must be
recited and one must keep silent about their meanings.

A group of the Akhbārīs from among the Shī‘ah who lived during the 10th
and 11th centuries AH were also of the same belief. In his introduction
to *Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah*, Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn (Mullā Ṣadrā)[^25]
expressed extreme regret for the way of thinking of these people,
saying:

“Indeed we are afflicted by a group whose viewpoint fails to perceive
the lights and secrets of wisdom. They have regarded as heresy to
reflect on celestial matters, divine knowledge and the glorious verses
[of the Qur’an]. They treat as deviation any opposition to common
beliefs. It is as if they were traditionalist Ḥanbalīs for whom the
questions of obligatory (*wājib*) and possible (*mumkin*), eternal
(*qadīm*) and contingent (*ḥādith*) are dubious. Their thinking does not
go beyond what is tangible.”[^26]

After stating the beliefs of the *Ahl al-Ḥadīth* and Ḥanbalīs, Professor
Muṭahharī has said:

“The view of Ḥanbalī and the Ahl al-Ḥadīth has still gained following,
and some Shī‘ah *ḥadīth* scholars in the latter periods have explicitly
stated that even the question of the Oneness of God is totally a
heavenly (devotional) issue and intellectually, there is no sufficient
proof for it, and it is only through obedience to the dictate of
religion that we are bound to believe that God is One.”[^27]

### Assessment

Firstly, even assuming that heavenly truths must be known through
“heavenly means and power”, this principle has no contradiction with
knowing these truths by means of reason because it (reason) is also a
“heavenly element”. As mentioned in traditions (*aḥādīth*), reason or
intellect (*‘aql*) is inward proof (*ḥujjat-e bāṭinī*) of God for
mankind while the prophets are His outward proofs (*ḥujaj-e
ẓāhirī*).[^28]

It is true that reason cannot discern all religious truths, but it is
not totally incapable of knowing religious truths. In this regard, Imām
‘Alī (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يُطْلِعِ الْعُقُولَ عَلَى تَحْدِيدِ صِفَتِهِ، ولَمْ يَحْجُبْهَا
عَنْ وَاجِبِ مَعْرِفَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has not informed (human) wit about the limits of His qualities.
Nevertheless, He has not prevented it from securing essential knowledge
of Him.”***[^29]

Secondly, by denying rational knowledge and its validity, there is no
way of proving the [reality of] *sharī‘ah*. In such a case, there is no
room for the Qur’an and Sunnah through which we could know the
principles and branches of religion.

Thirdly, rational thinking has been encouraged and emphasized in the
Holy Qur’an. The Qur’an has described those who do not use their minds
as the worst of beasts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِندَ اللّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ
لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed the worst of beasts in Allah’s sight are the deaf and the
dumb who do not apply reason.”***[^30]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَيَجْعَلُ الرِّجْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ لا يَعْقِلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He lays defilement on those who do not apply reason.”***[^31]

In many instances, the Holy Qur’an has made use of rational thinking,
engaging in intellectual discussion and argumentation. For example, by
means of two rational arguments, it has proved the Oneness of God,
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَوْ كَانَ فِيهِمَا آلِهَةٌ إِلا اللَّهُ لَفَسَدَتَا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Had there been gods in them other than Allah, they would surely have
fallen apart.”***[^32]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا كَانَ مَعَهُ مِنْ إِلَهٍ إِذًا لَذَهَبَ كُلُّ إِلَهٍ بِمَا
خَلَقَ وَلَعَلا بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Neither is there any god besides Him, for then each god would take
away what he created, and some of them would surely rise up against
others.”***[^33]

In refuting the notion of those who think that God has a son, it is thus
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ وَلَدًا سُبْحَانَهُ بَلْ لَهُ مَا فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأرْضِ كُلٌّ لَهُ قَانِتُونَ ٭ بَدِيعُ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالأرْضِ وَإِذَا قَضَى أَمْرًا فَإِنَّمَا يَقُولُ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they say, ‘Allah has taken a son.’ Immaculate is He! Rather to
Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. All are obedient
to Him, the Originator of the heavens and the earth; and when He decides
on a matter, He just says to it, ‘Be!’ and it is.”***[^34]

These two verses speak about two rational proofs in refuting the belief
in God having an offspring. One is based on the essence of *tawḥīd* and
God’s immunity from any similitude or partner, and the other is based on
God’s immunity from change (*taghyīr*) and quantization (*tadrīj*).[^35]

Fourthly, in the *Sunnah* of the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) and the sayings and
conduct of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), the credibility and authority of
reason has been emphasized and actually utilized by them. By taking a
glance at *Nahj al-Balaghah*,[^36] *Usul al-Kafi*,[^37] *Al-Ṭawḥid* by
Shaykh al-Ṣadūq,[^38] *Al-Iḥtijāj* by Ṭabarsī,[^39] and other Shī‘ah
sources, one will clearly find out this fact. As we have said earlier,
in the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) reason has been recognized as
the inward proof of God. Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) has regarded reason as the
human being’s guide in knowing God as well as in knowing the principles
of what is good and what is evil:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِالْعَقلِ عَرَفَ الْعِبادُ خالِقَهُم وَأَنَّهُمْ مَخْلوقونَ،
وَأَنَّهُ المُدَبِّرُ لَهُمْ وَأَنَّهُمْ المُدَبَّرونَ... وَعَرَفوا
بِهِ الْحَسَنَ مِنَ القَبيحِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By means of reason, the servants recognize their Creator and that
they are creatures and that He is their Governor and that they are
governed… and they distinguished the good from the evil…”***[^40]

According to Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*), one of the goals of the mission of the
prophets is “to unveil before them (people) the hidden virtues of
wisdom”: [^41]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُثيروا لَهُمْ دَفائِنَ العُقولِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fifthly, the Holy Qur’an and traditions (*aḥādīth*) have a set of
sublime knowledge which is beyond sensory perception and common
understanding and comprehension. For example, God is the Dominant One
(*al-Ghālib*). He is the First and the Last (*al-Awwal wa ’l-Ākhir*). He
is the Inward and the Outward (*al-Baṭin wa ’ẓ-Ẓāhir*).

He encompasses everything (*al-Muḥīṭ*). His Unity is not numerical
oneness. He is with everything without being parallel with it in time
and space. He is outside everything but not in the sense of detachment
and separation (*infiṣāl*). Everything comes from Him and shall return
to Him. His Word is identical with His Action, and so on and so forth.

Now, this question is raised: what is the reason behind mentioning these
facts in the Book (Qur’an) and the *Sunnah*? Is it to lay down a set of
lessons for reflection, intellection, understanding, and inspiration and
to guide the minds while swimming in the boundless ocean of divine
knowledge? Or, is it to present issues and problems without solution and
beyond comprehension so as to persuade the minds to submission, silence
and blind following?!

These pieces of knowledge are not instructions, commands or orders.
There is no point in reasoning out, therefore, that “Our duty is to obey
what is commanded and nothing else!” They are a set of theoretical
issues. If they are beyond comprehension and understanding, what is the
benefit in mentioning them? It is a like a Grade One teacher who teaches
a college level subject [such as calculus or statistics] to his pupils
and tells them to accept whatever she tells them although they could not
comprehend it!

God could be known, therefore, and at the same time, man can know Him
through reason and reflection on the signs in the horizon and in
himself, although

(1) his knowledge of the Divine Essence and Attributes is limited and
his understanding of the Divine Essence and Attributes (as they are) is
beyond the power of the human mind or intellect – “He has not informed
(human) wit about the limits of His qualities”[^42] – and

(2) to follow this path is not that easy and simple as it needs special
intellectual agility and efforts.

This is not to suggest, however, that it is possible for everybody to
understand all levels of rational and philosophical discussions about
all issues related to theology. Definitely, this is not so. And there
are many limitations, prerequisites and impediments along the way. The
point is that this way is open for the human being, and there have
always been people who have been able to examine metaphysical issues
pertaining to theology through the correct use of reason and rational
thinking.

In conclusion, let us state once again that the point is not to limit
the way of knowing God to the rational means and method, because one can
also know God through mystical intuition (*shuhūd*). And after proving
[the genuineness of] revelation (*waḥyi*), one can also know issues
pertaining to the Unseen through revelation. But even these two are
based on rational knowledge, and denial of reason and rational knowledge
is tantamount to the denial of both intuition and revelation.

Review Questions
----------------

1. Who are the rationalists? Write their viewpoint about knowing God.

2. Write the statement of Professor Muṭahharī about knowing God through
the intellect.

3. As far as knowing God through the intellect is concerned, state the
pieces of evidence about this from the Holy Qur’an.

4. Write the view of the intuitionists about knowing God and the
objection to it.

5. Write the view of the sensualists about knowing God and the objection
to it.

6. Write the summary of the sensualists’ view about knowing God and the
objection to it.

[^1]: Aristotle (384-322 BCE): a Greek philosopher, a student of Plato
and teacher of Alexander the Great. He wrote on many subjects, including
physics, metaphysics, poetry, theater, music, logic, rhetoric, politics,
government, ethics, biology, and zoology. Together with Plato and
Socrates (Plato’s teacher), Aristotle is one of the most important
founding figures in Western philosophy. [Trans.]

[^2]: René Descartes (1596-1650): French mathematician and the founding
father of modern philosophy. His theory of knowledge starts with the
quest for certainty, for an indubitable starting-point or foundation on
the basis alone of which progress is possible. This is eventually found
in his celebrated ‘Cogito ergo sum’ which means “I think therefore I
am.” His main writings are Discourse on Method, The Meditations,
Principles of Philosophy, The Passions of the Soul and Ruler for the
Direction of the Mind. [Trans.]

[^3]: Abū Naṣr al-Fārābī (known in the West as Alpharabius) (c.
872-950/951 CE): a Muslim polymath (in the fields of cosmology, logic,
music, psychology, and sociology) and one of the greatest scientists and
philosophers of the world during his time. [Trans.]

[^4]: Abū ‘Alī al-Ḥusayn ibn ‘Abd Allāh ibn Sīnā Balkhī, known as Abū
‘Alī Sīnā Balkhī or Ibn Sīnā and commonly known in English by his
Latinized name “Avicenna” (c. 980-1037) was a Persian polymath and the
foremost physician and philosopher of his time. He was also an
astronomer, chemist, geologist, logician, paleontologist, mathematician,
physicist, poet, psychologist, scientist, and teacher. His important
works include Al-Shifā’ (an encyclopedic work covering, among other
things, logic, physics and metaphysics), Al-Najāt (a summary of
Al-Shifā’), and Al-Ishārāt or in full, Al-Ishārāt wa ’t-Tanbīhāt (a
latter work consisting of four parts, viz. logic, physics, metaphysics,
and mysticism). [Trans.]

[^5]: Ash‘arites (‘ashā‘irah): followers of Abū ’-Ḥasan al-Ash‘arī (died
330 AH).

[^6]: For further information in this regard, see the book Darāmadī bar
‘Ilm-e Kalām (An Introduction to Scholastic Theology) by the author.

[^7]: Murtada Mutahhari (1920-79) was a leading theoretician of the 1979
Islamic Revolution in Iran. As an accomplished scholar of Islamic
sciences, he played a pivotal role in forming the modern Islamic
discourse which served as the foundation of the revolution. With close
to ninety works on different subjects to his credit, he is considered
one of the leading thinkers of the global Islamic movement in the
twentieth century.

[^8]: Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism, vol. 5, pp. 33-34
(Introduction).

[^9]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:190-191.

[^10]: Ḥakīm Lahījī, Gawhar-e Murād, p. 34.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 38. In this regard, see Āyatullāh Jawādī ‘Āmulī,
Shinākht dar Qur’ān (Knowledge in the Qur’an), pp. 379-380.

[^12]: Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679): English philosopher, mathematician and
linguist who was one of the main philosophers that founded materialism.
[Trans.]

[^13]: Pierre Gassendi (1592-1655): French Catholic priest, philosopher
and astronomer. [Trans.]

[^14]: David Hume (1711-1776), Scottish historian and philosopher, who
influenced the development of skepticism and empiricism, is considered
one of the greatest skeptics in the history of philosophy. Hume thought
that one’s subjective perceptions never provide true knowledge of
reality and one can know nothing outside of experience. Accordingly,
even the law of cause and effect was an unjustified belief. [Trans.]

[^15]: Paul Foulkes, Falsafeh-ye ‘Umūmī (General Philosophy), trans.
Yaḥyā Mahdawī, pp. 130-131; Hans Reichenbach, Pidāyesh-ye Falsafeh-ye
‘Ilmī (The Rise of Scientific Philosophy), trans. Mūsā Akramī, pp.
106-107.

[^16]: Principle or law of non-contradiction: the law of logic that it
is not the case that p and not-p. Contradiction is the final logical
stopping point in that if a contradiction can be derived from a set of
premises, then at least one of them is false. [Trans.]

[^17]: Felicien Robert Challaye (1875-1967): an anti-colonialist French
philosopher and journalist. [Trans.]

[^18]: Felicien Robert Challaye, Shinākht-e Rawishhā-ye ‘Ulūm (Knowledge
of the Scientific Methods), trans. Yaḥyā Mahdawī, p. 116.

[^19]: Francis Bacon (1561-1626): an English philosopher, statesman,
scientist, lawyer, jurist, and author who established and popularized an
inductive methodology for scientific inquiry, often called the Baconian
method or simply, the scientific method. [Trans.]

[^20]: John Stuart Mill (1806-73): a British philosopher, civil servant
and an influential contributor to social theory, political theory, and
political economy. [Trans.]

[^21]: Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism (The
Principles of Philosophy and the Method of Realism), vol. 2, p. 97.

[^22]: Sūrat Ṭā Hā 20:5.

[^23]: Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 93.

[^24]: Abū Muḥammad Sufyān ibn ‘Uyaynah ibn Maymūn al-Hilālī
al-Kūfī (725-815 CE): a prominent Sunnī religious scholar in Makkah from
the third generation of Muslims referred to as the Tābi‘u al-Tābi‘īn
(the Followers of the Followers). [Trans.]

[^25]: Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī (1572-1641), better known as Mullā Ṣadrā or
Sadr al-Muta’allihīn: the foremost representative of the
Illuminationist (ishrāqī) School of Islamic philosophy whose magnum opus
is Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah (The Four Journeys). [Trans.]

[^26]: Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn, Al-Asfār al-Arba‘ah, vol. 1, introduction.

[^27]: Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism, vol. 5,
p. 11.

[^28]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, “Kitāb al-‘Aql wa ’l-Jahl,” ḥadīth 12.

[^29]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 49.

[^30]: Sūrat al-Anfāl 8:22.

[^31]: Sūrat Yūnus 10:100.

[^32]: Sūrat al-Anbiyā’ 21:22.

[^33]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:91.

[^34]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:116-117.

[^35]: See Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān, vol. 11, p. 361.

[^36]: Nahj al-Balāghah (The Peak of Eloquence) is a collection of
speeches, sayings and letters of the Commander of the Faithful, Imām
‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib (‘a) compiled by Sharīf al-Raḍī Muḥammad ibn
al-Ḥusayn (d. 406 AH/1016). Its contents concern the three essential
topics of God, man and the universe, and include comments on scientific,
literary, social, ethical, and political issues. [Trans.]

[^37]: Al-Kāfi: more fully, Al-Kāfi fī ’l-Hadīth, one of the most
important Shī‘ah collections of hadīth, compiled by Shaykh Abū Ja‘far
Muḥammad ibn Ya‘qūb al-Kulaynī (d. 329 AH/941 CE) and divided into three
sections: Usūl al-Kāfī, Furū‘ al-Kāfī and Rawdah al-Kāfī consisting of
34 books, 326 sections, and over 16,000 ahādīth that can be traced back
to the Prophet and his family by an unbroken chain of transmission.
[Trans.]

[^38]: Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq: also known as Ibn Babūyah, one of the most
important of the early Shī‘ah scholars who died in 381 AH/991 CE. For
his short biography and works, see the introduction of Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq,
I’tiqādātu ’l-Imāmiyyah: A Shī‘ite Creed, 3rd Ed., trans. Asaf A. A.
Fyzee (Tehran: World Organization for Islamic Services, 1999), pp. 6-23.
[Trans.]

[^39]: Aḥmad ibn ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib al-Ṭabarsī (d. circa 620 AH): a
great Shī‘ah scholar, jurisprudent, traditionist (muḥaddith), and
historian of the sixth and early seventh century AH. Among his works are
Al-Iḥtijāj, Al-Kāfī fī ’l-Fiqh, Tārīkh al-A’immah and Kitāb al-Ṣalāh.
[Trans.]

[^40]: Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, “Kitāb al-‘Aql wa ’l-Jahl,” ḥadīth 35.

[^41]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 1.

[^42]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 49. [Trans.]


