Lesson 3: Natural Disposition (Fiṭrah) and Knowing God
======================================================

One of the ways of knowing God being always given attention by thinkers
and scholars and also given importance by the prophets through whom they
have guided the people to the true religion and the worship of God is
the human being’s natural disposition (*fiṭrah*).

Definition of Fiṭrah
--------------------

*Fiṭrah* is defined in the Qur’an and traditions as “new and
unprecedented creation.” The originality of the creation of the universe
has two dimensions. One is that God Himself has created the primary
components of the universe and brought the universe into existence
through their composition, and the other is that God Himself has also
conceived of the design of creation without copying it from anything or
anybody.

*Fiṭrah* is a type of intrinsic guidance for the human being in the
realm of knowledge and sensory perception. It is identical with instinct
(*gharīzah*) in the sense that each of them is a sort of “intrinsic
guidance” (*hidāyat-e takwīnī*). But their difference lies in the fact
that *fiṭrah* pertains to rational types of guidance while instinct
pertains to non-rational types of guidance. Hence, *fiṭrah* is regarded
as one of the salient features of the human being while instinct is one
of the characteristics of [lower] animal life.

The Distinctive Features of Fiṭrah
----------------------------------

Human *fiṭrah* can be identified with the following salient features:

1. Since it is an integral part of human creation, it is not outside the
framework of cause and effect, although external factors have
contributed in its growth and development;

2. Man has intuitive knowledge of it but it can also be known through
acquisitive knowledge;

3. It is inseparable with rational perception and knowledge; that is, it
is crystallized in the realm of rational human life and it is regarded
as the criterion for man’s humanity;

4. It is the touchstone and standard of human exaltation because it has
a sense of sanctity (*taqaddus*);

5. It is general and universal; and

6. It is permanent and inalterable.

Some of the abovementioned features can also be found in instinct, such
as the first, second, fifth, and sixth features while two features – the
third and the fourth – are exclusive to *fiṭrah*.

Given these salient features, one can also distinguish *fiṭrah* from
habit (*‘ādat*), for habit is not innate but rather a product and
outcome of external factors. Moreover, it is not universal and
permanent.[^1]

It must be noted that these salient features can be inferred by
analyzing *fiṭrah*, and thus, they are essential and definite. That is,
in view of the definition given to *fiṭrah*, negation of the said
features is tantamount to contradiction. For example, notwithstanding
the assumption that an object is square, the identical size of its sides
is denied. Notwithstanding the assumption that a substance is water, its
being liquid is denied. In the words of the Muslim philosophers, such
predicates (*maḥmūlāt*)[^2] are called “predicates about the core”
(*maḥmūlāt ‘an ṣamīmah*) and Emmanuel Kant[^3] has called such
predicates “analytic propositions.”

Therefore, there is no need to cite proofs and evidence to establish the
abovementioned features.

Fiṭrah in the Domain of Knowledge and Sensory Perception
--------------------------------------------------------

As we have stated, *fiṭrah* is one of the characteristics of rational
human life, and human life has two domains of manifestations, viz.
knowledge and feeling. In other words, they are perception (*idrāk*) and
inclination (*girāyesh*). That is to say that on account of *fiṭrah*,
man perceives the truths and tends to incline to them.

Intrinsic (fiṭrī) Knowledge
---------------------------

Intrinsic (*fiṭrī*) knowledge refers to the things which the human
reason (*‘aql*) axiomatically knows and accepts, without need for any
learning (*ta‘līm*) and inculcation (*talqīn*) and they are known in
logic as “rational axioms” (*badīhiyyāt-e ‘aqlī*), which, in turn, are
divided into two, viz. theoretical rational axioms (*badīhiyyāt-e
‘aqlī-ye naẓarī*) and practical rational axioms (*badīhiyyāt-e ‘aqlī
‘amalī*):

1. Theoretical rational axioms, such as the law of non-contradiction,
circular argument, the rule that qualities of the same weight are equal,
the rule that a whole is bigger than its part, and so forth, and

2. The rule on the goodness of justice and honesty, and the evil of
injustice and telling a lie, and the like.

Ibn Sīnā has defined intrinsic perceptions (*idrākāt-e fiṭrī*) with two
characteristics. First is that they emanate from human nature and not a
product of teaching (*ta‘līm*) and inculcation (*talqīn*), and the other
is that they are definite and undeniable:

“*Fiṭrah* means that granted that man is suddenly created mature and
intelligent and has so far not heard of any belief or view from anyone
and has not been able to interact with anyone, he would entertain an
idea in his mind and doubt about it. So, if he was able to doubt it,
*fiṭrah* does not testify to it and if he was not able to doubt it, it
is the dictate of his *fiṭrah*.”[^4]

Instinctive Inclinations
------------------------

As we have stated earlier, intrinsic inclinations are rational and have
a sense of sanctity or sacredness (*qidāsah*). This type of inclinations
is called “sublime inclinations” in psychology, in contradistinction to
“personal inclinations” such as love of oneself, and “social
inclinations” such as tribalism and patriotism.

According to psychologists, “sublime inclinations” have four types:

1. *Search for the truth*. It is also called sense of curiosity and
honesty; that is, man intrinsically accepts, searches for the truth and
inclines to it.

2. *Love of beauty (aesthetics)*. Man is naturally inclined to goodness
and beauty, and his emotions are stimulated in perceiving whatever is
beautiful, and thus bringing particular pleasure to himself.
Archeological evidence testifies that aesthetic values have been in
existence since pre-historic times.

3. *Love of good or moral inclination*. It is one of man’s intrinsic and
sublime inclinations; one of the most important points of his
distinction to the animals

4. *Religious feeling*. It is an intrinsic inclination to a metaphysical
and sublime truth; according to psychologists, it is one of the primary
and permanent elements of the human soul; it is as fundamental as the
sense of beauty, good and right.[^5]

Fiṭrah and Search for God
-------------------------

As stated earlier, the sense of curiosity and truthfulness is one of the
intrinsic inclinations of the human being, and because of this intrinsic
guidance, he wants to know the secrets and causes of phenomena. Just as
this intrinsic inclination prompts him to search for the cause of each
of the phenomena, it also stimulates him to search for the cause of the
totality of phenomena in the universe regarded as a single unit.[^6]

Fiṭrah and Inclination to God
-----------------------------

The human being’s intrinsic inclination to God can be proved in two
ways. One is to study one’s psyche and the behavioral and verbal
reactions of others and thereby to identify such inclination and the
other is to refer to the views and opinions of scholars, particularly
the psychologists. We shall first deal with the first way and explain it
in two presentations, viz. love for absolute perfection and hope for a
superior power in moments of danger.

### a. Love for Absolute Perfection

The human being will find out in himself that he loves perfection; nay,
he wants perfection in the absolute sense. By referring to the actions
and sayings of others, he will also discover the same feeling in others.
(It must be noted that we do not talk here about attainment of absolute
perfection but rather about love for absolute perfection.)

We hereby state that the existence of such a feeling in the human being
is a proof of the reality of absolute perfection, and what is meant by
“God” is nothing but Absolute Perfection and Beauty, and Infinity.

The conclusion of these two preliminary points is that man innately
loves God, although there might be mistakes in practice by loving what
is not really absolutely perfect. For example, an infant’s sense of
hunger inspires her that there is food or something to eat in the world,
but in many instances, she commits a mistake in identifying what can
really be eaten but proceeds to putting an insect into her mouth, for
example.

The question is, what is the proof that love for the absolute perfection
necessitates its being real? Is it not possible that this feeling is
incorrect and baseless?

Reply: The reality of love for absolute perfection can be proved in two
ways:

The first way is that instinctive and intrinsic inclinations, without
any reality in the outside world, are incompatible with the order
governing the universe because a study on the existing human and animal
instincts (*gharāyiz*) shows that they pay attention and are attached to
real things, and if ever there is any mistake, it is in identifying the
manifestations, and not in the essence of the thing.

The second way is that the realization of matters whose reality pertains
to nothing is impossible without the realization of the *muḍāfun ‘ilayh*
(noun in the genitive case) and their adjunct (*muta‘alliq*).[^7] For
example, knowledge (*‘ilm*) or awareness necessitates object of
knowledge (*ma‘lūm*) and to suppose knowledge without its adjunct is
something impossible. The will (*irādah*), therefore, needs a purpose
(*murād*) [for itself to function]. Love (*ḥubb*) necessitates an object
of love (*maḥbūb*). Affection demands an object of affection, and so on
and so forth.

If these stated things potentially (*bi’l-quwwah*) exist, then their
adjuncts (*muta‘alliqāt*) must also exist potentially, and if the stated
things actually (*bi’l-fi‘l*) exist, then their adjuncts
(*muta‘alliqāt*) must also exist actually. Since our assumption is that
inclination to the absolute perfection actually exists, it follows that
the Absolute Perfection also actually exists.

### b. Hope for a Superior Power in Moments of Danger

In moments of danger and crisis in life when the human being loses hope
in all natural means and causes, deep inside him he feels that there is
a Power over all physical powers and if It wills, It can rescue him. As
such, the hope to live gets stronger in him and he strives harder in
order to survive. And this in itself is a testimony to the
instinctiveness of theism deep within the human being. Yet, the
amusements of material life make him heedless of the existence of that
Superior Power under common conditions. In reality, the amusements of
life are like dust to the mirror of *fiṭrah* and because of which the
human being cannot see the face of truth in it. The many crises in life
remove all those dust, thereby making clear the mirror of *fiṭrah*.

In this regard, Ṣadr al-Mu’allihīn said:

“The existence of God, as stated, is something innate as testified by
the fact that when the human being is situated in horrible conditions,
he would intrinsically repose his trust in God and turn toward the Cause
of causes (*musabbab al-asbāb*) and the One who turns difficulties into
ease, although he gives no attention to this intrinsic inclination of
his.”[^8]

‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā’ī has also said in this regard:

“No one – believer or unbeliever – has any doubt that in moments of
danger when there is no hope for any means and way of rescue, the human
being turns his attention toward, and seeks the assistance of, a
Superior Power which is above all means and is immune from any defect,
negligence, oblivion, and the like. Meanwhile, hope and expectation,
just like love, hatred, will, aversion, attraction, and the like are
qualities that depend on others and they will not be materialized
without the existence of their dependents (*muta‘alliq*) in the outside
world.

Therefore, the actual hope in one’s self for a Powerful Being is a
testimony to the actual existence of It. The human *fiṭrah* can clearly
discern the existence of such a Power although in many cases, because of
the amusements [in life] he is so overly heedless of Its outward
elements and manifestations. Yet, with the emergence of perils and
difficulties in life, this veil of heedlessness will be removed and
*fiṭrah* will play its role of guidance.”[^9]

In numerous verses, the Holy Qur’an has also stated the fact that in
times of danger and crisis, the human being seeks refuge in One God. One
can point to the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذا رَكِبُوا فِي الْفُلْكِ دَعَوُا اللّهَ مُخْلِصينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ فَلَمّا نَجّاهُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ إِذا هُمْ يُشْرِكُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When they board the ship, they invoke Allah putting exclusive faith
in Him, but when He delivers them to land, behold, they ascribe partners
[to Him], being ungrateful for what We have given them!”***[^10]

### Reply to Two Objections

*First Objection:*

Hope for a superior power in moments of danger and lose of hope for
natural means do not provide a logical proof for the existence of that
superior power because it is possible that the cause of this hope is
man’s love for life and subsistence. Although he knows for a fact that
there is no rescuing power, his love for life generates this imagination
in him. Someone who is drowning knows that there is no one who can
rescue him, yet he still shouts and calls for help.

*Reply:*

Like love, affection, will, hatred, and the like, sense of hope is a
reality adjunct to something else (“added essence”). If it is realized
actually, its adjunct must also exist actually. In the case of the
drowning person, even granted that there is no human rescuer out there,
this call for help shows that there is really a Rescuer. His shout
reflects his inner feelings on the existence of a Power that can rescue
him if It wills so.

*Objection 2:*

If search for God and belief in Him are intrinsic human inclinations,
how comes not all people believe in, and worship God, and not all those
who worship God express interest on issues pertaining to the task of
knowing God?

*Reply:*

The innateness (*fiṭriyyah*) of a human inclination does not necessarily
mean that it is uniformly active in all people and in all conditions,
yielding the same result. The role of *fiṭrah* is in terms of the order
of succession of its practical effect within the appropriate limit, and
not in being the total cause. For this reason, external conditions and
factors have their contribution in its emergence. This point is not
limited to the human being’s inclination to God. For instance, love of
knowledge is one of the intrinsic inclinations of the human being, but
it is actually expressed in different ways under different conditions.
Sometimes, it is so extreme that it prevails over all physical instincts
and inclinations and there are also times when it is very low. Yet, in
any case, knowledge is something lovable and desirable, and the human
being accepts it deep inside him.

What Scholars Say
-----------------

That faith in God stems from man’s inner being is acceptable to many
scholars and some of them have even regarded the heart as the best locus
for knowing God. We have stated earlier that religious feeling is one of
the primordial dimensions of the human soul. Here, we shall quote the
statements of some scholars:

1. Blaise Pascal (1623-1662), a renowned French [physicist, religious
philosopher and] mathematician, has said, “The heart, and not the
intellect, bears witness to the existence of God, and faith is attained
through this way. The heart has proofs which are inaccessible to the
intellect.”[^11]

2. Nicolas Malebranche (1638-1715), a French philosopher, says:

“Although the human soul is connected to the body, its real and original
link is to God. But since the human being becomes sinful, his attention
is drawn to the body and his link to the Origin becomes weaker. He must
strive hard to strengthen that link…

“The human soul cannot perceive anything except that which is connected
and linked to it and since it has no real connection to the body and its
link is to God, it can only perceive the existence of God…

“Given this, it becomes clear that the Essence of God needs no proof.
His existence is axiomatic and the human knowledge of His Being is
essential, and the human soul can directly perceive God without any
intermediary.”[^12]

3. William James (1842-1910), the famous American psychologist, has made
an extensive study of religion and faith in God through psychology and
written a book entitled *The Varieties of Religious Experience* in this
regard. Some parts of the said book have been translated into Persian
under the title *Dīn wa Rawān* (*Religion and Psyche*).[^13] He says:

“The primordial source of religious concepts emanates from the beliefs
of the heart, and then philosophy and intellectual arguments put those
concepts in a system or formula. Disposition and the heart come forward
and the intellect follows suit, guiding it.”[^14]

He also says:

“We feel that we have a defect and flaw in our being which is the source
of our restlessness, and we also feel that whenever we establish
connection with a power superior to us, we can rescue ourselves from
this restlessness and inquietude. This is already enough for the human
being to resort to a higher truth. He will thus realize that within him
there is something beyond these restlessness and inquietude and that he
is linked to a higher truth which is not separated from him and which
can help him. And when his being of descent and lower position is in a
whirlpool and deep waters, it (higher truth) will become his refuge and
ark of salvation.[^15]

4. Christoph Meiners (1747-1810), a German researcher who has written
valuable works of criticism on the general history of religions, is one
of the pioneering modern scholars who confirmed that there is no
community or nation without religion and that religion has emanated from
the human being’s innermost self.[^16]

5. Although Sigmund Freud[^17] regards religion as a product of human
imagination, he has a somehow moderate stance on intrinsic knowledge.
For example, he has then said:

“It cannot be denied that some persons feel something from within which
cannot be explained well. This subjective assumption is a perpetual
feeling which is reflected in the great mystics as well as in Indian
religious thinking. It is possible that it constitutes the source or
essence of religious feelings which are the manifestations of various
religions.”

He has doubt on this subject and acknowledges that by his
psychoanalysis, he has not been able to find any trace of such feelings
in himself, but he adds that this fact does not allow him to deny the
existence of the said feeling in others.[^18]

6. Max Muller[^19] says, “Feelings of infinity give rise to the birth of
belief and religion.”

7. Jean-Jacques Rousseau[^20] said, “Common sense is the best way to
prove the existence of God.”

8. Albert Einstein[^21] said, “My religion consists of inadequate and
insignificant veneration of a Superior Spirit.” He also said, “The most
beautiful experience is to experience secrets and mysteries – the same
experience that has brought religion (religiosity) into existence… the
same feeling which is the quintessence of real religiosity.”[^22]

Fiṭrah and Religion from the Perspective of Revelation
------------------------------------------------------

The innateness of religion has been categorically put forth in the
Qur’an and traditions. The most explicit verse in this regard is verse
30 of *Sūrat al-Rūm* which has become known as the Verse of Human Nature
(*āyat al-* *fiṭrah*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لاَ تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ٭ ذَٰلِكَ ٱلدِّينُ
ٱلْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ ٱلنَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set your heart on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of Allah according to which He originated mankind. There is
no altering Allah’s creation; that is the upright religion, but most
people do not know.”***[^23]

The Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ مَوْلودٍ يولَدُ عَلَى الفِطْرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Everyone begotten is born in the state of fiṭrah.”***

According to Imām al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*), this means that the gnosis
(*ma‘rifah*) that God is the Creator of man and the universe is
ingrained in every human being.[^24]

Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has regarded “the renewal of the intrinsic covenant
between God and mankind” as one of the goals of the prophets’ *bi‘thah*
(mission):

> لِيَسْتَأْدوهُمْ ميثاقَ فِطْرَتِهِ xc

The Imām (*‘a*) has also said that *al-tawḥīd* which is called “the word
of purity” (*kalimat al-ikhlāṣ*) is rooted in man’s being.[^25] And
there are many traditions (*aḥādīth*) regarding the intrinsic nature of
religion and to quote them is beyond the scope of the discussion.

It is appropriate for us to end this discourse with some couplets from
Naẓīrī Nayshābūrī:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غير من در پس اين پرده سخنسازي هست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
راز در دل نتوان داشت كه غمّازي هست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بلبلان! گل ز گلستان به شبستان آريد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كه در اين كنج قفس زمزمه پردازي هست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تو مپندار كه اين قصّه به خود ميگويم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گوش نزديك لبم آر كه آوازي هست
  </p>
</blockquote>

Review Questions
----------------

State the definition of *fiṭrah*.

Write down the salient features of human *fiṭrah*.

Explain the theoretical rational axioms and practical rational axioms.

State what Ibn Sīnā said about the salient features of *fiṭrah*.

Write down the types of sublime inclinations according to the
psychologists.

Explain briefly the first way of the human being’s inclination to God.

Write down Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn’s proof of the intrinsic nature of
inclination to God.

State ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī’s proof on the intrinsic nature of
inclination to God.

Write down the objection to the intrinsic nature of theism and the reply
to it.

Explain the intrinsic nature of religion in the Qur’an and traditions
(*aḥādīth*).

[^1]: See Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Fiṭrah, pp. 32-34, 69-73.

[^2]: Maḥmūl: the logical predicate, i.e. the term (or terms) in a
proposition which predicates something about the subject (mawḍu‘), e.g.
the term “mortal” in the proposition: “Man is mortal.” [Trans.]

[^3]: Immanuel Kant (1724-1804): the German philosopher regarded by many
as the most influential thinker of modern times. Describing in the
Metaphysics of Ethics (1797) his ethical system which is anchored in a
notion that reason is the final authority for morality, actions of any
sort, Kant believed, must be undertaken from a sense of duty dictated by
reason, and no action performed for expediency or solely in obedience to
law or custom can be regarded as moral. [Trans.]

[^4]: Ibn Sīnā, Al-Najāt, p. 62.

[^5]: Ḥiss-e Madhhabī Yā Bu‘d-e Chahārum-e Rūḥ-e Insānī (Religious
Feeling or the Fourth Dimension of the Human Soul), pp. 16-32.

[^6]: In this regard, refer to the first lesson.

[^7]: The assumption is that it is an “added essence” (dhāt al-iḍāfah).
That is, its being pertaining to nothing is embedded in its essence. In
this case, the assumption of its being real without the existence of its
adjunct (muta‘alliq) is tantamount to contradiction. Adjunct
(muta‘alliq): an adverb or a phrase that adds meaning to the verb in a
sentence or part of a sentence. [Trans.]

[^8]: Ṣadr al-Mu’allihīn, Al-Mabda’ wa ’l-Ma‘ād, p. 16.

[^9]: Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān, vol. 12, p. 272, exegesis of Sūrat al-Naḥl, verse 53.

[^10]: Sūrat al-‘Ankabūt 29:65.

[^11]: Sayr-e Ḥikmat dar Urūpā (The Trend of Wisdom in Europe), vol. 2,
p. 18; Falsafeh wa Imān-e Masīḥī (Philosophy and Christian Faith), p.
54.

[^12]: Sayr-e Ḥikmat dar Ūrupā, vol. 2, pp. 22-23.

[^13]: Six out of 20 chapters of the book have been translated into
Persian. See William James, Dīn wa Rawān (Religion and Psyche), trans.
Mahdī Qā’inī (Tehran: Intishārāt wa Āmūzesh-e Inqilābī Islāmī, 1372
AHS). [Trans.]

[^14]: Dīn wa Rawān, trans. Mahdī Qā’inī, p. 57.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 122.

[^16]: Dīnpazhūhishī (Religious Studies), vol. 1, trans. Bahā’ al-Dīn
Khurramshāhī, p. 122.

[^17]: Sigmund Freud (1856-1940): the founder of psychoanalysis who
founded the International Psychoanalytical Association in 1910 and whose
view on psychoanalysis was reached through his study of the effect of
hypnosis on hysteria. Among his numerous and well-known works are The
Interpretations of Dreams, The Psychopathology of Everyday Life,
Introductory Lectures in Psychoanalysis, Humor and Its Relation to the
Unconscious, The Ego and the Id, The Problem of Anxiety, and The Future
of an Illusion. [Trans.]

[^18]: Kūdak az Naẓar-e Wirāthat wa Tabiyat (The Child in Terms of
Nature and Nurture), vol. 1, p. 308, quoting Andīshehhā-ye Freud
(Freudian Thoughts), p. 89.

[^19]: Friedrich Max Müller (1823-1900), more regularly known as Max
Müller: a German philologist and Orientalist, and one of the founders of
the western academic field of Indian studies and the discipline of
comparative religion. [Trans.]

[^20]: Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78): Swiss-born French writer,
philosopher, and political theorist. Greatly influenced by Denis
Diderot, Rousseau first gained fame from his essay Discourse on the
Sciences and the Arts (1750), an attack on the arts as a source for the
increased wealth of the rich and an instrument of propaganda. In his
Discourse on Inequality (1755), he professed the equality and goodness
of ‘natural man’ and asserted that the golden age of humanity occurred
before the formation of society, which bred competition and the
corrupting influences of property, commerce, science, and agriculture.
The Social Contract (1762), influential during the French Revolution,
claimed that when human beings formed a social contract to live in
society, they delegated authority to a government; however, they
retained sovereignty and the power to withdraw that authority when
necessary. [Trans.]

[^21]: Albert Einstein (1879-1955): German, Swiss and American
mathematician and atomic physicist who stimulated a revolution in
physics by discovering the theory of general relativity and for which he
received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1921 and is often regarded as the
father of modern physics. [Trans.]

[^22]: Kūdak az Naẓar-e Wirāthat wa Tabiyat, vol. 1, p. 69, quoting
Irtibāt-e Insān wa Jahān (The Relationship of Man and the World), vol.
3, p. 175.

[^23]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30. [Trans.]

[^24]: Tafsīr Burhān, vol. 3, p. 261.

[^25]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 110.


