Lesson 4: Order in the Universe and Knowing God
===============================================

One of the rational – and at the same time, simple and universal – ways
of knowing God is to reflect on the order or design in the creation.
This way has been given much importance in the Qur’an and the Sunnah, as
this has also been continuously the focus of attention of the
theologians (*mutakallimūn*), and in the contemporary period, it has
also acquired more significance.[^1]

The Definition and Types of Order
---------------------------------

*Naẓm* (order or design) is a kind of relationship between two or more
things. In *naẓm*, a relationship or interdependence is established
among the parts of a phenomenon or among the members of an entity. As
such, *naẓm* is inseparable with the principle of causation
(*‘illiyyah*). That is, whenever there is *naẓm*, the cause-and-effect
relationship governs.

The cause-and-effect relationship that exists in *naẓm* is sometimes
agent-based and outcome-based at other times. In the first case, the
*naẓm* is called “cause-and-effect order” (*naẓm-e ‘illī wa ma‘lūlī*) or
“agent-based cause” (*illat-e fā‘ilī*) [where the emphasis is on the
agent] while in the second case, the *naẓm* is called “outcome order”
(*naẓm-e ghā’ī*) or “outcome-based cause” (*‘illat-e ghā’ī*).

The relationship between the clouds, wind, and rain, the fineness of
air, and the order that exists between them are examples of the first
case while the relationship between the cornea, retina, iris and other
parts of the eye which are essential for vision is an example of the
second case. That is, the organic relationship or order of these parts
in a given condition brings about vision or the power of sight. And
seeing is the outcome (*ghāyah*) of this special relationship.

There is another type of *naẓm* which is called *naẓm-e istiḥsānī*
(formal or structural order). This order is caused by a particular
composition of the components of a phenomenon or an aggregate and since
aesthetic value influences the human being and provides him with a
pleasant portrait, it is called formal or approbational (*istiḥsānī*)
order.

The difference between the abovementioned types of order is that what is
taken into account in the agent-based order (*naẓm-e fā‘ilī*) is that
every effect or happening depends on a cause which precedes it and
brings it into existence. Whether that cause has self-awareness and
willpower or not is inconsequential in the said order.

In the outcome-based order (*naẓm-e ghā’ī*), however, not only the
existence of the cause or causes of a phenomenon but also the element of
self-awareness and willpower are taken into consideration, because among
the hundreds or thousands of probable relations among the components of
a phenomenon, only one of them can lead to a certain outcome determined
for it. Therefore, the agent-based cause of such order must be
self-conscious and has willpower.

In the formal or structural order (*naẓm-e istiḥsānī*), meanwhile, the
focus is only the external or structural elegance of a phenomenon
irrespective of it having a cause or none, and if it is has, whether it
is self-conscious and goal-oriented, or not.

The Order of Outcome and the Argument of Design
-----------------------------------------------

From what has been said, it became clear that the existing order or
design in the Argument of Design is the Order of Outcome (*naẓm-e
ghā’ī*), because only the existence of such order which can lead man to
the existence of the All-wise and All-powerful Creator, and not the
other two types of order (agent-based and structural orders), because in
these two types of order, as stated, the elements of self-consciousness
and willpower are not requisites.

The order of outcome, however, necessitates consciousness and willpower.
The fact that out of thousands of probable relationships, only one
relationship can lead to a specific outcome or goal, and such an outcome
or goal is materialized, leaves no room for any doubt that the existing
relationship or order has a wise, powerful and independent Agent.

In this regard, Professor Muṭahharī (*r*)[^2] has said, thus:

“The meaning of order applied in knowing God is the order caused by an
Ultimate Cause and not the order attributable to an agent-based cause.
The order attributable to an agent-based cause is nothing but to say
that every effect or consequence necessitates a cause or agent.
Naturally, if it is also the effect of another cause and the said cause
is also the effect of yet another cause – and so on and so forth –
inevitably, there exists an order among them – a chain-like order. This
order cannot be a proof of the existence of God.

But the order caused by an Ultimate Cause means that the effect has a
condition or state which bespeaks of the existence of freewill in the
cause. That is, it has a condition or state which can bring about the
effect into existence in other forms but it has brought it into
existence in a specific form for a particular purpose it has. So, in the
case of the Cause, it must have consciousness, perception and willpower
so as to identify the objective and to discern the function of a given
structure or condition for the said objective, and finally, to bring the
said effect into existence for the said objective.

The principle of the ultimate cause is only possible when the cause that
brings the effect into existence has consciousness, perception and
willpower, or if the agent itself has no consciousness, perception and
willpower, it is under the control and supervision of a Superior Agent
that manages it and leads it toward the objective intended for it. The
order which exists in the universe and is the proof of the existence of
God is exactly this order.”[^3]

It is Design and Not Accident!
------------------------------

One cannot deny the existence of order or design in the universe. All
branches of science testify to the existence of this order or design in
the universe. Scientists have different definitions of “the scientific
method” but most of them accept that science is meant to discover the
universal rules and laws of nature. Obviously, the hierarchy of laws
discovered earlier by sciences ascertains the existence of these laws.
Now, our freedom to conduct research allows us to ask why these laws
exist. That is, how can we explain the existence of this order,
hierarchy and usefulness of the laws of nature? In this regard, there
are only two possibilities:

1. This order or design is the product of expansion and continuity of
the universe which incidentally came into existence at the beginning,
and

2. The order or system in nature is the product of an accurate design
which has created it.

The first assumption is unbelievable. Therefore, the second assumption
must be accepted and the existence of a powerful and all-wise Creator be
acknowledged.[^4]

The primary components of living bodies are three elements, viz.
hydrogen, oxygen and carbon, and some amount of nitrogen and very small
quantities of other elements that are combined with them. In simple and
small organisms, millions of atoms of such elements exist and are
combined together in specific proportions and forms.

In terms of probability, the chance or accident of having a given
outcome is so insignificant and as good as zero. Now, let us consider
the most complex of organisms, i.e. the human being, who wants to
discover or manipulate the laws of nature. Is it possible for this being
to have accidentally come into existence through a spontaneous
combination of those elements?![^5]

Imām al-Ṣādiq (‘a) and the Proof of Order
-----------------------------------------

As part of his detailed discourse with Mufaḍḍal ibn ‘Umar about the
existence of God and its proofs, Imam al-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) has mentioned the
order and perfection in the universe, saying thus:

“The structure of the universe is the foremost directive and argument
for the existence of Almighty Allah – how the parts thereof have been
set together and have been possessed of elegant workmanship and design.
An appropriate mood of contemplation with reason focused on individual
parts will disclose that this universe is comparable to a house
furnished with all articles necessary for human beings. The sky is like
a canopy; the earth is spread like a carpet, while the stars set in
stratum upon stratum, appear as lamps alight in their places. The gems
are treasured as if the house has lots of collections [of beautiful
things]. Besides these, everything is readily available to meet
individual needs.

Man, in this world, is like the masterful owner of the house, having in
his possession everything therein. And there exist the different plant
species available for meeting individual needs… Different species of
animals have been allotted functions for particular exigencies and
interest… This order and arrangement is a clear proof that the universe
has been designed and created on the basis of decree, wisdom, order, and
harmony.”[^6]

Review Questions
----------------

1. Write down the definition of order and its types.

2. Explain the intended order in the argument of design.

3. How do we prove that the existing order in the universe is a design
and not an accident?

4. Write down Imām al-Ṣādiq’s (*‘a*) discourse about the argument of
design.

[^1]: The argument of design has a particular history and development in
Christian theology. For further information in this regard, see the book
God in Philosophy or Science and Religion (1968) by Ian Graeme Barbour
(1923- ), a prominent American scholar on the relationship between
science and religion whose 1989-91 Gifford Lectures yielded the widely
recognized texts, Religion in an Age of Science (1990) and Ethics in an
Age of Technology (1993).

[^2]: The abbreviation, “r” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
raḥmatullāh ‘alayhi, raḥmatullāh ‘alayhā, or raḥmatullāh ‘alayhim (may
peace be upon him/her/them), which is mentioned after the names of pious
people. [Trans.]

[^3]: Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Tawḥīd, pp. 79-80.

[^4]: John Kelur Munisma (?), Ithbāt-e Wujūd-e Khudā (Proving the
Existence of God), trans. Aḥmad Ārām, pp. 224-226, with a slight
terminological modification.

[^5]: Ibid., pp. 179-180.

[^6]: ‘Allāmah Majlisī, Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 3, p. 62.


