Lesson 6: The Argument of Contingency
=====================================

In Islamic theology, the argument of contingency (*ḥudūth*) is of
special importance in that it is called the “special way” of the
theologians. The argument of contingency has been described in various
ways in the books of scholastic theology,[^1] and explicitly discussed
in traditions (*aḥādīth*).[^2]

This argument consists of two premises and a conclusion:

Premise 1: The universe is contingent (*ḥādith*).

Premise 2: Anything contingent is in need of a Maker.

Conclusion: The universe is in need of a Maker.

The second premise of this argument is rational and axiomatic, and those
who deny the existence of God also accept it as it is a corollary of the
principle of causation. And the proof of its first premise is as
follows:

1. The universe is changeable and alterable.

2. Anything which is changeable and alterable is contingent.

Therefore, the universe is contingent.

The second premise of this reasoning is also axiomatic and its being so
can be known by reflecting upon the reality of change, for ‘contingency’
(*ḥudūth*) means coming into existence after being non-existent;
furthermore, anything which is changeable and alterable has no
permanence and stability, and any state of it is preceded by
non-existence, and since this peculiarity is universal, contingency is
also universal and all-encompassing.

The first premise of this argument can be attained through sensory
observation, because both outward observation and scientific discovery
testify to the motion (*ḥarikah*) and evolution in the universe, as also
confirmed by philosophical argument.[^3]

In asserting the argument of contingency, ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī has
said:

“Basic observation proves, as can also be found out through scientific
curiosity, that the components of the universe have existential
connection to one another, and this connection or interrelatedness is
not only true to a particular set of components of the universe; in
fact, wherever we focus our attention and examine thoroughly, we will
discover better the root of this relationship.”[^4]

In its own existence, the universe is changeable and alterable; that is,
it comes into existence after being non-existent, for once we assess the
happenings in the universe in whatever way, we will finally arrive at
the universal motion (positional-spatial motion or substantial motion).
Motion is existence after non-existence and being mixed with non-being,
and as the law of cause and effect demands, any contingent being needs a
cause in order to exist.

Objection
---------

It is true that matter (*māddah*) is in constant motion and change, and
motion and change, in turn, necessitate renewal (*tajaddud*) and
contingency, but the same concomitance makes renewal and contingency
perpetual and permanent for matter. That is, matter’s nature of being
alterable and in constant motion shall be perpetual and permanent and
anything which is perpetual and permanent is not in need of any cause.

### Reply

Motion and change are characteristics of matter, and matter is qualified
(*mawṣūf*) as ‘object in motion’. As such, in relation to motion matter
serves as recipient or object. For this reason, it makes no difference
whether motion can be distinguished from matter or not, and as reason
dictates and experience testifies to the emergence of a phenomenon, the
existence of the recipient is not sufficient because the existence of
the agent is also necessary. It is thus impossible for the mover
(*muḥarrak*) to be identical with the moved (*mutaḥarrik*) object. As
the law of causation dictates, therefore, motion is in need of a cause
other than than its recipient matter, whether the motion is essentially
inseparable to the matter or separable to it.[^5]

This discourse does not also contradict the law of inertia in physics
because the substance of the said law is that in preserving the motion
it has, a physical body is in need of an external factor and it is in
need of the external factor only in terms of changing the position or
speed of the motion. And the substance of the rational principle is that
the contingency of the motion necessitates an external cause although it
is possible that the said cause considers the motion essential and
inseparable to the body such that for the continuity of the motion, it
may not be in need of an external cause.

Given this, the incorrectness of the assumption of the perpetual and
moving matter in interpreting the emergence of the phenomena in the
world of nature becomes clear, because the sole perpetuity of their
existence is not sufficient to explain their motion. Motion needs not
only a recipient (*mutaḥarrik* or the moving object) but also an agent
(*mutaḥarrak* or mover). In this regard, ‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī has
said:

“Matter which can only possibly have components, forms and properties
and nothing else cannot create their activity, just like cotton which
has the capacity to become clothes. This capability alone cannot make it
become clothes and the cotton cannot be worn; rather, other factors such
as spinning, weaving and sewing machines must get involved… Regarding
influence (*ta’thīr*), the effector (*mu’aththar*) must create the
effect (*athar*) and regarding the state of being impressed
(*ta’aththur*), the impressed one (*muta’aththar*) must be devoid of
effect, and of course, lackness (*wijdān*) cannot be created, and for
this reason, matter which is the bearer of possibility and potentiality
of a thing cannot by itself have the capability of the said thing which
it does not have.

“It is true that the actualities which matter bring into existence come
into existence through analysis and synthesis and the emergence of
suitable conditions, but it must be seen whether or not only the
possibility of analysis and synthesis in matter can bring the actuality
of analysis and synthesis into existence, and whether or not the
possibility of conditions is identical with the actuality of the
conditions.”[^6]

The Second Principle of Thermodynamics and the Universe’s Contingency
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The second principle of thermodynamics which is a law in physics states
the fact that if two bodies – warm and cold – are beside each other, the
heat of the first body will transfer to the second body and this
transfer of heat will continue until an equilibrium of heat between the
two bodies is attained and it is not possible for the contrary to
spontaneously happen. This process is also called “entropy or tendency
to equilibrium”; that is, if we leave the bodies by themselves, they
will incline to equilibrium. Mechanical and heat equilibrium is the
natural state of bodies.

Sometimes this law is also called “tendency to disorder” and the reason
for this is that the state of disorder of the energy molecules is their
most improbable state, and their state of disorder is their most
probable state. For example, for all the air molecules of a room where
we are situated to be located in a particular corner is rationally
possible but it is so improbable. On the other hand, their being
dispersed in the different parts of the room is so probable and
possible.

Therefore, the dispersion of energy and its synthesis is more probable
and more natural than its concentration in one location. For this
reason, the tendency to attain equilibrium (natural state) is equal to
the tendency to end up with disorder in the abovementioned meaning.[^7]

Of course, it must be noted that the state of equilibrium does not mean
internal stability. Inside every system, there is a strong heat motion.
Every physical body at every moment, therefore, is subject to
transformation. That is, the mutual formation of its molecules differs
from moment to moment.[^8]

Frank Allen,[^9] a biological physics professor, says:

“The second law of thermodynamics has proved that the universe is
constantly moving toward the state in which all bodies reach an equally
low degree of heat and there will be no more consumable energy. In that
state, life will no longer be possible. If the universe had no beginning
and has always existed ever since, it must have come into existence from
such state of inactivity and stagnation.”[^10]

Bertrand Russell’s Objection
----------------------------

Although Bertrand Russell[^11] accepts the argument of the said law of
physics on the contingency of the universe, he regards as incorrect to
cite it as proof of the existence of God. [He says:]

“Can we draw a conclusion here that the universe has been created by a
creator – whereas by resorting to the laws derived from the method of
drawing acceptable scientific conclusion, the answer is definitely
negative? There is no existing proof that the universe has not come into
existence spontaneously, except that this matter seems strange. In
nature, however, there is no existing law which shows that the things
which seem strange to us must not come into being.

Drawing a conclusion on the existence of God is synonymous with drawing
a conclusion on the existence of a cause, and causative conclusions are
only permissible in the realm of science when they begin with causal
laws. Creating [something] out of nothing is something which is
impossible in practice. As such, to suppose that the universe has been
created by a creator is in no way more logical than the premise that the
universe has come into being without any cause, because both the two
violate the causal laws which we can observe with a single power
(uniformly).”[^12]

### Reply

Russell’s objection is derived from his positivist foundation of
epistemology. That is based on the principle of sensory acceptance of
reality in the sense that any idea which cannot be tested through
sensory experiment has no scientific value and is unacceptable. Yet,
this foundation is also rejected by contemporary philosophers of science
and its most manifest flaw is that this very claim of the positivists is
also a piece of information which is not also a product of the senses
and cannot be tested and experienced by the senses.

In principle, as stated in the fifth lesson, without relying on a series
of rational principles, no empirical law – including the principle of
non-contradiction, the law of causation and the principle of uniformity
of nature – can be proven [to be true].

Human knowledge, therefore, can be classified into two, viz. rational
and non-rational. Some components of the rational knowledge are so
crucial and fundamental that denial of them necessitates denial of the
human knowledge as a whole. On this basis, we maintain that the need of
the phenomenon for a phenomenon-maker and of the originated for an
originator is one of the rational axioms, and confirming it does not
change anything but the correct conception of its components
(originated, originator, need).

In this way, it is true that none of the two assumptions – the
spontaneous coming into existence of the universe and the creation of
the universe by an Intelligent Creator – can be tested and experimented
by the senses and for this reason, they have equal position, but it is
not so from the rational perspective. Reason regards the first
assumption as unacceptable and the second assumption as acceptable.
Likewise, this judgment of reason actually follows its judgment
regarding the principle of causation.

Review Questions
----------------

1. Explain the premises of the argument of contingency.

2. Write down the argument of contingency in the words of the late
‘Allāmah al-Ṭabāṭabā’ī.

3. Write down the necessary concomitance of matter and change regarding
the argument of contingency along with its refutation.

4. How can the argument of contingency be proved to be true by applying
the second law of thermodynamics?

5. State the objection of Bertrand Russell to the argument of
contingency along with its refutation.

[^1]: In this regard, see Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī, Al-Maṭālib al-‘Āliyah,
vol. 1, pp. 200-232; Muḥaqqiq al-Ṭūsī, Qawā’id al-‘Aqā’id, pp. 39-45;
Sayyid Sharīf Gurgānī, Sharḥ al-Mawāqif, vol. 8, pp. 3-4.

[^2]: In this regard, see Al-Ilāhiyyāt fī Madrasat Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

[^3]: It refers to the trans-substantial motion argument initiated and
proved by Ṣadr al-Muta’allihīn. See Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Ṣadr al-Dīn
Shīrāzī and His Transcendent Theosophy: Background, Life and Works
(Tehran: Institute of Humanities and Cultural Studies, 1997), pp. 85-97.
[Trans.]

[^4]: Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism, vol. 5, pp. 91-93.

[^5]: For further information in this regard, see the essay about cause
and effect in volume 3 of Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism.

[^6]: Uṣūl-e Falsafeh wa Rawish-e Realism, vol. 5, pp. 17-18.

[^7]: A. Kitaikarudiski and L. Landau (?), Fīzīk Barāye Hameh (Physics
for All), trans. Muḥammad Yāsīn, pp. 404-409.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 433.

[^9]: John "Jack" Frank Allen (1908-2001): a Canadian-born physicist who
discovered, along with Pyotr Leonidovich Kapitsa and Don Misener,
the superfluid phase of matter in 1937 using liquid helium in the Royal
Society Mond Laboratory in Cambridge, England. [Trans.]

[^10]: Ithbāt-e Wujūd-e Khudā (Proving the Existence of God) written by
40 scholars, trans. Aḥmad Ārām, pp. 18-19.

[^11]: Bertrand Russell (1872 - 1970): a British philosopher,
mathematician and man of letters. Initially a subscriber of idealism, he
broke away in 1898 and eventually became an empiricist. His works
include The Principles of Mathematics (1903), Principia Mathematica (3
vols., 1910-1913) in collaboration with A.N. Whitehead, Marriage and
Morals (1929), Education and the Social Order (1932), An Inquiry into
Meaning and Truth (1940), History of Western Philosophy (1945), and
popularizations such as The ABC of Relativity (1925), as well as his
Autobiography (3 vols., 1967-69). [Trans.]

[^12]: Bertrand Russell, Scientific Worldview, pp. 114-115.


