Free Time
=========

First we ask this question: Is there anything called free time?

We can surely say: No, because man when he finishes a work, will be
engaged in another. It may be less or more important than before. Even
sports, itself, is an unproductive work though it is productive in its
psychological output for a player.

Islam - as we mentioned previously - gives man the time for which he
refreshes and amuses himself and his family and enjoys its pleasures and
delights. It even gives this time more value and importance, because it
is a supporter of the periods of work and worship.

But, our discussion about free time is not that which gives man renewed
energy, rather it is that a wasted time in which the youth not only
scorn their vital and great responsibilities, but also, live in the
state of useless, negative, and wanton time.

Mostly, free time falls into disorder when we waste our time and
neglect its value, whereas, it can be an opportunity for seeking
science, or for learning some new skills, or for correcting wrong
conceptions, or for helping Allah's creatures, or for meeting the needs
of a believer, or to be acquainted with the issues of the Muslim world,
or for developing what we have obtained of previous knowledge, or to
become acquainted with a new friend seeking Allah's pleasure, or to
strengthen an old relationship with a friend, and so on.

Even if an unexploited time is considered out of the scope of age,
because the real age is the age of that farm which was previously
mentioned in a Hadith, is it wise for a man who owns a wide land arable
for agriculture, to leave it unplanted?!

In this regard, one scientist says: I read more and if I become tired
of reading, I take a rest by reading. He explains this by saying: I
incline to reading scientific books, but when I feel exhausted of
reading, I turn to read literary or history books in order to ease the
tiredness of scientific reading.

Look at those who are around you. Do not you respect the one who stands
before a shop waiting for his turn, or at a station waiting for a bus,
or in a clinic holding a book in his hand and reading it?!

Do not you respect a man going on his way remembering a poem which he
memorized before, or a verse of the Qur'an he does not want to forget,
or repeats some glorifications which increase and strengthen his
relation with Allah, the Most High?!

Do not you show respect for a person who holds in his pocket a small
notebook in which he records a proverb or a saying he read in a
newspaper, or an information he got by chance, or an important number he
found here and there which helps him in quoting what he says, or he
records an idea which comes suddenly to his mind and is afraid to miss
or forget it?

Surely, telephones now exist which can record messages, and wall
secretaries are placed in front of houses to be used by visitors to
record their notes in case of not seeing the owner of the house. These
are clear evidences for the attention of the owner of the house as to
what has happened during his absence.

A person who daily reads newspapers; follows newscasts and visits sites
on the Internet or is acquainted with what happens around himself in
this ever-changing world, is a man who is careful not to cast his time
aside like a disregarded paper into a wastebasket. He feels that he is
cut off from the world if he does not keep up on the movement of the
world, and if his steady vigile is stopped, surely he feels loneliness
as if he has lost something precious.

The people of an American town discovered that an illiterate woman
learned how to read and write late and without a teacher. When she was
asked about this, she answered: Indeed, I felt the loss of precious time
that I had missed, therefore, I tried to compensate for it and, thus, I
used to eavesdrop and steal a look at my small daughter while she was
studying and, with her, I used to savour all her lessons.

Thus, we should eliminate the following expressions from the dictionary
of our life:

- I missed the train!
- What is the use of working now. Indeed, I have lost various
opportunities, and chance always opposes me.
- Many people preceded me in that endeavor and I have no place, now.
- I tried and I failed. There is no reason to repeat the same
experimentâ€¦etc.

We should replace the above mentioned expressions with the following:
There is always time to work before death.

But, regarding "compensation of wasted time"; this term is not correct.
Because wasted time cannot be compensated, nor can it be delayed.
Wishing the period of youth to come back after passing away is a false
desire which is captured only by poets and there is no possibility to
achieve it in reality. Nevertheless, it is possible for youth to avoid
additional negligence, and excessive loss by regretting and utilizing
what remains of their lives, and not to cause their lives to be a
plunder of play, levity and idle relaxation.

Through experiments, it is proved that laziness, unemployment and
leisure factors cause deviations and corruption. In this respect, a poet
says:

"Surely, youth, spare time and luxury are causes of corruption for man
and what corruption they are." We should, also, differentiate between
spare time, in which there is no use, and a dedication to review,
self-criticize, and be alone with one's self, or to take permission in
order to renew one's activity. This is a part of work, not free time. It
is something desirable due to its being the time which distributes more
abundance to other times.


**Utilizing Free Time**

Leisure is defined by those concerned as free time and in which one is
not connected by the necessity of achieving a specified goal. It is the
time in which man frees himself from any commitments and necessities of
life, and spends it in any way he wishes. Regarding students and youth,
it includes the period of their summer and winter holidays, week ends,
time and permission out of their working hours, in addition to free time
secured by the era of modern technology.

The following are some suggestions which include some means of
utilizing free time, and we hope that our young men and women will find
in them an assistance to their empty hours:

1- Reading: It has been said that the importance of books has
deteriorated during the past two decades competition with other media
such as: Radio, TV, newspapers, computer, and the net work of
information, but books still keep their value because of the following
reasons:

1. All other competitions depend on them, and the most successful
programs and investigational articles take their knowledge from books
them-selves.

2. The ability of controlling the book, such as: Selecting it, or
borrowing and copying it. It is up to the reader's taste, his desire and
needs to control the kind of requested book in any time and any place.

3. Using a book as a source for writing, and as long as there are
researches and studies, sources and references will not someday be null
and void. Even, we observe that various CD's disks, in reality, are
archived books.

As long as a book has all these values and its importance has decreased
among students and youth to the extent that they turn away from it, it
was still the right of a poet to say:

"I am the one who exchanged books with friends, but, I found no friend
but books."

And we should not forget that the profit we gain from the pleasure of
reading and its advantage cannot be truly appreciated except by those
readers who are fond of books and have established, them, a long
companionship. If we miss this, it is because of being overwhelmed by
thesis and competitions, which we have mentioned before. Among the best
ways to fill leisure time is by diverse and useful reading. In addition,
there are some observations which help in deepening the understanding of
the usefulness of reading.

They are:

1- To read what fulfills our ideological, spiritual and psychological
needs. We should not force ourselves on to be against reading like a man
who forces himself away from food and we should not desert books on the
plea that we lack the dedication to reading, because once separation
occurs, it is difficult to unite it again.

2- Always keep your pen with you while reading in order to take some
notes on some concepts or opinions which may help you later. You can,
also, underline some important concepts or mark them with a phosphorous
pen so that you can review them easily without the need to read the
whole book.

3- Reading may open for you, unexpected ideas in a book, so, do not
miss them and write them down immediately, because they may benefit you
one day in your ideological, cultural, and literary projects in the
future.

4- It is better to depend on cards of research in writing down your
information including the name of the source from which you cited it,
the author's name, the date of its edition and the number of the page.

Nevertheless, reading does not only to apply books, but also, includes
newspapers, magazines and journals and what is daily offered by
newsstands. They present news and information items about the different
affairs and the fields of life of which no young man or woman who wants
to live fully their age can avoid. In this regard, a Prophetic hadith
says: "The one who is well acquainted with the affairs of his time, is
secure against afflictions, conspiracies, and confusions."

One of the fruits of reading is that of writing. During leisure time,
young men and women can practice their hobbies, such as writing, be it
an article or story, or poetry and so on, and present them to people of
experience. By this way, they can improve their writing ability.

**2-Attending Lectures and Seminars:**

One of the useful ways to fill our free time is to become acquainted
with cultural and scientific weekly programs and literary gatherings.
What is presented of lectures and seminars can help us enrich our
knowledge and develop our ability in dialogue, criticism and diverse
opinions.

And, if we participate in putting forward a question to a lecturer or
the participants in a seminar, surely we will make use of it and benefit
others as well. In this respect, a hadith says: "Three are rewarded: The
questioner, the questioned and the listener of them," and thus, our
social and cultural personality develops and thrives.

Our observation of the way of asking a question, the way of dialogue,
interposing and directing a question, teach us the manner of dialogue
and how to pay attention to points which stir further discussions of
subjects or problems. It is better to take our diary with us to write
down the most prominent opinions introduced in a lecture or a seminar so
that we may keep it as a cultural subject which may benefit us one day
in time of need.

In these meetings and sessions, we may, also, become acquainted with a
great number of educated people, writers, authors, and personalities who
participate in such cultural, ideological and literary activities.


**3- Listening and Watching:**

The four mass media (radio, T.V., cinema and theater) are not only
means of play and amusement, but also, they are instruments of
education. An education through them may be performed intentionally or
unintentionally, i.e., it comes directly or indirectly which obligates
us to distinguish and diagnose it from audible and visible items.

What is shown and broadcasted through these media, such as, local
subjects and other imported programs, are not all useful for listening
and watching; some are useful and some are harmful; while yet others are
poisonous.

Before these double edged weapons, we should have a strong and
intelligent sense in order to separate the correct from wrong, and the
well from the unwell, otherwise, we will be victims of such
informational schemes which are directed by specialized authorities,
biased and purposeful agencies and net works.

And do not be surprised if we know that there are educational,
informational and social scientists, and psychologists who present, for
us, their audible and visible goods covered by beautiful papers, but, in
reality, they are harmful in Muslim markets. They often aim at invading
our houses because the barriers - by the development of these means and
their advancement - are indeed dissolved and cause the information media
to enter every house without asking permission.

These equipments, developed very quickly and greatly in the form of
astronautics, video tapes, cassettes, and disks which are cheap and
simply transported, but they are heavy in presentation and burdens, and
cannot be dominated by remote control. But, we, as Muslims, must control
them with our desires, education, cultural, social and religious
backgrounds which do not permit the watching of dissolute, profligate
and trite films because they do not address anything except sexual and
material desires and, sometimes, they intentionally aim at corrupting
morals, distorting concepts, and turning values upside down.

And because these equipments are double-edged weapons i.e. they carry
both evil and good inside their propagations, it is necessary to use
their good things and avoid their evils. An example of the process of
filling temporary leisure time would like the process of filling up
intestinal emptiness; is it wise to enter everything into our stomach
for allaying our hunger even if it is dirty, poisonous, dangerous and
threatens our health, and safety?!

As a result of this, it is incumbent on us - onlookers and listeners -
to safeguard, as much as possible, our characteristics, identity and our
cultural and religious obligations. Therefore, we should judge and
evaluate what we hear and what we see according to our ideology,
culture, education and experience, otherwise, we will be turned into
prisoners of these media which will lead us to dangerous crossroads.

Submissive sitting, for long hours before a T.V. motivates numbness and
wasting of time and which causes disorder in the routine of other daily
programs and perhaps causes ideological paralysis. Thus, it is
recommended for each of us to distribute the hours of his/her watching
in a purposed and selective manner.

The psychologists confirm that television - in itself- does not create
the problems of aggression and deviation, but, it is created by
miseducation by one's own family, relatives and friends. So, aggressive
children and youth choose aggressive programs to support their former
directions and television becomes a supporter towards deviation, and
violence.

And though these media have numerous advantages which mostly meet each
other, some researchers have studied both advantages and disadvantages
of television. The following are some disadvantages that they
diagnosed:

1.Killing time, wasting age, and engaging both individuals and a nation
(ummah) against performing their significant responsibilities.

2.Transfering irregular and deviated environments to our society, and
imposing evil and degraded moral patterns on people.

3. Building a corrupted culture in the minds of the youth and showing
the dissolute at the forefront of a society as if it is the norm.

4. Misrepresenting the contemporary affairs of the Muslims and
demolishing of the obstacles that exist between us (Muslims) and the
enemies of our ummah, represented by the Jewish Zionists.

But, still, we do not deprive ourselves of useful radio and T.V.
programs which include scientific, cultural, political, literary,
social, economical and health programs, particularly those programs
which present the problems and afflictions from which our society
suffers and which are discussed by experts, specialists, and
professionals.

**4- The Computer and Information Network:**

When computers came into existence, they not only filled up the free
time of the youth, but also, occupied their time completely to the
extent that they have no associate nor rival. Indeed, they exceeded all
the means of entertainment and play before it. A computer, in this
respect, is like other media. It can be used for the benefit of people
or can be changed into a tool of corruption and destruction.

It is unjust for this active and brilliant invention, which has
numerous capabilities, to be used only as a tool of entertainment and
play. In it, there are programs prepared for teaching accounting,
business administration, and the principles of driving a car, or
learning grammar of a certain language. In addition to this, there are
various other services which are too numerous to mention them, like the
fields of typing, handwriting, designing, layout, drawing, painting and
others. And the programs on the internet are wider in their content
regarding science, information, politics, and culture, as well as, in
different fields of life.

From the blue screen of the computer man become educated by its high
degree of flexibility, speed of processing data and the capability of
diverse coverage: Geographical, theological, social, development of
positive thinking, deepening of the concept of participation,
non-acceptance of intuitions (self-evident truth), negative convincing
and not surrendering to simplicity, all are blessings but at the same
time foster indignation.

It is upon us to make use of such blessings in the best way, otherwise,
we will be afflicted with its indignation, particularly regarding the
imported games which bear, in their undisclosed contents information and
morals which differ from our Islamic morals and customs.

Therefore, it is obligatory for us to have spontaneous and supervisory
over setting certain conditions which should be observed in such games.
Among them are: They should bear human characteristics and have
scientific value. They should be diversified and not be only for
entertainment. They should not create enmity among the players, nor
contradict the instructions of our religion, morals and customs.

However, setting long hours in front of this equipment, which has
severe temptation exceeds television in its open and extended hours of
sitting and which has made some countries, like Sweden, to specify the
age of permission for using such games. They become concerned with the
necessity of not introducing the young to the temptations of these games
for fear of their education and the specified time in which they are
allowed to use the computer for the sake of entertainment.

Indeed, the harm of being addicted to the computer as a tool of
entertainment is not less than wasting time watching a well-known game
of football or being engaged in watching videos and television. Among
the dangers of this invention, which has become a member of our family,
is the decreasing of our circle of friends or social relations. The
youth think that this invention has already achieved their wish and they
are in no need of friends, but, this becomes far from the reality of a
society and people. Even the dialogue sites of the network of the
Internet cannot achieve the same advantages and medical benefits which
we gain from direct friendly meetings in face to face visits.

We should, also, know that even those feelings, and emotions and
excitements which we get through the computer screen cannot be a
complete substitute for direct meetings which contain warm feelings and
continuity, activity and close acquaintance with others. Magnetized
disks - with the exception of their importance - will not replace books
which are considered our companion in everywhere; at home, in school, in
the car, in the airplane, on a ship, etc. The same thing concerning
personal exchanges on the network sites will not be a perfect substitute
for direct friendly visits whatever the attractive service or
qualifications they add to it by its producers and propagandists.

**5- Learning Skills:**

Among the affairs which become available and within the reach of most
young men and women are instructional, technical and handicraft
institutions which offer practical lessons in different skills, such as:
Driving, programming, trade, smithery, electricity, and handicrafts such
as: Tailoring, domestic works, first aid, learning foreign languages and
others. These skills enable the youth to have a better life and form a
safe employment at their free time, particularly during summer
holidays.

Learning one or more of these skills, not only fills one's time, but
also, pours its practical advantage on the personality of young men or
women who will obtain fundamental knowledge in professions or
handicrafts which concern them at the present and in the future. These
skills are regarded among the distinctions and bases of superiority and
are for the benefit of the one who requests a work or a certain
professions specially when there is a competition. In this respect, a
Prophetic saying (hadith) says: "Every man's worth is in his attainments
(what he does proficiently)"

And having experience in these fields benefits a young man or woman
even outside the area of specialization. For example, learning a foreign
language is useful in having dialogue with foreigners, reading books
written in that language or having correspondence in it, and, also,
reading intern reports of drugs or doctor's prescriptions or brochures
which are used to learn how to run equipments.

On the other hand, among the best and the noblest skills to be learned
by a Muslim young man and woman is reading the Holy Qur'an, its
recitation and memorizing a part or parts of it or the whole Holy Qur'an
if possible. And if there is no a special course for learning and
memorizing the Qur'an, it is better to use cassettes or laser disks
which enable one to learn the initial principles of reading the Holy
Qur'an and its recitation. Indeed, there are eminent reciters of the
Qur'an among the Muslim generations who depend on this way of memorizing
it perfectly.

Finally, it is better to know that any obtained skill needs practice
and continuity in order to be developed and perfected. In this regard, a
proverb says: "Practice leads towards perfection."

**6- The Means of Relaxations and Enter-tainment:**

Since a long time ago, Imam Ali (a.s.) said: "The hearts get disgusted
as bodies get disgusted; so look for beautiful, wise sayings for them."
'Tarif' in Arabic means 'newly acquired' because every new thing has its
special pleasure, flavor and is a motive for the continuity of an action
with great activity, unlike a tedious manner which brings for man
tiredness, weariness and alienation.

Have not you tried that personally? When you change the direction in
which you walk every day towards your institution or your work center or
when you change the decoration of your room in which you live, even
through simple technical touches like changing the position of some
furniture, or when you change your clothes though they are cheap, do not
you feel psychologically different for it. Simplicity in itself may be
an art which is taste.

Imam Ali (a.s.) is, also, quoted to have said: "Hearts are imbued with
passion and the power of advancing and retreating.

Therefore, approach them for action at a time when they are passionate
and when they are in a mood for advancing, because if hearts are forced
(to do a thing) they will be blinded." In this presentation, he (a.s.)
offers us a new way of amusement which began to be depended on not only
in schools and institutions, but also, in factories, industries and
offices. Experiments proved that a worker who amuses himself during work
in one way or another will surely attend to his work with an open and
high spirit (mentally; psychologically; spiritually) and as a result, it
will be reflected, not only on the quantity and quality of his
production, but also, on his relationship with his colleagues in his
work environment.

Islam equalizes between man's needs and does not eliminate this human
need. So, it is better to give a part of our time to amusement whose
procedures become diverse and numerous. The following are some of
them:

a- Sports Amusement: Its branches and colors are various and
continuously increasing. The most famous one is football which is useful
to health; psychologically, socially and bodily, and swimming and other
kinds of amusement. b- Artistic Amusement: Like practicing the hobbies
of painting, drawing, handwriting, sculpture, punching, and handicrafts,
such as: Sewing, embroidery, making flowers, decorating houses, and the
collecting of stamps.

c- Social Amusement: This includes exchanging visits which is among its
well-known procedures and of which Islam greatly encourages,
correspondence, calling each other by telephone, celebrating beautiful
occasions, participating in cooperative activities for the purpose of
strengthening bounds of relationship among the faithful, in addition to
taking long and short trips which remove most of the states of bodily,
psychological and intellectual tiredness, and exhaustion.

d- Tourist Amusement: This includes paying visits to sacred places, and
beautiful archeological, historical and tourist areas which give both
psychological and cultural advantages.

It is worthy of our observation that amusement - in all its forms -
does not mean to escape from the pressures of life, as some may think,
but, it is a readiness and preparedness to face it once more and not as
described by others as the discharging of additional energy which has no
aim, rather, it is a useful and safe investment of those powers at both
levels; individuals and groups.

The following are some conditions of amusement encouraged by Islam:

1. It should be free from any corruption, harm, falsehood, wrong and
forbiddance.

2. It should be free from any extravagance and pre-occupation which may
waste time, all of it. It is recommended that out of any amusement and
investment of free time should arise a particular or general advantage,
because it is dislikable for a young man or woman to be empty and
unoccupied in either the action of this world or the action of the next
world.

On a very hot summer day and in the city of Madinah, one of those who
used to plot against Islam and its leaders wanted to degrade Muhammad
al-Baqir (a.s.), the grandson of Imam Hussein bin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.), whom he saw working on his farm at the height of midday and
said: 'You are an old man from the elders of the tribe of Quraish and at
this hour and under such circumstances, you are seeking worldly gains.
What if death comes upon you while you are in this condition?" The Imam
(a.s.) answered him:

"O Allah! Should death come to me in this state, it will come to me
while I am doing something pleasing to Allah, to spare myself begging
from you and other people. I would only fear death if it came to me
while I was sinning against Allah?"!! Indeed, the Imam's answer is a
precious lesson which has to be taken into consideration by the Muslim
youth.


**Sleeping and Staying up at Night**

No doubt, sleep is a natural need of man. Allah, the Glorified, granted
us this glorious blessing in having relaxation, and sleep during night
hours in order to renew and revive our activity and energy after being
exhausted by the difficulties and the deeds of the day. Without sleep,
surely, we would have been destroyed by the continuity of work in the
day and night. Therefore, it is considered as means of amusement for
one's self, and body, especially for those who work hard and are greatly
exhausted in their day.

But, it is noted that some young people, male or female, may misuse -
sometimes uninten-tionally - these blessings. They stay up late at night
and sleep late into the day on the plea of having nothing to do or they
say, to pass the night awake is beautiful, so they kill their time with
empty and talkative discourses. In this regard, a Prophetic hadith says:
"Allah dislikes a young man / woman who sleeps much," i.e., the one who
increases sleeping for long hours exceeds the natural need of man.

On one side, some covetous people make use of their time and reduce
their time of sleep, depending on the proverb which says "Whoever seeks
superiority, should spend his nights (in doing some activities)", and
are satisfied with the least amount of hours of sleep. On the other
side, some young men or women yield themselves to long hours of sleep
without paying attention to their age and how it passes in this slumber
to the extent that their amount of sleep exceeds their working hours and
production.

And passing the night awake, if it does not benefit man and those
around him; nor there is worship in it, nor seeking knowledge, nor
having a productive action in it, will surely have, not only, bad
consequences on the youth, but also, its disadvantages will become more
than its advantages.

The principles of balance - which was mentioned earlier - is useful for
application and implementation of any affair in life, because Islam is
the religion of both non-extravagance and non-negligence, i.e., it does
not confirm either prodigality or negligence in any thing. In this
regard, the Almighty, Allah says: "And thus We made you a nation justly
balanced." (Holy Qur'an (2: 143)


**A Final Word**

This is the glass of our age before us - Allah's deposit upon our
neck - so, how will we get it back?

Is it full of good or is it full of evil? Is it empty and unoccupied?
Or is it smashed, broken into pieces and spent on the pavements of play,
entertainment, fun, relaxation, chatter and the meetings of
unemployment?

Shall we use what has been said by some scholars who make use of their
time more than others when they say: "We want to leave our impressions
on time, and never let it leave its impressions on us."

One scholar expressed this in his saying: "The regret of great men
reminds us to elevate our life and when we leave this world, we will
leave behind the results of our mistakes on the sands of time."

The following are a collection of proverbs that help us to achieve the
above statements:

- "If you sleep on flowers in your youth, surely you will sleep on
thorns in your old age."
- "If one is lazy in his youthfulness, surely, he will be a beggar in
his oldness."
- "All the flowers of the future are a result of the seeds which you
plant today."
- "Day and night have an effect upon you, therefore, do have an effect
on them."
- "Do not fear a slow advancement, but, beware of standing immobile."
- "The present world is the plantation for the Hereafter."
- "Time is like a sword, if you do not cut it, it will cut you."
- "Unemployment is the mother of all vices."
- "The opportunity of a lazy man, languishes with him."
- "To miss an opportunity brings about grief."
- "This world is a passage, while the next world is the place of
dwelling; so, take your passage (as a way by performing good deeds) to
your abode.


