Preface
=======

In today’s world, we find people with intense and diverse religious
beliefs. Some of them are gifted orators. Others are writers who are apt
at transforming their thoughts to exquisite expressions. There are still
others, who lost in their own thoughts, can be easily impressed by any
misinformation. They make all efforts to justify their false beliefs.
However, the counterfeit and false can never be transformed into genuine
and fair. Thus, deviation from truth becomes their as well as their
proponents’ destiny.

The example of Ibn Khaldun in this context is quite relevant. He was
skeptical about the belief in Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s). However, the Muslim
world at large agrees that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had twelve
successors. The first of whom is ‘Ali (a.s.) and the remaining eleven
are from the children of ‘Ali (a.s.) and Fatimah (s.a.). The twelfth of
them will be Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) who will fill this earth will justice and
equity just as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has made many such prophecies.

Another example is that of Haafez Jalaluddin Suyuti who displays his
startling ignorance by enumerating these twelve successors thus: The
four rightly guided Caliphs, four Caliphs from Bani Umayyah and two from
Bani Abbas; he considers the last two as unknown.

But reliable traditions establish that the twelfth one will rise in the
last age and will fill the earth with absolute justice and equity.
Another authentic tradition accepted by all Sunni Scholars is: “Anyone
who dies without recognizing the Imam of his time dies the death of
ignorance”. Such evident traditions that cannot be rejected are then
easily subjected to misinterpretation, which in turn lead to baseless
and absurd justifications. In the horde of these justifications, the
feeble voice of the one crying for his Imam (a.t.f.s.) is drowned. The
voice that directs towards “Hazrat Hujjat Ibn al-Hasan (a.t.f.s.)” the
last leader of the oppressed is subdued. As a result, doubts arise not
only among the deniers but also among the believers.

This book is thus meant to address the doubts that have invaded the
hearts of those who are skeptical and also to respond to the queries
that may arise in the minds of others. It’s an effort to help in
protecting ourselves from the present sinful and corrupt atmosphere. At
the same time, it is also for strengthening our recognition of our last
Imam (a.t.f.s.).

The life of this world is short and will soon come to an end. However,
it will be subjected to a strict reckoning in the Hereafter. None can
escape this accounting. Only the one who will be under the pleasant
protection of his Imam (a.t.f.s.) will be rescued.

O Lord! Keep us steadfast on the belief of Your last Hujjat (a.t.f.s.)
till our last breadth. Ameen!


