Question 10
===========

What is the proof of the birth of Imam Mahdi (a.s.)? Whether any one has
seen him after his birth?

**Reply:**

According to both the Shi’a as well as Sunni historians, Imam e Zamaana
(a.t.f.s.) is already born. This is a well established historical fact.

For example, the famous Sunni historian ‘Ali Ibn Masoodi says: “In 260
A.H. during the reign of Motamid Abassi, Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Ja’far Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Husain
Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) expired. His age at the time of his death
was 29 years. He is the father of the awaited Mahdi.”[^1]

Shaikh Sulaiman Qunduzi says: “According to the authentic reports, Qa’im
was born in the night of the 15th of Shabaan in the year 255A.H. in the
city of Samarra.”[^2]

misguidance and corruption. They knew that he will be the son of Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). They conspired to extinguish this light.
Therefore, right from the day of his birth, his whereabouts were kept
secret. So, the people in general could not set eyes on him. But some of
the companions of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) had the honor of visiting
him. Few of them have been recorded as follows:

1) Hakimah Khatoon: She was the daughter of Imam Muhammad al-Taqi
(a.s.), the sister of Imam ‘Ali Naqi al-Hadi (a.s.) and the aunt of Imam
Hasan al- Askari (a.s.). She saw Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.) in the night of his
birth itself. Two slave girls Naseem and Maariyah narrate: “When the
child was born, he prostrated on the ground and raising the index finger
towards the sky, he sneezed and said:

“Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Universe and blessings of Allah be
upon Muhammad and his progeny.”[^3]

2) Abu Basir: He was a servant who said: “I presented myself before
Sahebuz Zaman (a.s.) while he was in the cradle. I went near him and did
salaam.” Hazrat (a.s.) asked: “Did you recognize me?” He replied: “You
are my elder and my leader and the son of my Imam...” Then Imam
(a.t.f.s.) said:

“I am the last of the successors and through me difficulties shall be
lifted from my family and my Shi’as.”[^4]

3) Saad Ibn Abdullah e Qummi: According to numerous reports, he went to
Saamarra for visiting Hazrat Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). He saw a child
who was like a luminous moon. On asking about him, he was replied:

“He is Mahdi, the Qa’im of Aale Muhammad (a.t.f.s.).”[^5]

4) A group of Shi’as: Once a group of 40 Shi’as came in the presence of
the 11th Imam, Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). They asked him to introduce
the divine proof after him. Imam (a.s.) accepted their request and
introduced to them his son. He emerged as a full moon, resembling his
father, Imam Askari (a.s.), who said:

“After me, this son of mine is your Imam and my Caliph among you. You
all obey him. Don't scatter away from his leadership lest you and your
religion be destroyed. Also, know that you shall not see him again after
today till a very long time. Therefore, you all should obey his
representative.”[^6]

5) Abu Sahal Naubakhti: He chronicles: “When he was seriously ill, Imam
Askari (a.s.) called for his son to be brought near him. Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.), who was a child then, responded accordingly. The son saluted
the father. I looked at him. His colour was shining white. His hair was
rolled up and curly. His teeth were wide. Imam Hasan (a.s.) addressed
him as, “O Chief of the people of his house”. He then asked his help in
consuming the medicine which was brewing next to him. He assisted
accordingly. Imam Askari (a.s.) performed ablutions and said to his son:

“O my son! You are the Mahdi and the proof of Allah on the earth.”[^7]

[^1]: Muruj uz Zahab, Masoodi, vol. 4, p. 199

[^2]: Yanaabee’ al-Mawaddah, vol. 3, p. 114

[^3]: Ilzaamun Naasib, Ayatullah Shaikh Haaeri al-Yazdi, vol. 1, p. 340

[^4]: Kashful Ghummah, Allama Erbeli (a.r.), vol. 2, p. 499

[^5]: Ilzamun Naasib, vol. 1, p. 342

[^6]: ‘Usman Ibn Saeed’, Ilzaamun Naasib, vol. 1, p. 341

[^7]: Ilzaamun Naasib, vol. 1, p. 351


