Question 11
===========

Why did Imam Mahdi (a.s.) come out in the open, in spite of his many
enemies, at the time of the martyrdom of his father?

**Reply:**

As has been explained previously that due to the exceptional conditions
of that time, except a very select group none had seen Imam Mahdi
(a.s.). These selective meetings continued till the day of the demise of
the eleventh Imam (a.s.). That is, the eight of Rabee’ al- Awwal, 260
A.H. On this day, perhaps due to four reasons, Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
revealed himself to all and was present in the burial ceremonies of his
honourable father, Imam Askari (a.s.) along with his assembly of
relatives. These possible reasons were as follows:

1) Only an Imam can lead the funeral prayers of an Imam. For observing
this divine practice, it was necessary for Imam Mahdi (a.s.) to reveal
himself and perform the funeral prayers in front of the bier of his
father.

2) To prevent any representative of the Caliph from reciting the funeral
prayers over the holy bier of the eleventh Imam (a.s.), announcing the
termination of the flow of Imamat and introducing the tyrant Abbaside
Caliph as the Imam of the Shiites.

3) To prevent corruption from entering the proceedings of the matter of
Imamat. Jaafar, the son of Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) and the brother of
Imam Askari (a.s.) had an evil stratagem to claim the position of
Imamat. He had come with an intention to lead the funeral prayers on the
bier of the martyred Imam (a.s.).

4) For verifying the continuation of the true chain of Imamat and
Islamic Mastership. To announce to the believers in Imamat that after
Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), there is the twelfth Imam responsible for
spiritual successorship, the Islamic message and religious as well as
worldly mastership. He has been born and is very much present.[^1]

The Abbasids now knew that this is the era when, the annihilator of the
oppressors, the subsider of the tyrants, and the avenger of the blood of
the oppressed has been born and is very much present amongst them.

[^1]: Khurshid al-Maghrib, Muhammad Ridha’ Hakimi, p. 24


