Question 12
===========

Describe the details of the conditions of the birth of Imam Az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.)?

**Reply:**

Hakimah Khatoon, the daughter of Imam Muhammad Taqi al-Javaad (a.s.),
and the aunt of Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) narrates the conditions of
the birth of Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.) as follows:

Abu Muhammad Imam Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (al-Askari) (a.s.) sent for me and
said:  
 “O Aunt! Break your fast with us tonight. This is the eve of 15th of
Shabaan and Allah, the High, will bring forth the Hujjah on this night.
He will be his Proof on His earth.”

Lady Hakimah says that she asked him: “Who is his mother?” He (a.s.)
replied: “Narjis”.

On this she said: “May Allah make me your ransom! There is no sign (of
pregnancy) in her.” He (a.s.) said: “It is as I tell you”

Lady Hakimah continues, “I came and when I greeted and sat, she came to
take off my shoes and wished me, saying:

“My lady! How are you this evening?” “Rather, you are my lady,” said I,
“and the lady of my household”.

She turned my word down and said, “What is this dear aunt?” “Dear child!
Allah, the Exalted, will grant you tonight a boy, the master of this
world and the hereafter.”

She sat and felt shy. When I finished the evening breaking the fast, I
went to bed and slept. It was in the middle of the night when I got up
to perform prayers. I finished my prayers while Narjis was still
sleeping and there was still no sign (of pregnancy) in her. I sat up
performing the post prayers supplications and then I went to bed. All of
a sudden I woke up. She was still asleep. She then woke up and performed
prayers.

Lady Hakimah said: “As doubts arose in my mind, Abu Muhammad (Imam Hasan
al-Askari) (a.s.) called out, “Do not haste, O aunt, the affair has come
near.” I recited the Surahs Alif Laam Mim Sajdah and Yasin. As I was
doing that she woke up suddenly.

I rushed towards her and read the name of Allah on her and asked “Are
you alright?” “Yes” she replied. “Pull yourself together and gather your
heart. It will be as I told you”.

Lady Hakimah continues: “And then I fainted as parturition seized her. I
was brought back to my senses by my Master (a.s.).

I removed the sheet from him, and there he was, prostrating on the earth
with his forehead, palms, knees and toes. I pulled him to myself and he
was pure and clean. Abu Muhammad (a.s.) called on me:

“Bring my son to me, aunt.” I took his son to him. He put his hands
under his thighs and back and put the infant’s feet on his chest. He
then put his tongue in his mouth and touched his eyes, ears and joints
with his hands. “My son, speak”, he said.

The infant said:

“I bear witness that there is no deity other than Allah, He is the One
without a partner, and I bear witness that Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is
Allah’s Messenger.”

He then sent salutations upon Amirul Momeneen (a.s.) and the other Imams
(a.s.) till he reached his father and then stopped on account of
reverence.

Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, “Take him to his mother so he may greet her
and then bring him back to me”. I took him to his mother and he greeted
her. Then I brought him back and put him in the sitting room. He then
said, “Aunt, come to us on the seventh day.”

Lady Hakimah says, “In the morning, I came to offer my greetings to Abu
Muhammad (a.s.). I removed the curtain looking for my Master. On failing
to find him, I asked his father, “May I be your ransom, where is my
Master?”

He (a.s.) said, “We entrusted him to the one that the mother of Moses
(a.s.) had entrusted him to.” When it was the seventh day, I came and
greeted and sat down. He (a.s.) said, “Bring my son to me.” I brought my
master wrapped in a diaper. He did to his son what he had done earlier.
Then he put his tongue into his mouth, as if he was feeding him milk or
honey. Then he said, “Talk, O my son.”

The blessed infant said, “I bear witness that there is no deity other
than Allah.” He then praised and beseeched blessings for Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) and Amir ul-Mu’minin ‘Ali (a.s.), and every one of the Imams
(a.s.) till he reached his father. Then he recited this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُرِيدُ أَنْ نَمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ وَنُمَكِّنَ
لَهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِيَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا
مِنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We desire to confer kindness upon those who have been enfeebled
on the earth and make them Imams and make them heirs and give them power
on earth and show Pharaoh and Haman and their armies what they have been
averting.” (Surah Qasas, 28: 5-6)*** [^1]

Other narrations mention that, “When Hazrat Saaheb ul Amr (a.s.) was
born, a light beamed from his forehead towards the heights of the
heaven. I saw white birds descending from the sky, rubbing their wings
on his head and body and then flying off. Hazrat Imam Hasan al- Askari
(a.s.) told me:

“O aunt! Bring my son to me. ...... On his arm, the Qur’anic verse was
written:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ ۚ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ
زَهُوقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Truth has arrived and falsehood vanished. Surely, falsehood was
bound to vanish.” (Surah Bani Israael, 17: 81)*** [^2]

“Sahl al-Shaybani narrates, ‘Bishr ibn Sulaiman al- Nakhkhaas, a
descendant of Abu Ayyub Ansari and a devotee of Abu al-Hasan (a.s.) and
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and their neighbor at Saamarraa, Kafur, the servant
came to me and said, “Our Master Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad (a.s.)
is calling you.’ I went to the Master and as I sat in front of him, he
said:

“O Bishr, you are from the descendants of the Ansaar. This devotion is
your legacy, which each coming generation of yours inherits from your
preceding generation. You are the trusted ones of us Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).
I am elevating you and ennobling you by an excellence through which you
will surpass all Shiites in devotion, by sharing a secret with you and
sending you to purchase a certain bondmaid.”

He then wrote a very fine letter in Roman script and Roman language and
imprinted his seal on it. He took out a yellow cloth wherein were two
hundred gold coins. He said, “Take this and go to Baghdad.” He told me
to go to the crossing of the Euphrates on noon of such and such day and
when I reach the boats of the captives, he said:

“You will see bondmaids in them. You will find buyers working for the
procurers of the Abbasids and a small group from the Arab youths. When
you see that keep an eye on a man called Umar ibn Yazid al-Nakhkhas from
a distance all day long, until a bondmaid with the described qualities
is brought to the buyers.”

... At that moment go to Amr Ibn Yazid al- Nakhkhas and tell him you
have a kind-hearted letter from a certain man of nobility, which he has
written in Roman language and in Roman script, describing therein his
benevolence, his fidelity, his excellence, and his generosity, so she
may discern from it the character of its author. Should she be
interested in him and choose him, then I am his representative in buying
her from you.”

Bishr Ibn Sulayman says, “I did all that which my Master Abu al-Hasan
(a.s.) had ordered me to do with respect to the bondmaid. When she saw
the epistle, she cried profusely and said to Amr Ibn Yazid, “Sell me to
the author of this letter.” She took the solemnest of oaths that should
he refuse to sell her to him, she will take her life.

I negotiated the price with the dealer until it settled exactly on the
amount of dinars my Master had given me. The money being sufficient, I
took the bondmaid, who was extremely happy and joyous. I returned with
her to my residence in Baghdad. She was very restless until she took out
from her pocket the letter of our Master. She would kiss it and put it
on her eyes and place it on her cheeks and touch it to her body.
Astonished, I said, “You are kissing a letter whose author is unknown to
you!”

“O unaware of the position of the progeny of Prophets (a.s.),” she
responded. “Lend me your ears and empty your heart for my words. I am
Malika, the daughter of Yashua, son of the Caesar of Rome. My mother is
from the descendants of the disciples (Hawaariyyoon) of Jesus, and her
lineage goes back to the successor of Jesus, Sham’oon. I will narrate to
you the wonderful story. My grandfather, the Caesar (of Rome), wanted me
to marry his nephew when I was a thirteen years of age.

So, he gathered in his palace three hundred priests and monks from the
descendants of the Hawaariyyoon, and from their men of stature seven
hundred men. He gathered four thousand men from the commanders of the
army and officers of the military and leaders of the armed forces and
chiefs of the tribes. He erected a throne from the dearest of his
riches, which was studded with varieties of jewels and was raised over
forty steps.

When his nephew climbed, the crosses were fixed about, the bishops took
their stands in great reverence, and the pages of the Bible were opened,
suddenly the crosses collapsed from the top and hit the ground. The
pillars of the throne crumbled and crashed onto the floor. My
grandfather’s nephew, who had risen over the throne, fell down and
became unconscious. The colours of the bishops changed and their chests
trembled. Their leader said to my grandfather, ‘Please excuse me from
facing this evil, which forebodes the demise of the Christian religion
and the regal creed.’

“My grandfather took this as an evil omen and said to the bishops,
‘Erect these scaffolds, raise the crosses and bring the brother of this
deceased man, whose dreams have been ruined, so I may marry him to this
young girl; so the evil of his dead brother may go away through his
good-fortune.'

“When they did that, the same thing happened to the second prospective
groom as had happened to the first. People dispersed. My grandfather the
Caesar stood in great distress and entered the quarters of the
womenfolk. I dropped the curtains and the same night dreamt that Prophet
Jesus (a.s.), Sham’un (a.s.) and a number of disciples (Hawaariyyoon)
had gathered at my grandfather’s palace. They had installed a pulpit of
light that was defying the heavens in height. It was the same spot where
my grandfather had installed his throne.

At this, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), his son in law and successor the Prince of
the Believers (a.s.) and a number of his sons (a.s.) entered. Prophet
Jesus (a.s.) went forward and embraced him. Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) said to
him, ‘O Ruhallah, I have come to you to propose to your successor
Sham’un for his daughter Malika for this son of mine’, pointing towards
his son Abu Muhammad (Imam Hasan al-Askari) (a.s.), the son of the
writer of this epistle. Prophet Jesus (a.s.) looked at Sham’un (a.s.)
and said, ‘The greatest honor has come to you. Let your relation be
bonded with the relation of the house of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).’

“Sham’un said, ‘It will be my honor to do so.’ He climbed the pulpit.
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) performed the rituals and married me to his son.
Prophet Jesus (a.s.), the sons of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and the disciples
bore witness. When I woke up, I was scared to report this to my father
or grandfather, fearing they will kill me. I kept this a secret and did
not reveal it to them. Meanwhile, my heart longed for Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) so much that I forsook eating and drinking. I became weak and
became lean and sickly. There was no physician in the cities of Rome
(modern day Italy) that my grandfather did not consult for my treatment.
When despair overwhelmed him, he said to me, ‘O solace of my heart, do
you have any wish that I may fulfil it?’”

I said, ‘Grandfather, I see the doors of relief shut on me. However, if
you save the Muslim captives in your prison torture, remove their
manacles, favour them and kindly release them, I am hopeful that Prophet
Jesus (a.s.) and his mother (a.s.) will give me health.’

When he did that, I made an effort to show good recovery and ate a
little food. This made him very happy and he became ever intense to
confer kindness and respect upon the captives.

“I also saw in my dreams for fourteen nights the Chief of the women of
the worlds, Hazrat Fatimah (a.s.). She visited me along with Mary
(a.s.), the daughter of ‘Imran, and one thousand serfs from the Gardens.
Mary says to me, “This is the Chief of the ladies (a.s.), the mother of
your husband Abu Muhammad, (a.s.).’ I held her, cried and complained why
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) did not come to visit me. The Chief of the ladies
(a.s.) said:

‘...If you desire the pleasure of Allah, the Exalted, and the pleasure
of Prophet Jesus (a.s.) and his mother (a.s.), and to have Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) visit you, say, I bear witness that there is no deity other than
Allah and that my father Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.’

“When I spoke these words, the Chief of the ladies of the world embraced
me and my soul was blessed. She (a.s.) said, ‘Now expect the visitations
of Abu Muhammad (a.s.). I am sending him to you.’ I woke up in great
excitement and expectation of meeting Abu Muhammad (a.s.) When it was
the next night, I saw Abu Muhammad (a.s.) in my dream... and his
visitation to me have not ceased yet.”

Bishr says, “I said to her, ‘How did you fall amongst the captives?’”

She said, “Abu Muhammad (a.s.) told me on one of the nights, ‘Your
grandfather will shortly be dispatching an army to fight the Muslims on
such and such day, and he will follow them. You have to join them in the
wardrobe of servants along with a number of servants from such and such
route. I did that and the vanguards of the Muslims encountered us, which
led to my situation that you see.

None knows that I am the granddaughter of the Roman Caesar until now
except you and that is because I told you. The gentleman in whose share
of booty I fell, asked me of my name. I concealed my identity from him
and said, ‘Narjis’. He said, ‘A name of the servants.’ I said to her,
“It is amazing that you are Roman and your language is Arabic.”

She said, “Due to my grandfather’s persistence and encouragement to
increase my learning, he appointed a woman, who was his interpreter, to
visit me. She would come to me day and night and teach me Arabic until I
became fluent and articulate.”

Bishr said: “When I brought her back to Saamarraa, I entered upon my
Master Abu al Hasan (a.s.). He said to her, “How did Allah show you the
Glory of Islam and disgrace of Christianity and the nobility of Muhammad
and his Household?” She said, “How would I describe, O son of the
Messenger of Allah, something which you know better than me?” “I would
like to confer kindness on you.”

He said to her: “Which one is dearer to you, ten thousand gold coins or
a happy tiding of eternal grandeur?” “Happy tidings of a son for me,”
she said. “Rejoice the tidings of a son who will rule the world, from
the East to the West, and will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it would be fraught with oppression and corruption.”

“From whom?” she asked. From the one for whom the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) proposed for you on such and such night, in such and such
year, replied my Master in Roman. He said, “To whom Jesus and his
successor married you.” “From your son Abu Muhammad (a.s.)?” she asked.
Do you know him?” “Has there been a night he has not visited me since I
have embraced Islam at the hands of the Chief of the Ladies!”

Our Master said, “Kafur, call my sister Hakimah.” And when she entered,
he said to her, “Here she is.” Lady Hakimah embraced her and was
delighted to see her.

Abu al–Hasan (a.s.) said to her:

Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Hamza has narrated the following names of the
mother of Hazrat Hujjat (a.t.f.s.): Malika, Susan, Rehaanah, Saiqal and
Narjis.

“O daughter of the Messenger of Allah, take her to your house and teach
her the duties and the traditions, for she is the wife of Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) and the mother of al-Qa’im (a.t.f.s.).”

[^1]: Behaarul Anwaar (English tr.), vol. 51, pp. 10-12, Ansariyan
Publications

[^2]: Muntahal Aamaal, Shaikh Abbas Qummi (a.r.), vol. 2, p. 285


