Question 14
===========

Mention the names, titles and agnomens of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s)?

Reply:

The real name of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is “M-H-M-D” which is the same
as that of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had
prophesied,

“His name will be my name and his agnomen will be my agnomen.”[^1]

His agnomen is Abul Qasim. He is also addressed as Abu Saaleh, Abu
Abdillah, Abu Ibrahim, Abu Ja’far and Abu Husain.”[^2]

His Titles are:

**Mahdi:**

This is his most famous title. The word “Mahdi” is derived from the
infinitive of guidance and means the one who has been guided by the
Almighty. In this context Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked, “Why is he
called al-Mahdi?” He (a.s.) replied:

“Because he will be guided to every hidden affair .”[^3]

Also, it has been narrated from Imam Al-Baqir (a.s.):

“He is named Mahdi as, he will guide to a hidden affair”[^4]

**Qa’im:**

This means the one who will rise with the truth. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) said:

“Al-Qa’im has been named so because he will rise after the oblivion of
his name.”[^5]

When Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.) was asked:

“Why has he been named al-Qa’im?” He (a.s.) replied:

“Because he will rise after the oblivion of his name and the refutation
of his Imamate by the majority of believers.”[^6]

**Mansoor:**

While explaining the Qur’anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…. وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Whosoever is killed unjustly....” (Surah al-Isra’, 17:35)***

Imam Al-Baqir (a.s.) said: “It refers to Husain Ibn ‘Ali (a.s.).”

Regarding the second part of the verse:

…

**  
**

فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَانًا فَلَا يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ ۖ
إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنْصُورًا 

***“...We have assigned to his heir the authority, so he may not exceed
in killing and the one who is helped (Mansoor)” (Surah al-Isra’,
17:35)***

He (a.s.) said:

“Allah has named the Mahdi, al-Mansur as He has named Ahmad, Muhammad
and Mahmood and as Jesus has been named al-Masih”

**Muntazar:**

Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (a.s.) was asked:

“Why is he called Muntazar (one who is awaited)?”

He (a.s.) replied:

“Because the days of his occultation will be prolonged and its duration
lengthy, with the sincere ones waiting his reappearance and the doubters
denying it......” [^7]

**Baqiyatullah:**

It has been narrated in traditions that, when Hazrat (a.t.f.s.) will
reappear, he (a.s.) will lean against the Kaaba. Three hundred and
thirteen of his followers will gather around him from far away places.
The first words with which he will address them will be this Qur’anic
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَقِيَّتُ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ ۚ وَمَا
أَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ بِحَفِيظٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What remains with Allah is better for you if you are believers.”
(Surah Hud, 11: 86)***

He will then say:

“I am the ‘Baqiyatullah’ (the remnant of Allah). I am His proof and His
caliph over you all.”

Then all will salute him thus: “Salutations be upon you, O Baqiyatullah
in His earth.”[^8]

In addition, he (a.t.f.s) is also addressed by the following titles:

• Hujjatullah (The proof of Allah)

• Al-Khalaf al-Saaleh (The Virtuous Heir)

• Gharim (The One who seeks)

• Mu’ammal (The One who is hoped for)

• Muntaqim (The Avenger)

• Al-Maa al-Maeen (The flowing water)

• Waliullah (The Friend of Allah)

• Sahibul Amr (Master of the Affair)

• Sahibuz Zamaan (Master of the Age)

We shall continue the series of these questions in the following
volumes, Inshallah.

We pray to Allah, the Almighty, that He hastens the reappearance of our
master Hazrat Baqiyatullah al-Azam (a.t.f.s.) and that He enumerates us
amongst his followers and helpers. Ameen.

[^1]: Kamaaluddin, p. 287

[^2]: Ilzaamun Naasib, Shaikh Haaeri Yazdi, vol. 1, p. 483

[^3]: Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 51, chapter 2, H. No. 6

[^4]: Isbatul Hudaat, Shaikh Hurr Aameli, vol. 7, p. 110 & 169

[^5]: Ma’anil Akhbar, Shaikh Saduq, p. 65

[^6]: Kamaaluddin, p. 387

[^7]: Kamaaluddin, p. 378

[^8]: Muntahal Aamaal, Shaikh Abbas Qummi, vol. 2, p. 286


