Question 2
==========

What has been mentioned about Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) in the books of
other religions?

**Reply:**

An examination of the religious books of the different religions
conclusively proves that the belief in the Promised Mahdi is not
exclusive only to the Muslims. Even other religions have this belief as
is illustrated:

1) Kitab us Zind the religious book of the Parsis mentions about the end
of Injustice and the victory of the righteous as follows:

“There is a constant conflict between the armies of Ahreman and Yazdan
for supremacy in the land. Though mostly Ahreman is victorious yet
Yazdan is never fully vanquished such that neither he nor his progeny
remain. In difficulties, he receives help from God (Avarmazd) as he is
His son. Thus, their war will go on for 9000 years until finally Yazdan
receives a great victory. Ahreman’s army will be defeated and no trace
of his followers will remain in the heavens and the earth. Following the
complete defeat of Ahreman and the conclusive victory of Yazdan the
world will progress towards its perfection and happiness. Men will enjoy
lasting peace and victory.”[^1]

In the book Jamsabnaamah it is mentions that: “In the land of Taziyaan,
from the progeny of Bani Hashim, a person will rise. He will possess a
large head, a husky voice, and long shins. He will follow the religion
of his ancestors. He will come to Persia with a big army. He will
enliven the land with justice and equity.”

At another place it is mentioned: “The Great Reformer will spread the
religion in the Land. He will eradicate poverty and scarcity. He will
successfully support Yazdan against Ahreman. He will lead humanity
through an ethical, moral and intellectual revolution”.

2) Shakmuni is considered as an intellectual in Indian Mythology. He is
also believed to be a messenger and a possessor of divine communication.
He describes the spiritual leader of humanity thus: “In those days there
will be a religion (All worldly authority will terminate in the hands of
the son of the leader of the two worlds Jamnad Kishan). The mountains of
the east and the west will be under his authority. He will travel on the
clouds. The angels will be his servants. Men and Jinn all will submit to
him. His rule will spread in the lands of the east and the west and even
beyond the oceans. There will be only one divine religion. Divine
religion will be enlivened and everyone will believe and have
recognition of only one God.[^2]

The Vedas which is considered as the divine book of the Hindus record
thus: “After the world suffers heavy destruction, a King will appear in
the Last Age. He will be called “the Helped One” and will be a Universal
Leader. He will rule on the entire world and will collect all people on
one religion. He will recognize every person from the believers as well
as the disbelievers. He will be the one who actualizes God’s will.

In the Old Testament, it is written that: “*Let your waist be girded and
your lamps burning. Be like men watching for their lord, when he returns
from the marriage feast; that, when he comes and knocks, they may
immediately open to him. Blessed are those servants, whom the lord will
find watching when he comes..... Therefore be ready also, for the Son of
Man is coming in an hour that you don't expect him.”* (Luke 12:35-36)

In the Old Testament, the divine book of the Jews, it is mentioned that;
“*A shoot will come up from the stump of Jesse; from his roots a branch
will bear fruit. The Spirit of the LORD will rest on him...... with
righteousness he will judge the needy, with justice he will give
decisions for the poor of the earth. ...... The wolf will live with the
lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lion and
the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. The cow will
feed with the bear, their young will lie down together, and the lion
will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the lair of the
cobra and put his hand into it. They will neither harm nor destroy on
all my holy mountain, for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the
LORD as the waters cover the sea*.” (Isaiah 11:1-10)

5) In the Psalms, it is mentioned that: “*For evil men will be cut off,
but those who hope in the LORD will inherit the land. A little while,
and the wicked will be no more; though you look for them, they will not
be found. But the meek will inherit the land and enjoy great peace*.”
(Psalm 37: 9-12)

[^1]: Al-Fusul Al-Muhimmah, Ibn Sabbagh Maliki, p. 294

[^2]: Religions and Mahdawiyyah, Muhammad Behisti, p. 18


