Question 3
==========

Do the verses of the Holy Qur’an prove the existence and reappearance of
Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)?

**Reply:**

First and foremost, it is not necessary that the Holy Qur’an explains in
detail all the concepts. Given that it actually deals with many things,
so it does not get involved with the finer aspects and intricacies.

Yet, there is an affirmative reply to this question as well. Many verses
of the Majestic Qur’an do prove the existence and also mention about the
government of Hazrat al-Hujjat (a.t.f.s.). Eminent scholars have listed
such verses in their books. Among them Allama al-Majlisi (r.a.) deserves
special mention for having brought numerous such verses in his book
“Behar al-Anwar”, some of which are mentioned hereunder:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ
الْأَرْضَ يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We wrote in the Book after the reminder that (as for)
the land, My righteous servants shall inherit it.”(Surah al-Anbiya’,
21:105)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah at-Tawbah, 9: 33)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَىٰ لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا ۚ يَعْبُدُونَنِي
لَا يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا ۚ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ
فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me.” (Surah an-Nur, 24:55)***

Elucidating this verse in his book “al-Ghaibah”, Shaikh Tusi (r.a.)
testifies to it being revealed about the occultation, reappearance and
the supporters of Imam (a.t.f.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُرِيدُ أَنْ نَمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We desire to bestow a favour upon those who were deemed weak in
the earth and to make them the Imams and to make them the heirs.” (Surah
al-Qasas 28: 5)***

In the same book “al-Ghaibah”, Shaikh Tusi (r.a.) reports a tradition
from Ameerul Momineen ‘Ali (a.s.), expounding this verse as follows:

“When the earth becomes restricted and a killing field for the Holy
Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) progeny, then Allah will send Mahdi, to degrade the
enemies and elevate the friends.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنْ تُغْنِيَ عَنْهُمْ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ
شَيْئًا ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ ۖ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death; indeed, We
have made the communications clear to you that you may understand.”
(Surah al-Hadid, 58: 17)***

Explaining this verse Sheikh Tusi (r.a.) narrates in his book
“al-Ghaibah” from Ibn Abbas as follows: “The giving of life to the earth
after its death in this verse refers to the Qa’im (a.t.f.s.) from the
progeny of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.). After reappearance, he will purify the
earth from all evil and enliven it through justice and equity.”

Likewise Allama Majlisi (r.a.) brings 60 verses from the Holy Qur’an
about the occultation and reappearance of Imam (a.s.). The discerning
should therefore refer to this reliable book.


