Question 5
==========

Whether the original books of the Ahlul Sunnat mention and relate about
the matters related to the existence, life and reappearance of Imam
Mahdi (a.s.)?

**Reply:**

It is an accepted fact that the belief of the promised Mahdi is found
with the Shi’as who are the believers in Imamat. Many verses from the
Holy Qur’an and thousands of traditions are available in this regard.
Numerous books of the Ahlul Sunnat that contained traditions on this
topic became the target of bias. The reigns of Bani Umayya and Bani
Abbas were the periods when the enemies of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were in
power. They never gave a chance to Muslim historians to relate
traditions on this subject.

Petty politics and concealment of the truth were the foundations on
which the governments of Bani Umayya and Bani Abbas were raised. Their
main aim was to keep a partisan attitude in matters of Imamat. How could
the usurpers of Imamat allow any such tradition to remain in the books?
Yet, the mention of Hazrat al-Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is found in some of the
important books of Ahlul Sunnat. We produce some examples hereunder:

Huzaifa said: “The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was delivering a sermon in
which he was forewarning about the future conditions. In the same sermon
he (s.a.w.a.) said that:

“Even if the life of the world remains only for a single day, Allah will
lengthen it to such an extent till a person from my progeny appears (to
rule the world). His name will be my name.”

Salman asked, “O Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)! From where will your son
appear? He (s.a.w.a.) placed his hand on the back of Imam Husain (a.s.)
and said: ‘That son of mine will be from him’.”[^1]

Abdullah Ibn Masood narrates that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said:

“Even if one day remains for the end of the world, Allah the High shall
lengthen that day to such an extent that a person from my nation and my
family will establish divine leadership. His name will be the same as
mine. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression.”[^2]

Elsewhere he (s.a.w.a.) mentioned that:

“The promised Mahdi is from my progeny and from the children of
Fatimah.”[^3]

Abu Saeed Khudri narrates from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that:

“In the last period, kings will subject my nation to calamities. One
cannot even bear to listen to their atrocities. The vast earth will
become small and narrow for them as it would be replete with oppression
and tyranny. The believers will not find any sanctuary from oppression.
Then, Allah will send a man from my family. He will fill the earth with
justice and equity just as it was previously filled with oppression and
tyranny. The inhabitants of the earth and the skies will become happy
with him. The earth will reveal its treasures for him. The skies will
shower rains. Men will desire life again. He will live among the people
for 7 or 9 years.”[^4]

It is also narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that he said:  
 “Our Mahdi has a broad forehead and a deep insight. He will fill the
earth with justice and equity as it was filled with oppression and
tyranny. He will rule for 7 years”[^5]

[^1]: Faraaed al-Simtain, Muhammad Juvaini Khurasani, vol. 2, p.
Yanaabee’ al-Mawaddah, Shaikh Sulaiman Qunduzi, vol. 3, p. 163

[^2]: Fusool al-Muhimmah, Ibn Sabbagh Maaliki, p. 294

[^3]: Fusool al-Muhimmah, Ibn Sabbagh Maaliki, p. 294

[^4]: Al Bayaan Fi Akhbaar al-Sahebiz Zamaan, Hafiz Ganji Shaafei, p.
493

[^5]: Yanaabee’ al-Mawaddah, Shaikh Sulaiman Qunduzi, vol. 3, p. 163;
Fusul al-Muhimmah, Ibn Sabbag al-Maliki, p. 293


