Question 7
==========

What is the reason that whenever the name “Qa’im (a.s.)” is mentioned
all Shi’as rise in respect?

**Reply:**

It is a practice among the Shi’as that whenever the name “Qa’im (a.s.)”
is pronounced in their gatherings, all of them stand up in reverence.
Though this action is not established as an obligatory one, it is
prevalent as a highly recommended act for expressing deference for the
beloved Imam (a.t.f.s.).

Imam As-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked, “What is the reason for standing while
mentioning the title al-Qa’im?” He (a.s.) replied:

“Sahib al-‘Amr (a.s.) will have a long occultation. Whenever he will be
addressed by the title al-Qa’im, due to the intense love which his
followers will have for him, they will remember his noble era and
express sorrow at his present distress. Reciprocating this action, even
Hazrat (a.t.f.s.) is benevolently attentive towards them. Since this
condition results in receiving the attention of Imam (a.t.f.s), it is
recommended to stand as a mark of respect for him and pray for his early
reappearance.”[^1]

In certain conditions, it becomes compulsory to stand. When either this
title or any of his other titles are mentioned in a gathering and all
the people stand up respectfully. In such a situation if someone does
not rise, it would be equivalent to insulting him. Here, not rising will
necessarily be forbidden.

Ayatullah Sayed Mahmood Taleqani (r.a.) says: “Perhaps this practice of
standing is not just for the purpose of respect, as otherwise it would
be necessary even on the mentioning of the names of Allah, the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the other Imams (a.s.). Standing is an indication
of the preparedness and support for him in relation to the worldly
resurgence... All oppression and difficulties started in the unpleasant
era of the Ummayyad government. Thereafter, this (oppression) continued
in the Crusades, the conquest of the Mongols and the suffocation under
the colonial rule. They lorded over the people but finally became
naught. But the religious government of true Islam will always remain
powerful. It will be established by the true guides personified in the
word Qa’im. By standing we demonstrate our eagerness for helping in its
affair.”[^2]

[^1]: Ilzamun Naasib, vol.1, p. 271

[^2]: Khurshid al-Maghrib, Muhammad Ridha’ Hakimi, p. 264


