Question 8
==========

What are the similarities between Divine Apostles and Imam al-Zaman
(a.s.)?

**Reply:**

The following traditions narrated from the infallible Imams (a.s.)
sufficiently answer this question:  
 Imam Zainul Abedin (a.s.) said:

“In our Qa’im are found the characteristics of the Prophets (s.a.w.a.).
They are similar to those of our father Hazrat Adam (a.s.), Hazrat Nuh
(a.s.), Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.), Hazrat Isa (a.s.), Hazrat Ayyub (a.s.),
and Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.). As regards Hazrat Adam (a.s.)
and Hazrat Nuh (a.s.), it is their long life. As regards Hazrat Ibrahim
(a.s.), it is his secret birth and staying away from the people. In case
of Hazrat Musa (a.s.), it is the fear and his disappearance. In case of
Hazrat Isa (a.s.), it is the controversy among the people about him. In
case of Hazrat Ayub (a.s.), it is his perfection after his great test.
And in the case of Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), it is his coming out with
a sword.”[^1]

Muhammad Ibn Muslim narrates: I went to Imam Al-Baqir (a.s.) and asked
him about the Qa’im of Aali-Muhammad (a.t.f.s.). He (a.s.) replied:

“O Muhammad Ibn Muslim! The Qa’im of Aali Muhammad (a.t.f.s.) has the
similarities of five Prophets (a.s.): Hazrat Yunus Ibn Matta (a.s.),
Hazrat Yusuf Ibn Yaqub (a.s.), Hazrat Musa (a.s.), Hazrat Isa (a.s.) and
Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).”

“His similarity with Hazrat Yunus (a.s.) is his occultation from which
he returned to his village as a youth though he had grown old. His
similarity with Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) is his concealment from his near
ones, the people in general and his brothers. The severity of his affair
for his father Hazrat Yaqub (a.s.) although he was not very far from his
father, his relatives and his people. His similarity with Hazrat Musa
(a.s.) is his severe anxiety from the people and his long and secret
occultation which started right from his birth and the seeking of refuge
of his followers due to the torment and wretchedness which reached to
them after him.

This continued till Allah, the High by His command, granted him victory
over his enemies. His similarity with Hazrat Isa (a.s.) is the dispute
regarding him among the people. A group alleged that he has not yet been
born, while another group claimed that he has expired. Yet another
assumed that he was killed by crucifixion.”

“His similarity to his forefather Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is his
rising with the sword and slaying the enemies of God and the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) , the oppressors , the ruffians and conquering them with the
sword. His awe will be visible in their hearts. Among the signs of his
rising is the revolt of Sufyani from Syria and of a Yemeni from Yemen. A
divine call will be heard in the Holy month of Ramadhan, which will call
out his name and the name of his father .”[^2]

[^1]: Kamaaluddin, p. 322

[^2]: Mahdi al-Mau’d, ‘Ali Dawaani, p. 481


