Author's Foreword
=================

Three years ago, we attempted a humble under­taking: studying the
deepest bases on which each of Marxism and Islam stands, and the book
*Our Philosophy* **فلسفتنا** interpreted our attempt. That was a
starting ­point for a successive strain of thought trying to study Islam
from base to top .

So was *Our Philosophy*, then, published to be succeeded, after about
two years, by *Our Economy* **اقتصادنا**; and the two intellectual
brothers (meaning books) are still waiting for other brothers to join,
so that the whole intellectual series, which we aspire to present to
Muslims, may be completed.

From the very beginning, we noticed that ­in spite of the unmatchable
welcome with which the series was met, so much so that the copies of
*Our Philosophy* were sold out within only few weeks—there is a
considerable paradox between the high Muslim intellect and the general
intellectual atmosphere in which we nowadays live. It is even very
difficult, for many, to live upto this high standard of Muslim intellect
without exerting a great deal of hard effort. It was inevitable, then,
to initiate successive series of books through which the reader ascends
higher steps of Muslim intellectualism that may en­able him to
appreciate its supreme standard.

Thus emerged the idea of "The Islamic School": an attempt to use a
scholastic procedure in intro­ducing the Muslim intellect through
successive series parallel to the main series; (i.e., *Our Philosophy*
and *Our Economy*), sharing its burden of carrying the Muslim
intellectual message and agreeing with it in mutual and main purpose,
although it differs in degree and level.

As we were contemplating on issuing "The Islamic School", we defined the
characteristics of the Muslim intellect composing the general outlook
and intellectual taste of the presumed School.

These characteristics may be summed up thus:

1. The direct aim behind establishing "The Islamic School" is to supply
conviction, more than innovation; therefore, it derives its intellectual
topics from *Our Philosophy*, *Our Econ­omy* and their intellectual
brothers, displaying them all within a specific scholastic framework,
without confining itself to ideas presented for the first time.

2. "The Islamic School" does not always restrict itself to proving the
form of any particular idea. Such form here is less clearly highlighted
than in *Our Philosophy* and her sisters—all this is done according to
the degree of simplification ex­pected from scholastic series.

3. "The Islamic School" deals with a broader in­tellectual horizon than
that of *Our Philosophy* and her sisters. It does not only deal with the
major aspects of the general Islamic intellect. It deals with the
different philosophical, histori­cal or Qur'anic topics which affect the
growth of the Islamic awareness, the building and com­pletion of the
Muslim character, from both intellectual and spiritual standpoints.

Allah Almighty has decreed that the idea of "The Islamic School" should
meet another idea derived from the Introduction to *Our Philosophy*, and
that both ideas get intermingled with each other and see the light in
the form of this book.

The other idea came out of the dear readers' persistence that we must
reprint *Our Philosophy*, and to attempt broadening and simplifying the
topics in *Our Philosophy* before we reprint the whole book for the
second time, a matter that requires a leisure which I do not have at the
present time.

Accordingly, the dear readers' wish started to make a direction towards
the Introduction to *Our Philosophy* itself because reprinting such
Introduction would not take as much effort as reprinting the entire
book. The influx of requests left no room to suspect the necessity of
responding to them.

There did both ideas meet: Why should the Introduction to *Our
Philosophy* not be the first series of "The Islamic School"?

And so it was.

But we were not satisfied with printing the Introduction only; we also
introduced some sig­nificant adjustments, giving some of its concepts a
broader explanation, such as the concept of the egotistic instinct. We
added to it two important chapters: One is "Contemporary man and his
capac­ity to solve the social problem", which is the first chapter of
this book and which deals with the human capac­ity to establish the
social system that guarantees happiness and perfection.

The other chapter is "Islam's standpoint regarding freedom and
security". It is the last chapter of this book. In it we attempted a
comparative study between the standpoint of each of Islam and capitalism
towards freedom, and that of Islam and Marxism towards security.

Thus did the Introduction multiply, taking a new name: Contemporary Man
and the Social Prob­lem, as the first series of "The Islamic School";
verily, only Allah grants success.

**Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr**  
 an-Najaf al-Ashraf,  
 Iraq


