Contemporary Man and his Capability to Solve the Social Problem
===============================================================

The Actual Human Problem
------------------------

The world problem that occupies peoples' minds now, affecting the heart
of their present existence, is the social problem which can be
summarized by giving the most frank answer to this question:

*What is the system that suits humanity, the one through which humanity
achieves a happy social life?*

Naturally, this problem occupies a prominent and serious position. In
its complexity and diver­sity of suggested solutions, it poses as a
source of danger to humanity itself, for system is included in the
calculation of the human life, affecting the core of its social entity.

This problem is deeply rooted in the distant epochs of the history of
human existence. Mankind faced it ever since it had sprung up in its
social life. The human social entity stemmed from several in­dividuals
linked to each other through common bonds and ties. These bonds,
naturally, need general directions and organization. Indeed, it is on
the extent of the harmony between this system and the existing human
reality and its interest that both social stability and happiness
depend.

This social problem has pushed humanity, in its intellectual and
political arenas, to wage a long battle and engage in a struggle full of
different sorts of combat, and by different codes of the human mind,
aiming at erecting and engineering the social structure, trying to
sketch its plans and lay down its pillars. It was a tiring struggle,
crowded with miseries and iniquities, full of laughter and sorrow, one
in which happiness was espoused to misery. All this occurred because of
all the different colors of abnormality and deviation that characterized
those social systems. Except for glimpses that shone during moments of
the history of this planet, the social existence of man would have lived
in continu­ous misery and dived into tumultuous waves.

We do not want to display, now, the rounds of the human struggle in the
social field, for we do not want, by making such type of research here,
to narrate the history of agonizing humanity, showing the different
spheres through which it revolved since time immemorial. Instead, we
want to partake in humanity's present living circumstances and in the
rounds it reached, so that we may know the desti­nation that a round is
expected to reach, and the natural shore towards which a ship should
make its way and dock, so that it may reach peace and goodness, coming
back to a stable life of justice and happiness after a long struggle and
tiring en­deavour, after journeying for so long in different places and
directions.

In fact, contemporary man's awareness of today's social problem is
stronger than at any past epoch of ancient history. Today, he is more
conscious of his relationship to the problem and to its complexity, for
modern man has come to realize the fact that the problem is of his own
making, and that the social order is not imposed on him from above, the
way natural phenomena operate, for these phenomena govern man's
relationship to na­ture.

Man now stands in contrast with ancient man who often used to look at
the social order as though it were an order of nature, facing it without
choice or power. While he could not develop the law of earth
gravitation, by the same token, he could not change his social
relations. Naturally, when man starts to believe that those relations
are but one aspect of behaviour while man himself chooses without losing
his own will within their sphere, the social problem then starts to
reflect in him—in man that lives it intellectually—a revolutionary
bitterness, instead of the bitterness of yielding

Modern man, on the other hand, started to be contemporary to a
tremendous change in man's control over nature, a change that has never
been preceded. This growing control, terrifying and gigantic, increases
the complexity of the social problem and doubles its dangers, for it
opens to mankind new and great avenues of utilization; and it doubles
the significance of the social order on which depends the distribution
of each individual's share of those tremendous outcomes that nature
today bestows on man with generosity.

Man, after all, inherited from his predecessors, along ages, a broader
experience, more inclusive and deep, that resulted from the social
experiences which ancient man had had, and in their light he studies the
social problem.

Humanity and its Treatment of the Problem
-----------------------------------------

Having acquainted ourselves with the essential question humanity faced
ever since it practiced its conscious social existence, artistically
attempting to answer it along its remote history, we want now to cast a
look at what humanity, now and in all other ages, possesses of
capacities and essential conditions required for giving an accurate
answer to the essential afore-mentioned question, i.e., "What is the
system which suits humanity best, the one through which it can achieve
happi­ness in its social life?"

Can humanity provide the answer?

And what is the required amount—in its intel­lectual and spiritual
composition—of conditions necess­ary to succeed in providing the answer?

What sort of absurdities’ can guarantee humanity ultimate success in the
test and terseness in providing the answer to the question, in the way
it chooses to solve the social problem, in reaching the best system that
guarantees humanity's happiness, uplifting it to the highest levels?

In a clearer expression: How can contemporary man perceive, say, that
democratic capitalism, dicta­torship, social proletarianism, etc., is
the best system? If humanity perceived this or that, what are the
absurdities which guarantee that it is right and correct in its
perception?

Even if it secured all of that, will it suffice to per­ceive the best
system, knowing it fully well, to put it to practice in order to solve
the social problem on its basis? Or will the implementation of the
system depend on other elements which may not be available, in spite of
the "knowledge" of its prac­ticality and merit?

The points which we have raised now are related to a large extent to the
common concept of society and cosmos; therefore, the method to deal with
them differs among scholars, each according to his respective common
concepts; so let us start with Marxism.

The windmill (Marxism argues), for example, inspires man to feel that
the feudal system is the best system for him. The steam mill that
succeeded it teaches man that capitalism is worthier of implementation.
Today's electrical and atomic means of production give the society new
intellectual concept, believing that the social system is the fittest
Marxism sees man as being spiritually and intel­lectually conditioned to
the method of production and the type of producing powers.

Being independent of these powers, he cannot think in social terms, nor
can he know the best system. The producing powers, according to Marxism,
dictate to him such knowledge, allowing him to answer the essential
ques­tion which we laid out in our Introduction above, and he, in turn,
will recur their echo carefully and faithfully.

Humanity's capacity to conceive the best sys­tem, then, is exactly its
own capacity to interpret the social outcome of all producing powers,
returning their echo.

As for the old conventional conception, it is now wrong, since a more
modern social conception has been invented

What assures the Soviet man that his viewpoint is accurate is the belief
that such view represents the new aspect of the social awareness,
expressing a new stage of history; so, it has to be correct, unlike old
viewpoints

It is true, though, that some social views may seem to be new—in spite
of their falsehood—such as the Nazi view in the first half of this
century, as it seemed as if it were expressing a new development in
history But how fast are such veiled views uncovered, proving through
experience that they are nothing but an echo to the old views, an
interpre­tation of worn-out historical stages, not new views *per se.*

Thus does Marxism assert: the "modernity" of the social view, i.e., its
birth as the outcome of newly-formulated historical circumstances, is
the guarantor of its accuracy as long as history is in escalating
advancement

There is something else, and that is: Today, for example, humanity's
perception of the social system, as being the fittest, is insufficient,
according to Marxism, to put it to practice unless and until the class
that benefits from it more than others (this, according to this example,
is the proletariat) is vio­lent, a class struggle will take place
against the class that benefits from keeping the old system. This mad
struggle interacts with the concept of the fittest system; hence, such
struggle will get fiercer as long as that concept grows and becomes
clearer and, in its turn, it deepens the concept, helping it grow as it
gets more strong and prevalent

This Marxist viewpoint is based on the material­istic historical ideals
which are criticized in our broad study of economic Marxism[^1] . What
we add here is that history itself proves that the social ideals
concerning identifying the type of systems that are the fittest are not
created by the producing powers; rather, man has his own originality and
creativity in this sphere, independently of the means of production.

Otherwise, how can Marxism explain to us the ideas of nationalization,
socialism and state ownership during distant and separate periods of
history? If the belief in the idea of nationalization—as the fittest
system, according to the Soviet man nowadays—is the result of the sort
of today's producing powers, what is the meaning of the appearance of
the same idea in remote times when these producing powers were
non-existent?

Did not Plato believe in communism, imagining his ideal city on a
communist model? Was his con­ception the outcome of modern means of
production which the Greeks never possessed? What can I say? But the
social ideas two thousand years ago reached a stage of maturity and
depth in the minds of some great political thinkers to a degree which
paved for them the way of their implementation just as does the Soviet
man nowadays, with only few adjustments.

This is Woo-Di, the greatest of China's emperors from the Han dynasty,
believed, out of knowledge and experience, in the social system as being
the fittest. He put it to practice during the period from 140 - 87 B.C.,
making all natural resources the property of the nation and
nationalizing the industries of salt extrac­tion, iron mining and
wine-making He wanted to put an end to the authority of commissioners
and commercial competitors.

He established a special system for transportation and exchange under
the auspices of the state, trying thereby to control trade in order to
be able to avoid sudden price fluctuations. The state workers themselves
used to undertake carrying and delivering goods to the respective owners
throughout the country, and the government itself used to stock whatever
items were left of the nation's need, selling them when their prices
rose above the necess­ary limit and buying them back when their prices
fell He set to establish great common institutions to create jobs for
the millions of those who could not be absorbed by the private
industries.

Also, in the beginning of the Christian era, Wang Mang ascended the
throne and became enthusiastic about the idea of emancipating slaves and
putting an end to both slavery and feudalism, just like what the
Europeans believed in doing at the beginning of the capitalist era. He
abolished slavery, took the lands from the feudal class, nationalized
arable lands and distributed them among the peasants, forbade buy­ing or
selling lands in order to avoid repossession. And he nationalized mines
and some other major industries, too.

So, could Woo-Di or Wang Mang have derived their social inspiration and
political policies from steam power, electricity or the atom, the
energies which Marxism considers to be the bases of social thinking?

So do we derive this conclusion: Perceiving this system or that—as being
the fittest—is not the making of this producing power or that.

Also, the advancing movement of history—the one through which Marxism
proves that the "modernity" of thinking guarantees its accuracy—is
nothing but another myth of history, for certainly reactionary and
melting trends of civilization are numerous indeed As for non-Marxist
thinkers, these decide that man's ability to conceive the fittest system
grows with him from the many social experiences through which he lives.

Therefore, when social man puts to practice a specific social system,
embodying it within his own living experience, he can notice from his
experience of that system the faults and weak points that hide within
the system, for these will be event­ually discovered, enabling man to
conceive a more terse and informed social system.

Thus, man will be enabled to conceive the fittest system, putting his
answer to the essential question in the light of his experience and
knowledge. The more complete and numerous the experiments or systems he
tries are, the more knowledge and terseness he achieves, becoming more
ca­pable of defining the fittest system and determining its dimensions.

Our main question: "What is the fittest social system?" is but another
way of asking: "What is the best method of home-heating?" This question
faced man ever since he felt cold for the first time inside his cave or
hideout; so, he engaged himself in thinking of an answer to it, until he
was led, through his observations and numerous experiences, to a way to
make a fire. Then he persistently struggled to find a better answer to
the question across his prolonged experiences, until he finally
discovered electricity for heating.

So was the case with thousands of other prob­lems which he faced
throughout his life. He found the way to solve those problems through
experience, and his perception increased in exactness as his experiments
increased in number. Among such problems are: the problem of getting the
best medicine for tuberculosis, the easiest method for oil drilling, the
fastest means for transportation and travel, or the best method for
wool-weaving, etc

Just as man has been able to solve all of these problems, providing
answers for all of those questions through experience, so can man answer
the question of "What is the fittest social system?" from his social
experiences that disclose both advantages and disadvantages of the
particular system scrutinized, pointing out the reactions to it on the
social level

The Difference between a Natural Experiment and a Social Experience
-------------------------------------------------------------------

This is accurate to a certain degree: The social experience allows man
to provide the answer to this question: "What is the fittest (social)
system?" just as natural experiments enabled him to answer several other
questions which encompassed his life ever since it had begun.

But we have to differentiate—if we want to study this issue
deeper—between the social experi­ences that formulate man's perception
of the fittest system and the natural experiments from which man
acquires his knowledge of nature's secrets and laws and the methods to
benefit from them, to find out, for example, the best medicine, the
fastest means of travel, the best method for weaving, the easiest method
for oil-drilling, or even the best way to divide the atom.

For the social experiences—social man's trials of different social
systems—do not really reach, in their intellectual output, the same
degree like that of natural experiments, i.e., man's experiments of the
natural phenomena, for these indeed differ from the first in many
points. Such a difference leads to man's varying ability to benefit from
both natural and social experiments.

So, while man is capable of comprehending the secrets of natural
phenomena, ascending to the peak of perfection as time passes by, due to
his natural and scientific experiments, well, he really cannot help
taking a slow pace in his attempt to comprehend the fittest social
system, without ever being able to achieve absolute perfection in his
social thinking, no matter how diversified and numerous his social
experiences may be.

It is mandatory on us, in order to know all of this, to study these
significant differences between the nature of a social experience and a
natural one, so that we may be able to reach the fact we have already
decided, that is, the natural experiment may be able to grant mankind,
across ages a complete image of nature to be used to utilize the natural
phenomena and laws. As for the social experience, this cannot guarantee
mankind to discover such a complete ideology concerning the social
issue.

The most significant of these differences may be summarized thus:

**First:** The natural experiment can be initiated and practiced by one
individual, comprehending it through noticing and observing, directly
studying all what may be disclosed of its facts and shortcomings and
coming to a specific idea hinging on that experiment.

As for the social experience, it is but the em­bodiment of an already
practiced and implemented system. The experience of the feudal or
capitalist system, for example, means the society's implemen­tation of
this system during a period of its history; hence, such an experience
cannot be done or ab­sorbed by just one person.

Rather, the entire com­munity implements the social experience,
consuming a life-span of the community's age far wider than does this
individual or that. When one wants to bene­fit from a certain social
experience, he cannot be contemporary to all of its events, just like
being contemporary to an actual natural experiment while­ implementing
it; rather, he can be contemporary to one side of its events,
necessarily depending on his assumption, derivation and (knowledge of)
history while scrutinizing all the aspects and consequences of the
experience.

**Second:** The thinking crystallized by a natural experiment is much
more subjective and accurate than that derived by man from a social
experience.

This is a most essentially significant point which forbids the social
experience from reaching the level of a natural and scientific point;
therefore, it has to be thoroughly clarified.

In the natural experiment, the interest of the person performing it is
tied to his discovery of the truth, the complete honest truth, without
covering anything up, and he most often does not have the least interest
in falsifying the truth or discomposing its features, an action which
will eventually be found out through experiment.

If he, for example, wants to examine the effects of a certain chemical
on tuber­culosis germs, while putting it in those germs' en­vironment,
he will not then be concerned except about knowing its degree of effect,
albeit if it is high or low, and he will not benefit in treating
tuberculosis from falsifying the truth, over-estimating or
under-estimating such an effect. Accordingly, the trend of the mind of
the person experimenting the method will naturally be directed towards
subjec­tivity and accuracy.

As for the social experience, the interest of the person performing such
an experiment does not always stop at his finding out the truth,
discovering the fittest social system for all mankind; but it may even
be to his own personal advantage to conceal the truth from the eyes of
the beholders The person whose interest hinges on the capitalist system
and on monopoly or on the banking interest system, for example, will
find out that his benefit lies in the truth which emphasizes that the
system of capitalism, monopoly and bank interest is the most suitable
one, so that the profits such system brings him will con­tinue.

He, therefore, is not being naturally sub­jective, as long as his
personal impulse urges him to discover the truth in the colour which
agrees with his own personal interests. So is the case with the other
person whose per­sonal interest conflicts with interest rates or
monopoly; nothing concerns him more than truth convicting the interest
and monopoly systems.

When such a person seeks the answer to the social question of "What is
the most suitable (social) system?", out of his own social research, he
always is pushed by an internal power that favours a specific viewpoint.
In other words, by no means is he a neutral person *per se*. And so do
we come to know that man's think­ing of the social problem cannot
usually guarantee subjectivity and selflessness to the degree that
ensures the accuracy of man's thinking while treating a natural
experiment or dealing with a cosmic question.

**Third:** Suppose someone has been able to free himself intellectually
from his self impulses, reasoning with subjectivity, finding out the
fact that this system or that is the most suitable for all humanity,
well, who can guarantee this person's concern about all humanity's
interest if such interest does not agree with his own? Who is going to
guar­antee this person's effort to put the most suitable social system
for humanity to practice if it does conflict with this person's own
interest? Is it sufficient reason, for example, for the capitalists who
believe that Socialism is a more fitting social system (than Capitalism)
to go ahead and implement it even though it does conflict with their own
interests?

Is it sufficient that the belief of contemporary man (the man of Western
civilization)—in the light of the experiences which he has
lived—in­decency and permissiveness, is his belief in what all these
relationships include of moral dangers, decay and disintegration, on
man's tomorrow and future, causes him to rush to develop such
relationships in the method which guarantees humanity's future,
protecting it from sexual and instinctive disintegration, as long as he
does not feel any contemporary danger to the present in which he lives,
and as long as such relationships do, indeed, provide him with a
plenitude of pleasure and fun?

We, then, in the light of all of this, do feel in need not only for
finding out the most suitable system for all humanity, but also in need
for an impulse that makes us concerned about the interest of mankind as
a whole, trying to bring such system to reality, even when it conflicts
with that portion (of society) we represent out of the whole.

**Fourth:** The system that social man estab­lishes, the one in the
practicality and efficiency of which he believes, cannot be qualified to
bring this man up, i.e., uplift him in the human sphere to wider
horizons because the system which social man makes always reflects its
maker's present circumstance, his spiritual and psychological status.
So, if the society enjoys a low degree of strength and solidarity of
self-will, it indeed has never been capable of growing this will up—by
establishing a firm social system which nurtures self-will and firms
solidarity.

For so long as it does not possess a solid will, it then is incapable of
discovering such a system and of implementing it; rather, it establishes
the system that reflects its disintegration and melting self-will.
Otherwise, can we expect a society which does not possess its self-will
to oppose the temptation of wine drinking, for example, without
enjoy­ing a will uplifting it above such a cheap desire like this? Can
we expect such a society to execute a firm system that bans similar
cheap desires, nurturing man's self-will, restoring to him his freedom,
eman­cipating him from the slavery of desire and temp­tation? Of course
not!

We do not expect firmness from a disintegrating society, even when such
a society realizes the danger of disintegration and of its consequences.
Nor do we expect the society which is enslaved by the desire of wine
drinking to free itself from such desires on its own free will, no
matter how aware of wine's effects such a society may be.

For awareness is deepened and focussed by the so­ciety if it continues
disintegrating itself and satisfying its desires; and the more it
continues to do so, the more it becomes incapable of treating the
situation and uplifting its humanity to higher degrees. This is the
reason that caused man-made civili­zations to be incapable of
establishing a system which makes man oppose his slavery to his own
desires, uplifting him to a higher human level.

Even the United States, which best expresses the greatest of man-­made
civilizations, has failed to enforce the law that forbids drinking, for
it is self-contradictory to expect a society, which gave up itself to
its own desires and to their enslavement, to institute laws that uplift
it from the pitfall in which it has willingly chosen to throw itself.
But we do find the Islamic system—which is brought by Divine Revelation
(contrarily to man-made systems)—capable of nurturing humanity, in the
system's own way, up­lifting it to high pinnacles, banning wines and
other evil desires, creating in man a conscious and firm self-will.

\*\*\*

What remains for us—after having explained a portion of the essential
differences between the social experience performed by the entire
society and the natural experiment performed by the individual
him­self—is to raise the last question in treating the prob­lem under
discussion (the problem of the extent of mankind's capacity in the field
of social organization and in selecting the most suitable social
system), and the question is: "What is the scientific value of
organizing the group's life, laying the grounds for social living and of
the social system on scientific bases derived from natural experiments
which are as exact as the experiments performed in the spheres of
physics and chemistry, getting rid of all the weak points we studied
while dealing with the nature of the social experience?"

In other words: Is it possible—while organizing social life and getting
acquainted with the most suitable social system—to leave aside
humanity's history, by passing the experiences human societies performed
across ages, those experiences towards which we have nothing to do but
glance from a distance, hiding be­hind curtains of time that separate us
from them, can we lay aside all this by building our social life in the
light of scientific experiments which we ourselves live and practice on
this individual or that, so that we may get to know the most suitable
social system? Some optimists may tend to answer this ques­tion in the
affirmative, considering what the Western man enjoys today of tremendous
potentials; for is it not that the social system is the one that
guarantees satisfying man's needs in the best possible way?

Is it not that man's needs are realistic matter­ of fact things that can
be scientifically measured and tested like all other natural phenomena?
Is it *not* that the methods of satisfying these needs mean limited
measures scientific logic is capable of mea­suring and subjecting to
tests, studying their effects to satisfy the needs and the results which
they bring about? So; why can the social system *not* be laid on bases
of such experiments?

Why can we *not* find out, through experiment on one person or many
persons, the sum of natural, physiological and psychological effects
which play a role in activating individuals’ intellectual gifts,
broadening their intelligence, so that if we want to or­ganize our
social life in a way that guarantees broad­ening the mental and
intellectual gifts, we make sure that all such effects will be present
in a multitude in the system for all individuals?

Some amateurs may imagine more than this, reasoning thus: "This is not
only possible, it also is what modern Europe actually did in its Western
civilization after discarding religion, ethics and all intellectual and
social axioms, directing itself in building its life towards science,
hence, jumping in its modern historical procedure, opening the gates of
heavens and possessing the treasures of earth. " But before we answer
the question we have raised above (i.e., our inquiry about the extent of
the possibility of laying the grounds of social life on a scientific
experimental basis), we have to discuss this latest image of Western
civilization and this superficial trend of believing that the social
system, which represents the essential facet of this civilization under
discussion, is the product of its scientific ele­ment.

The fact is this: The social system in which Europe believed, the social
principles it called for and in which it believed, did not really result
from an experi­mental scientific study; rather, it was more theor­etical
than experimental, more of philosophical principles than experimented
scientific ideas, the result of a mental understanding and the belief in
limited intellectual principles more than a result of a derivative
reasoning or an experimental research in man's needs, his psychological,
physiological and natural characteristics.

One who studies modern European Renaissance—so-called by the European
history—with understanding, he will certainly be able to comprehend that
the general trend of the Renaissance in the spheres of the substance did
in­deed differ from its general trend in both social and organizational
spheres. In the sphere of substance it was scientific, for its ideas
about the world of substance were indeed based on observation and
experiment. Its ideas about the composition of water and air, about the
law of gravitation or atom-dividing, were all scientific ideas derived
from observation and experiment.

As in the social field, the modern Western mind was based on
theoretical, rather than scientific, ideas. For example, it calls for
human rights declared in its social revolution, and it is quite obvious
that the idea of right is not scientific, for man's right of freedom,
for example, is not a substance capable of measurement and experiment,
so, it is out of the reach of scientific research; rather, need itself
is the substantial phenomenon which can be scientifically studied.

If we observe the principle of equality among all members of the
society—this principle is regarded theoretically as one of the basic
requirements of modern social life—we will find out that this prin­ciple
was not derived scientifically from closer observation, for people are
not equal in the scientific criteria except in their general human
quality. After that, they all differ in their natural, physiological,
psychological and intellectual qualities. The principle of (social)
equity expresses an ethical value which is mental, rather than
experimental, conclusion.

So, do we clearly distinguish between the stamp of the social system in
modern Western civilization and the scientific one? And so do we realize
that the scientific trend of thinking in which modern Europe excelled
did not include the field of social principle in the spheres of
politics, economy and sociology. By this we declare only the truth, and
we do not want to blame Western civilization for its negligence of the
value of scientific knowledge, in the field of social organization, or
for not building such system on the bases of natural scientific
experiments, for indeed such scientific experiments can never be
suit­able as bases for social organization.

It is true, though, that man's needs can be subjected to experiment on
many occasions, and also the methods of satisfying these needs. But the
basic problem in social organization is not to satisfy the needs of this
individual or that; rather, it is to create a fair equilibrium among the
needs of all individuals, and to define their interrelations within the
framework which allows them to satisfy these needs. Obviously, the
scientific experiment on this individual and that does not allow
discovering such a framework, the nature of such relationships and the
method of finding out such equilibrium.

Instead, all this can be found out during the whole society's
implementation of a (particular) social system, for all the points of
weakness and strength in the system will eventually be discovered.
Accordingly, what must be followed in order to find the needed fair
equilibrium, which guarantees the happiness of all, will also be
discovered. Add to this the fact that the same needs, or their
consequences, cannot be discovered in one scientific experiment.

Take this example: The person who gets used to committing adultery, as a
happy person, you may not be able to discover what he really lacks or
what grieves him, but you will possibly find out that the society that
lived, as did this same person, a large span of its lifetime allowing
itself to follow its sexual desires, you may find it after a period of
its social experience falling down, its spiritual entity cracked, its
moral courage, free-will and intellectual spark all gone.

So, not all the results which have to be known, while establishing the
most suitable social system, can be discovered in a scientific
experiment which we perform inside natural and physiological
laboratories, or even inside psychological laboratories on this person
or that. Rather, their discovery depends on long-term social
experiences.

After this, using a natural scientific experiment in the field of social
organization is sure to be moti­vated by the same personal inclination
which threatens our use of social experiences. For as long as the
individual has his own personal interests—that may or may not agree with
the fact decided by the experi­ence—, the possibility will always be
there that this individual's mind is self-motivated, losing the
sub­jectivity which characterizes scientific ideas, in all other areas
as well.

\*\*\*

Now, having come to know man's capacity to solve the social problem and
answer its essential ques­tion, we exhibit the social doctrines which
occupy humanity's mind nowadays, among which an intellec­tual or
political combat is going on, according to the extent of their social
existence in man's life. These doctrines are four:

1. The Democratic System

2. The Social System

3. The Communist System

4. The Islamic System

The first three of these doctrines represent three human viewpoints that
attempt to answer the essential question: "What is the most suitable
(social) system?" They are answers which mankind put for this question,
according to his potentials and limited capacity the extent of which we
have explained a short while ago.

As for the Islamic System, it offers itself on the social level as a
religion based on Divine Revelation and Endowment, not an experimental
ideology stemming out of mankind's capacity and potentials.

The world today is sharing two of these four systems: the democratic
capitalist system is the basis of government in a large portion of the
globe, while the socialist system is prevalent in another large portion.
Each of these systems possesses a great political structure, protecting
it in its struggle with the other, arming it in its gigantic battle
waged by its heroes for leading the world and uniting the social system
in it. As for the communist and Islamic systems, their actual existence
is purely intellectual. The Islamic system, however, went through one of
the most glorious and successful experiences of all social systems, then
tempests blew on it when the field was—or was almost—empty of principled
leaders.

Hence, the experience remained at the mercy of peo­ple in whose hearts
Islam had not yet matured, nor were their souls filled by its spirit and
essence. Con­sequently; these souls were incapable of resisting and
withstanding. So; the Islamic structure crumbled, and the Islamic system
lingered as an idea in the mind of the Muslim nation, a creed in
Muslims’ hearts, and hope which its striving sons try to bring to
reality.

As for the communist system, it still is an ex­perience which has not
been fully tried; yet, the leadership of the social camp is directing
its mind nowadays towards preparing a social environment for it, having
failed to put it into practice when it took the reins of government in
its hands and declared the implementation of the social system,
practising it as a step towards "true communism".

So, what is our position as Muslims *vis-à-vis* these systems? And what
is our case for which we have to dedi­cate our lives and towards whose
shore we have to lead our ship?

[^1]: Refer to Iqtisaduna (Our Economy), pp. 3-196.


