Capitalist Democracy
====================

So let us start with the capitalist democratic system, the system which
cast a sort of injustice in the economic life, a dictatorship in the
political, a stagnation in the intellectual life of the Church and
whatever is related to it, preparing the reins of government and
influence to a new ruling group which substituted its predecessors yet
played their very social role only in a new manner.

Capitalist democracy has been based on a limitless belief in the
individual, and that his per­sonal interests by themselves guarantee,
naturally, the society's interest in different fields, and that the idea
of government is but for the pro­tection of individuals and their
personal interests; therefore, the government must not go beyond this
objective in its activities and actual scopes.

Capitalist democracy may be summarized by declaring the four norms of
freedom: political, econ­omic, intellectual and individual. Political
freedom allows every individual's speech to be heard and opinion to be
respected in determining the nation's general well-being, planning,
construction and appointing the authorities for its protection. For the
nation's general system and ruling organ are a matter directly linked to
the life of each of its individuals, affectively touching one’s
happiness or misery; so, it is natural, then, that each individual has
the right to participate in and build both system and organ.

Had the social issue been as we said before, a matter of life or death,
happiness or misery of the natives on whom general laws and regulations
are enforced, it equally is natural not to let an individual or group,
whatever the circumstances may be, take its responsibility as long as
there is no individual whose purity of purpose and wisdom of mind rise
above inclinations and mistakes.

Therefore, there has to be a complete equity in the political rights of
all citizens, for they all are equal in bearing the results of the
social issue and obeying the demands of constituting and executing
authorities. On this basis stands the right of voting and the principle
of general election which guarantee that the ruling organ, in all its
authorities and offices, represents the majority of citizens.

Economic freedom hinges on belief in free economy on which the open door
policy has been erected, determining to open all doors and prepare all
fields before the citizen in the economic field. So, everyone has the
right to ownership for the sake of both consumption and production. Such
productive ownership, which renders the mass capital without a limit or
restriction, is equally allowed for every­one. Each individual, then,
possesses an absolute freedom to produce, in any norm or method,
accu­mulate, increase and multiply wealth in the light of his own
personal interests and benefits.

According to the allegation of some defenders of this "economic
freedom", the laws of political economy, which naturally are based on
general principles, can guarantee the society's happiness and keep an
economic equilibrium in it, and that the personal interest, which is the
strong motive and real goal of the individual in his work and activ­ity,
is the best to guarantee the general social interest, and that the
competition which takes place in the free market is solely sufficient to
create the spirit of justice and equity in different accords and
con­tracts.

The natural laws of economy, for example, interfere in keeping the
natural level of price in a manner which can almost be mechanical, for
if the price rises above its fair natural limits, demand will decrease,
according to the natural law which rules that "The rise of a price
causes a decrease in de­mand", and the decrease in demand causes in turn
the lowering of the price, according to another natural law, and it does
not leave price until it lowers it to its previous level, thereby
removing exceptions. The personal interest always imposes on the
individual to think of the way to increase and improve production, while
decreasing its expense and cost.

This (according to the same theory) brings forth the society's interest
at the same time when it is regarded as a private issue which also
concerns the individual. Competition naturally demands restricting
prices of goods and paying workers and labourers fair wages without
injustice or inequity, for each seller or producer fears raising his
prices or the lowering of the wages of his labourers because of the
competition of other sellers and producers.

Intellectual freedom means that people must live free in their doctrines
and beliefs according to their reasoning or whatever their liking and
inclination inspire to them without obstacles from the authority. The
government must not rob any indiv­idual of this freedom, nor must it
forbid him from practising his right in it, the proclamation of his
ideals and beliefs, and the defence of his viewpoints and reasoning.
Personal freedom expresses: the emancipation of man in his behaviour
from different kinds of press­ures and restrictions.

Therefore, he possesses his will and (the freedom to) improve it
according to his personal desires, regardless of whatever happens as a
result of applying such control over his personal conduct of
consequences and results, unless they clash with the control of others
over their own con­duct. The deadline at which the personal freedom of
any individual stops is: others’ freedom. As long as the individual does
not harm this latter freedom, there is no problem in conditioning his
life in the manner which he/she likes, following different customs,
tra­ditions, rituals and rites one finds to be palatable, for this is a
private matter which is linked to his/her existence, whether pre­sent or
future.

As long as he possesses such existence, he is capable of faring with it
however he pleases. Religious freedom, according to the norm of
capitalism it advocates, is but an expression of the individual freedom
in its doctrinal aspect, and of the personal freedom in the practical
aspect which is related to doctrines and conduct.

From this exposition we can reach this sum­mary: The wide intellectual
line of such a system, as we hinted to it, is: Society's interests are
linked to those of the individual: The individual is the basis on which
the social system must be erected. A good government is the apparatus
which is utilized for the service and benefit of the individual and the
strong instrument to keep and protect his interests.

Such is the capitalist democracy in its basic principles for the sake of
which several revolutions broke out and many peoples and nations strove
to achieve under the leadership of leaders who, when describing such new
system and counting its merits, describe paradise in its blessing and
happiness and what it contains of aspiration, bliss, dignity and
fortune, and on which several amendments were made, but such amendments
never touched its heart's essence; rather, it stayed maintaining the
most signi­ficant of its principles and bases.

Materialistic Trend in Capitalism
---------------------------------

It is obvious that this social system is a purely materialistic one
which mankind has followed separately from both his beginning and end,
limited to the utilitarian aspect of his materialistic life, placing his
assumptions thereupon. But this system, while being saturated with a
domineering materialistic outlook, has never been based on a
materialistic philosophy of life or a detailed study thereof. Life
within the social atmosphere of this system has been separated from
every relationship outside the materialistic and utilitarian limits, but
there has been no complete philosophical comprehension prepared for the
establishment of this system for the purpose of such separating
operation[^1].

I do not mean that the world did not contain schools for philosophical
materialism and its adherents; rather, it contained popularity of the
materialistic inclination as the result of the experimental mentality
which was widespread since the beginning of the Industrial Revol­ution,
and by the spirit of doubt and intellectual upheaval brought forth by
the intellectual revolution which befell a group of notions used to be
considered among the most clear and accurate facts[^2] and by the spirit
of rebellion and anger against the alleged "religion" which was freezing
the minds and intel­lects, flattering tyranny and iniquity, supporting
the social corruption in every battle it waged against the weak and the
oppressed.[^3]

These three factors helped promote material­ism in the minds of many a
Western mentality. All of this is true, but the materialistic system has
never been based on a philosophical compre­hension of life, and this is
its contradiction and incapacity, for the social aspect of life is
linked to the reality of life: It is not crystallized in a correct form
except when it is based on a central basis which explains life, its
reality and limitations.

The materialistic system lacks such a basis, for it implies deception
and cheating, speed and little consideration when the realistic aspect
of life is frozen and the social issue is studied separately from it,
although the continuation of the intellectual balance of a system is its
restriction of attitude, from the beginning, to the reality of life
which attitude provides society with the social ingredient: the mutual
relationships among people and one’s method in understanding it and
discovering its secrets and values...

Had mankind in this planet been the making of a man­aging and
overwhelming Power that knows his secrets and obscurities, appearances
and peculiarities, organ­izing and directing him., then he would have
naturally surrendered, in his direction and life-condi­tioning, to such
Creating Power, for that is wiser than him regarding his own affairs as
being more knowledgeable about his reality, more righteous in faring and
more moderate than he is...

Also, had this limited life been the beginning of a perpetual one that
will stem out of it, taking its hue there from, with its balances
depending on the extent of the first one's moderation and
right­eousness., then it would have been natural to organize the present
life, since it is the beginning of an immortal one based on both
materialistic and non-materialistic principles.

Therefore, the issue of believing in God and in life to have sprung from
Him is not a purely idealistic matter detached from life so it would be
separated from life's spheres, for which special codes and laws would
have to be legislated, while by passing that matter and separating it.
Rather, it is a matter linked to the mind, the heart and life
alto­gether.

The proof for its closer link to life than demo­cratic capitalism itself
is that its idea is based on the belief that there has been neither
individual nor a group of individuals whose infallibility of objective,
intel­lectual inclination and discretion are of the degree which allows
entrusting the social issue to it and to depend on it for the
establishment of a righteous life of the nation.

This very basis has neither position nor meaning except when built on a
purely materialistic philosophy which does not recognize the
establishment of a system except by a limited human mind. The capitalist
system is materialistic in all the sense the world implies; it either
implies materialism, without daring to declare its link to it and
dependence on it, or it may be ignorant of the extent of the natural
link between the realistic matter of life and its social aspect.
Therefore, it lacks the philos­ophy on which every social system has to
lean. It simply is materialistic even though it has never been based on
a materialistic philosophy with clear outlines.

Position of Ethics in Capitalism
--------------------------------

The result of such materialism with whose spirit the system has been
overwhelmed is that ethics have been left out of all calculations,
without winning any existence in that system, or say their concepts and
ideals have been altered, and the personal benefit has been declared as
a super-most priority and all types of freedom are means towards
achieving this priority. Resulting from that are all calamities and
catastrophes, troubles and tribulations about which the modern world has
complained (and will keep complaining).

Advocates of democratic capitalism may defend its attitude towards the
individual and his personal interests by saying that the personal
interest by itself brings forth the social interest, and the results
achieved by ethics in their spiritual values are also achieved in the
democratic capitalist society, not through "ethics" but through the
special "motives" and their service: When man performs a social
ser­vice, he, too, achieves a personal benefit, being part of the
society for which he labours.

When he save someone's endangered life, he also earns a benefit for
himself, for that person's life will serve the social body a portion of
which service will be his own. Therefore, the personal motive and the
utilitarian sense suffice to guarantee and ensure the social interests
since they, when analyzed, amount to personal interests and individual
benefits

Such an apology is closer to vast imagination than to reasoning. Imagine
if the practical criterion in the life of every individual in the nation
had been the achievement of his personal benefits and interests, to the
widest possible range, and had the State been providing for the
individual his freedom, sanctifying him without reservation or
limitation..., then what would the position of social work have been in
the dictionary of such an individual?

How can the link between the social interest and the individual one be
sufficient to direct the individual towards the oc­cupations called
forth by ethical codes, knowing that many such occupations do not bring
him any benefit?

If it happens that they do contain some benefit to him, since he is a
member of the com­munity, it often happens, too, that such minute
benefit (which cannot be conceived except analyti­cally) would be
counteracted by transient benefits or individual interests which find in
freedom a guar­antee to their achievement, so much so that the
individual would trample over all systems of ethics and spiritual
conscience.

Tragedies of the Capitalist System
----------------------------------

If we wish to discern the consequent series of social tragedies
resulting from this system which does not stand on a studied
philosophical base, this research's scope will only be too narrow for
that; therefore, we would like to just allude to them thus: The first of
such series is the minority ruling the majority, controlling its
interests and essential affairs. Political freedom has meant that the
establishment of systems and codes as well as their execu­tion is the
right of the majority.

Let us suppose that the group which represents the majority of the
na­tion holds the reins of government and legislation while having the
democratic capitalist mentality, which is a mentality purely
materialistic in its trend, inclinations and objectives, what will be
the fate of the other groups?

Or, say, what can the minority expect in the shade of laws legislated
for the benefit of the majority to protect its interests? Will it be
strange, then, if the majority legislates laws in the light of its own
interests, neglecting the minority's interests, following an unjust
trend to achieve its desires that may harm others’ interests? Who will
maintain this minority's existing entity and defend it against
injustice, as long as the personal benefit is the concern of every
individual, and as long as the majority does not know, in its social
concept, any values for the spiritual and intellectual principles?

Naturally, sovereignty will stay under the system as it did before, and
the symp­toms of monopoly and trespassing on the rights and interests of
others will linger in the social at­mosphere of this system as it did in
the old social systems The only difference is that degrading the human
dignity used to be done by the individual to his nation; now in this
system it comes from the majorities against the minorities, the first
composing a huge number of humans.

This is not the whole story. The tragedy would then be simple, but the
stage is set for more laughs than tears. The case worsens and becomes
more severe when the economic issue results from this system later on;
therefore, the economic freedom is decided in the fashion which we have
described above, sanctioning all the ways and means of getting rich; no
matter how outrageous or odd in method or manner, guaranteeing what it
had advertised when the world was busy in a big industrial revolution
and science was giving birth to the machine which over­turned the face
of industry and wiped out manual industries and the like.

The coast was then clear for an outrageous wealth for the nation's
minority. Opportunities enabled the latter to benefit from the modem
means of production, provided by limit­less capitalist liberties with
sufficient absurdities for their utilization and use to the furthermost
limit, annihilating thereby many groups of the nation whose industries
were wiped out by the machine that shook their livelihoods without
finding a way to withstand the torrent, since the promoters of the
modern industries were armed with "economic free­dom" and all other
"sacred" liberties.

Thus does the field remain vacant except of that elite group of the
promoters of industry and production, while the middle class is being
reduced to the generally low level, and this crushed majority falling at
the mercy of that elite group that does not think or calculate except
according to the "democratic capi­talist" mode.

Naturally, then, it would not extend its kind and assisting aid to them
in order to get them out of the pit and give them a share of its
tremendous profits. Why should it, since its "ethical" criterion is
benefit and pleasure, as long as the State guarantees absolute freedom
in what­ever it does, so long as the democratic capitalist sys­tem is
too narrow for the intellectual philosophy of life with all its related
concepts?

The matter, therefore, has to be studied in the manner inspired by this
system, which is: These important men take advantage of the majority's
need for them and their living standards to oblige those who are capable
of working in their occupations and factories for a limited time and for
wages enough only to sus­tain them. This is the "logic" of pure
utili­tarianism which they would naturally adopt, dividing the nation
consequently to a group in the peak of wealth and a majority in a
bottomless pit: Here, the nation's political right is crystallized in a
new form.

As for equality with regard to the citizens' politi­cal rights, even
though it is not wiped out of the system's record, it has survived this
turmoil only as a shadow and pure ideology: When the economic freedom
records the results which we exposed above, it will come to the
conclusion of the deep division which we have explicated, taking control
of the situation and holding the reins, conquering the political
free­dom before it.

Because of its economic status in the society and capacity of using all
means of propaganda, and because of its capacity of buying supporters
and helpers, the capitalist group controls the reins of government in
the nation, seizing power in order to use it for its own interests and
to guard its objectives, and both legislative and social systems will be
controlled by capi­tal, after it has already been supposed by the
demo­cratic concepts to be the right of all the nation. Thus does
democratic capitalism become in the end an authority monopolized by the
minority, a means through which several individuals protect their own
ex­istence at the expense of others, according to the utilitarian
mentality inspired by the democratic capitalist "culture".

Here we reach the worst series enacted by this system. Those people in
whose hands the democratic capitalist system has placed all sorts of
influence, providing them with every kind of power and poten­tial, will
direct their attention, inspired by this sys­tem's mentality, towards
the horizons and feel ­inspired by their interests and objectives—that
they are in need of even new areas of influence for two reasons:

**First:** The abundance of production depends on the extent of
abundance and availability of essen­tial materials; therefore,
whosoever's share of such materials is larger, his producing capacities
will be stronger and more plentiful. These materials are spread in God's
vast lands. It is necessary to obtain them, then the lands which contain
them have to be seized [by force if need be] for absorption and
utilization.

**Second:** The strength of the producing speed and power, motivated by
the anxiety for plenty of profit on one hand, and the low standard of
living of many nations, due to the materialistic greed of the capitalist
group and its competition with the public through its utilitarian means,
on the other, make the public unable to purchase products and consume
them. All of this makes the big producers in dire need of new markets to
sell their surplus products. Finding such markets means thinking of
seizing [colonizing] new lands.

Thus is the matter studied in a purely materialistic mentality.
Naturally, such mentality, the system of which has never been based on
spiritual or ethical principles and the social system of which admits
nothing but filling this limited life with different sorts of pleasures
and desires, finds in these two reasons a justification and a "logical"
appetizer to transgress on peaceful countries, trespass on their
dignity, con­trol their provisions and potential natural resources,
utilizing their wealth for marketing its surplus products.

All of this is a "reasonable" and "permissible" matter, according to the
"ideals" of individual inter­ests on whose bases both capitalist system
and "free economy" stand; from here is the giant of materialism sets
free to invade and wage wars, scuffling and tying, colonizing and
exploiting in order to satisfy the mania of wills and whims. Look into
the tragedies humanity has suffered because of such system which is
materialistic in spirit, form, manner and aim, even though it has never
been based on a certain philosophy in agreement with that spirit and
form, in harmony with such manners and objectives, as we have pointed
out above.

Judge for yourself the share of happiness and stability of a society
based on the principles of this system and ideals, one which lacks
self-denial and mutual trust, true compassion and love, and all the good
spiritual trends, so much so that the indiv­idual lives in it feeling
that he is responsible only for his own self, that he is in danger
because of each and every interest of others that may clash with his
own, as if he is living in a continuous struggle and race, unarmed
except by his own powers, aiming thereby at none other than his own
personal interest.

[^1]: This experiment has won a great significance in the scien­tific
field, having achieved an unexpected success in finding out many facts
and unveiling surprising secrets which have enabled mankind to utilize
those secrets and facts for a practical living. The success it has
achieved has won it sanctity in the minds of common people, making these
people depart from the abstract ideals and all facts which cannot be
realized through the senses and experi­ments, so much so that the
experimental sense has become, according to the doctrine of many
experi­mentalists, the only basis for knowledge and science. We have
explained in Falsafatuna (Our Philosophy) the fact that the experiment
itself relies on the mental intellect, and that the main basis for all
knowledge and science is the mind which realizes facts the senses cannot
feel as it does concrete facts.

[^2]: Among the prevalent beliefs which used to enjoy a high degree of
clarity and simplicity, although based neither on an intellectually
logical basis nor a philosophical proof, was the belief that earth was
the centre of the world. When such beliefs crumbled down in the shade of
accurate experiments, the common notion was shaken, and a wave of doubt
overtook many intel­lects, causing thereby the resurrection of Greek
sophis­try influenced by the doubting spirit just as it was influenced
during the Greek period by the spirit of doubt which had resulted from
the contradictions of philosophical creeds and the intensity of
arguments among them.

[^3]: The Church played a significant role in utilizing religion in a
scandalizing manner, making its name nothing but a tool for the
achievement of its own aims and objectives, strangulating scientific and
social liberties, establishing the Inquisition Courts and granting them
wide prerogatives to fare with people's fate, so much so that all of
that resulted in people being fed-up with religion altogether and
feeling disgusted with it: Crimes were being committed in its name,
although in its pure reality and accurate essence it is not less than
those grumbling critics in denouncing crimes and in the desire to uproot
motives behinds these crimes. I have explained these notions and
undertaken a de­tailed scientific study thereof in my book Iqtisaduna.


