Socialism and Communism
=======================

In socialism, there are many creeds the most famous of which is the
socialist creed, which is based on the Marxist theory, and argumentative
materialism, which is a certain philosophy of life and a materialistic
comprehension of it according to the dialectical method. Dialectical
materialists have applied this dialectical materialism to history,
sociol­ogy and economy. So, it has become a philosophical creed in world
affairs, a method to study history and sociology, a creed in economy and
a plan in politics. In other words, it formulates all of mankind into a
particular structure as regarding his way of thinking, his attitude
towards life and his practical method therein.

There is no doubt that the materialistic phil­osophy and the dialectical
method have never been innovations or creations of the Marxist creed.
The materialistic trend has lived within the philosophical field for
thousands of years, once in the open and once hidden behind
sophistication and absolute denial. Also, the dialectical method of
reasoning is deeply rooted in the lines of human thinking. Its lines
were perfected at the hands of Hegel, the well ­known idealistic
philosopher. Karl Marx only adopted such "reasoning" and philosophy. He
tried to apply it in all fields of life; so, he made two researches: One
of them is his purely materialistic, in a dialectical method,
interpretation of history. The other is his claim therein that he found
out the contradictions within the capital and surplus value which the
capitalist steals in his creed from the labourer[^1].

On these "achievements" has he erected his belief in the necessity of
abolishing the communist and socialist societies which he considered to
be a step for mankind to completely apply communism. The social field in
this philosophy is one of battling contradictions, and every social
situation which prevails on such field is but a purely materialistic
phenomenon which harmonizes with the other phenomena and materialistic
climes and is affected by them. But he at the same time carries his own
self-contradiction in the essence, and a battle of contra­dictions will
then be waged within its context until all contradictions assemble to
cause a change in that situation and prepare for another one.

Thus does the battle linger until all mankind form one single class, and
the interests of every individual will be repre­sented in the interests
of that unified class. At that moment will harmony prevail and peace
become a reality, and all bad effects of the democratic capitalist
system will be completely removed, for they resulted only from the
existence of many classes within one society, and such multitude
resulted from di­viding the society into a producer and a labourer.
Therefore, such a division has to be stopped by abol­ishing (private)
ownership. Here, communism differs from socialism in the main economic
outlines, for the communist economy hinges on:

**First:** Abolishing private ownership and its complete eradication
from the society, giving wealth to the public and placing it in the
hands of the State since the latter is the legal representative of the
so­ciety in managing and utilizing it for the common welfare. The
communist belief in the necessity of this absolute nationalization is
due to the natural reaction of the consequences of private ownership in
the democratic capitalist system.

This nationaliz­ation has thus been justified: It is meant to abolish
the capitalist class and unite the society into one class in order to
put an end to that struggle and to forbid the individual from utilizing
differ­ent means and methods to accumulate his wealth in order to
satisfy his greed, motivated by his own selfish interest.

**Second:** Distribution of products according to individuals’
consumption need. It can be summed up thus: From everyone according to
his capacity, and for everyone according to his need. This is so because
every individual has natural needs without which he cannot live. So, he
gives the so­ciety all of his endeavour so that the society may provide
him with his living necessities and take care of his livelihood.

**Third:** An economic procedure planned by the State, in which it
combines the society's need with production in its volume, diversity and
limitation, so that the society will not be inflicted with the same line
in the communist economy, that is, the abolish­ment of private
ownership, has been substituted with a moderate solution:
nationalization of heavy indus­tries, foreign and domestic trades,
putting all of them under government monopoly; in other words,
abolishing large mass capital by freeing the simple industries and
trades, leaving them to the individuals.

The wide line of the communist economy collided with the reality of the
human nature, to which we referred above, for the individuals started
neglecting the performance of their duties and of being active in their
jobs, running away from their social obliga­tions; the system is
supposed to guarantee their livelihood and the fulfilment of their
needs.

Also, it is supposed not to exert any further effort; there­fore, why
should the individual exert himself and sweat as long as the result is
already in his calculation, the result of both states of laziness and
activity? Why should he rush to provide happiness for others, trading
the convenience of others for his own sweat, tears, life and energy,
since he does not believe in any principle in life except that of a
purely materialistic nature?

Therefore, the advocates of such a creed were forced to freeze absolute
nationalization. They were also forced to adjust the other line in the
communist economy by allowing wages to vary in order to push the
labourers to be active and perfect in their jobs, making the excuse that
these variations are only temporary, and that they will disappear once
the capitalist mentality is crushed and man is created anew.

For the latter purpose, they continuously create changes in their
economic methods and socialist modes in order to follow the failure of
an old method by trying a new one. They have not yet succeeded in
getting rid of all basic cornerstones of the capitalist econ­omy. For
example, the interest loans have not been totally abolished, although
they are, in fact, the basis of social corruption in the capitalist
economy.

All of this, however, does not mean that those advocates have had
shortcomings, or that they have not been serious in their creed or
unfaithful to their doctrine; rather, it means that they have clashed
with reality while trying to put them to practice, finding their path
full of obstacles and contradictions put forth by the human nature
before the revol­utionary method of the "social reform" which they have
been promising. Reality, then, forced them to go back on their word in
the hope that a miracle would sooner or later take place.

As regarding the political aspect, communism, in its long run, aims in
the end at erasing the "state" from the society when the miracle takes
place and the "social mentality" prevails on all humans, so much so that
all people will be thinking of nothing but of the materialistic social
welfare. Before then, as long as the miracle has not taken place yet and
people are not unified into one "class", when the society is still
divided to capitalist and proletariat forces, it is necessary that the
government should be purely proletariat; so, it is a democratic rule
within the circle of labour and also a dictatorship regarding the
masses. They have reasoned thus: Proletariat dictatorship of government
is necessary in all stages passed by mankind, using the individual
mentality for the protection of the interests of the working class,
strangulating capitalism and forbidding it from coming to the field
again.

In fact, this creed, represented by Marxist social­ism then by Marxist
communism, is distinguished from the democratic capitalist system in its
reliance on a particular materialistic philosophy which adopts a
particular concept of life to which all idealistic prin­ciples and
values are not ascribed and which is analyzed in a certain sort of
analysis which does not leave room for a Creator above the natural
limits, nor to an anticipated compensation beyond the borders of this
limited materialistic life. This con­trasts democratic capitalism, for
although it is a ma­terialistic system, it has never been based on a
precise philosophical foundation.

The accurate linkage between the realistic understanding of life and the
social issue as accepted by materialistic communism versus democratic
capitalism has neither believed in this theory, nor has it tried to
explain it. Hence, the communist creed is worthy of a philosophical
study and of a test through tackling the philosophy on which it has
hinged and from which it has been derived.

Judging any system is dependent on the extent of the success of its
philosophical concept in portraying and compre­hending life. It is easy
to comprehend, when we cast the first glance at the simplified or
"accomplished" communist system, that its general nature is the fusion
of the individual into the society, making him a tool for the
achievement of the general criteria which it enforces. It completely
contradicts the free capital­ist system which puts the society at the
service of the individual for the achievement of the latter's interests.

It seems that it has been predestined for the individual and social
personalities, according to the precepts of both systems, to clash and
to duel with each other. The individual personality has become
victorious in one of them, the one based on the individual and his own
personal benefits, inflict­ing the society thereby with economic
catastrophes which have shaken its existence and mutilated life in all
its sectors. The social personality has won in the other, which has come
to correct the mistakes of the previous one, assisting the society and
reducing the individual personality to dissolution and annihi­lation,
inflicting the individuals with severe dilemmas which ruined their
freedom, personal existence and natural rights of selecting and
rationalizing.

Communism Criticized
--------------------

Actually, although the communist system has treated several inflictions
of free capitalism by abolishing private ownership, such a treatment has
had some natural consequences which have made such a treatment very
costly and the method to put it to use very exerting and cannot be used
except when all other ways and methods fail. On the other hand, it is an
incomplete treatment which does not guar­antee the eradication of social
corruption, for it has not really been successful in its diagnosis of
the ail­ment and the discovery of the point from which evil has set out
to subjugate the world to the capitalist system, keeping that point
maintaining its position in the social life of the communist creed.
There­fore, mankind has not won a definite solution to his greatest
problem, nor has he obtained the medicine to medicate his ailments and
uproot his sickening symptoms.

As regarding the consequences of this treatment, they are, indeed,
great: They can put an end to the freedom of individuals for the sake of
substituting communist ownership for private ownership. The case is so
because this tremendous social change contra­dicts the general human
nature upto, at least, the pre­sent time, as its promoters admit, since
materialistic man still thinks subjectively, calculating his interests
through his own limited individualistic eyes.

Estab­lishing a new structure for the society in which the individuals
dissolve completely, a structure which totally puts an end to personal
motives, requires a strong power to hold the society's reins with iron
hands, suppressing any resisting voice, strangulating any opposition,
monopolizing all means of news media and the press, enforcing a belt
around the nation nobody can by any means go beyond, and becoming
habituated to charging and doubting, so that the rein of authority may
not suddenly slip out of its hands.

This is natural in every system desired to be imposed on the nation
before the mentality of such a system ripens in it and its spirit
prevails. Yes, if materialistic man starts reasoning social­ly,
realizing his interests in a social mentality, with his own personal
feelings, desires and inclinations melting through his own self, then a
system in which individ­uals "melt" can be established, leaving in the
arena none but as huge “social” giant.

But the achievement of this in the materialistic man, who does not
believe except in a limited life without knowing any meaning for it
except materialistic pleasures, needs a miracle to create paradise on
earth and to bring it down from hea­ven. The communists promise us such
a paradise, wait­ing for that day when the factory changes the human
nature, creating him anew with idealistic thoughts and deeds even if he
does not believe the weight of an atom in ideal values or ethical
principles. If such a miracle happens, then we will have a talk with
them.

As for the time being, the position of the social structure which they
desire calls for the confinement of individuals within the limits of
this structure's idea and its guarantee for protection by the group that
believes in it and using caution concerning it by sup­pressing the human
nature and the psychological emotions, forbidding them by all possible
means from setting themselves free.

Even when he wins a total assurance and a social guarantee of his
livelihood and needs, for the social wealth provides him with all of
these during the time of need, the individual who lives in the shade of
a system like this will be better off if he can get such an assurance
without losing the pleasure of breathing the fresh air of cultivated
freedom rather than being forced to melt his personality in fire and
drown him­self in the tumultuous social sea.

How can he have a desire for freedom, in any field, when he is deprived
of freedom in livelihood, while sustaining his life is totally tied to a
particular "committee", although economic and sustain­ing freedom is the
basis of all other norms of free­dom? The advocates answer this question
by still asking: "What can man do with freedom and enjoyment of his
right to criticize and publicize his opin­ions while moaning under a
horrible social burden? What benefit can his discussion and opposition
bring him when he needs accurate nutrition and guaranteed life more than
opposition or the fuss freedom brings him?"

Those who ask such questions look only at capi­talist democracy as if it
is the only social issue which competes with their own in the field;
therefore, they underestimate the value of the individual dignity and
its rights, for they see it as a menace to the general social torrent.
But humanity has the right not to sacrifice any of its principles or
privileges as long as it does not have to. It has but to choose either a
dignity which is an ideal privilege of humanity, and a need which is its
materialistic privilege, only if it lacks the system which can combine
both aspects and succeed in solving both problems.

The man whose energy is being squeezed by others, without finding a good
and comfortable life or a fair salary and an assurance during the time
of need, is indeed one deprived of enjoying life, separated from a
stable and quiet life. Also, a man threatened every moment, questioned
about every movement, liable to be arrested without a trial and be
imprisoned, banished or even killed for any reason, is indeed one who
lives in fear and ter­ror; horror forbids him from enjoying the
pleasures of this life.

The third man, the one whose life is comfort­able, feeling assured of
preserving his dignity and safety, is indeed humanity's sweet dream. So,
how can such a dream become a reality? When will it become an existing
actuality? We have said above that the communist solution to the social
problem is incomplete, in addition to its consequences to which we have
also referred. For he, although human emotions and feelings breathe
within him, is evoked by the general social pressure which caused some
thinkers to resort to the new solution, but they did not put their hands
on the causes of corruption so that they could eradicate it; rather,
they eradicated something else; therefore, they were not successful in
their medication.

The concept of private ownership is not the one responsible for the sins
of absolute capitalism which shook the world and its felicity, so much
so that it is not the one that forces millions of labourers to be idle
for the sake of the investment of a new machine which put an end to
their industry, as it happened at the dawn of the Industrial Revolution,
nor is it the one that forces the capitalist to destroy large quantities
of his products in order to maintain their price and in preference of
extravagance to satisfy the need of the poor thereby.

Nor is it the one that invites him to make his wealth a gaining capital
multiplied through usury, absorbing the civilians' endeavour without
production or toil. Nor is it the one that pushes him to buy all
consumption goods from the market in order to monopolize them and raise
their prices. Nor is it the one that forces him to open new markets,
even when the freedom and rights of nations will be violated by them and
their prestige and freedom weakened. All of these terrifying calamities
have not re­sulted from private ownership; rather, they are the breed of
the materialistic individual interest which has been made the criterion
of life in the capitalist system and the absolute reason for all acts
and deal­ings.

When a society is based on such an individual criterion which is
self-advocate, nothing can be ex­pected from it except what has already
befallen. It is from the nature of this criterion that all curses and
calamities befall the entire human race, not from the principle of
private ownership. If the criterion is changed, and a new cultivated
objective for life is put forth, one that harmonizes with the human
nature, only then will the real remedy of the greatest human problem
become a reality.

[^1]: I have explained these theories and undertaken a detailed
scientific study of them in my book Iqtisaduna.


