Islam and The Social Problem
============================

The Accurate Analysis of The Problem
------------------------------------

In order to reach the first circle in analyzing the social problem, we
have to question that materialistic individualistic interest established
by the capitalist system as a criterion, a pretext, a goal and an
objective and ask: "What is the idea which made such a criterion seem to
be correct according to the democratic capitalist mentality which
inspired it?" This very idea is the real basis of the social tribulation
and the failure of democratic capitalism in bringing about man's
happiness and safeguarding his dignity. If we can abolish such an idea,
we will put a definite end to all conspiracies against social welfare
and intrigues against the society's rights and accurate freedom and be
successful in utilizing the private ownership for humanity's good,
upliftment and advancement in the industrial spheres and production
fields.

So, what is this idea?

This idea is summarized according to the limited materialistic
interpretation of life on which the West has erected the colossal
monument of capitalism. If every member of the society believes that his
only field in this great universe is his personal materi­alistic life,
believing also in his freedom in using and utilizing this life, and that
he can gain nothing from this life except the pleasure made available to
him through materialism, adding these materialistic creeds to his
egoism, which is essentially inherent within him..., then he will choose
the path of materialists and execute all of their methods, unless a
mighty power deprives him of his freedom and stops him.

Egoism is the instinct more general or ancient than any other we have
come to know. All other instincts are its own branches and divisions,
including the instinct of survival. Man's love for his own self, which
means his love for pleasure and happiness for his own person, and his
hatred of pain and suffering, is the motive which pushes him to make a
living and provide himself with his nutritious and materialistic needs.
Therefore, he may put an end to his own life by committing suicide if he
finds out that the pain of dying is easier than tolerating the pains of
which his life is full.

The natural reality, that is, that which hides behind every human life,
directing it with its fingers, is egoism which we call "loving pleasure
and hating pain". Man cannot be required to willingly tolerate the
bitterness of pain without enjoying some pleasure simply in order that
others may get their own plea­sure and felicity except when he is robbed
of his humanity and is given a new nature which neither loves pleasure
nor hates pain.

Even the marvellous norms of self-denial, which we see in mankind and
about which we hear throughout history, are, in fact, subject to the
same principal motivating power: egoism. Man may be influenced by his
son or friend, and he may sacrifice himself for the sake of some ideals
and principles, but he would never per­form such heroism unless he
derives a particular pleasure from it and a benefit which exceeds the
loss he suffers by preferring his son's or friend's benefit to that of
his own, or by sacrificing himself for the sake of a principle in which
he believes.

Thus can we interpret the general behaviour of man, in the spheres of
egoism and sacrifice alike. Man has an inherent readiness to enjoy
different things: materialistic, like enjoying eating, drinking, sexual
pleasures, etc., or non-materialistic, like behavioural and emotional
pleasures, that is, enjoying ethical principles and a spiritual
companion, or a particular faith, when man finds such principles or that
companion or this faith to be part of his own entity.

This readiness which prepares man to enjoy such different sorts of
pleasures differs in degrees among individuals and varies in
effectiveness accord­ing to the variations in man's circumstances,
natural elements and the upbringing which influences him. When we find
out that such readiness matures na­turally in man, such as his readiness
to enjoy sex, for example, we find out that the other kinds of
readi­ness may not appear during one's lifetime, and that they remain
waiting for the natural elements to help them mature and blossom.

Behind all such readi­ness is the egoistic instinct which outlines man's
behaviour according to the degree of maturity of such readiness; it
pushes a person to prefer one kind of food to another when he is hungry,
and it pushes some other person to even give his own food to others.
This is so because the first person's readiness to enjoy the ethical and
emotional principles which pushes him to self-denial is hidden: The
auxiliary elements of upbringing have neither centralized nor matured
such readiness. The other person has won such sort of upbringing;
therefore, he enjoys ethical and emotional principles, sacrificing his
own self for their achievement.

When we want to make a change in someone's behaviour, we have to change
his concept of pleasure and benefit, including the suggested behaviour
in the general framework of the egoistic instinct.

If the egoistic instinct occupies such a position in man's world, and
the "self" means nothing but a limited materialistic energy, and
pleasure is nothing but whatever fun and felicity materialism brings, it
would be natural for man then to feel that his sphere of gaining is
limited, his scope is short, and his objective in it is to get an amount
of materialistic pleasure. The way to get that is, of course, confined
to life's vein: wealth, which opens the door to man to achieve all of
his purposes and desires. This is the natural sequence of materialistic
reasoning which leads to a complete capitalist men­tality.

Can you see if the problem can be totally solved if we refuse the
principle of private ownership, while maintaining such materialistic
concepts of life as those thinkers have tried? Can society be saved from
the tragedy of such principles by only abolishing private ownership so
that it would gain a guarantee for its happiness and stability? The only
guarantee for man's happiness and stability depends to a large extent on
ensuring that those charged with respon­sibility will not deviate from
their scopes and reform plans in the field of action and execution.

Such res­ponsible persons are supposed to embrace the same purely
materialistic concepts of life on which capi­talism stands. The only
difference is that they have shaped such concepts in new philosophical
structures. Reason would suppose that the personal interest quite often
stands in the face of the common interest, and that the individual has
to choose between either a loss and a pain which he endures for the sake
of others, or a gain and pleasure which he enjoys at their own expense.
So, what guarantees the nation and its rights, the doctrine and its
objectives, will have during such critical moments through which the
rulers go?

The indiv­idual interest is not represented in private ownership only,
so that we would rule out our supposition to abolish the principle of
private ownership; rather, it is represented in many different manners
and forms. A proof for that is the treason of many past rulers
discovered today by the advocates of communism who have revealed how
those rulers deviated from the same principles which they had professed
to adopt.

The wealth controlled by the capitalist group, under the shade of
absolute economic and individual liberties, dealing with it according to
its materialistic mentality, is given, when the state nationalizes all
sorts of wealth and abolishes private ownership, to the state apparatus
itself which is composed of a group controlled by the same materialistic
concepts of life which oblige them to give priority to their own
individualistic interests, according to the egoistic instinct, refusing
that man should give up his pleasure and interest without a
compensation. So long as the materialistic interest is the dominating
power, accord­ing to the materialistic concepts of life, new fields for
struggle and competition will be reserved, and the society will be
exposed to different dangers and exploitation.

Danger to humanity is all hidden within such materialistic concepts and
whatever goals and deeds stem from them. Unifying capitalist norms of
wealth, the small or the big, into one huge wealth to be taken care of
by the state, without any new development of the human intellect, does
not curb such a danger; rather, it turns the entire nation into
labourers working for one company, tying their life and prestige to the
promoters and owners of that company.

Yes, this “company” differs from the capitalist company: The owners of
the capitalist company are the ones who own its profits, spending them
according to their own inclinations, while the owners of the other
company do not possess any of that, as the system assumes. But the
fields of individualistic interest are still open, and the materialistic
concept of life, the one that makes such an interest a goal and a
justification, still remains

How to Solve the Problem
------------------------

The world has two ways to avoid the danger and establish the pillars of
a stable society:

One is this: Mankind has to be changed, or a new nature be created
within him that would make him sacrifice his personal interests and
limited materialistic achievements for the sake of the society and its
interests, in spite of his own belief that there are no principles
except those materialistic ones, and no gains except those of this
limited life.

This could be accomplished if egoism were uprooted from his nature's
essence and substituted with love for the group; therefore, man will be
born not loving his own self except as being part of the society,
feeling no pleasure for his own happiness and benefits ex­cept as they
represent part of the general happiness and common interest. The
"instinct" of loving the group will then guarantee its running after its
own interests and the achievement of its own ob­jectives in a mechanical
manner and mode.

The other, the one the advocates of communism dream of bringing into
man's future, promising the world that they would create it anew, a
creation which would make it move mechanically to serve the group and
its interests, is this: So that such a great feat is accomplished, we
have to trust the world leadership to them, just as the patient is
entrusted to the surgeon for surgery in order to chop off his bad parts
and adjust the crooked ones. Nobody knows how long such a surgical
operation, which puts man at the mercy of the surgeon, will last.

Man's sub­mission to that is but the greatest proof of the extent of
injustice which he has suffered in the democratic capital­ist system
which has deceived him with the alleged "freedoms", robbing him finally
of even his own dignity, sucking his blood in order to present him as an
easy drink to the pampered group represented by the rulers. The idea of
such an opinion which advocates treating the problem by "modernizing"
man and creating him anew, hinges on the Marxist interpretation of
egoism.

Marxism believes that self-love (egoism) is neither a natural
inclination nor an in­stinctive phenomenon within man's entity but a
result of the social condition which is based on private ownership, for
the social status of private ownership is what formulates the spiritual
and in­nate composition of man, creating in the individual his own love
for his personal interests and individual benefits.

If a revolution occurs in the bases on which the social structure
stands, and general ownership and socialism substitute private
owner­ship, then the revolution will be reflected in all cor­ners of the
society and in the inner context of man; so much so that his personal
feelings will change to common feelings, and his love for his own
interests and individualistic benefits will change to loving the common
interest and benefit, according to the equi­librium law between the
status of Islamic ownership and the totality of the overall phenomenon
according to which they condition themselves.

In fact, this Marxist interpretation of egoism judges the relationship
between the self's reality (the egoistic instinct) and the social
circumstances in an upside-down manner. Otherwise, how can we believe
that the personal motive is the outcome of private ownership and all the
class contradictions resulting from it?

If man did not have, before hand, the personal motive, he would not have
caused such contradictions, nor could he have thought of private
ownership and personal monopoly. Why should man monopolize the system's
achievements, placing it in such a way that protects his own inter­ests
at the expense of others, if he does not feel the personal motive within
the depths of his own self?

The fact is that the social appearances of egoism in the economic and
political field are but the result of the personal motive, of the
egoistic instinct. This motive is deeper than it is in man's entity;
therefore, it cannot vanish, nor can its roots be pulled out by simply
removing such effects, for an operation like this is not more than
substituting effects for others different than the first in shape or
appearance yet similar to them in essence and reality.

Add to this, if we interpret the personal motive (the egoistic instinct)
subjectively, as a reflection of the phenomenon of individualism within
the social system, such as the phenomenon of private owner­ship, as
Marxism has done, would this not mean that the personal motive will lose
its subjective and causing factor from the social system by abolishing
private ownership because, although it is a phenomenon of an
individualistic nature, it still is not unique in kind, as there is, for
example, the phenomenon of private management which is kept even by the
socialist sys­tem?

Although it abolishes private ownership of the means of production, the
socialist system does not abolish the private management by the ruling
ap­paratus which practices proletariat dictatorship and monopolizes the
supervision over all means of pro­duction and their management. It is
not logical to manage the means of production at the moment of their
nationalization by a social common manage­ment of all the individuals of
the society.

The social­ist system, then, maintains distinguished individual­istic
phenomena, and it is natural that such phe­nomena maintain the personal
motive, continuously reflecting it in the inner context of man, just as
the phenomenon of private ownership used to do.

Thus do we come to know the value of the first way to solve the problem:
the communist way which regards abolishing the legislation of private
ownership, wiping it out of the law, as the only guarantee to solve the
problem and "modernize" man. As regarding the other way, which is stated
above, it is the one followed by Islam because of its belief that the
only solution to the problem is to develop man's materialistic concept
of life.

It has not started with abolishing the concept of private ownership;
rather, it assaulted the materialistic concept of life and put for life
a new concept, basing on it a system in which the individual is not
treated as a machine in the social apparatus, nor is the society a group
ready to serve the individual.

Rather, it has given each his rights, and has guaranteed the individual
his dignity, spiritual and materialistic. Islam has placed its hand on
the real cause of sickness in the democratic social system, and whatever
systems branch from it, wiping them out in a manner which harmonizes
with the human nature.

The basic hinging point to what the human life has suffered different
sorts of miseries and calamities is the materialistic outlook of life
which may be summed up thus: the supposition that only man's life on
earth is worthy of all consideration. It establishes the
indiv­idualistic interest as the criterion to each action and activity.

According to Islam, democratic capitalism is a system doomed to collapse
and will certainly fail not because of the allegations of the advocates
of communist economy, the self-contradictions of capitalism and the
elements of destruction carried inherently by private ownership, for
Islam differs in its logical approach, political economy and social
philosophy from the concepts of such allegations and their argumentative
manner, as I have clarified in my works *Falsafatuna* (Our Philosophy)
and *Iqtisaduna* (Our Economy), and it guarantees the position of
private ownership within a social framework, one free of such alleged
contradictions.

The reason for the failure and aggravating situ­ation with which
democratic capitalism is afflicted, according to Islam, is rendered to
the purely materialistic concepts of democratic capitalism which cannot
make people happy in a system that learns its essence from it, deriving
its general outlines from its es­sence and direction.

There has to be, thereupon, some other source, other than the
materialistic ideas about the universe, from which the social system
quenches its thirst, and there has to be an accurate political awareness
stemming out of true concepts of life, adopting the greatest of man's
issues, attempting to achieve it on the basis of such concepts and
studying the world affairs from that angle. When such political
aware­ness matures in the world, wiping away any other political
awareness, the world will then be able to enter a new life shining with
light, full of happiness. This deep political awareness is the true
message of Islam in the world, and such a delivering message is, indeed,
the eternal message of Islam which has derived its social system, which
differs from all the systems we have so far explicated, from a new
intel­lectual base for life and the universe.

Through such an intellectual base, Islam has defined the proper outlook
of man at his life. It has made him believe that his life stems from the
principle of absolute perfection, that it is but a prep­aration for a
world free of toil and suffering, hence providing him with a new ethical
criterion in his steps and stages. This criterion is: the pleasure of
Allah Almighty. Not everything the individual interest imposes is
permissible, yet everything causing an individual loss is prohibited and
undesirable.

Rather, the goal which Islam has drawn for mankind in his life is Divine
Pleasure, and the ethical criterion through which all deeds are weighed
is the amount one is able to obtain of such a sacred goal. The straight
man is that who achieves such a goal. The complete Islamic character is
the one which has made all of its various paces along the guidance of
such goal and the light of such criterion and within its general
framework.

This change in the ethical concepts, criteria and objectives does not
mean changing the human nature and creating it anew, as the communist
idea meant. Egoism, that is, man's love for his own self and for the
achievement of his personal desires, is natural in mankind, and we do
not know of any research in any experimental field which is more clear
than that of humanity in its long history which proves the "self" of
egoism.

If egoism had not been natural and inherent within man, early man would
not have rushed, before forming his social entity, to achieve his needs
and defend himself against the dangers and try in his primitive ways
through which he protected his life and maintained his existence to get
what he de­sired and in the end enter the social life and assimilate in
relations with others for the purpose of achieving such needs and
avoiding such dangers. Since egoism occupies such a position in the
human nature, any definite solution to the great human problem must be
based on belief in such a reality. If it is based on the idea of
developing or overcoming it, then it will be an idealistic solution
which does not have a place in the reality of the practical life man has
been leading.

The Religious Message
---------------------

Here, religion performs its great message the burdens of which no one
else can bear, nor its constructive goals and wise objectives can be
achieved, except on its bases and principles. It combines the ethical
criteria put by man with the egoistic instinct centred with­in his
nature. In other words, religion unites the instinctive criteria of
working and living; that is, egoism, and the criterion which ought to be
the basis for working and living, in order to guarantee (for mankind)
happiness, prosperity and justice.

The instinctive criterion demands that man must give preference to his
own personal interests over those of the society and the factors which
maintain its unity; and the criterion which must preside and prevail is
that in the estimation of which all interests equate, and according to
the concepts of which all individual and social principles strike a
balance. How is it possible, then, to coordinate both criteria and unite
both balances so that the human nature might return in the individual to
be a factor of goodness and happiness for everyone, after it had been
for a long time a factor that caused tragedies which developed
selfishness, as it pleases?

The coordination and unification occur in a manner guaranteed by
religion for the strayed hu­manity, and this has two styles: The first
style is to concentrate on the realistic interpretation of life,
propagating its comprehension in its accurate hue, as introductory
prelude to an everlasting life in which man achieves an amount of
happiness which depends on his endeavour during this limited life in the
hope to achieve the Pleasure of Allah.

The ethical criterion, that is, achieving Allah's Pleasure, while
winning its great social objectives, simultaneously ensures the
achievement of the individual interest. Religion, therefore, leads man
to partici­pate in the construction of a happy society and the
maintenance of its just issues which, all in all, achieve the Pleasure
of Allah Almighty, for that is included in the estimation of his
personal gain, so long as every deed and activity in this field will be
quite handsomely rewarded.

The society's issue is also the individual's, according to the precepts
and concepts of religion regarding life and its comprehension. Such a
style of coordination cannot be achieved under the shade of a
materialistic comprehension of life, for the ma­terialistic
comprehension of life makes man naturally looking at none but his
present scope and limited lifespan, contrarily to the realistic
interpretation of life presented by Islam. The latter expands man's
scope, imposing on him a deeper outlook at his own interests and
benefits, turning a quick loss into a real gain within such a deep
sight, and the quick gain is turned in the end into a real loss:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ أَسَاء فَعَلَيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever does a good deed, it is for his own self, and whoever does
wrong, it is against his own self.*** ***(Qur'an, 41:46).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَأُولَئِكَ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ يُرْزَقُونَ فِيهَا بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever, male or female, does a good deed, while truly believing,
shall certainly en­ter Paradise in which he will be sustained without a
limit.*** ***(Qur'an, 40:40) .***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ يَصْدُرُ النَّاسُ أَشْتَاتًا لِّيُرَوْا أَعْمَالَهُمْ،
فَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَهُ، وَمَن يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On that Day (of Judgement) shall people be presented in numerous
numbers in order to be shown their deeds; whoever does good even the
weight of an atom shall receive its reward, and whoever does wrong even
the weight of an atom shall receive its punishment.*** ***(Qur'an,
99:6-8).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ لاَ يُصِيبُهُمْ ظَمَأٌ وَلاَ نَصَبٌ وَلاَ
مَخْمَصَةٌ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلاَ يَطَؤُونَ مَوْطِئًا يَغِيظُ
الْكُفَّارَ وَلاَ يَنَالُونَ مِنْ عَدُوٍّ نَّيْلاً إِلاَّ كُتِبَ لَهُم
بِهِ عَمَلٌ صَالِحٌ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ،
وَلاَ يُنفِقُونَ نَفَقَةً صَغِيرَةً وَلاَ كَبِيرَةً وَلاَ يَقْطَعُونَ
وَادِيًا إِلاَّ كُتِبَ لَهُمْ لِيَجْزِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنَ مَا
كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[This is so] because thirst does not afflict them nor fatigue nor
hunger in God’s way, nor do they tread a path which enrages the
infidels, nor do they receive from the enemy (any injury) but on account
of its being reckoned to their credit as a deed of righteousness. Indeed
God does not allow the reward of those who do good to go in vain. Nor do
they spend anything (in the way of God), be it small or big, nor do they
cut across a valley, except that it is recorded to their credit so that
God may reward them with*** ***better than what they were doing.***
***(Qur’an, 9:120 – 121).***

These are but some magnificent portraits our religion presents as an
example for the first style, the one it follows for the purpose of
coordinating both criteria and the unification of both balances, joining
the per­sonal motives with the ways of goodness in life and developing
the individual’s interest in a manner that would make him believe that
his personal interests and the general matter-of-fact interest, as
outlined by Islam, are inter-related.[^1]

As regarding the other method followed by relig­ion to incorporate the
personal motive with the society’s prin­ciples or interests, it is to
guarantee to nourish man spiritually and help the growth of humane
feelings and ethical inclinations within him. Within the human nature,
as we have pointed out before, there are energies and capabilities of
different inclinations. Some of them are materialistic the appetites of
which open naturally, such as the appetite for food, drink and sex,
while others are intellectual inclinations which blossom and grow
through culti­vation and care.

Therefore, it is natural for man, if left for himself, to be controlled
by the materialistic inclinations, for these blossom naturally, while
the intellectual inclinations and their innate readiness remain veiled
within the soul. Religion, believing in an infallible leadership
supported by God, entrusts the task of cultivating humanity and
nurturing the intellectual inclinations therein to this leadership and
its branches, creating thereby a group of righteous emotions and
feelings, and man starts loving the ethi­cal principles and ideals which
religion brings him up to respect and to die for, and it removes from
his path all obstacles composed of his own interests and benefits.

This does not mean that egoism is obliterated from the human nature.
Rather, it means that the action geared towards the achievement of such
principles and ideals is a complete execution of the will of ego­ism,
for the principles, because of religious upbring­ing, become loved by
man as means of deriving a "special" pleasure from them.

These, then, are the two ways from which results the joining of the
ethical issue to the personal matter. One of them may be summarized
thus: providing a realistic interpretation of an everlasting life not
for the purpose of man turning away from this life, nor is it for his
submission to injustice and acceptance of iniquity. Not at all; it is
for the sake of checking man through the accurate ethical criterion
provided by that interpretation with sufficient assurance.

The other way may be summarized thus: The ethical education resulting in
various feelings and emotions within man which guarantee the
implementation of the ethical criterion according to the inspiration of
the soul. The spiritual comprehension and ethical edu­cation of the
soul, according to the Message of Islam, are the coordinating factors in
treating the deeper cause behind the human tragedy. Let us describe the
comprehension of life as a prelude for a perpetual one, according to the
spiri­tual comprehension of life, and let us describe the emotions and
feelings, nurtured by the ethical edu­cation, as "the ethical feelings
of life".

The spiritual comprehension of life and the ethical feeling thereof are
the two bases on which the new ethical criterion put by Islam for
humanity stands, and this (criterion) is: achieving the Pleasure of
Allah. This Pleasure, the one put forth by Islam as a general criterion
for life, is the one which leads the boat towards the shores of
righteousness, goodness and justice. The basic characteristic in the
Islamic system is represented through its erection on a spiritual
comprehension of life and an ethical feeling thereof, and the wide line
in this system is: the regard for both individual and society, and
ensuring the equi­librium between the individual and the social life:
The individual is not the central base in the legis­lation and
government, nor is the big social being the only thing the State looks
at or for whose sake it legislates.

Every social system which does not stem out of this comprehension and
feeling is either a system which follows the individual in his egoistic
inclination, thus exposing the social life to the most severe
consequences and dire perils, or it is a system which suppresses the
individual's instincts and paralyzes in him his own nature for the sake
of "protecting" the society and its interests, hence an everlasting
bitter struggle starts between the system and its legislations, and the
individuals and their inclinations.

Nay! The social existence of the system will always be exposed to
failure at the hands of its own promoters, as long as they, too, have
their own personal inclinations and instincts, and so long as these
instincts find, through suppressing the other "individualistic"
instincts and taking charge of strict leadership, a wide scope and a
field unmatchable for setting out and utilization.

Both spiritual comprehension of life and the ethical feeling thereof do
not only result in a com­plete system of life in which there is high
regard for each component of the society, each individual will be
granted his liberty which has been cultivated by that comprehension and
feeling and which the State re­stricts when there is any deviation from
it. I say: Every doctrine which does not produce for mankind this sort
of system can never be other than cooling the air off and alleviating
woes rather than providing a remedy and a definite eradication of social
desires and vices.

The intact social structure is erected on none other than a spiritual
comprehension of life and an ethical feeling thereof, one from which
both a system is set forth to fill life with the spirit of this feeling
and the essence of that comprehension. This is Islam in the most precise
and wonderful expression: a spiritual and ethical doctrine from which
springs a perfect system for mankind which portrays the clearly marked
scope, determining his goal to be even higher than that scope,
acquainting him with his achievements there from.

As for its abolishment of the spiritual compre­hension of life,
stripping man of his ethical feeling thereof, considering the ethical
concepts as pure whims created by the materialistic interests, and that
only the economic factor is the criterion for all values and ethics,
hoping from all of this to achieve man's happiness and social
stability..., this, indeed, is but a hope, a desire, which can never be
achieved until man­kind is turned into a mechanical apparatus organized
by few mechanical engineers.

Basing man on the basis of that spiritual comprehension of life and the
ethical feeling thereof is not a hard or impossible task, for religions
during man's history have performed their great message in this respect,
and all what the world today contains of spiritual values, ethical
awareness, virtuous feelings and emotions do not have an explanation
more clear and logical in their pillars and bases other than the great
endeavours undertaken by religions to culti­vate humanity and its
natural motives and whatever required for living and working.

Islam has carried the torch of bursting light after mankind had reached
a certain degree of awareness. It preached the spiritual and ethical
base on the widest scales and furthermost scopes, raising thereupon the
banner of humanity. It established an intel­lectual State which ruled
the world for a quarter of a century, aiming at the unity of all mankind
into one intellectual base which portrays the mode and man­ner of life.
The Islamic State, therefore, has two functions: One is to lift mankind
through the intel­lectual base, stamping his inclination and feelings
with its stamp. The other is watching him externally and bringing him
back to the base if he practically deviates from it.

Therefore, the political awareness of Islam is not only an awareness of
the structural aspect of the social life, but it also is a profound
political awareness which stems from an entirely complete outlook
towards life, the cosmos, sociology, politics, economics and ethics.

This inclusive outlook is the complete Islamic awareness. Any other sort
of political awareness can either be a superficial political awareness
which does not look at the world except from a particular angle without
basing its concepts except on one particular hinging point. Or it may be
a political aware­ness which studies the world from the purely
materi­alistic angle which provides mankind with feuds and sufferings of
all various shapes and hues.

[^1]: Refer to Iqtisaduna, p.307.


