Islam’s Position Towards Freedom and Social Assurance
=====================================================

Freedom According to Capitalism and Islam
-----------------------------------------

We have come to know, from the above con­tents, that freedom is the
central point in the capital­ist thinking, and the concept of
"insurance" (rather, assurance) is the basic revolving point in the
socialist and communist systems. For this purpose we will be studying,
com­paratively, the position of Islam and capitalism from freedom,
comparing thereafter between the "insurance" according to Islam and
according to the Marxist creed. When we say "freedom", we mean thereby
its general meaning; that is, rejection of others' domi­nation, for this
concept is the one which we can find in both civilizations, even when
its frame and intellec­tual base vary in both[^1].

When we start comparing freedom according to Islam with freedom
according to the democratic capitalist system, basic differences appear
to us between the freedom which has been lived by the capi­talist
society and advocated by capitalism, and the freedom whose banner Islam
has borne and adopted by the society which Islam has created, providing
its own experience on history's stage. Each of these norms of freedom
bears the stamp of civilization to which it belongs and with whose
concepts of the cosmos and life it agrees, expressing the intellectual
and psychological state which civilization created in history.

Freedom, in the capitalist civilization, has start­ed as a bitterly
overwhelming doubt, and this doubt changed, in its revolutionary
expansion, into a doctrinal belief in freedom. Contrarily to this is
freedom in the Islamic civilization, for here it is but an expression of
a firm central conviction (i.e., belief in God) from which freedom
derives its revolution.

According to the firmness of this conviction and the depth of its
implication in man's life do the revolutionary powers in that freedom
multiply. Capitalist freedom has a positive connotation. It considers
man to possess his own self, faring with it as he pleases, without
surrendering in that to any external authority.

For this purpose, all social insti­tutions, which affect man's life,
derive their legal right to control every individual from the
individuals themselves. Freedom, according to Islam, maintains the
revolutionary aspect of freedom: man’s emancipation from the slavery of
idols' control, all idols from whose yoke humanity has been suffering
throughout history. But it erects this great task of liberation on the
basis of a submission purely for Allah, and for Allah alone.

Therefore, man's submission to God in Islam (instead of possessing his
own self, according to capitalism) is the tool through which man breaks
all other norms of submission or slavery, for this sort of submission,
in its sublime meaning, makes him feel that he, together with all other
sorts of power with which he coexists, stands on the same grounds before
one Lord. Therefore, no power on earth has the right to fare with his
destiny as it pleases or to control his existence and life. Freedom,
according to the precepts of capitalist civilization, is a natural right
for man, and he may give his right up whenever he pleases. But it is not
so according to Islam. Freedom according to Islam is essentially tied to
submission to Allah. Islam does not permit man to yield, to be enslaved
or to give up his freedom:

*Do not be a slave of others, since Allah created you free*.[^2]

Man, according to Islam, is to account for the use of his freedom, and
freedom is not a state of irresponsibility.

This is the difference between both norms of freedom in their general
characteristics. Now we are going to explain this concept with more
details:

Freedom According to the Capitalist Civilization
------------------------------------------------

Freedom was initiated in the capitalist civiliza­tion under the shades
of an overwhelmingly bitter doubt which dominated the mainstreams of the
entire European thought as a result of the intellectual revol­utions
which succeeded each other at the dawn of modern Europe, shaking all the
Western intellectual pillars.

The idols of European thinking started falling down one after the other
due to the revolutionary discoveries in the world of science which cast
their light at the Western man with new concepts of the world and life,
and with theories completely in contradiction to the accepted precepts
of the past, those which formed the cornerstone of his intellectual
entity, intellectual and religious life.

Western man started, across those successive ­intellectual revolutions,
to look at the cosmos through new eyes, and at the intellectual heritage
humanity had left him since the dawn of history with looks of doubt and
suspicion. He started to feel that the world of Copernicus, who proved
that the earth is but a planet of the sun, differs a great deal from the
conventional world which Ptolemy spoke of, and that nature, which
started revealing its secrets to Galileo and his peers among the
scientists, is a new thing compared to the portrait inherited down from
the saints and former thinkers like Saint Thomas Acquinas, Dante and
others.

Thus does he suddenly, and with a trembling hand, throw his former
precepts, trying to be relieved of the frame in which he lived thousands
of years. In its escalating revolutionary torrent, doubt did not stop
there. Rather, it wiped out all values and precepts common to humanity
and on which it depended to check behaviour and regulate relationships.
So long as the new cosmos contradicts the old concepts of the world, and
as long as man keeps looking at his reality and environment from a
scientific angle, rather than from mythology, then there has to be a
reassessment of the religious concept and likewise of all goals and
principles man has lived before his new outlook of himself and his world
crystallizes.

On this basis has the religion of Western man faced the dilemma of
"modern" doubt, and it does not really hinge except on an emotional
basis which soon started drying up because of the Church's tyranny and
might. It was natural, then, that all of these ethical bases melted at
the conclusion of this defeat. So were the principles and ideals which
check man's behaviour and tolerate his extremism, for ethics have always
been linked to religion throughout humanity's existence. When they lose
their religious source which provides them with true values and links
them to the world of the unknown and of the rewards, they be­come an
empty ruin and an unjustifiable tax. History always highlights this
fact.

Greek advocates of sophistry disbelieved in deism because of their
dependence on a "sophisticated" doubt, so they rejected the ethical
restrictions, rebelling against them, and Western man repeated the story
anew when "modern" doubt engulfed his religious creed. He revolted
against all sorts of disciplinary manners and ethical codes. Such
manners and ethics seemed to him to be linked to an ancient phase of
man's history.

Western man set out as he willed to behave as he liked, filling his
lungs with the fresh air in which "modern" doubt occupied the position
of principles and standards, when they used to restrict the internal
inclination of man and his behaviour. Here were the ideas of the
intellectual freedom and the personal liberty born: The idea of
intel­lectual freedom has come as a result of a revolutionary doubt and
a mental disturbance which blew up all intellectual precepts.

So much so that there remain no more sublime facts the denial of which
is not permissible, as long as doubt extends itself to all spheres. And
the idea of personal liberty comes as an expression of the negative
results reached by "modern" doubt in its intellectual combat against
faith and ethics, for it is natural that the man who conquers his own
faith and ethics is to believe in his own personal liberty and reject
any authority to check his behaviour and control his will. According to
such a sequence, modern man reaches doubt, intellectual freedom and
finally "personal liberty". Here comes the role of economic freedom to
form a new series of this "civilized" sequence:

Having believed in his personal liberty, modern man starts placing his
goals and criteria on this basis.

Having practically disbelieved in the religious out­look of life and the
cosmos, and their respective relationship to the Creator and to whatever
reward or punishment man awaits, life starts to him to seem as a chance
to win the largest possible portion of pleasure and materialistic
enjoyment which cannot be achieved except through wealth. Therefore,
wealth returns as the magic key and the goal towards which modern man
labours, the man who enjoys com­plete freedom in his behaviour.

It becomes necess­ary to establish the basis of economic freedom and
open all fields before this free being to work for the achievement of
this new goal: wealth, which Western civilization puts up as a new idol
for mankind, and every sacrifice mankind offers in this respect is now
an honest deed and an accepted scapegoat. The economic motive becomes
dominating as long as the march of modern civilization becomes more
distant from the spiritual and intellectual principles which he has
refused in the beginning of the march. The mania for wealth increases to
dominate the situation, and the precepts of goodness, virtue and
religion disappear, so much so that Marxism, during one of the Western
civilization's dilemmas, imagines that the economic motive is the
impetus which directs the human history in all ages.

It is not possible that the idea of economic free­dom can be separate
from another idea which is: the idea of political freedom, for the
essential condition for practising a free activity on the economic stage
is the removal of the political obstacles and the con­quest of the
difficulties put forth by the ruling auth­ority through the possession
and nationalization of the governing apparatus, so that the individual
may rest assured that there is no power which can separate him from his
achievements and desired goals.

Thus were the general outlooks or basic series, of which Western man
composed his civilization, completed. He worked sincerely to establish
his life on their basis and adopt a world call of them. In this light
can we clearly see this "civilization" in its characteristics to which
we have pointed out at the beginning of this chapter, for it is a
civilized phenomenon which started as a bitter and disturbing doubt and
ended as a doctrinal belief in freedom.

It is an expression of the belief of Western man in his control over
himself and his possession of his will after he had refused to submit to
any authority. Freedom, according to capitalist democracy, does not only
mean the denial of others' control; rather, it means much more than
this: It means man's control over himself and the practical separation
between himself and his own Creator and destiny.

As for Islam, its position from freedom essen­tially differs from that
of Western civilization, for it takes care of freedom in its negative
implication or, rather, in its revolutionary output which liberates
mankind from others’ control, breaking the chains and shackles which
handcuff him. It considers the achievement of this negative implication
of free­dom as one of the greatest goals of the Divine Mess­age Itself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَضَعُ عَنْهُمْ إِصْرَهُمْ وَالأَغْلالَ الَّتِي كَانَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He releases them from their heavy burdens and from the yokes that
are on them*****...** ***(Qur'an, 7: 157).***

But it does not link this concept to its positive implication according
to the concepts of Western civilization, for it does not consider man's
right to be liberated from others' control and standing by their side on
par as a result of man's control over himself and his right to determine
his behaviour and conduct in life; that is, what we would label "the
positive implication of freedom according to the concepts of Western
civilization".

Rather, it links freedom and liberation from all idols and artificial
shackles to sincere submission to Allah. Man, after all, is a servant of
Allah Who does not recognize any submission except to Him, or he yields
to any idol­atrous relationship of any colour or shape. Instead, he
stands on equal footing in his own sincere sub­mission to Allah with the
rest of cosmic creation. The essential basis of freedom in Islam,
there­fore, is unity and belief in sincere submission to Allah before
Whose hands all idolatrous powers are crushed, the powers which trampled
on man's dignity throughout history.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى كَلِمَةٍ سَوَاء بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللَّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ
شَيْئًا وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضًا أَرْبَابًا مِّن دُونِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: "O People of the Book (Christians and Jews)! Come to common
terms between us and you: that we worship none but Allah; that we
associate no partners with Him; that we install none, from among
our­selves, as lords and patrons other than Allah."*** ***(Qur'an, 3:64)
.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَتَعْبُدُونَ مَا تَنْحِتُونَ، وَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He said: "Do you worship that which you have (your­selves) carved?!
But Allah has created you and your handiwork."*** ***(Qur'an,
37:95-96).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ عِبَادٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily those whom you call on besides Allah are servants like unto
you*****..** ***(Qur'an, 7:194).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَرْبَابٌ مُّتَفَرِّقُونَ خَيْرٌ أَمِ اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Are many lords differing among themselves better, or the one Allah,
Supreme and Irresist­ible?*** ***(Qur'an, 12:39).***

Thus does Islam base the liberation from all kinds of slavery on the
principle of admitting an absolute submission to Allah, making the
relationship between man and his Lord the firmly-rooted basis for his
liberation in dealing with all people and with all natural things in the
cosmos. Islam and Western civilization, although both practicing the
operation of man's liberation, differ in the intellectual basis on which
this liberation stands.

Islam bases it on the belief in man alone and in his control over
himself which has doubted all principles and facts that are lying behind
the materialistic dimensions of man's existence. For this purpose has
the idea of freedom in Islam been rendered to a believing doctrine which
believes in the Unity of God, and to a firm convic­tion in His control
over the cosmos. The deeper this belief goes into the Muslim's heart,
and the more centralized his unifying outlook to Allah is, the more
elevated his soul will be and the deeper his feeling of dignity and
liberty, and the more stiff his will to stand in the face of tyranny,
corruption and en­slavement by others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَهُمُ الْبَغْيُ هُمْ يَنتَصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who, when an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them, (are
not cowed but) help and defend themselves.*** ***(Qur'an, 42:39).***

Contrarily to this is the idea of freedom accord­ing to Western
civilization: This is the product of doubt, unbelief and the result of
disturbance and rebellion, not of conviction or stability, as we have
already come to know. We can classify the democratic capitalist norms of
freedom, for the purpose of comparing them with Islam, into two kinds:

1. One of them is freedom in the personal sphere of man, which is what
democracy labels "Personal Freedom".

2. The other is freedom in the social sphere. This includes the
intellectual, political and economic norms of freedom.

Personal freedom treats man's conduct as an individual, albeit if he
lives independently or as part of the society. As for the three other
norms of freedom, these treat man as an individual living among the
group, permitting him to voice his ideas to others as he likes and
granting him the right to choose the kind of ruling authority which he
prefers, opening before him the way to all different kinds of economic
activity according to his capacity and inclination.

Freedom in the Personal Sphere
------------------------------

Modern Western civilization has tried hard to get the largest possible
share of freedom for each individual in his/her personal conduct, the
share which does not harm other people's freedom. It is not important,
after making this freedom available for all individuals, how they would
use it, the outcomes resulting there from, the psychological and
intellectual reactions thereof, as long as each individual is free in
his/her behaviour and conduct, capable of executing his/her own will in
all personal spheres. The drunkard, for example, is allowed to drink as
much liquor as he wants and sacrifice the last particle of his
consciousness and awareness as long as he does not bother others or
become a men­ace to their lives in one way or another.

Mankind has become intoxicated with the tones of this "freedom" and
slept therein for sometime, feeling for the first time that he has
broken all the chains and that this giant, who has been suppressed
within his depths for thousands of years, has set out for the first time
and has been permitted to do what­ever he willed in the light, without
fear or worry. But this sweet dream did not last long. Man started
waking up slowly to gradually realize that he is disturbed, that this
freedom has chained him with huge chains, destroying his hopes for a
free humane setting out. He found himself being pushed in a carriage
running on a planned path without being able to change or im­prove its
course.

All his consolation and solace, while looking at his destiny on his
planned path, is that there is someone who has said that this carriage
is the carriage of freedom, in spite of these cuffs and chains in his
hands. But when did freedom change into a chain? And how did setting out
lead to those cuffs which pull the carriage along its planned destiny,
and in the end man woke up to witness such bitter reality?

This, indeed, is what Islam had predicted fourteen centuries ago when it
did not contend itself with providing such superficial meaning for
freedom for humanity which has been inflicted with all these
contradictions in the modern living experience of Western man. Rather,
it went further and brought forth a much deeper concept of freedom. It
declared a revolution not only against the chains and shackles as they
appear, but, rather, against their psycho­logical and intellectual
roots. Thus has it guaranteed man the highest and purest norms of
freedom people have ever tasted across the passage of history...

If freedom, according to Western civilization, starts from "liberation"
to end in norms of slavery and chains, as we shall explain, then vast
freedom, according to Islam, is quite the opposite, for this starts from
pure submission to Allah Almighty to end with liberation from all norms
of humiliating slavery. Islam starts its operation to liberate man from
the inner content of man himself, for it sees that granting man freedom
is not by saying to him: "This is the path. We have cleared it for you;
so, walk along it in peace."

Rather, man becomes truly free when he can control his path and maintain
for his humanity the right to determine his path and portray its
char­acteristics and directions. This depends, above all, on man's
liberation from the slavery of the desires which occupy his mind so that
the desire may turn into a tool which attracts man to what he likes, not
a pushing power to exhaust man's will without being able to practice
towards it any potential or ability, for if it has been so, man would
have lost his freedom in the first place.

It does not change the reality when his hands are free as long as his
mind and all his hu­man concepts, which distinguish him from the animal
kingdom, are chained and frozen. We all know that the essential thing
which distinguishes man's freedom from that of the animals is generally
the fact that, although they both act according to their respective
will, animals’ will is always subservient to their desires and
instinctive inclinations.

As for man, he is equipped with the capacity to control his desires,
using his mental logic in their respect. The secret of his freedom, as a
human being, then, is confined within this capacity. If we freeze it
within him, being satisfied with granting him the superficial freedom in
his practical behaviour, providing him with all capabilities and
temptations to respond favourably to his desires, as the "modern"
Western civilization has already done, then we would gradually de­stroy
his human freedom in exchange for the desires of the animal which is
confined within his depths, making him a tool to satisfy those desires,
so much so that when he looks at himself, during his passage, he will
find himself the indicted one, rather than the indicting, one whose
affairs and will are over­come.

Contrariwise: If we start with that capacity in which the secret of
human freedom is confined, giving it growth and nourishment, remaking
man as a human being, not as a beast, making him aware of the fact that
his message in life is much more sublime than that abhorred beastly
destiny driven to him by those desires, and that his high principle for
the purpose of whose achievement he is created, is much, much more
elevated than these trivial objectives and cheap gains which he gets
through his materialistic pleasures.

I say: If we do all this until man is liberated from the slavery of his
own desires, eman­cipating himself from their captivating influence,
possessing his own will..., the free man will then be created who can
say "Yes" or "No" without his mouth being suppressed or hand chained by
this temporary desire or that cheap thrill. This is exactly what the
Qur'an has said when it put for the Muslim individual his particular
spiritual stamp, developing his criteria and principles, pulling him out
of earth and its limited goals to vaster horizons and more sublime
objectives:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَاء وَالْبَنِينَ
وَالْقَنَاطِيرِ الْمُقَنطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالْخَيْلِ
الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَالأَنْعَامِ وَالْحَرْثِ ذَلِكَ مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاللَّهُ عِندَهُ حُسْنُ الْمَآبِ. قُلْ أَؤُنَبِّئُكُم
بِخَيْرٍ مِّن ذَلِكُمْ لِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتٌ
تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَأَزْوَاجٌ
مُّطَهَّرَةٌ وَرِضْوَانٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ
.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they covet: women and
sons; heaped-up hoards of gold and silver; horses branded (for blood and
excellence); and (wealth of) cattle and well­-tilled land. Such are the
possessions of this world's life; but in nearness to Allah is the best
of the goals (to return to). Say: "Shall I give you glad tidings of
things far better than those?" For the righteous there are gardens in
nearness to their Lord, with rivers flowing beneath; therein is their
eternal home; with companions pure (and holy) and the good pleasure of
Allah, for Allah is well aware of (all) His servants.*** ***(Qur'an,
3:14-15).***

This is but the war of liberation in its internal context of man, and it
ultimately is the first basis and the head start to liberate mankind
according to Islam. Without it, all norms of freedom would become
falsehood and deception, and in the end captivity and chains. We see, in
the light of this Qur'anic guidance, that the method the Qur'an uses to
deliver mankind from the yoke of desires and the slavery of pleasures is
the general method which Islam always uses to cultivate humanity in all
fields: the method of *Tawhid* (Unity of God).

Islam, when it liberates man from worldly slavery and its vanishing
pleasures, connects him with heavens and its gardens the similitude of
which is the Pleasure of Allah, for *Tawhid* in Islam is the aid for
man's inner liberation from all norms of slavery, and it is the aid for
the human liberation in all fields. Suffices us here to mention one
example which we have left behind in a previous chapter, in order to
know the glorious results of this liberation and the extent of the
difference between the true freedom of the Qur'anic man and those
artificial norms of freedom advocated by the modern nations of the
Western civilization.

The nation the Qur'an liberated, when it called it in one word to
renounce wine, has been able to say "No" to wine and erase it from its
dictionary after it used to be part of its entity and an article of its
necessities. It was in pos­session of its own will, free in facing its
desires and animal impulses. In short, it enjoyed a true freedom which
allowed it to control its conduct. As for the nation which modern
civilization has cre­ated, granting it its individual freedom according
to its particular method, in spite of this artificial mask of
freedom..., it really does not possess any of its own will, nor can it
control its own existence, for it has never liberated its inner content.

Rather, it yielded to its pleasures and desires under the cover of
individual freedom until it lost its freedom while satisfying such
desires and pleasures. The strongest propaganda campaign against liquor
conducted by the government of the United States has not been able to
liberate the American nation from the slavery to liquor, in spite of the
huge materialistic and spiri­tual potentials the ruling authority and
various social institutes used for this purpose.

This fearful failure is but the result of Western man losing his real
freedom, for he cannot say "No", whenever convinced, as does the man of
the Qur'an. In­stead, he says the word which his desire forces him to
articu­late. For this reason, he has not been able to free himself from
liquor's entanglement, for he has not, under the shade of the Western
civilization, won a real emancipation within his spiritual and
intellectual content.[^3]

This internal emancipation, or inner-building of man's entity, is,
according to Islam, the corner­stone in the establishment of a free and
happy society. As long as man does not possess his will, is un­able to
control his inner situation or maintain his cultivated humanity in
determining his conduct, he can never truly free himself social­ly in
order to resist temptation, nor can he wage the battle of an external
liberation with merits and bravery:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْمٍ حَتَّى يُغَيِّرُواْ مَا
بِأَنفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily, never will Allah change the con­dition of a people until they
change it them­selves (with their own souls).*** ***(Qur'an, 13:11).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا أَرَدْنَا أَن نُّهْلِكَ قَرْيَةً أَمَرْنَا مُتْرَفِيهَا
فَفَسَقُواْ فِيهَا فَحَقَّ عَلَيْهَا الْقَوْلُ فَدَمَّرْنَاهَا
تَدْمِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If We will to perish a village, We would order the rich in it who
would make corruption therein; then it would be opportune for Our call,
and we would totally ruin it*****.** ***(Qur'an, 17: 16).***

Freedom in the Social Sphere
----------------------------

While waging the war of humanity's inner liber­ation, Islam likewise
wages another war to liberate man socially. It ruins, in the internal
content of man, the idols of desire which rob him of his human free­dom.
It smashes, in the field of exchanged relationships among individuals,
the social idols as well. It eman­cipates humanity from its slavery. It
puts an end to man worshipping man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى كَلِمَةٍ سَوَاء بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللَّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ
شَيْئًا وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُنَا بَعْضًا أَرْبَابًا مِّن دُونِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: "O People of the Book (Christians and Jews)! Come to common
terms between us and you: that we worship none but Allah; that we
associate no partners with Him; that we install none, from among
our­selves, as lords and patrons other than Allah."*** ***(Qur'an,
3:64).***

Man's submission to Allah makes all people stand on equal footing before
the Hands of the worshipped Creator; there is no nation that has the
right to colonize and enslave another nation, nor is there a group of
the society allowed to rob another group or violate its freedom, nor is
there one human being who has the right to pose himself as an idol to be
worshipped by others. Once more do we find out that the second Qur'anic
battlefield for the purpose of liberation uses the same method it used
in the first, that is, the battle to liberate man internally from the
control of his desires, and it is used in all other Islamic epics, which
is: *Tawhid*.

As long as man acknowledges sub­mission to Allah alone, he would
naturally reject any idol or fake worship of any person or being. He
would lift his head up high with dignity, and he will not feel the
humiliation of slavery and sub­missiveness to any power on earth or to
any idol. The phenomenon of idol-worship in man's life has been
initiated for two reasons: One of them is his slavery to his own desire
which makes him surrender his freedom to the human idol which can
satisfy and guarantee the fulfilment of that desire. The other is his
ignorance of the points of weakness and incapacity that lie behind those
idolatrous masks professing deism.

Islam has emancipated man from slavery to desire, as we have come to
know above, and from the fakery of those deceitful idolatrous masks:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ عِبَادٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those whom you call as gods other than Allah are but His servants
like your own selves*****.** ***(Qur'an, 7:194).***

It naturally follows that he conquers idol-wor­ship and wipes out from
the Muslim minds idolatry in all its various shapes and colours. In the
light of the bases on which the liberation of man from the slaveries of
desire in the personal field stands, and his emancipation from
idol-worship in the social, albeit if the idol is a nation, a group, or
an individual, can we know the individual's sphere of practical conduct
in Islam.

Islam is different from the modern Western civilizations which do not
restrict this practical freedom of the individual but those of others.
Islam takes care, first of all, as we have already come to know, of
emancipating the individual from the slavery of desires and idols,
allowing him to behave as he pleases as long as he does not go beyond
Allah's limits. The Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُم مَّا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is He Who has created for you all things that are on earth...***
***(Qur'an, 2:29).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُم مَّا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
مِّنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He has subjected to you, as from Him, all that is in the heavens
and on earth.*** ***(Qur'an, 45:13).***

Hence, Islam puts the cosmos in its entirety at the disposal of man of
his freedom, but it restricts freedom to the limits which make it
congenial with his internal liberation from the slavery of desire and
his external liberation from the slavery of idols. As regarding
practical freedom in adoring the desire and clinging to earth and all
what this implies, re­nouncing human freedom in its true meaning...

As regarding practical freedom in remaining silent about injustice and
relinquishing right, worshipping idols and getting closer to them,
pursuing their own interests and giving up the real great and true
message of man in this life..., all of this is not permitted in Islam:
It is nothing but the destruction of the deepest meanings of freedom in
man. Instead, Islam understands it to be part of a perfect intellectual
and spiritual program on the basis of which humanity must stand.

\*\*\*

When we highlight this liberating and revolutionary aspect of Islam in
the social sphere, we do not imply thereby that it agrees with the
democratic social norms of freedom in their particular Western
framework. While differing from the Western civilization in its concept
of personal liberty, as we have come to know a short while ago, Islam
also differs from it in its concept of the political, economic and
intellectual freedom.

The Western concept of political freedom expresses the basic idea of the
Western civilization which claims that man possesses himself, and nobody
has the right to give him directions. Political freedom has been a
result of practicing such basic idea in the political field, for as long
as the structure, colour and laws of the social life directly affect all
members of the society, then everybody has to participate in the
operation of social construction as he pleases, and no individual may
force another to do what he does not like or subject him by force to a
system which he does not accept.

Political freedom starts conflicting with the basic idea as soon as it
faces the reality of life, for it is quite natural that the society
contains numerous different opinion, and adopting some people's opinion
means depriving others of their right to have their own will and control
their own destiny. Here has the idea to adopt the majority's opinion
come as a collaboration between the basic idea and political freedom.

But it is an incomplete collaboration because the minority enjoys its
rights of freedom and self-will similarly to the majority, and the
majority's opinion deprives it of using its right; therefore, the
principle of the majority is not more than a system through which one
group plays havoc with another group's rights, with only a numerical
difference.

We do not deny that the majority principle maybe one accepted by all
people; therefore, the minority tries hard to execute the viewpoint of
the ma­jority as being the one with more followers, even though it
spontaneously believes in another view­point and tries to attract the
majority to it. But this is an assumption the validity of which cannot
be ascertained in all societies. There are many minorities that do not
accept any viewpoint other than their own even if such a viewpoint
opposes that of the majority.

From this we can come to this summary: The basic idea of the Western
civilization, as soon as it functions in the political field, starts
contradicting itself and facing the reality, turning to a norm of
despotism and individualism in government shown in the best way by the
majority ruling the minority. Islam does not believe in this "basic
idea" of the Western civilization, for it is based on man wor­shipping
Allah, and that Allah alone is man's Master and Sustainer, the only One
Who has the right to arrange his life-style:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَرْبَابٌ مُّتَفَرِّقُونَ خَيْرٌ أَمِ اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ
الْقَهَّارُ؟ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِهِ إِلاَّ أَسْمَاء
سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا أَنتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُم مَّا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ بِهَا مِن
سُلْطَانٍ إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلاَّ لِلَّهِ أَمَرَ أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُواْ
إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Are many lords differing among them­selves better or the One God,
Supreme and Irresistible? The Command is for none but Allah. He has
commanded that you should worship none but Him:...*** ***(Qur'an,
12:39-40).***

And it blames those individuals who yield to others, granting them the
right of Imamate in life and Divine upbringing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتَّخَذُواْ أَحْبَارَهُمْ وَرُهْبَانَهُمْ أَرْبَابًا مِّن دُونِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They take their priests and anchorites to be their lords in
derogation of Allah*****.** ***(Qur'an, 9:31).***

Therefore, neither the individual nor all the individuals combined have
the right to monopolize authority other than Allah, directing the social
life and establishing curricula and constitutions, etc. Among the
outcomes of such "equality" in this life we come to know that man's
political liberation is based on the belief in the equality of all
society members to bear the burdens of the Divine Trust and their
cooperation in enacting Al­mighty Allah's commandments: "Everyone of you
is in charge and is responsible for those of whom he is in charge."
Political equality in Islam differs in shape from its Western
counterpart: It is equality in bear­ing responsibility, not in ruling.

Among the results of this equality is man's emancipation in the
political field from the control of others and the eradication of all
norms of political exploitation, individualistic and class government.

For this reason do we find the Glorious Qur'an renouncing Pharaoh's rule
as well as the society whom he ruled, for he symbolized the control of
the individual over the government and the domination of one class over
all others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ عَلا فِي الأَرْضِ وَجَعَلَ أَهْلَهَا شِيَعًا
يَسْتَضْعِفُ طَائِفَةً مِّنْهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Truly Pharaoh elevated himself in the land and broke up its people
into sections, depressing a small group among them...*** ***(Qur'an,
28:4).***

Any political structure which allows an individ­ual or class to exploit
and subjugate other individuals or classes is not accepted by Islam, for
it opposes the equality among the society members in bearing
responsibility in their absolute submission to Allah Almighty. As for
the economic freedom, it is, in its capi­talist concept, only a freedom
in appearance which may be summarized thus: allowing every individual to
behave as he pleases in the economic field with­out the interference or
pressure of the ruling appar­atus.

Having permitted the individual to behave as he pleases, capitalism is
not further concerned about securing anything he wants. In other words,
it is not concerned with allowing him to want anything. For this purpose
do we find out that economic freedom, in its materialistic concept, does
not bear any mean­ing to those who were not allowed by opportunities to
live, nor were the circumstances of competition and economic racing
prepared for them.

Thus does freedom become merely a mirage without being able to grant
these people of its meaning except according to the amount of freedom it
grants the individuals who are incapable of, say, swimming when we say
to them: "You are free to swim as you please, wherever you like."

If we really want to let them swim freely as they choose, giving them a
chance to enjoy this sport as those who can swim enjoy it, we would have
secured their safety during that and asked the expert swimmers to
protect them, watch over them and not abandon them while swimming else
they should get drowned; hence, we would have really promoted true
freedom and the ability to swim for all in reality, even though we may
have restricted a little bit the activity of the expert swimmers for the
sake of protecting the life of others.

This is exactly what Islam has done in the econ­omic field: It called
for both economic freedom and assurance, incorporating them into a
unified structure, for all are free in the economic field, but within
certain limits. The individual is not free when the security of other
individuals and the maintenance of the general welfare demand that he
gives up some of his freedom. Thus have the ideas of freedom and
security been coordinated in Islam.[^4]

As for intellectual freedom, this, according to Western civilization, is
permitting any individual to think, declare and propagate his ideas as
he pleases, as long as he does not harm the concept of freedom and the
bases on which it hinges. For this reason, democratic societies try hard
to oppose fascist ideas, limiting their freedom or annihilating them
alto­gether, for such ideas fight the very same basic idea and
intellectual premise on which the concept of free­dom and the democratic
bases stand.

Islam differs from democratic capitalism in this situation as a result
of its being different from it in the nature of the intellectual base it
adopts which is *Tawhid* and linking the cosmos to One Lord. It allows
the human mind to set out and declare itself as long as it does not
revolt against its intellectual base which is the true basis of the
availability of free­dom for mankind according to Islam, granting him
his free and glorious character which does not dis­solve before
temptations, nor does it kneel down before idols.

Both Western civilization and Islam allow intellectual freedom as long
as there is no danger resulting from it against the essential base and
freedom itself. Among the fruits of the intellectual freedom in Islam is
the war it wages against imitation and stagnant thinking, against mental
submission to myths or to ideas of others without consciousness or
scrutinizing. Islam aims thereby at creating an analytical mind or an
experimental one in man.

It is not enough to establish the free mind in man by just saying to
him: "You may think as you please", as has the Western civilization
done, for this expansion of freedom will be at the expense of freedom
itself, and it quite often leads to hues of intellectual slavery
symbolized in imitation, fanati­cism and the glorification of
superstitions.

Rather, in order to create the free mind, according to Islam, man has to
nurture the analytical or experimental mind which does not accept an
idea without scruti­nizing, nor does it believe in a doctrine unless it
is proved, so that this conscious mind may ensure the intellectual
freedom and protect man from misusing it because of imitation,
fanaticism or scruples. In fact, this is but the share of the Islamic
struggle for the internal liberation of man.

Just as it emanci­pated man's will from the slavery of temptation, as we
have already come to know, so has it liberated the human consciousness
from the slavery of imi­tation, fanaticism and superstition. In both
this and that has man become free indeed in his mind and will.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اجْتَنَبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ أَن يَعْبُدُوهَا وَأَنَابُوا إِلَى
اللَّهِ لَهُمُ الْبُشْرَى فَبَشِّرْ عِبَادِ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَمِعُونَ
الْقَوْلَ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ أَحْسَنَهُ أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ هَدَاهُمُ
اللَّهُ وَأُولَئِكَ هُمْ أُوْلُوا الأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So announce the god tidings to My servants, those who listen to the
word, and follow the best (meaning) of it. Those are they whom Allah has
guided; those are men of reason.*** ***(Qur'an, 39:17-18).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ لِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ
إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have sent down unto thee (also) the Message; that you may
explain clearly to men what is sent for them, and that they may give
thought. (Qur'an, 16:44).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ أَمَانِيُّهُمْ؛ قُلْ: هَاتُواْ بُرْهَانَكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are their (vain) desires. Say: "Pro­duce your proof if you are
truthful."*** ***(Qur'an, 2:111).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اتَّبِعُوا مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ قَالُواْ بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَا أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَنَا أَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ
لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئًا وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When it is said to them: "Follow what Allah has revealed," they say:
"Nay! We shall follow the ways of our fathers." What?! Even though their
fathers were void of wisdom and guid­ance?!*** ***(Qur'an, 2.170).***

Insurance in Islam vs. Marxism
------------------------------

Insurance in Islam differs from socialist insur­ance which is based on
the Marxist principles in many respects due to the difference between
the two systems of insurance in the foundations, frameworks and
ob­jectives.

We cannot attempt here except to display some aspects of such
differences, having been sat­isfied with our detailed study of them in
our book *Iqtisaduna (Our Economy).*

1) Social Security in Islam
---------------------------

It is one of the hu­man rights enforced by Allah Almighty. As such, it
does not differ according to circumstances or social levels. As for
insurance according to Marxism, it is the right of the machine, rather
than of man. When the producing machine reaches a particular point,
social security becomes an essential condition for its growth and
increase of production. Unless the producing powers reach this point,
the idea of insurance does not make any sense. For this reason, Marxism
considers insurance to belong to particular societies during a limited
period of their history.

2) Islamic Concept of Practising Social Security
------------------------------------------------

It is the result of fraternal sympathy which prevails in the Islamic
society. Islamic brotherhood is the frame which does the role of
insurance therein. The *hadith* says: "The Muslim is the brother of
every Muslim; he neither does him injustice, nor does he abstain from
his rescue. He does not deprive him. Therefore, Muslims have to
persevere, visit each other, cooperate with each other and console those
who are in need."

As for Marxism, it regards social security as nothing but the result of
a huge and bitter struggle which must be sparked and widened, so that
when the class struggle starts, and one class victoriously wipes out the
other, only then shall social security prevail. Insurance according to
Marxism is but an expression of a tight unity and overwhelming
fraternity; it hinges but on a polar contradiction and a destructive
struggle.

3) Insurance, as a Human Right According to Islam
-------------------------------------------------

It does not concern one group rather than another. It covers even those
who are incapable of par­ticipating in the general production at all.
They are, however, insured in the shade of the Islamic society, and the
State has to make available for them all means of livelihood. As for
Marxist insurance, it derives its existence from the class struggle
between the working class and the capitalist class the result of which
is a victory for the working class (proletariat) and its cooperation
with and participation in that wealth.

For this purpose, there is no Marxist explanation for the insurance of
the life of those disabled who live far away from the class struggle
because of their affiliation with the working class rather than with the
capitalist class, since they have no right to take any gain from the
struggle and its booties.

4) Insurance According to Marxism
---------------------------------

It is the respon­sibility of the State alone. In Islam, it is the
respon­sibility of both individuals and State; therefore, Islam has set
two principles: one of them is the prin­ciple of general cooperation,
and the other is the principle of social security. The principle of
cooperation means that each Muslim individual is responsible for
ensuring the livelihood of others according to his capacity.

Muslims should practice this principle even during the cases when they
lose the State which practices the legislative injunctions. The *hadith*
states that: "Any believer who denies another believer the use of
some­thing which he needs, while he or someone else is able to let him
do so, then Allah will resurrect him on the Day of Judgement with a
black face, blue eyes, his hands tied up to his neck. It will be said:
'This is a traitor who betrayed Allah and His Messenger'; then he will
be thrown into Hell-fire."

The principle of social security determines the responsibility of the
State in this respect. It has to ensure a level of honourable prosperity
for all citizens from the State and general sources of income, and also
from its treasury.[^5] For the clarification of this principle, the
*hadith* says: "The ruler receives wealth and distributes it, according
to the Commandments of Allah, to eight shares: to the poor, the
destitute, the tax-collectors, those who do not mind helping Muslims,
the slaves, those incapable of paying their debts, in the Way of Allah
and to the wayfarers who are unable to buy their journey back home.

Eight shares he distributes among them, each according to his need,
without stringency or fear. Whatever remains will be turned back to the
ruler. Whatever lacks, and people do not have enough, the State has to
finance their need from its own budget according to their need, so that
they will all have enough."

[^1]: For this reason, the word "freedom", when used in its general
sense in genuine Islamic texts, cannot be charged of being influenced by
the precepts of the Western civilization. The Commander of the Faithful
'Ali, peace be with him, is quoted as saying, "Do not be a slave to
others since Allah has created you free." Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sadiq, peace be with him, has said "There are five virtues, one who
is without them does not really have much of any interest. The first is
faithfulness; the second is good management; the third is shyness
(modesty); the fourth is good manners; and the fifth, which com­bines
all of these virtues together, is freedom."

[^2]: Nahj al-balaghah by Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib, sermon 195, Bihar
al-Anwar, v. 77, p.214.

[^3]: See my article “Freedom in the Qur'an” published in the series
titled “Ikhtarna Laka” (Dar az-Zahra', Beirut, 1395/ 1975, pp. 43 - 54).

[^4]: For the purpose of elaboration, notice our study of capitalist
democracy in Iqtisaduna, pp. 247 -269.

[^5]: For detailed information, see Iqtisaduna (the chapter on
“Economical Problems as Islam sees them and their solutions”), p.328 and
following pages.


