1. Sura Al Fatiha (the Opening)
===============================

1. ayah 6 "Keep us on the straight path (siratul mustaqeem)"

Imam Sadiq (as) narrates, "Siratul Mustaqeem is Ameerul Momineen Ali
(asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Maani ul Akbar pg 32)


**2.Sura Baqarah (The Cow)**

1. ayah 26 , "Surely Allah is not ashamed to set forth any parable,
even that of a gnat or anything above that; as for those who believe,
they know that it is the truth from their Lord,"

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) narrates regarding this ayah"Allah mentioned the
example of gnat for Ameerul Momineen (asws) and the one who is above
that is RasoolAllah (saw). Allah says, "as for those who believe, they
know that it is the truth from their Lord," and that truth is Ameerul
Momineen (asws)." (Tafseer e Burhan First Edition pg 70)

2. ayah 38 "We said: Go forth from this (state) all; so surely there
will come to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance,
no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve"

Jabir narrates, "I asked Imam Abu Jafar (as) regarding this ayah, "so
surely there will come to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows
My guidance, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve.", Imam
(as) said, "The guidance is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Tafseer
Ayyashi First Edition pg 60)

3. ayah 40 "Be faithful to your promise with Me and I will fulfill My
promise with you" Sama bin Mahran narrates, "I asked Imam Abu Abdullah
Sadiq (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "That promise of Allah
is wilayat e Ali (asws). It is wajib upon you from Allah. Fulfill it and
Allah will fulfill His promise of jannah with you." (Tafseer e Ayyashi
First Edition pg 60)

4. ayah 45 "And see assistance through patience and prayer, and most
surely it is a hard thing except for the submissive ones."

Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates regarding this saying of Allah, "The most
submissive in the prayers are RasoolAllah (saw) and Ali (asws) ibn Abi
Talib (as)." (Tafseer e Furat pg 20)

5. ayah 58 "enter the door prostrate and say "Repentance", We will
forgive you" Saeed Ilfalafri narrates I heard Imam Reza (as) say
regarding this ayah, "We are the door of repentance for you." (Tafseer e
Ayyashi First Edition pg 63)

6. ayah 105 "Those who disbelieve from among the followers of the Book
do not like, nor do the polytheists, that the good should be sent down
to you from your Lord, and Allah chooses especially whom He pleases for
His mercy, and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace."

Abu Salih narrates from Hammar who narrates from Imam Reza (as) who
narrates from His Forefathers the saying of Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
regarding this ayah, "Allah chooses especially whom He pleases for His
mercy" , Imam (as) said, "Allah has chosen His Prophet, His Successor,
and His Offspring for His mercy. Allah has 100 different kinds of mercy.
99 of which are for Muhammad (saw), Ali (asws), and His Offspring. One
is for all of the believers".

(Tafseer Burhan First Editon pg 140)

7. ayah 138 "We take our color from Allah and who is better than Allah
at coloring. We are His worshippers"

Imam Abu Abdullah Sadiq (as) narrates, "The color of Allah is in r
eference to the momin's promise of allegiance regarding Ameerul Momineen
(asws)." (Tafseer e Furat pg 62)

8. ayah 143 "And thus We have appointed you a middle nation, that ye
may be witnesses against mankind and that the messenger may be a witness
against you"
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said regarding this ayah, " There is always a
witness in every era fro m Us. Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as) was in His
time. Hussain (as) was in His time. Every one of Us who invites towards
Allah." (Tafseer e Furat pg 62)

9. ayah 185 "The month of Ramazan is that in which the Quran was
revealed, a guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance and the
distinction; therefore whoever of you is present in the month, he shall
fast therein, and whoever is sick or upon a journey, then (he shall
fast) a (like) number of other days; Allah desires ease for you, and He
does not desire for you difficulty, and (He desires) that you should
complete the number and that you should exalt the greatness of Allah for
His having guided you and that you may give thanks."

Yunus bin Yaqoub narrates from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) regarding this
ayah, "Allah desires comfort for you, and He does not desire for you
difficulty", Imam (as) said, "That comfort is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib
(as)." (Tafseer Furat pg 3)

10. ayah 208 "O' you who believe! Enter into submission" In Tafseer
Qumi, Imam (as) says regarding this ayah of Allah, "It means enter into
the Wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (asws)". (Tafseer Furat pg 61)

11. ayah 238 "Be guardians of your prayers and of the middle prayer and
stand up with the devotion to Allah"

Zarara narrates from Abdul Rahman bin Kaseer who narrates from Imam
Sadiq (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "The prayer is
RasoolAllah (saw), Ameerul Momineen (asws), Syeda (sa), Hasan (as) and
Hussain (as). The middle prayer is Ameerul Momineen (asws). "Stand up
with devotion to Allah" are those who are obedient to Imams (as)."
(Tafseer e Furat First Edition pg 47)

12. ayah 249 "Surely! Allah will try you with a river." Ibne Abbas (ra)
narrates, "There is a name of Ameerul Momineen (asws) in the Book of
Allah that people are unaware of." The people asked him, "What is that
name"? Ibne Abbas (ra) replied, "Nahr (river)". Allah says in Quran,
"Surely Allah will try you with a river" (Tafseer Furat pg 69)

13. ayah 256 "Whoever disbelieves in the Shaitan and believes in Allah
he indeed has laid hold onto the firmest handle, which shall not break
off, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing."

In the tafseer of this ayah, RasoolAllah (saw) says , "Whosoever wishes
to hold fast to that firm handle which will never break off should keep
fast held to the wilayat of My Brother and My Successor, Ali (as)ibn Abi
Talib (as). Because whosoever loves Him, Allah will never let Him end in
loss. Whosoever is jealous of Him, Allah will never give him any
success." (Tafseer e Safi page 71)

The people asked, "O'RasoolAllah (saw), what is the firmest handle?"
RasoolAllah (saw) replied, "The Wilayat of the Master of the
Successors." The people asked, "O'RasoolAllah (saw), who is the Master
of the Successors?" RasoolAllah (saw) replied, "Ameerul Momineen (saw)."
The people asked, "O'RasoolAllah (saw), who is Ameerul Momineen (saw)?"
RasoolAllah (saw) replied, "The Master of Muslims and their Imam after
Me." The people asked, "O'RasoolAllah (saw), who is the Master of
Muslims and their Imam after You?" RasoolAllah (saw) replied, "My
Brother, Ali (saw) ibn Abi Talib"

(Bihar ul Anwar 36th Edition page 20 hadith 16, Borhan First Edition
page 244 hadith 11, Al Yaqeen page 62, Ghayatol Maram page 19 hadith 20,
page 46 hadith 61, and page 167)

14. ayah 265 "And the parable of those who spend their property to seek
the pleasure of Allah and for the certainty 'of their souls is as the
parable of a garden on an elevated ground, upon which heavy rain falls
so it brings forth its fruit twofold but if heavy rain does not fall
upon it, then light rain (is sufficient); and Allah sees what you do."

In the tafseer of this ayah "And the parable of those who spend their
property to seek the pleasure of Allah", Imam Sadiq (as) said, "This
ayah was revealed for Ameerul Momineen Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)."
(Tafseer Furat pg 7)


