3. Sura Aal E Imran (the Family of Imran)
=========================================

1. ayah 7 "He it is Who has revealed the Book to you; some of its
verses are decisive, they are the basis of the Book, and others are
allegorical; then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity they
follow the part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and
seeking to give it (their own) interpretation"".

Abdul bin Rahman bin Kaseer Al Hashimi narrates from Imam Abu Abdullah
(as) regarding the tafseer of this ayah, Imam (as) said, "In this ayah
decisive verses are Ameerul Momineen (asws) and Aimma (as). Allegorical
verses are 1, 2 , and 3 (abu bakr la, umar la, and usman la). Those in
whose hearts contains doubts and perversity are their families and their
companions." (Tafseer e Ayyashi First Edition pg 185)

2. ayah 18 "Allah bears witness that there is no god but He and so do
the angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation
with justice; there is no god but He the Mighty, the Wise"

Jabir bin Abdullah narrates I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) regarding
this ayah, Imam (as) said, "Allah testified there is no god except Him.
He testified for His greatness and honor. As for the angels, Allah
testified because they obeyed their Lord and in this ayah, the people of
knowledge are prophets and successors. The adl (justice) is Ameerul
Momineen (asws)."
(Tafseer e Ayyashi First Edition pg 166)

3. ayah 61 "But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has
come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your
sons and our women and your women and our nafs (selves) and your nafs
(selves), then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of
Allah on the liars"

Saeed bin Hussain narrates from Imam Abu Jafar (as) regarding this
ayah, "our sons and your sons", Imam (as) said, "This is referring to
Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Hussain (as). "our women and your women" is in
reference to Syeda (sa). "our nafs and your nafs" is in reference to
Ameerul Momineen (asws)". (Tafseer Furat pg 14)

4. ayah 103 "And hold fast by the rope of Allah all together and do not
separate" Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates "One day I was with RasoolAllah (saw)
when a man came and asked RasoolAllah (saw) regarding this ayah. The man
asked, "Who is the rope of Allah?" RasoolAllah (saw) replied, "I am the
Prophet of Allah and Ali (asws) is the rope of Allah." The man left
saying, "I believe in the Prophet of Allah and hold fast to His Rope".

(Tafseer e Furat pg 14)

Ibne Yazid narrates, "I asked Abul Hasan (asws) regarding this ayah,
"Behold the rope of Allah". Imam (as) said, "Ali (asws) is that strong
rope of Allah." (Tafseer e Burhan First Vol 194)

5. ayah 112 "Abasement shall be their portion wheresoever they are
found except where they grasp a rope from Allah and a rope from men"

Aban bin Taghlab narrates "I asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) regarding this
saying of Allah, Imam (as) said, "The rope from Allah is His Book and
the rope from amongst the people is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)".
(Tafsir e Furat pg 14)

Yunus bin AbduRahman and other companions narrate from Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "The rope from Allah is His
Book and the rope from amongst the people is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib
(as)." (Tafseer Ayyashi First Vol pg 196)

6. ayah 157 "And if you are slain in the way of Allah or you die" Jabir
narrates, "I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) regarding this ayah of Alla
h, Imam (as) said, ""O'Jabir! Do you know what is the way of Allah?" I
said, "I do not know. I hope that You will tell me." Imam (as) said,
"The way of Allah is Ali (asws) and His Offspring. One who is slain in
Their Wilayat is slain in the way of Allah. One who dies in Their
Wilayat has died in the way of Allah." (Tafseer Ayyashi First Edition pg
202)

7. ayah 193 "Our Lord! surely we have heard a preacher calling to the
faith, saying: Believe in your Lord, so we did believe; Our Lord!
forgive us therefore our faults, and cover our evil deeds and make us
die with the righteous"

Umar bin Abu Rahman bin Qasir narrates from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
regarding this ayah, "surely we have heard a preacher calling to the
faith, saying: Believe in your Lord, so we did believe" , Imam (as)
said, "That was Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as) for whom a caller from the
heavens asked the people to believe in RasoolAllah (saw)" (Tafseer
Ayyashi First Edition pg 211)

8. ayah 195 "So their Lord accepted their prayer: That I will not waste
the work of a worker among you, whether male or female, the one of you
being from the other; they, therefore, who fled and were turned out of
their homes and persecuted in My way and who fought and were slain, I
will most certainly cover their evil deeds, and I will most certainly
make them enter gardens beneath which rivers flow; a reward from Allah,
and with Allah is yet better reward" Amir bin Yassir narrates regarding
this ayah, "male is Moula Ali (asws) and female is Syeda (sa)." (Manqib
pg 3)

RasoolAllah (saw) said to Moula Ali (asws), "Allah has promised the
best reward for You and Your shia." (Tafseer e Burhan First Edition pg
333)

9. ayah 198 "they shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow, abiding
in them; an entertainment from their Lord, and that which is Allah is
best for the righteous" Asbagh bin Nabata narrates regarding this ayah
that was revealed for Moula Ali (asws), RasoolAllah (saw) said, "O'Ali
(asws)! You are that reward and those who will live in jannah are Your
helpers." (Tafseer Ayyashi First Edition pg 212)


