4. Sura Nisa (women)
====================

1. ayah 175 "As for those who believe in Allah and hold fast to Him, He
will cause them to enter into His mercy and grace and guide them to
Himself by a straight path." Imam Muhammad Baqir says, "Holding fast to
Allah means holding fast to Wilayat e Ali (asws)". (Tafseer e Furat page
58) 5. Sura al Maaida (The Table)

1. ayah 3 " This day have I perfected for you your religion and
completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion "

Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates in the tafseer of this ayah, "Today We have
perfected for you your religion" through Prophet "and revealed all of My
blessings upon You" through Ali (asws) "and chose for you Islam as your
religion" through Arfat (Tafseer e Furat pg 120)

Abu Jawood narrates, "I heard Imam Abu Jafar (as) saying regarding this
ayah of Allah, Imam (as) said, "The wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (asws)
is the reason for the completion of the religion." (Tafseer Furat pg
119)

Ameerul Momineen (asws) said to His Son, Imam Hussain (as), "I am that
blessing of Allah that Allah uses to bless His servants. I am the one
for whom Allah said, "This day have I perfected for you your religion
and completed My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion"
(Fazail ibn Shazaan pg 83)

2. ayah 7 "Remember Allah's grace upon you and His promise by which He
bound you when you said: We hear and we obey; And keep your promise to
Allah. He knows what is in the chests of men."

When RasoolAllah (saw) took the promise of allegiance of the wilayat of
Moula Ali (as) from the people, they said, "We hear and we obey.
Whatever you have said for us to do, we will do". Later they broke this
promise of allegiance. So this verse was revealed for those people who
broke the promise of allegiance. (Tafseer Safi page no. 131 ref Tafseer
Qumi)

3. ayah 56 "And whoever takes Allah and His Messenger and those who
believe for a guardian, then surely the party of Allah are they that
shall be triumphant" Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates regarding this ayah, "The
party of Allah is Ameerul Momineen Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)."
(Tafseer Furat pg 129)


**6. Sura An'aam (The Cattle)**

1. ayah 44 "But when they neglected that with which they had been
admonished, We opened for them the doors of all things, until when they
rejoiced in what they were given We seized them suddenly; then lo! they
were in utter despair"

Jabir narrates "I asked Imam Abu Jafar (as) regarding this ayah, "But
when they neglected that with which they had been admonished, We opened
for them the doors of all things" , Imam (as) said, "Allah reminded them
regarding the wilayat of Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Tafseer e
Furat pg 133)

2. ayah 92 "And this is the book We have revealed, blessed" Abu Baseer
narrates, "I heard Imam Abu Jafar (as) saying regarding this ayah, Imam
(as) said, "The blessed is Ameerul Momineen (asws) and He is the
interpretator of Quran, the revealed book. He is the blessing upon the
ummah of Muhammad (saw)." (Tafseer Qummi Second Edition pg 234) 7.Sura
Araaf (The Heights)

1. ayah 44 "And the dwellers of the garden will call out to the inmates
of the fire" Ali bin Ibrahim narrates from his father who narrates from
Muhammad bin Faqeel who narrates from Imam Reza (as) regarding this
saying of Allah, "And the dwellers of the garden will call out to the
inmates of the fire" , Imam (as) said, "The caller is Ameerul Momineen
(asws)". Abul Qasim narrates from Muhammad bin Hanfia who narrates from
Ameerul Momineen (asws) ; Ameerul Momineen (asws) said, "I am the
caller". Imam Abu Jafar (as) narrates, "One who called from jannah is
Ameerul Momineen (asws)". (Al Manaqib pg 3)

2. ayah 46 "on the most elevated places there shall be men who know all
by their marks" Hasham asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) regarding this
saying of Allah, "What does it mean there will be men on araaf (elevated
places)?" Imam (as) replied, "Do you not kno w there are people from
amongst your tribe who know who is good and who is bad. We are those
people who will know Our lovers by the marks on their foreheads"

Zadan said to Salman (as), "I have heard RasoolAllah (saw) say more
than 10 times say regarding Al i (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as), "You and
Your Successors will be on Araaf between jannah and jahannum.

No one will be able to enter into jannah except those who recognize You
and You recognize them. Those who will deny You and You will deny them
will be thrown into hell." (Tafseer Ayyashi Second Edition pg 22)

3. ayah 157 "Those who follow the Messenger-Prophet, the Ummi, whom
they find written down with them in the Taurat and the Injeel (who)
enjoins them good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful to them the
good things and makes unlawful to them impure things, and removes from
them their burden and the shackles which were upon them; so (as for)
those who believe in him and honor him and help him, and follow the noor
which has been sent down with him, these it is that are the
successful"

Abu Baseer narrates regarding this ayah, "so (as for) those who believe
in him and honor him and help him, and follow the noor which has been
sent down with him", Imam (as) said, "That noor is Ali (asws) ibn Abi
Talib (as)". (Tafseer e Burhan Second Edition pg 39)


**8.Sura Anfaal (Spoils of War)**

1. ayah 62 "And if they intend to deceive you-- then surely Allah is
sufficient for you; He it is Who strengthened you with His help and with
the believers"

Abu Huraira (la) narrates, "On the throne it is written, "There is no
god except Allah, Muhammad (saw) is My servant and Prophet, whom I
helped through Ali (asws)." This ayah was revealed for Ali (asws) ibn
Abi Talib (as) "He it is Who strengthened you with His help and with the
believers" and that help is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)". (Taweel ul
Ayat pg 201)


