9. Sura Tawba (repentance)
==========================

1. ayah 33 "He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the
religion of truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions,
though the polytheists may be averse" Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, "True
deen is wilayat of Moula Ali (asws)." (Usool e Kafi Kitab e Hujjat
chapter 107 hadith no 91)

2. ayah 36 "Surely the number of months with Allah is twelve months by
Allah's ordinance since the day when He created the heavens and the
earth, of these four being sacred" Jabir bin al Jafi asked Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "Those twelve months is
in reference to the 12 Imams (as). Four of Them are sacred. Out of the
12 Imams (as) four have the same name, Ali Ameerul Momineen (asws), Ali
(as) bin al Hussain (as), Ali (as) bin Musa (as) al Reza and Ali (as)
bin Muhammad (as) al Naqi. In another hadith it is narrated the four
sacred are Ali (asws), al Hasan (as), al Hussain (as), and al Qaim
(ajfts). This ayah is in reference of "that is the right religion"
(Munaqib First Edition pg 244)

4. ayah 105 "And say: Work; so Allah will see your work and (so will)
His Messenger and the believers (momin); and you shall be brought back
to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of
what you did"

It is narrated from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) that when He recited this
ayah, "so Allah will see your work and (so will) His Messenger and the
believers (momin)", Imam (as) said, "I swear by Allah that momin is Ali
(asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Usool e Kafi First Edition pg 22)

4.ayah 119 "Be careful of your duty to Allah and be with the truthful"
Moula Ali (asws) said, "I am the truthful". Buriba al Ajali narrates "I
asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "We
are those who are truthful." (Usool al Kafi First Edition pg 198)


**10. Sura Yunus (Jonas)**

1. ayah 53 "And they ask you: Is this true? Say; Yes, by My Lord, it is
most surely the truth" Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said regarding this
ayah, "O'Muhammad (saw)! When the people of Mecca ask You regarding Ali
(asws) say "He is My Imam and My Lord is truth". (Amali Sudooq pg 601)

2. ayah 58 "Say; In the grace of Allah and in His mercy let them
rejoice there in. It is better than what they gather" Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) was asked about this ayah, Imam (as) said, "Grace of Allah is
RasoolAllah (saw) and His Mercy is Ameerul Momineen (asws)". (Tafseer e
Furat pg 62)


**11.Sura Hud**

1. ayah 17 "Is he then who has with him clear proof from his Lord, and
a witness from Him recites it" Ibn Masood narrates regarding this ayah,
The proof is RasoolAllah (saw) and the witness is Ali (asws)." (Fazail
ibn Shazaan pg 174)


**13. Sura Raad (Thunder)**

1. ayah 7 "You are only a warner and for every nation there is a
guide". When this ayah was revealed to RasoolAllah (saw),He said , "I am
just a warner and Ali (as) is guide after Me." Then He said to Moula Ali
(as), "O'Ali (as)! Those who will be guided after Me will be guided
through You." (Tafseer e Safi page 258)

Ibn Masood narrates regarding this ayah, "The warner is RasoolAllah
(saw) and the guide is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Fazail ibn
Shazaan pg 174)

Abdullah bin Ata narrates, "I heard Imam Sadiq (as) saying regarding
this ayah, "You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every
people." Imam (as) said, "RasoolAllah (saw) is the warner and Ali (asws)
is the guide". (Basair al Darjaat pg 29)

2. ayah 43 "Say: Allah and whoever has knowledge of the book is
sufficient witness between me and you"

Burida bin muawiyah narrates "I asked Imam Abu Jafar al Baqir (as)
regarding this ayah, Imam (as) replied, "This ayah was revealed for Us.
Ali (asws) is the first amongst Us and the greatest. He is the best
after RasoolAllah (saw)." (Usool e Kafi First Edition pg 229)


