14. Sura Ibrahim
================

1. ayah 52 "This is a clear message for mankind in order that they may
be warned thereby, and that they may know that He is only One Allah, and
that men of understanding may take heed" Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says
regarding this ayah, "Clear message is Ameerul Momineen (asws) and
warned is regarding His Wilayat. Those who have wisdom and take advice
are the shia of Ali (asws)." (Taweel ul Ayat Second Edition pg 570)

Abu Baseer narrates, "I heard Imam Abu Jafar (as) saying regarding this
ayah, Imam (as) said, "This ayah "that men of understanding may take
heed" is referring to those who love Him (Moula Ali asws), His Shia."

(Tafseer Qummi Second Edition pg 234)


**15. Sura Hijr (The Rock)**

1. ayah 41 "He said: This is a right way with Me:" Imam Abu Abdullah al
Sadiq (as) narrates regarding this ayah, "He said: This is a right way
with Me", Imam (as) said, "I swear by Allah, the right way is Ali
(asws). I swear by Allah, He is meezan (scale) and Siratul Mustaqeem
(right path)." (Mukhtasir al Basair pg 98)

2. ayah 75 "Surely in this are signs for those who examine" Jabir
narrates from Imam Abu Jafar (as) who narrates from Ameerul Momineen
(asws) regarding this saying of Allah, "Surely in this are signs for
those who examine" , Imam (as) said, "RasoolAllah (saw) is those who
examine along with Me and the Imams (as) from My Offspring". (Usool e
Kafi First Edition pg 218)

3. ayah 76 "Surely it is on a road that still abides" Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said regarding this ayah, "This ayah was revealed for Ameerul
Momineen (asws)." (Taweel al Ayat First Edition pg 250)

4.ayah 87 "And certainly We have given you seven of the oft repeated
verses and the great Quran" Hassan Amiri narrates, "I asked Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) regarding this saying of Allah, Imam (as) said, "We are those
seven oft repeated verses and Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as) is the great
Quran." (Al Burhan Second Vol pg 354)


**16.Sura Nahl (The Bee)**

1. ayah 16 "And landmarks and by the stars they find the right way" Al
Washa narrates, "I asked Imam Reza (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as)
said, "We are those landmarks and star is RasoolAllah (saw)." Asbat bin
Salim narrates from Hasim who asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) regarding this
ayah, Imam (as) said, "RasoolAllah (saw) is the star and Aimmah (as) are
landmarks". (Usool e Kafi First Edition pg 207)

2. ayah 90, "Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of
good (to others) and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency
and evil and rebellion; He admonishes you that you may be mindful", Imam
(as) said, "Justice is testifying to the oneness of Allah and prophet
hood of RasoolAllah (saw), ahsan (doing of good) is Ameerul Momineen
(asws), and indecency, evil, and rebellion are three (abu bakr (la),
umar (la), and usman (la)) (Tafseer e Qummi)


**18. Sura al Kahf (The Cave)**

1 .ayah 2 "That He might give warning of a severe punishment from Him"
Barqi narrates from Abu Baseer who narrates from Imam Abu Jafar (as)
regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "That severe punishment is Ameerul
Momineen Ali (asws). He is from the near ones of RasoolAllah (saw). He
slayed the enemies of RasoolAllah (saw). This is why Allah has said,
"give warning of severe punishment from Him" (Tafseer e Ayyashi Second
Edition pg 247)

**20. Sura Taa-haa**

1. ayah 108 "On that day they shall follow the summoner who deceiveth
not" Abul Hasan Imam Musa (as) bin Jafar (as) narrates from His Father,
"I asked from My Father regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "Al Dayaa
(summoner) is Ameerul Momineen (asws)." (Taweel ul Ayat pg 311)

2. ayah 135 "So you will come to know who is the follower of the
straight path and who is right" Hifs Kanani narrates, "I heard Imam Abu
Abdullah (as) say regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "Straight path is
Ameerul Momineen (asws) and those who follow Him are those who are
right." (Taweel ul Ayat First Editon pg 323) 21. Sura Anbiya
(Prophets)

1. ayah 26 "They are honored servants." (see ayah 27)

2. ayah 27 "They do not precede Him in speech and act according to His
commandment" Moula Ali (asws) says, "I am the one for whom these ayahs
were revealed". (Fazail ibn Shazaan pg 83)

**22. Sura Hajj (Pilgrimmage)**

1. ayah 24 "And they are guided to gentle speech; they are guided unto
the path of the praised one" Regarding this ayah of Allah, Imam (as)
said, "They are those who love Ameerul Momineen (asws) and Ahlul Bayt
(as)." (Taweel ul Ayat First Edition pg 335)

23. Sura Muminoon (The Believers)

1. ayah 77, "Until We open for them the door of extreme punishment,
behold! They are in despair at it."

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said regarding "This ayah was revealed for Ali
(asws) ibn Abi Talib (as) for when He will return during Rajat".
(Tafseer e Burhan Third Volume pg 811)

24. Sura Noor

1. ayah 35 "Allah is the light (noor) of the heavens and the earth; a
likeness of His light is as a niche in which is a lamp, the lamp is in a
glass, (and) the glass is as it were a brightly shining star, lit from a
blessed olive-tree, neither eastern nor western, the oil whereof almost
gives light though fire touch it not-- light upon light-- Allah guides
to His light whom He pleases, and Allah sets forth parables for men, and
Allah is Cognizant of all things"

Muffassil bin Yassar narrates I asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) regarding
this ayah of Allah. Regarding "Allah is the light of the heavens and the
earth" Imam (as) said, "Yes, Allah is like this." Then I asked about ,
"a likeness of His light". Imam (as) replied, "This is Muhammad (saw)."
I said, "In which is a lamp". Imam (as) said, "This refers to the heart
of Muhammad (saw)." I asked, "What is lamp?

What is its light?" Imam (as) replied, "The light of knowledge is in
reference to the nabuwiat of Muha mmad (saw)." Then I asked regarding
this ayah, "lit from a blessed olive tree neither of the east nor of the
west." Imam (as) said, "This is in reference to Ameerul Momineen (asws).
It is not for any jewish or christain." Then I asked about this ayah,
"Whose oil almost glows itself though no fire touch it" Imam (as) said,
"This is in reference to Aal e Muhammad (as)." Then I asked about "noor
upon noor" Imam (as) said, "This is in reference to Imams (as) after
Imams (as)."

(Maani ul Akbar pg 150)

There is a narration from RasoolAllah (saw) regarding this saying of
Allah, "Allah is the noor of the heavens and the earth" , RasoolAllah
(saw) said, "Verily,O'Ali (asws)! My name is Noor and You are the Noor
of religion. Light is Hasan (as) and Hussain (as). Lamp is Ali (as) bin
Hussain (as). Brightly shining star is Muhammad (as) bin Ali (as) bin
Hussain (as). Jafar (as) bin Muhammad (as) is the olive tree. The
blessed is Musa (as) bin Jafar (as). The oil is Ali (as) bin Musa (as)
al Reza. Its light is Muhammad (as) bin Ali (as). The west is Ali (as)
bin Muhammad (as). The east is Hasan (as) bin Muhammad (as) and the one
who will light it is Al Qaim (ajfts)."
(Manaqib First Edition pg 240)

2. ayah 55 "Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good
that He will most certainly make them representatives in the earth as He
made representatives of those before them and that He will most
certainly establish for them their religion which He has chosen for
them"

Abdullah bin Sinan narrates from Imam Sadiq (as) regarding this ayah,
Imam (as) said, "This ayah was revealed for Ameerul Momineen Ali (asws)
ibn Abi Talib (as) and the Imams (as) from His offspring." Then Imam
(as) said, "This ayah "that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange" is in
reference to the zahoor of Qaim (ajfts)." (Taweel ul Ayat First Vol pg
368)


