25. Sura Furqaan (the Criterion)
================================

1. ayah 11 "But they reject the hour, and We have prepared a burning
fire for him who rejects the hour" Abu Samit narrates from Imam Sadiq
(as), Imam (as) said, "Verily, there are 12 hours in the day and 12
hours in the night. Verily, Ali (asws) is the greatest hour amongst
those hours." (Tafseer e Burhan Third Vol pg 157)

2. ayah 54 "And He it is who has created man from the water and then He
has made for him blood relationship and marriage relationship and your
Lord is powerful" Regarding this ayah, RasoolAllah (saw) said, "This
ayah was revealed for Ali (asws)" (Tafseer e Burhan Third Edition pg 70,
Roza tul Waizain pg 71) 26. Sura ash-Shu'araa (The Poets)

1. ayah 4 "if We please We would send down upon them a sign from the
heavens so that their necks would remain bowed before it."

Abu Basir narrates "I heard Imam Jafar (as) say regarding this ayah,
Imam (as) said, "Sun appeared at the time of Asr and then a person
appeared. The beauty of His face clearly told He was Imam e Shaams
(sun)." I asked "Who was that?" Imam (as) replied, "Who can He be? I
swear by Allah, He is Ameerul Momineen (asws). He is that ayat (sign)".
(Taweel ul Ayat First Edition pg 386, al Burhan Third Edition pg 180)

**27. Sura Naml (Ant)**

1. ayah 40 "One who had the knowledge of the Book said: I will bring it
to you in the twinkling of an eye. Then when he saw it settled beside
him, he said: This is of the grace of my Lord that He may try me whether
I am grateful or ungrateful; and whoever is grateful, he is grateful
only for his own soul, and whoever is ungrateful, then surely my Lord is
Self- sufficient, Honored"

Atya Ufi narrates Abu Saeed al Khudri said, "I asked RasoolAllah (saw)
regarding this ayah, "One who had the knowledge of the Book" ,
RasoolAllah (saw) said, "That is My brother, Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib
(as)". (Al Bihar 35th Vol pg 429)


**28. Sura Qasas (The Stories)**

1. ayah 5 "And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed
weak in the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the
heirs" Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, "This ayah was revealed for Ameerul
Momineen (asws)" (Biharul Anwar vol 24 pg 168)

2. ayah 35 "We shall appoint a sultan for the both of you and Firoan
and his followers will not be able to reach you because of Our Signs."

"After Musa (as) and Haroon (as) received the orders of Allah to preach
to Firoan, they started o ff towards the court of Firoan. Both of them
were extremely frustrated and worried as to how they would be treated by
Firoan. Along the way, they saw a rider approaching them. He was wearing
a dress adorned with gold and silver stitching and holding a swor d made
of gold.

He said to them, "Follow Me. Do not have any fear." This rider reached
the court of Firoan and said, "Obey these two prophets. If you do not, I
will kill you." Upon hearing these words, Firoan became so frightened.
Then this rider disappeared. Firoan asked Hz Musa (as) and Haroon to
come to his court the next day and say whatever it was they wished to
say. When Musa (as) and Haroon (as) left, Firoan asked his guards, "Why
did you allow this rider to enter without my permission?" The guards r
eplied, "We swear by your honor, we did not see any rider. We only saw
these two brothers."

That rider was Ameerul Momineen Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as). Allah
hiddenly helped all the prophets through Ali (as) and openly helped
Muhammad (saw) through Ali (as). Moula Ali (as) is that great Kalim ul
Kubra (greatest word of Allah) which Allah sent in order to help His
prophets in every age and in various forms.

Ali (as) always was a helper to the prophets, messengers, and friends
of Allah. All the prayers of the prophets, messengers and friends of
Allah were accepted through Moula Ali (as). All of their problems,
difficulties, and sufferings were removed through Moula Ali (as). This
ayah of Quran refers to that incident; "We shall appoint a sultan for
the both of you and Firoan and his followers will not be able to reach
you because of Our Signs." Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates that rider was
Ayatul Kubra (greatest sign) and Sultan for them.

(Al Qatra First Edition pg 66)

31. Sura Luqman

1. ayah 14 "Be grateful to Me and to both your parents; to Me is the
eventual coming" Zaid bin al Munzeer narrates, "I heard Imam Abu Jafar
(as) say regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said, "This ayah is in reference
to RasoolAllah (saw) and Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)". (Taweel ul Ayat
pg 469)


33. Sura Ahzab (The Clans)

1. ayah 23 "Of the believers are men who are true to that which they
covenanted with Allah. Some of them have paid their vow by death (in
battle), and some of them still are waiting; and they have not altered
in the least"

Tabarri writes in his tafseer, "Those who fulfilled their promise were
Hamza and his companions. They promised with Allah they would not run
from the battlefield. They fought courageously until they were martyred.
Those who are awaiting is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as) who remains
steadfast in His jihad (struggle for Allah) and has not retreated from
His oath." (Taweel ul Ayat pg 442)

35.Sura Fatir (The Originator)

1. ayah 32 "We gave the book for an inheritance to those whom We chose
from among Our servants but of them is he who makes his soul to suffer a
loss, and of them is he who takes a middle course and of them is he who
is foremost in good deeds by Allah's permission; this is great favour"

Salim narrates I asked Imam Abu Jafar (as) regarding this ayah, Imam
(as) said, "Those who are foremost in deeds of goodness are Imams (as)
and those who take the middle course are those who recognize the Imams
(as). Those who wrong themselves are those who do not r ecognize the
Imams (as)."

(Usool e Kafi First Edition pg 214)


**36. Sura Ya-Seen**

1. ayah 12 " Surely We give life to the dead, and We write down what
they have sent before and their footprints, and We have preserved
everything in Imam e Mubeen" Ameerul Momineen (as) says, "I swear by My
Lord! I am Imam e Mubeen" (Tafseer e Safi page 421 )

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says, "RasoolAllah (saw) looked towards Moula
Ali (as) and said, "He is Imam e Mubeen. Allah has put in Him the
knowledge of the whole creation." (Tafseer e Burhan page 886)

Ibn Masood narrates regarding this ayah, "Imam Mubeen is Ali (asws) ibn
Abi Talib (as)". (Fazail ibn Shazaan pg 174)

37. Sura Saffat (The Ranks)

1. ayah 24 "Stop them for they have to face the questioning" I am the
one whom Allah says regarding My enemies, "Stop them for they have to
face the questioning" (Fazail ibn Shazaan pg 83)

38. Sa'ad

1. ayah 27 "And We did not create the heavens and the earths and what
is between them in vain"

Abu Baseer narrates from Imam Abu Abdullah (as) regarding this ayah,
Imam (as) said, "Allah created the heavens to praise Ali (asws) and the
earth to praise Syeda (sa) and whatever is between them is for Their
Offspring, the Imams (as)". (Tafseer e Burhan Fourth Vol pg 206)

2. ayah 75 "Are you proud or are you of the exalted ones?" Abu Saeed
Khudri narrates, "We were sitting with RasoolAllah (saw) when a man came
and said, "O'RasoolAllah (saw)! Tell me about iblees regarding this
ayah, "Are you proud or are you of the exalted ones?" . O'RasoolAllah
(saw)! Who are those who are greater than angels?" RasoolAllah (saw)
said, "Myself, Ali (asws), Fatima (sa), Hasan (as), and Hussain (as).

We use to praise Allah near the throne of Allah 2000 years before the
creation of Adam. When Allah created Adam, He ordered the angels to
perform sajdah to him. He did not order Us to perform sajda to Adam. So
the angels performed sajda all except iblees. He refused. Allah asked
him, "Are you proud or are you of the exalted ones?" Allah was referring
to those 5 names that were written on the throne. We are the doors of
Allah through whom Allah bestows His blessings. Those who seek guidance
obtain their guidance through Us. One who hates Us hates Allah. Allah
will throw him into the hellfire. No one will love Us except a halali
(one who is born legitimate)."
(Kafaya al Talib)

3.ayah 86 "Say: I do not ask you for any reward for it; nor am I of
those who pretend." (see ayah 87)

4.ayah 87 "It is nothing except a reminder to the people" In the
tafseer of these ayahs, Imam Sadiq (as) says, "These ayahs were revealed
for Ameerul Momineen (asws)" (Roz al Kafi pg 287)

5.ayah 88 "And most certainly you will come to know about it after a
time" Imam Sadiq (as) says, "This ayah was revealed in reference to the
parents of Al Qaim (ajfts)." (Roz al Kafi pg 287)

39.Sura Zumar (The Groups)

1. ayah 9, " is it so that those who know are equal to those who do not
know? So guidance is for those who use intellect." In the tafseer of
this ayah, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) narrates from His Father (as), " We are
those who know. Those who do not know are Our enemies. Those who use
their intellects and gain guidance are Our shia." (Tafseer Furat pg
306)

2. ayah 33 "And he who brings the truth and (he who) accepts it as the
truth-- these are they that guard (against evil)."

Imam Jafar Sadiq(as) narrates regarding this ayah, "And he who brings
the truth and (he who) accepts it as the truth" , Imam (as) said, "The
one who came with truth is RasoolAllah (saw) and the one who testified
to Him is Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Taweel al Ayat Second Edition
pg 517)

3. ayah 56 "O' woe to me! For what I fell short of in my duty to Allah"
Imam Musa Kazim (as) says regarding this ayah, "Duty to Allah is Ameerul
Momineen (asws) and the Imams (as) who came after Him." (Usool e Kafi
First Edition pg 145)

41. Sura Fussilat (Explained in detail)

1. ayah 8 "As for those who believe and do good, they shall surely have
a reward never to be cut off"

Zahri narrates from Imam al Sadiq (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as)
said, "This ayah was revealed for Salman (as), Miqdad (ra), Ammar (ra),
and Abu Dharr (ra). There is a reward for them that will never be cut
off." (Tafseer e Furat pg 27)

Abu Abullah Imam Sadiq (as) narrates regarding this saying of Allah,
"except those who believe and do good, for them is a reward that shall
never be cut off". Imam (as) said, "The momineens are Salman Farsi (as),
Miqad (ra), Ammar bin Yasir (ra), and Abu Dhar (ra). The reward that
will never cut off is Ameerul Momineen (asws)." (Tafseer e Furat pg
577)

42.Sura ash-Shura (Consultation)

1. ayah 13 "He (Allah) declared sharia (laws) from the deen (religion)
for you whom We have given to Nuh and we revealed this upon you. Which
We also have given to Ibrahim, Musa, and Isa. So stay on this deen
(religion) and do not divert from it" Masoomeen (as) have said,
"Religion (deen) is the wilayat of Moula Ali (asws)." (Tafseer Safi,
Tafseer Qummi)

43. Sura Zukhruf (Ornaments of Gold)

1. ayah 4 "And surely it is in the original of the Book (umm al kitab)
with Us, Most High, Most Wise"

Imam Sadiq (as) narrates, "Ameerul Momineen (asws) is umm al Kitab
(original of the book). This is in accordance with the saying of Allah,
"Keep us on the straight path" (1:6). (Maani ul Akbar pg 32) In the
tafseer of this ayah, Imam (as) said, "Ali ul Hakeem (Most High Most
Wise) is Ameerul Momineen (asws).

(Tafseer e Burhan 4th Edition pg 134) Ibn Masood narrates regarding
this ayah, "Umm al Kitab (original of the book) is Ameerul Momineen
(asws)". (Fazail ibn Shazaan pg 174)

2. ayah 41 "And if We take thee away, We surely shall take vengeance on
them" Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates regarding this ayah, "And if We take thee
away, We surely shall take vengeance on them," with Ali (asws) ibn Abi
Talib (as)." (Tafseer e Furat pg 402)


47. Sura Muhammad

1. ayah 28 "That is because they follow what is displeasing to Allah
and are averse to His pleasure therefore He has made null their deeds"
Jabir bin Yazid narrates from Imam Abu Jafar (as) regarding this ayah,
Imam (as) said, "They disliked Ali (asws) and refused to follow Him
while He was the pleasure of Allah and His Prophet."


