50. Sura Qaaf
=============

1. ayah 21 "And every soul shall come with it a driver and a witness"
Imam Abu Abdullah (as) narrates regarding this ayah, Imam (as) said,
"Ameerul Momineen (asws) is the driver and RasoolAllah (saw) is the
witness". (Taweel ul Ayat pg 590)

51. Sura Dhariyat (The Winnowing Winds)

1. ayah 7 "I swear by the heaven full of paths" Abu Hamza Thumali
narrates, "I asked Imam Abu Jafar (as) regarding this ayah, Imam (as)
said, "Heaven is RasoolAllah (saw) and the paths are Ameerul Momineen
(asws) and His Ahlul Bayt (as)." (Tafseer e Furat pg 441)

2. ayah 9 "He who is averse is made to turn away from it" RasoolAllah
(saw) narrates regarding this ayah, "This ayah was revealed in regarding
the wilayat of Moula Ali (asws). It means to those who oppose the amr
(command) of Allah will be thrown into the hellfire." (Al Manaqib Third
Edition pg 96)

54. Sura al Qamar (Moon)

1. ayah 36 "And certainly He warned them of Our blow but they did doubt
the warnings" RasoolAllah (saw), "O'Ali (asws)! You are the blow of
Allah (Tafseer e Furat pg 455)

55. Sura Rahman (Beneficent)

1. ayah 19, "He has made the two seas flow freely so that They meet
each other" Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates " This ayah refers to Moula Ali
(asws) and Syeda (sa). There is a curtain between Them so They do not
cross each other. RasoolAllah (saw) said, "The pearls came out of these
oceans, and that is Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Hussain (as)." (Tafseer e
Furat)

2. ayah 20 "Between Them is a barrier which They cannot pass" Jafar bin
Muhammad narrates regarding this ayah, "Imam (as) said, "Ameerul
Momineen (asws) and Syeda (sa) are two deep oceans, and neither crosses
the other." (Tafseer e Furat pg 46)

3. ayah 6 "the stars and the trees prostrate to Him" (see ayah 9)

4. ayah 7 "And the heaven, He raised it high and He set the measure"
(see ayah 9)

5. ayah 8 "That you do not exceed the measure." (see ayah 9)

6. ayah 9 "But observe the measure strictly nor fall short thereof"
Dawood al Rikki narrates, "I asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) regarding this
saying of Allah, "the stars and the trees prostrate to Him" (55:6). Imam
(as) said, "Star is RasoolAllah (saw) and trees is in reference to
Ameerul Momineen (asws) and Aimmah (as) who even for the blink of an eye
never disobeyed Allah." Dawood says, "Then I asked regarding this ayah,
"And the heaven, He raised it high and He set the measure" (56:7).

Imam (as) said, "This is in reference to the demise of RasoolAllah
(saw) when Allah called Him back to Him (Allah). Setting the measure is
Ameerul Momineen (asws). Then I asked regarding this ayah, "That you do
not exceed the meaure." (55:8) Imam (as) said, "Allah is saying "Do not
disobey Imam (as) nor turn against Them". Then I asked regarding this
ayah, "But observe the measure strictly nor fall short thereof" (55:9)
Imam (as) said, "Obey Imams (as) with adl (justice) and do not usurp
Their rights." (Taweel ul Ayat pg 63)


**56. Sura al Waqia (The Inevitable)**

1. ayah 39 "A group(thalit) from among the first" (see ayah 40)

2. ayah 40 "a group (thalit) of those of later time"

Abu Saeed al Maidini narrates from Imam Sadiq (as) regarding this ayah,
"The first was Hazqeel who was momin from Aal e Firoan and the other is
Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as)." (Taweel ul Ayat pg 621) And from amongst
your names it is thaqal (heavy), thawab (reward) and thalit (groups).
(Manaqib Third Edition pg 70)

57. Sura Hadid (The Iron)

1. ayah 19 "And as for those who believe in Allah and His messengers,
these are the truthful and martyred ones in the sight of their Lord"
Ibne Abbas narrates, "Ameerul Momineen (asws) is the truthful and
martyr" (Al Qatra Second Edition pg 166)

2. ayah 28 "O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and
believe in His Messenger: He will give you two portions of His mercy,
and make for you a noor with which you will walk, and forgive you, and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful" Ibne Abbas (ra) narrates regarding this
ayah, "O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and believe
in His Messenger: He will give you two portions of His mercy" is in
reference to Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Hussain (as) and "and make for you
a noor with which you will walk" is in reference to Ali (asws) ibn Abi
Talib (as)". (Tafseer Furat pg 180)

59. Sura Hashir (The Exile)

1. ayah 20 "Not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of
the garden. The owners of the garden, They are the victorious.

Abu Saeed al Qudri narrates RasoolAllah (saw) recited this ayah, then
RasoolAllah (saw) said, "The people of jannah are those who obeyed Me
and accepted the Wilayat of Ali (asws) after Me. Remember! Ali (asws) is
a part of Me. One who wages war against Him wages war against Me." Then
RasoolAllah (saw) called Ali (asws), and said, "O'Ali (asws)! Your fight
is My fight. Your friendship is My friendship. You are the knowledge
between Me and My ummah." (Tafseer e Furat pg 183)


**61. Sura Saaf (Ranks)**

1. ayah 10 "O' you who believe! Shall I lead you to a trade that will
save you from a horrible punishment? Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) narrates
regarding this saying of Allah that Ameerul Momineen (a sws) said, "I am
that trade that protects you from the wrath of Allah." (Tafseer e Burhan
Fourth Edition pg 330) 66. Sura Tahrim (Prohibition)

1. ayah 4 "Then surely it is Allah who is his master and Jibrael and
the believers who do good"

Asma binte Amais narrates "I heard RasoolAllah (saw) say regarding this
ayah, "Ali (asws) ibn Abi Talib (as) is salih ul momineen (believers who
do good)." Rashid Hijri narrates, "I was with my Moula, Ameerul Momineen
(asws). He looked at me and said, "I swear by Allah, o' Rashid, I am the
salih ul momineen (believers who do good)." (Tafseer e Furat pg 185)

68. Sura Qalam (The Pen)

1. ayah 1 "Noon.I swear by the Pen" Muhammad bin Fazil asked Abul Hasan
(as) regarding this saying of Allah, Imam (as) said, "Pen is Ameerul
Momineen (asws)." (Taweel ul Ayat Second Vol pg 810)

69. Sura Haqqa (The Reality)

1. ayah 12 "When He hears, He remembers" Makhool asked Moula Ali (asws)
regarding this ayah, "When He hears, He remembers" (69:12). Moula Ali
(asws) said, "RasoolAllah (saw) prayed to Allah and asked "Make Ali
(asws)'s Ear "Izn e Waiya". Moula (asws) said, "Whenever I listened to
anything from RasoolAllah (saw), I would memorize it and remember it."
RasoolAllah (saw) said, "O'Ali (asws)! Allah order ed Me to inform You
that You are "Izn e Waiya" of My knowledge".
(Tafseer al Burhan 3rd Vol pg 150)

2. ayah 51 "Verily! He is Haqqul Yaqeen!" Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said
regarding this ayah, "Verily! He is Haqqul Yaqeen!" Imam (as) said,
"Verily! Haqqul Yaqeen is Ameerul Momineen (asws). One who denies this
has turned away from haqq (truth)."


