First
=====

It is commendable for one who prays to use a pure soil he is sure to be
clean regardless of where he takes it from; there is no preference nor
any distinction of one soil over another in as far as prostrating upon
it is concerned. This is only an indication that the person offering his
prayers demonstrates concern about the cleanliness of his body and
clothes, and about the place where he offers his prayers.

It is something which a Muslim regards as a good plateau upon which he
prostrates when at home or when travelling, one which he may not find
everywhere, i.e. other towns, bazaars, hotels, inns, rest areas, parks,
traveller lodges, transportation stations, ports, shelters, etc. How can
one do so since such places may be frequented by non-Muslims and other
people who are heedless of and indifferent to religion when it comes to
a spot which by necessity has to be pure and clean?

What is wrong with a Muslim taking a precaution relevant to his creed
by carrying with him a pure soil with which he feels comfortable and of
the cleanliness of which he is sure to prostate upon when he offers his
prayers rather than prostrating on filth, uncleanness and impurities?
The latter never bring one closer to Allah, nor does the Sunnah permit
prostrating upon them, nor doing so is accepted by sound reason once a
person has made sure that his body and clothes are clean. Moreover, the
Sunnah prohibits offering prayers in places such as: garbage collection
sites, slaughter-houses, cemeteries, highways, toilets, places where
camels rest, mandating that mosques should be cleansed and perfumed .

This terse and precious religious attitude was adopted by pious men of
the first Muslim century. Such a very highly commendable precaution was
adopted by the great tabi\`i and faqih whose fiqh was unanimously agreed
upon, namely Masrooq al-Ajda\` who used to carry with him whenever he
travelled a block of baked clay upon which he would prostrate, as we are
told by the head mentor and the trusted hafiz, the Imam of the Sunnah
and the authority of his time, Abu Bakr ibn Abu Shaybah. In Volume Two
of Al-Musannaf, it is recorded that "Whenever Masrooq travelled, he used
to carry with him on board the vessel a block of baked clay upon which
he would prostrate."

This is the first premise endorsed by the Shi\`as. It has a precedent
that goes back to the days of the early sahabah and their sincere
tabi\`in. As regarding the second premise, here it is explained:


