Second
======

The rule of "absolute consideration" determines that some lands are
better than others, and it acknowledges the differences between relics
and the views in their regard. This is something normal, rational,
agreed upon by all nations, governments, authorities, and all the
world's rulers. Through relating or attributing one land, place, or area
of a specific significance to another, decisions are made and
injunctions are derived which should not be violated, nor should those
who violate them be pardoned.

Can you not see how autonomous regions, parks, halls, homes,
government-controlled offices, especially those owned by the royal
palace and whereby the country's monarch is characterized, enjoy a
special status and are subject to specific jurisdictions which people
have to safeguard and the laws relevant to which have to be adhered
to?

Such is the case with places, buildings, and edifices related to Allah
Almighty. These enjoy a special status. Injunctions, rites, and
obligations, from the adherence to which nobody who submits to Allah is
exempted, are sanctioned and safeguarded. Anyone who lives under the
banner of Tawhid and is a Muslim has to shoulder his full responsibility
in safeguarding and following them.

It is according to this same agreed upon rule of "absolute
consideration" that there is for the Ka\`ba an injunction of its own,
and so is the case with the Haram and with both Sacred Mosques of Mecca
and Medina. There are injunctions relevant specifically to them both.
There are other injunctions and restrictions relevant to public mosques
and places of worship where the Name of Allah is celebrated. Such
injunctions include sanctifying and venerating them and keeping them
clean of any filth.

Those who are in the state of janaba, women during their menstruation
as well as those during their post-natal periods, are all prohibited
from entering them. They are not to be sold out at all under any pretext
whatsoever, unlike the case of private trusts the sale or trade of which
(for something better) is subject to other injunctions and regulations.
Such a status is due to their being relevant to the King of Kings, the
Lord of the Worlds.

The reason why Mecca is regarded as a safe haven sought by all people
who perform the pilgrimage and by those who visit it from each and every
distant land, and the fact that such pilgrimage rites are obligatory
even when it comes to its plants and produces, is due to the mandate
derived from such a relationship that necessitates edicts to be
enforced, and the fact that Allah had chosen such places [for
distinction] rather than any others.

So is the case with regard to considering Medina as a sacred Haram to
be venerated. All sanctities relevant to it and to its people and soil
[which we find] in the sacred Sunnah as well as those relevant to
whoever reaches it or is buried therein, are all due to the same status,
to its being belonging to Allah, the most Exalted One, and to its being
the capital of the throne of His greatest Prophet, the one who conveyed
His conclusive Message, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny.

This status, and its law of relationship, does not only concern the
legislator, it is also something natural sanctioned by Islam. Not only
is it better than all other places, it is the absolute criterion of
preferring one piece of land over another when it comes to issues
relevant to prophets and messengers and to their successors, to the
truthful, to the martyrs, to the faithful and to their categories, up to
whatever distinction one may conceive based on sacred Islam. Nay! Such a
status is the axis upon which the cycle of existence revolves, one
through which everything else stands, one to which all wishes aspire and
from which every relationship and source of endearment, all links and
connections, all factors of grudge and animosity, hostility and
spite..., are rendered.

It is also the source of every disagreement, dissension, and hypocrisy.
It also is the foundation of every unity and unification, every asylum,
every accord and peace agreement. Upon it are the structures of
totalities are built and social institutes are erected. In the light of
its being the ultimate objective are states formed and governments
dispute with one another, causing rivalries, discords, disputes, then
punches, then bloody battles and wars. In its light do nations and
tribes group together, then groups and societies abound. In its light do
establishments get founded in order to deal with religious and secular
issues and theological societies centralize, and so do scientific,
social, sociological, nationalistic, sectarian, partisan, and political
factions, during crises or ease, when at rest or in motion, when united
or disunited, when in agreement or in disagreement.

The mighty and victorious government, the one which governs all
humanity since its very first day and till eternity without any bias to
anyone or without anyone freeing himself from its authority, day in and
day out, is the relative government wherein there is the safeguarding of
both the creed and the life in this world and at which man-made systems
end, and so do the general social canon, as well as the human affairs of
all individuals.

People, though numerous, are subjugated to its authority, shackled in
its chains, tied in its webs, having no escape route therefrom. It is
the one that rules and abrogates, over-rules and sustains, lifts and
lowers, joins and disconnects, brings closer or distances, gives and
takes, elevates and humiliates, rewards and penalizes, honors and
abases.

It is the same one that makes the unknown soldier held in high esteem,
honored and respected. It finds him worthy of all honoring; in it, he is
glorified and dignified by the people and by the government. It scatters
roses and flowers on his soil and grave, immortalizing him, keeping his
memory alive on the pages of history for all time to come.

Such a government is the same one wherein catastrophes and disasters
become tolerable. Through its criteria does man willingly work hard,
facing trials, tribulations, and tremendous calamities headlong,
[happily] sacrificing his all for its sake. It is the one that prompted
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny, as we are told by Lady Ayesha , to kiss the corpse of the great
sahabi Othman ibn Maz\`oon as tears were trickling down his cheeks...


