Supplement 2
============

Is not a soil that symbolizes the signs of Tawhid and the defense of
Tawhid to the end more worthy of prostrating upon? It surely invites one
to be kind at heart, to be compassionate, to be affectionate and
gentle.

Is it not most exemplary and the best thing to do to make the
prostration on a soil from which springs of blood gushed out colored
with the dye of love for Allah and crafted on the Sunnah of Allah and on
pure and sincere loyalty to Him? Is there anything better than a soil
kneaded with the blood of a pure and revered person, an individual the
rewards of loving whom are the token of appreciation of the Conclusive
Divine Message? It is a soil fermented with the blood of the Master of
the Youths of Paradise, a symbol of love for Allah and for His Messenger
(P) and the trust left by Muhammad (P) among his Muslim nation as we are
told by the Sunnah.

It is based upon both premises that we take out of the soil of Kerbala
such pieces to prostrate upon them just as the faqih of past
generations, namely Masrooq ibn al-Ajda\`, used to carry with him a
block of baked clay taken out of the soil of sacred Medina to prostrate
on. This man was the student of the righteous caliphate, the faqih of
Medina and the teacher of the Sunnah. Far away from him to be charged of
inventing a bid\`a. Which of these premises causes us to really feel the
pain of unfairness? Which one of them contradicts the call of the Holy
Qur'an or the Sunnah of Allah and His Messenger (P)? Which one of them
should we denounce and label as a bid\`a? Which one of them violates
reason, logic, or common-sense?

When the Shi\`as use Kerbala's soil to prostrate upon, they do not
claim that doing so is absolutely obligatory, nor do they claim that it
is an obligation derived from the Shari\`a or the creed, nor is it one
of the sect's obligation, nor does anyone among them, from the very
first day, distinguish between it and others collected from the earth's
soil, when they regard prostrating upon it as permissible, contrary to
what ignorant folks claim, those who base their claim on their own
personal views.

To them [Shi\`as], [such a turba] is mandated by reason and is highly
commendable, that's all. It is opting for the best of what one should
prostrate upon when one consults his reason and logic and common-sense
alone, as you have already been told above. There are many followers of
this sect who take with them when they travel any such thing other than
Kerbala's turba upon which the prostration is valid such as a pure and
clean rug woven of palm leaves they are confident to be clean, or
anything like that upon which they prostrate when they perform their
prayers.

We are of the view that anyone who adopts these sound premises and
takes into consideration the issues relevant to precaution and to
sanctity will conclude that the people who live at the Sacred Mosques:
Mecca and Medina, and who seek shelter with them, as well as those who
live around them, must take out of that soil round flat pieces or
tablets upon which they should prostrate in accordance with both
arguments and as a means to rid themselves of the heat of the gravel at
the Sacred Mosque especially at noon and during hot weather to prostrate
upon and to carry them as pure and blessed places of prostration
whenever they travel as was done by their good ancestors, the peers of
the faqih Masrooq ibn al-Ajda\` whose story you have already heard. They
should make them available to those who visit these Mosques and to the
pilgrims who go to those sacred lands from other Islamic countries.

They should be adopted by the Islamic nation as a place of prostration
when at home and when travelling, and they should regard them as
souvenirs reminding them of Allah and His Messenger (P) and of the
places where His angel of revelation descended, ones which remind them
of their Lord and of His Prophet whenever they look at them, smell them,
and smell in them the fragrance of Tawhid and Prophethood... They would
be lanterns of guidance at Muslims' homes enlightening the hearts and
the minds of those endowed with wisdom. The Muslims would then seek
nearness to Allah Almighty in every part of the world by prostrating
upon a soil taken from the very best spot chosen by Allah Himself to be
a safe, secure, and holy House, a house of sanctity, honor, blessing,
the sacred resting place of His Prophet.

Besides, it actually carries a great and effective publicity: It
invites people to enter into the folds of Islam, to visit the Ka\`ba, in
order to worship Allah, to visit the capital of His Sunnah and the grave
of the one who carried out the Message of such Sunnah. Indeed, whoever
holds Allah's sanctities with high regards, it surely is better for him
with his Lord.

Finally, such is our Husain (as), and such is our love for him. Such is
his mourning. Such is Kerbala and its turba: the piece of earth upon
which we prostrate. Allah is our Lord, and our Sunnah and its tradition
is the Sunnah of our Prophet (P) and its tradition, and to Allah does
all Praise belong. And what reason do we have not to believe in Allah
and in the truth that has come to us while we earnestly desire that our
Lord lets us join the (ranks of) the good people?

(Holy Qur'an, 5:84)

And so that those who have been given the knowledge may know that it is
the truth from your Lord, so that they may believe in it and their
hearts may be humbled before it. Most surely Allah is the Guide of those
who believe in a straight path.

(Holy Qur'an, 22:54)


