The Balances of Justice in the Resurrection Day
===============================================

VERSE NO.46ِ47

These verses reveal the ignorance of the unbelievers, that how do these
unaware and haughty people forget their Lord in their merriments and
enjoying His abundant bounties, but when the lightest breath of the
punishment of your Lord touches them, they become so fearful that they
cry out:ِ \`\`Woe to us! We were oppressors''. But this emergency
wakefulness too will not profit them, and when the punishment is
removed, they continue with their evil deeds. Then comes the Final
Judgement of God and His SCALES OF JUSTICE in work. Even our smallest
action is registered in the record of people which God holds! Everything
will be weighted in the scales of justice, [ 178 ]

and considered for due recompense. Any one who has done an atom's
weight of good or evil deed will see it.

The Arabic, \`\`MESGHA"LA ZARRAT'' means the weight of a small ant or
the weight of a small particle of dust. It is found in six places in
Qura"n; and in 2 cases the same meaning has been manifested in the
weight of a grain of mustard-seed. All these imply the precision and the
perfection of God's judgement, and His accounting. His knowledge is
perfect, therefore his justice will be perfect too. When God takes the
account of something, or judges a case; His work is excellently perfect.
There is no outburst of rage, or outside influences; to pervert his
justice for selfish purposes. God needs not the help of anyone in His
judgement because He is All-knowing, All-aware.

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى وَهَارُونَ الْفُرْقَانَ وَضِيَاءً وَذِكْراً
لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ(( 48 ))

48- AND WE GAVE MOSES AND AARON THE CRITERION, (OF RIGHT AND WRONG) AND
A LIGHT, AND A REMINDER FOR THE PIOUS.

الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ بِالْغَيْبِ وَهُمْ مِّنَ السَّاعَةِ
مُشْفِقُونَ(( 49 ))

49- THOSE WHO FEAR THEIR LORD IN PRIVATE, AND FEAR OF THE HOUR.

وَهَذَا ذِكْرٌ مُّبَارَكٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ أَفَأَنْتُمْ لَهُ مُنكِرُونَ((
50 ))

50- AND THIS IS A BLESSED REMINDER THAT WE HAVE SENT IT DOWN. DO YOU
THEN DENY IT.

[ 179 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
SOME EPISODES IN THE LIFE OF PROPHETS**

VERSE NO.48ِ50

The next verses in this chapter refer to some episodes in the life of
the prophets. The beginning is with Moses and Aaron who were given a
criterion to distinguish between right and wrong, true and false:ِ
\`\`And We gave Moses and Aaron the Forghan (criterion), and a light,
and a reminder for the pious.'' The Arabic, \`\`FORGHAN'' principally is
something which can separate the right from the wrong. It is a means of
knowing these two. Some commentators have understood it to be the BIBLE.
In cases too, FORGHAN has been used as another name for Qura"n. As to
the Arabic, \`\`ZIA'', it is a light emitted from the very substance of
any lightgiving material, and this is the nature of all the SCRIPTURES,
and the miracles, that the apostles have shown.

The next verse (NO.49) introduces the men of piety:ِ

\`\`Those who fear their Lord in private and dread of the Hour.''
(Resurrection Day) The Arabic, \`\`TAGHWA'' that We have translated to
piety is some sort of a fear of running against the will of God which is
set in the heart of the pious, or the virtuous. Such a fear is akin to
the love of God. HAZRAT IMAM ALI (AS) was asked of the meaning of piety.
In answer to this question he said:ِ \`\`Suppose you have all your deeds
in a tray. If you are a pious man, you fear not to carry the tray,
uncovered, on your head, and pass through a market.''

This sort of Godfearing which causes such a said piety, will of course
end to the salvation of the pious. There is also the dread of our evil
deeds and its consequences in the life to come. This sort of fear may
also end to Man's prosperity by giving a halt to evil deeds.

[ 180 ]

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ رُشْدَهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا بِهِ
عَالِمِينَ(( 51 ))

51- AND WE PROVIDED FOR ABRAHAM TO DEVELOP FROM BEFORE, AND WE KNEW HIM
WELL.

إِذْ قَالَ لاَِبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَا هَذِهِ التَّمَاثِيلُ الَّتِى
أَنْتُمْ لَهَا عَاكِفُونَ(( 52 ))

52- WHEN HE SAID TO HIS FATHER (AZAR), AND TO HIS PEOPLE:ِ \`\`WHAT ARE
THESE (LIFELESS) IMAGES TO WHICH YOU ARE SO DEVOUTED?''

قَالُوا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا لَهَا عَابِدِينَ(( 53 ))

53- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE FOUND OUR FATHERS WORSHIPPING THEM.''

قَالَ لَقَدْ كُنتُمْ أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمْ فِى ضَلاَل مُّبِين(( 54 ))

54- HE SAID:ِ \`\`VERILY YOU AND YOUR FATHERS HAVE BEEN IN MANIFEST
ERROR!''

قَالُوا أَجِئْتَنَا بِالْحَقِّ أَمْ أَنْتَ مِنَ اللاَّعِبِينَ(( 55 ))

55- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`HAVE YOU BROUGHT US THE TRUTH, OR YOU ARE OF THE
JESTERS!?''

قَالَ بَل رَبُّكُمْ رَبُّ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ الَّذِى فَطَرَهُنَّ
وَأَنَا عَلَى ذَلِكُمْ مِّنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ(( 56 ))

56- HE SAID:ِ \`\`(PERFECT TRUTH) THAT YOUR LORD IS THE LORD OF THE
HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. HE WHO ORIGINATED THEM, AND I AM OF THE WITNESSES
TO THAT.''

[ 181 ]

وَتَاللهِ لاََكِيدَنَّ أَصْنَامَكُمْ بَعْدَ أَنْ تُوَلُّوا
مُدْبِرِينَ(( 57 ))

57- AND BY ALLAH I WILL MAKE A PLAN AGAINST YOUR IDOLS AFTER YOU HAVE
GONE AWAY, TURNING YOUR BACKS.

فَجَعَلَهُمْ جُذَاذاً إِلاَّ كَبِيراً لَّهُمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ إِلَيْهِ
يَرْجِعُونَ(( 58 ))

58- THEN HE BROKE THEM ALL INTO PIECES, EXCEPT THE BIGGEST OF THEM, SO
THAT THEY MIGHT RETURN TO HIM.

**THE COMMENTARY
ABRAHAM PLANS TO DESTROY THE IDOLS**

VERSE NO.51ِ58

Abraham had developed from before, and was furnished with the knowledge
of Monotheism in his early teenages. God was aware of his wide variety
of merits, and brought him up under His care and mercy. He was indeed
well developed, and far more for his age, and that appeared clearly when
the boy argued with his father about the idols that they made, and then
sold for worship:ِ

\`\`What are these lifeless images to which you are so devouted?'' This
assertion of Abraham consists of a good reasoning too, because nothing
can be seen of such false gods, except a senseless image which is all
they have. What answer the idolaters could have except adhering to their
ancestors and their customs which was in fact their culture:ِ \`\`They
said:ِ We found our fathers worshipping them.'' And Abraham's answer to
this was:ِ

\`\`Verily you and your fathers have all been in a manifest error.''
There was now a serious conflict betweem the godly boy and his godless
father, which may teach us how a righteous man should behave, when there
is a contend and variance of opinion, between his parent and his duty to
God. Whenever evil stands firmly between a [ 182 ]

godly man, and his God, he should fight against evil bravely, and if he
is subjected to the Fire of Persecution, he should stand firm enough to
draw God's Mercy, Who can easily turn our troubles to our comfort.

In the eyes of Abraham, religion was very serious and important, but in
the hands of his people, it was a play-toy or a means of material
benefit. His father's business was to make idols, and to sell it for
material profit, and for social advantages. How could he then suffer his
teenager son, to endanger his rightful commerce, and personal concerns?
After all, that noble work was one of their ancestral customs that they
had inherited from old. They therefore said to Abraham:ِ

\`\`Are you serious in what you say, and have you brought us the truth;
or you are only jesting with us?''

The Godly boy who was indeed serious in his assertions, said to
them:ِ

\`\`It is a perfect truth that your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and
earth. It is He who originated them, and I testify to that.''

After their hot controversy, Abraham decided to convince them that how
futile and helpless their gods could be. So he told them that he would
be doing something against their false gods, when they were all absent.
This threat was another hint to that, their gods were dependent on their
care; and not they on the care and protection of their gods! ABRAHAM'S
threat aroused little enthusiasm in the group, and they left him to his
own devices.

He created an amazing scenery to make known to his people, how
worthless were those stocks and stones that they worshipped for God....
He broke all the small idols into pieces and then put his axe on the
shoulder of the biggest of them; as if a fight had taken place among the
idols, large and small!

Then the biggest of the gods, had to tell their worshippers what really
had happened! [ 183 ]

قَالُوا مَنْ فَعَلَ هَذَا بِآلِهَتِنَا إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ((
59 ))

59- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`HE WHO HAS DONE THIS WITH OUR GODS IS INDEED OF THE
OPPRESSORS.'' (AND MUST BE PUNISHED)

قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا فَتىً يَذْكُرُهُمْ يُقَالُ لَهُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ(( 60
))

60- (A GROUP OF THEM) SAID:ِ \`\`WE HEARD A YOUTH SPEAKING AGAINST
THEM, WHO IS CALLED ABRAHAM.

قَالُوا فَأْتُوا بِهِ عَلَى أَعْيُنِ النَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَشْهَدُونَ((
61 ))

61- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`BRING HIM BEFORE THE EYES OF THE PEOPLE, THAT THEY
MAY BEAR WITNESS.''

قَالُوا أَأَنْتَ فَعَلْتَ هَذَا بِآلِهَتِنَا يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ(( 62 ))

62- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`DID YOU DO THIS WITH OUR GODS, O, ABRAHAM?''

قَالَ بَلْ فَعَلَهُ كَبِيرُهُمْ هَذَا فَسْأَلُوهُمْ إِنْ كَانُوا
يَنطِقُونَ(( 63 ))

63- HE SAID:ِ \`\`PERHAPS THIS BIGGEST ONE OF THEM HAS DONE IT, SO ASK
THEM IF THEY ARE SPEAKING.''

فَرَجَعُوا إِلَى أَنفُسِهِمْ فَقَالُوا إِنَّكُمْ أَنْتُمُ
الظَّالِمُونَ(( 64 ))

64- THEN THEY TURNED TO THEMSELVES, (TO THEIR CONSCIENCE) AND SAID:ِ
\`\`YOU YOURSELVES ARE OPPRESSORS.''

ثُمَّ نُكِسُوا عَلَى رُءُوسِهِمْ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا هَؤُلاَءِ
يَنطِقُونَ(( 65 ))

65- THEN THEY DROOPED THEIR HEADS DOWN, (SAYING:ِ) \`\`YOU KNOW WELL
THAT THESE DO NOT SPEAK.'' [ 184 ]

قَالَ أَفَتَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مَا لاَ يَنفَعُكُمْ شَيْئاً
وَلاَ يَضُرُّكُمْ(( 66 ))

66- HE SAID:ِ \`\`DO YOU THEN WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH, THAT WHICH DOES
NOT PROFIT YOU ANYTHING; AND NEITHER HARMS YOU.''

أُفّ لَّكُمْ وَلِمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ((
67 ))

67- \`\`FIE UPON YOU, AND UPON WHAT YOU WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH. DO
YOU NOT THEN USE YOUR WISDOM.

**THE COMMENTARY
A KNOCKING DOWN REASON**

VERSE NO.59ِ67

When people entered their temple, they saw something that struck them
all with astonishment! Some of the people who had not heard what Abraham
had said against their idols, were amazed to see that scenery! So they
exclaimed:ِ \`\`Who may have done this sort of grave wrong to our
gods?'' The others who had heard what Abraham said about their idols,
asserted:ِ \`\`We did hear a youth, whose name is Abraham, speaking
against our gods.''

Then a formal council of the people was held, and Abraham was
arraigned. No one was ever heard to have said anything against the idols
except Abraham. Therefore they bore witness that he had threatened to
plan a plot against their idols! The community was entirely agitated.
There was a very great enthusiasm and excitement among all. In the sight
of a group of them, the greatest of crimes had been done, that a
venturous bold youth had shaken the basis and the foundation of their
creed. Their first question was:ِ [ 185 ]

\`\`O, ABRAHAM! Did you do this with our gods?'' But Abraham seemed to
be wonderfully indifferent, and with utmost coolness! in an ironic
language he said to the furious people:ِ \`\`Why are you asking me!? You
had better asked your gods. Perhaps the biggest of them in whose hand is
the axe, has been angry with the smaller, and has smashed them all in a
quarrel!''

Thus Abraham tried to open the eyes of his people, and to teach them
some truth of their falsehood. The boy's irony touched them to the
quick. Some of them became thoughtful. They referred to their inner
conscience and then they hung their heads in shame.

Soon after, a group of the people who had material interests and social
advantages on account of the idols, took the lead, and said:ِ \`\`You
well know that these idols do not speak!''

This was precisely what Abraham was waiting for, and thus he began his
reasonable attack:ِ \`\`Do you then worship something which can neither
hurt you nor profit! Fie upon you and upon what you worship apart from
Allah.''

قَالُوا حَرِّقُوهُ وَانصُرُوا آلِهَتَكُمْ إِنْ كُنتُمْ فَاعِلِينَ(( 68
))

68- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`BURN HIM AND HELP YOUR GODS IF YOU ARE TO DO
ANYTHING.''

قُلْنَا يَا نَارُ كُونِى بَرْداً وَسَلاَماً عَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ(( 69
))

69- WE SAID:ِ \`\`O, FIRE! BECOME COLD AND SAFE FOR ABRAHAM.''

وَأَرَادُوا بِهِ كَيْداً فَجَعَلْنَاهُمُ الاَْخْسَرِينَ(( 70 ))

70- THEY SOUGHT TO LAY A PLOT AGAINST HIM, BUT WE MADE THEM THE WORST
OF LOSERS. [ 186 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
WHERE THE FIRE BECOMES A FLOWER-GARDEN!**

VERSE NO.59ِ67

When people returned to their temple once again, they met with
something that struck them with astonishment.... All their idols were
smashed, except the biggest of them, who had an axe in his hand! Abraham
revolted against idolatry when he was in his teenages. He broke the
idols boldly, and condemned the idolaters wisely and very reasonably.

Usually power and logic are inversely proportional. As the physical
power of Man increases, his logic will decrease. This matter is true
with all, except the Godly men, that as they become more powerful, they
become more humble too! When dictators cannot obtain their objects
reasonably, and cannot express their feelings logically, they use power
to overcome the obstructions, and to silence the objections. This tenet
of power was enforced against the knocking down reasons of Abraham.
\`\`Burn him! Turn him to ashes! This was now the logic of the
heathens.'' In order to support their cruel decree with some reasons,
they added another phrase, saying:ِ

\`\`Burn Abraham and help your gods!'' They kindled a huge fire of
persecution, the smoke of which darkened a long distance around, and its
flames threatened the sky! To help increasing the flames of the fire, it
was declared to be a sacred deed, and the best of the prayers, by the
priests and clergies. It was so that even that old, woman offered the
fuel of her winter for that holy fire! Soon the fire blazed so
dreadfully that no creature could approach it from a far distance!
Therefore they put Abraham like a shooting stone into a catapult; an
ancient machine for throwing heavy stones in war.

[ 187 ]

It is narrated that GABRIEL the arch angel of God appeared to Abraham
in the catapult, and said to him:ِ \`\`Do you want any help!?'' Abraham
said to Gabriel:ِ \`\`Of you? No! None at all!'' Gabriel told the
youth:ِ \`\`Then ask your Lord to help you!'' In answer to the angel,
Abraham said:ِ \`\`It is enough for me that my Lord is aware of my state
!'' They cast the godly youth into the middle of the hell of
persecution! But Man proposes, and God disposes:ِ \`\`We said; O, Fire!
Become cool and safe for Abraham!'' And everything was so that Allah
willed! The Fire became a Flower-Garden!

وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَلُوطاً إِلَى الاَْرْضِ الَّتِى بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا
لِلْعَالَمِينَ(( 71 ))

71- AND WE DELIVERED HIM AND LOT, TO THE LAND WHICH WE HAD BLESSED FOR
ALL MANKIND.

وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً وَكُلّاً جَعَلْنَا
صَالِحِينَ(( 72 ))

72- AND WE GRANTED HIM ISAAC, AND JACOB IN ADDITION; AND MADE THEM ALL
RIGHTEOUS.

وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا وَأَوْحَيْنَا
إِلَيْهِمْ فِعْلَ الْخَيْرَاتِ وَإِقَامَ الصَّلاَةِ وَإِيتَاءَ
الزَّكَاةِ وَكَانُوا لَنَا عَابِدِينَ(( 73 ))

73- AND WE MADE THEM LEADERS, GUIDING PEOPLE BY OUR ORDER, AND WE
INSPIRED THEM WITH THE (COMMANDMENT) OF DOING GOOD DEEDS, AND PERFORMING
THE PRAYER, AND PAYING THE ALMS-TAX, AND THEY WERE OUR WORSHIPPERS. [
188 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ABRAHAM'S EMIGRATION FROM THE LAND OF IDOLS**

VERSE NO.71ِ73 The wonderful rescue of Abraham from the huge blazing
fire of Nimrode waved all the pillars and foundations of their
government and community. Nimrode could not then consider ABRAHAM as a
young ambitious, and bold venturer youth who looked for progress in
rank, wealth and power. He seemed more similar to the great Divine
leaders and the prophets of God, but at any price, he thought that he
must get rid of him. Now Abraham had obtained a wide fame and a great
reputation among the people, and it was not that easy now to do away
with him. In spite of all that, Nimrode accused him of corrupting the
people's religion and creed of their fathers. He therefore confiscated
all his herds of cattle and ordered him to leave the land of Chaldees.

Abraham objected, saying:ِ \`\`He had spent his life time in obtaining
the cattle here, and if they had to confiscate what he owned, they had
to give him back his life time.'' Then a brave judge in the court,
confirmed Abraham's claim, that Nimrode who called himself a god, had to
give Abraham back his life time, in exchange for his domestic animal.
After that brave judgement, Nimrode agreed to exile the Man of God, with
the right of taking all his properties as well as his herd of cattle.
These objections were the political tricks and plays of Nimrode, and as
a matter of fact, he was willing in the depth of his heart to give to
Abraham half of his throne in order to get rid of him.

Abraham was born in UR of Chaldees, a place of the lower reach of
EUPHRATES, a hundred miles distant from Persian Gulf. This land was one
of the cradles of the human ancient civilization. From his home town,
Abraham emigrated to SYRIA which comprised of the land of Canaan, or
what we call it PALESTINE now. Syria is a country on eastern shore of
the Mediterranean, with [ 189 ]

its capital at Damascus. Syria is an ancient as a land, but young as a
state. Ancient Syria comprised the area stretched from the Mediterranean
coast in the West, as for north as ANTIOCH, and as for south as Sinai
Peninsula.

What is Lebanon, Israel, and Jordan today, were integral parts of
Syria. Ancient Syria was generally a province of empires ruled by Egypt,
Babylon, Assyria, Hittate, and Persia. The next verse (NO.72) refers to
one of the Great Gifts of God, that was bestowed on Abraham; and that
was two righteous sons, and pure and good lineage of progeny. In his old
age, he was granted Isaac and Ishmael, that he was eager to have all his
life. He also could enjoy the company of his grandson Jacob, who was
also a righteous man and a prophet.

In the last verse (NO.77), reference is made to six characteristics or
qualifications of these righteous men of God who were 1) leaders of
people in the way of Allah. 2) Their leadership was through God's
command. 3) They knew their duties to do good deeds. 4) They all
performed the prayer. 5) They regularly paid the alms-tax. 6) And they
were all God's worshippers and truthful servants.

وَلُوطاً آتَيْنَاهُ حُكْماً وَعِلْماً وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنْ الْقَرْيَةِ
الَّتِى كَانَتْ تَّعْمَلُ الْخَبَائِثَ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمَ سَوْء
فَاسِقِينَ(( 74 ))

74- AND LOT; WE GAVE HIM SANCTION AND KNOWLEDGE, AND WE SAVED HIM FROM
THE TOWN WHICH WAS DOING EVIL, THAT THEY WERE A PEOPLE, DEBAUCHERS.

وَأَدْخَلْنَاهُ فِى رَحْمَتِنَا إِنَّهُ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ(( 75 ))

75- AND WE ADMITTED TO OUR MERCY, THAT HE WAS OF THE RIGHTEOUS (MEN). [
190 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
LOT'S RESCUE FROM THE SINFUL LAND**

VERSE NO.74ِ75 Lot was one of the near kins of Abraham, and an apostle
too. Here is mentioned a part of his endeavours against evil. The
Arabic, \`\`HOKM'' translated to, \`\`sanction'' in its various shades
of meaning, can be the authority of prophethood, wisdom, and knowledge,
all of which are included in the sanction of his prophethood.

Lot emigrated in accompany with ABRAHAM to Palestine. Then he left the
Arch Prophet, as per order of God, and went to admonish the townsfolk of
Sodom and Gomorrah, who were a people given to abominations and sexual
perversion. Lot admonished them compassionately, but they rejected and
scoffed at him and insisted upon their sinful deeds. Finally, God's
wrath fell upon them, and their towns were overthrown and all the people
were destroyed, save Lot and his followers who were not many.

وَنُوحاً إِذْ نَادَى مِنْ قَبْلُ فَاسْتَجَبْنَا لَهُ فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ
وَأَهْلَهُ مِنَ الْكَرْبِ الْعَظِيمِ(( 76 ))

76- AND NOAH, WHEN HE CALLED BEFORE, (ABRAHAM AND LOT)AND WE ANSWERED
HIM AND RESCUED HIM AND HIS FOLK FROM A GREAT DISTRESS.

وَنَصَرْنَاهُ مِنْ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا إِنَّهُمْ
كَانُوا قَوْمَ سَوْء فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 77 ))

77- AND WE HELPED HIM AGAINST A PEOPLE WHO BELIED OUR SIGNS, THAT THEY
WERE A BAD PEOPLE, SO WE DROWNED THEM ALL.

[ 191 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
NOAH'S RESCUE FROM THE PAWS OF THE OBSTINATE UNBELIEVERS.**

VERSE NO.76ِ77 Following the mention of Abraham and Lot, the reference
is made to Noah, another arch prophet of God who lived many centuries
before Abraham. Noah called Allah and said:ِ

\`\`O, My Lord! I have called to my people night, and day, but my call
only increased their flight. When I called them, they thrust their
fingers into their ears, not to hear me. O, My Lord! Leave not alive
even one of the unbelievers upon the earth, because if you leave them,
they will only mislead your worshipper servants, and they will breed
only wicked ungrateful ones. O, My Lord! help me for I am vanquished.''
When the prophet Noah prayed so, his Lord answered him; and taught him
how to build the Ark in the sight of God. He constructed the boat in
which he and his followers were rescued from the wrath of the Flood, and
the sinners were all drowned.

وَدَاوُدَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ إِذْ يَحْكُمَانِ فِى الْحَرْثِ إِذْ نَفَشَتْ
فِيهِ غَنَمُ الْقَوْمِ وَكُنَّا لِحُكْمِهِمْ شَاهِدِينَ(( 78 ))

78- AND DAVID AND SOLOMON, WHEN THEY WERE JUDGING THE CASE OF A SOWN
FIELD, IN WHICH THE PEOPLE'S SHEEP HAD STRAYED BY NIGHT; AND WE WERE
WITNESSING THEIR JUGEMENT.

فَفَهَّمْنَاهَا سُلَيْمَانَ وَكُلاًّ آتَيْنَا حُكْماً وَعِلْماً
وَسَخَّرْنَا مَعَ دَاوُدَ الْجِبَالَ يُسَبِّحْنَ وَالطَّيْرَ وَكُنَّا
فَاعِلِينَ(( 79 ))

[ 192 ]

79- THEN WE MADE SOLOMON TO UNDERSTAND IT, AND WE GAVE EACH OF THEM
(THE MERITS OF) JUDGEMENT, AND KNOWLEDGE. AND WE SUBDUED THE MOUNTAINS
AND THE BRIDS WITH DAVID TO CELEBRATE OUR PRAISE AND WE WERE DOING
(THESE THINGS).

وَعَلَّمْنَاهُ صَنْعَةَ لَبُوس لَّكُمْ لِتُحْصِنَكُمْ مِنْ بَأْسِكُمْ
فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ شَاكِرُونَ(( 80 ))

80- AND WE TAUGHT HIM THE CRAFT OF COAT OF MAIL, TO PROTECT YOU IN YOUR
WAR. ARE YOU THEN THANKFUL?

**THE COMMENTARY
DAVID AND SOLOMON'S JUDGEMENT**

VERSE NO.78ِ80

The above verses relate a part of the story of David and Solomon, and
begins with a brief reference to David's judgement who was the king, and
to that of his son who was then a boy of eleven years old. Qura"n
relates the incident in brief, but the commentators have their own
explanations according to some Islamic traditions. Most of them narrate
the story as follows:ِ


