The Commentary : All Creatures Prostrate Themselves Before God
==============================================================

VERSE NO.18

According to various verses of Qura"n, all the creatures that make the
universe, prostrate themselves, and bow down before God. They all
glorify Him and celebrate His praise. In the S 17:14, we read thus:ِ
\`\`Glorify Him the seven heavens and the earth, and whoever is in them;
and there is not a thing that does not celebrate His praise, but you do
not understand their celebration.'' Therefore, all the creatures, be
they animate or inanimate, even the skies and the earth, the sun, moon
and stars, the mountains and trees and beasts, all and all glorify God,
and celebrate His praise. [ 227 ]

The very existence of each creature is a sign and a witness of the
Creator's Infinite Power, Wisdom, Oneness, and also Beauty and Goodness.
When the birds sing, in reality they sing the praise of their Creator,
and pray for His sustenance. In other word; all the creatures of
whatever kind depend to God for their existence. Without God they are
nothing. So they work with harmony with God's universal law. If they
leave that harmony, they will perish. Therefore, if prostration means
submission to the will of God, such harmony in universe can be construed
as their submission and prostration.

Some of gnostics and learned (LIKE JALALADIN RUMI) are of opinion that
every atom in the universe has some sort of intelligence and
understanding, and glorifies God, and celebrates the praise of his
Creator, who has granted its wonderful order and harmony.

هَذَانِ خَصْمَانِ اخْتَصَمُوا فِى رَبِّهِمْ فَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
قُطِّعَتْ لَهُمْ ثِيَابٌ مِّنْ نَّار يُصَبُّ مِنْ فَوْقِ رُءُوسِهِمْ
الْحَمِيمُ(( 19 ))

19- THESE ARE TWO CONTENTIOUS WHO CONTEND ABOUT THEIR LORD. AS TO THOSE
WHO DISBELIEVED, FOR THEM IS CUT OUT GARMENTS OF FIRE, AND BOILING WATER
WILL BE POURED OVER THEIR HEADS.

يُصْهَرُ بِهِ مَا فِى بُطُونِهِمْ وَالْجُلُودُ(( 20 ))

20- BY WHICH WHATEVER IS IN THEIR STOMACH WILL BE MELTED, AND THEIR
SKIN TOO.

وَلَهُمْ مَّقَامِعُ مِنْ حَدِيد(( 21 ))

21- AND FOR THEM IS WHIPS OF IRON.

[ 228 ]

كُلَّمَا أَرَادُوا أَنْ يَخْرُجُوا مِنْهَا مِنْ غَمّ أُعِيدُوا فِيهَا
وَذُوقُوا عَذَابَ الْحَرِيقِ(( 22 ))

22- EVERY TIME THAT THEY INTEND TO GET OUT OF THAT, FROM THE ANGUISH,
THEY WILL BE TURNED BACK TO IT, AND (IT WILL BE SAID TO THEM) TASTE YOU
THE PUNISHMENT OF BURNING.

إِنَّ اللهَ يُدْخِلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جَنَّات
تَجْرِى مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَارُ يُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ
مِنْ ذَهَب وَلُؤْلُؤاً وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ(( 23 ))

23- VERILY ALLAH WILL ADMIT THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS,
INTO GARDENS (PARADISE) BENEATH WHICH STREAMS FLOW. THEREIN THEY SHALL
BE ADORNED WITH BRACELETS OF GOLD AND PEARL, AND THEIR CLOTHING THERE IS
OF SILK.


وَهُدُوا إِلَى الطَّيِّبِ مِنَ الْقَوْلِ وَهُدُوا إِلَى صِرَاطِ
الْحَمِيدِ(( 24 )) 24- AND THEY ARE GUIDED TO GOOD WORDS, AND ARE GUIDED
TO PRAISEWORTHY PATH.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE TWO OPPONENT PARTIES**

VERSE NO.19ِ24 Most of the commentators have written that the above
verse (NO.19) was revealed in the following occasion of the BATTLE OF
BADR:ِ

On the Friday morning of MARCH 624 AD. (17th RAMAZAN 2AH), the [ 229 ]
Maccans proceeded to capture the water wells in the field of BADR. There
they found Muslims firmly on guard! To have access to water, the
heathens had no other choice but to fight for it. So was the battle of
Badr started, and at first with a number of single combats between the
famous champions and veterans of the two antagonist parties. Such was
the normal custom of Arabs in their wars. ATBEH, from among the
idolaters came forth, accompanied by his brother, \`\`SHAIBEH'' and his
son, \`\`VALID'' and they asked for challengers. From among the Muslim
troops, the prophet's uncle HAZRAT HAMZIH, and HAZRAT IMAM ALI, and his
cousin, \`\`OBEIDEH'' went to answer them.

In a fierce fight between the six opponents, Imam Ali (AS) slayed
Valid, and Hazrat Hamzeh killed, Shaibeh. OBEIDEH who was relatively an
old man, was wounded, but Imam Ali (AS) rushed to his aid and thereby
ATBEH was also killed. As a result, three of the leading men from among
the heathens were killed and a believer injured. To this effect the
above verse (NO.19) was sent down.

**COMMENTS**

In the previous verse (NO.17) a mention was made of five groups of
non-Muslims, who always will stand in opposition against Muslims. If we
consider their contention with deeper insight, we come to the conclusion
that their differences are all about their Lord, and in particular about
His Oneness. This is because we all look at our Lord from the stand
point of our own understandings. It is unfortunately so that, if we ask
a cow to describe his Lord for us, she will begin with the description
of His great, sharp, and beautiful horns! As a matter of fact our
differences are not mainly about religions, but rather about the Oneness
of God. Here for those who deny God or defy His Oneness, four kinds of
severe punishment has been mentioned, namely 1) A clothing of Fire. [
230 ]

2) A shower of boiling water, that melts whatever is in their stomach.
3) Whips of iron 4) And turning them back to their anguish and dreadful
abode when they try to get out of it.

The salty and the sweet water in the sea, are two streams or two
streaks, that flow together until the Trumpet is blown for Resurrection
of all. So are the two antagonist parties, such as Hazrat Imam Ali (AS)
and HAZRAT HAMZEH (R.A.) with their opponents, ATBEH and VALID.
Generally, the believers and the unbelievers will continue contending
about their Lord upto the final judgement in the Resurrection Day, when
those who deny God and defy His Will; have to wear their new garment
which is cut out of Fire, as a consequence of their evil deeds. This is
a punishment that no evil doer can escape it.

On the contrary, believers who have done good deeds, will enjoy a good,
comfortable, and eternal life; in the GARDENS OF BLISS (PARADISE),
adorned with costly ornaments, clothed with beautiful silks, and guided
to purity of speech, and to a praiseworthy path.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَالْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ الَّذِى جَعَلْنَاهُ لِلنَّاسِ سَوَاءً الْعَاكِفُ فِيهِ
وَالْبَادِ وَمَنْ يُرِدْ فِيهِ بِإِلْحَاد بِظُلْم نُّذِقْهُ مِنْ عَذَاب
أَلِيم(( 25 ))

25- VERILY THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED, AND BAR (PEOPLE) FROM ALLAH'S WAY AND
THE SACRED MOSQUE (KAABEH), WHICH WE HAVE MADE IT FOR PEOPLE EQUALLY, BE
THEY DWELLERS OR BEDOUINE. AND WHOEVER INTENDS PROFANITY THEREIN BY
OPPRESSION WE WILL MAKE HIM TASTE A PAINFUL TORMENT. [ 231 ]

**THE COMMENTARY**

Here the immediate reference is to a special group of the heathens who
bar the way of Allah and create obstructions in the way of pilgrims to
the Sacred Mosque. (KAABEH), the Sacred Mosque in Mecca is made for
people equally, whether they be the townsfolk of Mecca or travel there
from far distant places as pilgrims. Whoever intends profanity, or
violates the sanctity of the sacred precinct (HARAM), or oppress the
pilgrims, he shall have to taste a painful punishment. Many things are
seriously prohibited during the performance of the rites of pilgrimage,
such as obscenity, wickedness, wrangling, and any kind of oppression and
harm to pilgrims or any creature (S 2:193). Through the pilgrimage, men
and women come together from far and near, to share in sacrifice, to
perform congregational prayer, and celebrate the praise of God.

To respect the pilgrims there, is so important that Hazrat Imam Ali
ordered his governor not to charge rent of quarter given to the
pilgrims. We read in the letter NO.68 of Hazrat Imam Ali's NAHJUL
BALAGHA, which he has written to his governor in Mecca,
(QUASUM-IBN-ABBASS) that:ِ \`\`Order the citizens of Mecca not to charge
rent of the quarters that they give out to pilgrims, because the
All-mighty Lord has decreed that; (S 22:25) in this Holy City, the
permanent residents and the pilgrims have equal status and right. May
God enable us to do things which He approves of, and likes.''

وَإِذْ بَوَّأْنَا لِإِبْرَاهِيمَ مَكَانَ الْبَيْتِ أَنْ لاَّ تُشْرِكْ
بِى شَيْئاً وَطَهِّرْ بَيْتِى لِلطَّائِفِينَ وَالْقَائِمِينَ
وَالرُّكَّعِ السُّجُودِ(( 26 ))

26- AND WHEN WE PREPARED FOR ABRAHAM THE SITE OF THE HOUSE; (AND WE
SAID TO HIM BUILD IT, AND) DO NOT [ 232 ]

ASSOCIATE WITH ME ANYTHING, AND CLEANSE MY HOUSE FOR THOSE WHO
ENCOMPASS, AND THOSE WHO STAND (IN PRAYER) AND THOSE WHO BOW DOWN AND
PROSTRATE THEMSELVES.

وَأَذِّنْ فِى النَّاسِ بِالْحَجِّ يَأْتُوكَ رِجَالا وَعَلَى كُلِّ
ضَامِر يَأْتِينَ مِنْ كُلِّ فَجّ عَمِيق(( 27 ))

27- AND PROCLAIM THE PILGRIMAGE AMONG PEOPLE IN ORDER TO COME TO YOU
EITHER ON FOOT OR RIDING ANY LEAN BEAST TO COME FROM FAR AWAY ROADS.

لِيَشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ لَهُمْ وَيَذْكُرُوا اسْمَ اللهِ فِى أَيَّام
مَّعْلُومَات عَلَى مَا رَزَقَهُمْ مِّنْ بَهِيمَةِ الاَْنْعَامِ فَكُلُوا
مِنْهَا وَأَطْعِمُوا الْبَائِسَ الْفَقِيرَ(( 28 ))

28- SO AS TO WITNESS THE BENEFITS THAT THERE ARE FOR THEM, AND TO
PRONOUNCE THE NAME OF ALLAH IN CERTAIN DAYS, OVER WHAT HE HAS GIVEN THEM
OF SUSTENANCE, SUCH AS THE CATTLE (FOR SACRIFICE). SO EAT OF IT, AND
FEED THE UNFORTUNATE POOR.

**THE COMMENTARY
GENERAL ANNOUNCEMENT FOR PILGRIMAGE**

VERSE NO.26ِ28

Here the verses begin with the construction of KAABEH which is the most
Sacred Mosque of Muslims, and stands in the city of Mecca. According to
Islamic traditions, the Sacred Mosque was at first built by ADAM, and it
was ruined in the FLOOD. Then Allah showed its foundations to ABRAHAM,
and he, with the help of his son Ishmael, [ 233 ] raised up the walls
and reconstructed the first Mosque of Mankind in which the only one God
of universe, (Allah) should have been worshipped. So when the Sacred
house was completed, Allah said to Abraham:ِ

\`\`....And do not associate with me anything, and cleanse my house for
those who encompass, and for those who stand in prayer, or who bow down
and prostrate themselves.''

When the house was built and cleansed all round, and made ready for
worship; Abraham was ordered to proclaim the pilgrimage among all
people, to come there from far and near, either on foot or mounted.

**THE CERTAIN DAYS OF PILGRIMAGE**

Commentators differ as to when the certain days of pilgrimage (NO.28)
are, but most of them have understood it to be the first ten days of the
Arabic Month ZUL-HAJJ, and also another limited period consisting of the
two or three subsequent days known as, \`\`TASHRIQ''. The Days of
Tashriq is a stay of two or at maximum three days after the complete
performance of the rites of pilgrimage. So was the pilgrimage announced
generally and for all people by Abraham, so as to come there from
everywhere, far or near, on foot or mounted on lean camel or whatever.

There in the Mecca, during performing the rites, pilgrims would see
many kinds of benefits that may exist for them, in this present material
life, or on their future spiritual life as well. Thereby, they may enjoy
the benefits of trade and commerical activities, or appreciate the
profits of tourism, be it for pleasure or culture.

So also the spiritual advantages of their pilgrimage can be estimated
as immense. Such advantages differ from different points of view, that
every individual pilgrim may look on. Among the pilgrimage's social
advantages, we may consider the opportunities which the journey may
provide for strengthening our international brotherhood. [ 234 ]

**ETHICAL BENEFITS OF PILGRIMAGE**

One of the main objects of pilgrimage to the Sacred House of Allah is
the ethical benefits of the pilgrims. There in the course of performing
the rites of HAJJ, all the morals of the pilgrim will undergo a change!
When he wears the white garb of the pilgrims, and finds himself alike
with all; he even may forget that he lives in such a material world.
With the GARB=IHRA"M, certain pilgrim's prohibitions come into
operation, and the pilgrim is dedicated to worship, and denial of
vanities, passions, lusts, luxuries, and worldly desires. Then the
pilgrim may at once feel a wonderful comfort which is rarely found in
our material world. He feels to be completely unloaded. When the chief
rites are performed one after another, the spiritual relation of Man
with his Lord will increase instant by instant. So much so that the
pilgrim may find himself a newly born, and brought into existence by new
rules and regulations.

**POLITICAL PROFITS OF PILGRIMAGE**

In spite of presenting the deepest and purest of worship, HAJJ is the
most effective means of political development. The spirit of worship is
to consider God, and the soul of politics is to consider people. So the
pilgrimage's political aspect, is a very effective means of uniting
Muslims together. It also is a good medium of communicating with other
nations who are ruled by a tyrant or a dictator. Pilgrimage is a door
which opens to freedom, and also serves to strengthen the faith of
people.

**THE CULTURAL BENEFITS OF PILGRIMAGE**

During the pilgrimage, cultural exchange among various groups of people
is something inevitable. The great congregation of Muslims, who have
gathered together for their religious worship, include different kinds
of people of various [ 235 ] race, nation, colour, language, culture,
and thought. In their religious contacts, they may exchange all sorts of
news of their nations to one another, and may also have all kinds of
commerical transactions, and cultural or political, activities.

A considerable rite of HAJJ, is the sacrifices of cattle. In the first
sight, the sacrifices are symbols of the piety of heart, and some sort
of a worship. Then the flesh of the sacrifices has to be shared with
fellow-men, and in particular with those who are poor and needy. It is
not a rightful deed to sacrifice a cattle, have a little part of it
served, and to bury the rest of the flesh in the ground. If there is an
extra amount of meat, it should be taken to other countries any how, and
be given to the poor and needy.

ثُمَّ لْيَقْضُوا تَفَثَهُمْ وَلْيُوفُوا نُذُورَهُمْ وَلْيَطَّوَّفُوا
بِالْبَيْتِ الْعَتِيقِ(( 29 ))

29- THEN LET THEM TRIM UP THEMSELVES, AND FULFIL THEIR VOWS, AND
ENCIRCLE THE ANCIENT HOUSE.

ذَلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ حُرُمَاتِ اللهِ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّهُ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِ وَأُحِلَّتْ لَكُمُ الاَْنْعَامُ إِلاَّ مَا يُتْلَى عَلَيْكُمْ
فَاجْتَنِبُوا الرِّجْسَ مِنْ الاَْوْثَانِ وَاجْتَنِبُوا قَوْلَ
الزُّورِ(( 30 ))

30- THOSE ARE (THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE), AND WHOEVER VENERATES THE
SACRED RITES OF ALLAH, THAT IS BETTER FOR HIM WITH HIS LORD. AND THE
CATTLE IS MADE LAWFUL FOR YOU, EXCEPT THAT WHICH IS RECITED TO YOU (AS
UNLAWFUL). SO AVOID THE ABOMINATION OF THE IDOLS, AND AVOID FALSE
WORD.

[ 236 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
SOME OTHER CHIEF RITES OF HAJJ**
VERSE NO.29ِ30

Among the chief rites of HAJJ are some prohibitions to be observed
during the state of Ihram, when the pilgrim has to have his White Garb
on. Some of the prohibitions that the pilgrim should abstain are as
follows:ِ The pilgrim should not cut his nail, and cut or trim his hair.
No game must be hunted, and no scent must be used. Even the pilgrim must
not see himself through a looking glass. Cutting the trees within the
Sacred precinct of KAABEH is also forbidden, and sexual contacts are
unlawful. All the said prohibitions apply equally to man and woman, and
the taboos are removed on the 10th day when the HAJJ has been
completed:ِ \`\`Let them remove their SUPERFLUOUS. (TRIM UP)''

Then there is a second commandment in the verse (NO.29):ِ \`\`....And
let them fulfil their, \`\`VOWS'' and encircle the Ancient House.'' Many
of the pilgrims may vow to perform extra prayer or circumambulation, or
sacrifice, for certain demands. Here, they are reminded not to forget
their promise.

And as to why KAABEH has been named the, \`\`ANCIENT HOUSE'' in the
above verse? Because it is the oldest center of Monotheism, and it is
the first house built for people to worship Allah. (S 3:96)

**WHAT IS MEANT BY, \`\`GHOL ZUR''?**

The arabic, \`\`GHOL ZUR'' translated to false word, may refer to the
rites performed by Arab pilgrims in the Pagan Era. When they encircled
KAABEH nudely, they sung as a part of the circumambulation rite, the
following false words:ِ \`\`Here I am at Your service. O, Lord! Here I
am. No partner you have except the partner who is yours, and you own
him.'' [ 237 ]

The above false recital was a perverted form of what HAZRAT ABRAHAM
(AS) had taught them, the correct form of which is as follows. When the
pilgrims put on their white Garb (IHRAM) they make their Intention
(NIYYAT) by rehearsing:ِ

\`\`Here I am at your service, O, my Lord! Here I am.
There is no partner for you. Here I am.
Truly the Praise and the Favour is Yours, and the Dominion.
There is no partner for You! Here I am.''
The last verse (NO.30) refers to the lawful meats, the unlawfuls among
which were excluded in S 2:173 that:ِ
\`\`He has forbidden you carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, and any
flesh that is slaughtered in the name of any other than Allah.''

حُنَفَاءَ للهِِ غَيْرَ مُشْرِكِينَ بِهِ وَمَنْ يُشْرِكْ بِاللهِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا خَرَّ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَتَخْطَفُهُ الطَّيْرُ أَوْ تَهْوِى
بِهِ الرِّيحُ فِى مَكَان سَحِيق(( 31 ))

31- (PERFORM THE RITES OF HAJJ HAVING) PURE FAITH IN ALLAH, ASSOCIATING
NOTHING WITH HIM. HE WHO ASSOCIATES PARTNERS WITH ALLAH, IT IS AS IF HE
HAS FALLEN FROM THE SKY, AND THE BIRDS SNATCH HIM (IN THE AIR); OR THE
WIND CARRIES HIM OFF TO A FAR-DISTANT PLACE.

ذَلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقْوَى
الْقُلُوبِ(( 32 ))

32- THESE ARE (THE RITES OF PILGRIMAGE); AND WHOEVER VENERATES THE
RITES OF ALLAH, IT IS DUE TO THE PIETY OF THE HEARTS.

[ 238 ]

لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ إِلَى أَجَل مُّسَمّىً ثُمَّ مَحِلُّهَا إِلَى
الْبَيْتِ الْعَتِيقِ(( 33 ))

33- IN THEM (IN THE CATTLE FOR SACRIFICE), THERE ARE BENEFITS FOR YOU,
UP TO A STATED TERM (UNTIL THEY ARE SACRIFICED). THEN THEIR LAWFUL PLACE
(OF SACRIFICE) IS THE ANCIENT HOUSE.

**THE COMMENTARY
VENERATION OF RITUALS**
VERSE NO.31ِ33

Here again the stress is put on the Monotheism, and rejection of
idolatries. In other word; purity in faith and associating no one and
nothing with Allah, should be the main intention of the worship, or
performing rites. The faith in the ONENESS OF GOD is settled in the
depth of every heart by instinct. Man should always keep that faith
clean and clear from any kind of partners and compeers. Then there is a
simile to illustrate the state of an idolater or disbeliever:ِ \`\`He
who associates partners with Allah, it is as if he has fallen from the
sky, and birds snatch him in the air, or the wind carries him off to a
far-distant place.''

This is the parable of a man who associates partners with Allah, his
only One and true Lord. He is said to be like a man who falls from the
heaven. Here the heaven or sky implies the Monotheism. Where can be the
destination of such a falling down? He might be snatched by the false
objects of his worship, just like being picked up in the air by some
vultures, or even the wrath of God may seize him like a wind and throw
him to a far-distant place such as Hell.

[ 239 ]

SHA-A-ER, which we have translated to rites, may also mean signs,
symbols, or marks by which something is known to belong to something
else. So SHA-A-ER of Allah is the topics of Allah's religion, and in
this case here, they are the chief rites of Hajj (PILGRIMAGE); such as
Safa" and Marva, the place of Sacrifice, Arafa"t, Mashar, and etc. It is
worthy of note here that venerating the rites, is not a physical
veneration, as some Muslims would think of. Some of the pilgrims took
the veneration to mean giving a bigger or a more valuable sacrifice to
God; such as offering a camel instead of a sheep, or a cow instead of a
goat. It is rather the spiritual veneration due to the piety of the
heart which is valid here. We have to show high respect and hold the
signs of God in great esteem. Certainly the flesh of our sacrifices will
never reach Allah, neither their blood. That which will reach Him is the
piety of our heart.

The pronoun, \`\`IN THEM'' in verse NO.33, refers to the domestic
animals that pilgrims bring with them for sacrifice. Some of them
believed that when they were on their way towards HAJJ, they had not the
right of using the camels allocated to sacrifice, as mounts or as
carriers of their loads. These cattle were brought from far and near,
without using their milk or their back.

Once the prophet saw an old man, walking with difficulty, while he was
pulling on the bridle of his camel. The prophet said to him:ِ \`\`Why
don't you mount her?'' The Arab said:ِ \`\`O, Messenger of God! How can
I mount her when she is adopted as sacrifice?'' The prophet said again
to him:ِ \`\`Woe is you! Mount her!'' So was this verse (NO.33) revealed
to announce the permission of using cattle before they are given to
sacrifice by saying; they are useful in many ways to the pilgrims before
they are slaughtered on the altar. The camels may be used as mounts, and
for carrying burdens, and cows and sheep are used for their milk, and
after the rite of sacrifice all are used for their meat. Their wool can
also be woven into cloth.

[ 240 ]

وَلِكُلِّ أُمَّة جَعَلْنَا مَنْسَكاً لِّيَذْكُرُوا اسْمَ اللهِ عَلَى
مَا رَزَقَهُمْ مِّنْ بَهِيمَةِ الاَْنْعَامِ فَإِلَـهُكُمْ إِلَـهٌ
وَاحِدٌ فَلَهُ أَسْلِمُوا وَبَشِّرِ الْمُخْبِتِينَ(( 34 ))

34- AND FOR EVERY NATION WE HAVE APPOINTED A RITUAL (OF SACRIFICE),
THAT THEY MAY PRONOUNCE THE NAME OF ALLAH OVER THE CATTLE WHICH HE HAS
GIVEN THEM FOR SUSTENANCE. SO, YOUR GOD IS AN ONLY ONE GOD, THEN TO HIM
SURRENDER (ALL OF YOU) AND GIVE GLAD TIDINGS TO THE HUMBLES.

الَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِرَ اللهُ وَجِلَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَالصَّابِرِينَ عَلَى
مَا أَصَابَهُمْ وَالْمُقِيمِى الصَّلاَةِ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ
يُنْفِقُونَ(( 35 ))

35- THOSE WHOSE HEARTS ARE FILLED WITH THE AWE OF REVERENCE, WHEN ALLAH
IS MENTIONED; AND THOSE WHO ARE PATIENT ON WHAT AFFLICTS THEM, AND THE
PERFORMERS OF THE PRAYER, AND THOSE WHO PAY IN CHARITY OF WHAT WE HAVE
GIVEN THEM FOR SUSTENANCE.

**THE COMMENTARY
GIVE GLAD-TIDINGS TO THE HUMBLES**
VERSE NO.34ِ35

The verses here imply that the ritual of sacrifice was not especially
ordained for Muslims. Allah has appointed the ritual for every nation,
so as to pronounce the name of Allah over the cattle which He has given
them for sustenance. This ritual is a symbol of thanks giving by sharing
the meat with fellow-men, and a sign of piety of the heart for offering
it purely to the Only one God. [ 241 ]

**THE PILGRIM'S WEAK POINT**

True that the sacrifice is a symbol of thanks giving by sharing meat
with fellow-men, but it can also remind us of the incident of ABRAHAM
who was even ready to sacrifice his son in the way of Allah. We all
know, how HAZRAT IMAM HUSSAIN (AS) offered all his dearers and nearers
to the Altar of Love for God, in the battle-field of KARBALA":ِ SHAIKH
BAHA"EE, has composed a beautiful QUATRAIN in this relation which shows
up the weak point of the pilgrim in his sight:ِ

\`\`The pilgrim is busy in his movements around KAABEH;
Whatever of the rites of Hajj he performs are all good.
His short coming is on the ALTAR, that he brings something else,
For sacrifice instead of himself, at the sacrificing place of love.''

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

Then in the second verse (NO.35), some qualities of those who are
truthful devotees of Allah, have been mentioned as follows:ِ That they
are humble before God, and even when the name of Allah is mentioned,
their heart is filled with the awe of reverence. In other word, fear of
Allah which is akin to love, touches them to the heart. They do not fear
His wrath without a cause; nor do they doubt His Mercy and Forgiveness.
It is rather their sense of responsibility that frightens them. It is
the grandeur of the Creator that fills their heart with awe and
respect.

They are patient in trials and afflictions and will not lose their
constancy when a misfortune touches them. They show their gratitude to
God by their acts of charity to all fellow-creatures. They therefore,
neither grieve nor fear of anything apart from God.

[ 242 ]

وَالْبُدْنَ جَعَلْنَاهَا لَكُمْ مِّنْ شَعَائِرِ اللهِ لَكُمْ فِيهَا
خَيْرٌ فَاذْكُرُوا اسْمَ اللهِ عَلَيْهَا صَوَافَّ فَإِذَا وَجَبَتْ
جُنُوبُهَا فَكُلُوا مِنْهَا وَأَطْعِمُوا الْقَانِعَ وَالْمُعْتَرَّ
كَذَلِكَ سَخَّرْنَاهَا لَكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ(( 36 ))

36- AND AS TO THE (SACRIFICIAL) FAT CAMEL, WE HAVE MADE HER OF THE
SACRAMENTS OF ALLAH FOR YOU. IN THEM THERE ARE GOOD THINGS FOR YOU.
THEREFORE PRONOUNCE THE NAME OF ALLAH OVER THEM AS THEY ARE DRAWN UP IN
LINE (FOR SACRIFICE) AND WHEN THEIR FLANKS ARE COLLAPSED, EAT OF THEM
AND FEED THE CONTENTED POOR, AND THE BEGGAR. SO DID WE SUBJECT IT TO YOU
THAT YOU MIGHT BE THANKFUL.

لَنْ يَنَالَ اللهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلاَ دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَكِنْ يَنَالُهُ
التَّقْوَى مِنْكُمْ كَذَلِكَ سَخَّرَهَا لَكُمْ لِتُكَبِّرُوا اللهَ عَلَى
مَا هَدَاكُمْ وَبَشِّرِ الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 37 ))

37- THE FLESH OF THEM WILL NEVER REACH ALLAH, NEITHER THEIR BLOOD; BUT
YOUR PIETY WILL REACH HIM. SO DID HE SUBJECTED HER TO YOU, IN ORDER TO
GLORIFY ALLAH FOR WHAT HE HAS GUIDED YOU ON; AND GIVE GLAD-TIDINGS TO
THE GOOD DOERS.

إِنَّ اللهَ يُدَافِعُ عَنْ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُحِبُّ
كُلَّ خَوَّان كَفُور(( 38 ))

38- ALLAH WILL DEFEND THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED. VERILY ALLAH LOVES NOT
ANY THANKLESS TRAITOR. [ 243 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
WHY SACRIFICE!?**
VERSE NO.36ِ38
The argument is still about the chief rites of pilgrimage, such as the
sacraments of Allah, the rituals of sacrifice, and in particular, the
camels that are brought for sacrifice, when they are drawn up in line.


Here we should know that being large and fat is not necessarily one of
the conditions for acceptance of the sacrifice. She should rather be not
very lean, and lacking flesh. The pilgrim may have many good things as a
result of the sacrifice that he offers, either spiritually or
physically.

Then the manner of the sacrifice has been mentioned in brief, that it
is incumbent upon the sacrificer to pronounce the name of Allah over
them, when they are on the altar. The best way of offering the sacrifice
is to face the victim towards KAABEH, and rehearse the following
verses:ِ

\`\`I have set my face towards Him, who created the heavens and the
earth; and never shall I adopt partners to Allah. In truth my prayer,
and my service of sacrifice, my life, and my death, are all for Allah
the Lord of the worlds. No partner has He. To this I am ordered and I am
the first of Muslims. (Those who submit to Allah's will) My Lord! It is
yours and for you. In the name of Allah and by Allah, and Allah is
Greater. My Lord! Accept it from me.''

Allah has permitted us to eat the meat of cattle, but on condition that
we pronounce His name at the solemn act of taking life. Without such
invocation, we are apt to forget the sacredness of life, and prove that
cruelty is our custom. But when we pronounce the name of Creator over
the creature that we slaughter, it is a sign that the need of food makes
us to take the life of the creatures. To this effect, a Muslim [ 244 ]

begins serving his food with saying:ِ \`\`In the name of Allah, the
Merciful, the compassionate.'' The commandment continues thus:ِ \`\`And
when their flanks are collapsed (i.e. The victim is slaughtered well)
eat of them and feed the contented poor, and the beggar.'' Although
contemptuous begging is not approved of; the relief of all kind of
distress, deserved or undeserved, is included in charity. So, in the
above verse (NO.36), he who begs with humility, and he who receives
gifts with gratitude and contentment, are both mentioned for
consideration.

The next verse (NO.37) is an answer to the question that; \`\`Why
sacrifice!? What sort of a need may Allah have to the sacrifice of His
creatures?'':ِ

\`\`The flesh of them will never reach Allah, neither their blood, but
your piety will reach Him.'' In other word, it is not the meat or the
blood-shed which is important in the sacrifice, or is admired by Allah.
But He does appreciate what is physically offered to Him through the
sincerity of the hearts, and honesty of intentions.


