Camel the Ship of Desert
========================

Camel is the most useful animal in Arabian Deserts. It is a large
cud-chewing animal adopted for life in desert regions. The single-humped
Arabian camel has been domesticated for 5000 years. At first it was a
beast of burden, but now all parts of the animal are used, including the
flesh, milk, wool, and even the dung for fuel. The camel is very
resistive against thirst. A series of deep cells in stomach chambers
acts as storage for water. A single, 15-gal. drink suffices the camel
during a five-day trip with heavy load. Fat is stored in the hump, and
acts as a food reserves during forced travels.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

[ 245 ]

أُذِنَ لِلَّذِينَ يُقَاتَلُونَ بِأَنَّهُمْ ظُلِمُوا وَإِنَّ اللهَ عَلَى
نَصْرِهِمْ لَقَدِيرٌ(( 39 ))

39- TO THOSE ON WHOM WAR HAS BEEN IMPOSED, PERMISSION IS GIVEN (TO
FIGHT AND DEFEND), BECAUSE THEY HAVE BEEN OPPRESSED, AND ALLAH IS ABLE
TO HELP THEM.

الَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ بِغَيْرِ حَقّ إِلاَّ أَنْ
يَقُولُوا رَبُّنَا اللهُ وَلَوْلاَ دَفْعُ اللهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُمْ
بِبَعْض لَّهُدِّمَتْ صَوَامِعُ وَبِيَعٌ وَصَلَوَاتٌ وَمَسَاجِدُ يُذْكَرُ
فِيهَا اسْمُ اللهِ كَثِيراً وَلَيَنصُرَنَّ اللهُ مَنْ يَنصُرُهُ إِنَّ
اللهَ لَقَوِىٌّ عَزِيزٌ(( 40 ))

40- THOSE WHO WERE EXPELLED FROM THEIR HOMES UNJUSTLY, ONLY BECAUSE
THEY SAID; \`\`OUR LORD IS ALLAH'', AND IF ALLAH WOULD NOT REPEL PEOPLE,
SOME BY THE MIGHT OF OTHERS; THE MONASTERIES, CHURCHES, SYNAGOGUES, AND
MOSQUES, WHEREIN ALLAH'S NAME IS PRONOUNCED MUCH, WOULD HAVE BEEN
DESTROYED. AND CERTAINLY ALLAH WILL HELP HIM, WHO HELP HIM, THAT ALLAH
IS ALL-STRENGTH, EXALTED IN MIGHT.

الَّذِينَ إِنْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِى الاَْرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلاَةَ
وَآتَوْا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ
وَللهِِ عَاقِبَةُ الاُْمُورِ(( 41 ))

41- THOSE WHO; IF WE GIVE THEM POWER ON THE LAND, WILL PERFORM THE
PRAYER, AND PAY THE ALMS-TAX, AND ENJOIN GOOD, AND FORBID EVIL, AND TO
ALLAH BELONGS THE END OF AFFAIRS. [ 246 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FIRST COMMAND ON JAHA"D**
VERSE NO.39ِ41

When the Muslims lived in Mecca at first, they were frequently
persecuted by the idolaters. Many a time they went to the prophet
injured, or with a broken head or limb, and asked the Messenger of God
to let them fight and defend themselves against the violence and cruelty
of the pagans. But the prophet's answer to them was:ِ \`\`Wait a little
more. Have patience. I am not yet allowed to fight.'' It was so until
the Muslim were ordered to emigrate from Mecca to Medina. There the
prophet mobilized a little army when the above verse (NO.39)
revealed:ِ

\`\`To those on whom war has been imposed, permission is given to fight
and defend for being oppressed.''

When the above verse revealed, Muslim were permitted to pick up a sword
and defend themselves.

Some commentators are of opinion that the verse, S 2:190 was the first
one to admit JAHA"D as follows:ِ

\`\`And fight in the way of Allah with those who fight with you, and do
not exceed the limits, because Allah loves not those who exceed the
limits.''

We are of opinion that the above verse (S 22:39) was that of the first
permission to the sacred fight (JIHA"D), a proof for which may be the
word, \`\`OZENA'' which means, \`\`permission has been given.''

The Arabic, \`\`YOGHA"TELUN'' means those against whom war has been
made, or in other word; war has been imposed on them. The next verse
(NO.40) explains that how the said people on whom war is imposed, have
been wronged, being driven by persecution out of their home and
hearth:ِ

[ 247 ]

\`\`Those who were expelled from their homes unjustly, just for saying,
\`\`Our Lord is Allah''....'' Therefore, for the first time, as we
mentioned above, the SACRED FIGHT OR JAHA"D for self-defence of Muslims
was justified and permitted. Here the new and small Muslim community was
not only permitted to fight for their existence, but also they had to
fight for the very existence of their faith in their Only one TRUE GOD.
So, their fight was not for soil, water, race, power or other material
privileges. Then some reasons are given for the permission of Jahad and
self-defence:ِ \`\`If Allah would not repel people, some by the might of
others: the Monasteries, Churches, Synagogues, and Mosques wherein
Allah's name is pronounced much, would have been destroyed.''

In these verses, two important parts of the philosophy of Jahad have
been pointed to:ِ Firstly, it is considered as the fight of the
oppressed against the oppressor. This is a natural right of the
oppressed to get up, and take arm, and shout out, and compel the
oppressor to set down in his place and position. Secondly, the fight is
waged against the tyrant and cruel dictators, who want to eliminate the
name of God, and wipe out the faith from people's hearts. This is when
they proceed to destroy the sacred places of worship where Allah's name
is pronounced much more than elsewhere.

Here the verb, \`\`destroy'', may not be physical destroying of the
buildings of temples and mosques; but through various tricks and
mischievous acts, they try to render such places of worship ineffective.
And here too is where the Godly has to stand firmly against their
corruption. [ 248 ]

وَإِنْ يُكَذِّبُوكَ فَقَدْ كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوح وَعَادٌ
وَثَمُودُ(( 42 ))

42- AND IF THEY BELIE YOU, SO DID THE PEOPLE OF NOAH, طD AND SAMUD
BELIE (THEIR APOSTLES) BEFORE YOU.

وَقَوْمُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَقَوْمُ لُوط(( 43 ))

43- AND ALSO THE PEOPLE OF ABRAHAM AND LOT (BELIED THEIR PROPHET)

وَأَصْحَابُ مَدْيَنَ وَكُذِّبَ مُوسَى فَأَمْلَيْتُ لِلْكَافِرِينَ ثُمَّ
أَخَذْتُهُمْ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ نَكِيرِ(( 44 ))

44- AND THE COMPANIONS OF THE MEDIAN TOO. AND MOSES WAS ALSO BELIED.
THEN I RESPITED THE UNBELIEVERS. AFTER THAT I SEIZED THEM, THEN HOW WAS
(MY PUNISHMENT FOR) DENIAL?

فَكَأَيِّنْ مِّنْ قَرْيَة أَهْلَكْنَاهَا وَهِىَ ظَالِمَةٌ فَهِىَ
خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا وَبِئْر مُّعَطَّلَة وَقَصْر مَّشِيد(( 45 ))

45- SO, HOW MANY A TOWN THAT WE DESTROYED IT WHILE BEING OPPRESSOR.
THEN IT FELL DOWN UPON ITS ROOF, AND ABANDONED WELL AND LOFTY PALACES.

**THE COMMENTARY
ABANDONED WELLS AND PALACES**
VERSE NO.42ِ45

These verses begin with comforting and consoling our prophet by saying
to him:ِ \`\`Do not worry about their denial. If these Arabs reject you,
almost all our prophets that came before you, were belied by their own
people.'' [ 249 ] In other word, the verses imply that if our prophet
had been belied and accused of deception by the pagan Arabs this was not
so new a matter. Almost all the Messengers of God were belied, and
accused of imposture and lie by their own people! So did the people of
Noah belie him. The people of A"D accused their apostle, \`\`HUD'' of
lie! The people of Samud too, belied their prophet SALEH, and the people
of Medians rejected Shuaib their prophet. Eve the Israelites caused a
lot of troubles for Moses in order to stop him in his mission.

Then reference is made to some kinds of God's punishment that seized
the unbelievers:ِ \`\`How many a town that We destroyed it, while its
towns-folk were sinful. It fell down upon its roof, and their water-well
and high palaces were abandoned.''

Here, the fall of buildings upon their roofs means that they were
turned upside down. In other word, the roof fell down first, and the
whole structure including the walls came down after that, falling upon
the ruins of the roof. Then the water wells have been mentioned to have
been abandoned, and their high and glorious palaces that were ignored.
The water wells were, and still they are, the main means of living for
the Arabs among the deserts. These were abandoned when their owners, and
lands, and buildings, were all destroyed; when God's wrath seized them
for their sinful acts.

أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِى الاَْرْضِ فَتَكُونَ لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ يَعْقِلُونَ
بِهَا أَوْ آذَانٌ يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا فَإِنَّهَا لاَ تَعْمَى الاَْبْصَارُ
وَلَكِنْ تَعْمَى الْقُلُوبُ الَّتِى فِى الصُّدُورِ(( 46 ))

46- DO THEY NOT TRAVEL IN THE LAND, WITH A HEART TO APPREHEND (THE
TRUTH) BY IT, OR WITH EARS TO HEAR WITH? SO, IT IS NOT THE EYES THAT ARE
BLIND, BUT BLIND ARE THE HEARTS THAT ARE IN THE BREASTS.

[ 250 ]

وَيَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالْعَذَابِ وَلَنْ يُخْلِفَ اللهُ وَعْدَهُ وَإِنَّ
يَوْماً عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ كَأَلْفِ سَنَة مِّمَّا تَعُدُّونَ(( 47 ))

47- AND THEY ASK YOU TO HASTEN ON THE PUNISHMENT, AND ALLAH WILL NEVER
FAIL HIS PROMISE. AND A DAY WITH YOUR LORD IS LIKE A THOUSAND YEARS OF
WHAT YOU ARE COUNTING.

وَكَأَيِّنْ مِّنْ قَرْيَة أَمْلَيْتُ لَهَا وَهِىَ ظَالِمَةٌ ثُمَّ
أَخَذْتُهَا وَإِلَىَّ الْمَصِيرُ(( 48 ))

48- AND HOW MANY A TOWN THAT I HAVE RESPITED IT WHILE BEING OPPRESSORS.
THEN I SEIZED IT, AND TO ME IS THE DESTINATION.

**THE COMMENTARY
TRAVELLING FOR WAKEFULNESS OF HEART**
VERSE NO.46ِ48 Touring through the land will show us surviving traces
of past generations, such as their relics, states, customs, places,
plants, cults, and cultures:ِ

\`\`Do they not travel in the land, with a heart to apprehend by it, or
with ears to hear....?'' Look at the ruins of the palaces and splendid
mansions, left from the tyrants and haughty rulers, and arrogant
generations of the past, who lived and ruled with top power! These
silent remnants of them can speak to us with a thousand tongues! These
ruins and relics are expressive books that will teach us the custom and
deeds of their owners. The way of their living, and their fates of
fortune and misfortune. To put more light upon the matter, Qura"n adds:ِ
\`\`....It is not the eyes that are blind, but blind are the hearts that
are in the breasts.''

[ 251 ]

In other word, the unbelievers may have their physical eyes and ears
very sound and safe, but their heart which is the seat of their
understanding and affections is out of work. If their inner eyes and
ears were active, they could easily see and feel the signs of God in
every creature or even in every atom or molecule. They then could hear
and apprehend that every voice and even every noise in the nature is a
song that celebrates the praise of God.

The second verse here (NO.74) illustrates another feature of the
ignorance of the blind hearted people who say:ِ \`\`If so; why are we
not punished for our sinful acts? And they ask the prophet to hasten on
the punishment. Tell them; you need not to hurry for that, because Allah
will never fail in His promise:ِ

\`\`....And a day with your Lord is like a thousand years of what you
are counting.'' Early or late, far or near, and past and future, all
accrue from relativity of time and space. This is where our Lord, whose
absolute goodness, power, and knowledge, is Infinite and beyond time and
space, has His own measure and scale and a day with Him is like a
thousand years of what we are counting; and perhaps more and fifty
thousands of years with our reckoning.

In other word, we may need one thousand years of time to do a job, but
it is easy for God to do the same in a twinkle of an eye. The last verse
mentions the chances and options that men will lose when he has the
respite of God:ِ \`\`And how many a town that I respited it while being
oppressors, and then I seized it; and to Me is the destination.''

Through His respite Allah will provide chances for man in order to
repent and return. Unfortunately, he forgets that God's justice involves
to call everyone to account for his deeds, and then to punish or reward
him accordingly. Is it not foolishness, or being blind, to ignore the
valuable respite given by Him, and to try to hasten the punishment!?

[ 252 ]

قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّمَا أَنَا لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ(( 49
))

49- SAY:ِ \`\`O, PEOPLE! I AM ONLY A PLAIN WARNER FOR YOU.''

فَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ مَّغْفِرَةٌ
وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ(( 50 ))

50- SO, THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, FOR THEM IS
FORGIVENESS AND GENEROUS SUSTENANCE.

وَالَّذِينَ سَعَوْا فِى آيَاتِنَا مُعَاجِزِينَ أُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
الْجَحِيمِ(( 51 ))

51- AND THOSE WHO STRIVED AGAINST OUR SIGNS, TO FRUSTRATE THEM, THEY
ARE THE COMPANIONS OF THE HELL.

**THE COMMENTARY
GENEROUS SUSTENANCE**

VERSE NO.49ِ51

The argument was on the \`\`HASTE'' of disbelievers for God's
punishment, and now to sum up the matter, through the above verses, the
prophet is ordered to say to all the people:ِ \`\`O, people! I am only a
plain warner for you.'' The duty of the prophets is to convey the
Message of God to all the people clearly. The Message includes warnings
as well as glad-tidings. Punishment or Forgiveness of the sinners is not
a part of the apostle's duty. It rests only with God, Who is the owner
and the ruler of all His creatures.

We should also know this fact that, even the warning and punishment of
God are definite parts of His Mercy, that may make an evil doer to turn
and then proceed to amend his evil conducts.

[ 253 ] Then in the next two verses, a feature of the warning, and also
a feature of the glad-tidings, have been illustrated saying:ِ

\`\`For those who believed and did righteous deeds awaits forgiveness,
and generous sustenance.''

And as to the opposite party, we read:ِ

\`\`Those who strived against our signs.... they are the companions of
Hell.''

Here the generous sustenance in the widest sense of its meaning, is
physical as well as spiritual. God's reward is always far more than
Man's merits, and what they really deserve. What a reward can be
comparable to God's Forgiveness of our sins, which may end in our
salvation?

وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَّسُول وَلاَ نَبِىّ إِلاَّ إِذَا
تَمَنَّى أَلْقَى الشَّيْطَانُ فِى أُمْنِيَّتِهِ فَيَنْسَخُ اللهُ مَا
يُلْقِى الشَّيْطَانُ ثُمَّ يُحْكِمُ اللهُ آيَاتِهِ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ
حَكِيمٌ(( 52 ))

52- AND WE DID NOT SEND BEFORE YOU ANY MESSENGER NOR A PROPHET, EXCEPT
WHEN SATAN INDUCED IN HIS DESIRES (SOME SUGGESTIONS), ALLAH ABROGATED
WHAT SATAN INDUCED, THEN ALLAH CONFIRMED HIS SIGNS, AND ALLAH IS
ALL-KNOWING, ALL-WISE.

لِيَجْعَلَ مَا يُلْقِى الشَّيْطَانُ فِتْنَةً لِّلَّذِينَ فِى
قُلُوبِهِمْ مَّرَضٌ وَالْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَإِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ
لَفِى شِقَاق بَعِيد(( 53 ))

53- SO AS TO MAKE SATAN'S INDUCEMENT A TRIAL FOR THOSE IN WHOSE HEARTS
IS A DISEASE, AND WHOSE HEARTS ARE HARD, AND THE OPPRESSORS ARE IN A
WIDE SCHISM.

وَلِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَّبِّكَ
فَيُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ فَتُخْبِتَ لَهُ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَإِنَّ اللهَ لَهَادِ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِلَى صِرَاط مُّسْتَقِيم(( 54 ))

[ 254 ]

54- AND THAT, THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN KNOWLEDGE MAY KNOW THAT IT IS THE
TRUTH FROM YOUR LORD; SO AS TO BELIEVE IN IT, THAT THEIR HEARTS MIGHT BE
HUMBLE TO HIM, AND CERTAINLY ALLAH IS THE GUIDE OF THOSE WHO BELIEVED,
TO A STRAIGHT WAY.

**THE COMMENTARY
SATANIC TEMPTATIONS IN THE WAY OF PROPHETS**

VERSE NO.52ِ54 Here is a warning that the plots and conspiracies of the
opposition party is not something new; and it has always existed and
will continue existing.

Satans tried to tempt the prophets that came before our prophet, with
new, and to some extent attractive suggestions; trying to change their
desires. But Allah cancelled all their devilish tricks, and abrogated
whatever Satans induced in them, and confirmed His own signs and
inspirations. These Satanic inspirations were not contrary to the will
of God. No one can do anything that God will not, and His will is always
done. Here our Lord would like to make of the Satanic inducements a
trial for those who had or have a disease of hardness in their hearts.
On the other hand, prophets too, are human being as any other human.
Their exception is that they are inspired, and their motive and acts are
all righteous for being under the control and direct care of Allah. So
are they not immune of being confronted with Satan's temptation and
inducements. The Devils induce their deceiving suggestions, but Allah
protects his apostle from the evil and keeps them going on, in their
right and direct way.

In other word; God in His Mercy and through His inspiration will cancel
all the deceiving suggestions of Satans, and confirms His [ 255 ]

own signs, and makes His intention clearly known to His prophets, and
turns it to a means of strengthening their faith, and increasing their
endeavour.

The distinction between the Messengers of God and His prophets, is in
that, a Messenger has a Divine Book revealed to him, which he has to
teach and preach it; and convey its contents to people. But the prophet
receives inspiration, though he is not commissioned to propagate his
mission widely. A prophet is like a physician that the patient has to go
to him and seek his aid, but a Messenger is a doctor that goes to the
diseased to cure him.

وَلاَ يَزَالُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِى مِّرْيَة مِّنْهُ حَتَّى
تَأْتِيَهُمُ السَّاعَةُ بَغْتَةً أَوْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْم
عَقِيم(( 55 ))

55- AND THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED ARE ALWAYS IN DOUBT ABOUT IT, UNTIL THE
HOUR (OF DOOM) COMES TO THEM SUDDENLY, OR THERE COMES TO THEM THE
SCOURGE OF THE BARREN DAY. (IN WHICH THEY CANNOT COMPENSATE)

الْمُلْكُ يَوْمَئِذ لِّلّهِ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ فَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فِى جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ(( 56 ))

56- THE KINGDOM ON THAT DAY WILL BELONG (ONLY) TO ALLAH. HE WILL JUDGE
BETWEEN THEM. THEN THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED, AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS,
WILL BE IN THE GARDENS OF BLISS. (PARADISE)

وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا فَأُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمْ
عَذَابٌ مُّهِينٌ(( 57 ))

57- AND THOSE WHO HAVE DISBELIEVED, AND BELIED OUR SIGNS, FOR THEM WILL
BE A HUMILIATING PUNISHMENT. [ 256 ]

وَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُوا فِى سَبِيلِ اللهِ ثُمَّ قُتِلُوا أَوْ مَاتُوا
لَيَرْزُقَنَّهُمُ اللهُ رِزْقاً حَسَناً وَإِنَّ اللهَ لَهُوَ خَيْرُ
الرَّازِقِينَ(( 58 ))

58- AND THOSE WHO EMIGRATED IN THE WAY OF ALLAH, THEN THEY WERE KILLED,
OR DIED, ALLAH WILL CERTAINLY SUSTAIN THEM WITH A FAIR SUSTENANCE, AND
VERILY ALLAH IS THE BEST OF SUSTAINERS.

لَيُدْخِلَنَّهُمْ مُّدْخَلا يَرْضَوْنَهُ وَإِنَّ اللهَ لَعَلِيمٌ
حَلِيمٌ(( 59 )) 59- HE WILL CERTAINLY ADMIT THEM TO A PLACE OF WHICH
THEY ARE WELL-PLEASED, AND VERILY ALLAH IS ALL-KNOWING, ALL-LENIENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
FAIR SUSTENANCE** VERSE NO.55ِ59

The first of the verses here alludes to the doubt in the hearts of
disbelievers, that always will be there, until they reach the hour of
their Final Judgement. This is the case of them, so long as they are in
their disbelief. Of course there are some of them who eventually may
believe and convert by repentance and amendment before they die.
Therefore this verse applies only to those who die disbelievers.

The real disbelievers are always subject to doubt, distrust, and lack
of faith; because they do not want to make sure, or if they want that,
they do not work for it. They neither give ear, nor think the matter
over. They just close their eyes and their minds, and open their mouths
in denial and rejection, until they give up their time of respite, for
repentance and returns, and it becomes too late for them to profit by
the guidance of Divine Revelation. [ 257 ]

Next, reference is made to the absolute Kingdom of Allah which is
established in the Dooms Day. In that Day, Kingdom and rulership belongs
only to God. In this present world, kings and governors have some sort
of a kingdom, although very limited. But when the Day of Doom will come,
the kingdom and kingship, will belong only to God, because, then, the
respite given to Satan will expire, and people will yield no more to
devils and to their superstitious fetishes. The dictators and tyrants
who rule over here, are not a thing to be mentioned in the life to come.
They are all afflicted and chained in their ignorance and arrogance.
Allah is the real owner of everything, and so is He the real governor of
everything too particularly in the Resurrection Day.

Then there is the reference to those believers who leave their home and
hearth, in order to emigrate elsewhere for the sake of God. If they die
in their way on to Allah, or get killed, their reward rests with Allah;
and they are well recompensed. Their reward includes a fair sustenance
that Allah has promised them through this verse. (NO.58) Here a fair
sustenance has been promised for those who die, or, are killed in their
way for the sake of God such as the emigration! What sort of a
sustenance, fair or unfair, in the world of the deads is needed!? Here
we should say that Qura"n denied death as we may know it, and gives
another idea about the death in S 2:153 saying:ِ

\`\`Don't say of those who are slain in the way of Allah that they are
dead. Nay! They are alive, but you do not apprehend.'' ذَلِكَ وَمَنْ
عَاقَبَ بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبَ بِهِ ثُمَّ بُغِىَ عَلَيْهِ لَيَنصُرَنَّهُ
اللهُ إِنَّ اللهَ لَعَفُوٌّ غَفُورٌ(( 60 ))

60- SO IS IT; AND HE WHO RETALIATED THE LIKE OF WHAT HE HAD BEEN
AFFLICTED WITH, AND THEN HE WAS OPPRESSED, ALLAH WILL CERTAINLY HELP
HIM; THAT ALLAH IS ALL-PARDONING ALL-FORGIVING.

[ 258 ]

ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللهَ يُولِجُ الَّيْلَ فِى النَّهَارِ وَيُولِجُ
النَّهَارَ فِى الَّيْلِ وَأَنَّ اللهَ سَمِيعٌ بَصِيرٌ(( 61 ))

61- THAT IS BECAUSE, ALLAH MAKES THE NIGHT TO ENTER INTO THE DAY, AND
MAKES THE DAY TO ENTER INTO NIGHT; AND THAT ALLAH IS ALL-HEARING,
ALL-SEEING.

ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنَّ مَا يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ
هُوَ الْبَاطِلُ وَأَنَّ اللهَ هُوَ الْعَلِىُّ الْكَبِيرُ(( 62 ))

62- THAT IS BECAUSE, ALLAHِHE IS THE TRUTH, AND THAT, WHAT THEY CALL
APART FROM HIM, IT IS FALSEHOOD; AND THAT; ALLAHِHE IS THE HIGHEST, THE
GREATEST.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**
VERSE NO.60ِ62 It was only a couple of days left from the Arabic Sacred
month Moharram, in which Muslims are prohibited to fight; when a group
of the idolaters attacked them, and Muslims took up their swords and
bravely defended themselves. The pagans kicked up a fuss about the
defensive fight of Muslims, saying; Mohammad and his followers have
violated the sanctity of the SACRED MONTHS.

**WHO IS VICTORIOUS?**

The first verse above (NO.60), implies that, God's promises of help and
victory are not only for the Hereafter, but even in this present life of
Man the promises well apply. If a man defends himself against oppression
and injustice of persecutors, subjugators, and tyrants, he will of
surety receive God's help.

[ 259 ]

In general, when a Muslim is afflicted with an injury, patience is
better, although bitter, and glorious is to return good for evil; but it
is also a right for human to retaliate the like of what he has been
afflicted with, particularly when the opposite party is following the
creed of devils. In such a case, retaliation is even necessary for the
good and safety of community. Then if the other side again after
retaliation is oppressive, we should fight him and make sure that God is
on our side and will help us, because man has every right to defend
himself, and God will always defend the righteous believer.

The next verse refers to God's Infinite Power; an example of which can
be seen in the change of day and night; two important phenomena in our
daily life. The night has the gift of rest and sleep for us, and the day
will bring us sight and activity.

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللهَ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَتُصْبِحُ
الاَْرْضُ مُخْضَرَّةً إِنَّ اللهَ لَطِيفٌ خَبِيرٌ(( 63 ))


