The Signs of Allah in Existing
==============================

VERSE NO.63ِ66

The immediate reference here is to the nature of the earth, its
vegetation, and their connection with rain, that is sent down from the
sky through the universal plan of God, and in MEASURE. Then we see the
soil on the land covered with a green velvet on which are painted all
colours of flowers, various fruits, and all sorts of produces. He who is
the first and the main cause of this phenomenon, is no one and nothing
except the Sacred Substance, Who is All-subtle and All-aware. The
Arabic, \`\`LATIF'' is one of the names of God which is found in many
verses in Qura"n, but it is a little difficult to grasp its real applied
meaning, for having many denotation and connotations, such as; Fine,
Fair, Kind. Subtle, Pure, and Delicate, Tender, Thin, Elegant, and the
one who is always inclined to bestow gifts.

[ 261 ]

Allah is the Creator and the Owner of everything and everyone that
exists in the universe. Here in the second verse (NO.64), another two of
the names of God have been mentioned, namely, \`\`Hamid'' which is
translated to, \`\`Praiseworthy'' and, \`\`GHANI'' with several shades
of meanings, such as, \`\`Free of want'', \`\`Self-sufficient''. So also
it means one who needs nothing and is able to satisfy the needs of
others. It also means, \`\`Saturated'', and \`\`Rich'' but the meaning
which we grasp is that our Praiseworthy Lord, depends in no way
whatever, on His creatures, and He will never become in need of any one
other than Himself.

As to the protecting quality of the sky and the hazards of its fall;
\`\`....And He withholds the sky from falling upon the earth.''
Please refer to our translator's note on commenting S 21:33 page 166 of
volume 4.
Then the last verse above (NO.66), refers to another important sign of
God's Infinite Power and knowledge which is the life and death:ِ
\`\`It is He who gave you life, then He will cause you to die, and
again He will Give you life, but Man is ungrateful.''
Allah gives us life. He causes us to die. Once again He causes the dead
to get up and live a new life!
What sort of a power or knowledge is this, through which Allah has
subjectd to us whatever is in the sky, in the earth, and in the oceans?
And why in spite of all these favours and wonderful gifts, we are still
thankless!?

لِّكُلِّ أُمَّة جَعَلْنَا مَنسَكاً هُمْ نَاسِكُوهُ فَلاَ يُنَازِعُنَّكَ
فِى الاَْمْرِ وَادْعُ إِلَى رَبِّكَ إِنَّكَ لَعَلَى هُدىً مُّسْتَقِيم((
67 )) [ 262 ]

67- FOR EVERY (RELIGIOUS) NATION WE HAVE ORDAINED A RITUAL WHICH THEY
OBSERVE. SO THEY SHOULD NOT WRANGLE WITH YOU UPON THE MATTER. INVITE
THEM TO YOUR LORD THAT YOU ARE ON A DIRECT GUIDANCE.

وَإِنْ جَادَلُوكَ فَقُلِ اللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ(( 68 ))

68- AND IF THEY DISPUTE WITH YOU, THEN SAY:ِ \`\`ALLAH KNOWS BEST WHAT
ARE YOU DOING.''

اللهُ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كُنْتُمْ فِيهِ
تَخْتَلِفُونَ(( 69 ))

69- ALLAH WILL JUDGE BETWEEN YOU IN THE DAY OF RESURRECTION, UPON THAT
IN WHICH YOU WERE AT VARIANCE.

أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِى السَّمَاءِ وَالاَْرْضِ
إِنَّ ذَلِكَ فِى كِتَاب إِنَّ ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللهِ يَسِيرٌ(( 70 ))

70- DO YOU NOT KNOW THAT ALLAH KNOWS WHATEVER IS IN THE SKY AND EARTH.
VERILY THAT (KNOWLEDGE) IS IN A BOOK. AND THAT IS EASY FOR ALLAH.

**THE COMMENTARY
EVERY NATION HAS RITUALS** VERSE NO.67ِ70

The opposition party of the prophet, raised up hot disputes on account
of some rituals of Islam that seemed new to them; and insisted to remain
with their old cult and creed. So in the first verse here, it has been
stated that, for every nation God has ordained a ritual that they
observe it.

[ 263 ]

Rites and ceremonies concerning the worship of God, is a need in man's
soul and social organization. Their effect is very positive on the
individuals, as well as the community:ِ \`\`For every religious nation
(OMMAT) We have ordained a ritual which they observe.'' So, why should a
non-Muslim wrangle with us, for the Islamic Rituals that our Lord Has
ordained for us? Do they themselves have not rituals somehow the like of
ours? Such a wrangling means that the objector knows nothing about the
matter on which he disputes.

Then Qura"n, in the next verse (NO.68) advises the prophet in
particular, and Muslims in general, saying:ِ \`\`If they continue
disputing with you tell them that Allah knows best what are you doing.''
In the day of Resurrection, God will judge between all groups of people,
and all the creeds, which are at variance, and will make distinct to the
parties, what is wrong and what is right:ِ \`\`Do you not know that
Allah knows whatever is in the sky and earth?''

وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مَا لَمْ يُنَزِّلْ بِهِ سُلْطَاناً وَمَا
لَيْسَ لَهُمْ بِهِ عِلْمٌ وَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ نَّصِير(( 71 ))

71- AND THEY WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH THAT FOR WHICH NO AUTHORITY HAS
BEEN SENT DOWN, AND THEY HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE OF IT. AND FOR OPPRESSORS,
THERE IS NO HELPER.

وَإِذَا تُتْلَى عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَات تَعْرِفُ فِى وُجُوهِ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا الْمُنْكَرَ يَكَادُونَ يَسْطُونَ بِالَّذِينَ
يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِنَا قُلْ أَفَأُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِشَرّ مِّنْ
ذَلِكُمُ النَّارُ وَعَدَهَا اللهُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَبِئْسَ
الْمَصِيرُ(( 72 ))

[ 264 ]

72- AND WHEN OUR CLEAR SIGNS (VERSES OF QURA"N) ARE REHEARSED TO THEM,
YOU MAY RECOGNIZE IN THE FACES OF THE UNBELIEVERS DENIAL, SO MUCH SO,
THAT THEY ARE INCLINED TO RAISE UP THEIR HANDS (TO ATTACK ON) THOSE WHO
REHEARSE OUR SIGNS TO THEM.

SAY:ِ \`\`SHALL I THEN INFORM YOU OF (SOMETHING) WORSE THAN THAT? THE
FIRE! WHICH ALLAH HAS PROMISED IT TO THE UNBELIEVERS, AND WHAT A BAD
DESTINATION IS IT!''

يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ ضُرِبَ مَثَلٌ فَاسْتَمِعُوا لَهُ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ لَنْ يَخْلُقُوا ذُبَاباً وَلَوِ اجْتَمَعُوا
لَهُ وَإِنْ يَسْلُبْهُمُ الذُّبَابُ شَيْئاً لاَّ يَسْتَنقِذُوهُ مِنْهُ
ضَعُفَ الطَّالِبُ وَالْمَطْلُوبُ(( 73 ))

73- O, PEOPLE! A PARABLE HAS BEEN STRUCK, THEN LISTEN TO IT. VERILY
THOSE WHOM YOU CALL APART FROM ALLAH, CAN NEVER CREATE (EVEN) A FLY,
THOUGH THEY GATHER TO DO IT; AND IF A FLY TAKES SOMETHING AWAY OF THEM,
THEY CANNOT TAKE IT BACK FROM IT. WEAK IS THE SEEKER AND THE SOUGHT.

مَا قَدَرُوا اللهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ إِنَّ اللهَ لَقَوِىٌّ عَزِيزٌ(( 74
))

74- THEY DID NOT APPRAISE ALLAH AS HE DESERVES, THAT ALLAH IS POWERFUL
AND EXALTED IN POWER.

[ 265 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
DEITIES WEAKER THAN FLY**

VERSE NO.71ِ74

The first verse here implies that; if man worships anything or any one
apart from Allah, his service and faith is supported by no reason and
logic of whatever, and he is void of knowledge or any authority for his
false worship. Any one with a common sense can easily apprehend the
absurdity of serving idols or worshipping the false gods. Behind this
manifest falsehood, and clear mistake of Man, lays the material profits
and physical advantages and social privileges of some selfish and evil
priests who encourage the common people to observe the ridiculous
rituals, and to dishonour our Merciful Lord by such false religious
services. And thus, such falsehood and useless deeds will become the
adopted custom and cult of a community, however small in the lap of
Mankind's society. Such a people are then not willing to see or listen
to the truth that is sent down from their Gracious and Compassionate
God:ِ

\`\`And when our clear signs are rehearsed to them, you may recognize
in the faces of the unbelievers denial, so much so that they are
inclined to raise up their hands to attack on those who rehearse our
signs to them!'' The above verse (NO.72) refers to the obstinate
reaction of the idolaters and unbelievers, against the revelations of
God. In other word, they receive the revelation of God as something
inauspicious and bad, due to their compound ignorance and lack of
knowledge. So Qura"n, through the said verse informs them of something
which is worse than that which they think of, through an irony; and that
is the dreadful and inevitable punishment that awaits them in the
Blazing Fire of Hell.

[ 266 ]

Then through an expressive parable, the weakness of these kinds of
worshippers and their false gods, has been illustrated. This is to show
how poor, feeble, helpless, and ineffectual, both of these creatures;
the worshipped and the worshippers are:ِ \`\`They can never create
anything, even a fly; and if a fly snatches something from them, they
cannot get it back from the fly; that weak is the seeker and the
sought.'' In other word; all the idols, deities, and deified men,
including the scholars, inventors, educated, skilled and thoughtfuls,
can never create a gnat, even if they all unite and gather for that
purpose.

After striking the above parable; Qura"n concludes that, no man knows
Allah as He may, and no one appraises Him as He deserves; in His might
and exalted power.

اللهُ يَصْطَفِى مِنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ رُسُلا وَمِنَ النَّاسِ إِنَّ اللهَ
سَمِيعٌ بَصِيرٌ(( 75 ))

75- ALLAH CHOOSES FROM AMONG THE ANGELS MESSENGERS; AND FROM AMONG
PEOPLE. VERILY ALLAH IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-SEEING.

يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ وَإِلَى اللهِ تُرْجَعُ
الاُْمُورُ(( 76 ))

76- HE KNOWS WHATEVER IS BEFORE THEM, AND WHATEVER IS BEHIND THEM; AND
AFFAIRS WILL RETURN TO ALLAH.

يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ارْكَعُوا وَاسْجُدُوا وَاعْبُدُوا
رَبَّكُمْ وَافْعَلُوا الْخَيْرَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ(( 77 ))

77- O, YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED;ِ BOW DOWN, AND PROSTRATE YOURSELVES, AND
WORSHIP YOUR LORD, AND DO GOOD DEEDS; THAT YOU MAY PROSPER.

[ 267 ]

وَجَاهِدُوا فِى اللهِ حَقَّ جِهَادِهِ هُوَ اجْتَبَاكُمْ وَمَا جَعَلَ
عَلَيْكُمْ فِى الدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَج مِلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ هُوَ
سَمَّاكُمْ الْمُسْلِمينَ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَفِى هَذَا لِيَكُونَ الرَّسُولُ
شَهِيداً عَلَيْكُمْ وَتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى النَّاسِ فَأَقِيمُوا
الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِاللهِ هُوَ مَوْلاَكُمْ
فَنِعْمَ الْمَوْلَى وَنِعْمَ النَّصِيرُ(( 78 ))

78- AND STRIVE IN (THE WAY OF) ALLAH AS HE DESERVES. HE HAS ELECTED
YOU, AND IMPOSED NOT ON YOU ANY DIFFICULTY BY THE RELIGION, (WHICH IS)
THE CREED OF YOUR FATHER ABRAHAM. IT WAS HE WHO NAMED YOU MUSLIMS, FROM
BEFORE (IN THE OLD SCRIPTURES) AND IN THIS (QURA"N), THAT THE MESSENGER
MIGHT BE A WITNESS OVER YOU, AND YOU BE WITNESSES OVER PEOPLE. SO,
PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND PAY THE ALMSِTAX, AND HOLD FAST TO ALLAH: HE IS
YOUR MASTER, SO GOOD A MASTER, AND SO GOOD A HELPER.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION** VERSE NO.75ِ78

Some of the chiefs and nominal lettered and learned men from among the
pagan Arabs, such as VALID-IBN-MAGHEEREH; who thought too much of
himself, in a surprising tone used to say:ِ \`\`In spite of a gentleman
like me, why should Allah have elected a man such as Mohammad, who is
not rich, nor learned, as His Messenger?'' So the above verse (NO.75)
revealed to teach them that Allah who is All-seeing, All-hearing knows [
268 ] the best who has the necessary merits and qualifications, to be
elected as the Messenger of God:ِ \`\`Allah chooses from among the
angels Messengers, and from among people too, that He is the
All-hearing, All-seeing.''

**FIVE IMPORTANT ORDERS**

The aforesaid verses reprehended the worship of all sorts of gods,
idols, deified men, and fetishes. Now owing to the fact that there were
men who worshipped the angels and apostles and took them as gods, the
verse is to tell them that all the angels and the apostles too, are
servants of God Who has created them and chosen some from among them as
His Messengers. God chooses from among His angels some one like GABRIEL
as His Messenger, in order to convey God's Messages to His apostles,
whose duties are to communicate God's orders to Mankind. Both of the
angel and man Messengers are chosen servants of God and subject to His
will. Therefore, no one should ever worship an angel or a prophet, or
take them for gods.

In the next two verses, which are the ending of this chapter, (HAJJ),
as a happy conclusion a series of instructions have been recommended
that can protect man's Here and Hereafter, and bring him prosperity in
his physical and spiritual life. Four of such important and useful
instructions have been included in verse NO.77:ِ

\`\`O, you who have believed; bow down, and prostrate yourself, and
worship your Lord, and do good deeds; that you may prosper.''

Then in the next verse (NO.78), we receive the fifth order of our Lord
concerning JIHAD:ِ

\`\`And strive in Allah as He deserves.''

Most of the commentators have taken JIHAD in this verse in its general
sense of meaning.

The Arabic, \`\`JIHAD'' translated here to, \`\`STRIVING'' in its
narrow [ 269 ]

sense, is the sacred fight against the heathens, and its religious term
is \`\`JIHAD''. But the word in its broad and general meaning implies
all sorts of endeavours that a believer may do for the sake of God.
Here, \`\`JIHAD as God deserves'' may mean an endeavour in the way of
God, that is done with utmost purity and sincerity, an important and
great kind of Jihad is the combat and challenge of Man against his own
selfishness, lusts, and caprices. Then paying Alms-tax is the sixth of
the commandments.

**THE END OF SUREH THE PILGRIMAGE (22)**

[ 270 ] سُورَةَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ

**THE BELIEVERS**

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE

قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ(( 1 ))

1- VERILY THE BELIEVERS HAVE PROSPERED.

الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِى صَلاَتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ(( 2 ))

2- THOSE WHO ARE HUMBLE IN THEIR PRAYER.

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنِ اللَّغْوِ مُعْرِضُونَ(( 3 ))

3- AND THOSE WHO AVOID VANITY. (IN THEIR WORDS AND DEEDS)

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِلزَّكَاةِ فَاعِلُونَ(( 4 ))

4- AND THOSE WHO ARE ACTIVE IN ALMS-TAX.

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ حَافِظُونَ(( 5 ))

5- AND THOSE WHO GUARD THEIR SEXUAL ORGANS.

إِلاَّ عَلَى أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ
غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ (( 6 ))

6- EXCEPT FROM THEIR WIVES, AND WHAT THEIR RIGHT HANDS OWN. THEN THEY
ARE NOT BLAMEWORTHY.


[ 271 ]

فَمَنِ ابْتَغَى وَرَاءَ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ(( 7 ))

7- BUT HE WHO SEEKS TO GO BEYOND THAT, THEN THEY ARE THE
TRANSGRESSORS.

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لاَِمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ(( 8 ))

8- AND THOSE WHO TAKE CARE OF TRUSTS AND THEIR COVENANT.

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَى صَلَوَاتِهِمْ يُحَافِظُونَ(( 9 ))

9- AND THOSE WHO GUARD THEIR PRAYERS.

أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْوَارِثُونَ(( 10 ))

10- THOSE ARE THE INHERITORS.

الَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الْفِرْدَوْسَ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ(( 11 ))

11- THOSE WHO SHALL INHERIT THE PARADISE, WHEREIN THEY ABIDE FOR
EVER.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SIGNIFICANT QUALITIES OF BELIEVERS** VERSE NO.1ِ11

This chapter is named, \`\`THE BELIEVERS'' after its verse NO.1,
saying:ِ \`\`Verily the believers have prospered.'' They are prosperous
for achieving their aims in all aspects. They have obtained salvation.
Their sins have been forgiven them. Victory and success in this world is
theirs, and in the Hereafter they will inherit the Paradise. [ 272 ]

Then the significant qualities of the true believers have been
mentioned for those who are interested in such prosperity. The first of
their attributes mentioned here, is their humility in prayer. Here, the
performance of the prayer itself is not brought among the distinct
characteristics of believers, but their humbleness in prayer is in a top
class. In fact, it is the humility and sincerity in prayer which is
weighty, and gives valour and value to the prayer.

The humbleness in prayer includes considering the importance of God's
presence, and being present in mind, when glorifying or supplicating.
And confessing how helpless and weak a man is, when he relies not upon
the power of God. The second description of the true believer is
avoidance of vanity. They keep aloof of vain deeds, and idle talks.
There is an honest aim beyond whatever they say, or in whatever they do.
They do not tell lies. They do not call people bad names.

Then the next verse, (NO.4) points out the third distinction of
believers, that they are active in alms giving and charity. The fourth
speciality of them is their chastity. They control their sex affairs and
guard their sexual organs, with the exception of their wives, or what
their right hands have owned. A Muslim's sexual relation is restricted
to marriage bond, under which the rights of both parties are maintained.
Even when a Muslim marries a slave girl, her status of rights become
equal to that of a free woman.

Then through verse NO.8, the fifth and the sixth special features of
believers have been mentioned:ِ \`\`They take care of their trusts, and
observe their covenants and promises.'' Trusts may be a property
entrusted, or it might be a duty assigned by someone to some other whom
he trusts. The most significant one among the trusts that man may carry
upon his shoulder is, his duties to God. To this effect HA"FIZ, our
great poet has composed:ِ

[ 273 ]

The heaven could not carry the heavy load of trust; The lot fell upon
me, a mad creature! ZARRA"RIH, a great disciple of Hazrat Imam Bagher
(AS) was of opinion that kingdom and rulership is a trust from God. In
other word; a king or ruler holds his kingdom on trust from God for his
subjects, and therefore according to the following verse, (S 4:58)
trusts must be delivered back to their owners, which have the merits and
necessary power and knowledge to guard the trusts:ِ \`\`Allah commands
you to deliver trusts back to their owner, and when you judge between
people judge with justice.''

And at last, the verse NO.9, mentions the eighth prominent quality of
the believers; which is being watchful on their prayers. In the above
mentioned series of eight significant qualifications, the first was
humbleness in prayer, and the last is watchfulness in prayer, which
means to observe all its important conditions like; time, place,
cleansing and ablutions, direction, good recital, and presence of mind
to show humbleness and sincerity.

\*\*\*\*\*

JALAL-AL-DIN RUMI has a beautiful poem in this relation, saying:ِ

\`\`If I direct not my heart's face to their presence,
I do not reckon my prayer a prayer.
My object in prayer is to open my heart, to say;
How painful and sad is being far from You.
If not that; what a prayer is this, to be faced to sanctum,
With the heart in BAZAAR!''

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

[ 274 ]

وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الاِْنسَانَ مِنْ سُلاَلَة مِّنْ طِين (( 12 ))

12- AND VERILY WE CREATED MAN FROM AN EXTRACTIVE OF CLAY.

ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاهُ نُطْفَةً فِى قَرَار مَّكِين(( 13 ))

13- THEN WE MADE HIM A SPERM IN A FIRM PLACE.

ثُمَّ خَلَقْنَا النُّطْفَةَ عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْعَلَقَةَ مُضْغَةً
فَخَلَقْنَا الْمُضْغَةَ عِظَاماً فَكَسَوْنَا الْعِظَامَ لَحْماً ثُمَّ
أَنشَأْنَاهُ خَلْقاً آخَرَ فَتَبَارَكَ اللهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ(( 14
))

14- THEN WE CREATED A CLOT (FROM THE) SPERM. THEN WE MADE THE CLOT A
LUMP (OF FLESH). THEN WE CREATED BONES OUT OF THE LUMP, AND WE CLOTHED
THE BONES WITH FLESH. AFTER THAT WE BEGAN FOR HIM (i.e. FOR THE BODY)
ANOTHER (KIND) OF CREATION. SO GLORIOUS IS ALLAH THE BEST OF CREATORS.

ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ لَمَيِّتُونَ(( 15 ))

15- THEN AFTER THAT YOU ARE TO DIE.

ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تُبْعَثُونَ(( 16 ))

16- THEN IN THE RESURRECTION DAY YOU WILL BE RAISED UP.


[ 275 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE DEVELOPMENT OF FOETUS** VERSE NO.12ِ16

These verses will take us for a look through the inner world of
ourselves, and through the steps and stages of our creation. They will
teach us how Man the noblest of creatures, has been made out of the dead
and worthless clay. This is the superior and amazing power of God, that
from the simplest of materials has made the most complex of creatures!
Man is created of clay! So in this passage the five various stages in
the creation of Man has been beautifully summarized, in order to show in
a glance, Man's position in this everchanging life; that how the
inorganic materials turn to living matter:ِ \`\`Then We made him a semen
in a safe and secure (FIRM) place.''

The first stage in the creation of Man is the conversion of clay to
semen, which is the viscid whitish fluid produced in the male
reproductive organs, containing the spermatozoon that serves to
fertilize the ovum. This is performed with utmost safety and security in
father's loins and mother's womb.

Then the wonderful movements and development of the sperm in the
mother's womb has been mentioned in brief and one stage of creation
after another, saying that the semen is changed into a clot of thickly
congealed blood. The clot is then changed to a lump of flesh among which
the bones are made. After the above wonderful steps of development,
reference is made to another amazing stage of Man's creation, through
which a further process takes place; giving the foetus a soul, so that
the animal may become a Man. This process is the breathing of God's
Spirit into him. From here on, the physical growth of the babe, is
parallel to that of his spiritual progress.

[ 276 ]

After stating the five stages of creation of Man which will end in
clothing the bones with flesh, the word \`\`creation'', is no more
repeated for the next stage of creation: \`\`....After that we began for
him another kind of creation.'' This is the breathing of God's spirit in
the developed foetus. The Arabic, \`\`AN, SHAA, NA", HO'' that we have
translated to, \`\`We began for him'' means to originate a creation
accompanied with teaching and training it too. This is the case with the
foetus when it begins to develop physically as well as mentally.

\*\*\*\*\*

In fact, the physical body is a means to improve the spirit of God
which is breathed in Man. When the spirit is developed enough, it is no
more in need of the body and can easily leave it to live alone. Then the
spiritless body will decay and die, and the soul or spirit which is the
original in Man's existence, will continue living, by opening a new
chapter of life in the Intermediate World. (BARZAKH) This new world is
beyond time and space, in which the soul of Man lives until the solar
system has changed enough; and is prepared for the Resurrection and
raise up of the deads. Then the soul is granted a body, which is
everlasting, and both of them will live together for ever, either in
Paradise, or in Hell, so long as God will.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعَ طَرَائِقَ وَمَا كُنَّا عَنِ
الْخَلْقِ غَافِلِينَ(( 17 ))

[ 277 ]

وَأَنزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً بِقَدَر فَأَسْكَنَّاهُ فِى الاَْرْضِ
وَإِنَّا عَلَى ذَهَاب بِهِ لَقَادِرُونَ(( 18 ))

18- AND WE SENT DOWN FROM THE SKY WATER IN MEASURE, AND LOGED IT INTO
EARTH; AND CERTAINLY WE ARE ABLE TO TAKE IT. (BACK)

فَأَنشَأْنَا لَكُمْ بِهِ جَنَّات مِنْ نَّخِيل وَأَعْنَاب لَّكُمْ فِيهَا
فَوَاكِهُ كَثِيرَةٌ وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ(( 19 ))

19- THEN BY IT WE MADE GARDENS OF PALMS AND GRAPES FOR YOU, IN WHICH
THERE IS ABUNDANT SUPPLY OF FRUITS, AND OF WHICH YOU EAT.

وَشَجَرَةً تَخْرُجُ مِنْ طُورِ سَيْنَاءَ تَنْبُتُ بِالدُّهْنِ وَصِبْغ
لِّلاَْكِلِينَ(( 20 ))

20- AND THE TREE WHICH GROWS ON MOUNT SINAI, PRODUCES OIL AND STEW
MATERIAL FOR THOSE WHO EAT.

وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِى الاَْنْعَامِ لَعِبْرَةً نُّسقِيكُمْ مِّمَّا فِى
بُطُونِهَا وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ كَثِيرَةٌ وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ((
21 ))

21- AND SURELY IN THE CATTLE, THERE IS A LESSON FOR YOU; WE GIVE YOU TO
DRINK OF WHAT IS INSIDE THEM, (THEIR MILK) AND IN THEM THERE ARE MANY
BENEFITS FOR YOU, AND OF THEM YOU EAT.

وَعَلَيْهَا وَعَلَى الْفُلْكِ تُحْمَلُونَ(( 22 ))

22- AND UPON THEM, AND UPON THE SHIPS YOU RIDE.


