Again the Signs of Monotheism
=============================

VERSE NO.17ِ22

Following the aformentioned passage which took us in, for a look in our
inner world, this passage takes us out, for a walk of study in our outer
world. In both of the worlds; inside and outside of us, we can observe
brilliant signs of Monotheism:ِ \`\`And verily We have created seven
ways above you, and We have not been negligent of creation.'' The
Arabic, \`\`TARA"ـGH'' is the plural for, \`\`TARIGH'' which means road,
way, or layer. If taken for road, it may either be the orbits in which
the planets swim, or the ways through which the angels may descend, and
ascend.

And if the word is taken to mean, \`\`layer'', we may think of various
layers of the ocean of air, at the bottom of which we live; such as the
TroposphereِStratosphereِIonosphereِExosphereِthe Empty space, and the
Meteoric Zone and etc. Sky in Qura"n, has come with various shades of
meaning such as; overhead, the ocean of air above us, our solar system,
and the constellation and the whole collection of stars. As to what the
NO.7 attributed to the skies may mean, we are of opinion that the exact
seven in numbers is intended here. This idea may be proved from other
verses. There are verses in Qura"n that imply all the solar systems,
planets, stars, asteroids, or whatever may exist of meteors, large and
small, are all stationed within the realm, and in the bonds of the first
of the said seven skies, the lower one of which we have it above us. We
read in S 41:12:ِ

\`\`Allah then formed the sky into seven firmaments, (skies) in two
days, and to each sky He assigned its duties. And we have adorned the
lower sky with the [ 279 ] brilliant stars and provided it with
security. That is the ordering of the All-mighty, All-knowing.''

So according to the above verse, the lowest of the seven skies which we
see it above us is the place of all brilliant stars, planets, suns,
moons, and in general all the celestial bodies, that we may see them
with our eyes, or we may not see them even with our modern telescopes.
Therefore, the upper six skies beyond the celestial bodies, are all
unknown to us, and we know not much about them. Perhaps in future
science will help Man to discover something about them and give us some
signs and symptoms. We only know that in the first and lowest one of the
seven skies, our Globe is only a drop of water in a huge ocean, and
Allah is Greater than All.

Then we come to the next clause of the first verse (NO.17), which
assures us that; God cares for us, and for all his creation. This is
among God's absolute goodness that He cares for us and for His
creatures. His hands of care for us is active in innumerable ways such
as sending the rain, and penetrating it in the earth to keep its
moisture for long. Then by it, He makes Gardens in which so many kinds
and colours of fruits are produced, from among which we may name grapes,
dates figs, and olives:ِ \`\`And the tree which grows on Mount Sinai,
and produces oil and stew material for those who eat.''

The rainfall is seasonal and in measure. It is fortunately confined to
few months in the year. If it would always continue to rain, no one
could live on earth except the sea creatures. On the other hand, if the
rain would cease to fall, no one could live on earth for want of water.
See you then; how grateful should Man be to Allah for sending the rain
in due measure

[ 280 ]

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحاً إِلَى قَوْمِهِ فَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا
اللهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِّنْ إِلَـه غَيْرُهُ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 23 ))

23- AND WE SENT NOAH TO HIS PEOPLE; AND HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY PEOPLE!
WORSHIP ALLAH. YOU HAVE NO GOD OTHER THAN HIM. DO YOU NOT THEN TAKE
CARE?

فَقَالَ الْمَلَأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ قَوْمِهِ مَا هَذَا إِلاَّ
بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُكُمْ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَتَفَضَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلَوْ شَاءَ
اللهُ لاََنزَلَ مَلاَئِكَةً مَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَذَا فِى آبَائِنَا
الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 24 ))

24- THEN THE CHIEFS OF THE UNBELIEVERS AMONG HIS PEOPLE SAID:ِ \`\`THIS
IS NO MORE THAN A MAN LIKE YOURSELVES, WHO SEEKS TO HAVE SUPERIORITY
OVER YOU. AND IF ALLAH WILLED, HE WOULD HAVE SENT DOWN ANGELS. WE HAVE
NOT HEARD OF SUCH A THING AMONG OUR FATHERS OF OLD.''

إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ رَجُلٌ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ فَتَرَبَّصُوا بِهِ حَتَّى حِين((
25 ))

25- HE IS NOT EXCEPT A MAN WHO IS POSSESSED; (INFLUENCED BY EVIL
SPIRITS) SO WAIT FOR HIM A WHILE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE LOGIC OF THE HAUGHTY BLIND-HEARTED** VERSE NO.23ِ25

Here on, we will hear of Monotheism, Resurrection Day, and God's
Message and covenants, from the tongue of the prophets and Messengers of
God, beginning from Noah:ِ

\`\`And We sent Noah to his people, and he said to them:ِ \`\`O, my
people! Worship Allah. You have no god other than Him.'' [ 281 ] Here,
Qura"n directs the attentions to the Divine Teachers who are sent with
God's Message and clear signs, to instruct and guide us to the righteous
path of truth and prosperity that ends to Paradise. Unfortunately, when
Noah started his carrier; through Satanic Temptation some of the high
ups, from among his people started casting parasites, and perverting the
attentions, through excuses and flimsy pretexts, and eventually belied
and rejected their truthful prophet:ِ \`\`Then the chiefs of the
unbelievers among his people said:ِ \`\`This is no more than a man like
yourselves, who seeks to have superiority over you. And if Allah willed
He would have sent down angels.''

Therefore, Noah the compassionate and truthful Divine teacher of Man,
and an Arch Prophet of God, was accused of being a liar, and was mocked
at for being a man like any other of them; who themselves were no more
than some rascals and ungodly, arrogant people. It is narrated from a
great saint who has said:ِ \`\`Thanks to God our Merciful Lord who has
chosen our enemies from among the fools.'' These arrogant chiefs have
always done their best to frustrate the Messengers of God and to render
them unsuccessful; but the All-mighty God has always protected His
apostles, so that they all did their duties well in spreading the word
of Allah in an upper hand, and to convey God's Message to whoever they
had to.

When the unbelievers listened to the eloquent and penetrating speeches
of their prophet, and found some of their friends and families to have
believed in them secretly, the chieftains became anxious for their own
social positions, and undue privileges. So they began to deny the
apostles and attribute wrong motives to them, saying; they are mad, they
are possessed, they are poets, and finally they accused them of trying
to establish their own personal superiority over their people, in spite
of being no more than a mortal man like anyother individual.

[ 282 ]

قَالَ رَبِّ انصُرْنِى بِمَا كَذَّبُونِ(( 26 ))

26- NOAH SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY LORD! HELP ME IN WHAT THEY BELIE ME.''
(CALLING ME LIAR)

فَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ أَنِ اصْنَعِ الْفُلْكَ بِأَعْيُنِنَا وَوَحْيِنَا
فَإِذَا جَاءَ أَمْرُنَا وَفَارَ التَّنُّورُ فَاسْلُكْ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلّ
زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ وَأَهْلَكَ إِلاَّ مَنْ سَبَقَ عَلَيْهِ الْقَوْلُ
مِنْهُمْ وَلاَ تُخَاطِبْنِى فِى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا إِنَّهُمْ
مُّغْرَقُونَ(( 27 ))

27- SO WE INSPIRED HIM, SAYING:ِ \`\`CONSTRUCT THE ARK UNDER OUR EYES
(OUR DIRECTIONS) AND OUR INSPIRATION. THEN WHEN OUR ORDER IS ISSUED, AND
(WATER) GUSHED OUT OF THE OVEN, THEN YOU TAKE ABOARD OF ALL KINDS, ONE
PAIR, AND ALSO YOUR FAMILY; EXCEPT HIM AGAINST WHOM THE WORD (OF
PUNISHMENT) HAS ALREADY GONE FORTH. AND ADDRESS ME NOT CONCERNING THOSE
WHO HAVE OPPRESSED, THAT THEY SHALL BE DROWNED.''

فَإِذَا اسْتَوَيْتَ أَنْتَ وَمَنْ مَّعَكَ عَلَى الْفُلْكِ فَقُلِ
الْحَمْدُ للهِِ الَّذِى نَجَّانَا مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 28 ))

28- AND WHEN YOU, AND THOSE WHO ARE WITH YOU, HAVE SEATED ON THE ARK,
SAY:ِ \`\`PRAISE BE TO ALLAH, WHO SAVED US FROM THE OPPRESSING
PEOPLE.''

وَقُلْ رَبِّ أَنزِلْنِى مُنْزَلا مُّبَارَكاً وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ
الْمُنزِلِينَ(( 29 ))

29- AND SAY:ِ \`\`MY LORD! DEBARK ME IN A BLESSED HARBOUR, AND YOU ARE
THE BEST OF DEBARKERS.''

[ 283 ]

إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَات وَإِنْ كُنَّا لَمُبْتَلِينَ(( 30 )) 30- VERILY
IN THAT THERE ARE SIGNS, AND WE CERTAINLY DO PUT MAN TO TRIAL. (THAT
THEY MAY UNDERSTAND)

**THE COMMENTARY
THE END OF A REBELLIOUS PEOPLE**
VERSE NO.26ِ30

When NOAH lost his hopes for guiding his obstinate people, he said to
our Lord:ِ \`\`My Lord! Help me in what my people belied me.'' God
answered his prayer, and instructed him how to prepare the necessary
preliminaries for the rescue of believers and annihilation of the
obstinate unbelievers:ِ \`\`We inspired Noah saying; construct the Ark
under our eyes and inspiration.'' The word, \`\`inspiration'' in this
clause, implies that Noah constructed the ship with the direction of
Allah, and he learned the know how through the inspiration of God.

God's next instruction to Noah was to wait and watch for Allah's order
to be issued, a sign of which would be the oven from which water had to
gush out. Usually from an OVEN a fire will burst into flame; but from
the oven of God's wrath, can anything gush out, even water or
earthquake. Then when he sign of God's order appeared, Noah was
commanded to take aboard the Ark, one pair of each kind of creatures, to
which he could have access; in accompany with his own family, of which
his sinful son was excluded.

When Noah and those who were with him embarked, Noah said:ِ \`\`Praise
be to Allah who saved us from the oppressing people.'' And they all gave
themselves up to the furious sea and dreadful waves under the care of
God.

[ 284 ]

ثُمَّ أَنشَأْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ قَرْناً آخَرِينَ(( 31 ))

31- AFTER THEM WE ORIGINATED ANOTHER GENERATION.

فَأَرْسَلْنَا فِيهِمْ رَسُولا مِّنْهُمْ أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللهَ مَا لَكُمْ
مِّنْ إِلَـه غَيْرُهُ أَفَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 32 ))

32- AND WE SENT TO THEM A MESSENGER OF THEMSELVES, SAYING THAT; WORSHIP
ALLAH. YOU HAVE NO GOD OTHER THAN HIM. DO YOU NOT THEN PAY HEED?

وَقَالَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْ قَوْمِهِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا
بِلِقَاءِ الاْخِرَةِ وَأَتْرَفْنَاهُمْ فِى الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا مَا
هَذَا إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُكُمْ يَأْكُلُ مِمَّا تَأْكُلُونَ مِنْهُ
وَيَشْرَبُ مِمَّا تَشْرَبُونَ(( 33 ))

33- AND THE CHIEFS OF HIS PEOPLE WHO DISBELIEVED AND DENIED THE
ENCOUNTER OF THE LIFE TO COME, AND ON WHOM WE HAD BESTOWED THE GOOD
THINGS OF THIS LIFE SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS NO MORE THAN A MAN LIKE
YOURSELVES, WHO EATS OF WHAT YOU EAT, AND DRINKS OF WHAT YOU DRINK.''

وَلَئِنْ أَطَعْتُمْ بَشَراً مِّثْلَكُمْ إِنَّكُمْ إِذاً لَّخَاسِرُونَ((
34 ))

34- AND IF YOU OBEY A MAN LIKE YOURSELVES. THEN YOU WILL BE LOSERS.

أَيَعِدُكُمْ أَنَّكُمْ إِذَا مِتُّمْ وَكُنتُمْ تُرَاباً وَعِظَاماً
أَنَّكُمْ مُّخْرَجُونَ(( 35 ))

35- DOES HE PROMISE YOU THAT WHEN YOU DIED AND BECAME DUST AND BONES
YOU WILL COME OUT. (OF GRAVES)

[ 285 ]

هَيْهَاتَ هَيْهَاتَ لِمَا تُوعَدُونَ(( 36 ))

36- FAR FROM IT! FAR FROM IT! IS THAT WHICH YOU ARE PROMISED.

إِنْ هِىَ إِلاَّ حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا وَمَا نَحْنُ
بِمَبْعُوثِينَ(( 37 ))

37- IT IS NOT EXCEPT OUR LIFE IN THIS WORLD.

WE LIVE AND WE DIE; AND WE WILL NOT BE RAISED UP AGAIN.

إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ رَجُلٌ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللهِ كَذِباً وَمَا نَحْنُ لَهُ
بِمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 38 ))

38- HE IS ONLY A MAN WHO HAS FORGED A LIE AGAINST ALLAH, AND WE WILL
NOT BELIEVE HIM.

قَالَ رَبِّ انصُرْنِى بِمَا كَذَّبُونِ(( 39 ))

39- HE SAID; O, MY LORD! HELP ME IN WHAT THEY BELIE ME. (CALLING ME
LIAR)

قَالَ عَمَّا قَلِيل لَّيُصْبِحُنَّ نَادِمِينَ(( 40 ))

40- (HIS LORD) SAID:ِ SOON SHALL THEY BECOME RUEFUL.

فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ بِالْحَقِّ فَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ غُثَاءً فَبُعْداً
لِّلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 41 )) 41- THEN A CRY SEIZED THEM JUSTLY, AND
WE MADE THEM AS WITHERED LEAVES! SO; AWAY WITH THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
OPPRESSORS.


[ 286 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SORROWFUL FATE OF THAMUD**

VERSE NO.31ِ41

The argument is now about another obstinate and wicked generation of
people who appeared after the Flood. As a matter of fact, Man cannot
abide without Divine teachers for having a spirit, for his spiritual
life. So, once again God sent His Messenger to warn and to show Man the
straight path to prosperity and salvation. In these verses, the name of
the people and their apostle has not been mentioned. Therefore it might
be a general statement about the prophets after Noah and their people,
like A"D and Thamud, to whom Hud and Salih were sent.

Here, one may ask; to what a people after the Flood, the said prophet
in these verses had been sent, and what was the name of the prophet?
Some commentators have understood the people to have been, \`\`Thamud''
to whom the prophet Salih was sent. The reason that such commentators
have, is the similarity of punishments of the two group of people. In
the last of the above verses (NO.41) we read that; \`\`A CRY SEIZED
THEM''. We also have read in S 11:66ِ67; \`\`When our decree issued, We
saved Salih and those who believed with him.... and then a cry seized
the wrong-doers, and they lay prostrated in their homes before morning,
as if they had never dwelt and flourished there.'' Now let us return to
the sinful people to see what sort of an answer they gave to the call of
their prophet; \`\`to worship God alone!?''

The chiefs of his people who disbelieved, and denied the encounter of
the life to come, and on whom We had bestowed the good things of this
world said; \`\`This is no more than a Mortal Man the like of [ 287 ]
yourselves who eats of what you eat and drinks of what you drink.''

Those who are blind for their love of luxury and pleasure, usually
think of the present, and care not for the past and future. In their
sight, yesterday is gone, and tomorrow may not come; and the gain is all
in present, if some one by his preaching and warning asks them to be
careful and avoid evil, they take him as an enemy; and accuse him of
falsehood and calumny. Such was the case of the wicked and evil doers
with their prophet to whom they said;ِ \`\`We all die like you prophets.
No one has returned yet after his death, to tell us what is what, and
who is who. Every day a group of children is born and a group of the
aged will die, and this natural cycle continues; and we have not ever
seen a dead who has turned to dust and bones, to have come back. Why
should we then bother ourselves for our unknown tomorrow or future as
far as we can be happy today?''

However, these unbelievers do not know that this sort of reasoning and
motives, belong to the animal class of creatures and will not satisfy
Man who has everlasting spiritual existence. In this relation, to be or
not to be is not our question. We are and we shall be, and non-existence
cannot threat our existence. SAADI the great poet has: O, SAADI; If the
flood of annihilation takes away the house of your life; Keep your heart
firm, that the foundation of existence is strong for depending on Him.

The unbelievers concluded not to follow their prophet for being a
Mankind the like of themselves. They rejected the doctrine of the life
to come thinking it to be impossible. When their pride and vanity went
out of the bonds, their prophet asked for God's help. Soon after a
deadly cry seized them, and turned them to something like rubbish or
dead and dry leaves, or like scum floating on a violent flood of water.
It seemed as if they had not lived at all!

[ 288 ]

ثُمَّ أَنشَأْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ قُرُوناً آخَرِينَ(( 42 ))

42- AFTER THAT, WE CREATED OTHER GENERATIONS.

مَا تَسْبِقُ مِنْ أُمَّة أَجَلَهَا وَمَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ(( 43 ))

43- NO NATION OUTSTRIPS ITS TERM, NOR CAN THEY DELAY IT.

ثُمَّ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا تَتْرَا كُلَّ مَا جَاءَ أُمَّةً رَّسُولُهَا
كَذَّبُوهُ فَأَتْبَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ بَعْضاً وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَحَادِيثَ
فَبُعْداً لِّقَوْم لاَّ يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 44 ))

44- WE THEN SENT OUR MESSENGERS ONE AFTER ANOTHER. WHENEVER ITS
MESSENGER CAME TO A NATION, THEY BELIED HIM. SO WE MADE SOME OF THEM TO
FOLLOW SOME OTHER (IN THEIR RUIN), AND WE MADE THEM NARRATIVES. (FOR
THOSE AFTER THEM)

THEN, AWAY WITH A PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE NOT.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE REBELLIOUS TRIBES WERE DESTROYED ONE AFTER ANOTHER** VERSE
NO.42ِ44

After the people of Thamud, mention is made of other generations that
came after them and before Moses:ِ \`\`After that We created other
generations.'' God's Mercy will never cease. If a people becomes an
obstruction in the way of development and evolutions, God's care will
push them aside, and bring new generations to replace them.

On the other, hand the call of the prophets too, in the course of the
history has not ceased:ِ [ 289 ] \`\`We then sent our Messengers one
after another.'' These Divine Teachers have been sent successively, but
the obstinate and ignorant wicked have remained with their foolish
rejection and blasphemy. So when their rejection of truth and obstinacy
passed over the boundaries, set by the Merciful Lord, their houses and
household were all wiped out, so that only an obscure tale of their
existence remained after them.

ثُمَّ أَرْسَلْنَا مُوسَى وَأَخَاهُ هَارُونَ بِآيَاتِنَا وَسُلْطَان
مُّبِين(( 45 ))

45- THEN WE SENT MOSES, AND HIS BROTHER AARON WITH OUR SIGNS, AND A
PERSPICUOUS AUTHORITY.

إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلاَءِيْهِ فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَكَانُوا قَوْماً
عَالِينَ(( 46 ))

46- TO PHARAOH AND HIS CHIEFS, BUT THEY RECEIVED THEM WITH PRIDE, AND
THEY WERE SUPERIORITY COMPLEX A PEOPLE.

فَقَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لِبَشَرَيْنِ مِثْلِنَا وَقَوْمُهُمَا لَنَا
عَابِدُونَ(( 47 ))

47- SO, THEY SAID:ِ \`\`SHALL WE BELIEVE IN TWO MEN WHO ARE LIKE
OURSELVES, AND WHILE THEIR PEOPLE ARE OUR SERVANTS.''

فَكَذَّبُوهُمَا فَكَانُوا مِنْ الْمُهْلَكِينَ(( 48 ))

48- SO, THEY BELIED THEM AND BECAME OF THOSE WHO WERE DESTROYED.

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ(( 49 ))

49- AND WE GAVE MOSES THE BOOK, PERHAPS THEY WOULD BE GUIDED. [ 290 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE RAISE OF MOSES, AND FALL OF PHARAOHNISM**

VERSE NO.45ِ49

In this passage, there has come an abstract of the Pharaoh and his
host's story; Moses, in accompany with his brother Aaron, were sent to
Pharaoh and his courtiers with expressive miracles and authority from
God; calling them to submit to Allah, and to worship him alone. Pride
and vanity made Pharaoh and his courtiers to reject the call, and
accusing the brethren of lie. They said among themselves; The two men
belong to the Israelites who are our slaves, and worship us as their
gods. How should we then, accept them as the Messengers and elects of
God, and follow them leaving our creed and cult.

Moses and Aaron had a twofold missions, namely to make Pharaoh and the
Egyptians to submit to Allah, and leave aside the worship of idols,
false gods, and deified kings. Their second task was to rescue the
Israelites of their slavery and continued and wearisome labour for their
Egyptian slave masters; and then to organize them into a religious
people according to the Mosaic Law. Pharaoh and his chiefs rejected the
Divine call:ِ

\`\`So, they said; Shall we believe in two men who are like ourselves,
and while their people are our servants.'' The Israelites too,
repeatedly rebelled against the Law, and fell in great troubles.
وَجَعَلْنَا ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ آيَةً وَآوَيْنَاهُمَا إِلَى رَبْوَة
ذَاتِ قَرَار وَمَعِين(( 50 )) 50- AND WE MADE THE SON OF MARY AND HIS
MOTHER A SIGN, AND GAVE THEM SHELTER, IN A LOFTY LAND WITH COMFORT AND
SPRING.

[ 291 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ANOTHER SIGN OF GOD**
VERSE NO.50

Here in this verse is a brief reference to Jesus Christ and his mother,
Mary the virgin:ِ \`\`And We made the son of Mary and his mother a
sign.''

The exceptional birth of Jesus from a virgin mother has some connection
with Mary the mother, and some relations with Jesus the son; and
therefore, both of them in this verse have been introduced as one single
sign of God. The virgin birth of Jesus, and his speech in the cradle as
a baby were both miracles. When her mother was accused of unchastity,
her son who was a baby in the cradle vindicated his mother, and clearly
proved the falsehood of the calumny. Then the second clause of the verse
indicates that God gave them a safe and secure shelter:ِ \`\`....And
gave them shelter in a lofty land with comfort and spring.''

As to the place wherein the mother and child, were given a secure
shelter, commentators differ. Some say that it was NAZARETH, their home
town. Some other are of opinion that the place was in Damascus. A third
party know it to have been the place to which Mary went to deliver her
child when the proper time for child birth approached.

As it is cited in S 19:22ِ26; there, was a dry palm-tree on a high
piece of land, beneath which Mary took a shelter; and first in anguish.
Soon the palm-tree bore sweet fruit. Then beneath the tree, there flowed
a stream of fresh clean water that gushed out of a spring. There she
gave birth to Jesus Christ the Arch Prophet of God. Then after some
repose, and a little spiritual prepration, Mary took her wonderful child
and went to her family.

[ 292 ]

يَا أَيُّهَا الرُّسُلُ كُلُوا مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَاعْمَلُوا صَالِحاً
إِنِّى بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ(( 51 ))

51- O, MESSENGERS! EAT OF THE GOOD PURE FOODS, AND DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS;
THAT I KNOW WHATEVER YOU DO.

وَإِنَّ هَذِهِ أُمَّتُكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَأَنَا رَبُّكُمْ
فَاتَّقُونِ(( 52 ))

52- AND THIS IS YOUR COMMUNITY, A SINGLE ONE COMMUNITY; AND I AM YOUR
LORD, SO BEWARE OF ME.

فَتَقَطَّعُوا أَمْرَهُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ زُبُراً كُلُّ حِزْب بِمَا
لَدَيْهِمْ فَرِحُونَ(( 53 ))

53- BUT THEY DIVIDED THEIR AFFAIR AMONG THEMSELVES. (THEY DIVIDED INTO
SCHISM AND HOSTILE GROUPS) EACH SECT IS REJOICING IN WHAT IS WITH THEM.
فَذَرْهُمْ فِى غَمْرَتِهِمْ حَتَّى حِين(( 54 ))

54- SO LEAVE THEM IN THEIR CONFUSION FOR A WHILE. (UNTIL DEATH OR GOD'S
PUNISHMENT SEIZES THEM.)

**THE COMMENTARY
THERE IS ONLY ONE SINGLE RELIGIOUS NATION. (OMMAT)** VERSE NO.51ِ54

In the first verse of this passage, the prophets are addressed to eat
of the pure good and lawful foods, and to do good things. The difference
between a prophet, and an ordinary man, is not in their need for food,
water, and clothing. The main difference here is that; the prophet uses
everything and even the food, as a means of development and evolution;
whereas the ordinary man looks as the aim of life, to food, drink, and
enjoyments, just as any other animal.

[ 293 ]

Considering that the kind of food, and its degree of purity and
lawfulness is very effective in man's moral and spiritual life; eating
good, clean and lawful food is taken among good and righteous deeds. In
Islamic traditions we have; that eating of unlawful foods or drinks will
prevent man's prayer from being answered. On the other hand, no one has
the right of prohibiliting the use of that which, Allah has pronounced
it as lawful. In other word, it is unlawful to abstain from lawful,
clean, good things like those who lead an ascetic life. This is because,
ascetism is neither a reasonable act, nor it is found among the
commandments of Allah.

\`\`O, Messengers! Eat of the good pure foods, and do righteous deeds,
that I know whatever you do.'' Then the next verse tells the prophets
that, they all belong to a single community, and God is your only Lord
and Cherisher:ِ \`\`And this is your community a single one community,
and I am your Lord; so beware of Me.'' Therefore, the followers of the
prophets too, should follow a single creed and programme, the principle
of which is one and the same everywhere and at any time.

In fact, all the prophets are a single spirit in many bodies. Their aim
is one, and their Message is the same. Their religion is one and they
are all the servants of the same one, and the only God, and they owe
whatever they have to Him. Unfortunately, those people who made the
religion and the reputation of the prophets, the capital of their
trades, and a means for their material benefits and social privileges;
they cut out the unity of OMMAT into pieces, and formed sects to satisfy
their interests.

[ 294 ]

أَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّمَا نُمِدُّهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ مَّال وَبَنِينَ(( 55 ))

55- DO THEY THINK THAT BY WHAT WE HELP THEM OF WEALTH AND SONS....

نُسَارِعُ لَهُمْ فِى الْخَيْرَاتِ بَل لاَّ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 56 ))

56- WE ARE HASTENING FOR THEM IN GOOD THINGS? THEY RATHER DO NOT
APPREHEND.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ هُمْ مِّنْ خَشْيَةِ رَبِّهِمْ مُّشْفِقُونَ(( 57 ))

57- VERILY THOSE WHO ARE IN AWE, FOR THE FEAR OF THEIR LORD....

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 58 ))

58- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN THE SIGNS OF THEIR LORD.

وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِرَبِّهِمْ لاَ يُشْرِكُونَ(( 59 ))

59- AND THOSE WHO DO NOT ASSOCIATE ANYTHING WITH THEIR LORD.

وَالَّذِينَ يُؤْتُونَ مَا آتَوا وَقُلُوبُهُمْ وَجِلَةٌ أَنَّهُمْ إِلَى
رَبِّهِمْ رَاجِعُونَ(( 60 ))

60- AND THOSE WHO GIVE OF WHAT THEY ARE GIVEN, AND THEIR HEARTS ARE
ANXIOUS THAT THEY ARE RETURNING TO THEIR LORD.

أُوْلَئِكَ يُسَارِعُونَ فِى الْخَيْرَاتِ وَهُمْ لَهَا سَابِقُونَ(( 61
))

61- THOSE HASTEN IN GOOD DEEDS, AND THEY TAKE PRECEDENCE IN IT.


