The Unacceptable Request
========================

VERSE NO.99ِ100

Following the argument about the obstinacy of the unbelievers in their
false and evil way of life; now mention is made of their destination and
their state, when they encounter with the affliction of death. Clinging
to false motives and to their worldly affair, and following their
caprices and vain desires, which is supported by rejecting faith and
denying truth, will keep them busy; until once and of a sudden they face
the reality of death! Then the veil is removed and their eyes will
become keen and they feel the approach of serious danger. Here is when
they anxiously will say; My Lord! Please send me back and give me
another chance to make up for my past religious omissions and
shortcomings, but then it is late....too late:ِ

\`\`Not so! It is only a word that they say it.'' Their request is no
more than an empty word of excuse, and even if God would agree with
their request, they would again continue the evil way that they went in
the past:ِ

\`\`Now before them is the INTERMEDIATE WORLD (BARZAKH) up to the day
that they shall be raised up for the Final Judgement.'' [ 312 ]

**WHAT IS THE INTERMEDIATE WORLD (BARZAKH)?**

Barzakh which means a partition or barrier is the name of the place or
the state in which people will continue living after death and before
the Resurrection Day. There, the soul has to stand on its own foot and
merits, and rarely anything may come to him from the material world that
he has left behind. In many verses of Qura"n, reference is made to the
wonderful world of BARZAKH, which is the dwelling place of Man's soul,
after his death and up to the Day of Doom. Instances of such verses that
may prove this amazing world of deads, is in S 3:169ِ171 which are as
follows:ِ \`\`And count not those who were slain in Allah's way as
deads. They are alive; living with their Lord, and are provided with
sustenance....

Rejoicing for what Allah Has bestowed on them of His Grace, and are
joyful in those behind them, who have not yet joined them, that they are
neither to fear nor to grieve. Rejoicing in Allah's bounty and grace,
that Allah will not waste the reward of the believers.'' Not only the
believers of high grade and dignity are alive after death; the worst of
the disbelievers too, according to the S 40:46 are alive. These are the
folk of Pharaoh, who will then taste the severest of penalty in the
Resurrection Day. They also are punished painfully in the Intermediate
World:ِ

\`\`They (i.e. The people of Pharaoh) will be brought in front of the
Fire in the morning and evening, and in the Day when the Final Judgement
is established, it will be said:ِ (to the guards of Hell) cast you the
people of Pharaoh to the hardest of torment.'' The above verses and many
others, will prove that, whether Man be a believer or unbeliever, he
will continue living after death, either in prosperity or anguish.

There are also many traditions narrated from the prophet and from the
infallible Imams (AS), which not only proves the existence of [ 313 ]

the Intermediate World, that gives also some details about how the life
after death is. The opinion of the life after death and before
Resurrection Day is accepted with unanimous approval of the learned and
scholars of all Islamic sects, particularly the two main group of Sonni
and Shiite. It is generally believed that in the Intermediate World, the
soul of Man will continue living in accompany with a new BODY; which is
very much finer than the coarse material body that we have in the
present world! A body perhaps made of electric or magnetic, or other
kind of finer field like gravity.

In Islamic literatures, this body is named, the SIMILAR BODY which is
exactly the same as our material body in form and shape. It is also
sometimes called the second body. Some of the Islamic scholars and men
of knowledge, have understood the Intermediate World to be similar to
the world of sleep which is void of time and space. They say that the
Finer Body or the Similar Body, already exists within us, and after
death it will apear and manifest itself when it is separated from this
material body. Some of the jurists are of opinion that, in the
Intermediate World people are divided in there groups; the believers,
the unbelievers, and the weaklings. The Intermediate life is for the
first two group of people, and those who are the weaklings, will live
there in some sort of an unawareness, until the Resurrection touches
them.

فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِى الصُّورِ فَلاَ أَنسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذ وَلاَ
يَتَسَاءَلُونَ(( 101 ))

101- WHEN THE TRUMPET IS BLOWN, THEIR WILL BE NO RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THEM IN THAT DAY, NOR DO THEY ASK EACH OTHER FOR HELP. (EACH SOUL HAS TO
STAND ON HIS OWN MERITS, AND NO ONE CAN HELP THE OTHERS)

[ 314 ]

فَمَنْ ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ(( 102
))

102- THEN, THOSE WHOSE BALANCES (OF GOOD DEEDS) ARE HEAVY, THEY ARE THE
PROSPEROUS.

وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ
فِى جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدُونَ(( 103 ))

103- AND THOSE WHOSE BALANCES (OF GOOD DEED) ARE LIGHT. THEY ARE THOSE
WHO HAVE FORFEITED THEIR SOULS, IN HELL THEY ARE FOR EVER.

تَلْفَحُ وُجُوهَهُمُ النَّارُ وَهُمْ فِيهَا كَالِحُونَ(( 104 ))

104- THE FIRE WILL SCORCH THEIR FACES, AND THEREIN THEY LOOK GHASTLY.

**THE COMMENTARY
A CORNER OF THE PUNISHMENT OF EVIL DOERS** VERSE NO.104

Now the argument passes over the Intermediate World (BARZAKH), to
illustrate a corner of the punishment of evil doers; in the day of Final
Judgement.

When the Trumpet is blown to announce the end of this world, and the
beginning of the next life all the creatures who live on the earth will
die with the first sound. In the second blowing of the Trumpet, all will
raise up and come to life once again; so as to be prepared for the Final
Judgement:ِ \`\`The Trumpet will be sounded and all that are in the
heavens, and on earth will swoon except he whom Allah wills to exempt.
Then for a second time the Trumpet is blown, and all will stand up,
looking on.'' (S 39:68)

[ 315 ]

In that critical time and stage, people are so fearful that no one
cares the least, for anyone else even for their near kindred. It is a
day which its quake is so terrible that every suckling mother forgets
her baby, and every pregnant female will cast her burden, and you will
see people drunken while they are not drunken, but the chastisement of
Allah is so sever. (S 22:2) In that dreadful stage of anxiety and fear,
practically all the old relationships will disolve. Although they are in
sight of each other, but the sinner there, wishes that he could redeem
himself from the torment of that day by sacrificing his children, wife,
brothers, all the kindred who sheltered him, and all that is on earth;
at the price of delivering him! (S 70:11ِ15)

After the wonderful raise up, in that critical state of hope and
despair, the measuring of Man's deeds is proceeded on. In that final
judgement, good and evil deeds will be put in the two pans of the scale
of justice, and weighed against each other. If the good deeds are
heavier, the good doer will attain salvation, and then prospers in the
Gardens of bliss in Paradise. But if the evil deeds of Man are much
heavier than his good works, the destination is Hell and living in
misery and anguish:ِ

\`\`And those whose balance of good deeds is light, they are those who
have forfeited their souls, in Hell they abide for ever.'' Therein their
faces will be scorched and disfigured by the fire, and will look ghastly
with their lips quivering.

أَلَمْ تَكُنْ آيَاتِى تُتْلَى عَلَيْكُمْ فَكُنتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ((
105 ))

105- WERE MY SIGNS NOT REHEARSED TO YOU, AND YOU BELIED THEM?

[ 316 ]

قَالُوا رَبَّنَا غَلَبَتْ عَلَيْنَا شِقْوَتُنَا وَكُنَّا قَوْماً
ضَالِّينَ(( 106 ))

106- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`OUR LORD! OUR ADVERSITY OVERCAME US, AND WE BECAME
A PEOPLE ASTRAY.''

رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا مِنْهَا فَإِنْ عُدْنَا فَإِنَّا ظَالِمُونَ(( 107
))

107- OUR LORD! TAKE US OUT OF IT, THEN IF WE RETURN (TO EVIL) WE ARE
INDEED OPRESSORS. (INDEED)

قَالَ اخْسَئُوا فِيهَا وَلاَ تُكَلِّمُونِ(( 108 ))

108- HE SHALL SAY:ِ \`\`GO YOU AWAY INTO IT, AND DO NOT SPEAK TO ME''

إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْ عِبَادِى يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا
فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الرَّاحِمِينَ(( 109 ))

109- (HAVE YOU FORGOTTEN THAT) A GROUP OF MY SERVANTS WERE SAYING:ِ
\`\`OUR LORD! WE HAVE BELIEVED; THEN FORGIVE US AND HAVE MERCY ON US,
THAT YOU ARE THE BEST OF MERCIFULS.''

فَاتَّخَذْتُمُوهُمْ سِخْرِيّاً حَتَّى أَنسَوْكُمْ ذِكْرِى وَكُنتُمْ
مِّنْهُمْ تَضْحَكُونَ(( 110 ))

110- AND YOU TOOK THEM FOR A LAUGHING-STOCK; SO THAT THEY CAUSED YOU TO
FORGET ME, WHILE YOU WERE MOCKING AT THEM.

إِنِّى جَزَيْتُهُمْ الْيَوْمَ بِمَا صَبَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ هُمُ
الْفَائِزُونَ(( 111 ))

111- TODAY, I HAVE REWARDED THEM FOR THEIR PATIENCE, AND THEY ARE THE
TRIUMPHANTS.

[ 317 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
DON'T SPEAK TO ME**

VERSE NO.105ِ111 Now comes the turn of the excuses of the companions of
Hell, which is rejected by God, and they have to suffer the torments of
the damned.

In answer to the question that; \`\`Were My signs not rehearsed to you
and belied them?'' They say:ِ \`\`Our adversity overcame us and we went
astray.'' They metaphorically say that it was their fate and misfortune
that led them to such a terrible misery. By such confessions, they
intend to attract the forgiveness of God, but no one can deceive Allah
in any way. In other word, what they mean is that the Satan within them
overcame them, and of their bad luck and misfortune was the cause of
their astray. Of course, the truth is not so as they say it. Man is not
the slave of any Satan within or without, unless he himself wants the
slavery. He is not even in chain of his caprices, passions, and vain
desires, unless he himself wants it.

It is really by our delibrate choice, if we submit to devils and do
evil deeds. No one has taken our hand and say; do this and do that, and
no one is to be blamed for our deeds, except ourselves. Therefore by
rejecting the truth that came to them through the prophets from their
Lord, and for their mockery of the apostles and men of God, they
forfeited their souls; and then in the time of harvest they come to know
that they had sowed nothing except the seeds of evil, shame, and sorrow!
Now torment and anguish was their produce:ِ

\`\`And you took them for a laughing-stock; so much so, that they
caused you to forget Me, while you were mocking at them.''

They were so busy in mocking at the believers, and in pulling [ 318 ]
their legs, and were so submerged in ridiculous and idle talks,that the
believers became the unconscious cause of the nonbelievers forgetfulness
of God, and ignoring His warnings through the apostles. They therefore,
became the victims of their own mockeries.

قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتُمْ فِى الاَْرْضِ عَدَدَ سِنِينَ(( 112 ))

112- HE WILL SAY:ِ \`\`HOW MANY YEARS DID YOU STAY ON THE EARTH?

قَالُوا لَبِثْنَا يَوْماً أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْم فَسْأَلِ الْعَادِّينَ(( 113
))

113- THEY WILL SAY:ِ \`\`WE HAVE STAYED A DAY OR PART OF A DAY, BUT
(YOU BETTER) ASK THE COUNTERS.''

قَالَ إِنْ لَّبِثْتُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا لَّوْ أَنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ
تَعْلَمُونَ(( 114 ))

114- HE WILL SAY; \`\`YOU STAYED NOT, EXCEPT A LITTLE WHILE, IF YOU
COULD KNOW.''

أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثاً وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا لاَ
تُرْجَعُونَ(( 115 ))

115- DID YOU THINK THEN, THAT WE CREATED YOU IN VAIN, AND THAT YOU
WOULD NOT BE RETURNED TO US.

فَتَعَالَى اللهُ الْمَلِكُ الْحَقُّ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ رَبُّ
الْعَرْشِ الْكَرِيمِ(( 116 ))

116- SO, HIGH EXALTED BE ALLAH, THE KING OF TRUTH. THERE IS NO GOD
EXCEPT HIM, (WHO IS) THE LORD OF THE NOBLE THRONE.

[ 319 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OUR SHORT LIFE ON THIS EARTH** VERSE NO.112ِ116

The relativity of time and space proves that we live in eternity, and
in our life to come this will manifest itself clearly to us:ِ \`\`In the
Resurrection Day, the sinners will swear that they tarried not here
except for an hour. But those who are endowed with knowledge and faith
will say; verily you have tarried according to Allah's record up to the
Resurrection Day which is today, but you were not aware.'' (S
30:55ِ56)

Compared with eternity, our life time in this world is extremely short,
and we stay not in this earth except for a little while, if we only
could know it. In the life to come, many things shall be cleared to us;
among which is the short probation period that we have to tarry here.
The results of our probation and tests and trials, are given to us in
the Day of Doom. Now we should know that life is real, earnest, and
grave cannot be its goal.

وَمَنْ يَدْعُ مَعَ اللهِ إِلَهاً آخَرَ لاَ بُرْهَانَ لَهُ بِهِ
فَإِنَّمَا حِسَابُهُ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ الْكَافِرُونَ((
117 )) 117- AND WHOEVER CALLS ANOTHER GOD WITH ALLAH, THERE IS NO PROOF
FOR HIM IN THAT, AND HIS RECKONING IS WITH HIS LORD. AND THAT, THE
NON-BELIEVERS WILL NOT PROSPER.

وَقُلْ رَّبِّ اغْفِرْ وَارْحَمْ وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الرَّاحِمِينَ(( 118
))

118- AND SAY:ِ \`\`MY LORD! FORGIVE AND HAVE MERCY, THAT YOU ARE THE
BEST OF MERCIFULS.''

[ 320 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE PROSPEROUS AND NON-PROSPEROUS**

VERSE NO.117ِ118 The chapter of \`\`BELIEVERS'' is ended here with an
stress again on the ONENESS of God, and that the heathens and polytheist
will not prosper:ِ \`\`Whoever calls another god with Allah, there is no
proof for him in that....'' God is the only reality, and if anyone
however tries to prove other gods besides Him, he will have no reason to
prove his claim. Allah is the only Creator, cherisher and Lord of all
and, He has no partner of whatsoever.

Finally, all the believers are enjoined to commit themselves to the
care of Allah by begging His pardon and praying for His Mercy:ِ
\`\`Say:ِ \`\`My Lord! Forgive and have Mercy on us that you are the
best of Mercifuls.'' Although the prophet is addressed here, but in
general, the supplication and entreaty, applies to all the believers.

THE END OF SUREH THE BELIEVERS (23)

THE END OF PART 17

[ 321 ]

سُورَةُ النُّورِ THE LIGHT

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE

سُورَةٌ أَنزَلْنَاهَا وَفَرَضْنَاهَا وَأَنزَلْنَا فِيهَا آيَات
بَيِّنَات لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ(( 1 ))

1- A SUREH (CHAPTER) THAT WE HAVE SENT IT DOWN, AND MADE IT INCUMBENT;
AND WE HAVE SENT DOWN IN IT CLEAR SIGNS THAT YOU MAY PAY ATTENTION.
(TAKE ADMONITION)

الزَّانِيَةُ وَالزَّانِى فَاجْلِدُوا كُلَّ وَاحِد مِّنْهُمَا مِائَةَ
جَلْدَة وَلاَ تَأْخُذْكُمْ بِهِمَا رَأْفَةٌ فِى دِينِ اللهِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ
تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاْخِرِ وَلْيَشْهَدْ عَذَابَهُمَا
طَائِفَةٌ مِّنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 2 ))

2- AS TO THE ADULTERESS AND ADULTERER, FLOG EACH OF THEM WITH A HUNDRED
STRIPES; AND HAVE NO PITY ON THEM IN THE MATTER OF GOD'S RELIGION, IF
YOU DO BELIEVE IN ALLAH AND THE LAST DAY. AND A PARTY OF BELIEVERS
SHOULD WITNESS THEIR PUNISHMENT.

[ 322 ]

الزَّانِى لاَ يَنكِحُ إلاَّ زَانِيَةً أَوْ مُشْرِكَةً وَالزَّانِيَةُ
لاَ يَنكِحُهَا إِلاَّ زَان أَوْ مُشْرِكٌ وَحُرِّمَ ذَلِكَ عَلَى
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 3 ))

3- THE ADULTERER IS NOT TO MARRY EXCEPT AN ADULTERESS OR A POLYTHEIST
WOMAN, AND AS TO THE ADULTERESS, NO ONE SHALL MARRY HER EXCEPT AN
ADULTERER OR A POLYTHEIST; AND THAT HAS BEEN MADE UNLAWFUL FOR
BELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY THE PUNISHMENT FOR ADULTERY** VERSE NO.1ِ3

This chapter is named, \`\`LIGHT'' after one of its most expressive
verses; (NO.34) meanwhile the whole SUREH casts light upon aspects of
life. It casts the light of chastity on man and woman. It casts the
light of truth on words and speeches. It sheds the light of Monotheism
and faith upon the hearts and souls. The Arabic, \`\`SUREH'' comes from,
\`\`SUR'' which means height, and tall walls, constructed in ancient to
protect people from the rush of enemies. SUREH also means high and
beautiful buildings, and also the various parts of such a building is
called SUREH; and hence the chapters of Qura"n which are supposed to be
smaller parts of a great palace.

Then the SUREH of LIGHT begins with the first of a series of
commandment which is very strict and decisive:ِ \`\`As to the adulteress
and adulterer, flog each of them with a hundred stripes, and have no
pity on them in the matter of religion.'' [ 323 ]

The sexual affairs can deeply affect spiritual as well as physical
life. In this chapter of Qura"n Allah has issued some decrees that are
not mere matters of convenience. Allah has ordained them for our serious
observance in life.

The Arabic, \`\`ZINA"'' which means unlawful sexual intercourse,
includes adultery and fornication between married or unmarried couples.
In contrary to Christian religion, the Law of marriage and divorce is
made easy in Islam. So there is no room for any excuse for a Muslim in;
\`\`Why unlawful sexual intercourse?'' These issues here make for
greater self-respect of man and woman, and will protect the life in
wedlock for both sexes making it safe and honourable.'' The third verse
refers to the marriage of an adulterer or adulteress:ِ \`\`The adulterer
is not to marry except an adulteress, or a polytheist woman....''

Some commentators do not take the above verse in imperative mood, so as
to be considered an order. They suppose it as an informative assertion,
that expresses an evident reality, that; clean people will seek clean
people, and the unclean will go after the unclean. In other word;
\`\`Birds of a feather flock together.'' Some other commentators are of
opinion that this is a religious injunction that chaste people should
not marry the unchaste, because some of the moral diseases are
contagious the like of physical diseases.

**WHY LADIES FIRST?**

Here the adulteress precedes the adulterer in the issue; but in S 5:41
where the decree is issued for thieves, the male thief is mentioned
before the female thief:ِ \`\`And as to the male thief, and the female
thief, cut their hands as a [ 324 ]

retribution of what they have earned.'' (S 5:41) This may imply that in
the sexual affairs the role of the fair sex is much more critical due to
her temptations and attractions; in theft men play a higher role and are
more effective than women.

وَالَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ الْمُحْصَنَاتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَأْتُوا بِأَرْبَعَةِ
شُهَدَاءَ فَاجْلِدُوهُمْ ثَمَانِينَ جَلْدَةً وَلاَ تَقْبَلُوا لَهُمْ
شَهَادَةً أَبَداً وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ(( 4 ))

4- AND THOSE WHO ACCUSE THE WOMEN IN WEDLOCK, AND BRING NOT FOUR
WITNESSES (TO PROVE THEIR CHARGE), FLOG THEM WITH EIGHTY STRIPES, AND DO
NOT ACCEPT ANY TESTIMONY OF THEM FOR EVER, FOR THEY ARE THE
DEBAUCHERS.

إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَأَصْلَحُوا فَإِنَّ اللهَ
غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 5 ))

5- EXCEPT THOSE WHO REPENTED AFTER THAT, AND AMENDED (THEIR CONDUCTS);
FOR ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE ISSUE FOR CALUMNY** VERSE NO.4ِ5

Following the punishment for adultery, the decree for slander is issued
in the above passage. This is to protect the respect and prestige of
people, specially the women in wedlock:ِ \`\`And those who accuse the
women in wedlock, and bring not four witnesses to prove it, flog them
with eighty lashes, and do not accept their testimony for ever, because
they are debauchers.''

[ 325 ]

This is a strict warning to those who put forward a slander about other
people, and in particular about woman in wedlock without any clear
evidence. If a woman's chastity is brought under question, the charge
must be supported by four witnesses, which is twice as much as it is
needed for general accusations. If the slanderer fails to prove his
charge, he himself is to be flogged with eighty lashes; and after that,
if he did not repent and did not amend his conduct, he is reckoned among
debauchers. Then no one has to accept his testifications for ever. But,
if he or she repented and amended, his deprivation of the right of
giving evidence, which is some sort of a social disgrace will be
cancelled. ABUHANIFAH has narrated that he asked Hazrat Imam Sadiq
(AS):ِ \`\`Which one of the two major sins is the greater; adultery, or
murder,?'' Imam Sadiq (AS) answered:ِ \`\`The murder is greater a sin.''
ABUHANIFAH asked again:ِ \`\`If so; why then four witnesses are needed
to prove a slander, but for the murder two of them will do!?'' Hazrat
Imam answered:ِ \`\`In the cases of adultery two persons are to be
punished, but in the case a murder only one has to be punished.''

**THE CONDITIONS OF REPENTANCE**

We have frequently mentioned that, repentance is not merely regret and
being sorry for a sin or doing wrong.

Besides awareness, and a deep sorrow of a genuine regret, there must
also be a painful sting of conscience, with the purpose of amendment. It
is a saying that; repentance is the weight of indigest meals eaten
yesterday. Therefore the consequences of the wrong is to be removed, and
its wounds redressed. When he has ruined the reputation of an innocent
woman and disgraced her among the society, the main step in repentance
is to strictly refute his former assertions, and to disprove and
overthrow it by argument, evidences, or proof.

[ 326 ]

وَالَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ أَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَّهُمْ شُهَدَاءُ
إِلاَّ أَنفُسُهُمْ فَشَهَادَةُ أَحَدِهِمْ أَرْبَعُ شَهَادَات بِاللهِ
إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ(( 6 ))

6- AND THOSE WHO ACCUSE THEIR WIVES (OF UNCHASTITY) AND HAVE NO
WITNESSES EXCEPT THEMSELVES, THEN THE WITNESS OF ONE OF THEM, BEARING
FOUR TIMES ALLAH TO WITNESS THAT HE IS TRUTHFUL.

وَالْخَامِسَةُ أَنَّ لَعْنَتَ اللهِ عَلَيْهِ إِنْ كَانَ مِنْ
الْكَاذِبِينَ(( 7 ))

7- AND A FIFTH TIME, THE CURSE OF ALLAH UPON HIM, IF HE SHOULD BE OF
THE LIARS.

وَيَدْرَأُ عَنْهَا الْعَذَابَ أَنْ تَشْهَدَ أَرْبَعَ شَهَادَات بِاللهِ
إِنَّهُ لَمِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ(( 8 ))

8- AND IT SHALL AVERT THE PUNISHMENT FROM HER, IF SHE TESTIFIES, FOUR
TIMES BEARING ALLAH TO WITNESS, THAT HE IS OF THE LIARS.

وَالْخَامِسَةَ أَنَّ غَضَبَ اللهِ عَلَيْهَا إِنْ كَانَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ(( 9 ))

9- AND A FIFTH TIME, THAT THE WRATH OF ALLAH BE UPON HER, IF HE IS OF
THE TRUTHFULS.

وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ وَأَنَّ اللهَ تَوَّابٌ
حَكِيمٌ(( 10 ))

10- AND IF IT WERE NOT FOR ALLAH'S GRACE ON YOU, AND HIS MERCY, AND
THAT HE ACCEPTS REPENTANCE, AND IS ALL-WISE. (HIS PUNISHMENT WOULD HAVE
AFFLICTED MOST OF YOU)

[ 327 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION** VERSE NO.6ِ10

SAAD-IBN-EBA"DEH who was the chief of the Helpers in Medina, said to
the prophet:ِ \`\`O, Messenger of God! When those who accuse a woman in
wedlock, (VERSE NO.4) and fail to bring four witnesses to prove their
charge, they are to be whipped eighty whips. What then if I go home and
see some one making love with my wife!? Can I tell them; continue with
your love making, till I go out and bring four men to see you in that
condition, so as to testify in the court when it is needed!?

And if I slay her, no one will believe me without having two witnesses
to testify on that, and then I am to be slayed in retaliation!'' The
prophet took it as an objection against the commandment of Allah, and
frowned at the question. SAAD apprehended the prophet's worry, and said
again:ِ \`\`O, Messenger of God! May me and my parent be thy ransom. I
never protest against the revelations of my Lord, but I asked that in
order to ascertain my heart.''

The prophet kept silent, because, without his reference to inspiration
he would never say anything. Then a few days later it so happened that,
\`\`HALAL-IBN-OMMAYEH'' complained to the prophet that he had seen with
his own eyes a debaucher making love with his wife. The prophet showed a
dark and thoughtful complexion, when GABRIEL appeared to him and brought
down the above verses.


