The Issue For Accusing a Wife
=============================

If a husband catches his wife in adultery, it is not possible to prove
it, because it is much difficult to find four witnesses in time. [ 328
]

Eventually, it will be more difficult for them to live a normal married
life, and it only depends to the honour and agreement of the spouses.
The solution suggested by Qura"n in this case is; if the husband swears
four times that he has seen the guilt, and in addition invokes the curse
of Allah on himself, if he be a liar; that will be the first step in
proving the guilt and betrayal. But if the wife too, swears and invokes
the curse similarly to deny the charge, she will be acquitted of the
guilt. If she confesses, or does not take the steps, the charge is
proved and the punishment will follow. Then after such an incident it is
difficult for the spouses to live together happily, unless they excuse
each other and show some tolerance.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ جَاءُوا بِالاِْفْكِ عُصْبَةٌ مِّنْكُمْ لاَ تَحْسَبُوهُ
شَرّاً لَّكُمْ بَلْ هُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ لِكُلِّ امْرِىء مِّنْهُمْ مَّا
اكْتَسَبَ مِنَ الاِْثْمِ وَالَّذِى تَوَلَّى كِبْرَهُ مِنْهُمْ لَهُ
عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 11 ))

11- VERILY THOSE WHO CAME WITH THE SLANDER, WERE A BAND OF YOU. DO NOT
RECKON IT EVIL FOR YOU. IT RATHER IS GOOD FOR YOU.

FOR EVERY MAN OF THEM IS WHAT HE HAS EARNED OF THE SIN. AND FROM AMONG
THEM ALL, HE WHO TOOK UPON HIMSELF THE MAIN PART OF IT, FOR HIM IS A
GREAT PUNISHMENT.

لَّوْلاَ إِذْ سَمِعْتُمُوهُ ظَنَّ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتُ
بِأَنفُسِهِمْ خَيْراً وَقَالُوا هَذَا إِفْكٌ مُّبِينٌ(( 12 ))

12- WHY WHEN YOU HEARD IT, THE BELIEVING MEN AND WOMEN DID NOT THINK
WELL OF THEIR OWN PEOPLE, AND SAY; THIS IS A MANIFEST SCANDAL?

[ 329 ]

لَّوْلاَ جَاءُو عَلَيْهِ بِأَرْبَعَةِ شُهَدَاءَ فَإِذْ لَمْ يَأْتُوا
بِالشُّهَدَاءِ فَأُوْلَئِكَ عِنْدَ اللهِ هُمُ الْكَاذِبُونَ(( 13 ))

13- WHY DID THEY BRING NOT FOUR WITNESSES ON THAT? NOW THAT THEY DO NOT
BRING THE (NECESSARY) WITNESSES THEY ARE THE LIARS IN THE SIGHT OF
ALLAH.

وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ فِى الدُّنْيَا
وَالاْخِرَةِ لَمَسَّكُمْ فِى مَا أَفَضْتُمْ فِيهِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 14
))

14- AND IF IT WAS NOT FOR THE GRACE OF ALLAH ON YOU AND HIS MERCY, IN
THE PRESENT WORLD AND HEREAFTER, THERE WOULD HAVE TOUCHED YOU A GREAT
PUNISHMENT FOR WHAT YOU SUBMERGED IN IT (OF SIN).

إِذْ تَلَقَّوْنَهُ بِأَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَتَقُولُونَ بِأَفْوَاهِكُمْ مَّا
لَيْسَ لَكُمْ بِهِ عِلْمٌ وَتَحْسَبُونَهُ هَيِّناً وَهُوَ عِنْدَ اللهِ
عَظِيمٌ(( 15 ))

15- WHEN YOU RECEIVED IT BY YOUR TONGUES, AND WERE SAYING WITH YOUR
MOUTHS, THAT OF WHICH YOU HAD NO KNOWLEDGE; AND YOU CONSIDERED IT AS A
TRIFLE, WHILE IT IS VERY GREAT WITH ALLAH.

وَلَوْلاَ إِذْ سَمِعْتُمُوهُ قُلْتُمْ مَّا يَكُونُ لَنَا أَنْ
نَّتَكَلَّمَ بِهَذَا سُبْحَانَكَ هَذَا بُهْتَانٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 16 ))

16- AND WHY WHEN YOU HEARD IT, YOU DID NOT SAY; IT IS NOT RIGHT FOR US
TO SPEAK OF THAT, GLORY BE TO YOU! THIS IS A GREAT CALUMNY.

[ 330 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

In the expedition of, \`\`BANU-MUSTALAGH'', the prophet took his young
wife, HAZRAT AISHA with him. It was a late evening when the army was
ordered to return back to Medina. In that very time, that Aisha, the
mother of believers had gone a distance to perform ablution for the
night prayer, she lost her valuable necklace. The search for the lost
necklace kept her busy for a while, and when she returned to the camp,
they all had gone! The carriers had also taken her camel-litter which
was usually covered and provided with curtains, and she being very light
in weight, her absence was not known to them. So they put the litter on
the camel and set out with the army. When the army reached the next
halt, they noticed that she was not on the couch.

When she saw the camp gone, she knew not what to do in the dark of the
night and where to go. She therefore sat down to rest, hoping that some
one would come to fetch her, as soon as her absence was noticed. Next
morning she was found by Safwan a young pious believer, whose duty was
to search the place when the camp had left, with the aim to pick up
anything valuable that could have been left behind. When Safwan saw the
mother of believers there, he very politely lowered his camel, so that
Hazrat Aisha could ride on the animal, and then rode on, and Safwan
brought her leading the camel on foot.

This incident gave occasion to the hypocrites, and in particular to
their chief, \`\`ABDULLAH-IBN-UBAI'' to raise a malicious scandal
against the prophet's young and pious wife, in order to defame the
Messenger of God; but on contrary, shame and infamy fell upon
themselves, when their shameful plot was disclosed.

**COMMENTS**

VERSE NO.11ِ16 The first verse in this passage, without going through
the incident, implies how a false report, or a slander maliciously
uttered, [ 331 ]

may stir up a population and cause great troubles. They were a band
among the new community of Muslims.... a small band of united hypocrites
who were always tending to injure the reputation of the prophet and his
disciples. They were some forty people or less, and both men and women
were involved in spreading the scandal, while the ring leader in them
was ABDULLAH-IBN-UBAI, whom the prophet did not want to punish, till he
died and joined the fire in Hell. They spread the scandal with the bad
intention of ruining the reputation of the prophet and his companions,
but Allah turned it to the benefit and good of the believers.

The incident served to tear off the veil from ugly faces of the
non-believers given to hypocrisy. By that event, Muslims learned that
they should not pay attention to the rumours that the gossipers spread
here and there. The next lesson to have been taken was that, Muslims
should not think too much of the mere appearances of events unless its
inner truth has been revealed to them. Such are some of the reasons by
which Qura"n gives comfort to the prophet and to his truthful
companions:ِ \`\`.... Do not reckon it evil, it rather is good, (useful)
for you.''

The pronoun,\`\`YOU'' here refers to all believers, and it may imply
that all the believers are as one single body of brotherhood, sharing
each other in happiness or sadness. Or they may be reckoned as one
single soul in many bodies.

Then another group of believers were addressed who were deceived in
this regard, for being simple minded. They should have thought well of
the believers when the rumour was maliciously spread:ِ \`\`Why when you
heard it, the believing men and women did not think well of their own
people and say; this is a manifest scandal?'' [ 332 ]

**MORE ABOUT THE CALUMNY**

In return from the expedition of BANIMOSTALAQ, an incident gave an
opportunity and a fit time to IBN-UBAI (LA) and to the other hypocrites
to flaunt, and attack the prophet's good name and reputation in a showy
manner. The prophet always took one of his wives, and in turn; in his
journeys and expedition with him. In that of BANIMOSTALAQ, it was the
turn of A"YESHEH, the only young wife of the prophet to come with the
army. Women were usually carried by what it is called a litter. This was
then a couch covered and provided with curtains, and it was carried upon
a camel back. In the stations and halts of the army, the camel driver
made his camel to sit down, and then he himself went aside, leaving his
passenger free to get down the litter for a little walk, or some rest
and refreshment.

It happened so that in a station, the cameleer lowered down his camel
for A"YESHEH to come out of her litter, and he went afar, so as to not
invade the privacy of the mother of believers. She dismounted and went
to a distance out of sight in search of a private lavatory. When she
returned, she found that she had left a precious ornament which was a
gift of her mother, in that remote place. She hastened to get the
ornament. It was grown dark now; and she wasted sometimes for the
search, and at last when she found her lost ornament and returned back
to the camp, all had gone and there was no body there!

Because her litter was veiled, and she very light in weight, her
absence was not noticed by the camel driver until the army had reached
to the next station. When she saw that the army had decamped, she could
do nothing but to stay there and wait till some one could come to take
her. The prophet always assigned some one to lag after the army, and
stay in search in the left stations, to find if anything or any body is
remained or left behind.

[ 333 ]

In this turn, \`\`SAFWAN'' a pious believer was appointed to stay
behind for the search business. It was late in the dark of the night
when Safwan saw something in black from a distance. He came nearer and
saw that she was the MOTHER OF THE BELIEVERS! He discretely placed her
on the camel he had, and brought her leading the camel by foot. At the
day break, they reached the town, and ZAINAB'S sister who was now the
prophet's wife; saw them. She went to ZAINAB, and in that small society
of rivals, said to her sister that:ِ \`\`AISHA WAS OUT WITH SAFWAN ALL
THE NIGHT!''

Soon the rumour reached to the ear of ABDULLAH-IBN-UBAI, the leader of
the hypocrites, who was an expert rumour monger. He took the incident as
an effective weapon and used it against the prophet and his wife's
chastity. As a ring leader, he magnified the petty gossip and made it a
general topic of idle talk! And soon after there was much ado about
nothing in the town. IBN-UBAI the chief of the hypocrites became the
ring leader among the rumour mongers.

The slander kept growing for weeks, while Aisha was not aware of it the
least! She only was amazed to see the behaviour of the prophet towards
her being a little changed. One day she was sick in bed, and was taken
to her mother's house to be looked after and nursed. Then her mother
gave her the news of the rumour and hearsay.

Henceforth she wept so bitterly that her health and life was seriously
endangered. She continually prayed to God to reveal the truth whatever
it was, about her. Then one day the prophet sat upon the pulpit and
delivered a sermon saying:ِ \`\`Why are these people vexing me about my
family? I have seen nothing but good of them. Safwan is a pious believer
and a zealous in prayer. Why should they accuse him so falsely?''

Then the prophet went to visit his wife who was sick in bed, in the
house of ABUBAKR. When he entered, she was badly sick, as if in her
death bed, and drowned in her bitter tears, that recently she had heard
of the scandal. [ 334 ] The prophet sat down in front of her asking how
she was? It was as if she wanted to tell him:ِ \`\`If you visit me in my
death-bed as my physician, I won't give the pleasure of sickness in
exchange with the two worlds.''

He then said to her:ِ \`\`AISHA! you may know what the people are
saying about you!? You should have known by now that Allah is the
All-forgiving, the Most Merciful. If you have done something wrong, and
people are right in their assertion, then repent and return to Allah,
and of course He will forgive you.'' She, not unlike an angry tigeress,
once again burst into tears, and roared upon her parent who were present
and said to them:ِ \`\`Why don't you speak of my innocence? Why you two
have shut up your tongues?'' She then addressed the prophet and said
loudly and in rage:ِ

\`\`No! No! I will not repent! Should I repent of something that I have
not done it? I have not done anything wrong so as to beg pardon for
it.''

She then raised up her hands towards the heavens and prayed:ِ \`\`O, My
Lord! O, My Merciful and truthful Lord! At least reveal to your prophet
whether I have sinned or not; because I cannot stand his being cross
with me!'' The prophet like a learned psychologist could see and read
the lines of innocence throughout her countenance. He was sure that she
was truthful. At once the marks of inspiration appeared in him. He
perspired and asked to cover him. ABUBAKR and his wife were filled with
fear, lest the accusation be confirmed by the revelation. On the other
hand, Aisha became calm and quiet. The signs of happiness appeared in
her face. They all waited to see what would come out of the supernatural
inspiration.

The prophet got up and gave the glad-tidings to his trustworthy wife.
He said:ِ \`\`AISHA! Don't you worry anymore; for Allah has acquitted
you of the slander.'' Thus the above verses of Qura"n were revealed
about the calumny.

FROM:ِ MOHAMMAD THE MESSENGER OF GOD

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

[ 335 ]

يَعِظُكُمُ اللهُ أَنْ تَعُودُوا لِمِثْلِهِ أَبَداً إِنْ كُنتُمْ
مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 17 ))

17- ALLAH WARNS YOU NEVER TO REPEAT THE LIKE OF IT, IF YOU ARE
BELIEVERS.

وَيُبَيِّنُ اللهُ لَكُمُ الاْيَاتِ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 18 ))

18- AND ALLAH MAKES THE SIGNS CLEAR FOR YOU, AND ALLAH IS ALL-KNOWING
ALL-WISE.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَ أَنْ تَشِيعَ الْفَاحِشَةُ فِى الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ فِى الدُّنْيَا وَالاْخِرَةِ وَاللهُ
يَعْلَمُ وَأَنْتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 19 ))

19- THOSE WHO LOVE TO SPREAD OBSCENE ACTS AMONG THE BELIEVERS, FOR THEM
IS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT IN THE PRESENT WORLD, AND IN HEREAFTER, AND
ALLAH KNOWS AND YOU KNOW NOT.

وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ وَأَنَّ اللهَ رَءُوفٌ
رَّحِيمٌ(( 20 ))

20- AND IF IT WAS NOT FOR THE GRACE OF ALLAH ON YOU AND HIS MERCY AND
THAT ALLAH IS ALL-GENTLE, COMPASSIONATE. (HE WOULD HAVE PUNISHED YOU
SEVERELY)

**THE COMMENTARY
SPREADING OBSCENE ACTS**
VERSE NO.17ِ20 The above verses are complementary to the story of the
calumny; which is so heinous and hateful a sin that Allah has explained
it from various stand points, so that Muslims may not fall into such
traps any more:ِ

[ 336 ] \`\`Allah warns you never to repeat the like of it, if you are
believers.'' It is a sign of belief to avoid committing such shameful
sins.

Then the incident is turned from a private affair into a general
matter, that may affect the society in its worst of forms:ِ \`\`Those
who love to spread obscene acts among the believers, for them is a
painful punishment.'' This verse does not say; \`\`Those who do spread
obscene acts''. It rather threatens those who love to do so. Obscene act
is not only a deed which is offensive to chastity or to modesty. Any
kind of mischievous and morally corrupt act is obscene. Therefore the
backbiting and speaking ill of an absent person, has been condemned in
Islam. This is because it reveals the hidden faults and guilts, and may
serve to reduce the degree of its ugliness and unlawfulness.

Sin is the like of fire. When the fire is kindled in a room, it must
either be extinguished or controlled. If we blow it up, or increase its
fuel; soon the whole room will catch fire.

The most effectual mischief which is planned by Evil; is to seduce the
simple minded and common people who have no harm for the community. They
are easily deluded by gossip, and by the spread of obscene acts step by
step, until they eventually become the instrument of Satan. Such social
dangers are not known by all, even by the learned people; but Allah
knows it well. Casual talk about the affairs of other people, typically
including rumour and critical comments, is one of the most dangerous
weapons that the enemy may use against the good fame and reputation of
people, and to terror their personality.

This was why the nonbelievers and the hypocrites, in their foul play;
spread in their most cowardly manner, the gossips and rumours to impair
the reputation of the prophet, whom Allah has raised above all! [ 337
]

يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لاَ تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ
وَمَنْ يَتَّبِعْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَإِنَّهُ يَأْمُرُ
بِالْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنْكَرِ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
وَرَحْمَتُهُ مَا زَكَى مِنْكُمْ مِّنْ أَحَد أَبَداً وَلَكِنَّ اللهَ
يُزَكِّى مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَاللهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 21 ))

21- O, YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED! DO NOT FOLLOW THE FOOTSTEPS OF SATAN. FOR
WHOEVER FOLLOWS THE FOOTSTEPS OF SATAN, THEN HE BIDS TO OBSCENE ACTS AND
EVIL DEEDS.

AND IF IT WAS NOT FOR THE GRACE OF ALLAH ON YOU, AND HIS MERCY, NONE OF
YOU WOULD EVER BE SANCTIFIED, BUT ALLAH PURIFIES WHOM HE WILL, AND ALLAH
IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-KNOWING.

وَلاَ يَأْتَلِ أُوْلُوا الْفَضْلِ مِنْكُمْ وَالسَّعَةِ أَنْ يُؤْتُوا
أُوْلِى الْقُرْبَى وَالْمَسَاكِينَ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ فِى سَبِيلِ اللهِ
وَلْيَعْفُوا وَلْيَصْفَحُوا أَلاَ تُحِبُّونَ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ اللهُ لَكُمْ
وَاللهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ(( 22 ))

22- AND THE RICH, AND THOSE ENDUED WITH GRACE AMONG YOU SHOULD NOT
SWEAR (OR DECIDE) TO WITHHOLD GIVING KINSMEN, THE POOR, AND THE
EMIGRANTS IN THE WAY OF ALLAH. THEY RATHER SHOULD PARDON AND OVERLOOK.
DO YOU NOT WISH THAT ALLAH WOULD FORGIVE YOU? AND ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING
COMPASSIONATE.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَرْمُونَ الْمُحْصَنَاتِ الْغَافِلاَتِ الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ
لُعِنُوا فِى الدُّنْيَا وَالاْخِرَةِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 23 ))

[ 338 ]

23- VERILY THOSE WHO ACCUSE THE BELIEVING WOMEN IN WEDLOCK WHO ARE
UNAWARE, ARE CURSED IN THIS WORLD, AND IN THE NEXT, AND FOR THEM IS A
GREAT PUNISHMENT.

يَوْمَ تَشْهَدُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَلْسِنَتُهُمْ وَأَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُمْ
بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 24 ))

24- ON THE DAY WHEN THEIR TONGUES, THEIR HANDS, AND THEIR FEET, SHALL
TESTIFY AGAINST THEM; AS TO WHAT THEY WERE DOING.

يَوْمَئِذ يُوَفِّيهِمُ اللهُ دِينَهُمُ الْحَقَّ وَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ
اللهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ الْمُبِينُ(( 25 ))

25- ON THAT DAY, ALLAH WILL REQUIT THEM THEIR DUE RIGHT, AND THEY WILL
KNOW THAT ALLAH IS THE PERSPICUOUS TRUTH.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE PUNISHMENT TOO, HAS AN ACCOUNT**
VERSE NO.21ِ25

This passage too, can be considered as a complementary to the story of
calumny, and it also is a warning to the believers that the Satanic
temptations and traces may be weak at beginning, but gradually will
become stronger and stronger. If Man does not stop following the
temptations of evil, he will soon find himself subject to it. A believer
is never cast down into the bosom of evil and corruption, suddenly and
at once. But he may fall to that abyss gradually and step by step. At
first he may befriend the evil doer, and in the second step, he may take
part in their parties and meetings. After that he may think of
committing a sin, and then do some doubtful deeds. In his fourth step,
he will commit minor sins, and [ 339 ]

eventually he proceeds on major sins, and is ruined. We therefore may
say that; piety, which includes the purity in heart, word, and in deed,
is a high standard of believing people, and it is a measure for the
evaluation of Man's spiritual grades. Therefore it can only come by the
Grace of God and His Mercy, because Allah is the only protector who can
protect His servants against Satanic Temptations, to which our nature is
subject:ِ \`\`.... And if it was not for the Grace of Allah on you, and
His Mercy, none of you would ever be sanctified; but Allah purifies whom
He will, that Allah is All-hearing, All-knowing.''

Although the next verse (NO.22), in a general application holds good
for all times; that, a generous patron should not withdraw his support
on account of personal anger; Some Sonni Commentators have written that
the immediate reference of the verse was to ABUBAKR, the father of
Hazrat Aisha. He was a wealthy companion of our prophet, and used a good
part of his wealth in the service of Islam and Muslim. It so happened
that one of the slanderers of Hazrat Aisha, was MASTIH-IBN-ASASIH a
cousin of ABUBAKR, whom he had been in habit of supporting. When Mastih
took part in spreading the calumny, ABUBAKR decided to stop his aid.
Commentators say through this verse ABUBAKR was asked to forgive and
forget his cousin's wrong, and hence the verse:ِ

\`\`The rich and those endued with Grace among you, should not swear or
decide to withhold giving kinsmen, and the poor, and the emigrants in
the way of Allah. They should rather pardon and overlook.''

Then once again in the next verse, (NO.23) the slanderers of believing
women in wedlock who are unaware have been attacked and threatened of
being cursed and punished in both lives:ِ

\`\`Verily those who accuse the believing women in wedlock who are
unaware, are cursed in this world, and in the next, and for them is a
great punishment.''

Truthful and chast women are usually indiscreet, because their mind is
pure and they think of no evil.

[ 340 ] And the ending verses state the condition in which such a
sinners may fall:ِ

\`\`On the day when their tongues, their hands, and their feet shall
testify against them, as to what they were doing.'' If we do not confess
bravely and do not repent seriously, then we must wait for our faculties
of sight, hearing, speech, and movement, to become witnesses against us;
and to complain that we have misused them.

الْخَبِيثَاتُ لِلْخَبِيثِينَ وَالْخَبِيثُونَ لِلْخَبِيثَاتِ
وَالطَّيِّبَاتُ لِلطَّيِّبِينَ وَالطَّيِّبُونَ لِلطَّيِّبَاتِ أُوْلَئِكَ
مُبَرَّءُونَ مِمَّا يَقُولُونَ لَهُمْ مَّغْفِرَةٌ وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ(( 26
))

26- UNCLEAN WOMEN ARE FOR UNCLEAN MEN, AND UNCLEAN MEN ARE FOR UNCLEAN
WOMEN. AND, CLEAN WOMEN ARE FOR CLEAN MEN, AND CLEAN MEN ARE FOR CLEAN
WOMEN. THEY ARE ACQUITTED OF WHAT THEY SAY. FOR THEM IS FORGIVENESS AND
HONOURABLE SUSTENANCE.

**THE COMMENTARY
LOVERS OF LIGHT, LOOK FOR LOVERS OF LIGHT** VERSE NO.26

This verse is to emphasize the previous verses about the calumny. It is
natural that, \`\`birds of a feather flock together''. And chaste women
are for chaste men, and clean spouses for clean spouse. Such are the
pious men and women that God's forgiveness and honourable sustenance is
theirs.

[ 341 ]

According to Arabic grammer, the letter, = ت T at the end of a word is
the sign for a feminine gender; be it a real female or a figurative one.
This is why the word, \`\`AL-KHABISA"T'' has been translate to unclean
women which implies a woman given to indiscriminate lewdness. But if the
word is to be taken as a figurative female, its meaning will change. To
this effect some of the expounders of Qura"n have understood the clause;
\`\`UNCLEAN WOMEN ARE FOR UNCLEAN MEN = الخبيثات للخبيثين'' to mean
figurativelly unclean words and unclean deeds, are issued from unclean
men and women. So are good and pure words and deeds issued by chaste men
and women. To some of the commentators, this verse is the like of S 24:3
which denotes the adulterer:ِ

\`\`The adulterer will not marry except an adulteress or a polytheist
woman; and the adulteress should not marry, except an adulterer, or
polytheist; and such a marriage has been made unlawful for the
believers.''

يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لاَ تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ
بُيُوتِكُمْ حَتَّى تَسْتَأْنِسُوا وَتُسَلِّمُوا عَلَى أَهْلِهَا ذَلِكُمْ
خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ(( 27 ))

27- O, YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED; ENTER NOT HOUSES OTHER THAN YOUR OWN
HOUSE, UNTIL YOU FAMILIARIZE WITH THE HOUSEHOLD AND SALUTE THEM. THAT IS
THE BEST FOR YOU, PERHAPS YOU MAY BE ADMONISHED.

فَإِنْ لَّمْ تَجِدُوا فِيهَا أَحَداً فَلاَ تَدْخُلُوهَا حَتَّى يُؤْذَنَ
لَكُمْ وَإِنْ قِيلَ لَكُمُ ارْجِعُوا فَارْجِعُوا هُوَ أَزْكَى لَكُمْ
وَاللهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ(( 28 ))

28- THEN IF YOU FIND NO ONE THEREIN, DO NOT ENTER IT, UNTIL YOU ARE
PERMITTED. AND IF YOU ARE TOLD TO GO [ 342 ]

BACK, THEN RETURN; THAT IS CLEANER FOR YOU, AND ALLAH KNOWS WHATEVER
YOU DO.

لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَنْ تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ مَسْكُونَة
فِيهَا مَتَاعٌ لَّكُمْ وَاللهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا
تَكْتُمُونَ(( 29 ))

29- IT IS NOT A FAULT ON YOU IF YOU ENTER AN INHABITED HOUSE IN WHICH
THERE ARE SOME USES FOR YOU, AND ALLAH KNOWS WHATEVER YOU REVEAL AND
WHATEVER YOU CONCEAL.

**THE COMMENTARY
DON'T ENTER PEOPLE'S HOUSE WITHOUT THEIR PERMISSION**

VERSE NO.27ِ29 In these verses, some ethical injunctions are given
about admittance, which helps to protect the general chastity:ِ \`\`O,
you who have believed! Enter not houses other than your own house, until
you familiarize with thehousehold, and salute them (when you enter).
That is the best for you. Perhaps you may be admonished.''

The Arabic word; \`\`TASTAANISU'' translated to familiarize with the
household, will briefly imply that you should not knock at the door
hardly. You have to ask for permission politely and mildly. After all,
you should not enter without a kind salutation which is a sign of peace
and brotherhood. In other word; the conventions of privacy in homes is
essential to a refined life; and it should not be intruded wildly.
According to the Islamic Law, it must be respected with dignity and
acted with social conformity. For a Muslim to enter a house, it is a
principle to ask for a respectful permission, after a due familiarity
which must be followed by offering a good salutation.

[ 343 ]

Then comes the complementary to the above instruction saying:ِ \`\`If
you find no one in the house, do not enter it until you are permitted.
Even if you are told to go back; you better return, which is cleaner a
deed.''

Even if no one answers, there might be people in that house who are not
authorized to give you the permission, or they are not ready or willing
to present themselves. In such a condition a Muslim has no right to
enter. He should wait. He should knock at the door or ring the bell a
few times. If no answer, or no permission is given, we should not be
angry, and must withhold patiently. Any way! No one is allowed to
intrude the privacy of other people without their wishes.

This rule too, has its own exceptions. It does not apply to houses used
for other useful purposes, like a shop, a restaurant or store.

قُلْ لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَى لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ(( 30 ))

30- AND SAY TO THE BELIEVEING MEN TO MAKE SHORT OF THEIR LOOKS, AND
GUARD THEIR SEXUAL ORGANS. THIS IS CLEANER FOR THEM, THAT ALLAH IS AWARE
OF WHAT THEY MAKE.

وَقُلْ لِّلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوجَهُنَّ وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا
وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَى جُيُوبِهِنَّ وَلاَ يُبْدِينَ
زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلاَّ لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَائِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَاءِ
بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَائِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَاءِ بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ
إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِى إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِى أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ أَوْ
نِسَائِهِنَّ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ أَوِ التَّابِعِينَ غَيْرِ
أُوْلِى الاِْرْبَةِ مِنَ [ 344 ]

الرِّجَالِ أَوِ الطِّفْلِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يَظْهَرُوا عَلَى عَوْرَاتِ
النِّسَاءِ وَلاَ يَضْرِبْنَ بِأَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ
مِنْ زِينَتِهِنَّ وَتُوبُوا إِلَى اللهِ جَمِيعاً أَيُّهَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ(( 31 ))

31- AND SAY TO THE BELIEVING WOMEN TO MAKE SHORT OF THEIR LOOKS, AND
GUARD THEIR SEXUAL ORGANS, AND REVEAL NOT THEIR ADORNMENT EXCEPT WHAT
(UN- INTENTIONALLY) APPEARS OF IT.

AND THEY SHOULD CAST THEIR TUCKERS OVER THEIR BOSOMS, AND DO NOT REVEAL
THEIR ADORNMENT EXCEPT TO THEIR HUSBANDS, OR THEIR FATHERS, OR THEIR
HUSBAND'S FATHER, OR THEIR SONS, OR THEIR HUSBAND'S SONS, OR THEIR
BROTHERS OR THEIR BROTHER'S SONS, OR THEIR SISTER'S SONS, OR THEIR
WOMEN, OR WHAT THEIR RIGHT HANDS OWN, OR THE MEN WHO ATTEND THEM WITHOUT
HAVING SEXUAL DESIRE, OR CHILDREN WHO HAVE NOT YET ATTAINED THE SEXUAL
KNOWLEDGE OF WOMEN. NOR SHOULD THEY STRIKE THEIR FEET TO MAKE KNOWN WHAT
IS HIDDEN OF THEIR ORNAMENT.

AND REPENT TO ALLAH ALL OF YOU, O BELIEVERS, PERHAPS YOU MAY PROSPER.


