No Gloating With Lust
=====================

VERSE NO.30ِ31

**OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

A young believer met with a beautiful young woman in his way. He gazed
at her beauties and adornments, and even when she passed by he followed
her with his gaze upon her, until he intoxicated, hit his face to a
projection of the wall, so that a lot of blood was shed out of his
forehead. The prophet saw him and asked what had happened to him? The
young man narrated the event with truth. Then the prophet was inspired
with the above revelation:ِ \`\`Say to the believing men to make short
of their looks and guard their sexual organs.... and say to the
believing woman to make short of their looks and guard their sexual
organs.''

The Arabic, \`\`YAGHOZZU'' comes from the root word, \`\`GHAZZ'' which
means to reduce or to make something shorter. Therefore the verse does
not imply that believers should close their eyes and do not look at a
thing at all. It rather wants them to cut their looks short in certain
cases. On the other, hand the verse does not clearly say, what is that
on which we have to shorten our looks. If we take it for general; it
will be anything unlawful for look, and if we consider it in special
sense, it is gloating with lust that is to be made short, as in this
occasion of revelation we came to know. Of course, the latter view is
more apt here, because the whole passage is about attractions and
beauties of the fair sex; and concealing their charms and adornments. So
we may take it to say; \`\`Do not stare earnestly and from lust, upon
the beauties and adornments of a women that may bewitch you.''

[ 346 ]

As to the clause, \`\`guard your sexual organs'' (FARJ), only in the
above verses, (NO.30 and 31) it is commented to mean both sexes should
not look at each other's sexual organs, which is cleaner for sex
affairs. But in other passages of Qura"n, the said phrase is said to
mean, \`\`Do not commit fornication or adultery'' In this passage of
Qura"n, the rule of piety applies equally to both sexes; but on account
of the nature of the opposite sexes, and their social lives, a greater
amount of privacy is needed for the fair sex to keep on with her
modesty, especially in the matter of covering and clothing:ِ

\`\`And they should cast their tuckers over their bosoms, and do not
reveal their adornment except to a certain number of their near
relatives.''

By, \`\`ZINAT'' translated to adornment, may means both, ornaments, as
well as natural beauty, which is the place of ornament on her body. On
the other hand, that part of their beauty or adornment which is said
here to appear unintentionally; is taken to mean the face and wrists of
women.

Then those among the close relatives of a woman who are not forbidden
to see her in her glory, are mentioned to be as follows:ِ 1ِHer husband.
2ِHer father. 3ِHer husband's father. 4ِHer sons. 5ِHer husband's sons.
6ِHer brothers. 7ِHer brother's sons. 8ِHer sister's sons. 9ِHer related
women. 10ِWhat their right hands own (of slaves). 11ِMen who attend her
without having sexual desires. 12ِAnd the children who know nothing of
sexual affairs.

To the above numbers, Islamic jurists have added two more men, namely;
13ِHer uncle in mother side. 14ِHer uncle in father side. She should not
be showy by tinkling her ankle ornaments so as to draw attentions to
herself.

وَأَنكِحُوا الاَْيَامَى مِنْكُمْ وَالصَّالِحِينَ مِنْ عِبَادِكُمْ
وَإِمَائِكُمْ إِنْ يَكُونُوا فُقَرَاءَ يُغْنِهِمُ اللهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ
وَاللهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 32 ))

[ 347 ]

32- AND MARRY THOSE AMONG YOU WHO ARE SPOUSELESS, AND (ALSO) THE
RIGHTEOUS OF YOUR MALE AND FEMALE SLAVES. IF THEY ARE POOR, ALLAH WILL
ENRICH THEM OUT OF HIS GRACE, THAT ALLAH IS THE ALL-KNOWING EXTENDER.

وَلْيَسْتَعْفِفِ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَجِدُونَ نِكَاحاً حَتَّى يُغْنِيَهُمُ
اللهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ وَالَّذِينَ يَبْتَغُونَ الْكِتَابَ مِمَّا مَلَكَتْ
أَيْمَانُكُمْ فَكَاتِبُوهُمْ إِنْ عَلِمْتُمْ فِيهِمْ خَيْراً وَآتُوهُمْ
مِّنْ مَّالِ اللهِ الَّذِى آتَاكُمْ وَلاَ تُكْرِهُوا فَتَيَاتِكُمْ عَلَى
الْبِغَاءِ إِنْ أَرَدْنَ تَحَصُّناً لِّتَبْتَغُوا عَرَضَ الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَمَنْ يُكْرِههُّنَّ فَإِنَّ اللهَ مِنْ بَعْدِ إِكْرَاهِهِنَّ
غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 33 ))

33- AND THOSE WHO CANNOT AFFORD TO MARRY, SHOULD KEEP CHASTE UNTIL
ALLAH ENRICH THEM OUT OF HIS GRACE.

AND THOSE OF YOUR SLAVES WHO ASK FOR A WRITING (CONTRACT) TO BUY THEIR
FREEDOM, WRITE THE CONTRACT FOR THEM, IF YOU KNOW IT TO BE GOOD FOR
THEM. AND GIVE THEM SOME OF THE WEALTH OF ALLAH THAT HAS COME TO YOU.
AND FORCE NOT YOUR SLAVE GIRLS TO PROSTITUTION, FOR OBTAINING THE GOODS
OF THIS WORLD'S LIFE; IF THEY WISH TO LIVE IN CHASTITY. WHOEVER
CONSTRAINS THEM TO THAT, KNOW THAT AFTER THEY BEING COMPELLED, ALLAH IS
ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.

[ 348 ]

وَلَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ آيَات مُّبَيِّنَات وَمَثَلا مِّنَ
الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ وَمَوْعِظَةً لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ(( 34 ))

34- AND VERILY WE HAVE SENT DOWN TO YOU PERSPICUOUS SIGNS, AND EXAMPLES
OF THOSE (PEOPLE) WHO HAVE PASSED AWAY BEFORE YOU; AND ADMONITION FOR
THE PIOUS PEOPLE.

**THE COMMENTARY
URGING AN EASY MARRIAGE** VERSE NO.32ِ34

These verses allude to another important way of challenge against
fornication and obscene acts, which passes through a simple and easy
marriage. It is evident that, to wind up the stuff of sinning, our
natural desires and cravings must be correctly satisfied. In this
respect, negative action or reaction will not do:ِ

\`\`Marry those among you who are spouseless, and also the righteous of
your male and female slave.'' The argument has now been driven from sex
ethics to marriage. Islam strictly recommends any male or female without
a mate; to marry if he or she can afford. There is no objection if a
Muslim decides to marry a mate in a lower circle or class, like a slave
or servant. In Islam, there is no distinction between a Lord of Qoraish,
and a negro of HABASH (ABYSSINIA), except in their measure of piety and
virtue. This is because God's Mercy is for all His creatures, and is not
confined to a certain class of peoples.

Usually the main excuse for living a bachelor is being poor, and saying
I can't afford:ِ \`\`If they are poor, Allah will enrich then out of His
Grace.'' If a man cannot afford the expenses of marriage like dower and
[ 349 ]

alimony, he must wait and keep chaste until Allah enrich him. His or
her cravings must be satisfied within marriage, if they want to live a
refined life, with social safety and physical and spiritual health.

اللهُ نُورُ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاة فِيهَا
مِصْبَاحٌ الْمِصْبَاحُ فِى زُجَاجَة الزُّجَاجَةُ كَأَنَّهَا كَوْكَبٌ
دُرِّىٌّ يُوقَدُ ...مِنْ شَجَرَة مُّبَارَكَة زَيْتُونِة لاَّ شَرْقِيَّة
وَلاَّ غَرْبِيَّة يَكَادُ زَيْتُهَا يُضِىءُ وَلَوْ لَمْ تَمْسَسْهُ نَارٌ
نُّورٌ عَلَى نُور يَهْدِى اللهُ لِنُورِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَضْرِبُ اللهُ
الاَْمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ وَاللهُ بِكُلِّ شَىْء عَلِيمٌ(( 35 ))

35- ALLAH IS THE LIGHT OF HEAVEN AND EARTH. THE EXAMPLE OF HIS LIGHT IS
A NICHE, IN WHICH THERE IS A LAMP. THE LAMP IS IN A GLASS. THE GLASS IS
AS IF A BRILLIANT STAR. (IT IS) KINDLED FROM A BLESSED TREE OF OLIVE,
WHICH IS NEITHER EASTERN NOR WESTERN. ITS OIL IS WELL-NIGH TO SHINE,
EVEN THOUGH NO FIRE HAS TOUCHED IT! LIGHT UPON LIGHT. ALLAH WILL GUIDE
TO HIS LIGHT WHOM HE WILL.

AND ALLAH STRIKES SIMILITUDES FOR PEOPLE, AND ALLAH HAS THE KNOWLEDGE
OF EVERYTHING.

فِى بُيُوت أَذِنَ اللهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالاْصَالِ(( 36 ))

36- (THE SAID BRIGHT LAMP) IS (SEEN) IN THE HOUSES WHICH ALLAH HAS
PERMITTED TO BE RAISED UP, AND HIS NAME TO BE MENTIONED THEREIN. HE IS
GLORIFIED THERE, IN THE MORNINGS AND EVENINGS.

[ 350 ]

رِجَالٌ لاَّ تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلاَ بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللهِ
وَإِقَامِ الصَّلاَةِ وَإِيتَاءِ الزَّكَاةِ يَخَافُونَ يَوْماً
تَتَقَلَّبُ فِيهِ الْقُلُوبُ وَالاَْبْصَارُ(( 37 ))

37- BY MEN WHOM NEITHER TRADE NOR TRANSACTION CAN DIVERT FROM
REMEMBERING ALLAH, AND PERFORMING THE PRAYER; AND PAYING THE ALMS-TAX.
THEY FEAR THE DAY IN WHICH HEARTS AND EYES SHALL TURN SIDEWAYS.

لِيَجْزِيَهُمُ اللهُ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا وَيَزِيدَهُمْ مِّنْ فَضْلِهِ
وَاللهُ يَرْزُقُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَاب(( 38 ))

38- SO AS TO REWARD THEM FOR THEIR BETTER DEEDS, AND INCREASE THEM
(THEIR REWARD) OUT OF HIS GRACE. AND ALLAH GIVES SUSTENANCE TO WHOM HE
WILL, WITHOUT MEASURE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE VERSE OF LIGHT** VERSE NO.35ِ38

About the famous verse of light much have been said by different
expounders of Qura"n, scholars, gnostics; and religious jurists. In
other word, this glorious parable of light, which is full of allegorical
truth about the mysteries of Man's spiritual being, has such a wide
variety of meanings that many voluminous book have been written and
published to comment it, and yet no one has done adequate justice to its
full meaning. The verse begins with the clause:ِ

\`\`Allah is the light of heavens and earth.'' Some expounders have
understood the light to mean \`\`guide''. [ 351 ]

Some other have said it means, \`\`ILLUMINATOR'', and another group
have translated it to, \`\`DECORATOR''. In Qura"nic literature several
things have been given the title of light:ِ 1) QURA"N IS LIGHT = S 5:15
2) FAITH IS LIGHT = S 2:257

3) ALLAH'S GUIDANCE IS LIGHT = S 6:122 4) ISLAM IS LIGHT = S 9:32
5) THE PROPHET IS ALSO LIGHT = S 33:46

As to the qualifications of light we may say:ِ 1- According to the
latest QUANTOM THEORY OF LIGHT; the nature of light has a dual view,
because it behaves both as quanta of energy, and as a wave phenomenon.
2- It is the most beautiful and the finest of all phenomena.
3- It has the highest of speeds.
4- It is the means of vision, without which no one can see anything.
5- It is the source of all the colours that we see and enjoy.
6- The sun light is the source of all the energies that exist, and
which kills many kinds of microbs.

The physical light is somehow like a mirror, that, reflects and shows
the true light in the world of reality, which is Allah. Of course, the
physical light has its own weak points and draw-backs, whereas Allah,
which is the true light in the world of reality, is far from the least
fault and defect.

The physical light depends on its source. It can be decomposed to
particles or photons. It is unstable and in movement, while the light of
truth is free of such physical characterstics. According to the above
introduction, if we are to choose somehow a similitude for Allah in this
material world, we may make use of light to some limited extend.
Meanwhile, we have to keep in mind that God's high position is
infinitely higher than whatever we may think of, or imagine. It is
remarkable, that, any entity has its light and illumination in a measure
or degree, which is relative to it relation to [ 352 ]

God, namely; Qura"n is light and has light, because it is the word of
God. Islam is light and has light, for being the chosen religion of God.
Prophets are light, because they carry the Message of God. Faith is
light, because it is the code of connection to God. Knowledge is light
for being a means of acquaintance with Allah. Qura"n gives some details
of how the Divine Light might be:ِ \`\`....The example of this light is
a niche, in which there is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is
as if a brilliant star. It is kindled from a blessed tree of olive which
is neither Eastern, nor Western. Its oil is well-nigh to shine, even
though no Fire has touched itِlight upon light. Allah guides to His
light whom He will.''

To explain the meaning of the parable, and to know how the light
illuminates the innermost of Man's being. We have to expound the meaning
of some of the technichal terms or words, that are found in the verse of
Light:ِ The Arabic, \`\`MESHKA"T'' translated to niche is a little
recess in a wall of ancient rooms, especially for putting a lamp or a
bust in it. The niche is raised up enough to diffuse the light all
inside the room. Of course, this was before the invention of electric
lamps.

The Arabic, \`\`ZAJA"JEH'' basically means transparent stones or
crystals. It also means glass, and here it refers to the glass globe
that covers the flame.

\`\`MESBA"H'' is the lamp which consists of a wick and a pot of fuel
for burning and giving out the necessary light. This light which is
emitted from the Divine lamp can be, \`\`FAITH IN ALLAH'', that
illuminates the heart of Man. If so, the lamp is the faith, the glass
bulb is the heart of the believer. The niche is then his breast, and the
blessed tree of olive can be the Inspiration which ends in purifying the
believer. [ 353 ]

**MY OFFTAKE OF THE ABOVE COMMENTS**

I see the verse of light as a glorious parable full of allegorical
truth about God and the mysteries of Man's spiritual being. So far, none
of the commentators have dared to say decisively it means this or that!
All of them have gone to a zigzag way in explaining and expounding the
verse. His holiness grand Ayatullah Maka"rim, has given an explanation
of the verse in some twenty pages, supported with many traditions. I
have done my best to go through his view on that, but all I could
understand is what an abstract of which is written above.

However, the Persian Gnostics and mystics too, have their own comments
on this strange verse of light. In their sight, the niche seems to be
the whole material worldِthe universe and its physical contents. The
glass which is as brilliant as a star is the spiritual world on which is
founded the physical universe. And God, the All-knowing, All-power is
the light which illuminates and controls everything. This light is not
Eastern or western, nor relies on space neither in time. In other word,
the Essence, or if you want to call it the, \`\`SUBSTANCE OF EXISTENCE''
has appeared; or to say in other word, has manifested its self through
the, \`\`ATTRIBUTES''.

Then the Attributes are manifested and have been reflected through the
material creation. On the other hand, the substance is exactly the very
existence of the Attributes i.e. The Substance of God and His Attributes
are not two different or two separate things. But I am of opinion that
Allah, His apostle, and a certain group who are well versed in Qura"n;
(RA"SIKHUNA-FEL-ELM) know the real meaning:ِ \`\`He, it is who sent down
to you the Book. Some of its verses are \`\`FUNDAMENTALS'', (clear and
evident in meaning) they are the mother of the Book. And some other of
the verses are, AMBIGUOUS. But those in whose hearts is perversity, they
follow the ambiguous part seeking dissension, and seeking to [ 354 ]

paraphrase it (with allegorical explanation). But no one knows the
hidden meaning except Allah, and those who are well-grounded in
knowledge; who say, we believe in it. All are from our Lord. And none do
mind, save the men of understanding.'' (S 3:5)

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَاب بِقِيعَة يَحْسَبُهُ
الظَّمْئَانُ مَاءً حَتَّى إِذَا جَاءَهُ لَمْ يَجِدْهُ شَيْئاً وَوَجَدَ
اللهَ عِنْدَهُ فَوَفَّاهُ حِسَابَهُ وَاللهُ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ(( 39 ))

39- AND AS FOR THE NON-BELIEVERS; THEIR DEEDS ARE SUCH AS A MIRAGE IN A
DESERT, WHICH THE THIRSTY THINKS IT TO BE WATER, UNTIL HE COMES TO IT,
AND FINDS IT NOT TO BE ANYTHING! AND ONLY FINDS ALLAH WITH HIM WHO
CLEARS HIS ACCOUNT. AND SO SWIFT IS ALLAH'S RECKONING.

أَوْ كَظُلُمَات فِى بَحْر لُّجِّىّ يَغْشَاهُ مَوْجٌ مِّنْ فَوْقِهِ
مَوْجٌ مِّنْ فَوْقِهِ سَحَابٌ ظُلُمَاتٌ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْض إِذَا
أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَرَاهَا وَمَنْ لَّمْ يَجْعَلِ اللهُ لَهُ
نُوراً فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُّور(( 40 ))

40- OR LIKE DARKNESSES IN DEPTHS OF A VAST OCEAN COVERED WITH WAVE OVER
WAVE, ABOVE WHICH ARE CLOUDS. DARKNESSES, SOME OF THEM OVER SOME OTHER.
WHEN HE STRETCHES HIS HAND OUT, HE IS ALMOST UNABLE TO SEE IT. FOR ANY
ONE TO WHOM ALLAH ASSIGNS NO LIGHT, THERE WILL BE NO LIGHT FOR HIM. (AT
ALL)

[ 355 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
DEEDS THAT ARE MIRAGES** VERSE NO.39ِ40

The argument has now turned from light, towards darkness; and again to
the believers who prosper, and to the non-believers who are afflicted in
utter darknesses, for rejecting the light of reality and truth. The word
revolves around a poor thirsty, and meanwhile ignorant traveller in a
wide desert, who is in need of a glass of cold water, but actually goes
after a mirage:ِ \`\`As to the non-believers, their deeds are such as a
mirage....'' The man, dying of thirst, sees the mirage as a lake of
standing water; but when he comes to it, finds nothing there!

In fact, we have a metaphor here to show us that; he who rejects faith
and ignores the light of God, he will be led to utter darknesses.
Darkness is not an entity by itself. It rather is the absence or the
nullity of light. Darkness is falsehood, and light is the truth. Then
the state of a person who refuses to use the light of truth, is somehow
the like of a thirsty man, who runs after water in a hot and barren
desert; from a distance he sees the mirage which seems to him like a
lake; in which water stands glittering. When he rushes on, and comes
near; he finds nothing at all! Thirst is the truth which is still with
him, and the illusory things which are like mirages which he has worked
for, will lead him to his destruction. He has to die of thirst, because
power, wealth, and luxuries, will not satisfy the spiritual thirst of
Man. So, anyone who leaves light and lives in the darkness, he deserves
all sorts of afflictions and misfortune.

\*\*\*\*\*

[ 356 ]

**WHAT IS THE MIRAGE?**

MIRAGE is an illusion of land or water where none exists. By
definition; it is an effect caused by total reflection of light at the
upper surface of shallow layers of hot air in contact with the ground,
the appearance being that of pools of water in which are seen inverted
images of more distant objects. The mirage usually happens near horizon,
and is caused by non-uniform atmospheric refraction of light. The most
common is the WATER MIRAGE that has decieved so many desert travellers.
It occurs over land that is warmer than the overlying air. Light travels
faster in the lighter and warmer air near the surface, than in the
progressively cooler air above. The effect is to curve the light upward.
Light from the sky appears to come from below the horizon, producing the
illusion of a lake of standing water. This type of mirage also occurs
over water that is warmer than the overlying air.

1ِCHAMBERS DICTIONARY OF SCIENCE
2ِATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH, BY: J.H.RUSH

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

In the second metaphor, the likeness of the deeds of the non-believers,
is said to be comparable to the darknesses in the depths of a great
sea:ِ \`\`Or like darknesses in depths of a vast ocean, covered with
wave over wave, above which are clouds.'' So much so that he who has
been afflicted in such a darkness, when stretches out his hand, he is
almost unable to see it.

The light of reality and truth in our life is the light of faith,
without which all the space around us will be dark. Irrecoverably dark.
Dark even amid the blaze of noon! The three kinds of darknesses that are
mentioned herein this verse; may refer to the darkness of deed.

[ 357 ] Some commentators have understood them to be the darknesses
that are stages of ignorance. That is to say:ِ

1ِThey don't know, and yet do not know that they don't know.
2ِThey don't know, and yet they think they know.
3ِThey don't know, but are aware of their ignorance.

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللهَ يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَنْ فِى السَّمَوَاتِ
وَالاَْرْضِ وَالطَّيْرُ صَافَّات كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلاَتَهُ
وَتَسْبِيحَهُ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ(( 41 ))

41- HAVE YOU NOT SEEN THAT WHOEVER IS IN THE SKIES AND EARTH SANCTIFIES
ALLAH? AND THE BIRD WITH OUTSPREAD WINGS; EACH ONE HAS KNOWN HIS PRAYER
AND SANCTIFICATION, AND ALLAH KNOWS WELL WHAT THEY DO.

وَللهِِ مُلْكُ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَإِلَى اللهِ الْمَصِيرُ(( 42
))

42- AND TO ALLAH BELONGS THE KINGDOM OF THE SKIES AND EARTH, AND TO
ALLAH IS THE RETURN.

**THE COMMENTARY
ALL SANCTIFY HIM**

VERSE NO.41ِ42

The prophet is addressed here, but the announcement is a general,
saying:ِ \`\`Have you not seen that whoever is in the skies and earth
sanctifies Allah? And the bird with outspread wings....'' This
sanctification proves His creativeness, and His creativeness is a clear
sign of His ownership. Therefore, to Him belongs all the creatures that
live in the skies, or earth. All denizens of the air, such as the birds
and even the angels that are supposed to be near to Him, and near to His
throne, serve Him, and worship Him without ceasing; and are proud to do
that.

[ 358 ]

Our prophet Mohammad (SA) chose for himself the glorious title of,
\`\`THE SERVANT OF GOD''. All celebrate His praise night and day; and
never droop or intermit. All the creatures of the universe; animate or
inanimate, are endowed with some sort of a degree of intelligence. They
do have some kind of intellect or mind in operation, by which they know
their Creator, and know how to celebrate His praise, and glorify Him. In
other word; they know how to pray to their Lord and how to sanctify
Him.

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللهَ يُزْجِى سَحَاباً ثُمَّ يُؤَلِّفُ بَيْنَهُ ثُمَّ
يَجْعَلُهُ رُكَاماً فَتَرَى الْوَدْقَ يَخْرُجُ مِنْ خِلاَلِهِ
وَيُنَزِّلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِنْ جِبَال فِيهَا مِنْ بَرَد فَيُصِيبُ بِهِ
مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَصْرِفُهُ عَنْ مَّنْ يَشَاءُ يَكَادُ سَنَا بَرْقِهِ
يَذْهَبُ بِالاَْبْصَارِ(( 43 ))

43- HAVE YOU NOT SEEN THAT HOW ALLAH DRIVES THE CLOUDS GENTLY; THEN HE
JOINS THEM TOGETHER, THEN HE PILES THEM UP (IN MASSES), THEN YOU WILL
SEE THE DROPLETS (OF RAIN) COMING OUT OF IT.

AND HE SENDS DOWN FROM THE SKY HAILS OUT OF THE MOUNTAINLIKE (CLOUDS),
PELTING WITH IT WHOM HE WILL, AND TURNING IT AWAY FROM WHOM HE PLEASES.
THE FLASH OF ITS LIGHTENING ALMOST SNATCHES THE EYE.

يُقَلِّبُ اللهُ الَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً
لاُِّوْلِى الاَْبْصَارِ(( 44 ))

44- ALLAH CHANGES THE NIGHT AND DAY. VERILY IN THAT THERE IS LESSON FOR
THOSE WHO HAVE EYES.

[ 359 ]

وَاللهُ خَلَقَ كُلَّ دَابَّة مِّنْ مَّاء فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَمْشِى عَلَى
بَطْنِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ يَمْشِى عَلَى رِجْلَيْنِ وَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ
يَمْشِى عَلَى أَرْبَع يَخْلُقُ اللهُ مَا يَشَاءُ إِنَّ اللهَ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَىْء قَدِيرٌ(( 45 ))

45- AND ALLAH CREATED EVERY CREATURE FROM WATER. SOME OF THEM CREEP
UPON THEIR BELLIES, AND SOME OF THEM WALK UPON TWO FEET, AND OF THEM ARE
SOME WHO GO WITH FOUR (LEGS).

ALLAH CREATES WHATEVER HE WILL, THAT ALLAH HAS POWER OVER EVERYTHING.

**THE COMMENTARY
ANOTHER CORNER OF THE WONDERS OF CREATION** VERSE NO.43ِ45

Here the immediate reference is to some of the useful phenomena of
nature like the rain, day and night, and the source of creation of
creatures which is the water. Not only the maintenance of life depends
on water that all the creatures, is said, to have basically been created
from it. If we consider the movements of the clouds overhead, we soon
come to know that there is an object or aim behind every movement or any
change that takes place up there. All the movements are reasonable and
seems that each one is a part of a general plan fulfilled by a great and
infinite intelligence.

We see during the winter that, thin layers of clouds move gently
around, in various fantastic shapes and forms, as if they are various
creatures moving over us! They then join together and heap up and become
a dark huge body, which covers the shining face of the sun. It
eventually pours down droplets of rain, and wonderful crystals of snow,
and sometimes awful hail-stone, for our punishment. Such [ 360 ]

phenomena are sometimes accompanied by blinding flashes of lightening
that almost snatches the eyes.

In the second clause of the above verse (NO.43) mention is made of
mountainlike clouds in the sky from which showers of hail-stone may come
to afflict some people, and turn away from some other. This is because
the clouds, as seen from over by an aeroplane, have not a level surface
and seem to be mountains and valleys from far above.

Hail-stones is precipitation in the form of ice particles that range in
diameter from less than 1/4 inch, to more than 5". These grains of ice
may be spherical, conical, or quite irregular. Typically they consist of
alternating layers of clear and opaque ice. Hail-stone often form in the
thunderstorms that have rising air current strong enough to suspend ice
particles while they grow by the accretion of water droplets at
subfreezing temperature.

Opaque ice is formed by the accretion of small sparse droplets, and
clear ice by accretion of larger quantities of cloud moisture.
Hail-stone may seriously damage plant life, and large hail-stones can
injure people or animal, or even it may damage buildings. Hail-stone is
also an aviation hazard, and it is one reason why pilots avoid
thunderstorm:ِ \`\`....And He sends down from the sky hail-stones out of
the mountainlike clouds, pelting with it whom He Will, and turning away
from whom He pleases.''

The next verse refers to another important sign of God, which is the
change of night to day and day to night. One of the two, lengthens while
the other shortens, and vice versa. They gradually change in length and
bring forth the various seasons. The existence of both, night and day,
as well as their changes in length, temperature, and whatsoever, is
indeed vital to the natural life of Man:ِ

\`\`Allah changes the night and day. Verily in that changes there are
lessons for those who have eyes to learn.'' [ 361 ] لَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا
آيَات مُّبَيِّنَات وَاللهُ يَهْدِى مَنْ يَشَاءُ إِلَى صِرَاط
مُّسْتَقِيم(( 46 ))

46- VERILY WE HAVE SENT DOWN PERSPICUOUS SIGNS, AND ALLAH GUIDES
WHOEVER HE WILL TO A STRAIGHT PATH.

وَيَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِاللهِ وَبِالرَّسُولِ وَأَطَعْنَا ثُمَّ
يَتَوَلَّى فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُمْ مِّنْ بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَمَا أُوْلَئِكَ
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 47 ))

47- AND THEY SAY; \`\`WE BELIEVE IN ALLAH AND IN THE MESSENGER, AND WE
OBEY.'' THEN A GROUP OF THEM TURN AWAY AFTER THAT, SURELY THEY ARE NOT
BELIEVERS.

وَإِذَا دُعُوا إِلَى اللهِ وَرَسُولِهِ لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَهُمْ إِذَا
فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُمْ مُّعْرِضُونَ(( 48 ))

وَإِنْ يَكُنْ لَّهُمُ الْحَقُّ يَأْتُوا إِلَيْهِ مُذْعِنِينَ(( 49 ))

49- BUT IF THE RIGHT IS THEIRS, THEY COME TO IT SUBMISSIVELY.

أَفِى قُلُوبِهِمْ مَّرَضٌ أَمِ ارْتَابُوا أَمْ يَخَافُونَ أَنْ يَحِيفَ
اللهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَرَسُولُهُ بَلْ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ(( 50
))

50- IS THERE A SICKNESS IN THEIR HEARTS? OR ARE THEY IN DOUBT!? OR DO
THEY FEAR THAT ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER WILL DEAL UNJUSTLY WITH THEM? NOT
SO! THEY THEMSELVES ARE THE OPPRESSORS.


