The Wonderful Story of Zelgharnine
==================================

VERSE NO.83ِ91

The third question that the Jewish Arabs raised to test our prophet,
was about Zelgharnine. The other two questions that he answered, were
about the soul, and the seven sleepers. In all the three narrations,
there are incidents which may take us out of this limited field of our
present life and nature. They will show us that the world is not exactly
as what we see it and feel it.

[ 32 ]

The story of Zelgharnine has occupied the thought of our scholars and
researchers for many centuries, in order to know who this faithful and
righteous king really was!? In our commentary, we will begin to explain
his personality and the lessons that we may learn from the three
historical episodes of him, so as to illustrate how power and
opportunities should be used in the service of God:ِ

\`\`They ask you about Zelgharnine: Say; soon shall I recite to you a
mention of him.'' This verse implies that people were already acquainted
with the story and history of Zelgharnine in our prophet's life time,
but it must have had some ambiguities, that the people wanted to have it
cleared.

Zelgharnine was a powerful and righteous king, with all sorts of means
and facilities, to do much of what he wanted. He had a good deal of
knowledge and wisdom, correct management, and great armed forces,
besides skilled man power, and whatever of physical and spiritual
possibilities that he needed:ِ

\`\`And he followed a way, until he reached the setting point of the
sun, in a muddy dark spring of water with a people beside it.'' Here, we
ought to know that the sun will never set upon the earth. East and West
of the sun are two relative terms. So we know from this verse that
Zelgharnine's expedition to the west, terminated to a spring, with
eruption of a kind of dark water, as if it was muddy; beside which lived
a certain group of people:ِ

\`\`We said; O, Zelgharnine! You may either punish them or treat them
kindly.''

Some commentators have understood the phrase; \`\`We said, O,
Zelgharnine.'' To imply that, the king was an apostle too, whom God
inspired with the commandments. There are also commentators who think
otherwise. They believe that, the word of God was induced to them,
rather than being inspired. God's word and intention can be easily
induced to any one and to anything, at any time and place.

After receiving the Divine instruction, Zelgharnine decided to [ 33 ]

protect the weak and the righteous people, by punishing the evildoers,
and meanwhile he believed that the just and the true punishment would
come in the Hereafter, in the God's Final Judgement. He therefore
regulated his punishments so as to maintain a good order among the
community of those semicivilized people, and left the rest for God's
Final Judgement. In other word, he took it easy for them, and though his
power was very great, he imposed no heavy task upon the people, so that
his rules and orders for them was easy to follow.

After that, Zelgharnine proceeded on another expedition, and this time
towards the east:ِ

\`\`He then followed another way, until he reached where it seemed to
him to be the rising place of the sun.'' His second expedition was
towards the East, and he went on that way, until he met with some
primitive people, who were nude, and exposed to sun rays!

ثُمَّ أَتْبَعَ سَبَباً(( 92 ))

92- AFTER THAT HE FOLLOWED A WA 00 Y:

حَتَّى إِذَا بَلَغَ بَيْنَ السَّدَّيْنِ وَجَدَ مِنْ دُونِهِمَا قَوْماً
لاَّ يَكَادُونَ يَفْقَهُونَ قَوْلا(( 93 ))

93- UNTIL HE REACHED BETWEEN TWO MOUNTAINS, AND THERE HE FOUND A
PEOPLE, OTHER THAN THE TWO (AFOREMENTIONED) WHO COULD NOT UNDERSTAND A
WORD.

قَالُوا يَا ذَا الْقَرْنَيْنِ إِنَّ يَأْجُوجَ وَمَأْجُوجَ مُفْسِدُونَ
فِى الاَْرْضِ فَهَلْ نَجْعَلُ لَكَ خَرْجاً عَلَى أَنْ تَجْعَلَ بَيْنَنَا
وَبَيْنَهُمْ سَدّاً(( 94 ))

94- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, ZELGHARNINE! GOG AND MAGOG ARE MAKING MISCHIEF
IN (OUR) LAND. MAY WE PAY YOU A [ 34 ]

TRIBUTE, SO AS TO MAKE A BARRIER BETWEEN US AND BETWEEN THEM?''

قَالَ مَا مَكَّنِّى فِيهِ رَبِّى خَيْرٌ فَأَعِينُونِى بِقُوَّة أَجْعَلْ
بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَهُمْ رَدْماً(( 95 )) 95- HE SAID:ِ \`\`THAT IN WHICH
MY LORD HAS ESTABLISHED ME, IS BETTER. YOU JUST HELP ME WITH (MAN)
POWER, TO MAKE A PROTECTIVE BARRIER BETWEEN YOU AND BETWEEN THEM.''

آتُونِى زُبَرَ الْحَدِيدِ حَتَّى إِذَا سَاوَى بَيْنَ الصَّدَفَيْنِ
قَالَ انفُخُوا حَتَّى إِذَا جَعَلَهُ نَاراً قَالَ آتُونِى أُفْرِغْ
عَلَيْهِ قِطْراً(( 96 ))

96- BRING ME BLOCKS OF IRON. (HE THEN PILED THEM UP) UNTIL IT LEVELLED
WITH TWO ENDS OF THE MOUNTAINS, HE SAID:ِ \`\`BLOW''; UNTIL THE (IRON
WALL) BECAME RED-HOT, HE SAID; \`\`BRING ME MOLTEN COPPER TO POUR ON
IT.''

فَمَا اسْطَاعُوا أَنْ يَظْهَرُوهُ وَمَا اسْتَطَاعُوا لَهُ نَقْباً(( 97
)) 97- SO THEY WERE NOT ABLE EITHER TO CLIMB IT OR PIERCE IT THROUGH.

قَالَ هَذَا رَحْمَةٌ مِّنْ رَبِّى فَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ رَبِّى جَعَلَهُ
دَكَّاءَ وَكَانَ وَعْدُ رَبِّى حَقّاً(( 98 )) 98- HE SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS
A MERCY FROM MY LORD. THEN WHEN THE PROMISE OF MY LORD CAME TO PASS, HE
WILL LEVEL IT WITH GROUND, AND THE PROMISE OF MY LORD HAS ALWAYS BEEN
TRUE.''

[ 35 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
HOW WAS THE IRON BARRIER CONSTRUCTED**

VERSE NO.92ِ98

Zelgharnine proceeded on a third journey, and came between two
mountains, where he found a people who could not understand the language
of Zelgharnine and his hosts, except through interpretation. They were
more developed than the other two kind of people that he had encountered
before. The verses here imply that they were industrious a people, and
to some extent skilled in the metal works. They could provide iron
blocks or bricks, and have melted copper. They could make use of
blowers, to increase the heat, and turn iron to red-hot or even melt
it.

They were a peaceful people too, and were willing to provide security
and peace, by paying special taxes and tributes to their conquerors.
They therefore made known to Zelgharnine that Gog and Magog made
mischief in their land, and disturbed their security every now and then.
They asked the king to close up the wide gap which was between the two
mountains from where they were invaded by the wild tribes. They added
that they were ready to pay special taxes, or tributes, for the
construction of a barrier in the gap. Zelgharnine knew his power to have
been given him through the Mercy and Grace of God; and that, his duty
was to help and to protect his subjects without imposing heavy taxes and
hard duties on them. He therefore considered their request, and said to
them:ِ

\`\`That in which my Lord has established me is better. Just give me a
hand of power so as to build a protective barrier between you and
between them.''

He then managed to fill the gap between the two mountains with pieces
of iron. By his order, fire was blown so that the iron pile turned
red-hot and melted to a mixture, making out a firm wall; high enough not
to be scaled. He then asked for melted copper, which was poured upon the
red-hot barrier, to make it hard enough, not to be pierced through! It
was finally finished to resist any attempt to climb it, or to dig it
through. [ 36 ]

Zelgharnine did that great constructional work that his weak subjects
needed, but claimed no credit for himself in doing that, as if he knew
it to be his duty! He only tried to turn the attentions through the
work, to God, who provided them with the necessary means and materials
for their security and protection:ِ

\`\`He said; This is a Mercy from my Lord. Then when the promise of my
Lord comes to pass, He will level it with the ground.'' In other word he
said; what remains forever is God and God's Mercy; and even this iron
barrier has a limited life, and when its hour comes, it will crumble to
dust.

**LESSONS TO BE LEARNED FROM THIS NARRATIVE**

The above mentioned three episodes of Zelgharnine's history, includes
many useful lessons for us to learn, some of which are as follows:ِ

.ِIn this material world, no work can be done, and nothing can be made,
without the use of necessary means, apparatus, and instruments. .ِThe
sun will not set in a dark muddy water, but a great personality may fall
or set in a slimy swamp of sin and mistake. A piece of cloud may cover
and conceal the glory of the sun, and in the same way, a sin, a slip, or
even a mistake, may spoil reputation of a great man. .ِNo ruler can rule
well without punishing the evil doers, and rewarding the righteous
subjects with utmost justice, and this is why Zelgharnine said:ِ

\`\`As for he who has oppressed, I shall soon punish him....but as for
he who believed and did righteous deeds, for him shall be good
reward...''

.ِImposing heavy duties, and heavy taxes upon the subjects, will
decrease the governor's popularity and lawfulness. .ِSee that
Zelgharnine listened and gave ear even to the people who knew not to
speak, and could not express their feelings easily, and so should be a
good and just ruler. [ 37 ]

.ِSecurity and safety is the first aid, and the most important
necessity of life, which the ruler should give it the needed priority.
Therefore, the ruler should construct the greatest barrier against the
corruptors and evil doers of the land.

**WHO WAS ZELGHARNINE?**

In Arabic language, \`\`GHARNINE'' literally means two horns, two
mountain peaks, two epochs, two centuries, and also two RHINOCEROS. The
prefix, \`\`ZEL'' will add ownership, and hence we may translate,
\`\`Zelgharnine'', to the owner of two horns like a RAM. Sure enough
Zelgharnine was a great king, but why was he called the owner of two
horns? Some commentators believe that, the king has had two horns fixed
in his crown, made of jewels and in the form of beautiful peacock's
feather; or, perhaps in the form of the horns of a ram. As to the
question that who was the king with such a crown, or having the marks
given him by Qura"n; some expounders have thought him to be Alexander
the Great, but others have raised doubts about him, because, according
to Qura"n, Zelgharnine was a man of faith. He believed in God, as well
as in Resurrection Day; while Alexander the great believed in idols, and
Grecian gods.

Many commentators, and in particular ABULKALA"M AZA"D, who was the
minister of education in India; in his famous analytic book, gives clear
evidences that, Zelgharnine of Qura"n is the ancient king of Persian,
known as Cyrus the Great.

In the 19th century, in the excavations of MORGHA"B near the ESTAKHR of
FARS, a statue of Cyrus the Great was discovered which was in the form
of a Man, with two eagle wings, and a crown on his head, having two
horns like that of a ram. Then a group of known excavators from Germany
came to see and study the image, and made sure that what is written in
the O.T. in the BOOK OF DANIEL, which will follow shortly, applies to
Cyrus the Great, who had two born or something like that in his crown.

In the old Testament, in DANِ8 we read thus:ِ [ 38 ]

1ِ\`\`In the third year that BELSHAZZAR was king, I saw a second
vision. In this vision I suddenly found myself in the walled city of
SUSA in the province of ELAM. I was standing by the river ULAI, and
there, beside the river I saw a ram that had two long horns, one of
which was longer than the other. I watched the ram butting with his
horns to the west, the north, and the south. No animal could stop him or
escape his power. He did as he pleased and grew arrogant.

5ِWhile I was wondering what this meant, a goat came rushing out of the
West, moving so fast that his feet didn't touch the ground. He had one
prominent horn between his eyes. He came towards the ram, which I had
seen standing beside the river, and rushed at him with all his force. I
watched him attack the ram. He was so angry that he smashed into him and
broke the two horns. The ram had no strength to resist. He was thrown to
the ground and trampled on, and there was no one who could save him.

15ِI was trying to understand what the vision meant, when suddenly some
one was standing in front of me. I heard a voice call out over the river
ULAI, saying:ِ \`\`GABRIEL! Explain to him the meaning of what he saw.
Gabriel came and stood beside me and I was so terrified that I fell to
the ground.

He said to me, \`\`Mortal man, understand the meaning:ِ'' 20-The ram
you saw that had two horns represents the kingdom of Media and Persia.
The goat represents the kingdom of Greece, and the prominent horn
between his eyes is the first king. The verses of Qura"n imply that
Zelgharnine was a faithful believer, and very kind to all. He was very
just in judgement and attracted God's special Mercy and Grace on
himself. He was the friend of good doers, and the foe of evil and
oppressor. He was not in love with wealth, and used his power for the
good of people, and for the welfare of his subjects. He, sincerely
believed in God, as well as in the Resurrection Day.

He managed to construct the strongest of barriers without using mud and
bricks, or stones, as was usual; and with the aim of providing security
and safety for a group of weak people who wanted to leave in peace.

HERODOTUS, the ancient Greek historian has written:ِ

\`\`Cyrus the Great commanded his soldiers not to draw their sword,
except against a warrior. He ordered that, any soldier who bent or cast
down his spear [ 39 ] and sword should not be harmed. By such
commandments Cyrus reduced much of the misfortunes and afflictions of
the war. He was kind and generous and was not greedy. He was very wise
and his main slogan was:ِ "SERVICE TO PEOPLE"''

**WHO WERE THE GOG AND MAGOG?**

Gog and Magog are mentioned twice in the Holy Qura"n. In the above
verse (No.94) they have been introduced as a mischief maker people in
the land, and also in S 21:96 we read:ِ

\`\`Until the Gog and Magog are let through (THE BARRIER) and they
shall break forth from every hill.'' The two verses imply that they were
a wild, lawless, cruel, and blood-thirsty people; who lived on plunder
of other nations, and making trouble for neighbouring people.

Almost all the commentators have agreed that they were the wild tribes
of central ASIA, who made sudden and hostile incursion on settled
kingdoms and empires, at various stages of the history. The Chinese
Empire built the great wall of China to prevent the invasion and plunder
of a group of them who were called the Mongols.

The Persian Empire has also suffered from them at various time and
place. The last of their raid was in the 12th century, leaded by GENGHIS
KHAN in which they utterly destroyed many great cities like NISHA"BUR.
We may conclude that the people of CAUCASIA were those who asked Cyrus
in his journey, to build them a barrier to prevent the sudden attack of
these wild and cruel people.

وَتَرَكْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذ يَمُوجُ فِى بَعْض وَنُفِخَ فِى
الصُّورِ فَجَمَعْنَاهُمْ جَمْعاً(( 99 ))

99- ON THAT DAY, WE LEAVE SOME OF THEM WAVING IN SOME OTHER. AND IT
WILL BE BLOWN IN THE TRUMPET, THEN WE SHALL GATHER THEM TOGETHER. [ 40
]

وَعَرَضْنَا جَهَنَّمَ يَوْمَئِذ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ عَرْضاً(( 100 ))

100- AND WE SHALL EXPOSE THE HELL THAT DAY TO THE UNBELIEVERS, WHAT AN
EXPOSING!

الَّذِينَ كَانَتْ أَعْيُنُهُمْ فِى غِطَاء عَنْ ذِكْرِى وَكَانُوا لاَ
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَمْعاً(( 101 ))

101- THOSE WHOSE EYES WERE COVERED FROM REMEMBERING ME, AND COULD NOT
HEAR THE TRUTH.

أَفَحَسِبَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا عِبَادِى مِنْ دُونِى
أَوْلِيَاءَ إِنَّا أَعْتَدْنَا جَهَنَّمَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ نُزُلا(( 102 ))
102- DO THEN THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED THINK THAT THEY CAN TAKE MY SERVANTS
AS PATRONS BESIDES ME? WE HAVE PREPARED THE HELL FOR DISBELIEVERS TO
ALIGHT.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE ABODE OF DISBELIEVERS**

VERSE NO.99ِ102 Before the great summons come from God, and before the
trumpet is blown in order to form the bodies once again, and to raise
the dead; making them ready for final judgement the above verse refers
to the condition in which Man exists:ِ

\`\`On that Day we leave some of them waving in some other.'' As to the
meaning of the phrase:ِ \`\`WAVING IN ONE ANOTHER'' various meanings
have been suggested by different commentators. Some say that they wave,
because of their great numbers. When there are a great many people in
one place, we idiomatically say the place waves with man and woman. It
may also mean that they are trembling with fear, just like a sea when it
is waving with storm. \*\*\*\*\*

[ 41 ]

**WAVING IN ONE ANOTHER**

I understand something else from the term, \`\`WAVING'' in the above
phrase:ِ Hazrat Imam Ali (AS) has said; \`\`Soul in the body of Man, is
like the meaning in a word.'' Here in this verse, the reference is to
the condition of Mankind before the great summon comes from God, and
before the trumpet is blown. This is when the bodies are still in their
graves, and Resurrection has not yet begun.

In this condition, the existence of Man consists of the elements of
which his body was made, and his soul, whatever it is. Here the likeness
of the souls of man and woman, is the likeness of the picture and form
of them, in the Electromagnetic fields. That is to say; in one Satellite
T.V. Transmission, millions of pictures, of the same man or thing, or
other man or things, are waving in one another, in the same field and in
any point. Yet they are all distinguished from one another by their
frequency, amplitude, and intensity of wave! It is possible to detect
and show them to one living eye, with the help of a suitable detector or
receiver. So is the condition in which our souls wave in one another,
before our Resurrection; or at least it can be a good example. Then
Allah will make a body for us, as He has done before, to detect our soul
and to be as a receiver for the next monitor or illustration of it.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

Then the trumpet will be blown by the arch angel of God whose name is
\`\`ISRA"FIL'', and all are summoned for the Final Judgement of God.
After that, Allah will expose the Hell, to the unbelievers whose eyes
were covered from remembering God, and who did not listen to the word of
truth. In this world, there are infinite signs of God which may convey
His Message, but what is to be done when some one does not want to see
or hear something!?

These unbelievers are those who thought they could take God's servants
as their patrons and protectors, besides God. [ 42 ]

قُلْ هَلْ نُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِالاَْخْسَرِينَ أَعْمَالا(( 103 ))

103- SAY:ِ \`\`SHALL WE INFORM YOU OF THOSE WHO ARE THE GREATEST LOSERS
IN THEIR WORK?''

الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ سَعْيُهُمْ فِى الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ يَحْسَبُونَ
أَنَّهُمْ يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعاً(( 104 ))

104- THOSE WHOSE EFFORTS IN THIS WORLD'S LIFE HAS BEEN LOST, AND YET
THEY THINK THEY HAVE DONE WELL.

أُولَئِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَلِقَائِهِ فَحَبِطَتْ
أَعْمَالُهُمْ فَلاَ نُقِيمُ لَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَزْناً(( 105
))

105- THEY ARE THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED THE SIGNS OF THEIR LORD AND MEETING
HIM. SO THEIR (GOOD) DEEDS ARE NEGATED (RENDERED OF NO VALUE). THEN IN
THE RESURRECTION DAY, WE HOLD NO WEIGHT FOR THEM.

ذَلِكَ جَزَاؤُهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ بِمَا كَفَرُوا وَاتَّخَذُوا آيَاتِى
وَرُسُلِى هُزُواً(( 106 ))

106- SO IS HELL THEIR REWARD FOR WHAT THEY DISBELIEVED AND TOOK MY
SIGNS AND MESSENGERS IN MOCKERY.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَانَتْ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتُ الْفِرْدَوْسِ نُزُلا(( 107 ))

107- VERILY THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, IN THE GARDENS
OF PARADISE WILL THEY ALIGHT.

خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا لاَ يَبْغُونَ عَنْهَا حِوَلا(( 108 ))

108- THEREIN THEY ABIDE FOREVER, WISHING NO TRANSFER. (FROM THEIR PLACE
OF ABODE) [ 43 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE GREATEST OF LOSERS**

VERSE NO.103ِ108

The above verses, and the others which will follow, up to the end of
the chapter of the cave, are some sort of a conclusion, and the last
summing up of the discourses in this chapter. It beings with introducing
the greatest of losers, saying:ِ \`\`....They are those whose efforts in
this world's life has been lost, and yet they think that they have done
well.''

The loss is not only to lose some material gain or money. The real loss
is when someone loses his main capital. What a capital is more valuable
than our knowledge and wisdom, than our natural faculties, and after all
our life and youth, if we waste them and obtain nothing in exchange.
When such powers in Man turn to be destructive, instead of being
constructive, Man may lose whatever he has.

Poor and helpless are those who boast on their work in this life, and
on what they think they have sown of seeds, but when they come to
harvest they find nothing, and see that even their seeds and capitals
have all been lost; and find all their work of no avail! They at last
come to know that no one's aid and protection is of any use except that
of God, but too late now.

They were going wrong, but they thought they were right and acquiring
merits. This was because they did not do what they did, purely for God.
There was hidden selfish motives in their service and worship, and even
their charity was for outward show. Therefore, no weight can be given to
the works and motives that are not sincerely for God.

Unless we believe in God, and in His Final Judgement and know that our
deeds are all recorded, we cannot open an account, or give a credit for
our deeds. To disbelieve in God, and to take His signs and Messengers in
mockery, will negate all the positive deeds of Man. How can we expect a
good result of our deeds, when we do not take the higher life seriously
and treat such an important tenet as a jest? How [ 44 ]

can we sow the seeds in a salty land and expect to reap sweet good
fruit?

A good example of those who are wrong and losers, and yet they think
they do good and acquire merits are the monks, hermits, and anchorites.
They retire from the world, and devote themselves to asceticism. They
leave their society and live in solitude, and do not marry, for
religious reasons they say! They make lawful things unlawful for
themselves, while no Divine Religion, nor even a common sense, wants to
prevent and even to blame Man for observing the laws of nature and
creation.

And so are the great losers those who replace Monotheism for Trinity,
and truth with superstitions, and yet they think they observe God's true
religious law.

قُلْ لَّوْ كَانَ الْبَحْرُ مِدَاداً لِّكَلِمَاتِ رَبِّى لَنَفِدَ
الْبَحْرُ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَنفَدَ كَلِمَاتُ رَبِّى وَلَوْ جِئْنَا بِمِثْلِهِ
مَدَداً(( 109 ))

110- SAY:ِ \`\`VERILY I AM A MANKIND THE LIKE OF YOU. IT IS INSPIRED TO
ME THAT YOUR GOD IS THE ONLY ONE GOD. SO, HE WHO HOPES TO MEET HIS LORD,
SHOULD DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, AND ASSOCIATE NO ONE IN THE WORSHIP OF HIS
LORD.''


