Occasion of the Relevation /verse No.46ِ50
==========================================

There was a quarrel between a Jew and a hypocrite. The Jew asked him to
refer their case to the Messenger of God for judgement. The hypocrite
rejected the proposal saying:ِ \`\`Mohammad will not observe the justice
between me and you, for being cross with me for lack of faith, and with
you for rejecting his religion.'' To this effect the above verses
revealed. The immediate reference of the first (NO.46), is to the
perspicuous verses of the Glorious Qura"n that are all expressed
clearly, and they express things clearly too. These verses are the true
signs of God by which, Allah guides to Himself those who obtain the
necessary merits and qualifications:ِ

\`\`Verily We have sent down perspicuous signs; and Allah guides
whoever He will.'' To obtain the honour of being faithful, the first
condition is to conform the tongue with the heart, and to bring both in
harmony and agreement; Not to continue a nominal Muslim, or become a
hypocrite who say:ِ \`\`....We believe in Allah and in the Messenger,
and we obey; and then turn away. Such are not believers indeed.'' In
fact, these are the real hypocrites who play fast and loose according to
their selfish aims. Their belief is in the tip of their tongue. They
claim to be Muslims and to be obedient to the Messenger, but in time of
need and in emergency cases, they prove to have a heart that is beyond,
and against, their tongue!

According to the above occasion of revelation, when it is said to
them:ِ \`\`Why don't you come to the Messenger of God for judgement?''
They bring excuses for their turning away. But when they are sure that
the judgement would be in their favour, they readily come and ask the [
363 ]

Messenger of God to judge between them. This proves that they are
looking for a judge to be flexible enough to lower the balance in their
favour. They don't like justice or a judge who would not be open to
bribery, gifts, or at least flattery! To this effect, such people are
merely hypocrites and are far from being a believer, or even a Muslim.
And all these faithlessness and hypocrisy, is due to a sickness which is
in the bottom of their heart; A disease, the pain of which is manifested
in their continuous doubt and wavering.

إِنَّمَا كَانَ قَوْلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذَا دُعُوا إِلَى اللهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَهُمْ أَنْ يَقُولُوا سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا
وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ(( 51 ))

51- THE ONLY WORD OF THE BELIEVERS, WHEN THEY ARE CALLED TO ALLAH AND
HIS MESSENGER TO JUDGE BETWEEN THEM IS THAT, THEY SAY; \`\`WE HEAR AND
WE OBEY'' AND THEY ARE THE PROSPERERS.

وَمَنْ يُطِعِ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَيَخْشَ اللهَ وَيَتَّقْهِ فَأُوْلَئِكَ
هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ(( 52 ))

52- AND WHOEVER OBEYS ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER, AND FEARS ALLAH AND IS
CAUTIOUS OF HIM, THEN THEY ARE THE WINNERS.

وَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لَئِنْ أَمَرْتَهُمْ
لَيَخْرُجُنَّ قُلْ لاَّ تُقْسِمُوا طَاعَةٌ مَّعْرُوفَةٌ إِنَّ اللهَ
خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ(( 53 ))

53- AND THEY SWORE BY ALLAH, THEIR STRONGEST OATH THAT IF YOU WOULD
ORDER THEM, THEY WOULD COME OUT. (LEAVING HOME FOR EMIGRATION)

[ 364 ]

TELL THEM:ِ \`\`DON'T SWEAR. REASONABLE OBEDIENCE, (IS ENOUGH) FOR
ALLAH IS AWARE OF WHATEVER YOU DO.''

قُلْ أَطِيعُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوا فَإِنَّمَا
عَلَيْهِ مَا حُمِّلَ وَعَلَيْكُمْ مَّا حُمِّلْتُمْ وَإِنْ تُطِيعُوهُ
تَهْتَدُوا وَمَا عَلَى الرَّسُولِ إِلاَّ الْبَلاَغُ الْمُبِينُ (( 54
))

SAY; OBEY ALLAH AND OBEY THE MESSENGER. AND IF YOU TURN AWAY, HE IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT HE DOES, AND YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT YOU DO.
BUT IF YOU OBEY HIM YOU WILL BE GUIDED. AND THE MESSENGER HAS NO DUTY
OTHER THAN MANIFEST DELIVERY. (OF GOD'S MESSAGE)

**THE COMMENTARY
FAITH AND ABSOLUTE SUBMISSION TO TRUTH**
VERSE NO.51ِ54

The above verses are complementary and contrary to the previous ones
which dealt with the nonbelievers and hypocrites. The argument here is
about the believers and their behaviour in their obedience:ِ \`\`The
only word of the believers when they are called to Allah and to His
Messenger to judge between them is that, they say:ِ \`\`We hear and we
obey'' and they are the winners.''

This, however is contrary to the creed of a nominal Muslim or a
hypocrite, who will say openly and loudly:ِ \`\`We hear and obey'' but
their [ 365 ]

hearts deny their tongues, and they do not obey in time. Contrary to
them are the believers who eagerly wait for the prophet's order to hear
and perform it perfectly.

When the previous verses revealed some of the hypocrites who were
anxious of their social position among Muslim, came to the prophet and
swore by Allah their strongest oath, saying:ِ \`\`They would obey and
follow the prophet's commands by all means; but in fact they were liars
because they had not the light of faith and truth in their hearts.''

Idle swear, when you believe not in the sworn, will have not the least
value. Instead of boastings, supported by strong oath, you better have
your mouth closed and open your hands. Instead of claiming we better be
up and doing:ِ \`\`....Tell them don't swear. Reasonable obedience will
do; because Allah is aware of whatever you do.''

Of course, things are to be done by Man with his Free Will. No one
forces us to obey God's order and religious commandments which have been
explained to us by His apostles. The mission of the Messenger of God is
only to convey and explain clearly whatever of Message he has received
from our Lord. Therefore the responsibility for our conduct rests
entirely upon ourselves, and we have to taste the reaction of our
actions.

وَعَدَ اللهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِى الاَْرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِى ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْناً يَعْبُدُونَنِى لاَ
يُشْرِكُونَ بِى شَيْئاً وَمَنْ كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ(( 55 ))

[ 366 ]

55- ALLAH HAS PROMISED THOSE OF YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED, AND HAVE DONE
RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, THAT HE WILL SURELY MAKE THEM SUCCESSORES IN THE LAND,
AS HE HAD MADE THOSE WHO WERE BEFORE THEM SUCCESSORS. AND THAT HE WILL
ESTABLISH FOR THEM, THEIR RELIGION WHICH HE HAS CHOSEN FOR THEM. AND
THAT HE WILL CHANGE THEIR FEAR TO SECURITY, SO AS TO WORSHIP ME AND DO
NOT ASSOCIATE WITH ME ANYTHING. AND HE WHO DISBELIEVED AFTER THAT, THEN
THEY ARE THE DEBAUCHERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

VERSE NO.55

Almost all the commentators have narrated that, when Muslims emigrated
to Medina from Mecca, all the Arabs raised against them, except some who
lived in Medina. So the believers lived in a state of anxiety and fear,
so much so that they could not leave aside their arms even when they
wanted to sleep.

They were asking one another that how long could that awful and uneasy
situation last? Then the above verse revealed to console and encourage
them, and to inspire them with the hope for a good future.

**THE TRUTHFUL BELIEVERS WILL UNIVERSALLY COME TO POWER**

Here the verse with stress and emphasis foretells that, those believers
who do righteous deeds, will inherit the land and will become [ 367 ]
the successors with authority and power to rule, as God made those who
lived before them Khalifs, such as Solomon and David. Here three
promises have been given in this verse to the believers who do righteous
deeds, namely:ِ

1ِThey will inherit enough power and authority to rule all over the
land, in order to maintain the law and justice.
2ِThe religion chosen by Allah which is Islam, the submission to God's
will, is to be openly established.
3ِThe righteous believer will live in peace and security and shall have
a comfortable opportunity to worship Allah, without being forced to
serve anyone else besides Allah.

We Shiites are of opinion that such a perfect and universal rulership
of the believers, as God has promised here, will not come to pass,
except with the advent of \`\`AL-MAHDI (AF)''. When he appears the final
goal of Man's creation will be attained, which is to worship Allah
without associating partners to Him, and without the least amount of
anxiety and fear.

وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ(( 56 ))

56- AND PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND PAY THE ALMS-TAX, AND OBEY THE
MESSENGER, PERHAPS YOU MAY RECEIVE MERCY.

لاَ تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مُعْجِزِينَ فِى الاَْرْضِ
وَمَأْوَاهُمُ النَّارُ وَلَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ(( 57 ))

57- DON'T YOU THINK THAT NON-BELIEVERS ARE ABLE TO FRUSTRATE (ALLAH IN
HIS PLANS), ON THE EARTH, AND THEIR ABODE IS THE FIRE, AND WHAT A BAD
ABODE.

[ 368 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
IT IS NOT POSSIBLE TO ESCAPE PUNISHMENT** VERSE NO.56ِ57

The above verses will instruct people how to provide for the
aformentioned promises of inheriting the governorship of the earth. To
start for that goal, they have to perform the prayer as it is taught by
the prophet, and to pay the alms-tax and to obey the prophet's
instruction in general, and whatever he has ordered them to do in any
position.

Performing these instructions may bring God's Mercy upon the performers
and provide for his spiritual and physical progress. Then they may
obtain the necessary merits for such a promised universal rulership. We
may think in this course of endeavour that the enemies of truth may make
obstructions and prevent God from carrying on His promises. Here we
ought to know that:ِ \`\`....The unbelievers are not able to frustrate
Allah in His plans and promises on the earth. Their obstruction only
will lead them to their doom and destination which might be the blazing
Fire in Hell.''

يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِيَسْتَأْذِنْكُمُ الَّذِينَ مَلَكَتْ
أَيْمَانُكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ لَمْ يَبْلُغُوا الْحُلُمَ مِنْكُمْ ثَلاَثَ
مَرَّات مِّنْ قَبْلِ صَلاَةِ الْفَجْرِ وَحِينَ تَضَعُونَ ثِيَابَكُمْ
مِّنْ الظَّهِيرَةِ وَمِنْ بَعْدِ صَلاَةِ الْعِشَاءِ ثَلاَثُ عَوْرَات
لَّكُمْ لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلاَ عَلَيْهِمْ جُنَاحٌ بَعْدَهُنَّ
طَوَّافُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ بَعْضُكُمْ عَلَى بَعْض كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللهُ
لَكُمُ الاْيَاتِ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 58 ))

58- O, YOU WHO HAVE BELIEVED! LET THOSE WHOM YOUR RIGHT HAND OWNS, AND
THOSE OF YOU WHO HAVE NOT REACHED PUBERTY (YOUR CHILDREN), ASK YOUR
PERMISSION ON THREE TIMES (FOR COMING TO YOUR PRIVATE ROOM),ِ

[ 369 ]

BEFORE MORNING PRAYER, AND WHEN YOU TAKE OFF YOUR CLOTHES IN (THE HEAT
OF) NOON, AND AFTER THE NIGHT PRAYERِTHE THREE TIMES OF PRIVACY FOR YOU.
THERE IS NO FAULT IN YOU, NOR ON THEY OUTSIDE OF THOSE TIMES TO MOVE
ROUND ABOUT, ATTENDING SOME OF YOU SOME OTHER. SO DOES ALLAH MAKE CLEAR
TO YOU THE SIGNS (OF ETHICS), THAT ALLAH IS ALL-KNOWING, ALL-WISE.

وَإِذَا بَلَغَ الاَْطْفَالُ مِنْكُمُ الْحُلُمَ فَلْيَسْتَأْذِنُوا كَمَا
اسْتَأْذَنَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللهُ لَكُمْ
آيَاتِهِ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 59 ))

59- AND WHEN YOUR CHILDREN REACH (THE AGE OF) PUBERTY, THEY SHOULD ASK
FOR PERMISSION (TO ENTER YOUR CHAMBERS) AS THOSE WHO WERE BEFORE THEM
ASKED FOR PERMISSION. SO DOES ALLAH MAKE CLEAR TO YOU HIS SIGNS, THAT
ALLAH IS ALL-KNOWING, ALL-WISE.

وَالْقَوَاعِدُ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ اللاَّتِى لاَ يَرْجُونَ نِكَاحاً
فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْهِنَّ جُنَاحٌ أَنْ يَضَعْنَ ثِيَابَهُنَّ غَيْرَ
مُتَبَرِّجَات بِزِينَة وَأَنْ يَسْتَعْفِفْنَ خَيْرٌ لَّهُنَّ وَاللهُ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ (( 60 ))

60- AS TO THE WOMEN WHO ARE SO OLD THAT DO NOT EXPECT MARRIAGE, THERE
IS NO FAULT IN THEM IF THEY PUT OFF THEIR GARMENT, WITHOUT REVEALING
THEIR ADORNMENT, AND IF THEY BE MODEST, IT IS BETTER FOR THEM; AND ALLAH
IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-KNOWING.

[ 370 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE RULES OF ENTERING THE PRIVACY OF PARENTS** VERSE NO.58ِ60

Generally, the object that is followed throughout this chapter of
light, is the challenge against the sexual contaminations, and observing
the general rules of chastity and modesty in the community. Here too,
some rules have been recommended to support that object of chastity,
which is very essential to a refined human life. These are the rules
against entering the bedroom of parents and elders, and disturbing their
privacy. In the sight of Islam respecting the privacy of other people is
essential and very important a matter. Observing the rules of ethics,
and conformity to accepted standards is a must, and a part of our
religious duty to our Lord. Even our children and servants are not
exceptionable in this order. That is to say, they are not allowed to
enter their parent's chamber of privacy, without permission, in certain
times of day and night:ِ

\`\`O, you who have believed! Let those whom your right hand owns, and
even your children that have not attained yet the age of puberty, ask
your permission for coming to your private rooms in three times; before
morning; and when you take off your clothes in the heat of noon; and
after the night prayer. These are the three times of privacy for you,
that you might be undressed.''

Some commentators have understood; \`\`Those whom your right hand
owns'' to be those who have to render personal service to their masters
and mistresses by day and night; because, nowadays there are no slaves
in the master's houses.

The children who have not attained the age of puberty are not to be
necessarily our own children. All the children who are somehow [ 371 ]

within our house must conform to the standards of the refined Islamic
life. Of course, by children here both sexes are meant, be a girl or a
boy.

By the age of puberty, the state or quality of being capable of
begetting or bearing offspring is wanted here. But even before sexual
maturity is reached, which is under the age of say, fourteen, still the
children in the house must take leave for the said three times, in order
to enter the bedroom of their parent, or elders. In other word; parents
should not think that their children are child, and know nothing of the
affairs. It certainly will put a negative effect in their mind, if they
suddenly open their eyes or the door, and see their father and mother in
a critical state of sexual intercourse!

In the last verse, the rule of modesty for old women has been
explained. For young woman in the house the rules of dress, do not
exactly apply to the old one, who do not expect a marriage. So, they may
have their garments off without intending to be showy. In the sight of
Islam, modesty is always becoming to women, young or old.

لَيْسَ عَلَى الاَْعْمَى حَرَجٌ وَلاَ عَلَى الاَْعْرَجِ حَرَجٌ وَلاَ
عَلَى الْمَرِيضِ حَرَجٌ وَلاَ عَلَى أَنفُسِكُمْ أَنْ تَأْكُلُوا مِنْ
بُيُوتِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ آبَائِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ أَوْ
بُيُوتِ إِخْوَانِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أَخَوَاتِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ
أَعْمَامِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ عَمَّاتِكُمْ أَوْ بُيُوتِ أَخْوَالِكُمْ أَوْ
بُيُوتِ خَالاَتِكُمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكْتُمْ مَّفَاتِحَهُ أَوْ صَدِيقِكُمْ
لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَنْ تَأْكُلُوا جَمِيعاً أَوْ أَشْتَاتاً
فَإِذَا دَخَلْتُمْ بُيُوتاً فَسَلِّمُوا عَلَى أَنفُسِكُمْ تَحِيَّةً
مِّنْ عِنْدِ اللهِ مُبَارَكَةً طَيِّبَةً كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللهُ لَكُمُ
الاْيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ(( 61 ))

[ 372 ]

61- THERE IS NO FAULT IN THE BLIND, AND THERE IS NO FAULT IN THE LAME,
AND THERE IS NO FAULT IN THE SICK, NEITHER IN YOURSELVES, THAT YOU EAT
OF YOUR OWN HOUSES, OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR FATHERS, OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR
MOTHERS, OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR BROTHERS, OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR SISTERS,
OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR PATERNAL UNCLES, OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR AUNTS IN
FATHER SIDE, OR THE HOUSES OF YOUR UNCLES IN MOTHER SIDE, OR THE HOUSES
OF YOUR MATERNAL AUNTS, OR WHEREVER YOU OWN ITS KEYS, (OR THE HOUSE OF)
YOUR FRIEND. THERE IS NO FAULT IN YOU WHETHER TO EAT TOGETHER OR
SEPARATELY.

THEN WHEN YOU ENTERED HOUSES, SALUTE ONE ANOTHER WITH A GREETING,
BLESSED AND PURE, FROM ALLAH. SO DOES ALLAH MAKE CLEAR FOR YOU THE
SIGNS, PERHAPS YOU BECOME WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE HOUSES IN WHICH TAKING MEAL IS ALLOWED** VERSE NO.61

The aformentioned verses were about the admission or permission of
entering the private room of parents in certain time of day and night.
Here in this verse, an exception of taking leave to enter some houses
has been explained. It says that we are allowed to enter to [ 373 ]

the houses of a certain group of our near relatives, and even we can
take meal with the households there:ِ \`\`There is no fault in the
blind, and there is no fault in the lame, and there is no fault in the
sick, neither yourselves, that you eat of your own houses, or....'' Why
then the first reference here is to the blind, lame, and sick?

According to some narrations about the superstitions of the Pagan Era,
the blind, and the lame, and some people afflicted with certain diseases
were cursed by gods, and no one dared to associate with them, or take
meal with them for fear of bad omen! The lame and blind themselves too,
refrained from associating others for being shy, and wanting not to
bother the healthy people. It was also regarded as an ill omen, to take
meal in the houses of near relatives. Islam enjoined hospitality and
gentle fellowship in each other's houses, and in particular enjoined the
observation of bonds of relationship.

إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَإِذَا
كَانُوا مَعَهُ عَلَى أَمْر جَامِع لَّمْ يَذْهَبُوا حَتَّى
يَسْتَأْذِنُوهُ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَأْذِنُونَكَ أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللهِ وَرَسُولِهِ فَإِذَا اسْتَأْذَنُوكَ لِبَعْضِ
شَأْنِهِمْ فَأْذَنْ لِّمَنْ شِئْتَ مِنْهُمْ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمُ اللهَ
إِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 62 ))

62- THE (TRUE) BELIEVERS ARE THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED IN ALLAH AND HIS
MESSENGER, AND WHEN THEY ARE WITH HIM FOR A COMPREHENSIVE MATTER, THEY
DO NOT GO AWAY UNTIL THEY ASK HIS PERMISSION. VERILY THOSE WHO ASK YOUR
PERMISSION, THEY ARE THE ONES WHO BELIEVE IN GOD AND HIS MESSENGER. THEN
WHEN THEY ASK YOUR

[ 374 ]

PERMISSION FOR SOME OF THEIR PERSONAL AFFAIRS, PERMIT THOSE OF THEM
WHOM YOU WILL, AND ASK FOR ALLAH'S FORGIVENESS FOR THEM, THAT ALLAH IS
ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.

لاَ تَجْعَلُوا دُعَاءَ الرَّسُولِ بَيْنَكُمْ كَدُعَاءِ بَعْضِكُمْ
بَعْضاً قَدْ يَعْلَمُ اللهُ الَّذِينَ يَتَسَلَّلُونَ مِنْكُمْ لِوَاذاً
فَلْيَحْذَرِ الَّذِينَ يُخَالِفُونَ عَنْ أَمْرِهِ أَنْ تُصِيبَهُمْ
فِتْنَةٌ أَوْ يُصِيبَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 63 ))

63- DO NOT CALL (ADDRESS) THE MESSENGER AMONG YOU AS YOU CALL EACH
OTHER.

VERILY ALLAH KNOWS THOSE OF YOU WHO SLIP AWAY, CONCEALING THEMSELVES
BEHIND OTHERS. THEREFORE, LET THOSE BEWARE, WHO OPPOSE HIS ORDER, LEST A
TRIAL SHOULD BEFALL THEM; OR A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT AFFLICT THEM.

أَلاَ إِنَّ للهِِ مَا فِى السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ قَدْ يَعْلَمُ مَا
أَنْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ وَيَوْمَ يُرْجَعُونَ إِلَيْهِ فَيُنَبِّئُهُمْ بِمَا
عَمِلُوا وَاللهُ بِكُلِّ شَىْء عَلِيمٌ(( 64 ))

64- KNOW THAT; TO ALLAH BELONGS ALL THAT IS IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH.

HE KNOWS WELL ON WHAT (KIND OF PLAN OR INTENTION) YOU ARE. AND THE DAY
WHEN THEY SHALL BE RETURNED TO HIM, THEN HE WILL INFORM THEM OF WHAT
THEY DID, AND ALLAH HAS THE KNOWLEDGE OF ALL THINGS.

[ 375 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

VERSE NO.62ِ64 Commentators have narrated that the verse (NO.62) was
revealed about the incident of HANZALIH, whom angels bathed.

He was a young true believer who had a date for his marriage with the
girl he loved just when the battle of OHUD began. The young man asked
for prophet's permission in order to attend his marriage ceremony, when
the prophet was in a military council for war. The Messenger of God gave
him the permission, and he left the battle-field of Ohud to join his
marriage festival. In the next day, he anxiously and urgently left his
bride alone, and joined the prophet in the battle field. He needed
ceremonial ablution for sexual intercourse with his bride but had no
time to find water and wash out his body. He fought bravely and was at
last martyred. The prophet said that he had seen the angels bathing him
and hence his famous Islamic title of GHASIL-AL-MALA"EKEH which means
the, \`\`bathed by angels.''

**DON'T LEAVE THE PROPHET ALONE**

Now the verses will teach us how to behave in the presence of the
prophet and before his successors in general. When calling the prophet
or even the religious leaders who at present may lead us to the way of
our prophet, we should be of characteristics of highly cultivated and
refined, and in addressing them we must use proper terms of respect:ِ

\`\`Do not call the Messenger among you as you call each other.''

The first of the above verses (NO.62) which was revealed on the above
mentioned occasion, implies that we should not leave the prophet (or his
successor) alone, and go away when he is occupied with a comprehensive
and important social matter, in which our presence is needed:ِ

[ 376 ]

\`\`The true believers are those who believe in Allah and his
Messenger, and when they are with him for a comprehensive matter, they
do not go away until they have his permission.''

Comprehensive matters could have been those common and important
matters which pertain to the whole community, such as declaring a sacred
war against enemy's intrusion, as it was the case with the incident of
Ohud. Other reason too, such as the congregational prayers have also
been mentioned, but all these are only parts of the whole meaning, which
drives at a joint consultation with a view to a joint venture. As a
matter of fact, this is a disciplinary order that no one should ever
neglect it. Sometimes it will be essential to sacrifice a personal
benefit to save a more important social profit, for the whole
community.

Then comes the ending of this passage that:ِ \`\`....Then when they ask
your permission for some of their personal affairs, permit those of them
that you will, and ask for Allah's forgiveness for them, that Allah is
All-forgiving, Compassionate.'' In such emergency cases, even those who
would leave the field of war or the site of work, they still have some
shortcomings, and defects, in doing their duty because of their absence
or leave. Therefore, they still need the prophet to pardon them and to
ask God to forgive them for their defect.

\*\*\*\*\*

**MORE ABOUT HANZALIH, THE BATHED BY ANGELS**

HANZALIH, one of the famous companions of our prophet, was a very
sincere and truthful young believer who was in love with a girl. The
couple had an appointment for their wedding ceremony, which became
coincident at the arrival of GHORAISH for the battle of OHUD.

[ 377 ] HANZALIH was wavering and in unsettled state of mind, as what
was the right to do in that critical condition concerning whether to
fight and die, or to marry and live. In one side, he had his dearly
loved fiancee waiting for him in her marriage ceremony. On the other
hand, he had the Messenger of God involved in a defensive war with
unequal forces, and also the sabotages of the Jews and hypocrites. So he
could not decide what was the best thing to be done. After a long
contemplation, he went to prophet and asked his opinion about that? In
answer, the prophet told him:ِ \`\`Go and do the marriage, for the
marriage will save half of the religion of a young man or woman.''

When HANZALIH got the prophet's permission, he happily left OHUD, and
came to his bride, and the marriage ceremony was performed, and the
young couple became husband and wife.

Soon the nuptial night sleep elapsed; so sweet and so quick. When it
dawned, HANZALIH woke up to perform his morning prayer. Then he looked
through the window and saw the bright Arabian stars in the sky, and he
said to himself: \`\`No! I must go! I should not leave the Messenger of
God with his cruel enemies, and lay down here.'' Hearing that, his bride
was waken up, and she anxiously asked:ِ \`\`What did you say my dear?
Where you want to go which is a must!?'' He gazed at the bewitching
beauty of his bride, and said after a pause:ِ \`\`I must go to the
battle-field, where the prophet and my Muslim brothers are in danger. I
must join them as soon as possible.''

\`\`But you said that the prophet has given you permission to marry and
live with your bride. Didn't you?'' asked his bride. \`\`Yes my dear! It
was really so.'' Said HANZALIH, \`\`But I can't consent and satisfy my
heart to leave the prophet with our enemies, and enjoy the company of my
bride in peace.'' \`\`But you are just married'', said the bride,
\`\`And you have every right to live with your bride, if not for a
month, at least for a honey-week- a bride that you have frequently said
that you are in love with her!'' [ 378 ]

\`\`It is true that I do love you but if the heathens win to slay the
prophet in my absence, and I lose the opportunity of defending him and
die in his cause, I can never pardon myself, and even with a sweet heart
as you are, life will seem deadly bitter to me.''

He then wore his armour, and wavered his sword, and kissed his dearest
for good-bye! She burst into hot bitter tears and said:ِ \`\`O, you my
husband! If so do not hasten then! Wait a minute for I have something
very important to tell you!'' She then drew her tucker over her bosom to
conceal her adornment and quickly went out of the house. After a few
minutes, she returned with two men from the neighbouring friends! Then
in the presence of the two men she asked her husband, saying:ِ
\`\`Please tell the truth! Did you have intercourse with me as your
legal wife last night?'' \`\`Yes of course'', said HANZALIH, \`\`But why
do you ask that?'' The bride said:ِ \`\`I want the two gentlemen to bear
witness when necessary, perhaps I bear a child after you''ِand then she
burst into bitter tears. Then she tried hard to hold her control and at
last she said:ِ

\`\`My dear HANZALIH! I do not hope to see you again, for last night I
dreamt a curious dream! I dreamt that the door of heavens opened at
once, and several angels came down on the ground! The angels then took
you up in the skies with themselves. I take my dream to mean that you
shall be martyred in this sacred fight.''

HANZALIH smiled and said:ِ \`\`What a good news!'' He then hastened to
the battle-field. It was just the time when Muslim had been defeated and
scattered round about, and there was the strong rumour that Mohammad
(SA) had been killed!follow him, for life is only faith, and strive for
that faith. He then roared like a lion, but his roar was nothing than;
\`\`ALLAH-HO-AKBAR'', and attacked the enemy fearlessly and lonely, and
bold enough not to fear death. He killed two of the enemies and wounded
many and he was then martyred. Some of the pagans went to mutilate him
but one of them shouted:ِ \`\`Don't mutilate him for he is HANZALIH the
son of ABU-A"MIR!'' So they left the bridegroom drowned in his sacred
blood.

After the war was over, it was found that most of the Muslim martyrs
like HAZRAT HAMZIH had been mutilated. The prophet prayed on his body
and buried him and then said to his companions:ِ

\`\`I saw that the angels bathed HANZALIH and gave him his necessary
cleansing ablution.'' HANZALIH was therefore nicknamed,
\`\`GHASILATOL-MALA",EKEH'', which means the one who got ablution by the
angels, or we may take it as the one babtized by the angels.


THE END OF SUREH THE LIGHT (24)

[ 380 ]


