The Seperator
=============

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE.

تَبَارَكَ الَّذِى نَزَّلَ الْفُرْقَانَ عَلَى عَبْدِهِ لِيَكُونَ
لِلْعَالَمِينَ نَذِيراً(( 1 ))

1- BLESSED IS HE WHO SENT DOWN THE SEPARATOR, (QURA"N) UPON HIS
SERVANT, IN ORDER TO BE A WARNER TO (ALL THE PEOPLE OF) THE WORLDS.

الَّذِى لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَلَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَداً
وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَّهُ شَرِيكٌ فِى الْمُلْكِ وَخَلَقَ كُلَّ شَىْء
فَقَدَّرَهُ تَقْدِيراً(( 2 ))

2- HE TO WHOM BELONGS THE DOMINION OF THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, AND WHO
WILL NOT TAKE (TO HIMSELF) ANY CHILD, AND THERE WILL NOT BE ANY PARTNER
FOR HIM, IN THE DOMINION. AND HE CREATED EVERYTHING, AND DISPOSED THEM
MINUTELY.

[ 381 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SUPER CRITERION**

VERSE 1ِ2

This chapter begins with the word, \`\`TABA"RAKA'' which is translated
to, \`\`BLESSED''. However, this is not the exact meaning of the word
because, when an English speaking man says \`\`GOD BLESS ME'' he asks
God to guard himِto keep himِor to protect him, or else to make him
holy. But an Arab does not really mean these things. By TABA"RAKA which
is from the root word, \`\`BARAKAT'', he understands something that has
a continuous benefit, goodness, or help. In general, it is something
with permanent usefulness. So:ِ \`\`Blessed is He who sent down the
\`\`FORGHA"N'' upon His servant in order to be a warner to the worlds.''
(MANKIND)''

Here the blessings of God's Substance has been introduced through the,
\`\`FORGHA"N'' that is a means of separating the right from wrong, and
the true from false. Lucky is the man who has a means or a criterion by
which he may distinguish the truth from falsehood, and to separate the
gold from the dross.

In other word, FORGHA"N is another name for QURA"N, and it means that
the Book revealed by God is qualified to distinguish between right and
wrong, false and true. By it, we may clearly separate evil from good,
and darkness from light. It is some sort of a light itself by which we
can distinguish everything. It is also a warner among mankind and a
bearer of good news too.

This FORGHA"N is the Message and the will, of our Lord who is the only
one true God who takes no child to Himself, and has no partner in the
universe and the whole being. He is the Creator of everything who has
arranged and measured them as they should.

Therefore, the first lesson that we can take from FORGHA"N, is how to
differentiate between the true God who has created everything, and Who
owns everything; against the false gods, such as the idols, and the
fetishes that are forged by some selfish profiteers.

The difference between FORGHA"N and QURA"N is said to be in that; [ 382
]

QURA"N refers to the whole Book of Allah whereas FORGHA"N refers to the
fundamental verses of the Book. Worthy of note is that the final object
of sending FORGHA"N to the Messenger of God is to warn mankind. This
means that Qura"n is a universal Message of God for all mankind in all
times and spaces.

وَاتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ آلِهَةً لاَّ يَخْلُقُونَ شَيْئاً وَهُمْ
يُخْلَقُونَ وَلاَ يَمْلِكُونَ لاَِنفُسِهِمْ ضَرّاً وَلاَ نَفْعاً وَلاَ
يَمْلِكُونَ مَوْتاً وَلاَ حَيَاةً وَلاَ نُشُوراً(( 3 ))

3- AND THEY TOOK APART FROM HIM, GODS THAT THEY CREATED NOTHING, AND
THEMSELVES ARE CREATED. AND THEY HAVE NO POWER TO HURT OR PROFIT
THEMSELVES, AND THEY DO NOT OWN THE POWER OF DEATH OR LIFE, AND NOR
RESURRECTION.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ إِفْكٌ افْتَرَاهُ
وَأَعَانَهُ عَلَيْهِ قَوْمٌ آخَرُونَ فَقَدْ جَاءُوا ظُلْماً وَزُوراً(( 4
))

4- AND THOSE WHO HAVE NOT BELIEVED, SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS NOTHING EXCEPT A
FORGERY THAT HE HAS FORGED IT, AND OTHER PEOPLE HAVE HELPED HIM OVER
IT.

THEY INDEED HAVE COME WITH OPPRESSION, AND GREAT LIE.

وَقَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الاَْوَّلِينَ اكْتَتَبَهَا فَهِىَ تُمْلَى عَلَيْهِ
بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلا(( 5 ))

5- AND THEY ALSO SAID:ِ\`\`(THOSE PASSAGES ARE) PRIMEVAL FAIRY TALES
THAT HE HAS COPIED THEM, AND THEY ARE DICTATED TO HIM MORNING AND
EVENING.''

[ 383 ]

قُلْ أَنزَلَهُ الَّذِى يَعْلَمُ السِّرَّ فِى السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ
إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً(( 6 ))

6- SAY HE SENT IT DOWN WHO KNOWS THE SECRET IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH.
FOR, HE IS THE ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
VARIOUS CALUMNIES**
VERSE NO.3ِ6

The first verse here (NO.3) calls the polytheist to the court of human
conscience for a just judgement, and meanwhile it stings, and
reproaches, with a clear logic and a knocking down reason, that:ِ
\`\`They took apart from Him gods, that can create nothing and
themselves are created. And they have no power to hurt or to profit
themselves....''

Here a criterion has been given to us in order to know the true God
from the false onesِA false god cannot create anything, be it as big as
an elephant, or as small as a gnat. Even if a gnat snatches something of
him; say, a drop of his blood, he is not able to get it back from the
gnat. What sort of a god can we consider him, when he cannot create
anything, while he himself has been created!? A god who has not any
control over a loss or a profit, at least, for himself. A god that
cannot ward off his own death, and has no power to maintain the life
that has been bestowed on him.

If one is really so; why should others who are like himself, deify him
and worship him as a god? When such false deities cannot be of any use
to themselves, how can they help and support their worshipers, at least,
in emergency cases. In this verse, the false gods have been qualified by
the verbs, \`\`THEY DO NOT OWN'' and, \`\`THEY DO NOT CREATE'' which are
in plural form and masculine gender, and apply not correctly to the
idols. [ 384 ]

This implies that the verbs also alludes to deified men and women, such
as Jesus (AS) and his mother Mary, and also to the deified angels.

The second and third verses refer to the unjust charges by which the
non-believers accused our prophet, saying:ِ \`\`This is nothing but a
forgery that he has forged it and that other people have helped him over
it.'' \`\`These passages are primeval fairy-tales that he has copied
them, and that they are dictated to him mornings and evenings.''

The non-believers shamelessly accused our truthful prophet whom they
themselves had nicknamed; \`\`AMIN=TRUSTWORTHY'' and said that the
revelation (i.e. QURA"N) was not a revelation, and was a forgery! In
other word, they meant all the logics, and reasonings for the Oneness of
God, for the life after death, for the Resurrection Day, for the final
judgement, and for the Paradise and Hell; are fanciful fairy-tales and
have no basis in fact! They also said that; \`\`The stories of the
prophets that are cited in the Qura"n, and also the punishment or
salvation of the wrong and right people which he has narrated, are all
primeval fables, that he has copied them, and are no more than legendary
matters of myth, that some of his companions such Salma"n Farsi, dictate
to him mornings and evenings!''

By such scandals, they wanted to scatter the believers from around our
prophet. This was while everybody in that era, knew well that the
Messenger of God never attended a school, and never learned to read and
write, and never associated with the learned or unlearned Jews and
Christians throughout his life. But we can clearly see that Qura"n
teaches minutely, the fundamentals of spiritual knowledge, and wonderful
scientific points, that no man has had access to them before. These
mysterious scientific matters can only come from the All-knowing
Substance Who knows the secrets in the heavens and earth.

[ 385 ]

وَقَالُوا مَالِ هَذَا الرَّسُولِ يَأْكُلُ الطَّعَامَ وَيَمْشِى فِى
الاَْسْوَاقِ لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مَلَكٌ فَيَكُونَ مَعَهُ نَذِيراً((
7 ))

7- AND THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT IS WRONG WITH THIS MESSENGER WHO EATS FOOD,
AND WALKS IN THE MARKETS? WHY HAS NOT AN ANGEL BEEN SENT DOWN TO HIM SO
AS TO BE A WARNER WITH HIM?''

أَوْ يُلْقَى إِلَيْهِ كَنزٌ أَوْ تَكُونُ لَهُ جَنَّةٌ يَأْكُلُ مِنْهَا
وَقَالَ الظَّالِمُونَ إِنْ تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ رَجُلا مَّسْحُوراً(( 8
))

8- OR WHY HAS NOT A TREASURE BEEN GIVEN HIM, OR WHY HAS HE NOT A GARDEN
TO EAT FROM IT. AND THE OPPRESSORS SAID; YOU ARE NOT FOLLOWING BUT A MAN
WHO IS FASCINATED.

انظُرْ كَيْفَ ضَرَبُوا لَكَ الاَْمْثَالَ فَضَلُّوا فَلاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
سَبِيلا(( 9 ))

9- SEE HOW DID THEY STRIKE SIMILITUDES FOR YOU! AND STRAYED SO THAT
THEY WILL NOT BE ABLE TO FIND A WAY.

تَبَارَكَ الَّذِى إِنْ شَاءَ جَعَلَ لَكَ خَيْراً مِّنْ ذَلِكَ جَنَّات
تَجْرِى مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَارُ وَيَجْعَلْ لَّكَ قُصُوراً(( 10 ))

10- BLESSED IS HE WHO, IF HE WILL, GIVE YOU BETTER THAN THESE, GARDENS
BENEATH WHICH STREAMS FLOW, AND TO MAKE FOR YOU (EXCELLENT) PALACES.

[ 386 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**
VERSE NO.7ِ10

The prophet was in the sacred Mosque (KAABEH) when
ABDULLAH-IBN-OMMAYEH, went to him and said:ِ \`\`O, Mohammad! That which
you claim to be, is too great to be bearable for us! You claim to be the
Messenger of God, who is the Creator of the universe.'' But it is not
becoming for such a God, to choose for His Messenger a poor and helpless
man like you or me. The prophet kept quiet, and begged his Lord to
answer those pagans, when the above verses revealed:ِ

And they said:ِ \`\`What is wrong with this Messenger who eats food,
and walks in the streets. Why has not an angel been sent down to him, so
as to be a warner with him.''

**WHY THIS PROPHET HAS NO TREASURE OR GARDEN!?**

Some of the flimsy objections of the wicked and ungodly have been
mentioned in the above passage. They said that:ِ \`\`He is no more than
a man like us. Why is he not an angel instead of a man? Why does he eat
food and drink water? Why should he walk in the streets and markets like
us? Why has God not given him a treasure or at least he has not a garden
to provide his sustenance!'' They were of opinion that a man of high
position and personality should not go to the market to buy what he
needs, because this is the duty of his servants and personnels, to go
after such trifles.

Those unbelievers did not want to think that the nature of an angel is
different from that of a man. A teacher for mankind should share man's
nature. Should know well the cause of Man's joy and sorrow, business and
wedlock, and other social or natural problems. He should feel our pains
and mingle with our life so as to be able to teach a lesson or to issue
a useful injunction. If our prophet was an angel, he could add nothing
except confusion to our social life.

From the whole passage we may understand that the heathens [ 387 ] who
were the prophet's sworn enemy, have gradually mitigated, and given a
reduction to their expectations, as to how and who the Messenger of God
should have been! At first, they said that the Messenger of God must be
an angel. Then they said; at least a Messenger should be accompanied and
assisted by an angel, so as to help him in his warnings. After that they
said, if the elect of God for His Messenger is to be a man, God should
cast a treasure upon him to spend however he thinks it necessary.

Then they lowered down and said; at least the Messenger of God should
have a big garden to satisfy his sustenance. Finally, they concluded
that, he must be a possessed, or a poet, and dared to accuse him of
madness.

The next verse answers all these childish charges in brief and through
a short sentence:ِ \`\`See how did they strike similitudes for you and
strayed so far, that they will not be able to find a way.'' As a matter
of fact, ignorance had covered the eyes of the unbelievers so tightly
and so thickly that they could not even differentiate between a tyrant
king and prophet of God, who is sent as a Mercy to all the world.

If our prophet wanted to serve the best of foods and drinks, it could
easily be provided for him, but he wanted to live with the common,
unwealthy, people and live like them.

He milked his goat, swept his chamber, and washed his clothes; while he
was so respected and held sacred among his companions and followers,
that they snatched the splashes of his ablution for blessings!

And such was the nature of all the prophets of God! We already know
that; Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh, the great tyrant, in the form of
two shepherds with their shepherd sticks in hand, and wooled cloaks
on.

They told Pharaoh; if you submit to your Lord and obey us we [ 388 ]
may guarantee your kingdom and respect, to remain for you!

Then Pharaoh said to his courtiers:ِ \`\`Are you all not astonished of
what these two shepherds say!? They lay down a condition on me that my
kingship and kingdom may depend on obeying and following their will!!!
They say so while poverty and weakness is emitted from their whole
existence!.''

بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالسَّاعَةِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِمَنْ كَذَّبَ بِالسَّاعَةِ
سَعِيراً(( 11 ))

11- THEY HAVE RATHER THE HOUR, AND WE HAVE PREPARED FOR THOSE WHO
BELIED THE HOUR, A BLAZING FIRE.

إِذَا رَأَتْهُم مِّنْ مَّكَان بَعِيد سَمِعُوا لَهَا تَغَيُّظاً
وَزَفِيراً(( 12 ))

12- WHEN THE FIRE SEES THEM FROM A FAR PLACE, THEY SHALL HEAR THE
DREADFUL ROAR OF RAGING THAT THE FIRE HAS.

وَإِذَا أُلْقُوا مِنْهَا مَكَاناً ضَيِّقاً مُقَرَّنِينَ دَعَوْا
هُنَالِكَ ثُبُوراً(( 13 ))

13- AND WHEN THEY ARE FLUNG TO A CONSTRICTED PLACE OF IT, IN CHAIN,
THERE THEY WILL CALL FOR DESTRUCTION.

لاَّ تَدْعُوا الْيَوْمَ ثُبُوراً وَاحِداً وَادْعُوا ثُبُوراً كَثِيراً((
14 ))

14- TODAY CALL YOU NOT FOR DESTRUCTION ONCE, BUT CALL FOR TOO MANY
DESTRUCTIONS.

قُلْ أَذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ أَمْ جَنَّةُ الْخُلْدِ الَّتِى وُعِدَ
الْمُتَّقُونَ كَانَتْ لَهُمْ جَزَاءً وَمَصِيراً(( 15 ))

15- SAY:ِ IS THAT BETTER OR THE GARDEN OF ETERNITY WHICH HAS BEEN
PROMISED TO THOSE WHO WARD OFF EVIL? THIS WAS THEIR REWARD AND
DESTINATION. [ 389 ]

لَّهُمْ فِيهَا مَا يَشَاءُونَ خَالِدِينَ كَانَ عَلَى رَبِّكَ وَعْداً
مَّسْئُولا(( 16 ))

16- FOR THEM IS THEREIN, WHATEVER THEY WISH ETERNALLY. THIS WAS A
PROMISE BINDING UPON YOUR LORD, TO BE ASKED FOR.

**THE COMMENTARY
A COMPARISON OF PARADISE AND HELL**
VERSE NO.11ِ16
These verses make clear that the non-believers have been in doubt about
all the tenets and principles of God's religion, such as the Monotheism,
Prophethood, and Resurrection Day.

Denying Resurrection Day not only includes the rejection of God and His
apostle; that it also denying justice and truth, and accepting that,
evil can always dominate, and that, truth will eventually be defeated
and suppressed.

For those of such opinion a blazing Fire is prepared, the fuel of which
comes out of their conducts:ِ \`\`When the Fire sees them from a far
place, they shall hear its dreadful roar of raging and fury.'' In this
verse, the Fire has been personified by having the faculty of seeing and
being furious, and moving with violence. The verse does not say that the
sinners see the Fire; but the Fire sees them from a far place, as if it
has eyes and ears!

Before feeling the blaze and heat of the Fire, the nonbelievers will
not realize how dangerous their position is. But when they sense it,
they will tremble with fear and terror, and when they are flung to a
constricted place of Hell, they wish for death and destruction, but too
late now! There will be no rescue, and no one to help. They see
annihilation far better than the torment which they have to suffer, but
alas! There is also no destruction, and anytime that their skin is
perfectly burnt in the Fire, a new skin will grow over them to replace [
390 ]

the former, and to burn once again! God never oppresses. They taste the
fruit of their deeds.

وَيَوْمَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ وَمَا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ فَيَقُولُ
أَأَنْتُمْ أَضْلَلْتُمْ عِبَادِى هَؤُلاَءِ أَمْ هُمْ ضَلُّوا
السَّبِيلَ(( 17 ))

17- AND THE DAY IN WHICH HE GATHERS THEM AND WHAT THEY WORSHIP APART
FROM ALLAH, AND HE WILL SAY; (TO THEIR FALSE GODS) \`\`WAS IT YOU WHO
STRAYED THESE MY SERVANTS, OR THEY THEMSELVES LOST THE WAY?''

قَالُوا سُبْحَانَكَ مَا كَانَ يَنْبَغِى لَنَا أَنْ نَتَّخِذَ مِنْ
دُونِكَ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ وَلَكِنْ مَّتَّعْتَهُمْ وَآبَاءَهُمْ حَتَّى
نَسُوا الذِّكْرَ وَكَانُوا قَوْماً بُوراً(( 18 ))

18- THEY SAY:ِ \`\`GLORY TO YOU! WE WERE NOT THE POSITION OF TAKING
APART FROM YOU ANY GUARDIAN. YOU GAVE THEM AND THEIR FATHERS THE GOOD
THINGS (OF LIFE) UNTIL THEY FORGOT THE REMEMBRANCE (THE PRAYER & QURA"N)
AND BECAME A PEOPLE OF PERDITION.''

فَقَدْ كَذَّبُوكُمْ بِمَا تَقُولُونَ فَمَا تَسْتَطِيعُونَ صَرْفاً وَلاَ
نَصْراً وَمَنْ يَظْلِمْ مِّنْكُمْ نُذِقْهُ عَذَاباً كَبِيراً(( 19 ))

19- (ALLAH WILL SAY TO THEM); THEY HAVE ALREADY DENIED WHATEVER YOU
SAY. AND NOW YOU ARE NOT ABLE TO TURN (THE PUNISHMENT) AWAY, AND NEITHER
HELP. AND THOSE OF YOU WHO OPPRESS, WE SHALL MAKE THEM TO TASTE A BIG
TORMENT. [ 391 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
QUESTIONING THE FALSE GODS AND THEIR WORSHIPPERS**
VERSE NO.17ِ19

In His Final Judgement, Allah will gather together the false worshipped
and worshippers to question both parties. He will say to the false
gods:ِ \`\`Were it you who strayed these servants of mine!?'' They
strickly deny it, and will say to their Lord:ِ \`\`Glory to you! We were
not on the position of taking apart from you any guardian for
ourselves.'' The truthful servants of God, such as Jesus Christ and the
angels, who were deified and worshipped by certain people, with certain
purposes; never asked, and never willed, to be worshipped by anyone. On
the contrary, they themselves worshipped Allah, and prayed for God's
protection. They were proud of being called the servants of God.

According to the above verse (NO.18), the main cause of deviation from
Monotheism, has been their living in affluence, and abundance in
property:ِ

\`\`....You gave them and their fathers the good things of life until
they forgot you and your reminders, so that the luxurious life of people
with insufficient capacity will lead them eventually to pride and
haughtiness which usually ends in losing their self and soul, and
forgetting their Merciful Lord.'' Then they will commit whatever of sin
they wish without thinking of the consequences.

**THE END OF PART 18**

[ 392 ]

وَما أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ مِنْ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلاَّ إِنَّهُمْ
لَيَأْكُلُونَ الطَّعَامَ وَيَمْشُونَ فِى الاَْسْوَاقِ وَجَعَلْنَا
بَعْضَكُمْ لِبَعْض فِتْنَةً أَتَصْبِرُونَ وَكَانَ رَبُّكَ بَصِيراً (( 20
))

20- AND WE SENT NOT BEFORE YOU ANY OF THE MESSENGERS, EXCEPT THAT THEY
ATE FOOD, AND WALKED IN THE MARKETS. AND WE HAVE MADE SOME OF YOU AS A
TRIAL FOR OTHERS. WILL YOU HAVE PATIENCE? AND YOUR LORD HAS ALWAYS BEEN
SEEING.

**THE COMMENTARY
ALL THE PROPHETS WERE SO**
VERSE NO.20

The aformationed verse (NO.7) implied that the unbelievers objected
saying; Why should the Messengers of God eat food and walk in the
bazaar? Why are they not angels or at least why the angels do not come
down to help them in their warnings? Why a treasure has not been given
them the like of the kings of Persia, or why they do not have big
gardens and palaces like the Roman Emperors? An answer was given before
in brief to such flimsy pretexts and childish objections, and now
through the above verse (NO.20) the answer is explained with more
detail:ِ

\`\`We did not send before you any of the Messengers except that they
ate food and walked in the markets. No one has said, that Moses ate no
food, and Jesus went not in the bazaar, and walked not in the streets.''
The prophets on the basis of their nature might be or become some sort
of a trial for some short-sighted or narrow-minded people. Their
election from among the ordinary people may become a topic of dispute
among some people, and put some others to trial; particularly those who
are rich or have rank and power.

[ 393 ]

Their similarity in appearance may deceive and delude those who are
haughty and arrogant. These may say to themselves:ِ \`\`These prophets
are no more than Men the like of us. On the other hand, they are poor
and we are rich, they are weak and we in power. Therefore why should
they be preferred over us in being the elect of God?''

Such dim and dull hearted men cannot understand, as Rumi has said in
his famous MATHNAVI, that:ِ \`\`Both the sweet and salty water are
pleasant in their appearance but they differ widely. Both of them are
wasps in their nature, but one of them stings you, and the other gives
out honey!'' Therefore, patience and perseverance can help man to
succeed in such tests and trials, and also to become aware that God sees
all thing and is aware of whatever we do.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا
الْمَلاَئِكَةُ أَوْ نَرَى رَبَّنَا لَقَدِ اسْتَكْبَرُوا فِى أَنفُسِهِمْ
وَعَتَوْ عُتُوّاً كَبِيراً(( 21 ))

21- AND THOSE WHO DO NOT EXPECT OUR MEETING, SAID:ِ \`\`WHY ANGELS ARE
NOT SENT TO US, OR WE SEE NOT OUR LORD?

VERILY THEY ARE TOO PROUD IN THEMSELVES, (THEY THINK TOO MUCH OF
THEMSELVES) AND HAVE REVOLTED A GREAT REVOLT!

يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ لاَ بُشْرَى يَوْمَئِذ لِّلْمُجْرِمِينَ
وَيَقُولُونَ حِجْراً مَّحْجُوراً(( 22 ))

22- THE DAY IN WHICH THEY SEE THE ANGELS, THERE IS NO GOOD NEWS FOR
SINNERS IN THAT DAY. AND THEY WILL SAY GIVE US RESPITE.

[ 394 ]

وَقَدِمْنَا إِلَى مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَل فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً
مَّنْثُوراً(( 23 ))

23- AND WE APPLY TO WHATEVER OF DEEDS THEY HAVE DONE AND THEN WE SHALL
MAKE IT AS SCATTERED DUST!

أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَئِذ خَيْرٌ مُّسْتَقَرّاً وَأَحْسَنُ
مَقِيلا(( 24 ))

24- THE COMPANIONS OF PARADISE, IN THAT DAY, WILL HAVE THE BETTER
ABODE, AND THE BEST PLACES OF REPOSE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE BIG CLAIMS**
VERSE NO.21ِ24

Here again the reference is to some other of the childish objections
and and flimsy excuses of the heathens who do not expect to meet with
their Lord in a field of surety. They said:ِ \`\`....Why angels are not
sent to us, or we see not our Lord!?''

Of course, we all shall see the angels of God, and they will certainly
come to us in day or night, to visit us in our death-bed; so as to
separate our soul from our body, but:ِ \`\`The day in which they see the
angels there is no good news for sinners, who will say to the angels
give us respite!''

The source of such haughty assertion and childish objections is having
no faith in God's Final Judgement, and expecting not to see the
consequences of evil deeds in the Resurrection Day.

Those who believe not in God's reckoning, and have no faith in
Resurrection Day and Final Judgement will not think of the encounter
with our Lord at all. This is because they arrogantly think too much of
themselves, and have no faith in Hereafter. [ 395 ]

They think that they are free to do whatever they want, without an
account or seeing the bad consequences. But very soon they will come to
know that it was not so as they thought, and that there is an order, an
account, and also a duty for every particle in this being. Then their
evil deeds will stand as a barrier between them and their salvation, and
their good deeds tooِif they have had anyِwould be dissipated and
scattered about as dusts in a wind for having a foul intention and evil
purpose in beyond!

**THE PESTS OF RIGHTEOUS DEEDS**

Then comes the next verse (NO.23) saying:ِ

\`\`And We apply to whatever of deeds that they have done, and then We
shall make it as scattered dust.'' This verse is similar to the one in S
14:18 saying:ِ

\`\`The likeness of the conducts of those who believe not in their
Lord, is like ashes on which the wind blows in a stormy day. No power
will have they over anything of which they have earned. That is the far
erring.''

The logical reason for the above philosophy is evident:ِ That which
gives form and meaning to an act is the intention and purpose, which is
beyond it. Believers do things with pure Divine intentions, and for the
sake of God; whereas the non-believers do what they do for show and
pretence; and for their selfish material benefits. As an instance, we
know some mosques that have remained firm, and endured for several
hundred of years, but there were houses and firm private palaces, that
were constructed with best of materials, and building blocks, but did
not remain after their owners, even for a couple of decades!

In the sight of Islam, deeds too, have their pests and plagues, such
as; pretence, vanity, pride, selfish purposes, and evil intentions. It
also may happen so that; someone does a good deed, but later [ 396 ]

on, he does an evil deed, rendering the former ineffective and null.

Therefore , on contrary to the non-believers, the faithfuls will have
an abode of bliss and bounty, and the best places of rest and repose:ِ
\`\`The companions of Paradise, in that day will have the better abode
and the best places of repose.''

25- AND THE DAY WHEN THE SKY WITH CLOUD WILL SPLIT, AND ANGELS SHALL BE
SENT DOWN SUCCESSIVELY.


الْمُلْكُ يَوْمَئِذ الْحَقُّ لِلرَّحْمَانِ وَكَانَ يَوْماً عَلَى
الْكَافِرِينَ عَسِيراً(( 26 ))

26- IN THAT DAY, THE TRUE KINGDOM BELONGS TO THE MERCIFUL. AND IT SHALL
BE A DAY HARD FOR THE HEATHENS.


