When the Sky Will Split
=======================

VERSE NO.25ِ26

The argument still continues about the fate of the sinners, and their
great anguish and hardship in the Day of Dooms:ِ \`\`Remember the Day in
which the sky with clouds is rent asunder, and the angels are sent down
one after another. (successively).'' As to the meaning of the fissure
and split of the sky, what can it mean? We know well that there is not a
thing as sky around us, to be split or rent asunder. Therefore, by
splitting the sky we may take it to mean that the visible world will
split and give way to the unseen world [ 397 ]

to appear through the said cleft or crack. In other word; today we see
the sky remote, vacant, and without any inhabitants, except some clouds
of various forms and densities, and being a field for the birds to fly.
But tomorrow, when the wonderful incident of Resurrection occurs, things
overhead will appear to us differently! The sky will appear to be
inhabited by the angels, Jins, and other creatures.

The verse then applies to a clear characteristic of the Resurrection
Day in which the real commander and the true giver of order will prove
to be the Merciful to Whom always belongs the dominion of the sky and
the earth, and the rulership of everything.

وَيَوْمَ يَعَضُّ الظَّالِمُ عَلَى يَدَيْهِ يَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِى
اتَّخَذْتُ مَعَ الرَّسُولِ سَبِيلا(( 27 ))

27- AND THE DAY WHEN THE OPPRESSOR WILL BITE HIS HANDS, SAYING:ِ
\`\`WOULD THAT I HAD TAKEN A WAY WITH THE MESSENGER OF GOD.''

يَا وَيْلَتَى لَيْتَنِى لَمْ أَتَّخِذْ فُلاَناً خَلِيلا(( 28 ))

28- O, WOE IS ME! WOULD THAT I HAD NO TAKEN SO AND SO FOR A FRIEND.

لَّقَدْ أَضَلَّنِى عَنِ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَنِى وَكَانَ
الشَّيْطَانُ لِلْإِنسَانِ خَذُولا(( 29 ))

29- VERILY HE STRAYED ME FROM REMEMBRANCE (QURA"N) AFTER IT HAD COME TO
ME. AND SATAN HAS ALWAYS BEEN PERFIDIOUS TO MAN.

[ 398 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

In the life time of our prophet there were two intimate friends whose
name were, \`\`UQBA'' and \`\`ABI''. Whenever Ugba returned from a
journey, it was his custom to hold a party and invite some of the
neighbouring people to dinner. In one of such parties the prophet too,
was invited. His holiness attended the party but refused to eat anything
there! Ugba was an idolater declared as unclean by Qura"n, and therefore
the prophet could not dine with him. He asked the prophet why, and the
prophet said that he would not serve anything until he would testify to
the Oneness of God, and to admit his prophethood.

Ugba uttered the word of testimony and the prophet ate with him. When
ABI his intimate friend heard of Ugba's testimony, became cross with him
and reproached him for his recantation. Uqba denied his recantation and
said to ABI; \`\`An honourable man was my guest, and said that he would
not have my dinner unless I testify to the Oneness of God and his
prophethood. To please him I did that nominally and merely in pretence,
and I believe not in my utterance and testimony!''

ABI said to him:ِ \`\`If you want my friendship continued, you must go
to Mohammad and abuse him somehow, and maltreat him.'' Uqba did what his
friend wanted to please him, and became an apostate! Later on, in the
Battle of Badr, Uqba was killed, and then in the battle of Ohud, his
friend Abi was also slayed. The above verse revealed about the above
mentioned friends, but the words here are general, and we are interested
in its general sense of meaning.

**EVIL FRIEND STRAYED ME**

VERSE NO.27ِ29 There are strange sceneries in the Resurrection Day,
some of [ 399 ]

which have been pointed to in the previous verses. Here another sight
of the scene has been referred to, and that is the pity and regret that
the sinner has to suffer:ِ \`\`And the Day when the oppressor will bite
his hands, saying; would that I had taken a way with the Messenger of
God.'' When the sinners and oppressors think of their past, and remember
the opportunities that they had but took no care of them. They will be
ashamed of themselves and their behaviour. This is why the Resurrection
Day is also called the Day of Rue and Regret. The sinner blames himself
for befriending those who caused his perversion and astray.

Without any doubt, one of the important factors that makes up man's
characteristic and personality is the company who keeps. He takes most
of his moral characters, virtues, customs, and thoughts, from his
associates and comrades. A Persian poem, very famous, is:ِ \`\`Tell me
the company you keep;

And I will tell you who you are.'' As a matter of fact, friends are
dangerous as enemies, because after their friendship there is nothing so
dangerous as to have them for enemies. John Gay has among his Fables:ِ
\`\`An open foe may prove a curse,
But a pretended friend is worse.''

Very often the role of friend in one's prosperity and progress is much
more effective than any other factor. True that prosperity gives us
friends, but adversity proves their friendship.

The above occasion of revelation will show us how a man may reach the
critical stage of beginning a prosperous life, when he is suddenly
knocked down by the ignorance of a friend:ِ \`\`O, woe is me! Would that
I had not taken so and so for a friend.'' The first lesson that we may
learn from this verse is to take care, not to choose an evil friend or
comrade who may lead us astray from the path of truth. It is a tested
proverb that, old friends are better than the new ones; and a friend in
need is a friend indeed.

[ 400 ]

وَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِى اتَّخَذُوا هَذَا الْقُرْآنَ
مَهْجُوراً(( 30 ))

30- AND THE MESSENGER SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY LORD! SEE THAT MY PEOPLE HAVE
ABANDONED THIS QURA"N.''

وَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَا لِكُلِّ نَبِىّ عَدُوّاً مِّنَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
وَكَفَى بِرَبِّكَ هَادِياً وَنَصِيراً (( 31 ))

31- AND SO HAVE WE MADE FOR EVERY PROPHET AN ENEMY FROM AMONG THE
SINNERS, AND YOUR LORD SUFFICES FOR A GUIDE AND HELPER.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلاَ نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الْقُرْآنُ جُمْلَةً
وَاحِدَةً كَذَلِكَ لِنُثَبِّتَ بِهِ فُؤَادَكَ وَرَتَّلْنَاهُ تَرْتِيلا((
32 ))

32- AND THE NON-BELIEVERS SAID:ِ \`\`WHY HAS NOT THE QURA"N BEEN SENT
DOWN TO HIM ALL AT ONCE?''

SO DID WE TO STRENGTHEN YOUR HEART BY IT, AND WE READ IT TO YOU
GRADUALLY. (BY AND BY)

وَلاَ يَأْتُونَكَ بِمَثَل إِلاَّ جِئْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَأَحْسَنَ
تَفْسِيراً(( 33 ))

33- AND THEY DO NOT BRING TO YOU ANY SIMILITUDE, EXCEPT THAT WE BRING
TO YOU THE TRUTH, (ABOUT IT) AND A BETTER EXPLANATION.

الَّذِينَ يُحْشَرُونَ عَلَى وُجُوهِهِمْ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ أُوْلَئِكَ
شَرٌّ مَّكَاناً وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلا(( 34 ))

34- THOSE WHO WILL BE GATHERED ON THEIR FACES (HEADLONG) TO HELL, THEY
HAVE THE WORST OF PLACES, AND THE MOST ASTRAY OF WAY.

[ 401 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
O, MY LORD! PEOPLE HAVE ABANDONED QURA"N**

VERSE NO.30ِ34 The first verse of the above passage consists of the
prophet's complain, that people have not received the glorious Qura"n as
they should:ِ \`\`And the Messenger said:ِ O, my Lord! See you that my
people have abandoned this Qura"n.'' This complain of our prophet is
still valid and also applies to Muslims of our time. The Holy Qura"n
which is the code of life, and the means of rescue, and the cause of
progress and success, has been forgotten. Muslims have put aside this
wonderful book that is full of vital programmes of social life, and yet
for penal laws and regulations Muslims stretch their begging hand to
non-Muslims!

This is when all the Islamic world consider their Divine Book as a
treasure of truth which is expressed in the most eloquent and beautiful
way. The Holy Qura"n is a wonderful Book that lowers for the layman and
common people to understand it, and grows deeper and higher for the
learned researchers, but unfortunately we Muslims print and publish the
Book in utmost beauty, and we respect it so much that, when we want to
go on a journey we pass from under Qura"n, and for blessings, we put it
in the dower of our bride in marriage. In spite of all that, few and
rare are those who ponder over its wonderful verses, or those who
perform its commandments and follow its vital injunctions.

In many Islamic countries, there are so many showy and ostentatious
schools and centers, that make people learn Qura"n by heart and recite
it from memory, while their thought is focussed on the East or West, and
their laws are taken from non-believers! They use Qura"n as a shield, or
as a cover to conceal their wrongs. Ay! Today too, the prophet cries out
that:ِ \`\`O, my Lord! See that my people have abandoned this Qura"n.''
[ 402 ]

The next verse is to comfort our prophet that, in spite of all the
hostilities of the enemies, and the negligence of the Muslims, God's
guidance and help will suffice:ِ

\`\`And so have We made for every prophet an enemy from among the
sinners, and your Lord will suffice for a Guide and Helper.'' Sin is
hostile by its nature, and works against truth. This was a reason that
the prophet's enemies, and those who injured all the godly men, were
always among the sinners. On the other hand, their hostility has always
been rendered ineffective by God's support and Guidance of those who
work for His cause. Finally, the non-believers have raised up the
question here that, why has not Qura"n been sent down to him all at
once?

To answer the above question, three reasons have been given as
follows:ِ

1) In order to strengthen the prophet's heart, so as to fulfil his
great and dangerous duty.
2) The verses revealed gradually as the occasions demanded from time to
time.
3) To answer the questions that were raised up in accordance with
various incidents that occurred:ِ

\`\`And they do not bring to you any similitude except that We bring to
you the truth about it, and a better explanation.''

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلْنَا مَعَهُ أَخَاهُ هَارُونَ
وَزِيراً(( 35 ))

35- AND VERILY WE GAVE MOSES THE BOOK (TOWRA"T), AND MADE HIS BROTHER
AARON AS A MINISTER WITH HIM.

فَقُلْنَا اذْهَبَا إِلَى الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا
فَدَمَّرْنَاهُمْ تَدْمِيراً(( 36 ))

[ 403 ]

36- THEN WE SAID:ِ \`\`GO YOU TWO, TO THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BELIED OUR
SIGNS. THEN WE DESTROYED THEM UTTERLY.

وَقَوْمَ نُوح لَّمَّا كَذَّبُوا الرُّسُلَ أَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ لِلنَّاسِ آيَةً وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ عَذَاباً
أَلِيماً(( 37 ))

37- AND THE PEOPLE OF NOAH, WHEN THEY BELIED THE MESSENGERS, WE DROWNED
THEM AND MADE THEM A SIGN FOR PEOPLE, AND WE HAVE PREPARED FOR THE
OPPRESSORS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

وَعَاداً وَثَمُودَ وَأَصْحَابَ الرَّسِّ وَقُرُوناً بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ
كَثِيراً(( 38 ))

38- AND طD, AND THAMUD, AND THE COMPANION OF RASS (A PEOPLE WHO
WORSHIPPED PINE TREE), AND MANY GENERATIONS BETWEEN THEM.

وَكُلّاً ضَرَبْنَا لَهُ الاَْمْثَالَ وَكُلّاً تَبَّرْنَا تَتْبِيراً((
39 ))

39- AND FOR ALL OF THEM WE STRUCK SIMILITUDE (AND WHEN OF NO USE), WE
BROKE THEM ALL TO UTTER DESTRUCTION.

وَلَقَدْ أَتَوْا عَلَى الْقَرْيَةِ الَّتِى أُمْطِرَتْ مَطَرَ السَّوْءِ
أَفَلَمْ يَكُونُوا يَرَوْنَهَا بَلْ كَانُوا لاَ يَرْجُونَ نُشُوراً(( 40
))

40- AND VERILY THEY HAVE PASSED BY THE TOWN ON WHICH IT RAINED A BAD
RAIN. HAVE THEY NOT SEEN IT? YES. BUT THEY DON'T EXPECT THE UPRAISING. [
404 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

SO MANY LESSONS, AND SO MUCH NEGLIGENCE!!**
VERSE NO.35ِ40

In order to console the prophet and believers, and to threaten the
enemies and objectors, Qura"n alludes to the fate of the past nations
who rejected truth and belied their apostles, and finally were punished
and destroyed. Among them were the people of Noah, A"d, Thamud, and the
companions of Rass. Their story here has just been mentioned to
illustrate how arrogant and ignorant they must have been that they were
afflicted so badly.

They rejected the clear signs of their LordِMerciful Lord, and followed
the way of Satan to polytheism and idolatry, rejecting their apostle's
advices and warnings, and thus they ruined their self and soul, and
their whole existence:ِ \`\`And the people of Noah; when they belied the
Messengers we drowned them and made them a sign for people.... And A"d,
Thamud, and the Companions of Rass, and many generations between them
were all destroyed.''

Not only the contemporaries of Hazrat Mohammad (SA), but the past
generations too, had little respect for their prophets. Of course, they
could never frustrate God in His plan. On the contrary, the rejectors of
truth and non-believers, were those who suffered a painful punishment
and who were wiped up for their wrong deeds and wrong faith.

The people of A"d were those to whom the prophet, Hood was sent, and
Thamud were the people of Salih. There are some arguments, as who the
companions of Rass could have been?

The Arabic word, \`\`RASS'' means a light effect, and also it may mean,
an old well, or a shallow water pit. Perhaps the Companions of Rass have
had many wells, which when dried and got no water, they lost their
lives.

[ 405 ]

Some commentators believe that, the Companions of Rass were a people
who lived in YAMA"MIH, and a prophet named HANZALIH was sent to them,
but the people rejected by casting him in a deep well and covering its
top! Some commentators have known these miserable people to have been
the remnants of A"d and Thamud.

Another view about the Companion of Rass is a narration from HAZRAT
IMAM REZA (AS) that; they were a people who worshipped a certain kind of
PINE TREE. They had twelve towns at the bank of a river named RASS. Each
town had taken its name as one of the 12 solar months of Persians such
as, FARVARDIN-ORDIBEHESHT-KHORDAD and etc. They offered sacrifices to
their god pine tree, and prostrated themselves before it and cried for
salvation!! When they were submerged in their idolatry and sank in
blasphemy, Allah sent to them an apostle from among the Israelites. When
they belied their prophet and rejected him, he prayed to God, and the
main pine tree dried and withered up. They took the event as a sorcery
from their apostle and approved to slay him. They cast him down to the
bottom of a deep well and put the cover on! And so was their apostle
martyred.

The Arabs contemporary to our prophet, passed by the ruins of the towns
that were overthrown by the wrath of God:- \`\`Verily they have passed
by the town on which it rained a bad rain....'' This may refer to Lut's
story and destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, the ruins of which were
present in the life time of our prophet. These were a couple of the five
cities in the Dead Sea area, the destruction of which is associated in
Qura"nic tradition with the time of ABRAHAM.

[ 406 ]

The most probable view is that the valley of SIDDIM in which the cities
were located is now under the southeastern end of the Dead sea. The
tradition of the destruction suggests an earthquake accompanied by a
dreadful cry and a shower of brimstone which destroyed all the
inhabitants who were non-believers.

وَإِذَا رَأَوْكَ إِنْ يَتَّخِذُونَكَ إِلاَّ هُزُواً أَهَذَا الَّذِى
بَعَثَ اللهُ رَسُولا(( 41 ))

41- AND WHEN THEY SEE YOU, THEY TAKE YOU NOT EXCEPT IN MOCKERY, SAYING;
IS THIS HE WHOM ALLAH HAS RAISED A MESSENGER!?

إِنْ كَادَ لَيُضِلُّنَا عَنْ آلِهَتِنَا لَوْلاَ أَنْ صَبَرْنَا
عَلَيْهَا وَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ حِينَ يَرَوْنَ الْعَذَابَ مَنْ أَضَلُّ
سَبِيلا(( 42 ))

42- HE WAS WELL-NIGH TO STRAY US FROM OUR GODS, HAD WE NOT STOOD FIRM
ON THEM.

AND SOON WILL THEY KNOW, WHEN SEEING THE TORMENT, THAT WHO HAS STRAYED
FROM THE WAY.

أَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَـهَهُ هَوَاهُ أَفَأَنْتَ تَكُونُ عَلَيْهِ
وَكِيلا(( 43 ))

43- HAVE YOU SEEN HIM WHO HAS TAKEN HIS CAPRICE FOR HIS GOD, WILL YOU
THEN BE AN ATTORNEY FOR HIM.

أَمْ تَحْسَبُ أَنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ يَسْمَعُونَ أَوْ يَعْقِلُونَ إِنْ هُمْ
إِلاَّ كَالاَْنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ سَبِيلا(( 44 ))

44- DO YOU THINK THAT MOST OF THEM HEAR OR UNDERSTAND, THEY ARE NOT
EXCEPT LIKE CATTLE, AND MORE ASTRAY IN THE WAY.

[ 407 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
MORE ASTRAY THAN CATTLE** VERSE NO.41-44

In the above passage, another instance of the false logic of the
polytheists has been pointed to and answered. When they saw the prophet,
they ironically would say to one another:-

\`\`Is this he who Allah has appointed a Messenger!?'' \`\`What a big
claim!'' They said. \`\`What a strange word! Is it not ridiculous
indeed?'' They were saying so while they had lived with the prophet for
some forty years before his mission, and they had given him the title
of, \`\`TRUSTWORTHY'' for his truthfulness. The pagans were in a
conflict of mind and thought. From one hand, they ridiculed the prophet,
and took him and his doctrine in mockery, and on the other hand, they
feared to lose the creed and cult of their fathers and their inherited
idols. This was because they knew that Mohammad (SA) was very serious in
his call, and effective in his endeavours.

Then another weak point of the heathens has been pointed to in the next
verse:- \`\`Have you seen him who has taken his caprices for his God?
Will you then be an attorney for him?'' This is to say; if they scoff at
you, and reject your call or show various kind of oppositions against
you, it is not your fault or the weak point of your Message. It is their
own fault that they do not follow a wisdom or a logic, and cannot
understand. They even have no faith in God, and in fact their God is
their caprices.

When instead of God, some people worship their caprices, impulses, and
vain desires; it is difficult for reason to overcome and [ 408 ] prevail
over the blind passion. Then, no one even a prophet can undertake any
responsibility for such a lost class of people who have killed their own
conscience, and have spoiled their internal instinct.

In other word, they are no more a human being, so as to be dealt with
as a human. They are indeed like cattle, and even worse astray in the
way of life.

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى رَبِّكَ كَيْفَ مَدَّ الظِّلَّ وَلَوْ شَاءَ لَجَعَلَهُ
سَاكِناً ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا الشَّمْسَ عَلَيْهِ دَلِيلا(( 45 ))

45- DID YOU SEE HOW YOUR LORD EXPANDED THE SHADOW? HAD HE WILLED HE
WOULD HAVE MADE IT STILL THEN WE MADE THE SUN A GUIDE OVER IT.

ثُمَّ قَبَضْنَاهُ إِلَيْنَا قَبْضاً يَسِيراً(( 46 ))

46- THEN WE COLLECTED IT TOWARDS US EASILY.

وَهُوَ الَّذِى جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الَّيْلَ لِبَاساً وَالنَّوْمَ سُبَاتاً
وَجَعَلَ النَّهَارَ نُشُوراً(( 47 ))

47- AND IT IS HE WHO HAS MADE THE NIGHT A CLOTHING FOR YOU, AND SLEEP A
REST, AND MADE THE DAY A RESURRECTION.

وَهُوَ الَّذِى أَرْسَلَ الرِّيَاحَ بُشْراً بَيْنَ يَدَىْ رَحْمَتِهِ
وَأَنزَلْنَا مِنْ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً طَهُوراً(( 48 ))

48- AND IT IS HE WHO SENT THE WINDS AS GLAD-TIDINGS BEFORE HIS MERCY,
AND WE SENT DOWN FROM THE SKY PURIFYING WATER.

[ 409 ]

لِنُحْيِىَ بِهِ بَلْدَةً مَّيْتاً وَنُسْقِيَهُ مِمَّا خَلَقْنَا
أَنْعَاماً وَأَنَاسِىَّ كَثِيراً(( 49 ))

49- SO AS TO REVIVE A DEAD LAND BY IT, AND GIVE IT TO DRINK TO WHAT WE
CREATED OF CATTLE, AND SO MANY MANKIND.

وَلَقَدْ صَرَّفْنَاهُ بَيْنَهُمْ لِيَذَّكَّرُوا فَأَبَى أَكْثَرُ
النَّاسِ إِلاَّ كُفُوراً(( 50 ))

50- AND VERILY WE CIRCULATED IT (QURA"N) AMONG THEM IN ORDER TO BECOME
MINDFUL, YET MOST OF THE PEOPLE REFUSED ALL, EXCEPT DENIAL.

**THE COMMENTARY
MOVEMENT OF THE SHADOWS**
VERSE NO.45ِ50 The above verses disclose some of the secrets of
Monotheism through some of God's bounties.

The stress of the word here is, on the shadow and its blessings and
manifold profits for Man and animal. These are manifested through the
night and sleep and rest, through the day and raising to life and work,
through the winds that act as heralds for God's Mercy which is the rain,
and thereby the revival of the parched earth. In other word, whatever we
see or we feel in this wide nature, if we go through it we shall find it
to be a clear sign of our Merciful Lord. The sun and the moon, the day
and the night, the light and the shade, the wind and the rain, and
whatever else on which we point our finger, they are all signs and
symbols which to some extent illustrate the Infinite Knowledge, Wisdom
and Power of God. They all prove to work according to a general and
universal plan accompanied with a unity of purpose throughout the
universe:-

[ 410 ]

\`\`Did you not see how your Lord expanded the shadow? Had He willd, He
would have made it still. Then We made the sun a guide over it.'' The
reference here is to the great usefulness of the moving shadows which do
not stand still. Some commentators have known the shadow mentioned here
to be the impressive phenomenon of light and shade, which may appear in
the early morning before the sun rise. At first, the false dawn appears
with its uncertain light, and long shadow followed by streaks of black
in the East. After that, the true dawn will appear with beautiful
colours of light and shade. These are merely due to the reflections of
light, and are not made by the direct beams of sunlight.

Some other commentators are of opinion that the shadow mentioned here
is the dark night itself, that creates for us the opportunity of rest
and repose through our inevitable sleep. But the ending of the verse
implies that the shadows are made and guided by the sun. This is to say
that, if there was no sun and its light, shadow could have no meaning,
and that we have to study shadow through its opposite and antagonist,
which is the light.

If we go deeply through the matter, we see that the morning shadows are
larger than those which appear about noon, and their lengths and
directions are guided by the sun. As the sun rises higher and higher,
the shadows contract, and become shorter and shorter. In the regions
where the sun gets actually to Zenith at noon, there is no shadow left
at the time because the substance that produces the shadow will then
absorb it. Here a mystical opinion is that, everything and every
material substance is a shadow which is cast by the only true reality,
which is the light of God:-

\`\`Allah is the light of the heavens and earth. The parable of His
light is a niche in which is a lamp....'' [ 411 ] Therefore, God is the
only light, and anything else whether concrete or abstract, are only
shadows, depended and guided by the light. It is the light that gives
length, size, form, or substance, to all things. Even the sun is nothing
except a shadow of God's light.

Then comes the verse NO.48; the immediate reference of which is to the
winds:- \`\`And it is He Who sent winds, as bearers of glad-tidings
before His Mercy. And We sent down from the sky purifying water so as to
revive a dead land by it....''

The roles of the winds is not hidden from us, knowing them to be the
forerunners which are sent before, to announce the approach of the rain
which is a great Mercy of God.

Had there been no wind, there would have been not a drop of rain and
hence the calamity. So the winds are the heralds of God's Mercy.... the
rain which is a distilled pure water for drink, and the best of
purifying means too. A means by which a parched piece of land may
quickly come to life, and grow plants and vegetations and all sorts of
fruits, flowers and produces!

\*\*\*\*\*

Some expounders of Qura"n have taken the pronoun, \`\`IT'' related to
the verb, circulated, (V.NO.50) to be the water that comes down as
rain:ِ \`\`And verily We have circulated it among them to be mindful.''
But some others, and among them HAZRAT AYATULLAH MAKAREM, have
understood it to be the revelation of God which comes down from the
heavens which in this case it is the Holy Qura"n.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

[ 412 ]

وَلَوْ شِئْنَا لَبَعَثْنَا فِى كُلِّ قَرْيَة نَّذِيراً(( 51 ))

51- AND HAD WE WILLED, WE WOULD HAVE RAISED UP A WARNER IN EVERY
TOWN.

فَلاَ تُطِعِ الْكَافِرِينَ وَجَاهِدْهُمْ بِهِ جِهَاداً كَبِيراً(( 52
))

52- SO DO NOT YOU FOLLOW THE NON-BELIEVERS, AND STRIVE AGAINST THEM BY
IT (QURA"N), A GREAT STRIVING.

وَهُوَ الَّذِى مَرَجَ الْبَحْرَيْنِ هَذَا عَذْبٌ فُرَاتٌ وَهَذَا مِلْحٌ
أُجَاجٌ وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَهُمَا بَرْزَخاً وَحِجْراً مَّحْجُوراً(( 53 ))

53- AND IT IS HE WHO HAS SET TO FLOW (IN PARALLEL) TWO SEAS. THIS ONE
IS SWEET AND WHOLESOME, AND THE OTHER IS SALTY BITTER; AND HE HAS MADE A
BARRIER BETWEEN THEM. (IT IS SO THAT, AS IF BOTH OF THEM SAY TO EACH
OTHER); STAY ALOOF! (APPROACH ME NOT)

وَهُوَ الَّذِى خَلَقَ مِنَ الْمَاءِ بَشَراً فَجَعَلَهُ نَسَباً
وَصِهْراً وَكَانَ رَبُّكَ قَدِيراً(( 54 ))

54- AND IT IS HE WHO CREATED FROM WATER THE MANKIND, AND MADE FOR HIM
BLOOD AND MARRIAGE RELATIVES; AND YOUR LORD HAS ALWAYS BEEN
ALL-,MIGHTY.


