Two Simultaneous Seas, a Salty and a Sweet
==========================================

VERSE NO.51ِ55

\`\`Had We willed we could have raised up a warner apostle in every
town, as some of the Arabs ask for it.'' The whole load of conveyance of
God's Message to all mankind, has been put upon the shoulders of our
prophet (SA) alone, and as far as it is the decision of God, it is quite
reasonable and prudent. In this manner of sending Message and Messenger,
due to the oneness of leadership, the variances shall be reduced to a
minimum. It also proves the grandeur of the Messenger of God, and the
greatness of his prophetic mission.

In the next verse (NO.52), two instructions are given to the Messenger
of God, namely:-

1ِDo not put up with non-believers, and follow them not.
2ِFight and strive against them with the weapon of God's revelation.
(QURA"N).... a strife so great that may suit your great prophetic
mission.

The mental, educational, and cultural strife (JIHAD) is far more
important, and greater in value, than that in the battle field, for the
cause.

In the next verse, (NO.53) once again the attentions are attracted
towards the infinite power and knowledge of God, by painting to a
natural phenomenon which consists of two simultaneous seas, one salty
and the other sweet, flowing along without mutual effect and mixing! An
invisible barrier keeps them separate of one another, and prevents them
to mix or mingle. Some investigators have searched all over the world to
find where the two sweet and salty companions live together, but we
think it otherwise:ِ

The great rivers of sweet water eventually shall enter a sea, which is
usually salty bitter. In the point of contact and encounter, which is
called the mouth of the sea, both of them remain separate of one
another.

[ 414 ]

In the sight of a physic scholar, this phenomenon is not very strange,
but a thoughtful believer has a different view. Due to a physical
quality of water which is called the \`\`DENSITY'', that is the ratio of
mass to volume, the two will not mix.

The sweet water remains thus in the mouth of the sea, and the low-tide
and high-tide subject millions of trees and an immense part of the land,
to irrigation. This is the case now in South Iran, our country. In the
years that it rains not well enough, the salty part of the mouth of the
sea will overcome the sweet part, and will cause the anxiety of the
farmers, and some men and animals for drinking water.

Let us not ignore here that natural phenomena are nothing but the work,
craft, and order of God, the All knowing, All-mighty Creator of
universe.

In the next verse we read:-

\`\`And it is He Who created from water the mankind....''

Have you ever seen an artist to draw and paint a beautiful portrait in
water!?

This is only true of God, that we see a high percentage of all living
creatures, man, animal, and even fruits and vegetations consist of
water.

Commentators differ, as to what sort of a water is the reference in
this verse? (NO.54)

Some expounders refer it to Adam and Eve who were created of mud which
is a mixture of water and dust. Some refer to the sperm by which woman
becomes pregnant, but as we mentioned above, most of our body consists
of water and to this effect Man's resistance against thirst is very
low.

وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلاَّ مُبَشِّراً وَنَذِيراً(( 56 ))

56- AND WE HAVE SENT YOU NOT EXCEPT AS A BEARER OF GLAD-TIDINGS, AND A
WARNER.

[ 415 ]

قُلْ مَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِلاَّ مَنْ شَاءَ أَنْ
يَتَّخِذَ إِلَى رَبِّهِ سَبِيلا(( 57 ))

57- SAY I DO NOT ASK YOU A WAGE FOR IT, BUT HE WHO WILLS MAY TAKE A WAY
TO HIS LORD.

وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى الْحَىِّ الَّذِى لاَ يَمُوتُ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِهِ
وَكَفَى بِهِ بِذُنُوبِ عِبَادِهِ خَبِيراً(( 58 ))

58- AND PUT YOUR TRUST ON THAT LIVING WHO NEVER DIES, AND CELEBRATE HIS
PRAISE. AND ENOUGH IS THAT HE IS AWARE OF HIS SERVANT'S GUILTS.

الَّذِى خَلَقَ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا فِى سِتَّةِ
أَيَّام ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ الرَّحْمنُ فَسْأَلْ بِهِ
خَبِيراً(( 59 ))

59- HE WHO CREATED THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, AND WHATEVER IS BETWEEN THEM
IN SIX DAYS. THEN HE SETTLED (HIS POWER AND AUTHORITY) ON THE THRONE. HE
IS MERCIFUL. ASK YOU THEN OF HIM WHO IS AWARE.

**THE COMMENTARY
MY REWARD IS YOUR GUIDANCE**
VERSE NO.56ِ59

Here the prophet is advised to tell us that he expects no reward from
us for all the troubles that he suffers in conveyance of God's Message
to us. In fact his very reward is our guidance. In another verse, (S
42:23) the prophet has been ordered to say:ِ \`\`I do not ask you a wage
for it, except loving my near of kins''. This is because only his
dearers and nearers were those who seriously followed his way, and who
were the truthful guardians of his doctrine and creed. The second verse
makes clear that the prophet's absolute reliance was upon God:ِ

[ 416 ] \`\`And put your trust on that living who never dies, and
celebrate His praise. And it is enough that He is aware of His servant's
guilt.'' The ending clause of the verse (NO.58) assures the prophet of
God's supporting him against the tricks and hostilities of the heathens
and hypocrites, saying that; \`\`Allah is aware of whatever they do or
intend to do. And how can Man hide his tricks and conceal his betrayal
while Allah knows better than him whatever of bad or good deeds he may
do.''

So we all must put our trusts upon the ever lasting support Who never
dies and His Infinite might and knowledge will never diminish the
least.

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اسْجُدُوا لِلرَّحْمَانِ قَالُوا وَمَا الرَّحْمنُ
أَنَسْجُدُ لِمَا تَأْمُرُنَا وَزَادَهُمْ نُفُوراً(( 60 ))

60- AND WHEN IT WAS SAID TO THEM PROSTRATE YOURSELVES BEFORE THE
MERCIFUL, THEY SAID:ِ \`\`AND WHO THE MERCIFUL IS? SHOULD WE PROSTRATE
OURSELVES BEFORE WHAT YOU ORDER US TO?'' AND IT INCREASED THEM IN
AVERSION.

تَبَارَكَ الَّذِى جَعَلَ فِى السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجاً وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا
سِرَاجاً وَقَمَراً مُّنِيراً(( 61 ))

61- BLESSED IS HE WHO HAS SET CONSTELLATIONS IN THE SKY, AND INSTALLED
A LAMP IN IT, AND AN ILLUMINATING MOON.

وَهُوَ الَّذِى جَعَلَ الَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ خِلْفَةً لِّمَنْ أَرَادَ
أَنْ يَذَّكَّرَ أَوْ أَرَادَ شُكُوراً(( 62 ))

62- AND IT IS HE WHO MADE THE NIGHT AND DAY SUCCESSORS FOR HIM WHO
INTENDED TO REMEMBER, OR HE WILLS TO BE THANKFUL. [ 417 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CONSTELLATIONS**
VERSE NO.60ِ62

The Arabs among the opposition group of our prophet who had no
spiritual light and insight, could not understand the full significance
of Allah's Attributes, and in particular of, \`\`AL-RAHMA"N = THE
MERCIFUL''. They could not see why is He the Most Gracious, and how has
He infinite and unbounded Mercy and Grace!:ِ \`\`So when it was said to
them prostarte yourselves before Rahma"n, they said:;ِ \`\`And what
AL-RAHMA"N = the Merciful is !?'' The next verse is to answer their
question by alluding to some of the Merciful's wonders of creation:ِ
\`\`Blessed is He who set the constellations in the sky.''

The Arabic \`\`BORJ'' or in its plural form, \`\`BORUJ'' literally
means appearance, a connotation of which is the towers that are more
apparent in the defensive walls of a town. (ancient cities) Arabs call
them BORJ. It also refers to high palaces. But in the above verse
(NO.61), the immediate reference is to the constellations, which are the
configuration of stars, consisting of a number of arbitrary groups of
fixed stars. This verse implies the minute order and the fixed system of
rule, which govern the heavens and earth, and are controlling the
movements of the sun and the moon, and all the celestial bodies. It is
this regular movement that makes the night and day, and the season and
time. This regular system has held its control over universe for
millions of years without any change or variation in speed, state,
position, or other vital measures.

[ 418 ]

**MORE ABOUT CONSTELLATIONS**

The sky overhead has been divided to 88 or more star groups, or as the
groups are called, the constellations. Each group of star or
constellation has its own name and definite boundaries. The most
conspicuous ones were named by star gazers several thousand years ago.
Some of them too, have taken their names in comparatively modern times.
For the constellations to show the picture of the lion, hercules, and
lady in chair, and etc., one must have a good imagination. However, as
one becomes more familiar with the stars, they fall into easily
recognized patterns.

Some of the brighter stars have been given names such as Sirius,
Gall-bladder and Alder-baren. Many of them have been designated by
letters of Greek Alphabet, followed by the generative of the Latin, or
Latinized name of the constellation. For example we may say; SIRIUS is
the brightest of stars in the constellation, Canis Magor = the greater
dog. And the brightest star in the whole sky is also known as the Alpha=
a Most probably the immediate reference in this verse (NO.61) is to the
12 constellations that fall in the imaginary belt in the heavens 16ْ
broad; in middle of which is the ecliptic, or sun's path. The said belt
also includes the paths of the moon and all the principle planets. This
belt is also called the ZODIAC, which is a Greek word that means,
\`\`THE CIRCLE OF ANIMALS''. ZODIAC is divided to 12 divisions or signs,
according to the apparent shapes of 12 star groups or constellations
that can be seen in the belt. These are as follows:ِ

1- Ram. 2- Bull. 3- Twins. 4- Crab. 5- Lion. 6- Virgin. 7- Balance. 8-
Scorpion. 9- Archer. 10- Goat. 11- Water Bearer. 12- Fish. These are the
names of the 12 constellations through which the sun moves in one solar
year. It will be noted that eleven of the above twelve names refer to
members of the animal kingdom. The very existence and the creation of
the said groups of stars is amazing and of great importance if one has a
good understanding and insight.

[ 419 ]

Of course, the ZODIAC as explained above has no particular significance
in astronomy.

**QUOTED FROM THE BOOK OF POPULAR SCIENCEِVOLUME-ONE
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمنِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الاَْرْضِ هَوْناً
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمْ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلاَماً(( 63 ))

63- AND THE SERVANTS OF THE MERCIFUL ARE THOSE WHO WALK ON THE EARTH
HUMBLY, AND WHEN THE IGNORANTS ADDRESS THEM THEY SAY; SALA"M = PEACE.

وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ سُجَّداً وَقِيَاماً(( 64 ))

64- AND THOSE WHO PASS THEIR NIGHT IN PROSTRATION AND STANDING, FOR
THEIR LORD.

وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اصْرِفْ عَنَّا عَذَابَ جَهَنَّمَ إِنَّ
عَذَابَهَا كَانَ غَرَاماً(( 65 ))

65- AND THOSE WHO SAY; \`\`OUR LORD! TURN AWAY FROM US THE TORMENT OF
HELL, THAT ITS TORMENT IS EVERLASTING.

إِنَّهَا سَاءَتْ مُسْتَقَرّاً وَمُقَاماً(( 66 ))

66- THAT IT IS AN EVIL ABODE AND STATION.

وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا وَلَمْ يَقْتُرُوا وَكَانَ
بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ قَوَاماً(( 67 ))

67- AND THOSE WHO, WHEN THEY SPEND ARE NEITHER PRODIGAL NOR
PARSIMONIOUS. BETWEEN THESE TWO EXTREMES THEY ARE MODERATE.

[ 420 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

FIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE GODLY**
VERSE NO.63ِ67
From now on, a series of qualifications that belong to the God-fearing
people have been mentioned. These are contrary to the characters of the
Godless who says; \`\`And tell me who the Merciful is?'' Here five of
the qualifications of the righteous have been mentioned as follows:ِ

1ِWhen they walk in the streets, they walk with humility and in a state
of freedom from pride and arrogance. In other word, their first quality
is negation of pride in all their manners, because pride is the true
sign of ignorance.

2ِThe second quality found in men of God is patience, which is bearing
difficulties, and enduring pains, trials, or the like, without complaint
or with equanimity.

3ِTheir third character is their humble and sincere prayer in day, and
particularly in the night that brings them nearer to God.

4ِTheir fourth attainment is their God-fearing, who say:ِ

\`\`Our Lord! Turn away from us the torment of Hell which is an
everlasting torment.''

5ِTheir fifth attribute is being moderate in all aspects of life. Even
when they spend, they are neither prodigal, nor parsimonious.

وَالَّذِينَ لاَ يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللهِ إِلَـهاً آخَرَ وَلاَ يَقْتُلُونَ
النَّفْسَ الَّتِى حَرَّمَ اللهُ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ وَلاَ يَزْنُونَ وَمَنْ
يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ يَلْقَ أَثَاماً(( 68 ))

68- AND THOSE WHO CALL NOT BESIDES ALLAH ANOTHER GOD, NOR DO THEY KILL
A PERSON THAT ALLAH HAS FORBIDDEN, NEITHER THEY FORNICATE; AND WHOEVER
DOES THAT HE WILL MEET WITH (THE CONSEQUENCES OF) SINNING.

[ 421 ]

يُضَاعَفْ لَهُ الْعَذَابُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَيَخْلُدْ فِيهِ
مُهَاناً(( 69 ))

69- DOUBLED SHALL BE THE PUNISHMENT FOR HIM IN THE RESURRECTION DAY,
AND WILL ABIDE IN IT DISGRACED.

إِلاَّ مَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلا صَالِحاً فَأُوْلَئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَات وَكَانَ اللهُ غَفُوراً
رَّحِيماً(( 70 ))

70- EXCEPT HIM WHO REPENTED AND BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS. THEN
THEY ARE THOSE WHO, ALLAH WILL CHANGE THEIR EVIL FOR GOOD, BECAUSE ALLAH
HAS ALWAYS BEEN ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE. وَمَنْ تَابَ وَعَمِلَ
صَالِحاً فَإِنَّهُ يَتُوبُ إِلَى اللهِ مَتَاباً(( 71 ))

71- AND HE WHO REPENTS, AND DOES RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, HE (TRULY) RETURNS TO
ALLAH.

**THE COMMENTARY
OTHER VIRTUES OF THE MERCIFUL'S SERVANTS**

VERSE NO.68ِ71

The argument continues here to illustrate the virtues of the Godly, and
the Merciful's truthful servants. Three major sins have been strictly
forbidden and sternly condemned. These are polytheism, murder, and
fornication. Five of the said virtues were named and explained in the
preceding passage, and the other three are explained here, as
follows:ِ

6ِThe sixth virtue of the righteous believer is his pure faith in [ 422
] Monotheism. A purity by which he calls nothing and no one besides
Allah. He knows well that worshipping anything or any body apart from
Allah, is a hateful crime and an oppression against Allah.

7ِTheir seventh character is such that they are far from killing a
person, particularly without any right, or that whom Allah has
forbidden. Such a hateful sin is a crime against God, as well as our
fellow-creatures.

8ِAnd their eighth specification is avoiding fornication, which is a
Major Sin that injures the respect of Mankind, and it is a rebel against
God.

The greatness of the above three Major Sins is according to the above
mentioned order; i.e. Polytheism is the worst of all sins. Murder is
worse than fornication, and adultery is too bad a guilt. All of them
will have their reward paid in full, but in the blazing fire of Hell!
Such great crimes will never be left unanswered, and the guilty has to
meet with the consequences of his deeds.

But even in the case of such heinous sins, there is no room for
despair, and if the sinner repents, ceases doing wrong, and amends his
deeds, God is always Merciful and Forgiving.

وَالَّذِينَ لاَ يَشْهَدُونَ الزُّورَ وَإِذَا مَرُّوا بِاللَّغْوِ
مَرُّوا كِرَاماً(( 72 ))

72- AND THOSE WHO BEAR NOT FALSE WITNESS, AND WHEN THEY PASS BY VAIN A
THING THEY PASS GENTLY.

وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِّرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ لَمْ يَخِرُّوا عَلَيْهَا
صُمّاً وَعُمْيَاناً(( 73 ))

73- AND THOSE WHO, WHEN THEY ARE REMINDED BY ALLAH'S SIGNS, FALL NOT ON
THEM DEAFLY AND BLINDLY.

[ 423 ]

وَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا
وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُن وَاجْعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَاماً((
74 ))

74- AND THOSE WHO SAY:ِ \`\`OUR LORD! GRANT US COMFORT OF EYES THROUGH
OUR SPOUSES AND OFFSPRINGS, AND MAKE US LEADERS OF THE GOD-FEARINGS.''

أُوْلَئِكَ يُجْزَوْنَ الْغُرْفَةَ بِمَا صَبَرُوا وَيُلَقَّوْنَ فِيهَا
تَحِيَّةً وَسَلاَماً(( 75 ))

75- THOSE ARE THEY WHO WILL BE REWARDED THE TOP PLACES (IN PARADISE)
FOR THEIR FORTITUDE, AND WILL RECEIVE THEREIN GREETINGS AND
SALUTATION.

خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا حَسُنَتْ مُسْتَقَرّاً وَمُقَاماً(( 76 ))

76- THEY WILL ABIDE THEREIN FOR EVER, IN THE BEST OF ABODES AND
POSITIONS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE REWARDS FOR THE SERVANTS OF GOD**

VERSE NO.72ِ76

Following the previous verses, some more of the virtues of the truthful
servants of God have been mentioned here:ِ \`\`And those who bear not
false witness, and when they pass by a vain thing, they pass by
dignity.'' A righteous man of God never gives an evidence which is not
right and true, and he will not assist a fraud or falsehood. When they
pass by futilities, like vain talk, playing buffoon, or useless show,
and etc., they withdraw from it in a dignified way. [ 424 ] The 10th
qualification of a righteous man of God is that, when they encounter
with a sign of God, or a verse of His Book, they shall welcome it with
an open eye and a hearing ear.

They do not fall upon the signs of God, deafly or blindly. To have a
good understanding of God's order and Message, is a source of stability
and a cause of constancy. Those with closed eyes and ears may easily be
deceived and seduced which will lead to blasphemy.

The eleventh characteristic of the truthful believers, is their special
care for educating and bringing up their children, wives, and their
household, so as to be a cause of comfort and happiness for themselves
and for other people. A Muslim not only should seek salvation for
himself, that he also feels some responsibility for those who live with
him, like his wife and children in particular, and for his fellow
creature in general. He therefore prays for the maintenance of God's Law
and Religion after him through his wife and children. In fact, the
believer's ambition is to bring up their families in righteousness, and
even to become a leader in all good deeds and virtues.

These were some of the qualifications of the believers and truthful
servants of God, the rewards of whom is paid in full, when they are in
the top places of Paradise, where they shall live for ever without
feeling any disease, old age, weakness, or want.

قُلْ مَا يَعْبَأُ بِكُمْ رَبِّى لَوْلاَ دُعَاؤُكُمْ فَقَدْ كَذَّبْتُمْ
فَسَوْفَ يَكُونُ لِزَاماً(( 77 ))

77- SAY:ِ \`\`MY LORD WOULD NOT CARE FOR YOU, WERE IT NOT FOR YOUR
PRAYER. BUT YOU HAVE BELIED, AND SOON (YOUR PUNISHMENT) WILL BECOME
INEVITABLE.''

[ 425 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
WITHOUT PRAYER, MAN WORTHS NOTHING**

VERSE NO.77

This is the ending of the chapter, \`\`FORGHA"N'' and a conclusion to
all its verses. The Arabic, \`\`DO-ط'' translated to, \`\`prayer''
includes all sorts of calling God, such as; the customary prayer,
supplications, thanks-giving, and begging His pardon, all of which arise
from Man's faith in his Lord. Therefore, the verse may mean; that which
gives Man a worth and value is his prayer to God. The above verse may
imply; You denied your Lord in the past, and belied His apostles, and
followed the evil way of Satan. Now if you do not repent and return to
your God, and cease not your evil way and deeds, you shall have no more
chance, but to taste the inevitable consequences of your deeds in the
Fire of Hell; Although by rejecting the signs of God you have already
made a Hell of your present life, which in nature is, and could be, a
Semi-Paradise for you.

Allah is high above all needs, and our prayer increases or decreases
nothing in His Glory and Dignity. If all His creatures become
disbelievers, an electron weight of loss, will not set upon His kingdom
and kingship. But He turns in His Mercy to all who call on Him.
Meanwhile those who arrogantly reject His signs, will meet with the
consequences of their rejection, manifested in the blazing fire of
Hell.

Prayers to God will be answered on conditions, some of which are as
follows:ِ

1ِFirst of all, you should know Him from Whom you ask for something.
2ِThen you should call him with a pure heart and a sincere mind.
[ 426 ]

3ِYou should try to please Him through your righteous deeds. 4ِAnd
finally, you should do your best to reach your aim, by your own
endeavour and through the existing natural means and ways. Man should
know that the laws of nature are all God's authorities for doing or not
doing something; and that, God will help those who help themselves.
Prayers should serve as a means of knowing God, preventing sins, and
cleansing souls.

THE END OF SUREH FORGHA"N (25) = (SEPARATOR)

[ 427 ]

<p dir="rtl">
سُورَةُ الشُّعَراء
</p>

THE POETS

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE.


طسم(( 1 ))
1- T-S-M (TA"-SIN-MIM)
تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ(( 2 ))

2- THOSE ARE THE SIGNS (VERSES) OF THE PERSPICUOUS BOOK.

لَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَّفْسَكَ أَلاَّ يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ(( 3 ))

3- PERHAPS YOU FRET YOURSELF TO DEATH, BECAUSE THEY DO NOT BECOME
BELIEVERS.

إِنْ نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِمْ مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ(( 4 ))

4- IF WE WILL, WE SHALL SEND DOWN ON THEM A SIGN FROM THE SKY, TO WHICH
THEIR NECKS WILL BEND IN HUMILITY.

[ 428 ]

وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِّنْ ذِكْر مِّنَ الرَّحْمَـنِ مُحْدَث إِلاَّ كَانُوا
عَنْهُ مُعْرِضِينَ(( 5 ))

5- AND THERE COMES NOT TO THEM ANY NEW REMINDER FROM THE MERCIFUL
EXCEPT THEY TURN AWAY FROM IT.

فَقَدْ كَذَّبُوا فَسَيَأْتِيهِمْ أَنْبَاءُ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ
يَسْتَهْزِئُون(( 6 ))

6- SO THEY BELIED AND SOON WILL COME TO THEM THE NEWS OF THAT WHICH
THEY WERE MOCKING AT.

**THE COMMENTARY
THEY DREAD ANYTHING THAT IS NEW**

VERSE NO.1ِ6 This chapter begins with the grandeur and sublimity of the
Glorious Qura"n:ِ These are the signs of the perspicuous Book.''

The Arabic, \`\`TELKA'' meaning, \`\`THOSE'' is a nominative pronoun,
designating to the relation of a subject which is not near; and implies
the grandeur and greatness of the subject. As if it says, the subject is
so high that it is out of access. The Book in the verse is also
qualified by the adjective, \`\`MOBIN'' which we have translated to,
\`\`PERSPICUOUS'' being both transitive and intransitive, to wit.; The
Book has the quality of being clear to the understanding. It also can
make clear, ambiguous matters expressively for those who are willing to
know a matter.

Then it applies to console or comfort the Messenger of God, so that he
may not sensitively pay heed, if some arrogant pagans among Arabs reject
him, or if some spiteful Jews deny his truth or stand against his
Message. Sooner or later, they all shall be defeated, and the word of
God will have ascendancy over all other words, and soon the [ 429 ] news
of that will come to them all; of that which they were mocking at. They
all have been put to trial, or else it is not difficult for God to push
His word forward, to rule supreme:ِ

\`\`If We will, We shall send down on them a sign from the sky to which
their necks will bend in humility.''

If God willed to force people to believe, it was very easy to do it for
Him. He could send a miracle either from the sky or from the earth to
force His obstinate servant to bow down and prostrate themselves before
their Lord in humility. But He has granted a free will to man, and it is
against His universal plan to violate the Free Will and to make His
servants, believers by force-majeure. On the other hand, He sends
Messengers to men, by some perspicuous signs and miracles to teach and
train people, so that through their Free Will, and willingly they may
conform themselves to God's purpose, and to follow God's natural or
spiritual rules and regulations, which is for Man's own good and
benefit.

People may deny, reject, or even mock at God's revelation, but they
soon will see the consequences of their heedlessness, and will realize
the power of truth, and woe unto them, for the misfortune that they
incurred through their foolish opposition.

أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الاَْرْضِ كَمْ أَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ
زَوْج كَرِيم(( 7 ))

7- DO THEY NOT LOOK AT THE EARTH (SO AS TO SEE) HOW MANY OF ALL
BENEFICIAL PAIRS (OF PLANTS) HAVE WE GROWN?

إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 8 ))

8- VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN, AND YET MOST OF THEM BELIEVE NOT.

[ 430 ]

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 9 ))

9- AND THAT YOUR LORD, HE IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, THE COMPASSIONATE.


