The Painful End of Pharoah's Folk
=================================

VERSE NO.61ِ68

In these verses, the last part of the story of Pharaoh and his folk has
been illustrated. It was so that Moses and all his people passed over
the sea safely and Pharaoh and his great army drowned:ِ \`\`And We saved
Moses and whoever was with him. After that We drowned the others.'' The
king and his forces hurried all the night in pursuit, and finally they
reached the fugitives in the sunrise. When the two parties saw each
other, the Israelites trembled with fear because they had the dangerous
and roaring sea in front, and a sea of furious enemy in behind! A people
who had fed themselves for many years with their children's blood:ِ
\`\`When the two parties saw each other, the companions of Moses said:ِ
\`\`We shall certainly be overtaken.''

In such that critical condition, Moses was amazingly calm and comfort!
He seemed to have a support far more powerful than Pharaoh and his
forces. When the alarmed Israelites said that they would soon be seized
by the tyrant and his cruel army, he indifferently said:ِ

\`\`Not so! My Lord is with me. Soon will He guide me.'' God Had
already told Moses at the beginning of his mission that; \`\`Wherever
you go, I am with you. I hear and I see.'' That promise was enough for
Moses that God would deliver him somehow from that dangerous deadlock.
Soon he was inspired:ِ \`\`Moses! Strike the sea with your stick.'' He
struck, and the sea cleaved and a path was made across it:ِ \`\`Each
part of the sea became like a huge mountain!'' For more details of the
Pass Over, please refer to volume 3 of this book commenting
Sِ17:101ِ103.

[ 449 ]

وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ(( 69 ))

69- AND REHEARSE TO THEM THE STORY OF ABRAHAM.

إِذْ قَالَ لاَِبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ(( 70 ))

70- WHEN HE SAID TO HIS FATHER AND HIS PEOPLE:ِ \`\`WHAT DO YOU
WORSHIP.''

قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ أَصْنَاماً فَنَظَلُّ لَهَا عَاكِفِينَ(( 71 ))

71- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE WORSHIP SOME IDOLS AS A ROUTINE AND WE ATTEND
THEM.

قَالَ هَلْ يَسْمَعُونَكُمْ إِذْ تَدْعُونَ(( 72 ))

72- HE SAID:ِ \`\`DO THEY HEAR YOU WHEN YOU CALL?''

أَوْ يَنْفَعُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَضُرُّونَ(( 73 ))

73- OR DO THEY PROFIT YOU OR HARM?

قَالُوا بَلْ وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا كَذَلِكَ يَفْعَلُونَ(( 74 ))

74- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE FOUND OUR FATHERS DOING THAT.''

قَالَ أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَّا كُنْتُمْ تَعْبُدُونَ(( 75 ))

75- HE SAID:ِ \`\`HAVE YOU SEEN WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN WORSHIPPING.''

أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمُ الاَْقْدَمُونَ(( 76 ))

76- YOU AND YOUR FATHERS BEFORE YOU.

فَإِنَّهُمْ عَدُوٌّ لِّى إِلاَّ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 77 ))

77- ALL OF THEM ARE MY ENEMIES, EXCEPT THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

[ 450 ]

الَّذِى خَلَقَنِى فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ(( 78 ))

78- HE WHO CREATED ME, AND IT IS HE WHO GUIDES ME.

وَالَّذِى هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِى وَيَسْقِينِ(( 79 ))

79- AND HE WHO FEEDS ME AND FURNISHES ME WITH DRINK.

وَإِذَا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ(( 80 ))

80- AND WHEN I BECAME SICK THEN HE IS WHO CURES ME.

وَالَّذِى يُمِيتُنِى ثُمَّ يُحْيِينِ(( 81 ))

81- AND HE WHO MAKES ME TO DIE, THEN RESTORES ME BACK TO LIFE.

وَالَّذِى أَطْمَعُ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ لِى خَطِيئَتِى يَوْمَ الدِّينِ(( 82
))

82- AND HE WHOM I COVER TO FORGIVE ME MY WRONGS IN THE DAY OF DOOM.

**THE COMMENTARY
I WORSHIP SUCH A GOD**

VERSE NO.69ِ82

Following the story of Moses in his Pass Over, and drowning Pharaoh and
his host, the immediate reference goes back to a part of the adventures
of ABRAHAM, another Arch prophet of God:ِ \`\`And rehearse to them the
story of Abraham; when he said to his father, and to his people:ِ
\`\`What do you worship?'' And they immediately answered:ِ \`\`We
worship the idols as a daily routine, and always attend them.''

They said so, as if they were proud of doing such that useless and
foolish act! But Abraham then a youth in his teenages, kept them [ 451 ]
under a shower of questions or better to say objections!:ِ

\`\`Do they hear you when you call them? Or can they be of any profit,
or even of any harm to you?''

Of course, there was not any sign of the least amount of intelligence
and understanding in their false gods which were only pieces of carved
stones!

The idolaters who could find no reason for their ridiculous worship,
said:ِ

\`\`We found our fathers doing that!''

This was a sign of their blind and dark imitation.

At the beginning, Abraham revealed his ideas about the idolatary and
false worship, in the form of a gentle and reasonable dialogue. He
patiently argued with his father and his people about God's truth, then
he tried to convince his people that the idols are not a worthy object
of worship, who can neither hear nor answer a call. But his people
obstinately rejected him, and threatened him of punishments like to
death with stone!

Therefore, in the next step he bravely attacked idolatry; and all the
false deities were declared, by the lad who would be the Shaikh of the
Prophets in future, as the enemies of him, and all the Mankind:ِ

\`\`He said:ِ \`\`Have you seen what you have been worshipping so
far.... You and your fathers of old?....All of them are my enemies,
except the Lord of all the worlds.''

Why should man worship and serve something or someone who has no power
to do anything bad or good? A god who can neither profit nor harm, whose
worship lowers the dignity of man, and becomes a cause of making
mischief and going astray. Such a worship may only end in cutting off
Man's spiritual relation with truth, and his Merciful God, who takes
care of all of us; Who may forgive us our sins and [ 452 ]

cleanse the mirror of our heart from the rusts of falsehood. Who has
created us and guides us. Who feeds us and furnishes us with drink. Who
will make us to die, and then raises us to life. Who cures the sick....
These were the objections of Abraham, when he addressed his father and
folk. Some commentators have understood \`\`AZAR'' to have been
Abraham's uncle and not his real father.

رَبِّ هَبْ لِى حُكْماً وَأَلْحِقْنِى بِالصَّالِحِينَ(( 83 ))

83- MY LORD! BESTOW ON ME WISDOM, AND JOIN ME WITH THE RIGHTEOUS.

وَاجْعَلْ لِى لِسَانَ صِدْق فِى الاْخِرِينَ(( 84 ))

84- AND MAKE FOR ME A TRUTHFUL TONGUE (GOOD FAME) AMONG THE LAST ONES.
(THOSE WHO COME AFTER ME)

وَاجْعَلْنِى مِنْ وَرَثَةِ جَنَّةِ النَّعِيمِ(( 85 ))

85- AND MAKE ME OF THE INHERITORS OF THE GARDEN OF BLISS. (THE
PARADISE)

وَاغْفِرْ لاَِبِى إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ(( 86 ))

86- AND FORGIVE MY FATHER THAT HE WAS OF THE STRAYS.

وَلاَ تُخْزِنِى يَوْمَ يُبْعَثُونَ(( 87 ))

87- AND DISGRACE ME NOT THE DAY (IN WHICH) THEY ARE RAISED UP.

[ 453 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FRUITFUL PRAYERS OF ABRAHAM**
VERSE NO.83ِ87

Abraham said to his father and to his people whatever was to be said,
of Monotheism and their great wrong worship of the false gods. He showed
them the distinction between right and wrong, and God and idols.

Now follows the fruitful prayers of Abraham to his Lord, through which
he asks the Merciful to grant him the most important inmost wishes he
had. His first desire was to enlighten his soul with Divine wisdom and
having the power of right judgement. Then it was to have a truthful
tongue of people after him and to join the righteous people and good
doers. And finally, he asked Allah to give him habitation in the
Paradise. He also prayed for his strayed father to share in his
spiritual felicity.

يَوْمَ لاَ يَنْفَعُ مَالٌ وَلاَ بَنُونَ(( 88 ))

88- THE DAY IN WHICH NEITHER WEALTH NOR SONS SHALL PROFIT.

إِلاَّ مَنْ أَتَى اللهَ بِقَلْب سَلِيم(( 89 ))

89- EXCEPT HE WHO CAME TO GOD WITH AN INTACT HEART.

وَأُزْلِفَتِ الْجَنَّةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ(( 90 ))

90- AND THE PARADISE WILL BE BROUGHT NEAR FOR THOSE WHO AVOID EVIL.

وَبُرِّزَتْ الْجَحِيمُ لِلْغَاوِينَ(( 91 ))

91- AND THE HELL WILL BE REVEALED TO THE ERRING.

[ 454 ]

وَقِيلَ لَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْبُدُونَ(( 92 ))

92- AND IT WILL BE SAID TO THEM:ِ \`\`WHERE ARE THE (FALSE GODS) THAT
YOU WERE WORSHIPPING.''

مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ هَلْ يَنْصُرُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَنْتَصِرُونَ(( 93 ))

93- APART FROM ALLAH. DO THEY HELP YOU, OR ARE THEY (THEMSELVES)
HELPED?

فَكُبْكِبُوا فِيهَا هُمْ وَالْغَاوُنَ(( 94 ))

94- THEN THEY ARE THROWN HEADLONG IN IT (IN THE HELL) AND THE ERRINGS
(TOO).

وَجُنُودُ إِبْلِيسَ أَجْمَعُونَ(( 95 ))

95- AND THE HOSTS OF EBLIS ALL TOGETHER.

قَالُوا وَهُمْ فِيهَا يَخْتَصِمُونَ(( 96 ))

96- THEY SAY:ِ WHILE THEY ARE DISPUTING THEREIN;

تَاللهِ إِنْ كُنَّا لَفِى ضَلاَل مُّبِين(( 97 ))

97- BY ALLAH WE WERE IN MANIFEST ERROR,

إِذْ نُسَوِّيكُمْ بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 98 ))

98- WHEN WE WERE CONSIDERING YOU EQUAL TO THE LORD OF THE WORLDS.

وَمَا أَضَلَّنَا إِلاَّ الْمُجْرِمُونَ(( 99 ))

99- AND NONE STRAYED US EXCEPT THE SINNERS

[ 455 ]

فَمَا لَنَا مِنْ شَافِعِينَ(( 100 ))

100- NOW THERE IS NONE OF THE INTERCESSORS FOR US.

وَلاَ صَدِيق حَمِيم(( 101 ))

101- AND NOT A LOYAL FRIEND.

فَلَوْ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً فَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 102 ))

102- THEN IF THERE COULD BE ANOTHER CHANCE OF RETURN FOR US, WE WOULD
BE OF THE BELIEVERS.

إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 103
))

103- VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN, AND MOST OF THEM WERE NOT BELIEVERS.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 104 ))

104- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, AND COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE DISPUTE AMONG THE WORSHIPPERS AND THE FALSE WORSHIPPED** VERSE
NO.88ِ104

Now we are given a perception of the Day of Doom and the end of the
sinful disbelievers:ِ \`\`Remember the Day in which neither wealth nor
sons shall profit; except he who came to God with intact heart.'' There
in the Resurrection Day, Man's wealth and children can do nothing for
him! Only good deeds that are done with a pure heart and godly
intention, will come to Man's help. [ 456 ]

There in that dreadful day, all chances are lost; and there is no room
for atonement. The Paradise will be brought near, and the Hell will be
revealed to the wrong doers to whom will be said:ِ \`\`Where are the
false gods that you were worshipping?'' Then the wrong worshipper and
the false worshipped will both be thrown head long into the Hell.
Paradise then will be the abode of the righteous, whereas the Fire of
Misery is to lodge the evil doers, who have rejected the truth.

The worshippers of false gods who were the hosts of evil Ibliss, shall
become the fuel of the Blazing Fire. It will ironically be said to
them:ِ \`\`Where are the false gods that you were worshipping. Can they
help you, or are they even helped themselves?'' That is the station in
which the eyes of the unbelievers will be fully opened, and they will
come to know that the signs of God were always around them. They say to
each other, while they are disputing therein:ِ \`\`By Allah we have been
in the manifest error, when we were considering you equal to the Lord of
the worlds; and none strayed us except the sinners.'' Then they will
have a tender desire to return back for another chance, in order to make
for their shortcomings, but they are still wrong, because even if they
were sent back they would certainly return to their former evil ways.

كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوح الْمُرْسَلِينَ(( 105 ))

105- THE PEOPLE OF NOAH BELIED THE MESSENGERS.

إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ نُوحٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 106 ))

106- WHEN THEIR BROTHER NOAH SAID TO THEM:ِ \`\`WILL YOU NOT AVOID
EVIL?''

إِنِّى لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ(( 107 ))

107- I AM A TRUSTWORTHY MESSENGER FOR YOU.

[ 457 ]

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 108 ))

108- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ أَجْرِىَ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ(( 109 ))

109- AND I ASK YOU OF NO REWARD FOR IT, THAT MY REWARD IS NOT EXCEPT
UPON THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 110 ))

110- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

قَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الاَْرْذَلُونَ(( 111 ))

111- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`SHOULD WE BELIEVE YOU WHILE THE LOWLY PEOPLE ARE
YOUR FOLLOWERS?''

قَالَ وَمَا عِلْمِى بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 112 ))

112- NOAH SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT DO I KNOW OF WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN DOING.''

إِنْ حِسَابُهُمْ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّى لَوْ تَشْعُرُونَ(( 113 ))

113- VERILY THEIR ACCOUNT FALLS ON NO ONE EXCEPT MY LORD IF YOU COULD
ONLY KNOW.

وَمَا أَنَا بِطَارِدِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 114 ))

114- AND I AM NOT THE ONE TO DRIVE AWAY THE BELIEVERS.

إِنْ أَنَا إِلاَّ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ (( 115 ))

115- I AM NAUGHT, EXCEPT A PLAIN WARNER.

[ 458 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
O, NOAH! WHY THE LOWLY PERSONS ARE YOUR FOLLOWERS?**
VERSE NO.105ِ115

Noah's people had been faithless and mischief makers. Noah was sent to
them to warn and admonish them, and to tell them that the house has an
owner; but the obstinate people did not listen to him. When their
compassionate brother told them:ِ \`\`Will you not avoid evil? I am a
trustworthy Messenger for you, and I ask you of no reward for it.'' The
leaders of the people belied the Messenger of God and rejected him, by
saying; true that you have always lived among us a truthful and
compassionate brother, but look at the lowly persons that are around you
as your followers! Do you expect us to be classed with them? The
criterion for evaluation of personality in their sight was wealth,
clothes, good appearance, and swift mounts. So to them, the poor
labourers who had faith in Noah were known as mean, base, and lowly
fellows. In answer to them Noah said:ِ

\`\`How do I know what do they have in their mind, or what have they
done before?'' I only know that I should not drive them away from me,
because I am sent to preach and advise everyone. All the people have the
same right to come and listen to the Message of their Lord and to
receive God's Mercy. My duty is only to convey God's Message to His
servants, and I am naught except a plain warner. So if my followers are
otherwise, you ought to know that their account falls on no one, except
my Lord, if you could only know it.''

قَالُوا لَئِنْ لَّمْ تَنْتَهِ يَا نُوحُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ
الْمَرْجُومِينَ(( 116 ))

116- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`IF YOU DO NOT DESIST, O, NOAH, YOU WILL BE
STONED.''

[ 459 ]

قَالَ رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِى كَذَّبُونِ(( 117 ))

117- HE SAID:ِ \`\`MY LORD! MY PEOPLE HAVE BELIED ME.''

فَافْتَحْ بَيْنِى وَبَيْنَهُمْ فَتْحاً وَنَجِّنِى وَمَنْ مَّعِى مِنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 118 ))

118- THEN OPEN AN OPENING BETWEEN ME AND THEM. (SEPARATE US FROM EACH
OTHER) AND SAVE ME AND WHO IS WITH ME OF THE BELIEVERS.''

فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ فِى الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ(( 119 ))

119- SO WE SAVED HIM AND WHOEVER WAS WITH HIM IN THE FULL-LOADED ARK.

ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا بَعْدُ الْبَاقِينَ(( 120 ))

120- THEN WE DROWNED THE REST.

إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 121
))

121- VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN. AND MOST OF THEM WERE NOT BELIEVERS.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 122 ))

122- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
NOAH WAS RESCUED AND POLYTHEISTS WERE DROWNED**

VERSE NO.116ِ122

The reaction of the leaders and chiefs of his people, to Noah's call
was none the better than that of the cruel tyrants of the history. [ 460
]

They threatened the Messenger of God with death by stone; but their
threats recoiled on themselves by God's justice and power. The threats
did never prevent the men of God from carrying out their mission. Noah
came to the conclusion that there was no more use in his preachings and
admonishings among these infidel and stubborn people; he therefore asked
his Lord to help him. God's help very soon appeared, but in a wonderful
way:ِ \`\`Noah said my Lord! My people have belied me. Then open an
opening between me and them, so as to separate us from one another; and
save me and the believers from their guiles and threats.''

Allah answered His Messenger, and His Mercy was bestowed on Noah and
whoever believed in him. Allah saved him and whoever was with him in
that full-loaded Ark, and the rest of the people were all drowned in
that furious Flood.

كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ الْمُرْسَلِينَ(( 123 ))

123- طD (TOO) BELIED THE MESSENGERS.

إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ هُودٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 124 ))

124- WHEN THEIR BROTHER HOOD SAID TO THEM:ِ \`\`WILL YOU NOT AVOID
EVIL?''

إِنِّى لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ(( 125 ))

125- I AM A TRUSTWORTHY MESSENGER FOR YOU.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 126 ))

126- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ أَجْرِىَ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ(( 127 ))

127- AND I ASK YOU NOT ANY REWARD, THAT MY REWARD IS NOT EXCEPT UPON
THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

[ 461 ]

أَتَبْنُونَ بِكُلِّ رِيع آيَةً تَعْبَثُونَ(( 128 ))

128- DO YOU BUILD A SIGN UPON EVERY HIGH PLACE BY VANITY (TO AMUSE
YOURSELVES)?

وَتَتَّخِذُونَ مَصَانِعَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَخْلُدُونَ(( 129 ))

129- AND YOU TAKE STRONG HOLDS (FOR FIRMNESS) THAT YOU MAY LIVE FOR
EVER!?

وَإِذَا بَطَشْتُمْ بَطَشْتُمْ جَبَّارِينَ(( 130 ))

130- AND WHEN YOU ASSAULT, YOU ASSAULT LIKE THE CRUEL TYRANTS.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 131 ))

131- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME

وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِى أَمَدَّكُمْ بِمَا تَعْلَمُونَ(( 132 ))

132- AND BEWARE OF HIM, WHO HAS HELPED YOU BY WHAT YOU KNOW.

أَمَدَّكُمْ بِأَنْعَام وَبَنِينَ(( 133 ))

133- HE HELPED YOU BY CATTLE AND SONS.

وَجَنَّات وَعُيُون(( 134 ))

134- AND BY GARDENS AND SPRINGS.

إِنِّى أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْم عَظِيم(( 135 ))

135- THAT I FEAR FOR YOU THE TORMENT OF A GREAT DAY!

[ 462 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CRIMES OF A"D**

VERSE NO.123ِ135

Here comes now, and once again, the fate of A"d who misused the
bounties of God, and blasphemed. The story of A"d is an Arabic tradition
and it is not found in the Bible. Their prophet Hood, whose tomb is
still traditionally shown in HAZARMUTHِYEMEN; was sent to warn the
rebellious and sinful people. In a compassionate way Hood advised his
people saying:ِ

\`\`I am a trustworthy Messenger for you. Will you not avoid evil then?
If you fear God and obey me, I will lead you in a straight path of
prosperity and salvation, and I ask you not any reward. Why should you
build a sign or a monument upon every high place which are merely
errected for vanity and self-amusement?''

The people of A"d were great builders. In creed, they were severe
materialists, and felt to be very safe and secure in their strongholds
and firm houses. They forsook God and oppressed their weaker people
without any consideration! In spite of all their brute power, when they
rejected God's Message brought to them by Hood, they proved to be very
helpless and weak as any other creature.

\`\`When you assault you assault like the cruel tyrants.'' This implies
that those who came within their power, were oppressed and treated with
cruelty without any consideration.

Their prophet, Hood criticised their extravagant ambitions, their
cruelty and tender love for material properties, like firm and excellent
houses, gardens with springs, and etc.

He warned them to be careful of the agony of a great day in which they
had to see the consequences of their works. They did not listen to their
well-wisher prophet and therefore suffered the inevitable penalties for
their thanklessness.

[ 463 ]

قَالُوا سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْنَا أَوَعَظْتَ أَمْ لَمْ تَكُنْ مِّنَ
الْوَاعِظِينَ(( 136 ))

136- THEY SAID; IT IS ALIKE TO US WHETHER YOU PREACH OR DO NOT
PREACH.

إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ خُلُقُ الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 137 ))

137- THIS IS NAUGHT BUT AN OLD CUSTOM. (OF THE PRIMEVALS)

وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ(( 138 ))

138- AND WE SHALL NOT BE PUNISHED.

فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 139 ))

139- THEN THEY BELIED HIM AND WE DESTROYED THEM. VERILY IN THAT IS A
SIGN; AND MOST OF THEM WERE NOT BELIEVERS.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 140 ))

140- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, THE COMPASSIONATE.


