Don't Admonish Us in Vain
=========================

VERSE NO.136ِ140

In the previous verses, we read the meaningful advices of Hud, to the
faithless people of A"d. Now we come to the futile, hollow, and
faithless answers of his people:ِ \`\`They said:ِ \`\`It is alike to us
whether you preach or do not preach.''
[ 464 ]

They rejected their prophet and said to him; do not bother us and
yourself. Whether you preach us or not, we are not going to listen to
you. We don't believe in what you say at all, because we have heard
enough of that sort of ineffectual warnings that are naught except an
old custom. You are only reviving the ancient superstitions. Who has
come back from the world of deads to tell us what is what and who is
who?:ِ \`\`Then they belied him and we destroyed them.''

كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ(( 141 ))

141- THAMUD BELIED THE MESSENGERS (OF GOD).

إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ صَالِحٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 142 ))

142- WHEN THEIR BROTHER SALIH SAID TO THEM:ِ \`\`WILL YOU NOT AVOID
EVIL?''

إِنِّى لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ(( 143 ))

143- I AM A TRUSTWORTHY APOSTLE FOR YOU.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 144 ))

144- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ أَجْرِىَ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ(( 145 ))

145- AND I ASK YOU NOT FOR ANY REWARD, THAT MY REWARD IS NOT EXCEPT
UPON THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

أَتُتْرَكُونَ فِى مَا هَاهُنَا آمِنِينَ(( 146 ))

146- WILL YOU BE LEFT SECURE IN WHAT ARE HERE;

[ 465 ]

فِى جَنَّات وَعُيُون(( 147 ))

147- IN GARDENS AND SPRINGS.

وَزُرُوع وَنَخْل طَلْعُهَا هَضِيمٌ(( 148 ))

148- AND SOWN FIELDS, AND PALM-TREES LADEN WITH SWEET FRUIT.

وَتَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتاً فَارِهِينَ(( 149 ))

149- AND YOU HEW HOUSES IN THE MOUNTAINS TO MAKE MERRY.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 150 ))

150- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

وَلاَ تُطِيعُوا أَمْرَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ(( 151 )) 151- AND DO NOT OBEY THE
ORDER OF PRODIGALS. الَّذِينَ يُفْسِدُونَ فِى الاَْرْضِ وَلاَ
يُصْلِحُونَ(( 152 )) 152- THOSE WHO MAKE MISCHIEF IN THE LAND AND AMEND
NOT. (ANYTHING)

**THE COMMENTARY
DON'T OBEY THE ORDER OF PRODIGALS** VERSE NO.141ِ152

The fifth of the stories of the prophets in this chapter (NO.26), has
been cited here as an abstract of the history of the people of Thamud,
and their prophet Salih, who lived in a place between Medina and Syria
called; \`\`WADI-AL-GHORA"''.

[ 466 ]

The story of Thamud as narrated by QURA"N will show how the history has
been repeated:ِ Thamud (too) belied the Messengers of God, when their
brother Salih said to them:ِ \`\`I am a trustworthy apostle for you,
then beware of Allah and obey me.''

Allah sent His Messenger Salih to preach and to warn them, and probably
to guide them to truth and to the straight way of real development and
evolution. He told them:ِ \`\`Do you think that you shall abide in what
you have forever? And that these fruitful gardens and farmlands that are
watered from springs will remain in your possession forever? Do you
think that these firm chambers that you have hewed in the rocks, will
prevent death to catch you?'' \`\`Beware of Allah and obey me, and do
not obey the order of the prodigals who make mischief in the land, and
amend not anything.''

In order to prove his truthfulness, Salih brought them a sign from
Allah, which was a she-camel who miraculously came out of the rocks, but
the people, and in particular their chiefs, accused the prophet of God
of sorcery; and then they foolishly incurred the wrath of God, and soon
after Allah destroyed them all.

\*\*\*\*\*

**WHO WERE THAMUD?**

Historian say that THAMUD were an old Arab tribe, whose capital was a
town named Petra. As their material civilization advanced, their
spiritual culture lagged behind that they became godless and infidels,
and finally God destroyed them all. They were a wealthy people and
skilled carvers of stones. They hewed their houses in the mountains to
be secure, and were much occupied in amusements, festivity, and [ 467
]

making merry. They were cruel to the weak, and oppressed the poor. The
cities were on the old caravan road, from Medina to Syria some 180
miles; a place which is called now, \`\`MADA"IN-AL-SALIH'' which means
the cities of Salih. In this place is seen the ruined site of the people
of Thamud, to whom the apostle Salih had been sent, whose marked miracle
was a she-camel that had come out of the rocks by the request of Thamud
chiefs, as a sign of Salih's prophethood.

There in the cities of Salih are several dated inscriptions that are
preserved, besides many sepulchral rock-hewn chambers, in some of which
human bones and remain were found. Among these graves and chambers,
there is also the ruins of a great hall in which their gods were
worshipped. The people of Thamud were not only skilled in hewing the
rocks. As we may get out of the above verses, they must have been proud
of their subterranean canals lying under the surface of the earth for
leading water from the springs to their fruitful gardens and farmlands
for irregation.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ(( 153 ))

153- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`YOU ARE OF THOSE BEWITCHED.''

مَا أَنْتَ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُنَا فَأْتِ بِآيَة إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ(( 154 ))

154- YOU ARE NOT EXCEPT A MAN LIKE US. THEN BRING A SIGN IF YOU ARE OF
THE TRUTHFULS.

قَالَ هَذِهِ نَاقَةٌ لَّهَا شِرْبٌ وَلَكُمْ شِرْبُ يَوْم مَّعْلُوم((
155 ))

[ 468 ]

155- HE SAID HERE IS A SHE-CAMEL. (WHICH YOU HAVE ASKED AS A SIGN) FOR
HER IS A SHARE OF WATER, AND FOR YOU A SHARE, ON A DAY APPOINTED.

وَلاَ تَمَسُّوهَا بِسُوء فَيَأْخُذَكُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْم عَظِيم(( 156 ))

156- (LET HER HAVE HER SHARE) AND TOUCH HER NOT WITH HARM, THAT THE
TORMENT OF A GREAT DAY MAY SEIZE YOU.

فَعَقَرُوهَا فَأَصْبَحُوا نَادِمِينَ(( 157 ))

157- BUT THEY HAMSTRUNG HER AND IN THE MORNING WERE REMORSEFUL.

فَأَخَذَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 158 ))

158- THEN THE PUNISHMENT SEIZED THEM. VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN, AND
MOST OF THEM WERE NOT BELIEVERS.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 159 ))

159- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE OBSTINACY OF THAMUD**
VERSE NO.153ِ159

In the previous passage, we read how the logic and kind reasoning of
Salih was, when he asked his people to beware of God and stop doing evil
deeds. Now we are seeing the reaction of Thamud to the [ 469 ] advices
of their well-wisher and compassionate prophet. To answer him they
said:ِ \`\`You are bewitched, and are naught except a man like us.'' It
was not for finding the truth, but only for raising pretexts, that they
asked for a miracle:ِ \`\`If you are really truthful in what you claim
of; then bring a sign from your Lord.''

The compassionate prophet considered their request for a miracle, and
prayed to God; and a she-camel came out of the rocks as they had asked
to! She was a strange kind of camel that differed much from the ordinary
camels. Then Salih said to his people:ِ \`\`Here you are with the camel
which you asked as a sign of my prophethood. For her is a share of
water, and for you a share, on a day appointed. Therefore, let her have
her share of water, and do not harm her, lest the torment of a great day
may seize you.''

Unfortunately, the obstinate and ignorant people did not want to make
up for their shortcomings. They themselves had asked for such that
miracle through which a camel had to come out of the rocks as a sign of
Salih's truthfulness. When the camel was revealed as a test case, they
did not respect the watering rights that was given her. One of them got
up and hamstrung the creature, while all the others applauded and
confirmed his evil act with pleasure! Their cheerfulness endured no
long, and soon they all became remorseful for their evil actِa regret
that was too late. There happened a dreadful earthquake and all of them
were burried alive, and their excellent houses turned to the worst of
graves in a minute!

[ 470 ]

كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوط الْمُرْسَلِينَ(( 160 ))

160- THE PEOPLE OF LOT BELIED THE MESSENGERS.

إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ لُوطٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 161 ))

161- WHEN THEIR BROTHER LOT SAID TO THEM:ِ

\`\`WILL YOU NOT AVOID EVIL?''

إِنِّى لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ(( 162 ))

162- I AM A TRUSTWORTHY APOSTLE FOR YOU.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 163 ))

163- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ أَجْرِىَ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ(( 164 ))

164- AND I ASK YOU NOT ANY REWARD, THAT MY REWARD IS NOT EXCEPT UPON
THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

أَتَأْتُونَ الذُّكْرَانَ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 165 ))

165- (SHOULD YOU BE THE ONLY CREATURE THAT) FROM AMONG THE WORLDS COME
TO MALES (SEXUALLY)!?

وَتَذَرُونَ مَا خَلَقَ لَكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ مِّنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ بَلْ
أَنْتُمْ قَوْمٌ عَادُونَ(( 166 ))

166- AND YOU LEAVE YOUR WIVES THAT ALLAH HAS CREATED FOR YOU? YOU ARE
RATHER A PEOPLE WHO TRANSGRESS.

**THE COMMENTARY
A SHAMEFUL TRANSGRESSING PEOPLE**
VERSE NO.160ِ166

Lot is the sixth of the apostles whose adventure has been [ 471 ]

mentioned in this chapter. His incident happened in the life time of
Abraham, but it is mentioned here, because Qura"n is not a historical
book. Lot's mission was to a people who were addicted to the heinuous
crime of pederasty. When Lot admonished his people, his warning merely
excited their wrath, and they threatened to cast him out of their town.
They shamelessly worked against their own nature, and their
compassionate apostle warned them saying:ِ

\`\`Should you be the only creature from among all the worlds to come
to males sexually, and to leave your clean wives that Allah has created
for you!?'' In the various chapters of Qura"n such as:ِ S.7ِ S.11ِ S.15ِ
S.21ِ S.27 and S.29, reference has been made to various parts of Lot's
story, and in each case a different aspect of the shameful and indecent
sin of homosexuality and pederasty has been pointed to. In the above
mentioned SUREHS, the obscene crime has been qualified with the hateful
words like; transgression, debauchery, ignorance and etc. He who commits
pederasty will be condemned to death by Islam's judgement.

\*\*\*\*\*

Nowadays, the mysterious illness of AIDS has become a general topic of
conversation throughout the world, while no doctor doubts that the main
cause of the hateful disease is the filthy act of pederasty. T.N.

It is proved that perversion in sex affairs is one of the most
dangerous of the perversions.

قَالُوا لَئِنْ لَّمْ تَنْتَهِ يَا لُوطُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ
الْمُخْرَجِينَ(( 167 ))

167- THEY SAID; O, LOT! IF YOU DESIST NOT, YOU SHALL BE BANISHED.

[ 472 ]

قَالَ إِنِّى لِعَمَلِكُمْ مِّنَ الْقَالِينَ(( 168 )) 168- LOT SAID:ِ
\`\`I ABHOR YOUR DEED.''

رَبِّ نَجِّنِى وَأَهْلِى مِمَّا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 169 ))

169- MY LORD! SAVE ME AND MY FAMILY OF WHAT THEY DO.

فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 170 ))

170- THEN WE SAVED HIM AND HIS FAMILY ALL-TOGETHER.

إِلاَّ عَجُوزاً فِى الْغَابِرِينَ(( 171 ))

171- EXCEPT AN OLD WOMAN (WHO WAS LEFT BEHIND) AMONG THOSE WHO
STAYED.

ثُمَّ دَمَّرْنَا الاْخَرِينَ(( 172 ))

172- THEN WE DESTROYED THE OTHERS.

وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ مَّطَراً فَسَاءَ مَطَرُ الْمُنذَرِينَ(( 173
))

173- AND WE RAINED ON THEM (AN AWFUL) RAIN. SO BAD WAS THE RAIN FOR
THOSE WHO WERE WARNED.

إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 174
))

174- VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN. AND MOST OF THEM WERE NOT BELIEVERS.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 175 ))

175- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, COMPASSIONATE.

[ 473 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE END OF LOT'S PEOPLE**
VERSE NO.167ِ175

Instead of paying heed to the brotherly advices of Lot, his people
plunged into the lagoon of sinful passions! When they felt that Lot was
bothering them by his warning, they ironically said to one another that,
Lot and his family are a people who seek to keep clean. So, we better
cast them out of our town and expel them from here. It has also been
narrated that the foul people of Lot would banish chaste people from
among themselves in the worst possible form and manner. Lot's missionary
object had him forced to live among those unchaste people, although the
whole society was detestable in his sight. It is worthwhile here to note
that he did not say to his people;; I abhor you. He rather said:ِ

\`\`I abhor your deed,'' (NO.168) which seems him to have been driving
against their homosexuality.

Lot was willing to escape from that horrible community when his duty no
longer demanded; and that was why he prayed to his Lord saying:ِ \`\`My
Lord! Save me and my family of what they do.''

This is to say that he was afraid of the bad consequences of the
obscene and disgusting deeds of his people to afflict his family too.
Eventually, God answered his prayer, and Lot and his family who were the
only believers among the townsfolk, were saved, and others were all
destroyed!

God rained upon them an awful rain which perished them all. When God's
decree was issued, their towns were turned upside down by something like
a quake; and after that a shower of brimstones, or baked clay, rained
and burried them in. Contrary to the ordinary rain which is reviving and
life giving, that rain was deathful and destructive. God has always been
Merciful and Compassionate. In this [ 474 ] incident too, He did not
destroy the sinful and sinless all together. The believers were saved
first, and when all of them left the town, the rest who were all
disbelievers were defeated by the dreadful rain!:ِ

\`\`Then We saved him and his family all-together, except an old woman
who was left behind among those who stayed.'' This was Lot's wife who
stayed behind and was perished with the unbelievers because she never
believe in her husband!

كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ لْئَيْكَةِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ(( 176 ))

176- THE COMPANIONS OF AIKAT BELIED THE MESSENGERS.

إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ شُعَيْبٌ أَلاَ تَتَّقُونَ(( 177 ))

177- WHEN SHUAIB SAID TO THEM:ِ \`\`WILL YOU NOT AVOID EVIL?''

إِنِّى لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ (( 178 ))

178- I AM A TRUSTWORTHY APOSTLE FOR YOU.

فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ(( 179 ))

179- THEN BEWARE OF ALLAH AND OBEY ME.

وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ أَجْرِىَ إِلاَّ عَلَى رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ(( 180 ))

180- AND I ASK YOU NOT FOR ANY REWARD, THAT MY REWARD IS NOT EXCEPT
UPON THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

أَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ وَلاَ تَكُونُوا مِنَ الْمُخْسِرِينَ(( 181 ))

181- GIVE THE MEASURE FAITHFULLY, AND BE NOT OF THOSE WHO GIVE LESS.

[ 475 ]

وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ(( 182 ))

182- AND MEASURE WITH A CORRECT SCALE.

وَلاَ تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَاءَهُمْ وَلاَ تَعْثَوْا فِى الاَْرْضِ
مُفْسِدِينَ(( 183 ))

183- AND LESSEN NOT THE PEOPLE'S GOODS, AND DO NOT CORRUPT THE LAND BY
MAKING MISCHIEF.

وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِى خَلَقَكُمْ وَالْجِبِلَّةَ الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 184 ))

184- AN BEWARE OF HE WHO CREATED YOU AND THE FIRST GENERATIONS.

**THE COMMENTARY
SHUAIB AND THE COMPANIONS OF AIKAT**
VERSE NO.176ِ184

This is the seventh, and the last of a series of the events that has
occurred in the life time of the prophets, that have been narrated in
this chapter. The immediate reference is now to the Divine Mission of
the apostle Shuaib in Medyan in the South of ancient Syria. The central
place of the argument was AIKAT, a town surrounded by woods and forests.
The people of Medyan belied all the Messengers of God, and in
particular, rejected Shuaib impolitely. We understand from the various
verses of Qura"n that the population of Medyan, and in particular the
inhabitants of AIKAT, must have had a comfortable and luxurious living.
They were a commerical people given to fraud, and without any kind of
fear cheated one another in business affairs! They played with their
scales, lessening the dues of their simple minded customers. Shuaib
admonished them saying:ِ

\`\`Give the measure faithfully, and be not of those who give less than
what they should. Lessen not the people's goods and do not corrupt the
land by making mischief.'' [ 476 ]

Shuaib warned his people to avoid evil, and to beware of the Lord God,
their Creator, and the Creator of the past generations. He asked them to
follow him in the God's way, which in their case was to measure
faithfully and to give people their due, and make no mischief to corrupt
the land. But the companions of Aikat rejected Shuaib's prophethood, and
even denied that they were doing wrong!

\*\*\*\*\*

Nowadays, the same thing of fraud is happening in our markets here, and
when we ask why so? They deny that they are doing wrong! They say the
sellers and the buyers, do their transactions on the basis of their
mutual consent. No seller forces anyone to buy from him. Let them go
elsewhere and buy whatever they want. Both the truth and right are
neglected in our bargains. I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed
Satan.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

The companions of Aikat even claimed that the former generations were
not wrong and behaved not wrongly, and that every individual and every
nation will meet with his natural destiny. As a matter of fact, they did
not know, or did not want to know, that, life is what we make it, and we
only harvest the seed which we have sowed. Anyhow, the gentle and
compassionate advices of Shuaib, failed and had no effect in those hard
hearts! Their only reply was to expel Shuaib and his followers from the
town:ِ

\`\`The leaders and the arrogant party of his people said to him; O,
Shuaib! We will certainly cast you and your followers out of our Land if
you do not turn to our cult and creed, and accept not our religion.''
S.7:88

[ 477 ]

In fact, they asked Shuaib and the Muslims who followed him to practise
the vices that they detested. So the final word and ultimatum of Shuaib
to those arrogant people was:ِ We leave the matter to God to handle and
judge, because we obey Him and we do His will, and we seek His pleasure,
and to Him alone we have put our trusts.

قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ(( 185 ))

185- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`VERILY YOU ARE OF THOSE WHO ARE BEWITCHED.'' (i.e.
YOU ARE MAD!)

وَمَا أَنْتَ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُنَا وَإِنْ نَّظُنُّكَ لَمِنَ
الْكَاذِبِينَ(( 186 ))

186- AND YOU ARE NAUGHT EXCEPT A MAN LIKE US, AND WE THINK THAT YOU ARE
OF THE LIARS!

فَأَسْقِطْ عَلَيْنَا كِسَفاً مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ(( 187 ))

187- THEN DROP DOWN UPON US A PIECE OF THE SKY IF YOU ARE OF THE
TRUTHFULS.

قَالَ رَبِّى أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ(( 188 ))

188- SHUAIB SAID:ِ \`\`MY LORD KNOWS BEST, WHAT YOU DO.''

فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمِ الظُّلَّةِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ
عَذَابَ يَوْم عَظِيم(( 189 ))

189- SO THEY BELIED HIM, AND THERE SEIZED THEM THE CHASTISEMENT OF A
DAY OF DARKENING CLOUD. INDEED IT WAS THE CHASTISEMENT OF A GREAT DAY.

[ 478 ]

إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ(( 190
))

190- VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN; AND MOST OF THEM WERE NOT BELIEVERS.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 191 ))

191- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, COMPASSIONATE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FATE OF THE OBSTINATE PEOPLE**
VERSE NO.185ِ191

When the obstinate people of Medyan could not defend themselves against
the reasonable logic of Shuaib, they accused him of lying and being
mad:ِ \`\`Verily you are of those who are bewitched. You are nothing
more than a mortal like everyone else. We think you to be a liar. If you
are indeed truthful in what you say; then drop down upon us a piece of
the sky.'' By the challenge of bringing down a piece of the sky, they
did not really mean it. They only wanted to pull their prophet's leg,
and somehow to prove their charges of calling him liar and mad.

On the other hand, Shuaib did not fall to a hot controversy and dispute
with those arrogant people. He only said:ِ \`\`My Lord knows whatever
you do.''

The Arabic, \`\`ZOLLAT'' (V.NO.189) is basically a piece of cloud which
casts a dark shadow. Most of the commentators have narrated that for
seven days it became very hot, while there was not even a light breeze.
Then at once a dark black cloud covered all overhead and cast a great
dark shadow to which people sought refuge from the deathful heat of the
day. Then it so happened that the dark cloud issued a flash of lightning
with a crash of thunder which was followed by a severe earthquake and
destroyed all the creatures, turning some to ashes! [ 479 ]

**NOTES:**

The tales of seven of the prophets have been cited in brief in this
chapter (Sِ26), which makes up an integral training circle with a
perfect harmony between all. The main object of all of their mission is
piety and avoiding evil deeds. Their call is supported by the fact that
none of them asked one for a reward or wage. Then reference is made to
the most important perversion and sinful acts of their people; such as
the oppression and cruelty of Pharaoh's folkِIdolatry among Abraham's
peopleِPride and vanity with Noah's peopleِlavishment and prodigality in
Adِcorruption and mischievous conducts of the people of Salihِand
homosexuality and pederasty of the people of Lotِand eventually
reference is to the Medyan citizens and the companions of Aikat, who
were a commerical people given up to fraud.

Then all the narrated affairs have been ended in God's Mercy and Power,
through which good doers were prospered, and the wrong doers were
punished.

وَإِنَّهُ لَتَنْزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 192 ))

192- AND TRULY IT IS A REVELATION FROM THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.

193- BROUGHT DOWN (TO YOU) BY THE TRUSTWORTHY SPIRIT.

عَلَى قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنذِرِينَ(( 194 ))

194- UPON YOUR HEART IN ORDER TO BE OF THE WARNERS.

[ 480 ]

بِلِسَان عَرَبِىّ مُّبِين(( 195 ))

195- IN A PERSPICUOUS ARABIC LANGUAGE.

وَإِنَّهُ لَفِى زُبُرِ الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 196 ))

196- AND THAT, IT IS IN THE SCRIPTURES OF THE FIRST ONES.

أَوَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَّهُمْ آيَةً أَنْ يَعْلَمَهُ عُلَمَاءُ بَنِى
إِسْرَائِيلَ(( 197 ))

197- IS IT NOT A SIGN FOR THEM THAT THE LEARNED ISRAELITES KNOW IT!?


