The Grandeur of Quran
=====================

VERSE NO.192ِ197

Leaving the seven stories of the prophets, the immediate reference is
now to the grandeur of Qura"n; and its importance in the old Scriptures.
The greatness of Qura"n comes from the greatness of its Author, Who is
the Lord and Creator of all the worlds:ِ And truly it is a revelation
from the Lord of all the worlds, brought down to your heart by the
Trustworthy Spirit in a perspicuous Arabic language.

The Arabic, \`\`GHALB'' literally means the, \`\`HEART''; but its
connotations such as, the seat of affection, memory, and understanding,
are used much more in Qura"n than its denotation. ZOBUR (VERSE NO.196)
usually translated to PSALMS, is the name of the Scripture that was sent
down to David, but here it may include all the Scriptures that were
given to the prophets before Mohammad (SA).

[ 481 ]

Many of the Jewish doctors and learned, such as ABDULLAH-IBN-SALAM, and
MAGHAIRIQ, and Christian monks like, \`\`BOHAIRA"'' recognized the
Message of God brought down by Mohammad (SA):ِ \`\`Is it not a sign for
them that learned Israelites know it?'' After all; the main tenets, and
the most important principles that are found in the Bible, such as the
10 commandments are also found in the Glorious Qura"n.

وَلَوْ نَزَّلْنَاهُ عَلَى بَعْضِ الاَْعْجَمِينَ(( 198 ))

198- HAD WE SENT IT DOWN TO SOME NON-ARABS.

فَقَرَأَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مَّا كَانُوا بِهِ مُؤْمِنِينَ(( 199 ))

199- AND HAD HE RECITED IT TO THEM, THEY WOULD NOT HAVE BELIEVED IN
IT.

كَذَلِكَ سَلَكْنَاهُ فِى قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ(( 200 ))

200- SO DO WE ENTER IT TO THE HEARTS OF THE SINNERS.

لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ حَتَّى يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الاَْلِيمَ(( 201 ))

201- THEY WILL NOT BELIEVE IT, UNTIL THEY SEE THE PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

فَيَأْتِيَهُمْ بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 202 ))

202- WHICH WILL SUDDENLY COME TO THEM WHILE THEY DO NOT KNOW! (THEY
DON'T EXPECT IT)

فَيَقُولُوا هَلْ نَحْنُ مُنظَرُونَ(( 203 ))

203- THEN THEY WILL SAY:ِ \`\`SHALL WE BE RESPITED?''

[ 482 ]

**THE COMMENTARY HAD THE QURA"N BEEN SENT TO NON-ARABS....?**

VERSE NO.198ِ203

Arabs were not in a position to catch any sort of a knowledge from
other nations. This was contrary to Persians, about whom the prophet
said:ِ \`\`If knowledge is taken up to Pleiades, a group of the Persians
will pull it down.'':ِ \`\`Had We sent it down to some none Arabs, and
had he recited it to them they would not have believed it.'' Therefore,
the words of God reflected, and entered to the hearts and minds of the
sinful Arabs by and by, and gradually in a period of 23 years.

And besides; they were such a racially diverse community that the waves
of fanaticism had made them deaf, and were far from accepting a cult or
creed of a non-Arab whom they called AJME, which means the stranger.
They were so obstinate in their paganism that would not believe in any
truth until they could see a painful punishment, afflicting them out of
a sudden. By such punishments, the calamities of this material world is
most probably wanted.

FANATICISM, which is excessive enthusiasm and unreasoning zeal on any
subject such as religion, race, or tribe, has been strictly reproved by
Islam. Fanaticism will lay a cover upon the eyes to prevent seeing the
fact and truth. Hazrat Imam Ali (AS) has said:ِ \`\`Allah will punish
six groups of people for six kinds of sinِHe punishes Arabs for their
fanaticism, the headmen for their pride, the rulers for their
oppression, the jurists for their jealousy, the merchants for their
fraud, and the rustics for their ignorance.''

[ 483 ]

أَفَبِعَذَابِنَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونَ(( 204 ))

204- DO THEY SEEK TO HASTEN OUR PUNISHMENT!?

أَفَرَأَيْتَ إِنْ مَّتَّعْنَاهُمْ سِنِينَ(( 205 ))

205- HAVE YOU THEN SEEN, IF WE LET THEM ENJOY (THIS LIFE) FOR YEARS?

ثُمَّ جَاءَهُمْ مَّا كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ(( 206 ))

206- THEN THERE CAME TO THEM THAT WHICH THEY WERE PROMISED.

مَا أَغْنَى عَنْهُمْ مَّا كَانُوا يُمَتَّعُونَ(( 207 ))

207- WHAT THEY HAVE ENJOYED WILL AVAIL THEM NOTHING.

وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَة إِلاَّ لَهَا مُنذِرُونَ(( 208 ))

208- AND WE DID NOT DESTROY ANY TOWN EXCEPT THAT, THERE WERE WARNERS
FOR IT,

ذِكْرَى وَمَا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ(( 209 ))

209- TO REMIND. AND WE WERE NOT OPPRESSORS.

وَمَا تَنَزَّلَتْ بِهِ الشَّيَاطِينُ(( 210 ))

210- AND THE SATANS DID NOT BRING IT DOWN.

وَمَا يَنْبَغِى لَهُمْ وَمَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ(( 211 ))

211- AND IT IS NOT BEFITTING THEM, NOR ARE THEY ABLE TO.

إِنَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّمْعِ لَمَعْزُولُونَ(( 212 ))

212- THEY ARE BREFT OF HEARING. (EVESDROPPING)

[ 484 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ANOTHER CHARGE BROUGHT ON QURA"N**

VERSE NO.204ِ212

The previous passage was ended in that, the sinners will ask for some
respite in their death-bed. They forget that they frequently had scoffed
at God's revelation and ironically asked to hasten Allah's punishment
when they were sound and safe! But even still, if they could obtain a
respite nothing would change in their part. If Allah would let them to
live long and enjoy this life for many years, what difference could it
make, when they do not want to change their mind and their way? They
will continue again with their previous enjoyments. The more the better;
they will think again, while it is not the enjoyments that bring
salvation and prosperity. The sinners keep themselves busy with sins
until it is too late to repent, even if they mean it. Some others are so
shameless that they boldly ask to hasten their punishment. These have no
faith in God's justice and judgement, but Allah's punishment will
afflict them much sooner than they may come to think of it:ِ

\`\`And We did not destroy any town except that there were warners for
it....to remind. And We were not oppressors.'' Allah Who is All-mercy
and All-forgiving, will respite the sinners enough to ponder over the
consequences of their oppressions and evil deeds; but they plunge so
deep into the lagoon of vanity and guilt, that the respite profits them
nothing. After all; God is well aware of Man's weak-points and will
never oppress any one the least.

Then the Sacred Book of Allah proceeds to answer another charge that
the unbelievers have brought on Qura"n, saying that Mohammad (SA) was
connected with Jinns, and the Evil Spirits are the real author of
Qura"n!:ِ

[ 485 ]

\`\`And the Satan did not bring it down, and it is not befitting them,
nor are they able to do that. They are breft of evesdropping.'' The
pagans were struck with astonishment when Qura"n was rehearsed to them,
so they attributed the wonderful power and influence of the Book of God
to evil spirits.

Had they used their brain and faculty of thought, they could easily
apprehend that such a masterpiece and glorious message is not befitting
Satans, and they can never be able to bring down such a truthful
message. How and where from can they obtain such a knowledge and such
beneficient message, which is all against their ideas and nature? The
Satan who they said, must have done it, has not such an ability and
merit, so as to hear the word of God or to get such inspirations through
the angels.

فَلاَ تَدْعُ مَعَ اللهِ إِلَهاً آخَرَ فَتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُعَذَّبِينَ((
213 ))

213- THEN CALL ON NO OTHER GOD BESIDES ALLAH, LEST YOU BE OF THOSE WHO
ARE TORMENTED.

وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الاَْقْرَبِينَ(( 214 ))

214- AND ADMONISH YOUR NEAREST KINSFOLK.

وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِمَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 215 ))

215- AND LOWER DOWN YOUR WING, (SHOW KINDNESS) FOR HE WHO FOLLOWS YOU
OF THE BELIEVERS.

فَإِنْ عَصَوْكَ فَقُلْ إِنِّى بَرِىءٌ مِّمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ(( 216 ))

216- THEN IF THEY DISOBEY YOU SAY; \`\`I AM DEVOID OF WHAT YOU DO.''

[ 486 ]

وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى الْعَزِيزِ الرَّحِيمِ(( 217 ))

217- AND PUT YOUR TRUST IN THE EXALTED IN MIGHT, THE COMPASSIONATE.

الَّذِى يَرَاكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ(( 218 ))

218- HE WHO SEES YOU WHEN YOU GET UP.

وَتَقَلُّبَكَ فِى السَّاجِدِينَ(( 219 ))

219- AND YOUR MOVEMENT AMONG THOSE WHO PROSTRATE THEMSELVES.

إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ(( 220 ))

220- THAT HE IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-KNOWING.

**THE COMMENTARY
INVITE YOUR NEAR KINS TO ISLAM**

VERSE NO.213ِ220

Through the above verses, five instructions are given to the Messenger
of God:ِ

1ِFirst of all he is ordered to go on being considerate in Monotheism.
Although the prophet was the herald and proclaimer of Monotheism
himself, the importance of the tenet is so high in Islam, that for more
emphasis the prophet is addressed here, saying:ِ \`\`Call on no one
other than Allah, lest you be of those who are tormented.''

2ِThe next instruction is to show the prophet how to make known his
prophetic mission, and from where to begin:ِ \`\`And admonish your
nearest kinsfolk.''

In order to proceed on an extensive revolutionary carrier, one [ 487 ]
must begin in a small circle, the best of which is that of the nearest
kinsfolk and friends, who have a better record and first hand
information about the leader's past and background.

It was then three years from his prophetic mission when the above
instruction was revealed. Accordingly, the Messenger of God invited some
forty men of his nearest family to a dinner in his uncle's house
(ABUTALIB). When the dinner was served and the prophet wanted to make a
speech his other uncle ABULAHAB disturbed the meeting and scattered out
the prophet's guests.

Next day once again the prophet gathered them together and after dinner
in a brief speech he said to them:ِ \`\`Upon my Lord I know no one to
have brought to his family a thing so good that I have brought to you. I
have brought to you the good of this world and that of the Hereafter.
Which one of you, then, are willing to help me and become my brother as
well as my successor?'' All the guests rejected him, except Hazrat Imam
Ali (AS) who got up and said:ِ \`\`O, Messenger of God! In your
prophetic mission, I am your mate and Helper.''

Then the prophet said to the guests who were his nearest of kins:ِ
\`\`Verily this is my brother, and my executor, and my successor among
you, therefore, all of you listen to him and obey him.'' Some of the
audience scoffed at him and dismissed, while Abulahab said to ABUTALIB
who was Hazrat Imam Ali's father:ِ \`\`Your nephew commands you to obey
the orders of your son.'' This incident has been narrated by almost all
important Sonni writers and scholars such as:ِ IBN-ABIJARIR,
IBN-ABIHATIM, IBN-MARDUYEH, BAIHAGHI, SAALABI, TABARI AND IBN-ASIR.

3ِThe third instruction puts the prophet in a greater circle than the
family circle mentioned above. He is ordered to be kind, gentle, and
considerate, with all the believers who follow him:ِ [ 488 ]

\`\`And lower down your wings for he who follows you of the
believers.'' Lower your wing is an Arabic idiom that the high-flying
bird being considerate and kind, lowers her wings to her youngsters.

4ِThen the prophet is instructed, not to worry if the pagans rejected
faith. Just tell them that you are not responsible for what they do, and
they themselves are to answer for it, in a Final Judgement:ِ \`\`Then if
they disobey you; say, I am devoid of whatever you do.''

5ِAnd in the fifth order, God tells the prophet to put his whole trust
on God, lest such oppositions and hostilities might discourage him:ِ
\`\`And put your trust in the Exalted in might, the compassionate who
sees you when you are standing or moving among those who prostrate
themselves.''

Kneeling and prostarting are relative arrangements of different parts
of Muslim Prayer. Our prophet was himself very earnest and Zealous in
his prayers, and in his sight, the prayer was the pillar of the religion
of Islam.

\*\*\*\*\*

**MOHAMMAD'S (SA) FIRST SPEECH**

Three years from the first Revelation elapsed. Qura"n was gradually
revealed up to some forty chapters, or what they called it SUREH.
Muslim's underground endeavors was not sufficient. People were receiving
contradictory news from here and there about Mohammad (SA) and what he
claimed of. Therefore, God ordered His Messenger to publicate his
preaching by admonishing his nearest kinsmen first, and invite them to
accept the new religious doctrine:ِ

\`\`And admonish your nearest kinsfolk, and lower your wings for he who
follows you of the believers.'' Sِ26:2ِ14

[ 489 ] To obey this commandment of Allah, the prophet invited some
forty men from among his nearest kinsmen, and gathered them together in
ABUTALIB'S house, in a night for dinner. They all accept the invitation
to see what was going on under the ground. In that party, the prophet
decided to give reason to the reasonable, and to show a miracle for
those who lacked some common sence. His first public miracle was of that
sort which was shown by JESUS CHRIST, mentioned in the N.T.; \`\`feeding
a crowd with a little food!'' There, a small portion of food was
prepared which was scarcely enough to satisfy an individual, and yet,
out of that small portion of food, he fed all the forty men to
satisfaction! The whole group were amazed to see that!

One of the prophet's uncles, named ABULAHAB, who always and everywhere
criticized Mohammad, took the lead and said to his brother ABUTALIB:ِ
\`\`Our nephew has learned the art sorcery so how he fed this large
group of people with that little food!'' Mohammad did not say anything
to that false assertion of his uncle, and sufficed with an ironical
smile. When the dinner was served, Mohammad (SA) got up in a point where
all the guests could see him and made his first speech as follows:ِ
\`\`In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate''

\`\`O, you the progenies of ABDULMOTALLIB! Rescue yourselves from the
Fire of Hell. Know that he who is sent in search of water by his people
will not tell them lies. Upon my Lord! If all the people tell you lie, I
will not. And if all the people mislead you, I do not do that. Upon the
God except whom there is no other god, I am the Messenger of God, to all
the people. Upon my Lord you all will die as you go to sleep, and all of
you shall be raised from death, as you wake up! Then you will have to
give an account of whatever you have done, bad or good. Then your reward
for good deeds is good, and that foe bad deeds shall be bad.

[ 490 ]

Certainly, Paradise and Hell, both exist eternally, and are awaiting
you according to your good or evil deeds. O, you offsprings of
ABDULMOTALLIB! Upon my Lord, I know not anyone to have brought for his
family, so good a thing as I have brought for you. That which I have
brought is prosperity and salvation in this life, and in the hereafter
(if you follow me). If I say to you that a cavalry of enemy are coming
from behind the mountains to attack you, do you deny me? I am telling
you, be cautious, and save yourselves from the dangers of the fire of
Hell. Of my Lord I want nothing dearer to me than (GUIDING) you; and
this is why I warn you of a dreadful torture which is very near.

My example with you is that of a man who sees the enemy who comes to
invade the houses and he anxiously wants to inform his clan before the
invasion begins. Thus the man frequently shouts to his family:ِ \`\`Get
you up! Wake up! morning is come.'' He does his best to make the family
aware of the approach of their enemy. Your enemy is your deeds, your
customs, and faith (of Polytheism). I am the Messenger of God to inform
you of that, and to invite you to utter and testify two words which is
easy to say but difficult to bear. Say you:ِ \`\`There is no god but
Allah, and that, I, Mohammad, am His Messenger.''

Then Mohammad paused for a while looking at the audience, and said
again:ِ Is there anyone among you my kinsmen who may accept my cause and
become my executor and successor?''

ABULAHAB the evil uncle, opened his mouth again and said to Mohammad
(SA):ِ \`\`Down with you! Was that why you gathered us together here
wasting our time!?''

[ 491 ]

Imam Ali (AS), who was the youngest among all and in his teenages got
up and with an innocence and verasity said:ِ

\`\`O, Messenger of God! I faithfully believe in you and your mission,
and in this cause I am your real mate and helper.'' Mohammad (SA), who
never showed the least doubt or fluctuation concerning his Divine
Mission throughout his life, with a decisive mode of speech, said:ِ
\`\`All of you know then, that this Ali is my brother and my successor.
So all of you have to listen to him and obey his order.'' ABULAHAB could
now guess that his nephew's serious words, could not be without some
strong support and firm standpoint, and yet he did not want to admit the
truth or go short, so he said to his brother ABUTALIB:ِ
\`\`Congratulations! Now your nephew whom you support so much, commands
you to obey the order of your little son!''

After that irony, the group dismissed, but the meeting was by no means
a failure as one may think. The prophet as per order of God warned his
nearest kinsfolk, and also publicated his preachings and declared the
principle tenets of his doctrine as a new religion, and made people to
consider the matter and think over it.

REFERENCES:ِ PEYAMBAR BY:ِ Z.RAHNAMAِTHE HISTORY OF BAIHAGHIِTHE
HISTORY OF TABARIِTABARSI'S MAJMAULBAYANِALMIZA"N, BY TABA"TABA"EE.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُمْ عَلَى مَنْ تَنَزَّلُ الشَّيَاطِينُ(( 221 ))

221- SHALL I INFORM YOU ON WHOM THE SATANS COME DOWN? [ 492 ]


تَنَزَّلُ عَلَى كُلِّ أَفَّاك أَثِيم(( 222 ))

222- THEY COME DOWN UPON EVERY LYING SINNER.

يُلْقُونَ السَّمْعَ وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ كَاذِبُونَ(( 223 ))

223- THEY INDUCE (TO OTHERS WHAT THEY) HEAR AND MOST OF THEM ARE
LIARS.

وَالشُّعَرَاءُ يَتَّبِعُهُمُ الْغَاوُنَ(( 224 ))

224- (THE PROPHET IS NOT A POET) POETS ARE THOSE WHOM THE STRAYS
FOLLOW.

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّهُمْ فِى كُلِّ وَاد يَهِيمُونَ(( 225 ))

225- HAVE YOU NOT SEEN THAT THEY WANDER IN EVERY FIELD?

وَأَنَّهُمْ يَقُولُونَ مَا لاَ يَفْعَلُونَ(( 226 ))

226- AND THEY SAY THAT WHICH THEY DO NOT DO IT. (THEY ARE PREACHING
WHAT THEY THEMSELVES DO NOT PRACTICE)

إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَذَكَرُوا اللهَ
كَثِيراً وَانتَصَرُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ
ظَلَمُوا أَىَّ مُنقَلَب يَنقَلِبُونَ(( 227 ))

227- EXCEPT THOSE WHO BELIEVE AND DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, AND REMEMBER
ALLAH TOO MUCH, AND DEFEND WHEN THEY ARE OPPRESSED, AND SOON WILL THE
OPPRESSORS KNOW TO WHAT A DESTINATION WILL THEY TURN.

[ 493 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE PROPHET IS NOT A POET**

VERSE NO.221ِ227

Here are the last verses of the chapter of poets, to make us more
acquainted with Satanic Temptations, and reject the malicious charges
that the heathens put on the Messenger of God calling him a poet or
possessed. Some others accused him of being inspired by evil spirits.
This is when Satanic inducements have their own clear signs that will
easily distinguish them from the truth, and Divine Inspiration. Satanic
inducement is destructive, noxious and corruptive to morals, and its
followers are liars and sinners, and no one can attribute such
characteristics to the Glorious Qura"n and to whom brought it.

Satan will entrap those people who are liars and do not avoid evil and
wickedness. Their most evident examples are those who maliciously said
that the Messenger of God was possessed, and was inspired by evil
spirit. They were all lying sinners, who had easily given up their minds
and thoughts to Devil and, tried to cover the prophet of God with their
own cloak shamelessly, but they utterly failed.

The pagans also accused the prophet of being a poet at his early stages
of preachings. In Sِ37:36, we read:ِ \`\`And they say:ِ \`\`Should we
leave our gods for the sake of a poet who is possessed?'' Qura"n proves
that the methodical way of the prophet was far different from that of a
poet. A poet lives with his own imaginations and emotions, but a prophet
lives in the world of realities and truth:ِ \`\`Poets are those whom the
strays follow. Have you not seen that they wander in every field. And
that, they say that which they do not do it. Except those who....''

[ 494 ]

The attack to the poets is to be read with the exception mentioned in
verse NO.227, that follows the attack. Poetry is like a pot or like an
instrument. It may be used either in favour of an object or against it.
Poetry can work in favour of evil or against it, and so is the condition
of poetry with righteousness and religion. It depends on who and how
someone uses the poetry, which is a very effective instrument, and
sometimes an efficient weapon.

There are poets whose objects are not merely poetry and playing with
words and speech. They have a Divine, Social, Moral or perhaps a
philosophical message to convey through their poems. These groups of
poets sincerely believe in God and His Apostles and in the Resurrection
Day. They do righteous deeds. They remember Allah too much; and stand
firm against oppression. They use their poetry as an effectual weapon
against evil and corruption.

THE END OF SUREH POETS (26) [ 495 ]

<p dir="rtl">
سُورَةُ النَّمْلِ
</p>

**THE ANT**

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE.

طس تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْقُرْآنِ وَكِتَاب مُّبِين(( 1 ))

1- TA-SIN. THOSE ARE THE SIGNS (VERSES) OF QURA"N, AND THE PERSPICUOUS
BOOK.

هُدىً وَبُشْرَى لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 2 ))

2- A GUIDANCE AND GOOD NEWS FOR THE BELIEVERS.

الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ
بِالاْخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ(( 3 ))

3- THOSE WHO PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND PAY THE ALMS-TAX, AND ARE SURE OF
THE LIFE TO COME. (THE HEREAFTER)

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالاْخِرَةِ زَيَّنَّا لَهُمْ
أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَهُمْ يَعْمَهُونَ(( 4 ))

4- THOSE WHO WILL NOT BELIEVE IN THE LIFE TO COME, WE HAVE DECORATED
THEIR DEEDS FOR THEM, SO THEY ARE CONFUSED.

[ 496 ]

أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ لَهُمْ سُوءُ الْعَذَابِ وَهُمْ فِى الاْخِرَةِ هُمُ
الاَْخْسَرُونَ(( 5 ))

5- THOSE ARE THEY FOR WHOM IS THE GRIEVOUS TORMENT, AND THEY ARE THE
GREATEST LOSERS IN THE HEREAFTER.

وَإِنَّكَ لَتُلَقَّى الْقُرْآنَ مِنْ لَّدُنْ حَكِيم عَلِيم(( 6 ))

6- AND VERILY YOU GET THE QURA"N FROM THE ALL-WISE, ALL-KNOWING.

**THE COMMENTARY
QURA"N HAS COME FROM THE ALL-KNOWING LORD**

VERSE NO.1ِ6

The Arabic \`\`TELKA'' translated to, \`\`THOSE'' is a nominative
pronoun which points to something not near; and therefore implies the
greatness of the subject, which in this case it is the Glorious Qura"n.
The adjective, \`\`MOBIN'' translated to, \`\`PERSPICUOUS'' qualifies
Qura"n, and means being clear, as well as making something clear to the
understanding. In other word, the adjective implies that the Book
explains all we need; such as the nature of Allah, the Physical and
Spiritual worlds that have surrounded us, and Man's position therein. It
will guide us to the right conducts, and gives us a glad-tiding for a
good end that we may have in Paradise as well as in this temporary life
in which we are living on probation.

Qura"n is guidance and a good-news for the believers who perform the
prayer, pay the alms-tax, and who are sure of the life to come. [ 497 ]
True that the believers are already guided; but we should know that
faith and guidance consists of many stages and grades, and so that, each
lower grade is a platform for jumping to an upper stage of progress in
the path of evolution. To this effect we always ask our Lord in our
Daily Prayers, saying:ِ

\`\`Guide us to the straight way...''

Then the verses apply to the opposite party saying:ِ \`\`Those who will
not believe in the life to come, We have adorned their deeds for them,
so they are confused and live in distraction.'' Those who reject the
guidance of Allah follow their own whims and caprices. Their deeds may
only please themselves for being decorated in their eyes, and as a
result of that, they are perplexed and wander about in distraction:ِ
\`\`Those are they for whom is the grievous torment, and they are the
greatest losers in the hereafter.''

7- (AND REMEMBER) WHEN MOSES SAID TO HIS HOUSEHOLD:ِ \`\`I PERCEIVED A
FIRE. SOON I WILL BRING YOU A NEWS OF IT, OR BRING YOU A BURNING BRAND
THAT YOU MAY WARM YOURSELVES. (BY KINDLING A FIRE)

فَلَمَّا جَاءَهَا نُودِىَ أَنْ بُورِكَ مَنْ فِى النَّارِ وَمَنْ
حَوْلَهَا وَسُبْحَانَ اللهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 8 ))

8- THEN WHEN HE CAME TO IT, (HE HEARD) A CALL SAYING:ِ \`\`BLESSED IS
HE WHO IS IN THE FIRE, AND HE WHO IS AROUND IT. AND GLORY BE TO ALLAH,
THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.''

[ 498 ]

يَا مُوسَى إِنَّهُ أَنَا اللهُ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ (( 9 ))

9- O, MOSES! VERILY I AM ALLAH, EXALTED IN MIGHT, ALL-WISE.

وَأَلْقِ عَصَاكَ فَلَمَّا رَءَاهَا تَهْتَزُّ كَأَنَّهَا جَانٌّ وَلَّى
مُدْبِراً وَلَمْ يُعَقِّبْ يَا مُوسَى لاَ تَخَفْ إِنِّى لاَ يَخَافُ
لَدَىَّ الْمُرْسَلُونَ(( 10 ))

10- AND CAST DOWN YOUR STAFF. THEN WHEN HE SAW IT MOVING FAST AS IF A
SNAKE, HE TURNED BACK AND LOOKED NOT BEHIND. (HE FLED)

O, MOSES! DO NOT BE AFRAID, THAT THE MESSENGERS DO NOT FEAR IN MY
PRESENCE.

إِلاَّ مَنْ ظَلَمَ ثُمَّ بَدَّلَ حُسْناً بَعْدَ سُوء فَإِنِّى غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ(( 11 ))

11- EXCEPT HE WHO OPPRESSED, THEN CHANGED TO GOOD AFTER DOING BAD; THEN
I AM ALL-FORGIVING COMPASSIONATE.

وَأَدْخِلْ يَدَكَ فِى جَيْبِكَ تَخْرُجْ بَيْضَاءَ مِنْ غَيْرِ سُوء فِى
تِسْعِ آيَات إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ وَقَوْمِهِ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْماً
فَاسِقِينَ(( 12 ))

12- AND PUT YOUR HAND INTO YOUR ARM-PIT, AND IT WILL COME OUT SHINING
WHITE WITH NOTHING WRONG. (THESE ARE AMONG) THE NINE SIGNS TO PHARAOH
AND HIS PEOPLE, THAT THEY HAVE BEEN A PEOPLE OF DEBAUCHERIES.

[ 499 ]

فَلَمَّا جَاءَتْهُمْ آيَاتُنَا مُبْصِرَةً قَالُوا هَذَا سِحْرٌ
مُّبِينٌ(( 13 ))

13- BUT WHEN OUR ILLUMINATING SIGNS CAME TO THEM THEY SAID:ِ \`\`THIS
IS A CLEAR SORCERY.''

وَجَحَدُوا بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَا أَنْفُسُهُمْ ظُلْماً وَعُلُوّاً
فَانظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُفْسِدِينَ(( 14 ))

14- AND THEY (DELIBERATELY) DENIED THEM OUT OF PRIDE AND OPPRESSION
THOUGH THEIR SOULS WERE SURE OF IT. THEN SEE HOW WAS THE END OF THE
EVIL-DOERS.


