Moses Comes Here With the Hope of Taking a Brand of Fire
========================================================

VERSE NO.7ِ14

Again in this chapter (S-27) a brief narration about each one of five
prophets has been revealed, beginning with that of Moses the Arch
Prophet. He was travelling in the darkness of a cold night in accompany
with his wife and children, when he perceived a light in a distance,
which he deemed it to be a fire. He said to his household:ِ \`\`I
perceived a fire. Soon I will bring you a news of it, or bring you a
burning brand by which you may kindle a fire to warm up yourselves.''
When Moses came near to the fire he found things to be different. He saw
a green branch of tree from which a fire or some sort of an intense
light was glowing. Nor the heat of the Fire burnt the tree, neither the
moisture of the tree quenched the Fire:ِ \`\`Then when Moses came to it,
he heard a call, saying:ِ \`\`Blessed is he who is in the Fire, and he
who is around it. And Glory be to Allah the Lord of all the worlds.''

[ 500 ]

As to the phrase in the above verse; \`\`WHO IS IN THE FIRE AND WHO IS
AROUND IT'', some commentators have said:ِ \`\`GOD WAS IN THE FIRE AND
MOSES WAS AROUND IT.'' God was in the Fire Who said to Moses:ِ

\`\`O, Moses! Verily I am Allah, the Exalted in might the All-wise.''
And it was Moses around the Fire who is also supposed to be blessed.
This refers to the wonderful nature of the Fire through which a glowing
green tree spoke to Moses saying:ِ \`\`I am your Lord Allah-Yahovah, the
Exalted in might, All-wise.''

With that strange voice, the dawn of revelation and miracle began in
the heart of Moses. As to what the fire really was, Man's knowledge is
not enough to answer. Some say, it was a reflection of the Glory of
Allah and a gleam of the Spiritual World, that was reflected to Moses
through that curious tree. In other word, the light was emitted from the
original source of Absolute Power and mere Wisdom, which was among its
abilities to give life to a dead piece of wood.

Then two miracles were given to Moses:ِ that of the snake, which when
he threw his stick down it turned into a swift moving snake. The second
miracle was the shining white hand:ِ

\`\`And put your hand into your arm-pit, and it will come out shining
white with nothing wrong.'' When usually one hand puts out stains of
white colour, the white spots must be due to some sort of a disease such
as leprosy. But in the case of Moses things were different. The white
spots that shone was a sign of glory and a reflection from the same
light which attracted his attention, and made him to come near with the
hope of taking a burning brand of fire.

Moses was equipped with the arm of revelations an miracles, and sent to
Pharaoh and his people so as to direct them into the straight path of
evolution, but they denied him and out of pride and arrogance rejected
the illuminating signs of the Merciful Lord saying:ِ \`\`This is a clear
sorcery!''

[ 501 ]

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا دَاوُدَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ عِلْماً وَقَالاَ الْحَمْدُ
للهِِ الَّذِى فَضَّلَنَا عَلَى كَثِير مِّنْ عِبَادِهِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ((
15 ))

15- AND VERILY WE GAVE DAVID AND SOLOMON A KNOWLEDGE, AND THEY SAID:ِ
\`\`PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH WHO EXCELLED US ABOVE MANY OF HIS BELIEVING
SERVANTS.''

وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمَانُ دَاوُدَ وَقَالَ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ عُلِّمْنَا
مَنطِقَ الطَّيْرِ وَأُوتِينَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَىْء إِنَّ هَذَا لَهُوَ
الْفَضْلُ الْمُبِينُ(( 16 ))

16- AND SOLOMON BECAME THE INHERITOR OF DAVID, AND SAID:ِ \`\`O,
PEOPLE! WE HAVE BEEN TAUGHT THE LANGUAGE OF BIRD, AND WE HAVE BEEN GIVEN
OF EVERYTHING. (THAT WE MAY NEED) AND THIS IS INDEED A MANIFEST GRACE.
(FROM OUR LORD TO US)

**THE COMMENTARY
THE KINGDOM OF SOLOMON**

VERSE NO.15ِ16

Now the reference is made to two more of the Israelite apostles, namely
David and Solomon.

The community in which they lived differed much of that, in which their
previous apostles lived, and therefore they could manage to establish a
very great kingdom, ruled by justice and truth.

This proves that if the Divine leaders and the godly men, could
establish a kingdom and rule by Divine Laws, the social affairs of Man
would change a lot to his benefit.

[ 502 ]

Solomon and David were both apostles of God and men of piety and
virtues. God had bestowed on them wisdom and a very high physical and
spiritual knowledge. Solomon could speak with the bird hoopoe, and
understand the speech of ants. He had subdued the rebels, demons, and
devils. He used his power and knowledge to extend the kingdom of
Allah.

Their enemies mightِhave ascribed their knowledge to sorcery and
conquering the Jinnis and evil spirits, but according to the above
verses and verses in the other chapters of Qura"n, they themselves have
always ascribed whatever they had of knowledge, wisdom, and power, to
Allah Who is the Only source of all powers and knowledge:ِ \`\`And
verily We gave David and Solomon a knowledge, and they said:ِ \`\`Praise
belongs to Allah who excelled us above many of His believing servants.''
Then the verses allude to some of the Graces of God that was bestowed on
Solomon:ِ \`\`And Solomon became the inheritor of David and said:ِ
\`\`O, People! We have been taught the language of bird and we have been
given of everything that we may need; and this is indeed a manifest
Grace from our Lord to us.''

It is now proved a matter; that, all the creatures have some sort or
some means of communication with the other creatures! Most of the
creatures, and most probably all of them, do have some sort of a
community and society like Man! Among them, that of the ants and the
bees have been recently better known.

We have wonderful informations about the intelligence of the creatures
other than Man. Some of them are so skillful in building their nests,
that we may say they excel Man in architecture! Some other have strange
informations concerning their larvas, which are immature and often
wormlike form, in which they hatch their eggs. Therein, they remain with
increase in size and other minor changes until they assume the pupa
stages. Verious kinds are known as caterpillar, grubs, maggots, and
etc.

[ 503 ]

Some creatures can foresee the air and climate condition with regards
to temperature, wind velocity, rain, and etc., even several months
before the happening. Animals are trained in our age to do extraordinary
works which Man cannot. The ants and their civilization, the bees and
their amazing social life, and the wonders of emigration among the
birds, and the radar system of the bats, are all signs that may prove
how deep and meaningful is the understanding and the intelligence of
other creatures. So they might have some sort of a mysterious
communication, that it had been taught to Solomon, the apostle of God.

وَحُشِرَ لِسُلَيْمَانَ جُنُودُهُ مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالاِْنْسِ وَالطَّيْرِ
فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ(( 17 ))

17- AND SOLOMON'S HOSTS OF JINN, MAN AND BIRD, WERE DISPOSED IN ORDER
FOR HIM, AND THEY WERE IN MANY GROUPS.

حَتَّى إِذَا أَتَوْا عَلَى وَادِ النَّمْلِ قَالَتْ نَمْلَةٌ يَا
أَيُّهَا النَّمْلُ ادْخُلُوا مَسَاكِنَكُمْ لاَ يَحْطِمَنَّكُمْ
سُلَيْمَانُ وَجُنُودُهُ وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 18 ))

18- AT LENGTH, WHEN THEY CAME TO THE LAND OF THE ANTS, AN ANT SAID:ِ
\`\`O, ANTS! ENTER YOUR HOUSES LEST SOLOMON AND HIS HOSTS MAY CRUSH YOU
WHILE THEY ARE UNWARE.''

فَتَبَسَّمَ ضَاحِكاً مِّنْ قَوْلِهَا وَقَالَ رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِى أَنْ
أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِى أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَىَّ وَعَلَى وَالِدَىَّ وَأَنْ
أَعْمَلَ صَالِحاً تَرْضَاهُ وَأَدْخِلْنِى بِرَحْمَتِكَ فِى عِبَادِكَ
الصَّالِحِينَ(( 19 ))

[ 504 ]

19- THEN HE SMILED AT HER WORD, AND SAID:ِ \`\`MY LORD! INSPIRE ME HOW
TO BE THANKFUL FOR YOUR BOUNTY THAT YOU HAVE BESTOWED ON ME AND ON MY
PARENTS, AND THAT I MAY DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS TO PLEASE YOU. AND ADMIT ME
BY YOUR MERCY, AMONG YOUR RIGHTOUS SERVANTS.''

**THE COMMENTARY
SOLOMON ON THE LAND OF ANTS**

VERSE NO.17ِ19

As it is narrated by Qura"n, it seems that the history of Solomon was
connected with miracles and supernatural powers. Of course, in the sight
of the believers such that events are not amazing, because they have the
faith that God can do whatever He may want. Solomon's hosts of various
kinds were so numerous that he had to halt the first group and move the
last, until he could arrange them in order. This is what we understand
from the word, \`\`YOUZAROON'' which is translated to, \`\`they were in
many groups''. He then set out with his numerous hosts and:ِ \`\`At
length they came to the land of the ants. An ant said; \`\`O, you ants!
Enter your houses lest Solomon and his hosts may crush you
unwittingly.''

When solomon heard and understood what the ant said, he smiled with
joy; because he through the Grace and favours of God on him, had prayed
for being thankful for all those bounties he had received. To him
thankfulness meant to do righteous deeds, to please God and harm no one,
even if it would be unintentionally treading on a humble creatures when
he was busy with great problems of mankind.

[ 505 ]

وَتَفَقَّدَ الطَّيْرَ فَقَالَ مَا لِى لاَ أَرَى الْهُدْهُدَ أَمْ كَانَ
مِنَ الْغَائِبِينَ(( 20 ))

20- HE VIEWED THE BIRD AND SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT IS (WRONG) WITH ME THAT I DO
NOT SEE THE HOOPOE, OR IS HE AMONG THE ABSENTS.''

لَأُعَذِّبَنَّهُ عَذَاباً شَدِيداً أَوْ لاََذْبَحَنَّهُ أَوْ
لَيَأْتِيَنِّى بِسُلْطَان مُّبِين(( 21 ))

21- I WILL PUNISH HIM A SEVERE PUNISHMENT, OR I MAY SLAUGHTER HIM,
UNLESS HE COMES TO ME WITH A CLEAR REASON. (FOR HIS ABSENCE)

فَمَكَثَ غَيْرَ بَعِيد فَقَالَ أَحَطتُ بِمَا لَمْ تُحِطْ بِهِ
وَجِئْتُكَ مِنْ سَبَإ بِنَبَإ يَقِين(( 22 ))

22- IT TOOK NO LONG (WHEN HE APPERED) AND SAID:ِ \`\`I COMPASSED (A
TERRITORY) WHICH YOU COMPASSED NOT, AND I HAVE COME TO YOU FROM SHEBA
WITH A SURE INFORMATION.''

إِنِّى وَجَدتُّ امْرَأَةً تَمْلِكُهُمْ وَأُوتِيَتْ مِنْ كُلِّ شَىْء
وَلَهَا عَرْشٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 23 ))

23- I FOUND A WOMAN REIGNING OVER THEM, AND SHE HAS BEEN GIVEN OF
EVERYTHING, AND FOR HER IS A GREAT THRONE.

وَجَدْتُّهَا وَقَوْمَهَا يَسْجُدُونَ لِلشَّمْسِ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ
وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمْ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَصَدَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ
فَهُمْ لاَ يَهْتَدُونَ(( 24 ))

24- I FOUND HER AND HER PEOPLE PROSTRATING TO THE SUN, APART FROM
ALLAH, AND SATAN HAS DECORATED FOR THEM THEIR DEEDS AND HAS BARRED THEM
FROM THE WAY (OF ALLAH) AND THEREFORE THEY WILL NOT BE GUIDED.

[ 506 ]

أَلاَّ يَسْجُدُوا للهِِ الَّذِى يُخْرِجُ الْخَبْءَ فِى السَّموَاتِ
وَالاَْرْضِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تُخْفُونَ وَمَا تُعْلِنُونَ(( 25 )) 25- WHY
DO THEY NOT PROSTRATE THEMSELVES TO THE ALLAH, WHO BRINGS TO LIGHT THAT
WHICH IS HIDDEN IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, AND WHO KNOWS WHAT YOU CONCEAL
AND WHAT YOU REVEAL.

**THE COMMENTARY

HOOPOE AND THE QUEEN OF SHEBA** VERSE NO.20ِ25

Solomon saw not the hoopoe in the line, and considered his absence.
This proves that he kept a strict control over everything. In fact,
order and discipline has always been the custom of men of God. Solomon
too kept all his organizations and in particular his armed forces
strictly in order. Birds also served among his hosts for being light on
the wing and swift in travel, and could deliver the king's commands to
his farthest of subjects, the fastest possible on those days.

When the king saw that Hoopoe was not present, he said:ِ \`\`I will
punish him severely or even I may slaughter him, unless he comes to me
with a clear reason.'' Hoopoe's absence took no long, and he appeared
saying that he had discovered something new which had been unknown to
the king so far!:ِ \`\`I compassed a territory which you have compassed
not, and I am coming to you from SABA" with some sure informations. I
found a woman reigning over them, that she has been given of everything
and has a very great throne! She and her people prostrate themselves to
the sun apart from Allah.''

SABA" is identified with the Biblical Sheba which was ruled by a [ 507
] queen named BELGHAIS. It is said to have been a city of Yemen, located
in present HAZARMOOTH territory. Their ancient religion was to worship
heavenly bodies, particularly the sun which seemed to be the largest of
all. In his report to Solomon, the bird objects why should the queen and
all her subjects worship the creation, instead of the creator who knows
the hidden secrets of man's mind, Who brings to light that which is
hidden in the heavens and earth such as a seed in the soil. Hoopoe then
continues his critic:ِ

\`\`Satan has decorated for them their evil deeds and has barred them
from the way of Allah and therefor they will not be guided.'' (unless
the king apostle could do something)

اللهُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ(( 26 ))

26- ALLAH, THERE IS NO GOD EXCEPT THE LORD OF THE GREAT THRONE.

قَالَ سَنَنظُرُ أَصَدَقْتَ أَمْ كُنتَ مِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ(( 27 ))

27- SOLOMON SAID:ِ \`\`SOON SHALL WE SEE WHETHER YOU SAID THE TRUTH OR
YOU WERE OF THE LIARS.''

اذْهَب بِكِتَابِى هَذَا فَأَلْقِهْ إِلَيْهِمْ ثُمَّ تَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ
فَانظُرْ مَاذَا يَرْجِعُونَ(( 28 ))

28- GO WITH THIS LETTER OF MINE, AND CAST IT UPON THEM. THEN STAY AWAY
FROM THEM AND SEE WHAT DO THEY RETURN. (IN ANSWER)

قَالَتْ يَا أَيُّهَا المَلَأُ إِنِّى أُلْقِىَ إِلَىَّ كِتَابٌ كَرِيمٌ((
29 ))

29- SHE SAID:ِ \`\`O, CHIEFS! AN HONORABLE LETTER HAS BEEN CAST ON
ME.''

[ 508 ]

إِنَّهُ مِنْ سُلَيْمَانَ وَإِنَّهُ بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ
الرَّحِيمِ(( 30 ))

30- IT IS FROM SOLOMON; AND IT IS IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE.

أَلاَّ تَعْلُوا عَلَىَّ وَأْتُونِى مُسْلِمِينَ(( 31 ))

31- THAT ELATE NOT YOURSELVES (WITH PRIDE) OVER ME, AND COME TO ME IN
SUBMISSION.

قَالَتْ يَا أَيُّهَا المَلَأُ أَفْتُونِى فِى أَمْرِى مَا كُنتُ
قَاطِعَةً أَمْراً حَتَّى تَشْهَدُونِ(( 32 ))

32- SHE SAID:ِ \`\`O, CHIEFS! LET ME KNOW YOUR OPINIONS ABOUT MY
AFFAIR, THAT I WAS NOT TO DECIDE ON SOME AFFAIR WITHOUT YOUR
PRESENCE.''

قَالُوا نَحْنُ أُوْلُوا قُوَّة وَأُولُوا بَأْس شَدِيد وَالاَْمْرُ
إِلَيْكِ فَانظُرِى مَاذَا تَأْمُرِينَ(( 33 ))

33- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE ARE POWERFUL AND PROWESS, AND THE ORDER RESTS
WITH YOU. THEN SEE WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO COMMAND.''

قَالَتْ إِنَّ الْمُلُوكَ إِذَا دَخَلُوا قَرْيَةً أَفْسَدُوهَا
وَجَعَلُوا أَعِزَّةَ أَهْلِهَا أَذِلَّةً وَكَذَلِكَ يَفْعَلُونَ(( 34
))

34- SHE SAID WHEN THE KINGS ENTER A TOWN, THEY RUIN IT AND MAKE THE
HONOURED OF ITS INHABITANTS THE MEANEST, AND SO WILL THEY DO. (WITH US
TOO)

وَإِنِّى مُرْسِلَةٌ إِلَيْهِمْ بِهَدِيَّة فَنَاظِرَةٌ بِمَ يَرْجِعُ
الْمُرْسَلُونَ(( 35 ))

35- AND I AM GOING TO SEND THEM A PRESENT AND WAIT TO SEE WHAT DO THE
ENVOYS BRING BACK.

[ 509 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
KINGS ARE DESTRUCTIVE**

VERSE NO.26ِ35

Solomon deeply considered the report of hoopoe. The report was not so
simple a matter as to be taken easy. It was connected with the fate of a
country with a large population. He did not doubt that the hoopoe was
truthful, and had found a new country, but he had to investigate and to
make sure whether the bird's withdrawal and informations about queen's
power, wealth, and splendour, was well estimated or not. Did they really
worship the sun instead Allah or the hoopoe had misunderstood?

At length Solomon wrote a short letter but with a great content, and
said to the bird: \`\`Go with this letter of mine and cast it upon them.
Then stay away from them and see what do they return in answer.'' She
received the letter from the wonderful page who brought it, and then
opened to read. From the beginning of the letter which was in the name
of Allah, and from the Messenger, who brought the Message, the queen
understood that the letter was honourable and that the aim of Solomon
could not be a worldly conquest; and that he wanted to spread the light
of God as far as he could. Such apprehension proves that the queen of
Sheba had already a ray of Divine light in her heart.

As soon as she read Solomon's letter, she held a consultance meeting
with her ministers, chief commanders, elders, and advisors. Besides
having a great amount of wealth and high dignity, the queen whose
behaviour with her subjects was quite democratic, had the full
confidence of her subjects. She would do nothing without consulting her
council who were obedient to her in everything:ِ \`\`They said: We are
powerful and prowess, and the order rests with you. Then see what are
you going to command.''

[ 510 ]

She was as loyal to her people as they were to her. She was a peaceful
ruler and did not want to ruin her country by war. فَلَمَّا جَاءَ
سُلَيْمَانَ قَالَ أَتُمِدُّونَنِ بِمَال فَمَا آتَانِ اللهُ خَيْرٌ
مِّمَّا آتَاكُمْ بَلْ أَنْتُمْ بِهَدِيَّتِكُمْ تَفْرَحُونَ(( 36 ))

36- WHEN (THE ENVOYS) CAME TO SOLOMON HE SAID:ِ \`\`DO YOU SUCCOUR ME
WITH WEALTH? WHILE WHAT ALLAH HAS GIVEN ME IS BETTER THAN THAT WHICH HE
HAS GIVEN YOU. BUT YOU RATHER REJOICE IN YOUR GIFTS.''

ارْجِعْ إِلَيْهِمْ فَلَنَأْتِيَنَّهُمْ بِجُنُود لاَّ قِبَلَ لَهُمْ
بِهَا وَلَنُخْرِجَنَّهُمْ مِّنْهَا أَذِلَّةً وَهُمْ صَاغِرُونَ(( 37 ))

37- RETURN TO THEM! THEN WE SHALL COME TO THEM WITH FORCES WHICH THEY
WILL HAVE NO POWER TO RESIST, AND WE WILL DRIVE THEM OUT OF IT ABASED
AND DESPISED.

**THE COMMENTARY
DECEIVE ME NOT WITH WEALTH**

VERSE NO.36ِ37

The envoys of Belghais set out for Syria with a caravan carrying the
presents, to attract the attention of Solomon. When they met with the
divine king strange enough, that he neither welcomed them nor he
accepted their gifts, saying:ِ \`\`Have you come to help me with your
wealth and are you rejoicing in your gifts!'' Belghais whose line of
sight was limited to see the material things of this world that are
valued such as gold, wealth, and rank, could not know how farther to the
line could Solomon's sight penetrate. She therefore thought that she
could quieten Solomon with a handful of gold and jewels, and in the same
time tranquilize her [ 511 ] warlike subjects and reign in peace. But
what actually happened was far different from what the queen expected!
Solomon who would not be content with less than submission to the will
of God, took the present as a white elephant, and sent them back
saying:ِ

\`\`Do you succour me with wealth!? That which Allah has given me is
far better than what He has given you. Return to them. We shall come to
them with forces which they will have no power to resist.'' And so it
was proved that the material things of this world in comparison to the
Spiritual virtues were so trifle a thing in the sight of man of God like
Solomon that they utterly failed to attract his attention.

قَالَ يَا أَيُّهَا المَلَأُ أَيُّكُمْ يَأْتِينِى بِعَرْشِهَا قَبْلَ
أَنْ يَأْتُونِى مُسْلِمِينَ(( 38 ))

38- SOLOMON SAID:ِ \`\`O, CHIEFS! WHICH OF YOU WILL BRING ME HER THRONE
BEFORE THEY COME TO ME IN SUBMISSION?''

قَالَ عِفْريتٌ مِّنَ الْجِنِّ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَقُومَ
مِنْ مَّقَامِكَ وَإِنِّى عَلَيْهِ لَقَوِىٌّ أَمِينٌ(( 39 ))

39- A DEMON FROM AMONG THE JINN SAID:ِ \`\`I WILL BRING IT TO YOU
BEFORE YOU GET UP FROM YOUR PLACE, AND I AM STRONG AND TRUSTWORTHY (FOR
THIS JOB).''

قَالَ الَّذِى عِنْدَهُ عِلْمٌ مِّنَ الْكِتَابِ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ قَبْلَ
أَنْ يَرْتَدَّ إِلَيْكَ طَرْفُكَ فَلَمَّا رَءَاهُ مُسْتَقِرّاً عِنْدَهُ
قَالَ هَذَا مِنْ فَضْلِ رَبِّى لِيَبْلُوَنِى ءَأَشْكُرُ أَمْ أَكْفُرُ
وَمَنْ شَكَرَ فَإِنَّمَا يَشْكُرُ لِنَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَإِنَّ
رَبِّى غَنِىٌّ كَرِيمٌ(( 40 ))

40- HE WITH WHOM WAS A KNOWLEDGE OF THE BOOK (HIS NAME IS SAID TO HAVE
BEEN A"SIF BARKHIA), SAID:ِ \`\`I WILL BRING IT TO YOU, BEFORE YOUR
GLANCE RETURNS TO YOU.

[ 512 ]

(IN A TWINKLE OF AN EYE) THEN WHEN HE SAW THE THRONE PLACED BEFORE HIM
HE SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS OF THE GRACE OF MY LORD, SO AS TO EXAMINE ME
WHETHER I GIVE THANKS OR DENY? HE WHO GAVE THANKS, GIVES THANKS ONLY FOR
HIMSELF, AND HE WHO WAS UNGRATEFUL THEN MY LORD IS FREE OF WANT,
GRACIOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
HER THRONE SHALL BE HERE IN A TWINKLE OF AN EYE**

VERSE NO.38ِ40

Then the envoys took back the gifts and set out for home. They informed
their queen of the grandeur of Solomon and the splendour of his court.
They told her how extraordinary a king he was, and that they were not
able to stand against his amazing power and wonderful forces. Therefore,
Belghais decided to go to Solomon personally and discuss the matters in
between with him. She set out with such motive, and she was accompanied
by a group of her courtiers. As soon as she set out for that journey,
Solomon knew it, and decided to make a show of his power in a strange
way, and through a miracle, in order to convince the queen of Sheba and
her subjects that he was relied on Divine Power. Then Solomon said:ِ
\`\`O, chiefs! Which of you will bring me her throne before they come to
me in submission?''

One of Solomon's ministers named A"SIF BARKHAI, with whom was a
knowledge of the Book said:ِ \`\`I will bring it to you in a twinkle of
an eye.'' Then Solomon opened his eyes and the throne was there! Her
throne which was the symbol of her power and and dignity, was decorated
with patterns of gold and Jewels, and other costly ornaments, but
Solomon altered it to a basis of faith and virtue, by the unity of God.
[ 513 ]

The Arabic, \`\`IFRIT'' translated to demon, means a refractory
obstinate person. A powerful and craftly wicked whether Man or Jinn, who
is apt to betray; and to this effect he has defended himself that he is
trustworthy for the job.

**IT IS BY THE GRACE OF MY GOD**

The boastful men of power and wealth in this material world, will
forget everything when comes to power, except himself. He ascribes all
that he has to his merit and knowledge, apart from God! An example of
this was QURA"N = BIBLICAL KORAH, who was contemporary to Moses, and
against him too! We read thus in QURA"NِS 28:76:ِ \`\`QURA"N was among
the people of Moses who acted insolently towards the Arch prophet of
God! Such were the treasures that we had bestowed on him that their keys
were to be carried by a body of strong men.''

His people adviced him saying:ِ \`\`Exalt not, because Allah will not
love those who exalt....He said:ِ \`\`This has been given to me because
of a knowledge which is with me! Then We caused the earth to swallow him
up and his house.... and no one helped him.'' Solomon was thankful to
God that his companions were endowed with such power that they instantly
brought the heavy throne through such a long distance, without letting
the queen to know it. He was thankful to God while he knew well that his
thankfulness will not benefit God aught, because He is high above all
needs.

قَالَ نَكِّرُوا لَهَا عَرْشَهَا نَنظُرْ أَتَهْتَدِى أَمْ تَكُونُ مِنَ
الَّذِينَ لاَ يَهْتَدُونَ(( 41 ))

41- SOLOMON SAID:ِ \`\`DISGUISE HER THRONE FOR HER, THAT WE MAY SEE IF
SHE WILL BE GUIDED, OR WILL BE OF THOSE WHO WILL NOT BE GUIDED.''

[ 514 ]

فَلَمَّا جَاءَتْ قِيلَ أَهَكَذَا عَرْشُكِ قَالَتْ كَأَنَّهُ هُوَ
وَأُوتِينَا الْعِلْمَ مِنْ قَبْلِهَا وَكُنَّا مُسْلِمِينَ(( 42 ))

42- AND WHEN SHE CAME, IT WAS SAID:ِ \`\`IS YOUR THRONE LIKE THIS? SHE
SAID:ِ \`\`AS IF, THIS IS IT! AND BEFORE IT, WE WERE GIVEN KNOWLEDGE AND
BECAME MUSLIMS. (SUBMITTED TO ALLAH)

وَصَدَّهَا مَا كَانَتْ تَّعْبُدُ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ إِنَّهَا كَانَتْ مِنْ
قَوْم كَافِرِينَ(( 43 ))

43- AND (SOLOMON) PREVENTED HER FROM WHAT SHE WAS WORSHIPPING APART
FROM ALLAH (THE SUN), THAT SHE WAS OF A PEOPLE WHO WERE DISBELIEVERS.

قِيلَ لَهَا ادْخُلِى الصَّرْحَ فَلَمَّا رَأَتْهُ حَسِبَتْهُ لُجَّةً
وَكَشَفَتْ عَنْ سَاقَيْهَا قَالَ إِنَّهُ صَرْحٌ مُّمَرَّدٌ مِّنْ
قَوَارِيرَ قَالَتْ رَبِّ إِنِّى ظَلَمْتُ نَفْسِى وَأَسْلَمْتُ مَعَ
سُلَيْمَانَ للهِِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 44 ))

44- IT WAS SAID TO HER:ِ \`\`ENTER THE HALL (OF THE PALACE). WHEN SHE
SAW IT, SHE DEEMED IT TO BE A SPREADING OF WATER, AND (THEREFORE) SHE
UNCOVERED HER LEGS, BUT HE (SOLOMON) SAID TO HER:ِ \`\`IT IS A HALL
COVERED WITH CRYSTALS.''

SHE SAID:ِ \`\`MY LORD! I HAVE OPPRESSED MYSELF, BUT I HAVE (NOW)
SUBMITTED TO ALLAH THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS, WITH SOLOMON.

[ 515 ]


