The Light of Faith in the Heart of the Queen of Sheba
=====================================================

VERSE NO.41ِ44

To examine the apprehension and her power of conceiving ideas, and in
order to prepare her for acceptance of God's Message, Solomon ordered
her throne to be altered:ِ \`\`Solomon said:ِ \`\`Disguise her throne
for her that we may see if she will be GUIDED!'' Here a question arises
that; what was the aim of Solomon by testing the insight and wisdom of
Belghais? One answer is that; he might have wanted to know how had he to
treat his newly fair and infringer convert.

As to the clause in the verse NO.41:ِ \`\`Disguise her throne that we
may see if she is GUIDED.'' And particularly the ending word of the
clause, (GUIDED) gives a mystical meaning to the verse, namely:ِ The
throne was the symbol of the queen's physical power and pride. Then it
was transformed to a basis of faith and virtue by Solomon. This was
suitable test in order to make know whether the queen of Sheba and the
worshipper of the sun, could be guided to the true God, and get rid of
the false gods. In other word, Solomon wanted to transform Belghais, and
set her on a different kind of throne. So, let us wait and watch what
her reaction was.

In spite of all the alterations, she recognized her throne which she
always kept it in a secure place, and so Belghais passed the examination
with excellent marks. She recognized her former throne of power, the
legs of which were set on polytheism and disbelief in the only and the
only true God.

She also understood quickly her new throne of power which was settled
upon Monotheism and piety. In spite of all the differences and [ 516 ]

contrast she could understand that her new throne of power was far
better and more valuable in the sight of knowledge and wisdom. Then
comes the next part of the story in which the queen of Sheba was ushered
to the hall:ِ \`\`It was said to her enter the hall.''

When she stood the test well, she was asked to enter the Sacred
Precinct of Sanctity and prophethood, the symbol of which was then the
great palace of Solomon, and its glorious hall the floor of which was
constructed of crystals. The floor of the hall is said to have been made
of a crystal cover underwhich a stream of water flowed:ِ \`\`It was said
to her:ِ \`\`Enter the hall of the palace. When she saw it, she deemed
it to be a spreading of water, and therefore she uncovered her legs.
Solomon, her Divine Guide, said to her:ِ \`\`It is a hall covered with
crystals. Then she said:ِ \`\`My Lord! I have oppressed myself so far,
but I have now submitted to Allah the Lord of all the world with
Solomon.''

\*\*\*\*\*

**WHAT HAPPENED TO BELGHAIS THEN?**

Concerning the question that what happened to Belghais at last, the
Holy Qura"n is silent and gives no answer. Some of the commentators have
their own views which are not supported by any historical evidences.
Aloosi has written in his ROOH-AL-MANI that, when she was converted, she
was married with Solomon, but the writer's view is not supported by any
reason or evidence. The Bible (O.T.) says that she returned back and
ruled her country, but this time under the control of Solomon and his
Lord, \`\`Allah''. We read in, 1 KINGS-10:ِ

\`\`The queen of Sheba went to Solomon and the glory of his court left
her breathless and amazed! She therefore said to king Solomon:- \`\`What
I heard in my country about you and your wisdom is true, but I could not
believe it. Until I had [ 517 ]

come and seen it all of myself, your wisdom and wealth are much greater
than what I was told. How fortunate are your wives and how fortunate are
your servants who are always in your presence, and are privileged to
hear your wise sayings. Praise the Lord your God. He has shown how
pleased He is with you by making you king of Israel.'' \`\`king Solomon
gave the queen of Sheba everything she asked for, besides all the
customary gifts that he had generously given her. Then she and her
attendants returned to the land of Sheba.''

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَى ثَمُودَ أَخَاهُمْ صَالِحاً أَنِ اعْبُدُوا
اللهَ فَإِذَا هُمْ فَرِيقَانِ يَخْتَصِمُونَ(( 45 ))

45- AND WE SENT TO THAMUD THEIR BROTHER SALIH SAYING:ِ \`\`WORSHIP
ALLAH.'' THEN TWO SECTS AMONG THEM BEGAN QUARRELLING. (WITH EACH
OTHER)

قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ لِمَ تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِالسَّيِّئَةِ قَبْلَ الْحَسَنَةِ
لَوْلاَ تَسْتَغْفِرُونَ اللهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ(( 46 ))

46- HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY PEOPLE! WHY DO YOU SEEK TO HASTEN EVIL BEFORE
GOOD? WHY DON'T YOU ASK FOR GOD'S FORGIVENESS, THAT YOU MAY RECEIVE
(GOD'S) MERCY?''

قَالُوا اطَّيَّرْنَا بِكَ وَبِمَنْ مَّعَكَ قَالَ طَائِرُكُمْ عِنْدَ
اللهِ بَلْ أَنْتُمْ قَوْمٌ تُفْتَنُونَ(( 47 ))

47- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE AUGUR BAD OMEN OF YOU AND OF THOSE WITH YOU''.
HE SAID:ِ \`\`YOUR OMEN (GOOD OR BAD) RESTS WITH ALLAH, BUT YOU ARE A
PEOPLE UNDER TRIAL.''

[ 518 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

SALIH AND THE PEOPLE OF THAMUD** VERSE NO.45ِ47

The fourth prophet that a part of his life is narrated in this chapter
(Sِ27) is Salih, who was sent to the people of Thamud:ِ \`\`And We sent
to Thamud their brother Salih who said to them, \`\`Worship Allah''.
Then two groups among them began quarrelling.''

The main story of Thamud and Salih is found in QURA"N Sِ26: 141ِ159.
The point here is the plot against the prophet which was planned by a
group of nine men who augured bad omen of Salih's teachings! In the
sight of them the pure and truthful preaching of Salih, their
compassionate brother seemed to be evil, and they augured bad omen of
him! So they conspired to slay him, but Allah perished them utterly.

The abstract of Salih's Message to the people of Thamud was:ِ \`\`To
worship Allah and no one else''. But they were divided in two groups,
concerning the Message. One group of them were the high-handed and
insolent disbelievers, and the second group were the low-handed
believers who were weaker in physical power. These two groups strived
against one another.

Salih began to admonish them, and warned them of the punishment of God.
But they belied him and took no care about his warnings and continued
with their evil deeds. One should not think that his evil deeds are
overlooked by God when he is not punished. God will always give a chance
or a respite to His servant so as to stop doing wrong and to amend and
correct himself.

God's Grace will act cautiously with you, but when you go beyond the
limits set by Him, he will disgrace you. So instead of following the
advices of their compassionate [ 519 ]

apostle, they adhered to a series of vain talks and chimerical words
saying:ِ \`\`We augur bad omen of you and of those who believe you.'' In
fact, they were a people under trial and they failed.

**AUGUR AND OMEN**

In several points in Qura"n, reference is made to augur and omen. As an
instance of this it is cited in S 36:18 that the people of ANTIOCK, in
answer to the apostles of Jesus Christ said:ِ \`\`We augur an evil omen
from you, and if you desist not, we will stone and inflict a grievous
punishment on you.'' The Arabic, \`\`TATAYAR'' comes from the root word
\`\`TAIR'' which means bird. In the sight of Islam and Qura"n, AUGUR,
and omen of good or bad is only superstition.

The above verse proves that in the first century before Christ there
lived, (AS HISTORIANS SAY) the Roman Diviners who held a college
consisted of fifteen members, who observed omens thought, to manifest
the will of Gods. Their interpretation of the flight of birds, for
example, determined the propitious moment that would favour an action.

As a matter of fact, Man cannot be indifferent to accidents and
phenomena, and eventually he has to find a reason or a cause for all the
happenings. If the man is a believer, he ascribes all events to the will
of God which is according to knowledge and wisdom, and that there is a
logic and a rightful purpose beyond every incident. So, such a believing
man has no problem with events of bad or good nature. It is the
unbeliever who is perplexed when a misfortune appears. He wonders and
wanders till he finds a cause to satisfy him with that.

[ 520 ]

وَكَانَ فِى الْمَدِينَةِ تِسْعَةُ رَهْط يُفْسِدُونَ فِى الاَْرْضِ وَلاَ
يُصْلِحُونَ(( 48 ))

48- AND THERE WERE NINE BANDS IN THE CITY WHO WERE MAKING MISCHIEF IN
THE LAND WITH NO REFORMING.

قَالُوا تَقَاسَمُوا بِاللهِ لَنُبَيِّتَنَّهُ وَأَهْلَهُ ثُمَّ
لَنَقُولَنَّ لِوَلِيِّهِ مَا شَهِدْنَا مَهْلِكَ أَهْلِهِ وَإِنَّا
لَصَادِقُونَ(( 49 ))

49- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`ALL OF YOU SWEAR BY ALLAH TO MAKE A SURPRISE ATTACK
BY NIGHT ON HIM AND HIS FAMILY. THEN WE WILL TELL HIS HEIR, WE WERE NOT
PRESENT AT THE SLAUGHTER OF HIS FAMILY AND WE ARE TRUTHFUL.

وَمَكَرُوا مَكْراً وَمَكَرْنَا مَكْراً وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 50 ))

50- THEY DEVISED A DEVICE, AND WE TOO DEVISED A DEVICE, WHILE THEY DID
NOT KNOW.

فَانظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ مَكْرِهِمْ أَنَّا دَمَّرْنَاهُمْ
وَقَوْمَهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 51 ))

51- SO BEHOLD WHAT WAS THE END OF THEIR DEVICE. WE DESTROYED THEM AND
THEIR PEOPLE ALL TOGETHER.

فَتِلْكَ بُيُوتُهُمْ خَاوِيَةً بِمَا ظَلَمُوا إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً
لِّقَوْم يَعْلَمُونَ(( 52 ))

52- THOSE ARE THEIR HOUSES DESOLATED DUE TO THEIR OPPRESSION. VERILY IN
THAT, THERE IS A SIGN FOR A PEOPLE WHO UNDERSTAND.

وَأَنجَيْنَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَكَانُوا يَتَّقُونَ(( 53 ))

53- AND WE SAVED THOSE WHO BELIEVED, AND WERE AVOIDING EVIL.

[ 521 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

THE CONSPIRACY OF NINE BANDS IN VADI-AL-GHORA"**

VERSE NO.48ِ53

Here is another part of the story of Salih and his people. There were
nine bands of mischief maker in the towns, each band less than ten and
more than three in number. They were always against any reform. Each of
these bands had their own leader, and belonged to a different tribe.
When Salih began to enjoin good and forbid evil, the small devilish
bands found their interests and material advantages in danger, and to
this effect they hatched a plot to slay the prophet and his family in
the night by a surprise attack. Nine small bands united together and
conspired against the prophet's life. The plot was to kill Salih and his
family by a night surprise attack, and then deny their crime by swearing
that they were not present at the site so that their tribes could not
want to exact.

Such a plot was also planned against our holy prophet Mohammad (SA),
but thanks to God that the plot failed.

Destruction was the end of those devils. They plotted a plan and Allah
did plan a plot against them and they were all destroyed, leaving their
comfortable houses which had been turned to the nests of corruption,
desolated and deprived of inhabitants, in a ruinous condition.

In the meantime Allah saved those who believed and who were avoiding
evil. Some commentators are of opinion that those who were saved with
Salih (AS), numbered to four thousands:ِ

\`\`And We saved those who believed and were avoiding evil.''

[ 522 ]

وَلُوطاً إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ أَتَأْتُونَ الْفَاحِشَةَ وَأَنْتُمْ
تُبْصِرُونَ(( 54 ))

54- AND (REMIND) LOT, WHEN HE SAID TO HIS PEOPLE:ِ \`\`DO YOU COMMIT
INDECENCY WHILE YOU SEE (ITS OBSCENENESS).

أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الرِّجَالَ شَهْوَةً مِّنْ دُونِ النِّسَاءِ بَلْ
أَنْتُمْ قَوْمٌ تَجْهَلُونَ(( 55 ))

55- DO YOU COME TO MEN LUSTFULLY APART FROM WOMAN? YOU ARE A PEOPLE WHO
ACT IGNORANTLY.

**THE COMMENTARY

THE PERVERSION OF LOT'S PEOPLE** VERSE NO.54ِ55

The story of Lot has been cited in several other places in Qura"n such
as in:ِ S 7ِ11ِ15 and S 26. This is because Qura"n is not a historical
book, to narrate one incident once and for all. Whenever necessary
mention is made of various parts of the incidents and the encounter of
the prophets with their people, so as to teach lessons in the way of
Man's development.

Here the point of stress is that, the crime of the people of Lot was
against their own nature! They went to men lustfully apart from woman
and were awfully indulged in pederasty. They committed such indecency
openly and they frankly defended when some one enjoined them to do good
and to live that evil custom. They could feel how heinuous their deed
was, and yet they gave way to their nasty passions:ِ \`\`And remind Lot
when he said to his people:ِ \`\`Do you commit indecency while you
see!?''

[ 523 ]

The ending of the above verse, \`\`WHILE YOU SEE'' has been commented
with a twofold of meaning. Some commentators have said that, the people
of Lot would do their heinous act of pederasty openly and before the
eyes of one another! But we do not think so. It may mean that they knew
the obsceneness of their evil deeds, and could see the bad consequences
of it, which had appeared among their wives and children and in general
throughout their society, and yet they were not willing to desist!

THE END OF PART (19)

[ 524 ]

فَمَا كَانَ جَوَابَ قَوْمِهِ إِلاَّ أَنْ قَالُوا أَخْرِجُوا آلَ لُوط
مِّنْ قَرْيَتِكُمْ إِنَّهُمْ أُنَاسٌ يَتَطَهَّرُونَ(( 56 ))

56- BUT THE ANSWER OF HIS PEOPLE WAS NOT EXCEPT THAT THEY SAID:ِ
\`\`BANISH THE FOLK OF LOT FROM YOUR TOWN, THAT THEY ARE MEN WHO SEEK TO
KEEP CLEAN.''

فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَهُ قَدَّرْنَاهَا مِنَ
الْغَابِرِينَ(( 57 ))

57- THEN WE SAVED HIM AND HIS FAMILY, EXCEPT HIS WIFE WHO, WE DESTINED
TO STAY BACK.

وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ مَّطَراً فَسَاءَ مَطَرُ الْمُنذَرِينَ(( 58
))

58- AND WE RAINED ON THEM A RAIN, (OF BRIMSTONE) AND SO BAD WAS THE
RAIN FOR THOSE WHO WERE ADMONISHED. (BUT THEY PAID NO HEED)

قُلِ الْحَمْدُ للهِِ وَسَلاَمٌ عَلَى عِبَادِهِ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَى
أَاللهُ خَيْرٌ أَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ(( 59 ))

59- SAY:ِ \`\`PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH, AND PEACE BE UPON HIS SERVANTS
WHOM HE HAS CHOSEN.''

IS ALLAH BETTER OR (THE FALSE GODS) THAT THEY ASSOCIATE? (WITH HIM)

**THE COMMENTARY
WHERE DECENCY IS WRONG**

VERSE NO.56ِ59

The people of Lot were not willing to leave their homosexuality, and
their prophet's warnings had no effect on them. They were so accustomed
to their indecencies that never thought of amending their behaviour.

[ 525 ]

It is narrated that Lot preached them for some thirty years, but of no
use! Even during such a long period of time, his wife did not believe
his truth. Not only his people were not ashamed of their evil deeds,
they ironically rebuked the chaste persons among them for their purity
and loving to keep clean. God's kindness acted moderately on them, but
when they transgressed the bounds of decency, Allah's decree was issued,
and harshly sent them to their doom:ِ

\`\`Then We saved him and his family except his wife whom We destined
to stay among the doomed, and We rained on them....what an awful rain!''
In a morning when they, sound and safe, began to begin their nasty
works; Lo! Out of a sudden, there was a quake followed by a scream
beyond the threshold of pain! Then it began to rain cats and dogs, but
this time not pure crystaline water. It seemed to be a shower of
brimstones!

Lot and his followers had left the town before dawn as per order of the
angel of God, and were all saved from the disaster. And now if we are
willing to take a lesson of that incident we have to say from the depth
of our heart:ِ \`\`Praise belongs to Allah and peace be on his chosen
servants.''

أَمَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ وَأَنزَلَ لَكُمْ مِّنَ
السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَنْبَتْنَا بِهِ حَدَائِقَ ذَاتَ بَهْجَة مَّا كَانَ
لَكُمْ أَنْ تُنْبِتُوا شَجَرَهَا أَءِلَـهٌ مَّعَ اللهِ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ
يَعْدِلُونَ(( 60 ))

60- (ARE YOUR PARTNERS BETTER) OR HE WHO CREATED THE HEAVENS AND EARTH,
AND SENT DOWN FOR YOU FROM THE SKY WATER. THEN WE GREW OUT OF IT
DELIGHTFUL GARDENS. IT WAS NOT IN YOUR POWER TO GROW ITS TREES. IS THERE
ANY GOD BESIDES ALLAH? THEY ARE RATHER A PEOPLE WHO ASSIGN EQUALS. (WITH
ALLAH)

[ 526 ]

أَمَّنْ جَعَلَ الاَْرْضَ قَرَاراً وَجَعَلَ خِلاَلَهَا أَنْهَاراً
وَجَعَلَ لَهَا رَوَاسِىَ وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَ الْبَحْرَيْنِ حَاجِزاً
أَءِلَـهٌ مَّعَ اللهِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 61 ))

61- OR HE WHO MADE THE EARTH STABLE, AND SET RIVERS INIT, AND MADE
MOUNTAINS FOR IT. AND PUT BETWEEN TWO SEES A BARRIER. IS THERE ANY GOD
BESIDES ALLAH? NAY; MOST OF THEM DO NOT KNOW.

أَمَّنْ يُجِيبُ الْمُضطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
وَيَجْعَلُكُمْ خُلَفَاءَ الاَْرْضِ أَءِلَـهٌ مَّعَ اللهِ قَلِيلا مَّا
تَذَكَّرُونَ(( 62 ))

62- OR HE WHO ANSWERS THE HELPLESS WHEN HE CALLS HIM (FOR HELP), AND
REMOVES THE AFFLICTION, AND MAKES YOU SUCCESSORS IN THE EARTH. IS THERE
ANY GOD BESIDES ALLAH? HOW LITTLE YOU REFLECT.

أَمَّنْ يَهْدِيكُمْ فِى ظُلُمَاتِ الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ وَمَنْ يُرْسِلُ
الرِّيَاحَ بُشْراً بَيْنَ يَدَىْ رَحْمَتِهِ أَءِلَـهٌ مَّعَ اللهِ
تَعَالَى اللهُ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ(( 63 ))

63- OR HE WHO GUIDES YOU IN THE DARKNESSES OF THE LAND AND SEA, AND HE
WHO SENDS THE WINDS AS A GLAD-TIDING BEFORE HIS MERCY. (RAIN) IS THERE
ANY GOD BESIDES ALLAH? HIGH IS ALLAH ABOVE WHAT THEY ASSOCIATE.

أَمَّنْ يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَمَنْ يَرْزُقُكُمْ مِّنَ
السَّمَاءِ وَالاَْرْضِ أَءِلَـهٌ مَّعَ اللهِ قُلْ هَاتُوا بُرْهَانَكُمْ
إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ(( 64 ))

[ 527 ]

64- OR HE WHO ORIGINATES CREATION, AND THEN HE RECREATES IT. AND HE WHO
GIVES YOU SUSTENANCE FROM THE SKY AND EARTH. IS THERE ANY GOD BESIDES
ALLAH? SAY:ِ \`\`BRING YOUR REASON IF YOU ARE TRUTHFUL.''

**THE COMMENTARY**

IN SPITE OF SO MANY PROOFS OF UNITY, THEY ARE STILL POLYTHEISTS.

VERSE NO.60ِ64 Following a mention of parts of the histories of five
great prophets, a question has repeatedly been raised that:ِ \`\`Is God
with his infinite power, knowledge, and mercy, better, or the worthless
idols, and poor false gods that you serve?'' or to put it in other way;
is there any god besides Allah? Such questions are supported by knocking
down reasons and reasonings that; is anyone or anything in power and
knowledge, or other attributes, equal to He Who created the heavens and
earth, or He Who sends down for you water from the sky. By that water,
He grew out delightful and fruitful gardens, a tree of which have not
the power to grew, or even one of its flowers to point.

The man's limited power which is bestowed on him by God's Grace, is not
comparable with that of God, which is infinite and limitless. God has
easily sent down water, in measure, from the sky overhead; and has grown
out of it delightful gardens full of beauty, glory, with different kinds
of fruit of various shape, colour, taste, odour, and essence; whereas
man is not able to make a single seed to sprout and develop and grow
into a tree. As a matter of fact, each leaf [ 528 ]

on a tree is a book of evidences of the one true God who has created
the garden as well as the earth and the whole UNIVERSE! In the second
verse, the question is about the order, settlement, and firmness of the
heavens and the earth. The earth, is a cradle or a resting bed for
mankind. God has rendered it stable in spite of its several kinds of
movement each of which can easily upset the living comfort of man, and
turn our cradle to our death bed.

Throughout the universe, anything that you see is a sign that can
easily show you the unity of design, and the unity of purpose. But what
a reason can be found to prove any god besides the Creator of the
universe which is not vain, valueless, and foolish a proof. The third
question will take us in a trip to have a look in our inner world. What
do we have to support us when we are smited by a calamity due to our
evil deeds; and on who, can we put our trust? When we are helpless in
the paws of afflictions, who can, or will, help us except our Merciful
Lord who is more Compassionate than our kind mother who may only weep
for us in our misfortunes.

When all the doors of hope has been closed on us, and all our means and
physical instruments have failed, the mysterious hand of our Gracious
God will come out of the invisible sleeve, and a door is opened from an
unexpected direction!

Then we may see, if we want, the signs of our Lord which are always
evident and abundant in our inner world as well as the outer:ِ \`\`Are
your partners better or He Who answers the helpless when he calls Him
for help, and removes the affliction, and makes you successors in the
earth?''

Not only the nature, and our external world, is full of evidences and
signs that may lead man to his Gracious Creator; there are still more
suggesting hints in man's inner conscience and heart, that look after
him with kind eyes. In our agonies and afflictions, we cry to Him for
help and He answers our prayer and relieves our sufferings. [ 529 ] Of
course, God will answer the prayer of all His creatures, but He seems to
have a particular consideration for the helpless distressed, who calls
Him from the depths of his heart.

In the forth verse above, the immediate reference is to the matter of
guidence, whether physical or spiritual:ِ \`\`Are these idols better, or
He who guides you in the darknesses of the land and sea?'' And then a
mention is made of the creation and recreation; or life and death, and
after all the Resurrection. In the above mentioned verses, Allah has
pointed to 12 signs of His, in order to prove His Oneness, and these
are:ِ 1ِThe sky. 2ِThe earth. 3ِThe rain. 4ِThe effects of the rain in
our life and living. 5ِMan's resting place. 6ِThe rivers. 7ِThe firm
mountains. 8ِThe barrier that separates the salty sea from the sweet
one. 9ِGod's answering the prayer of His helpless servants. 10ِTheir
guidance in the darknesses of the sea land, or if you want to say that
of the body and soul. 11ِThe winds which are the bearer of good news.
12ِAnd making us the successors on the earth and inheriting it.

قُلْ لاَّ يَعْلَمُ مَنْ فِى السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ الْغَيْبَ إِلاَّ
اللهُ وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ أَيَّانَ يُبْعَثُونَ(( 65 ))

65- SAY:ِ \`\`NO ONE IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH KNOWS THE UNSEEN EXCEPT
ALLAH, NOR DO THEY KNOW WHEN ARE THEY RESURRECTED.''

بَلِ ادَّارَكَ عِلْمُهُمْ فِى الاْخِرَةِ بَلْ هُمْ فِى شَكّ مِّنْهَا
بَلْ هُمْ مِّنْهَا عَمُونَ(( 66 ))

66- THEY HAVE USED ALL THEIR KNOWLEDGE (TO KNOW) THE HEREAFTER, AND YET
THEY ARE IN DOUBT OF IT; OR (BETTER TO SAY) THEY ARE BLIND TO IT.

[ 530 ]

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَئِذَا كُنَّا تُرَاباً وَآبَاؤُنَا أَئِنَّا
لَمُخْرَجُونَ(( 67 ))

67- AND THE UNBELIEVERS SAID:ِ \`\`WHEN WE BECAME DUST, (WE) AND OUR
FATHERS, ARE WE TO COME OUT.'' (OF OUR GRAVES)

لَقَدْ وُعِدْنَا هَذَا نَحْنُ وَآبَاؤُنَا مِنْ قَبْلُ إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ
أَسَاطِيرُ الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 68 ))

68- VERILY WE HAVE BEEN PROMISED OF THIS, AND OUR FATHERS (TOO), FROM
BEFORE. THIS (PROMISE) IS NOT, EXCEPT THE FABLE OF THE ANCIENTS.

**THE COMMENTARY**

VERSE NO.65ِ68

The argument is still continued about the Resurrection Day, the exact
time of which is not known to any one except Allah:ِ

The unbelievers who believe not even in God, cannot see anything beyond
their physical senses in this material world. In particular, their
knowledge, whatever it be will not suffice to bring them a certainty
about Resurrection Day. This is because their rejection of the spiritual
light will make them blind, and prevent them from seeing the spiritual
world. However, with the believers this is not true. They can apprehend
their own Resurrection from their sleeping and waking up, and through
their truthful dreams. They also can see their own revival through the
revival of earth in the spring, and many other signs and reasons.

[ 531 ]

Those who deny the raise of deads, have no knowledge about the details
of the Hereafter, so they deny the root. Their ignorance is not due to
lack of reasons for proving the Resurrection Day. It is because they
close their eyes and do not want to see:ِ \`\`And the unbelievers said:ِ
\`\`When we became dusts-we and our fathers-do we come out of the
graves?'' In their sight, it seems not possible to come back to life
when they are died and turned to dusts. But they have forgotten that
they had been dusts at first and were raised up to life from dust.

قُلْ سِيرُوا فِى الاَْرْضِ فَانظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الْمُجْرِمِينَ(( 69 ))

69- SAY:ِ \`\`TRAVEL IN THE EARTH, AND SEE HOW WAS THE END OF THE
SINNERS.''

وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ تَكُنْ فِى ضَيْق مِّمَّا يَمْكُرُونَ((
70 ))

70- AND GRIEVE NOT OVER THEM, NOR BE STRAITENED AT THEIR INTRIGUES.

وَيَقُولُونَ مَتَى هَذَا الْوَعْدُ إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ(( 71 ))

71- AND THEY SAY:ِ \`\`WHEN IS THE PROMISE TO COME IF YOU ARE
TRUTHFULS?''

قُلْ عَسَى أَنْ يَكُونَ رَدِفَ لَكُمْ بَعْضُ الَّذِى تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ((
72 ))

72- SAY:ِ \`\`SOME OF WHAT YOU SEEK TO HASTEN MIGHT BE WELL BEHIND
YOU.'' (TRYING TO CATCH YOU)

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَذُو فَضْل عَلَى النَّاسِ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ
يَشْكُرُونَ(( 73 ))

73- AND VERILY YOUR LORD IS GRACEFUL TO MANKIND, BUT MOST OF THEM GIVE
NO THANKS. [ 532 ]

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَيَعْلَمُ مَا تُكِنُّ صُدُورُهُمْ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ((
74 ))

74- AND YOUR LORD CERTAINLY KNOWS WHAT THEIR HEARTS CONCEAL, AND WHAT
THEY REVEAL.

وَمَا مِنْ غَائِبَة فِى السَّمَاءِ وَالاَْرْضِ إِلاَّ فِى كِتَاب
مُّبِين(( 75 ))

75- AND THERE IS NOTHING HIDDEN IN THE SKY AND EARTH, EXCEPT THAT (IT
IS RECORDED) IN A PERSPICUOUS BOOK.


