In the Bosom of Pharoah
=======================

VERSE NO.7ِ9

\* Suckle him, and when you fear for him, cast him in the sea.
\* Fear not and grieve not.
\* We will return him to you. We will make him an apostle.

According to the famous poem, composed by PARVIN EATISA"MI, when she
cast her beautiful baby into the sea, she looked after him with a pity,
and deep sorrow saying:ِ

\`\`O, my helpless child! If the Grace of God forget you, how can you
be rescued from this boat, that has no captain. If God save you not
through His Mercy, the water will give your dust to the wind.'' Then
there came an inspiration from God, saying to the depressed mother:ِ
\`\`What sort of a vain imagination is that! Our traveller has already
reached home. We took what you threw. You saw the hand of truth but you
did not recognize it. The sea surface is more comfortable for him than
his cradle. The flood is now his nurse and the wave his mother. Rivers
do not overflow of their own accord. They do that which We tell them to
do. You better go and leave him to us. Your love is only that of a
mother. But our nature is justice and to promote our servants. Whoever
is helpless, we do help, and whoever is indigent will have us for
friend.'' Pharaoh and his queen were at the sea shore, when the waves
brought the mysterious wooden box near them, and Lo! There was an
attractive beautiful child in it:ِ

Then Pharaoh's folk picked him up, so as to be an enemy for them, and a
cause of grief, that Pharaoh, Ha"ma"n, and their hosts were wrong
doers.

[ 550 ]

God's plan was so that the wicked king had to nurture the man who was
to be a means of their destruction.

The Egyptian midwives had the king's order to kill all the male born
babies of the Israelite mothers. Moses was saved from that slaughter
because the extraordinary beauty of the baby attracted the midwife's
attention. She told the mother of Moses:ِ \`\`I have to inform the
executioner to slay your baby, and to take my reward for that. But I am
so attracted by the beauty of your child that I feel a tender love in my
heart for him so much so that I cannot inform the executioner. Try to
protect your child somehow, and let none of the spies discover him.''

Therefore the mother of Moses nursed and suckled the infant. Then there
came the danger of the guards to find the child and the poor mother
trembled with fear and was filled up with a knocking down grief:ِ
\`\`And We inspired the mother of Moses to suckle him and when you fear
for him cast him into the sea. So fear not and grieve not. We will
return him to you and we will make him of the Apostles.''

When the baby was picked out of the sea by Pharaoh's body-guards, there
was a hot controversy whether to kill the child or not. It so happened
that the queen was attracted by the baby. The king had no son; and the
queen prevented them to kill the child. They were sure enough that he
was an Israelite baby, for being thrown in the sea. Yet the queen said
to the king:ِ \`\`He can be a joy of eye (CAUSE OF HAPPINESS) for me and
you. So do not kill him. Perhaps he may profit us, or we may take him
for a son.'' Moses was accepted by A"SIYEH, the queen of Egypt as a son.
He was now to be brought up under the charge of the king's court,
because it was God's will that he might learn all the wisdom and
erudition of the Egyptians in order to expose all that was hollow and
wicked in it.

[ 551 ]

وَأَصْبَحَ فُؤَادُ أُمِّ مُوسَى فَارِغاً إِنْ كَادَتْ لَتُبْدِى بِهِ
لَوْلاَ أَنْ رَّبَطْنَا عَلَى قَلْبِهَا لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ((
10 ))

10- THE MORNING CAME WHEN THE HEART OF MOSES' MOTHER WAS EMPTY (OF FEAR
AND GRIEF). SHE WAS WELLNIGH TO DISCLOSE WHO HE WAS, HAD WE NOT
STRENGTHENED HER HEART IN ORDER TO BE OF THE BELIEVERS.

وَقَالَتْ لاُِخْتِهِ قُصِّيهِ فَبَصُرَتْ بِهِ عَنْ جُنُب وَهُمْ لاَ
يَشْعُرُونَ(( 11 ))

11- AND SHE SAID TO HIS SISTER; \`\`FOLLOW HIM UP''. SO SHE WATCHED HIM
FROM A DISTANCE, WHILE THEY KNEW NOT.

وَحَرَّمْنَا عَلَيْهِ الْمَرَاضِعَ مِنْ قَبْلُ فَقَالَتْ هَلْ
أَدُلُّكُمْ عَلَى أَهْلِ بَيْت يَكْفُلُونَهُ لَكُمْ وَهُمْ لَهُ
نَاصِحُونَ(( 12 ))

12- AND WE FORBADE HIM TO SUCK ANY FOSTER MOTHER FROM BEFORE. THEN (HIS
SISTER) SAID:ِ \`\`SHALL I LEAD YOU TO A HOUSEHOLD TO TAKE CHARGE OF HIM
FOR YOU, WHO ARE WELL-WISHERS FOR HIM.''

فَرَدَدْنَاهُ إِلَى أُمِّهِ كَىْ تَقَرَّ عَيْنُهَا وَلاَ تَحْزَنَ
وَلِتَعْلَمَ أَنَّ وَعْدَ اللهِ حَقٌّ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ(( 13 ))

13- SO WE RETURNED HIM TO HIS MOTHER, TO ENLIGHTEN HER EYES (WITH JOY),
AND THAT SHE MIGHT NOT GRIEVE, AND TO KNOW THAT THE PROMISE OF GOD IS
TRUE; THOUGH MOST OF THEM DO NOT KNOW.

[ 552 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
GOD RETURNS MOSES TO HIS MOTHER**
VERSE NO.10ِ13

She handed over her baby to the sea, but soon after, a storm of sorrow
overtook her heart. Her baby had occupied all her heart which had
suddenly became empty, and now she could deeply feel the vacancy. Of
course, she had a light in her heart which was the promise of God, and
she could believe to some extent that God will never forgot His promise,
and He would return her child back to her. Doubt and imagination became
active in her inner self to knock her down, that her Lord came to her
help, and strengthened her heart so as to increase her faith in God, and
that He would fulfil His promise and return her child to her.

God will never fail in His promise, but the short-sighted people may
not understand that God's wisdom, power and goodness is far more
comprehensive than their little plan in their material world. The mother
then told her daughter keep an eye upon the chest from a distance, and
see what would happen to your brother. The girl saw that her brother was
picked up by the body-guards of Pharaoh. Then she came to know that they
have adopted the child, and were in search of a foster to bring him up
for them. She therefore went closer and said to them:ِ \`\`....Shall I
lead you to a household, to take chare of your baby and who are willing
to have such a job, and are well-wishers for him?'' In other word, she
said to them:ِ \`\`I know a woman who has breasts full of milk, and a
heart full of love for him.''

It is narrated that the baby had rejected to suck several foster
mothers, who showed to be willing to nurse him; but as soon as he was
brought to his mother, he grasped her and began to suck. This was
because Allah did not want to feed His future prophet with a milk that
was doubtful, or perhaps made of unlawful foods. Thus Allah gave Moses
the benefit of his mother's milk and fosterage, as well as the
advantages of being brought up in the royal family. [ 553 ]

وَلَمَّا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَاسْتَوَى آتَيْنَاهُ حُكْماً وَعِلْماً
وَكَذَلِكَ نَجْزِى الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 14 ))

14- AND WHEN HE REACHED MATURITY AND WAS ESTABLISHED, WE GAVE HIM
WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE, AND SO DO WE REWARD THE GOOD-DOERS.

وَدَخَلَ الْمَدِينَةَ عَلَى حِينِ غَفْلَة مِّنْ أَهْلِهَا فَوَجَدَ
فِيهَا رَجُلَيْنِ يَقْتَتِلاَنِ هَذَا مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ وَهَذَا مِنْ
عَدُوِّهِ فَاسْتَغَاثَهُ الَّذِى مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ عَلَى الَّذِى مِنْ
عَدُوِّهِ فَوَكَزَهُ مُوسَى فَقَضَى عَلَيْهِ قَالَ هَذَا مِنْ عَمَلِ
الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ مُّضِلٌّ مُّبِينٌ(( 15 ))

15- AND HE ENTERED THE CITY UNNOTICED BY ITS PEOPLE, AND THEREIN HE
FOUND TWO MEN FIGHTING. THIS ONE WAS OF HIS OWN RACE, AND THE OTHER WAS
OF HIS ENEMIES. THE MAN OF HIS OWN RACE (THE ISRAELITE) APPEALED TO HIM
AGAINST HIS ENEMY. THEN MOSES STRUCK HIM ON THE CHEST, BY A FIST AND HE
DIED.HE SAID:ِ \`\`THIS WAS OF THE WORK OF SATAN, THAT HE IS AN OPEN
MISLEADING ENEMY.''

قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّى ظَلَمْتُ نَفْسِى فَاغْفِرْ لِى فَغَفَرَ لَهُ إِنَّهُ
هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 16 ))

16- HE PRAYED:ِ MY LORD! I OPPRESSED MY SOUL. SO FORGIVE ME''.THEN HE
FORGAVE HIM, THAT HE IS ALL FORGIVING COMPASSIONATE.

قَالَ رَبِّ بِمَا أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَىَّ فَلَنْ أَكُونَ ظَهِيراً
لِّلْمُجْرِمِينَ (( 17 ))

17- HE SAID; \`\`MY LORD! FOR YOUR BOUNTY UPON ME (BY WHICH YOU HAVE
MADE ME STRONG) I WILL NEVER BE A HELP TO THE SINNERS.'' [ 554 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
MOSES SUPPORTING THE HELPLESS**

VERSE NO.14ِ17

Now we come to read the third part of the story of Moses in the above
passage of Qura"n. When he was matured and well established, God gave
him wisdom and knowledge. Moses was a good-doer and a virtuous youth,
and his piety brought him the necessary merits of being especially
favoured by his compassionate Lord. As to the question what age was that
of his maturity and establishment, one view is that; full age or
maturity is that time when a person has been brought by natural process
to completeness of growth and development. The age of maturity for the
prophet might be different. Our prophet reached maturity for his
prophetic mission, when he was forty years old; when his physical build
was completed and his mental and moral habit formed.

Therefore when Moses came out from the king's palace and went to the
city, his external as well as internal development was perfect. So he
went into the outer world to be tried and proved, to develop enough for
his divine mission. One day Moses left the palace and went to the town,
in a time that he could be unnoticed by the townsfolk; because it was a
time of break and untracked of the routine business, which might have
been at noon.

In the time he went out all the business in the town had been
suspended. He might have deliberately chosen that time, because a
courtier in the king's palace was not free to wander about at anytime he
liked. Moses was visiting the city privately and without any body guard.
There in the town he encountered with a quarrel that was broken [ 555
]

between two men; friend and a foe; or say it, an Israelite and one
Egyptian. The Israelite appealed to Moses against the Egyptian. Moses
who found the Israelite in an oppressed and helpless condition, went
forth and with the intention of separating them he struck the Egyptian
on the chest, by a fist; and the man suddenly died! When he died, Moses
was filled with sorrow, and trembled with the fear for having committed
a sin; and said:-

\`\`This was of the work of Satan, because he is an open misleading
enemy to Man.'' As a matter of fact, Moses did not mean to kill the
chap. He struck him so as to release the collar of the Israelite but the
Egyptian died at once.

When so, Moses was filled with sorrow, regret, and repentance for what
he had done. Then in order to obtain God's forgiveness, in a fervent
prayer he said and vowed:-

\`\`My Lord! I have oppressed my soul. So forgive me. Then Allah
forgave him that He is All-forgiving Compassionate.''

فَأَصْبَحَ فِى الْمَدِينَةِ خَائِفاً يَتَرَقَّبُ فَإِذَا الَّذِى
اسْتَنصَرَهُ بِالاَْمْسِ يَسْتَصْرِخُهُ قَالَ لَهُ مُوسَى إِنَّكَ
لَغَوِىٌّ مُّبِينٌ(( 18 ))

18- HE BEGAN HIS MORNING IN THE TOWN FEARFUL AND CAUTIOUS; WHEN (HE
SAW) HIM WHO SOUGHT HIS HELP YESTERDAY, CALLING HIM FOR HELP (AGAIN).
MOSES SAID TO HIM:- \`\`YOU ARE INDEED A CLEAR STRAGGLED.''

[ 556 ]

فَلَمَّا أَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَبْطِشَ بِالَّذِى هُوَ عَدُوٌّ لَّهُمَا
قَالَ يَا مُوسَى أَتُرِيدُ أَنْ تَقْتُلَنِى كَمَا قَتَلْتَ نَفْساً
بِالاَْمْسِ إِنْ تُرِيدُ إِلاَّ أَنْ تَكُونَ جَبَّاراً فِى الاَْرْضِ
وَمَا تُرِيدُ أَنْ تَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُصْلِحِينَ(( 19 ))

19- THEN WHEN HE INTENDED TO SEIZE FIRMLY THE MAN WHO WAS ENEMY TO THEM
BOTH; HE SAID:- \`\`O, MOSES! DO YOU WANT TO KILL ME AS YOU KILLED A
PERSON YESTERDAY? YOU ONLY WANT TO BE A TYRANT IN THE LAND AND YOU DO
NOT WANT TO BE OF THOSE WHO PUT THINGS ARIGHT.

وَجَاءَ رَجُلٌ مِّنْ أَقْصَا الْمَدِينَةِ يَسْعَى قَالَ يَا مُوسَى
إِنَّ الْمَلَأَ يَأْتَمِرُونَ بِكَ لِيَقْتُلُوكَ فَاخْرُجْ إِنِّى لَكَ
مِنْ النَّاصِحِينَ(( 20 ))

20- AND (MEANWHILE) THERE CAME A MAN RUNNING FROM THE FARTHEST PART OF
THE CITY: HE SAID:- \`\`O, MOSES! THE CHIEFS ARE CONSULTING TO KILL YOU.
SO GET OUT (OF THE TOWN) THAT I AM A (SINCERE) ADVISOR FOR YOU.''

فَخَرَجَ مِنْهَا خَائِفاً يَتَرَقَّبُ قَالَ رَبِّ نَجِّنِى مِنَ
الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 21 ))

21- SO, HE WENT OUT OF THE TOWN, FEARFUL AND CAUTIOUS. HE PRAYED:-
\`\`O, MY LORD! SAVE ME FROM THE PEOPLE WHO ARE OPPRESSORS.''

وَلَمَّا تَوَجَّهَ تِلْقَاءَ مَدْيَنَ قَالَ عَسَى رَبِّى أَنْ
يَهْدِيَنِى سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ(( 22 ))

22- AND WHEN HE MADE HIS WAY TOWARDS MEDIAN, HE SAID:- \`\`I HOPE MY
LORD MAY GUIDE ME TO A DIRECT WAY.''

[ 557 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
MOSES SECRETLY MAKES FOR MEDIAN**

VERSE NO.18ِ22

The news of, an Egyption murdered by an Israelite slave, spread
throughout the city and went to the court of the king. This was not
considered as a simple murder, because the Egyptians looked upon the
Israelites as their slaves, considering themselves the slave masters.
Therefore Moses dared not to go back to the palace and wandered about
all the night. Next morning, he found himself confused and fearful, for
what he had done yesterday. In his way, once again he saw the same
Israelite in quarrel with another Egyptian. Moses knew that Egyptian
well, to have been hostile to Israelites, and in particular to Moses
himself. In spite of that, when the Israelite called Moses to help him,
he blamed the Israelite for being a straggled, and one who is out of the
right way. But Moses still found himself obliged to intervene between
the two men, who were quarrelling. It seemed as if the Egyptian knew all
about Moses and his yesterday's event. He knew that he lived in the
king's palace and that he had come out surreptitiously, and that he had
killed a man yesterday. He therefore said to Moses:-

\`\`Are you going to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You only
want to be a dictator in the land, and you do not want to be of those
who want to put things rightly.''

Anyhow, the rumours had reached the palace, and a council had condemned
Moses to death. Such was the situation when:- \`\`There came a man
running from the farthest part of the town, a district in which was the
palace of the king.'' He said to Moses in a hurry:- \`\`The chiefs have
decided to kill you. So get you out of the town as soon as you can, and
save your life, and know that I sincerely advise you.'' This is the man
who was later called the Believer of Pharaoh's Folk. His name was
HAZQIL, and he was one of the near kins of Pharaoh and was among the
kings advisors. He was always annoyed of the [ 558 ]

crimes of the tyrant, and expected for someone to come forth and begin
a revolution against all those unjustice and oppressions. Moses found
his position unstable in the city as well as in the king's palace, which
was his home. He therefore decided to escape, not knowing where to go.
This was where he referred his case to his Lord God saying:- \`\`O, my
Lord! Save me from the people who are so unjust.'' Then he found it the
best way to set out for Median, and he prayed to God to guide him to a
right way.

وَلَمَّا وَرَدَ مَاءَ مَدْيَنَ وَجَدَ عَلَيْهِ أُمَّةً مِنَ النَّاسِ
يَسْقُونَ وَوَجَدَ مِنْ دُونِهِمْ امْرَأتَيْنِ تَذُودَانِ قَالَ مَا
خَطْبُكُمَا قَالَتَا لاَ نَسْقِى حَتَّى يُصْدِرَ الرِّعَاءُ وَأَبُونَا
شَيْخٌ كَبِيرٌ(( 23 ))

23- WHEN HE CAME TO THE WATER (WELL) OF MEDIAN, FOUND A COMPANY OF
PEOPLE WATERING (THEIR FLOCKS), AND HE FOUND APART FROM THEM TWO WOMEN
WHO WERE KEEPING BACK (THEIR SHEEP).

HE SAID (TO THE WOMEN):- \`\`WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO? (WHY DON'T YOU
PROCEED TO WATER YOUR SHEEP) THEY ANSWERED:- \`\`WE DO NOT TAKE WATER,
UNTIL THE SHEPHERDS HAVE GONE AWAY. AND OUR FATHER IS VERY OLD. فَسَقَى
لَهُمَا ثُمَّ تَوَلَّى إِلَى الظِّلِّ فَقَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّى لِمَا
أَنزَلْتَ إِلَىَّ مِنْ خَيْر فَقِيرٌ(( 24 )) 24- SO HE WATERED (THEIR
FLOCKS) FOR THEM, AND THEN HE TURNED TOWARDS THE SHADOW, AND SAID:-
\`\`MY LORD! I AM IN NEED OF WHATEVER OF GOOD YOU SEND TO ME.''

[ 559 ]

فَجَاءَتْهُ إِحْدَاهُمَا تَمْشِى عَلَى اسْتِحْيَاء قَالَتْ إِنَّ أَبِى
يَدْعُوكَ لِيَجْزِيَكَ أَجْرَ مَا سَقَيْتَ لَنَا فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُ
وَقَصَّ عَلَيْهِ الْقَصَصَ قَالَ لاَ تَخَفْ نَجَوْتَ مِنَ الْقَوْمِ
الظَّالِمِينَ(( 25 )) 25- THEN CAME TO HIM ONE OF THE TWO (GIRLS)
WALKING BASHFULLY. SHE SAID:- \`\`MY FATHER HAS INVITED YOU IN ORDER TO
REWARD YOU FOR WATERING FOR US (OUR FLOCKS). THEN WHEN MOSES WENT TO HIM
AND RELATED TO HIM THE STORY, HE SAID:- \`\`FEAR NO MORE. YOU HAVE BEEN
SAVED FROM THE OPPRESSING PEOPLE.

**THE COMMENTARY
A GOOD DEED OPENS THE GOOD DOORS**
VERSE NO.23ِ25

We now come to the fifth episode of the life of Moses, in which he
arrived at the water of Median. He traveled for several days in a road
that was entirely unknown to him. At last the prospect of Median
appeared to him, and then Moses arrived in a green spot in a waste
desert in Median. He was tired, travel-worn, and thirsty. By the side of
the water well or spring, he found several shephereds watering their
flocks. As a stranger he waited under the shade of a tree for his turn
to come for taking water. There he saw two girls waiting with their
sheep to water them. He said to the girls:- \`\`Why don't you proceed to
water your sheep?'' The two modest Maidens answered:- \`\`We do not take
water until the shephereds have gone away.'' The girls added that their
father was very old, and that was why they had brought their flocks for
watering them. Their chastity seemed to have prevented them from
thrusting themselves among those men.

Moses went on at once, and made his way among the shepherds, and
watered the sheep that belonged to the girls. He then returned [ 560 ]
back to the shadow of the tree, with the consolation of thinking that he
had done a good deed for the sake of God.

As a homeless wanderer now, he was in a desperate need, but those who
have their God in their mind in all conditions, will never abandon to
despair. There is always a candle of light glimmering in the depth of
their heart. So was Moses who looked overhead in the deep sky, and
said:- \`\`My Lord! I am in need of whatever of good you send to me.''
He did not tell the girls or the shepherds that he was in need of
anything, although he might have been thirsty, and hungry too. And why
should he have asked them, when his Lord, Who is our Lord too, is always
OMNIPRESENT? God always has a surprise for His sincere servants who do
not forget Him. Moses said so, and saw one of the two beauties, who had
returned back. She came directly towards Moses, but with utmost shyness.
She had a message for Moses:-

\`\`My father wants to thank you for what you have done for us. Father
wants to see you personally and give you a reward for your kindness.''
What an interesting message, through such an attractive Messenger, and
in so desperate a situation,-Glory be to Allah! He went and saw the old
apostle of God:- The old and young men apprehended each other very well,
and became sincere friends. Moses told them his story, all and at once.
The daughters too, were listening to the narrative with high interest
and deep consideration. The stranger had penetrated deeply into the
heart of one of the girlsِa heart so pure and so innocent. Then the old
man whose name was Shuaib assured Moses saying:- \`\`Fear no more You
have been saved from the oppressing people.''

Allah answered his prayer that he said in Egypt:- \`\`So he went out of
the town fearful and cautious. He prayed:- O, my Lord! Save me from the
people who are oppressors.'' S-28:21

[ 561 ]

قَالَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا يَا أَبَتِ اسْتَأْجِرْهُ إِنَّ خَيْرَ مَنِ
اسْتَأْجَرْتَ الْقَوِىُّ الاَْمِينُ(( 26 ))

26- ONE OF THE TWO (GIRLS) SAID:- \`\`O, FATHER! ASK HIM TO WORK FOR
YOU , THAT THE BEST WHOM YOU MAY HIRE, IS THE STRONG TRUSTWORTHY.

قَالَ إِنِّى أُرِيدُ أَنْ أُنكِحَكَ إِحْدَى ابْنَتَىَّ هَاتَيْنِ عَلَى
أَنْ تَأْجُرَنِى ثَمَانِىَ حِجَج فَإِنْ أَتْمَمْتَ عَشْراً فَمِنْ
عِنْدِكَ وَمَا أُرِيدُ أَنْ أَشُقَّ عَلَيْكَ سَتَجِدُنِى إِنْ شَاءَ
اللهُ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ(( 27 ))

27- (SHUAIB) SAID:- \`\`I WOULD LIKE TO MARRY YOU ONE OF THE TWO
DAUGHTERS OF MINE, ON CONDITION THAT YOU WORK FOR ME FOR EIGHT YEARS,
AND IF YOU LIKE YOU MAY MAKE IT TEN. I DO NOT WANT TO TAKE IT HARD FOR
YOU. IF GOD WILLS, SOON SHALL YOU FIND ME OF THE RIGHTEOUS.''

قَالَ ذَلِكَ بَيْنِى وَبَيْنَكَ أَيَّمَا الاَْجَلَيْنِ قَضَيْتُ فَلاَ
عُدْوَانَ عَلَىَّ وَاللهُ عَلَى مَا نَقُولُ وَكِيلٌ(( 28 )) 28- MOSES
SAID:- \`\`(I AGREE) LET IT BE SO BETWEEN ME AND YOU. WHICHEVER OF THE
TWO TERMS I FULFIL, IT SHALL NOT BE WRONG; AND ALLAH IS A WITNESS ON
WHAT WE SAY.''

**THE COMMENTARY
MOSES IN THE HOUSE OF SHUAIB**

VERSE NO.26ِ28 Moses came to the house of Shaib a house that was far
different from the palace of Pharaoh. Here the rooms were full of
purity, the walls painted with sincerity and virtue, and the roof was
made of intellectuality and intelligence. [ 562 ]

When Moses narrated his story to the household, they all felt that he
was not stranger to them. They all wanted to have him somehow
permanently. And so was the case with Moses himself who felt to be at
home there. Then one of the two girls whose name was SAFOORAH, took the
lead, and asked her old father to employ him for being strong and
trusty, the two qualities admired by all:-

\`\`One of the two girls said:- \`\`O, father! Employ him to work for
us, that the best whom you may hire is the strong, trustworthy.'' The
father followed the proposal of his daughter, and asked him if he was
willing to marry one of the two girls and stay with them for a period of
at least eight years. His service for that period could be reckoned as
the dower for the bride:- \`\`I would like'' said Shuaib to Moses,
\`\`To marry you one of the two daughters of mine, on condition that you
work for me for eight years, and if you like, you may make it ten.''

Moses accepted the proposal with pleasure, and they ratified their
covenant by appealing to God:- \`\`Moses said; let it be so between me
and you. Whichever of the two terms I fulfil no harm is done, and Allah
is a witness on what we say.''

فَلَمَّا قَضَى مُوسَى الاَْجَلَ وَسَارَ بِأَهْلِهِ آنَسَ مِنْ جَانِبِ
الطُّورِ نَاراً قَالَ لاَِهْلِهِ امْكُثُوا إِنِّى آنَسْتُ نَاراً
لَّعَلِّى آتِيكُمْ مِنْهَا بِخَبَر أَوْ جَذْوَة مِّنَ النَّارِ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَصْطَلُونَ(( 29 ))

29- WHEN MOSES PASSED THE TERM, AND SET OUT WITH HIS HOUSEHOLD, HE
PERCEIVED A FIRE ON THE MOUNTAIN-SIDE. HE SAID TO HIS HOUSEHOLD:-
\`\`WAIT A MINUTE! I PERCEIVE A FIRE, PERHAPS I BRING YOU A NEWS OF IT,
OR A BRAND OF FIRE BY WHICH YOU MAY WARM YOURSELVES.

[ 563 ] فَلَمَّا أَتَاهَا نُودِىَ مِنْ شَاطِىءِ الْوَادِ الاَْيْمَنِ
فِى الْبُقْعَةِ الْمُبَارَكَةِ مِنْ الشَّجَرَةِ أَنْ يَا مُوسَى إِنِّى
أَنَا اللهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 30 ))

30- WHEN HE CAME TO IT, IT WAS CALLED OUT OF THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE
VALLEY, FROM A BUSH IN A HIGH BLESSED SPOT, SAYING:- \`\`O, MOSES! I AM
ALLAH, LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS.''

وَأَنْ أَلْقِ عَصَاكَ فَلَمَّا رَءَاهَا تَهْتَزُّ كَأَنَّهَا جَانٌّ
وَلَّى مُدْبِراً وَلَمْ يُعَقِّبْ يَا مُوسَى أَقْبِلْ وَلاَ تَخَفْ
إِنَّكَ مِنَ الاْمِنِينَ(( 31 ))

31- AND CAST DOWN YOUR STAFF! WHEN HE SAW IT MOVING FAST LIKE A SNAKE
(HE WAS AFRAID AND) TURNED HIS BACK (RUNNING AWAY), AND EVEN DID NOT
LOOK BEHIND!

اسْلُكْ يَدَكَ فِى جَيْبِكَ تَخْرُجْ بَيْضَاءَ مِنْ غَيْرِ سُوء
وَاضْمُمْ إِلَيْكَ جَنَاحَكَ مِنَ الرَّهْبِ فَذَانِكَ بُرْهَانَانِ مِنْ
رَّبِّكَ إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلاَءِيْهِ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْماً
فَاسِقِينَ(( 32 ))

32- INSERT YOUR HAND INTO YOUR ARM-PIT. IT WILL COME OUT WHITE, BUT
UNHARMED.

DRAW BACK TO YOURSELF YOUR FLANKS NOT TO FEAR. (PUT YOUR HANDS UPON
YOUR CHEST)

THESE ARE TWO PROOFS FROM YOUR LORD, FOR PHARAOH AND HIS CHIEFS, WHO
HAVE BEEN A PEOPLE, UNCHASTE. قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّى قَتَلْتُ مِنْهُمْ
نَفْساً فَأَخَافُ أَنْ يَقْتُلُونِ(( 33 ))

[ 564 ]

33- HE SAID MY LORD! I HAVE KILLED ONE OF THEM, AND I AM AFRAID THAT
THEY KILL ME.

وَأَخِى هَارُونُ هُوَ أَفْصَحُ مِنِّى لِسَاناً فَأَرْسِلْهُ مَعِىَ
رِدْءاً يُصَدِّقُنِى إِنِّى أَخَافُ أَنْ يُكَذِّبُونِ(( 34 ))

34- AND MY BROTHER AARON IS MORE ELOQUENT THAN ME, SO SEND HIM WITH ME
TO HELP CONFIRMING ME, THAT I FEAR THEM TO BELIE ME.

قَالَ سَنَشُدُّ عَضُدَكَ بِأَخِيكَ وَنَجْعَلُ لَكُمَا سُلْطَاناً فَلاَ
يَصِلُونَ إِلَيْكُمَا بِآيَاتِنَا أَنْتُمَا وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَكُمَا
الْغَالِبُونَ(( 35 )) 35- (ALLAH) SAID:- \`\`SOON SHALL WE STRENGTHEN
YOUR ARM THROUGH YOUR BROTHER, AND GIVE AUTHORITY TO BOTH OF YOU, SO
THAT THEY WILL NOT OVERCOME YOU, BECAUSE OF OUR SIGNS. YOU TWO, AND
WHOEVER FOLLOWS YOU, ARE THE CONQUERORS.

**THE COMMENTARY
A SPARK OF INSPIRATION**

VERSE NO.29ِ35 Now comes the seventh episode of our story about the
Arch Prophet of God, inwhich he hears a call, a Divine call-from a green
burning bush, where from, he is assigned to his great sacred mission.
Moses worked in the house of Shuaib for ten years. No one knows what
happened to him during that decade. It might have been the best and the
happiest part of his life. A decade of tranquility, comfort, learning
from a Divine Teacher (SHUAIB), and the enjoyments [ 565 ]

of a good wife, and a good family life. There he had enough time, as a
shephered and a farmer, in the wilds and deserts and mountain, to ponder
over the wonders of nature, and the artful creation of his Lord and
Creator. Soon ten years elapsed:-

He had seen a light glimmering from that distance and when he came
close to pick up a brand of fire, he found it to have been a green
burning bush, which burnt, but did not consume!

When he approached the bush to see what sort of a natural phenomenon
could it be, he heard a call, saying:-

\`\`Blessed is he who is in the fire and he who is around it. Glory be
to Allah the Lord of all the world. O, Moses! I am Allah (YAHOVAH),
Exalted in Might, All-wise.''

There was a little pause, and Moses struck with astonishment! Once
again the call said:- \`\`O, Moses, I am your Lord! Take off your
sandals that you are now in the sacred valley of TOWA". I am Allah,
there is no god but Me, so serve me. And what is that in your right
hand?''

Moses who was perplexed by the Sweet Compassionate voice, said:- \`\`It
is my stick, upon it I lean, with it I beat down leave for my flock, and
it has other uses besides.'' Again the voice said:- \`\`O, Moses cast
your stick down.'' Moses threw it down and there upon it turned into a
fast moving huge snake! Moses was afraid and turned his back, and fled
away, and did not look behind!

But the call assured him saying:-

\`\`O, Moses! Don't be afraid and seize it, we shall return it to its
former condition. Prophets do not fear in My Presence. Come back and now
put your hand [ 566 ]

into your arm-pit, and you will have it out shining white and without
any harm! Go you now to Pharaoh that he has transgressed all the bounds.
He and his people have been debauchers.'' Moses got his great spiritual
mission, and was assured enough that there was nothing for him to fear,
and that in dangers and difficulties, God would be with him; but still
there was a knot in his heart, and he seemed to have some questions
unanswered. \`\`My Lord!'' He said, \`\`I have killed one of them, and I
am afraid they will want to take vengeance for that, by killing me. On
the other hand, I am not well versed in speech, while my brother Aaron
is more eloquent than me. So appoint him a counsellor for me. Grant me
enough strength and let him share my task, that we may celebrate your
praises without stint.''

The call replied:- \`\`O, Moses! Your requests are granted.''

فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ مُّوسَى بِآيَاتِنَا بَيِّنَات قَالُوا مَا هَذَا
إِلاَّ سِحْرٌ مُّفْتَرىً وَمَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَذَا فِى آبَائِنَا
الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 36 ))

36- THEN WHEN MOSES CAME TO THEM WITH OUR CLEAR SIGNS, THEY SAID:-
\`\`THIS IS NOTHING EXCEPT A FORGED SORCERY, AND WE HAVE NOT HEARD OF
THIS (SORT OF THINGS) AMONG OUR FOREFATHERS.''

وَقَالَ مُوسَى رَبِّى أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ جَاءَ بِالْهُدَى مِنْ عِنْدِهِ
وَمَنْ تَكُونُ لَهُ عَاقِبَةُ الدَّارِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ
الظَّالِمُونَ(( 37 ))

37- AND MOSES SAID (TO THEM):- \`\`MY LORD KNOWS BEST THAT WHO HAS COME
WITH GUIDANCE FROM HIM, AND WHOSE SHALL BE THE (GOOD) END OF ABODE; THAT
THE OPPRESSORS WILL NOT PROSPER.''

[ 567 ]


