Moses in the Court of Pharoah
=============================

VERSE NO.36-37

We are now in the 8th stage of this great adventure that we are
following. Moses returns back to the king's palace, but this time very
differently.

Moses was promoted to the high rank of prophethood in which his brother
was his minister. Both of them were sent to Pharaoh, and with many
obstructions, they finally got a time to visit the king who was then
surrounded by his courtiers.

Moses conveyed the Message of God to the king and showed him the signs
of our Lord miraculously.

When Moses went to Pharaoh, he was anxious of being accused of lying
and falsehood; and that, actually came to pass. When he showed to the
king and his chiefs the signs that had come to him from God, they all
belied him and said:-

\`\`This is nothing but sorcery that you have forged, and what you say
about the worship of only one God is a thing that our ancestors had it
not among their creed.''

The arm that they took up against Moses, was the same weapon that the
tyrants and cruel dictators have always used. He lowered Moses, the Arch
Prophet of God to the rank of a sorcerer and to the level of a liar!!
The man who may forge a lie, to make a ladder for material progress!

To answer them, Moses appealed to God, and made a mention of the end
and final abode of the disbelievers and other oppressors who will not
prosper. He said to the king:-

\`\`My Lord knows best that, who is guided by Him, and who is misguided
by falsehood; and that, what will be the end of those who are right, and
those who are wrong. It is a mere fact that oppressors will not
prosper.''

[ 568 ]

وَقَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ يَا أَيُّهَا الْمَلَأُ مَا عَلِمْتُ لَكُمْ مِّنْ
إِلَـه غَيْرِى فَأَوْقِدْ لِى يَا هَامَانُ عَلَى الطِّينِ فَاجْعَل لِى
صَرْحاً لَّعَلِّى أَطَّلِعُ إِلَى إِلَـهِ مُوسَى وَإِنِّى لاََظُنُّهُ
مِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ(( 38 ))

38- AND PHARAOH SAID:- \`\`O, CHIEFS! I KNOW NOT ANY GOD FOR YOU OTHER
THAN MYSELF. SO, KINDLE ME A FIRE, O, HA"MA"N, UPON CLAY AND BUILD ME A
HIGH TOWER, THAT I MAY BE INFORMED OF THE GOD OF MOSES, THOUGH I THINK
HIM TO BE OF THE LIARS.''

وَاسْتَكْبَرَ هُوَ وَجُنُودُهُ فِى الاَْرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ
وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ إِلَيْنَا لاَ يُرْجَعُونَ(( 39 ))

39- AND HE AND HIS HOST WERE UNRIGHTLY PROUD IN THE LAND, AND THOUGHT
THAT THEY WOULD NOT RETURN TO US.

فَأَخَذْنَاهُ وَجُنُودَهُ فَنَبَذْنَاهُمْ فِى الْيَمِّ فَانظُرْ كَيْفَ
كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 40 ))

40- THEREFORE WE SEIZED HIM AND HIS HOSTS AND CAST THEM INTO THE SEA.
THEN SEE HOW WAS THE END OF THE OPPRESSORS.

وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ وَيَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ لاَ يُنصَرُونَ(( 41 ))

41- AND WE MADE THEM LEADERS WHO CALL (PEOPLE) TO THE FIRE, AND IN THE
DAY OF RESURRECTION THEY ARE NOT HELPED.

وَأَتْبَعْنَاهُمْ فِى هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا لَعْنَةً وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
هُمْ مِّنَ الْمَقْبُوحِينَ(( 42 ))

42- AND WE FOLLOWED THEM IN THIS WORLD BY A CURSE, AND IN THE DAY OF
RESURRECTION THEY ARE OF THE DETESTEBLES.

[ 569 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
LOOK AT THE OPPRESSOR'S END**

VERSE NO.38ِ42

We are now on the ninth stage of the adventurous enterprises, and
meanwhile the story is full of useful lessons to be learned if any one
is willing. We know that when some important event happens against the
interests of a veteran politician, an old trick is to create a new
scenery, in order to focus the general attentions towards the new one,
and pervert the minds from the old. This was the case with building a
huge tower to deviate the attentions from Moses and his miraculous and
wonderful God. So the construction of a tower began which was a building
very abnormal. It seems to us that the construction of that great tower
was after the clear victory of Moses over the sorcerers. When that
wonderful victory of the Messenger of God became a general topic of
conversation throughout Egypt, it gave a great shock to the foundation
of Pharaoh's kingship and godship.

Therefore in a meeting with his chieftains, he said:-

\`\`As to the earth, no one should doubt that I am the greatests of
rulers, and your only god that deserves your worship. As for the God of
Moses who lives in the heavens, there are no reasons that he really
exists! Although I think Moses to be of the liars, I still shall verify
the matter. Ha"ma"n has to make me a tower, high enough to get some
informations about the God of Moses, Whom he claims to be the Lord of
the heaven and the earth.''

So far, bricks were unknown to the Egyptians, and seems to have been
the first time when building material made by molding clay into blocks,
while moist was hardening them in the fire was going to be used in the
construction of buildings.

[ 570 ]

Some commentators like, Fakhr Razi, have doubted Pharaoh to have built
the said tower or such that high building. They reason that Pharaoh and
his people could have gone on the top a mountain, and see whatever they
could see from the top of that tower. Such commentators have forgotten
that Egypt is not a mountainous land, and they have ignored how arrogant
and blown with pride Pharaoh was, and how simple mindeded and illiterate
fools, his subjects were.

Just have a look at the pride and vanity of Pharaoh, who was in fact
nothing more than a weak mortal. He said to his chiefs and courtiers,
and also to Moses and Aaron, that:-

\`\`I am your god and your only god! So you all will have to worship me
alone.'' And Pharaoh said:- \`\`O, chiefs! I know not any god for you
other than myself.'' How ridiculous such an assertion can be,
particularly when it is uttered by a mortal who might be slayed by a
microbe. So also his next assertion or order will prove how foolish the
king was, if he really was serious in what he said:- \`\`....So kindle
me a fire, O, Ha"ma"n upon clay and build me a high tower, that I may be
informed of the God of Moses, though I think him to be of the liars!''

If not so, and he was not a fool himself, he was making fools of his
followers, and subjects. If they were not fools, how dare of him to make
them to worship him for their god, and to go upon a tower to see the
Lord of heavens and earth.

This has always been the creed of the tyrants and cruel dictators, to
do their best to keep their followers unaware, and in a deep ignorance,
so as to follow them blindly.

Anyhow; some historians have narrated that; Ha"ma"n engaged more than
fifty thousands of skilled and unskilled labourers in that construction
business. He opened the doors of public purse, and spent [ 571 ]

a great amount of money for the tower's construction, which was no less
important than the Pyramids. The tower went up higher and higher,
perhaps as high as the Eafell tower in Paris, but not as high as the
Empire State of New York city. It was built easy to climb, and its
spiral and wide stairs were so that one could ascend the tower by riding
a horse!

The tower was completed, and Pharaoh in a glorious ceremony inaugurated
it officially. He then went up the tower and looked at the starry sky,
but nothing seemed to be different from what he could see from, the
bottom earth. But he was not that sort of a man to leave demagogism. He
shot an arrow out of his bow towards the sky, in order to kill the God
of Moses! The arrow turned back to him stained with blood-Perhaps the
blood of a bird and he pretended to have killed the heavenly Lord of
Moses who was up in the skies, and announced that there was no more god
other than himself.

It was in such awfully low creed and cult that Pharaoh and his hosts
were drowned. They could not believe that there would be a Resurrection
Day, and a final Judgement. They could not understand that every deed,
bad or good, whatever, will have its due consequences. And so they lost
the chances of repentance, and being guided by the two great Divine
Teachers. They incurred the wrath of God through their arrogance and
evil deeds, and therefore God cast them in the sea and drowned them. The
water which is the main source of life, for them, turned to the real
cause of death:- \`\`Therefore, We seized him and his hosts, and cast
them into the sea. Then behold how was the end of the oppressors.''

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا أَهْلَكْنَا
الْقُرُونَ الاُْولَى بَصَائِرَ لِلنَّاسِ وَهُدىً وَرَحْمَةً لَّعَلَّهُمْ
يَتَذَكَّرُونَ(( 43 ))

43- AND VERILY WE GAVE MOSES THE BOOK (TORAH), AFTER [ 572 ]

WE DESTROYED THE EARLIER GENERATIONS; AS DISCERNMENTS FOR PEOPLE AND
GUIDANCE AND MERCY, THAT THEY MIGHT BE MINDFUL. وَمَا كُنتَ بِجَانِبِ
الْغَرْبِىِّ إِذْ قَضَيْنَا إِلَى مُوسَى الاَْمْرَ وَمَا كُنتَ مِنَ
الشَّاهِدِينَ(( 44 ))

44- AND YOU WERE NOT IN THE WESTERN SIDE, WHEN WE DECREED TO MOSES THE
COMMANDMENT, AND YOU WERE NOT OF THE WITNESSES. (WHEN WE ARMED HIM WITH
THE MIRACLES)

وَلَكِنَّا أَنشَأْنَا قُرُوناً فَتَطَاوَلَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْعُمُرُ وَمَا
كُنتَ ثَاوِياً فِى أَهْلِ مَدْيَنَ تَتْلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِنَا
وَلَكِنَّا كُنَّا مُرْسِلِينَ(( 45 ))

45- BUT WE CREATED GENERATIONS WHOSE LIVES WE PROLONGED, (AND THE
TRACES OF THE PROPHETS WERE EFFACED, SO WE SENT YOU WITH YOUR DIVINE
BOOK), AND YOU WERE NOT A DWELLER AMONG THE MIDIANITES TO RECITE TO THEM
(THE PRONOUN THEM REFERS TO THE IDOLATERS OF MECCA) OUR SIGNS, BUT WE
WERE SENDING MESSENGERS.

وَمَا كُنتَ بِجَانِبِ الطُّورِ إِذْ نَادَيْنَا وَلَكِنْ رَّحْمَةً مِّنْ
رَّبِّكَ لِتُنذِرَ قَوْماً مَّا أَتَاهُمْ مِّنْ نَّذِير مِّنْ قَبْلِكَ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ(( 46 ))

46- AND YOU WERE NOT AT THE MOUNTAIN-SIDE, WHEN WE CALLED (MOSES). BUT
AS A MERCY FROM YOUR LORD (WE INSPIRED YOU WITH OUR MESSAGE) TO WARN A
PEOPLE TO WHOM NO WARNER HAD COME BEFORE YOU, PERHAPS THEY BE MINDFUL.

[ 573 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ONLY GOD SHOWS YOU SUCH UNSEEN**

VERSE NO.43ِ46

We now have reached the end of our story which is the disclosure of the
Law and Divine Book of Towrat, which was sent down to Moses:- \`\`And
verily We gave Moses the Book, after We destroyed the earlier
generations, as discernments for people, and a guidance and mercy; that
they might be mindful.''

Allah overwhelmed the tyrannies of many generations before the advent
of Moses, and began new ages one after another until the turn was given
to Pharaoh. The generations that were destroyed included the people of
Noah, Aad and Thamud, whose prophet's law, instructions, scriptures, and
even their traces have effaced and been destroyed by elapse of ages.
Pharaoh too, did not do what he should have done, and preferred evil
over good, and ignored the light of truth that came to him through the
Messenger of God; and followed his own caprices. What a misfortune that
he left aside the eternal light of God and went deep into darknesses of
devil. He could have received God's forgiveness and Mercy, had he
followed guidance of Moses; but he deliberately closed his eyes and went
on blindly until he fell into a pit of Fire.

By Western Side (V.NO.44), it may mean the western side of the valley
of TUWA" wherein stays the mount Tour, from where Moses received his
prophetic mission.

وَلَوْلاَ أَنْ تُصِيبَهُمْ مُّصِيبَةٌ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ
فَيَقُولُوا رَبَّنَا لَوْلاَ أَرْسَلْتَ إِلَيْنَا رَسُولا فَنَتَّبِعَ
آيَاتِكَ وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 47 ))

[ 574 ]

47- WHENEVER AN AFFLICTION AFFLICTED THEM DUE TO WHAT THEIR HANDS HAD
SENT FORTH, THEY WOULD SAY:- \`\`OUR LORD! WHY DID YOU NOT SEND A
MESSENGER TO US, SO THAT WE COULD FOLLOW YOUR SIGNS AND BECOME OF THE
BELIEVERS.''

فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ عِنْدِنَا قَالُوا لَوْلاَ أُوتِىَ
مِثْلَ مَا أُوتِىَ مُوسَى أَوَلَمْ يَكْفُرُوا بِمَا أُوتِىَ مُوسَى مِنْ
قَبْلُ قَالُوا سِحْرَانِ تَظَاهَرَا وَقَالُوا إِنَّا بِكُلّ كَافِرُونَ((
48 ))

48- THEN WHEN THE TRUTH CAME TO THEM FROM US, THEY SAID:- \`\`WHY IS HE
NOT GIVEN THE LIKE OF WHAT WAS GIVEN TO MOSES?'' DO THEY NOT DISBELIEVE
IN WHAT CAME TO MOSES AFORETIME (OF THE ADVENT OF OTHER PROPHETS LIKE
JESUS AND MOHAMMAD FORETOLD IN THE SCRIPTURES) THEY SAID:- (MOSES AND
AARON ARE) TWO SORCERERS HELPING EACH OTHER, AND SAID WE DISBELIEVE
ALL.

قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِكِتَاب مِّنْ عِنْدِ اللهِ هُوَ أَهْدَى مِنْهُمَا
أَتَّبِعْهُ إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ(( 49 ))

49- SAY:- \`\`(IF YOU THINK THAT QURA"N AND TOWRA"T ARE NOT FROM GOD)
THEN BRING A BOOK FROM ALLAH TO BE A BETTER GUIDE THAN THESE TWO, THAT I
MAY FOLLOW IT, IF YOU ARE TRUTHFULS.''

فَإِنْ لَّمْ يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَكَ فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يَتَّبِعُونَ
أَهْوَاءَهُمْ وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنِ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدىً
مِّنَ اللهِ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَهْدِى الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 50 ))

[ 575 ]

50- THEN IF THEY DO NOT ANSWER YOU, KNOW THAT THEY ONLY FOLLOW THEIR
CAPRICES. AND WHO IS MORE ASTRAY THAN HE WHO FOLLOWS HIS CAPRICE,
WITHOUT A GUIDANCE FROM ALLAH? THAT ALLAH WILL NOT GUIDE A PEOPLE WHO
ARE OPPRESSORS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THEY ESCAPE THE TRUTH BY EXCUSES**

VERSE NO.47-50

Then first of the above verses (NO.47) implies that the path of truth
is direct and clear, and any one with a common sense will condemn
polytheism, evil, and idolatry. Even without the prophets, idolatries,
and evil deeds are remorseful and blameworthy for mankind, and deserve a
severe punishment. But even so, Allah, the Compassionate has sent His
wise and knowing Messengers from the way of Mercy and Grace to His
servants, so that no one may say; had a warner come to us we would not
be punished for what we should not have it done. If a misfortune
afflicts Man, instead of knowing that it is the inevitable result of his
deeds, he may put the blame on the shoulder of providence and say:-

\`\`Our Lord! Why did you not send an apostle to guide us, so as to
follow your signs, and become believers?'' Even though an Arch Prophet
such as Mohammad (SA), has been sent with authority, manifest signs, and
perspicuous Book, to them; who was all knowledge and all wisdom, they
still went astray and preferred falsehood over truth, and followed their
caprices. With Mohammad no one has any excuse to say; \`\`I did not
know, or I was not warned and so and so.''

[ 576 ]

The argument then goes on, about the excuses and objections that the
non-believers made, merely because they wanted to continue with their
perverted way of life. When our prophet came to them with so many
undeniable evidences they said:- \`\`Why is he not like Moses,'' or
\`\`why does he not do what Moses did with his rod and white hand.''

They did not want to admit that the time in which Moses lived was
different from the time of Mohammad (SA). On the other hand, Mohammad
(SA), was the last and the seal of prophets, and his miracles had to
endure for ever. Therefore his Qura"n is a miracle very different to
those given to Moses, and more lasting than the rod and shining white
hand. So their requests were all flimsy pretexts. Did they believe in
Moses or did Moses tell them to worship a piece of carved stone, instead
of the Lord God, Who created them and the whole universe? The idolaters
of Mecca and Pharaoh and his hosts were of the same idea in calling
their prophet as sorcerers.

Now the revelation which is sent down to us; in the form of the
Glorious Qura"n, is the best of guides. It is the remedy for our
spiritual, physical, and social diseases throughout ages. We prefer to
follow our caprices and make objections and excuses, to escape duties
that are incumbent upon us, and which are for our own good! How can a
man who escapes the facts and truths, and follows his caprices and
lusts, be guided, even by such a Book as Qura"n?

In the other verse above (NO.49), Man has been challenged to bring
something better than Qura"n for guidance. Elsewhere in the Qura"n is
cited:- \`\`If Man thinks that it is not a revelation from God, then let
him produce a book the like of it, or even one chapter the like of one
of the 114 SUREHS of the Glorious Qura"n.'' So far, which is a period of
15 centuries, no one has ever answered or satisfied the challenge
although hundreds have tried.

[ 577 ]

وَلَقَدْ وَصَّلْنَا لَهُمُ الْقَوْلَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ(( 51
))

51- AND VERILY WE HAVE RELATED TO THEM THE WORD, (QURA"NIC VERSES)
PERHAPS THEY BE MINDFUL.

الَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ هُمْ بِهِ يُؤْمِنُونَ((
52 ))

52- THOSE TO WHOM WE GAVE THE BOOK BEFORE IT, THEY BELIEVE IN IT.

وَإِذَا يُتْلَى عَلَيْهِمْ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ إِنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ
رَّبِّنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا مِنْ قَبْلِهِ مُسْلِمِينَ(( 53 ))

53- AND WHEN IT IS RECITED TO THEM, THEY SAY:- \`\`WE BELIEVE IN IT,
THAT IT IS THE TRUTH FROM OUR LORD. WE WERE SUBMITTERS BEFORE IT. (WAS
REVEALED)''

أُوْلَئِكَ يُؤْتَوْنَ أَجْرَهُمْ مَّرَّتَيْنِ بِمَا صَبَرُوا
وَيَدْرَءُونَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ السَّيِّئَةَ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ
يُنفِقُونَ(( 54 ))

54- THEY WILL BE GIVEN THEIR REWARD TWICE, FOR BEING PATIENT, AND THEY
AVERT EVIL WITH GOOD DEEDS, AND OF THE SUSTENANCE WHICH WE HAVE GIVEN
THEM THEY SPEND (SOME) FOR CHARITY.

وَإِذَا سَمِعُوا اللَّغْوَ أَعْرَضُوا عَنْهُ وَقَالُوا لَنَا
أَعْمَالُنَا وَلَكُمْ أَعْمَالُكُمْ سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ لاَ نَبْتَغِى
الْجَاهِلِينَ(( 55 ))

55- AND WHEN THEY HEARD VAIN TALKS, THEY TURNED AWAY FROM IT AND SAID:-
\`\`OURS IS OUR DEEDS AND YOURS IS YOUR DEEDS. PEACE BE UPON YOU. WE ARE
NOT FOND OF IGNORANTS.

[ 578 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

VERSE NO.51-55

SAEED-IBN-JOBAIR has narrated that the above verses were sent down on
the occasion that the Nighsh of Abyssinia, who was a truthful Christian,
sent a group of seventy priests to Medina to study what sort of religion
Islam was; and that, what was the Message which Mohammad had to convey.
When they visited our prophet, he rehearsed to them the SUREH, YA"-SIN
of Qura"n. They all wept and shed tears for the love of God, and
converted saying:- \`\`....We believe in this. It is a truth from our
Lord. We were submitters to the will of God before this.'' This verse is
an evidence that a group of the people of the Book were converted when a
part of the Holy Qura"n was rehearsed to them.

**COMMENTS**

The verses of Qura"n came down to the Arabs successively and one after
another, in a joined train of meaningful words; in order to make them
think and be mindful. But the blinded hearts did not apprehend, and
rejected the truth. The word of God that was sent before in other
languages, then was reaching Quraish in their own language, through a
man who was of them, and of the same race and tribe, and they knew him
and his ancestor. What excuse did they have then to reject faith and
deny the facts except paganism zeal. And this was while others who had
studied their scriptures, believed in him and in the Book that was given
him:- \`\`Those to whom We gave the Book before it, they believe it.''

Besides the above occasion of revelation which has its historical
basis, this verse is also a general one, and even in our time it applies
well, because we have seen so many Christians and also Jews, who have
known our prophet through their own scriptures and have sincerely
accepted the religion of Islam. This is because a truthful adherent to [
579 ] Moses and Jesus will soon find himself to be a Muslim too, and the
converse is also true.

Finally, reference is made to one of the important qualifications of
those people of the Book, who heard the word of God and recognized it,
and believed it, and adhered to it. They do not mingle with roving
ramblers, who pass their time in vain talks:- \`\`And when they heard
vain talks they turned away from it and said:- \`\`Ours is our deeds and
yours is your deeds. Peace on you, we are not fond of ignorants.''

They were so because a righteous believer will have no spare time to
sit down and listen to vain talk and rubbish arguments. On the other
hand, they are gentle and polite by nature. Therefore when they find
themselves fallen among a company who are talkative, and driven to
rambling in arguments, they do not waste their time with them, and
instead of arguing to defend their deeds they politely get up and go
away, and meanwhile saying:- \`\`....Ours is our deeds and yours is
yours. All of us will have to taste the inevitable consequences of our
deeds. Peace on you.''

إِنَّكَ لاَ تَهْدِى مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ وَلَكِنَّ اللهَ يَهْدِى مَنْ
يَشَاءُ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ(( 56 ))

56- YOU CANNOT GUIDE WHOEVER YOU LIKE. BUT ALLAH GUIDES WHOEVER HE
WILL, AND HE KNOWS BEST THOSE WHO ARE GUIDED.

وَقَالُوا إِنْ نَّتَّبِعِ الْهُدَى مَعَكَ نُتَخَطَّفْ مِنْ أَرْضِنَا
أَوَلَمْ نُمَكِّنْ لَّهُمْ حَرَماً آمِناً يُجْبَى إِلَيْهِ ثَمَرَاتُ
كُلِّ شَىْء رِّزْقاً مِّنْ لَّدُنَّا وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ(( 57 ))

57- AND THEY SAID:- \`\`IF WE FOLLOW THE GUIDANCE WITH YOU, WE SHALL BE
DRIVEN FROM OUR LAND.'' HAVE WE NOT ESTABLISHED FOR THEM A SECURE
SANCTUARY TO WHICH IS BROUGHT THE FRUITS OF EVERYTHING, AS A SUSTENANCE
FROM US, BUT MOST OF THEM KNOW NOT.

[ 580 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
GOD WILL GUIDE WHOM HE WILL**

VERSE NO.56ِ57

The aforesaid verses pointed to two group of people: The first group of
them were the pagan Arabs and particularly Quraish, who were from the
same race and family that the prophet himself was. It is evident that
the prophet was most desirous to guide them, but they obstinately stood
firm against our prophet who loved so tenderly to lead them, and
remained non-believers. On the other hand, there were a second group of
whom we made a mention in the previous passages. They were the group of
Christians who came from Abyssina and without causing any trouble
converted, and hence the verse (NO.56), in its general sense of
meaning:- \`\`You cannot guide whoever you like. It rather is Allah Who
guides whom He will.''

Here the word \`\`guidance'' does not mean to show some one the right
way, because such a guidance is a part of the duties of all the
apostles. \`\`GUIDANCE'' here will rather mean to join somebody to his
desired object, and this is only the work of God, who can sow the seed
of faith and fidelity, in the field of those hearts that have the
necessary merits. In other word, we must know that all those whom we
love tenderly, do not necessarily share our ideas about everything. God
alone knows the inner nature and the hidden motives of all His servants,
and therefore He will guide whom He will. So, by the verse; the prophet
is consoled not to grieve if he could not improve the spiritual
conditions of his dear citizens, because this matter is for God to
decide upon.

As to the next verse, it has been narrated that HARITH-IBN-NUFELL a
chief of the tribes, came to the prophet and said:- \`\`We do believe
that what you say is mere truth, but if we disclose our belief in you,
the pagans will [ 581 ] attack us, and drive us out of our land, and
will compel us to leave our home and hearth and go away, and we have not
enough power to resist them.''

They said so because they were not aware enough of the Infinite power
of the All-mighty Lord. They had not enough faith that Allah would
easily vanquish His enemies and raise up those whom He will. The
All-mighty who established for them such a secure sanctuary as Mecca, to
which is brought the fruits of everything as a sustenance from Him.

**THE FAITH OF HAZRAT ABUTALIB**

All the Muslims have unanimously testified that, HAZRAT ABUTALIB, the
prophet's uncle, was his most sincere supporter, most faithful
protector, and more loving him than any father could love his son. Why
then some of the narrators have tried to present him as a faithless and
even non-Muslim. And this is while they are so tolerant and careless
about others who played no effective role in the scenery of Islam and
yet they pulled themselves to the top of affairs without any right. This
will lead us to know that the head of such dangerous strings of
political play was in the hand of the rivals and antagonists of Hazrat
Imam Ali (AS). They have always insisted to deny his natural and
religious virtues and instead of that, forge some weak points for him.

Certainly, the Ommayids nasty dynasty did their best in this regard,
and came no short; and such traditions that we still hear them, are
nothing but the traces of their dirty worldly endeavours in this
respect.

The above phrase (you cannot guide whoever you like) has [ 582 ]
therefore nothing to do with HAZRAT ABUTALIB, and as we said; was
revealed on the occasion of a group of pagan Arabs who stubbornly
rejected the Message of God, and contrary to them, a group of Christians
who studied deeply and by FREE WILL accepted and supported the
Message.

It also is worthy of note that the fanatic Sonni commentator,
(FAKHR-RAZI) who has narrated the said occasion of revelation with
successive witnesses, has also stipulated that the verse has nothing to
do with ABUTALIB.

The only reason that Sonni expounders of Qura"n have used to prove that
Abutalib died non-Muslim, is what they have called it, the collective
opinion of all Muslims; while this proof is not true, and there has not
ever been a consensus of opinion on this issue among all sects of
Muslims.

Another important Sonni commentator is A"LOSI, who has written in his
famous ROOH-AL-MAANI, that, those who have said there is a broad
consensus of opinion on this issue are wrong, because Muslims do differ
widely on this respect, among whom we may name are all the Shiites and
also the infallible Imams.

The most important narrator of this tradition is said to have been
ABUHORAIREH. They say he has personally witnessed Abutalib's death bed,
when Mohammad (SA) said to his uncle; testify that there is no god save
Allah, and the uncle answered; if Quraish would not reproach me and
accuse me of having testified by fear, I would announce my faith in
Monotheism to please you!!!

This is while we are sure that ABUHORAIREH declared to be a Muslim at
the conquest of KHAIBAR. This event was seven years after Emigration,
while Abutalib died several years before Emigration (HIJRAT). And if you
say ABUHORAIREH was not present at Abutalib's death bed, but might have
heard that from some one else, the question then shall be:- \`\`Who the
some one else was?''

\*\*\*\*\*

[ 583 ]

81- THEN WE MADE THE EARTH TO SWALLOW HIM AND HIS HOUSE; AND THERE WAS
NOT ANY HOST FOR HIM TO HELP HIM APART FROM ALLAH, NOR WAS HE OF THOSE
WHO COULD HELP THEMSELVES.

وَأَصْبَحَ الَّذِينَ تَمَنَّوْا مَكَانَهُ بِالاَْمْسِ يَقُولُونَ
وَيْكَأَنَّ اللهَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ
وَيَقْدِرُ لَوْلاَ أَنْ مَّنَّ اللهُ عَلَيْنَا لَخَسَفَ بِنَا
وَيْكَأَنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ الْكَافِرُونَ(( 82 ))

82- AND NEXT MORNING, THOSE WHO WERE DESIROUS TO HAVE HIS POSITION
YESTERDAY, WERE SAYING:- \`\`WOE UPON US! IT IS ALLAH WHO EXPANDS THE
SUSTENANCE FOR WHOEVER OF HIS SERVANTS HE WILLS, AND RESTRICTS.'' (IT
FOR WHOM HE LIKES)

HAD ALLAH NOT OBLIGED US, HE WOULD HAVE US SWALLOWED (BY THE EARTH)
TOO. WOE UPON US! IT IS AS IF THE NON-BELIEVERS DO NOT PROSPER.


