The Madness For Showing Wealth
==============================

VERSE NO.79ِ82

Usually the rich people will be afflicted by various kinds of mental
and spiritual diseases, among which is the love for showing their wealth
to the others. They rejoice to mount an expensive automobile, and wear
precious ornaments, and even splash drops of [ 599 ] water, or particles
of dusts upon the eyes of the passers-by! They do not know that their
foolish exhibitions of wealth will create envy and jealousy in others,
and their excellence and good fortune may incite a discontent or even a
hatred in their fellows. Korah was a manifest example of such a showy
habit of the wealthy, therefore, when he went out among his people in
that splendour and brilliant luster, the worldly people were attracted
to him, and thought how happy they could be if they had his position.

On the other hand, the people who had some knowledge and wisdom said:-
\`\`Woe is you! The reward of Allah is far better for him who believes
and does righteous deeds. Let such gaudiness allure you not. There are
other spiritual measure and wealth for man, that are more precious and
becoming, and also everlasting compared with the fleeting wealth of
Korah, which is not more than a cause of fall.''

\`\`Then We made the earth to swallow him and his house, and there was
not any host for him to help apart from Allah, neither he could be of
any help to himself.''

Whatever of good in this world, and in the world to come, exist, is
from God, because He is the Main Source of all good things. He is mere
goodness and beauty and no evil can come out of good. To think otherwise
is to associate a false god besides the mere truth.

No one should ever think that Islam likes poverty, or dislikes wealth.
On contrary, our religion looks positively to riches, and of course on
conditions. In the sight of Islam, this world and the good things that
it has, can all be a means of attaining the good things in the world to
come:- \`\`And seek through what Allah has given you the last abode in
Paradise, and forget not also your share of this world, and do good to
others as Allah has done good to you.''

[ 600 ]

That sort of wealth is admired by Islam, that has been obtained from a
lawful way. Then the wealthy should forget not his own share, and a
share for the needy and poor. Then through the rest of what he has, he
should seek the prosperity of the life to come. This may be attained by
helping the helpless, and saving the fallen in the lagoon of loan and
debt with usury. Or, giving a hand in raising the level of common
education and knowledge. If some one loves wealth for such purposes, his
love is not that of material or worldly. As a matter of fact, a poor
nation cannot live a free and independent life. Poverty will render man
ineffective and dependent, and he shall live in darkness, in both, this
life and the life to come. Poverty will lead man to commit sin.

تِلْكَ الدَّارُ الاْخِرَةُ نَجْعَلُهَا لِلَّذِينَ لاَ يُرِيدُونَ
عُلُوّاً فِى الاَْرْضِ وَلاَ فَسَاداً وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ(( 83
))

83- THAT IS THE LAST ABODE WHICH WE WILL ALLOCATE IT TO THOSE WHO HAVE
NO TENDENCY TO BE EXORBITANT IN THE LAND, (THEY DO NOT WANT TO GO BEYOND
THE ESTABLISHED LIMITS OF RIGHT) NOR TO MAKE MISCHIEF. AND THE GOOD END
IS FOR THOSE WHO AVOID EVIL.

مَنْ جَاءَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ خَيْرٌ مِّنْهَا وَمَنْ جَاءَ
بِالسَّيِّئَةِ فَلاَ يُجْزَى الَّذِينَ عَمِلُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ إِلاَّ مَا
كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 84 ))

84- HE WHO CAME WITH A GOOD DEED, FOR HIM IS ONE BETTER THAN THAT, AND
HE WHO CAME WITH AN EVIL DEEDِTHOSE WHO HAVE DONE EVIL DEEDS WILL NOT BE
REQUITED EXCEPT FOR THAT WHICH THEY WERE DOING.

[ 601 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
WHAT OF SEEKING UNDESERVED SUPERIORITY, AND MAKING MISCHIEF?**

VERSE NO.83ِ84

The above verses may be taken as a conclusion to the incident of Moses
and Pharaoh, and his companion Korah. They challenged with truth, and
sought unjust superiority over the people, and arrogantly stood firm
against the truth that was with Moses. Pharaoh was blinded by pride, and
wealth had deafened Korah. So they lost whatever they had in this world,
and provided nothing for their next life except Fire and the wrath of
God.

We have translated Arabic, \`\`OLLOV'' in the text, to \`\`EXORBITANT''
as opposed to submission to the will of God. It implies those who have
the tendency to go beyond the established limits of truth and right.
They want to exceed what is customary, proper, and reasonable.

Then reference is made to the consequences of Man's deeds, the reaction
of which will return to himself. A good deed has a surely good reward,
and according to some other verses, our Gracious God may sometimes give
a tenfold reward to a good doer, depending how sincere and faithful in
his acts he might be. We read in S 6:160:

\`\`Whoever comes with a good deed, he shall have a tenfold the like of
it, and whoever comes with a bad deed, he will not be oppressed.''

إِنَّ الَّذِى فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَاد قُلْ
رَّبِّى أَعْلَمُ مَنْ جَاءَ بِالْهُدَى وَمَنْ هُوَ فِى ضَلاَل مُّبِين((
85 ))

[ 602 ]

85- VERILY HE WHO MADE THE QURA"N INCUMBENT UPON YOU, WILL BRING YOU
BACK (TO THE PLACE OF RETURN) AGAIN. SAY:- MY LORD KNOWS BEST, THAT WHO
HAS COME WITH GUIDANCE, AND WHO IS IN MANIFEST ERROR.

وَمَا كُنتَ تَرْجُوا أَنْ يُلْقَى إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابُ إِلاَّ رَحْمَةً
مِّنْ رَّبِّكَ فَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ ظَهِيراً لِّلْكَافِرِينَ(( 86 ))

86- AND YOU WERE NOT EXPECTING A BOOK TO BE INDUCTED TO YOU, EXCEPT BY
A MERCY FROM YOUR LORD, SO BE NOT A SUPPORTER OF THE NON-BELIEVERS.

وَلاَ يَصُدُّنَّكَ عَنْ آيَاتِ اللهِ بَعْدَ إِذْ أُنزِلَتْ إِلَيْكَ
وَادْعُ إِلَى رَبِّكَ وَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 87 ))

87- AND LET THEM NOT BAR YOU FROM THE SIGNS OF ALLAH, AFTER IT HAS BEEN
SENT DOWN TO YOU, AND CALL (PEOPLE) TO YOUR LORD, AND BE NOT OF THE
POLYTHEISTS.

وَلاَ تَدْعُ مَعَ اللهِ إِلَهاً آخَرَ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ كُلُّ
شَىْء هَالِكٌ إِلاَّ وَجْهَهُ لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ(( 88
))

88- AND DO NOT CALL BESIDES ALLAH OTHER GOD. THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE.
EVERYTHING IS PERISHABLE EXCEPT HIS FACE. FOR HIM IS THE ORDER (TO BE
ISSUED). AND TO HIM YOU SHALL BE RETURNED.

[ 603 ]

**THE COMMENTARY**

VERSE NO.85ِ88

**OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

When the prophet was forced to change his field of combat, and emigrate
from Mecca to Medina, he left his home town (Mecca), in which was the
Sacred Mosque built by his forefather Abraham. It was natural for him to
love such a home town tenderly. When the prophet set out and made for
Medina, he reached a point which is called JOHFA, at a short distance
from Mecca. He turned and cast a last look on that beloved Sacred city
of God, and felt very sad in the heartِa heart that was strongly
connected with that sacred place. In that condition Gabriel appeared to
him and said:-

\`\`Do you indeed love your home town so much?'' The prophet answered:-
\`\`Yes! So it is.'' Gabriel said:- \`\`Your Lord has sent me to give
you the news, that:- \`\`He who made the Qura"n incumbent upon you, He
will bring you back to Mecca.'' And we all know that the promise of God
was soon after fulfilled, and Mohammad (SA) returned to Mecca at the
head of a great army, each soldier of which, would collect the splashes
of the water that he used for his ablution (VOZOO), as a precious means
of good luck, and blessings.

**THE PROMISE OF RETURN TO THE SECURE SANCTUARY**

\`\`He who made the Qura"n imcumbent upon you will bring you back again
to Mecca.'' The Arabic \`\`ME-A"D'' which literally means returned to
the first state or place, is generally refered to Resurrection Day, in
which Man will return to life, and he is restored to the presence of
God; but as a connotation in Islamic history, it has also been used as a
title for Mecca.

[ 604 ]

**DON'T WORRY**

The verse implies that Allah says to His Servant Mohammad Mostafa":-
\`\`Don't worry! The same Lord Who rescued Moses from the Chest, and
brought him back from the sea to his mother and home; He will bring you
back to your home town, and so victorious! The Same Gracious God, Who
sent down the Qura"n to you and made it incumbent upon you, to convey
its Message and to fulfil its commandment, and to follow its
instructions; He too will easily and successfully return you to your
home again.''

Then there is the next verse with immediate reference to the importance
of Qura"n:- \`\`And you were not expecting a Book to be induced to you
except by a Mercy from your Lord, therefore support you not the
non-believers.'' This was in the Universal Mercy of God that the
Glorious Qura"n was to be revealed, as a means of rehearsal and
teaching, so that its principles, rules, and instructions might be put
to practice by mankind, up to the Resurrection Day.

Most probably the prophet who was illiterate and like all his citizens
unable to read a book, did not expect to receive such a wonderful
miracle from His Lord, although he was sure that his Lord's Mercy was
and is, infinite. Then when he was inspired with the revelation, at the
beginning it brought him nothing from his people except denial,
persecution, conflict, and sorrow. But in the course of time, it proved
to be a real mercy from God, not only to the unlearned prophet, but to
all his followers, and mankind, throughout ages. It is a miracle that no
one other than God can bring the like of it, not even a chapter the like
of it!

The last verse (NO.88) will sum up the lessons of the whole Sureh. It
teaches us to admit that the only reality is God who is not liable to
any change, and whatever other than Him is perishable and may change to
other form or state, or pass away, but Allah will endure for ever.

[ 605 ]

**EVERYTHING IS PERISHABLE**

The Arabic, \`\`HA"LIK'' which has been translated to, \`\`PERISHABLE''
does not necessarily mean that everything will pass away and come to
nothing, and if so, the Paradise and the Hell too, will have to be
destroyed and reduced to non-being.

Things are liable to change and destruction, and turning into a new
thing, because their existence has been given them by an Everlasting
Existence, Whom we call Allah. Allah exists substantially, and in His
existence depends on no one, and nothing. If He wills something will
perish, and if He wills a thing continues to be, and is preserved.

This verse is true in this material and physical world, but it cannot
be true in a spiritual world. Not only the world after the Resurrection
Day is created for ever, that the Intermediate world which comes after
death too, is also permanent. Even in this material world of us, things
like the sun and the moon will die and lose their light emitting and
shining power, but they will still keep on with their material body.

If we look at the existing things a little deeper, we soon shall come
to know that, they do not have an existence of their own self, and
whatever has been bestowed on them changes all the time, and all, depend
upon some other existence that never changes at all.

As a matter of fact, any change or any movement is gradually going to
some sort of a death and appearing in another kind of life.

Our great poet, Saadi has:-

\`\`O, Saadi! If the flood of death destructs the house of life; Worry
not! Because the Foundation of being is firm in Him.''

**THE END OF SUREH THE NARRATION (28)**

[ 606 ]

<p dir="rtl">
سُورَةُ العَنْكَبُوتِ
</p>

**THE SPIDER**

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE

الم(( 1 ))

1- A-L-M (ALIF-LA"M-MIM)

أَحَسِبَ النَّاسُ أَنْ يُتْرَكُوا أَنْ يَقُولُوا آمَنَّا وَهُمْ لاَ
يُفْتَنُونَ(( 2 ))

2- DO PEOPLE THINK THAT THEY WILL BE LEFT (UNATTENDED) IF THEY SAY:-
\`\`WE BELIEVE'', AND YET THEY ARE NOT TESTED.

وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ اللهُ
الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ الْكَاذِبِينَ(( 3 ))

3- AND VERILY WE HAVE TESTED THOSE WHO WERE BEFORE THEM. SO ALLAH HAS
TO MAKE KNOWN THOSE WHO ARE TRUTHFUL AND THOSE WHO ARE LIARS.

**THE COMMENTARY**

VERSE NO.1ِ3

**OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

Some commentators have narrated that; the first eleven verses of the
chapter, \`\`SPIDER'' have been revealed in Medina, and the rest in
Mecca. These eleven verses, they say, are about the Muslim Converts [
607 ] who had stayed in Mecca, and were not willing to leave their home
and hearth, and emigrate to Medina.

They received a letter from their Muslim brothers, who had emigrated to
Medina; that Allah will not accept their faith unless they had emigrated
and joined them in Medina.

So the Meccans decided to emigrate; and when they set out and made for
Medina, they were attacked by the pagan idolaters, by which some were
slayed, some badly injured, and some could flee to Medina.

Some commentators have known the second verse above, to have been
revealed on the persecution of Ammar and his parent who were martyred in
that sad event. Anyhow, in its general sense of meaning, the above
verses will encourage Muslims to be patient, and stay firm against the
waves of enmity and persecutions to which they were confronted.

The connections and continuities of the said eleven verses are reasons,
through which we believe they have all been revealed in Mecca.

**GOD'S TRIAL IS AN EVERLASTING METHOD**

\`\`Do people think they will be left alone if they say we believe
without being tested?''

The Arabic, \`\`YOF.TA.NOON'' from its roat word, \`\`FITNEH'' refers
to a goldsmith who applies fire to his melting pot, in order to burn out
the dross and purify the gold. When God puts a believer in trial or
test, it is of course not for acquiring a knowledge; that, Allah is
All-knowing and knows everything the best, even before they are created.
Therefore, the word to know has been used here in the sense of test and
trial, which means to make something known if it is hidden. Allah rather
wants here to make something known. For such trials; much pain, sorrow,
and trouble, might accompany, not because they are good things in
themselves but because they will purify the soul of Man, and will reveal
and make known the merits that are hidden in the believers and to
improve their mental and spiritual capacities.

On the other hand, faith and belief is a function of the heart, and not
something to adorn the tip of the tongue. What of a thing, to say [ 608
]

\`\`YES'' by the tongue and to reject it by all means. It must be tried
and tested so as to be made known to all relevant people and things.
This world of us here is like a university or similar to a farm-land. In
a university the programme is to develop the abilities and talents of
students.

And in a farm land the plan is to sow a seed. It then has to sprout up
and grow to show its inner world of the seed and to bring it from power
to effect and to make it to bear fruit.

Therefore, when a man tests a man, he intends to discover something
unknown to him, but when God tests a man, He may intend to bring
something to effect, or else to train.

أَمْ حَسِبَ الَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ أَنْ يَسْبِقُونَا سَاءَ
مَا يَحْكُمُونَ(( 4 ))

4- OR DO THOSE WHO DO EVIL, THINK THAT THEY CAN LEAVE US BEHIND? (IF
SO) BAD IS WHAT THEY JUDGE.

مَنْ كَانَ يَرْجُوا لِقَاءَ اللهِ فَإِنَّ أَجَلَ اللهِ لاََت وَهُوَ
السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ(( 5 ))

5- HE WHO EXPECTS TO VISIT ALLAH, (LET HIM KNOW THAT) ALLAH'S TERM IS
COMING, AND HE IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-KNOWING.

وَمَنْ جَاهَدَ فَإِنَّمَا يُجَاهِدُ لِنَفْسِهِ إِنَّ اللهَ لَغَنِىٌّ
عَنِ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 6 ))

6- AND HE WHO STRIVED, HE ONLY STRIVES FOR HIMSELF, THAT ALLAH IS FREE
OF WANT FROM ALL THE WORLDS.

وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَنُكَفِّرَنَّ عَنْهُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَحْسَنَ الَّذِى كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ(( 7 ))

7- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, WE WILL COVER THEIR
SINS, AND WE WILL REWARD THEM THE BEST OF WHAT THEY WERE DOING.

[ 609 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
IMPOSSIBLE TO ESCAPE GOD'S DOMINION**
VERSE NO.4ِ7

Following the argument which was about the general test of God, the
non-believers are threatened here, not to think that God will not punish
them after His respite:

\`\`Or do those who do evil think that they can leave us behind? So bad
is that which they judge.'' If the non-believers think that they can
frustrate Allah in His plans, they are indeed at fault; because many a
time is when God fulfils his intention by the hand of those who do not
believe in Him. Then the matter of God's visit has been put forth that:
\`\`He who expect to visit Allah, let him know that, Allah's term is
coming, and He is All-hearing, All-knowing.''

This verse tells the believers that, if they really expect to visit
Allah, they must be hardy and active in God's way, and cease not
endeavour until they have reached their sacred object.

Of course, the visit of God is not seeing him by the sense of sight. It
is to reach an spiritual position, in which there is not any veil,
curtain, or partition, between God and His servant. There in that
position the servant will know that his Lord is the Manifest Truth. The
quest of a true believer is God. He always will try to increase his
knowledge and recognition of Allah by doing righteous deeds. The
believer in all his movements is looking for God's pleasure because he
is in love with God. He has no other object of hope, but to meet his
beloved Lord in anyway that might be possible.

The last verse (NO.7), is a complementary to the previous ones, which
explains in brief how to strive in the way of God, and what a result may
you get out of your strife; that is to say; whatever of good deeds we
do, it will result in our own benefit, and God will gain or lose nothing
in that, because He is essentially free from want. Therefore [ 610 ]
when we serve or worship Him, we confer no benefit on Him. We rather
seek our own spiritual progress. So is the case when we do evil, the
reaction of which will return back to injure our very soul.

وَوَصَّيْنَا الاِْنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ حُسْناً وَإِنْ جَاهَدَاكَ
لِتُشْرِكَ بِى مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ فَلاَ تُطِعْهُمَا إِلَىَّ
مَرْجِعُكُمْ فَأُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ(( 8 ))

8- AND WE HAVE ENJOINED MANKIND TO DO GOOD TO HIS (OR HER) PARENTS. AND
IF THEY TRIED TO MAKE YOU TO ASCRIBE WITH ME WHAT YOU HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE
OF IT, THEN DO NOT OBEY THEM. YOUR RETURN IS TO ME. THEN I WILL INFORM
YOU OF WHAT YOU WERE DOING.

وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَنُدْخِلَنَّهُمْ فِى
الصَّالِحِينَ(( 9 ))

9- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, I WILL ENTER THEM
AMONG THE RIGHTEOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION**

VERSE NO.8ِ9

In the life time of our prophet, some of the Meccans, such as \`\`AYASH
IBN-ABIRABIEH'' converted and joined Muslims, whose mother abstained
from food and drink for sometimes in order to make her son to recant.
The above verse revealed to show Muslims what is to be done in such
cases, in which faith and blasphemy encounter in a critical situation.

[ 611 ]

**THE BEST ADVICE ABOUT PARENTS**

It is a general Law that mankind has to respect his parents and to do
good to them. Although this is a religious law and one of the
commandments, it also is a natural Law of creation. This Law applies to
believers and non-believers equally. Anyone who is supposed to be from
the kind of Man, will have to be kind and gentle to his parents, and to
do good to them. But the emotional connections with parents should not
outshine and surpass the Spiritual Connection of Man with his Gracious
Creator:-

\`\`....And if they tried to make you ascribe with Me what you have no
knowledge of it, then do not obey them, that your return is to Me.''

Although the respect of father and mother is a great commandment of
God, and has been strictly enjoined in the Qura"n, an instance of which
is in S-17:23:-

\`\`And your Lord Has decreed that you worship no one except him, and
do good to parents. If one of them or both of them attain old age with
you, do not say to them, \`\`FIE'' (express not any disgust) and do not
shout upon them, and say to them honourable words; and lower to them
your wing of humility out of Mercy, and say:-

\`\`My Lord! Have Mercy on them as they nurtured me when I was a
child.'' In spite of all that, in the matter of faith and worship, the
accounts are different; and even the parents have no right to force
their children. They should not urge and encourage their children to
associate any kind of PARTNER to the true God.

وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَقُولُ آمَنَّا بِاللهِ فَإِذَا أُوذِىَ فِى اللهِ
جَعَلَ فِتْنَةَ النَّاسِ كَعَذَابِ اللهِ وَلَئِنْ جَاءَ نَصْرٌ مِّنْ
رَّبِّكَ لَيَقُولُنَّ إِنَّا كُنَّا مَعَكُمْ أَوَلَيْسَ اللهُ بِأَعْلَمَ
بِمَا فِى صُدُورِ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 10 ))

[ 612 ]

10- AND OF THE PEOPLE ARE THOSE WHO SAY:- \`\`WE BELIEVE IN ALLAH'';
BUT WHEN HE IS HARMED FOR THE SAKE OF ALLAH, TAKES THE NUISANCE OF
PEOPLE (AS HARD AS) THE PUNISHMENT OF ALLAH. AND IF A VICTORY CAME FROM
YOUR LORD HE WILL SAY:- \`\`WE WERE WITH YOU. DOES NOT ALLAH KNOW THE
BEST OF ALL, THAT WHICH IS IN THE BREAST OF THE WORLDS?

وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ اللهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ
الْمُنَافِقِينَ(( 11 ))

11- AND CERTAINLY ALLAH KNOWS THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED, AND HE CERTAINLY
KNOWS THE HYPOCRITES.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّبِعُوا سَبِيلَنَا
وَلْنَحْمِلْ خَطَايَاكُمْ وَمَا هُمْ بِحَامِلِينَ مِنْ خَطَايَاهُمْ
مِّنْ شَىْء إِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ(( 12 ))

12- AND THE NON-BELIEVERS SAID TO THE BELIEVERS:- \`\`FOLLOW OUR WAY,
AND WE WILL CARRY YOUR FAULTS'', AND THEY ARE NOT THE CARRIERS OF
ANYTHING OF THEIR FAULTS. VERILY THEY ARE THE LIARS.

وَلَيَحْمِلُنَّ أَثْقَالَهُمْ وَأَثْقَالا مَّعَ أَثْقَالِهِمْ
وَلَيُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ(( 13 ))

13- THEY SHALL BEAR THEIR OWN HEAVY BURDENS AND OTHER BURDENS ALONG
WITH THEIR HEAVY LOADS; AND THEY WILL BE QUESTIONED IN THE RESURRECTION
DAY ABOUT THAT WHICH THEY WERE FORGING.

[ 613 ]

**THE COMMENTARY

PARTNERS IN VICTORY BUT NOT IN FAILURE**

VERSE NO.10ِ13

Here the duplicity of hypocrites have been exposed, who are faithless
but in days of good luck, they pretend to be faithful, and this is when
nothing throughout the universe is hidden from God:- \`\`And of the
people are those who say:- \`\`We believe in Allah, but when he is
harmed for the sake of Allah, takes the nuisance of people as hard as
the punishment of Allah.''

The Arabic, \`\`FITNEH'' translated here to, \`\`NUISANCE'', literally
means trial. In this verse (NO.10) the, \`\`TRIAL OF PEOPLE'' has come
vis-a-vis of the punishment of God, or we may say the TORMENT OF GOD. In
fact, the trial of people is not a torment as the punishment of God
might be. Trial of people is some sort of a test which is the process of
putting someone to the proof. On the other hand, God's punishment will
bring real suffering and affliction.

Then the argument is driven to the vain and futile logic of the
polytheists and non-believers, who say to the believers:-

\`\`....Follow our way and we will carry your faults.''

So were the hypocrites, while there are non-believers too, who openly
scoff at faith and say:- \`\`Take it easy and follow us, instead of
that, we shall bear your sins; but they shall bear their own heavy
burdens and other burdens along with their heavy loads.''

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحاً إِلَى قَوْمِهِ فَلَبِثَ فِيهِمْ أَلْفَ
سَنَة إِلاَّ خَمْسِينَ عَاماً فَأَخَذَهُمُ الطُّوفَانُ وَهُمْ
ظَالِمُونَ(( 14 ))

14- AND WE SENT NOAH TO HIS PEOPLE, AND HE TARRIED AMONG THEM A
THOUSAND YEARS SAVE FIFTY AAM. THEN THE FLOOD SEIZED THEM WHILE THEY
WERE OPPRESSOR.

[ 614 ]

فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَأَصْحَابَ السَّفِينَةِ وَجَعَلْنَاهَا آيَةً
لِّلْعَالَمِينَ(( 15 ))

15- THEN WE RESCUED HIM AND THE COMPANIONS OF THE ARK, AND MADE IT A
SIGN FOR ALL THE WORLDS.

وَإِبْرَاهِيمَ إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ اعْبُدُوا اللهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ
ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 16 ))

16- AND ABRAHAM, WHEN HE SAID TO HIS PEOPLE:- \`\`WORSHIP ALLAH AND
BEWARE OF HIM. THAT IS BETTER FOR YOU IF YOU WERE TO UNDERSTAND.''

إِنَّمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ أَوْثَاناً وَتَخْلُقُونَ إِفْكاً
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ لاَ يَمْلِكُونَ لَكُمْ
رِزْقاً فَابْتَغُوا عِنْدَ اللهِ الرِّزْقَ وَاعْبُدُوهُ وَاشْكُرُوا لَهُ
إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ(( 17 ))

17- YOU ONLY WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH SOME IDOLS, AND YOU CREATE A
CALUMNY. VERILY THOSE WHOM YOU WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH, HAVE NO POWER
TO SUSTAIN YOU. SO SEEK SUSTENANCE FROM ALLAH, AND BE THANKFUL TO HIM.
TO HIM YOU SHALL BE RETURNED.

وَإِنْ تُكَذِّبُوا فَقَدْ كَذَّبَ أُمَمٌ مِّنْ قَبْلِكُمْ وَمَا عَلَى
الرَّسُولِ إِلاَّ الْبَلاَغُ الْمُبِينُ(( 18 ))

18- AND IF YOU BELIE (ME), SO DID GENERATIONS BEFORE YOU BELIE (THEIR
APOSTLES). AND THE MESSENGER IS NOT OBLIGATED EXCEPT TO CONVEY (THE
MESSAGE) PLAINLY.

أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا كَيْفَ يُبْدِىءُ اللهُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ إِنَّ
ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللهِ يَسِيرٌ(( 19 )) [ 615 ]


