A Hint To the Story of Noah & Abraham
=====================================

VERSE NO.17ِ19

On account of the general test and trial of Man, a mention is made of
Noah and Abraham, the two Arch prophets of God who were no exception in
God's general test. They both were put to trial by their Lord, and
suffered a great deal of hardship and hazards. But they passed their
examinations so well and with excellent marks, and became great examples
of being patient in the hardship and having their trust on their Lord.
Noah stood firm among the enemies of God and preached his people
continuously during his wonderful long life of 950 years!:- \`\`And We
sent Noah to his people, and he tarried among them a thousand years save
fifty AAM. Then the Flood seized them while they were oppressors.''

\*\*\*\*\*

As to the meaning of AAM, almost all the translators of Qura"n have
either ignored to mention the word, \`\`AAM'' or have taken it to mean,
\`\`YEAR''. But the Arabic dictionaries have translated it to,
\`\`YEAR'' as well as to a period which is less than a yearِa period
which consists of only one summer and one winter, that are successive.
On the other hand, the Arabic, \`\`SANAT'' has always been translated
to, \`\`YEAR'' by all.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

During his long life of hardship and trouble, Noah never looked to be
tired or in despair. Eventually, when he came to the conclusion that
there were no more among the heathens to join him in his folk of
believers, he asked for God's judgement, and then all the oppressors
were seized by the flood, and their nasty and shameful lives were
ended.

Following an abstract of Noah's story, the reference has been made to
another Arch Prophet of God, who is an everlasting example [ 616 ] in
faith, virtue, sincerity, and patience:- He admonished his people and
said to them:- \`\`Worship Allah and beware of Him.''

Here two practical religious programmes have been proposed by the
prophet that will guarantee the felicity of Man. That is to worship
Allah the only one and true God, without associating any partners to
Him, and also to be on guard against doing evil deeds.

What of those things or persons that people worship apart from God?
They are nothing more than falsehood, and some calumnies that they have
forged, which are of no help to Man at all. Their gods have no power to
sustain any one or even to feed themselves:- \`\`Verily those whom you
worship apart from Allah, have no power to sustain you. So seek
sustenance from Allah and be thankful to Him.''

In other word, commit yourself to the care of Allah and put your trust
in Him. Seek from Him all that is needed for your physical or spiritual
progress, and prepare yourself for your everlasting life, in the world
to come. Do not doubt that Allah can, and will give His servant all that
he may need.

قُلْ سِيرُوا فِى الاَْرْضِ فَانْظُرُوا كَيْفَ بَدَأَ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ
اللهُ يُنشِىءُ النَّشْأَةَ الاْخِرَةَ إِنَّ اللهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَىْء
قَدِيرٌ(( 20 ))

20- SAY:- \`\`TRAVEL THROUGH THE EARTH, AND SEE HOW HAS HE ORIGINATED
THE CREATION, THEN ALLAH WILL CREATE THE LAST CREATION (AS HE CREATED
THE FIRST), FOR ALLAH HAS POWER ON (DOING) ALL-THINGS.''

يُعَذِّبُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَرْحَمُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُقْلَبُونَ((
21 ))

21- HE PUNISHES WHOM HE WILL, AND WILL HAVE MERCY ON WHOM HE WILL, AND
TO HIM YOU SHALL RETURN.

[ 617 ]

وَمَا أَنْتُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ فِى الاَْرْضِ وَلاَ فِى السَّمَاءِ وَمَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مِنْ وَلِىّ وَلاَ نَصِير(( 22 ))

22- AND YOU WILL NOT BE ABLE TO FRUSTRATE (GOD'S PLANS) IN THE EARTH,
NOR IN THE SKY, AND THERE IS NOT ANY PROTECTOR OR HELPER FOR YOU APART
FROM ALLAH.

وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ اللهِ وَلِقَائِهِ أُوْلَئِكَ يَئِسُوا
مِنْ رَّحْمَتِى وَأُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 23 ))

23- AND THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED THE SIGNS OF ALLAH AND HIS VISIT, THEY
HAVE DESPAIRED OF MY MERCY, AND FOR THEM IS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
THOSE ABANDONED TO DESPAIR**

VERSE NO.20ِ23

The argument goes on about the Resurrection of Man. It is a style of
Qura"n to pause on a critical point of a story and then apply to some
conclusions. The previous verse (NO.19) was encouraging men to travel
mentally through the earth, and see how Allah has originated the
creation, and how He concludes and then renews it.

Then here in the above verse (NO.20), the Guide Book of Allah bids us
to continue our travel through the earth physically, in order to study
God's creation, and the past and present of Man, and the causes of their
fortune and misfortune. Such a study may lead us to the gates of the
life to come, which already exists beyond this material world of us:-

\`\`Say; travel through the earth and see how has He originated the
creation, and then Allah will create the last creation, as He has done
the first; for He has power to do all things.''

[ 618 ]

The successive two verses will prove the possibility of the
Resurrection and the life in the world to come. Proofs can be found for
the oneness of God by the study of Man's Internal and External world. So
is the case with the matter of Resurrection that can be proved in the
same way.

In other word, if we travel through the earth physically, we can see
many wonders of creation that will astonish our minds, and attract our
attention and admiration. Then if we open our eyes, we can see wonders
upon wonders, each of which is a clear sign of the Unity and Oneness of
the Creator. Then if we travel through the earth spiritually and with a
keen sight and through, we soon shall come to know that each green leaf
is a great book, the pages of which are all filled with strange miracles
of God, and the wonders of His creation. Then from the known we can
easily know the unknown.

Then the verses apply to one of the main problems of Resurrection Day;
and that is the Mercy and Punishment of God:- \`\`He punishes whom He
will, and He will have Mercy on whom He will, and to him you shall
return.''

Although God's Mercy will always take precedence of His wrath, here in
this verse, God's punishment has been mentioned before His Mercy! This
might be due to the sentence being in a threatening mode. It also may be
taken that Punishment and Mercy here are mentioned in their general
sense of meanings, which then they will include the Punishment and Mercy
in this world, as well as that of the life to come.

فَمَا كَانَ جَوَابَ قَوْمِهِ إِلاَّ أَنْ قَالُوا اقْتُلُوهُ أَوْ
حَرِّقُوهُ فَأَنجَاهُ اللهُ مِنَ النَّارِ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لاَيَات
لِّقَوْم يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 24 ))

24- AND THE ANSWER OF ABRAHAM'S PEOPLE WAS NOTHING EXCEPT THAT THEY
SAID; KILL HIM, OR BURN HIM! THEN [ 619 ]

ALLAH RESCUED HIM FROM THE FIRE. VERILY IN THAT THERE ARE SIGNS FOR A
PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE.

وَقَالَ إِنَّمَا اتَّخَذْتُمْ مِّنْ دُونِ اللهِ أَوْثَاناً مَّوَدَّةَ
بَيْنِكُمْ فِى الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُ
بَعْضُكُمْ بِبَعْض وَيَلْعَنُ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضاً وَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ
وَمَا لَكُمْ مِّنْ نَّاصِرِينَ(( 25 ))

25- AND HE SAID:- \`\`YOU HAVE ONLY TAKEN SOME IDOLS, APART FROM ALLAH,
TO BE A CAUSE OF MUTUAL LOVE BETWEEN YOU IN THE LIFE OF THIS WORLD; THEN
IN THE RESURRECTION DAY, SOME OF YOU WILL DENY SOME OTHER, AND SOME OF
YOU WILL CURSE SOME OTHER, AND YOUR ABODE SHALL BE THE FIRE, AND YOU
WILL HAVE NONE OF THE HELPERS.

فَآمَنَ لَهُ لُوطٌ وَقَالَ إِنِّى مُهَاجِرٌ إِلَى رَبِّى إِنَّهُ هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ(( 26 ))

26- THEN LOT BELIEVED IN HIM, AND SAID:- \`\`I WILL EMIGRATE TOWARDS MY
LORD, THAT HE IS EXALTED IN MIGHT, ALL-WISE.''

وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَجَعَلْنَا فِى ذُرِّيَّتِهِ
النُّبُوَّةَ وَالْكِتَابَ وَآتَيْنَاهُ أَجْرَهُ فِى الدُّنْيَا وَإِنَّهُ
فِى الاْخِرَةِ لَمِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ(( 27 ))

27- AND WE GRANTED HIM ISAAC AND JACOB, AND BESTOWED ON HIS DESCENDANTS
PROPHETHOOD AND BOOK. AND WE GAVE HIM HIS REWARD IN THIS WORLD, AND IN
THE WORLD TO COME HE WILL BE OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

[ 620 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE ANSWER OF THOSE INDULGED IN PRIDE, TO ABRAHAM**

VERSE NO.24ِ27
Abraham gave his reasons to prove Monotheism, Resurrection, and
Prophethood; but his proud and cruel people answered him by the logic of
tyrants, which is force majeure, and use of Satanic Power:- \`\`The
answer of Abraham's people was nothing except that they said:- \`\`Kill
him! Or burn him!'' They cast him into a huge Fire but his Lord saved
him from the Fire. (We have given more detail about this incident in
S-21:59ِ67)

Abraham criticized the religion of his people, saying that:-

\`\`You have only taken some carved stones, (idols) apart from Allah,
for your worship. You think these idols are a cause of mutual love
between you in the life of this world, but in the life to come some of
you will deny some other and even some of you will curse some others!
These false gods of yours can neither be of any help to you nor of any
harm. Fie upon you and upon the gods that you worship apart from Allah.
Don't you ever want to understand!?''

Their logic was to burn Abraham in the Fire, and they did cast him in a
hell of fire but Abraham's Lord saved His servant and turned the fire
into a flower-garden for Abraham.

How can the plot of evil-doers harm the Man of God who is always with
God and God is always with him. In next verse, it is pointed to the
faith of Lot and emigration of Abraham or both:- \`\`Then Lot believed
in him and said:- \`\`I will emigrate towards my Lord, that He is
Exalted in might, All-wise.''

[ 621 ]

Lot was a nephew of Abraham who was an apostle himself. He apprehended
Abraham's doctrine and adhered to his teaching, and accepted the
voluntary exile with him, leaving Chaldaee for old Syria, a part of
which was the present Palestine.

In the last verse, four of God's blessings and Graces that are bestowed
upon Abraham, will prove that the good end belongs to the righteous who
avoid evil:-

He was given worthy and righteous children and offsprings among whom
there were great prophets.
God bestowed on his descendants prophethood and Book. God gave him
reward in this world.

God has made him of the righteous in the next world:-

\`\`And We granted him Isaac and Jacob and bestowed on his descendants
prophethood and Book....''

Isaac was Abraham's son, and Jacob was his grandson. Abraham had two
sons, named Ishmael and Isaac, who became the fountain head of prophecy
and revelation. Mohammad Mostafa (SA), our dear prophet is also from the
progeny of Ishmael.

وَلُوطاً إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ إِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الْفَاحِشَةَ مَا
سَبَقَكُمْ بِهَا مِنْ أَحَد مِّنَ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 28 ))

28- AND LOT, WHEN HE SAID TO HIS PEOPLE:- \`\`YOU COMMIT SUCH INDECENCY
IN WHICH NO ONE IN THE WORLDS HAS PRECEDED YOU.''

أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الرِّجَالَ وَتَقْطَعُونَ السَّبِيلَ وَتَأْتُونَ
فِى نَادِيكُمُ الْمُنكَرَ فَمَا كَانَ جَوَابَ قَوْمِهِ إِلاَّ أَنْ
قَالُوا ائْتِنَا بِعَذَابِ اللهِ إِنْ كُنتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ(( 29 ))

[ 622 ]

29- DO YOU COME TO MEN (FOR LUSTS), AND CUT THE WAY (OF MAN'S
GENERATION), AND DO EVIL IN YOUR GATHERINGS!?

THEN THE ANSWER OF HIS PEOPLE WAS NOT, EXCEPT THAT THEY SAID; BRING US
THE PUNISHMENT OF ALLAH IF YOU ARE TRUTHFULS.

قَالَ رَبِّ انصُرْنِى عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْمُفْسِدِينَ(( 30 ))

30- HE SAID:- \`\`MY LORD! HELP ME AGAINST THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
CORRUPTORS.''

**THE COMMENTARY
THE OBSTINATES, WITH CONTAMINATED SKIRT**

VERSE NO.28ِ30

Following a brief of the story of Abraham, now the immediate reference
is to an episode of Lot's:- \`\`And remember Lot when he said to his
people; You commit such indecency in which no one in the worlds has
preceded you.'' The verse implies that they were pederasts and had
sexual relations with males, which is against the laws of nature. In
other word, they were cutting the ways of Man's generation and begetting
children.

They were so shameless, that committed their horrible indecency and
heinous sin openly and practised it publicly! What a degradation and
abasement for Man, and how near to a beast will this shameful lead.

[ 623 ]

So, Lot admonished and warned his people but of no use, and they
insisted upon the hateful act, and their answer to Lot was only; bring
us the punishment of God if you are truthful. What else could the
prophet of God do then? With a sad heart, and a tearful eye, he prayed
to his Lord, saying:-

\`\`My Lord! Help me against the people who are corruptors of
themselves, as well as the others.'' God answered his servant, and next
day none of the corruptors could move on the earth! And so was the
punishment of God.

**THE CALAMITY OF HOMOSEXUALITY**

Homosexuality or eroticism for one of the same sex, is among the worsts
of Moral Perversions; which is a main source of many corruptions in
Man's society. Male and femal are created so that they naturally find
comfort and relief of mental distress, through the love of their
opposite sex. Therefore, the abnormal sexual inclination will soon
result in bad psychological diseases, and to continue with it will end
in a painful destiny and sorrowful Spiritual and Physical death. Such an
abnormal relation will ruin the nerves, destroy the will, and waste the
personality of victim, particularly if he is a boy. The homosexual
parents can never become a good father or mother for their children.
This is why God has strictly forbidden the heinous sin, and condemns to
death he who commits such a horrible crime.

وَلَمَّا جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ بِالْبُشْرَى قَالُوا إِنَّا
مُهْلِكُوا أَهْلِ هَذِهِ الْقَرْيَةِ إِنَّ أَهْلَهَا كَانُوا
ظَالِمِينَ(( 31 ))

31- AND WHEN OUR MESSENGERS (THE ANGELS) CAME TO ABRAHAM WITH
GLAD-TIDINGS. THEY SAID:- \`\`WE ARE TO DESTROY THE PEOPLE OF THIS TOWN,
(POINTING AT SODOM& GOMORAH) THAT THE TOWNSFOLK HAVE BEEN
OPPRESSORS.''

[ 624 ]

قَالَ إِنَّ فِيهَا لُوطاً قَالُوا نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ فِيهَا
لَنُنَجِّيَنَّهُ وَأَهْلَهُ إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَهُ كَانَتْ مِنَ
الْغَابِرِينَ(( 32 ))

32- HE SAID:- \`\`BUT LOT IS IN IT.'' THEY SAID:- \`\`WE KNOW BETTER
WHO ARE IN IT. WE WILL SAVE HIM AND HIS FOLK, EXCEPT HIS WIFE. SHE
LAGGED BEHIND.

وَلَمَّا أَنْ جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا لُوطاً سِىءَ بِهِمْ وَضَاقَ بِهِمْ
ذَرْعاً وَقَالُوا لاَ تَخَفْ وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ إِنَّا مُنَجُّوكَ وَأَهْلَكَ
إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَكَ كَانَتْ مِنَ الْغَابِرِينَ(( 33 ))

33- AND WHEN OUR MESSENGERS CAME TO LOT, HE BECAME DISTRESSED AND
DISTURBED (BY SEEING THEM). BUT THEY SAID (TO LOT):- \`\`FEAR NOT, AND
NEITHER GRIEVE, WE WILL SAVE YOU AND YOUR FOLK, EXCEPT YOUR WIFE. SHE
LAGGED BEHIND. (WITH THOSE WHO WERE PUNISHED)

إِنَّا مُنزِلُونَ عَلَى أَهْلِ هَذِهِ الْقَرْيَةِ رِجْزاً مِّنَ
السَّمَاءِ بِمَا كَانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ (( 34 ))

34- WE SHALL SEND DOWN UPON THE FOLK OF THIS TOWN A CALAMITY FROM THE
SKY, BECAUSE THEY HAVE BEEN DEBAUCHERS.

وَلَقَد تَّرَكْنَا مِنْهَا آيَةً بَيِّنَةً لِّقَوْم يَعْقِلُونَ(( 35
))

35- AND VERILY WE LEFT OUT OF IT A CLEAR SIGN FOR A PEOPLE WHO CARE TO
UNDERSTAND.

[ 625 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE DESTINY OF DEFILED PEOPLE**

VERSE NO.31ِ35

Finally Allah answered the prayer of Hid servant Lot, and the decree
for a dreadful and heavy punishment of the defiled people was issued.
The angels whose mission was to punish the homosexual non-believers; in
their way to Sodom and Gomorrah paid a visit to HAZRAT ABRAHAM, in irder
to give him the good news of having a son in that old age he was! When
they told the Shaikh of Prophets their destinations, he showed anxiety
for Lot and some other believers who were striving hard against devil in
that damned land:-

\`\`Abraham said to the angels:- \`\`But Lot is in there.''

They said:- \`\`We know better who are in it. We will save him and his
folk, except his wife.'' When Abraham said so to the angels, possibily
he should have thought that God would not destroy a people among whom
there lives an apostle, and several true believers. But the angel
assured him that they knew well the situation of the towns and that, who
was who, in there. When the angels of God went to Lot, he became annoyed
and distressed, but soon the angels consoled him and told him not to be
afraid, nor grieve, that they would rescue him and his followers, and
then punish the sinners.

When Lot and his folk were delivered; a calamity from the heaven seized
the sinful people. It began with a rain of brimstone, something like a
volcanic eruption followed by an earthquake which overwhelmed the cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah.

(We have written this incident in a greater detail in volume three of
our Book, S 11-Page-188ِ198):- \`\`And verily we left out of it a clear
sign for a people who care to understand.

[ 626 ]

Allameh YUSUF ALI, has written in his commentary, here, that the whole
tract on which the cities were situated at the bank of Dead Sea, which
Arabs call the SEA OF LOT (BAHR-AL-LUT) is at present covered with
Sulphurous salts, and is even now deadly to animals and plants.

\*\*\*\*\*

SODOM & GOMORAH, SISTERS OF POMPEII & HERCULANIUM \`\`THE ERUPTION OF
MOUNT VESUVIUS''

INTRODUCTORY:

\`\`NOTHING WAS TO BE HEARD BUT THE SHRIEKS OF WOMEN, THE SCREAMS OF
CHILDREN, AND THE CRIES OF MEN!''

The story of the people of Lot in the Sodom and Gomorah, is somehow
similar to that of POMPEII and HERCULANIUM, that were buried by the
eruption of Mount Vesuvius some two thousand years ago.

Pompeii a beautiful flourishing city, a port and a popular resort, and
ancient city of campania Italy, 14m southeast of NAPLE, and immediately
southeast of mount vesuvius. Herculanium was also a very beautiful city
of fine villas at its western base.

Mount Vesuvius was about six miles southeast of NAPLES on the eastern
shore of the BAY OF NAPLES. It was a richly cultivated mountain covered
with very fertile vineyards and surrounded by cities and towns.

On August 24, in the year 79 A.D., a series of earthquakes culminated
in violent explosion. POMPEII was buried under firry cinders, smoking
stones, and burning ashes. At HERCULONEUM, these falling substances
mixed with water and hardened into porous rocks which covered the city
to an average depth of 18 to 20 feet.

One of the survived inhabitants of the town was named GAIUS [ 627 ]
PLINIUS, whom today is called PLINY THE YOUNGER. He was 18 years old
when the volcanic Mount Vesuvius erupted and buried POMEII and
HERCULONEUM, which were two of the most beautiful cities inthe Roman
Empire.

Some years later PLINY THE YOUNGER wrote his graphic account of the
catastrophe in two letters to his friend TACITUS, the Roman Historian.
In these letters is an ideal report by an observer of the calamity, and
the second is a model account by an eye witness. It has all the dramatic
elements that accompany disasters.

The religious leaders felt that these cities were chosen for
destruction because they had been centers of luxury and vice. (I MYSELF,
PREDICTED THE FALL OF ABADAN & KHORAMSHAHR SEVERAL YEARS BEFORE, WHEN I
MADE A SPEECH FOR A GREAT AUDIENCE, SEEING THE TOWNS A CENTER OF LUXURY
& VICE. TRANSLATOR)

Pliny himself believed that the end had come, and indeed in one sense
it had, because untold number of people perished in a night.

HERCULONEUM remained buried until 1709, and POMPEII, until 1748. Slowly
over the years the cities have been excavated. A magnificent library,
precious marble statues, luxurious villas, paintings still perfect in
colour have been reclaimed from the layers of ashes and lava that
preserved them. Even the dice that were being thrown, and the bread that
was being baked on that fatal day have been brought to light, and so a
disaster that wreaked death and destruction in bygone centuries has
become the source of much of our knowledge of Roman life and art.

**THE LETTER OF PLINY TO TACITUS, ABOUT THE ERUPTION OF MOUNT
VESUVIUS**

The letter which, in compliance with your request, I wrote to you,
concerning the death of my uncle (PLINY THE ELDER) has raised, it seems,
your curiosity to know what terrors and dangers attended me while I
continued at Misenum; (MISENO NORTHWEST OF THE BAY OF NAPLES) for there
I think the account in my former letter broke off, though my shocked
soul recoils, my tongue shall tell.

[ 628 ]

My uncle having left us, I continued the employment which prevented my
going with him, till it was time to bathe, after which I went to supper,
and then fell into a short and unquiet sleep. There had been, during
many days before, some shocks of an earthquake, which the less alarmed
us as they are frequent in Campania. They were so particularly violent
that night, that they not only shook everything about us, but seemed,
indeed, to threaten total destruction. My mother flew to my chamber,
where she found me rising in order to awaken her. We went out to a small
court belonging to the house, which separated the sea from the
buildings.

As I was at that time but eighteen years of age, I know not whether I
should call my behaviour, in this perilous conjuncture, courage or
rashness. I took up LIVY and amused myself with turning over that
author, and even making extracts from him, as if I had been perfectly at
my ease. While we were in this situation, a friend of my uncle's, who
was just come from Spain to pay him a visit, joined us and observing me
sitting by my mother with a book in my hand reproved her patience, and
my security. Nevertheless, I still went on with my author. It was now
morning, but the light was exceedingly faint and languid. The buildings
all around us tottered. Though we stood upon open ground, the place was
narrow and confined and there was no remaining without imminent danger.
We therefore resolved to leave the town.

The people followed us in the utmost consternation, and as to a mind
distracted with terror, every suggestion seems more prudent than its
ownِPressed in great crowds about us in our way out. Being advanced at a
convenient distance from the houses, we stood still, in the midst of a
most hazardous and tremendous scene. The chariots, which we had ordered
to be drawn out, were so agitated backward and forward, though upon the
most level ground, that we could not keep them steady, even supporting
them with large stones. The sea seemed to roll back upon itself, and to
be driven from its banks by the convulsive motion of the earth. It is
certain at least, the shore was considerably enlarged, and several sea
animals were left upon it. On the other side, a black and dreadful cloud
bursting with an igneous [ 629 ]

serpentine vapor darted out a long train of fire, resembling flashes of
lightning, but much larger. Upon this our Spanish friend, whom I
mentioned above, addressed himself to my mother and me, with great
warmth and earnestness:- \`\`If your mother and your uncle are safe,
your uncle certainly wishes you may be so too; but if he perished, it
was his desire, no doubt, that you both might survive him. Why do you
then delay your escape a moment? We could never think of our own safety,
we replied, while we were uncertain of his; upon which our friend left
us, and withdrew from the danger with the utmost precipitation.''

Soon afterwards, the cloud seemed to descend and cover the whole ocean;
as indeed, it entirely hid the Island of Caprea (CAPRI), and the
promontory of Misenum. My mother conjured me to make my escape at any
rate, which as I was young I might easily effect. As for herself, she
said her age and corpulence rendered all attempts of that sort
impossible. However she willingly meet death, if she could have the
satisfaction of seeing that she was not the occasion of mine. But I
absolutely refused to leave her, and taking her by the hand, I led her
on. She complied with great reluctance, and not without many reproaches
to herself for being the occasion of retarding my flight.

The ashes now began to fall upon us, thought in no great quantity. I
turned my head and observed behind us a thick smoke, which came rolling
after us like a torrent. I proposed, which we had yet any light, to turn
out of the high road, lest she should be pressed to death in the dark,
by the crowd that followed us.

We had scarcely stepped out of the path, when darkness overspread us,
not like that of a cloudy night there is no moon, but of a room when it
is shut up and all the lights extinct. Nothing then was to be heard but
the shrieks of women, the screams of children and the cries of men. Some
were calling for their children, others for their parents, others for
their husbands. They could only distinguish each other by their voices.
One lamented his own fate, another that of his family; some wished to
die, from the very fear of dying; some lifted their hands to gods; but
greater part imagined that the last and eternal night was come, which
was to destroy both the gods and the world [ 630 ]

together. Among these there were some who augmented the real terrors by
imaginary ones, and made the frightened multitude falsely believe that
Misenum was actually in flames. At length, a glimmering light appeared,
which we imagined to be rather the forerunner of an approaching burst of
flames (as in fact it was), than the return of day. However the fire
fell at a distance from us. Then again we were immersed in thick
darkness, and a heavy shower of ashes rained upon us, which we were
obliged every now and then to shake off, otherwise we should have been
overwhelmed and buried in the heap.

At last, this terrible darkness was dissipated by degrees like a cloud
of smoke. The real day returned and even the sun appeared though very
faintly and as when an eclipse is coming on. We returned to Misenum and
refreshed ourselves, and passed an anxious night between hope and fear
for the earth still continued to shake. However my mother and I
notwithstanding the danger we passed, and that which still threatened
us, had no intention of leaving Misenum till we should receive some
account of my uncle. Farewell.


**FROM: GROLIER CLASSICS & INTERNATIONAL ENCYCLOPIA
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

وَإِلَى مَدْيَنَ أَخَاهُمْ شُعَيْباً فَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللهَ
وَارْجُوا الْيَوْمَ الاْخِرَ وَلاَ تَعْثَوْا فِى الاَْرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ
(( 36 ))

36- AND TO MEDIAN (WE SENT) THEIR BROTHER SHUAIB. THEN HE SAID:- \`\`O,
MY PEOPLE! WORSHIP ALLAH, AND HOPE FOR THE LAST DAY, AND MAKE NO
MISCHIEF IN THE LAND THROUGH CORRUPTION.''

فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الرَّجْفَةُ فَأَصْبَحُوا فِى دَارِهِمْ
جَاثِمِينَ(( 37 ))

37- THEY BELIED HIM. SO AN EARTHQUAKE SEIZED THEM AND [ 631 ]

IN THE MORNING THEY WERE LAID IN THEIR HOUSES UPSIDE DOWN.
(MOTIONLESS)

وَعَاداً وَثَمُودَ وَقَدْ تَبَيَّنَ لَكُمْ مِّنْ مَّسَاكِنِهِمْ
وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَصَدَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ
وَكَانُوا مُسْتَبْصِرِينَ(( 38 ))

38- AND طD, AND THAMUD; IT HAS BEEN CLEAR TO YOU FROM (THE RUINS OF)
THEIR HOMES. AND SATAN ADORNED FOR THEM THEIR DEEDS, AND BARRED THEM
FROM THE WAY, WHILE THEY COULD SEE.

وَقَارُونَ وَفِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَلَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ مُّوسَى
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا فِى الاَْرْضِ وَمَا كَانُوا سَابِقِينَ((
39 ))

39- AND KORAH, PHARAOH, AND HA"MA"N. MOSES CAME TO THEM WITH CLEAR
SIGNS, BUT THEY ACTED PROUDLY AND PRECEDED NOT.

فَكُلّاً أَخَذْنَا بِذَنْبِهِ فَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِ
حَاصِباً وَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ أَخَذَتْهُ الصَّيْحَةُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ
خَسَفْنَا بِهِ الاَْرْضَ وَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ أَغْرَقْنَا وَمَا كَانَ اللهُ
لِيَظْلِمَهُمْ وَلَكِنْ كَانُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ(( 40 ))

[ 632 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
EACH OPPRESSING GROUP WERE PUNISHED SOMEHOW**

VERSE NO.36ِ40

Following the affliction of the people of Lot, now a brief reference is
made to other people with similar fate, such as the people of Median,
A"d, Thamud, and the Egyptions, who were around Pharaoh and Korah:-
\`\`And to Median We sent their brother Shuaib. Then he said to them:-
\`\`O, My People! Worship Allah and hope for the last Day to come, and
make no mischief in the land.''

The story of Shuaib was narrated with more detail in the volume 3 of
our book, pages 198ِ203.

Their persistently assailing sin, was, fraud and commerical immorality;
and they were punished by a mighty blast like that of a volcanic
eruption. They believed not in Resurrection Day and the Final Judgement,
and so they lost the true object of life, and strayed from the path of
truth. All the above mentioned four groups of people were afflicted by
the reactions of their own actions, and thus incurred the wrath of God,
and were all destroyed. They did their wrong deeds deliberately and with
Free Will, and Allah did not oppress them, but they themselves were
oppressing.

مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ كَمَثَلِ
الْعَنكَبُوتِ اتَّخَذَتْ بَيْتاً وَإِنَّ أَوْهَنَ الْبُيُوتِ لَبَيْتُ
الْعَنْكَبُوتِ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ(( 41 ))

41- THE PARABLE OF THOSE WHO TOOK PROTECTORS OTHER THAN ALLAH, IS THAT
OF THE SPIDERِSHE TOOK A HOUSE (SPAN A WEB) AND VERILY THE MOST INFIRM
OF HOUSES IS THE SPIDER'S HOUSE, IF THEY COULD ONLY KNOW.

[ 633 ]

إِنَّ اللهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مِنْ شَىْء وَهُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ(( 42 ))

42- VERILY ALLAH KNOWS WHATEVER THEY CALL UPON, BESIDES HIM, AND HE IS
THE EXALTED IN MIGHT, ALL-WISE.

وَتِلْكَ الاَْمْثَالُ نَضْرِبُهَا لِلنَّاسِ وَمَا يَعْقِلُهَا إِلاَّ
الْعَالِمُونَ(( 43 ))

43- AND THESE SIMILITUDES WE COIN THEM FOR PEOPLE, BUT NONE UNDERSTANDS
THEM EXCEPT THOSE WITH KNOWLEDGE.

خَلَقَ اللهُ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ
لاَيَةً لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 44 ))

44- ALLAH CREATED THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, WITH RIGHTNESS. VERILY IN THAT
THERE IS A SIGN FOR THE BELIEVERS.


