Is It Possible For God To Beget a Cchild?
=========================================

VERSE NO.34ِ35

Following the clear and expressive story of Jesus Christ and his
strange birth; Qura"n applies to the polytheistic ideas, and
superstitious notions, that have mingled with truth, about the Arch
Prophet of God. Qura"n has narrated the event with words of truth and
veracity, but they doubt, and adhere to the false ideas that they have
forged and fabricated. Some of the Jews doubted the innocence of Mary,
and some of the Christians doubted Jesus as being a human. Some knew him
to be the God, and some other believed him as the SON OF GOD! And
following such false ideas, there appeared the doctrine of TRINITY.

Christians have ignored that begetting a son is a physical act, which
is caused by physical needs of man's animal nature. Attributing a wife
or children to God is derogatory to His glorified substance, the sacred,
the most high. As a matter of fact, the doctrine of TRINITY did not form
a part of the apostles preaching, as this is reported in the New
Testament. In its final form, it is a product of many factors that were
invented long after Jesus raise to the heavens.

\*\*\*\*\* [ 63 ]

**THE BIRTH OF JESUS IN THE GOSPEL**

LUKEِ1:26ِ38 The birth of Jesus in the Book of Matthew, and Luke, has
been cited with not much difference from Qura"n:ِ \`\`In the sixth month
of Elizabeth's pregnancy, God sent His archangel GABRIEL to a town in
Galilee, named Nazareth. He had a Message for Mary the virgin. So
Gabriel went to her and said:ِ

Peace be with you. God has greatly blessed you. Mary wondered and
trembled with fear! Gabriel said to her:ِ Don't be afraid. God has been
gracious to you. Soon you will become pregnant and give birth to a son,
and you will name him Jesus. Mary said to the angel:ِ But I am a virgin,
how then this can happen? Gabriel answered:ِ God's powerِthe holy spirit
will do that.'' As how did Mary introduced her baby to her people the
New Testament is silent, and Qura"n's report about that is as mentioned
above in the commentary.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

وَإِنَّ اللهَ رَبِّى وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ هَذَا صِرَاطٌ
مُّسْتَقِيمٌ(( 36 ))

36- AND VERILY ALLAH IS MY LORD AND YOUR LORD, SO WORSHIP HIM; THIS IS
THE DIRECT WAY.

فَاخْتَلَفَ الاَْحْزَابُ مِنْ بَيْنِهِمْ فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
مِنْ مَّشْهَدِ يَوْم عَظِيم(( 37 ))

37- THEN THE PARTIES DIFFERED AMONG THEMSELVES. SO, WOE TO THOSE WHO
DISBELIEVED ON SEEING THE GREAT DAY.

أَسْمِعْ بِهِمْ وَأَبْصِرْ يَوْمَ يَأْتُونَنَا لَكِنِ الظَّالِمُونَ
الْيَوْمَ فِى ضَلاَل مُّبِين(( 38 ))

38- HOW SHARP THEIR EARS AND EYES ARE THE DAY THAT THEY COME TO US. BUT
TO-DAY THE OPPRESSORS ARE IN MANIFEST ERROR. [ 64 ]

وَأَنذِرْهُمْ يَوْمَ الْحَسْرَةِ إِذْ قُضِىَ الاَْمْرُ وَهُمْ فِى
غَفْلَة وَهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 39 ))

39- AND WARN THEM OF THE DAY OF REGRET. WHEN THE MATTER IS JUDGED (AND
GOD'S DECREE IS ISSUED), AND THEY ARE IN NEGLIGENCE, AND THEY BELIEVE
NOT.

إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَرِثُ الاَْرْضَ وَمَنْ عَلَيْهَا وَإِلَيْنَا
يُرْجَعُونَ(( 40 ))

40- WE WILL INHERIT THE EARTH, AND WHOEVER IS ON IT, AND TO US THEY
WILL BE RETURNED.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE DAY OF REGRET AND SORROW**

VERSE NO.36ِ40 The last word of Jesus Christ that was uttered in the
cradle, put a stress on the Monotheism of worship. He said:ِ \`\`Allah
is my Lord, so worship Him alone, and this is the right way.''

So Jesus began his life with his challenge against duality, trinity,
and polytheism. In the Qura"n, S 43:63ِ64 we read:ِ \`\`When Jesus came
with clear signs, he said; Now I have come to you to make clear to you
by wisdom some of the matters upon which you have differed, so fear
Allah and obey me, that Allah is your Lord and my Lord. But sects
differed among themselves, then Woe to the oppressors from the anguish
of the fearful day.''

Christ's teaching was as simple as his life, and explained clearly the
Mosaic Law in a plain language, and through parables and examples, but
later on the Christians made it crooked and mingled the simple matters
with complex philosophical doctrine of ancient Greeks, such as the
fabricated Trinity that has been a riddle for solution by suggestions
that, how can the number one, 3 times equals one; i.e. 1+1+1=1 [ 65 ]

Jesus very frankly said to his audience that my Lord and your Lord is
Allah, the only one God. So worship Him if you look for a direct way:ِ
\`\`They thus fell in variance and differed among themselves, and Woe is
unto them in Dooms Day, for what they have forged and fabricated.'' The
said differences were so extensive among the Christian sects that
Constantine, the Roman Emperor held a high assembly of the priests,
scholars, learned, elders, and doctors of the Law, which numbered to
some 2170 members. In that great meeting some said that Jesus was the
God, who had come down on the earth for giving life to some and taking
life from some other. Some said; not so! He was only the son of God; and
some said he was only one of the three hypostasis. A group of the
members called his mother Mary to be a god or a godness too.

There were also in that meeting those who said, Jesus was no more than
a sincere servant of God, honoured and elected by Him as His apostle.
From among the great assembly, 308 persons who made the greatest party
of having the same belief, their doctrine was approved and accepted as
the ORTHODOX, and were considered to be sound in religious doctrine. No
opinion was accepted there with unanimous approval, and their greatest
religious weak point, which is their polytheism remained with them.

وَاذْكُرْ فِى الْكِتَابِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صِدِّيقاً
نَبِيّاً(( 41 ))

41- AND MENTION ABRAHAM IN THE BOOK, THAT, HE WAS A TRUTHFUL (MAN, AND
ALSO) A PROPHET.

إِذْ قَالَ لاَِبِيهِ يَا أَبَتِ لِمَ تَعْبُدُ مَا لاَ يَسْمَعُ وَلاَ
يُبْصِرُ وَلاَ يُغْنِى عَنْكَ شَيْئاً(( 42 )) [ 66 ] 42- WHEN HE SAID TO
HIS FATHER:ِ \`\`O, MY FATHER! WHY DO YOU WORSHIP THAT WHICH NEITHER
HEARS NOR SEES AND WILL NOT AVAIL YOU ANYTHING?

يَا أَبَتِ إِنِّى قَدْ جَاءَنِى مِنْ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَمْ يَأْتِكَ
فَاتَّبِعْنِى أَهْدِكَ صِرَاطاً سَوِيّاً(( 43 ))

43- O, MY FATHER! OF KNOWLEDGE, SOME HAS COME TO ME, WHICH HAS NOT COME
TO YOU. THEN FOLLOW ME TO LEAD YOU TO AN EVEN WAY.

يَا أَبَتِ لاَ تَعْبُدْ الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ كَانَ
لِلرَّحْمَانِ عَصِيّاً(( 44 ))

44- O, MY FATHER! DO NOT WORSHIP SATAN, THAT SATAN WAS A REBEL AGAINST
THE MERCIFUL.

يَا أَبَتِ إِنِّى أَخَافُ أَنْ يَمَسَّكَ عَذَابٌ مِّنْ الرَّحْمَنِ
فَتَكُونَ لِلشَّيْطَانِ وَلِيّاً(( 45 ))

45- O, MY FATHER! I AM AFRAID TO TOUCH YOU A TORMENT FROM THE MERCIFUL,
THEN YOU BECOME A FRIEND OF SATAN.


**THE COMMENTARY
ABRAHAM'S KNOCKING-DOWN LOGIC**

VERSE NO.41ِ45 Following the story of Jesus and his mother, there has
come a part of Abraham's history and his conflict with his father. He,
as a young boy pleaded with his father earnestly to accept the truth of
God; but he was rejected. His father was an idol maker and idol seller,
and Abraham was afraid that the friendliness of his father to evil would
incur the wrath of God, who is the Most Merciful and Just. [ 67 ]

The Arabic, \`\`AB'' literally means father, but metaphorically applies
to uncle and guardian too. Therefore, some commentators believe that the
idol maker in this address was Abraham's uncle, and not his real father.
Both parties have their own reasonings for their apprehension. The
narration begins with the verse (NO.41) saying:ِ

\`\`And make a mention of Abraham in the BOOK that he was a truthful
man, and also a prophet. Here the Arabic, \`\`SEDDIGH'' translated to
truthful, has other shades of meaning such as friend, but it mainly
denotes a man without falsehood and lie uttered or acted to deceive. It
is a man qualified with veracity, sincerity, and genuineness. So a
prophet is supposed to be truthful, before he is promoted to the rank of
a prophet or an apostle:ِ

\`\`He said to his father:ِ Why do you worship something which can
neither hear, nor see, and is of not any use, and can avail you nothing
in needs?'' In Abraham's word to his father, we see a perspicuous
reason, and a plain to understanding proof, against polytheism and
idolatries. He told his father; why should you worship something or
someone for a god, who can do nothing for you, and who can do nothing
for himself. He who cannot see our tears and cannot hear our prayers!
Why should we refer to a deity who cannot solve even a simple problem
for us.

Worthy of note here that, Hazrat Abraham began his mission with
preaching his own household. He very politely and with clear cut
reasons, asked his father to cease idolatry and adhere to his real God
and true Creator who is the only one. He tried to attract the attention
of his father to the evil consequences of idolatry and polytheism,
saying:ِ

\`\`O, my father! Don't worship Satan and befriend not evil that I am
afraid to touch you a torment from our Merciful Lord, and you become a
friend of Satan instead of Allah.'' [ 68 ] But his father threatened to
stone the boy to death, if he would give up the idols, and turn his face
away from them. He therefore said to Abraham:ِ

قَالَ أَرَاغِبٌ أَنْتَ عَنْ آلِهَتِى يَا إِبْراهِيمُ لَئِنْ لَمْ
تَنتَهِ لاََرْجُمَنَّكَ وَاهْجُرْنِى مَلِيّاً(( 46 ))

46- HE SAID:ِ \`\`ARE YOU TURNING AWAY FROM MY GODS O, ABRAHAM!? IF YOU
CEASE NOT, I WILL STONE YOU. NOW LEAVE ME FOR LONG.''

قَالَ سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكَ سَأَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكَ رَبِّى إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِى
حَفِيّاً(( 47 ))

47- HE SAID:ِ \`\`PEACE ON YOU. SOON SHALL I ASK MY LORD TO FORGIVE
YOU, THAT HE HAS BEEN KIND TO ME.

وَأَعْتَزِلُكُمْ وَمَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ وَأَدْعُوا رَبِّى
عَسَى أَلاَّ أَكُونَ بِدُعَاءِ رَبِّى شَقِيّاً(( 48 ))

48- AND I WILL WITHDRAW FROM YOU AND WHAT YOU CALL ON APART FROM ALLAH,
AND I WILL PRAY TO MY LORD WITH THE HOPE THAT MY PRAYER WILL BE
ANSWERED.

فَلَمَّا اعْتَزَلَهُمْ وَمَا يَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ وَهَبْنَا
لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَكُلّاً جَعَلْنَا نَبِيّاً(( 49 ))

49- THEN WHEN HE WITHDREW FROM THEM AND WHAT THEY CALLED APART FROM
ALLAH, WE GRANTED HIM ISAAC AND JACOB; AND EACH ONE OF THEM WE MADE A
PROPHET.

وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُمْ مِّنْ رَّحْمَتِنَا وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ لِسَانَ صِدْق
عَلِيّاً(( 50 ))

50- AND WE BESTOWED ON THEM OF OUR MERCY, AND MADE FOR THEM AN EXALTED
LANGUAGE OF TRUTH. [ 69 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE RESULT OF LEAVING POLYTHEISM**

VERSE NO.46ِ50 The gentle and kind speech of Abraham did not touch the
heart of his father, and on the contrary filled him with anger, and
increased his selfishness; so that he arrogantly threatened his son to
kill him by stone, which is the worst kind of killing a person:ِ \`\`He
said:ِ O, Abraham! If you cease not, I will stone you. Now, you get out
of here, and leave me for long.'' The verses that are related to
Abraham, seem to be the conclusion of a long argument, and the outcome
of Abraham's knowledge and truthfulness. What his father has said in
answer to him, in a rude and repellent tone, is the outcome of
polytheism; which is vanity, pride and arrogance.

The father said:ِ You must cease your Monotheism and adhere to my
idols. If not, I will stone you. Now for the time being get out of my
sight. But in return for abuse and threat, the boy spoke with gentle and
kind words. The argument ends with the son full of love, forgiveness,
and of course firm in his belief, while the father is full of anger,
fanaticism, and emotion of displeasure. Here is where the difference
between a man of God, and a Godless man can be clearly distinguished.

AZAR, according to some Islamic traditions, is the name of Abraham's
father or uncle in this relation. Whoever he was, he could not bear
Abraham to despise his idols which were his profitable business and
occupation too. Abraham held his own control of being nervous, and very
politely said to his father:ِ

\`\`Peace be on you! Soon shall I ask my Lord to forgive you, that my
Lord Has been kind to me.'' He then withdrew himself and left his home
and hearth in the Ur of the Chaldees, and never returned to his home
town again. He applied himself in full time at the service of his only
one God, and put all his trusts upon Him:ِ [ 70 ]

\`\`I will withdraw from you, and whatever you worship apart from
Allah, and I will pray to my Lord, and I hope that my prayer will be
answered.'' When Abraham withdrew from them and their false god's, Allah
bestowed on him His Mercy, and granted him Jacob and Isaac. Jacob was
the son of Isaac and the grandson of Abraham, the line of whom held the
banner of Monotheism for several generations.

وَاذْكُرْ فِى الْكِتَابِ مُوسَى إِنَّهُ كَانَ مُخْلَصاً وَكَانَ رَسُولا
نَبِيّاً(( 51 ))

51- AND MENTION MOSES IN THE BOOK, THAT HE WAS SINCERE A PROPHET (AND)
MESSENGER (TOO).

وَنَادَيْنَاهُ مِنْ جَانِبِ الطُّورِ الاَْيْمَنِ وَقَرَّبْنَاهُ
نَجِيّاً(( 52 ))

52- AND WE CALLED HIM FROM THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE MOUNT SINAI, AND
BROUGHT HIM NEAR FOR MUTUAL INTERCOURSE

وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ مِنْ رَّحْمَتِنَا أَخَاهُ هَارُونَ نَبِيّاً(( 53 ))

53- AND OUT OF OUR MERCY WE MADE FOR HIM HIS BROTHER AARON, A PROPHET.
(TOO)

**THE COMMENTARY
MOSES, AN ELECT OF GOD AND A SINCERE PROPHET**

VERSE NO.51ِ53 The above three verses point in brief to Moses, who was
an offspring of Abraham, who raised up again the flag of Monotheism in
his sacred lineage. Here five gifts of God which were granted him is
pointed to, which are as follows:ِ 1ِGod purified him and made him a
sincere servant due to his obedience and stainless worship.

2ِAllah raised him up to the rank of an arch prophet.

[ 71 ]

3ِHe had the honour that God spoke to him, besides the usual
inspiration which is the way of communicating with prophets. In other
word; Moses was a prophet especially chosen to rescue the Israelites
from the bondage and servitude of Egyptians. He was the one with whom
God spoke without the intervention of angels, and hence his title of,
\`\`MOSES, THE INTERLOCUTOR''. He was also inspired as a Messenger,
receiving a Book of Law, and organised a religious community.

4ِGod pulled him near, and called him from the right side of the Mount
Sinai.

This may refer to the incident of the Fire. When Moses was travelling
with his family to graze the flocks of SHUAIB, his father-in-law; he
reached near about the mountain of Sinai, when he saw a fire in
distance. He went towards it to get a brand, to kindle a fire for his
family. When he went near enough, he heard a voice from the fire that
called him by his name, saying:ِ \`\`O, Moses! You are in a sacred
place; so take out your sandals.'' There; nine great miracles were given
him for show, and his important mission was explained to him.

5ِWhen God spoke to Moses through the Fire, he asked his Lord to
associate his brother Aaron in his mission too. وَاذْكُرْ فِى الْكِتَابِ
إِسْمَاعِيلَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صَادِقَ الْوَعْدِ وَكَانَ رَسُولا نَّبِيّاً((
54 ))

54- AND MENTION ISHMAEL IN THE BOOK, THAT HE WAS A TRUTHFUL IN PROMISE,
AND HE WAS A PROPHET MESSENGER.

وَكَانَ يَأْمُرُ أَهْلَهُ بِالصَّلاَةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ وَكَانَ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِ مَرْضِيّاً(( 55 ))

55- AND HE WAS BIDDIND HIS HOUSEHOLD TO (PERFORM) THE PRAYER AND (PAY
THE) ALMS-TAX. AND HE WAS AGREEABLE TO HIS LORD. (GOD WAS PLEASED WITH
HIM) [ 72 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ISHMAEL, THE TRUTHFUL IN PROMISE**

VERSE NO.54ِ55 Here the immediate reference is to Ishmael who was the
prophet, and the chosen sacrifice of God, who was in particular very
truthful in his promises. His next peculiarity was that he used to bid
his household to perform the prayer and to pay the alms-tax, or say it,
the \`\`Tithe'' for the poor and needy. The verse (NO.55) ends in that
he was agreeable to God, and Allah was always pleased with him. The
stress is put upon the fulfilment of promises, and the training of
family and near relatives. As a matter of fact, no one can become a
prophet or a Messenger of God, without being truthful in his promises,
and careful to observe it. On the other hand, the first stage of
preaching a message or teaching a doctrine, is to begin with near
relatives; and then the others. The verses end in that, Ishmael has
always been agreeable to his Lord and God was pleased with him.

According to Qura"n and Islamic traditions, Abraham told his son
Ishmael that he had an order through his dream to offer him as a
sacrifice to God. In answer to his father, the son, said:ِ \`\`Do as God
has ordered you to do; and if God speed, you shall find me patient in
that.'' So he voluntarily offered his life and accepted to be sacrificed
and never wavered in his promise, but Allah prevented his father to
sacrifice him, and so, Abraham redeemed him by the substitution of a
lamb, as per order of his Lord; and hence the title of \`\`truthful in
promise'', for the Chosen Sacrifice of God. (ISMA"ELِZABIHULLAH).

وَاذْكُرْ فِى الْكِتَابِ إِدْرِيسَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صِدِّيقاً نَّبِيّاً((
56 ))

56- AND MENTION IDRIS IN THE BOOK, THAT HE WAS A TRUTHFUL MAN AND A
PROPHET. [ 73 ]

وَرَفَعْنَاهُ مَكَاناً عَلِيّاً(( 57 ))

57- AND WE RAISED HIM TO A HIGH POSITION.

أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِّنَ النَّبِيِّينَ مِنْ
ذُرِّيَّةِ آدَمَ وَمِمَّنْ حَمَلْنَا مَعَ نُوح وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّةِ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْرَائِيلَ وَمِمَّنْ هَدَيْنَا وَاجْتَبَيْنَا إِذَا
تُتْلَى عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُ الرَّحْمنِ خَرُّوا سُجَّداً وَبُكِيّاً(( 58
))

58- THEY ARE THOSE WHOM GOD HAS BLESSED OF THE PROPHETS, FROM THE SEED
OF ADAM, AND OF HE WHO WE CARRIED WITH NOAH, (IN THE ARK) AND FROM THE
SEED OF ABRAHAM AND ISRAEL, AND OF HE WHO WE GUIDED AND CHOSE. WHEN THE
SIGNS OF THE MERCIFUL WERE RECITED TO THEM THEY FELL DOWN IN PROSTRATION
AND WEEPING.

فَخَلَفَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ خَلْفٌ أَضَاعُوا الصَّلاَةَ وَاتَّبَعُوا
الشَّهَوَاتِ فَسَوْفَ يَلْقَوْنَ غَيّاً(( 59 ))

59- THEN AFTER THEM (OTHER) GENERATIONS SUCCEEDED THEM WHO SPOILED THE
PRAYER, AND FOLLOWED (THEIR) LUSTS. SO VERY SOON WILL THEY MEET (THE
CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR) ERROR. إِلاَّ مَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ
صَالِحاً فَأُوْلَئِكَ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ شَيْئاً((
60 )) 60- EXCEPT HE WHO REPENTED, AND BELIEVED, AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEED;
THEY ARE THOSE WHO ENTER THE PARADISE AND WILL NOT BE OPPRESSED
ANYTHING.

[ 74 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THESE ARE THE TRUTHFUL APOSTLES**

VERSE NO.56ِ60

Idris was a prophet and a truthful and sincere man. He is mentioned
twice in the Qura"n; here and in a short verse in S 21:85 :ِ \`\`And
Ishmael, Idris, and Zul-kifl were all men of patience.'' According to
some Islamic traditions, Idris was Noah's grandfather. Arabs call him
IDRIS from the root word, \`\`DARS'' which means lesson. This is because
he was the first man who used a pen in writing. He is said to have been
well versed in arithmetic and astronomy. He was also the first to teach
man the art of sewing clothes. His Biblical name is, \`\`AKHNUKH'':ِ
\`\`And mention Idris in the Book that he was a truthful man and a
prophet, when We raised him to a high position.''

As to what the said, \`\`HIGH POSITION'' could have been, the
commentators have different views. Some of them think that he has had a
high rank and respect among his people, and that they honoured him much.
Some have taken it to mean he has had a high spiritual dignity in the
sight of God; and a third group of the commentators understand from the
said phrase that, Idris too, like Jesus Christ was taken up to heavens
by Allah, his Lord. Such differences may arise from the various shades
of meanings that the Arabic, \`\`MAKA"N'' translated by us to,
\`\`POSITION'' has on the tip of the tongues; like, place, position,
social rank, locality or spot occupied as a dwelling place, building,
space, and etc.

Then follows the next verse (NO.59) saying:ِ

\`\`Then after them, other generations succeeded them, who spoiled the
prayer and followed their lusts.'' The earlier generations can be
grouped into three epochs:ِ AِFrom Adam to Noah BِFrom Noah to Abraham
CِFrom Abraham to our prophet Mohammad, when God's Book and Message were
perverted to comply with the selfish ideas and caprices of false
religious leaders. [ 75 ]

جَنَّاتِ عَدْن الَّتِى وَعَدَ الرَّحْمنُ عِبَادَهُ بِالْغَيْبِ إِنَّهُ
كَانَ وَعْدُهُ مَأْتِيّاً(( 61 ))

61- THE GARDENS OF EDEN, WHICH THE MERCIFUL PROMISED HIS SERVANTS WHILE
UNSEEN. VERILY HIS PROMISE WILL COME TO PASS.

لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْواً إِلاَّ سَلاَماً وَلَهُمْ رِزْقُهُمْ
فِيهَا بُكْرَةً وَعَشِيّاً(( 62 ))

62- THEREIN THEY SHALL HEAR NO IDLE TALK, BUT ONLY PEACE (SALUTATION).
AND THEREIN THEY SHALL HAVE THEIR SUSTENANCE AT MORNING AND EVENING.

تِلْكَ الْجَنَّةُ الَّتِى نُورِثُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا مَنْ كَانَ تَقِيّاً((
63 ))

63- SUCH IS THE PARADISE WHICH WE MAKE OUR PIOUS SERVANTS TO INHERIT.

**THE COMMENTARY
A DESCRIPTION OF PARADISE**

VERSE NO.61ِ63

The verses carry more details of the Gardens of Bliss, which make the
Paradise, beneath which streams of water flow. They are everlasting
gardens, not seen the like of it. In the verse NO.61, the Arabic,
\`\`JANNA"T'' is the plural for,\`\`JENNAT'' which means garden. It
therefore implies that Paradise consists of numerous gardens which God
has promised to grant them to His truthful servants. The gardens are
qualified by the adjective, \`\`Eden'' which means permanent and
everlasting. The word unseen in the verse, may imply that no one has
ever seen such gardens of that beauty, and even no thought can
comprehend them.

[ 76 ] One of the ethical bounties of Paradise is that, no one of its
inhabitants use idle talks:ِ \`\`Therein they shall hear no idle talk,
but only, SALA"M.'' The Arabic \`\`SALA"M'', has a much wider
significance than, peace or salutation. First of all it is one of the
beautiful names of God. It also denotes health, peace, perfection,
freedom, sense of security and permanence, and some other shades of
meaning. There prevails a general health of body, mind, thought and
behaviour. The place is clean of all sorts of infection and disease.

There in the Paradise the inhabitants can have whatever they desire.
The life therein is never monotonous, or wearisomely uniform. They will
have various gifts and sustenances at morning and evening, and their
course of development and progress will continue by getting new gifts
from their Gracious Lord.

وَمَا نَتَنَزَّلُ إِلاَّ بِأَمْرِ رَبِّكَ لَهُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِينَا
وَمَا خَلْفَنَا وَمَا بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ وَمَا كَانَ رَبُّكَ نَسِيّاً(( 64
))

64- AND WE COME NOT DOWN EXCEPT BY THE COMMAND OF YOUR LORD. TO HIM
BELONGS WHATEVER IS BEFORE US AND BEHIND US, AND WHAT IS IN BETWEEN; AND
YOUR LORD IS NOT FORGETFUL.

رَبُّ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا فَاعْبُدْهُ وَاصْطَبِرْ
لِعِبَادَتِهِ هَلْ تَعْلَمُ لَهُ سَمِيّاً(( 65 ))


