Occasion of the Revelation
==========================

VERSE NO.64ِ65

Inspiration to our prophet Mohammad (SA) ceased for several days, and
no angel such as GABRIEL appeared to him. He became very anxious. When
again Gabriel came the prophet said:ِ \`\`Why so much delay. I was
longing to meet you.'' In answer to the prophet Gabriel said:ِ \`\`I
too, have missed you much, but we angels come not down except by the
command of Allah. We are all, only, servants to our Lord; and to Him
belongs whatever we have before us or in behind. Our past, present, and
future is His.''

**GOD FORGETS NOTHING**

The angels of God carrying his Order, Message, or Grace, are absolute
servants of God. They may come down to man only by command of God, and
according to God's Universal Plan, Will, and Purpose. God will never
forget anything or anyone, and Mercifully cares for all. So we have to
wait patiently for His angel, wisdom, and providence, to appear. He is
our Lord, our only Lord, and the Lord of all:ِ \`\`Lord of the heavens
and earth, and whatever is between them. So worship him and be steadfast
in his worship. Do you know a namesake for him?'' If we search the whole
universe, and the wide world of our thought and imagination, we shall
find nothing and no one, to be compared with Him in name and quality. He
is the only one true God, and all praises refer and return back to Him,
Glory be to our Lord, the Merciful, the Compassionate.

وَيَقُولُ الاِْنسَانُ أَئِذَا مَا مِتُّ لَسَوْفَ أُخْرَجُ حَيّاً(( 66
))

66- AND MAN SAYS:ِ \`\`WHEN I AM DEAD, SHALL I SOON GET OUT ALIVE!? [
78 ]

أَوَلاَ يَذْكُرُ الاِْنسَانُ أَنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَلَمْ يَكُ
شَيْئاً(( 67 ))

67- WILL NOT MAN REMEMBER THAT WE CREATED HIM BEFORE, WHILE HE WAS NOT
A THING?

فَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَحْشُرَنَّهُمْ وَالشَّيَاطِينَ ثُمَّ لَنُحْضِرَنَّهُمْ
حَوْلَ جَهَنَّمَ جِثِيّاً(( 68 ))

68- SO, BY YOUR LORD, WE WILL SURELY GATHER THEM TOGETHER, AND (ALSO)
THE SATANS; THEN WE ASSEMBLE THEM ABOUT THE HELL, WOBBLING ON THEIR
KNEES.

ثُمَّ لَنَنزِعَنَّ مِنْ كُلِّ شِيعَة أَيُّهُمْ أَشَدُّ عَلَى الرَّحْمنِ
عِتِيّاً(( 69 ))

69- THEN WE SEPARATE FROM EVERY SECT, THE STOUTEST OF REBELS OF THEM,
AGAINST THE MERCIFUL.

ثُمَّ لَنَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِالَّذِينَ هُمْ أَوْلَى بِهَا صِلِيّاً(( 70
))

70- WE KNOW THEN THE BEST, THOSE WHO DESERVE MORE TO BE BURNED
THEREIN.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

VALID-IBN-MAGHIRAH, forgeting all about his own creation, took a piece
of bone that belonged to a dead man; and showed it to our prophet
Mohammad (SA), while he was turning the bone into powder with the
pressure of his fingers, and said:ِ \`\`Do you really say that, this
rotten bone will come to life once again? Who can give life to such a
dry bone which is already decomposed?'' Our prophet who was sure that
God has power over all things, said with emphasis that; He will give
them life who created them for the first time, when they were nothing at
all. [ 79 ]

**ROUND ABOUT THE HELL**

VERSE NO.66ِ70

Man in a denial tongue, and rejecting language says:ِ \`\`When I am
dead and decayed, shall I come to life once again?'' And he is
answered:ِ \`\`Were you not created before when you were not a thing at
all?'' In other word; Man was nothing at first, and God created him! Is
it not possible for the same God who created Man when he was nothing, to
recreate him from dusts and bones which are at least something, and
whatever else has remained of him spiritually or physically?

Through the next verse (NO.68), Allah has strictly threatened the
sinners and the unbelievers, that He will gather them around the Hell
for His Final Judgement while they are wobbling on their knees. There;
from every sect their stoutest of rebels against the Merciful God, are
separated. They are then joined with their devilish friends, and all are
prepared for God's Final Judgement, so as to taste their deserved
punishment. Those who reject the truth, and do evil deeds, deserve to be
herded with their friends who are Satans.

وَإِنْ مِّنْكُمْ إِلاَّ وَارِدُهَا كَانَ عَلَى رَبِّكَ حَتْماً
مَّقْضِيّاً(( 71 ))

71- THERE IS NONE OF YOU UNLESS HE WILL ENTER IT, WHICH IS A DETERMINED
DECREE OF YOUR LORD.

ثُمَّ نُنَجِّى الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا وَنَذَرُ الظَّالِمِينَ فِيهَا
جِثِيّاً (( 72 ))

72- THEN WE SHALL SAVE THOSE WHO AVOIDED EVIL, AND LEAVE THE OPPRESSORS
THEREIN, HOBBLING ON THEIR KNEES. [ 80 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ALL WILL HAVE TO SEE THE HELL**

NO.71ِ72

\`\`There is none of you unless he has to enter it, and then We shall
save those who have avoided evil.'' Commentators have various ideas
about the entry. Some have taken it to mean approaching the Hell in
order to see how dreadful it is. Some others have understood, passing
over it through a bridge called SERA"T. Another view is that, everyone
will enter the Hell, but the believers have some sort of a light, that
quenches the blaze of the fire, and they will get out safety. Meanwhile,
the disbelievers too, will enter the Fire but Allah will keep them
there.

And how we all will have to pass through the hell so as to see with our
own eyes, that terrible blazing Fire in which the sinners have to live.
He who accepts His oneness, and does right, Our Merciful Lord will save
him and lead him to His Paradise. According to some traditions, there is
a bridge stretched over the Hell, over which all must pass in their way
to destination. Some will pass the bridge easily and very quickly, and
some will walk over it with much difficulty, and will finally fall down
amid the fire.

وَإِذَا تُتْلى عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَات قَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَىُّ الْفَرِيقَيْنِ خَيْرٌ مَّقَاماً وَأَحْسَنُ
نَدِيّاً(( 73 ))

73- WHEN OUR PERSPICUOUS SIGNS (VERSES) ARE RECITED TO THEM, THE
UNBELIEVERS SAY TO THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED:ِ \`\`WHICH ONE OF THE TWO
PARTIES IS BETTER IN POSITION, AND SUPERIOR IN ASSOCIATION?''

[ 81 ]

وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِّنْ قَرْن هُمْ أَحْسَنُ أَثَاثاً
وَرِئْياً(( 74 ))

74- AND HOW MANY A GENERATION WE DESTROYED BEFORE THEM, WHO WERE BETTER
IN PROPERTY AND SPLENDOUR.

قُلْ مَنْ كَانَ فِى الضَّلاَلَةِ فَلْيَمْدُدْ لَهُ الرَّحْمنُ مَدّاً
حَتَّى إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ إِمَّا الْعَذَابَ وَإِمَّا
السَّاعَةَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ هُوَ شَرٌّ مَّكَاناً وَأَضْعَفُ جُنداً((
75 ))

75- SAY, HE WHO IS IN ERROR, THEN THE MERCIFUL WILL RESPITE HIM, TILL
HE SEES WHAT THEY ARE PROMISED, WHETHER THE PUNISHMENT, OR, THE HOUR.
THEN VERY SOON WILL THEY KNOW WHO IS WORSE IN POSITION, AND WEAKER OF
HOSTS.

وَيَزِيدُ اللهُ الَّذِينَ اهْتَدَوْا هُدىً وَالْبَاقِيَاتُ
الصَّالِحَاتُ خَيْرٌ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ ثَوَاباً وَخَيْرٌ مَّرَدّاً(( 76
))

76- AND ALLAH WILL INCREASE THOSE WHO ARE GUIDED (THEIR) GUIDANCE, AND
THE ABIDING (DEEDS) OF RIGHTEOUSNESS ARE BETTER WITH YOUR LORD, AS
REWARD AND GOOD END.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO.73ِ76**

The first class of people who converted and joined the prophet were
among the weaker party of the community who had pure and sincere hearts,
and who were not contaminated with the filth of sin, and evil deeds.
Among these were Men and Women, although poor, and [ 82 ] labourer, but
with lofty purposes, and high ambition; such as BALA"L, YA"SIR,
SOMMAYEH, AMMA"R, KHOBA"B, and SALMA"N PA"RSI. In that pagan era, the
unit of measure, and the criterion of personality was gold and glitter,
something that our prophet was going to overwhelm. The pagans used to
wear beautiful clothing, and precious ornaments, and move among the
believers to show their splendour and glory. In a taunting language,
they said to the believers:ِ

\`\`Which one of the two parties is better in position and superior in
association?'' The unbelievers may temporarily be able to get a better
physical position with enough wealth, furniture and living welfare; so
as to attract the attention of common people, whose wisdom are usually
in their eyes, but eventually the truth must prevail.

Every evil deed will have its own evil consequences, and also its
deserved punishment; either, here in this world, or in the life to come.
Those who are in error may have a respite from their Merciful Lord, but
Allah fails not in His promise, and sooner or later they have to
confront with the fruit of their deeds, bitter or sweet, because in the
Universal Law of Creation and Creator there is a reaction for every
action. Therefore, God's respite should not delude them and render them
self-conceited, so as to use the rope of respite in hanging themselves:
\`\`He who is in error, the Merciful may respite him, till he sees what
they are promised, whether the punishment of this life or the dreads or
terrors of the HOUR!''

أَفَرَأَيْتَ الَّذِى كَفَرَ بِآيَاتِنَا وَقَالَ لَأُوتَيَنَّ مَالا
وَوَلَداً(( 77 ))

77- DID YOU THEN SEE HIM WHO DISBELIEVED OUR SIGNS, AND SAID I WILL BE
GIVEN (MUCH) WEALTH AND (MANY) CHILDREN? [ 83 ]

أَطَّلَعَ الْغَيْبَ أَمِ اتَّخَذَ عِنْدَ الرَّحْمنِ عَهْداً(( 78 ))

78- HAS HE SEEN THE UNSEEN, OR HAS HE MADE A COVENANT (ON THAT) WITH
ALLAH?

كَلاَّ سَنَكْتُبُ مَا يَقُولُ وَنَمُدُّ لَهُ مِنْ الْعَذَابِ مَدّاً((
79 ))

79- NOT SO, (AS HE SAYS) SOON SHALL WE WRITE DOWN, WHAT HE SAYS, AND
LENGTHEN FOR HIM THE PUNISHMENT A LENGTH.

وَنَرِثُهُ مَا يَقُولُ وَيَأْتِينَا فَرْداً(( 80 ))

80- AND WE INHERIT HIM WHAT HE SAYS (OF WEALTH AND CHILDREN) AND HE
SHALL COME TO US ALONE.

وَاتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ آلِهَةً لِّيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزّاً(( 81
))

81- AND THEY TOOK DEITIES APART FROM ALLAH, IN ORDER TO BE A RESPECT
FOR THEM.

كَلاَّ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدّاً((
82 ))

82- NOT SO; (AS THEY THINK) SOON SHALL THEY DENY THEIR WORSHIP AND
BECOME OPPONENT AGAINST THEM.

**THE COMMENTARY
A SUPERSTITIOUS AND PERVERTED THOUGHT**

VERSE NO.77ِ82

There are some people who may think that piety and faith in God, will
bar them from secular welfares, and keep them away from the good things
of this world; and their hope for Paradise is some sort of a sell on
credit, which may not be paid. This sort of idea is absurd, [ 84 ] and
also very dangerous in Man's social affairs. Qura"n strictly rejects
this kind of ideas, and foresees a dreadful end, and a painful
punishment for those who hold it:ِ

\`\`Did you see him who denied our signs, and said that he will be
given much wealth and many children on the basis of his faithlessness.
How does he foretell that? Has he penetrated into the world of unseen,
or has he made a covenant with Allah on that account? Soon shall We
write down what he says, and inherit him whatever he may have and then
he will come to us alone and without anything or any one!'' There were
men among the Pagan Arabs who boasted saying:ِ \`\`In the near future I
will be having much wealth and many children, because piety and faith
have not put my feet in chain, and I am not fettered by the petty
spiritual and religious rules and regulations.'' Those pagans who are
not rare in our time too, build their worldly desires on such ridiculous
basis. In other word they have built their house at a sea shore which is
made of fine sand. They do not think that any good must come out of the
hands of God, and no one can know what will happen to him to-morrow.

The next verse (NO.81) reveals another object of the pagans in their
worship of false gods. They do that in order to gain social respect
among the common people and laymen:ِ \`\`They have taken deities apart
from Allah, in order to be a glory for them, and have people's respect.
But it is not so as they think, and very soon the truth will uncover its
beautiful face, and they shall deny their false gods, and disclaim
connection with them.'' So also, the idols and the deified men and
women, will deny that they knew anything of their worshippers, and their
acts of worship. Thus the false gods and the foolish worshippers will
leave each other in the lurch.

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا الشَّيَاطِينَ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
تَؤُزُّهُمْ أَزّاً(( 83 ))

83- DID YOU NOT SEE THAT WE SENT SATANS AGAINST THE UNBELIEVERS TO
INCITE THEM (A SEVERE) INCITEMENT? [ 85 ]

فَلاَ تَعْجَلْ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّمَا نَعُدُّ لَهُمْ عَدّاً(( 84 ))

84- THEN DO NOT HASTEN AGAINST THEM THAT WE ARE COUNTING FOR THEM THE
NUMBERS. (OF DAYS OF THEIR RESPITE)

يَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ الْمُتَّقِينَ إِلَى الرَّحْمَنِ وَفْداً(( 85 ))

85- THE DAY IN WHICH WE MUSTER THE PIOUS ONES TOWARDS THE MERCIFUL IN
MULTITUDES.

وَنَسُوقُ الْمُجْرِمِينَ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ وِرْداً(( 86 ))

86- AND WE DRIVE THE SINNERS TOWARDS THE HELL LIKE THIRSTY CAMELS.

لاَ يَمْلِكُونَ الشَّفَاعَةَ إِلاَّ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ عِنْدَ الرَّحْمنِ
عَهْداً(( 87 ))

87- THEY DO NOT OWN (ANY ONE FOR) INTERCESSION, EXCEPT THOSE WHO HAVE
MADE A COVENANT WITH THE MERCIFUL.

**THE COMMENTARY
WHO IS COMPETENT TO INTERCEDE** VERSE NO.83ِ87

The above verses begin with the influence of Satan on disbelievers, who
in fact, have deliberately given way to Devil to rule on their heart and
mind. Then the prophet is addressed and told, not to hurry against the
followers of Satan, because Allah has given them a limited period of
respite, the days of which are numbered:ِ [ 86 ]

\`\`Then do not hasten against them that We are counting for them the
numbers.'' God's Mercy will let the evil doers to have a certain period
of respite so as to consider and evaluate their own deeds, perhaps in
their last chance they may repent and return to their Lord, and follow
his straight path of truth. The days of their term of respite are
numbered. If they reach to a certain level of defiance and wrong, they
will fall down in destruction. So their alluring but deceitful show of
worth and success should not worry the believers, or mislead or perplex
their thought, so as to lose their spirit of trust in Lord.

In the next two verses (NO.85ِ86), the contrast between the saved and
the doomed, has been illustrated in short verses with very expressive
words. Those who have obtained salvation will move on with dignity and
glory, like a mounted victorious commander, leading his hosts when they
return home from the battle-field: \`\`The day in which We muster the
pious ones towards the Merciful in multitude.'' The Arabic, \`\`VAFD''
translated to, \`\`multitude'' is a comprehensive word with various
meanings, such as a delegation who are sent to a king as the
representative of a territory, having the right to debate, and who are
respected and welcomed by the king. Also it may mean those who are
mounted on a horse and etc.

As for the doomed he will go forth in anguish like a herd of tired and
thirsty camels who rush madly for water, but the only thing they
encounter is a blazing fire. They will have no one to intercede with God
on their behalf, except those who have made a covenant with Allah the
Merciful. These are most probably the truthful believers who have
associated no one with the only true God, and who have done righteous
deeds and have avoided evil. They have sincerely followed the
instructions of the Messenger of God, and loved tenderly the saints and
Godly persons who are pure in faith. Such true believers might become
authorized to intercede with Allah on behalf of those sinners who
deserve their intercession. [ 87 ]

وَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمنُ وَلَداً(( 88 ))

88- AND THEY SAID:ِ \`\`THE MERCIFUL HAS TAKEN A CHILD.''

لَقَدْ جِئْتُمْ شَيْئاً إِدّاً(( 89 ))

89- YOU HAVE INDEED UTTERED AN ABOMINABLE WORD.

تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنشَقُّ الاَْرْضُ
وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدّاً(( 90 ))

90- THE SKIES ARE NEAR TO SPLIT OF THAT (HEINOUS WORD), AND THE EARTH
TO REND ASUNDER, AND THE MOUNTAINS TO FALL SMASHING.

أَنْ دَعَوْا لِلرَّحْمَانِ وَلَداً(( 91 ))

91- THAT THEY CLAIMED A CHILD FOR THE MERCIFUL.

وَمَا يَنْبَغِى لِلرَّحْمَانِ أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ وَلَداً(( 92 ))

92- AND IT IS NOT BECOMING FOR THE MERCIFUL TO TAKE A CHILD.

إِنْ كُلُّ مَنْ فِى السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ إِلاَّ آتِى الرَّحْمنِ
عَبْداً(( 93 ))

93- THERE IS NONE IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, WHO COMES NOT TO THE
MERCIFUL AS A SERVANT.

لَقَدْ أَحْصَاهُمْ وَعَدَّهُمْ عَدّاً(( 94 ))

94- VERILY HE HAS COUNTED AND NUMBERED THEM EXACTLY.

وَكُلُّهُمْ آتِيهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَرْداً(( 95 ))

95- AND ALL OF THEM WILL COME TO HIM IN THE RESURRECTION DAY ALONE. [
88 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
GOD IS FAR FROM BEGETTING A CHILD**

VERSE NO.88ِ95 \`\`And they said:ِ The Merciful God has taken a
child!!'' Not only the Christians say Jesus Christ is the son of God; so
are the Jews too, who call OZAIR to be a son of God. And they are no
better than the Arab idolaters who thought that the angels are God's
daughters. And indeed what an ugly and abominable thing have they all
attributed to the Creator of the Infinite Universe by their
ignorance!:ِ

\`\`The skies are near to split of the heinous word, and the earth is
to rend asunder, and no wonder if the mountains fall down smashing,
because of such awfully wrong assertion!'' In fact they knew nothing of
God, or else they would not say that He has a son or a daughter. Every
creature is His created servant and willingly or unwillingly obeys His
universal rules and laws.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَيَجْعَلُ لَهُمُ
الرَّحْمنُ وُدّاً(( 96 ))

96- VERILY THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, SOON THE
MERCIFUL WILL RENDER THEM LOVELY. (SO THAT BOTH FRIEND AND FOE WILL LOVE
THEM)

فَإِنَّمَا يَسَّرْنَاهُ بِلِسَانِكَ لِتُبَشِّرَ بِهِ الْمُتَّقِينَ
وَتُنذِرَ بِهِ قَوْماً لُدّاً(( 97 ))

97- WE HAVE MADE IT EASY (TO UNDERSTAND) BY YOUR TONGUE SO THAT YOU
GIVE GLAD-TIDINGS TO THOSE WHO ARE PIOUS, AND TO WARN BY IT A HOSTILE
PEOPLE.

وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِنْ قَرْن هَلْ تُحِسُّ مِنْهُمْ مِّنْ
أَحَد أَوْ تَسْمَعُ لَهُمْ رِكْزاً(( 98 ))

98- AND HOW MANY A GENERATION WE DESTROYED BEFORE THEM. DO YOU FEEL ANY
ONE OF THEM, OR HEAR OF THEM A WHISPER? [ 89 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
FAITH IS THE SOURCE OF LOVE**

VERSE NO.96ِ98 Faith is a source of love; and good deeds breed ardent
affection, where as evil deeds breed hatred and contention. Therefore,
those Godly people who do good deeds, will earn the love of God, and as
a result of it, the love of his fellow creatures. Many a time we have
seen with our own eyes that when a faithful good doer dies, all the
people who knew him have tears in their eyes for losing him. This is
because Allah Who is the Source of whole existence loves a righteous
believer, and so His love extends throughout the existence, so much so
that, the person whom God loves, he is loved by the angels and all the
creatures who may know him.

Some of the famous historians, and expounders of Qura"n have written
that, the above verse (NO.96) was revealed to our prophet on account of
Hazrat Imam Ali (AS). Among these writers we may mention, ZOMOKHSHARI in
his famous \`\`KASHA"F'', GANJI SHA"FE-IE, GHARTABI, TABARSI and
SAALABI. If we study the verse a little deeper, and with an eye of
justice, it is most applicable to Hazrat Imam Ali, whom no one among the
Muslims can ever excel in faithfulness, and good deeds, as well as
knowledge and wisdom.

THE END OF SUREH MARY (19)

[ 90 ] سوره طه

TA" HA"

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE طه(( 1 ))

1- T-H (TA" HA")

مَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لِتَشْقَى(( 2 ))

2- WE HAVE NOT SENT DOWN THE QURA"N TO YOU TO PUT YOURSELF IN
HARDSHIP.

إِلاَّ تَذْكِرَةً لِّمَنْ يَخْشَى(( 3 ))

3- (THIS IS) ONLY A REMINDER FOR HIM WHO FEARS (GOD).

تَنزِيلا مِّمَّنْ خَلَقَ الاَْرْضَ وَالسَّمَوَاتِ الْعُلَى(( 4 ))

4- A REVELATION FROM HE WHO CREATED THE EARTH AND THE HIGH HEAVENS.

الرَّحْمنُ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَى(( 5 ))

5- THE MERCIFUL WHO DOMINATED THE EMPYREAN.

لَهُ مَا فِى السَّموَاتِ وَمَا فِى الاَْرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا وَمَا
تَحْتَ الثَّرَى(( 6 )) [ 91 ]

6- HE OWNS ALL THAT IS IN THE HEAVENS, AND ALL THAT IS IN THE EARTH,
AND WHATEVER IS BETWEEN THEM, AND WHATEVER IS UNDER GROUND (OF MINES AND
MINERALS).

وَإِنْ تَجْهَرْ بِالْقَوْلِ فَإِنَّهُ يَعْلَمُ السِّرَّ وَأَخْفَى(( 7
))

7- AND IF YOU RAISE YOUR VOICE (OR LOWER IT) HE KNOWS THE SECRETS AND
THE MOST HIDDEN (MATTERS).

اللهُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ لَهُ الاَْسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى(( 8 ))

8- ALLAH, THERE IS NO GOD EXCEPT HE. FOR HIM IS THE MOST BEAUTIFUL
NAMES.


**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO.1ِ8**

AN ABSTRACT

In these verses, it is narrated how Moses was chosen a prophet and
inspired with God's mission. God revealed Himself to Moses through
something like a fire, and by the light of the Fire, he found his
lifeless staff to have life, and to move fast to and fro, and in zigag!
as a big serpent. There at the light of the Fire, Moses was armed with
two miracles, as the signs of God; the serpent/stick, and his hand which
shone white when he put it in his arm-pit. With these two signs Moses
and his brother Aaron were sent to overthrow the greatest power of their
timeِPharaoh the tyrant of Egypt.

The story of Moses has been narrated in many places in the Qura"n, and
in each place the narration is the most appropriate one relative to the
context. Part of these narrations is religious or historical, and some
others are moral or of social affairs. We see stories among them of the
rise and fall of powers, and spiritual combats with foe and friend. [ 92
]

**DON'T PUT YOURSELF SO MUCH IN TROUBLE**

As to the word or letter, \`\`TA"-HA"'', most of commentators and
expounders of Qura"n do not classify it as the abbreviated letters. They
take it as a word to mean, \`\`O, MAN'' by which our prophet has been
addressed. In Arabic literature and poetry, before and after Islamic
era, we sometimes come to Ta Ha to have been used in place of \`\`O,
MAN'' in a verse or sentence. On the other hand, some literature experts
believe that the abbreviated letters have had some sort of a meaning
like a word, but they have been forgotten and out of date through their
long history, and of course God knows the best.

Now almost all the commentators take it as a proper noun to have
addressed the prophet like YA"-SIN in the chapter 36. The narration
begins with saying:ِ \`\`O, Mohammad! We have not sent down the Qura"n
to you to put yourself in trouble and hardship. It rather is to be a
reminder by you for those who may fear Allah and avoid evil, by having a
sense of responsibility.''

The sender of the Message is He Who created the earth and the high
heavens. The Merciful God whose power and control extends throughout the
universe. In the sixth verse, reference is made to the infinite
knowledge of Allah, who knows all the secrets and the most hidden
matters. It makes no difference for him if we raise or lower our voice,
or even hide our intention in our mind.

This group of verses end in that; to God belongs all the beautiful
names. According to some Islamic traditions these names are numbered up
to 99, such as; Allah, Merciful, Compassionate, Forgiving, All-knowing,
and etc.

وَهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ مُوسَى(( 9 ))

9- AND HAS THE STORY OF MOSES COME TO YOU?

إِذْ رَءَا نَاراً فَقَالَ لاَِهْلِهِ امْكُثُوا إِنِّى آنَسْتُ نَاراً
لَّعَلِّى آتِيكُمْ مِّنْهَا بِقَبَس أَوْ أَجِدُ عَلَى النَّارِ هُدىً((
10 )) [ 93 ]

10- WHEN HE SAW A FIRE, AND SAID TO HIS FAMILY:ِ \`\`WAIT A MINUTE! I
SAW A FIRE. PERHAPS I MAY BRING YOU A BRAND OF IT, OR FIND SOME GUIDANCE
NEAR THE FIRE.

فَلَمَّا أَتَاهَا نُودِىَ يَا مُوسَى(( 11 ))

11- WHEN HE CAME TO IT, A VOICE CALLED OUT, O, MOSES!

إِنِّى أَنَا رَبُّكَ فَاخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ إِنَّكَ بِالْوَادِ
الْمُقَدَّسِ طُوىً(( 12 ))

12- I AM YOUR LORD, THEN PUT OFF YOUR SANDALS, THAT YOU ARE IN THE
SACRED VALLEY OF TOWA".

وَأَنَا اخْتَرْتُكَ فَاسْتَمِعْ لِمَا يُوحَى(( 13 ))

13- AND I HAVE CHOSEN YOU, (FOR THE POSITION OF PROPHETHOOD) SO LISTEN
TO WHAT WILL BE INSPIRED.

14- VERILY I AM ALLAH, THERE IS NO GOD EXCEPT ME. THEN WORSHIP ME
(ALONE), AND PERFORM PRAYER TO REMEMBER ME.

إِنَّ السَّاعَةَ آتِيَةٌ أَكَادُ أُخْفِيهَا لِتُجْزَى كُلُّ نَفْس بِمَا
تَسْعَى(( 15 ))

15- VERILY THE HOUR WILL COME, I WOULD LIKE TO HIDE IT, SO AS TO REWARD
EVERYONE ACCORDING TO HIS ENDEAVOUR.

فَلاَ يَصُدَّنَّكَ عَنْهَا مَنْ لاَّ يُؤْمِنُ بِهَا وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ
فَتَرْدَى(( 16 ))

16- SO, LET NOT BAR YOU FROM IT HE WHO BELIEVES IT NOT; AND HAS
FOLLOWED HIS CAPRICES, LEST YOU PERISH.

[ 94 ]


