Pharaoh Pepares For Final Attack
================================

VERSE NO.59ِ64

Moses did his best to put Pharaoh aright. He showed him the miracle of
the rod, and that of the white hand, and other clear signs, but the
selfish king rejected all; as being magic, and refused to believe [ 111
]

in any god except the Egyptian gods, among whom, he himself was one! He
accused Moses of having come to drive them out of their land by his
sorcery! Nationalism is a weapon, that has always been used by dictator
rulers against their opposers throughout the history. He therefore said
to Moses:ِ \`\`You are no more than a magician skilled enough. We too,
will bring you a magic the like of yours, "so make an appointment for
that." '' Moses, calm, and with utmost indifference, said:ِ

\`\`Let it be on the day of festival, and let people be mustered when
the sun shines up enough.'' The Egyptians had a day of General festival
in which the streets and tall buildings were decorated, and people were
off in holiday. Moses appointed this day for the combat, so as to
collect as large a number of people as possible, to show them the
beautiful features of God's truth.

Then the great day of challenge between truth and falsehood came to
pass. Tens of thousands of men and women, including Pharaoh, his
courtiers, and his magicians, had come to see what was going on. Moses
warned the sorcerers that their trickery and deceit against God would be
disclosed, and that, they would be defeated and given to God's wrath:ِ
\`\`Moses said to them:ِ Woe unto you! Do not forge lie against Allah,
lest He destroy you by a torment.'' When so, they disputed about their
plan among themselves, but they were judging Moses with the standards of
Pharaoh, thinking that he too, like themselves had given to trickery and
deception. Therefore, some of them said to the others the same thing
that Pharaoh had said:ِ \`\`These are two skilled magicians who have
come to drive us out of our country by their magic and we must do our
best to stop them.''

\*\*\*\*\*
[ 112 ]

**LET US ASK MY FATHER**

Rumi in his famous Mathnavi, has an interesting narration about the
whisper, and conference of Pharaoh's magicians, as follows:ِ The
magicians held a secret conference before their encounter with Moses.
They knew well that he was not an ordinary man. They knew him with such
a high magical power far above what they could conceive. So they
conferred with one another, and then the head of them said:ِ As you
already know, my father, who is now dead; was the greatest of magicians
of his time. Let us go and hold our meeting upon his grave, and conjure
up his spirit, and ask him what is the fact about Moses and his
sorcery?

They did so; and the spirit of the dead magician said to the
sorcerers:ِ Keep a watch upon Moses until he is full asleep. Then you go
near him and proceed to pick up his stick. If it remained the same, and
nothing happened, you can be sure that he is no more than a sorcerer,
and you may easily overcome him by doing so, and so. But, if you found
the stick to turn again to a serpent, even when Moses is asleep, you
should know that Moses is not a sorcerer. He is indeed a man of God, and
his Lord supports him both in sleep and wakefulness. This is because
magic is not effective when the magician is not awake.

The object of RUMI in saying the above story is that:ِ QURA"N,is the
miracle of Mohammad (SA), as the rod was a miracle of Moses (AS). Now
Mohammad (SA) seems to have slept for a period of more than 14
centuries, while we have always seen his miraculous BOOK (QURA"N) active
and effective, working behind him as clear signs of God, with a daily
increasing glory and reputation!

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

[ 113 ]

قَالُوا يَا مُوسَى إِمَّا أَنْ تُلْقِىَ وَإِمَّا أَنْ نَّكُونَ أَوَّلَ
مَنْ أَلْقَى(( 65 ))

65- AND THEY SAID:- \`\`O, MOSES! WILL YOU CAST (THE STAFF) OR WE ARE
THE FIRST TO CAST DOWN?''

قَالَ بَلْ أَلْقُوا فَإِذَا حِبَالُهُمْ وَعِصِيُّهُمْ يُخَيَّلُ
إِلَيْهِ مِنْ سِحْرِهِمْ أَنَّهَا تَسْعَى(( 66 ))

66- HE SAID:ِ \`\`YOU THROW DOWN (FIRST). THEN THEIR ROPES AND RODS DUE
TO THEIR MAGIC, IN HIS IMAGINATIONS WERE MOVING FAST!'' فَأَوْجَسَ فِى
نَفْسِهِ خِيفَةً مُّوسَى(( 67 ))

67- AND MOSES CONCEIVED (SOME SORT OF) A FEAR IN HIMSELF. قُلْنَا لاَ
تَخَفْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الاَْعْلَى(( 68 ))

68- WE SAID (TO MOSES):ِ \`\`DON'T BE AFRAID THAT YOU HAVE THE UPPER
HAND. وَأَلْقِ مَا فِى يَمِينِكَ تَلْقَفْ مَا صَنَعُوا إِنَّمَا صَنَعُوا
كَيْدُ سَاحِر وَلاَ يُفْلِحُ السَّاحِرُ حَيْثُ أَتَى(( 69 )) 69- AND
CAST DOWN THAT WHICH IS IN YOUR RIGHT HAND, (i.e. THE ROD) THAT WILL
SWALLOW WHATEVER THEY HAVE FABRICATED. ALL THEIR FABRICATION IS NOTHING
BUT THE GUILE OF SORCERER, AND A SORCERER WILL NOT PROSPER WHEREVER HE
GOES.

[ 114 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
MOSES TOO, COMES TO THE FIELD**

VERSE NO.65ِ69

The sorcerers united to stand firmly against Moses, in order to win the
combat. At the beginning, they showed some sort of a politeness or
ethical conduct by respecting Moses, and saying to him:ِ \`\`Will you
cast your staff, or you want us to be the first to throw down?'' Some
commentators have thought that their polite and ethical behaviour with
Moses, paved the way for their final prosperity and salvation. In the
glorious name of Pharaoh, they threw their rods and ropes in which they
had stored some chemical materials such as mercury; and when exposed to
the heat of sunshine, they showed some physical reaction and movement.

In fact, after a lot of inculcations, and impressing by frequent
repetitions of certain words and phrases; their strings and sticks were
thrown and seemed to move about like snakes! Their magic seemed so real,
and existent as snakes of various sizes and colours, that a great outcry
of happiness and excitement burst out among the Egyptian crowd; followed
by the exclamations of; \`\`Long live Pharaoh!''

Seeing that scenery, Moses conceived some sort of a fear in himself,
and mysterious anxiety creeped over his mind! But soon after he came to
himself and remembered that the All-mighty God was with him, Who sees
and hears everything. So his faith in God gave him the necessary
confidence:ِ \`\`We said to Moses; Don't be afraid that you have the
upper hand, and cast down that which is in your right hand, that will
swallow all their fabrication....'' Falsehood may flaunt and display
itself boastfully across a race course with truth, but it cannot win in
the presence of truth, and finally will vanish in contempt. [ 115 ]

Here, we should know that magic is unlawful and a major sin in the
sight of Islam. It has been strictly forbidden, because in many cases it
serves to mislead people. Of course, there are some exceptions in it, as
in the case with any other act; such as using it to prove the falsehood
of false prophets. The trickery and deception of a sorcerer will soon be
disclosed, and the sorcerers will never prosper, and they will not
succeed to fulfil their evil purposes.

\*\*\*\*\*

**MAGIC AND MAGICIAN**

A remarkable quotation from the Book, named, \`\`THE GOLDEN BOUGH''
written by Sir James Frazer; has been cited in the International
Encyclopedia as follows, which may give our dear reader some good
information about magic and magician:ِ Magic is irrational practices
believed to influence man's relation to his environment, both human and
non human. Magic is often contrasted with religion, and it is physical
rather than spiritual in nature. Magic does not depend on supernatural
assistance as religion does. Magic is believed to compel a desired
result, where as in religion a higher power is asked for help. Medieval
magic involved belief in a spiritual agency, like Devil or Jinns. Magic
incantations often contain references to ancestors. In ancient Babylon,
religion sacrifices was believed to be compelling in effect.

Sir James Frazer's theory of the origin of magic, and its functions,
held that magic was primitive man's science, because of its
materialistic and mechanical conceptions. But science represents a body
of method and theory which primitive man lacks. It can also be pointed
out that, non literate people do not confuse magic with whatever
empirical knowledge through experiences they do possess. That is to say;
spells, rites, and incantations, may be [ 116 ] considered necessary
condition for success, but they are not sufficient conditions. For
example, in gardening, spells are used in the belief that, they are
needed to make plants grow, but they do not replace planting and
weeding.

Belief in the effectiveness of magic in carrying out harmful actions,
and also following positive aims, is found in many illiterate societies,
and by no means unknown in literate cultures.

Magic is in fact the guile of magician, that may work for a number of
reasons; like the MEANS USED. As an instance poisons are themselves
effective, but are understood in magical terms. Magic may be used along
with empirically productive actions, such as the work of gardening that
makes plants grow, but the credit is given to spells.

Coincidence too, accounts for the apparent power of some magic. Magic
does have a psychological effect. The belief that he is helped by a
spell, may enable a man to perform a difficult feat and notable deed.
Black magic which is also called sorcery, is the hostile and harmful
action, as carried out by professional practitioners to separate a woman
from a man, or to replace a hatred for love in two hearts. Techniques of
sorcery vary widely, including the use of spells and various objects and
substances.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

فَأُلْقِىَ السَّحَرَةُ سُجَّداً قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِرَبِّ هَارُونَ
وَمُوسَى(( 70 ))

70- (MOSES CAST DOWN HIS ROD. IT BECAME A HUGE SERPENT AND SWALLOWED
WHATEVER THEY HAD FABRICATED)

THEN THE MAGICIANS PROSTRATED THEMSELVES, SAYING:ِ \`\`WE BELIEVED IN
THE LORD OF AARON AND MOSES.'' [ 117 ]

قَالَ آمَنْتُمْ لَهُ قَبْلَ أَنْ آذَنَ لَكُمْ إِنَّهُ لَكَبِيرُكُمُ
الَّذِى عَلَّمَكُمُ السِّحْرَ فَلاَُ قَطِّعَنَّ أَيْدِيَكُمْ
وَأَرْجُلَكُمْ مِنْ خِلاَف وَلاَُصَلِّبَنَّكُمْ فِى جُذُوعِ النَّخْلِ
وَلَتَعْلَمُنَّ أَيُّنَا أَشَدُّ عَذَاباً وَأَبْقَى(( 71 ))

71- (PHARAOH) SAID; \`\`YOU BELIEVED HIM BEFORE I GIVE YOU PERMISSION!?
HE IS YOUR MASTER WHO HAS TAUGHT YOU SORCERY. SO I WILL CUT YOUR HANDS
AND FEET ON ALTERNATE SIDES, AND I WILL CRUCIFY YOU UPON THE TRUNKS OF
PALM-TREES, THAT YOU MAY KNOW WHICH OF US IS MORE SEVERE IN PUNISHMENT
AND MORE LASTING!''

قَالُوا لَنْ نُّؤْثِرَكَ عَلَى مَا جَاءَنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَالَّذِى فَطَرَنَا فَاقْضِ مَا أَنْتَ قَاض إِنَّمَا تَقْضِى هَذِهِ
الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا(( 72 ))

72- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE SHALL NEVER PREFER YOU OVER WHAT HAS COME TO US
OF CLEAR SIGNS, AND OVER HE WHO CREATED US. SO JUDGE WHATEVER YOU ARE TO
JUDGE, (DO YOUR WORST) THAT YOU CAN JUDGE ONLY IN THIS LOWER WORLD.''

إِنَّا آمَنَّا بِرَبِّنَا لِيَغْفِرَ لَنَا خَطَايَانَا وَمَا
أَكْرَهْتَنَا عَلَيْهِ مِنَ السِّحْرِ وَاللهُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى(( 73 ))

73- WE HAVE BELIEVED IN OUR LORD, THAT HE MAY FORGIVE US OUR FAULTS,
AND THE SORCERY TO WHICH YOU COMPELLED US, AND ALLAH IS THE BEST AND
EVERLASTING. [ 118 ]

إِنَّهُ مَنْ يَأْتِ رَبَّهُ مُجْرِماً فَإِنَّ لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ لاَ
يَمُوتُ فِيهَا وَلاَ يَحْيى(( 74 ))

74- VERILY HE WHO COMES TO HIS LORD AS A SINNER, THEN FOR HIM IS
(WAITING) THE HELL, WHEREIN HE SHALL NEITHER DIE NOR LIVE!

وَمَنْ يَأْتِهِ مُؤْمِناً قَدْ عَمِلَ الصَّالِحَاتِ فَأُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمُ
الدَّرَجَاتُ الْعُلَى(( 75 ))

75- AND HE WHO COMES TO HIM A BELIEVER, HAVING DONE RIGHTEOUS DEEDS,
THEN THERE ARE HIGH GRADES FOR THEM.

جَنَّاتُ عَدْن تَجْرِى مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا
وَذَلِكَ جَزَاءُ مَنْ تَزَكَّى(( 76 ))

76- GARDENS OF ETERNITY, BENEATH WHICH STREAMS FLOW, THEREIN THEY SHALL
ABIDE FOR EVER, AND THAT IS THE REWARD OF HE WHO PURIFIES (HIMSELF).

**THE COMMENTARY
THE GREAT VICTORY OF MOSES**

VERSE NO.70ِ76

In that critical condition in which the outcry of joy and excitement,
on the part of the Egyptians had filled the area for their wonderful
performance of magic, God said to Moses:ِ \`\`Don't worry! You do have
the upper hand. Just cast down the thing which is in your right hand.''
Moses cast down his rod, and LO! A huge serpent appeared moving, and
swallowed whatever Pharaoh's magicians had forged and the whole crowd
was struck with astonishment! No voice was heard any more. A silence
prevailed, as if people had bird on their head.

[ 119 ]

The magician who could distinguish well, between a miracle and a magic,
suddenly prostrated themselves reclining with faces on the ground, in
humble adoration and worship of Allah, the Lord of Moses and Aaron! Thus
they practically recanted their former creed, which was a mixture of
magic, superstition, trickery, and deception, to which the Egyptians
were compelled to bow, because their king was the high priest and the
supreme god of that false religion. There in the field, the sorcerers
openly and very frankly announced:ِ \`\`We believe in the Lord of Moses
and Aaron!'' Pharaoh, filled with fear and anger, was going mad! He
accused his own magicians of having been in league with Moses, and that
having been taught by him!

The merciless tyrant, who thought all his subjects had to follow his
order by all means and without any objection; cried on the magicians
with a dreadful wrath, saying:ِ \`\`You did believe him before I give
you leave!? He is your chief master who has taught you magic.'' Pharaoh
then issued his inhuman and cruel decree of punishment! It was to cut
their hands and feet on alternate side, and then to crucify them upon
the trunks of palm-trees! But on the other hand, to his unjust and
inhuman judgement the reaction of the magicians was very cold, and with
much indifference! They said to Pharaoh:ِ

\`\`Do your worst o, king! Do us whatever of cruelty and oppression you
can! But know that we are not going to deny and reject the clear signs
that has been appeared. We shall never prefer you over our Lord, and His
clear signs that has already come to us. We have believed in our Lord,
with the hope that He may forgive us our faults; and in particular the
sorcery to which you compelled us. Allah, our Lord is the best, and the
Everlasting; and your judgement might only be valid in this mortal
life.'' [ 120 ]

**KNOWLEDGE MIGHT BE A SOURCE OF FAITH**

Here, in this story, knowledge was the cause of the fast and sincere
conversion of the magicians. They at once changed their mind and way,
from disbelief to belief, and from wrong to right; turning 180³ degrees
out of phase from which they were! Such a wonderful change was due to
their apt knowledge, to distinguish truth from falsehood, and miracle
from sorcery. In a few hours, they jumped to a great distance in their
way to evolution and development. They became so faithful, and
consequently so brave, that they could easily suffer a dreadful
mutilation and martyrdom. In other word, they were some poor unfortunate
disbelievers in the morning, and became rich, brave, and prosperous
believers in the same day's evening! Here is a good teaching lesson for
the materialist who considers the cause of all movements to be
economical.

وَلَقَدْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى مُوسَى أَنْ أَسْرِ بِعِبَادِى فَاضْرِبْ
لَهُمْ طَرِيقاً فِى الْبَحْرِ يَبَساً لاَ تَخَافُ دَرَكاً وَلاَ
تَخْشَى(( 77 ))

77- AND WE INSPIRED MOSES WITH (OUR COMMAND), THAT SET OUT WITH MY
SERVANTS IN THE NIGHT, AND STRIKE FOR THEM A DRY PATH IN THE SEA. FEAR
NOT OF BEING OVERTAKEN, NOR BEING DROWNED.

فَأَتْبَعَهُمْ فِرْعَوْنُ بِجُنُودِهِ فَغَشِيَهُمْ مِّنَ الْيَمِّ مَا
غَشِيَهُمْ(( 78 ))

78- THEN PHARAOH CHASED THEM WITH HIS HOSTS, AND (THE SEA) TOOK THEM
IN, WHATEVER TOOK THEM IN.

وَأَضَلَّ فِرْعَوْنُ قَوْمَهُ وَمَا هَدَى(( 79 ))

79- AND PHARAOH MISLED HIS PEOPLE, AND DID NOT GUIDE. [ 121 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE RESCUE OF ISRAELITES, AND DROWNING OF EGYPTIANS**

VERSE NO.77ِ79

After the victorious challenge of Moses with magicians, the incident
became a general topic of conversation all over the Egypt, but Pharaoh
and his forces barred people from the way of truth. The Israelites too,
were still under the pressure of Pharaoh and his cruel courtiers. At
last YAHOVAH=ALLAH, ordered Moses to take the children of Israel out of
Egypt:ِ \`\`And We inspired Moses with our order to set out with My
servants, in the dark of the night; and strike for them a dry-path in
the sea. Pass them over and fear not of being caught by Pharaoh or being
drowned in the sea, and else.'' They were told not to have fear of
anything at all. So they crossed a dry path which was created
miraculously by the rod of Moses, while Pharaoh who had chased them with
his hosts, were all drowned and perished!

So far, everything was gone all right, but the hard task of Moses had
began with his stubborn and ignorant people just as soon as they passed
the Nile over!

The Israelites were rescued from the bondages of slavery and hard
labour, free of reward or wages. They passed over, and set out on their
way towards the promised land. But they ignorantly closed their eyes
over the light of God's Grace and Guidance, and were tempted by a
Satanِby a mysterious stranger hypocrite whom they called Samari or
Samaritan. He made an image of a calf which mooed like the lowing of a
cow, by some technical tricks; and renewed the worship of the ancient
Egyptian god, which was a cow famed as OSIRIS! Samari managed to deceive
the Israelites and to introduce his own hand made golden calf as the
Lord of Moses; and thus he led the children of Israel astray, and to the
darkness of ignorance. [ 122 ]

يَا بَنِى إِسْرَائِيلَ قَدْ أَنجَيْنَاكُمْ مِنْ عَدُوِّكُمْ
وَوَاعَدْنَاكُمْ جَانِبَ الطُّورِ الاَْيْمَنَ وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكُمُ
الْمَنَّ وَالسَّلْوَى(( 80 ))

80- O, CHILDREN OF ISRAEL! WE RESCUED YOU FROM YOUR ENEMY, AND MADE AN
APPOINTMENT WITH YOU UPON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE MOUNTAIN (SINAI), AND WE
SENT DOWN TO YOU MANNA AND QUAILS.

كُلُوا مِنْ طَيِّبَاتِ مَا رَزَقْنَاكُمْ وَلاَ تَطْغَوْا فِيهِ
فَيَحِلَّ عَلَيْكُمْ غَضَبِى وَمَنْ يَحْلِلْ عَلَيْهِ غَضَبِى فَقَدْ
هَوَى(( 81 ))

81- EAT OF THE GOOD THINGS THAT WE HAVE PROVIDED FOR YOUR SUSTENANCE,
AND DO NOT EXCEED THEREIN, SO THAT MY WRATH MAY FALL UPON YOU; AND HE ON
WHOM MY WRATH FALLS, HAS INDEED FALLEN. (TO RUIN)

وَإِنِّى لَغَفَّارٌ لِّمَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحاً ثُمَّ
اهْتَدَى(( 82 ))

82- AND YET I AM FORGIVER OF HIM WHO REPENTED, AND BELIEVED, AND DID
RIGHTEOUS DEEDS; AND THEN WAS GUIDED.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE ONLY WAY TO RESCUE**

VERSE NO.80ِ82 Here, the children of Israel have been addressed in
general, and for all ages; reminding them of the great bounties and
favours of God [ 123 ]

bestowed on them, and showing them the right way to rescue and
salvation:ِ \`\`O, children of Israel! We saved you from your enemy, and
then made an appointment with you on the mount Sinai, and We sent down
to you Manna and Quails.''

The appointment was when Moses went up the Mount Sinai for forty days
and nights leaving the elders with Aaron behind, among the Israelites.
Then in his absence, his people were tested and failed in the trial, by
making a golden calf and taking it for a god. For more information about
this event, please refer to volume 2 of this book S 7:155ِ156, and for
Manna and Quails, you will find more detail in volume one page 82.

We may add here that the Arabian side of Sinai, which is called
JABALِALِMUSA was where Moses received his first commission before going
to Egypt. He also received the Law from there, after the Pass Over.
After reminding them of the physical and spiritual bounties, Allah gives
the children of Israel a strict warning:ِ \`\`Eat of the good thing that
We have given you as sustenance and exceed not therein. Let not my wrath
fall upon you that might drive you to ruin.''

The verse implies; forget not that God saved you from the bondage of
Pharaoh and his cruel subjects. Allah and His Messenger have guided you
to a direct path to development of your spiritual and physical life.
Enjoy the Grace of God, and serve the fruits of His Mercy; and give your
sincere thank to him in return. Exceed not the established limits lest
you incur the wrath of Allah upon yourselves, and by that lose all you
have.

وَمَا أَعْجَلَكَ عَنْ قَوْمِكَ يَا مُوسَى(( 83 )) [ 124 ]

83- (WHEN MOSES CAME UP ON THE MOUNTAIN WE SAID TO HIM:ِ) \`\`AND WHAT
MADE YOU, O, MOSES, TO HASTEN IN ADVACE OF YOUR PEOPLE?''

قَالَ هُمْ أُولاَءِ عَلَى أَثَرِى وَعَجِلْتُ إِلَيْكَ رَبِّ لِتَرْضَى((
84 ))

84- HE SAID; \`\`THEY ARE FOLLOWING ME, AND I HASTENED MY LORD TO
PLEASE YOU.''

قَالَ فَإِنَّا قَدْ فَتَنَّا قَوْمَكَ مِنْ بَعْدِكَ وَأَضَلَّهُمُ
السَّامِرِىُّ(( 85 ))

85- HE SAID:ِ \`\`WE HAVE TESTED YOUR PEOPLE AFTER YOU (LEFT THEM), AND
SAMARITAN LED THEM ASTRAY!''

فَرَجَعَ مُوسَى إِلَى قَوْمِهِ غَضْبَانَ أَسِفاً قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ
أَلَمْ يَعِدْكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ وَعْداً حَسَناً أَفَطَالَ عَلَيْكُمُ
الْعَهْدُ أَمْ أَرَدْتُمْ أَنْ يَحِلَّ عَلَيْكُمْ غَضَبٌ مِنْ رَّبِّكُمْ
فَأَخْلَفْتُمْ مَّوْعِدِى(( 86 ))

86- THEN MOSES RETURNED TO HIS PEOPLE ANGRY AND SORROWFUL, SAYING:ِ
\`\`O, MY PEOPLE! DID YOUR LORD NOT PROMISE YOU A FAIR PROMISE? OR DID
THE PROMISE SEEM TOO LONG TO YOU? OR YOU INTENDED TO INCUR UPON YOU A
WRATH OF YOUR LORD? THAT YOU BROKE YOUR PROMISE TO ME!

قَالُوا مَا أَخْلَفْنَا مَوْعِدَكَ بِمَلْكِنَا وَلَكِنَّا حُمِّلْنَا
أَوْزَاراً مِّنْ زِينَةِ الْقَوْمِ فَقَذَفْنَاهَا فَكَذَلِكَ أَلْقَى
السَّامِرِىُّ(( 87 ))

87- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE DID NOT BREAK OUR PROMISE WITH YOU OF OUR OWN
VOLITION, BUT WE CARRIED SOME OF THE [ 125 ]

ORNAMENTS OF THE PEOPLE (EGYPTIANS), AND WE THREW THEM (INTO THE FIRE),
AND SO DID SA"MARI INDUCE. (PERSUADED US TO DO SO!)''

فَأَخْرَجَ لَهُمْ عِجْلا جَسَداً لَّهُ خُوَارٌ فَقَالُوا هَذَا
إِلَهُكُمْ وَإِلَهُ مُوسَى فَنَسِىَ(( 88 )) 88- THEN HE MADE OUT OF IT
FOR THEM A CALF IMAGE, WHICH HAD A LOWING SOUND; THEN THEY SAID:ِ
\`\`THIS IS YOUR GOD, AND THE GOD OF MOSES.'' AND FORGOT (EVERYTHING).

أَفَلاَ يَرَوْنَ أَلاَّ يَرْجِعُ إِلَيْهِمْ قَوْلا وَلاَ يَمْلِكُ
لَهُمْ ضَرّاً وَلاَ نَفْعاً(( 89 ))

89- COULD THEY NOT SEE THAT (THE CALF IMAGE) DID NOT RETURN A WORD BACK
TO THEM (IN ANSWER), AND HAD NO POWER TO HURT THEM, NOR TO PROFIT?

وَلَقَدْ قَالَ لَهُمْ هَارُونُ مِنْ قَبْلُ يَا قَوْمِ إِنَّمَا
فُتِنتُمْ بِهِ وَإِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ الرَّحْمنُ فَاتَّبِعُونِى وَأَطِيعُوا
أَمْرِى (( 90 ))

90- YET AARON HAD SAID TO THEM BEFORE THIS; THAT, O, MY PEOPLE! YOU
HAVE BEEN TEMPTED BY IT, AND YOUR LORD IS THE MERCIFUL GOD, SO FOLLOW ME
AND OBEY MY ORDER.

قَالُوا لَنْ نَّبْرَحَ عَلَيْهِ عَاكِفِينَ حَتَّى يَرْجِعَ إِلَيْنَا
مُوسَى(( 91 ))

91- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE WILL NEVER CEASE WORSHIPPING IT UNTIL MOSES
RETURNS TO US.'' [ 126 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE PLOT OF SAMARITAN**

VERSE NO.83ِ91

In these verses, another phase of the advent of Moses has been narrated
in brief, which consists of many interesting and useful lessons. This
was when Moses was invited by his Lord, for forty nights of a special
duty; and eventually getting the Law and the commandments. But in his
absence, a stranger hypocrite, famed as Samaritan made a gold image of a
calf, and introduced it to Israelites as their god and the god of Moses.
Samaritan supported his idea, by propounding the Bull-god, which was the
symbol of OSIRIS who was worshipped by the ancient Egyptians.

This incident has also been cited in this book of us, in volume one,
page 78ِ79. Moses, in a fervent love for God, and in his most eager
condition to visit his beloved Merciful Lord, went on the Mount Sinai in
a haste. There Allah said to him:ِ

\`\`O, Moses! What made you to come up here in such a haste and in
advance of your people?''

In answer to his beloved, Moses said:ِ \`\`They are coming after me,
and I hastened my Lord to please you.'' But YAHOVAH informed his apostle
thus:ِ \`\`The case is not so as you think! I have tested your people
after you and in your absence, and they failed the trial, because
Sa"mari led them astray.''

Hearing that; Moses was inflamed with anger. He found all his
endeavours throughout years of toil and trouble, to have been rendered
ineffective. Polytheism and idolatry, in its worst shape had appeared
to, and accepted by, his people! Now Satan had managed well to mislead
the children of Israel.

Moses returned to his people full of anger and sorrow. He shouted upon
them saying:ِ \`\`Did your Lord not promise you a fair promise? Or did
His promise take [ 127 ]

God's promise was to guide and protect them, and to lead them to the
promised land. On the other hand, their promise was to worship and serve
Allah alone, and associate no partner with Him, and to obey his
commandments, and to follow his Law. The Israelites did know that what a
shameful act of perversion had they done, diverting to such that wrong
end. So they began to create excuses saying:ِ \`\`We did not break our
promise with you of our own volition. It was rather Sa"maritan who did
so and so, and finally fabricated the golden calf, and led us
astray.''

Of course, Sa"maritan was responsible for making the golden calf and
reminding and renewing the worship of the Bull-god (APIS), which was
worshipped by the ancient Egyptians as the symbol of the king of deads
(OSIRIS). But the Israelites too, could not think themselves free of
responsibilities. At least they could apprehend that their new Bull-god
could do them no harm, neither profit them aught. It even could not
answer back to them a word of a question. This proves that how blind,
and how foolish, the people must have been; who left the Cherisher and
Sustainer of the Univers with all that clear signs and symptoms which
they had seen, one after another, and then grasped an image of a calf,
and took it for god!

قَالَ يَا هَارُونُ مَا مَنَعَكَ إِذْ رَأَيْتَهُمْ ضَلُّوا(( 92 ))

92- HE SAID:- \`\`O, AARON! WHEN YOU SAW THEM GOING WRONG, WHAT
PREVENTED YOU....

أَلاَّ تَتَّبِعَنِ أَفَعَصَيْتَ أَمْرِى(( 93 ))

93- THAT YOU DID NOT FOLLOW ME; DID YOU TOO, DISOBEY MY ORDER?''

[ 128 ]

قَالَ يَبْنَؤُمَّ لاَ تَأْخُذْ بِلِحْيَتِى وَلاَ بِرَأْسِى إِنِّى
خَشِيتُ أَنْ تَقُولَ فَرَّقْتَ بَيْنَ بَنِى إِسْرَائِيلَ وَلَمْ تَرْقُبْ
قَوْلِى(( 94 ))

94- HE SAID:ِ\`\`O, SON OF MOTHER! DO NOT SEIZE MY BEARD, NOR MY HEAD.
I WAS AFRAID OF YOU TO SAY; YOU SOWED DISCORD AMONG THE ISRAELITES, AND
TOOK NO CARE FOR MY WORD.''

قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكَ يَا سَامِرِىُّ(( 95 ))

95- HE SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT DO YOU THEN SAY, O, SA"MARI?''

قَالَ بَصُرْتُ بِمَا لَمْ يَبْصُرُوا بِهِ فَقَبَضْتُ قَبْضَةً مِّنْ
أَثَرِ الرَّسُولِ فَنَبَذْتُهَا وَكَذَلِكَ سَوَّلَتْ لِى نَفْسِى(( 96
))

96- HE SAID:ِ \`\`I SAW WHAT THEY SAW IT NOT. SO I TOOK SOME OF THE
TRACES OF THE MESSENGER, THEN I CAST IT, AND SO MY SOUL MAGNIFIED THE
MATTER TO ME.''

قَالَ فَاذْهَبْ فَإِنَّ لَكَ فِى الْحَيَاةِ أَنْ تَقُولَ لاَ مِسَاسَ
وَإِنَّ لَكَ مَوْعِداً لَّنْ تُخْلَفَهُ وَانظُرْ إِلَى إِلَهِكَ الَّذِى
ظَلْتَ عَلَيْهِ عَاكِفاً لَّنُحَرِّقَنَّهُ ثُمَّ لَنَنسِفَنَّهُ فِى
الْيَمِّ نَسْفاً(( 97 ))

97- HE SAID:ِ \`\`BE GONE THEN; THAT YOURS IS IN THIS LIFE TO SAY;
\`\`DON'T TOUCH ME'' AND (ALSO) THERE IS A PROMISE (OF GOD'S PUNISHMENT)
FOR YOU THAT YOU WILL NEVER FAIL IT. AND NOW LOOK AT YOUR GOD WHOM YOU
WORSHIPPED ALL THE TIME, THAT WE BURN IT AND THEN SCATTER (ITS ASHES)
INTO THE SEA.''

[ 129 ]

إِنَّمَا إِلـَهُكُمْ اللهُ الَّذِى لاَ إِلـَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَسِعَ كُلَّ
شَىْء عِلْماً(( 98 ))

98- VERILY YOUR GOD IS ALLAHِHE EXCEPT WHOM THERE IS NO GOD. HIS
KNOWLEDGE HAS EXTENDED OVER EVERYTHING.


