Take Lesson From the History
============================

VERSE NO.128ِ130

To study the history of the past nations, is the immediate order and
the theme of the above verses. In the stories of the prior generations,
there can be found many useful lessons and advices, particularly those
who we can see the ruins of their dwelling-places, and we may walk and
go to and fro in their houses. We only have to use our wisdom and
knowledge, to study the factors of their rise and fall, prosperity and
misfortune, in order to determine the outcomes, and use it in our own
benefit. In fact, the history is a great awakening teacher that can add
the experiences of other people to our own experiences:ِ \`\`Is it not
enough to guide them that how many of the generations We destroyed
before them, in whose dwelling-places they walk.'' Indeed, none are so
blind as those who do not want to see something which it has to be seen.
The most negligent of people is he who takes no advice from the changes
of the world.

The second verse (NO.129) is to answer the question that why does not
Allah punish such and such guilty people, as He punished the previous
wrong doers!? To answer this; we should know that, Allah in His
universal plan, has arranged for enough flexibility, and a merciful
chance of respite has been given to all. Even the most wicked and unjust
people have a term appointed them for respite. Had it not been so, God's
punishment would have necessarily afflicted them soon after an evil deed
was done.

Finally, the prophet has been addressed in the last verse (NO.130)
saying; now that it is not apt to punish a wrong doer, as soon as he
does a wrong deed; you take care of your patience and lose it not. Of
course, this does not mean that the prophet should sit still, and do
nothing against evil. In fact, there is an eternal feud between Man and
Satan, and the fight against evil is one of the cardinal points in
Islam. Therefore, a Muslim must always take help of patience, and
prayer, and commune with Allah so as to strengthen him in his strife
against evil, which is an endless grapple.

[ 146 ]

وَلاَ تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَى مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجاً
مِّنْهُمْ زَهْرَةَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنيَا لِنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ وَرِزْقُ
رَبِّكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى(( 131 ))

131- AND DO NOT STRETCH YOUR EYES (LOOK NOT WITH EAGERNESS) ON WHAT WE
HAVE GIVEN TO PARTIES OF THEM. (THESE ARE) THE BLOSSOMS OF THE PRESENT
LIFE, THROUGH WHICH WE TEST THEM; AND THE SUSTENANCE OF YOUR LORD IS
BETTER AND MORE ENDURING.

وَأْمُرْ أَهْلَكَ بِالصَّلاَةِ وَاصْطَبِرْ عَلَيْهَا لاَ نَسْأَلُكَ
رِزْقاً نَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُكَ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلتَّقْوَى(( 132 ))

132- AND ENJOIN THE PRAYER ON YOUR FAMILY, AND INSIST UPON IT. WE DO
NOT ASK YOU FOR SUSTENANCE. WE ARE SUSTAINING YOU, AND THE GOOD END IS
FOR PIETY.

وَقَالُوا لَوْلاَ يَأْتِينَا بِآيَة مِّنْ رَّبِّهِ أَوَلَمْ تَأْتِهِمْ
بَيِّنَةُ مَا فِى الصُّحُفِ الاُْولَى(( 133 ))

133- AND THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WHY DOES HE NOT BRING US A SIGN FROM HIS LORD?
HAS THERE NOT COME TO THEM THE EVIDENCES WHICH ARE IN THE FORMER
SCRIPTURES?''

وَلَوْ أَنَّا أَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ بِعَذَاب مِّنْ قَبْلِهِ لَقَالُوا
رَبَّنَا لَوْلاَ أَرْسَلْتَ إِلَيْنَا رَسُولا فَنَتَّبِعَ آيَاتِكَ مِنْ
قَبْلِ أَنْ نَّذِلَّ وَنَخْزَى(( 134 ))

134- AND IF WE HAD DESTROYED THEM BY A PUNISHMENT BEFORE IT, THEY WOULD
HAVE SAID:ِ \`\`OUR LORD! WHY DID YOU NOT SEND A MESSENGER TO US, SO
THAT WE MIGHT HAVE FOLLOWED YOUR SIGNS, BEFORE WE WERE HUMBLED AND
DISGRACED.''

[ 147 ] قُلْ كُلٌّ مُّتَرَبِّصٌ فَتَرَبَّصُوا فَسَتَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ
أَصْحَابُ الصِّرَاطِ السَّوِىِّ وَمَنِ اهْتَدَى(( 135 )) 135- WE ARE ALL
WAITING; THEN YOU WAIT ON. AND SOON SHALL YOU KNOW, WHO IS THE FOLLOWER
OF THE STRAIGHT WAY AND WHO HAS BEEN GUIDED.

**THE COMMENTARY**

VERSE NO.130ِ135 In these verses, some instructions are given to our
prophet, that are in fact, general to the whole community of Muslims;
and all have to observe it.

At first, it advises us not to look with eagerness to the temporal and
transitory bounties of this material world. These are the blossoms of
our present life that sprout out quickly, and fade away soon! If we
compare the good things of this material world with that of the life to
come, these are really trifles of little value and importance. They are
used by God as a means of tests and trials, in order to separate wrong
from right, and to make known the truthful and the liar. The good things
of the life to come, will come specially from God for His devoted
servants, and they are far better in value, and more enduring; and many
of them everlasting.

The next verse (NO.131) wants the prophet to enjoin the prayer on his
family and to insist upon that. When these verses were sent down in
Mecca, the prophet's household mainly consisted of Hazrat Khadijeh, his
wife, and Hazrat Imam Ali (AS), then a boy in his teen ages. Later on,
the family grew larger and larger:ِ \`\`And enjoin the prayer on your
family, and insist upon it. We do not ask you for sustenance. We are
sustaining you and the good end is for piety.'' A believer should not
worry about the necessities and ordinary needs of life. That's for God
to provide for them all; if they are indeed [ 148 ]

truthful believers. A Godly person looks for special provisions of the
righteous life in the service of God, which are more spiritual and less
physical.

The next verse (NO.132) points at one of the excuses of the unbelievers
who said:ِ

\`\`Why does he not bring us a sign?'' And immediately this is
answered:ِ

\`\`Has there not come to them the evidences that are in the former
Scriptures?''

Here, by evidences, the Holy Qura"n is meant, which includes the Divine
Truths that were found in the Scriptures, like the Bible and the Gospel.
Some commentators also understand that the objection was put forth by
the people of the Book, who claimed to have believed in the former
revelations, and this was when they already had the convincing signs in
their own Book. But still they were not convinced by the signs, which
may imply that they were not true to their own faith, and were not even
straight with themselves!

**THE END OF SUREH TA" HA" (20)

THE BEGINNING OF PART ِ 17** [ 149 ]

<p dir="rtl">
سُورَةُ الاَْنْبِيَاء
</p>

THE PROPHETS بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمَـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH
THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE

اقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ وَهُمْ فِى غَفْلَة مُّعْرِضُونَ(( 1
))

1- THE TIME HAS APPROACHED FOR PEOPLE'S RECKONING AND YET THEY TURN
AWAY IN NEGLIGENCE.

مَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ ذِكْر مِّنْ رَّبِّهِمْ مُّحْدَث إِلاَّ
اسْتَمَعُوهُ وَهُمْ يَلْعَبُونَ(( 2 ))

2- NO NEW REMINDER CAME TO THEM FROM THEIR LORD, EXCEPT THAT THEY HEARD
IT WHILE THEY WERE PLAYING!

لاَهِيَةً قُلُوبُهُمْ وَأَسَرُّوا النَّجْوَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا هَلْ
هَذَا إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُكُمْ أَفَتَأْتُونَ السِّحْرَ وَأَنْتُمْ
تُبْصِرُونَ(( 3 ))

3- THEIR HEARTS ARE AMUSED. AND THE OPPRESSORS HIDE WHISPERING; \`\`IS
HE OTHER THAN A HUMAN LIKE YOURSELVES? DO YOU THEN GO TO WITCHCRAFT
WHILE YOU CAN SEE?''

[ 150 ]

قَالَ رَبِّى يَعْلَمُ الْقَوْلَ فِى السَّمَاءِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَهُوَ
السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ(( 4 ))

4- HE SAID:ِ \`\`MY LORD KNOWS WHATEVER IS SAID IN THE HEAVENS AND
EARTH, AND HE IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-KNOWING.''

بَلْ قَالُوا أَضْغَاثُ أَحْلاَم بَلِ افْتَرَاهُ بَلْ هُوَ شَاعِرٌ
فَلْيَأْتِنَا بِآيَة كَمَا أُرْسِلَ الاَْوَّلُونَ(( 5 ))

5- THEY SAID:ِ (THESE ARE NOT INSPIRATIONS. THEY ARE ONLY) NIGHTMARES,
OR HE HAS FORGED IT, OR HE MIGHT BE A POET, (OR IF NOT SO) THEN LET HIM
BRING US A SIGN, LIKE THAT WITH WHICH THE FIRST MESSENGERS WERE SENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
VARIOUS OBJECTIONS**

VERSE NO.1ِ5

This chapter begins with a serious and shaking warning to all people:ِ
\`\`The time has approached for people's reckoning, and yet they are
turning away with negligence.'' Here, the assertion that our reckoning
is now very near, may imply that the future of our world in the length
of time, is less than its past. By approach of reckoning the death,
might also be considered; which gives a stop to all our acts, and casts
our gaze on the result of our deeds. Every breath is a step that takes
us nearer to our doom, and yet we are heedless, and even turn our backs
to the Merciful Messages of our Creator.

In the second verse, an stress is put upon the importance of the
warning:ِ \`\`When new reminder or warning comes to them they listen to
it while their hearts are busy in amusements?'' What a use of giving
ear, when the [ 151 ]

heart is absent. Such people will naturally find no way to salvation
and prosperity. For fear of criticism, they whisper to each other,
saying:ِ \`\`Is he other than a human like ourselves? Why then should we
attend to his witchcraft, when we are able to see, and we can find our
way on?'' The poor pagans who kept their whisperings confidential, did
not know that, every word, if it is uttered openly, or whispered
secretly, is well known to God. To this effect our prophet said:ِ \`\`My
Lord knows whatever is said in the heavens and earth, and He is
All-hearing, All-knowing.

The verses then apply to the heathenic accusations and charges made on
the inspired Messenger of God, and his Message. The charges that the
heathens and hypocrites made against our prophet were many, and some of
them contradictory!:ِ Some called him a magician, and other said; he is
a poet. One said, he is mad, and another said, his fascinating words are
charming. Some made sure that his saying were the sayings of God through
inspiration, and some thought it to be nightmares! Some thought him to
be a mankind like themselves because he ate, drank, and walked in the
streets.

They objected why has he not a house made of gold and silver and a
garden so and so; if he really is the Messenger of God!? But the truth
about him is that, he was an elect of God from among mankind. He was an
inspired apostle, and the last and the seal of the Messengers of God.

**IS QURA"N CREATED?**

The adjective, \`\`MOHDAS=NEWLY CREATED'' which qualifies Qura"n, or
the word of God, has long been a general topic of debates and
conversation among Muslim scholars and learned. They have argued to make
it clear, whether Qura"n which is the word of God, is something newly
created or it is a preexistent and eternal thing. For many decades, the
question occupied the minds of many learned and scholars, and it was
sometimes mingled with political affairs too. Today, it is pretty clear
for us that, if the meaning and the aim and object of the word is
wanted, it is everlasting and eternal, for being [ 152 ]

included in God's knowledge. On the other hand, if the word,
expression, verbal signals, or discourse, is wanted; it is only waves
created in the air, or ink drawn on papers. So it is newly created a
thing. In other word, Qura"n consists of words and meanings. The words
are created, and the meanings eternally exist in God's knowledge.

مَا آمَنَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ مِّنْ قَرْيَة أَهْلَكْنَاهَا أَفَهُمْ
يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 6 ))

6- NONE OF THE TOWNS THAT WE DESTROYED BEFORE THEM DID BELIEVE. WILL
THEN THEY BELIEVE?

وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالا نُوحِى إِلَيْهِمْ فَسْأَلُوا
أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 7 ))

7- AND WE SENT NO ONE BEFORE YOU, EXCEPT MEN WHOM WE INSPIRED. SO ASK
THOSE WHO ARE WELL VERSED IN THE REMINDER (SCRIPTURES) IF YOU DO NOT
KNOW.

وَمَا جَعَلْنَاهُمْ جَسَداً لاَّ يَأْكُلُونَ الطَّعَامَ وَمَا كَانُوا
خَالِدِينَ(( 8 ))

8- AND WE MADE THEM NOT A BODY THAT ATE NO FOOD, AND THEY WERE NOT
ETERNAL.

ثُمَّ صَدَقْنَاهُمُ الْوَعْدَ فَأَنجَيْنَاهُمْ وَمَنْ نَّشَاءُ
وَأَهْلَكْنَا الْمُسْرِفِينَ(( 9 ))

9- THEN WE FULFILLED OUR PROMISE TO THEM, AND WE SAVED THEM, AND THOSE
WHOM WE PLEASED; AND WE DESTROYED THE TRANSGRESSORS.

لَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ كِتَاباً فِيهِ ذِكْرُكُمْ أَفَلاَ
تَعْقِلُونَ(( 10 ))

10- NOW WE HAVE SENT DOWN TO YOU A BOOK IN WHICH IS YOUR REMEMBRANCE.

[ 153 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
APOSTLES WERE ALL OF MANKIND**

VERSE NO.6ِ10

The above verses include some answers to the objections raised by the
unbelievers in the aforementioned verses. It begins with their
extemporaneous requests for certain ridiculous miracles, and God's
answer to them was:ِ \`\`None of the towns that We destroyed before
them, did believe! Will then they believe?'' Hundreds of various
miracles were shown by different apostles and Messengers of God, and
failed to convince the unbelievers of old! Who can now guarantee that
the present unbelievers will believe? If Man really looks for a miracle,
what does he see which is not a miracle? As SAADI has composed; the
green leaf of a tree, is a great book of knowledge and miracles, that
may lead us in knowing our Lord, but there must be an eye to see, and a
mind to apprehend.

Among the objections of the heathens was; why should the prophet be as
man like ourselves, and not an angel, or some other creature? The next
verse (NO.7) is to answer this:ِ \`\`We sent no one before you as our
Messenger, except men whom We inspired.'' \`\`That the prophet is just a
man like ourselves might be true in some respects, but the sweet and
salty water too, seem to be alike; while they are not. As men, they were
subject to all the physical laws that govern the material body of Man
such as hunger, thirst, sleep, and death. On the other hand, the
victorious end was theirs, that they were delivered by God from evil,
and obtained a superior felicity of enjoying a comfortable and eternal
life.

**WHO ARE AHL-AL-ZIKR**

The title, \`\`AHL-AL-ZIKR'' which we have translated to; \`\`Well
versed in the scripture'' literally includes all men of understanding
and knowledge. It is a general law of wisdom, that the unlearned should
refer to and follow the learned. Here in this verse, the immediate
reference is to those who are well versed in the Bible and Gosple. A [
154 ]

clear example of those who are well versed in the Qura"n, is definitely
Hazrat Imam Ali (AS), and the eleven Imams after him. This verse (NO.7)
has been taken as proof that the unlearned Muslim should follow a well
learned religious leader; the technical term of which is; Imitation of
Religious Jurisprudent. The last verse here (NO.10) says:ِ

\`\`We have sent down to you a Book in which is your remembrance.'' Our
remembrance here may mean that Qura"n reminds us of our duties and
responsibilities with respect to our Creator, our society, and
ourselves. It will also raise up the good fame and reputation of
Muslims, and gives publicity to their tenets and schools throughout the
world. In Qura"n, also there is whatever of Guidance Man may need in all
ages.

وَكَمْ قَصَمْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَة كَانَتْ ظَالِمَةً وَأَنشَأْنَا بَعْدَهَا
قَوْماً آخَرِينَ(( 11 ))

11- AND HOW MANY A TOWN WE DESTROYED WHO WERE OPPRESSORS, AND AFTER IT,
WE BROUGHT ON OTHER PEOPLE.

فَلَمَّا أَحَسُّوا بَأْسَنَا إِذَا هُمْ مِنْهَا يَرْكُضُونَ(( 12 ))

12- WHEN THEY FELT OUR MIGHT, (i.e THE APPROACH OF OUR PUNISHMENT) THEY
FLED OUT OF IT.

لاَ تَرْكُضُوا وَارْجِعُوا إِلَى مَا أُتْرِفْتُمْ فِيهِ وَمَسَاكِنِكُمْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْأَلُونَ(( 13 ))

13- DO NOT FLEE, AND RETURN TO YOUR LUXURIES THAT YOU HAVE SUPPLIED,
INTO AND TO YOUR HOUSES. THAT YOU MIGHT BE QUESTIONED.

قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ(( 14 ))

14- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WOE TO US! WE WERE OPPRESSORS.

[ 155 ]

فَمَا زَالَتْ تِلْكَ دَعْوَاهُمْ حَتَّى جَعَلْنَاهُمْ حَصِيداً
خَامِدِينَ (( 15 ))

15- AND THIS CRY THEY KEPT REPEATING, UNTIL WE MOWED THEM DOWN; AND
MADE THEM SILENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
HOW WERE THE OPPRESSORS PUNISHED**

VERSE NO.11ِ15

\`\`And how many a town We destroyed who were oppressors, and after it
We brought on other people.''

The Arabic, \`\`GHASAMA'' translated to \`\`destroyed'', literally
means to; smashِto break in pieces by violence, or to destroy something
utterly. such a violence and severity, implies that Allah may decree a
very hard punishment for the oppressors for having based His creation
upon justice. Then the next verse points out, how weak, helpless, and
easily impressed, were the proud and haughty unbelievers, when God's
punishment seized them:ِ

\`\`When they felt the approach of our punishment, they fled out to
avoid it, but in vain.'' They seemed to have fallen in a panic! A sudden
overpowering fright seized them, and they fled away just like a
vanquished army who have the bare sword of the foe in front and in
behind of them. Thus God's wrath may encompass the oppressors. When the
thought of fleeing filled them with panic, and they decided to scape,
they were ironically told:ِ \`\`Do not flee, and return to your
beautiful houses that you have adorned with luxuries that you might be
asked.''

This verse, (NO.13) is an ironic expression which itself is the
beginning of the punishment. Then the lamentation and tears of the
unbelievers would avail them nothing for being too late. They were so at
last that nothing could save them, except God, whose will is always
done. The verse ends in the Arabic word, \`\`TASALOON'' which is from
the [ 156 ] root word, \`\`SO ALL''. It literally denotes to asking, but
it also has many connotations, and shades of meaning such as:ِ To
inquire of; to questionِto request, petitionِto demandِto claimِand to
expect. Poor and needy people had to come to them in request of some
help in charity, but they turned them out of their doors without giving
them a hand. Here is where the verse of truth says to those who flee
from the wrath of God:ِ \`\`Don't flee! Return to your luxuries that you
have supplied, and to your beautiful houses, that you may be asked for a
help for the sake of God.

They are at last wakened up to see the realities of life. They find the
things that they were jesting with, to have been more serious and grave
than they thought. But this out of time wakefulness, will be of no use
to them. Now they will have to continue with their catchword which is
\`\`Woe to us'', until they are mowed and quietened and quenched!

وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالاَْرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا لاَعِبِينَ((
16 ))

16- AND WE DID NOT CREATE THE HEAVEN AND EARTH AND WHATEVER IS BETWEEN
THEM AS A PLAYTHING.

لَوْ أَرَدْنَا أَنْ نَّتَّخِذَ لَهْواً لاَّتَّخَذْنَاهُ مِنْ لَّدُنَّا
إِنْ كُنَّا فَاعِلِينَ(( 17 ))

17- IF WE INTENDED TO TAKE A PLAYTHING, WE WOULD HAVE TAKEN IT FROM OUR
PRESENCE; IF WE WERE TO DO. (BUT WE ARE FAR FROM PLAY)

بَلْ نَقْذِفُ بِالْحَقِّ عَلَى الْبَاطِلِ فَيَدْمَغُهُ فَإِذَا هُوَ
زَاهِقٌ وَلَكُمُ الْوَيْلُ مِمَّا تَصِفُونَ(( 18 ))

18- WE SHALL RATHER HURL THE TRUTH AT FALSEHOOD, SO THAT IT KNOCKS OUT
ITS BRAIN; AND THEN IT VANISHES AWAY, AND WOE TO YOU FOR WHAT YOU
DESCRIBE. [ 157 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CREATION IS NOT A PLAY**

VERSE NO.16ِ18 The oppressors do not see any aim and object beyond the
creation of the universe, except their own enjoyment of the good things
to which they may have access, like food, drink, music, and fair sex.
How wrong is a gnat, when it thinks that the butcher has brought the
meat in the shop for the gnats to eat. They think of no goal for the
creation, but the fact is not so as they think:ِ

\`\`We did not create the heaven and earth and whatever is between them
as a play thing. This expanded earth, and high extensive sky; so many
creatures with beauty and grace, and all the colourful things abounding
in startling contrasts, and full of variety, that we can see, or we
cannot see, will all testify and prove that there is an important aim
and object behind the creation of creatures, individually as well as
collectively.'' God never does jest nor play with his creatures. Nothing
is created unless there is a reasonable purpose and a logical aim behind
its creation.

And about God, we should say nothing except the truth of which we are
sure enough. If God had really wished to indulge in some pastime, or
that which amuses Him, why should He have it done with the lowly things
of His creation that we see down here? Ascribing sons, daughters,
partners, and etc. to God are all superstitious remarks derogating from
His dignity and merits. The majesty of Allah the Most High is so that,
even the highest of creatures that Man may ever think of, serve Him
willingly or unwillingly, and all are dependent on Him for their
existence, and all are sustained by Him, as God Himself is dependent
only on His own Sacred Essence:ِ

\`\`Had We intended to have a play thing, We would have taken it from
our presence; if We were to do?'' This verse implies that God will never
create something for play and amusement. [ 158 ]

**THE AIM OF CREATION**

The Materialists think of creation to be aimless, because in their
sight the source of all creatures is a material, void of intelligence
and knowledge! Contrary to them are the Divine Philosophers, and the
followers of Divine Religions, who see a high aim, and excellent
purpose, for the creation of anything; because the Creator is
All-knowing, All-mighty, and All-wise. Such a Creator will never create
a thing useless and void of aim and object. As to the question of what
the aim or object might be, we have to go through the matter a little
deeper:ِ

God has not the least amount of shortcoming or deficiency in His
everlasting existence. So there is not any gap that He may want to fill
it by His creation and creatures. Nor is He in need of the worship or
service of anything that may exist. We should not compare the Creator's
attributes, with that of His creatures, even those in the highest of
ranks and dearer and nearer to Him, such as the prophets, angels, and
saints. Because He is Infinite in Substance, as well as in His
Attributes. We therefore may conclude that the aim of creation must lay
somehow in the creation of Man who is the most advanced among the
existing creatures. He is in the front of all as regards progress,
faculties, and ideas. For Man, the universe is a school to train and to
develop him. Here is a farm land in which he has to sow the seeds of
progress, and reap and harvest it in the Hereafter.

If we are asked to worship our Lord, it is because our worship serves
to improve our spiritual and physical faculties. If God, the Most
Merciful puts us under a test in His trials here, He intends to reveal,
and to develop our hidden merits. In brief, we may say that the aim of
creation is development and progress in all possible aspects and
respects. Of course, we ought to know that the Evolution and development
depends to a very high extent, to our own Free Will; and we should step
on, and tread the road of development on our own feet, and not to be
taken on as a lame!

[ 159 ]

وَلَهُ مَنْ فِى السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَمَنْ عِنْدَهُ لاَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِهِ وَلاَ يَسْتَحْسِرُونَ(( 19 ))

19- AND TO HIM BELONGS WHOEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, AND THOSE
WHO ARE WITH HIM, ARE HUMBLE IN HIS WORSHIP, NOR DO THEY IMPAIR. (IN
THAT)

يُسَبِّحُونَ الَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لاَ يَفْتُرُونَ(( 20 ))

20- THEY GLORIFY HIM NIGHT AND DAY, AND DROOP NOT.

أَمِ اتَّخَذُوا آلِهَةً مِّنَ الاَْرْضِ هُمْ يُنْشِرُونَ(( 21 ))

21- HAVE THEY TAKEN GODS FROM THE EARTH WHO CAN (CREATE AND) SPREAD
ABOUT.

لَوْ كَانَ فِيهِمَا آلِهَةٌ إِلاَّ اللهُ لَفَسَدَتَا فَسُبْحَانَ اللهِ
رَبِّ الْعَرْشِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ(( 22 ))

22- HAD THERE BEEN IN THEM GODS OTHER THAN ALLAH; THEY BOTH (EARTH AND
HEAVEN) WOULD HAVE BEEN CORRUPTED. SO, GLORY TO ALLAH, LORD OF THE
THRONE, OF WHAT THEY DESCRIBE.

لاَ يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ(( 23 ))

23- HE IS NOT QUESTIONED OF WHAT HE DOES, BUT THEY WILL BE
QUESTIONED.

أَمِ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ آلِهَةً قُلْ هَاتُوا بُرْهَانَكُمْ هَذَا
ذِكْرُ مَنْ مَعِىَ وَذِكْرُ مَنْ قَبْلِى بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ الْحَقَّ فَهُمْ مُّعْرِضُونَ(( 24 ))


