Imagination Is the Source of Polytheism
=======================================

VERSE NO.19ِ25

The last argument was on that, there is an aim, intention, and will,
behind the creation of all things that are created; individually or
generally. Here in these verses that are complementary to the
aforementioned ones, Allah has revealed that:ِ \`\`And to Him belongs
whoever is in the heavens and earth, and those who are with him are
humble in His worship; nor do they impair in that. They glorify him
night and day, and droop not.'' Even the angels whom we know them to be
the purest, and most glorious of creatures, that are made out of light,
and who are dears and nears to God; they worship the Lord with sincerity
and humility, and are proud of their worship. Why should then He need
the prayer or the worship of a Man like me and you? If we hear of His
compelling commandments, telling us, to do this, or not to do that; it
is only for our own good, and it merely ends to our physical and
spiritual development. He wants to cleanse us through worship, and to
purify us by a tittle charity of alms giving. [ 161 ]

After the aim and intention, in the creation of every creature has been
emphasized; the stress is laid upon the UNITY and ONENESS of the Creator
Himself. All reasons are on the favour of UNITY OF GOD; that there is
Allah the only one God, with no partner or any co-sharer besides Him.
This is the Major and Main Message of Mohammad (SA), and all his
followers, and also the message of all the prophets who came before
him.

In the next verses (NO.21ِ23), the false gods are all rebuked and
sharply reprehended, that they have no power of repelling a gnat from
themselves, how can you then expect them to help you or give you a hand
in a misfortune, calamity, or a victory? Here by false gods; all sorts
of idols, fetishes, deified heros, kings, animals, natural forces, and
heavenly bodies, are meant that Man has ever worshipped them. Such gods
are nothing except imaginations of their foolish worshippers, who in
times, dared to offer their children to the cursed Altars of Satans, as
sacrifices to their gods.

**THE REASONING BY OBSTACLE**

The reasoning of verse NO.22, to prove Monotheism; in its simplest
form, is a minute philosophical reason, used to prove the oneness of
Creator, throughout His creation. Islamic Philosophers have called it;
\`\`THE REASONING BY OBSTACLE'' Without any doubt, we observe that a
single system governs the whole universe. A system which is harmonious
in all aspects, and concordant in all respects, throughout the creation.
Its rules and laws are all firm, fixed, and constant, and are executed
in the skies, and are effective in the earth as well. The plans and
programmes of the said system, read with one another all over the world,
and all its parts and subsystems are proportional too!

[ 162 ]

Such a wonderful harmony proves to have its origin taken from a single
source. It is as if only one single commander commands throughout the
kingdom or dominion of EXISTENCE. Had there been numerous origins, and
different wills effective, such a harmony could never exist, and what
the verse (NO.22) speaks of corruption, would occur. It would then
easily prove that; \`\`Too many cooks will spoil the broth.'' If we
become a little more considerate, and study the matter carefully, we may
easily come to know whether a certain book has been written by a single
writer, or it has two or more authors. A book which has been written by
a single author, has all its phrases, sentences, and passages, in
perfect harmony with one another. Even the style of writing, the measure
of eloquency, the choice of words, and the use of idioms, proverbs, and
examples; are of the same kind all over the book.

But if two or more authors have shared the writing, and different parts
or articles have been written by different writers, a wide variety of
everything specially in regulations of literature, will be found
throughout the book. The composition, the style, even the dictation of
various parts of the book, may prove a different author. This is because
two writers are two different writers, and if the two could be similar
in all aspects and all respects, they were one and not two. This matter
is also true with the great book of universe, the grandeur of which is
wonderfully limitless! It is true that we as a Man, will not be able to
study the whole infinitely extensive book of universe in such a short
life that we have; but that portion of study to which Man has gained
access, has proved the said harmony and the unity of the Creator, and
oneness of the owner of the world who is our Merciful Lord.

If the rules and laws that govern the universe, were not fixed,
consistent, and valid in all parts of the world; how could a rocket
manned by a trained astronaut perform a space travel, and land safely on
the moon or other planets? If different intentions and wills were to [
163 ]

govern the nature no such things were ever possible, and science and
scientific laws had no meaning then. If two or more wills and intention
were to govern the universe, each one of them would follow his own idea
and demand, and nothing could be made free of impediment, and hence the
valid reasoning by obstacle, in the verse NO.22.

وَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمَنُ وَلَداً سُبْحَانَهُ بَلْ عِبَادٌ
مُّكْرَمُونَ(( 26 ))

26- AND THEY SAID:ِ \`\`THE MERCIFUL GOD HAS TAKEN A CHILD!'' GLORY TO
HIM! THEY RATHER ARE (HIS) HONOURED SERVANTS.

لاَ يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ(( 27 ))

27- WHO DO NOT PRECEDE HIM IN SPEECH, AND WHO ACT BY HIS ORDER.

يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ وَلاَ يَشْفَعُونَ
إِلاَّ لِمَنِ ارْتَضَى وَهُمْ مِّنْ خَشْيَتِهِ مُشْفِقُونَ(( 28 ))

28- HE KNOWS WHAT IS BEFORE THEM, AND WHAT IS BEHIND THEM, AND THEY DO
NOT INTERCEDE EXCEPT FOR THOSE WITH WHOM GOD IS PLEASED. (ALLAH APPROVES
THEIR INTERCESSION) AND THEY ARE KIND FOR AWE OF HIM.

وَمَنْ يَقُلْ مِنْهُمْ إِنِّى إِلَهٌ مِّنْ دُونِهِ فَذَلِكَ نَجْزِيهِ
جَهَنَّمَ كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِى الظَّالِمِينَ(( 29 ))

29- AND IF ANY ONE OF THEM SAY:ِ \`\`I AM A GOD APART OF HIM'' WE
RECOMPENSE HIM WITH HELL. SO DO WE RECOMPENSE THE OPPRESSORS.

[ 164 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
ANGELS ARE THE HONOURED SERVANTS OF GOD**

VERSE NO.26ِ29

In the aforementioned verses, the argument was about the prophets, and
the negation of all sorts of polytheism, and in particular about
attributing children to God, such as saying the angels are the daughters
of God's; as the Pagan Arabs used to say. Now the argument has been
moved to a wider field which may also include the TRINITY; and the
Trinitarians false idea that God has begotten a son! Saying Jesus Christ
is the SON OF GOD, is none the better than what the Pagan Arabs said,
that, the angels are the daughters of God. This is because all the
prophets, saints, and angels, are no more than God's honoured servants.
They deserve our respect but not our worship, because whatever they do
or say, they do and say it as per the order of God and by His
inspiration.

Then the angels are qualified with six qualifications, namely:ِ

1- They are the SERVANTS of God.
2- They are HONOURED by God.
3- They are PROUD of being God's servants.
4- They are so POLITE that they do not precede God in speech.
5- They ACT as per order of God.
6- They are KIND for awe of God.

The Arabic, \`\`KHASHYAT'' literally means dread or fear, but not all
kinds of fear. It is a profound and reverent dread caused by veneration
and solemn wonder which might be inspired to man of God. أَوَلَمْ يَرَ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّ السَّموَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ كَانَتَا رَتْقاً
فَفَتَقْنَاهُمَا وَجَعَلْنَا مِنَ الْمَاءِ كُلَّ شَىْء حَىّ أَفَلاَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 30 ))

[ 165 ]

30- DO THE UNBELIEVERS NOT SEE THAT, THE SKIES AND THE EARTH WERE
CONNECTED TOGETHER, (AS ONE MASS) THEN WE OPENED THEM. AND WE MADE
EVERYTHING ALIVE OF WATER. DO THEY THEN NOT BELIEVE?

وَجَعَلْنَا فِى الاَْرْضِ رَوَاسِىَ أَنْ تَمِيدَ بِهِمْ وَجَعَلْنَا
فِيهَا فِجَاجاً سُبُلا لَّعَلَّهُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ(( 31 ))

31- AND WE SET ON THE EARTH THE FIRM MOUNTAINS, NOT TO SHAKE THEM, AND
WE SET IN IT VALLEYS (TO SERVE AS) WAYS, THAT THEY MAY BE GUIDED.

وَجَعَلْنَا السَّمَاءَ سَقْفاً مَّحْفُوظاً وَهُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِهَا
مُعْرِضُونَ(( 32 ))

32- AND WE MADE THE SKY A PROTECTED CEILING, AND THEY TURN AWAY FROM
ITS SIGNS.

وَهُوَ الَّذِى خَلَقَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ
كُلٌّ فِى فَلَك يَسْبَحُونَ (( 33 ))

33- AND HE IS WHO CREATED THE NIGHT AND DAY, AND THE SUN AND THE MOON,
EACH SWIMMING IN AN ORBIT.


**THE COMMENTARY
AGAIN THE SIGNS OF GOD**

VERSE NO.30ِ33

Here a series of God's signs in the system of the existence has been
pointed to in brief:ِ \`\`Do the unbelievers not see that the skies and
the earth were connected together as one mass, then We opened them?''
Commentators have had a long discussion as to what the [ 166 ]

connection, and then the separation of the heavens and earth may mean.
The most accepted view is that, the whole solar system has at first been
one burning gaseous mass, and through its internal explosion it has been
divided to huge parts, and then they have solidated to form the existing
heavenly bodies, or the planets of the solar system that spin around
themselves, and swim in their elliptical orbits.

Another comment about it, is that; at the beginning, it did not rain,
and the doors of the sky was closed. Then Allah opened it to rain down,
and by that the earth began to grow its plant, and to produce its
vegetation and fruit. The verses of Qura"n are usually mainfold in
meanings. Each verse may have a high meaning for a learned scholar, in
spite of giving a lower meaning to a layman.

Then reference is made to the importance of water:ِ \`\`And We have
made everything alive of water.'' Some commentators have understood this
verse to mean that the main source of life is water, and that the first
living creatures have been made in the oceans. Some other commentators
have taken the water here to be the SPERMATOZOON which is the male
reproductive cell, or gamete, able to fertilize a female ovum.

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE ROLE OF WATER IN LIFE**

Some details of the role of water in our life, and in the life of all
the creatures, seems to be needed in order to clear the matter more. The
verse here (NO.30) implies that everything is made alive of water. With
reference to some biological books, we got some quotations to put light
upon the matter as follows:ِ

Water (H2O) is the world's most abundant chemical compound. It [ 167 ]
is one of the few ingredients necessary to sustain life. Man uses water
to drink, to prepare food and fruit, and to keep cool in summer and warm
in winter. Water is essential to growth of all living things. It is the
medium in which all plant and animal cells exist, and by means of which
they function. Life on earth began in the water of the oceans. Water is
vital to animal and plant life. It is also a major factor in weather.

Ancient cities developed where water was available for farming,
transportation and other uses. Modern industrial civilizations use water
in enormous quantities for purposes ranging from washing dishes, to
making steam in atomic power plants. In early times, men believed water
to be an element along with air, fire, and earth. However in 1783, the
French Chemist, ANTOINE LAVOISIER found water to be composed of oxygen
and hydrogen. The melting and boiling points of water is; 0³C and 100³C
respectively. The density of water is the usual standard for specific
gravity, the specific gravity (SG) of water being taken as one (1).

From the Encyclopedia International

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

Then in the next verse (NO.31), the immediate reference is to the
importance of mountains, and the role which they play in Man's life:ِ
\`\`And We set on the earth, the firm mountains not to shake them, and
set in it valleys to serve as ways that they may be guided.'' Mountains
are fixed in the earth, and have pierced down through it as a further
source of safety to life against vibrations caused by winds or
explosions. The mountains are also barriers to various invasions, and
yet God has provided valleys and roads between them, to afford high ways
in order to direct men in the way they should go.

[ 168 ]

**SWIMMING IN THEIR ORBIT**

The next verse (NO.33) refers to the movements of the sun and the moon
and other stars:ِ \`\`And He is who created the night and day, and the
sun and the moon, each swimming in an orbit.'' Like the other celestial
bodies in the heavens, the sun seems to be constantly moving. Not only
does it apparently rise and set each day, but it seems to be changing
its position with respect to other stars. This apparent movement of the
sun is because our earth is moving around the sun at a speed of about 18
miles a second. Its path around the sun is elliptical and it takes the
earth about one year to complete its journey. Of course, the sun does
have its own movements of spinning round itself as well as a
simultaneous movement of the sun and its planets, (i.e. The whole solar
system) around a polar star.

**THE SKY IS A FIRM CEILING**

As we have already said elsewhere in this book, the Arabic word,
\`\`SAMAA'' has been used with various meanings in Qura"n, like;
overhead, the whole universe, the solar system; and here it means the
atmosphere, or the ocean of air, which surrounds our globe. Frank Alen,
the professor of physic, has said that the atmosphere consists of gases
which protect our life. The air has such a volume and height that can do
as a chain mail in protecting the earth against the rush of some twenty
millions pieces of deathful meteores everyday. These transient celestial
bodies, large and small, enter the atmosphere with a great velocity of
50Km per second. They possibly may hit the earth in a collision and
cause calamities by their clashes, but the sky is usually protected from
such a danger wisely. When the meteore reach the atmosphere, through the
power of friction with the particles of the air, they become enormously
hot and then melt and finally turn to ashes and fine particles before
coming down to the earth. However, there are occasions when a remainder
or residue of them do reach the earth. As an instance of this, in 1908
one such great [ 169 ]

meteore hit the ground in Siberia in a part of Soviet Russia, the
diameter of which covered a length of 40 miles and caused a great
casualty: \`\`And We made the sky a protected ceiling, and they turn
away from its signs.''

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE PROTECTING CEILING**

The verse NO.32, refers to the sky overhead, as a protected or
protecting ceiling that we usually ignore its signs. This ceiling is
nothing other than the huge ocean of air that we call it the ATMOSPHER,
in the bottom of which we live and we die. It surrounds the more solid
part of the earth, the land and water, but it is just as truly a part of
the earth as they are. If we were to be removed from this airy envelope
somehow, we should gasp and die, as fishes die when they are taken out
of water. The sky or the atmosphere which seems blue consists of a
mixture of different gases.... Nitrogen makes up almost four fifth of
it, and oxygen a little more than one fifth. There are also small
quantities of other gases like argon, neon, helium, krypton, xenon,
carbon-dioxid, hydrogen and OZON, which is a form of heavy oxygen.

The atmosphere also contains a considerable amount of water vapor. The
earth holds the atmosphere by gravitational attraction.

The oxygen in the atmosphere makes fire possible, because BURNING,
chemically means combination of oxygen with carbon. Our breathing is
also part of a burning process, that provides the heat or necessary
temperature of our body. Nitrogen which is a gas chemically inactive,
slows down the process of burning or oxidation. We cannot breath pure
oxygen for long because the burning in pure oxygen will be too intensly
hot and dangerous. Nitrogen is also necessary for the growth of plant
life. It is also an essential element in all explosives. [ 170 ]

Plants absorb the carbon dioxide which is in the air and utilize it in
the manufacture of food in the green leaf through PHOTOSYNTHESIS. Man
and animal inhale oxygen and give off carbon dioxide as a waste product
of breathing. About fifteen miles above the earth, there is a layer of
OZONE which is a kind of supercharged oxygen. Each OZON molcule contains
three atoms of oxygen instead of the two atoms in the ordinary one. This
layer of ozone absorbs a great deal of the ultraviolet rays of the sun.
If this layer of OZON was not to filter out the rays, the ultraviolet
beams would sunborn us to death. This is one of the many purposes that
the verse (NO.32) is driving at, by saying:ِ \`\`We made the sky a
protecting ceiling for you.''

The atmosphere moderates the extremes of heat and cold upon the earth,
which is another protecting character of it. It also protects man from a
steady hail of meteoric particles that would otherwise make his life
upon earth a constant nightmare. Meteores range in size from small
fragments to huge rocks. The vast majority are small. It is estimated
that over a hundred billions of meteores strike the earth's atmosphere
every twenty four hours, but as they come in contact with the air most
of them are reduced to gas and dust through friction. It is probable
that the atmosphere protects Man not only from the meteores, but also
from certain types of electrically charged particles from the sun.

Without the atmosphere, there would be no rain to fall upon the parched
ground, and make plants grow. There would be no wind, and no clouds. If
there was no air, there could be no sound, no hearing, and Man's ear
would be useless and hence the verse:ِ \`\`And We made the sky a
protected ceiling, and they turn away from its signs.'' QUOTED FROM:ِ
\`\`THE BOOK OF POPULAR SCIENCE''

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE**

[ 171 ]

وَمَا جَعَلْنَا لِبَشَر مِنْ قَبْلِكَ الْخُلْدَ أَفَإِيْن مِّتَّ فَهُمُ
الْخَالِدُونَ(( 34 ))

34- AND WE MADE NOT ETERNAL LIFE FOR ANY HUMAN BEING BEFORE YOU. THEN
IF YOU DIED, WILL THEY LIVE FOR EVER?

كُلُّ نَفْس ذَائِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ وَنَبْلُوكُمْ بِالشَّرِّ وَالْخَيْرِ
فِتْنَةً وَإِلَيْنَا تُرْجَعُونَ(( 35 ))

35- EVERY ONE WILL TASTE THE DEATH, AND WE TEST YOU BY BAD AND GOOD AS
A TRIAL, AND TO US YOU WILL RETURN.

**THE COMMENTARY
ALL WILL DIE**

VERSE NO.34ِ35

The Pagan Arabs raised various objections against our prophet that if
he is the Last and the Seal of the prophets, he must not die in order to
look after his religion which he claims to last! Others said:ِ \`\`Let
us be patient, because his death will soon give an end to all these
ados, and nervous agitations.''

They had forgotten that duration of a religion or a school, depends not
on its founder's duration. Moses and Jesus had died long before, and
their religions existed and exists thousands of years after them. This
is because a Divine Religion depends on our Everlasting Lord, Who is its
true founder, and not on a prophet or a Messenger, that a Messenger is
not the founder of the Message. Here is where the verse tells this sort
of people in answer that:ِ

\`\`We made not eternal life for any human being before you. Then if
you died, do they live for ever?'' Life upon this earth is not given to
any creature without death. Of course, it is our body that finally
resolves into its constituent elements; a process that we call it death.
But the soul of Man will not die, that its constituents are not matter
or material. In this period of our life on this planet, we all live on a
probation. Here we are tested by fortunes and misfortunes as a trial. If
we pass the trial with success, we shall be lucky in our life after
death, and vice versa. [ 172 ]

وَإِذَا رَآكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ يَتَّخِذُونَكَ إِلاَّ هُزُواً
أَهَذَا الَّذِى يَذْكُرُ آلِهَتَكُمْ وَهُمْ بِذِكْرِ الرَّحْمنِ هُمْ
كَافِرُونَ(( 36 ))

36- AND WHEN THE UNBELIEVERS SEE YOU, THEY TAKE YOU NOT, EXCEPT FOR AN
OBJECT OF MOCKERY. (THEY SAY:ِ ) \`\`IS HE WHO TALKS AGAINST YOUR
GODS?'' AND THEY THEMSELVES BLASPHEME AT THE MENTION OF THE MERCIFUL.

خُلِقَ الاِْنسَانُ مِنْ عَجَل سَأُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِى فَلاَ
تَسْتَعْجِلُونِ(( 37 ))

37- MAN HAS BEEN CREATED OF HASTE. SOON WILL I SHOW YOU MY SIGNS. THEN
DO NOT ASK ME TO HASTEN.

وَيَقُولُونَ مَتَى هَذَا الْوَعْدُ إِنْ كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ(( 38 ))

38- AND THEY SAY:ِ \`\`WHEN IS THE PROMISE COMING TO PASS, IF YOU ARE
TRUTHFULS?''

لَوْ يَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا حِينَ لاَ يَكُفُّونَ عَنْ وُجُوهِهِمُ
النَّارَ وَلاَ عَنْ ظُهُورِهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يُنْصَرُونَ(( 39 ))

39- IF THE UNBELIEVERS COULD ONLY KNOW WHEN THEY CANNOT WARD OFF THE
FIRE FROM THEIR FACES, NOR FROM THEIR BACKS, AND NEITHER ARE THEY
HELPED.

بَلْ تَأْتِيهِمْ بَغْتَةً فَتَبْهَتُهُمْ فَلاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ رَدَّهَا
وَلاَ هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ(( 40 ))

40- IT WILL COME UPON THEM AT ONCE, AND CONFOUNDS THEM SO THAT THEY
CANNOT BYِPASS IT; NOR WILL THEY BE RESPITED. [ 173 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
MAN IS CREATED OF HASTE**

VERSE NO.36ِ40 These verses here, reveal the disposition of the
unbelievers with respect to prophet Mohammad:ِ \`\`When the unbelievers
see you, they take you not except for an object of mockery.'' The
unbelievers took the prophet and the worship of God lightly and
sometimes as an object of mockery. When the Merciful God was mentioned
against their false gods they became angry and blasphemed. It is
wonderful that when some one said some truth about the falsehood of
their idols which they had made them out of wood and stone, and who were
void of intelligent or power of any kind, they became furious. But when
the All-knowing, All-mighty Merciful was on the tongues they abused and
called names!

Then another bad quality of Man in general, and the heathens in
particular, has been criticized that:ِ \`\`Man has been created of
haste. Soon will I show you my signs. Then do not ask me to hasten.'' It
seems that the flesh and skin of Man is mingled with haste. They waste
the respite that has been granted them for repentance and return. But
when the punishment of God comes near to them, they moan and lament with
grief. Again when they are delivered from their painful grief, they
forget all, and deny everything, and say:ِ

\`\`When is the promise coming to pass if you are telling us the
truth?'' The above verse (NO.38) alludes to another hasty request of the
unbelievers; but what is to be answered to the poor creature of haste!?
Woe unto them when the Fire of God's wrath encompasses them from all
sides, catching their faces and their backs suddenly, and no help is
then possible, and no Fire Fighter can deliver them!

[ 174 ]

وَلَقَدِ اسْتُهْزِىءَ بِرُسُل مِّنْ قَبْلِكَ فَحَاقَ بِالَّذِينَ
سَخِرُوا مِنْهُمْ مَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُون(( 41 ))

41- AND THE MESSENGERS WHO CAME BEFORE YOU, WERE ALSO MOCKED AT, BUT
THEIR MOCKERIES SURROUNDED THOSE OF THEM WHO SCOFFED.

قُلْ مَنْ يَكْلَؤُكُمْ بِالَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ مِنَ الرَّحْمنِ بَلْ
هُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِمْ مُّعْرِضُونَ(( 42 ))

42- SAY; WHO GUARDS YOU IN THE NIGHT AND DAY FROM THE (WRATH) OF THE
MERCIFUL? AYE! THEY TURN AWAY AT THE REMEMBRANCE OF THEIR LORD.

أَمْ لَهُمْ آلِهَةٌ تَمْنَعُهُمْ مِّنْ دُونِنَا لاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
نَصْرَ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ مِّنَّا يُصْحَبُونَ(( 43 ))

43- OR DO THEY HAVE GODS TO DEFEND THEM APART FROM US?

(THESE FABRICATED GODS OF THEM) ARE NOT ABLE TO HELP THEMSELVES, NOR
ARE THEY HELPED BY US.

بَلْ مَتَّعْنَا هَؤُلاَءِ وَآبَاءَهُمْ حَتَّى طَالَ عَلَيْهِمُ
الْعُمُرُ أَفَلاَ يَرَوْنَ أَنَّا نَأْتِى الاَْرْضَ نَنقُصُهَا مِنْ
أَطْرَافِهَا أَفَهُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ(( 44 ))

44- AYE! WE BESTOWED ON THESE AND THEIR FATHERS, (THE ENJOYMENTS) UNTIL
THEIR LIFE WAS PROLONGED. (AND CAUSED THEM TO REBEL)

DO THEY NOT SEE THAT WE ARE SHRINKING THE EARTH FROM ITS SIDES? ARE
THEY THEN THE CONQUERORS?

قُلْ إِنَّمَا أُنذِرُكُمْ بِالْوَحْىِ وَلاَ يَسْمَعُ الصُّمُّ
الدُّعَاءَ إِذَا مَا يُنذَرُونَ(( 45 ))

45- SAY:ِ \`\`I WARN YOU THROUGH INSPIRATION. BUT THOSE WHO ARE DEAF
WILL NOT HEAR WHEN THEY ARE WARNED.''

[ 175 ]

**THE COMMENTARY**

IF THE EAR IS THAT OF YOURS.....

VERSE NO.41ِ45 In the first of the above group of verses, Allah
proceeds to console His Messenger, that, you are not the only prophet of
God the unbelievers mock at:ِ

\`\`And the Messengers who came before you were also mocked at....'' In
other word, the Messengers who were sent to Man before our prophet were
also mocked at by the unbelievers of their time, but the history is a
good teacher, and has many good and useful lessons to be learnt. Their
dreadful ends has made the way clear. The heathens contemporary to our
prophet, and those in ages after him, will have to be the objects of
their own mockery in due time. Therefore grieve not, and let not such
insanities, and extreme follies affect your Grand Soul, or soften your
ironic will.

If our Lord had not made the sky overhead, a protecting ceiling, as
commented in the previous verse (NO.32), it would be enough to turn our
life to a nightmare. Our Lord Has appointed various kinds of guards over
us to protect us day and night.

God's Grace and Mercy will deal moderately with us, and will let us
have enough respite. But if we transgress the bounds of decency, and
become rebellious, and incur God's wrath; He will defame and disgrace
us, and His punishment may seize and afflict us at any time by night or
day.

In the next verse (NO.44), a strange impression has been put forth
that:ِ

\`\`....Do they not see that We are shrinking the earth from its sides?
Are they then the conquerors?'' [ 176 ]

As to the meaning of the shrinkage of the earth, various comments have
been made by different commentators:ِ

1ِSome say, it means that Allah gradually takes the lands from the
hands of the heathens, and hands it over to the hands of Muslims.
However, this can't be, because this chapter (Sِ21) was revealed in
Mecca, and then Muslims had not such conquests.

2ِSome other have taken it to mean the lands are gradually wasted and
destroyed with the nations living on them.

3ِSome have understood the object of shrinkage to be the inhabitants of
the earth, particularly the learned scholars and men of knowledge.


