Section Two: Period of Occultation
==================================

General Objectives
------------------

After studying this discourse, students are expected:

1. To know the continuity of the interpretation and practice of religion
during this period of occultation;

2. To be acquainted with the characteristics and sources of *ijtihād*;
and

3. To know some rational and textual proofs for the guardianship of the
jurist [*wilāyah al-faqīh*] and be acquainted with its theoretical
dimensions.

Introduction
------------

Since the Imām of the Time (*‘atfs*) is not present during the period of
occultation, flawless interpretation of the religion is naturally not
possible and there is deprivation of ideal political leadership. So, the
function of religious authority and political leadership of the Imām
(*‘atfs*) is not exercised.

As such, the people will be deprived of the religious authority and
political leadership of the infallible Imām (*‘atfs*) and they have no
option but to engage in “waiting”. However, these questions are raised:
Has the religion of Islam offered a solution to these two important
issues (interpretation and implementation of the religion)? Or, have the
Imāms (*‘a*) shown a way to their Shī‘ah during the period of
occultation? We shall examine the reply to these related questions in
the two succeeding sections on religious authority and political
leadership.

Religious authority
-------------------

Without doubt, flawless interpretation of the religion comes to an end
with the occultation of the infallible Imām (*‘atfs*). During this
period, nothing further will be added to the corpus of the *ḥadīth* of
the Infallibles (*‘a*) and the main religious sources. From the existing
religious sources, which include the traditions of the Infallibles
(*‘a*), the religious duties of the faithful can be inferred such that
they have sufficient basis for the performance of duties. However, all
people cannot deduce their duties from the religious sources.

Therefore, naturally, they must refer to those who are capable of doing
this important task. In this manner, during the occultation of the Imām
(*‘atfs*) the position of intellectual authority is assumed by the
*‘ulamā’*—who are well-versed in religious principles and capable of
deducing the laws.

Of course, even during the time of the presence of the Imāms (*‘a*), not
all people had the opportunity to consult the Imām of their time. Due to
distance, many had become acquainted with their religious duties through
local *‘ulamā’* while the latter had greater chances of consulting the
Imām of their time. During the period of occultation, however, there is
no option but to refer to the *‘ulamā’*.

The *‘ulamā’* are those who are capable of deducing laws from the
religious sources. This capability is technically called *ijtihād* and
one who possesses this capability is known as a *mujtahid*.

Of course, in addition to *ijtihād* the intellectual authority has other
required qualities such as God-wariness [*taqwā*] and knowledge of the
state of affairs of his own time. Hence, the *mujtahidīn* are the
intellectual and religious authorities of the people during the period
of occultation.[^1]

Salient features of ijtihād
---------------------------

1. *Non-monopoly.* As defined earlier, *ijtihād* is not a monopoly of a
particular social group or class. Anyone with the required intellectual
and moral qualities can be the intellectual authority. As such,
according to the Shī‘ah, no particular class or stratum of society is
presented as the intellectual and religious authority of the people.

2. *Accessibility of ijtihād.* In the Shī‘ah school of thought, anyone
can acquire the competence to exercise *ijtihād* within a specific set
of rules. In the Sunnī school of thought, the door of *ijtihād* is
closed.[^2] The Sunnī *‘ulamā’* have to express views within the
framework of *ijtihādī* viewpoints of a certain number of their great
*mujtahidīn*. According to the Shī‘ah teachings, however, the *‘ulamā’*
always have the right to exercise *ijtihād*. Basically, the scholars who
are competent to practice *ijtihād* are not obliged to practice
*taqlīd*, for they have to act upon their personal *ijtihād*.[^3] So, it
is possible to have different *ijtihād*s and juristic opinions at one
time. It is even possible for a *mujtahid* to express diverse opinions
over the course of time and recant his former religious edict [*fatwā*].

3. *Ijtihād as rule-based.* *Ijtihād* as a method of understanding the
*sharī‘ah* depends on a set of rules. In other words *ijtihād*, which is
the process of arriving at a specific understanding of the religion, is
considered *ijtihād* only when it is derived through a specified logic.
Understanding which is not anchored in technical and systematic
*ijtihād* is speculative interpretation [*tafsīr bi’r-rayy*] which is
devoid of any value.

Of course, it must be noted that systematic understanding does not
always arrive at truth and unambiguous law. For this reason, unlike the
understanding of the infallible Imāms (*‘a*), the theory of *ijtihād* is
not considered a flawless pillar of the religion. Rather, at most it is
an understanding which serves as a proof [*ḥujjah*] for the *mujtahid*
and those who emulate him [*muqallidīn*].

Therefore, the concept of “proof” [*ḥujjiyyah*] distinguishes *ijtihād*
from speculative interpretation [*tafsīr bi’r-rayy*]. Forbidding of
speculative interpretation starts exactly from the moment when
systematic reasoning is lost. As such, in replying to a juristic
question, a *mujtahid* must traverse difficult and tortuous ways. The
reason for this is that the *faqīh* does not treat religious laws as
facilitators. His aim is to try his best so that his deduction is within
the framework of a set of rules and this is the reason for the concern
for credibility—so that it may serve as “proof”.

4. *Dynamism of ijtihād.* Since Islam is the final religion, it must be
able to offer answers to the problems and predicaments of every age.
“Final religion” means that its rules are such that they are applicable
in every period. It is true that *ijtihād* is exercised within the
framework of specific rules, but it gives the *mujtahidīn* the
opportunity to offer answers to the problems of his particular time by
referring back to the religious sources.

In the Islamic *sharī‘ah*, there are alterable elements which make it
possible for laws to be implemented in different areas. Some of these
elements are as follows:

a. In the Islamic *sharī‘ah*, rules are presented in general form. Since
the addressees of the religion are all people in all places, many of the
laws are in the form of permanent rules and not confined to a particular
time in history. For example, the principle of *pacta sunt servanda*[^4]
covers every treaty at every period.

b. In the Islamic *sharī‘ah*, apart from the common laws that are
implemented in normal conditions, certain laws are considered for
special conditions which are called secondary laws [*al-aḥkām
ath-thānawīyyah*]. These laws make it possible for the *sharī‘ah* to
conform to special conditions. For instance, in an emergency situation
in which it is not possible to implement a mandatory law, as long as the
situation is not normalized, it is not mandatory to implement it. Or, in
the case that the implementation of a law causes harm to a person or
persons, it must not be implemented.

c. In the Islamic *sharī‘ah*, the Islamic state has a credible standing
and can issue decrees while taking the society’s welfare into
consideration. These decrees or laws which are called “administrative
decrees” [*al-Aḥkām al-Hukūmiyyeh*] gives the Islamic state the
opportunity to implement the Islamic *sharī‘ah* based on the welfare of
Islam and the Muslims. These decrees are within the prerogatives granted
to the Islamic state.

In view of the alterable elements of the Islamic *sharī‘ah*, *ijtihād*
is a dynamic process compatible with time and place. Therefore, time and
place are two fundamental and decisive elements in the practice of
*ijtihād*.

It must be noted that many items or objectives assume various forms over
the course of time. In consonance with changes, laws may also change
accordingly. It is possible for an object to be an instrument of
gambling at a certain time and place and not so at another time and
place. Or, it is possible that at a certain time to buy and sell an item
is not allowed for being devoid of any rational benefit, but the same
item may be allowed as a commercial commodity at another time on account
of its acquisition of rational utility.

It is worth mentioning that in accordance with the famous view in Shī‘ah
jurisprudence, persons who are not *mujtahid* (i.e. they are not experts
in deducing religious laws) must refer to a living *mujtahid*. The rule
of referring to a living *mujtahid* gives the opportunity to the people
to always emulate a *mujtahid* who knows the conditions and exigencies
of the time and address their needs in accordance with each period.

Therefore, *ijtihād* in the Islamic culture, especially in the Shī‘ah
conception, has the necessary dynamism in conforming the religious laws
to current problems while ensuring that it is within the framework of
its conventional rules. While connecting to the religious tradition, it
addresses the needs of the changing world.

It must be added that these are the salient features of *ijtihād*.
*Ijtihād* is a process which can discharge this responsibility well.
However, the absence of answers to some problems in their various
dimensions is not an indication of the failure or futility of *ijtihād*.
Rather, the reason for this is that sometimes all the potential of
*ijtihād* in different areas are not utilized.

Sources of ijtihād
------------------

For the Shī‘ah, *ijtihād* is performed based on the four famous sources,
viz. the Qur’an, *Sunnah*, reason [*‘aql*], and consensus [*ijmā‘*]. The
Qur’an is the primary source of the religion and it is the basis of
deducing religious views.

Along with the Qur’an, since the *Sunnah* serves as the elucidation,
explanation and elaboration of the Qur’an, the authentic and credible
narrations constitute a vital source, such that without them one cannot
content himself with the Qur’an. Many religious laws cannot be inferred
by only referring to the Qur’an. In essence, the basic function of the
*Sunnah* is to elaborate the subjects concisely mentioned in the Qur’an.

Apart from the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*, which are considered the textual
sources of *ijtihād*, the intellect or reason [*‘aql*] is presented as
one of the sources of deducing laws. Since religion and reason are
totally compatible and concordant, definite rational laws are
substantiated by religion.[^5]

Consensus [*ijmā‘*] is the fourth source of *ijtihād*. *Ijmā‘* means the
agreement of *‘ulamā’* on a religious law such that through this
agreement, the view of the Infallibles (*‘a*) can be inferred. In other
words, *ijmā‘* in Shī‘ah *ijtihād* is a specific kind of agreement among
*‘ulamā’* which uncovers the view of the Infallibles (*‘a*) on a
particular issue. Therefore, mere consensus of a number of *‘ulamā’* and
*mujtahidīn* on a religious law cannot be considered credible *ijmā‘*
just because it closes the door for other *mujtahidīn*. Rather, this
consensus must be such that it establishes its concordance with the
pertinent view of the Infallibles (*‘a*).

Hence, Shī‘ah *ijtihād* is practiced only within the framework of these
four sources, and the logic of inferring the *sharī‘ah* is also put into
action within this parameter. Every proof which is claimed to be the
basis of understanding the religion has no option but to come from one
of these four sources. As such, it becomes clear that:

Firstly, sufficing with only the Qur’an in understanding Islamic law and
searching for all the answers in it alone is an exercise in futility and
an unacceptable inference.

Secondly, relying on rationalization and personal inferences is
acceptable provided only that it is substantiated by definite proof and
evidence.

Thirdly, custom or usage is not automatically credible unless it is
substantiated by reason or the *Sunnah*. In other words, if a
customarily accepted rule is consistent with explicit dictate of reason
or because of its persistence from the time of the Imāms (*‘a*) up to
the present, meaning that it is evident that it is approved by them,
such a rule can be considered a religious rule or decree. Otherwise, it
cannot be considered an integral part of the *sharī‘ah*.

Leadership
----------

The issue of leadership during the period of occultation can be examined
in two perspectives, viz. rational [*‘aqlī*] and textual [*naqlī*].
Here, we shall discuss them separately as “rational proof” and “textual
proof”:

### 1. Rational proof

The rational approach to the issue of leadership is based on the
following preliminary points:

1. From the Shī‘ah viewpoint, during the presence of the Imāms (*‘a*)
the leadership of the Islamic *ummah* rested on the shoulders of the
infallible Imāms and the religious laws were implemented in the society
by the Imām of every period who was the vicegerent of Allah and His
Messenger (*ṣ*). Since God has introduced them as the leaders of the
*ummah*, the rule of any other was naturally a usurpation of the
authority [*wilāyah*] of God, the Messenger (*ṣ*) and the Imāms (*‘a*).
The people were duty-bound to pave the ground for the rule of the Imām
of their time.

2. The sovereignty of God in the sphere of legislation demands that the
government during the period of occultation must also serve the
interests of the *sharī‘ah* in the realms of actions, decisions and
laws. It cannot be accepted that the religion is accepted and God is the
Sovereign and yet the Islamic laws are not implemented. Thus, as a
rational necessity emanating from the sovereignty of God, the Islamic
laws must be implemented.[^6]

3. Implementation of Islamic laws necessitates a decision-making body or
state. The verdicts of the *sharī‘ah* regarding different areas such as
economics, politics, *ḥudūd*,[^7] retribution and punishment, training
and education, and so on cannot be implemented without the existence of
a government. Just as earning a livelihood necessitates the
establishment of a government, the religion also cannot be implemented
except through a powerful ruling authority. Accordingly, a government is
necessary as a prerequisite to the implementation of the religion of
God.[^8]

4. The existence of a government or state naturally necessitates
requirements [*ilzām*] and mandates [*dastūr*]. The state presents
religious orders as legal obligations. In other words, the
implementation of religion lies in the government’s imposition. This
obligation is acceptable provided that the imposing institution has the
competence to impose them. If the ruling person or body does not have
this competence, he or it will have no right to rule and impose orders.
In essence, such an imposing institution lacks legitimacy
[*mashrū‘iyyah*].

Human beings on their own capacity have no right to oblige others to do
a thing and impose orders upon them unless God, who is the Real Ruler,
grants such a right. This is the principle of “man’s lack of authority”
on the basis of which one has no authority [*wilāyah*] over another
unless he has rational or textual proof to exercise such authority.

5. Since one of the elements of the Islamic government is the Islamic
nature of its decisions, reason dictates that it must be headed by a
person who is an expert on Islam.

6. After the acceptance of Imamate and the acknowledgment of the point
that the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) are the true leaders of the Islamic
society (after the Prophet (*ṣ*)) and that divine sovereignty is
implemented through them, religious leadership essentially belongs to
the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) and no other person has the right to rule
except when that right is delegated to him. In the case that there is no
proof of the infallible Imām’s (*‘atfs*) delegation of this right to a
specific person, since the government cannot be without a head, the most
pious and most righteous person among the Islamic scholars shall act as
the Imām’s deputy [*nā’ib*].[^9]

This view is a paraphrase of the theory of the guardianship of the
jurist [*wilāyah al-faqīh*]. The concept of *wilāyah* in this context is
nothing but the supervision of the Islamic society and it does not mean
interdiction of the people. Even if all people have attained sufficient
social maturity and rational growth, in the realm of government and
collective welfare, there is still a need for an institution of
leadership to maintain law and order. In the Shī‘ah culture, this
institution is what we called *wilāyah*.

### 2. Textual proof

Apart from rational proof regarding the *wilāyah* of the competent
jurist or Islamic scholar, it can also be clearly inferred from sayings
of the Infallibles (*‘a*) that the competent jurists [*fuqahā*] and
*mujtahidīn* are the deputies of the Imāms (*‘a*) during the period of
occultation and that the issue of leadership, like religious authority,
is within the competence of the *fuqahā*. In one of his sayings, the
Messenger of Allah (*ṣ*) has described the *‘ulamā’* as his caliphs. In
reply to a question on the identity of his caliphs, the Apostle (*ṣ*)
said: “They are those who narrate my *Sunnah*.”[^10]

Undoubtedly, the most common definition of “caliphate” is “the
leadership of the *ummah*”. Meanwhile, it is evident that the narrators
of the *Sunnah* are those who have the competence to know the substance
of religious views. Therefore, the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) has delegated the
position of caliphate and leadership after him to the religious
scholars. During the presence of the Imāms (*‘a*), they were the
indisputable religious scholars while during the period of occultation,
the *mujtahidīn* are the narrators of religion.

In another narration, the Imām of the Age (*‘atfs*) said about the duty
of the faithful in the events to come in the future: “In such cases,
refer to those who narrate our traditions. They are my proof over you
and I am Allah’s proof over them.”[^11]

Imām al-Mahdī (*‘atfs*) referred his followers to the *fuqahā* and this
referral is not only in explaining religious issues (religious
authority) but also in matters of implementation (political leadership).
In other words, both religious authority and political leadership have
been delegated to the religious scholars.[^12]

In these narrations, a specific *faqīh* or *mujtahid* has not been
appointed for the post. Any person who possesses this competence is
qualified to exercise authority [*wilāyah*]. Therefore, these narrations
indicate the general *wilāyah* of the *fuqahā*. As such, during the
period of oppressive governments, in judicial affairs and some issues
requiring administrative decrees, the Shī‘ah used to refer to the
*fuqahā* as much as possible, and the *fuqahā*, in turn, used to address
the affairs of the Shī‘ah as much as they could.

Any objection relating to the possibility of different *fuqahā*
exercising *wilāyah* at the same time is unjustifiable because in
periods of *ṭāghūtī* rule every *faqīh* exercises *wilāyah* within his
own jurisdiction. Whenever the leadership of a *faqīh* acquires general
acceptance and he has the opportunity to administer affairs, his decree
is also binding upon the other *fuqahā* within his jurisdiction and they
should not independently issue administrative decrees. Thus, upon the
formation of an Islamic state, a *faqīh* shall exercise *wilāyah* over
the government.

There are many ways of selecting the one among the *fuqahā* to head the
government. One of them is through general suffrage in the sense that
the faithful pay allegiance to one of the *fuqahā* who are competent and
rightful to exercise *wilāyah*. Thereafter, his view shall also be
binding upon the rest of *fuqahā*.

Hence, *wilāyah*, on the one hand, is an “appointed” [*intiṣābī*]
position in the sense that the *fuqahā* have been designated to this
position by the Imāms (*‘a*). On the other hand, there is also the
people’s will through “election” to make “official” a *faqīh*’s
*wilāyah* and the preeminence of his opinion over that of other *fuqahā*
in the realm of government and public welfare.

Assuming that the selected person loses one of the required
intellectual, practical or moral conditions of leadership, he is
automatically removed from the position of *wilāyah*. Similarly, if a
*mujtahid* loses his competence in *ijtihād*, he is automatically
removed from the position of religious authority. As such, there is a
system of identification in the Islamic government which constantly
supervises the administrative performance of the *faqīh*.

Whenever it finds out that the leader is no longer competent to
administer the affairs of society, it will inform the society
accordingly so that the faithful can pay allegiance to another *faqīh*
who possesses all the necessary qualifications of a leader. In our
Islamic system, the Assembly of Experts shoulders this responsibility.
This assembly, composed of Islamic scholars and *mujtahidīn* familiar
with current issues, has the prerogative to inform the people of their
responsibilities toward the Leader and his leadership.[^13]

Dimensions of the theory of wilāyah al-faqīh
--------------------------------------------

It is said that during the period of occultation of the infallible Imām
(*‘a*), just as the *fuqahā* are in charge of interpreting the religion
and expounding the laws, they also assume the post of leadership and
implementation of the religion. The different dimensions of the theory
of *wilāyah al-faqīh* will become clear through attention to the
following points:

1. According to the theory of *wilāyah al-faqīh*, in terms of leadership
the Islamic scholar is the successor of the infallible Imām (*‘atfs*).
This succession does not mean that the true station of the *faqīh* is
exactly the same as that of the infallible Imām (*‘atfs*). Obviously,
the true position and station of the infallible Imām (*‘a*) can never be
assumed or occupied by anyone else. The succession of the *faqīh*
encompasses only certain aspects mentioned earlier. However, the
superiority of the station of the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) compared with
that of the *fuqahā* and religious scholars does not invalidate the fact
that both the Imāms (*‘a*) and the *fuqahā* must be obeyed as the
leaders of society.

2. A state based on *wilāyah al-faqīh* has the necessary authority to
decide on matters of public interest. Therefore, when taking public
welfare, the principle of consultation and Islamic laws into
consideration, the state may decide to restrict individual liberties.
These prerogatives are likewise known as “absolute guardianship”
[*wilāyat-e muṭlaqeh*]. Acceptance of absolute guardianship does not
mean acceptance of unlimited power. In other words, “absoluteness” is
not incompatible with “constitutionalism”. That is, on the one hand, the
Islamic government is bound to implement Islamic laws and observe
Islamic standards. Even in the government of the Infallibles (*‘a*), no
decision which will incur the displeasure of God can ever be made.[^14]
On the other hand, since God has made the Imāms (*‘a*) the guardians of
the people and the society of the faithful and they, in turn, have
delegated this position to the *fuqahā*, the latter have the right to
exercise *wilāyah* within the framework of public interests and the
Islamic government has the necessary prerogatives as far as this
framework is concerned. Therefore, the following conclusions can be
drawn:

Firstly, absoluteness can never signify disregarding religious laws. In
other words, *wilāyah* is not absolute to such an extent that the
religious laws can be ignored, for basically *wilāyah* is in fact
intended to make the religion prevalent.

Secondly, absoluteness does not mean that the holder of *wilāyah* can
make any decision he likes. In addition to being compatible with
religious laws, decisions must be consistent with the interests of
people. Without taking into account the public welfare, individual
interests cannot be sacrificed. In principle, in the framework of
religious laws, none except the Islamic government has the right to
ignore individual interests unless there is a higher set of interests at
stake, i.e. the interests of society.

Thirdly, the jurist-guardian [*walī al-faqīh*] is obliged to consult
with experts. Thus, absoluteness does not mean disregarding the views of
other specialists. As provided for in the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Expediency Council serves as the advisory body of
the *walī al-faqīh* in identifying what is expedient.[^15]

3. The theory of *wilāyah al-faqīh* is in no way incompatible with
republicanism. Of course, *Wilāyah al-faqīh* signifies the rule of
religion and naturally, with respect to the rule of divine laws, the
people have no authority of their own and based on their religion, they
are obliged to implement the laws of Islam. The legitimacy
[*mashrū‘iyyah*] of Islamic laws does not emanate from the will of the
people. In the same vein, the rightfulness of the Islamic government
does not depend on the inclinations of the people.

It is undeniable, though, that an Islamic government is established
through the determination of the people and if the people do not desire
its establishment, the Islamic government can never be put into
practice. Therefore, the legitimacy of a government must be
distinguished from its materialization.

Since the Islamic government is a means to materialize some elements of
divine sovereignty, its rightfulness stems from the religion. However,
in many societies a religious government is not established because the
people are incapable of materializing their wish. As such, the religious
government has two pillars: a divine aspect—its rightfulness and
legitimacy [*mashrū‘iyyah*], and its people-related element which is the
source of the government’s acceptability [*maqbūliyyah*]. *Wilāyah*
represents the first pillar of the Islamic government while
republicanism is the basis of the second.

It is significant to note that the Islamic government cannot afford to
disregard its acceptability, for without legitimacy it has no means to
exert influence and implement its will and without influence it has no
basis for the materialization of its religious aspirations. Thus, the
Islamic government must be acceptable to the people both during its
establishment and its perpetuity.

Given this explanation it becomes clear that *wilāyah*, as a matter of
appointment [*intiṣābī*], does not signify disregard for the people’s
role in government; rather, it only expresses emphasis on the first
element.

4. It is clear that apart from intellectual competence to identify
religious views, the government is also in need of other sources of
expertise. The theory of *wilāyah al-faqīh* does not mean that in the
Islamic government only *fiqh* and *sharī‘ah* are held in honor while
other types of expertise and specializations are not shown importance.
The decisions of the government are legitimate provided that they are
endorsed and approved by the religious leader. It is natural, however,
that these decisions must have undergone the required process and
reached the stage of final approval. Certainly, in case that they
require non-juristic expertise, they must undergo a specific process.

5. In the *wilāyah al-faqīh* system, the *walī al-faqīh* is both a real
and legal entity. As a real entity, he is equal to all other citizens of
the Islamic state in the eyes of the law. As a legal entity, he gives
legitimacy to government decisions. After obtaining the approval of the
*wali al-faqīh*, administrative decrees become binding to all including
the *walī al-faqīh* himself and other *fuqahā*, and no one is excused.

Naturally, whenever a stated law tends to go against the interests of
the people, it shall be changed through a well-defined legal mechanism
except in cases where it is not possible to do so. In case of the
latter, using his legal prerogative and after consultation with the
concerned experts, the *walī al-faqīh* can suspend a law that tends to
go against the public interest.

Therefore, “absolute guardianship” does not efface the rule of law and
welfare-orientation of the society. Like all other citizens, the *walī
al-faqīh* is obliged to abide by every law enacted for all. In the
juristic parlance, to violate the ruler’s decree is unlawful even to the
ruler himself. After undergoing the entire legal process, a law is
considered a ruler’s decree.

6. *Wilāyah al-faqīh* does not deprive the people of any of their
legitimate and legal liberties. In the system based on *wilāyah
al-faqīh*, the people enjoy civil liberties and have the right to decide
on their choice of occupation, place of residence, spouse, and other
civil liberties related to their personal lives. Similarly, they enjoy
freedom of belief and the government does not impose any particular
belief upon them. Naturally, any freedom the exercise of which adversely
affects collective life and public welfare lacks any legitimacy.

In the Islamic system, the people are free in their political activities
and they are able to criticize government policies. As required by the
rule of enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong, the people
in the Islamic society abide by government orders but at the same time
monitor government policies and even criticize them whenever necessary.

They are religiously obligated to keep their criticism constructive and
relay their views to officials and leaders of the Islamic society even
up to the highest echelon. On the other hand, the Islamic state is
obliged to encourage the participation and supervision of the people. In
other words, it must strive to promote the people’s political liberties.

Meanwhile, it must be noted with emphasis that the Islamic approach to
freedom is much different from that of the atheistic and secular schools
of thought. From the Islamic perspective, freedom does not signify
empowerment of the people to commit sins and promiscuities—this is
unacceptable. Any promotion of ‘freedom’ which carries the people away
from divine sovereignty is unethical and unprincipled and in conflict
with virtue.

7. In the Islamic system, many *mujtahidīn* have been recognized by the
people as sources of emulation [*marāji‘ at-taqlīd*]. Meanwhile, the
*walī al-faqīh* is also a *mujtahid* who has a particular understanding
of Islamic laws and this understanding may be different from that of
other *mujtahidīn* at a particular time. In such a situation, this
question is raised: Which view should the people follow in discharging
their religious duties?

This conundrum has also been expressed in a different way: In a
religious government, on the one hand, the door of *ijtihād* is open and
different interpretations are advanced by *marāji‘ at-taqlīd* and
*mujtahidīn* through the institution of *ijtihād*. On the other hand,
all the many views cannot practically be converted into administrative
decrees. In such a situation, how can administrative decisions be based
upon religious views? What is the duty of those people who follow
*marāji‘ at-taqlīd* whose views are not reflected in the administrative
decrees and laws?

In reply to these questions, it must be said that obviously, no law can
accommodate and reflect all views. It must be borne in mind that once a
requirement of the law and government is approved, only one *ijtihād*
can be the basis of a law or administrative decision. Similarly, we have
implicitly accepted that in any realm where the government has to make
decisions, naturally the organs constituting the government must act
based on those decisions. In such a situation, in cases where acting
upon the law is not considered against the verdicts of a *marja‘
at-taqlīd*, practically no problem will arise. However, in cases where a
conflict exists, assuming that the issue in question is within the
jurisdiction of the religious government, the government’s decree or
decision shall prevail.

Therefore, by delineating the jurisdiction of government decisions and
those of personal affairs which are beyond the jurisdiction of the
government, the faithful citizen can abide by government policies and at
the same time follow his *marja‘ at-taqlīd*. This is also applicable to
the *marāji‘ at-taqlīd* in the sense that, although they have their own
particular juristic views, they must also abide by government policies.
In the same vein, experts in fields other than religion must abide by
administrative decrees and government decisions even where their expert
opinions are inconsistent with those decrees and decisions.

8. The theory of *wilāyah al-faqīh* is the understanding of the Shī‘ah
*‘ulamā’* and *mujtahidūn* from the religious sources. Among the
*mujtahidīn*, there may possibly be different views on the Islamic
political system during the period of occultation which are distinct
from the theory of *wilāyah al-faqīh*. In such a situation, there is no
doubt that only one view must be considered official on which the
religious government should be based.

Formalization of a political system has its own process. One
conventional method is to transform a theory on the Islamic system into
a public covenant. When based on public consensus, a theory acquires a
legal status, and it is natural that others who possess a different view
must accept the theory as the foundation of the government. It is true
that the door for discussion and exchange of opinions regarding the
theoretical foundation of the government is always open and the right of
concerned experts and scholars to express views is reserved.

However, the subject must not be discussed in such way that it would
lead to public distrust in the foundation of government and indifference
to the legal body, especially the constitution. Obviously, even those
who believe that the law must be changed acknowledge a specified way or
mechanism of legal amendment.

9. Every political system is explainable within the framework of a
particular worldview. When accepting a particular worldview, not every
political system can then be accepted. Naturally, depending on a
person’s perspective on the world and humanity, there are certain
limitations in his choice of the type of political system.

Given this explanation, it must be noted that the religious government
must not necessarily be consistent with other prevailing political
systems. It should not be expected that every political system could be
reconciled with the Islamic worldview in every aspect. As such, in
dealing with political systems which have been formed on the basis of
non-Islamic viewpoints, one must be very careful and meticulous and
reserve the right to criticize and deliberate. If there are positive or
acceptable points in these systems, these points must be taken and used
while observing the limits set by the Islamic worldview or ideology.

This point is applicable with respect to all political concepts. For
this reason, in dealing with such concepts, first of all their
association with religious views must be examined. Of course, without
sufficient knowledge of both the concepts and religious ideology, this
examination will be defective. It is possible that in certain political
systems, there are certain elements that can be accepted as positive
points.

On this basis, it cannot be asserted that democracy, as it is
implemented in the West, is totally compatible with the Islamic system.
Nevertheless, some of its features as a positive product of human
experience can be considered compatible with religious concepts. In
other words, a democratic model can be accommodated within the framework
of an Islamic system. That is, while the legitimacy of the Islamic
system is anchored in religious views, the substance of democratic
decisions is also compatible with Islamic law. So long as it does not
contradict Islamic rules, democracy as a method or means can be taken.

Public participation in different levels of decision-making,
implementation of a parliamentary system, devising systems to monitor
the performance of executive organs, selection of officeholders through
general suffrage, and similar elements can also be adopted in an Islamic
system.

[^1]: - See books on jurisprudence, the section regarding ijtihād and
taqlīd.

[^2]: - See Sharaf ad-Dīn al-Mūsawī, Al-Murājā‘at, Correspondence 4.

[^3]: - See books on jurisprudence, the section regarding ijtihād and
taqlīd.

[^4]: - Pacta sunt servanda: abidance with a treaty in letter and
spirit. [Trans.]

[^5]: - Obviously, indefinite laws cannot automatically be considered
religious laws. Contrary to Sunnī ijtihād in which indefinite and
hypothetical laws are sometimes treated as proof, in Shī‘ah ijtihād such
is not the case.

[^6]: - See Imām Khomeinī, Al-Bay‘, vol. 2, pp. 461, 464.

[^7]: - Ḥudūd (literally meaning boundaries or limits) in the Islamic
law are generally applied to penal law for punishments prescribed for
particular crimes whose extent is determined by law. [Trans.]

[^8]: - Al-Bay‘, vol. 2, pp. 461, 464.

[^9]: - In view of the fact that the principle is the absence of
authority, we cannot choose just any person to act as the Imām’s deputy
but must choose the best available person. In a government based on
religious laws, the best available person is none except the duly
competent jurist [faqīh jāmi‘ ash-sharāyiṭ].

[^10]: - This narration is recorded in Man Lā Yaḥḍuruh al-Faqīh, vol. 4,
p. 420. The text of the narration is as follows: رسول الله (ص): أللّهم
ارحم خلفائي. قيل يا رسول الله! و من خلفاؤك؟ قال الذين يأتون من بعدي
يروون عنّي حديثي و سنّتي. “The Messenger of Allah (ṣ) said: ‘O Allah!
Have mercy on my caliphs.’ ‘Who are they, O Messenger of Allah? And who
are your caliphs?’ He (ṣ) said: ‘They are those who after me shall
narrate my ḥadīth and my Sunnah’.”

[^11]: - Shaykh Ḥurr al-‘Āmilī, Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah, “Abwāb Ṣifāt
al-Qāḍī,” section 11, ḥadīth 9. The text of the narration is as follows:
أمّا الحوادث الواقعة فارجعوا فيها إلىٰ رواة حديثنا فانّهم حجّتي عليكم و
أنا حجة الله عليهم.

[^12]: - Al-Bay‘, vol. 2, p. 474.

[^13]: - Article 107 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran
thus stipulates: “(1) After the demise of Imām Khomeinī, the task of
appointing the Leader shall be vested with the experts elected by the
people. The experts will review and consult among themselves concerning
all the religious men possessing the qualifications specified in
Articles 5 and 109. In the event they find one of them better versed in
Islamic regulations or in political and social issues, or possessing
general popularity or special prominence for any of the qualifications
mentioned in Article 109, they shall elect him as the Leader. Otherwise,
in the absence of such superiority, they shall elect and declare one of
them as the Leader. The Leader thus elected by the Assembly of Experts
shall assume all the powers of the religious leader and all the
responsibilities arising from it. (2) The Leader is equal with the rest
of the people of the country in the eyes of law.”

[^14]: - Al-Bay‘, vol. 2, p. 461.

[^15]: - Article 112 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran
thus stipulates: “(1) Upon the order of the Leader, the Nation’s
Exigency Council shall meet at any time the Guardian Council judges a
proposed bill of the Islamic Consultative Assembly to be against the
principles of sharī‘ah or the Constitution, and the Assembly is unable
to meet the expectations of the Guardian Council. Also, the Council
shall meet for consideration on any issue forwarded to it by the Leader
and shall carry out any other responsibility as mentioned in this
Constitution. (2) The permanent and changeable members of the Council
shall be appointed by the Leader. (3) The rule for the Council shall be
formulated and approved by the Council members subject to the
confirmation by the Leader.”


