Foreword
========

The precious legacy left behind by the Holy Prophet’s Household [*Ahl
al-Bayt*] (may peace be upon them all) and their followers’ preservation
of this legacy from the menace of extinction is a perfect example of an
all-encompassing school [*maktab*] which embraces the different branches
of Islamic knowledge and this school has been able to train many
talented personalities by quenching them with the fountain that
gushes-forth.

The school has presented scholars to the Muslim community [*ummah*] who,
by following the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*), have occupied the
station of clarifying the doubts and skepticisms brought forth by
various creeds and intellectual currents both inside and outside the
Muslim society and, throughout the past centuries, they have been the
presenters of the firmest answers and solutions to these doubts.

Anchored in the responsibilities it is shouldering, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has embarked upon defending the sanctity of
*risālah* [apostleship] and its authentic beliefs—truths which have
always been opposed by the chiefs and leaders of anti-Islamic sects,
religions and trends. In this sacred path, the Assembly regards itself
as a follower of the upright pupils of the Ahl al-Bayt’s (*‘a*)
school—those who have always been ready to refute accusations and
calumnies and have tried always to be in the frontline of this struggle
while trying to conform to the demands of our time.

Experiences in this field, which have been preserved in books of the
scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt’s (*‘a*) school, are unique in their own
right. This is because the experiences have been based upon knowledge
[*‘ilm*] and the preeminence of intellect and reasoning, and at the same
time, are devoid of any iota of blind prejudice as well as whims and
caprice. These experiences address the experts, scholars and thinkers in
such a manner that is acceptable to a healthy mind and pure human
natural disposition [*fiṭrah*].

In a bid to assist those who are in quest of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has endeavored to enter a new phase using these
worthy experiences within a framework of research by drawing upon works
of contemporary Shi‘ah writers and those who, through divine guidance,
embraced this noble school.

This Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of valuable
works of pious predecessors and outstanding Shī‘ah personalities of the
past, so that those who are thirsty for truth can quench their thirst
from this refreshing fountain by understanding and embracing the truths
which the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*) has offered as a gift to the
entire world.

It is hoped that the esteemed readers will assist the Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*)
World Assembly with their valuable views and suggestions as well as
constructive criticisms.

We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist us
in propagating pure Muhammadan (*ṣ*) Islam.

We ask God, the Exalted, to accept this modest effort and enhance it
further under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth, Hadrat al-Mahdī
(may Allah, the Exalted, expedite his glorious advent).

It is appropriate here to express our utmost gratitude to the group of
scholars of the Office of the Supreme Leader in the Universities for
writing the book[^1] and to Mr. Mansoor Limba for translating it, as
well as to all our honorable colleagues in accomplishing this task
especially the dear friends in the Translation Office who performed
their responsibilities admirably. 

**Cultural Affairs Department**

**Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) World Assembly**

[^1]: - Ma‘ārif-e Islāmī (Qum: Office of the Supreme Leader in the
Universities, Spring 1379 AHS (2000)), volumes 1-2.


