Preface to the Farsi Edition
============================

This Islamic studies course aims to elucidate the Islamic worldview and
ideological foundations and to strengthen the religious beliefs of
esteemed students. The previous textbooks had been written and published
by a group of scholars on the basis of the needs and conditions of the
universities at that time. With some technical and substantial additions
and changes in certain topics, these textbooks are still taught in the
universities.

For many years, the Islamic Studies Professors and Courses Affairs
Department of the Office of the Supreme Leader in the Universities has
included in its program the writing of new Islamic Studies textbooks
based on the criticisms and assessment of the then existing textbooks
and manuscripts, the suggestions of Islamic studies professors and the
opinions of some students.

Thanks be to God, the Munificent, this program has been completed and
the Islamic studies course notes along with other course notes have now
been written and published. After using the book in experimental
teaching and obtaining correctional and supplementary views of
professors and students, it is hoped that a model textbook in terms of
its substance and structure has now been written and published, God
willing.

The present book is a product of the Islamic Studies Section of the
Textbook Writing and Research Unit of the Department. After sketching
out its initial table of contents, it has been written by the honorable
professors and Ḥujaj al-Islām[^1] Ḥamīd Pārsāniyā, Muḥammad Sa‘īdī-Mehr,
Amīr Dīwānī, Muḥsin Jawādī, and ‘Alī Riḍā Amīnī.[^2]

The following notes are worth considering:

1. In writing this book, intricate philosophical discussions are avoided
and an average level of understanding of students is taken into account.
In explaining religious tenets, Qur’anic concepts and traditions
[*aḥādīth*] are amply used.

2. Due to the inclusion of the topics on Resurrection [*ma‘ād*] in the
first volume of the book and the extensive citation of Qur’anic verses
and narrations [*riwāyāt*] in the Origin [*mabda’*] and Resurrection
[*ma‘ād*] Sections, the first volume is larger than the second. As such,
the respected professors can use the sections in the first volume as
they deem appropriate to supplement the second volume. Also, because of
the importance of the chapter on Imamate and leadership in the second
volume, there is more time during the second term to examine the
different dimensions of this topic.

3. The general objectives are stated at the beginning of every discourse
(section). It is hoped that the arrangement of the subjects in this
edition will facilitate understanding and discussion.

4. In view of the lofty station and value of ritual prayer [*ṣalāh*] in
the devotional system of Islam, selected parts of the works of Imām
Khomeinī (*r*)[^3] and a commentary of his *Ādābuṣ-Ṣalāt [The
Disciplines of the Prayer]*[^4]*,* which deals with the spiritual
secrets of prayer, have been included in the last discourse on
anthropology in Book One so that the students could become acquainted
with the inner [*bāṭinī*] or celestial [*malakūtī*] aspects of this
divine obligation. In these parts of the book, some mystical terms and
phrases have been used. With the respected professors’ exposition and
elucidation of the pertinent statements of Imām Khomeinī, these sections
could be of much benefit to students.

In spite of diligent efforts in writing and publishing this book, the
door for edition and revision is open for improvement. Suggestions and
ideas expressed by concerned authorities, scholars, professors, and
students can be of immense help in improving it.

Finally, we would like to express our sincere thanks and gratitude to
all our esteemed colleagues who have contributed to writing, editing and
typesetting this volume.

***Textbook Writing and Research Unit***

***Islamic Studies Professors and Courses Affairs Department***

***Office of the Supreme Leader in the Universities***

[^1]: - Ḥujaj al-Islām: the plural form of the religious title Ḥujjat
al-Islām which literally means “proof of Islam”. [Trans.]

[^2]: - The introduction of the book is written by Ḥujjat al-Islām
Pārsāniyā; the chapters pertaining to the knowledge of God by Dr.
Sa‘īdī-Mehr; the initial manuscript of the topics on the Resurrection by
Ḥujjat al-Islām Dīwānī and its revised edition by Dr. Sa‘īdī-Mehr; the
chapter on prophethood by Dr. Jawādī; and the chapter on Imamate and
leadership by Ḥujjat al-Islām Amīnī.

[^3]: - The abbreviation, “r” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
rahmatullāh ‘alayhi, rahmatullāh ‘alayhā, or rahmatullāh ‘alayhim [may
peace be upon him/her/them], which is mentioned after the names of pious
people. [Trans.]

[^4]: - Imām Khomeinī, Ādābuṣ-Ṣalāt [The Disciplines of the Prayer],
trans. Sālār Manāfī Anārī, 2nd edition (Tehran: Institute for the
Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, 2002). [Trans.]


