Section One: The Necessity of Prophethood
=========================================

General objectives
------------------

After studying this discourse, the students are expected:

1. To realize the rational necessity of prophethood;

2. To be acquainted with the views of philosophers and scholastic
theologians about revelation; and

3. To understand the perspective of the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*
regarding revelation.

Introduction
------------

The issue of prophethood [*nubuwwah*] or apostleship [*risālah*] is the
subject of many pages of voluminous history books—the accounts of men
who spent their lives conveying the message of God to His servants and
experienced different afflictions along this way.

Here, we do not need to scan the pages of history to ascertain their
existence because the signs of their existence are so obvious for us
that there is no room for doubt. When our eyes are attracted to the
architectural magnificence of churches or mosques, when our ears are
drawn to the melodious recitation of the Qur’an or the call to prayer
[*adhān*], and when we observe faithful men and women sincerely and
earnestly treading the path shown by the apostles of God (*‘a*),[^1] we
can see within ourselves the luminous visage of the prophets (*‘a*).

By hearing the sound of the invitation of the prophets (*‘a*, seeing
their celestial countenances and observing their saintly conduct, so
many men and women were attracted to and believed in them. This faith
[*īmān*] is based on the testimony of human nature [*fiṭrah*] which
smells the familiar scent of the celestial world in the persons of the
prophets (*‘a*) and acknowledges their truthfulness or rightfulness
without the need for rational investigation. However, this faith does
not close the door for reflection [*ta’ammul*] and thinking. In fact, it
opens it wide. For those who have not yet embraced the faith, thinking
can be a fertile ground for the growth of the seeds of faith while for
those who have faith, it serves as a means of defending the faith and
nurturing and cultivating the bud of belief [*‘aqīdah*].

This point shows that the rational study or examination of prophethood
is not an indispensable condition of faith in the prophets (*‘a*) but
only substantiates or supplements this faith.

As the door for thinking about prophethood is now open, questions must
be given answers which the intellect or reason [*‘aql*] can grasp well.
This is exactly the concern of this chapter, and the following questions
will be addressed:

1. Why must there be prophets in the lives of humankind? (The necessity
of prophethood)

2. What services and benefits have the prophets rendered to mankind?
(The blessings of the prophets (*‘a*))

3. How did the prophets communicate with God and receive His message?
(Revelation)

4. How can we be certain about the truthfulness of their claims to
prophethood? (Miracles)

5. Assuming that their presence is necessary, why has the caravan of
prophethood ceased to move? (Finality of the prophethood)

**\*\*\***

In the history of Islamic thought, the debate on the *necessity* of
prophethood has delved more into answering the following question: Why
must God have sent prophets to mankind? Muslim scholars have tried to
explain the philosophy behind the sending down of the prophets (*‘a*)
which is related to the ‘action of God’.

However, there is another question here and that is: Why should we
humans pay heed and take seriously the message and invitation of the
apostles (*‘a*)?

Could we not bother to take their invitation into account and just go
along our way and pass by without paying attention to them? This
question (regarding the human need to follow the prophets (*‘a*)) is of
immense importance nowadays. In Islamic philosophy and theology books,
the following question is also addressed: Why should man conduct
research and investigation about the prophets (*‘a*)?

However, this question has not been dealt with at great length. Perhaps,
the reason for this is that it is believed that if the philosophy behind
the sending down of prophets (*‘a*) is established, the philosophy
behind the human need to follow the prophets (*‘a*) will also be proven.

Muslim scholars have answered these questions by first dealing with God
and His Action, and concluding with man and his need to follow the
prophets (*‘a*). Nowadays, however, there are some transcendent
theosophers [*muta’allihīn*] who start by studying man and his need to
follow the prophets (*‘a*), and concluding with God and His Action
(sending down of the prophets (*‘a*)). This approach is widely adopted
in the Christian world but is also to some extent observed in the works
of Muslim scholars.

In this book, we shall follow the dominant approach in the books of
Islamic philosophy and theology. By explaining the ‘Action of God’ (the
necessity of sending down of the prophets (*‘a*)), we shall also
establish the human need to follow the prophets (*‘a*).

The necessity of prophethood from the Islamic theological perspective
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Scholastic theology or theology [*‘ilm al-kalām* or *kalām*], which is
one of the important branches of Islamic sciences, has a long
precedence. Scholastic theologians or theologians [*mutakallimīn*] are
those who expound religious beliefs and defend them against the
misgivings and doubts expressed by others. Sometimes, these misgivings
and doubts originate from outside the Islamic world. For example,
whenever the principle of the existence of God or monotheism [*tawḥīd*]
was under attack, all Muslim theologians would come forward to defend
it. However, there have also been times when doubts or misgivings were
expressed by Muslims against the beliefs of fellow Muslims, and this has
led to the emergence of different groups of theologians.

In addition, theologians have also differed about the methods of
defending their religious beliefs. Some of them such as the Mu‘tazilites
[*Mu‘tazilah*] preferred the rational method while others such as the
Ash‘arites [*Ashā‘irah*] did not much incline to rational theorization.
In terms of method, the Shī‘ah[^2] theology has many similarities to
that of the Mu‘tazilites but has fundamental differences with it with
regard to the beliefs being defended.[^3]

In this section, we shall use the arguments advanced by a great Shī‘ah
theologian, Sayyid Murtaḍā.[^4]

Through use of their intellect, human beings know that some things are
good while others are bad, and to know this, they are in no need of
revelation [*wahī*]. Without citing any basis from revelation, we know
that justice, honesty and trustworthiness are good and that injustice
and violation of the rights of others are bad.[^5]

Human beings not only understand the goodness of justice and gratitude
for the kindness and benevolence of others but also consider themselves
bound to observe justice and express gratitude towards others. In other
words, the intellect is not only aware that justice is good but also
knows that one must behave according to justice and not oppose it.
Perception of the necessity and expediency of doing an action does not
necessarily mean perception of its goodness and wholesomeness.
Theologians have discussed at length the rational perception of duties
(rational obligation).

The emphasis on the importance of intellect in perceiving what is good
or bad and identifying responsibility shows the high station of the
intellect in the life of humankind. In the Islamic traditions, the
intellect is described as the “inner apostle” [*rasūl-e bāṭin*].
Nevertheless, such an expression should not make us negligent of its
definitional scope and limitations.

Attention to the scope and limitation of the intellect and its function
is the basis of the theological proof [*burhān-e kalāmī*] for the
necessity of prophethood. Some of its limitations are as follows:

1. It is true that the intellect is capable of identifying the general
principles underlying good and bad actions, but it is incapable of
identifying particular cases in which a person is more involved in his
practical life. Whenever the rational intellect [*‘aql-e istidlālī*]
intends to identify the ruling on specific cases, it often makes
mistakes. The human intellect perceives that expressing gratitude to God
is both good and obligatory, but it does not know which actions express
such gratitude. The intellect is conscious of the necessity of
respecting the rights of others, but it does not know exactly how to
respect those rights nor does it know precisely what those rights are.

2. No doubt, the purpose of identifying good and bad actions is for
people to train themselves to do good deeds and refrain from evil deeds.
The truth of the matter, however, is that just to identify the goodness
of actions and to sense the rational duty to do them does not
automatically turn into action. In the same manner, mere identification
of wicked acts does not translate into abandonment of the same. In
addition to perception of an act’s goodness and the feeling of having a
sense of duty, the performance of a voluntary action depends on the
decision and will of a person. The nature of human will and the manner
of decision-making are also completely intertwined with a person’s
feelings, inclinations and desires.

Many people know that it is detestable to misappropriate the property of
others, but the pressure of hunger can lead them away from this natural
sense of responsibility and urge them to sacrifice their will at the
altar of needs and inclinations.

It is of immense importance to pay attention to the crucial role of
feelings and emotions and it bespeaks of the fact that the guidance or
direction of man toward perfection and deliverance does not depend
solely on his intellect and reason. In fact, training or upbringing must
also be given importance in such a way that feelings and emotions also
assist man and not hinder him along the path of doing wholesome and
righteous deeds.

The ethicists or moral teachers who reflect much on the elements of
moral or righteous deeds inform us that the intellect is sometimes
subdued by the desire [*hawā*] and delegates the guidance or stewardship
of the ship of humanity’s existence to feelings and emotions. Worse
still, apart from delegating the captainship of the ship of existence to
the feelings and emotions, at times it even makes itself their slave.
Ethicists call such intellect the “satanic intellect” [*‘aql-e
shayṭānī*] which indulges in trickery to satiate bestial instincts and
desires. As such, if man is supposed to attain salvation by doing
righteous deeds and following the dictates of his reason, his feelings
and emotions must be disciplined so as to abide by the intellect, and
not the other way around.

Yea, it is a reality that God has made the intellect a light to show the
way leading to man’s salvation, but it is also a fact that this beam
does not shed light on every perspective of this way. Its brightness is
not so strong that a breeze emitting from the carnal desires cannot blow
it out.

Now, the following question can be raised: Does God truly intend to
guide us or not? If not, why has He created the light of reason in human
beings? If He does intend to guide humankind toward salvation and
felicity—as He must be based on His infinite mercy—then He who knows
everything, including the limitations of the “inner apostle”, would
certainly send assistance so as to enhance the brightness of the light
as well as to make it safe from the whirlwind of whims and caprice.

If God does not want to invite people to do righteous deeds, why has He
bestowed them with an intellect which urges them towards righteousness?
If He wants to guide humanity towards felicity through righteous deeds,
why would He not supplement or complement the intellect’s invitation
through revelation? If one is serious in inviting a friend and knows
that by just reading an invitation the friend will not come, would he
not send a representative to accompany the friend so that he would be
assured of him coming?

The same is true in the case of God’s invitation to do righteous deeds
and worship Him [*‘ubūdiyyah*]. Out of His grace, He bestowed man with
the intellect. In the same manner, out of His grace, He sent His chosen
ones to affirm the intellect’s invitation and assist humanity by clearly
showing the different dimensions of the way to salvation. In addition,
by linking righteous deeds to everlasting bliss in the hereafter and
evil deeds to eternal damnation in the afterlife, humanity’s feelings
and emotions were resolutely set at the service of their intellects.

If a person were to truly understand that by doing righteous deeds he
would attain divine proximity [*qurb-e ilāhī*], and that divine pleasure
or satisfaction, which manifests in various forms, is the most pleasant
of all things, would he not desire to perform more and more righteous
deeds? Theologians call these acts of God “grace” [*luṭf*] and consider
them incumbent upon Him, for He does not withhold any grace that does
not result in some type of harm or corruption among creation.

Therefore, the theologian’s approach is essentially based on the fact
that God has invited man in accordance with the invitation of the
intellect to good, but that without the sending down of apostles (*‘a*)
this invitation is less productive and imperfect. Similarly, without the
sending down of revelation the light of the intellect will not be
sufficiently bright. He who, out of His grace, endows humanity with the
intellect also grants the religion and revelation so as to make the
light of reason brilliant enough to assist the intellect against whims
and caprice by linking everlasting felicity to righteous deeds.The
necessity of prophethood from the Islamic philosophical perspective  
 Although Islamic philosophy [*falsafah* or *ḥikmah*][^6] is rooted in
Qur’anic wisdom and Islamic traditions, especially the sayings of
Imam[^7] ‘Alī (*‘a*), there is no doubt that its organization or
systematization into an organized body of knowledge is the result of the
acquaintance of Muslim scholars with Greek thoughts with the translation
[into Arabic] of their works during the second and third century AH. The
Islamic civilization has produced great philosophers the most prominent
of whom are Fārābī,[^8] Ibn Sīnā,[^9] Shaykh al-Ishrāq,[^10] and Ṣadr
ad-Dīn Shīrāzī, well known as Mullā Ṣadrā.[^11] Islamic philosophy deals
not only with the common and prevailing subjects in Greek philosophy but
also with subjects that are not covered by Greek philosophers. The most
important of these are the issues of Resurrection [*ma‘ād*] and
prophethood [*nubuwwah*]. The philosophical discussion on prophethood
focuses more on divine revelation, but there is also an examination of
the necessity of sending prophets as the conveyers of the divine
revelation. The approach which is labeled “proof of general guidance”
[*burhān-e hidāyat-e ‘āmmeh*] is a legacy of Muslim philosophers in this
field.[^12]

In this section of the book, we shall present the following arguments:

1. Wherever you look at the infinite creation of God, in addition to the
order of existence you can also observe a sort of open and hidden
guidance and direction everywhere. The order of a being shows the
organization and coordination of its different components and the
absence of contradiction and conflict. However, its guidance means that
God has directed it towards a certain destination. God has not created
contingent beings [*mawjūdāt-e imkānī*] just to be abandoned later.
Rather, apart from designing an order or system of creation, He has
provided a sort of guidance according to the natural constitution of
each being:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation and then guided
it.”***[^13]

God created the honeybee and then taught it a wonderful system of
livelihood and attainment of perfection. If we try to liken the
honeybee’s system of life to a strong and organized ship, the instincts
which are actually God’s inspirations [*ilhām*] serve as the captain who
will direct it toward its predefined destination:

**  
**

﴿

**  
**
وَأَوْحَى رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ أَنِ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الْجِبَالِ
بُيُوتًا وَمِنَ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ﴾

***“And your Lord inspired the bee [saying]: ‘Make your home in the
mountains, and on the trees and the trellises that they erect’.”***[^14]

One plants a delicate seed and after sometime it grows, becomes a tree
and bears sweet and nutritious fruit. Certainly, inside the small seed
are wonderful elements that remain there until it becomes a full grown
tree. In every living thing, there is a sort of program that guides its
life through the rocky roads of the material or natural world—which is
the arena of struggle and conflict—to a certain destination. Muslim
philosophers have called this “the principle of general guidance”
[*aṣl-e hidāyat-e ‘āmmeh*].

It is said that the credibility of the above mentioned principle is not
anchored in a defective inductive reasoning or limited observation, but
rather on a proof that bespeaks of the existence of a motive and purpose
in the creation of every creature or thing. The reason behind this is
that God is All-wise and He does not do anything futile or useless:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاء وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا
ذَلِكَ ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنَ
النَّارِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the sky and the earth and whatever is between them
in vain. That is a conjecture of the faithless. So woe to the faithless
on account of the Fire!”***[^15]

If God did not guide living things to their ideal destinations according
to their natural constitutions, their lives would consist of aimlessness
and lack of purpose, whereas futility and vainness is unbecoming of
Allah.

Like other creatures, human beings are enveloped in God’s mercy and
guidance for there is surely a purpose in his creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا
لاَ تُرْجَعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did you suppose that We created you aimlessly, and that you will not
be brought back to Us?”***[^16]

Yes, anyone who acknowledges [the existence of] God and believes in His
power and wisdom has no doubt about the soundness of the *proof of
general* *guidance*. Is there any doubt about a principle which the
Qur’an explicitly affirms?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَا قَدَرُواْ اللّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ إِذْ قَالُواْ مَا أَنزَلَ
اللّهُ عَلَى بَشَرٍ مِّن شَيْءٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They did not regard Allah with the regard due to Him when they said,
‘Allah has not sent down anything to any human’.”***[^17]

This verse bears witness to the fact that due recognition of God
necessitates acknowledgment and recognition of His general guidance and
direction especially His intervention in the lives of humankind.

2. Guidance is commensurate to the faculties and potentials of every
being. Stones and other inanimate objects are guided according to
certain mechanical laws. Having a more complex structure, the plants
also have a more perfect sort of guidance, while the animals are guided
by their instincts.

Among all creatures, humans occupy the highest station. Like the shell,
the human being is an animal that has a precious gem within. In
appearance, the human being resembles other animals, but in addition he
has a divine spirit that bears a heavy burden of trust:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِّن
صَلْصَالٍ مِّنْ حَمَإٍ مَّسْنُونٍ ٭ فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ
فِيهِ مِن رُّوحِي فَقَعُواْ لَهُ سَاجِدِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When your Lord said to the angels, ‘Indeed I am going to create a
human out of dry clay [drawn] from an aging mud. So when I have
proportioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, then fall down in
prostration before him’.”***[^18]

Like other animals, man has instinctive guidance for his physical growth
and perfection and lives and develops by following that instinctive
guidance.

Yet, the divine spirit on which rational human life depends has endowed
man with an important advantage and that is the element of freewill or
volition [*ikhtīyār*]. Unlike other animals, man is not an innate
prisoner of his instincts for he can overcome their influence. He can
even regulate his instincts and desires to be at the service of his
intellect or reason.

Of course, such a creature requires access to a sort of guidance which
is consistent with his freewill.

Aristotle says:

“We must not follow those who tell us that since we are humans, we must
think of things human, and since we are mortals, we must engage in
transient affairs. Rather, as far as possible, we must make ourselves
immortal and we must try our best to live consistent with the best thing
(intellect) within us.”[^19]

Yet, how is it that we can make ourselves immortal and think of
eternity? Is it possible except by way of divine revelation? In the
absence of divine revelation, it is not possible to attain eternal
happiness.

Of course God, who has not spared creating eyebrow and eyelash—which
have lower albeit vital functions in the lives of human beings—does not
also spare sending prophets in which lie the survival of the human race
and the eternal happiness of every person.[^20]

3. It is true that the “*principle of general guidance*” emphasizes the
guidance of humanity toward eternal salvation in the hereafter; however,
since worldly life is the preliminary stage of this guidance, leadership
and direction in the affairs related to life in the world are among the
tasks of the prophets (*‘a*). In this connection, it is usually
emphasized that social life, which is the foundation of human
civilization, is only possible under the auspices of revealed teachings.
If there had been no historical record of the existence of prophets,
there would also have been no trace of human civilization. Collective
life is only possible with the existence of just laws and moral
upbringing which in turn emanate from revealed teachings.

If legislative authority had been delegated solely to humans, they would
not have taken true justice into consideration and would have enacted
laws according to material and personal interests. Moreover, in the
absence of superior morality, which is only possible through faith in
God and the hereafter, the existence of just laws cannot contribute to
the perpetuity of society and serve as the groundwork for material
welfare in this world as well as perfection and happiness in the next
world. Given the urgent need of mankind for divine guidance and the
*principle of general guidance*, the necessity of the mission
[*bi‘that*] of the prophets (*‘a*) and their presence in human society
is so evident that it cannot be denied.

Those who assert that the interests of humanity in this world do not
need prophetic teachings because we presently witness civilizations
devoid of revealed teachings and founded on atheism have ignored the
following points:

Firstly, notwithstanding a verbal denial in terms of beliefs and moral
principles, humankind of today is in fact deeply indebted to the
prophets (*‘a*). There are many religious virtues that hold various
societies intact which are actually products of the prophets’ (*‘a*)
efforts. When looking at history it is clear that humanity has benefited
much from the teachings of the prophets (*‘a*). Without the teachings of
the prophets would humankind have a stable collective life or would
people lead a more bestial life in which right and value would be the
slaves of power and might.[^21]

Secondly, Muslim philosophers do not claim that without the existence of
the prophets (*‘a*) and their teachings, no society could be founded
whatsoever. They are rather referring to a society which serves as the
grounds for human perfection and eternal bliss in the hereafter.[^22]
What rational person can claim that without the guidance of God he can
enact a code of law which is not only just and guarantees the perpetuity
of human race in this world but is also codified in such a manner that
it ensures eternal happiness and felicity in the next world? Only the
prophets (*‘a*) can teach the members of society and train them such
that they would observe the rights of others completely. Only the
prophets (*‘a*) can reform man, send him back to his original nature
which is God’s spirit, and make him immortal by the grace and mercy of
God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ هُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِّنْهُمْ يَتْلُو
عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِن كَانُوا مِن قَبْلُ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُّبِينٍ ٭
وَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْحَكِيمُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who sent to the unlettered [people] an apostle from among
themselves, to recite to them His signs, to purify them, and to teach
them the Book and wisdom, and earlier they had indeed been in manifest
error. And to others from among them [as well] who have not yet joined
them.”***[^23]

Some notes
----------

1. In addition to their holy scripture (the Qur’an), the Muslims have
access to a great literary corpus called *Sunnah*. In general, *Sunnah*
refers to the recorded narrations [*riwāyāt*] of the Holy Prophet
(*ṣ*)[^24] and infallible Imāms (*‘a*). A considerable section of these
narrations explains practical laws on the individual and collective life
but many narrations also expound ideological tenets and even deal with
the natural world and humanity.

The issue of the necessity of prophethood and the blessings of the
prophets has been also reflected in numerous narrations. Here, it
suffices to mention two narrations. From the following two narrations,
it can be discerned to what extent the writings of philosophers and
theologians in this regard are indebted to the *Sunnah*.

a. In reply to someone who asked for a proof of prophethood, Imām
aṣ-Ṣādiq (*‘a*) said:

“As we have proven that God, the All-wise, is our Creator who is Most
Sublime and Exalted to be comprehended and communicated by anyone, we
know that there must be prophets among the people to speak on His
behalf, express His will and guide the people about what is good and bad
on which depend their fate. So, there must be bidders and forbidders who
are none other than the prophets (*‘a*).”[^25]

b. In Sermon 1 of *Nahj al-Balāghah*,[^26] Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَعَثَ فِيهمْ رُسُلَهُ، وَوَاتَرَ إِلَيْهِمْ أَنْبِياءَهُ،
لِيَسْتَأْدُوهُمْ مِيثَاقَ فِطْرَتِهِ، وَيُذَكِّرُوهُمْ مَنْسِيَّ
نِعْمَتِهِ، وَيَحْتَجُّوا عَلَيْهِمْ بَالتَّبْلِيغِ، وَيُثِيرُوا
لَهُمْ دَفَائِنَ الْعُقُولِ، وَيُرُوهُمْ آيَاتِ الْمَقْدِرَةِ: مِنْ
سَقْف فَوْقَهُمْ مَرْفُوع، وَمِهَاد تَحْتَهُمْ مَوْضُوع، وَمَعَايِشَ
تُحْيِيهِمْ، وَآجَال تُفْنِيهمْ، وَأَوْصَاب تُهْرِمُهُمْ، وَأَحْدَاث
تَتَابَعُ عَلَيْهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then Allah sent His Messengers and a series of His prophets towards
them to get them to fulfill the pledges of His creation, to recall to
them His bounties, to exhort them by preaching, to unveil before them
the hidden virtues of wisdom and show them the signs of His Omnipotence
namely the sky which is raised over them, the earth that is placed
beneath them, means of living that sustain them, death which brings an
end to everything, ailments that turn them old and incidents that
successively betake them!”[^27]

2. Both philosophical and theological arguments show the intellect’s
limitations in identifying the rational and humane way of life which
raises man above the bestial form of living. These limitations are more
evident with respect to the otherworldly life which is beyond
comprehension of the intellect.

However, the limitations of the intellect do not negate its value and
credibility. It is only in comparison with the extensive needs of
humanity that we talk about the limitations of the intellect. Similarly,
whenever we talk about the insufficiency of the senses, this does not
mean we deny their exceptional cognitive functions. Everyone knows that
in the absence of the senses, the intellect or reason cannot function
properly. Conversely, without the intellect the senses cannot function
at all. The same is true in the case of reason [*‘aql*] and revelation
[*waḥī*]. Reason is kindled under the auspices of revelation. Without
the latter, the former will wander in the valley of the unknown.
Meanwhile, it is also by the hint of reason that revelation is welcomed,
and it is in the hearts of those who apply reason that the tree of
revelation bears fruit:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاء ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Only those of Allah’s servants having knowledge fear Him.”***[^28]

“Reason [*‘aql*] and religious law [*shar‘*]have no option [but to
acknowledge] that reason is the basis or foundation while religious law
is the structure. A structure without foundation is baseless while a
foundation without any structure is useless.”[^29]

In the words of a Christian theologian, Ian Barbour, “Revelation does
not negate reason but rather develops it. Reflection and research could
be compatible with religious commitment.”[^30]

3. It is sometimes assumed that the concept of “the necessity of doing
an action” cannot be applied to God on the grounds that accepting such
necessity implies setting a duty for Him to discharge and it does not
behoove Him to be *obligated* by others. Therefore, what do we really
mean by saying that—it is ‘*incumbent upon*’ or ‘*necessary*’ for God to
send down prophets? Do we want to set *dos* and *don’ts* for God?! For
this reason, the Ash‘arites [*Ashā‘irah*] have entirely avoided
discussing the necessity of prophethood.

4. What is meant by the necessity for God to *do an action* is that the
human intellect or reason understands the continuity of this action
within the context of the will of God and perceives God as the Doer of
the action. For example, when we say that God is the Necessary Being
[*wājib al-wujūd*] it means that the Being cannot be separated or
detached from the Divine Essence [*dhāt-e ilāhī*]. When we say that it
is necessary for God to send down prophets, it means nothing except that
God is All-wise and so benevolent to humanity that it is impossible for
Him not to send prophets.[^31]

[^1]: - The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salām, ‘alayhim’us-salām, or ‘alayhā’s-salām [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is mentioned after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imāms from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^2]: - In this volume, I have maintained the word “Shī‘ah” to refer to
both the group (single collective unit) and the individuals constituting
the group (plural). [Trans.]

[^3]: - See Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Understanding Islamic Sciences (London:
ICAS Press, 2002), p. 57-84. [Trans.]

[^4]: - See ash-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, Adh-dhakhīrah fī ‘Ilm al-Kalām, p.
323. Sayyid Murtaḍā ‘Alam al-Hudā (355-436 AH): a man of versatility
with a keen taste and talent for literature, jurisprudence and theology
whose verdicts and opinions are taken into account even today. Both he
and his brother Sayyid ar-Raḍī, the compiler of Nahj al-Balāghah,
studied from Shaykh al-Mufīd. [Trans.]

[^5]: - Some theologians point out the origin of the difference between
good and bad actions, believing that its criterion is the effects they
bring about in the lives of human beings. Accordingly, good deeds are
the source of felicity while evil deeds lead to perdition.

[^6]: - Regarding its literal and semantic definitions, see Muṭahharī,
Understanding Islamic Sciences, pp. 11-19. [Trans.]

[^7]: - Hadrat: The Arabic word Hadrat is used as a respectful form of
address. [Trans.]

[^8]: - One of Islam’s leading philosophers, al-Fārābī was born at
Fārāb, situated on the Jaxartes (Syr Darya), the modern Otrar. Coming to
Baghdad, he studied under the Christian doctor Johanna, son of Hilan.
Another of his teachers was Abū Bishr Matta, known as a translator of
Greek works. He next proceeded to Aleppo, to the court of Sayf
ad-Dawlah, son of Hamdān, and led a somewhat retired life under his
protection, assuming the garb of a Sufi. When this prince captured
Damascus, he took the philosopher with him, and there Fārābī died in 339
AH/950. Fārābī’s literary production was considerable, but a great
number of his works were lost very early. They were chiefly commentaries
or explanations of the Greek philosophers, especially Aristotle. In the
sphere of moral philosophy he wrote a commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics; in that of political philosophy, he made a summary of Plato’s
Laws, and composed a short treatise on the Ideal City. To psychology and
metaphysics he contributed numerous works, with such titles as
Intelligence and the Intelligible, The Soul, The Faculties of the Soul,
The One and Unity, Substance, Time, The Void, and Space and Measure. He
also commented on Alexander of Aphrodisias’ book, de Anima. Believing
that Greek philosophy was a unity, he labored to reconcile Plato and
Aristotle, and with this idea wrote treatises on The Aims of Plato and
Aristotle and The Agreement between Plato and Aristotle. He also
discussed certain interpretations of Aristotle proposed by Galen and
John Philoponus, and composed An Intervention between Aristotle and
Galen. [Trans.]

[^9]: - Abū ‘Alī al-Husayn ibn ‘Abdullāh ibn Sīnā, or Avicenna, entitled
al-Shaykh al-Ra’īs, or Hujjat al-Haqq by his compatriots, simply Shaykh
by his disciples, and the Prince of Physicians in the occidental world,
was born near Bukhārā in the year 370 AH/980. When Ibn Sīnā was five
years old he and his family moved to the city of Bukhārā, where the
young boy had a greater opportunity to study. At the age of ten he
already knew grammar, literature, and theology as well as the whole of
the Qur’an. When the famous mathematician, Abū ‘Abdullāh al-Natīlī, came
to Bukhārā, he was invited to stay at the house of Ibn Sīnā in order to
teach him mathematics. Under his tutelage Ibn Sīnā mastered the
Almagest, the Elements of Euclid and some logic, all of which he soon
knew better than his teacher. Having mastered mathematics, he then
turned his attention to physics, metaphysics, and medicine. By the time
he was sixteen, Ibn Sīnā had mastered all the sciences of his day and
was well known as a physician. In another two years, thanks to the
commentary of al-Fārābī, he was also to complete his understanding of
Aristotle’s metaphysics which at first had presented considerable
difficulty for him. Despite the loss in part or in toto of several of
his major works, such as the twenty-volume Kitāb al-Insāf on the
arbitration of Eastern and Western philosophy and the Lisān al-‘Arab in
ten volumes, over two-hundred and fifty books, treatises, and letters of
Ibn Sīnā have survived. They range from the voluminous Kitāb ash-Shifā
and Al-Qānūn fi’t-Tibb to treatises of only a few pages like Risālat
al-Fi‘l wal-Infi‘āl and Risālah fi’s-Sirr al-Qadar. His books can be
roughly divided into four separate groups: the philosophical, religious,
cosmological and physical, and finally the symbolical and metaphysical
narratives. Kitāb ash-Shifā, a vast philosophical and scientific
encyclopedia, is probably the largest work of its kind ever written by
one man. His dominating influence in medicine, philosophy and theology
has lasted over the ages and is still alive within the circles of
Islamic thought. [Trans.]

[^10]: - A towering figure of the Illuminationist School of Islamic
Philosophy [ishrāqī], Shahāb ad-Dīn Yahyā Suhrawardī (known as Shaykh
al-Ishrāq), was born in Suhraward, near Zanjān, Iran in 1155. After
studying in Isfahān, a leading center of Islamic scholarship, Suhrawardī
traveled through Iran, Anatolia and Syria. Influenced by mystical
teachings, he spent much time in meditation and seclusion, and in Halab
(modern Aleppo) he favorably impressed its ruler, Malik az-Zāhir. His
teachings, however, aroused the opposition of established and learned
religious men [‘ulamā], who persuaded Malik to have him put to death.
The appellation al-Maqtūl [the killed one] meant that he was not to be
considered a shahīd [martyr]. Suhrawardī wrote voluminously. The more
than 50 works that were attributed to him were classified into two
categories: doctrinal and philosophical accounts containing commentaries
on the works of Aristotle and Plato, as well as his contribution to the
Illuminationist School; and shorter treatises, generally written in
Persian and of an esoteric nature, meant to illustrate the paths and
journeys of a mystic before he could achieve ma‘rifah (gnosis or
esoteric knowledge). [Trans.]

[^11]: - Mullā Sadrā (d. 1050 AH/1640), also called Sadruddīn Shīrāzī
and Sadr al-Muta’allihīn, was a philosopher who led the Iranian cultural
renaissance in the 17th century. The foremost representative of Ishrāqī
[Illuminationist] School of philosopher-mystics, he is commonly regarded
by Iranians as the greatest philosopher of Iran. A scion of a notable
Shīrāzī family, Mullā Sadrā completed his education in Isfahān, then the
leading cultural and intellectual center of Iran. After his studies with
scholars there, he produced several works, the most famous of which was
his Asfār (Journeys). Asfār contains the bulk of his philosophy, which
was influenced by a personal mysticism bordering on asceticism that he
experienced during a 15-year retreat at Kahak, a village near Qum in
Iran. Toward the end of his life, Mullā Sadrā returned to Shīrāz to
teach. His teachings, however, were considered heretical by the orthodox
Shī‘ah theologians, who persecuted him, though his powerful family
connections permitted him to continue to write. He died on a pilgrimage
to Mecca. [Trans.]

[^12]: - See Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān, vol. 2, under the commentary of Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:213. See
also Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Nubuwwat [Prophethood] in Majmū‘eh-ye Āthār
[Anthology of Muṭahharī’s Works], vol. 4, p. 398.

[^13]: - Sūrah Ṭā Ḥā 20:50. In this volume, the translation of Qur’anic
passages is adapted from Sayyid ‘Alī Qulī Qarā’ī, The Qur’an with a
Phrase-by-Phrase English Translation (London: Islamic College for
Advanced Studies Press, 2004). [Trans.]

[^14]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:68.

[^15]: - Sūrah Ṣād 38:27.

[^16]: - Sūrah Mu’minūn 23:115.

[^17]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:91.

[^18]: - Sūrah Hijr 15:28-29.

[^19]: - Quoted in Marta Nusham (?), Aristotle, trans. ‘Izzat Allāh
Fūlādvand, p. 99. It can be said that Aristotle alludes to those who say
that man is flesh, skin and blood and nothing else, and the perfection
of human life must be sought in the same animalistic life.

[^20]: - Ibn Sīnā, Ash-Shifā, Theology Section, p. 44.

[^21]: - For more information see Muṭahharī, Nubuwwat in Majmū‘eh-ye
Āthār, vol. 4, pp. 351, 364.

[^22]: - ‘Abd ar-Razzāq Lāhījī, Guzīdeh-ye Gūhar-e Murād, ed. Ṣamad
Muwaḥḥid, p. 252.

[^23]: - Sūrah Jum‘ah 62:2-3.

[^24]: - The abbreviation, “s”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa ālihi wa sallam [may God’s blessings and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is mentioned after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (s). [Trans.]

[^25]: - Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 168 (with slight modification).

[^26]: - Nahj al-Balāghah (The Peak of Eloquence) is a collection of
speeches, sayings and letters of the Commander of the Faithful, Imām
‘Alī ibn Abī Tālib (‘a) compiled by Sharīf ar-Radī Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn (d. 406 AH/1016). The contents of the book concern the three
essential topics of God, man and the universe, and include comments on
scientific, literary, social, ethical, and political issues. With the
exception of the words of the Glorious Qur’an and of the Holy Prophet
(s), no words of man can equal it in eloquence. So far, more than 101
exegeses have been written on the Nahj al-Balāghah, indicating the
importance of this treatise to scholars and learned men of research and
investigation. For more information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/nahjul. [Trans.]

[^27]: - Syed ‘Ali Raza, Nahj al-Balāghah: The Peak of Eloquence (Qum:
Foundation of Islamic Cultural Propagation in the World, 1995), Sermon
1. [Trans.]

[^28]: - Sūrah Fāṭir (or al-Malā’ikah) 35:28.

[^29]: - Risālah Hidāyah aṭ-Ṭālibiyyīn in the anthology of treatises of
the great philosopher Ḥājj Mullā Hādī Sabziwārī, introduced and edited
by Sayyid Jalāl Ashtiyānī, p. 10.

[^30]: - Ian Barbour, ‘Ilm va Dīn [Science and Religion], trans.
Bahā’uddīn Khurramshāhī, p. 305. Ian G. Barbour (1923- ) is an American
scholar of the relationship between science and religion whose 1989-91
Gifford Lectures yielded the widely recognized texts, Religion in an Age
of Science (1990) and Ethics in an Age of Technology (1993). His earlier
Issues in Science and Religion (1965), widely acclaimed as a
groundbreaking volume, discussed the relationship of religious thought
to the history, methods, and theories of science. As a physicist and
theologian, Barbour was awarded the Templeton Prize in 1999 for Progress
in Religion in recognition of his efforts to create a dialogue between
the worlds of science and religion. [Trans.]

[^31]: - Muṭahharī, Nubuwwat in Majmū‘eh-ye Āthār, vol. 4, p. 365. For
in-depth discussion on the meaning of “necessity” with respect to God,
see Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabā’ī, Al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān,
vol. 14, p. 94.


