Section One: Period of the Presence of the Imāms (‘a)
=====================================================

General Objectives
------------------

After studying this discourse, students are expected:

1. To know the origin of the Sunnī and Shī‘ah schools of thought and
their main differences on the issue of Imamate;

2. To be acquainted with the manner of selecting the Imāms and their
continuity;

3. To understand the pivotal role of the Imāms in protecting the
foundation of religion, guiding the Muslims and propagating religious
teachings; and

4. To be aware of the Shī‘ah viewpoint on the savior and the
constructive effect of waiting during the period of occultation.

Introduction
------------

Clarification of the principle of Imamate and the circumstances
surrounding its inclusion in the intellectual body of a group of Muslims
(Shī‘ah) as one of their ideological principles lies in paying attention
to the following points:

1. Based on the monotheistic worldview, the One and Only God is the
Creator of the universe and the Master and Cherisher of the entire
creation including humanity. This is called “monotheism in Lordship”
[*tawḥīd fī’r-rubūbiyyah*]. Accordingly, for a religious and monotheist
person, God has the right to rule over human beings and assign duties to
them such that every person has duties to God and there is no escape but
to discharge them.

Therefore, God has the legislative right [*ḥaqq-e tashrī‘ī*] and the
people, in turn, are duty-bound to submit and surrender to Him. On the
one hand, the principle of monotheism gives this right solely to God and
it is wrong for people to associate this right to any other than Him. If
we believe someone else to have such a right, we have actually drifted
away from “monotheism in sovereignty” [*tawḥīd fī’l-ḥākimiyyah*], and
once we obey the command of other than God, we fall into the abyss of
“polytheism in obedience” [*shirk fī’ṭ-ṭā‘ah*].

On the other hand, the requisite of the acceptance of monotheism is the
all-encompassing legislative sovereignty of God in the sense that human
beings cannot accept the sovereignty of God only in some decrees or in a
specific domain; rather, one should abide by every commandment of God,
the Sublime, in every sphere.

2. God has exercised His legislative sovereignty by sending prophets and
issuing orders and decrees through them. However, if the religion is
meant to put Divine Sovereignty into action, as it is, and its ultimate
goal is the implementation of religious commandments, such a goal is in
need of prerequisites and special conditions apart from conveyance of
the message.

Historically, the tasks done by the prophets of God have been more than
the conveyance and elucidation of revelation. Their incessant struggles
and untiring efforts were not only confined to communication of a
message. In fact, the prophets (*‘a*) strived hard for the Divine
Sovereignty in different facets of life. The loftiest of the goals and
objectives of the prophets (*‘a*) was the emancipation of man from the
bondage of the *ṭāghūt*[^1] and drawing him to the servitude and worship
of God.

3. For the monotheistic logic to rule over the life of man, first of
all, we are in need of revelation and the conveyance of the message
which is the primary function and duty of the prophets of Allah
(prophethood). We are also in need of the elucidation, exposition and
teaching of the conveyed message so as to avoid difference of
interpretations (religious authority). In addition, there is a need for
an executive and administrative institution to actually implement the
religious commandments (leadership).

4. When the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) was alive, apart from conveying the
revelation, which is a prophetic function, he practically assumed two
other responsibilities. In case of any difference of opinions on a
religious matter, his view and opinion served as the final word. He, who
recited the Qur’an to the people, considered it also his duty to explain
it to them and state the rulings and cases not explicitly mentioned in
the Qur’an. This task of the Apostle (*ṣ*) was actually complimentary to
his role of receiving the revelation. As such, the *Sunnah* was of
special importance and played the role of explainer and elucidator of
the Qur’an. This is the same function of “religious authority”
[*marja‘iyyat-e dīnī*] which was also performed by the Holy Prophet
(*ṣ*).

The station of *wilāyah*[^2] and leadership was among the designations
of the Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*). Any decision he took for the *ummah*[^3]
was binding. From the very beginning of his prophetic call, he took
steps for the Islamic *ummah* to establish a government. His steps from
the beginning to the end bore witness of the existence of a systematic
program for the establishment of a religious government. The efforts
made in Mecca were also a historical prelude for the establishment of a
formal government in Medina. Purging of the internal enemies and the
hypocrites in Medina and waging war against the infidels and foreign
powers demonstrated the Muslims’ motivation to establish a global
government under the leadership of the Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*).

No Muslim at that time ever thought that the Prophet’s (*ṣ*) duty was
only to convey the message. His all-encompassing authority was such that
there was no separation between religion and politics.

In addition to the conveyance of revelation, the Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*)
had two other responsibilities—intellectual authority and practical
leadership of the Islamic *ummah*—exactly the same responsibilities
shouldered by the Imāms (*‘a*) after the Prophet (*ṣ*). Apart from being
the recipient of revelation, the Prophet (*ṣ*) was also the Imām and
*proof of Allah* [*ḥujjat Allāh*] for the people. His being the proof of
Allah entailed responsibilities on the part of the people.

Firstly, whatever the Prophet (*ṣ*) declared as lawful or unlawful—even
though not explicitly mentioned in the Qur’an—became a duty upon the
people. Secondly, whatever policy he as the leader adopted, was
thereafter an inviolable administrative measure or decree. Whatever
dispute, whether theoretical or practical, that was settled in the
presence of the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) subsequently the people had to “hold
fast” [*i‘tiṣām*] to it as “Allah’s cord” [*ḥabl Allāh*].[^4]

5. The Apostle (*ṣ*), therefore, had **two functions,** viz.
**apostleship [*****risālah*****] and leadership [*****imāmah*****]**.
With the declaration of the finality of prophethood by God,
***risālah*** culminated with the Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*) and the people
were not supposed to look for another prophet after him. Until the end
of the world, all must adhere to one religion—Islam—and its heavenly
book —the Qur’an—must be the basis of religion.

However, after the demise of the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*), this question was
raised: With the departure of the Prophet (*ṣ*), what is the designation
of Imamate or religious authority and leadership [*imāmah*] of the
Islamic *ummah*?

Shī‘ism
-------

Some believed that with the passing away of the Prophet (*ṣ*),
leadership [*imāmah*]—in the sense of perfect interpretation of the
religion—also came to an end. They believed that after the Prophet
(*ṣ*), God did not designate anyone to be the flawless interpreter of
the religion. In this case, divine leadership [*imāmah*] ended and
thereafter the implementers of divine sovereignty were general
vicegerents, viz. the people. As such, *imāmah* was not a divine
designation in the sense that God had not appointed someone for the
post.

Accordingly, the people had to assume the responsibility of religious
authority and the function of interpreting the religion was delegated to
them. The executive leadership of the people was determined by
themselves. Consultation and election was the means to determine the
successor and caliph [*khalīfah*] of the Messenger (*ṣ*) for the
performance of the function of leadership. In the course of time, this
notion became prevalent: “The Messenger of Allah (*ṣ*) has entrusted to
the people the affair of religious leadership.”

On the contrary, according to another group, just as prophethood is a
divine designation, leadership [*imāmah*] is also a divine covenant.
They believed that “Sovereignty or rule is the right of God and He
guarantees the perpetuity of His religion by designating the flawless
interpreter and infallible leader after the Prophet (*ṣ*).” Proponents
of the second view who are called Shī‘ah are of the opinion that the
institution of leadership [*imāmah*] has been determined and defined by
God Himself through the Prophet (*ṣ*), and the people must abide by it.

According to the Shī‘ah, twelve persons have been designated as the
leaders of the *ummah*, interpreters of the religion and masters of the
affairs, and the Qur’an also enjoins us to follow them.[^5] According to
this view, the sovereignty of God is observed through the Imāms who are
the vicegerents of God. All their commands are binding and their
interpretation of the religion is the correct interpretation.

The two schools of thought—Sunnī and Shī‘ah—are the two main trends in
the Muslim world. The issue of Imamate is the main issue that has
divided Muslims into two groups.[^6]

These two schools of thought differ on some issues:

1. The Shī‘ah regard the sayings and actions of the *Ahl al-Bayt*[^7]
(*‘a*), in addition to those of the Prophet (*ṣ*), as the decisive proof
and criterion of truth. According to this view, after the Apostle (*ṣ*)
a sort of religious authority based on “inspired knowledge” [*al-‘ilm
al-ladunnī*] is entrusted to the Imāms (*‘a*). Through means beyond our
comprehension, the Imāms (*‘a*) had acquired the Islamic sciences from
the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*). Each of them then passed to his successor
whatever he had inherited from the Prophet (*ṣ*).[^8]

The Ahl as-Sunnah, however, assert that only the Prophet (*ṣ*) is
infallible and only his sayings are devoid of any error, and none of his
family members, companions and caliphs has such merit. As such,
according to the Sunnīs the sayings of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) are at
most as authoritative as those of religious scholars.[^9] Hundreds of
mistakes of the companions and caliphs have been recorded in Sunnī
books.[^10]

2. According to the Shī‘ah, religious authority and leadership
[*imāmah*] is a divine trust which must be determined by God. As such,
Imamate is not a customary position or designation that depends on
public acceptance and allegiance. It is rather a program set up by God
for the guidance of mankind which does not necessitate the acceptance
and approval of the people. Linking the fate of religion to the will of
the people is tantamount to the mixture of the will of God with that of
the people, and this is incompatible with the necessity of Imamate and
the infinite wisdom of God. The commandments of God constitute His
religion and Imamate, which in God’s design for the guidance of humanity
is an integral part of religion and one of the divine obligations. The
people are duty-bound to implement this program. That is, the *ummah*
has no option but to accept it and this acceptance is a religious
obligation and a prerequisite of faith. From this perspective, there is
no difference between *nubuwwah* and *imāmah*. All those who accepted
prophethood [*nubuwwah*] must also accept Imamate [*imāmah*].

It is true that without the acceptance of the people, no program or
design can be implemented successfully. Therefore, the materialization
of Imamate depends on the will and approval of the people. It must be
noted, however, that materialization is not identical with the
rightfulness of a thing. According to the Shī‘ah, some dimensions of the
authority of the Imāms (*‘a*) were not put into practice, but this does
not nullify in any way the legitimacy of Imamate. Similarly, the
people’s non-acceptance or denial of true prophets never affected the
truthfulness of their messages.

According to Sunnī scholars, Imamate is an affair without any specified
divine decree and religious authority can be assumed by common religious
scholars. Leadership, therefore, is also an affair without any specified
divine decree. They maintain that the caliph or Imām can be determined
through general suffrage,[^11] appointment or designation by the
preceding caliph,[^12] or by the use of force and violence.[^13]

3. According to the Shī‘ah, Imamate is one of the fundamental
ideological principles which every Muslim must believe in and in which
there is no room for emulation [*taqlīd*]. Since designation of the Imām
is one of the prerogatives of God, it is one of the roots of religion
[*uṣūl ad-dīn*] and scholastic theology [*‘ilm al-kalām*] is its proper
place for discussion.[^14] The Ahl as-Sunnah, however, who regard
Imamate as an affair of the people without any specified divine decree
include it in the list of secondary duties in jurisprudence and discuss
it in the science of jurisprudence [*fiqh*].[^15]

4. In view of the aforementioned points, the Shī‘ah definition of
Imamate is totally different from that of the caliphate or leadership by
the Ahl as-Sunnah, where the issue of leadership and government is only
an outward aspect of the functions of Imamate and is not comprehensive
in all its aspects.[^16]

5. Most of the Shī‘ah give a special position to the Imāms (*‘a*) in
addition to their religious authority and political leadership.
According to the Shī‘ah, just as the legislative will of God is
manifested through the infallible Imāms (*‘a*), who are in charge of
religious guidance and sociopolitical leadership of the people, they
also have guardianship or authority [*wilāyah*] in the cosmic world
[*‘ālam-e takwīnī*] and serve as the medium between God and the people.
According to this perspective on Imamate, the Imāms (*‘a*) have a third
function, i.e. esoteric *imāmah*. In other words, like the Prophet
(*ṣ*), the Imāms (*‘a*) are mediums of divine grace and, by the will of
God, they have exceptional power over the world and mankind. Based on
the Shī‘ah teachings, the earth will not remain without the existence of
a proof of Allah [*ḥujjat Allāh*]. The miracles shown by the infallible
Imāms (*‘a*) are signs of this kind of *wilāyah*.[^17]

The necessity of Imamate
------------------------

No doubt, the compulsoriness [*wujūb*] of following the Imām is not the
same as proof of the rational necessity of Imamate, but even if such
necessity is not proven, the fact that we know that God has been kind to
His servants and entrusted the Imāms to the people is sufficient.
Therefore, to search for the rational reason and at times to challenge
the necessity, cannot affect in anyway the compulsoriness of obedience
to the Imāms (*‘a*). If the true sovereignty belongs to Him, as it does,
He can also set a specific program for its materialization.

At the same time, great religious figures have never neglected
discussing the rational justification of Imamate and have written much
in this regard. Of course, Imamate in its broad sense—general
Imamate—can be rationally justified very well but the number of the
Imāms or their names—specific Imamate—is beyond the confinement of
rational proofs as it can only be proved textually [*naqlī*], i.e. by
citing religious textual sources. The argument on the necessity of the
existence of an infallible Imām is like the argument on the necessity of
prophethood [*nubuwwah*] and revelation. This argument can be used in
both functions of the Imām—religious authority and political leadership.

Regarding religious authority it can be argued that if religion is
necessary and divine wisdom dictates, it must be clearly declared to the
people and this declaration is not only confined to the Qur’an. In fact,
a great portion of the laws needed by mankind cannot explicitly be
inferred from the Qur’an. As dictated by divine wisdom, therefore, there
must be infallible interpreters of the religion. This is the same
principle which is sometimes called “grace” [*luṭf*] and this extent of
grace is incumbent upon God.

This argument can also be confirmed historically and objectively.
Practically, the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) did not find the opportunity to
completely explain the Islamic law [*sharī‘ah*] to all people. By
briefly referring to Shī‘ah books on tradition [*ḥadīth*], it will
become clear that many laws that can be deduced from the sayings and
actions of the Infallibles (*‘a*) cannot basically be found in the
*Sunnah* of the Prophet (*ṣ*).[^18]

Notwithstanding all his efforts, the Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*) did not find
the opportunity to relay all the laws needed by Muslims, for during the
23 years of his prophetic mission, he had to deal with colossal problems
such as three years of confinement in the valley of Abū Ṭālib and ten
years of struggle and war with the enemies and the conspiracies of
hypocrites. Besides, after him, people even differed on some laws which
he taught to the people including the manner of performing ablution
[*wuḍū*].[^19]

Concerning the necessity of the second function, i.e. political
leadership, it can also be argued that after we acknowledge that
sovereignty belongs to God and the people are in need of a leader,
divine wisdom dictates that the Islamic society must not be devoid of
righteous leaders. If obedience to individuals disapproved by God is
supposed to be considered obedience to the *ṭāghūt*, life in society is
impossible without the ruler’s exercise of authority and the people’s
adherence to it. So, religious arrangement for this post must have been
formulated.

The historical reality or state of affairs of the Islamic society at
that time also confirms this point. Firstly, it cannot be accepted that
during the particular time when the Apostle (*ṣ*) was pursuing his great
mission and goal and the Islamic society was not yet well established,
the *ummah* would be devoid of just leadership. Secondly, delegation of
the issue of caliphate and leadership to consultation and general
suffrage cannot be part of the Prophet’s (*ṣ*) instructions, for general
suffrage at that time was an unknown method in society.

As a proof of this claim, the first and second caliphs also adopted
appointment [*istikhlāf*], i.e. designation of the succeeding caliph
(either by direct appointment or through a council). Thirdly, the
peculiar conditions of Arabia at that time such as the prevalence of
fanaticism and tribalism, the haughtiness of powerful foreign enemies,
the conspiracy of the hypocrites, the possibility of schemes against the
political authority of the Prophet (*ṣ*), and the emergence of false
prophets dictated that the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) would give special
attention to the issue of leadership and leave no stone unturned in
clarifying the ambiguities and doubts surrounding it.

Therefore, according to the Shī‘ah, by settling the issue of religious
authority and political leadership after him the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) had
perfected the religion and guaranteed its implementation. What is
mentioned as the last point of perfection in the religion was the scheme
related to the existence of proof [*ḥujjah*] in society that could
ensure the perfection of religion so that no loophole could be found in
the religious authority. For this reason, from the Shī‘ah viewpoint,
Imamate is a complementary of apostleship. The Apostle (*ṣ*) also
strongly links the Qur’an which is the symbol of apostleship to his pure
progeny [*‘itrah*] (*‘a*) which embodies the *Sunnah*.

Imamate as a matter of appointment [manṣūṣ]
-------------------------------------------

Infallibility [*‘iṣmah*], which is an essential characteristic of the
designated intellectual authority and perfect interpreter of the
religion, requires that the individuals occupying the post of Imamate
must be identified by God. A study of the life of Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*)
clearly shows that he had strived throughout his life to introduce the
Imāms (*‘a*). During the third year of the prophetic mission [*bi‘that*]
when the Apostle (*ṣ*) was commanded by God to openly invite his
relatives to Islam,[^20] he referred to Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) as his brother,
the executor of his will [*waṣī*] and successor [*khalīfah*] before an
assembly of his kith and kin, asking them to recognize ‘Alī (*‘a*) as
the caliph of the Muslims.[^21]

Elsewhere, he introduced the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) as one of the Two
Weighty Things [*thaqalayn*] inseparable to the Qur’an.[^22] It is clear
that what must always be with the Qur’an is like the Qur’an in the
compulsoriness of following it as an intellectual authority of the
Muslims. Similarly, the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) had also likened the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) to the Ark of Noah (*‘a*). That is, those who will
embark the Ark will be saved while those who will refuse to do so will
be drowned.[^23] In some instances, he introduced his *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) as the twelve caliphs after him and had not spared repeating and
emphasizing this.[^24]

The Tradition of Ghadīr [Ḥadīth al-Ghadīr]
------------------------------------------

The most explicit statement of the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) about Imamate is
the Tradition of Ghadīr [*Ḥadīth al-Ghadīr*]. According to historians,
on his way home from his Farewell Pilgrimage [*Ḥajj al-Wadā‘*], the
Prophet Muḥammad (*ṣ*) received a Qur’anic verse [*āyah*] in a place
called Ghadīr Khumm in which he was commanded to convey a message to the
people, and he was inspired that if this message were not conveyed, his
prophetic mission as a whole would not be fulfilled.[^25] As soon as he
received this verse, he decided to convey the message and gathered the
people for this purpose. In this historic speech, he first asked the
people: “Am I not your master [*mawlā*]?” When the people replied in the
affirmative, he held and raised the hand of ‘Alī (*‘a*) declared him as
the guardian or master [*walī*] after him. Then, the verse on the
perfection of the religion and the completion of God’s favor was
revealed whereby the universality of Islam and God being pleased with
this revered religion was highlighted.[^26]

This event is recorded in history and books of *ḥadīth* as indisputably
authentic, and more than a hundred companions of the Prophet (*ṣ*)
[*ṣaḥābah*] have narrated it. From the beginning of the second century
up to the fourth century AH, more than 360 Muslim scholars have reported
this event.[^27] Many books have also been written about the Tradition
of Ghadīr. There is no doubt about the event and the statement of the
Messenger of Allah (*ṣ*). If there is any difference between the Sunnīs
and the Shī‘ah, it is in the interpretation of the Prophet’s (*ṣ*)
statements. The Shī‘ah believe that the use of the word *walī* was in
the sense of ‘Alī (*‘a*) being the leader of Islamic society, while the
Sunnīs are of the opinion that by using this word the Apostle (*ṣ*) only
wanted to introduce ‘Alī (*‘a*) as “a person who must be respected and
befriended by everybody.”[^28]

In examining the Sunnī interpretation of the event in Ghadīr, it is
necessary to consider the following points:

1. According to what Muslim exegetes [*mufassirīn*] have reported, this
event took place after God commanded the Prophet (*ṣ*) to fulfill his
duty and convey to the people a particular message, and after the
conveyance of that message, the perfection of the religion and the
completion of God’s favor would be fulfilled. As such, apart from being
consistent with the purport of the two above mentioned verses, the
message must be so important that its conveyance would signify the
fulfillment of the prophetic mission and, in case of failure to convey
it, it would mean that the religion of God would be imperfect and His
favor incomplete. Obviously, respect and friendship, even if it be for
‘Alī (*‘a*), would not be important enough to signify the fulfillment of
the prophetic mission. On the contrary, it is negligence regarding the
designation of the intellectual authority and religious leadership which
could be tantamount to negligence in the fulfillment of the prophetic
mission and bring about the imperfection of the religion.

2. In this *ḥadīth*, the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*) asked those who were
present: “Have I not more authority over you than yourselves?” All
replied in unison: “Yes, it is so.”

This question is a hint—no, not just a hint, but an explicit referral,
to this verse: *“The Prophet is closer to the faithful than their own
souls”*[^29] which clearly proves the Prophet’s (*ṣ*) authority
[*wilāyah*] over the Islamic society. After the people acknowledged his
*wilāyah*, the Messenger of Allah (*ṣ*) said: “Of whomsoever I am master
[*mawlā*], ‘Alī is also his master [*mawlā*].” The rule of relationship
among the parts of the sentence suggests that the *wilāyah* of ‘Alī
(*‘a*) indicated therein is the same *wilāyah* of the Prophet (*ṣ*)
which has been acknowledged by the people.

3. Love of ‘Alī (*‘a*) and the Prophet’s *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) is
something commanded also by the Qur’an, describing it as a sign of
faith.[^30] This fact is not something unmentioned in the Qur’an
beforehand such that the failure to announce it would be considered
imperfection of religion and negligence of a prophetic duty.

4. After this conveyance of the Apostle (*ṣ*), Abū Bakr and ‘Umar (later
to become the first and second caliphs) congratulated ‘Alī (*‘a*), each
of them saying: “O son of Abū Ṭālib! You became my master [*mawlā*] and
the master [*mawlā*] of every Muslim, man and woman.”

From this event which happened in the presence of a large group of
Muslims and which was recorded in history, it can be deduced that the
audience or addressees of this message understood *wilāyah* not in the
sense of “friendship and support” because the expression, “You became my
*mawlā*” is consistent only with *wilāyah* in the sense of authority and
leadership.

5. In the same gathering, after being granted permission by the Prophet
(*ṣ*), Ḥassān ibn Thābit, a famous Arab poet, versified the historic
event of Ghadīr as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له: قم يا عليّ فإنّني رضيتك من بعدي إماماً و هاديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then he said: “Stand up O ‘Alī! For, I am indeed well pleased that
you are the Imām and guide after me.”***[^31]

The words “Imām” and “guide” [*hādī*] used in the verses clearly show
that the true meaning and implication in the statement of the Prophet
(*ṣ*) was that of *wilāyah* in the sense of authority and leadership.

This specific understanding of Imamate, especially in the event of
Ghadīr Khumm, had always been confirmed and emphasized by the Imāms
(*‘a*).[^32] It is clear, therefore, that Shī‘ism as a school of thought
is a distinct understanding and interpretation of the religion of Islam
and the prophetic message.

Historically, it can be traced back to the time of the prophetic call.
Contrary to the notion of some people, Shī‘ism is not a school of
thought which was later formed based on the emotions or feelings of a
group. The necessity of the designation of the Imām as substantiated by
religious text [*naṣṣ*] is exactly based on the Prophetic *Sunnah*.
According to this viewpoint, based upon his divine mission, the Holy
Prophet (*ṣ*) has set the way of the Imāms and their leadership as the
guarantor of the felicity of mankind.

The Role of the Imāms (‘a)
--------------------------

It is evident that the digression in the history of Islam and the
society’s refusal to accept the authority of the Imāms (*‘a*) hindered
the materialization of the true and essential role of Imamate in the
Islamic society. Yet, it must not be imagined that the Imāms (*‘a*) had
an insignificant contribution in the development of Islamic culture and
civilization. In spite of events, the role of the Imāms (*‘a*) in
fostering spirituality and religious sense, strengthening ideological
foundations, expounding Islamic law [*sharī‘ah*], interpreting the
Qur’an, and sharpening the sociopolitical insight of Muslims has been
considerable and fundamental. They have been the fountains of
spirituality, the standard-bearers of the Prophetic *Sunnah* and
Qur’anic culture, and the tributes of the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*), and they
have always been the focus of attention of the Islamic society.

A cursory glance at the history of Islam during the period of the Imāms
(*‘a*) shows well the following points:

1. A significant part of the religion of Islam consists of its worldview
and ideological principles. The people’s understanding and
interpretation of Islam depends on the extent and quality of their
understanding of its ideological elements. If the public sphere of a
society is away from the true understanding of these elements, this
society will fall into the abyss of ideological deviation. When the
Messenger of Allah (*ṣ*) is not present in the Islamic society and the
grounds for encountering other cultures gradually increase, it is to be
feared that ideological deviation and superstition might threaten the
culture of society.

The pivotal role of the great scholars who have acquired correct
understanding of religion from credible sources during such times is
critically important. In dealing with ideas such as extremism [*ghulū*],
predetermination [*jabr*], *tafwīḍ*,[^33] anthropomorphism, and many
others, the Imāms (*‘a*) as the intellectual authorities have had a
crucial role in guiding the people. Sublime subjects contained in *Nahj
al-Balāghah*, *aṣ-Ṣaḥīfah as-Sajjādiyyah*[^34] and narrations
[*riwāyāt*] of the Imāms (*‘a*) bear testimony to this fact.[^35]

2. It is clear that in view of the limited time and the absence of total
stability of the Islamic state, the Prophet (*ṣ*) did not have the
opportunity to mention and experience all the needs of the society
regarding Islamic law. Many needs came to light after him over the
course of time. In that situation, the Qur’an and the *Sunnah* of the
Prophet (*ṣ*) were naturally consulted, but the existence of different
interpretations of these two sources entailed differences and discord.

In that state of affairs, the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), as the true scholars
and those knowledgeable of the Book and the *Sunnah*, played a key role.
The extant numerous narrations from the Imāms (*‘a*) prove that the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) had a significant contribution in expounding the Islamic
law and training religious scholars and jurists [*fuqahā*].[^36] It is
interesting to note that a number of Sunnī *fuqahā* have been students
of the Imāms (*‘a*). By giving lessons to thousands of students, Imāms
al-Bāqīr[^37] and aṣ-Ṣādiq[^38] (*‘a*) have indeed played a decisive
role in training Sunnī and Shī‘ah *‘ulamā’*.

3. As the spiritual and moral guides of the Islamic society, the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) have had an undeniable impact in morally training the
Muslims and spiritually nurturing them. Apart from the Shī‘ah who
believe in the Imāms (*‘a*) as having lofty stations, others have always
considered the Imāms (*‘a*) as their practical moral and spiritual
guides and have been greatly influenced by the Imāms’ spiritual merits.

Moreover, the valuable propagational role of the Imāms (*‘a*) and their
extremely profound and sublime supplications, which up to now have
spiritually adorned the Muslim society, must not be forgotten. These
individuals from the progeny of the Prophet (*ṣ*) who were at the peak
of spirituality, morality and insight kept the sparks of spirituality in
Muslim society illuminated.

4. For the Umayyad and ‘Abbāsid rulers, the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) were
the main threats to their despotic rule, because the Imāms (*‘a*)
consistently propounded that their right to rule had been usurped, and
that the caliphate was a fundamental departure from the political
philosophy of Islam. Because they put forward this belief and because
they were figures in the station of Imamate—and in view of their
relation to the Holy Prophet (*ṣ*)—they could always keep the torches of
justice and anti-oppression illuminated in the hearts of the people. The
spiritual power of the Imāms (*‘a*) as the righteous descendants of the
Apostle (*ṣ*) had always threatened the rule of tyrants and frightened
the oppressive caliphs. Their persistent decisions to persecute and
martyr the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) were signs of this fear and
apprehension.

The opinions of the Imāms (*‘a*) have been known to the people in every
period. Everybody knew that the Umayyad and ‘Abbāsid caliphs had
basically never recognized the legitimacy of the Prophet’s progeny
(*‘a*). As such, many Shī‘ah would not even refer to judges appointed by
the government and, based on the religious teachings, they regarded
referral to these judges as tantamount to disbelief [*kufr*].[^39] It is
true that the principle of dissimulation [*taqiyyah*][^40] served as an
important rule in the sociopolitical life of the Shī‘ah, but the
opposition of the Imāms (*‘a*) to the rule of the caliphs was no secret.
The caliphs had always felt threatened by them and strived to uproot
their spiritual and social standing in society.

In view of the aforementioned points, it can be concluded that in
addition to the intellectual current called Shī‘ism, in which the basis
is the Imāms’ interpretation of religion and leadership of the Shī‘ah
who had always been a significant part of the Muslim society, the
contributions of the Imāms (*‘a*) in the ideological, moral, legal, and
political spheres are indeed significant and known to all.

Philosophy of Occultation [ghaybah]
-----------------------------------

With the acceptance of Imamate as one of the principles of Shī‘ah faith,
the following questions are raised: According to the Shī‘ah viewpoint
and ideological foundations, Imamate is an essential principle,
therefore what is the justification for occultation [*ghaybah*]? Since
divine wisdom demands the existence of an Imām in every period, how is
the long deprivation of the Muslim society from Imamate justified and
analyzed?

The answer to these questions can be inferred from the following points:

1. As stated earlier, only general *imāmah* can be proved rationally,
but based on divine exigency, [the philosophy behind] the number of
Imāms (*‘a*) is unknown to us and we cannot comprehend it based on
rational means.

2. The presence of an Imām is a grace from God, but the deprivation from
the presence of an Imām can be traced back to the actions of the
people.[^41] This deprivation also existed to some extent during the
periods of the Imāms (*‘a*) prior to the 12th Imām (*‘a*).

3. The people’s open connection to the hidden Imām (*‘atfs*)[^42] is in
abeyance as far as his two functions of religious authority and
political leadership are concerned, but the Imām’s esoteric Imamate
continues and the people benefit from the blessing of his existence.

At this time, the Imām (*‘atfs*) is like the sun behind the clouds. Just
as the sun behind the clouds is beneficial, the Imām (*‘atfs*) has an
esoteric connection with his Shī‘ah and the people are able to benefit
from the blessing of his existence. Basically, the world exists owing to
his existence and this function of the Imām which is “ontological
guardianship” [*wilāyat-e takwīnī*], “spiritual guardianship”
[*wilāyat-e ma‘nawī*] or “esoteric Imamate” [*imāmat-e bāṭinī*] does not
depend on his physical presence.

Keeping in view the above mentioned points, the principle of the
occultation of the Imām (*‘atfs*) is compatible with the general theory
on Imamate and it is here that the dynamic idea of “waiting” [*intiẓār*]
takes form. It is true that this idea also exists in other
religions,[^43] but in Islam to wait for the day when the Savior
[*munjī*] removes oppression from the world, turned the imaginary state
of a totally hidden subject into a belief about a true celestial living
being. Attention to a savior in the future turned attention to a living
person who, along with all other people, is also waiting. He lives with
us and actually feels our pains and sufferings.[^44] Waiting is a
positive and constructive idea, entailing many benefits some of which
are as follows:

a. The belief that the people are attached to his rule and consider
other governments as usurpers is a kind of idealism, fundamentalism and
legalism in their individual, social and political beliefs. It is
exactly like the condition of a people who, on account of particular
political conditions, feel as if their Imām is in exile and believe that
they must pave the grounds for his advent or reappearance. As such,
“waiting” [*intiẓār*] and “protest” [*i‘tirāḍ*] from the Shī‘ah
viewpoint is an intellectual tradition within the core of the Shī‘ah
political thought, and Imamate has not ended with the occultation of the
last Imām (*‘atfs*) but it rather continues in a particular way.

b. “Waiting” naturally gives direction to the human perspective as well
as meaning to the future. It removes despair and hopelessness from the
hearts of humanity. It gives purpose to their actions and makes them
more ready to show all their talents. Hence, “waiting for deliverance
[by the Imām’s advent]” [*intiẓār al-faraj*] has been described as the
activity of the Prophet’s *ummah*.[^45]

“Waiting” has made the Shī‘ah always endure difficulties and afflictions
with optimism and dynamism and given them a profound perspective and
positive orientation. Individuals whose aspiration it is to implement
global justice, righteous government, benevolent administration, human
dignity, and freedom from oppression no doubt follow a correct, lofty,
goal-oriented, and divine social philosophy, and these are among the
blessings of “waiting” and effects of the occultation [*ghaybah*].

c. The meaningfulness of history and the glad tidings of victory for the
faithful, which have also been repeated many times in the Qur’an, is one
of the secrets of *ghaybah*. The promises for the faithful to inherit
the earth, their assumption of power, the establishment of the
government of faith, the unification of religion, the unification of
government, and the unity of society, among others, give enthusiasm to
the faithful to engage in social struggle.[^46] From the Islamic
viewpoint, therefore, the philosophy of history acquires a particular
meaning. Accordingly, the future is not a condemnation of the will of
the powerful and the arrogant. Rather, the will of God will prevail
through the establishment of a benevolent state, the dominance of the
divine religion, and the prevalence of divine values throughout the
world. Therefore, history is leading us towards a positive future.

d. “Waiting” requires emphasis on values and negation of anti-values.
These ideals embellish the sociopolitical view of the faithful. The
faithful who are eager to implement social justice and the rule of
values will never submit to deviant viewpoints and always focus their
attention on a better society and a righteous world.

The spirit of waiting is an emphasis on the theory of Imamate and the
negation of any dispute over it. The Shī‘ah waits for his Imām and this
negates the sovereignty of any other.

e. For those who wait for the Imām [*muntaẓirīn*], any social change is
valuable provided that it contributes in the realization of the ideals
of the period of occultation. Thus, “waiting” itself is a positive
social movement and a sublime idea within a revolutionary thought. For
this reason, in terms of implementation, objectives, achievements, and
elements the Islamic Revolution in Iran must be compatible with the
ideals of the period of waiting. “Waiting” teaches the Shī‘ah not to
gather under any banner that is incompatible with the global revolution
of the Mahdī (*‘atfs*).

Moreover, the ideal or aspiration of “waiting” gives a particular
rationality to the Revolution. Since the period of occultation is always
a period of waiting, the revolution constantly continues in different
aspects until the establishment of the global government of the Mahdī
(*‘atfs*).

f. Belief in Imamate during the period of waiting endows humanity with
the opportunity to follow the perfect man [*insān al-kāmil*] (of his
time). Based on following the perfect man, the waiting person is always
strengthening himself spiritually.

A question
----------

Given the prolongation of the period of occultation, the following
questions may be raised: How can it be accepted that a hidden Imām is
living with us? Or, is not the belief that a perfect man could be living
with us for so long in occultation a superstitious one?

In reply to these question, some points are worth considering:

Firstly, the reality of the occultation of the Mahdī (*‘atfs*) has been
mentioned by the infallible Imāms (*‘a*). Therefore, those who believe
in the truthfulness of Imāms (*‘a*) can easily accept the 12th Imām’s
(*‘atfs*) occultation.[^47] The acceptance of the long life of an Imām
who is commissioned by God is not an unusual thing in religious culture.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حكيمى كين جهان پايبنده دارد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تواند حجّتى را زنده دارد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The All-wise Who created this world,*

*Can prolong the life of a proof.*

Also, the event of the birth of the Imām of the Time (*‘a*) has been
mentioned in history and books of tradition [*ḥadīth*], and even those
who witnessed the event have been identified.[^48]

Secondly, the Imām of the Time (*‘atfs*) was in minor occultation
[*ghaybah aṣ-ṣughrā*] for around 70 years[^49] during which period, the
proof of his existence had been well known to the Shī‘ah. Through his
special deputies [*nawwāb*], he had contact with the people. Apart from
the four special deputies, he had also appointed his representatives
[*wukalā*] in different cities and towns. Naturally, his deputies and
representatives were men of distinction and honor. It is absurd to think
that distinguished men would have been in contact with an imaginary and
superstitious person for 70 years. During that period, many individuals
had submitted their requests to the Imām (*‘atfs*) through his envoys,
and in reply to some of them, the hidden Imām (*‘atfs*) had written
letters. These letters are technically called *tawqī‘* some of which are
recorded in *ḥadīth* books.

Imamate and the duty of the faithful [mu’minīn]
-----------------------------------------------

After the acceptance of Imamate as an ideological principle, this
question is raised: What is the duty of a faithful believer with respect
to the principle of Imamate?

Undoubtedly, the primary requisite of the belief in the Imām (*‘atfs*)
is that we have to accept the way of the Imāms (*‘a*) as our
intellectual, ideological and practical reference. This means that
alongside the Qur’an, we have to give importance to the sayings and
actions of the infallible Imāms (*‘a*). Relying only on the Qur’an and
ignoring the authentic narrations is tantamount to ignoring the
intellectual authority of the infallible Imāms (*‘a*) which is in no way
compatible with true Shī‘ah doctrines.

Thus, one of the duties of the faithful is to love their Imāms (*‘a*).
In the Holy Qur’an, love of the Prophet’s (*ṣ*) relatives
[*dhū’l-qurbā*] has been mentioned as the reward for his prophetic
mission.[^50] Many of the laws and rules of etiquette prescribed in
Shī‘ah collections of law for the people are meant to attain the station
of affection—nay love—of the pure Imāms (*‘a*). In the Shī‘ah way of
thinking, the Imām is the theoretical and practical leader to whom the
people have also deep emotional attachment.

The emphasis on the performance of pilgrimages [*ziyārāt*] and
establishment of esoteric relationship with the Imām (*‘atfs*) which are
common in Shī‘ah tradition generates a particular disposition in the
faithful. Attachment to the truth and the truthful [*tawallā*] and the
establishment of affectionate relationship lead to the intellectual and
emotional fondness of the faithful to the perfect man.

This characteristic naturally influences the political insight and
attitude of the faithful. Love of those who have dedicated themselves to
the religion and the struggle against the *ṭāghūt* makes the heart of
the faithful overflowing with abhorrence and disgust for the oppressors
and infidels. As such, *tawalli* and *tabarri* [disgust for falsehood
and the people of falsehood] have a pivotal role in the attitudes and
interactions of the faithful society.

Apart from purifying man’s soul, love of the Imāms (*‘a*) generates
similar loves, embellishes his beliefs, organizes his actions, fosters
idealism, and cleanses his sociopolitical insight and outlook.

Meanwhile, the people have been invited to take the Imāms (*‘a*) as
their mediators in their supplications and connections to God. In our
religious sources, supplication without any mediator or medium
[*wasīlah*] has been described as defective and unanswered.

The practice of *tawassul*[^51] which is one of the elements of the
Shī‘ah beliefs is in no way incompatible or inconsistent with monotheism
[*tawḥīd*]. It is rather the acceptance of a kind of linear system in
the relationship with the Creator. In the Shī‘ah culture, the Imām is
the embodiment of *tawḥīd* on earth. In establishing communication with
him, the people are actually connected with the vicegerent of God and
this never contradicts the sovereignty of God. In fact, it is exactly
dependence on God.

*Tawassul* is the fostering of a special type of spiritual thinking in
which the perfect man is highlighted and in the relationship between
human and God the existence of the Imām is not ignored. In principle,
the term *tawassul,* or resorting to intermediaries, is the promotion of
the idea that God is the Essence of the universe and through the means
of *tawassul* we seek to connect to this Essence. In this idea, the Imām
is the cord of Allah [*ḥabl Allāh*].

By clinging to this cord, the people provide the means for their
improvement and proximity to God. Just as facing the *qiblah* (the
*Ka‘bah*) is a manifestation of *tawḥīd* and can never be considered
worship of an object, turning to the Imāms (*‘a*) and seeking their
intermediation is also not a negation of *tawḥīd*. In fact, the Imāms
(*‘a*) are *the spiritual* *ka‘bah* *of the hearts*. By drawing the
people toward *it* (the more they pay attention to the Imāms (*‘a*)) the
more their belief in God will increase.

The other duty of the faithful is to increase their knowledge of the
Imāms (‘a). In religious sources, it is stated that knowledge of God
depends on knowledge of the Imāms (‘a).[^52] In the words of the Imām
(‘a) himself, it is thus narrated: “God has no sign greater and more
important than us for the people[^53] and had it not been for us, God
would not have been recognized (as He ought to be recognized).”[^54]

[^1]: - The term tāghūt applies to any idol, object, or individual that
prevents men from doing what is good, and leads them astray. The term
has been used eight times in the Qur’an. Prior to Islam, tāghūt had been
the name of one of the idols of the Quraysh tribe. This name is used
also to mean Satan. Moreover, the term is used to indicate one who
rebels against lofty values, or who surpasses all bounds in his
despotism and tyranny and claims the prerogatives of divinity for
himself whether explicitly or implicitly. [Trans.]

[^2]: - For further information about the idea of guardianship [wilāyah]
and the guardian [wālī], see Murtadā Mutahharī, Wilāyah: The Station of
the Master, trans. Yahyā Cooper (Tehran: World Organization for Islamic
Services, 1982). [Trans.]

[^3]: - Ummah: the entire Islamic community which knows no territorial,
racial, national or ethnic distinction. [Trans.]

[^4]: - See Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:103.

[^5]: - Sūrah Nisā’ 4:59: “O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the
Apostle and those vested with authority among you.”

[^6]: - See Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 24.

[^7]: - Ahl al-Bayt: according to authentic hadīths recorded in both
Sunnī and Shī‘ah sources, the term Ahl al-Bayt, and interchangeably
Itrah and Āl, is a blessed Qur’anic appellation that belongs exclusively
to the Prophet, ‘Alī, Fātimah, Hasan, and Husayn (‘a). The members of
this Family of five, with the Prophet Muhammad (s) at its head, were the
ones present at the time the Qur’anic verses regarding their virtues
were being revealed to the Prophet (s). However, nine other Imāms from
the descendants of Imām al-Husayn (‘a) are also included in this chosen
Family, the final one being Imām al-Mahdī (‘a). For further information,
visit: http://www.al-islam.org/faq. [Trans.]

[^8]: - Murtaḍā Muṭahharī, Imāmat va Rahbarī [Imamate and Leadership],
p. 52.

[^9]: - See Sunnī books on the principles of jurisprudence and Sayyid
‘Abd al-Ḥusayn Sharaf ad-Dīn al-Mūsawī, Al-Murājā‘at, Correspondence 13.

[^10]: - Muṭahharī, Imāmat va Rahbarī, p. 53.

[^11]: - Sa‘ad ad-Dīn Taftāzānī, Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 5, p. 233;
Shahristānī, Al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 72.

[^12]: - Abū’l-Ḥasan Māwardī, Al-Aḥkām as-Salṭāniyyah, p. 7.

[^13]: - Taftāzānī, Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 5, p. 233.

[^14]: - ‘Abd ar-Razzāq Lāhījī, Gawhār-e Murād, p. 467.

[^15]: - Taftāzānī, Sharḥ al-Maqāṣid, vol. 5, p. 232.

[^16]: - See Muṭahharī, Imāmat va Rahbarī, p. 70.

[^17]: - See Uṣūl al-Kāfī, “Abwāb al-Ḥujjah”; Muṭahharī, Imāmat va
Rahbarī, p. 56.

[^18]: - By referring to the Shī‘ah books on tradition [ḥadīth], it will
become clear that the magnitude of narrations [riwāyāt] is ten times
greater than the Holy Qur’an and sayings of the Messenger of Allah (ṣ).
For instance, Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah compiled by the late Shaykh Ḥurr
al-‘Āmilī consists of 30 volumes; Mustadrak al-Wasā’il by Muḥaddith Nūrī
in 18 volumes; and Biḥār al-Anwār by ‘Allāmah Majlisī in 110 volumes
contain narrations from the Infallibles (‘a).

[^19]: - See Muṭahharī, Imāmat va Rahbarī, p. 93; Muḥammad Taqī Miṣbāḥ
Yazdī, Āmuzesh-e ‘Aqā’id, p. 305.

[^20]: - Sūrah Shū‘arā’ 26:214: “Warn the nearest of your kinsfolk.”

[^21]: - This account is recorded as Ḥadīth ad-Dār in Sunnī history
books. For example, see Tārīkh aṭ-Ṭabarī, vol. 2, pp. 319-321; Al-Kāmil
fī’t-Tārīkh, vol. 2, p. 62; Ibn Abī’l-Ḥadīd, Sharḥ Nahj al-Balāghah,
vol. 13, pp. 22, 244; Kanz al-‘Ummāl, vol. 15, p. 115. The text of the
ḥadīth is as follows: “Verily, this is my brother, executor of will and
my caliph after me. So, listen to him and obey him.”

[^22]: - Known as Ḥadīth ath-Thaqalayn, this statement is recorded
without a broken chain of transmission [mutawātir] from the Holy Prophet
(ṣ). It is narrated by 53 companions of the Prophet (ṣ) [ṣaḥābah] and
recorded in more than 200 Sunnī books on history, tradition and Qur’anic
exegesis [tafsīr]. See, for example, Ṣāḥīḥ Muslim, vol. 4, p. 873; Ṣaḥīḥ
Tirmidhī, vol. 5, p. 663; Musnad Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, vol. 5, p. 182; Sunan
ad-Dāramī, vol. 2, p. 231.

[^23]: - This statement of Prophet Muḥammad (ṣ) is known as Ḥadīth
as-Safīnah, narrated by famous ṣaḥābah such as ‘Ali ibn Abī Ṭālib, ‘Abd
Allāh ibn ‘Abbās, Abū Dharr al-Ghifāri, Abū Sa‘īd al-Khidri, Anas ibn
Mālik, and others, and recorded in Sunnī books.

[^24]: - In some of these narrations, the names of the twelve caliphs or
Imāms are mentioned while in some others only the names of the first and
the last.

[^25]: - Sūrah Mā’idah 5:67: “O Apostle! Communicate that which has been
sent down to you from your Lord, and if you do not, you will not have
communicated His message.”

[^26]: - Sūrah Mā’idah 5:3.

[^27]: - See ‘Allāmah Amīnī, Al-Ghadīr, vol. 1, pp. 14-151.

[^28]: - Sharaf ad-Dīn al-Mūsawī, Al-Murāja‘āt, Correspondences 57-58.

[^29]: - Sūrah Ahzāb 33:6.

[^30]: - Sūrah Shūrā 42:23: “Say, I do not ask of you any reward for it
except the affection for [my] relatives.”

[^31]: - Khwārazmī al-Mālikī, Al-Manāqib, p. 80; Sibṭ ibn Jawzī
al-Ḥanafī, Tadhkirat Khawāṣ al-Ummah, p. 20; Ganjī Shāfi‘ī, Kifāyah
aṭ-Ṭālib, p. 17; and others. [Trans.]

[^32]: - For example, it is mentioned by Imām ‘Alī (‘a) as narrated by
Ibn Ḥijr in Lisān al-Mīzān, vol. 2, p. 285 and Aṣ-Ṣawā‘iq al-Muḥriqah,
p. 126; adh-Dhahabī in Mīzān al-I‘tidāl, vol. 1, p. 441; Qundūzī in
Yanābī‘ al-Mawaddah, vol. 1, p. 134, bāb 38; Imām Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal in
Musnad Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, vol. 1, p. 119; Imāms Ḥasan and Ḥusayn (‘a) in
Al-Ghadīr, vol. 1, p. 197.

[^33]: - Tafwīḍ: the belief that after creating all beings, God has left
them to administer their own affairs and follow their own wills. In
other words, it is the upholding of freewill [ikhtiyār] vis-à-vis
predestination. [Trans.]

[^34]: - The book of fifty-seven prayers known as as-Sahīfah
(al-Kāmilah) as-Sajjādiyyah, which is one of the major Islamic manuals
of supplications, was transmitted from Imām Zayn al-‘Ābīdīn as-Sajjād,
the fourth of the Twelve Imāms and the only son of Imām Husayn to
survive the massacre at Karbala. See Sahīfah al-Kāmilah,
http://www.al-islam.org/sahifa. [Trans.]

[^35]: - In addition, many volumes of narrations on beliefs can be
observed in books on ḥadīth such as Al-Kulaynī, Uṣūl al-Kāfī and Shaykh
aṣ-Ṣadūq, At-Tawḥīd.

[^36]: - Many collections of juristic narrations have been compiled in
books of ḥadīth the most famous of which is Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah by Shaykh
Ḥurr al-‘Āmilī.

[^37]: - Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir: the fifth Imām from the Holy Prophet’s
Progeny. He was born in 57 AH/675 CE and spent most of his life in
Medina, until his martydom there in 114 AH/732 CE. See Bāqir Sharīf
al-Qarashi, The Life of Imām Mohammed al-Bāqir, trans. Jāsim al-Rasheed
(Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1999). [Trans.]

[^38]: - Ja‘far ibn Muhammad (‘a) entitled, as-Sādiq [The Truthful],” is
the sixth Imām from the Prophet’s Progeny (83-148 AH). Many of the Sunnī
and Shī‘ah ‘ulamā and scholars attended his teaching classes and
seminars. Narrators of tradition have quoted the number of Imām
as-Sādiq’s students as four thousand. The socio-economic conditions of
his time necessitated utmost efforts to be made by the Imam (‘a) in the
areas of expanding authentic and original Islamic teachings and in the
training and education of the faithful students. For this reason the
books of tradition and other books quote and cite more traditions from
Imām Ja‘far as-Sadiq than from any other infallible Imāms. See Shaykh
Mohammed al-Husayn al-Muzaffar, Imām Al-Sādiq, trans. Jāsim al-Rasheed
(Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1998). [Trans.]

[^39]: - Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 67.

[^40]: - Taqiyyah: prudential dissimulation of one’s true beliefs under
conditions of acute danger to one’s life, property, or honor, a practice
based on Qur’an, 3:28. As its observance depends on certain terms and
conditions, it may be obligatory [wājib], recommended [mustahab],
abominable [makrūh], or forbidden [harām]. For a discussion of taqiyyah,
see Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, Taqiyyah (Dar es Salaam: Bilal Muslim
Mission of Tanzania, 1992), http://www.al-islam.org/taqiyyah;
Al-Taqiyya/Dissimulation,
http://www.al-islam.org/encyclopedia/chapter6b.html; and ‘Allamah
Tabataba’i, Shi‘ite Islam (Albany, N.Y., 1975), pp. 223-225,
http://www.al-islam.org/anthology. [Trans.]

[^41]: - See ‘Allāmah Ḥillī, Kashf al-Murād fī Tajrīd al-I‘tiqād,
Section on Imamate.

[^42]: - The abbreviation, ‘atfs stands for the Arabic invocative
phrase, ‘ajjalallāhu ta‘ālā farajah ash-sharīf [may Allah, the Exalted,
expedite his glorious advent], which is invoked after mentioning the
name of Imām al-Mahdī (‘atfs). [Trans.]

[^43]: - See Muḥammad Riḍā Ḥakīmī, Khurshīd-e Maghrib, chaps. 4-6; Ṣāfī
Gulpāygānī, Muntakhab al-Āthār.

[^44]: - See Sayyid Muḥammad Bāqir Ṣadr, Baḥth Ḥawl al-Mahdī, p. 55. The
book’s English translation is An Inquiry Concerning Al-Mahdī (Tehran:
World Organization for Islamic Services, 1980). [Trans.].

[^45]: - ‘Allāmah Majlisī, Tuḥaf al-‘Uqūl, p. 37.

[^46]: - See Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:105; Sūrah Nūr 24:55; Sūrah Qaṣaṣ 28:5.

[^47]: - See Uṣūl al-Kāfī, “Kitāb al-Ḥujjah,” Bāb fī’l-Ghaybah”; Biḥar
al-Anwār, vol. 51, p. 110.

[^48]: - Gulpāygānī, Muntakhab al-Āthār, p. 355.

[^49]: - During the first 70 years of his Imamate, the Imām of the Time
(‘atfs) had special deputies to manage on behalf of the Imām the affairs
of the Shī‘ah. This period is known as the minor occultation.

[^50]: - Sūrah Shūrā 42:23: “Say, I do not ask of you any reward for it
except the affection for [my] relatives.”

[^51]: - Tawassul: literally, to resort to intermediaries. Technically,
it refers to the practice of petition prayer addressed to God through a
holy personage such as a prophet [nabī] or a saint [walī]. [Trans.]

[^52]: - Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 5, p. 312 as narrated from Imām al-Ḥusayn
(‘a).

[^53]: - Uṣūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 207.

[^54]: - Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq, At-Tawḥīd, p. 290.


