Introduction
============

**In the name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful**

By the grace and assistance of Allah, the translation and publication of
the commentary of more than two parts of the Qur'an in English under the
title of “An Enlightening Commentary, into the Light of the Holy Qur'an”
have been successfully fulfilled in three volumes. These humble volumes
were ardently met and well received by many sincere believers in most
parts of the world.

When the readers reflected their enthusiastic affections and we were
aware of their kind, cooperative and leading points of view about the
task as a helpful Islamic ideological reference for them, and they
appreciated especially the involving traditions from the Holy Prophet
(S) and his Ahlul Bayt (‘a), we understood that not only the exegesis of
the verses of the Qur'an were useful for them, but the concerning
Islamic traditions were also warmly embraced and utilized widely.

Besides that, via their communications, we felt their desire and the
urgent need of the Age for such leading statements, too. Therefore, it
was decided that the present valuable collection of holy traditions
which were carefully selected by Ayatullah 'Allamah Mujahid Al-Hajj
Sayyid Kamal Faqih Imani, to be translated into English and offered to
the believing Muslims.

On the other hand, regarding the Prophet's famous tradition known as
'Thaqalayn' (two weighty causes), and putting it into action, next to
the publication of the above-mentioned commentary of the Qur'an, and to
provide traces in the English language from both the Holy Qur'an and
Ahlul Bayt (‘a) together before our eyes, it was thought that the
translation of at least a small collection of traditions from Holy Ahlul
Bayt (‘a) would be supplied, so that these 'Two Weighty Causes' may work
parallel and not to be separated from each other. Therefore, this
favourable task was adventured in order that a short distance might be
paved towards the path of the obedience of the godly advice of the
Messenger of Allah (S) in the above mentioned magnificent tradition.

So, for the present time, the very humble endeavour was prepared and
entitled: 'A BundIe of flowers from the Garden of Traditions of the Holy
Prophet & Ahlul Bayt (‘a)' to indicate, firstly, the origin of the
materials and, secondly, that the collection is merely a small portion
of their vast ocean of varying knowledge which is linked to the
illimitable knowledge of Allah, because the Holy Ahlul Bayt (‘a) are the
same ones whom Allah has called "ar-rasikhuna fil 'ilm" (those deeply
established in knowledge), where He (s.w.t.) says:

***"... But no one knows its hidden meaning except Allah, and those who
are firmly grounded in knowledge..." (Sura Al-I-Imran, No.3, verse
7).***

However, it is certain that if this group of expressive traditions and
the like of them be practically observed by receptive people, the
resulting merits of those divinely-linked statements will be abundantly
beneficial in every step of their lives: socially, economically,
morally, ethically, and so on, Allah-Willing. So, we ask Allah (s.w.t.)
to shower His ceaseless infinite mercy upon all those who study this
book and try to act according to its involving reasonable ideas.

It is necessary to say, here, that some of the Arabic words involved in
the traditions , such as: I na-mahram , have rarely any equivalents in
English to convey their exact meaning.

Hereby, we sincerely appreciate not only the estimable people who helped
us with the completion of this book, but also the valuable helpful
instructive views we will receive from you, dear reader, which can
surely be encouraging and animating for us. Therefore, we thank you in
anticipation and ask you to communicate with us by the publisher's
address:

The Scientific, Religious Research Center,  
 Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (as.) Public Library, Isfahan, Iran.

We praise Allah and hope that may He forgive all our faults and
shortcomings, and, accept this small endeavour from us with giving
rewards to all those who have had a share, of any kind, in it, both in
this world and the next world.

Was-Salam  
 Sayyid Abbas Sadr-'Ameli  
 Translator  
 August 1997


