Ahlul Bayt
==========

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The likeness of my Ahlul Bayt (progeny)
amongst my Ummah (followers) is similar to Noah's Ark. Those who
embarked on it were rescued and those who rejected it perished...."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 27, p. 113

Imam al-Baqir, the fifth Imam, (‘a) said: "Our traditions (Ahlul Bayt)
survive in the hearts."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 144

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Make your gatherings lively with the
remembrance of ‘Ali-ibn-Abi-Talib." (Talk about the excellencies of ‘Ali
(‘a)).

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 38, p. 199

In 'Ikmal-ud-Din' a tradition, through 'Jabir-il-Ju'fi', is narrated
from 'Jabir-ibn-'Abdillah' thus: "I said: 'O Messenger of Allah we have
known Allah and His Apostle; then who is 'Ulul-Amr', those that Allah
has made their obedience the same as your obedience?' Then, the Prophet
(p.h.u.h.) said: 'O' Jabir! They are, after me, my successors and the
guides of Muslims; the first of them is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib; then (Imam)
Hasan, and (Imam) Husayn; then ‘Ali ibn Husayn; then Mohammad ibn ‘Ali;
known in the Turah as Baqir, whom you will see, O' Jabir! When you visit
him, give my regards to him. After him, there is Sadiq, Ja'far ibn
Muhammad; and after him Musa ibn Ja'far; then ‘Ali ibn Musa; then
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali; then ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, then Hasan ibn ‘Ali; and
after him (there comes) Al-Qaim, whose name and epithet is the same as
mine. He is Allah's Authority on the Earth and His Remainder amongst His
servants. He is the son of (Imam) Hasan-ibn-’Ali (al-al-’Askari). This
is the very personality by whose hands Allah will open the Easts and
Wests of the worlds and this is the very personality who will be absent
from his followers and those who love him, in which his mastership
cannot be proved by a statement of anyone except for the one whose heart
Allah tests for Faith."

Jabir said: "I asked him: 'O' Messenger of Allah will his followers
avail of him during his occultation?' He answered: 'Yes. By the One Who
appointed me to prophethood, they will seek brightness from his light
and will avail by devotion in his absence the same as the availing of
people from the (glow of) sun when clouds cover it...'

(Ikmal-ud-Din, vol. 1, p. 253, with nearly similar meaning in
Yanabir-ul-Mawaddah, p. 117)

Malik-ibn-Anas said about the virtue of Imam as-Sadiq (‘a): "No eye has
ever seen, no ear has ever heard, and no heart (soul) has ever been
striken that there can (contemporaneously) be anybody higher than (Imam)
Ja'far Sadiq (‘a) from the point of virtue, knowledge, worship, and
piety."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 47, p. 28

Imam Husayn (‘a) said: "By my soul, there is no Imam but he issues
judgement upon the Book, establishes justice, believes in the religion
of Truth, and restrains his self alongside the way of Allah.

Al-Irshad, vol. 204


