The Acceptable Characteristics
==============================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Shall I not introduce 'a believer' to you? A
believer is the one whom other believers trust with their souls and
wealth. Shall I not introduce 'a Muslim' to you? A Muslim is the one
from whose hand and tongue other Muslims are safe.... It is unlawful
(Haram) for a believer to do wrong against another believer, or leave
him/her in a lurch, or backbite against him/her, or suddenly reject
him/her."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 235

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "A Muslim believer must not attend a meeting
wherein Allah laws are being disobeyed and the one is not in a position
to stop it."

Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 374

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "He who habitually tells the truth, his deeds
are purified; Allah increases the sustenance of the one whose intention
is good; and he who treats his family members well, Allah prolongs the
length of his life."

Khisal by Saduq, vol. 1 p. 88

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "A man came to the Prophet (S)
and asked him to teach him an action so that both Allah, the Exalted,
and people would love him, his wealth would increase, his body would be
healthy, his life time would last long, and he would be raised with him
(the Prophet). Then, he (S) said: 'These are six traits which need six
qualities:

1. If you want Allah to love you, be afraid of Him and guard yourself
against sin.

2. If you want people to love you, be benevolent to them and decline
what they have in their hands.

3. If you want Allah to increase your wealth, then give its alms tax.

4. If you want Allah to make your body healthy, pay charity more
frequently.

5. If you want Allah to prolong your lifetime, then have regard for your
kinship.

6. And, if you want Allah to raise you with me, then do prolong your
prostrations before Allah, the One, the Dominator.'"

Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 599

Imam Ridha’, the eighth Imam, (‘a) said: A Muslim believer is not a true
believer unless there are three virtues in him: the manner of his lord,
the manner of his Prophet, and the manner of his Imam. Then, the manner
of his Lord is: concealing his secrets; hence Allah, to Whom belong
Might and Majesty, said: 'The Knower of the Unseen! So He does not
reveal His secrets to any, except to him whom He chooses as an
apostle,...'[^1]

Then, the manner of his Prophet is compliance with people, when surely,
Allah, Almighty and Glorious, commissioned His prophet to favour people
and He has said: 'Practice forgiveness and enjoin good and turn away
from the ignorant.’[^2]

Then the manner of his Imam is (to be firm and) being patient on good
days and bad days, when, verily, Allah to whom belong Might and Majesty,
says: 'And (they) are patient in distress and affliction'."[^3]

'Uyun-ul-Akhbar-ur-Ridha’, vol.1, p.256

Imam Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, the nineth Imam (‘a) said: "A Muslim believer
should obtain these three virtues: success granted by Allah, be an
admonisher of his self, and find approval from the one who advises him."

Muntah-al-'Amal, p.229

‘Ali ibn Husayn (‘a) the fourth Imam, was once asked how he, the son of
the Messenger of Allah began each morning, and he (‘a) replied: "I begin
each morning while I am demanded of eight virtues:

Allah, the Exalted, demands of me the obligatory; the Prophet (S)
demands of me his tradition (Sunnah); family dependents demand of me
food (material); the self looks for desires; Satan demands me (to
commit) sin; the two protective angels demand of me virtuousness, the
angel of death demands of me the spirit and, the grave demands of me my
body.

Therefore, I am, surrounded by these traits, demanded."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 15

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Verily everything is intimidated by a believer
because the religion of Allah causes him to be powerful, and he is not
intimidated by anything, which (epithet) is the characteristic of any
believer."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 305

[^1]: Sura Al-Jinn, No.72, verses 26 & 27

[^2]: Space

[^3]: Sura Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 177


