The Real Followers of Ahlul Bayt and Their Qualities
====================================================

Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) told Jabir: "Is it enough for a person to
(merely) embellish (oneself) as a Shi'ah (follower) by professing love
of us, Ahlul Bayt? Nay! By Allah, a person is not our follower except
the one who fears Allah and obeys Him. O' Jabir! Our followers are not
recognized save by humility; submission; honesty; praising Allah
abundantly; fasting and prayers; filial devotion; attending to the poor,
needy, debtors, and orphans who live near him; saying the truth;
reciting the Qur'an; withholding the tongue from people except for
benediction; and being trustworthy for relatives in any affairs..."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 74

Sulayman-ibn-Mahran said that he visited Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) while some
of the followers (Shi'ah) were attending him (‘a) and he heard that the
Imam (‘a), addressing them, said: "(Behave) to be as ornaments for us
and not to be against us as shame. Tell people of goodness, and protect
your tongues and hold it from excessive talk and offensive speech."

Al-Amali, by Saduq, p. 142

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Verily, we love those who are wise, perceptive
(intelligent), learned, forbearing, patient, reliable, and faithful.
Surely, Allah, Almighty and Glorious, favoured Prophets (‘a) with high
morality. Then, he who possesses them may praise Allah for them, but he
who does not have them may weep unto Allah, the Almighty and Glorious,
and ask Him for them." Jabir humbly asked what they were, and the Imam
(‘a) replied:

"They are: piety, contentment, patient endurance, gratefulness,
forbearance, modesty, graciousness, courage, enthusiasm, benevolence,
truthfulness, and honesty in deposits."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 56

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "... He who obeys Allah is a lover of us, and
the one who disobeys Him then he is an enemy for us (Ahlul Bayt)..."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 75


