Knowledge and Its Value
=======================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Teachers and students both share in rewards
but other people are deprived of them."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 25

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who propagates religious affairs without
having required competency does a disservice to the religion rather than
serving it."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p.121

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The worth of every man is in his
attainments."

Nahjul-Balagha, saying No. 482

Note:

The real value of a person is his knowledge (and the perfection of his
attainments). His worth and position would be in accordance with the
status of knowledge and attainment he holds. Eyes that are conscious of
real values do not look at the face, features, tallness of stature, size
or worldly pomp and position but look at the attainments of a person and
assess his worth according to these attainments. The conclusion is that
a man should strive to acquire distinction and knowledge.

The worth of every person is according to the extent of his knowledge.

Ghurar-ul-Hikam, p. 341

The Holy Prophet (S) said: " Knowledge is Allah's deposit on the earth
and scholars are His trustees of it. Therefore, he who acts according to
his knowledge, has really delivered His deposit...."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 36

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "Try to learn knowledge because learning it is
a good action and study is itself a worship."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 189

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The one who seeks for knowledge
is like a warrior in the cause of religion for the way of Allah."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 179

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: " Be careful of your knowledge and see from
whom you get it."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 92

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Try to obtain knowledge and ornament it with
patience and dignity; and be humble for the one who learns knowledge
from you."

Al-Kafi, vol.1, p. 36

Imam as-Sadiq (as.) said: "The one who learns knowledge and acts
accordingly, and teaches it for Allah, will be called magnificently in
heavens."

Al-Kafi, vol.1, p.35

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The good of this world and the world to come
is with knowledge."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol.1, p. 204


