The Excellence and Importance of Scholars
=========================================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "There are two groups of my Ummah that when
they are pious, my Ummah will be upright and when they are immoral my
Ummah will be corrupt."

The Messenger of Allah (S) was asked who they were, and he answered:
"The religious scholars and rulers."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 49

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "When confronting a sage, try to be more
inquisitive than talkative, and learn how to listen well as much as you
learn how to speak well, and do not interrupt the statement of anyone."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 222

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "O' ‘Ali! Gabriel wished to become a human
being for seven reasons, which are:

1. Congregational prayer.

2. Companionship with scholars.

3. Establishing peace between two persons.

4. Honouring the orphans.

5. Visiting the sick.

6. Attending a funeral procession.

7. Giving of water to Pilgrims.

8. Then, be desirous of these things."

Al -'Ithna 'Ashariyyah, p. 245

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "When the utterance of the wise
is to the point, it serves as a remedy, but if it is wrong it proves
like an illness."

Nahjul-Balagha, saying No. 265

Imam Hasan al-’Askari, the eleventh Imam, (‘a) said:

"The scholars of our followers (Shi'ah) are the guards of the bounds of
Islam. Then, anyone of our followers who undertakes this (duty) is
superior to the one who fights in the battle against the Romans,
(because this one defends the theological bounds of our followers)."

Al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 155

Imam Ridha’, the eighth Imam, (‘a) said: "Beware that surely a (true
religious) jurist is he who pours forth his benediction unto people,
saves them from their enemies, multiplies the blessings of Heaven for
them, and earns the Pleasure of Allah the Exalted, for them (through
guidance)."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 5

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: " ...The reward of a religious
scholar is greater than the reward of a person who is fasting on days
and establishes prayers during the night and fights in the Holy War for
the sake of Allah. And, when a religious scholar dies, there will appear
a gap in Islam which cannot be compensated except by a replacement of
that (kind)."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 43

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) told Kumayl: O' Kumayl! Those who
compile wealth are dead even though they may be living, while the sages
(who are endowed with knowledge) will remain as long as the world
remains. Their bodies perish but their depictions will exist in the
hearts."

Nahjul-Balagha, saying No.147

Imam Husayn (‘a) said: "...Verily, the paths to Muslims' affairs and the
religious ordinances are in the hands of the godly scholars who are the
trusties of Allah in His lawful and unlawful things. ..."

Tuhaful-'Uqul, p.172


