Preface
=======

***"If you do not know, ask the men of wisdom (among Ummah)."*** ***Sura
Nahl, no 16, verse 43, Sura Anbiya, No. 21, verse 7***

This holy verse enjoins the believers to refer to the people of dhikr
i.e., the men of wisdom and the scholars of Ummah in order to recognize
the right from wrong, when they (the believers) encounter with
difficulties, because Allah after teaching them knowledge, chose them
for that matter. Hence, they are those deeply rooted in knowledge who
know how to render the Qur'an.

This verse was revealed in order to introduce Ahlul Bayt (‘a), viz,
Muhammad (S), ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, who are called the five
holy lights known as 'Al-i-'Aba' to whom, there have been added nine
other blessed ones from the descendants of Imam Husayn. The Messenger of
Allah, in different suitable occasions, introduced them as the guiding
Imams, the torches in darknesses, and those deeply rooted in knowledge,
upon whom surely Allah (s.w.t.), has bestowed 'the Knowledge of the
Book'.

These facts, narrated in repeatedly stated traditions, have been
precisely approved by the followers of Prophet Muhammad (S) from the
time of revelation up to now, and some of the scholars and commentators
from Sunni school have also confessed in their books that those verses
of the Qur'an were revealed about and on the virtue of Ahlul Bayt (‘a).
A few of the examples of their books are as follows:

• Imam Tha'labi in his great commentary book upon the meaning of verse
42 from Sura An-Nahl, No. 16.

• Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol.2, p. 591.

• Tals Tabari, vol.14, p.75.

• Tafsir-i-Alusi, known as: 'Ruhul-Bayan', vol.14, p.134.

• Tafsir-i-Qartabi, vol.11, p.272.

• Tafsir-i-Hakim, or Shawahid-ut-Tanzil, vol.1, p. 334.

• Tafsir-i-Shabistary, or: Ihqaaq-ul-Haqq, vol.3, p.482.

• Yanani-ul-Mawaddah, by Qanduzi Hanafi, p. 119.

Basing on the very reality, we must approach the Immaculate Household,
Ahlul Bayt, and practice their guiding words to instruct our lives well.
In this regard, Imam al-Hadi (‘a) says:

"Your words of wisdom give light, your administration is guidance (for
people), and your recommendation is piety and equity."

Man Ia Yahduruh-ul-Faqih, Tahthib & 'Uyun-i-Akhbar-ur-Ridha’

Beware O' dear reader!
----------------------

It is via these blessed ones that the material and spiritual problems of
our lives, in this world and the world to come, can be solved.

It is on account of you that Allah pulls us out of the the lowliness (of
infidelity), sets us free from the clutches of hard grieves, and takes
us to safety from the precipices of annihilation of the world, and from
the Fire of Hell, too.

Man la Yahduruh-ul-Faqih, Tahthib & 'Uyun-i-Akhbar-ur-Ridha’

It was because of your mastership and leadership that Allah taught us
the laws of our religion, put in order what had been spoiled and
corrupted in our world. (And He saved us from poverty, degradation and
ignorance, then, bestowed us knowledge, honour and dignity.)

Man la Yahduruh-ul-Faqih, Tahthib & 'Uyun-i-Akhbar-ur-Ridha’

Well, if we leave following those blessed ones, we will fail in all
aspects. So, the Prophet (S) has said:

The parable of my Ahlul Bayt is similar to that of Noah's Ark. Whosoever
embarks it certainly will get rescued, but the one who opposes the
boarding of it, surely gets drowned."

This tradition has been narrated by eight companions of the Prophet (S)
and eight persons from the disciples of the companions, and by sixty
well-known scholars, and mor ethan 90 authors from the brothers os Sunni
school, mentioned in Mishkat-ul-Masabih, p.523, from Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal;
Fara'id-us-Simtayn, vol.2, p. 242; As-Sawaiq-ul-Muharraqah, p.234;
Uyun-ul-Akhbar, Vol.1, p.211; and others from the references of both
schools, which if you wish to refer to, are, mentioned in
Nafahat-ul-Azhar, vol.4, p.127.

The Messenger of Allah said: "It is probable that I be called soon and I
will respond. Then, I leave behind me among you two weighty (very worthy
and important) things:

The Book of Allah (i.e. the Qur'an), which is a stretched string from
the heaven to the earth, and my progeny, my Ahlul-Bait; for verily
Allah, The Merciful, the Aware, informed me that never, never, will
these two get separated from each other until they meet me at the Houd
of Kauthar (the Pond of Abundance). Therefore, be careful how you will
treat due to those two in my absence."

And, in another tradition it is added: "Never, never, shall you get
astray if you attach yourselves to these TWO."

This tradition is narrated by more than twenty persons from the
companions of the Prophet (S) and it is also narrated by over 185
narrators mentioned in Sahih Muslim, vol. 2, p. 238 & Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, vol.5, p. 181-182; Sahih-i-Tarmathi, vol.2, p.220, and others
from the references of both schools which, if you like to see, are
mentioned on pp. 199 to 210, vol. 1, in Nafahat-ul-Azhar fi
Khulasat-i-Abaqat-ul-Anwar.

Thus, what honour is more excellent than that the Qur'an, the Messenger
of Allah (S), and Ahlul Bayt (‘a) be our example, teacher, and leader.

That is why we, with a great mass of sincerity and devotion, say:

We are honoured that we are the followers of a religion whose founder on
Allah's direction was Allah's prophet and Amir-ul-Mu'mineen '‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib, the servant of Allah who was himself liberated from all
chains and was designated, in turn, as the liberator of Mankind from all
chains of slavery (to other than Allah).

We are honoured that Nahjul Balagha, which after the Qur'an is the
greatest prescription for spiritual and material life, is the highest
book for the liberation of mankind, and its spiritual and political
prescriptions are the most valuable for liberation is authored by our
Ma'sum Imam (‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a)).

We are honoured that Ma'sum Imam from '‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib to the
liberator of Mankind (‘a) who with the power of Allah is alive and
supervises all affairs, are our Imams.

We are honoured that the supplications, which are called the ascending
Qur'an, are from our Ma'sum Imams. We are honoured that the intimate
prayers of Sha'baniyyah, the supplications of 'Arafah of Husayn Ibn
'‘Ali, Sahifah Sajjaddiyah (the psalms of 'Al-i-Muhammad, and Sahifah
Fatimah (which is an Allah-inspired Book to Zahra-'i-Mardiyyah).

We are honoured that Baqir-ul-'Ulum, who is the highest personality of
history and no one, other than Allah Ta'ala, the Exalted, and the
Prophet (S) and the Ma'sum Imams, has been or will ever be able to
understand his station, is from us.

And, we are honoured that our Madhhab is Ja'fari and that our Figh
(Islamic Jurisprudence) which is an infinite sea (of knowledge), is one
of his (Imam as-Sadiq's (‘a)) contributions. And we are proud of all
Ma'sum Imams (‘a), and we are committed to following them.

We are honoured that our Ma'sum Imams (‘a) lived in prisons and in exile
because they tried to raise the status of the Deen (religion) of Islam
and implement (the teaching) of the Holy Qur'an, one of whose dimensions
is the formation of the Just Government, and finally became martyrs in
attempts to irradicate oppressive governments and Taghut of their own
time.

**Now, O' dear brother and sister!**

You are eye-witnesses, in this little globe, smaller than a village in
the universe, that today, the period of the burst of information, the
bewildered human race of our Age is burning in the thirst of the blazing
desert of injustice and inequality, while man is ceaselessly sinking
deeper and deeper into the swamp of impiety and inequity.

Those who boast of man's freedom and happiness are anxiously watching
the descent of the moral values, the very circumstance that they
themselves have created. They can afford nothing but looking at the
destruction of human and humanity. But, is it really the end of the
line?

The answer is surprisingly positive, unless man returns to his
godly-human-nature, applying the miserable experiments of his past life
as a torch for his future way and utilizing Islam as the best remedy.

In the present Age, Islam the glorious, as the best guiding
prescription, better than ever in history, has stretched its kind hand
to rescue him who is drowned in and overwhelmed with vices and, by the
Grace of Allah has stood to cure him from the sickness of corruption.

Islam is available to quench the thirst of that wandering man in the hot
desert of impiety by means of the wholesome water of its theology
enlightened with the glow of the knowledge and excellences of Ahlul
Bayt, which is the reflection of bright galaxy of revelation that has
ever had no err or mistake at all. It showers its light over all
material and spiritual aspects of man's life totally. Thus, it has
vividly opened a highway unto this deluded man that haply he goes toward
reality.

**But, o' dear friend,**

The first and the most essential way of recognizing a school of idea is
studying its main texts with proper understanding of the words of its
sages and leaders. It is by this means that the doctrine of that school
about the world and its problems upon different practical phenomena can
be realized and estimated.

It has been on this foundation and under this stimulus that we have
taken action in publishing a continuous commentary of the Qur'an in
English under the name of 'An Enlightening Commentary into the Light of
the Holy Qur'an', which was faced with such a warm reception of the
seekers of truth in many countries of the world that during less than
three years its first two volumes were reprinted five times.

Now, at the threshold of the sixth print of those sacred commentary
books, the present book as 'A bundle of Flowers' enriched from the
statements of the leaders of the instructive school of Islam, that is
the very Ahlul Bayt, is offered to all of those who seek for the Noblest
and latest Divine school. We expect that with utilizing the perfume of
these everlasting fresh flowers best, contemplate the following
expression from the eighth Imam (‘a):

Imam Ridha’ (‘a) said: "May the Mercy of Allah be upon the servant who
keeps alive our commandment". I asked him (‘a) how the one could keep
your commandment alive. He (‘a) said: "He (can) learn our sciences and
teach them to people. In fact, if people knew (the merits) and goodness
of our speech, surely they would follow us."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol.2, p.40; Ma'aniy-ul-Akhbar, by Saduq, p.180; and
Wasa'il ush-Shi'ah, vol.27, p.92

A Benevolent Expectation
------------------------

We hope that by reading and hearkening the noble words of those holy
ones, the statement be completed to the people of the world, may be,
through following the Holy Ahlul Bayt, the youth; viz, the new
generation, stand away from any religious, mental, moral, theological,
social, economical, political, and educational deviation, so that each
of them can grow to be an effective gentleman and also, as a devoted
soldier, to be helpful for Islam and Muslims throughout the world.

At the end, we send our sincere and pure regards with kind greetings to
those holy, excellent, purified and immaculate souls, while we say:

Peace be on you that your hearts aquaint with awareness of Allah, the
place where there are blessings of Allah and the source of the wisdom of
Allah. The secrets of Allah have been put in your safekeeping. You know
the knowledge of the Book of Allah by heart. You are the successors of
the Prophet of Allah (S) and the children of the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny and the mercy and blessings of Allah
as well.

Man La YahduruhuI Faqih, Tahthib & 'Uyun-i-Akhbar-ur-Ridha’

And Peace to all who follow guidance.

Sayyid Kamal Faqih Imani  
 Esfahan-Iran


