Injustice and Transgression
===========================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "On the Day of the Resurrection a caller will
announce: "Where are the oppressors and their assistants and those who
prepared an inkwell for them or fastened a bag for them or supplied the
ink of a pen (for them)? Then, gather these (people) with them!'"

Thawabab-ul-'A'mal, p. 309

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "By Allah, even if I am given all
the domains of the seven countries with all that exists under the skies
in order that I may disobey Allah to the extent of snatching one grain
of barley from an ant, I would not do it."

Nahjul-Balagha, p. 347

Imam al-Baqir, the fifth Imam, (‘a) said: "There are three types of
transgressions: the one which Allah, the Exalted, forgives, the one He
does not forgive, and that one which He does not ignore. Thus, the
transgression that He does not forgive is infidelity unto Allah, the
Almighty, and Glorious. And, the transgression which Allah forgives is
the one that a person commits (against) himself between him and Allah,
to Whom belong Might and Majesty. But the transgression which He does
not ignore is the one committed against rights of men."

Explanation

The third transgression is referring to when a person infringes upon the
rights of others. The way to forgiveness is first by satisfying
(contenting) the person whose rights were infringed upon. If that person
forgives him, then the transgression becomes as one that the person has
commited against himself. He may then seek forgiveness from Allah.

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 330

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Transgression causes the foot to
go astray, takes the blessings, and kills the nations."

Sharh Ghurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 2, p. 36

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "... Nothing is more inducive of
the reversal of Allah's bounty or for hastening of His retribution than
continuance in oppression, because Allah hears the prayer of the
oppressed and is on the look-out for the oppressors."

Nahjul-Balagha, Letter 53


