The Rights of Fellow Muslims
============================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who grieves a true Muslim cannot then
compensate for it by offering him the entire world because it is not
sufficient compensation (unless he repents and appeases the said
person)."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 75, p. 150

Imam al-Kadhim (‘a) said: "Among your most compulsory duties towards
your Muslim brother is that you conceal nothing from him which profits
him either in this life or in the Hereafter."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 75

Imam Hasan, the second Imam (‘a), said: "Treat others similar to the way
you would like for them to treat you."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 116

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "May Allah have mercy upon the
person who services a right and removes a wrong, or refutes an injustice
and establishes justice."

Ghurar-ul-Hikam, p. 181

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "These four characteristics are from the
manners of Prophets (‘a): righteousness, graciousness, patience and
perseverance in tolerating misfortunes, and rising for the right of a
believer."

Tuhaf-ul-Uqul, p. 277

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Surely, it is the common people
of the community who are the pillars of the religion, the power of the
Muslims and the defence against the enemies. Your leaning should
therefore be towards them and your inclination with them."

Nahjul Balagha, Letter 53

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "In no way is Allah worshipped better than by
fulfilling the right of a believer."

Al-Kafi, Vol.2, p. 170

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who hurts a Muslim believer, surely he
has hurt me."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 72

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who unlawfully and usurpingly deprives a
believer of wealth, Allah will continue to be displeased with him and
does not accept his good actions that he fulfills; and none of them will
be recorded among his good deeds until he repents and returns the wealth
which he had taken to its owner."

Mustadrak-ul-Wasa'il, vol. 17, p. 89


