Enjoining Right and Forbidding Wrong
====================================

***And from among you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is that shall be
successful.*** ***'Al-i-'lmran, No. 3, verse 104***

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The time when my Ummah (Muslim followers)
merely count on others to enjoin right and forbid wrong, in fact, they
have declared a fight against Allah, the Exalted."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 92

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "He who abandons forbidding what
is wrong theoretically and practically (and is indifferent while seeing
vices committed) is a moving corpse amongst the living."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 94

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "To prevent a Muslim from doing an unlawful
action is equivalent with Allah to the performance of seventy accepted
Hajj."

Mustadrak Al-Wasa'il-ush-Shia'h, vol. 11, p. 278

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Ask others to do good; you will
thus be among the good doers. Desist others from evil with your action
as well as your speech, and stay away, to the best of your ability, from
he who commits it. Struggle for Allah as is His due; and the reviling of
a reviler should not deter you in matters of Allah. Leap into danger for
the sake of right wherever it may be."

Nahjul Balagha, p. 392 letter 31

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "Verily, enjoining what is right and forbidding
what is wrong is the way of prophets and the method of good doers. It is
such a great obligatory deed (wajib) by which other obligatory deeds can
survive, other creeds can be saved, bargains are lawful, injustices are
warded off, and prosperity can fill the earth..."

Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 56

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The firmness of the religion is
due to enjoining what is good and forbidding what is wrong, and
observing the limits of Allah.

Ghurar-ul-Hikam, p. 236

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The one who sees a wrong action done should
prohibit it by his deed, if he is capable, of course; and if he cannot
do that, he should prohibit it by his tongue, but if he is not able to
do even that, he may forbid it by his heart."

Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 16, p. 135

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who enjoins right and prohibits wrong is
the vicegerent of both Allah and His Messenger on the earth."

Mustadrak-ul-Wasa'il, vol. 12, p. 179

The Holy Prophet (S) said: " Whensoever my Ummah undertake to enjoin
right and prohibit evil and associate in establishing benevolence, they
live happily and prosperously; but when they stop doing so, the
blessings will be taken off from them."

At-Tahthib, vol. 6, p. 181

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said to Imam al-Hasan and Imam
al-Husayn (‘a) when Ibn Muljam (the curse of Allah be upon him) struck
him (fatally with a sword): "... Fear Allah (and again) fear Allah in
the matter of Jihad, (struggle for the Holy War), with the help of your
property, lives and speech in the way of Allah..."

"Do not give up bidding for good and forbidding from evil lest the
mischievous gain positions over you, and then (in that case) when you
pray, your invocations will not be granted to you.

Nahjul Balagha, Letter 47, p. 422

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Enjoining good is the most
excellent deed of people."

Mustadrak-ul-Wasa'il, vol. 12, p.185

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "All good deeds totally, including even the
struggle in the Holy War in the way of Allah, comparing with enjoining
right and forbidding wrong, is like a small amount of saliva compared
with a deep ocean.

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 89

Imam al-Baqir, the fifth Imam, (‘a) said: " Allah, Almighty and
Glorious, revealed to Prophet Jethro (Shu'ayb) (‘a): 'I will punish one
hundred thousand people of your folk. Forty thousand people are from
their vicious ones but sixty thousand of them are from their good-doers.
Jethro (‘a) inquired: 'These are the vicious (who deserve punishment),
but what about the good-doers?' Then, Allah, Almighty and Glorious,
revealed to him: 'They (the good-doers) associated with the sinners and
did not become angry because of My wrath."

Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 56

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Ask others to do good and forbid
evil and do know that 'enjoining right and forbidding wrong' never draws
death near nor ceases sustenance."

Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 16, p. 120

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Woe to the people who do not support the
religion of Allah by enjoining good and forbidding evil."

Mustadrak Al-Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 12, p. 181


