The Opening Tradition
=====================

**In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

Imam Sajjad, the fourth Imam, (â€˜a) said: "All Praise is only Allah's,
and praise is His right: an illimitable praise that suits Him. I seek
refuge in Him from my own self of evils: verily, the (human) self is
certainly prone to do evil except such as my Lord has had mercy on. I
see refuge in Him from the evil of Satan who always increases a sin to
my sins. I seek refuge in Him from any immoral opposer, cruel king, and
forceful enemy."

"O' Lord! assign me as one of Your soldiers, because it is sure that
Your troops are totally victorious; and assign me among Your party, for
truly, it is Your party that will achieve Felicity; and accept me as one
of Your lovers, for, certainly, on the lovers of Allah there is no fear,
nor shall they grieve."

"O' Lord! improve my religion for me, for surely it is a divine
protection on all my affairs; and improve my next world for me, because,
no doubt, it is my permanent abode for me to escape from the scornful
people, and assign my life for me in increasing any goodness, and my
death a means of my freeing from any malady."

"O' Lord! bless Muhammad, the final prophet of all the members of
Messengers, and his pure progeny, as well as his gentle companions, and
bestow me three necessities today: do not hold any sin for me except
that You forgive it nor a grieve but You remove it, nor any enemy but
You send him away via the appellation of Allah which is the best names,
i.e. By the Name of Allah, the Lord of the earth and heaven..."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 90, p. 187 & Sahifah Sajjadiyyah, p. 572


