Companions & Friendship
=======================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Man is influenced by the faith of his
friends. Therefore, be careful of whom you associate with."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 192

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Be the friend of he who may grace you, not of
one whom you are better than." (- viz. make friends with ones who are
higher than you so that you progress.)

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 267

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "My most beloved brother is he who (makes me
aware of) my faults."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 282

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Verily, there are three (types
of) friends for a Muslim:

1. The friend who says: 'I am with you whether you are alive or dead',
and this is his deed.

2. The friend who says: ' I am with you unto the threshold of your grave
and then I will leave you', and this is his child.

3. The friend who says: 'I will be with you until when you die', and
this is his wealth which will belong to the inheritors when he dies."

Note:

From this tradition, and the like, we understand that the only thing
which will avail for individuals in the Hereafter is Faith and good
deeds. This is also referred to in many Islamic traditions as well as
the verses of the Holy Qur'an, for example:

***"For those who believe and work righteousness is (every) blessedness
and a beautiful place of (final) return." (13:29)***

***"As to those who believe and work righteousness, verily We shall not
suffer to perish the reward of any who do a (single) righteous deed."
(18:30)***

***"As to those who believe and work righteous deeds, they have, for
their entertainment, the Gardens of Paradise." (18: 107)***

***"On those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, will (God)
Most Gracious bestow Love." (19:96)***

Al-Khisal by Saduq, vol. 1, p. 88

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Be careful to have truthful friends and try to
obtain them, for they are your support when you are in welfare, and your
advocator when you have misfortune.

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 187

Imam Sajjad (‘a) said: "The meeting of the righteous invites you to
goodness."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 78, p.141

Imam Sajjad (‘a) said: "Beware of the companionship of the sinful, and
helping of the unjust."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 78, p.151.


