Serving People
==============

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who decreases a grief out of the grieves
of this world for his Muslim brother, Allah will decrease for him a
grief out of the grieves of the Hereafter."

Shahab-ul-Akhbar, p. 194

Imam Husayn (‘a) said: "Verily, the procession of people's needs towards
you is from among the blessings of Allah upon you. Therefore, grieve ye
not because of these blessings."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 318

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Whenever you find that your
Muslim brother is in need, try to see to it." (Do not let him feel
compelled to verbalize his need).

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 166

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) narrates from his forefathers (‘a), from the
Messenger of Allah (S), who said: "He who feeds a believer to satiate
him, Allah will feed him from the fruits of Heaven; he who dresses him
to cover his nakedness, Allah will give him clothing of brocade and
silk; he who quenches the thirst of a believer, Allah will give him
drink of the sealed container; and he who helps him or removes his
grief, Allah will settle him under the shade of His Throne on the Day of
Reckoning when there is no shade except for His Shade."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 382

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "People are the dependents of Allah for
sustenance, so the most beloved one of people with Him is the one who is
helpful to the dependents Allah and makes the family members of a house
happy."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 164

The holy Prophet (S) said: "He who helps a Muslim believer (in his
troubles), Allah, Almighty and Glorious, will remove from him
seventy-three agonies, one of which is in this world and seventy-two
other agonies at the time of Great Agony, when people are busy with
themselves (in Hereafter)."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p.199


