Charity and Alms
================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "My community will continue to live fairly
while they are faithful (to each other), return the deposits (to their
owners), and give alms (of their property); but, if they do not fulfil
these duties, they will encounter famine and scarcity."

Wasa'il-ush Shia'ah, vol. 6, p.13

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "O' children of Adam! Be your own
representative in the matter of your property and do with it whatever
you like to be done with it after your death."

Note:

The meaning is that if a person desires that after his death a portion
of his property should be spent on charity, he should not wait for his
death but spend it wherever he desires even during his lifetime; for it
is possible that after his death his successors may not act upon his
will or he may not get an opportunity to write a will.

Nahjul-Balagha, p. 512 Saying No. 254

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Give alms and cure your sick persons by it,
because alms can surely remove your bad fortunes and ailments; and it
causes prolongation of your lifetimes and increases your rewards."

Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 6, p. 371

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) who said:

"When I ascended to the sky, I saw three lines written on the door of
Heaven:

The first line: In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful; I am
Allah and there is no god save Me that My Grace preceeds My wrath.

The second line: In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful;
charity is repaid ten times and loan eighteen times, and regard for
kinship thirty times.

The third line: He who understands My Rank and My Lordship should never
accuse Me regarding sustenance."

Al - Ithna 'Ashariyyah, p. 85

Tawus-ibn-il-Yaman said that he heard when Imam ‘Ali-ibn-il-Husain,
Zainul-'Abidin (‘a) that said the epithets of a believer were five then
he asked him (‘a) about them and he answered: "Piety in private,
donating charity at the time of need, patience when misfortunes come,
tolerance at the time of anger, truthfulness when there is fear."

Al-Khisal by Saduq, p. 127


