Knowing Allah, His Greatness and His Grace
==========================================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "O' people! Verily, there is no prophet after
me, nor any Ummah after you (Muslims). So, take care to worship your
Lord, perform your five ritual prayers, fast in the appointed month
(Ramadan), make pilgrimage to the House of your Lord (Mecca), give the
alms of your wealth in order to purify your souls thereby, and obey the
Holders of Authority, so that you enter the Paradise of your Lord."

Khisal as-Saduq, p. 152

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Having the Greatness of the
Creator in your mind would make you realize the insignificance of the
creatures in your view."

Nahjul-Balagha, Statement 129

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: " Blessed is he who sincerely
devotes the entirety of his actions, knowledge, love, hatred, receiving,
relinquishing, speech, silence, deeds, and statements absolutely to
Allah."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 289

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "The heart is the sanctuary of Allah,
therefore, do not settle therein anything but Allah (The sacred place of
the heart belongs to and Him alone. Therefore, keep the love of the
world out of it.)

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 25

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Our true followers are those who, when they
are alone, remember Allah abundantly." (That is, they avoid committing
vices in private where there is no barrier for them to commit sin by the
mere remembrance of Allah.)

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 162

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "By Allah, He, the Exalted, expects of people
but two traits: that they confess for Him the blessings in order that He
increases His bounties for them; and that they make confessions about
their evil actions and then He forgives those sins for them."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 426

Imam Husayn ibn ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Verily, Allah, the Exalted, has not
created human beings except for recognizing Him and worshipping Him as
(the consequence of) knowing Him; and when they worship Him they would
lack the need of adoring any human being (or things) other than Him
because of that worship."

Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 180

The fourth Imam, ‘Ali ibn Husayn (‘a) said: "There is no destruction
(Hell) for a believer having three qualities:

Confessing that there is no god besides Allah, the One Who has no
partner; the intercession of the Messenger of Allah and the vastness of
the Grace of Allah.

Safinat-ul-Bihar, p. 517


