The Rights of Children
======================

The Holy Prophet (S) told Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a): "O' ‘Ali! Allah
has cursed the parents who would cause their child to be disobedient of
them by cursing them."

Wasa'il-ush Shiah, vol. 21, p. 290

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said to one of his followers: "Do not
devote most of your activity to your wife and your (grown up) children,
because if your wife and children are lovers of Allah, then He will not
leave His lovers uncared for, and if they be enemies of Allah, then why
should you worry and keep yourself busy about the enemies of Allah."

(There are two opposite extremes that can be taken by men in regards to
providing for their families. One is the negligence of his
responsibility to them and the other, which is addressed here, is the
excessive compiling of wealth for them. Either of these two extremes are
advised against).

Nahjul-Balagha, p. 536, saying No. 352

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Take action in teaching traditions (of Ahlul
Bayt) to your children before the corrupted persons precede in
corrupting them."

Al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 47

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Benediction of a man to his child is his
benediction to his parents."

Man La YahduruhuI Faqih, vol. 3, p. 483

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The right of a child upon his
father is that he should give him a nice appellation, train him well and
teach him the Qur'an (with its rules)."

Nahjul Balagha, Saying 399

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Have your children to learn swimming and and
shooting."

Al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 47

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "When your children are grown up to seven
years, teach them the prayers, and when they are ten years old,
seriously admonish them for it (in order that they establish prayers);
and separate their sleeping beds from each other."

Kanz-ul-Ummal, vol. 16, No. 45330

Imam Sajjad, the fourth Imam, (‘a) said: "The right of your child is
that you know that he has emerged from you and in this world, his right
and wrong are attributed to you. You are responsible of his fine
teaching and training, guiding him to his Lord, Almighty and Glorious,
and, assisting him to obey Him. Therefore, be sure that if you do a
favour to your child, you will obtain it; and if you act viciously
against him, it will come back to you, too."

Man La Yahduruhul Faqih, vol. 2, p. 622

The Holy Prophet (S) said: Honour your children and train them well, you
will be forgiven by Him."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 95


