Intercession and Help in Lawful Marriage
========================================

The Holy Prophet (p.h.u.h.) said: "He who struggles to join two Muslim
believers in lawful marriage that they marry under the divine law, Allah
will give him in marriage from the black-eyed houri (damsels in Heaven),
and there will be for him the reward of one year of worshipping for
every step he takes or word he speaks."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 221

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The best mediations is it that
you intercede between two persons for lawful marriage so that they both
marry under the law of Allah.

Al-Tahthib, vol.7, p. 415 & Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 331

Imam al-Kadhim (‘a) said: On the Judgement Day, the Day in which there
is no shade except the shade of Allah's Mercy, three varieties will
avail of the shade of Allah's Throne: the man who caused the marriage of
his Muslim brother, or he who served him, or the one who concealed his
secrets for his sake."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 356

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "He who unites an unmarried person in wedlock
will be of those on whom Allah will look at (mercifully) on the
Resurrection Day."

Al-Tahthib, vol. 7, p. 404

Imam al-Kadhim (‘a) said: "On the Reckoning Day, Allah has a special
shade of Mercy to spread under which none will reside except the
prophets, or their vicegerents, or a believer who frees a believing
slave, or a believer who pays the debt of another believing one, or a
believer who unites in wedlock a believing unmarried one."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 356

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "He who tries to join two Muslim believers in
lawful marriage so that they marry under the divine law, Allah will join
one thousand Houries (damsels of Heaven with black large eyes) in
marriage with him each of whom will be in a castle from pearls and
rubies."

Wasa'il ush-Shi'ah, vol. 20, p. 46


