Prayer and Its Effects
======================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The one who takes prayer light is not of me.
No, by Allah such a person will not reach the Haud, Pond of abundant."

Man La Yahduruhul Faqih, vol. 1, p. 206

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "If there be a stream at the house of one of
you in which the one washes himself five times a day, will there remain
anything from the dirt over his body? Verily, the likeness of prayers is
the same as the stream. The person who establishes ritual prayers clears
out his sins thereby, except for the sin that takes him out from Faith
he believes in."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 236

The Holy Prophet (S) said: An obligatory prayer, with Allah, is
equivalent to one thousand Hajj pilgrimages and one thousand Umrah
performances (voluntary pilgrimages to Ka'ba) which are right and
accepted."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 99, p. 14

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Do not waste your prayers, because, surely,
the person who wastes them will be raised with Croesus (Qarun) and Haman
so that it is rightfully certain for Allah to put the one in Hell with
hypocrites."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 83, p. 14

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Say each of your prayer as if it were your
last prayer."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 408

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "If a praying person knew to what
extent he was surrounded by His Mercy, he would never raise his head
from (the state of) prostration.

Tasnif al-Ghurar-ul-Hikam, p. 175

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "On the Reckoning Day, the first thing that a
servant will be reckoned for is the prayer; therefore, if it is
accepted, the rest (good actions) will be accepted, too, (otherwise, his
other good deeds will not avail him)."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 7, p. 267

At the last moments of his life, Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) called his relations
and companions and told them: "Verily, our intercession never reaches
the one who takes prayers lightly."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 236

Imam al-Baqir, the fifth Imam, (‘a) said: "There are ten things that
when a person meets Allah the Almighty and Glorious, with them, he will
enter Heaven:

1. Confessing that there is no god besides Allah

2. And that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah

3. Acknowledging what has come down to the Prophet (S) from Allah (the
Qur'an).

4. Establishing regular prayers.

5. Giving alms.

6. Fasting in Ramadan.

7. Performing the Pilgrimage (Hajj) to the Sacred House.

8. Kindness to the lovers of Allah

9. Detachment from the enemies of Allah

10. And, avoiding any alcoholic beverage."

Khisal by Saduq, p.432

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "For the God-fearing, prayer is a
means of seeking nearness to Allah and for the weak, the Hajj
(pilgrimage to Mecca) is as good as Jihad (fighting in the way of
Allah). For every thing there is a levy, and the levy of the body is
fasting. The Jihad of a woman is to afford pleasant company to her
husband."

Nahjul Balagha, saying 136

The Holy Prophet (S) said: There comes no night but that the angel of
death calls to the dead in the graves and inquires what they regret for
today when they have vividly seen (and known) this (the next life). Then
the dead will say: "Verily, we regret and envy the believers who are in
their mosques and they are praying while we are not; they give alms and
we do not; they fast during Ramadan but we do not; they donate in
charity what they have more than the need of their family members while
we do not; ..."

Irshad-ul-Qulub, p.53

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "At the (appointed) time of every prayer
(salat), I hear a caller who calls and says: "O children of Adam! Keep
up prayers in order to extinguish the fire you have lit against
yourselves (by committing sins)."

Mustadrak-ul-Wasa'il, vol. 3, p. 102

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Be careful of the prayers, for, on the Day
of Resurrection, when Allah the Exalted, will bring the servant (for
reckoning), the first thing that He will ask him about will be the
prayer. If one brings it completely, he will be of the people of
salvation, otherwise, he will be thrown into Fire."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 202

Abubasir said that he visited Umm Hamidah (Musa-ibn Ja'far's (‘a)
mother) in order to console her for the death of Ja'far-ibn-Muhammad
(‘a). Then she wept and he wept because of her weeping. After that, she
said: "O' Aba Muhammad! If you had seen Ja'far-ibn-Muhammad when he was
on his death-bed, you would have observed a wonderful thing: he opened
his eyes and said to gather all of his relatives." Then, she continued
saying that they gathered them all with no exception. Then he (‘a)
looked at them and said: "Verily, our intercession does not reach the
one who takes prayers lightly".

Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah vol. 4, p. 26

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The worship done by the one who earns his
living on unlawful money is similar to a building constructed upon
sand."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 258


