Wives and Good Treatment to Their Husbands
==========================================

Allah (s.w.t.) said:

***"And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from
among yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquility with them, and He has
put love and mercy between your (hearts): verily in that are Signs for
those who reflect."*** ***Sura al-Room, No. 30, Verse 21***

When the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.k.) received some information from 'Umm
Salamah about 'Uthman ibn Maz'un, he set out towards his followers and,
(addressing some of them), said: "Do you keep away from (your) wives?
Surely, I go to women, I eat food during the day, and I sleep at night.
So, he who turns away from my way of life is not of me."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 73

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "He who abandons marriage for the fear of the
expenses imposed on him, mistrusts Allah, Almighty and Glorious."

Man La Yahduruhul Faqih, vol. 3, p. 385

It is narrated from Imam Ridha’ (‘a) that Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), in answer
to a woman who wanted not to marry in order to gain a great virtue,
said: "Do not do that, because if it was a virtue, Fatimah (May God
bless her and give her peace) would be more competent than you, and,
surely, there is none (of women) who can excel her in any virtue."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 219

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) is narrated to have said that three women came to the
Holy Prophet (S) and said that their husbands avoided eating meat or
using perfume or approaching their wives. Then, (protesting their
behaviour), he (S) hastened to come out and went up in the pulpit and,
after praising Allah said: "What has happened to some groups of my
followers that they do not eat meat, do not utilize perfume, and avoid
approaching their wives?

Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 496

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said that when Uthman ibn Maz'un's wife announced to
the Prophet (S) that her husband was always busy fasting and praying day
and night without paying attention to his life and wife, the Prophet (S)
went unto his house and found him praying. When 'Uthman finished his
prayer, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: "O' 'Uthman, Allah has not sent
me for monkery but appointed me for a fluent, easy religion (which
protects the rights of the body and soul). I fast, keep up prayers, and
associate with my family. Then, he who likes my way and my creed, must
follow my way of life, my Sunnah; and, verily, marriage is of my
Sunnah."

Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p.494


