Admirable Qualities of Wives
============================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "There is no (believing) woman who gives her
husband a glass of water but it will be rewarded her better than the
worship of one year during which she fasts on days and keeps vigil
during the nights."

Wasa'il-ush Shi'ah, vol. 20, p. 172

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "It is to a woman to perfume herself with her
best fragrances, wear her best clothes, and ornament herself with her
best ornamentation in order to present herself available to her husband
whether it is day or night."

Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 508

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The Jihad (fighting in the way
of Allah) of a woman is to afford pleasant company to her husband."

Nahjul-Balagha, saying No. 494

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Allah, Almighty and Glorious, has said: 'Had
I willed to gather the good of this world and the next for a Muslim
believer, I would set for the one a humble heart, a thankful tongue, and
a body patient in afflictions. (To a man I would give) a pious wife whom
when he looks at he is delighted and who (she) protects herself and his
properties for him when he is away from her."

Usul al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 327

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Intensively is cursed (by Allah) the woman who
hurts her husband and makes him grievous, but intensively is prosperous
the woman who respects her husband and does not hurt him while she does
obey him in all conditions."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 252

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Verily your best woman is she who is
fertile, affectionate, keeps secrets, and is pious. She obeys her
husband and is honourably dear among her kinsmen. When she is with her
husband, she reveals her ornaments but conceals it from anyone other
than him. She hearkens to his speech and obeys his commands. When she is
in private, she dresses herself beautifully and is eager to offer him
generously whatever he wants from her. She is usually ornamented (for
him) and is not plain as men are."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 235

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "From the prosperity of a Muslim man is that
he has a pious wife, a large (comfortable) house, a pleasant mount, and
a righteous child."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 98

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The Jihad (fighting in the way of Allah) of
a woman is to afford pleasant company to her husband and the right of
her husband over her is the greatest right of all people over her."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 256


