Divorce and Its Effects
=======================

Allah (s.w.t.) said:

***"And when you divorce women and they reach their prescribed time,
then either retain them in good fellowship or set them free with
liberality, and do not retain them for injury, so that you exceed the
limits; and whoever does this, he indeed is unjust to his own soul; and
do not take Allah's communications for a mockery, and remember the favor
of Allah upon you, and that which He has revealed to you of the Book and
the Wisdom, admonishing you thereby; and be careful (of your duty to)
Allah, and know that Allah is the Knower of all things."*** ***Sura
Al-Baqarah, No. 2, Verse 231***

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Marry and do not divorce because the Throne
of heaven quakes from divorce."

Wasa'il ush Shiah, vol. 22, p. 9

Imam as-Sadiq (â€˜a) said: Allah, Almighty and Glorious, is pleased with
the house wherein marriage takes place and is displeased with the house
wherein divorce is found, and there is nothing with Allah more hateful
than divorce."

Al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 54

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Certainly, Allah, Almighty and Glorious,
dislikes or curses any man or woman whose intention of divorce or
marriage is merely tasting the pleasure of it."

The Holy Prophet (S) repeated this statement three times to emphasize
that any man who divorces his wife for a new marriage and tasting the
pleasure of the new wed, as well as if any woman who demands her divorce
for the same purpose and marries another man, is involved in the curse
of Allah.

Al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 54

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The lady from the women of my Ummah who
safely observes four traits deserves Heaven: if she protects her piety,
obeys her husband, establishes her five cardinal prayers, and fasts in
the month of Ramadan."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 107


