The Expected Mahdi (‘a) and His Government of Justice
=====================================================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Al-Mahdi is of my progeny from the sons of
Fatimah (‘a)."

Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 4, p. 107

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Happiness is for the one who will attend the
Qaim of my Ahlul Bayt and will follow him before his rise. This person
will love his (Qaim's) lovers and hate his enemies, and will accept the
leadership of the Imams from before his advent. These ones are my
friends, and are the most sincere members of my Ummah whom I honour very
much."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 129

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Allah will raise a man from my progeny, from
my Ahlul Bayt, by whom the earth will be filled with justice thoroughly
the same as it has been filled with injustice and oppression."

Al-Musannif, vol. 11, p. 371

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The person who dies and has not known the
Imam of his time (Imam Mahdi (‘a) is that of the present time) has died
the same as one who died during the Age of Ignorance."

Musnad-i-Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, vol. 2, p. 83; vol. 3, p. 446 & vol. 4, p.
96: Sahih-i-Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 13 & Sahih-i-Muslim vol. 6, p. 21,
No.1849. In addition to 25 other references introduced by Sunni
scholars.

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "When our Qaim rises, the sky
will send down its drops, the earth will grow its plants, enmity will
come out from the servants' hearts (in order that they live in peace and
brotherly love), and savages and beasts will continue to live together
peacefully...."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 316

Abil-Jarud said: "I asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a) whether he knew about my
love and sincerity for him and he answered he did. Then, I said I had a
question for him to answer me, for my eyes were blind and I scarcely
walked, so I could not always go to visit him. He wanted me to express
my question. I requested him to inform me of the creed by which he and
his household adored Allah, Almighty and Glorious, so that I could
worship Him, too, by it. He responded:

'You asked a great thing, though you stated a short expression. By
Allah, I give you (your answer of) my religion and the religion of my
fathers by which we worship Allah, Almighty and Glorious. It is: the
confession of faith that there is no god but Allah, that Muhammad (S) is
the Messenger of Allah, with affirmation that what has come to him (the
Qur'an) is from Allah, having affection (for us and) for the lovers and
obedients to us (AhIul Bayt) and hatred to our enemies, surrender to our
cause, awaiting our Qaim (the twelveth Imam, for whom there is a
domination that will come whenever Allah wills), and endeavouring (for
establishing divine obligatories and lawful matters) and being pious,
(with avoiding unlawful things)'."

Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 34

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "When our Qaim rises, sets his hand (authority)
over the heads of the servants, then, he will give them intellectual
development and complete their patience and insights. After that, Allah
will extend their sights and their hearing so that there will be no
barrier between them and the Qaim when he decides to speak with them,
then they hear, and they can watch him while he is in his place."

Yaumul Khalas, p. 269

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "At the time of Al-Qaim (Al-Mahdi) (‘a) a
believer who is in the East can see his (Muslim) brother who is in the
West, and vice versa, the one who is in the West can see his (Muslim)
brother who is the East."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 391

Note:

Dear reader! Surely the existence of the means of communication such as
satellites, televisions and the like can be helpful for us to understand
this tradition although none of these technological devices existed when
these precious words were uttered.

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "He (Al-Mahdi) will stay (in a place close to
the Kabah) between the Pillar and the Standing place (of Abraham) and
will call out saying: "O' group of my administrators and the prominent
people of mine whom Allah has stored preparing for my triumph before my
advent over the face of the earth! Come to me obediently." Then, his
call will reach them while they are in their praying places and at home
in their beds whether in the East of the Earth or in its West. So, they
hear him with this single call which reaches the ears of every one, and,
they totally respond (by coming to him) as well. Then, it takes for them
but a moment that all of them gather there, between the Pillar and the
Standing-place (of Abraham), attending him (‘a)."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 7

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) told his sincere companion, Al-Mufaddal, somethings
from the story of Al-Mahdi and his advent, thus: "O' Mufaddal! tell our
followers the data (about Al-Mahdi) in order that they may not doubt in
(their) religion."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 6

Imam Mahdi (‘a) said: I am Al-Mahdi and I am the still-living one who
will establish justice throughout the world the same as it has been
filled with oppression. Surely the earth will never remain without a
witness, and people will not live in lack of a leader. Thus, do not
retell this deposite except for your (Muslim) brothers who are Men of
God."

Kamal-ud-Din, p. 445

Imam Mahdi (‘a) said: "But for the incidents that happen (for Muslims),
refer to the narrators of our traditions, (i.e. scholars), because they
are my witnesses upon you and I am the witness of Allah upon them."

Kamal-ud-Din, p. 484

Imam Al-Mahdi (‘a) wrote in a letter to Ash-Shaykh Al-Mufid: "We are
aware of your circumstances and nothing of your affairs is concealed
from us."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 175

Imam Mahdi (‘a) wrote in a letter to Ash-Shaykh Al-Mufid: "We are not
regardless of considering you nor are we forgetful of you, because if it
were not so, afflictions would shower upon you and enemies would
eradicate you. Hence, fear Allah and obey Him, Glory be to His Majesty."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 175

Supplication
------------

May Allah (s.w.t.) hasten the reappearence of our 12th Imam (‘a) to
establish equality, truth, and justice throughout the world.


