Congregation Prayer
===================

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "Verily, when one of His servants establishes
a prayer in congregation and asks Him something which He does not grant,
Allah will be ashamed until He fulfils it."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 88, p. 4

Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha, the eighth Imam, (‘a) said: "The excellence
of the congregational prayer, comparing with solitary prayer, is one
rak'at to two thousand rak'ats."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 88, p. 4 & Wasa'il-ush Shi'ah, vol. 8, p. 290

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "One prayer of a man in congregation is
worthier than his forty years of prayers at home (alone)."

Mustadrak-ul-Wasa'il, vol. 6, p. 446

The Holy Prophet (S) said: "The rows of my followers in the
congregational prayer on the earth are like the rows of angels in the
sky; and a rak'at of prayer in congregation is equivalent with
twenty-four rak'ats, and every rak'at with Allah, Almighty and Glorious,
is more beloved than forty years of worship. Therefore, on the Day of
Justice, when Allah gathers all human beings from the beginning to the
end for Reckoning, there will be no believer who has attended the
congregational prayer but for whom Allah will decrease the grievousness
of the Day of Reckoning and after that the one will be told to enter
Heaven.

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 88, p. 6

Once a blind man came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said that there was
not anybody to take him to the mosque to attend the congregational
prayer with him (S) when he heard the prayer call. Then the Holy Prophet
(S) said: Stretch a thread from your house unto the mosque and attend
the congregational prayer."

At-Tahthib, vol. 3, p. 266

Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said: "The person who abandons the congregation (of
prayer) without having an excuse but only for unwillingness, and in
order to avoid attending the folk of Muslims, there will not be
(considered) any prayer for him."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 88, p. 11

Imam Ridha (‘a) said: "Certainly the congregational prayer has been
decreed in order that the pure Faith in Unity, in Islam, and in
worshipping Allah be openly revealed and (publicly) manifested, because,
thereby and with its apparency the reason of Allah, Almighty and
Glorious, will be completed for the totality of people in the East and
West (of the world). (Thus, the reality of Islam will be manifested and
known and infidelity and paganism before Islam will be like darkness
before light which cannot resist and vanishes at last.) Another reason
(for decreeing the congregational prayer) is that those who are far from
the truth, the hypocrite, and those who take it light but claim Islam,
then they may, willy or nilly, treat accordingly and show Islam from
them and try to protect (its laws in the society).

Again, the congregational prayer causes people to know each other which
makes it allowed and possible that some of them bear witness for some
others about their Islam, wherein there is the means of facility and
association for righteous deeds and godly actions which prevents too
much disobedience against Allah, Almighty and Glorious."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 88, p. 12

Supplication
------------

O' Lord! We eagerly desire that You assign us to the just, fair Islamic
government, (the which is really the rightful government of Imam Mahdi,
may Allah hasten his reappearance). Through his auspicious government,
thou reactivate and dearly love Islam and its followers while thou
humiliate hypocrisy and the hypocrite. And, in that period, include us
among those who invite people unto Thy obedience and lead them to Thy
path of guidance; and, endow us the honour and grandeur of both this
world and the next.

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 91, p. 6


