Invocation
==========

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Every invocation sought from Allah, Almighty
and Glorious, is barred by the sky unless it is coupled with 'Salawat',
benediction upon the Prophet and his progeny." (The expression of
'Salawat' means: O God bless Muhammad and his descendants).

Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 493

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "The Muslim believer whose calls were not
answered by Allah in this world will wish that none of them would have
been accepted when, in the Hereafter, he sees the abundance of rewards
(given him for their not being answered and suffering the troubles in
the world)."

Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 491

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "The most beloved deed on the
earth with Allah, Almighty and Glorious is invocation, and the best
worship is modesty and piety."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 295

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a), when teaching (some of) his followers,
said: "The doors of heaven are opened at five times: When it is raining;
at the time of Holy War; at the time of Call to prayer; at the time of
recitation of the Qur'an with the setting of the sun, and at the break
of dawn."

Al-Khisal, by Saduq, p. 302

Again, Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "Avail yourselves of the
invocation in five situations: At the time of recitation of the Qur'an,
at the time of prayer call, when it is raining, when attending the Holy
War ready for martyrdom, when an oppressed person supplicates, because,
certainly, there is no barrier for it beneath the Throne."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 343

Imam Husayn (‘a) said: "O Lord! You are the nearest one Whom can be
requested from; You are the soonest responder, and You are the most
gracious in bestowing; Whose gift is the vastest and You hearken the
best to what you are asked for. I call to You, O' the Beneficent in this
world and the next, and the Merciful in both of them!"

'Arafah Invocation

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "He who is bestowed four things
is not deprived of four things: he who is allowed to pray is not
deprived of the response to it; he who is allowed to offer repentance is
not deprived of its acceptance; he who is allowed to seek forgiveness is
not deprived of forgiveness; and he who is allowed to be grateful is not
deprived of furtherance of favours."

Nahjul Balagha, Saying 135

Note:

The compiler of Nahjul Balagha, as-Sayyid ar-Radi says: This is
confirmed by the Book of Allah. About praying, Allah says:

***" Call You to Me, I will answer you' (the Qur'an, 4:60).***

About forgiveness Allah says:

***'And whoever does evil, or wrongs his own self and thereafter seeks
the pardon of Allah shall find Allah Oft-Forgiving, Merciful' (the
Qur'an, 4:110).***

About gratefulness He says:

***'If you be grateful, I will increase (My favours) to you' (the
Qur'an, 14:7).***

About repentance He says:

***'Verily, repentance (acceptable) with Allah is only for those who do
evil ignorantly and then turn (to Allah) soon (after); these (are those
whom) Allah will turn (mercifully) to; and Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Wise (the Qur'an, 4:17).***

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "On the Reckoning Day, Allah will count the
invocations of believers as some good actions for them and thereby He
will promote their position in Heaven."

Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 216

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Treat your ailments with charity and repel
varieties of affliction by invocation."

At-Tahthib, vol. 4, p.112

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "Ask (Allah) for your requisite and insist on
demanding because Allah likes the persistence of the insisting believers
of His servants."

Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah,voI. 7, p. 60

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: "I recommend you to invocation, because you can
not get nigh to Allah by any means like it."

Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 467

Imam Amir ul Mu'mineen ‘Ali (‘a) said: "It may happen that you ask
(Allah) for something and He does not give it to you in order to endow
you with (something) of better quality (later)."

Ghurar-ul-Hikam, p.185


