Sexual Techniques
=================

There are no particular rules and laws either in foreplay or in
intercourse. The only laws and rules are the ones reached by the lovers
by mutual and often unspoken understanding. Whatever is pleasing and
satisfying to both the husband and the wife is right and proper; and
whatever is mutually displeasing is wrong. The only limitation to this
general rule would be any Shariah rule which goes against the wishes of
the husband or the wife.

Foreplay is Highly Recommended
------------------------------

Islam emphasizes on foreplay. Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) says, *“When you intend
to have sex with your wife, do not rush because the woman (also) has
needs (which should be fulfilled).”* [^1]  
 Sex without foreplay has been equated to cruelty. The Prophet (S) said,
*“Three people are cruel: …a person who has sex with his wife before
foreplay.”* [^2]  
 Another *hadith* equates sex without foreplay to animal behavior:
*“When anyone of you has sex with his wife, then he should not go to her
like birds; instead he should be slow and delaying.”* [^3]

As for the role of a woman in sexual foreplay, the Imams (A.S.) have
praised a wife who discards shyness when she is with her husband. Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (A.S.) says, *“The best woman among you is the one who
discards the armor of shyness when she undresses for her* *husband, and
puts on the armor of shyness when she dresses up again.”* [^4] After
all, modesty and chastity in public is the hallmark of a Muslim lady.  
 These sayings clearly show that the husband and the wife should feel
completely free when they are engaged in mutual stimulation which is
known as foreplay. There is nothing wrong, according to Islam, for a
woman to be active and responsive during sex. As for the Islamic
Shariah, all the *mujtahids* are unanimous in saying that the act of
sexual foreplay in itself is *mustahab* (recommended). Likewise, it is
recommended not to rush into sexual intercourse.[^5] The operative word
is mutual pleasure and satisfaction.

Techniques of Foreplay
----------------------

As far as the methods of mutual stimulation in foreplay are concerned,
the Shariah allows the husband and the wife to see, kiss, touch, smell
and stimulate any part of each other’s body. Therefore, oral sex, as it
is known, is allowed. Imam Musa al-Kazim (A.S.) was once asked, “Can a
person kiss his wife’s vagina?” The Imam (A.S.) said, *“No problem.”*
[^6]

The only restriction is that no foreign object should be used. The
restriction on the use of foreign objects is based on the following
*hadith*. ‘Ubaydullah bin Zurarah says that he had an old neighbor who
owned a young slave-girl. Because of his old age, he could not fully
satisfy the young slave-girl during sexual intercourse. She would
therefore ask him to place his fingers in her vagina as she liked it.
The old man complied with her wishes even though he did not like this
idea. So he requested ‘Ubaydullah to ask Imam ‘Ali ar-Reza (A.S.) about
it. When ‘Ubaydullah asked the Imam (A.S.) about it, the Imam (A.S.)
said, *“There is no problem as long as he uses any part of his own body
upon her, but he should not use anything other than his body on her.”*
[^7]

Though masturbation (i.e., self-stimulation of one’s own sexual organ
till emission of semen or orgasm) is not allowed, in the case of married
persons, there is no problem if the wife stimulates her husband’s penis
till the emission of semen or the husband stimulates his wife’s vagina
till orgasm. This is allowed because it does not come under
“self-stimulation”; it is stimulation by a lawful partner.

Sexual Intercourse
------------------

Is there any particular position for sexual intercourse which is
forbidden in Islam? No! As far as the basic coital positions are
concerned, there are no restrictions. The term ‘basic coital positions’
denotes the positions known as the man above, face to face, woman above
face to face; side position, face to face; rear-entry position in which
the husband penetrates the vagina from the rear. Actually, the Shariah
has left it on the husband and the wife to explore and experiment as
they wish.  
 However, it is *makruh* to adopt a standing position, or to face the
*qiblah* or keep it on the backside during the intercourse. It is
advisable to refrain from the acrobatic positions given by some
sexologists of the East and the West which might even cause physical
harm. Remember, the basic rule is mutual pleasure and flexibility. If
one partner does not like a particular position, then the other should
yield to his or her feelings.  
 It is highly emphasized that at the commencement of intercourse the
partners should recite *Bismillaahir Rah’maanir Rah’eem* (In the name of
Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful).

Anal Intercourse
----------------

The opinions of our *mujtahids* vary on the permissibility of anal
intercourse. The majority of the Shi’ah *mujtahids* have derived two
conclusions: (1) that anal intercourse is not *haraam* but strongly
disliked (*karahatan shadidah*) provided the wife agrees to it. (2) And
if she does not agree to it, then all *mujtahids* say that it is
precautionarily *wajib* to refrain from it.  
 However, during the last decade of his life, Ayatullah al-Khu’i
departed from the majority view and gave the ruling that it was
precautionarily *wajib* to abstain from anal intercourse no matter
whether the wife agrees to it or not.[^8]  
 Maulana Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi says, “I would strongly advise against
anal intercourse,” and quotes the saying of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (A.S.)
and Imam ‘Ali ar-Reza (A.S.) about anal intercourse: “*Woman is a means
of your pleasure, therefore do not harm her.”* [^9]

Hygiene
-------

After the intercourse the partners may first wipe their genitals with
clean pieces of cloth. It is recommended that the same cloth/towel must
not be used by both of them.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 40

[^2]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 40

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 82

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 14-15

[^5]: Al-’Urwah, p. 625

[^6]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 77

[^7]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 77

[^8]: al-Khu’i, Minhaju ‘s-Salihiyn, vol. 1 (Beirut: 22nd edition) p. 64

[^9]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 101-102


