Contraceptives and Abortion
===========================

According to the Shi’ah *fiqh*, family planning as a private measure to
space or regulate the family size for health or economic reasons is
permissible. Neither is there any Qur’anic verse or *hadith* against
birth control, nor is it *wajib* to have children in marriage.

The Contraceptive Methods
-------------------------

Let us examine some of the most commonly used contraceptive methods and
determine whether they are permissible in Islam or not. It must be
mentioned that we are studying the permissibility of these methods from
the Shariah point of view only. For the medical opinion about the
reliability or any side-effects of these methods, the reader must
consult his or her physician. Further each individual needs to check
additional conditions which may apply as per his *Marja’a*.

#### Oral Contraceptives

Birth control pills prevent conception by inhibiting ovulation. Since
all such pills inhibit ovulation, there is absolutely no problem in
using them. However, the individual must consult the physician about
possible side-effects.  
 The pills like the ‘morning-after’ and RU486 may be taken after the
intercourse BUT not after feeling or knowing that pregnancy has already
occurred.

#### Depo-Provera

Depo-Provera works exactly like the pills, but instead of taking it
orally it is injected once every three months. This and other similar
contraceptive methods by injection are also permissible.

#### Intrauterine Devices (IUD)

IUDs are plastic or metal objects, in a variety of shapes, that are
implanted inside the uterus. Since the *shari’* pregnancy begins at
implantation, there is no problem in using IUD as a birth control
device.

#### Barrier Devices

All barrier devices prevent the sperm from entering the uterus. This is
done by sheathing the penis with a condom, or by covering the cervix
with a diaphragm, cervical cap, or vaginal sponge. The use of
spermicidal substances which kill the sperm before reaching the ovum is
also a barrier device. There is absolutely no problem in using these
contraceptives either.

Abstinence During Fertile Period
--------------------------------

There are three basic procedures to predict ovulation so that sexual
intercourse can be avoided during the approximately six days of a
woman’s most fertile monthly phase. These three methods are as
follows:  
 a) Ovulation Method: A woman learns to recognize the fertile time by
checking the difference in the constitution of the cervical mucus
discharge. The cervical mucus discharge signals the highly fertile
period; and thus avoiding sex during the fertile days prevents
pregnancy.

b) Rhythm Method: A method similar to the first, but it depends on
observing the monthly cycles for a whole year to determine the fertile
days.

c) Temperature: In this method, besides keeping a calendar record of her
cycle, a woman also takes her temperature daily to detect ovulation. She
can know her ovulation whenever her basal body temperature increases.

#### Withdrawal (Coitus Interruptus)

Coitus interruptus means withdrawing the penis just before ejaculation.
This was the most common method of birth control before the invention of
modern devices.  
 Muhammad bin Muslim and ‘Abdur Rahman bin Abi ‘Abdillah Maymun asked
Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (A.S.) about withdrawal. The Imam (A.S.) said, *“It
is up to the man; he may spill it wherever he* *wants.”* [^1]  
 Based on this *hadith*, the majority of our *mujtahids* believe that
coitus interruptus is allowed but *makruh* without the wife’s
consent.[^2]  
 All methods mentioned above do not involve surgical operation and they
are also reversible. A woman (or man) using these methods can stop using
them at anytime in order to have a child.

#### Sterilization

Sterilization involves surgical operation.  
 Sterilization in men, known as vasectomy, means the severing or
blocking of the tube in the male reproductive tract. This tube or duct
passes sperm from the testes to the prostate and other reproductive
organs.  
 Sterilization in women, known as tubal ligation, involves the blocking
or severing of the fallopian tubes which transport the ovum.  
 The permissibility of sterilization depends on whether or not it is
reversible.

#### A Woman can Practice Birth Control

The wife has full right to the use of contraceptives even without the
approval of her husband.[^3] However, she should not use a method which
may come in the way of her husband’s conjugal rights. For example, she
cannot force him to use condom or practice coitus interruptus. This rule
is based upon the principle that the extent of the husband’s conjugal
rights over his wife is just that she should be sexually available,
responsive, and cooperative. This right does not extend to that of
bearing children for him. Bearing children or not is a personal decision
of the woman; and therefore, she may use contraceptives provided they do
not come in the way of her husband’s conjugal rights.

Abortion
--------

Islam’s approach to the issue of birth control and abortion is very
balanced. It allows women to prevent pregnancy but forbids them to
terminate it. Abortion after the implantation of the fertilized ovum in
the womb is absolutely forbidden and is considered a crime against the
law of God, and the fetus.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 105

[^2]: Sharh Lum’a, vol. 2, p. 28; al-’Urwah, p. 628; Minhaj, vol. 2, p.
267

[^3]: Minhaj, vol. 2, p. 276


