Duties of Other Family Members
==============================

Other household members should also know that the time and attention of
the newly married ones will be divided and previous expectations may
have to be changed to suit new circumstances. In joint families, the
*namehram* ladies must observe *hijab* if they are not living in a
separate house with their husbands.

Decency and Privacy
-------------------

The Prophet (S) and the Imams (A.S.) have emphasized that when you
engage in sexual intercourse, make sure that no child (or, for that
matter, any other person) sees you or hears you. Abu Basir quotes Imam
Ja’far as-Sadiq (A.S.) as follows, *“Be careful not to have sex with
your* *wife while a child can see you. The Prophet (S) used to dislike
this (attitude) very strongly.”* [^1] If a child sees and hears the
parents engaged in sexual intercourse, he might go through a shocking
psychological experience. It might also create a problem in his own
adult life. Islam has laid down clear guidelines about the privacy of
adults.  
 Qur’an gives us the following rules about privacy within the family
circles:  
 1. There are three times in a day: night, early morning and afternoon
which are considered as times of privacy.

2. The minor children should be taught that during times of privacy they
are not allowed to enter the bedroom of their parents or adults without
first asking their permission.

3. At other times, the children are free to come and go into the bedroom
of their parents without asking for their permission. In retrospect,
this means that the parents should be decently dressed at those other
times.

4. As for the mature children and adults, the Qur’an is clear that they
may enter the bedroom of their parents or other adults at all times only
after asking their permission.

[^1]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, vol. 14, p. 94-95


