Introduction
============

A. Who needs this book?
-----------------------

This book is compiled for those intending to marry in the near future or
the newly married people. In this short handbook we have tried to put
things in a nutshell. It is recommended to do a detailed reading of
other books on marriage, references of which are given at the end of
this book.

B. Why do we need to know the rules?
------------------------------------

It is the duty of every Muslim to follow the Islamic laws not only in
matters of prayers and fasting but in all his actions. Islam has well
defined rules about marriage and sex too. So if you want to follow Islam
fully, then you must know the Islamic rules and regulations governing
married life. Islam has never repressed the natural feelings of human
beings but provides rules that are divine.

This will not only enable you to be faithful to your religion but would
also shield you from the barrage of sex literature that portrays this
natural instinct as one that must be left uncontrolled. Western sexual
morality permits many things that are prohibited in Islam. The reason
for the prohibition of certain actions is not to act as an infringement
of an individual’s freedom but because Islam is concerned not only with
your physical well being but also your spiritual enhancement. Moreover,
we can see the degradation of society where absolute sexual freedom
prevails.

C. Main Objective of the book
-----------------------------

The commencement of a new life takes place through marriage. If Islamic
rules are known and followed, the child born will be chaste.  
 Insha’Allah our progeny can then be capable of being the Imam’s (A.S.)
followers.  
 This is the main objective of the book.

Note
----

Islamic Marriage is of two types; permanent and temporary (*Muta’*).
Since this book was compiled mostly for those entering into a permanent
alliance, the topic of *Muta’* has not been covered.


