When Must We Marry?
===================

The proper time and age of marrying is when the individual reaches
sexual as well as mental maturity. Mental maturity may mean the
capability of establishing a cordial family life and the ability to
fulfill rights of family members.  
 The need of a spouse and family is a natural and instinctive need which
Allah through His Wisdom has placed in human beings and is awakened at
its particular time and season, and makes its demand. If it is answered
on time and its requirement fulfilled, it traverses its natural course
and makes the person perfect. If it is delayed or answered in an
incorrect and unnatural mode, it deviates from its natural course,
rebels, and not only becomes corrupt itself, but also corrupts the man.

Who Is Eligible To Marry?
-------------------------

For man to become eligible for taking a woman’s hand in marriage, Islam
has several recommendations. According to Islamic laws, when a boy
attains the age of fifteen, or becomes sexually potent, he is *baligh*,
and has attained puberty. But this is not enough for entering into a
contract of marriage.  
 Apart from the laws related to puberty, there is a concept of *Rushd*
[^1] which can be translated as ‘capability of a sensible conduct’ or
maturity. A husband has to be *Rashid* and a wife *Rashidah;* so that
the responsibilities of married life are sensibly discharged.  
 Books of Islamic law may be referred to for exact details on physical
and mental maturity.

Recommendation for Early Marriage
---------------------------------

Islam highly recommends an early marriage. Even those who feel they
would not be able to bear the expenses of family are urged to repose
faith in Allah, as He is the Giver of Sustenance (*Rizq*), and go for an
early marriage.

[^1]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, Ansariyan
Publication, p. 34


