Selection of Spouse
===================

Now that we have seen how much importance Islam has accorded to marriage
and marital life you would perhaps ask, “How do we select a spouse? What
are the guidelines provided by Islam in this regard? Do we look for some
particular characteristics or just try to get the best from the worldly
point of view?”

Are Pre-Marital Contacts Necessary?
-----------------------------------

Ali Akber Mazaheri writes:  
 “The notion that a man and a woman must ‘know’ each other before they
decide to marry, so that they may then be able to live happily together
is an illusion. Had there been any element of truth and validity in
this, the divorce and separation rates in societies which practice it
would not have shown a steady rise. Similarly, the marriages which take
place without such pre-marital contacts would not have been known to
last happily.”[^1]  
 The Shariah permits the intended spouses to see each other for the
purpose of selection and also permits asking and giving opinions if
asked (without it being considered as *gheebat* under certain
conditions.)  
 We should never resort to deceive the opposite party or conceal a
defect during the selection process. Such things can have serious
ramifications if exposed after marriage  
 The school of Ahle-Bait (A.S.) has not left us to follow our whims and
fancies. We have been taught the best method of selecting a suitable
spouse. The most important criterion is piety or religiousness.

A. Religiousness
----------------

The author of *Youth and Spouse Selection* says, “The person who does
not have religion, does not have anything.”[^2]  
 When a man came to the Prophet (S) to seek guidance for selecting a
spouse, he (S) said, *“It is binding upon you to have a religious
spouse.” /em\>[^3]  
 Knowing the human weakness for beauty and wealth, the Messenger of
Allah (S) has forewarned, *“A man who marries a woman for the sake of
her wealth, Allah leaves him in his own condition, and one who marries
her (only) for her beauty, will find in her (things) which he dislikes
(unpleasing manners) and Allah will gather up all these things for one
who marries her for the sake of her faith (religiousness).”* [^4]*

B. Good Nature
--------------

The next important criterion is good nature.  
 Imam Reza (A.S.) wrote in reply to a person who had asked him if it was
advisable to marry his daughter to a person known for his ill nature,
*“If he is ill-natured (bad tempered), don’t marry your daughter to
him.”* [^5]  
 The same will apply where the bride-to-be lacks a good nature. Such a
woman, though she may be beautiful and rich, would make the life of her
husband miserable. She can never be patient in the difficulties that
arise in married life.

C. Compatibility
----------------

The Prophet (S) gave no recognition to class distinction, but in
marriage, he stressed upon compatibility. The marrying partners must be
*Kufw* of each other, so that there are no unnecessary misgivings
later.[^6] It is better for a religious woman who is committed to laws
and principles to marry a man like herself.  
 A man questioned the Prophet of Islam (S), “Whom must we marry?”  
 He replied, *“The suitable (matches).”*  
 “Who are the suitable matches?”  
 The Prophet (S) responded, *“Some of the faithfuls are match for
others.”* [^7]  
 Imam Sadiq (A.S.) said, *“An intelligent and wise woman must not be
matched except with a sage and wise man.”* [^8]

D. Decent Family
----------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) has given great emphasis on taking into
consideration a good family background when we intend to marry.  
 He said, *“Marry in the lap of a decent family, since the semen and the
genes have effect.”* [^9]  
 The Holy Prophet (S) also said, *“Look very carefully and minutely as
to where you are placing your child because genes and hereditary
qualities are transferred in a concealed and unintentional way and have
their effect.”* [^10]

E. Reason
---------

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali (A.S.) strongly forbade marrying a
foolish and insane person. *“Avoid marrying a stupid woman, since her
company is a woe (distress) and her children too get wasted.”* [^11]

F. Physical and Mental Health
-----------------------------

Though religiousness and piety are most important, it does not mean that
we totally disregard the physical appearance and beauty of the
prospective spouse.  
 The Holy Prophet (S) says, *“When one intends to marry a woman, he
should ask about her hair, just as he asks about her face (beauty),
since the hair is one of the two beauties (of women).”* [^12]

G. Whom can you Marry?
----------------------

“Islamic law has placed certain restrictions on the choice of your
spouse depending upon blood relationships and religious affiliations.”
Maulana Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi has summarized these laws in a beautiful
way:

#### Restrictions based on Relationship

There are certain blood relations which are considered *haraam* for you
as far as marriage is concerned. (As a general rule, anyone who is your
*mahram* is forbidden to you for marriage.) The list of such relatives
is given in the Qur’an as follows:  
 For Man: mother, daughter, paternal aunt, maternal aunt, niece,
foster-mother, foster-sister, mother-in-law, step-daughter,
daughter-in-law, all married women, sister-in-law (as a 2nd wife) (*See*
***Surah an-Nisaa’ 4:23-24***)  
 For Woman: father, son, paternal uncle, maternal uncle, nephew,
foster-mother’s husband, foster-brother, father-in-law, stepson,
son-in-law.

#### Restrictions based on Religion

A Shi’ah Muslim man can marry: a Shi’ah Muslim woman and a non-Shi’ah
Muslim woman. However, if there is danger of being misled, then it is
*haraam*.  
 He can also marry a Jewish or Christian woman in *mut’a* only. But he
cannot marry a woman of any other faith.  
 A Shi’ah Muslim woman can marry: a Shi’ah Muslim man or a non-Shi’ah
Muslim man, although it is better not to do so; and if there is danger
of being misled, then it is *haraam*. But she cannot marry a non-Muslim
man.[^13]

#### Cousin Marriages

Though Shariah does not forbid marriage between first cousins, but there
are opinions advocating against them mainly due to a probable risk of
the offspring inheriting genetic defects/diseases.

[^1]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akber Mazaheri

[^2]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, Ansariyan
Publication

[^3]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, Vol. 14, p. 30

[^4]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, Vol. 14, p. 31

[^5]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, p. 151

[^6]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, p. 34

[^7]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, p. 175

[^8]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, p. 178

[^9]: Makaremul Akhlaq

[^10]: Youth and Spouse Selection, Ali Akbar Mazaheri, p. 154

[^11]: Wasa’il ul-Shi’a, Vol. 14, p. 56

[^12]: Beharul Anwaar, Vol. 103, p. 237

[^13]: Marriage and Morals in Islam, Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi


