Lesson 10 : the Universal Message
=================================

News reached the holy city of Mecca that Muhammad ibn Abdullah had
proclaimed himself a Prophet sent by the One and only Almighty God.

As we mentioned a group of people had already become close to him and
the message of Tawheed. This small but very committed group pledged
their allegiance and full support to the cause of Allah (S.W.T.).

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had, in presence of the high ranked
dignitaries of the Quraysh and the people in Mecca, showed his deep
respect to Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

He openly called him his cousin, helper and inheritor. We should note
here that at no time did Hadhrat Abu Talib, (father of Ali), show any
kind of disrespect or resentment to the spread of Islam. He did not
protest against the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s claim or show disapproval of
his son's loyalty to him. On the contrary, Abu Talib gave his full
support to the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s message.

After the second invitation, Allah (S.W.T.) sent down another message
telling the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to progress to the next step in his
mission. He said, "O Muhammad! Guide whosoever you can towards the light
of Islam, distinguish the truth from falsehood, and do not be afraid of
the idol-worshippers, they shall soon perish and be totally
destroyed…"

Having heard these powerful words the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) now went to
Mount Saffa to share his important news. As soon as he reached the top
of the mountain, he called out loudly,
"O people of Mecca! O Quraysh! A heavenly message has now come down
which is extremely powerful. It is indeed a voice that is filled with
love, devotion and faith.

For those who seek the right path, take heed of the heavenly message
for such is the great news of the day… I believe time has come for you
take this important message and remember that you recognise Muhammad as
the Truthful (Sadiq) and the Trustworthy (Ameen)."

The Meccans all gathered around the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) listening to
what he had to say. He looked at the attentive audience and continued,
"O Meccans! O womenfolk and menfolk of Quraysh! If I were to say that
there is an army of enemies behind this mountain, ready to attack you,
would you believe me?"

The crowd answered, "Yes, O Muhammad! Verily, you are an honest,
trustworthy man and we know that till this moment you have never uttered
a single lie."

Having got this commitment from the people the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) began
to elaborate what he had said at the invitation, "Oh people! I am a
Prophet sent by God, and have been blessed for the entire universe, I
have been bestowed with the divine message to be universally spread for
all times and all ages.

"Oh people! Remember, death is not an ending to life, it is a beginning
of a new life. Death is like sleep and when you wake up from your sleep,
it is as if you are getting a new life, in preparation for the Day of
Reckoning.

If you perform good deeds, you will most certainly be rewarded in
abundance. But if you choose to do evil, the results will be severe
tortures and punishment.

"Oh people! I have been given the best and complete programme for you.
Indeed the return will bring you happiness, bliss in this world and the
hereafter, now read after me and proclaim: 'La Ilaaha Ila Allah...' -
'There is no God but Allah (S.W.T.)'

"This will bring you happiness and you will attain salvation. Accept
the Oneness of God, and show faith in Him. There is no distinction
between Arab and non- Arab, do not discriminate, none is superior in His
eyes, except the one who has adopted piety.

Be united, live in peace, harmony and accept this Holy message…" When
the idol-worshippers and the wealthy personalities of Mecca heard this,
they were startled by the contents of this heavenly message that was
being delivered by Muhammad Ibn Abdullah.
Each one of them whispered to the other: "What is this? What is
Muhammad saying? How dare he talk in such a manner in our presence?"

Since Abu Taalib was also a respected and well-known personality, they
wondered about him too. "Has Abu Taalib given full commitment to
Muhammad? Why are we ignorant of Abu Taalib's stance?"

Even as a murmur rose from the crowd, Abu Lahab shouted out aloud from
the far end in rage, "Woe to you! Is this what you wanted us here for,
to give us this message of yours?"

A huge confusion broke out in the crowd and most of the people left.
There was total disorder and many were shouting …

"Did you all hear what Muhammad said? He is a Messenger of God! Is it
possible to have a messenger from God? Can it be possible for a human
being to be a Prophet? And what is a Prophet anyway? Does he mean that
the idols that we, and our forefathers, worshipped are false? We don't
have to follow Muhammad and his claims to prophethood!"

Seeing that he would be able to do no more at that time, our Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) left and went home. He had however, accomplished the
first step by introducing to the Makkans, the concept of belief in One
God.

After that first time, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) went out everyday and
spoke to the people. Few listened to him but he never got angry or gave
up. In all circumstances he chose to use wisdom and gentle words.

The enemies of Islam knew that Muhammad was a man of great character.
When they saw that he was not openly succeeding in gaining many
followers, they wondered what steps he would take next to achieve his
aim. This made them nervous and they watched his every move.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.), in the meantime, was waiting for the right
moment and opportunity further spread Islam. The question that many were
asking at this time was 'How was the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) going to
manage to spread the heavenly call and what were his long term goals in
this mission?'

A Holy Verse The Qur'an says:
"Therefore declare thou (O' Our Apostle Muhammad!) openly what thou art
commanded and turn away from the polytheists" Sura Hijr, Verse 94

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT…**

1. From the beginning, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) always used gentle
words and kindness to spread the message of Islam. He never spoke
harshly to anyone - not even the enemies who insulted him time and
again.

2. In asking the people to listen to him from the top the mountain he
first established that even before they knew his rank as a Prophet, the
people already trusted him beyond any doubt. He also showed his trust in
Allah (S.W.T.) and his confidence in the Truth of what he was saying.

3. He emphasized that people should understand the concept of Tawheed
and the life in the Hereafter; that they should worship the One Supreme
Lord and fully commit themselves to the Islamic dogma: "LA ILAHA ILLA
ALLAH"

**Think and Answer**

1. What policies did the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) use in spreading the
message of Islam?
2. What measures did the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) take in calling the
people towards the truth?
3. Give an account of what transpired at Mount Saffa.
4. Why was the divine universal message spread in parts?


**Lesson 11 : Rejection All Kinds Of Selfish Motives**

Having discussed the general need and concept of prophethood and looked
at the early days of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s mission, we can
understand that he was sent as a bringer of glad tidings and a universal
message. In return, what is expected from us is that we follow this
message in order to gain salvation in the hereafter.

As days passed in Mecca, more and more people began to embrace Islam.
They had begun to realise that their previous faith in idols was
baseless and without foundation. In the meantime those who were stubborn
and refused to think began to worry about the opposition that was
growing to their idol worshipping practices.

They tried all methods to stop the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) - from
offering bribes to humiliating and insulting him but the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) saw through every plan of theirs and remained firm as a rock
in his quest.

It is a source of great surprise to the world and of pride to the
Muslims that this man single-handedly enlightened a nation that was deep
in the pit of ignorance, towards the purity of Tawheed and Islam. He
motivated people throughout Arabia to aspire towards the noble path of
Allah (S.W.T.). He exposed the idol-worshipping of past nations and
brought peoples' attention to the ugliness of the destiny of such
nations.

But none of this was easy! It took a lot of patience, faith and self
control on the part of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.). Let us see some of the
ways in which the Mushrikeen tried to stop the spread of Islam.

Once the Mushrikeen arranged for a meeting with Abu Taalib, who was
looked up to as a leader amongst the Quraysh. They asked him:

"Why do you prefer to keep silence when Muhammad is spreading Islam? We
need some answers from you. Don't you see that our people are being
attacked from all sides, there is chaos and confusion in the city, seeds
of discord and disunity have already been planted amongst us, and what
are you doing about the whole situation?

"Do you realise that your nephew has carefully made calculated moves to
destroy our gods from their roots? He has certainly tricked us into this
ugly plot!"

Seeing that they were not getting a positive response from him, they
began to take a threatening tone: "O Abu Taalib! We respect you as an
elder of the Quraysh that is why we have remained calm and patient
towards these sudden changes and the new movement that Muhammad has
brought, but it has gone too far now! He is insulting our gods - the
gods that we have always worshipped! He condemns them and claims that we
are ignorant. Now that it has reached to its peak, we will not tolerate
it any further!"

Saying this, they left. Immediately, Abu Taalib went to meet his nephew
and told him about the meeting with the Mushrikeen. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) said to him: "My dear uncle! All these problems are because
of the Shirk they perform. They have usurped the rights of their
women-folk. They have refused to accept the call of Islam. Islam rejects
all forms of false deities and has liberated human beings from such
man-made gods. Most surely I am the Hujjat (divine proof) from God to
you and for the whole mankind."

Abu Taalib listened to his words and agreed with him. Thus, the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) continued preaching Islam with the same energy as before.

Seeing that their threats had not worked, the Mushrikeen thought of
using a different approach. Because they did not understand the noble
character of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) they actually thought that they
would be able to bribe him with worldly temptations! They came up to Abu
Taalib again and presented the following proposals to him for the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.w.):

1. We shall honor Muhammad with a grand status, make him popular and
give him the leadership of HEJAAZ (now known as Medina).
2. We shall overwhelm him with the wealth and make him the richest man
amongst all the Quraysh.
In return they asked for the following condition to be fulfilled:

"Muhammad must stop this new movement. He will not insult our gods and
discontinue the talk of One God."

What a laughable bargain! Since Abu Taalib had promised to pass on
their message, he went to the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and told him of it. In
reply, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) dashed the hopes of the Mushrikeen by
clearly stating:

" By God! Even if they give me the sun in my right hand and the moon in
my left, and all the worldly glamour and temptations and its beauties
under my disposal, I will not stop spreading the divine message of Islam
and the worship of Allah (S.W.T.). Dear Uncle! Tell them to affirm and
accept only one statement - the Islamic Kalemah - so that they may
attain bliss and salvation in this world and the hereafter."

Having failed once again, the Mushrikeen began to taunt Abu Taalib
saying:

"O Abu Taalib, you are a noble man. A man highly respected among the
Quraysh, you have solved our problems in the past, but you don't seem to
be able to assist us in solving this big crisis for now! Why don't you
leave Muhammad and accept Ammar Bin Walid as your son till Muhammad
realises his grave mistakes!"

These words made Abu Taalib angry and he replied, "What madness! How
dare you loyalty to the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and Islam. The Mushrikeen
knew then that they would not get any support from him against
Muhammad.

Despite such difficulties, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) never gave in to
worldly temptations but fought constantly against falsehood in order to
establish the truth. His success can humiliate us and come up with such
insulting proposals and wretched thoughts! Shame on you! Woe upon you!"
With these words he turned away from them, showing his full be seen in
the form of the millions of Muslims living in the world today and the
many others who continue to accept his call towards Allah (S.W.T.)!

Through his actions and decisions, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) taught
us that as Muslims we are responsible for Islam and carry a very heavy
duty to combat idol- worshipping and un-Islamic thoughts/ideas. We have
be patient and keep up the true spirit of Tawheed.

A Holy Verse Allah (S.W.T.) says in the Qur'an:

" To this then go on inviting, and go on steadfastly on the right way
as you are commanded and do not follow their low desires, but say: I
believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book and I am commanded to be
just among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord; we shall have our deeds
and you shall have yours; no plea need there be (now) between us and
you: Allah will gather us together, and to Him is the return" Sura
Shura, Verse15

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT…**

1. Through the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s da'awah, he awakened those who
were fully immersed in ignorance and disbeliefs. Before his proclamation
as a messenger, people were totally drowned in corrupt ways. The message
of Islam gave light to the dead hearts.

2. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) used a number of different ways to eradicate
idol-worshipping and take people back to the Belief in the real God -
Allah (S.W.T.). This is one of the signs of a free-thinker.

3. The meaning of the reply given by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to the
arrogant officials of the Mushrikeen through his uncle i.e. Even if you
put the sun on my right hand, is a lesson to us even today.

the moon on the left hand, never will I will stop delivering the true
message of Islam,

**Think and Answer**

1. Give an account of reasons why you think people had deviate from the
truth?

2. What were the various methods that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) used
in his da'awah to the public?

3. What were the plots made by the leaders of Mushrikeen to stop the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)?

4. How did the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) react to the proposals of pagan
leaders?

5. What is our duty as Muslims towards Islam and da'awah for Islam? How
are you responsible today in safeguarding Islam and its rich values?
What are the challenges you face in school in order to maintain your
Islamic values?


