Lesson 14 : Brotherhood
=======================

A man once sat in the presence of the 7th Holy Imam, Musa Ibn Jaffer
(a.s.). He saw a friend of his, called Muhammad, from afar and smiled at
him. Muhammad smiled back and from the pleasure on both their faces at
seeing one another, it was obvious that they were good friends.

Seeing this exchange, Imam (a.s.) leaned nearer and asked the man, "You
really like Muhammad, don't you?" He replied, "Yes! O grandson of the
Holy Prophet, I do! Muhammad is a pious man. He has a very strong faith
and is a practicing Muslim. Is he also your friend?"

Imam (a.s.) replied:

"Of course! As you have said, he is a man of deep faith and has very
good akhlaq. Surely all believers are brothers to one another. We must
always try to show compassion to our believing brothers.

"Did you know that anyone who looks at a Mo'meen brother with contempt,
falsely accuses him, or does anything that would harm the man is
behaving in an un-Islamic manner? We should always behave with goodness
and act with kindness towards other believers.

If we intend to gain Allah (S.W.T.)'s blessings, we must try to be good
to one another. For the one who deceives his believing brother will be
most surely deprived of Allah (S.W.T.)'s blessings."

Islam is a way of life and it encourages goodness among people. Deceit,
slander, gossip and mockery are ugly acts and unacceptable in Islam.
Such devious manners create destruction within a society.

Islam treats both Muslim men and Muslim woman with the eyes of equity.
Beautiful gestures and titles, like brotherhood, will do no good if they
are not implemented or put into action. Islam requires from us that we
show compassion by fulfilling the needs and wants of other people. Good
qualities, if put in action, become the standard of Islamic ethics.

The true Believers are not only brothers and sisters in faith but also
in action. A practicing Muslim will not dare to hurt or upset another.
Whenever a Mo'meen or a Mo'meenah is hurting, others who practice imaan
will also feel his/her pain.

Our 6th infallible Imam, Al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said, "Muslims are
brothers to one another and they have rights over each other. If one of
them is hungry, is it possible for the others to eat and leave him in
the state of hunger? Is it possible for a Muslim to quench his own
thirst whilst his brother remains thirsty?

If a believing brother in faith does not have anything to wear, is it
possible for the others to be clothed and live him naked?" No, it cannot
be so! Every true practicing Muslim society consists of individuals who
aim to provide equal resources to all its members. They do not rest
until this aim is achieved. On the same issue, our 6th Imam (a.s.) has
also said:

"Every Muslim has a right over his brother in faith and they have
duties towards each other, some of which are:

1. One should greet the other when they meet.

2. If a Mo'meen becomes sick, the others should visit him.

3. If he dies, it becomes their duty to pay him his last respects and
attend his funeral services.

4. If a Mo'meen invites another to his house, he must accept his
invitation.

5. The most important of all is: whatever a believer desires for
himself, he must desire the same for others.

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUTâ€¦**

1. The most beautiful gift that Islam has given its followers is the
close bond of brotherhood and unity. If we implement the rules
concerning this matter, then we will have the perfect society - a thing
that the entire world is searching for.

2. Whenever a believer needs help, others should be ready to help.

3. The most important of all Islamic morals is that whatever a believer
desires for himself, he should desire the same for the others. And
whatever he dislikes for himself, he must dislike the same for others as
well.

**Think and Answer**

1. What outcomes do you think ugly habits like backbiting, insulting
and false accusations can lead to?

2. What does Islam offer to the Muslim Ummah?

3. What do you understand from the sayings of our 6th Holy Imam (a.s.)
quoted in the lesson above?

4. Find out what the strong recommendations of our Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) are in matters that relate to the rights believers have upon
one another? Explain your answers (and sources).


**Lesson 15 : Hard Work and Independence**

Asking in Islam has two meanings. The first one refers to inquiring
about things that one is ignorant of. To do this, we need to ask those
who possess the wealth of knowledge.

Obviously, to ask questions is a commendable act and also an excellent
method of learning. It is highly recommended that anyone who does not
know should ask those who do and gain from them. Islam came to awaken
souls and brought the light of knowledge. The doors to the seas and
oceans of knowledge and learning are wide open, and the key is with you.
One of the ways is through asking questions.

The second type of asking is the seeking help from others in order to
further oneself materially. In Islam, anyone claiming to be a beggar is
disliked and one who does not strive to remove himself from this
position is out of favour with Allah (S.W.T.) and the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.).

Once a man came and asked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.), "O Prophet of
Allah, advise me of good acts with which I may pave my way towards
Jannah (Paradise)."

In answer to the man's query, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) recommended three
important points. He told him:

"If you really wish happiness in the eternal life of the hereafter and
want to be amongst the dwellers of Jannah, take the following points
seriously and implement them:

1. Avoid getting unnecessarily annoyed.
2. Do not ask (material) things from people.
3. Like for others what you like for yourself."

What an important message to us all! The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) clearly
shows us that a true Believer is not dependent on people. We must try
not to humiliate ourselves in front of others. On the Day of Judgement,
Allah (S.W.T.) will bring down disgrace upon those who relied on fellow
human beings for their sustenance.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) showed utmost respect to the Muslims and
looked at them with dignity. Therefore, a Muslim must not lower himself
in front of others under any circumstances.

He must learn how to ask for the fulfilment wishes and to direct his
requests only to the most Kind and Merciful Lord. Muslims are valuable
people and most surely valuable in His eyes too!

If we take a look at one event that took place during the time of the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.), we will be better able to appreciate this message.
This is what happened:

There was a man in the city who did not work for his livelihood. His
family lived in appalling conditions of poverty. One day, his wife
suggested that he go and visit the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and ask for
some advice. She was confident that he would be in a position to assist
them in their difficult times and would help ease their problems.

The man reached the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s house and found people
gathered around him. Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) greeted and welcomed
him. The man sat down but felt ashamed to state his problems in front of
the others. Through his divine knowledge, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
knew the purpose of the man's visit, and began to address all those
seated. He said:

"Any one who seeks my help, I will most certainly help him. But, I
sincerely advise you all to be diligent, hard-working and ambitious so
that you become independent. Do not rely on others. After you have
struggled then finally seek help from God."

Hearing these words, the man quickly understood their meaning. He
immediately bid the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) farewell and left for his home.
The following morning, he decided to try and find work but at the end of
the day, his efforts seemed to be in vain and he decided to visit the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) again. After exchanging warm greetings, he sat beside
him with the intention of sharing his troubles.

It was in the fine character of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.w.) that he
respected the situation of others and their shortcomings. Even before
the man could speak, he repeated his advice of the previous day. Once
again, the man was struck by the words of the Messenger of Allah
(S.W.T.). He thought to try once again but the next evening saw him no
better that before.

For the third time, he sought out the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) feeling
that he had no way out except to beg for his help. This time the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) repeated the same advice and emphasized on having faith in
Allah (S.W.T.). He said:

"Whoever wants his desires to be fulfilled, should work hard, be
ambitious, have a strong faith in Allah (S.W.T.) and seek help from Him.
Have certainty that Allah (S.W.T.) will help."

This time, the man left determined to overcome all his doubts. That
night he sought help from the Almighty and placed all his hopes in Him
telling himself that he would certainly be answered. The next day, he
went into the forest and cut down some trees.

Chopping them into logs, he carried the wood into the town and sold
them in the market. This success encouraged him and strengthened his
faith in Allah (S.W.T.).

Slowly as the days passed, he saw the fruits of his labour and soon he
was able to lift his family out of poverty and live an independent and
comfortable life.

After a few weeks, with renewed confidence, he happily went to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and said, "O Prophet of Allah (S.W.T.), I have got
myself a good job, and my living conditions are much better."

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) smiled and reminded him of his earlier
advice: "Did I not tell you that anyone who needs help should seek it
from the Almighty, because sustenance comes from Allah (S.W.T.) and He
has promised rizq for all His creatures. Such are Allah (S.W.T.)'s
infinite blessings! How dignified a person becomes when he is
independent and self-reliant."

**FRUITS OF HARD LABOUR**

Almighty Allah (S.W.T.) has given a special status to human beings.
Human beings are created with honour and dignity. Islam has laid great
emphasis on hard work and noble ambitions. The goal of a person should
be to become self-reliant and not stretch a hand to others.

Worship in Islam has been divided into 70 parts and hard work in order
to earn Halaal (Lawful) sustenance is one of the best forms of Ebadat
(Worship).

Our 5th Holy Imam, Al-Baqir (a.s.) has said: "Whosoever strives to work
hard, looks after the well-being of his family and neighbours will
surely on the Day of Judgement have his face shining with radiance like
the full moon of the 15th night (of every month)."

Our 6th Holy Imam, Al-Sadiq (a.s.) has also spoken on this important
subject saying:

"Whosoever satisfies the needs and desires of his family, it is as if
he is performing Jehad in the way of Allah (S.W.T.)."

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUTâ€¦**

1. Asking for ones needs from others is an ugly act according to Islam
and Allah (S.W.T.) dislikes such people.

2. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) taught us that we must never humiliate
ourselves in front of others. According to Islam, the greatest Jehad is
to work hard and put tremendous effort. One must never under any
circumstances lose hope in Allah (S.W.T.).

3. The 6th Holy Imam (a.s.) has laid great stress in the importance of
working as a valuable form of worship.

**Think and Answer**

1. How did the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) respond to the needy man's
desperation?
2. What advice did the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) give?

3. Discuss with your friends and explain what you understand from the
hadith of our 6th Imam (a.s.) mentioned above. Then state the ways in
which we can apply it in our lives.


**Introduction to Chapter Six**

In The Name Of Allah (S.W.T.), the Beneficent, the Merciful

**IMAMAT AND LEADERSHIP**

We believe our Holy Prophet, Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) to be the last
heavenly Messenger sent by Allah (S.W.T.). Through his Risalah
(Prophethood), Islam was truly established and finally completed. Islam
expects Muslims to be practical in their lives and to follow its rich
principles.

The Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.w.) was endowed with the grave
responsibility of establishing Allah (S.W.T.)'s Divine Message and
training divine spiritual leaders, to protect and maintain the message
after him. These leaders would continue to guide the Ummah towards the
right path.

Thus, our last Messenger, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) left behind him
Imam Ali (a.s.) as guardian, authority and protector of Islam.
Therefore, it is the duty of all Muslims to believe in this appointed
Imamat as part of the heavenly path.

Is it possible to believe that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) would fail
to appoint a spiritual guide after his departure from this world? What
would have happened to the Muslim ummah without a leader to shoulder the
heavy responsibilities that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) left behind? The
noble Messenger of Allah (S.W.T.) completed the task as ordained by Him,
which included the introduction of Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) as the
rightfully guided Imam sent by the Almighty.


In this chapter, we will study the exalted personality of Imam Ali
(a.s.), beginning with his official appointment as Imam over the
Ummah.


