Preface
=======

##### In The Name of Allah Most Merciful and Compassionate

### Seyyed Hossein Nasr

The Study of Shi'ism
--------------------

Despite the vast amount of information and the number of factual details
assembled during the past century by Western scholarship in the fields
of orientalism and comparative religion, many gaps still exist in the
knowledge of the various religions of the world, even on the level of
historical facts. Moreover, until recently most of the studies carried
out within these fields have suffered from a lack of metaphysical
penetration and sympathetic insight. One of the most notable omissions
in Western studies of the religions of the East, and of Islam in
particular, has occurred in the case of Shi'ism. Until now Shi'ism has
received little attention; and when it has been discussed, it has
usually been relegated to the secondary and peripheral status of a
religio-political "sect," a heterodoxy or even a heresy. Hence its
importance in both the past and the present has been belittled far more
than a fair and objective study of the matter would justify.

The present work hopes to redress partially the lack of ac- cessible and
reliable English-language material pertaining to Shi'ism. It is the
first of a series of books designed to bring to the English-speaking
world accurate information about Shi'ism through the translation of
writings by authentic Shi'ite represen tatives and of some of the
traditional sources which, along with the Quran, form the foundation of
Shi'ite Islam. The purpose of this series is to present Shi'ism as a
living reality as it has been and as it is, in both its doctrinal and
historical aspects. Thereby we can reveal yet another dimension of the
Islamic tradition and

make better known the richness of the Islamic revelation in its
historical unfolding, which could have been willed only by Providence.

This task, however, is made particularly difficult in a European
language and for a predominantly non-Muslim audience by the fact that to
explain Shi'ism and the causes for its coming into being is to fall
immediately into polemics with Sunni Islam. The issues which thus arise,
in turn, if presented without the proper safeguards and without taking
into account the audience involved could only be detrimental to the
sympathetic understanding of Islam itself. In the traditional Islamic
atmosphere where faith in the revelation is naturally very strong, the
Sunni-Shi'ite polemics which have gone on for over thirteen centuries,
and which have become especially accentuated since the Ottoman-Safavid
rivalries dating from the tenth/sixteenth century, have never resulted
in the rejection of Islam by anyone from either camp. In the same way
the bitter medieval theological feuds among different Christian churches
and schools never caused anyone to abandon Christianity itself, for the
age was one characterized by faith. But were Christianity to be
presented to Muslims beginning with a full description of all the points
that separated, let us say, the Catholic and Orthodox churches in the
Middle Ages, or even the branches of the early church, and all that the
theologians of one group wrote against the other, the effect upon the
Muslims' understanding of the Christian religion itself could only be
negative. In fact a Muslim might begin to wonder how anyone could have
remained Christian or how the Church could have survived despite all
these divisions and controversies. Although the divisions within Islam
are far fewer than those in Christianity, one would expect the same type
of effect upon the Western reader faced with the Shi'ite-Sunni polemics.
These controversies would naturally be viewed by such a reader from the
outside and without the faith in Islam itself which has encompassed this
whole debate since its inception and has provided its traditional
context as well as the protection and support for the followers of both
sides.

Despite this difficulty, however, Shi'ism must of necessity be studied
and presented from its own point of view as well as from

within the general matrix of Islam. This task is made necessary first of
all because Shi'ism exists as an important historical reality within
Islam and hence it must be studied as an objective religious fact.
Secondly, the very attacks made against Islam and its unity by certain
Western authors (who point to the Sunni-Shi'ite division and often fail
to remember the similar divisions within every other world religion)
necessitate a detailed and at the same time authentic study of Shi'ism
within the total context of Islam. Had not such a demand existed it
would not even have been necessary to present to the world outside Islam
all the polemical arguments that have separated Sunnism and Shi'ism.
This is especially true at a time when many among the Sunni and Shi'ite
'ulama' are seeking in every way possible to avoid confrontation with
each other in order to safeguard the unity of Islam in a secularized
world which threatens Islam from both the outside and the inside.

The attitude of this group of ulama is of course in a sense reminiscent
of the ecumenism among religions, and also within a given religion, that
is so often discussed today in the West. Most often, however, people
search in these ecumenical movements for a common denominator which, in
certain instances, sacrifices divinely ordained qualitative differences
for the sake of a purely human and often quantitative egalitarianism. In
such cases the so-called "ecumenical" forces in question are no more
than a concealed form of the secularism and humanism which gripped the
West at the time of the Renaissance and which in their own turn caused
religious divisions within Christianity. This type of ecumenism, whose
hidden motive is much more worldly than religious, goes hand in hand
with the kind of charity that is willing to forego the love of God for
the love of the neighbor and in fact insists upon the love of the
neighbor in spite of a total lack of the love for God and the
Transcendent. The mentality which advocates this kind of "charity"
affords one more example of the loss of the transcendent dimension and
the reduction of all things to the purely worldly. It is yet another
manifestation of the secular character of modernism which in this case
has penetrated into the supreme Christian virtue of charity and, to the
extent

that it has been successful, has deprived this virtue of any spiritual
significance.

From the point of view of this type of ecumenical mentality, to speak
approvingly of the differences between religions, or of the different
orthodox schools within a single religion, is tantamount to betraying
man and his hope for salvation and peace. A secular and humanistic
ecumenism of this kind fails to see that real peace or salvation lies in
Unity through this divinely ordained diversity and not in its rejection,
and that the diversity of religions and also of the orthodox schools
within each religion are signs of the Divine compassion, which seeks to
convey the message of heaven to men possessing different spiritual and
psychological qualities. True ecumenism would be a search in depth after
Unity, essential and Transcendent Unity, and not the quest after a
uniformity which would destroy all qualitative distinctions. It would
accept and honor not only the sublime doctrines but even the minute
details of every tradition, and yet see the Unity which shines through
these very outward differences. And within each religion true ecumenism
would respect the other orthodox schools and yet remain faithful to
every facet of the traditional background of the school in question. It
would be less harmful to oppose other religions, as has been done by so
many religious authorities throughout history, than to be willing to
destroy essential aspects of one's own religion in order to reach a
common denominator with another group of men who are asked to undergo
the same losses. To say the least, a league of religions could not
guarantee religious peace, any more than the League of Nations
guaranteed political peace.

Different religions have been necessary in the long history of mankind
because there have been different "humanities" or human collectivities
on earth. There having been different recipients of the Divine message,
there has been more than one echo of the Divine Word. God has said "I"
to each of these "humanities" or communities; hence the plurality of
religions.[[1]](#011) Within each religion as well, especially within
those that have been destined for many ethnic groups, different orthodox
interpretations of the tradition, of the one heavenly message, have been
necessary in

order to guarantee the integration of the different psychological and
ethnic groupings into a single spiritual perspective. It is difficult to
imagine how the Far Eastern peoples could have become Buddhist without
the Mahayana school, or some of the Eastern peoples Muslim without
Shi'ism. The presence of such divisions within the religious tradition
in question does not contradict its inner unity and transcendence.
Rather it has been the way of ensuring spiritual unity in a world of
diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds.

Of course, since the exoteric religious perspective relies on outward
forms, it always tends in every religion to make its own interpretation
the only interpretation. That is why a particular school in any religion
chooses a single aspect of the religion and attaches itself so intensely
to that one aspect that it forgets and even negates all other aspects.
Only on the esoteric level of religious experience can there be
understanding of the inherent limitation of being bound to only one
aspect of the total Truth; only on the esoteric level can each religious
assertion be properly placed so as not to destroy the Transcendent Unity
which is beyond and yet dwells within the outward forms and
determinations of a particular religion or religious school.

Shi'ism in Islam should be studied in this light: as an affirmation of a
particular dimension of Islam which is made central and in fact taken by
Shi'ites to be Islam as such. It was not a movement that in any way
destroyed the Unity of Islam, but one that added to the richness of the
historical deployment and spread of the Quranic message. And despite its
exclusiveness, it contains within its forms the Unity which binds all
aspects of Islam together. Like Sunnism, Sufism and everything else that
is genuinely Islamic, Shi'ism was already contained as a seed in the
Holy Quran and in the earliest manifestations of the revelation, and
belongs to the totality of Islamic orthodoxy.[[2]](#012)

Moreover, in seeking to draw closer together in the spirit of a true
ecumenism in the above sense, as is advocated today by both the Sunni
and Shi'ite religious authorities, Shi'ism and Sunnism must not cease to
be what they are and what they have always been. Shi'ism, therefore,
must be presented in all its fullness, even

in those aspects which contradict Sunni interpretations of certain
events in Islamic history, which in any case are open to various
interpretations. Sunnism and Shi'ism must first of all remain faithful
to themselves and to their own traditional foundations before they can
engage in a discourse for the sake of Islam or, more generally speaking,
religious values as such. But if they are to sacrifice their integrity
for a common denominator which would of necessity fall below the
fullness of each, they will only have succeeded in destroying the
traditional foundation which has preserved both schools and guaranteed
their vitality over the centuries. Only Sufism or gnosis ('irfan) can
reach that Unity which embraces these two facets of Islam and yet
transcends their outward differences. Only Islamic esotericism can see
the legitimacy and meaning of each and the real significance of the
interpretation each has made of Islam and of Islamic history.

Without, therefore, wanting to reduce Shi'ism to a least common
denominator with Sunnism or to be apologetic, this book presents Shi'ism
as a religious reality and an important aspect of the Islamic tradition.
Such a presentation will make possible a more intimate knowledge of
Islam in its multidimensional reality but at the same time it will pose
certain difficulties of a polemical nature which can be resolved only on
the level which transcends polemics altogether. As already mentioned,
the presentation of Shi'ism in its totality and therefore including its
polemical aspects, while nothing new for the Sunni world, especially
since the intensification of Sunni-Shi'ite polemics during the Ottoman
and Safavid periods, would certainly have an adverse effect upon the
non-Muslim reader if the principles mentioned above were to be
forgotten.

   In order to understand Islam fully it must always be remembered that
it, like other religions, contained in itself from the beginning the
possibility of different types of interpretation: (1) that Shi'ism and
Sunnism, while opposed to each other on certain important aspects of
sacred history, are united in the acceptance of the Quran as the Word of
God and in the basic principles ofthe faith; (2) that Shi'ism bases
itself on a particular dimension of Islam and on an aspect of the nature
of the Prophet as continued later in the

line of the Imams and the Prophet's Household to the exclusion of, and
finally in opposition to, another aspect which is contained in Sunnism;
(3) and finally, that the Shi'ite-Sunni polemics can be put aside and
the position of each of these schools explained only on the level of
esotericism, which transcends their differences and yet unites them
inwardly.

Fundamental Elements of Shi'ism
-------------------------------

Although in Islam no political or social movement has ever been
separated from religion, which from the point of view of Islam
necessarily embraces all things, Shi'ism was not brought into existence
only by the question of the political succession to the Prophet of
Islam-upon whom be blessings and peace-as so many Western works claim
(although this question was of course of great importance). The problem
of political succession may be said to be the element that crystallized
the Shi'ites into a distinct group, and political suppression in later
periods, especially the martyrdom of Imam Husayn-upon whom be peace-only
accentuated this tendency ofthe Shi'ites to see themselves as a separate
community within the Islamic world. The principal cause of the coming
into being of Shi'ism, however, lies in the fact that this possibility
existed within the Islamic revelation itself and so had to be realized.
Inasmuch as there were exoteric and esoteric interpretations from the
very beginning, from which developed the schools (madhhab) of the
Shari'ah and Sufism in the Sunni world, there also had to be an
interpretation of Islam which would combine these elements in a single
whole. This possibility was realized in Shi'ism, for which the Imam is
the person in whom these two aspects of traditional authority are united
and in whom the religious life is marked by a sense of tragedy and
martyrdom. There had to be the possibility, we might say, of an
esotericismat least in its aspect of love rather than of pure
gnosis-which would flow into the exoteric domain and penetrate into even
the theological dimension of the religion, rather than remain confined
to its purely inward aspect. Such a possibility was

Shi'ism. Hence the question which arose was not so much who should be
the successor of the Holy Prophet as what the function and
qualifications of such a person would be.

The distinctive institution of Shi'ism is the Imamate and the question
of the Imamate is inseparable from that of walayat, or the esoteric
function of interpreting the inner mysteries of the Holy Quran and the
Shari'ah.[[3]](#013) According to the Shi'ite view the successor of the
Prophet of Islam must be one who not only rules over the community in
justice but also is able to interpret the Divine Law and its esoteric
meaning. Hence he must be free from error and sin (ma'sum) and he must
be chosen from on high by divine decree (nass) through the Prophet. The
whole ethos of Shi'ism revolves around the basic notion of walayat,
which is intimately connected with the notion of sancitity (wilayah) in
Sufism. At the same time walayat contains certain implications on the
level of the Shari'ah inasmuch as the Imam, or he who administers the
function of walayat, is also the interpreter of religion for the
religious community and its guide and legitimate ruler.

It can be argued quite convincingly that the very demand of 'Ali for
allegiance (bay'ah) from the whole Islamic community at the moment that
he became caliph implies that he accepted the method of selecting the
caliph by the voice of the majority which had been followed in the case
of the three khulafa' rashidun or "rightly-guided caliphs" before him,
and that thereby he accepted the previous caliphs insofar as they were
rulers and administrators of the Islamic community. What is also certain
from the Shi'ite point of view, however, is that he did not accept their
function as Imams in the Shi'ite sense of possessing the power and
function of giving the esoteric interpretations of the inner mysteries
of the Holy Quran and the Shari'ah, as is seen by his insistence from

the beginning that he was the heir and inheritor (wasi) of the Prophet
and the Prophet's legitimate successor in the Shi'ite sense of
"succession." The Sunni-Shi'ite dispute over the successors to the Holy
Prophet could be resolved if it were recognized that in one case there
is the question of administering a Divine Law and in the other of also
revealing and interpreting

its inner mysteries. The very life of Ali and his actions show that he
accepted the previous caliphs as understood in the Sunni sense of
khalifah (the ruler and the administrator of the Shari'ah), but confined
the function of walayat, after the Prophet, to himself. That is why it
is perfectly possible to respect him as a caliph in the Sunni sense and
as an Imam in the Shi'ite sense, each in its own perspective.

The five principles of religion (usul al-din) as stated by Shi'ism
include: tawhid or belief in Divine Unity; nubuwwah or prophecy; ma'ad
or ressurrection; imamah or the Imamate, belief in the Imams as
successors of the Prophet; and 'adl or Divine Justice. In the three
basic principles-Unity, prophecy, and resurrectionSunnism and Shi'ism
agree. It is only in the other two that they differ. In the question of
the Imamate, it is the insistence on the esoteric function of the Imam
that distinguishes the Shi'ite perspective from the Sunni; in the
question of justice it is the emphasis placed upon this attribute as an
intrinsic quality of the Divine Nature that is particular to Shi'ism. We
might say that in the exoteric formulation of Sunni theology, especially
as contained in Ash'arism, there is an emphasis upon the will of God.
Whatever God wills is just, precisely because it is willed by God; and
intelligence ('aql) is in a sense subordinated to this will and to the
"voluntarism" which characterizes this form of theology.[[4]](#014) In
Shi'ism, however, the quality of justice is considered as innate to the
Divine Nature. God cannot act in an unjust manner because it is His
Nature to be just. For Him to be unjust would violate His own Nature,
which is impossible. Intelligence can judge the justness or unjustness
of an act and this judgment is not completely suspended in favor of a
pure voluntarism on the part of God. Hence, there is a greater emphasis
upon intelligence ('aql) in Shi'ite theology and a greater emphasis upon
will (iradah) in Sunni kalam, or theology, at least in the predominant
Ash'arite school. The secret of the greater affinity of Shi'ite theology
for the "intellectual sciences" (al-'ulum al-'aqliyah) lies in part in
this manner of viewing Divine Justice.[[5]](#015)

Shi'ism also differs from Sunnism in its consideration of the means
whereby the original message of the Quranic revelation

reached the Islamic community, and thereby in certain aspects of the
sacred history of Islam. There is no disagreement on the Quran and the
Prophet, that is, on what constitutes the origin of the Islamic
religion. The difference in view begins with the period immediately
following the death of the Prophet. One might say that the personality
of the Prophet contained two dimensions which were later to become
crystallized into Sunnism and Shi'ism. Each of these two schools was
later to reflect back upon the life and personality of the Prophet
solely from its own point of view, thus leaving aside and forgetting or
misconstruing the other dimension excluded from its own perspective. For
Shi'ism the "dry" (in the alchemical sense) and "austere" aspect of the
Prophet's personality as reflected in his successors in the Sunni world
was equated with worldliness, while his "warm" and "compassionate"
dimension was emphasized as his whole personality and as the essence of
the nature of the Imams, who were considered to be a continuation of
him.[[6]](#016)

For the vast majority of the Islamic community, which supported the
original caliphate, the companions (sahabah) of the Prophet represent
the Prophet's heritage and the channel through which his message was
transmitted to later generations. Within the early community the
companions occupied a favored position and among them the first four
caliphs stood out as a distinct group. It is through the companions that
the sayings (hadith) and manner of living (sunnah) of the Prophet were
transmitted to the second generation of Muslims. Shi'ism, however,
concentrating on the question of walayat and insisting on the esoteric
content of the prophetic message, saw in Ali and the Household of the
Prophet (ahl-i bayt), in its Shi'ite sense, the sole channel through
which the original message of Islam was transmitted, although,
paradoxically enough the majority of the descendants of the Prophet
belonged to Sunnism and continue to do so until today. Hence, although
most of the hadith literature in Shi'ism and Sunnism is alike, the chain
of transmission in many instances is not the same. Also, inasmuch as the
Imams constitute for Shi'ism a continuation of the spiritual authority
of the Prophet-although not of course his law-bringing function-their
sayings and

actions represent a supplement to the prophetic hadith and sunnah. From
a purely religious and spiritual point of view the Imams may be said to
be for Shi'ism an extension of the personality of the Prophet during the
succeeding centuries. Such collections of the sayings of the Imams as
the Nahj al-balaghah of Ali and the Usul al-kafi, containing sayings of
all the Imams, are for the Shi'ites a continuation of the hadith
collections concerned with the sayings of the Prophet himself. In many
Shi'ite collections of hadith, the sayings of the Prophet and of the
Imams are combined. The grace (barakah) [[7]](#017) of the Quran, as
conveyed to the world by the Prophet, reached the Sunni community
through the companions (foremost among them were Abu Bakr, 'Umar,
'Uthman, Ali, and a few others such as Anas and Salman), and during
succeeding generations through the ulama and the Sufis, each in his own
world. This barakah, however, reached the Shi'ite community especially
through Ali and the Household of the Prophet-in its particular Shi'ite
sense as referred to above and not simply in the sense of any Alid.

It is the intense love for Ali and his progeny through Fatimah that
compensates for the lack of attention towards, and even neglect of, the
other companions in Shi'ism. It might be said that the light of Ali and
the Imams was so intense that it blinded the Shi'ites to the presence of
the other companions, many of whom were saintly men and also had
remarkable human qualities. Were it not for that intense love of Ali,
the Shi'ite attitude towards the companions would hardly be conceivable
and would appear unbalanced, as it surely must when seen from the
outside and without consideration for the intensity of devotion to the
Household of the Prophet. Certainly the rapid spread of Islam, which is
one of the most evident extrinsic arguments for the divine origin of the
religion, would have been inconceivable without the companions and
foremost among them the caliphs. This fact itself demonstrates how the
Shi'ite views concerning the companions and the whole of early Sunnism
were held within the context of a religious family (that of the whole of
Islam) whose existence was taken for granted. If Islam had not spread
through the Sunni caliphs and leaders many of the Shi'ite arguments

would have had no meaning. Sunnism and its very success in the world
must therefore be assumed as a necessary background for an understanding
of Shi'ism, whose minority role, sense ofmartyrdom and esoteric
qualities could only have been realized in the presence of the order
which had previously been established by the Sunni majority and
especially by the early companions and their entourage. This fact itself
points to the inner bond relating Sunnism and Shi'ism to their common
Quranic basis despite the outward polemics.

The barakah present in both Sunnism and Shi'ism has the same origin and
quality, especially if we take into consideration Sufism, which exists
in both segments of the Islamic community. The barakah is everywhere
that which has issued from the Quran and the Prophet, and it is often
referred to as the "Muhammadan barakah" (al-barakat al-muhammadiyah).

Shi'ism and the general esoteric teachings of Islam which are usually
identified with the essential teachings of Sufism have a very complex
and intricate relationship.[[8]](#018) Shi'ism must not be equated
simply with Islamic esotericism as such. In the Sunni world Islamic
esotericism manifests itself almost exclusively as Sufism, whereas in
the Shi'ite world, in addition to a Sufism similar to that found in the
Sunni world, there is an esoteric element based upon love (mahabbah)
which colors the whole structure of the religion. It is based on love
(or in the language of Hinduism, bhakta) rather than on pure gnosis or
ma'rifah, which by definition is always limited to a small number. There
are, of course, some who would equate original Shi'ism purely and simply
with esotericism.[[9]](#019) Within the Shi'ite tradition itself the
proponents of "Shi'ite gnosis" ('irfan-i shi'i) such as Sayyid Haydar
Amuli speak of the equivalence of Shi'ism and Sufism. In fact in his
major work, the Jami' al-asrar (Compendium of Divine Mysteries), Amuli's
main intention is to show that real Sufism and Shi'ism are the
same.[[10]](#020) But if we consider the whole of Shi'ism, then there is
of course in addition to the esoteric element the exoteric side, the law
which governs a human community. Ali ruled over a human society and the
sixth Imam, Ja'far al-Sadiq, founded the Twelve-Imam Shi'ite school of
law.Yet,as mentioned

above, esotericism, especially in the form of love, has always occupied
what might be called a privileged position within Shi'ism, so that even
the Shi'ite theology and creed contain formulations that are properly
speaking more mystical than strictly theological.

In addition to its law and the esoteric aspect contained in Sufism and
gnosis, Shi'ism contained from the beginning a type of Divine Wisdom,
inherited from the Prophet and the Imams, which became the basis for the
hikmah or sophia that later developed extensively in the Muslim world
and incorporated into its structure suitable elements of the
Graeco-Alexandrian, the Indian, and the Persian intellectual heritages.
It is often said that Islamic philosophy came into being as a result of
the translation of Greek texts and that after a few centuries Greek
philosophy died out in the Muslim world and found a new home in the
Latin West. This partially true account leaves out other basic aspects
of the story, such as the central role of the Quran as the source of
knowledge and truth for the Muslims; the fundamental role of the
spiritual hermeneutics (ta'wil) practiced by Sufis and Shi'ites alike,
through which all knowledge became related to the inner levels of
meaning of the Sacred Book; and the more than one thousand years of
traditional Islamic philosophy and theosophy which has continued to our
day in Shi'ite Persia and in adjacent areas.[[11]](#021) When we think
of Shi'ism we must remember that, in addition to the law and the
strictly esoteric teachings, Shi'ism possesses a "theosophy" or hikmah
which made possible the vast development of later Islamic philosophy and
the intellectual sciences from the beginning, enabling it to have a role
in the intellectual life of Islam far outweighing its numerical size.

The respect accorded to the intellect as the ladder to Divine Unity, an
element that is characteristic of all of Islam and especially emphasized
by Shi'ism, helped create a traditional educational system in which
rigorous training in logic went hand in hand with the religious and also
the esoteric sciences. The traditional curriculum of the Shi'ite
universities (madrasahs) includes to this day courses ranging from logic
and mathematics to metaphysics and Sufism. The hierarchy of knowledge
has made

of logic itself a ladder to reach the suprarational. Logical
demonstration, especially burhan-or demonstration in its technical
sense, which has played a role in Islamic logic that differs from its
use in Western logic-came to be regarded as a reflection of the Divine
Intellect itself, and with the help of its certainties the Shi'ite
metaphysicians and theologians have sought to demonstrate with rigor the
most metaphysical teachings of the religion. We see many examples of
this method in the present book, which is itself the result of such a
traditional madrasah education. It may present certain difficulties to
the Western reader who is accustomed to the total divorce of mysticism
and logic and for whom the certainty of logic has been used, or rather
misused, for so long as a tool to destroy all other certainties, both
religious and metaphysical. But the method itself has its root in a
fundamental aspect of Islam-in which the arguments of religion are based
not primarily on the miraculous but on the intellectually
evident[[12]](#022)-an aspect which has been strongly emphasized in
Shi'ism and is reflected in both the content and the form of its
traditional expositions.

Present State of Shi'ite Studies
--------------------------------

Historical factors, such as the fact that the West never had the same
direct political contact with Shi'ite Islam that it did with Sunni
Islam, have caused the Occident to be less aware until now of Shi'ite
Islam than of Sunnism. And Sunni Islam also has not always been
understood properly or interpreted sympathetically by all Western
scholars. The West came into direct contact with Islam in Spain, Sicily,
and Palestine in the Middle Ages and in the Balkans during the Ottoman
period. These encounters were all with Sunni Islam with the exception of
limited contacts with Isma'ilism during the Crusades. In the colonial
period India was the only large area in which a direct knowledge of
Shi'ism was necessary for day-to-day dealings with Muslims. For this
reason the few works in English dealing with Twelve-Imam Shi'ism are
mostly connected with the Indian subcontinent.[[13]](#023) As a result
of

this lack of familiarity many of the early Western orientalists brought
the most fantastic charges against Shi'ism, such as that its views were
forged by Jews disguised as Muslims. One of the reasons for this kind of
attack, which can also be seen in the case of Sufism, is that this type
of orientalist did not want to see in Islam any metaphysical or
eschatological doctrines of an intellectual content, which would make of
it something more than the famous "simple religion of the desert." Such
writers therefore had to reject as spurious any metaphysical and
spiritual doctrines found within the teachings of Shi'ism or Sufism. One
or two works written during this period and dealing with Shi'ism were
composed by missionaries who were particularly famous for their hatred
of Islam.[[14]](#024)

It is only during the last generation that a very limited number of
Western scholars have sought to make a more serious study of Shi'ism.
Chief among them are L. Massignon, who devoted a few major studies to
early Arab Shi'ism, and H. Corbin, who has devoted a lifetime to the
study of the whole of Shi'ism and its later intellectual development
especially as centered in Persia, and who has made known to the Western
world for the first time some of the metaphysical and theosophical
richness of this as yet relatively unknown aspect of Islam.[[15]](#025)
Yet, despite the efforts of these and a few other scholars, much of
Shi'ism remains to this day a closed book, and there has not appeared as
yet an introductory work in English to present the whole of Shi'ism to
one who is just beginning to delve into the subject.

The Present Book
----------------

It was to overcome this deficiency that in 1962 Professor Kenneth Morgan
of Colgate University, who pursues the laudable goal of presenting
Oriental religions to the West from the point of view of the authentic
representatives of these religions, approached me with the suggestion
that I supervise a series of three volumes dealing with Shi'ism and
written from the Shi'ite point of view. Aware of the difficulty of such
an undertaking, I accepted

because of the realization of the importance which the completion of
such a project might have upon the future of Islamic studies and even of
comparative religion as a whole. The present work is the first in that
series; the others will be a volume dealing with the Shi'ite view of the
Quran, written also by 'Allamah[[16]](#026) Tabataba'i, and an anthology
of the sayings of the Shi'ite Imams.

During the summer of 1963 when Professor Morgan was in Tehran we visited
'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i in Darakah, a small village
by the mountains near Tehran, where the venerable Shi'ite authority was
spending the summer months away from the heat of Qum where he usually
resides. The meeting was dominated by the humble presence of a man who
has devoted his whole life to the study of religion, in whom humility
and the power of intellectual analysis are combined. As we walked back
from the house through the winding and narrow roads of the village,
which still belongs to a calm and peaceful traditional world not as yet
perturbed by the sound and fury of modernism, Professor Morgan proposed
that 'Allamah Tabataba'i write the general volume on Shi'ism in the
series and also the volume on the Quran. Later I was able to gain the
consent of this celebrated Shi'ite authority that he put aside his
monumental Quranic commentary, al-Mizan, to devote some of his time to
these volumes. Having studied for years with him in the fields of
traditional philosophy and theosophy, I knew that of the traditional
Shi'ite authorities he was the one most qualified to write such a work,
a work which would be completely authentic from the Shi'ite point of
view and at the same time based upon an intellectual foundation. I
realized of course the innate difficulty of finding a person who would
be a reputable religious authority, respected by the Shi'ite community
and untainted by the influence of Western modes of thought, and at the
same time well enough conversant with the Western world and the
mentality of the Western reader to be able to address his arguments to
them. Unfortunately, no ideal solution could be found to this problem,
for in Persia, as elsewhere in the Muslim world, there are today usually
two types of men concerned with religious questions: (1) the traditional
authorities, who are as a rule completely unaware of the nature of the
psychological and mental structure of modern

man, or at best have a shallow knowledge of the modern world, and (2)
the modernized so-called "intellectuals," whose attachment to Islam is
often only sentimental and apologetic and who usually present a version
of Islam which would not be acceptable to the traditional authorities or
to the Muslim community (ummah). Only during the past few years has a
new class of scholars, still extremely small in number, come into being
which is both orthodox and traditional in the profound sense of these
terms and at the same time knows well the modern world and the language
necessary to reach the intelligent Western reader.

In any case, since the aim of Professor Morgan was to have a description
of Shi'ism by one of the respected traditional Shi'ite scholars, the
ulama, it was necessary to turn to the first class, of which 'Allamah
Tabataba'i is an eminent example. Of course one could not expect in such
a case the deep understanding of the Western audience for whom the work
is intended. Even his knowledge of Sunni Islam moves within the orbit of
the traditional polemics between Sunnism and Shi'ism, which has been
taken for granted until now by him as by so many other of the prominent
ulama of both sides. There are several types of Muslim and in particular
of Shi'ite ulama and among them some are not wellversed in theosophy and
gnosis and limit themselves to the exoteric sciences. 'Allamah
Tabataba'i represents that central and intellectually dominating class
of Shi'ite ulama who have combined interest in jurisprudence and Quranic
commentary with philosophy, theosophy, and Sufism and who represent a
more universal interpretation of the Shi'ite point of view. Within the
class of the traditional ulama, 'Allamah Tabataba'i possesses the
distinction of being a master of both the Shari'ite and esoteric
sciences and at the same time he is an outstanding hakim or traditional
Islamic philosopher (or more exactly, "theosopher"). Hence he was asked
to perform this important task despite all the difficulties inherent in
the presentation of the polemical side of Shi'ism to a world that does
not believe in the Islamic revelation to start with and for whom the
intense love of Ali and his Household, held by the Shi'ites, simply does
not exist. Certain explanations, therefore, are demanded that would not
occur to a person writing and thinking solely within the Shi'ite world
view.

Six years of collaboration with 'Allamah Tabataba'i and many journeys to
Qum and even Mashhad, which he often visits in the summer, helped me to
prepare the work gradually for translation into English-a task which
requires a translation of meaning from one world to another, to a world
that begins without the general background of knowledge and faith which
the usual audience of 'Allamah Tabataba'i possesses. In editing the text
so that it would make possible a thorough and profound under standing of
the structure of Islam, I have sought to take into full consideration
the differences existing between traditional and modern scholarship, and
also the particular demands of the audience to which this work is
addressed.[[17]](#027) But putting aside the demands made by these two
conditions, I have tried to remain as faithful to the original as
possible so as to enable the non-Muslim reader to study not only the
message but also the form and intellectual style of a traditional Muslim
authority.

The reader must therefore always remember that the arguments presented
in this book are not addressed by 'Allamah Tabataba'i to a mind that
begins with doubt but to one that is grounded in certainty and is
moreover immersed in the world of faith and religious dedication. The
depth of the doubt and nihilism of certain types of modern man would be
inconceivable to him. His arguments, therefore, may at times be
difficult to grasp or unconvincing to some Western readers; they are
only so, however, because he is addressing an audience whose demand for
causality and whose conception of the levels of reality is not identical
with that of the Western reader. Also there may be explanations in which
too much is taken for granted, or repetitions which appear to insult the
intelligence of the perspicacious Western reader in whom the analytical
powers of the mind are usually more developed than among most
Orientals.[[18]](#028) In these cases, the characteristic manner of his
presentation and the only world known to him, that of contemporary Islam
in its traditional aspect, must be kept in mind. If the arguments of St.
Anselm and St. Thomas for the proof of the existence of God do not
appeal to most modern men, it is not because modern men are more
intelligent than the medieval theologians, but because the medieval
masters were

addressing men of different mentalities with different needs for the
explanation of causality. Likewise, 'Allamah Tabataba'i offers arguments
addressed to the audience he knows, the traditional Muslim
intelligentsia. If all of his arguments do not appeal to the Western
reader, this should not be taken as proof of the contention that his
conclusions are invalid.

To summarize, this book may be said to be the first general introduction
to Shi'ism in modern times written by an outstanding contemporary
Shi'ite authority. While meant for the larger world outside of Shi'ism,
its arguments and methods of presentation are those of traditional
Shi'ism, which he represents and of which he is a pillar. 'Allamah
Tabataba'i has tried to present the traditional Shi'ite point of view as
it is and as it has been believed in and practiced by generations of
Shi'ites. He has sought to be faithful to Shi'ite views without regard
for the possible reactions of the outside world and without brushing
aside the particular features of Shi'ism that have been controversial.
To transcend the polemical level, two religious schools would  either
have to put aside their differences in the face of a common danger, or
the level of discourse would have to be shifted from the level of
historical and theological facts and dogmas to purely metaphysical
expositions. 'Allamah Tabataba'i has not taken either path but has
remained content with describing Shi'ism as it is. He has sought to do
full justice to the Shi'ite perspective in the light of the official
position that he holds in the Shi'ite religious world as he is a master
of both the exoteric (zahir) and the esoteric (batin) sciences. For
those who know the Islamic world well it is easy to discern the outward
difficulties that such an authority faces in expounding the total view
of things and especially in exposing the esoteric doctrines which alone
can claim true universality. He is seen in this book as the expositor
and defender of Shi'ism in both its exoteric and esoteric aspects, to
the extent that his position in the Shi'ite world has allowed him to
speak openly of the esoteric teachings. But all that is uttered carries
with it the voice of authority, which tradition alone provides. Behind
the words of 'Allamah Tabataba'i stand fourteen centuries of Shi'ite
Islam and the continuity and transmission of

a sacred and rehigious knowledge made possible by the continuity of the
Islamic tradition itself.

The Author
----------

'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i [[19]](#029) was born in
Tabriz in A.H. (lunar) 1321 or A.H. (solar) 1282, (A.D. 1903)
[[20]](#030) in a family of descendants of the Holy Prophet which for
fourteen generations has produced outstanding Islamic scholars.
[[21]](#031) He received his earliest education in his native city,
mastering the elements of Arabic and the religious sciences, and at
about the age of twenty set out for the great Shi'ite University of
Najaf to continue more advanced studies. Most students in the madrasahs
follow the branch of "transmitted sciences" (al-'ulum al-naqliyah),
especially the sciences dealing with the Divine Law, fiqh or
jurisprudence, and usul al-fiqh or the principles of jurisprudence.
'Allamah Tabataba'i, however, sought to master both branches of the
traditional sciences: the transmitted and the intellectual. He studied
Divine Law and the principles of jurisprudence with two of the great
masters of that day, Mirza Muhammad Husayn Na'ini and Shaykh Muhammad
Husayn Isfahani. He became such a master in this domain that had he kept
completely to these fields he would have become one of the foremost
mujtahids or authorities on Divine Law and would have been able to wield
much political and social influence.

But such was not his destiny. He was more attracted to the intellectual
sciences, and he studied assiduously the whole cycle of traditional
mathematics with Sayyid Abu'l-Qasim Khwansari, and traditional Islamic
philosophy, including the standard texts of the Shifa' of Ibn Sina, the
Asfar of Sadr al-Din Shirazi and the Tamhid al-qawa'id of Ibn Turkah,
with Sayyid Husayn Badkuba'i, himself a student of two of the most
famous masters of the school of Tehran, Sayyid Abu'l-Hasan Jilwah and
Aqa 'Ali Mudarris Zunuzi. [[22]](#032)

In addition to formal learning, or what the traditional Muslim sources
call "acquired science" ('ilm-i husuli), 'Allamah Taba-

taba'i sought after that "immediate science" ('ilm-i huduri) or gnosis
through which knowledge turns into vision of the supernal realities. He
was fortunate in finding a great master of Islamic gnosis, Mirza 'Ali
Qadi, who initiated him into the Divine mysteries and guided him in his
journey toward spiritual perfection. 'Allamah Tabataba'i once told me
that before meeting Qadi he had studied the Fusus al-hikam of Ibn 'Arabi
and thought that he knew it well. When he met this master of real
spiritual authority he realized that he knew nothing. He also told me
that when Mirza Ali Qadi began to teach the Fusus it was as if all the
walls of the room were speaking of the reality of gnosis and
participating in his exposition. Thanks to this master the years in
Najaf became for 'Allamah Tabataba'i not only a period of intellectual
attainment but also one of asceticism and spiritual practices, which
enabled him to attain that state of spiritual realization often referred
to as becoming divorced from the darkness of material limitations
(tajrid). He spent long periods in fasting and prayer and underwent a
long interval during which he kept absolute silence. Today his presence
carries with it the silence of perfect contemplation and concentration
even when he is speaking.

'Allamah Tabataba'i returned to Tabriz in A.H. (solar) 1314 (A.D. 1934)
and spent a few quiet years in that city teaching a small number of
disciples, but he was as yet unknown to the religious circles of Persia
at large. It was the devastating events of the Second World War and the
Russian occupation of Persia that brought 'Allamah Tabataba'i from
Tabriz to Qum in A.H. (solar) 1324 (A.D. 1945) Qum was then, and
continues to be, the center of religious studies in Persia. In his quiet
and unassuming manner 'Allamah Tabataba'i began to teach in this holy
city, concentrating on Quranic commentary and traditional Islamic
philosophy and theosophy, which had not been taught in Qum for many
years.

His magnetic personality and spiritual presence soon attracted some of
the most intelligent and competent of the students to him, and gradually
he made the teachings of Mulla Sadra once again a cornerstone of the
traditional curriculum. I still have a vivid memory of some of the
sessions of his public

lectures in one of the mosque-madrasahs of Qum where nearly four hundred
students sat at his feet to absorb his wisdom.

The activities of 'Allamah Tabataba'i since he came to Qum have also
included frequent visits to Tehran. After the Second World War, when
Marxism was fashionable among some of the youth in Tehran, he was the
only religious scholar who took the pains to study the philosophical
basis of Communism and supply a response to dialectical materialism from
the traditional point of view. The fruit of this effort was one of his
major works, Usul-i falsafah wa rawish-i ri'alism (The Principles of
Philosophy and the Method of Realism), in which he defended realism-in
its traditional and medieval sense-against all dialectical philosophies.
He also trained a number of disciples who belong to the community of
Persians with a modern education.

Since his coming to Qum, 'Allamah Tabataba'i has been indefatigable in
his efforts to convey the wisdom and intellectual message of Islam on
three different levels: to a large number of traditional students in
Qum, who are now scattered throughout Persia and other Shi'ite lands; to
a more select group of students whom he has taught gnosis and Sufism in
more intimate circles and who have usually met on Thursday evenings at
his home or other private places; and also to a group of Persians with a
modern education and occasionally non-Persians with whom he has met in
Tehran. During the past ten or twelve years there have been regular
sessions in Tehran attended by a select group of Persians, and in the
fall season by Henry Corbin, sessions in which the most profound and
pressing spiritual and intellectual problems have been discussed, and in
which I have usually had the role of translator and interpreter. During
these Years we have studied with 'Allamah Tabataba'i not only the
classical texts of divine wisdom and gnosis but also a whole cycle of
what might be called comparative gnosis, in which in each session the
sacred texts of one of the major religions, containing mystical and
gnostic teachings, such as the Tao Te-Ching, the Upanishads and the
Gospel of John, were discussed and compared with Sufism and Islamic
gnostic doctrines in general.

'Allamah Tabataba'i has therefore exercised a profound in-

fluence in both the traditional and modern circles in Persia. He has
tried to create a new intellectual elite among the modern educated
classes who wish to be acquainted with Islamic intellectuality as well
as with the modern world. Many among his traditional students who belong
to the class of ulama have tried to follow his example in this important
endeavor. Some of his students, such as Sayyid Jalal al-Din Ashtiyani of
Mashhad University and Murtada Mutahhari of Tehran University, are
themselves scholars of considerable reputation. 'Allamah Tabataba'i
often speaks of others among his students who possess great spiritual
qualities but do not manifest themselves outwardly.

In addition to a heavy program of teaching and guidance, 'Allamah
Tabataba'i has occupied himself with writing many books and articles
which attest to his remarkable intellectual powers and breadth of
learning within the world of the traditional Islamic sciences.
[[23]](#033)

Today at his home in Qum the venerable authority devotes nearly all of
his time to his Quranic commentary and the direction of some of his best
students. He stands as a symbol of what is most permanent in the long
tradition of Islamic scholarship and science, and his presence carries a
fragrance which can only come from one who has tasted the fruit of
Divine Knowledge. He exemplifies in his person the nobility, humility
and quest after truth which have characterized the finest Muslim
scholars over the ages. His knowledge and its exposition are a testimony
to what real Islamic learning is, how profound and how metaphysical, and
how different from so many of the shallow expositions of some of the
orientalists or the distorted caricatures of so many Muslim modernists.
Of course he does not have the awareness of the modern mentality and the
nature of the modern world that might be desired, but that could hardly
be expected in one whose life experience has been confined to the
traditional circles in Persia and Iraq.

### \* \* \*

A word must be added about the system of transliteration of Arabic and
Persian words and the manner in which reference is

made to Islamic sources. In the question of transliteration I have
followed the standard system used in most works on Islam (see the table
on p. vii), but in making reference to Islamic books I have sought to
remain completely faithful to the original manuscript. The author, like
most other Persian writers, refers to the very well-known Arabic works
in the Persian-speaking world in their Persian form and to the less
well-known in the original Arabic. For example, the history of al-Tabari
is referred to by the author as Tarikh-i Tabari, using the idafah
construction in Persian, which gives the same meaning as the word "of"
in English. This may appear somewhat disconcerting to one who knows
Arabic but no Persian, but it conveys a feeling for the spiritual and
religious climate of Persia where the two languages are used side by
side. In any case such references by the author have been transliterated
according to the original. I have only sought to make them uniform and
to give enough indication in the bibliography to make clear which author
and which work is in question.

In the bibliography also, only the works referred to by 'Allamah
Tabataba'i as his sources have been included, and not any secondary or
even other primary ones which I could have added myself. Also the entry
in the bibliography is according to the name of the book and not the
author, which has always been the method used in Islamic circles.

For technical reasons diacritical marks on Arabic words which have
become common in English, and italics in the case of all Arabic words
appearing in the text, have been employed only in the index and at the
first appearance of the word. In the end I should like to thank
Professor Kenneth Morgan, whose keen interest and commendable patience
in this project has made its achievement possible, and Mr. William
Chittick, who has helped me greatly in preparing the manuscript for
publication.

Seyyed Hossein Nasr  
 Tehran  
 Rabi al-awwal, 1390  
 Urdibihisht, 1350  
 May, 1971

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. See F. Schuon, Light on the Ancient Worlds, translated by Lord
Northbourne, Londan, 1965, especially Ch. IX, "Religio Perennis." 2. See
S. H. Nasr, Ideals and Realities of Islam, London, 1966, Ch. IV,
"Sunnism and Shi'ism." 3. On walayat see S. H. Nasr, Ideals, pp.
161-l62, and the many writings of H. Corbin on Shi'ism, which nearly
always turn to this major theme. 4. For a profound analysis and
criticism of Ash'arite theology see F. Schuon, "Dilemmas of Theological
Speculation," Studies in Comparative Religion, Spring, 1969, pp.66-93.
5. See S. H. Nasr. An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines,
Cambridge (U.S.A.), 1964, Introduction; also S. H. Nasr, Science and
Civilization in Islam, Cambridge (U.S.A.). 1968, Chapter II. 6. This
idea was first formulated in an as yet unpublished article of F. Schuon
entitled "Images d'Islam," some elements of which can be found in the
same author's Das Ewige im Vorganglichkeit, translated by T. Burckhardt,
Weilheim/ Oberbayern, 1970, in the Chapter entitled "Blick auf den
Islam," pp. 111-129. 7. This term is nearly impossible to translate into
English, the closest to an equivalent being the word "grace." if we do
not oppose grace to the naturol order as is done in most Christian
theological texts. See S. H. Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, Cambridge
(U.S.A.). 1964, pp.105-106. 8. See our study "Shi'ism and Sufism: Their
Relationship in Essence and in History," Religious Studies, October
1970, pp.229-242; also in our Sufi Essays, Albany. 1972. 9. This
position is especially defended by H. Corbin, who has devoted so many
penetrating studies to Shi'ism. 10. See H. Corbin's introduction to
Sayyid Haydar Amuli, La Philosophie Shi'ite, Tehran-Paris, 1969. 11. The
only history of philosophy in Western languages which takes these
elements into account is H. Corbin (with the collaboration of S. H. Nasr
and O. Yahaya), Histoire de la philosophie islamique, vol.I, Paris,
1963. 12. This question has been treated with great lucidity in F.
Schuon, Understanding Islam, translated by D. M. Matheson, London, 1963.
13. See for example J. N. Hollister, The Shi'a of India, London, 1953;
A. A. A. Fyzee, Outlines of Muhammadan Law, London, 1887; and N. B.
Baillie, A Digest of Moohummudan Law, London, 1887. Of course in Iraq
also the British were faced with a mixed Sunni-Shi'ite population but
perhaps because of the relatively small

size of the country this contact never gave rise to serious scholarly
concern with Shi'ite sources as it did in India. 14. We especially have
in mind D. M. Donaldson's The Shi'ie Religion, London, 1933, which is
still the standard work on Shi'ism in Western universities. Many of the
works written on the Shi'ites in India are also by missionaries who were
severely opposed to Islam. 15. Some of the works of Corbin dealing more
directly with Twelve-Imam Shi'ism itself include: "Pour une morphologie
de la spiritualite shi'ite," EranosJahrbuch, XXIX, 1960; "Le combat
spirituel du shi'isme," Eranos-Jahrbuch, XXX, 1961; and "Au 'pays' de
l'Imam cache, "Eranos-Jahrbuch, XXXII, 1963. Many of Corbin's writings
on Shi'ism have been brought together in his forthcoming En Islam
iranien. 16. 'Allamah is an honorific term in Arabic, Persian and other
Islamic languages meaning "very learned." 17. For my own views on the
relationships between Sunnism and Shi'ism see Ideals and Realities of
Islam, Ch. VI. 18. On this important question of the difference between
the Oriental and Western dialectic see F. Schuon, "La dialectique
orientale et son enracinement dans la foi," Logique et Transcendence,
Paris, 1970, pp. 129-169. 19. An account in Persian of 'Allamah
Tabataba'i by one of his outstanding students, Sayyid Jalal al-Din
Ashtiyani, can be found in Ma'arif-i islami, vol. V, 1347 (A. H. solar),
pp. 48-50. 20. since the beginning of the reign of Reza Shah the
Persians have been using even more than before the solar hegira calendar
in addition to the lunar, the former for civil and daily purposes and
the latter for religious functions. In the present work all Islamic
dates are lunar unless otherwise specified. 21. The title "Sayyid" in
'Allamah Tabataba'i's name is itself an indication of his being a
descendant of the Prophet. In Persia the term sayyid (or seyyed) is used
exclusively in this sense while in the Arab world it is usually used as
the equivalent of "gentleman" or "Mr." 22. On these figures see S. H.
Nasr, "The School of Ispahan," "Sadr al-Din Shirazi" and "Sabziwari" in
M. M. Sharif (ed), A History of Muslim Philosophy, vol. II, Wiesbaden,
1966. 23. See the bibliography for a complete list of the writings of
'Allamah Tabataba'i.
