Chapter Vii On the Knowledge of the Imam (imamology) (part-2)
=============================================================

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE LIVES OF THE TWELVE IMAMS
------------------------------------------------

### The First Imam Amir al-mu'minin Ali

Amir al-mu'minin Ali[[1]](#011) - upon whom be peace - was the son of
Abu Talib, the Shaykh of the Banu Hashim. Abu Talib was the uncle and
guardian of the Holy Prophet and the person who had brought the Prophet
to his house and raised him like his own son. After the Prophet was
chosen for his prophetic mission, Abu Talib continued to support him and
repelled from him the evil that came from the infidels among the Arabs
and especially the Quraysh.

According to well-known traditional accounts Ali was born ten years
before the commencement of the prophetic mission of the

Prophet. When six years old, as a result of famine in and around Mecca,
he was requested by the Prophet to leave his father's house and come to
the house of his cousin, the Prophet. There he was placed directly under
the guardianship and custody of the Holy Prophet.[[2]](#012)

A few years later, when the Prophet was endowed with the Divine gift of
prophecy and for the first time received the Divine revelation in the
cave of Hira', as he left the cave to return to town and his own house
he met Ali on the way. He told him what had happened and Ali accepted
the new faith.[[3]](#013) Again in a gathering when the Holy Prophet had
brought his relatives together and invited them to accept his religion,
he said the first person to accept his call would be his vicegerent and
inheritor and deputy. The only person to rise from his place and accept
the faith was Ali and the Prophet accepted his declaration of
faith.[[4]](#014) Therefore Ali was the first man in Islam to accept the
faith and is the first among the followers of the Prophet to have never
worshipped other than the One God.

Ali was always in the company of the Prophet until the Prophet migrated
from Mecca to Medina. On the night of the migration to Medina (hijrah)
when the infidels had surrounded the house of the Prophet and were
determined to invade the house at the end of the night and cut him to
pieces while he was in bed, Ali slept in place of the Prophet while the
Prophet left the house and set out for Medina.[[5]](#015) After the
departure of the Prophet, according to his wish Ali gave back to the
people the trusts and charges that they had left with the Prophet. Then
he went to Medina with his mother, the daughter of the Prophet, and two
other women.[[6]](#016) In Medina also Ali was constantly in the company
of the Prophet in private and in public. The Prophet gave Fatimah, his
beloved daughter from Khadijah, to Ali as his wife and when the Prophet
was creating bonds of brotherhood among his companions he selected Ali
as his brother.[[7]](#017)

Ali was present in all the wars in which the Prophet participated,
except the battle of Tabuk when he was ordered to stay in Medina in
place of the Prophet.[[8]](#018) He did not retreat in any battle nor
did he turn his face away from any enemy. He never disobeyed

the Prophet, so that the Prophet said, "Ali is never separated from the
Truth nor the Truth from Ali."[[9]](#019)

On the day of the death of the Prophet, Ali was thirty-three years old.
Although he was foremost in religious virtues and the most outstanding
among the companions of the Prophet, he was pushed aside from the
caliphate on the claim that he was too young and that he had many
enemies among the people because of the blood of the polytheists he had
spilled in the wars fought alongside the Prophet. Therefore Ali was
almost completely cut off from public affairs. He retreated to his house
where he began to train competent individuals in the Divine sciences and
in this way he passed the twenty-five years of the caliphate of the
first three caliphs who succeeded the Prophet. When the third caliph was
killed, people gave their allegiance to him and he was chosen as caliph.

During his caliphate of nearly four years and nine months, Ali followed
the way of the Prophet and gave his caliphate the form of a spiritual
movement and renewal and began many different types of reforms.
Naturally, these reforms were against the interests of certain parties
that sought their own benefit. As a result, a group of the companions
(foremost among whom were Talhah and Zubayr, who also gained the support
of A'ishah, and especially Mu'awiayh) made a pretext of the death of the
third caliph to raise their heads in opposition and began to revolt and
rebel against Ali.

In order to quell the civil strife and sedition, Ali fought a war near
Basra, known as the "Battle of the Camel," against Talhah and Zubayr in
which A'ishah, "the Mother of the Faithful," was also involved. He
fought another war against Mu'awiyah on the border of Iraq and Syria
which lasted for a year and a half and is famous as the "Battle of
Siffin." He also fought against the Khawarij[[10]](#020) at Nahrawan, in
a battle known as the "Battle of Nahrawan." Therefore, most of the days
of Ali's caliphate were spent in overcoming internal opposition.
Finally, in the morning of the 19th of Ramadan in the year 40 A.H.,
while praying in the mosque of Kufa, he was wounded by one of the
Khawarij and died as a martyr during the night of the 21st.[[11]](#021)

According to the testimony of friend and foe alike, Ali had no
shortcomings from the point of view of human perfection. And in the
Islamic virtues he was a perfect example of the upbringing and training
given by the Prophet. The discussions that have taken place concerning
his personality and the books written on this subject by Shi'ites,
Sunnis and members of other religions, as well as the simply curious
outside any distinct religious bodies, are hardly equaled in the case of
any other personality in history. In science and knowledge Ali was the
most learned of the companions of the Prophet, and of Muslims in
general. In his learned discourses he was the first in Islam to open the
door for logical demonstration and proof and to discuss the "divine
sciences" or metaphysics (ma'arif-i ilahiyah). He spoke concerning the
esoteric aspect of the Quran and devised Arabic grammar in order to
preserve the Quran's form of expression. He was the most eloquent Arab
in speech (as has been mentioned in the first part of this book).

The courage of Ali was proverbial. In all the wars in which he
participated during the lifetime of the Prophet, and also afterward, he
never displayed fear or anxiety. Although in many battles such as those
of Uhud, Hunayn, Khaybar and Khandaq the aides to the Prophet and the
Muslim army trembled in fear or dispersed and fled, he never turned his
back to the enemy. Never did a warrior or soldier engage Ali in battle
and come out of it alive. Yet, with full chivalry he would never slay a
weak enemy nor pursue those who fled. He would not engage in surprise
attacks or in turning streams of water upon the enemy. It has been
definitively established historically that in the Battle of Khaybar in
the attack against the fort he reached the ring of the door and with
sudden motion tore off the door and cast it away.[[12]](#022) Also on
the day when Mecca was conquered the Prophet ordered the idols to be
broken. The idol "Hubal" was the largest idol in Mecca, a giant stone
statue placed on the top of the Ka'bah. Following the command of the
Prophet, Ali placed his feet on the Prophet's shoulders, climbed to the
top of the Ka'bah, pulled "Hubal" from its place and cast it
down.[[13]](#023)

Ali was also without equal in religious asceticism and the

worship of God. In answer to some who had complained of Ali's anger
toward them, the Prophet said, "Do not reproach Ali for he is in a state
of Divine ecstasy and bewilderment."[[14]](#024) Abu Darda', one of the
companions, one day saw the body of Ali in one of the palm plantations
of Medina lying on the ground as stiff as wood. He went to Ali's house
to inform his noble wife, the daughter of the Prophet, and to express
his condolences. The daughter of the Prophet said, "My cousin (Ali) has
not died. Rather, in fear of God he has fainted. This condition
overcomes him often." There are many stories told of Ali's kindness to
the lowly, compassion for the needy and the poor, and generosity and
munificence toward those in misery and poverty. Ali spent all that he
earned to help the poor and needy, and himself lived in the strictest
and simplest manner. Ali loved agriculture and spent much of his time
digging wells, planting trees and cultivating fields. But all the fields
he cultivated or wells that he built he gave in endowment (waqf) to the
poor. His endowments, known as the "alms of Ali," had the noteworthy
income of twenty-four thousand gold dinars toward the end of his
life.[[15]](#025)

### The Second Imam Hasan Mujtaba

Imam Hasan Mujtaba - upon whom be peace - was the second Imam. He and
his brother Imam Husayn were the two sons of Amir al-mu'minin Ali and
Hadrat Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet. Many times the Prophet had
said, "Hasan and Husayn are my children." Because of these same words
Ali would say to his other children, "You are my children and Hasan and
Husayn are the children of the Prophet."[[16]](#026)

Imam Hasan was born in the year 3 A.H. in Medina[[17]](#027) and shared
in the life of the Prophet for somewhat over seven years, growing up
during that time under his loving care. After the death of the Prophet
which was no more than three, or according to some, six months earlier
than the death of Hadrat Fatimah, Hasan was placed directly under the
care of his noble father. After the death

of his father, through Divine Command and according to the will of his
father, Imam Hasan became Imam; he also occupied the outward function of
caliph for about six months, during which time he administered the
affairs of the Muslims. During that time Mu'awiayh, who was a bitter
enemy of Ali and his family and had fought for years with the ambition
of capturing the caliphate, first on the pretext of avenging the death
of the third caliph and finally with an open claim to the caliphate,
marched his army into Iraq, the seat of Imam Hasan's caliphate. War
ensued during which Mu'awiyah gradually subverted the generals and
commanders of Imam Hasan's army with large sums of money and deceiving
promises until the army rebelled against Imam Hasan.[[18]](#028)
Finally, the Imam was forced to make peace and to yield the caliphate to
Mu'awiyah, provided it would again return to Imam Hasan after
Mu'awiyah's death and the Imam's household and partisans would be
protected in every way.[[19]](#029)

In this way Mu'awiyah captured the Islamic caliphate and entered Iraq.
In a public speech he officially made null and void all the peace
conditions[[20]](#030) and in every way possible placed the severest
pressure upon the members of the Household of the Prophet and the
Shi'ah. During all the ten years of his imamate, Imam Hasan lived in
conditions of extreme hardship and under persecution, with no security
even in his own house. In the year 50 A.H. he was poisoned and martyred
by one of his own household who, as has been accounted by historians,
had been motivated by Mu'awiyah.[[21]](#031)

In human perfection Imam Hasan was reminiscent of his father and a
perfect example of his noble grandfather. In fact, as long as the
Prophet was alive, he and his brother were always in the company of the
Prophet who even sometimes would carry them on his shoulders. Both Sunni
and Shi'ite sources have transmitted this saying of the Holy Prophet
concerning Hasan and Husayn: "These two children of mine are Imams
whether they stand up or sit down" (allusion to whether they occupy the
external function of caliphate or not).[[22]](#032) Also there are many
traditions of the Holy Prophet and Ali concerning the fact that Imam
Hasan would gain the function of imamate after his noble father.

### The Third Imam Husayn (Sayyid al-Shuhada)

Imam Husayn (Sayyid al-Shuhada', "the lord among martyrs"), the second
child of Ali and Fatimah, was born in the year 4 A.H. and after the
martyrdom of his brother, Imam Hasan Mujtaba, became Imam through Divine
Command and his brother's will.[[23]](#033) Imam Husayn was Imam for a
period of ten years, all but the last six months coinciding with the
caliphate of Mu'awiyah. Imam Husayn lived under the most difficult
outward conditions of suppression and persecution. This was due to the
fact that, first of all, religious laws and regulations had lost much of
their weight and credit, and the edicts of the Umayyad government had
gained complete authority and power. Secondly, Mu'awiyah and his aides
made use of every possible means to put aside and move out of the way
the Household of the Prophet and the Shi'ah, and thus obliterate the
name of Ali and his family. And above all, Mu'awiyah wanted to
strengthen the basis of the caliphate of his son, Yazid, who because of
his lack of principles and scruples was opposed by a large group of
Muslims. Therefore, in order to quell all opposition, Mu'awiyah had
undertaken newer and more severe measures. By force and necessity Imam
Husayn had to endure these days and to tolerate every kind of mental and
spiritual agony and affliction from Mu'awiyah and his aides- until in
the middle of the year 60 A.H. Mu'awiyah died and his son Yazid took his
place.[[24]](#034)

Paying allegiance (bay'ah) was an old Arab practice which was carried
out in important matters such as that kingship and governorship. Those
who were ruled, and especially the well-known among them, would give
their hand in allegiance, agreement and obedience to their king or
prince and in this way would show their support for his actions.
Disagreement after allegiance was considered as disgrace and dishonor
for a people and, like breaking an agreement after having signed it
officially, it was considered as a definite crime. Following the example
of the Holy Prophet, people believed that allegiance, when given by free
will and not through force, carried authority and weight.

Mu'awiyah had asked the well-known among the people to give

their allegiance to Yazid, but had not imposed this request upon Imam
Husayn.[[25]](#035) He had especially told Yazid in his last will that
if Husayn refused to pay allegiance he should pass over it in silence
and overlook the matter, for he had understood correctly the disastrous
consequences which would follow if the issue were to be pressed. But
because of his egoism and recklessness, Yazid neglected his father's
advice and immediately after the death of his father ordered the
governor of Medina either to force a pledge of allegiance from Imam
Husayn or send his head to Damascus.[[26]](#036)

After the governor of Medina informed Imam Husayn of this demand, the
Imam, in order to think over the question, asked for a delay and
overnight started with his family toward Mecca. He sought refuge in the
sanctuary of God which in Islam is the official place of refuge and
security. This event occurred toward the end of the month of Rajab and
the beginning of Sha'ban of 60 A.H. For nearly four months Imam Husayn
stayed in Mecca in refuge. This news spread throughout the Islamic
world. On the one hand many people who were tired of the iniquities of
Mu'awiyah's rule and were even more dissatisfied when Yazid became
caliph, corresponded with Imam Husayn and expressed their sympathy for
him. On the other hand a flood of letters began to flow, especially from
Iraq and particularly the city of Kufa, inviting the Imam to go to Iraq
and accept the leadership of the populace there with the aim of
beginning an uprising to overcome injustice and iniquity. Naturally such
a situation was dangerous for Yazid.

The stay of Imam Husayn in Mecca continued until the season for
pilgrimage when Muslims from all over the world poured in groups into
Mecca in order to perform the rites of the hajj. The Imam discovered
that some of the followers of Yazid had entered Mecca as pilgrims
(hajjis) with the mission to kill the Imam during the rites of hajj with
the arms they carried under their special pilgrimage dress
(ihrami).[[27]](#037)

The Imam shortened the pilgrimage rites and decided to leave. Amidst the
vast crowd of people he stood up and in a short speech announced that he
was setting out for Iraq.[[28]](#038) In this short speech he also
declared that he would be martyred and asked Muslims to help him in
attaining the goal he had in view and to offer their

lives in the path of God. On the next day he set out with his family and
a group of his companions for Iraq.

Imam Husayn was determined not to give his allegiance to Yazid and knew
full well that he would be killed. He was aware that his death was
inevitable in the face of the awesome military power of the Umayyads,
supported as it was by corruption in certain sectors, spiritual decline,
and lack of will power among the people, especially in Iraq. Some of the
outstanding people of Mecca stood in the way of Imam Husayn and warned
him of the danger of the move he was making. But he answered that he
refused to pay allegiance and give his approval to a government of
injustice and tyranny. He added that he knew that wherever he turned or
went he would be killed.[[29]](#039) He would leave Mecca in order to
preserve the respect for the house of God and not allow this respect to
be destroyed by having his blood spilled there.

While on the way to Kufa and still a few days' journey away from the
city, he received news that the agent of Yazid in Kufa had put to death
the representative of the Imam in the city and also one of the Imam's
determined supporters who was a well-known man in Kufa. Their feet had
been tied and they had been dragged through streets.[[30]](#040) The
city and its surroundings were placed under strict observation and
countless soldiers of the enemy were awaiting him. There was no way open
to him but to march ahead and to face death. It was here that the Imam
expressed his definitive determination to go ahead and be martyred ; and
so he continued on his journey.[[31]](#041)

Approximately seventy kilometres from Kufa, in a desert named Karbala,
the Imam and his entourage were surrounded by the army of Yazid. For
eight days they stayed in this spot during which the circle narrowed and
the number of the enemy's army increased. Finally the Imam, with his
household and a small number of companions were encircled by an army of
thirty thousand soldiers.[[32]](#042) During these days the Imam
fortified his position and made a final selection of his companions. At
night he called his companions and during a short speech stated that
there was nothing ahead but death and martyrdom. He added that since the
enemy was concerned only with his person he would free them

from all obligations so that anyone who wished could escape in the
darkness of the night and save his life. Then he ordered the lights to
be turned out and most of his companions, who had joined him for their
own advantage, dispersed. Only a handful of those who loved the truth -
about forty of his close aides - and some of the Banu Hashim
remained.[[33]](#043)

Once again the Imam assembled those who were left and put them to a
test. He addressed his companions and Hasimite relatives. Each could
benefit from the darkness of the night and escape the danger. But this
time the faithful companions of the Imam answered each in his own way
that they would not deviate for a moment from the path of truth of which
the Imam was the leader and would never leave him alone. They said they
would defend his household to the last drop of their blood and as long
as they could carry a sword.[[34]](#044)

On the night of the month the last challenge to choose between
"allegiance or war" was made by the enemy to the Imam. The Imam asked
for a delay in order to worship overnight and became determined to enter
battle on the next day.[[35]](#045)

On the tenth day of Muharram of the year 61/680 the Imam lined up before
the enemy with his small band of followers, less than ninety persons
consisting of forty of his companions, thirty some members of the army
of the enemy that joined him during the night and day of war, and his
Hashimite family of children, brothers, nephews, nieces and cousins.
That day they fought from morning until their final breath, and the
Imam, the young Hashimites and the companions were all martyred. Among
those killed were two children of Imam Hasan, who were only thirteen and
eleven years old ; and a five-year-old child and a suckling baby of Imam
Husayn.

The army of the enemy, after ending the war, plundered the haram of the
Imam and burned his tents. They decapitated the bodies of the martyrs,
denuded them and threw them to the ground without burial. Then they
moved the members of the haram, all of whom were helpless women and
girls, along with the heads of the martyrs, to Kufa.[[36]](#046) Among
the prisoners there were three male

members: a twenty-two year old son of Imam Husayn who was

very ill and unable to move, namely Ali ibn Husayn, the fourth Imam ;
his four year old son, Muhammad ibn Ali, who became the fifth Imam ; and
finally Hasan Muthanna, the son of the second Imam who was also the
son-in-law of Imam Husayn and who, having been wounded during the war,
lay among the dead. They found him near death and through the
intercession of one of the generals did not cut of his head. Rather,
they took him with the prisoners to Kufa and from there to Damascus
before Yazid.

The event of Karbala, the capture of the women and children of the
Household of the Prophet, their being taken as prisoners from town to
town and the speeches made by the daughter of Ali, Zaynab, and the
fourth Imam who were among the prisoners, disgraced the Umayyads. Such
abuse of the Household of the Prophet annulled the propaganda which
Mu'awiyah had carried out for years. The matter reached such proportions
that Yazid in public disowned and condemned the actions of his agents.
The event of Karbala was a major factor in the overthrow of Umayyad rule
although its effect was delayed. It also strengthened the roots of
Shi'ism. Among its immediate results were the revolts and rebellions
combined with bloody wars which continued for twelve years. Among those
who were instrumental in the death of the Imam not one was able to
escape revenge and punishment.

Anyone who studies closely the history of the life of Imam Husayn and
Yazid and the conditions that prevailed at that time, and analyzes this
chapter of Islamic history, will have no doubt that in those
circumstances there was no choice before Imam Husayn but to be killed.
Swearing allegiance to Yazid would have meant publicly showing contempt
for Islam, something which was not possible for the Imam, for Yazid not
only showed no respect for Islam and its injunctions but also made a
public demonstration of impudently treading under foot its basis and its
laws. Those before him, even if they opposed religious injunctions,
always did so in the guise of religion, and at least formally respected
religion. They took pride on being companions of the Holy Prophet and
the other religious figures in whom people believed. From this it can be
concluded that the claim of some interpreters of these events is false
when they say that the two brothers, Hasan and Husayn,

had two different tastes and that one chose the way of peace and the
other the way of war, so that one brother made peace with Mu'awiyah
although he had an army of forty thousand while the other went to war
against Yazid with an army of forty. For we see that this same Imam
Husayn, who refused to pay allegiance to Yazid for one day, lived for
ten years under the rule of Mu'awiyah, in the same manner as his brother
who also had endured for ten years under Mu'awiyah, without opposing
him.

It must be said in truth that if Imam Hasan or Imam Husayn had fought
Mu'awiyah they would have been killed without there being the least
benefit for Islam. Their deaths would have had not effect before the
righteous-appearing policy of Mu'awiyah, a competent politician who
emphasized his being a companion of the Holy Prophet, the "scribe of the
revelation," and "uncle of the faithful" and who used every stratagem
possible to preserve a religious guise for his rule. Moreover, with his
ability to set the stage to accomplish his desires he could have had
them killed by their own people and then assumed a state of mourning and
sought to revenge their blood, just as he sought to give the impression
that he was avenging the killing of the third caliph.  

### The Fourth Imam Sajjad (Ali ibn Husayn entitled Zayn al-'abidin and Sajjad)

Imam Sajjad (Ali ibn Husayn entitled Zayn al-'abidin and Sajjad) was the
son of the third Imam and his wife, the queen among women, the daughter
of Yazdigird the king of Iran. He was the only son of Imam Husayn to
survive, for his other three brothers Ali Akbar, aged twenty-five, five
year old Ja'far and Ali Asghar (or 'Abdallah) who was a suckling baby
were martyred during the event of Karbala.[[37]](#047) The Imam had also
accompanied his father on the journey that terminated fatally in
Karbala, but because of severe illness and the inability to carry arms
or participate in fighting he was prevented from taking part in the holy
war and being martyred. So he was sent with the womenfolk to Damascus.
After spending a period in imprisonment he was sent with honor to Medina
because Yazid wanted to conciliate public

opinion. But for a second time, by the order of the Umayyad caliph, 'Abd
al-Malik, he was chained and sent from Medina to Damascus and then again
returned to Medina.[[38]](#048)

The fourth Imam, upon returning to Medina, retired from public life
completely, closed the door of his house to strangers and spent his time
in worship. He was in contact only with the elite among the Shi'ites
such as Abu Hamzah Thumali, Abu Khalid Kabuli and the like. The elite
disseminated among the Shi'ah and the religious sciences they learned
from the Imam. In this way Shi'ism spread considerably and showed its
effects during the imamate of the fifth Imam. Among the works of the
fourth Imam is a book called Sahifah sajjadiyah. It consists of
fifty-seven prayers concerning the most sublime Divine sciences and is
known as "The Psalm of the Household of the Prophet."

The fourth Imam died (according to some Shi'ite traditions poisoned by
Walid ibn 'Abd al-Malik through the instigation of the Umayyad caliph
Hisham[[39]](#049)) in 95/712 after thirty-five years of imamate.  
  

### The Fifth Imam Muhammad ibn Ali Baqir 

Imam Muhammad ibn Ali Baqir (the word baqir meaning he who cuts and
dissects, a title given to him by the Prophet)[[40]](#050) was the son
of the fourth Imam and was born in 57/675. He was present at the event
of Karbala when he was four years old. After his father, through Divine
Command and the decree of those who went before him, he became Imam. In
the year 114/732 he died, according to some Shi'ite traditions poisoned
by Ibrahim ibn Walid ibn 'Abdallah, the nephew of Hisham, the Umayyad
caliph.

During the imamate of the fifth Imam,as a result of the injustice of the
Umayyads, revolts and wars broke out in some corner of the Islamic world
every day. Moreover, there were disputes within the Umayyad family
itself which kept the caliphate busy and to a certain extent left the
members of the Household of the Prophet alone. From the other side, the
tragedy of Karbala and the oppression suffered by the Household of the
Prophet, of which the fourth

Imam was the most noteworthy embodiment, had attracted many Muslims to
the Imams.[[41]](#051) These factors combined to make it possible for
people and especially the Shi'ites to go in great numbers to Medina and
to come into the presence of the fifth Imam. Possibilities for
disseminating truths about Islam and the sciences of the Household of
the Prophet, which had never existed for the Imams before him, were
presented to the fifth Imam. The proof of this fact is the innumerable
traditions recounted from the fifth Imam and the large number of
illustrious men of science and Shi'ite scholars who were trained by him
in different Islamic sciences. These names are listed in books of
biographies of famous men in Islam.[[42]](#052)  
  

### The Sixth Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad

Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad, the son of the fifth Imam, was born in 83/702.
He died in 148/765 according to Shi'ite tradition, poisoned and martyred
through the intrigue of the Abbasid caliph Mansur. After the death of
his father he became Imam by Divine Command and decree of those who came
before him.

During the imamate of the sixth Imam greater possibilities and a more
favorable climate existed for him to propagate religious teachings. This
came about as a result of revolts in Islamic lands, especially the
uprising of the Muswaddah to overthrow the Umayyad caliphate, and the
bloody wars which finally led to the fall and extinction of the
Umayyads. The greater opportunities for Shi'ite teachings were also a
result of the favorable ground the fifth Imam had prepared during the
twenty years of his imamate through the propagation of the true
teachings of Islam and the sciences of the Household of the Prophet.

The Imam took advantage of the occasion to propagate the religious
sciences until the very end of his imamate, which was contemporary with
the end of the Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid caliphates. He
instructed many scholars in different fields of the intellectual and
transmitted sciences, such as Zararah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Mu'min Taq,
Hisham ibn

Hakam, Aban ibn Taghlib, Hisham ibn Salim, Hurayz, Hisham Kalbi
Nassabah, and Jabir ibn Hayyan, the alchemist. Even some important Sunni
scholars such as Sufyan Thawri, Abu Hanifah, the founder of the Hanafi
school of law, Qadi Sukuni, Qadi Abu'l-Bakhtari, and others, had the
honor of being his students. It is said that his classes and sessions of
instructions produced four thousand scholars of hadith and other
sciences.[[43]](#053) The number of traditions preserved from the fifth
and sixth Imams is more than all the hadith that have been recorded from
the Prophet and the other ten Imams combined.

But toward the end of his life the Imam was subjected to severe
restrictions placed upon him by the Abbasid caliph Mansur, who ordered
such torture and merciless killing of many of the descendants of the
Prophets who were Shi'ite that his actions even surpassed the cruelty
and heedlessness of the Umayyads. At his order they were arrested in
groups, some thrown into deep and dark prisons and tortured until they
died, while others were beheaded or buried alive or placed at the base
of or between walls of buildings, and walls were constructed over them.

Hisham, the Umayyad caliph, had ordered the sixth Imam to be arrested
and brought to Damascus. Later, the Imam was arrested by Saffah, the
Abbasid caliph, and brought to Iraq. Finally, Mansur had him arrested
again and brought to Samarrah where he had the Imam kept under
supervision, was in every way harsh and discourteous to him, and several
times thought of killing him.[[44]](#054) Eventually the Imam was
allowed to return to Medina where he spent the rest of his life in
hiding, until he was poisoned and martyred through the intrigue of
Mansur.[[45]](#055)

Upon hearing the news of the Imam's martyrdom, Marsur wrote to the
governor of Medina instructing him to go to the house of the Imam on the
pretext of expressing his condolences to the family, to ask for the
Imam's will and testament and read it. Whoever was chosen by the Imam as
his inheritor and successor should be beheaded on the spot. Of course
the aim of Mansur was to put and end to the whole question of imamate
and to Shi'ite aspirations. When the governor of Medina, following
orders, read the last will and testament, he saw that the Imam had
chosen four

people rather than one to administer his last will and testament: the
caliph himself, the governor of Medina, 'Abdallah Aftah, the Imam's
older son, and Musa, his younger son. In this way the plot of Mansur
failed.[[46]](#056)  
  

### The Seventh Imam Musa ibn Ja'far Kazim

Imam Musa ibn Ja'far Kazim, the son of the sixth Imam, was born in
128/744 and was poisoned and martyred in prison in 183/799.[[47]](#057)
He became Imam after the death of his father, through Divine Command and
the decree of his forefathers. The seventh Imam was contemporary with
the Abbasid caliphs, Mansur, Hadi, Mahdi and Harun. He lived in very
difficult times, in hiding, until finally Harun went on the hajj and in
Medina had the Imam arrested while praying in the Mosque of the Prophet.
He was chained and imprisoned, then taken from Medina to Basra and from
Basra to Baghdad where for years he was transferred from one prison to
another. Finally he died in Baghdad in the Sindi ibn Shahak prison
through poisoning[[48]](#058) and was buried in the cemetery of the
Quraysh which is now located in the city of Kazimayn.  
  

### The Eighth Imam Rida (Ali ibn Musa)

Imam Rida (Ali ibn Musa) was the son of the son of the seventh Imam and
according to well-known accounts was born in 148/765 and died in
203/817.[[49]](#059) The eighth Imam had reached the imamate, after the
death of his father, through Divine Command and the decree of his
forefathers. The period of his imamate coincided with the caliphate of
Harun and then his sons Amin and Ma'mun. After the death of his father,
Ma'mun fell into conflict with his brother Amin, which led to bloody
wars and finally the assassination of Amin, after which Ma'mun became
caliph.[[50]](#060) Until that day the policy of the Abbasid caliphate
toward the Shi'ites had been increasingly harsh and cruel. Every once in
a while one of the supporters of Ali

('alawis) would revolt, causing bloody wars and rebellions which were of
great difficulty and consequence for the caliphate.

The Shi'ite Imams would not cooperate with those who carried out these
rebellions and would not interfere with their affairs. The Shi'ites of
that day, who comprised a considerable population, continued to consider
the Imams as their religious leaders to whom obedience was obligatory
and believed in them as the real caliphs of the Holy Prophet. They
considered the caliphate to be far from the sacred authority of their
Imams, for the caliphate had come to seem more like the courts of the
Persian kings and Roman emperors and was being run by a group of people
more interested in worldly rule than in the strict application of
religious principles. The continuation of such a situation was dangerous
for the structure of the caliphate and was a serious threat to it.

Ma'mun thought of finding a new solution for these difficulties which
the seventy-year old policy of his Abbasid predecessors had not been
able to solve. To accomplish this end he chose the eighth Imam as his
successor, hoping this way to overcome two difficulties: first of all to
prevent the descendants of the Prophet from rebelling against the
government since they would be involved in the government themselves,
and secondly, to cause the people to lose their spiritual belief and
inner attachment to the Imams. This would be accomplished by having the
Imams become engrossed in worldly matters and the politics of the
caliphate itself, which had always been considered by the Shi'ite to be
evil and impure. In this way their religious organization would crumble
and they would no longer present any dangers to the caliphate.
Obviously, after accomplishing these ends, the removal of the Imam would
present no difficulties to the Abbasids.[[51]](#061)

In order to have this decision put into effect, Ma'mun asked the Imam to
come to Marw from Medina. Once he had arrived there, Ma'mun offered him
first the caliphate and then the succession to the caliphate. The Imam
made his apologies and turned down the proposal, but he was finally
induced to accept the successorship, with the condition that he would
not interfere in governmental affairs or in the appointment or dismissal
of government agents.[[52]](#062) This event occurred in 200/814. But
soon Ma'mun realized that

he had committed an error, for there was a rapid spread of Shi'ism, a
growth in the attachment of the populace to the Imam and an astounding
reception given to the Imam by the people and even by the army and
government agents. Ma'mun sought to find a remedy for this difficulty
and had the Imam poisoned and martyred. After his death the Imam was
buried in the city of Tus in Iran, which is now called Mashhad.

Ma'mun displayed great interest in having works on the intellectual
sciences translated into Arabic. He organized gatherings in which
scholars of different religions and sects assembled and carried out
scientific and scholarly debates. The eighth Imam also participated in
these assemblies and joined in the discussions with scholars of other
religions. Many of these debates are recorded in the collections of
Shi'ite hadiths.[[53]](#063)  
  

### The Ninth Imam Muhammad (ibn Ali) Taqi

Imam Muhammad (ibn Ali) Taq (sometimes called Jaway and Ibn al-Rida) was
the son of the eighth Imam. He was born in 195/809 in Medina and
according to Shi'ite traditions was martyred in 220/835, poisoned by his
wife, the daughter of Ma'mun, at the instigation of the Abbasid caliph
Mu'tasim. He was buried next to his grandfather, the seventh Imam, in
Kazimayn. He became Imam after the death of his father through Divine
Command and by the decree of his forefathers. At the time of the death
of his father he was in Medina. Ma'mun called him to Baghdad which was
then the capital of the caliphate and outwardly showed him much
kindness. He even gave the Imam his daughter in marriage and kept him in
Baghdad. In reality he wanted in this way to keep a close watch upon the
Imam from both outside and within his own household. The Imam spent some
time in Baghdad and then with the consent of Ma'mun set out for Medina
where he remained until Ma'mun's death. When Mu'tasim became caliph he
called the Imam back to Baghdad and, as we have seen, through the Imam's
wife had him poisoned and killed.[[54]](#064)

### The Tenth Imam Ali ibn Muhammad Naqi

Imam Ali ibn Muhammad Naqi (sometimes referred to by the title of Hadi),
was the son of the ninth Imam. He was born in 212/827 in Medina and
according to Shi'ite accounts was martyred through poisoning by Mu'tazz
the Abbasid caliph, in 254/868.[[55]](#065)

During his lifetime the tenth Imam was contemporary with seven of the
Abbasid caliphs: Ma'mun, Mu'tasim, Wathiq, Mutawakkil, Muntasir,
Musta'in and Mu'tazz. It was during the rule of Mu'tasim in 220/835 that
his noble father died through poisoning in Baghdad. At that time Ali ibn
Muhammad Naqi was in Medina. There he became the Imam through Divine
Command and the decree of the Imams before him. He stayed in Medina
teaching religious sciences until the time of Mutawakkil. In 243/857, as
a result of certain false charges that were made, Mutawakkil ordered one
of his government officials to invite the Imam form Medina to Samarrah
which was then the capital. He himself wrote the Imam a letter full of
kindness and courtesy asking him to come to the capital where they could
meet.[[56]](#066) Upon arrival in Samarrah the Imam was also shown
certain outward courtesy and respect. Yet at the same time Mutawakkil
tried by all possible means to trouble and dishonor him. Many times he
called the Imam to his presence with the aim of killing or disgracing
him and had his house searched.

In his enmity toward the Household of the Prophet Mutawakkil had no
equal among the Abbasid caliphs. He was especially opposed to Ali, whom
he cursed openly. He even ordered a clown to ridicule Ali at voluptuous
banquets. In the year 237/850 he ordered the mausoleum of Imam Husayn in
Karbala and many of the houses around it to be torn down to the ground.
The water was turned upon the tomb of the Imam. He ordered the ground of
the tomb to be plowed and cultivated so that any trace of the tomb would
be forgotten.[[57]](#067) During the life of Mutawakkil the condition of
life of the descendants of Ali in the Hijaz had reached such a pitiful
state that their womenfolk had no veils with which to cover themselves.
Many of them had only one old veil which they wore at the time of the
daily prayers. Pressures of a similar kind were put

on the descendants of Ali who lived in Egypt.[[58]](#068) The tenth

Imam accepted in patience the tortures and afflictions of the Abbasid
caliph Mutawakkil until the caliph died and was followed by Muntasir,
Musta'in and finally Mu'tazz, whose intrigue led to the Imam's being
poisoned and martyred.  
  

### The Eleventh Imam Hasan ibn Ali 'Askari

Imam Hasan ibn Ali 'Askari, the son of the tenth Imam, was born in
232/845 and according to some Shi'ite sources was poisoned and killed in
260/872 through the instigation of the Abbasid caliph
Mu'tamid.[[59]](#069) The eleventh Imam gained the imamate, after the
death of his noble father, through Divine Command and through the decree
of the previous Imams. During the seven years of his imamate, due to
untold restrictions placed upon him by the caliphate, he lived in hiding
and dissimulation (taqiyah). He did not have any social contact with
even the common people among the Shi'ite population. Only the elite of
the Shi'ah were able to see him. Even so, he spent most of his time in
prison.[[60]](#070)

There was extreme repression at that time because the Shi'ite population
had reached a considerable level in both numbers and power. Everyone
knew that the Shi'ah believed in the imamate, and the identity of the
Shi'ite Imams was also known. Therefore, the caliphate kept the Imams
under its close supervision more than ever before. It tried through
every possible means and through secret plans to remove and destroy
them. Also, the caliphate had come to know that the elite among the
Shi'ah believed that the eleventh Imam, according to traditions cited by
him as well as his forefathers, would have a son who was the promised
Mahdi. The coming of the Mahdi had been foretold in authenticated
hadiths of the Prophet in both Sunni and Shi'ite sources.[[61]](#071)
For this reason the eleventh Imam, more than other Imams, was kept under
close watch by the caliphate. The caliph of the time had decided
definitely to put an end to the imamate in Shi'ism through every
possible means and to close the door to the imamate once and for all.

Therefore, as soon as the news of the illness of the eleventh Imam
reached Mu'tamid, he sent a physician and a few of his

trusted agents and judges to the house of the Imam to be with him and
observe his condition and the situation within his house at all times.
After the death of the Imam, they had the house investigated and all his
female slaves examined by the midwife. For two years the secret agents
of the caliph searched for the successor of the Imam until they lost all
hope.[[62]](#072) The eleventh Imam was buried in his house in Samarrah
next to his noble father.

Here it should be remembered that during their lifetimes the Imams
trained many hundreds of scholars or religion and hadith, and it is
these scholars who have transmitted to us information about the Imams.
In order not to prolong the matter, the list of their names and works
and their biographies have not been included here.[[63]](#073)

### The Twelfth Imam Mahdi

The promised Mahdi, who is usually mentioned by his title of Imam-i 'Asr
(the Imam of the "Period") and Sahib al-Zaman (the Lord of the Age), is
the son of the eleventh Imam. His name is the same as that of the Holy
Prophet. He was born in Samarrah in 256/868 and until 260/872 when his
father was martyred, lived under his father's care and tutelage. He was
hidden from public view and only a few of the elite among the Shi'ah
were able to meet him.

After the martyrdom of his father he became Imam and by Divine Command
went into occultation (ghaybat). Thereafter he appeared only to his
deputies (na'ib) and even then only in exceptional
circumstances.[[64]](#074)

The Imam chose as a special deputy for a time Uthman ibn Sa'id 'Umari,
one of the companions of his father and grandfather who was his
confidant and trusted friend. Through his deputy the Imam would answer
the demands and questions of the Shi'ah. After Uthman ibn Sa'id, his son
Muhammad ibn Uthman Umari was appointed the deputy of the Imam. After
the death of Muhammad ibn Uthman, Abu'l Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti
was the special deputy, and after his death Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari was
chosen for this task.[[65]](#075)

A few days before the death of Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari in 329/939 an
order was issued by the Imam stating that in six days Ali ibn Muhammad
Simmari would die. Henceforth the special deputation of the Imam would
come to an end and the major occultation (ghaybat-i kubra) would begin
and would continue until the day God grants permission to the Imam to
manifest himself.

The occultation of the twelfth Imam is, therefore, divided into two
parts: the first, the minor occultation (ghaybat-i sughra) which began
in 260/872 and ended in 329/939, lasting about seventy years; the
second, the major occultation which commenced in 329/939 and will
continue as long as God wills it. In a hadith upon whose authenticity
everyone agrees, the Holy Prophet has said, "If there were to remain in
the life of the world but one day, God would prolong that day until He
sends in it a man from my community and my household. His name will be
the same as my name. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it was filled with oppression and tyranny."[[66]](#076)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Editor's note.' As mentioned above in Shi'ite Islam the title Amir
al-mu'minin is preserved for Ali and is never used in the case of
others. 2. al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.14; Manaqib of Khwarazmi, p.17. 3.
Dhakha'ir aI-'uqba, p.58; Manaqib of Khwarazmi, pp.16-22; Yanabi' al
mawaddah, pp.68-72. 4. Irshad of Mufid, p 4; Yanabi' al-mawaddah, p.122.
5. al-Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.28-30; Tadhkirat al-khawass', p.34; Yanabi
al-mawaddah, p.105; Manaqib of Khwarazmi; pp.73-74. 6. al-Fusal
al-muhimmah, p.34. 7. al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.20; Tadhkirat al-khawass,
pp.20-24; Yanabi' al-mawaddah, pp.63-65. 8. Tadhkirat al-khawass, p.18;
al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.21; Manaqib of Khwarazmi, p.74. 9. Manaqib Al
Abi Talib, by Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Shahrashub, Qum, n.d., vol.lll, pp.62
and 218; Ghayat al-maram, p.539; Yanabi' al-mawaddah, p.104. 10.
Editor's note: The Khawarij, literally those who stand "outside," refers
to a group who opposed both Ali and Mu'awiyah after the Battle of Siffin
and later formed an extremist group that disobeyed established authority
and was ada mantly opposed to both the Sunnis and the Shi'ites. 11.
Manaqib Al Abi Talib, vol. III, p.312; al-Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.113-123;
Tadhkirat al-khawass, pp.172-183. 12. Tadhkirat al-khawass, p.27. 13.
Ibid., p.27; Manaqib of Khwarazmi, p.71. 14. Manaqib Al Abi Talib,
vol.lll, p.221; Manaqib of Khwarazmi, p.92. 15. Nahj al-balaghah, part
III, book 24. 16. Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, pp.21 and 25;
Dhakha'ir al-uqba, pp.67 and 121. 17. Manaqib oflbn Shahrashub, vol. IV,
p.28; Dala'il al-imamah, p.60; al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.133; Tadhkirat
at-khawass, p.193: Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p. 204; Usul-i kafi, vol.l,
p.461. 18. Irshad, p.172; Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.33;
al-Fusul al muhimmah, p.144. 19. lrshad, p.172; Manaqib oflbn
Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.33; al-Imamah wa'l

siyasah of 'Abdallab ibn Muslim ibn Qutaybab, Cairo, 1327-31, vol. I,
p.163; al-Fusul al.muhimmah, p- 145; Tadhkirat al-khawass, p.197. 20.
Irshad, p.173; Manaqib of Tbn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p- 35; al-Imtmah wa'l
siyasah, vol.l, p.164. 21. Irshad, p.174; Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub,
vol. IV, p.42 a1-Fusul al muhimmah, p. 146; Tadhkirat al-khawass, p.211.
22. Irshad, p.181; Ithbat al-hudat, vol. V, pp- 129 and 134. 23. Irshad,
p- 179; ithbat al-hudat, vol. V, pp. 168-212; Ithbat al-wasiyah of
Mas'udi, Tehran, 1320, p.125. 24. Irshad, p.182; Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.
II, pp.226-228; al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.163. 25. Manaqib of Ibn
Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.88. 26. Ibid., p.88: Irshad, p.182; al-lmamah
wa'l-siyasah, vol.l, p.203; Tarikh-i Ya'qubi. vol.ll, p.229; al-Fusul
al-muhimmah, p.163; Tadhkirat al-khawass, p.235. 27. lrshad, p.201. 28.
Manaqib of Ibo Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.89. 29. Irshad, p.201; al-Fusul
al-muhimmah, p.168. 30. Irshad, p.204; a1-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.170;
Maqatil al-talibin of Abu'l- Faraj Isfahani, second edition, p.73. 31.
Irshad, p.205; a1-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.171; Maqatil al-talibin, p. 73.
32. Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.98. 33. Ibid. 34. Manaqib of
Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.99; Irshad, p.214. 35. Manaqib of Ibn
Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.98; Irshad, p.214. 36. Bihar al-anwar. vol. X,
pp.200, 202, 203. 37. Maqatil al-talibin, pp.52 and 59. 38. Tadhkirat
al-khawass, p.324: Ithbat al-hudat, vol. V, p.242. 39. Manaqib of Ibn
Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.176; Dala'il al-imamah, p.80; al-Fusu1
al-muhimmah, p.190. 40. Irshad, p.246; al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.193:
Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.197. 41. Usul al-kafi, vol.l,
p.469; Irshad, p.245; at-Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.202 and 203: Tarikh-i
Ya'qubi, vol.lll, p.63; Tadhkirat at-khawass, p.340; Dala'il al imamah,
p.94; Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.210. 42. Irshad, pp.245-253.
See also Kitab rijal al-Kashshi by Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-'Aziz Kashshi, Bombay, 1317; Kitab rijal al- Tusi by Muhammad ibn
Hasan Tusi, Najaf, 1381; Kitab-i fihrist of Tusi, Calcutta, 1281: and
other books of biography. 43. Usul-i kafi, vol.l, p.472; Dala'il
al-imamah, p.111; Irshad, p.254; Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.lll, p.119;
at-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.212: Tadhkirat al-khawass, p.346; Manaqib of Ibn
Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.280. 44. Irshad, p.254: al-Fusul al-muhimmah,
p.204; Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.247. 45. al-Fusul
al-muhimmah, p.212; Dala'il al-imamah, p.lll: Ithbat al-wasiyah, p.142.
46. Usul al-kafi, vol.l, p.310. 47. Ibid., p.476; Irshad, p.270;
al-Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.214-223; Dala'il al-imamah, pp. 146-148;
Tadhkirat al-khawass, pp.348-350; Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV,
p.324; Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.lll, p.150. 48. Irshad, pp.279-283; Dala'il
al-imamah, pp.148 and 154; al-Fusul al-muhim mah, p.222; Manaqib oflbn
Shahrashub, vol. IV, pp.323 and 327; Tarkh-i Ya'qubi, vol.lll, p.150.
49. Usul al-kafi, vol. I, p.486; Irshad, pp.284-295; Dala'il al-imamah,
pp. 175-177: al-Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.225-246: Tarikh-i Ya'qubi,
vol.lll. p.188.

50. Usul al-Kafi, vol. I, p 488 al Fusul al-muhimmah, p.237. 51. Dala'il
al-imamah, p 197 Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, p.363. 52. Usul-
kafi. vol. I, p 489 Irshad, p.290: al-Fusul al-muhimmah, p.237;
Tadhkirat al-khawass. p.352 Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV. p.363.
53. Manaqib of Ibo Shahrashub vol IV. p.351; Kitab al-ihtitjaj of Ahmad
ibn Ali ibn Abi Tailb al-Tabarsi Najaf 1385, vol.ll, pp.170-237. 54.
Irshad. p. 297; Usul al- kafi vol. I, pp. 492-497; Dala'il al-imamah.
pp. 201-209: Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub vol. IV. pp.377-399; al-Fusul
al-muhimmah pp. 247- 258. Tadhkirat al-khawass. p.358. 55. Usul-i kafi.
vol.l, pp.497-502: Irshad. p.307; Dala'il al-imamah, pp.216-. 222. al-
Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.259-265: Tadhkirat al-khawass. p.362; Manaqib of
Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV, pp.401-420. 56. Irshad pp.307-313: Usul-i kafi,
vol.l, p.501; al-Fusul al-muhimmmah, p.261: Tadhkirat al- khawass,
p.359: Manaqib of Ibn Shahrasbub, vol. IV. p.417: Ithbat al- wasiyah
p.176: Tarikh.i ya'qubi. vol.lll, p. 217. 57. Maqatil al-talibin, p.395.
58. Ibid.. pp. 395-396. 59. Irshad, p.315: Dala'il al-imamah. p.223:
al-Fusul al-muhimmah, pp.266 272: Manaqib of Ibn Shahrashub, vol. IV,
p.422: Usul al-klfi. vol.l, p.503. 60. Irshad, p. 324: USul al- kdfi.
vol. I. p.. 512: Manaqib of Ibn Shaliraishub, vol. IV. pp.429-430. 61.
Sahih of Tirmidhi. Cairo, 1350-52. vol. IX, chapter "Ma ja a fi'l-huda":
Sahih of Abu Da'ud, vol.ll, Kitab al-Mahdi: Sahih oflbn Majah, vol.ll.
chapter khurui' al-Mahdi": Yanabi' al-mawaddah: Kitab al-bayan fi akhbar
Sahib al zaman of Kanji Shaafi'i, Najaf, 1380; Nur al-absar: Mishkat
al-masabih of Muham. mad ibn 'Abdallan al-Khatib. Damascus, 1380; al-
Sawa'iq al-muhriqah, Is'af al raghibin of Muhammad al-Sabban, Cairo.
1281: al-Fusul al-muhimmmah; Sahih of Muslim: Kitab al-ghaybah by
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Nu'mani, Tehran, 1318; Kamal al-din by Shaykh
Saduq. Tehran, 1301; lthbat al-hudat; Bihar al-anwar, vol. LI and LII.
62. Usul-i kafi, vol. I, p.505: Irshad, p.319. 63. See Kitab al-rijal of
Kashshi; Rijal ofTusi; Fihrist ofTusi, and other works of biography
(rijal). 64. Bihar al-anwar, vol. LI, pp.2-34 and pp. 343--366; Kitab
al-ghaybah of Muhammad ibn Hasan Tusi, Tehran. 1324, pp.214-243; Ithbat
al-hudat, vol. VI and VII. 65. Bihar al-anwar, vol. LI, pp.360-361;
Kitab aI-ghaybah of Tuisi, p.242. 66. This particular version is related
from 'Abdallan ibn Mas'ud, al-Fusul al-muhimmah. p.271.
