Chapter Vii On the Knowledge of the Imam (imamology) (part-3)
=============================================================

On the Appearance of the Mahdi
------------------------------

In the discussion on prophecy and the imamate it was indicated that as a
result of the law of general guidance which governs all of creation, man
is of necessity endowed with the power of receiving revelation through
prophecy, which directs him toward the perfection of the human norm and
the well-being of the human species. Obviously, if this perfection and
happiness were not possible for man, whose life possesses a social
aspect, the very fact that he is endowed with his power would be
meaningless and futile. But there is no futility in creation.

In other words, ever since he has inhabited the earth, man has had the
wish to lead a social life filled with happiness in its true sense and
has striven toward this end. If such a wish were not to have an
objective existence it would never have been imprinted upon man's inner
nature, in the same way that if there were not food there would have
been no hunger. Or if there were to be no water there would be no thirst
and if there were to be no repro-

duction there would have been no sexual attraction between the sexes.

Therefore, by reason of inner necessity and determination, the future
will see a day when human society will be replete with justice and when
all will live in peace and tranquillity, when human beings will be fully
possessed of virtue and perfection. The establishment of such a
condition will occur through human hands but with Divine succor. And the
leader of such a society, who will be the savior of man, is called in
the language of the hadith, the Mahdi.

In the different religions that govern the world such as Hinduism,
Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Islam there are
references to a person who will come as the savior of mankind. These
religions have usually given happy tidings of his coming, although there
are naturally certain differences in detail that can be discerned when
these teachings are compared carefully. The hadith of the Holy Prophet
upon which all Muslims agree, "The Mahdi is of my progeny," refers to
this same truth.

There are numerous hadiths cited in Sunni and Shi'ite sources from the
Holy Prophet and the Imams concerning the appearance of the Mahdi, such
as that he is of the progeny of the Prophet and that his appearance will
enable human society to reach true perfection and the full realization
of spiritual life.[[1]](#011) In addition, there are numerous other
traditions concerning the fact that the Mahdi is the son of the eleventh
Imam, Hasan al-'Askari. They agree that after being born and undergoing
a long occultation the Mahdi will appear again, filling with justice the
world that has been corrupted by injustice and iniquity.

As an example, Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (the eighth Imam) has said, in the
course of a hadith, "The Imam after me is my son, Muhammad, and after
him his son Ali, and after Ali his son, Hasan, and after Hasan his son
Hujjat al-Qa'im, who is awaited during his occultation and obeyed during
his manifestation. If there remain from the life of the world but a
single day, Allah will extend that day until he becomes manifest, and
fill the world with justice in the same way that it had been filled with
iniquity. But when? As for news of the 'hour,' verily my father told me,
having

heard it from his father who heard it from his father who heard it from
his ancestors who heard it from Ali, that it was asked of the Holy
Prophet, 'Oh Prophet of God, when will the "support" (qa'im) who is from
thy family appear?' He said, 'His case is like that of the Hour (of the
Resurrection). "He alone will manifest it at its proper time. It is
heavy in the heavens and the earth. It cometh not to you save unawares"
(Quran, VII, 187).'"[[2]](#012)

Saqr ibn Abi Dulaf said, "I heard from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Rida [the ninth Imam] who said, 'The Imam after me is my son Ali; his
command is my command; his word is my word; to command is the command of
his father ; to obey him is to obey his father.' After these words the
Imam remained silent. I said to him, 'Oh son of the Prophet, who will be
the Imam after Hasan?' The Imam cried hard, then said, 'Verily after
Hasan his son is the awaited Imam who is "al-qa'im bi'l-haqq" (He who is
supported by the Truth).'"[[3]](#013)

Musa ibn Ja'far Baghdadi said, "I hear from the Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan ibn Ali [the eleventh Imam] who said, 'I see that after me
differences will appear among you concerning the Imam after me. Whoso
accepts the Imams after the Prophet of God but denies my son is like the
person who accepts all the prophets but denies the prophethood of
Muhammad, the Prophet of God, upon whom be peace and blessing. And whoso
denies [Muhammad] the Prophet of God is like one who has denied all the
prophets of God, for to obey the last of us is like obeying the first
and to deny the last of us is like denying the first. But beware! Verily
for my son there is an occultation during which all people will fall
into doubt except those whom Allah protects."[[4]](#014)

The opponents of Shi'ism protest that according to the beliefs of this
school the Hidden Imam should by now be nearly twelve centuries old,
whereas this is impossible for any human being. In answer it must be
said that the protest is based only on the unlikelihood of such an
occurrence, not its impossibility. Of course such a long lifetime or a
life of a longer period is unlikely. But those who study the hadiths of
the Holy Prophet and the Imams will see that they refer to this life as
one possessing miraculous qualities.

Miracles are certainly not impossible nor can they be negated through
scientific arguments. It can never be proved that the causes and agents
that are functioning in the world are solely those that we see and know
and that other causes which we do not know or whose effects and actions
we have not seen nor understood do not exist. It is in this way possible
that in one or several members of mankind there can be operating certain
causes and agents which bestow upon them a very long life of a thousand
or several thousand years. Medicine has not even lost hope of
discovering a way to achieve very long life spans. In any case such
protests from "peoples of the Book" such as Jews, Christians and Muslims
are most strange for they accept the miracles of the prophets of God
according to their own sacred scriptures.

The opponents of Shi'ism also protest that, although Shi'ism considers
the Imam necessary in order to expound the injunctions and verities of
religion and to guide the people, the occultation of the Imam is the
negation of this very purpose, for an Imam in occultation who cannot be
reached by mankind cannot be in any way beneficial or effective. The
opponents say that if God wills to bring forth an Imam to reform mankind
He is able to create him at the necessary moment and does not need to
create him thousands of years earlier. In answer it must be said that
such people have not really understood the meaning of the Imam, for in
the discussion on the imamate it became clear that the duty of the Imam
is not only the formal explanation of the religious sciences and
exoteric guidance of the people. In the same way that he has the duty of
guiding men outwardly, the Imam also bears the function of walayat and
the esoteric guidance of men. It is he who directs man's spiritual life
and orients the inner aspect of human action toward God. Clearly, his
physical presence or absence has no effect in this matter. The Imam
watches over men inwardly and is in communion with the soul and spirit
of men even if he be hidden from their physical eyes. His existence is
always necessary even if the time has not yet arrived for his outward
appearance and the universal reconstruction that he is to bring about.

### The Spiritual Message of Shi'ism

The message of Shi'ism to the world can be summarized in one sentence:
"To know God." Or in other words, it is to instruct man to follow the
path of Divine realization and the knowledge of God in order to gain
felicity and salvation. And this message is contained in the very phrase
with which the Holy Prophet commenced his prophetic mission when he
said: "Oh men ! Know God in His Oneness (and acknowledge Him) so that
you will gain salvation."[[5]](#015)

As a summary explanation of this message we will add that man is
attached by nature to many goals in this worldly life and to material
pleasures. He loves tasty food and drink, fashionable dress, attractive
palaces and surroundings, a beautiful and pleasuring wife, sincere
friends and great wealth. And in another direction he is attracted to
political power, position, reputation, the extension of his rule and
dominion and the destruction of anything that is opposed to his wishes.
But in his inner and primordial, God-given nature man understands that
all these are means created for man, but man is not created for all
these things. These things should be subservient to man and follow him
and not vice versa. To consider the stomach and the region below it as a
final end of life is the logic of cattle and sheep. To tear up, cut and
destroy other is the logic of the tiger, the wolf and the fox. The logic
inherent in human existence is the attainment of wisdom and nothing
else.

This logic based upon wisdom with the power which it possesses to
discern between reality and the unreal, guides us toward the truth and
not toward things our emotions demand or toward passions, selfishness
and egoism. This logic considers man as a part of the totality of
creation without any separate independence or the possibility of a
rebellious self-centeredness. In contrast to the current belief that man
is the master of creation and tames rebellious nature and conquers it to
force it to obey his wishes and desires, we find that in reality man
himself is an instrument in the hand of Universal Nature and is ruled
and commanded by it.

This logic based upon wisdom invites man to concentrate more closely
upon the apprehension he has of the existence of this world until it
becomes clear to him that the world of existence and all that is in it
does not issue from itself but rather from an Infinite Source. He will
then know that all he beauty and ugliness, all these creatures of the
earth and the heavens, which appear outwardly as independent realities,
gain reality only through another Reality and are manifested only in Its
Light, not by themselves and through themselves. In the same way that
the "realities" of today no more than vaguely remembered dreams in
relation to what will appear as "reality" tomorrow. In the last
analysis, everything in itself is no more than a tale and a dream. Only
God is Reality in the absolute sense, the One Who does not perish. Under
the protection of His Being, everything gains existence and becomes
manifested through the Light of His Essence.

If man becomes endowed with such vision and power of apprehension, then
the tent of his separative existence will fall down before his eyes like
a bubble on the surface of water. He will see with his eyes that the
world and all that is in it depend upon an Infinite Being who possesses
life, power, knowledge and every perfection to an infinite degree. Man
and every other being in the world are like so many windows which
display according to their capacity the world of eternity which
transcends them and lies beyond them.

It is at this moment that man takes from himself and all creatures the
quality of independence and primacy and returns these qualities to their
Owner. He detaches himself from all things to attach himself solely to
the One God. Before His Majesty and Grandeur he does nothing but bow in
humility. Only then does he become guided and directed by God so that
whatever he knows he knows in God. Through Divine guidance he becomes
adorned with moral and spiritual virtue and pure actions which are the
same as Islam itself, the submission to God, the religion that is in the
primordial nature of things.

This is the highest degree of human perfection and the station

of the perfect man (the Universal Man; insan-i kamil), namely the Imam
who has reached this rank through Divine grace. Furthermore, those who
have reached this station through the practice of spiritual methods,
with the different ranks and stations that they possess, are the true
followers of the Imam. It becomes thus clear that the knowledge of God
and of the Imam are inseparable in the same way that the knowledge of
God is inextricably connected to the knowledge of oneself. For he who
knows his own symbolic existence has already come to know the true
existence which belongs solely to God who is independent and without
need of anything whatsoever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Abu Ja'far (the fifth lmam) has said. "When our 'support' (qa'im)
rises, Allah will place his hand upon the heads of His servants. Then
through him their minds will come together and through him their
intellect will become perfected." (Bihar al-anwar, vol. LII. pp.328 and
336.) And Abu 'Abdallah (the sixth Imam) has said, "Knowledge is
comprised of twenty-seven letters, and all that has been brought by the
prophets is comprised of two letters; and men have not gained knowledge
of anything but these two letters. When our 'support' (qa'im) comes
forth, he will make manifest the other twenty-five letters and will
spread them among the people. He will add the two letters to them so
that they become pro pagated in the form of twenty-seven letters."
(Bihar al-anwar, vol. LII, p.336.) 2. ibid.. vol. LI, p.154. 3. ibid. 4.
Ibid., p.160. 5. Editor's note: Salvation (from the root falaha) in this
sense does not mean only salvation in the current, purely exoteric sense
it has acquired, but also means deliverance and spiritual realization in
the highest sense of the word.
