Appendix I Taqiyah Or Dissimulation
===================================

###### 'Allamah Tabataba'i

One of the most misunderstood aspects of Shi'ism is the practice of
dissimulation or taqiyah. With the. wider meaning of taqiyah. "to avoid
or shun any kind of danger," we are not concerned here. Rather, our aim
is to discuss that kind of taqiyah in which a man hides his religion or
certain of his religious practices in situations that would cause
definite or probable danger as a result of the actions of those who are
opposed to his religion or particular religious practices.

Among followers of the different schools of Islam, Shi'ites are well
kndwn for their practice of taqiyah. In case of danger they dissimulate
their religion and hide their particular religious and ritual practices
from their opponents.

The sources upon which the Shi'ites base themselves in this question
include the following verse of the Holy Quran: "Let not the believers
take disbelievers for their friends in preference to believers. Whoso
doeth that hath no connection with Allah unless (it be) that ye but
guard yourselves against them [tattaqu minhum. from the same root as
taqiyah], taking (as it were) security [tuqatan. again from the same
root as taqiyah]. Allah biddeth you beware (only) of Himself. Unto Allah
is the journeying" (III, 28). As is clear from this sacred verse, God,
the,Most Exalted, forbids with the utmost emphasis wilayah (meaning in
this case friend- ship and amity to the extent that it affects one's
life) with un- believers and orders man to be wary and have fear in such
a situation.

In another place He says, "Whoso disbelieveth in Allah after his
belief-save him who is forced thereto and whose heart is still

content with Faith-but whoso findeth ease in disbelief: On them is wrath
from Allah. Theirs will be an awful doom" (Quran, XVI, 106). As
mentioned in both Sunni and Shi'ite sources this verse was revealed
concerning 'Ammar ibn Yasir. After the migration (hijrah) of the Prophet
the infidels of Mecca imprisoned some of the Muslims of that city and
tortured them, forcing them to leave Islam and to return to their former
religion of idolatry. Included in this group who were tortured were
Ammar and his father and mother. Ammar's parents refused to turn away
from Islam and died under torture. But Ammar. in order to escape torture
and death, outwardly left Islam and accepted idol worship, thereby
escaping from danger. Having become free, he left Mecca secretly for
Medina. In Medina he went before the Holy Prophet-upon whom be blessings
and peace--and in a state of penitence and distress concerning what he
had done asked the Prophet if by acting as he did he had fallen outside
the sacred precinct of reli gion. The Prophet said that his duty was
what he had accom plished. The above verse was then revealed.

The two verses cited above were revealed concerning particular cases but
their meaning is such that they embrace all situations in which the
outward expression of doctrinal belief and religious practice might
bring about a dangerous situation. Besides these verses, there exist
many traditions from the members of the Household of the Prophet
ordering taqiyah when there is fear of danger.

Some have criticized Shi'ism by saying that to employ the practice of
taqiyah in religion is opposed to the virtues of courage and bravery.
The least amount of thought about this accusation will bring to light
its invalidity, fort aqiyah must be practiced in a situation where man
faces a danger which he cannot resist and against which he cannot fight.
Resistance to such a danger and failure to practice taqiyah in such
circumstances shows rashness and foolhardiness, not courage and bravery.
The qualities of courage and bravery can be applied only when there is
at least the possibility of success in man's efforts. But before a
definite or probable danger against which there is no possibility of
victory- throwing oneself before a cannon that is being fired or

lying down on the tracks before an onrushing train-any action of this
kind is nothing but a form of madness contrary to logic and common
sense. Therefore, we can summarize by saying that taqiyah must be
practiced only when there is a definite danger which cannot be avoided
and against which there is no hope of a successful strug gle and
victory.

The exact extent of danger which would make permissible the practice of
taqiyah has been debated among different mujtahids of Shi'ism. In our
view, the practice of taqiyah is permitted if there is definite danger
facing one's own life or the life of one's family, or the possibility of
the loss of the honor and virtue of one's wife or of other female
members of the family,or the danger of the loss of one's material
belongings to such an extent as to cause complete destitution and
prevent a man from being able to continue to support himself and his
family. In any case, prudence and the avoidance of definite dr probable
danger which cannot be averted is a generallaw of logic accepted by all
people and applied by men in all the different phases of their lives.
