Appendix Ii Mut'ah Or Temporary Marriage
========================================

###### 'Allamah Tabataba'i and Seyyed Hossein Nasr

Another of the misunderstood practices of Shi'ism that has often been
criticized. especially by some of the moderns, is temporary marriage or
mut'ah.

It is a definitely established historical fact that at the beginning of
Islam, namely between the commencement of the revelation and the
migration of the Holy Prophet to Medina, temporary marriage, called
mut'ah, was practiced by Muslims along with permanent marriage. As an
example one can cite the case of Zubayr al Sahabi, who married Asma, the
daughter of Abu Bakr, in a temporary marriage from this union were born
'Abdallah ibn Zubayr and 'Urwah ibn Zubayr. These figures were all among
the most famous companions of the Holy Prophet. Obviously if this union
were to have been illegitimate and categorized as adultery, which is one
of the most grievous sins in Islam and entails heavy punishments, it
would never have been performed by people who were among the foremost of
the companions.

Temporary marriage was also practiced from the time of the migration
until the death of the Holy Prophet. And even after that event duriIg
the rule of the first caliph and part of the rule of the second, Muslims
continued to practice it until it was banned by the second caliph, who
threatened those who practiced it with stoning. According to all of the
sources the second caliph made the following statement: "There are two
mut'ahs which existed in the time of the Prophet of God and Abu Bakr
which I have banned, and I will punish those who disobey my orders.
These two mut'ahs are the mut'ah concerning the pilgrimage[[1]](#011)
and the mut'ah concerning women.

Although at first some of the companions and the followers were opposed
to this ban by the second caliph, since that time the Sunnis have
considered mut'ah marriage to be unlawful. The Shi'ites, however,
following the teachings of the Lnams of the Household of the Prophet,
continued to consider it legitimate as it was during the lifetime of the
Prophet himself.

In the Quran, God says concerning the believers: "And who guard their
modesty-Save from their wives or the (slaves) that their right hands
possess, for then they are not blameworthy, But whoso craveth beyond
that, such are the transgresso s-" (Quran, XXIII, 5-7). Also, "And those
who preserve their hastity Save with their wives and those whom their
right hands possess, for thus they are not blameworthy; But whoso
seeketh more than that, those are they who are transgressors" (Quran,
LXX, 29-31). These verses were revealed in Mecca and from the time of
their revelation until the Hijrah, it is well known that mut'ah marriage
was practiced by Muslims. If mut'ah marriage had not been a true
marriage and women who had married according to it had not been
legitimate wives. certainly according to these Quranic verses they would
have been considered to be transgressors of the law and would have been
forbidden to practice mut'ah. It is thus clear that since temporary
marriage was not forbidden by the Prophet it was a legitimate marriage
and not a form of adultery.

The legitimacy of the mut'ah marriage contin ed from the time of the
hijrah until the death of the Holy Prophet as this verse, revealed after
the hijrah, proves, "And those of whom ye seek content[istamta'tum. from
the same root as mut'ah](by marrying them), give unto them their
portions as a dut (Quran, IV, 24). Those opposed to Shi'ism contend that
this verse from the "Chap ter on Women!' was later abrogated, but the
Shi'ah do not accept this view. In fact. the words of the second caliph
cited above are the best proof that up to the time of his ban such
marriages were still practiced.

It is inconceivable that if mut'ah had been abro gated and forbidden it
would have continued to be commonly practiced by Muslims during the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet and after his death until the time of the
second caliph; that ifmut'ah

had been abrogated no action would,have been taken to forbid it. We
cannot accept the claim that the only thing that the second caliph did
was to put into action an order of prohibition and abrogation of mut'ah
given by the Holy Prophet, for such a possibility is negated by the
clear words of the second caliph, 'There are two mut ahs which existed
in the time of the Prophet of God and Abu Bakr which I have banned, and
I will punish those who disobey my orders."

From the point of view of legislation and the preservation of public
interest also we must consider the legitimacy of temporary marriage,
like that of divorce, one of the noteworthy features of Islam. It is
obvious that laws and regulations are executed with the aim of
preserving the vital interests of the people in a society and providing
for their needs. The legitimization of marriage among mankind from the
beginning until today is an answer to the instinctive urge for sexual
union. Permanent marriage has been continuously practiced among the
different peoples of the world. Yet despite this fact, and all the
campaigns and efforts at public. persuasion that are carried out against
it, there exist throughout the countries of the world, in large and
small cities, both hidden and public places where illegitimate sexual
union or fornication takes place. This in itself is the best proof that
perma- nent marriage cannot fulfill the instinctive sexual desires of
everyone and that a solution must be sought for the problem.

Islam is a universal religion and in its legislation takes all types of
human beings into consideration. Considering the fact that permanent
marriage does not satisfy the instinctive sexual urge of certain men and
that adultery and fornication are according to lslam among the most
deadly of poisons. destroying the order and purity of human life. Islam
has legitimized temporary marriage under special conditions by virtue of
which it becomes distinct from adultery and fornication and free of
their evils and corruptions. These conditions inelude the necessity for
the woman to be single. to become married temporarily to only one man at
one time, and after divorce to keep a period during which she cannot be
remarried ('iddah), half of the time that is required after the

permanent marriage. The legitimizing of temporary marriage in Islam is
done with the aim of allowing within the sacred law possibilities that
minimize the evils resulting from the passions of men, which if not
channeled lawfully manifest themselves in much more dangerous ways
outside the structure of religious law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. The hajj al-mut'ah is a kind of pilgrimage which was legislated at
the end of the lifetime of the Prophet.
