Appendix Iv a Note On the Jinn
==============================

###### Seyyed Hossein Nasr

One of the least understood aspects of Islamic teachings in the modern
world concerns that class of beings called the jinn and referred to
several times in the Quran. The reason for misunder standing comes from
the post-Cartesian materialistic conception of the Universe, which
excludes the subtle and psychic world, where in fact the beings called
jinn belong in the traditional schemes of cosmology. To understand the
meaning of jinn one must therefore go beyond a conception of reality
which includes only the world of matter and the mind (this paralyzing
dualism which makes an understanding of traditional doctrines impossi
ble) to an awareness of a hierarchic reality made up of the three worlds
of spirit, psyche, and matter. The jinn can then be identified as beings
that belong to the psychic or intermediary world, the barzakh, situated
between this world and the world of pure Spirit.

In Quranic terminology and the hadith literature the jinn are usually
coupled with ins or mankind and often the phrase al-jinn wa'l-ins (the
jinn and men) is used as referring to that class of creatures to which
God's commands and prohibitions address themselves. Man was made of clay
into which God breathed (nafakha) His Spirit. The jinn in Islamic
doctrines are that group of creatures which was made of fire rather than
earth, and into which God also breathed His Spirit. Hence like man they
possess a spirit and consciousness and have Divine commands revealed to
them. on their own level of existence they are central creatures just as
men are central creatures in this world. But in contrast to men they
possess a volatile and "unfixed" outer form and so can

take on many shapes. This means that they are essentially crea tures of
the psychic rather than the physical world and that they can appear to
man in different forms and shapes.

Having been endowed with a spirit, the jinn, like men, possess
responsibility before God. Some are "religious" and "Muslim. These are
intermediate angels, the psychic forces that can lead man from the
physical to the spiritual world through the labyrinth of thc
intermediate world or barzakh. others are malefic forces that have
rebelled against God. in the same way that some men rebel against the
Divinity. Such jinn are identified with "the armies of Satan (junud
al-shaytan) and are the evil forces which by inducing the power of
apprehension (wahm) and imagination (khayal) in its negative aspect lead
man away from the Truth which his intelligence perceives by virtue of
the innate light that dwells within him.

In the religious cosmos of the traditional Muslim, which is filled with
material. psychic. and spiritual creatures of God, the jinn play their
own particular role. By the elite they are taken for what they are,
namely, psychic forces of the intermediate world of both a beneficent
and an evil nature: On the popular level, the jinn appear as concrete
physical creatures of different shapes and forms against which men seek
the aid of the Spirit, often by chanting verses of the Quran. The jinn
and all that pertains to them hence enter on the popular level into the
domain of demonology, magic. etc., and are a vivid reality for men whose
minds are still open towards the vast world of the psyche in its cosmic
aspect. The Muslim of this type of mentalitv lives in a world in which
he is aware of God and also of both the angelic forces representing the
good and the demonic forces representing the evil. He sees his life as a
struggle between these two elements within him and about him. Although
the jinn are of both kinds, the good and the evil most often in ilis
thought he identifies them with the demonic forces that lead men astray.
They are personifications of psychic forces that work within his mind
and soul. On the theological and metaphysical level of Islam, the order
of the jinn becomes understood as a necessary element in the hierarchy
of existence, an element which relates the physical world to higher
orders of

reality. The jinn are, moreover, especially akin to men in that, as was
mentioned above, into them also was breathed the Spirit of God. And some
of God's prophets, like Solomon, ruled over both men and jinn, as
attested to by the Holy Quran.

For the Western student of Islam, the meaning of the jinn cannot be
understood except through an understanding of tra ditional metaphysics,
cosmology and psychology. Only through this understanding do these
beings and their function, which in fact have their correspondences in
other religions, become mean ingful. We cannot reduce the belief in jinn
to superstition simply because we no longer understand what they
signify.

If a traditional Muslim were asked to give his opinion concern ing all
the interest in the modern world in psychic phenomena, the exploration
of the psychic world through drugs and other means, and the phenomena of
a psychic origin that become ever more recurrent nowadays, he would
answer that much of this is con nected to what he would understand by
the jinn. He would add that most of the jinn involved in these cases
are, alas, of the ma lefic and demonic kind before whom there is no
means of protec tion save the grace that issues forth from the world of
pure Spirit.
