Bibliography
============

The Writings of Allamah Tabataba'i
----------------------------------

al-Mizan (The Balance). 'Allamah's most important single work, a mon
umental commentary upon the Quran of which nineteen of the projected
twenty volumes have been completed, and fourteen volumes already
printed, in the original Arabic as well as in Persian translation.

Usul-i falsafah wa rawish-i ri'alilsm (The Principles of Philosophy and
the Method of Realism) in five volumes, with the commentary of Murtada
Mutahhari, of which the first three volumes have been published twice
and one volume has appeared in Arabic.

Hashiyah bar Asfar (Glosses upon the Asfar). Glosses upon the new
edition of the Asfar of Sadr al-Din Shirazi (Mulla Sadra) appearing
under the direction of 'AlIamah Tabataba'i, of which seven volumes have
ap peared. This edition will not include the third book (or rather
"journey," safar) on substances and accidents (al-jawahir wa'l-a'rad).

Musahabat ba Ustad Kurban (Dialogues with Professor Corbin). Two volumes
based on conversations carried out between Allamah Taba taba'i and Henry
Corbin of which the first volume was printed as the yearbook of Maktab-i
tashayyu', 1339 (A.R;solar).

Risalah dar hukumat-i islami(Treatise on Islamic Government) printed in
both Persian and Arabic.

Hashiyah-i hifayah (Glosses upon al-Kifayah).

Riaalah dar quwwah wa fi'l (Treatise on Potentiality and Actuality).

Risalah dar ithbat-i dhat tTreatise on the Proof of the Divine Essence).

Rialah dar sifat (Treatise on the Divine Attributes).

Risalah dar afal (Treatise on the Divine Acts).

Risalah dar wasa'it (Treatise on Means).

Risalah dar insan qabl al-dunya (Treatise on Man before the World).

Risalah dar insan fi'l-dunya (Treatise on Man in the World).

Riaah dar insan ba'd al-dunya (Treatise on Man after the World).

Risalah dar nubuwwat (Treatise on Prophecy).

Risalah dar walayat (Treatise on Initiation).

Risalah dar mushtaqqat (Treatise on Derivatives).

Risalah dar burhan (Treatise on Demonstration).

Risalah dar mughalatah (Treatise on Sophism).

Risalah dar tahlil (Treatise on Analysis).

Risalah dar tarkib (Treatise on Synthesis).

Risalah dar i'tibarat (Treatise on Contingents).

Risalah darnubuwwat Wa manamat (Treatise on Prophecy and Dreams).

Manzumah dar rasm-i khatt-i nasta'liq (Poem on the Method of Writing the
Nasta'liq Style of Calligraphy).

'Ali wa'l-falsafat al-ilahiyah (Ali and Metaphysics).

Qur 'an dar islam (The Quran in Islam), the English translation of which
will form the second volume of the present series.

Shi'ah dar islam (Shi'ite Islam), the present book.

'Allamah Tabataba'i is also the author of many articles, which have
appeared during the past twenty years in such journals as Maktab-i
tashayyu', Maktab-i islam, Ma'arif-i islami, and in such collections as
The Mulla Sadra Commemoration Volume (ed. by S. H. Nasr, Tehran, 1340)
and Marja'iyat wa ruhaniyat, Tehran, 1341.
