The Publishers
==============

###### In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful

This is one of the valueable works of 'Allamah Tabataba'i which is being
printed and presented to its admirers, by the help of Allah, for the
fifth time. The fifth edition is being published at the time when
'Allamah Tabataba'i has accepted the call of Allah and is no more among
us, and no doubt his death has grieved everyone.

'Allamah Tabataba'i was a great and unique person, free from want,
fefined and a commentator of the !ur'an. He was one of the shinning
stars of the Islamic world, a man whose profound and gnostical ideas and
valueable works had a deep influence in clearifying the Islamic
teachings. In the Islamic world in general and among the Muslim scholars
in particular he was known

as 'Allamah (the most learned), Philsuf (philosopher), Mufassir (the
interpretor of the Qur'an), Ayatullah (the sing of Allah). But as the
days pass it is becoming more manifest that these words of respect are
not able to reflect the great persona lity of the 'Allamah in all of its
dimen sions. If someone studies his behaviours, his way of life, his
scientific works, his profound ideas, his sincerity and his unprecedent
knowledge, he will surely come to the conclusion that without real
connection with the al-Mighty Allah, His Pro phet and the Ahlu'l Bayt no
one can have such a grace and favour. "He (Allah) gives the Wisdom to
whomsoever He will, and who so is given the Wisdom has been given much
good." (Qui'an 2:269)

Imam Khomayni mourned the 'Allamah in the following words: "I express my
sorrow at the loss which occured for the Hauza-e Ilmia (the centre of
Islamic Studies, Qum) and the Muslims by the death of the late 'Allamah
Tabataba'i9 I pay my condelences to you the nation of Iran and the
Hauza-e Ilmia. May Allah rise him (on the day of Resurrection) among the
servants and help ers of Islam, and may He bestow patience to his family
and his students."

'Allamah Tabataba'i had trained many students each of whom is an Islamic
think er and an able writer. To have a deeper insight of the 'Allamah's
personality, we shall present the views of a number of his students:

al-Ustad ash-Shahid Murtaza Nutahhari says: "'Allamah Tabataba'i is a
man whose exalted thoughts deserve to be studied, analysed and evaluated
for the next hundred years. Really he is one of the great servants of
Islam. He is truelly a symbol of piety and spirituality. In purification
of soul and piety he has ascended high peaks. For inany years I have
been benefit ing from his blessed spirituality and I still continue to
benefit. His exegesis of the Qur'an al-Mizan is one of the greatest
interpretations of the Qur'an. of course, he is not only famous in Iran,
he is well- known in the Islamic world and also in the non-Islamic.world
like Europe and America. The orientalists who were familiar with Islamic
teachings regarded himas a great thinker and used to visit him in Iran."

Shaykh Ibrahim Amini, an Islamic scholar and a writer of many books,
says that: "'Allamah Tabataba'i was a refined, good- natured, free from
want, kind, humble, sincere, calm and pleasant man. I had the honour of
attending his lectures for nearly thirty years. I even used to attend
his private classes on thursday nights. In all this period I can never
remember even onee that he might have become angry or even speak in
insulting manner; he always taught calmly and behaved very kindly even
with the most humble students as if they were his long-time friends. He
listened to every question and objection. I had never seen him praising
himself, he was never miser in imparting knowledge which he possessed
and training the students. He never left anyone's question unanswered.
In reading

and thinking he had an extra-ordinary power to consentrate on one
subject for a long time. The great teacher was a symbol of noble
ethics,healways listened to what others said and if a truth was uttered
to him, he would accept it. He refrained from polemic dicussions."

Ustad Muhammad Taqi Misbah, a famous teacher of Qum, says: Allamah
Tabataba 'i was a symbol of tranquillity, diginity, self-respect,
relying on Allah, sincerity, humbleness, kindness and noble ethics. One
could see the sign of spiritual perfection enlightment of heart and the
connection with the heavenly world on his angelic visage. His gatherings
was surrounded by such an atmosphere that the audience was forced into
spiritual contemplation. In the course of thirty years in which I had
the honour to attend his lectures, I have not heard the word "I" from
him; whereas l do not know" was heard many times from him. This was his
humbleness. one af the remark able qualities of this spiritual man is
his superabundance love and faith for the Ahlu'l Bayt. His day and night
activities in the field of knowledge did not stop him from paying
respects to, and asking help from, the Prophet and his family; and for
all his success he considered himself ob liged to these great
personalities.

"Although 'Allamah Tabataba'i was an unknown gem, who did not have any
desire for fame and spent an simple life, he immediately attracted the
seekers of truth and pre-eminence personalities, and started to teach
and train them, and thus planted the first deed for a cultural and
ethical move ment. Although he didn't have any material sources at his
disposal, he confronted all

the problems with the faith in Allah and the strength of personal
merits. He continued his march on the path which he had chosen without
any self-fishness or desire for material gains or position. He was not
alone in this way, he guided all his students and disciples to the
ultimate goal. Today we are witnessing the movement which was started
thirty five years ago by this great person. Today we are benefiting from
the fruits of a tree which was planted by this great man, and in future
by the grace of Allah it will provide more fruits for the Islamic
society."

**The Publishers**
