In the Name of Allah Most Merciful and Compassionate
====================================================

INTRODUCTION
------------

This book, which we have called Shi'ite Islam,[[1]](#011) seeks to
clarify the true identity of Shi'ism which is one of the two major
branches of Islam-the other being Sunnism. It deals in particular with
the way Shi'ism originated and later developed, with the type of
religious thought present in Shi'ism, and with Islamic sciences and
culture as seen from the Shi'ite point of view.

The Meaning of Religion (din)[[2]](#012) Islam, and Shi'ism
-----------------------------------------------------------

Religion. There is no doubt that each member of the human race is
naturally drawn to his fellow-men and that in his life in society he
acts in ways which are interrelated and interconnected. His eating,
drinking, sleeping, keeping awake, talking, listening, sitting, walking,
his social intercourse and meetings, at the same time that they are
formally and externally distinct, are invariably connected with each
other. One cannot perform just any act in any place or after any other
act. There is an order which must be observed.

There is, therefore, an order which governs the actions man performs in
the journey of this life, an order against which his actions cannot
rebel. In reality, these acts all originate from a distinct source. That
source is man's desire to possess a felicitous life, a life in which he
can reach to the greatest extent possible the objects of his desire, and
be gratified. Or, one could say that man wishes to provide in a more
complete way for his needs in order to continue his existence.

This is why man continually conforms his actions to rules and laws
either devised by himself or accepted from others, and why he selects a
particular way of life for himself among all the other existing
possibilities. He works in order to provide for his means of livelihood
and expects his activities to be guided by laws and regulations that
must be followed. In order to satisfy his sense of taste and overcome
hunger and thirst, he eats and drinks, for he considers eating and
drinking necessary for the continuation of his own happy existence. This
rule could be multiplied by many other instances.

The rules and laws that govern human existence depend for their
acceptance on the basic beliefs that man has concerning the nature of
universal existence, of which he himself is a part, and also upon his
judgment and evaluation of that existence. That the principles governing
man's actions depend on his conception of being as a whole becomes clear
if one meditates a moment on the different conceptions that people hold
as to the nature of the world and of man.

Those who consider the Universe to be confined only to this material,
sensible world, and man himself to be completely material and therefore
subject to annihilation when the breath of life leaves him at the moment
of death, follow a way oflife designed to provide for their material
desires and transient mundane pleasures. They strive solely on this
path, seeking to bring under their control the natural conditions and
factors of life.

Similarly, there are those who, like the common people among
idol-worshipers, consider the world of nature to be created by a god
above nature who has created the world specially for man and provided it
with multiple bounties so that man may benefit from his goodness. Such
men organize their lives so as to attract the pleasure of the god and
not invite his anger. They believe that if they please the god he will
multiply his bounty and make it lasting and if they anger him he will
take his bounty away from them.

On the other hand, such men as Zoroastrians, Jews, Christians, and
Muslims follow the "high path" in this life for they believe in God and
in man's eternal life, and consider man to be responsible for his good
and evil acts. As a result they accept as proven the

existence of a day of judgment (qiyamat) and follow a path that leads to
felicity in both this world and the next.

The totality of these fundamental beliefs concerning the nature of man
and the Universe, and regulations in conformity with them which are
applied to human life, is called religion (din). If there are
divergences in these fundamental beliefs and regulations, they are
called schools such as the Sunni and Shi'ite schools in Islam and the
Nestorian in Christianity. We can therefore say that man, even if he
does not believe in the Deity, can never be without religion if we
recognize religion as a program for life based on firm belief. Religion
can never be separated from life and is not simply a matter of
ceremonial acts.

The Holy Quran asserts that man has no choice but to follow religion,
which is a path that God has placed before man so that by treading it
man can reach Him. However, those who have accepted the religion of the
truth (Islam)[[3]](#013) march in all sincerity upon the path of God,
while those who have not accepted the religion of the truth have been
diverted from the divine path and have followed the wrong
road.[[4]](#014)

Islam etymologically means surrender and obedience. The Holy Quran calls
the religion which invites men toward this end "Islam" since its general
purpose is the surrender of man to the laws governing the Universe and
men, with the result that through this surrender he worships only the
One God and obeys only His commands.[[5]](#015) As the Holy Quran
informs us, the first person who called this religion "Islam" and its
followers "Muslims" was the Prophet Abraham, upon whom be
peace.[[6]](#016)

Shi'ah, which means literally partisan or follower, refers to those who
consider the succession to the Prophet-may God's peace and benediction
be upon him [[7]](#017)-to be the special right of the family of the
Prophet and who in the field of the Islamic sciences and culture follow
the school of the Household of the Prophet.[[8]](#018)

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Editor's note: The original title given by 'Allamah Tabataba'i to the
book is Shi'ah dar Islam (Shi'ism in Islam). What the author intends by
the title is Islam as seen and interpreted by Shi'ism. Therefore we have
chosen to call it Shi'ite Islam. 2. Editor's note: Although we have
rendered the word din by religion, its meaning is more universal than
that usually given to religion today. Din is the set of transcendent
principles and their applications in every domain of life which concern
man in his journey on earth and his life beyond this world. It could
properly be translated as tradition as understood by the traditional
authors in the West such as F. Schuon, R. Guenon, and A. K.
Coomaraswamy. 3. Editor's note: Speaking as a Muslim religious authority
the author has mentioned Islam in parentheses as "the religion of the
truth" without, however, in any way negating the universality of
revelation asserted in the Quran. For a Muslim quite naturally the
"religion of the truth" par excellence is Islam without this
beliefdetracting from the verity of other religions to some ofwhich the
author himself has referred in this and other works. See S. H. Nasr,
"Islam and the Encounter of Religions," The Islamic Quarterly, vol. X,
nos. 3 and 4, July and December 1966, pp.47-68. 4. "The curse of Allah
is on evil-doers, who debar (men) from the path of Allah and would have
it crooked,..." (Quran, VII, 44-45) (This and all subsequent citations
ofthe Quran are from The Meaning of the Glorious Koran, An Explanatory
Translation by Mohammed Marmaduke Pickthall, New York. New American
Library, 1953). 5. "Who is better in religion than he who surrendereth
his purpose to Allah while doing good (to men) and followeth the
tradition of Abraham, the upright?" (Quran, IV, 125). "Say: O People of
the Scripture! Come to an agreement between us and you: that we shall
worship none but Allah, and that we shall ascribe no partner unto Him,
and that none ofus shall take others for lords beside Allah. And if they
turn away, then say: Bear witness that we are they who have surrendered
(unto Him) [muslimun]." (Quran, III, 64). "O ye who believe! Come all
ofyou, into submission (unto Him)..." (Quran, II, 208). 6. "Our Lord!
And make us submissive unto Thee and of our seed a nation submissive
unto Thee..." (Quran, II, 128). "The faith of your father Abraham (is
yours). He hath named you Muslims..." (Quran, XXII, 78). 7. Editor's
note: In all Islamic languages whenever the name of one of the prophets,
and in Shi'ism also the Imams, is cited the honorific phrase 'alayhi

al-salam (May Peace be upon him) follows. In the case of the Prophet of
Islam, the phrase sall allahu 'alayhi Wa sallam (May God's peace and
benediction be upon him) is added. In this translation, inasmuch as it
is in a European language we have usually abstained from using these
terms which appear in the original Persian. Also in this work whenever
the term Prophet is used with a capital "P" it refers to the Prophet of
Islam. 8. A group of Zaydis who accept two caliphs before Ali and in
jurisprudence follow Abu Hanifah are also called Shi'ite because in
contrast to the Umayyads and Abbasids they consider the later caliphate
as belonging solely to Ali and his descendants.
