Part I: the Historical Background of Shi'ism
============================================

 
-

CHAPTER I THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF SHI'ISM
------------------------------------------

Shi'ism began with a reference made for the first time to the partisans
of Ali (shi'ah-i 'Ali), the first leader of the Household of the
Prophet, during the lifetime of the Prophet himself.[[1]](#011) The
course of the first manifestation and the later growth of Islam during
the twenty-three years of prophecy brought about many conditions which
necessitated the appearance of a group such as the Shi'ites among the
companions of the Prophet.

The Holy Prophet during the first days of his prophecy, when according
to the text of the Quran he was commanded to invite his closer relatives
to come to his religion,[[2]](#012) told them clearly that whoever would
be the first to accept his invitation would become his successor and
inheritor. Ali was the first to step forth and embrace Islam. The
Prophet accepted Ali's submission to the faith and thus fulfilled his
promise.[[3]](#013)

From the Shi'ite point of view it appears as unlikely that the leader of
a movement, during the first days of his activity, should introduce to
strangers one of his associates as his successor and deputy but not
introduce him to his completely loyal and devout aides and friends. Nor
does it appear likely that such a leader should accept someone as his
deputy and successor and introduce him to others as such, but then
throughout his life and religious call deprive his deputy of his duties
as deputy, disregard the respect due to his position as successor, and
refuse to make any distinctions between him and others.

The Prophet, according to many unquestioned and completely authenticated
hadiths, both Sunni and Shi'ite, clearly asserted that Ali was preserved
om error and sin in his actions and sayings. Whatever he said and did
was in perfect conformity with the teachings of religion4 and he was the
most knowledgeable of men in matters pertaining to the Islamic sciences
and injunctions.[[4]](#014)

During the period of prophecy Ali performed valuable services and made
remarkable sacrifices. When the infidels of Mecca decided to kill the
Prophet and surrounded his house, the Holy Prophet decided to emigrate
to Medina. He said to Ali, "Will you sleep in my bed at night so that
they will think that lam asleep and will be secure from being pursued by
them?" Ali accepted this dangerous assignment with open arms. This has
been recounted in different histories and collections of hadith. (The
emigration from Mecca to Medina marks the date of origin of the Islamic
calendar, known as the hijrah.) Ali also served by fighting in the
battles of Badr, Uhud, Khaybar, Khandaq, and Hunayn in which the
victories achieved with his aid were such that if Ali had not been
present the enemy would most likely have uprooted Islam and the Muslims,
as is recounted in the usual histories, lives of the Prophet, and
collections of hadith.

For Shi'ites, the central evidence of Ali's legitimacy as successor to
the Prophet is the event of Ghadir Khumm [[5]](#015) when the Prophet
chose Ali to the "general guardianship" (walayat-i 'ammah) of the people
and made Ali, like himself, their "guardian" (wali).[[6]](#016) It is
obvious that because of such distinctive services and recognition,
because of Ali's special virtues which were acclaimed by all,[[7]](#017)
and because of the great love the Prophet showed for him,[[8]](#018)
some of the companions of the Prophet who knew Ali well, and who were
champions of virtue and truth, came to love him. They assembled around
Ali and followed him to such an extent that many others began to
consider their love for him excessive and a few perhaps also became
jealous of him. Besides all these elements, we see in many sayings of
the Prophet reference to the "shi'ah of Ali" and the "shi'ah of the
Household of the Prophet."[[9]](#019)

The Cause of the Separation of the Shi'ite Minority from the Sunni Majority
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The friends and followers of Ali believed that after the death of the
Prophet the caliphate and religious authority (marja'iyat-i 'ilmi)
belonged to Ali. This belief came from their consideration of Ali's
position and station in relation to the Prophet, his relation to the
chosen among the companions, as well as his relation to Muslims in
general. It was only the events that occurred during the few days of the
Prophet's final illness that indicated that there was opposition to
their view.[[10]](#020) Contrary to their expectation, at the very
moment when the Prophet died and his body lay still unburied, while his
household and a few companions were occupied with providing for his
burial and funeral service, the friends and followers of Ali received
news of the activity of another group who had gone to the mosque where
the community was gathered faced with this sudden loss of its leader.
This group, which was later to form the majority, set forth in great
haste to select a caliph for the Muslims with the aim of ensuring the
welfare of the community and solving its immediate problems. They did
this without consulting the Household of the Prophet, his relatives or
many of his friends, who were busy with the funeral, and without
providing them with the least information. Thus Ali and his companions
were presented with afait accompli.[[11]](#021)

Ali and his friends-such as 'Abbas, Zubayr, Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad
and 'Ammar-after finishing with the burial of the body of the Prophet
became aware of the proceedings by which the caliph had been selected.
They protested against the act of choosing the caliph by consultation or
election, and also against those who were responsible for carrying it
out. They even presented their own proofs and arguments, but the answer
they received was that the welfare of the Muslims was at stake and the
solution lay in what had been done. [[12]](#022)

It was this protest and criticism which separated from the majority the
minority that were following Ali and made his followers known to society
as the "partisans" or "shi'ah" of Ali.

The caliphate of the time was anxious to guard against this appellation
being given to the Shi'ite minority and thus to have Muslim society
divided into sections comprised of a majority and a minority. The
supporters of the caliph considered the caliphate to be a matter of the
consensus of the community (ijma') and called those who objected the
"opponents of allegiance." They claimed that the Shi'ah stood,
therefore, opposed to Muslim society. Sometimes the Shi'ah were given
other pejorative and degrading names. [[13]](#023)

Shi'ism was condemned from the first moment because of the political
situation of the time and thus it could not accomplish anything through
mere political protest. Ali, in order to safeguard the well-being of
Islam and of the Muslims, and also because of lack of sufficient
political and military power, did not endeavor to begin an uprising
against the existing political order, which would have been of a bloody
nature. Yet those who protested against the established caliphate
refused to surrender to the majority in certain questions of faith and
continued to hold that the succession to the Prophet and religious
authority belonged by right to Ali.[[14]](#024) They believed that all
spiritual and religious matters should be referred to him and invited
people to become his followers. [[15]](#025)  
  

The Two Problems of Succession and Authority in Religious Sciences
------------------------------------------------------------------

In accordance with the Islamic teachings which form its basis, Shi'ism
believed that the most important question facing Islamic society was the
elucidation and clarification of Islamic teachings and the tenets ofthe
religious sciences.[[16]](#026) Only after such clarifica- tions were
made could the application of these teachings to the social order be
considered. In other words, Shi'ism believed that, before all else,
members of society should be able to gain a true vision of the world and
of men based on the real nature of things. Only then could they know and
perform their duties as human beings- in which lay their real
welfare-even if the performance

of these religious duties were to be against their desires. After
carrying out this first step a religious government should preserve and
execute real Islamic order in society in such a way that man would
worship none other than God, would possess personal and social freedom
to the extent possible, and would benefit from true personal and social
justice.

These two ends could be accomplished only by a person who was inerrant
and protected by God from having faults. Otherwise people could become
rulers or religious authorities who would not be free from the
possibility of distortion of thought or the committing of treachery in
the duties placed upon their shoulders. Were this to happen, the just
and freedom-giving rule of Islam could gradually be converted to
dictatorial rule and a completely autocratic government. Moreover, the
pure religious teachings, could become, as can be seen in the case of
certain other religions, the victims of change and distortion in the
hands of selfish scholars given to the satisfaction of their carnal
desires. As confirmed by the Holy Prophet, Ali followed perfectly and
completely the Book of God and the tradition of the Prophet in both
words and deeds.[[17]](#027) As Shi'ism sees it, if, as the majority
say, only the Quraysh[[18]](#028) opposed the rightful caliphate of Ali,
then that majority should have answered the Quraysh by asserting what
was right. They should have quelled all opposition to the right cause in
the same way that they fought against the group who refused to pay the
religious tax (zakat). The majority should not have remained indifferent
to what was right for fear of the opposition of the Quraysh.

What prevented the Shi'ah from accepting the elective method of choosing
the caliphate by the people was the fear of the unwholesome consequences
that might result from it: fear of possible corruption in Islamic
government and of the destruction of the solid basis for the sublime
religious sciences. As it happened, later events in Islamic history
confirmed this fear (or prediction), with the result that the Shi'ites
became ever firmer in their belief. During the earliest years, however,
because of the small number of its followers, Shi'ism  appeared
outwardly to have been absorbed into the majority, although privately it
continued to insist on

acquiring the Islamic sciences from the Household of the Prophet and to
invite people to its cause. At the same time, in order to preserve the
power of Islam and safeguard its progress, Shi'ism did not display any
open opposition to the rest of Islamic society. Members of the Shi'ite
community even fought hand in hand with the Sunni majority in holy wars
(jihad) and participated in public affairs. Ali himself guided the Sunni
majority in the interest of the whole of Islam whenever such action was
necessary.[[19]](#029)  

The Political Method of the Selection of the Caliph by Vote and Its Disagreement with the Shi'ite View
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shi'ism believes that the Divine Law of Islam (Shari'ah), whose
substance is found in the Book of God and in the tradition
(Sunnah)[[20]](#030) of the Holy Prophet, will remain valid to the Day
of Judgment and can never, nor will ever, be altered. A government which
is really Islamic cannot under any pretext refuse completely to carry
out the Shari'ah's injunctions. [[21]](#031) The only duty of an Islamic
government is to make decisions by consultation within the limits set by
the Shari'ah and in accordance with the demands of the moment.

The vow of allegiance to Abu Bakr at Saqifah, which was motivated at
least in part by political considerations, and the incident described in
the hadith of "ink and paper,"[[22]](#032) which occurred during the
last days of the illness of the Holy Prophet, reveal the fact that those
who directed and backed the movement to choose the caliph through the
process of election believed that the Book of God should be preserved in
the form of a constitution. They emphasized the Holy Book and paid much
less attention to the words of the Holy Prophet as an immutable source
of the teachings of Islam. They seem to have accepted the modification
of certain aspects of Islamic teachings concerning government to suit
the conditions of the moment and for the sake of the general welfare.

    This tendency to emphasize only certain principles of the Divine Law
is confirmed by many sayings that were later transmitted

concerning the companions of the Holy Prophet. For example, the
companions were considered to be independent authorities in matters of
the Divine Law (mujtahid),[[23]](#033) being able to exercise
independent judgment (ijtihad) in public affairs. It was also believed
that if they succeeded in their task they would be rewarded by God and
if they failed they would be forgiven by Him since they were among the
companions. This view was widely held during the early years following
the death of the Holy Prophet. Shi'ism takes a stricter stand and
believes that the actions of the companions, as of all other Muslims,
should be judged strictly according to the teachings of the Shari'ah.
For example, there was the complicated incident involving the famous
general Khalid ibn Walid in the house of one of the prominent Muslims of
the day, Malik ibn Nuwajrah, which led to the death of the latter. The
fact that Khalid was not at all taken to task for this incident because
of his being an outstanding military leader[[24]](#034) shows in the
eyes of Shi'ism an undue lenience toward some of the actions of the
companions which were below the norm of perfect piety and righteousness
set by the actions of the spiritual elite among the companions.

Another practice of the early years which is criticized by Shi'ism is
the cutting off of the khums[[25]](#035) from the members of the
Household of the Prophet and from the Holy Prophet's
relatives.[[26]](#036) Likewise, because of the emphasis laid by Shi'ism
on the sayings and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet it is difficult for it
to under stand why the writing down of the text of hadith was completely
banned and why, if a written hadith were found, it would be burned.
[[27]](#037) We know that this ban continued through the caliphate of
the khulafa' rashidun[[28]](#038) into the Umayyad period[[29]](#039)
and did not cease until the period of Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, who ruled
from A.H. 99/A.D. 717 to A.H. 1O1/A.D. 719.[[30]](#040)

During the period of the second caliph (13/634-25/644) there was a
continuation of the policy of emphasizing certain aspects of the
Shari'ah and of putting aside some of the practices which the Shi'ites
believe the Holy Prophet taught and practiced. Some practices were
forbidden, some were omitted, and some were added. For instance, the
pilgrimage of tamattu' (a kind of pilgrimage in which the 'umrah
ceremony is utilized in place of the

hajj ceremony) was banned by Umar during his caliphate, with the decree
that transgressors would be stoned; this in spite of the fact that
during his final pilgrimage the Holy Prophet-peace be upon
him-instituted, as in Quran, Surah II, 196, a special form for the
pilgrimage ceremonies that might be performed by pilgrims coming from
far away. Also, during the lifetime of the Prophet of God temporary
marriage (mut'ah) was practiced, but Umar forbade it. And even though
during the life of the Holy Prophet it was the practice to recite in the
call to prayers, "Hurry to the best act" (hayya 'ala khayr el-'amal),
Umar ordered that it be omitted because he said it would prevent people
from participating in holy war, jihad. (It is still recited in the
Shi'ite call to prayers, but not in the Sunni call.) There were also
additions to the Shari'ah: during the time of the Prophet a divorce was
valid only if the three declarations of divorce ("I divorce thee") were
made on three different occasions, but Umar allowed the triple divorce
declaration to be made at one time. Heavy penalties were imposed on
those who broke certain of these new regulations, such as stoning in the
case of mut'ah marriage.

It was also during the period of the rule of the second caliph that new
social and economic forces led to the uneven distribution of the public
treasury (bayt al-mal) among the people,[[31]](#041) an act which was
later the cause of bewildering class differences and frightful and
bloody struggles among Muslims. At this time Mu'awiyah was ruling in
Damascus in the style of the Persian and Byzantine kings and was even
given-the title of the "Khusraw of the Arabs" (a Persian title of the
highest imperial power), but no serious protest was made against him for
his worldly type of rule.[[32]](#042)

The second caliph was killed by a Persian slave in 25/644. In accordance
with the majority vote of a six-man council which had assembled by order
of the second caliph before his death, the third caliph was chosen. The
third caliph did not prevent his Umayyad relatives from becoming
dominant over the people during his caliphate and appointed some of them
as rulers in the Hijaz, Iraq, Egypt, and other Muslim lands.[[33]](#043)
These relatives began to be lax in applying moral principles in
government. Some of them openly

committed injustice and tyranny, sin and iniquity, and broke certain of
the tenets of firmly established Islamic laws.

Before long, streams of protest began to flow toward the capital. But
the caliph, who was under the influence of his relativesparticularly
Marwan ibn Hakam[[34]](#044)-did not act promptly or decisively to
remove the causes against which the people were protesting. Sometimes it
even happened that those who protested were punished and driven away.

An incident that happened in Egypt illustrates the nature of the rule of
the third caliph. A group of Muslims in Egypt rebelled against Uthman.
Uthman sensed the danger and asked Ali for help, expressing his feeling
of contrition. Ali told the Egyptians, You have revolted in order to
bring justice and truth to life.

Uthman has repented saying, 'I shall change my ways and in three days
will fulfill your wishes. I shall expel the oppressive rulers from their
posts.'" Ali then wrote an agreement with them on behalf of Uthman and
they started home. On the way they saw the slave of Uthman riding on his
camel in the direction of Egypt.

They became suspicious of him and searched him. On him they found a
letter for the governor of Egypt containing the following words: "In the
name of God. When 'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Addis comes to you beat him with a
hundred lashes, shave his head and beard and condemn him to long
imprisonment. Do the same in the case of 'Amr ibn al-Hamq, Suda ibn
Hamran, and 'Urwah ibn Niba'." The Egyptians took the letter and
returned with anger to Uthman, saying, "You have betrayed us!" Uthman
denied the letter. They said, "Your slave was the carrier of the
letter." He answered, "He has committed this act without my permission."

They said, "He rode upon your camel." He answered, "They have stolen my
camel." They said, "The letter is in the handwriting of your secretary."
He replied, "This has been done without my permission and knowledge."
They said, "In any case you are not cempetent to be caliph and must
resign, for if this has been done with your permission you are a traitor
and if such important matters take place without your permission and
knowledge then your incapability and incompetence is proven. In any
case, either resign or dismiss the oppressive agents from office
immediately."

Uthman answered, "If I wish to act according to your will, then it is
you who are the rulers. Then, what is my function?" They stood up and
left the gathering in anger.[[35]](#045)

During his caliphate Uthman allowed the government of Damascus, at the
head of which stood Mu'awiyah, to be strengthened more than ever before.
In reality, the center of gravity of the caliphate as far as political
power was concerned was shifting to Damascus and the organization in
Medina, the capital of the Islamic world, was politically no more than a
form without the necessary power and substance to support
it.[[36]](#046) Finally, in the year 35/656, the people rebelled and
after a few days of siege and fighting the third caliph was killed.

The first caliph was selected through the vote of the majority of the
companions, the second caliph by the will and testament of the first,
and the third by a six-man council whose members and rules of procedure
were organized and determined by the second caliph. Altogether. the
policy of these three caliphs, who were in power for twenty-five years,
was to execute and apply Islamic laws and principles in society in
accordance with ijtihad and what appeared as most wise at the time to
the caliphs themselves. As for the Islamic sciences, the policy of these
caliphs was to have the Holy Quran read and understood without being
concerned with commentaries upon it or allowing it to become the subject
of discussion. The hadith of the Prophet was recited and was transmitted
orally without being written down. Writing was limited to the text of
the Holy Quran and was forbidden in the case of hadith.[[37]](#047)

After the battle of Yamamah which ended in 12/633, many of those who had
been reciters of the Holy Quran and who knew it by heart were killed. As
a result Umar ibn al-Khattab proposed to the first caliph to have the
verses of the Holy Quran collected in written form, saying that if
another war were to occur and the rest of those who knew the Quran by
heart were to be killed, the knowledge of the text of the Holy Book
would disappear among men. Therefore, it was necessary to assemble the
Quranic verses in written form.[[38]](#048)

From the Shi'ite point of view it appears strange that this

decision was made concerning the Quran and yet despite the fact that the
prophetic hadith, which is the complement of the Quran, was faced with
the same danger and was not free from corruption in transmission,
addition, diminution, forgery and forgetfulness, the same attention was
not paid to it. On the contrary, as already mentioned. writing it down
was forbidden and all of the written versions of it that were found were
burned, as if to emphasize that only the text of the Holy Book should
exist in written form.

As for the other Islamic sciences, during this period little effort was
made to propagate them, the energies of the community being spent mostly
in establishing the new sociopolitical order. Despite all the praise and
consecration which are found in the Quran concerning knowledge
('ilm),[[39]](#049) and the emphasis placed upon its cultivation, the
avid cultivation of the religious sciences was postponed to a later
period of Islamic history.

Most men were occupied with the remarkable and continuous victories of
the Islamic armies, and were carried away by the flood of immeasurable
booty which came from all directions toward the Arabian peninsula. With
this new wealth and the worldliness which came along with it, few were
willing to devote themselves to the cultivation of the sciences of the
Household of the Prophet, at whose head stood Ali, whom the Holy Prophet
had introduced to the people as the one most versed in the Islamic
sciences. At the same time, the inner meaning and purpose of the
teachings of the Holy Quran were neglected by most of those who were
affected by this change. It is strange that, even in the matter of
collecting the verses of the Holy Quran, Ali was not consulted and his
name was not mentioned among those who participated in this task,
although it was known by everyone that he had collected the text of the
Holy Quran after the death of the Prophet.[[40]](#050)

It has been recounted in many traditions that after receiving allegiance
from the community, Abu Bakr sent someone to Ali and asked for his
allegiance. Ali said, "I have promised not to leave my house except for
the daily prayers until I compile the Quran." And it has been mentioned
that Ali gave his allegiance to Abu Bakr after six months. This itself
is proof that Ali had finished compiling the Quran. Likewise, it has
been recounted that after

compiling the Quran he placed the pages of the Holy Book on a camel and
showed it to the people. It is also recounted that the battle of Yamamah
after which the Quran was compiled, occurred during the second year of
the caliphate of Abu Bakr. These facts have been mentioned in most works
on history and hadith which deal with the account of the compilation of
the Holy Quran.

These and similar events made the followers of Ali more firm in their
belief and more conscious of the course that lay before them. They
increased their activity from day to day and Ali himself, who was cut
off from the possibility of educating and training the people in
general, concentrated on privately training an elite.

During this twenty-five year period Ali lost through death three of his
four dearest friends and associates, who were also among the companions
of the Prophet: Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, and Miqdad. They
had been constant in their friendship with him in all circumstances. It
was also during this same period that some of the other companions of
the Holy Prophet and a large number of their followers in the Hijaz, the
Yemen, Iraq, and other lands, joined the followers of Ali. As a result,
after the death of the third caliph the people turned to Ali from all
sides, swore allegiance to him and chose him as caliph.

The Termination of the Caliphate of 'Ali Amir al-mu'minin[[41]](#051) and His Method of Rule
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The caliphate of Ali began toward the end of the year 35/656 and lasted
about four years and nine months. During his period as caliph Ali
followed the ways of the Holy Prophet[[42]](#052) and brought conditions
back to their original state. He forced the resignation of all the
incompetent political elements who had a hand in directing
affairs[[43]](#053) and began in reality a major transformation of a
"revolutionary" nature which caused him innumerable
difficulties.[[44]](#054)

On his first day as caliph, in an address to the people, Ali said, "O
People, be aware that the difficulties which you faced during the
apostolic period of the Prophet of God have come upon you

once again and seized yow. Your ranks must be turned completely around
so that the people of virtue who have fallen behind should come forward
and those who had come to the fore without being worthy should fall
behind. There is both truth (haqq) and falsehood (batil). Each has its
followers; but a person should follow the truth. If falsehood be
prevalent it is not something new, and if the truth is rare and hard to
come by, sometimes even that which is rare wins the day so that there is
hope of advance. Of course it does not occur often that something which
has turned away from man should return to him."[[45]](#055)

Ali continued his radically different type of government based more on
righteousness than political efficacy but, as is necessary in the case
of every movement of this kind, elements of the opposition whose
interests were endangered began to display their displeasure and
resisted his rule. Basing their actions on the claim that they wanted to
revenge the death of Uthman, they instigated bloody wars which continued
throughout almost all the time that Ali was caliph. From the Shi'ite
point of view those who caused these civil wars had no end in mind other
than their own personal interest. The wish to revenge the blood of the
third caliph was no more than an excuse to fool the crowd. There was no
question of a misunderstanding.

After the death of the Holy Prophet, a small minority, following Ali,
refused to pay allegiance. At the head of the minority there were
Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, and Ammar. At the beginning of the caliphate
of Ali also a sizable minority in disagreement refused to pay
allegiance. Among the most persistent opponents were Sa'id ibn 'Ass,
Walid ibn 'Uqbah, Marwan ibn Hakam, 'Amr ibn 'Ass, Busr ibn Artat,
Samurah ibn Jundab, and Mughirah ibn Shu'bah.

The study of the biography of these two groups, and meditation upon the
acts they have performed and stories recounted of them in history books,
reveal fully their religious personality and aim.

The first group were among the elite of the companions of the Holy
Prophet and among the ascetics, devout worshipers and selfless devotees
of Islam who struggled on the path of Islamic freedom. They were
especially loved by the Prophet. The Prophet said,

"God has informed me that He loves four men and that I should love them
also." They asked about their names. He mentioned Ali and then the names
of Abu Dharr, Salman and Miqdad. (Sunan of Ibn Majah, Cairo, 1372,
vol.I, p. 66.) 'A'ishah has recounted that the Prophet of God said, "If
two alternatives are placed before Ammar, he will definitely choose that
which is more true and right." (Ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 66.) The Prophet
said, "There is no one between heaven and earth more truthful than Abu
Dharr." (Ibn Majah, vol. I, p. 68.) There is no record of a single
forbidden act committed by these men during their lifetime. They never
spilled any blood unjustly, did not commit aggression against anyone,
did not steal anyone's property, never sought to corrupt and misguide
people.

History is, however, full of accounts of unworthy acts committed by some
of the second group. The various acts committed by some of these men in
opposition to explicit Islamic teachings are beyond reckoning. These
acts cannot be excused in any manner except the way that is followed by
certain groups among the Sunnis who say that God was satisfied with them
and therefore they were free to perform whatever act they wished, and
that they would not be punished for violating the injunctions and
regulations existing in the Holy Book and the Sunnah.

The first war in the caliphate of Ali, which is called the "Battle of
the Camel," was caused by the unfortunate class differences created
during the period of rule of the second caliph as a result of the new
socioeconomic forces which caused an uneven distribution of the public
treasury among members of the community.

When chosen to the caliphate, Ali divided the treasury
evenly[[46]](#056) as had been the method of the Holy Prophet, but this
manner of dividing the wealth upset Talhah and Zubayr greatly. They
began to show signs of disobedience and left Medina for Mecca with the
alleged aim of making the pilgrimage. They persuaded "the mother of the
Faithful" (umm al-mu'minin), A'ishah, who was not friendly with Ali, to
join them and in the name of wanting to revenge the death of the third
caliph they began the bloody Battle of the Camel.[[47]](#057) This was
done despite the fact that this same Talhah and Zubayr were in Medina
when the third caliph was

besieged and killed but did nothing to defend him.[[48]](#058)
Furthermore, after his death they were the first to pay allegiance to
Ali on behalf of the immigrants (muhajirun)[[49]](#059) as well as on
their own.[[50]](#060)

Also, the "mother of the Faithful," A'ishah, did not show any opposition
to those who had killed the third caliph at the moment when she received
the news of his death.[[51]](#061) It must be remembered that the main
instigators of the disturbances that led to the death of the third
caliph were those companions who wrote letters from Medina to people
near and far inviting them to rebel against the caliph, a fact which is
repeated in many early Muslim histories.

As for the second war, called the Battle of Siffin, which lasted for a
year and a half its cause was the covetousness of Mu'awiyah for the
caliphate which for him was a worldly political instrument rather than a
religious institution. But as an excuse he made the revenge of the blood
of the third caliph the main issue and began a war in which more than a
hundred thousand people perished without reason. Naturally, in these
wars Mu'awiyah was the aggressor rather than the defender, for the
protest to revenge someone's blood can never occur in the form of
defense. The pretext of this war was blood revenge. During the last days
of his life, the third caliph, in order to quell the uprising against
him, asked Mu'awiyah for help, but the army of Mu'awiyah which set out
from Damascus to Medina purposely waited on the road until the caliph
was killed. Then he returned to Damascus,to begin an uprising to revenge
the caliph's death.[[52]](#062) After the death of Ali and his gaining
the caliphate himself, Mu'awiyah forgot the question of revenging the
blood of the third caliph and did not pursue the matter further.

After Siffin there occurred the battle of Nahrawan in which a number of
people, among whom there could be found some of the companions, rebelled
against Ali, possibly at the instigation of Mu'awiyah.[[53]](#063) These
people were causing rebellion throughout the lands of Islam, killing the
Muslims and especially the followers of Ali. They even attacked pregnant
women and killed their babies. Ali put down this uprising as well, but a
short while later was himself killed in the mosque of Kufa by one of the
members of this group who came to be known as the Khawarij.

The opponents of Ali claim that he was a courageous man but did not
possess political acumen. They claim that at the beginning of his
caliphate he could have temporarily made peace with his opponents. He
could have approached them through peace and friendship, thus courting
their satisfaction and approval. In this way he could have strengthened
his caliphate and only then turned to their extirpation and destruction.
What people who hold this view forget is that the movement of Ali was
not based on political opportunism. It was a radical and revolutionary
religious movement (in the true sense of revolution as a spiritual
movement to reestablish the real order of things and not in its current
political and social sense); therefore it could not have been
accomplished through compromise or flattery and forgery. A similar
situation can be seen during the apostleship of the Holy Prophet. The
infidels and polythesis proposed peace to him many times and swore that
if he were to abstain from protesting against their gods they would not
interfere with his religious mission. But the Prophet did not accept
such a proposal, although he could in those days of difficulty have made
peace and used flattery to fortify his own position, and then have risen
against his enemies. In fact, the Islamic message never allows a right
and just cause to be abandoned for the sake of strengthening another
good cause, nor a falsehood to be rejected and disproven through another
falsehood. There are many Quranic verses concerning this matter.
[[54]](#064)

The Benefit which the Shi'ah Derived from the Caliphate of Ali
--------------------------------------------------------------

During the four years and nine months of his caliphate, Ali was not able
to eliminate the disturbed conditions which were prevailing throughout
the Islamic world, but he was successful in three fundamental ways:

1. As a result of his just and upright manner of living he revealed once
again the beauty and attractiveness of the way of life of the Holy
Prophet, especially to the younger generation. In contrast to the
imperial grandeur of Mu'awiyah, he lived in

simplicity and poverty like the poorest of people.[[55]](#065) He never
favored his friends or relatives and family above others,[[56]](#066)
nor did he ever prefer wealth to poverty or brute force to weakness.

2. Despite the cumbersome and strenuous difficulties which absorbed his
time, he left behind among the Islamic community a valuable treasury of
the truly divine sciences and Islamic intellectual
disciplines.[[57]](#067) Nearly eleven thousand of his proverbs and
short sayings on different intellectual, religious and social subjects
have been recorded.[[58]](#068) In his talks and speeches he expounded
the most sublime Islamic sciences in a most elegant and flowing manner.
He established Arabic grammar and laid the basis for Arabic
literature.[[59]](#069)

He was the first in Islam to delve directly into the questions of
metaphysics (falsafah-i ilahi) in a manner combining intellectual rigor
and logical demonstration. He discussed problems which had never
appeared before in the same way among the metaphysicians of the
world.[[60]](#070) Moreover, he was so devoted to metaphysics and gnosis
that even in the heat of battle he would carry out intellectual
discourse and discuss metaphysical questions.[[61]](#071)

3. He trained a large number of religious scholars and Islamic savants,
among whom are found a number of ascetics and gnostics who were the
forefathers of the Sufis, such men as Uways al-Qarani, Kumayl
al-Nakha'i, Maytham al-Tammar and Roshaid al-Hajari. These men have been
recognized by the later Sufis as the founders of gnosis in Islam. Others
among his disciples became the first teachers of jurisprudence,
theology, Quranic commentary and recitation.[[62]](#072)  
  

The Transfer of the Caliphate to Mu'awiyah and Its Transformation into a Hereditary Monarchy
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the death of Ali, his son, Hasan ibn Ali, who is recognized by the
Shi'ah as their second Imam, became caliph. This designation occurred in
accordance with Ali's last will and testament and also by the allegiance
of the community to Hasan. But Mu'awiyah did not remain quiet before
this event. He marched with his army

toward Iraq, which was then the capital of the caliphate , and began to
wage war against Hasan.

Through different intrigues and the payment of great sums of money,
Mu'awiyah was able gradually to corrupt the aides and generals of Hasan.
Finally he was able to force Hasan to hand the caliphate over to him so
as to avoid bloodshed and to make peace.[[63]](#073)Hasan handed the
caliphate to Mu'awiyah on the condition that the caliphate would be
returned to him after the death of Mu'awiyah and that no harm would come
to his partisans.[[64]](#074)

In the year 40/661 Mu'awiyah finally gained control of the caliphate. He
then set out immediately for Iraq and in a speech to the people of that
land said: "I did not fight against you for the sake of the prayers or
of fasting. These acts you can perform yourself. What I wanted to
accomplish was to rule over you and this end I have achieved." He also
said, "The agreement I made with Hasan is null and void. It lies
trampled under my feet." [[65]](#075) With this declaration Mu'awiyah
made known to the people the real character of his government and
revealed the nature of the program he had in mind.

He indicated in his declaration that he would separate religion from
politics and would not give any guarantees concerning religious duties
and regulations. He would spend all his force to preserve and to keep
alive his own power, whatever might be the cost. Obviously a government
of such a nature is more of a sultanate and a monarchy than a caliphate
and vicegerency of the Prophet of God in its traditional Islamic sense.
That is why some who were admitted to his court addressed him as
"king."[[66]](#076) He himself in some private gatherings interpreted
his government as a monarchy,[[67]](#077) while in public he always
introduced himself as the caliph.

Naturally any monarchy that is based on force carries with it inherently
the principle of inheritance. Mu'awiyah, too, finally realized this
fact, and chose his son, Yazid, who was a heedless young man without the
least religious personality,[[68]](#078) as the "crown prince" and his
successor. This act was to be the cause of many regrettable events in
the future. Mu'awiyah had previously indicated that he would refuse to
permit Hasan ibn Ali to succeed

him as caliph and that he had other thoughts in mind. Therefore he had
caused Hasan to be killed by poisoning,[[69]](#079) thus preparing the
way for his son, Yazid.

In breaking his agreement with Hasan, Mu'awiyah made it clear that he
would never permit the Shi'ah of the Household of the Prophet to live in
a peaceful and secure environment and continue their activity as before,
and he carried into action this very intention. It has been said that he
went so far as to declare that whoever would transmit a hadith in praise
of the virtues of the Household of the Prophet would have no immunity or
protection concerning his life, merchandise and property.[[70]](#080) At
the same time he ordered that whoever could recite a hadith in praise of
the other companions or caliphs would be given sufficient reward. As a
result a noticeable number of hadiths were recorded at this time
praising the companions, some of which are of doubtful
authenticity.[[71]](#081) He ordered pejorative comments to be made
about Ali from the pulpits of mosques throughout the lands of Islam,
while he himself sought to revile Ali. This command continued to be more
or less in effect until the caliphate of Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, when it
was discontinued.[[72]](#082) With the help of his agents and
lieutenants, Mu'awiyah caused elite and the most outstanding among the
partisans of Ali to be put to death and the heads of some of them to be
carried on lances throughout different cities.[[73]](#083) The majority
of Shi'ites were forced to disown and even curse Ali and to express
their disdain for him. If they refused, they were put to death.

The Bleakest Days of Shi'ism
----------------------------

The most difficult period for Shi'ism was the twenty-year rule of
Mu'awiyah, during which the Shi'ites had no protection and most of them
were considered as marked characters, under suspicion and hunted down by
the state. Two of the leaders of Shi'ism who lived at this time, Imams
Hasan and Husayn, did not possess any means whatsoever to change the
negative and oppressive circumstances in which they lived. Husayn, the
third Imam

of Shi'ism, had no possibility of freeing the Shi'ites from persecution
in the ten years he was Imam during Mu'awiyah's caliphate, and when he
rebelled during the caliphate of Yazid he was massacred along with all
his aides and children.

Certain people in the Sunni world explain as pardonable the arbitrary,
unjust and irresponsible actions carried out at this time by Mu'awiyah
and his aides and lieutenants, some of whom were like Mu'awiyah himself,
among the companions. This group reasons that according to certain
hadiths of the Holy Prophet all the companions could practice ijtihad,
that they were excused by God for the sins they committed, and that God
was satisfied with them and forgave them whatever wrong they might have
performed. The Shi'ites, however, do not accept this argument for two
reasons:

1. It is not conceivable that a leader of human society like the Prophet
should rise in order to revivify truth, justice and freedom and to
persuade a group of people to accept his beliefs - a group all of whose
members had sacrificed their very existence in order to accomplish this
sacred end - and then as soon as this end is accomplished give his aides
and companions complete freedom to do with these sacred laws as they
will. It is not possible to believe that the Holy Prophet would have
forgiven the companions for whatever wrong action they might have
performed. Such indifference to the type of action performed by them
would have only destroyed the structure which the Holy Prophet had built
with the same means that he had used to construct it.

2. Those sayings which depict the companions as inviolable and pardoned
in advance for every act they might perform, even one unlawful or
inadmissible, are most likely apocryphal ; the authenticity of many of
them has not been fully established by traditional methods. Moreover, it
is known historically that the companions did not deal with one another
as if they were inviolable and pardoned for all their sins and
wrongdoings. Therefore, even judging by the way the companions acted and
dealt with each other, it can be concluded that such sayings cannot be
literally true in the way some have understood them. If they do contain
an aspect

of the truth it is in indicating the legal inviolability of the

companions and the sanctification which they enjoyed generally as a
group because of their proximity to the Holy Prophet. The expression of
God's satisfaction with the companions in the Holy Quran, because of the
services they had rendered in obeying His Command,[[74]](#084) refers to
their past actions, and to God's satisfaction with them in the past, not
to whatever action each one of them might perform in the future.  
  

The Establishment of Umayyad Rule
---------------------------------

In the year 60/680 Mu'awiyah died and his son Yazid became caliph, as
the result of the allegiance which his father had obtained for him from
the powerful political and military leaders of the community. From the
testimony of historical documents it can be seen clearly that Yazid had
no religious character at all and that even during the lifetime of his
father he was oblivious to the principles and regulations of Islam. At
that time his only interest was debauchery and frivolity. During his
three years of caliphate he was the cause of calamities that had no
precedent in the history of Islam, despite all the strife that had
occurred before him.

During the first year of Yazid's rule Imam Husayn, the grandson of the
Holy Prophet, was massacred in the most atrocious manner along with his
children, relatives, and friends. Yazid even had some of the women and
children of the Household of the Prophet killed and their heads
displayed in different cities. During the second year of his rule, he
ordered a general massacre of Medina and for three days gave his
soldiers freedom to kill, loot, and take the women of the city. During
the third year he had the sacred Ka'bah destroyed and burned.
[[75]](#085) Following Yazid, the family of Marwan gained possession of
the caliphate, according to details that are recorded in the history
books. The rule of this eleven-member group, which lasted for nearly
seventy years, was successful politically but from the point of view of
purely religious values it fell short of Islamic ideals and practices.
Islamic society was dominated by the Arab element alone and non-Arabs
were subordinated to the Arabs. In

fact a strong Arab empire was created which gave itself the name of an
Islamic caliphate. During this period some of the caliphs were
indifferent to religious sentiments to the extent that one of them - who
was the "vicegerent of the Holy Prophet" and was regarded as the
protector of religion - decided without showing any respect for Islamic
practices and the feelings of Muslims to construct a room above the
Ka'bah so that he could have a place to enjoy and amuse himself during
the annual pilgrimage.[[76]](#086) It is even recounted of one of these
caliphs that he made the Holy Quran a target for his arrow and in a poem
composed to the Quran said: "On the Day of Judgment when you appear
before God tell Him 'the caliph tore me.'"[[77]](#087)

Naturally the Shi'ites, whose basic differences with the Sunnis were in
the two questions of the Islamic caliphate and religious authority, were
passing through bitter and difficult days in this dark period. Yet in
spite of the unjust and irresponsible ways of the governments of the
time the asceticism and purity of the leaders of the Household of the
Prophet made the Shi'ites each day ever more determined to hold on to
their beliefs. Of particular importance was the tragic death of Husayn,
the third Imam, which played a major role in the spread of Shi'ism,
especially in regions away from the center of the caliphate, such as
Iraq, the Yemen, and Persia. This can be seen through the fact that
during the period of the fifth Imam, before the end of the first Islamic
century, and less than forty years after the death of Husayn, the
Shi'ites took advantage of the internal differences and weaknesses in
the Umayyad government and began to organize themselves, flocking to the
side of the fifth Imam. People came from all Islamic countries like a
flood to his door to collect hadith and to learn the Islamic sciences.
The first century had not yet ended when a few of the leaders who were
influential in the government established the city of Qum in Persia and
made it a Shi'ite settlement. But even then the Shi'ah continued to live
for the most part in hiding and followed their religious life secretly
without external manifestations.[[78]](#088)

Several times the descendants of the Prophet (who are called in Persian
sadat-i 'alawi) rebelled against the injustice of the

government, but each time they were defeated and usually lost their
lives. The severe and unscrupulous government of the time did not
overlook any means of crushing them. The body of Zayd, the leader of
Zayd Shi'ism, was dug out of the grave and hanged; then after remaining
on the gallows for three years it was brought down and burned, its ashes
being thrown to the wind.[[79]](#089) The Shi'ites believe that the
fourth and fifth Imams were poisoned by the Umayyads as the second and
third Imams had been killed by them before.[[80]](#090)

The calamities brought about by the Umayyads were so open and unveiled
that the majority of the Sunnis, although they believed generally that
it was their duty to obey the caliphs, felt the pangs of their religious
conscience and were forced to divide the caliphs into two groups. They
came to distinguish between the "rightly guided caliphs" (khulafa
rashidun) who are the first four caliphs after the death of the Holy
Prophet (Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Ali), and the others who began with
Mu'awiyah and who did not possess by any means the religious virtues of
the rightly guided caliphs.

The Umayyads caused so much public hatred as a result of their injustice
and heedlessness during their rule that after the definitive defeat and
death of the last Umayyad caliph his two sons and a number of their
family encountered great difficulties in escaping from the capital. No
matter where they turned no one would give them shelter. Finally after
much wandering the deserts of Nubia, Abyssinia, and Bajawah (between
Nubia and Abyssinia) during which many of them died from hunger and
thirst, they came to Bab al-Mandab of the Yemen. There they acquired
travel expenses from the people through begging and set out for Mecca
dressed as porters. In Mecca they finally succeeded in disappearing
among the mass of the people.[[81]](#091)  
  

Shi'ism During the 2nd/8th Century
----------------------------------

During the latter part of the first third of the 2nd/8th century,
following a series of revolutions and bloody wars throughout the

Islamic world which were due to the injustice, repressions, and
wrongdoings of the Umayyads, there began an anti-Umayyad movement in the
name of the Household of the Prophet in Khurasan in Persia. The leader
of this movement was the Persian general, Abu Muslim Marwazi, who
rebelled against Umayyad rule and advance his cause step by step until
he was able to overthrow the Umayyad government.[[82]](#092)

Although this movement originated from a profound Shi'ite background and
came into being more or less with the claim of wanting to avenge the
blood of the Household of the Prophet, and although people were even
asked secretly to give allegiance to a qualified member of the family of
the Prophet, it did not rise directly as a result of the instructions of
the Imams. This is witnessed by the fact that when Abu Muslim offered
the caliphate to the sixth Imam in Medina he rejected it completely
saying "You are not one of my men and the time is not my
time."[[83]](#093)

Finally the Abbasids gained the caliphate in the name of the family of
the Prophet [[84]](#094) and at the beginning showed some kindness to
people in general and to descendants of the Prophet in particular. In
the name of avenging the martyrdom of the family of the Prophet, they
massacred the Umayyads, going to the extent of opening their graves and
burning whatever they found in them.[[85]](#095) But soon they began to
follow unjust ways of the Umayyads and did not abstain in any way from
injustice and irresponsible action. Abu Hanifah, the founder of one of
the four Sunni schools of law, was imprisoned by al-Mansur and
tortured[[86]](#096)Ibn Hanbal the founder of another school of law was
whipped.[[87]](#097) The sixth Imam died from poisoning after much
torture and pain.[[88]](#098) The descendants of the Holy Prophet were
sometimes beheaded in groups, buried alive, or even placed within walls
of government buildings under construction.

Harun al-Rashid, the Abbasid caliph, during whose reign the Islamic
empire reached the apogee of its expansion and power, occasionally would
look at the sun and address it in these words: "Shine wherever thou
wilt, thou shalt never be able to leave my kingdom." On the other hand
his armies were advancing in the East and West, on the other hand a few
steps from the palace of the

caliph, and without his knowledge, officials had decided on their own to
collect tolls from people who wanted to cross the Baghdad bridge. Even
one day when the caliph himself wanted to cross the bridge he was
stopped and asked to pay the toll.[[89]](#099)

A singer, by chanting two lascivious verses, incited the passions of the
Abbasid caliph, Amin, who awarded him three million dirhams. The chanter
in joy threw himself at the feet of the caliph saying, "Oh, leader of
the faithful! You give me all this money?" The caliph answered, "It does
not matter. We receive money from an unknown part of the
country."[[90]](#0100)

The bewildering amount of wealth that was pouring every year from all
corners of the Islamic world into the public treasury in the capital
helped creating luxury and a mundane atmosphere. Much of it in fact was
often spent for the pleasures and iniquities of the caliph of the time.
The number of beautiful slave girls in the court of some of the caliphs
exceeded thousands. By the dissolution of Umayyad rule and the
establishment of the Abbasids, Shi'ism did not benefit in any way. Its
repressive and unjust opponents merely changed their name.  
  

Shi'ism in the 3rd/9th Century
------------------------------

At the beginning of the 3rd/9th century Shi'ism was able to breathe once
again. This more favorable condition was first of all due to the fact
that many scientific and philosophical books were translated from Greek,
Syriac, and other languages into Arabic, and people eagerly studied the
intellectual and rational sciences. Moreover, al-Ma'mun, the Abbasid
caliph from 198/813 to 218/833, had Mu'tazilite leanings and since in
his religious views he favored intellectual demonstration, he was more
inclined to give complete freedom to the discussion and propagation of
different religious views. Shi'ite theologians and scholars took full
advantage of this freedom and did their utmost to further scholarly
activities and propagate Shi'ite teachings. Also, al-Ma'mun, following
demands of the political forces at the time, had made the

eight Shi'ite Imam his successor, as is recounted in most

standard histories. As a result, the descendants of the Holy Prophet and
their friends were to a certain extent free from pressures from the
government and enjoyed some degrees of liberty. Yet before long the
cutting edge of the sword once again turned towards the Shi'ites and the
forgotten ways of the past came upon them again. This was particularly
true in the case of al-Mutawakkil (233/847-247/861) who held a special
enmity towards Ali and the Shi'ites. By his order the tomb of the third
Imam in Karbala was completely demolished.[[91]](#0101)  
  

Shi'ism in the 4th/10th Century
-------------------------------

In the 4th/10th century certain conditions again prevailed which aided
greatly the spread and strengthening of Shi'ism. Among them were the
weaknesses that appeared in the central Abbasid government and
administration and the appearance of the Buyid rulers. The Buyids, who
were Shi'ite had the greatest influence not only in the provinces of
Persia but also in the capital of the caliphate in Baghdad, and even
upon the caliph himself. This new strength of considerable proportions
enabled the Shi'ites to stand up before their opponents who previously
had tried to crush them by relying upon the power of the caliphate. It
also made it possible for the Shi'ites to propagate their religious
views openly.

As recorded by historians, during this century most of the Arabian
peninsula was Shi'ite with the exception of some of the big cities. Even
some of the major cities like Hajar, Uman, and Sa'dah were Shi'ite. In
Basra, which had always been a Sunni city and competed with Kufa which
was considered a Shi'ite center, there appeared a notable group of
Shi'ites. Also in Tripoli, Nablus, Tiberias, Aleppo, Nayshapur, and
Herat there were many Shi'ites, while Ahwaz and the coast of the Persian
Gulf on the Persian side were also Shi'ite.[[92]](#0102)

At the beginning of this century Nasir Utrush, after many years of
propagation of his religious mission in northern Persia, gained power in
Tabaristan and established a kingdom which continued

for several generations after him. Before Utrush, Hasan ibn Zayd
al-'Alawi had reigned from many years in Tabaristan. [[93]](#0103) Also
in this period the Fatimids, who were Isma'ili, conquered Egypt and
organized a caliphate which lasted for over two centuries
(296/908-567/1171).[[94]](#0104) Often disputation and fighting occurred
in major cities like Baghdad, Cairo and Nayshapur between Shi'ites and
Sunnis, in some of which the Shi'ites would gain the upper hand and come
out victorious.  
  

Shi'ism from the 5th/11th to the 9th/15th Centuries
---------------------------------------------------

From the 5th/11th to the 9th/15th centuries Shi'ism continued to expand
as it had done in the 4th/10th century.[[95]](#0105) Many kings and
rulers who were Shi'ite appeared in different parts of the Islamic world
and propagated Shi'ism. Toward the end of the 5th/11th century the
missionary activity of Isma'ilism took root in the fort of Alamut and
for nearly a century and a half the Isma'ilis lived in complete
independence in the central regions of Persia. Also the Sadat-i
Mar'ashi, who were descendants of the Holy Prophet, ruled for many years
in Mazandaran (Tabaristan).[[96]](#0106) Shah Muhammad Khudabandah, one
of the well-known Mongol rulers, became Shi'ite and his descendants
ruled for many years in Persia and were instrumental in spreading
Shi'ism.[[97]](#0107) Mention must also be made of the kings of the Aq
Qoyunlu and Qara Qoyunlu dynasties who ruled in Tabriz and whose domain
extended to Fars and Kerman,[[98]](#0108) as well as of the Fatimid
government which was ruling in Egypt.

Of course religious freedom and the possibility of exerting religious
power by the populace differed under different rulers. For example, with
the termination of Fatimid rule and coming to power of the Ayyubids the
scene changed completely and the Shi'ite population of Egypt and Syria
lost its religious independence. Many of the Shi'ites of Syria were
killed during this period merely on the accusation of following Shi'ism.
One of these was Shahid-iawwal (the First Martyr) Muhammad ibn Makki,
one of the great figures in Shi'ite jurisprudence, who was killed in

Damascus in 786/1384.[[99]](#0109) Also Shaykh al-ishraq Shihab al-Din
Suhrawardi was killed in Aleppo on the accusation that he was
cultivating Batini teachings and philosophy.[[100]](#0110) Altogether
during this period Shi'ism was growing from the point of view of
numbers, even though its religious power and freedom depended upon local
conditions and the rulers of the time. During this period, however,
Shi'ism never became the official religion of any Muslim state.  
  

Shi'ism in the 10th/16th and 11th/17th Centuries
------------------------------------------------

In the 10th/16th century Isma'il, who was of the household of Shaykh
Safi al-Din Ardibili (d. 735/1334), a Sufi master and also a Shi'ite,
began a revolt in Ardibil, with three hundred Sufis who were disciples
of his forefathers, with the aim of establishing an independent and
powerful Shi'ite country. In this way he began the conquest of Persia
and overcame the local feudal princes. After a series of bloody wars
with local rulers and also the Ottomans who held the title of caliph, he
succeeded in forming Persia piece by piece into a country and in making
Shi'ism the official religion in his kingdom.[[101]](#0111)

After the death of Shah Isma'il other Safavid kings reigned in Persia
until the 12th/18th century and each continued to recognize Shi'ism as
the official religion of the country and further to strengthen its hold
upon this land. At the height of their power, during the reign of Shah
'Abbas, the Safavids were able to increase the territorial expansion and
the population of Persia to twice its present size.[[102]](#0112) As for
other Muslim lands, the Shi'ite population continued the same as before
and increased only through the natural growth of population.  
  

Shi'ism from the 12th/18th to the 14th/20th Centuries
-----------------------------------------------------

During the past three centuries Shi'ism has followed its natural rate of
growth as before. At the present moment, during the latter

part of the 14th/20th century, Shi'ism is recognized as the official
religion in Iran, and in the Yemen and Iraq the majority population is
Shi'ite. In nearly all lands where there are Muslims one can find a
certain number of Shi'ites. It has been said that altogether in the
world today there are about eighty to ninety million Shi'ites.

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. The first designation to have appeared during the lifetime ofthe Holy
Prophet of God was shi'ah, and Salman, Abu Dharr. Miqdad and 'Ammar were
known by this name. See Hadir al'alam al-islami, Cairo, 1352, vol. I,
p.188. 2. Quran, XXVI, 214. 3. According to this hadith, Ali said, "I
who was the youngest of all have submitted that I am your vizier. The
Prophet put his hand around my neck and said, 'This person is my
brother, inheritor and vicegerent. You must obey him.' People laughed
and told Ahu Talib. 'He has ordered you to obey your son.'" Tabari,
al-To'rikh, Cairo, 1357, vol.II, p.63: Abu'l.Fida', al-Ta'rikh, Cairo,
1325, vol. I, p.116: Ibn al-Athir, al-Bidayah wa'l-nihayah, Cairo. 1358,
vol.III, p.39; Bahrani, Ghayat al-maram. Tehran. 1272, p.320. [Editor's
note: The reader Will notice that this hadith and certain others which
are quoted more than once appear each time in a slightly different form.
This is because the author has made use of different transmitted
versions in each place.] 4. Umm Salmah has recounted that the Prophet
said: "Ali is always with the Truth (haqq) and the Quran, and the Truth
and the Quran are always with him, and until the Day of Judgment they
will not be separated from each other." This hadith has been transmitted
through fifteen channels in Sunni sources and eleven in Shi'ite sources.
Umm Salmah, Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Bakr, A'ishah. Ali, Abu Sa'ld Khudri, Abu
Layla. Abu Ayyub Ansari are among its transmitters. Ghayat al-mararn
pp.539-540. The Prophet has a1so said, "God bless Ali for the Truth is
always with him." al-Bidayah wa'l-nihayah, vol. VII. p.36. 5. The
Prophet said: "Arbitration has been divided into ten parts. Nine parts
are given to Ali and one part is divided among all the people."
al-Bidayah wa'lnihayah. vol. VII, p.359. Salman Farsi has transmitted
this saying from the Prophet: "After me the most learned of men is Ali."
Ghayat al-maram, p.528. Ibn 'Abbas has said that the Prophet said: "Ali
is the most competent among people in judgment." From the book Fada'il
al-sahabah. mentioned in Ghayat al-maram, p.528. Umar used to say: "May
God never afflict me with a difficult task where Ali is not present."
al.Bidayah wa'l-nihayah. vol. VII. p.359. 6. Editor's note.' According
to Shi'ite beliefs, on returning from the last pil grimage to Mecca on
'the way to Mednia at a site called Ghadir Khumm the Prophet chose Ali
as his successor before the vast crowd that was accompanying him. The
Shi'ites celebrate this event to this day as a major religious feast
marking the day when the right of Ali to succession was universally
acclaimed. 7. The hadith of Ghadir in its different versions is one of
the definitely estab

lished hadiths among Sunnis and Shi'ah. More than a hundred of the
companions have recounted it with different chains of transmission and
expressions, and it has been recorded in books of Sunnism and Shi'ism
alike, Concerning details refer to Ghaayat al-maram, p. 79, 'Abaqat of
Musawi India, 1317 (Volume on Ghadir) and al-Ghadir of Amini, Najaf,
1372. 8. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, Najaf, 1358, vol, II, pp. 137 and 140;
Tarikh-i Abi'l-Fida', vol. I, p.156; sahih of Bukhari, Cairo, 1315, vol.
IV, p.207; Muruj al-dhahab of Mas'udi, Cairo, 1367, vol.ll, p.437,
vol.lll, pp.21 and 61. 9. Sahih of Muslim, vol. XV, p.176; Sahih, of
Bukhari, vol. IV, p.207; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.23 and vol.ll,
p.437; Tarikh-i Abi'l-Fida', vol.l, pp.127 and 181. 10. Jabir says: "We
were in the presence of the Prophet when Ali appeared from far away. The
Prophet said: 'I swear by Him who holds my life in His hands, this
person and his partisans (Shi'ah) will have salvation on the Day of
Judgment."' Ibn 'Abbas says: "When the verse: '(And) lo! those who
believe and do good works are the best ofcreated beings' (Quran, XCVII,
7) was revealed, the Prophet told Ali: 'This verse pertains to you and
your partisans who will possess felicity on the Day of Judgment and God
will also be satisfied with you."' These two hadiths and several others
are recorded in the book al-Duirr aI-manthur of Suyuti, Cairo', 1313,
vol. VI, p.379, and Ghayat al-maram, p.326. 11. While suffering from the
illness that led to his death, Muhammad organized an army under the
command of Usamah ibn Zayd and insisted that everyone should participate
in this war and go out of Medina. A number of people disobeyed the
Prophet including Abu Bakr and Umar and this disturbed the Prophet
greatly. (Sharh, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, Cairo, 1329, vol.l, p.53.) At the
moment of his death the Holy Prophet said: "Prepare ink and paper so
that I will have a letter written for you which will be a cause of
guidance for you and prevent you from being misled." Umar, who prevented
this action, said: "His illness has run out of hand and he is
delirious." (Tarikh-i Tabari; vol.ll, p.436: Sahih of Bukhari, vol.lll
and Sahih, of Muslim, Cairo, 1349, vol. V; al-Bidayah wa'l-nihayah, vol.
V, p.227; Ibn Abi'l- Hadid, vol. I, p.133.) A somewhat similar situation
occurred again during the illness which led to the death ofthe first
caliph. In his last testament the first caliph chose Umar and even
fainted while making the testament but Umar said nothing and did not
consider him to be delirious, although he had fainted while the testa
ment was being written. The Prophet had been inerrant and fully
conscious when he asked them to write down a letter of guidance. (Raudat
al-Safa' of Mir Khwand, Lucknow, 1332, vol.ll, p.260.) 12. lbn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l, p.58 and pp. 123135; Trikh-i Ya'qubi.vol.ll, p.102;
Tarikh.i Tabari, vol.ll, pp.445-460. 13. Tarikh.i Ya'qubi; vol.ll, pp.
103-106; Tarikh-i Abi'l-Fida, vol.l, pp.156 and 166; Muruj al-dhahab,
vol.ll, pp.307 and 352; lbn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l, pp.17 and 134. In answer
to Ibn Ahbas's protest Umar said, "I swear to God Ah was the most
deserving of alI people to become caliph, but for three reasons we
pushed him aside: (1) he was too young, (2) he was attached to the
descendants of 'Abd al-Muttalib, (3) people did not like to have
prophecy and the caliphate assembled in one house hold." (Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l, p.134.) Umar said to Ibn Abbas, "I swear to God that
Ali deserved the caliphate, but the Quraysh would not have been able to
bear his caliphate, for had he become caliph he would have forced the
people to accept the pure truth and follow the right path. Under his
caliphate they would not have been able to transgress the boundaries
ofjustice and thus would have sought to engage in war with him."
(Tarikh-i Ya'qubi; vol.ll, p.137.) 14. Amr ibn Horith said to Sa'id ibn
Zayd, "Did anyone oppose paying alle giance to Abu Bakr ?" He answered,
"No one was opposed to him except those who had become apostates or were
about to become so." Tarikh-i Tabari, vol.ll, p.447.

15. In the famous hadith of thaqalayn the Prophet says, "I leave two
things of value amidst you in trust which if you hold on to you will
never go astray: the Quran and the members of my household; these will
never he separated until the Day ofjudgment." This hadith has been
transmitted through more than a hundred channels by over thirty-five of
the companions of the Holy Prophet. ('Abaqat, volume on hadith-i
thaqalayn; Ghayat al-maram, p.211.) The Prophet said, "lam the city of
knowledge and Ali is its gate. Therefore whosoever seeks knowledge
should enter through its door." (al-Bidtyah wa'l-nihayah, vol. VII,
p.359.) 16. Ya'qubt-. vol.ll, pp.105-150, where this is mentioned often.
17. The Book of God and the sayings of the Holy Prophet and his
household are replete with encouragement and exhortation to acquire
knowledge, to the extent that the Holy Prophet says: "To seek knowledge
is incumbent upon every Mus lim." Bihar al-anwar of Majlisi, Tehran.
1301-15, vol.l, p.55. 18. al-Bidayah wa'I-nihayah, vol. VII, p.360. 19.
Editor's note: The Quraysh was the most aristocratic tribe in
pre-Islamic Arabia from which rose the Holy Prophet himself. But the
Quraysh, being the guardians of the Ka'bah, first opposed his prophecy
and offered the greatest resis tance against him. Only later did they
surrender to the new religion in which they have always continued to
hold a place of honor, especially the branch directly connected with the
family of the Prophet. 20. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, pp.111, 126 and 129. 21.
Editor's note.' The traditions of the Prophet as contained in his
sayings are called hadith, while his actions, deeds, words and all that
made up.the life which has become an example to all Muslims are called
sunnah. 22. God says in His Word: "For lo! it is an unassailable
Scripture. Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or behind it."
(Quran, XLI, 41-42) And He says, "The decision is for Allah only"
(Quran, VI, 57, also XII, 40 and 67), meaning the only shari'ah is the
Shari'ah and laws of God which must reach man through prophecy. And He
says. "but he [Muhammad] is the messenger of Allah and the Seal of the
Prophets." (Quran. XXXIII,40) And He says, "Whoso judgeth not by that
which Allah hath revealed: such are the disbelievers." (Quran, V, 44)
23. Editor's note: According to Shi'ite sources after the death of the
Prophet people gathered in the "covered porch" (saqifah) of Bani Sa'idah
and swore alle giance to Abu Bakr as caliph. As for the hadith of "ink
and paper" it refers to the Iast moments in the life ofthe Prophet as
related above in Note 11. 24. Editor's note: The mujtahid is one who
through mastery of the religious sciences and the possession of moral
qualities has the right to practice ijtihad or the giving of fresh
opinion on matters pertaining to the Shari'ah. The right of exercising
one's independent judgment based on the principles of the Law. or
ijtihad has ceased ih Sunni Islam since the 3rd/9th century whereas the
"gate of ijtihad has been always open in Shi'ite Islam. The leading
authorities in the Divine Law are called in Shi'ism mujtahids. 25.
Tarikh-i Ya'qubi vol.ll. p.110; Tarikh-i Abi'l Fida', vol. I, p. 158.
26. Editor's note: A religious tax paid to the family of the Prophet
which was discontinued in Sunni Islam after his death but continues in
Shi'ite Islam to this day. 27. al-Durr al-mathur. vol.lll, p.186;
Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.lll. p.48. Besides these, the necessity of the
khums has been mentioned in the Holy Quran: "And know that whatever ye
take of spoils of war, Io! a fifth (khumus) thereof is for Allah, and
for the messenger and for kinsmen(Quran, VIII, 41). 28. During his
caliphate Abu Bakr collected five hundred hadiths. A'ishah recounts: One
night I saw my father disturbed until morning. In the morning he told
me: 'Bring the hadiths.' Then he set them all on fire." (Kanz a1-'ummal
of 'Ala' al-Din Mutttaqi. Hyderahad. 1364-75, vol. V, p. 237.) Umar
wrote to all cities

stating 'that whosoever had a hadith should destroy it. (Kanz al-'ummal,
vol. V. p.237.) Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr says: "During the time of Umar
hadiths in creased. When they were brought to him he ordered them to be
burned." (Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, Beirut, 1376, vol. V, p.140.) 29. Editor's
note: The first four caliphs, Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali, are
together called the Khulafa rashidun, the rightly guided caliphs, and
their period of caliphate is sharply distinguished from that of the
Umayyads which followed because the rule of the first four caliphs was
strongly religious in character while the Umayyad caliphate was colored
by mundane and worldly considerations. 30. Tarikh-i Abi'l-Fida', vol.l,
p.151, and other similar sources. 31. Editor's note: For the benefit of
non-Muslim readers, all dates will be given in both A.H. (Islamic, lunar
calendar dating from the Hijrah) and the corre sponding A.D. years
(13/634-25/644); when a reference is made to a century, we have given
first the Islamic century and then the corresponding Christian century:
(4th/lOth century). 32. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.131; Tarikh-i
Abi'l-Fida', vol.l, p.160. 33. Usd al-ghabah of lbn Athir, Cairo, 1280.
vol. IV, p.386; aI-lsabah of lbn Hajar 'Asqalani, Cairo, 1323, vol.lll.
34. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.150; Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.168; Tarikh-i
Tabari, vol.lll, p.377, etc. 35. Tarikh- Ya'qubi, vol. ll;p. 150;
Tarikh-i Tabari; vol.lll, p.397. 36. Tarikh- Tabari, vol.lll;
pp.402-409; Tarikh-i Ya'qubi; vol.ll, pp.150-151. 37. Tarikh-i Tabari,
vol.lll, p.377. 38. 27ahih ofBukhari, vol. VI, p.98; Tarikh-i Ya'qubi;
vol.ll, p.113. 39. Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.lll; Tabari; vol.lll, pp.129-132.
40. Editor's note: The word ilm means science in its most universal
sense, like the Latin scientia, and applies to the religious as well as
intellectual, rational and philosophical forms of knowledge. Generally
it is distinguished from ma'rifah or irfan which is Divine knowledge and
may be compared to the Latin sapientia. Certain Muslim masters, however,
consider 'ilm in its highest sense to stand above irfan since it is a
Divine Quality, one ofGod's Names being al-'Alim, He Who knows. 41.
Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.113; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l, p.9. 42.
Editor's note: The title amir al-mu'minin, commander of the faithful,"
is used in Shi'ism solely for Ali, whereas in Sunni Islam it is a
general title conferred upon all the caliphs. 43. Ya'qubi, vol.ll,
p.154. 44. Ya'qubi; vol.ll, p.155; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.ll, p.364. 45.
Editor's note: Revolutionary in this context does not ofcourse bear the
same meaning that it carries generally today. In a traditional context a
revolutionary movement is the reestablishment or reapplication of
immutable principles of a transcendent order whereas in an
anti-traditional context it means rebellion against either these
principles or their application or against any established order in
general. 46. Nahj al-balaghah, the fifteenth sermon. 47. Muruj
al-dhahab, vol.ll. p.362; Nahj al-balaghah, sermon 122; Ya'qubi vol.ll,
p.160: Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. I, p.180. 48. Ya'qubi; vol.ll, p.156:
Abu'l-Fida-', vol.l, p.172; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.ll, p.366 49. Ya'qubi;
vol.ll, p.152. 50. Editor's note: The muhajirun refers to the early
converts to Islam who im migrated with the Prophet to Medina from Mecca.
51. Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.154; Abu'l-Fida, vol.l, p.171. 52. Ya'qubi,
vol.ll, p.152. 53. When Uthman was surrounded by those who had rebelled
he wrote to

Mu'awiyah asking for help. Mu'awiyah prepared an army of twelve thousand
men and sent them toward Medina. But he asked them to camp around
Damascus and came to Uthman himselftu report on the readiness ofthe
army. Uthman said, "You have made your army stop on purpose so that I
will be killed. Then you will make the spilling of my blood an excuse to
revolt yourself" Ya'qubi vol.ll, p.152; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.25;
Tabari, vol.lll, p.403. 54. Muruj al-dhahab, vol.ll, p.415. 55. For
instance, see the traditional commentaries which describe the circum
stances at the time of the revelation of these verses: "The chiefs among
them go about, exhorting: Go and be staunch to your gods!" (Quran,
XXXVIII, 7) and "And if We had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest
almost have inclined unto them a little" (Quran, XVII, 74 and "Who would
have had thee compromise, that they may compromise." (Quran, LXVIII, 9)
56. Muruj al-dhahab, vol.ll, p.431; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l, p.181. 57.
Abu'l-Fidl', vol. I, p.182; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid. vol.l, p.181. 58. Nahj
al-balaghah and hadiths found in books of both Sunnis and Shi'ites. 59.
Kitab al-ghurar wa'l-durar of Amidi, Sidon, 1349. 60. Such works as the
Nahw (Grammar) of Suyuti, Tehran, 1281 etc., vol.ll, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid,
vol.l, p.6. 61. See Nahj al-balaghah. 62. Amidst the fighting of the
Battle ofJamal a Bedouin asked Ali: "Oh, Com mander of the Faithful!
,You say God is one?" People attacked him from two sides and said:'Don't
you see that Ali is worried and his mind occupied with so many diverse
matters? Why do you engage in a discussion with him?" Ali told his com
panions. "Leave this man alone. My goal in fighting with these people is
none other than to clarify true doctrines and the ends of religion."
Then he set out to answer the Bedouin. Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll, p.65. 63.
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. I, pp.6-9. 64. Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p. 191, and other
histories. 65. Ya'qubi; vol.ll, p.192; Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.183. 66.
al-Nasa'ih, al.kafiyah of Muhammad al-'Alawi, Baghdad, 1368, vol.ll,
p.161 and others. 67. Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.193. 68. Ya'qubi, vol.ll,
p.207.

69. Yazid was a lecherous and self-indulgent person. He was always drunk
and wore silk sod unbecoming dress. His nightly parties were combined
with music and wine. He had a dog and a monkey which were always with
him as companions with which he amused himself. His monkey was named Abu
Qays. He would dress him in beautiful attire and make him be present at
his drinking parties. Sometimes he would mount him on horseback and send
him to races. Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.196; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.77.
70. Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.s; Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.183. 71.
al-Nasa'ih, al-kafiyah p.72, recounted from Kitab al-ahdath. 72.
Ya'qubi; vol. II, pp.199 and 210; Abu'l-Fida, vol.l, p.186; Muruj
al-dhahab, vol.lll, pp.33 and 35. 73. al-Nasa'ih al-kafiyah, pp.72-73.
74. al-Nasa'ih al-kdfiyah, pp.58.64, 77-78. 75. See Quran. IX, 100. 76.
Ya'qubi. vol.ll, p.216: Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.190; Muruj al-dhahab,
vol.lll, p.64, and other histories. 77. Ya'qubi, vol.ll, p.223:
Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.192; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.78. 78. Ya'qubi.
vol.ll, p.224; Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.192; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll,
p.81. 79. Walid ibn Yazid mentioned in Ya'qubi, vol.lll, p.73. 80. Walid
ibn Yazid mentioned in Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.228. 81. Mu'jam
al-buldan Yaqut Hamawi, Beirut, 1957. 82. Muruj al-dhahab vol. III,
pp.217-219; Ya'aubi. vol.ll, p.66. 83. Bihar al-anwar vol XII, and other
Shi'ite sources. 84. Ya'qubi vol. IIl; p. 84. 85. Ya'qubi; vol. III p.
79; Abu'l-Fida', vol.l, p.208, and other histories. 86. Ya'qubi' vol.
III, p.86; Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.268. 87. Ya'qubi, vol.lll, p.86;
Muruj al-dhahab, vol.lll, p.270. 88. Ya'qubi; vol.lll, pp.91-96..
Abu'l-Fida', vol. I, p.212. 89. Abu'l-Fida', vol.ll, p.6. 90. Yu'qubi-.
vol.lll, p.198; Abu'l-Fida', vol.ll. p.33. 91. Bihar al-anwar, vol. XII,
on the life of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq. 92. al-Aghani of Abu'l-Faraj
Isfahani, Cairo 1345-51, the story of the bridge of Baghdad. 93.
al-Aghani' the story of Amin. 94. abu'l-Fida-' and other histories. 95.
al-Hadarat al-islamiyah of Adam Mez, Cairo, 1366, vol.l, p.97. 96. Murj
al-dhahab, vol. IV, p.373; al-Milal wa'l-nihal of Shahristani, Cairo,
1368. vol.l, p.254. 97. Abu'l-Fida', vol.ll, p.63 and vol.lll, p.50. 98.
See the histories al-Ka-mil of Iba Athir, Cairo, 1348; Raudat al-safa';
and Habib al-siyar of Khwand Mir, Tehran, 1333. 99. Ibid. 100. Ibid.
101. Ibid. 102. Rayhanat al-adab of Muhammad 'Ali Tabrizi, Tehran
1326-32, vol.ll, p.365. and most works on the biography of famous men.
103. Rayhanat al-adab, vol.ll, p.380. 104. Raudat al-safa-', Habib
al-siyar and others. 105. Tarikh-i 'alam aray-i 'abbasi of lskandar
Bayk, Tehran, 1334 A.H. solar.
