Chapter Ii Divisions Within Shi'ism
===================================

Each religion possesses a certain number of primary principles which
form its essential basis and other principles of secondary importance.
When the followers of a religion differ as to the nature of the primary
principles and their secondary aspects but preserve a common basis, the
result is called division (inshi'ab) within that religion. Such
divisions exist in all traditions and religions, and more particularly
in the four "revealed" religions [[1]](#011) of Judaism, Christianity,
Zoroastrianism, and Islam.

Shi'ism did not undergo any divisions during the imamate of the first
three Imams: Ali, Hasan, and Husayn. But after the martyrdom of Husayn,
the majority of the Shi'ites accepted the imamate of Ali ibn Husayn
al-Sajjad, while a minority known as the Kisaniyah believed that the
third son of Ali, Muhammad ibn Hanafiyah, was the fourth Imam as well as
the promised Mahdi, and that he had gone into occultation in the Radwa
mountains[[2]](#012) and one day would reappear. After the death of Imam
al-Sajjad the majority of the Shi'ites accepted as Imam his son,
Muhammad al-Baqir, while a minority followed Zayd al-Shahid, another son
of Imam al-Sajjad, and became known as Zaydis. Following Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir, the Shi'ites accepted his son Ja'far al-Sadiq as Imam and
after the death of Imam Ja'far the majority followed his son Imam Musa
al-Kazim as the seventh Imam. However, one group followed the older son
of the sixth Imam, Isma'il, who had died while his father was still
alive, and when this latter group separated from the majority of
Shi'ites it became known as Isma'ilis. Others accepted as Imam either
'Abdollah al-Aftah or Muhammad, both sons of the sixth Imam. Finally,
another party

stopped with the sixth Imam himself and considered him as the last Imam.
In the same way, after the martyrdom of Imam Musa al-Kazim the majority
followed his son, Ali al-Rida, as the eight Imam. However, some stopped
with the seventh Imam and became known as the Waqifiyah.[[3]](#013)

From the eighth Imam to the twelfth, whom the majority of the Shi'ites
believe to be the promised Mahdi, no division of any importance took
place within Shi'ism. Even if certain events occurred in the form of
division, they lasted but a few days and dissolved by themselves. For
example, Ja'far, the son of the tenth Imam, claimed to be Imam after the
death of his brother, the eleventh Imam. A group of people followed him
but scattered in a few days and Ja'far himself did not follow his claim
any further. Further more, there are differences between Shi'ites in
theological and juridical matters which must not be considered as
division in religious schools. Also the Babi and Baha'i sects, which
like the Batinis (the Qaramitah) differ in both the principles (usul)
and branches (furu') of Islam from the Muslims, should in any sense be
considered as branches of Shi'ism.

The sects which separated from the majority of Shi'ites all dissolved
within a short period, except two: the Zaydi and the Isma'ili which
continue to exist until now. To this day communities of these branches
are active in various parts of the world such as the Yemen, India, and
Syria. Therefore, we shall limit our discussion to these two branches
along with the majority of Shi'ites who are Twelvers.

Zaydism and Its Branches
------------------------

The Zaydis are the followers of Zayd al-Shahid, the son of Imam
al-Sajjad. Zayd rebelled in 121/737 against the Umayyad caliph Hisham
'Abd al-Malik and a group paid allegiance to him. A battle ensued in
Kufa between Zayd and the army of the caliph in which Zayd was killed.

The followers of Zayd regard him as the fifth Imam of the Household of
the Prophet. After him his son, Yahya ibn Zayd, who rebelled against the
caliph Walid ibn Yazid and was also killed, took his place. After Yahya,
Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah and Ibrahim ibn 'Abdallah, who revolted against
the Abbasid caliph Mansur al-Dawaniqi and were also killed, were chosen
as Imams.

Henceforth for some time there was disorder in Zaydi ranks until Nasir
al-Utrush, a descendant of the brother of Zayd, arose in Khurasan. Being
pursued by the governmental authorities in that region, he fled to
Mazandaran, becoming himself Imam. For some time his descendants
continued to rule as Imams in that area.

According to Zaydi belief any descendant of Fatimah (the daughter of the
Prophet) who begins an uprising in the name of defending the truth may
become Imam if he is learned in the religious sciences, ethically pure,
courageous and generous. Yet for some time after Utrush and his
descendants there was no Imam who could bring about an insurrection with
the sword until recently when, about sixty years ago, Imam Yahya
revolted in the Yemen, which had been part of the Ottoman Empire, made
it independent, and began to rule there as Imam. His descendants
continued to rule in that region as Imams until very recently.

At the beginning the Zaydis, like Zayd himself, considered the first two
caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, as their Imams. But after a while some of
them began to delete the name of the first two caliphs from the list of
Imams and placed Ali as the first Imam.

From what is known of Zaydi beliefs it can be said that in the
principles of Islam (usul) they follow a path close to that of the
Mu'tazilites, while in the branches or derivative institutions of the
law (furu') they apply the jurisprudence of Abu Hanifah, the founder of
one of the four Sunni schools of law. They also differ among themselves
concerning certain problems.[[4]](#014)

Isma'ilism and Its Branches
---------------------------

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq had a son named Isma'il who was the oldest of his
children. Isma'il died during the lifetime of his father who summoned
witnesses to his death, including the governor of Medina.[[5]](#015)
Concerning this question , some believed that Isma'il did not die but
went into occultation, that he would appear again and would be the
promised Mahdi. They further believed that the summoning of witnesses on
the part of the Imam for Isma'il's death was a way of hiding the truth
in fear of al-Mansur, the Abbasid caliph. Another group believed that
the true Imam was Isma'il whose death meant the imamate was transferred
to his son Muhammad. A third group also held that although he died
during the lifetime of his father he was the Imam and that the imamate
passed after him to Muhammad ibn Isma'il and his descendants. The first
two groups soon became extinct, while the third branch continues to
exist to this day and has undergone a certain amount of division.

The Isma'ilis have a philosophy in many ways similar to that of the
Sabaeans (star worshippers)[[6]](#016). combined with elements of Hindu
gnosis. In the sciences and decrees of Islam they believe that each
exterior reality (zahir) has an inner aspect (batin) and each element of
revelation (tanzil) a hermeneutic and esoteric exegesis
(ta'wil).[[7]](#017)

The Isma'ilis believe that the earth can never exist without Proof
(hujjah) of God. The Proof is two kinds: "speaker" (natiq) and "silent
one" (samit). The speaker is a prophet and the silent one is an Imam or
Guardian (wali) who is the inheritor, or executor of the testament
(wasi) of a prophet. In any case the Proof of God is the perfect
theophany of the Divinity.

The principle of the Proof of God revolves constantly around the number
seven. A prophet (nabi), who is sent by God, has the function of
prophecy (nubuwwat), of bringing a Divine Law or Shari'ah. A prophet,
who is the perfect manifestation of God, has the esoteric power of
initiating men into the divine Mysteries (walayat).[[8]](#018) After him
there are seven of his testament (wasi) who possess the power of
executors of his testament (wasayat)

and the power of esoteric initiation into the Divine Mysteries
(walayat). The seventh in the succession possesses those two powers and
also the additional power of prophecy (nubuwwat). The cycle of seven
executors (wasis) is then repeated with the seventh a prophet.

The Isma'ilis say that Adam was sent as a prophet with the power of
prophecy and of esoteric guidance and he had seven executors of whom the
seventh was Noah, who had the three functions of nubuwwat, wasayat, and
walayat. Abraham was the seventh executor (wasi) of Noah, Moses the
seventh executor of Abraham, Jesus the seventh executor of Moses,
Muhammad the seventh executor of Jesus, and Muhammad ibn Isma'il the
seventh executor of Muhammad.

They consider the wasis of the Prophet to be: Ali, Husayn ibn Ali (they
do not consider Imam Hasan among the Imams), Ali ibn Husayn al-Sajjad,
Muhammad al-Baqir, Ja'far al-Sadiq, Isma'il ibn Ja'far, and Muhammad ibn
Isma'il. After this series there are seven descendants of Muhammad ibn
Isma'il whose names are hidden and secret. After them there are the
first seven rulers of the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt the first of whom,
'Ubaydallah al-Mahdi, was the founder of the Fatimid dynasty. The
Isma'ilis also believe that in addition to the Proof of God there are
always present on earth twelve "chiefs" (naqib) who are the companions
and elite followers of the Proof. Some of the branches of the Batinis,
however, like the Druzes, believe six of the "chiefs" to be from the
Imams and six from others.

The Batinis
-----------

In the year 278/891, a few years before the appearance of Ubaydallah
al-Mahdi in North Africa, there appeared in Kufa an unknown person from
Khuzistan (in southern Persia) who never revealed his name and identity.
He would fast during the day and worship at night and made a living from
his own labor. In addition he invited people to join the Isma'ili cause
and was able to assemble a large number of people about him. From among
them he

chose twelve "chiefs" (naqib) and then he set out for Damascus. Having
left Kufa he was never heard of again.

This unknown man was replaced by Ahmad, known as the Qaramite, who began
to propagate Batini teachings in Iraq. As the historians have recorded,
he instituted two daily prayers in place of the five of Islam, removed
the necessity of ablution after sexual intercourse, and made the
drinking of wine permissible. Contemporary with these events, other
Batini leaders rose to invite people to join their cause and assembled a
group of followers.

The Batinis had no respect for the lives and possessions of those who
were outside their group. For this reason they began uprisings in the
cities of Iraq, Bahrain, the Yemen, and Syria, spilling the blood of
people and looting their wealth. Many times they stopped the caravans of
those who were making the pilgrimage to Mecca, killing tens of thousands
of pilgrims and plundering their provisions and camels.

Abu Tahir al-Qaramati, one of the Qaramite leaders who in 311/923 had
conquered Basra and did not neglect to kill and plunder, set out with a
large number of Batinis for Mecca in 317/929. After overcoming the brief
resistance of government troops he entered the city and massacred the
population as well as the newly arrived pilgrims. Even within the Masjid
al-haram (the mosque containing the Ka'bah) and within the Holy Ka'bah
itself, there flowed streams of blood. He divided the covering of the
Ka'bah between his disciples. He tore away the door of the Ka'bah and
took the black stone from its place back to the Yemen. For twenty-two
years the black stone was in Qaramite hands. As a result of these
actions the majority of Muslims turned completely away from the Batinis
and considered them outside the pale of Islam. Even 'Ubaydallah
al-Mahdi, the Fatimid ruler, who had risen in those days in North Africa
and considered himself the promised Mahdi, abhorred them.

According to the view of historians the distinguishing charac- teristic
of the Batini school is that it interprets the external aspects of Islam
in an esoteric manner and considers the externals of the Shari'ah to be
only for simple-minded people of little intelligence who are deprived of
spiritual perfection. Yet occasionally

the Batini Imams did order certain regulations and laws to be practiced
and followed.

The Nizaris, Musta'lis, Druzes and Muqanna'ah
---------------------------------------------

The Nizaris. Ubaydallah al-Mahdi, who rose in North Africa in 292/904
and as an Isma'ili declared his imamate and established Fatimid rule, is
the founder of the dynasty whose descendants made Cairo the center of
their caliphate. For seven generations this sultanate and Isma'ili
imamate continued without any divisions. At the death of the seventh
Imam, al-Mustansir bi'llah Mu'idd ibn Ali, his sons, Nizar and
al-Musta'li, began to dispute over the caliphate and imamate. After long
disputes and bloody battle al-Musta'li was victorious. He captured his
brother Nizar and placed him in prison, where he died.

Following this dispute those who accepted the Fatimids divided into two
groups: the Nizaris and the Musta'lis. The Nizaris are the followers of
Hasan al-Sabbah, who was one of the close associates of al-Mustansir.
After Nizar's death, because of his support of Nizar, Hasan al-Sabbah
was expelled from Egypt by al-Musta'li. He came to Persia and after a
short while appeared in the Fort of Alamut near Qazwin. He conquered
Alamut and several surrounding forts. There he established his rule and
also began to invite people to the Isma'ili cause.

After the death of Hasan in 518/1124 Buzurg Umid Rudbari and after him
his son, Kiya Muhammad, continued to rule following the methods and ways
of Hasan al-Sabbah. After Kiya Muhammad, his son Hasan
'AlaDhikrihi'l-Salam, the fourth ruler of Alamut, changed the ways of
Hasan al-Sabbah, who had been Nizari, and became Batini. Henceforth the
Isma'ili forts continued as Batini. Four other rulers, Muhammad ibn Ala
Dhikruhi'l-Salam, Jala al-Din Hasan, 'Ala' al-Din, and Rukn al-Din
Khurshah, became Sultan and Imam one after another until Hulagu, the
Mongol conqueror, invaded Persia. He captured Isma'ili forts and put all
the Isma'ilis to death, leveling their forts to the ground.

Centuries later, in 1255/1839, the Aqa Khan of Mahalat in Persia, who
belonged to the Nizaris, rebelled against Muhammad

Shah Qajar in Kerman, but he was defeated and fled to Bombay. There he
propagated his Batini-Nizari cause which continues to this day. The
Nizaris are today called the Aqa Khanids.

The Musta'lis. The Musta'lis were the followers of al-Musta'li. Their
imamate continued during Fatimid rule in Egypt until it was brought to
an end in the year 567/1171. Shortly thereafter, the Bohra sect,
following the same school, appeared in India and survives to this day.

The Druzes. The Druzes, who live in the Druze mountains in Syria (and
also in Lebanon), were originally followers of the Fatimid caliphs. But
as a result of the missionary activity of Nashtakin, the Druzes joined
the Batini sect. The Druzes stop with the sixth Fatimid caliph al-Hakim
bi'llah, whom others believe to have been killed, and claim that he is
in occultation. He has ascended to heaven and will appear once again to
the world.

The Muqanna'ah. The Muqanna'ah were at first disciples of 'Ata' al-Marwi
known as Muqanna', who according to historical sources was a follower of
Abu Muslim of Khurasan. After the death of Abu Muslim, Muqanna' claimed
that Abu Muslim's soul had become incarnated in him. Soon he claimed to
be a prophet and later a divinity. Finally, in the year 162/777 he was
surrounded in the fort of Kabash in Transoxiana. When he became certain
that he would be captured and killed, he threw himself into a fire along
with some of his disciples and burned to death. His followers soon
adopted Isma'ilism and the ways of the Batinis.  
  

Differences Between Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and Isma'ilism and Zaydism
------------------------------------------------------------------

The majority of the Shi'ites, from whom the previously mentioned groups
have branched out, are Twelve-Imam Shi'ites, also called the Imamites.
As has already been mentioned, the Shi'ites came into being because of
criticism and protest concerning two basic problems of Islam, without
having any objections to the religious ways which through the
instructions of the Prophet had

become prevalent among their contemporary Muslims. These two problems
concerned Islamic government and authority in the religious sciences,
both of which the Shi'ites considered to be the particular right of the
Household of the Prophet.

The Shi'ites asserted that the Islamic caliphate, of which esoteric
guidance and spiritual leadership are inseparable elements, belongs to
Ali and his descendants. They also believed that according to the
specification of the Prophet the Imams of the Household of the Prophet
are twelve in number. Shi'ism held, moreover, that the external
teachings of the Quran, which are the injunctions and regulations of the
Shari'ah and include the principles of a complete spiritual life, are
valid and applicable for everyone at all times, and are not to be
abrogated until the Day of Judgment. These injunctions and regulations
must be learned through the guidance of the Household of the Prophet.

From a consideration of these points it becomes clear that the
difference between Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and Zaydism is that the Zaydis
usually do not consider the imamate to belong solely to the Household of
the Prophet and do not limit the number of Imams to twelve. Also they do
not follow the jurisprudence of the Household of the Prophet as do the
Twelve-Imam Shi'ites.

The difference between the Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and Isma'ilism lies in
that for the latter the imamate revolves around the number seven and
prophecy does not terminate with the Holy Prophet Muhammad. Also for
them, change and transformation in the injunctions of the Shari'ah are
admissible, as is even rejection of the duty of following Shari'ah,
especially among the Batinis. In contrast, the Twelve-Imam Shi'ites
consider the Prophet to be the "seal of prophecy" and believe him to
have twelve successors and executors of his will. They hold the external
aspect of the Shari'ah to be valid and impossible to abrogate. They
affirm that the Quran has both an exoteric and an esoteric aspect.  

Summary of the History of Twelve-Imam Shi'ism
---------------------------------------------

As has become clear form the previous pages, the majority of Shi'ites
are Twelvers. They were originally the same group of friends and
supporters of Ali who, after the death of the Prophet,

in order to defend the right of the Household of the Prophet in the
question of the caliphate and religious authority, began to criticize
and protest against prevalent views and separated from the majority of
the people.

During the caliphate of the "rightly-guided caliphs" (11/632-35/656) the
Shi'ites were under a certain amount of pressure which became much
greater during the Umayyad Caliphate (40/661-132/750) when they were no
longer protected in any way against destruction of their lives and
property. Yet the greater the pressure placed upon them, the firmer they
became in their belief. They especially benefited from their being
oppressed in spreading their beliefs and teachings.

From the middle of the 2nd/8th century when the Abbasid caliphs
established their dynasty, Shi'ism was able to gain a mew life as a
result of the languid and weak state prevailing at that time. Soon,
however, conditions became difficult once again and until the end of the
3rd/9th century became ever more stringent. At the beginning of the
4th/10th century, with the rise of the influential Buyids, who were
Shi'ites, Shi'ism gained power and became more or less free to carry out
its activities. It began to carry out scientific and scholarly debates
and continued in this manner until the end of the 5th/11th century. At
the beginning of the 7th/13th century when the Mongol invasion began, as
a result of the general involvement in war and chaos and the
continuation of the Crusades, the different Islamic governments did not
put too great a pressure upon the Shi'ites. Moreover, the conversion to
Shi'ism of some Mongol rulers in Persia and the rule of the Sadat-i
Mar'ashi (who were Shi'ites) in Mazandaran were instrumental in the
spread of the power and territory of Shi'ism. They made the presence of
large concentrations of Shi'ite population in Persia and other Muslim
lands felt more than ever before. This situation continued through the
9th/15th century.

At the beginning of the 10th/16th century, as a result of the rise of
the Safavids, Shi'ism became the official religion of the vast
territories of Persia and continues in this position to the present day.
In other regions of the world also there are tens of millions of
Shi'ites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Editor's note: From the general theological perspective oflslam the
"revealed religions" are those possessing Divine Scriptures and usually
numbered as above. This does not, however, prevent Muslims from
believing in the universality of revelation. which is particularly
accented in Sufism. Whenever the situation arose, Muslims applied this
principle outside the Semitic and Iranian monothe istic worlds, as for
example when they encountered Hinduism whose divine origin many Muslim
religious authorities admitted openly. 2. Editor's note: The Ratlwa
mountains are a range located near Medina and well known for the role
they played in early Islamic history. 3. Editor's note: It must be
remembered that most of the branches cited here had very few adherents
and are not in any way comparable to Twelve-Imam Shi'ism or Isma'ilism.
4. The material of this section is based on al- Milal wa'l-nihal and the
Kamil of Ibn Athir. 5. The material of this section' is taken from the
Kamil, Raudat al-safa-', Habib al-siyar, Abu'l-Fida-', al-Milal
wa'l-nihal, and some of its details from Tarikh-i Aqa Khaniyah of
Matba'i. Najaf, 1351. 6. Editor's note: Here Sabaean refers to the
people of Harran who had a religion in which stars played a major role,
Moreover, they were the depository of Hermetic and Neopythagorean
philosophy and played an important role in the transmission to Islam
ofthe more esoteric schools of Hellenistic philosophy as well as
astronomy and mathematics. They became extinct during the first few
centuries of Islamic history and must not he confused with the Sabseans
or Mandeans of Southern Iraq and Persia who still survive. 7. Editor's
note : The term "ta'wil," which plays a cardinal role in Shi'ism as well
as Sufism, means literally to return to the origin of a thing. It means
to penetrate the external aspect of any reality, whether it be sacred
scripture or phenomena of nature, to its inner essence, to go from the
phenomenon to the noumenon. 8. Editor's note: The term "wali" in Islam
means saint and wilayah as usually employed, particularly in Sufism,
means sanctity. But in the context of Shi'ism, wilayah (usually
pronounced walayat) means the esoteric power of the Imam whereby he is
able to initiate men into the Divine Mysteries and provide for them the
key to attaining sanctity. The use of the two terms, therefore, is
related, since on the one hand it pertains to the saintly life aind on
the other to the particular esoteric power of the Imam which leads men
to the saintly life. In the case of the Imam it also has other cosmic
and social connotations usually not identified with wilayah'n the
general sense of sanctity.
