Part Ii: Shi'ite Religious Thought
==================================

CHAPTER III THREE METHODS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT
----------------------------------------------

By "religious thought" we mean that form of thought which is concerned
with any of the problems of a religious nature within a particular
religion, in the same sense that mathematical thought is the form of
thought which deals with mathematical questions and solves mathematical
problems.

Needless to say religious thought, like other forms of thought, must
have reliable sources from which the raw material of its thought
originates and upon which it depends. Similarly, the process of
reasoning necessary for the solution of mathematical problems must have
a series of established mathematical facts and principles.

The single source upon which the divinely revealed religion of Islam
depends and upon which it is based, inasmuch as it is based on a
revelation of celestial origin, is none other than the Holy Quran. It is
the Quran which is the definitive testament of the universal and
ever-living prophethood of the Prophet and it is the content of the
Quran that bears the substance of the Islamic call. Of course the fact
that the Quran is alone the source of Islamic religious thought does not
eliminate other sources and origins of correct thinking, as will be
explained later.

There are three methods of religious thought in Islam. The Holy Quran in
its teachings points to three paths for Muslims to follow in order to
comprehend the purposes of religion and the Islamic sciences: (1) the
path of the external and formal aspect of religion (the Shari'ah); (2)
the path of intellectual understanding; and (3) the path of spiritual
comprehension achieved through sincerity (ikhlas) in obeying God.

It can be seen that the Holy Quran in its formal aspect addresses all
people without providing any demonstration or proof. Rather, depending
on the unique sovereignty of God, it commands people to accept the
principles of faith such as divine unity, prophethood, eschatology; it
gives them practical injunctions such as the daily prayers, fasting,
etc.; and at the same time it prohibits them from committing certain
other actions. Yet if the Quran had not provided authority for these
commands it would never have expected man to accept and obey them. It
must, therefore, be said that such simple utterances of the Quran are a
path toward the understanding of ultimate religious ends and the
comprehension of the Islamic sciences. We call such verbal expressions
as "Believe in God and His Prophet" and "Perform the prayers," the
external or formal aspect of religion.

In addition to guidance in the external aspect of religion, we see that
the Holy Quran in many verses guides man toward intellectual
understanding. It invites man to meditate, contemplate and deliberate
upon the signs of God in the macrocosm and the microcosm. It explains
many verities through unfettered intellectual reasoning. It must be said
in truth that no sacred book praises and recommends science and
intellectual knowledge for man as much as does the Quran. In many of its
words and utterances the Quran attests to the validity of intellectual
proof and rational demonstration, that is, it does not claim that man
should first accept the validity of the Islamic sciences and then
through intellectual proofs justify these sciences. Rather, with
complete confidence in the truth of its own position it proclaims that
man should use his intellect to discover the truth of the Islamic
sciences, and only then accept this truth. He should seek the
affirmation of the words contained in the Islamic message in the world
of creation which is itself a truthful witness. And finally man should
find the affirmation of his faith in the results of rational
demonstration ; he should not have to gain faith first and the, in
obedience to it, seek proofs. Thus philosophical thought is also a way
whose validity and efficacy is confirmed by the Holy Quran.[[1]](#011)

Also, in addition to guidance in the external and intellectual aspects
of religion, we see that the Holy Quran in subtle terms explains that
all true religious science originates and comes from

Divine Unity (tawhid) and the knowledge of god and His Attributes . The
perfection of the knowledge of God belongs to those whom He has drawn
from all places and elevated solely to Himself. It is these men who have
forgotten themselves and all things and as a result of sincerity in
obedience to God have been able to concentrate all their powers and
energies upon the transcendent world. Their eyes have become illuminated
through the vision of the light of the Pure Creator. With the eye of
discernment they have seen the reality of things in the kingdom of
heaven and earth, for through sincerity of obedience they have reached
the station of certainty (yaqin). As a result of this certainty the
kingdoms of heaven and earth and the immortal life of the eternal world
have become revealed to them.

Deliberation upon the following holy verses illuminates fully this
claim: "And We sent no messenger before thee but We inspired him
(saying): There is no God save Me (Allah), so worship Me" (Quran, XXI,
25);[[2]](#012) and, "Glorified be Allah from that which they attribute
(unto Him), Save single-minded slaves of Allah" (Quran, XXXVII,
159-160)[[3]](#013); and, "Say, I am only a mortal like you. My Lord
inspireth in me that your God is only One God. And whoever hopeth for
the meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous work, and make none
sharer of the worship due unto his Lord" (Quran, XVIII, 111)[[4]](#014);
and, "And serve the Lord till the inevitable [al-yaqin] cometh unto
thee" (Quran, XV, 99)[[5]](#015); and God says, "Thus did We show
Abraham the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of
those possessing certainty" (Quran, VI, 76)[[6]](#016); and "Nay, but
the record of the righteous is in 'Iliyin - Ah! what will convey unto
thee what 'Iliyin is! - A written record, attested by those who are
brought near (unto their Lord)" (Quran, LXXXIII, 18-21); and,[[7]](#017)
"Nay, would that ye knew (now) with a sure knowledge ['ilm al-yaqin]! Ye
will behold hellfire" (Quran, XII, 5-6).[[8]](#018)

Thus it may be said that one of the paths for the comprehension of
religious verities and sciences is the purification of the carnal soul
and sincerity in obedience to God.

From what has been said it becomes clear that the Holy Quran proposes
three methods for the comprehension of religious truths: the external,
or formal aspects of religion; intellectual reasoning;

and sincerity in obedience leading to the intellectual intuition which
results in the unveiling of the truth and its inward vision. Yet it must
be understood that these three methods differ from each other in several
ways. For instance, since the external forms of religion are verbal
expressions in the simplest language, they are in the hands of all
people, and everyone benefits from them according to his own
capacity.[[9]](#019) On the other hand, the other two paths, which are
appropriate to a particular group (the elite - khawass), are not common
to all. The path of the external forms of religion leads to the
understanding of the principles and the obligations of Islam and results
in knowledge of the substance of the beliefs and practices of Islam, and
of the principles of the Islamic sciences, ethics, and jurisprudence.
This is in contrast to the other two paths. The intellectual path can
discover the problems connected with faith, ethics, and the general
principles governing practical questions, but the intellectual method
cannot discover the specific religious injunctions given in the Quran
and the Sunnah. The path of purification of the carnal soul, since it
leads to the discovery of God-given spiritual truths, can have no limits
nor measure of its results or of the truths revealed through this divine
gift. Men who have reached this knowledge have cut themselves off from
everything and forgotten everything but God and are under the direct
guidance and dominion of God Himself - May His Name be Glorified.
Whatever He wants and not what they want is revealed to them.

We will now take up in detail the three methods of religious thought in
Islam.

FIRST METHOD: THE FORMAL ASPECT OF RELIGION
-------------------------------------------

**The Different Facets of the Formal Aspect of Religion**

It has become clear from what has been said thus far that the Holy
Quran, which is the principal source of religious thought in

Islam, has given full authority to the external meanings of its words
for those who give ear to its message. The same external meaning of the
Quranic verses has made the sayings of the Prophet complementary to the
words of the Quran and has declared them to be authoritative like the
Quran. For as the Quran says: "And We have revealed unto thee the
Remembrance that thou mayst explain to mankind that which hath been
revealed for them" (Quran, XVI, 44). And, "He it is who hath sent among
the unlettered ones a messenger of their own, to recite unto them His
revelations and to make them grow, and to teach them the scripture and
Wisdom" (Quran, LXII, 2). And, "And whatsoever the messenger giveth you,
take it. And whatsoever he forbiddeth, abstain (from it)" (Quran, LIX,
7). And, "Verily in the messenger of Allah ye have a good example"
(Quran, XXXIII, 21).

It is quite evident that such verses would not have any real meaning if
the words and deeds of the Prophet and even his silence and approval
were not authority for us just as the Quran itself is. Thus the words of
the Prophet are authoritative and must be accepted by those who have
heard them orally or received them through reliable transmission.
Moreover, through such a completely authentic chain of transmission it
is known that the Holy Prophet said, "I leave two things of value amidst
you in trust which if you hold on to you will never go astray: the Quran
and the members of my household. These will never be separated until the
Day of Judgment."[[10]](#020) According to this and other definitely
established hadiths the words of the Family of the Household of the
Prophet form a corpus that is complementary to the Prophetic religious
sciences and are inerrant in the explanation of the teachings and
injunctions of Islam. Their sayings, received orally or through reliable
transmission, are reliable and authoritative.

Therefore, it is clear that the traditional source from which the formal
and external aspect of religion is derived, which is an authoritative
document and which is also the basic source for the religious thought of
Islam, consists of two parts: The Book (the Quran) and the Sunnah. By
the Book is meant the external aspect of the verses of the Holy Quran;
and by the Sunnah, hadith received from the Prophet and his revered
Household.

### Traditions of the Companions

In Shi'ism hadiths transmitted through the companions are dealt with
according to this principle: if they deal with the words and actions of
the Prophet and do not contradict the hadiths of the Household of the
Prophet, they are acceptable. If they contain only the views or opinions
of the companions themselves and not those of the Prophet, they are not
authoritative as sources for religious injunctions. In this respect the
ruling of the companions is like the ruling of any other Muslim. In the
same way, the companions themselves dealt with other companions in
questions of Islamic law as they would with any Muslim, not as someone
special.  
  

### The Book and Tradition

The Book of God, the Holy Quran, is the principal source of every form
of Islamic thought. It is the Quran which gives religious validity and
authority to every other religious source in Islam. Therefore, it must
be comprehensible to all. Moreover, the Quran describes itself as the
light which illuminates all things. Also it challenges men and requests
them to ponder over its verses and observe that there are no disparities
or contradictions in them. It invites them to compose similar work, if
they can, to replace it. It is clear that if the Holy Quran were not
comprehensible to all there would be no place for such assertions.

To say that the Quran is in itself comprehensible to all is not in any
way contradictory to the previous assertion that the Prophet and his
Household are religious authorities in the Islamic sciences, which
sciences in reality are only elaborations of the content of the Quran.
For instance, in the part of the Islamic sciences which comprises the
injunctions and laws of the Shari'ah, the Quran contains only the
general principles. The clarification and elaboration of their details,
such as the manner of accomplishing the daily prayers, fasting,
exchanging merchandise, and

in fact all acts of worship ('ibadat) and transactions (mu'amalat), can
be achieved only by referring to the traditions of the Holy Prophet and
his Household.

As for the other part of the Islamic sciences dealing with doctrines and
ethical methods and practices, although their content and details can be
comprehended by all, the understanding of their full meaning depends on
accepting the method of the Household of the Prophet. Also each verse of
the Quran must be explained and interpreted by means of other Quranic
verses, not by views which have become acceptable and familiar to us
only through habit and custom.

Ali has said: "Some parts of the Quran speak with other parts of it
revealing to us their meaning and some parts attest to the meaning of
others."[[11]](#021) And the Prophet has said, "Parts of the Quran
verify other parts."[[12]](#022) And also: "Whosoever interprets the
Quran according to his own opinion has made a place for himself in the
fire."[[13]](#023)

As a simple example of the Quran through the Quran may be cited the
story of the torture of the people of Lot about whom in one place God
says, "And we rained on them a rain,"[[14]](#024) and in another place
He has changed this phrase to, "Lo! We sent a storm of stones upon them
(all)."[[15]](#025)By relating the second verse to the first it becomes
clear that by "rain" is meant "stones" from heaven. Whoever has studied
with care the hadiths of the Household of the Prophet, and the
outstanding companions who were the followers of the Prophet, will have
no doubt that the commentary of the Quran through the Quran is the sole
method of Quranic commentary taught by the Household of the
Prophet.[[16]](#026)  
  

### The Outward and Inward Aspects of the Quran

It has been explained that the Holy Quran elucidates religious aims
through its own words and gives commands to mankind in matter of
doctrine and action. But the meaning of the Quran is not limited to this
level. Rather, behind these same expressions

and within these same meanings there are deeper and wider levels of
meaning which only the spiritual elite who possess pure hearts can
comprehend.

The Prophet, who is the divinely appointed teacher of the Quran,
says:[[17]](#027) "The Quran has a beautiful exterior and a profound
interior." He has also said, "The Quran has an inner dimension, and that
inner dimension has an inner dimension up to seven inner
dimensions."[[18]](#028) Also in the sayings of the imams there are
numerous references to the inner aspect of the Quran.

The main support of these assertions is a symbol which God has mentioned
in Chapter XIII, verse 17, of the Quran. In this verse divine gifts are
symbolized by rain that falls from heaven and upon which depends the
life of the earth and its inhabitants. With the coming of the rain,
floods begin to flow and each river bed accepts a certain amount of the
flood, depending on its capacity. As it flows, the flood is covered with
foam, but beneath the foam there is that same water which is life-giving
and beneficial to mankind.

As is indicated by this symbolic story, the capacity for comprehension
of divine sciences, which are the source of man's inner life, differs
among people. There are those for whom there is no reality beyond
physical existence and the material life of this world which lasts but a
few days. Such people are attached to material appetites and physical
desires alone and fear nothing but the loss of material benefits and
sensory enjoyment. Such people, taking into consideration the
differences of degree among them, can at best accept the divine sciences
on the level of believing in a summary fashion in the doctrines and
performing the practical commands of Islam in purely outward manner
without any comprehension. They worship God with the hope of recompense
or fear of punishment in the next world.

There are also those who, because of the purity of their nature, do not
consider their well-being to lie in attachment to the transient
pleasures of the fleeting life of this world. The losses and gains and
bitter and sweet experiences of this world are for them no more than an
attractive illusion. Memory of those who passed before them in the
caravan of existence, who were pleasure-seekers yesterday and no more
than subjects of stories today, is a

warning that is continuously present before their eyes. Such men who
possess pure hearts are naturally attracted to the world of eternity.
They view the different phenomena of this passing world as symbols and
portents of the higher world, not as persisting and independent
realities.

It is at this point that through earthly and heavenly signs, signs upon
the horizons and within the souls of men,[[19]](#029) they "observe" in
a spiritual vision the Infinite Light of the Majesty and Glory of God.
Their hearts become completely enamored with the longing to reach an
understanding of the secret symbols of creation. Instead of being
imprisoned in the dark and narrow well of personal gain and selfishness
they begin to fly in the unlimited space of the world of eternity and
advance ever onwards toward the zenith of the spiritual world.

When they hear that God has forbidden the worship of idols, which
outwardly means bowing down before an idol, they understand this command
to mean that they should not obey other than God, for to obey means to
bow down before someone and to serve him. Beyond that meaning they
understand that they should not have hope of fear of other than God;
beyond that, they should not surrender to the demands of their selfish
appetites; and beyond that, they should not concentrate on anything
except God, May His Name be Glorified.

Likewise when they hear from the Quran that they should pray, the
external meaning of which is to perform the particular rites of prayers,
through its inner meaning they comprehend that they must worship and
obey God with all their hearts and souls. Beyond that they comprehend
that before God they must consider themselves as nothing, must forget
themselves and remember only God.[[20]](#030)

It can be seen that the inner meaning present in these two examples is
not due to the outward expression of the command and prohibition in
question. Yet the comprehension of this meaning is unavoidable for
anyone who has begun to meditate upon a more universal order and has
preferred to gain a vision of the universe of reality rather than his
own ego, who has preferred objectivity to an egocentric subjectivism.

From this discussion the meaning of the outward and inward aspects of
the Quran has become clear. It has also become evident that the inner
meaning of the Quran does no eradicate or invalidate its outward
meaning. Rather, it is like the soul which gives life to the body.
Islam, which is a universal and eternal religion and places the greatest
emphasis upon the "reformation" of mankind, can never dispense with its
external laws which are for the benefit of society, nor with its simple
doctrines which are the guardians and preservers of these laws.

How can a society, on the pretense that religion is only a matter of the
heart, that man's heart should be pure and that there is no value to
actions, live in disorder and yet attain happiness? How can impure deeds
and words cause the cultivation of a pure heart? Or how can impure words
emanate from a pure heart? God says in His Book, "Vile women are for
vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are for good men, and
good men for good women." (Quran, XXIV, 26) He also says, "As for the
good land, its vegetation cometh forth by permission of its Lord; while
as for that which is bad, only evil cometh forth (from it)." (Quran,
VII, 58) Thus it becomes evident that the Holy Quran has an outward and
an inward aspect and the inward aspect itself has different levels of
meaning. The hadith literature, which explains the content of the Quran,
also contains these various aspects.

### The Principles of Interpretation of the Quran

At the beginning of Islam it was commonly believed by some Sunnis that
if there was sufficient reason one could ignore the outward meaning of
Quranic verses and ascribe to them a contrary meaning. Usually the
meaning which opposed the outward, literal meaning was called ta'wil,
and what is called "ta'wil of the Quran" in Sunni Islam is usually
understood in this sense.

In the religious works of Sunni scholars, as well as in the
controversies that have been recorded as taking place between different
schools, one often observes that if a particular point of doctrine (that
has been established through the consensus of the ulama of a school or
through some other means) is opposed to the

outward meaning of a verse of the Quran, that verse is interpreted by
ta'wil to have a meaning contrary to its apparent meaning. Sometimes two
contending sides support two opposing views and present Quranic verses
in proof of their contentions. Each side interprets the verses presented
by the other side through ta'wil. This method has also penetrated more
or less into Shi'ism and can be seen in some Shi'ite theological works.

Yet, sufficient deliberation upon Quranic verses and the hadith of the
Household of the Prophet demonstrates clearly that the Holy Quran with
its attractive language and eloquent and lucid expression never uses
enigmatic or puzzling methods of exposition and always expounds any
subject in a language suitable for that subject. What has been rightly
called ta'wil, or hermeneutic interpretation, of the Holy Quran is not
concerned simply with the denotation of words. Rather, it is concerned
with certain truths and realities that transcend the comprehension of
the common run of men ; yet it is from these truths and realities that
the principles of doctrine and the practical injunctions of the Quran
issue forth.

The whole of the Quran possesses the sense of ta'wil, of esoteric
meaning, which cannot be comprehended directly through human thought
alone. Only the prophets and the pure among the saints of God who are
free from the dross of human imperfection can contemplate these meanings
while living on the present plane of existence. On the Day of
Resurrection the ta'wil of the Quran will be revealed to everyone.

This assertion can be explained by pointing to the fact that what forces
man to use speech, create words and make use of expressions is nothing
other than his social and material needs. In his social life man is
forced to try to make his fellow-men understand his thoughts and
intentions and the feelings which exist within his soul. To accomplish
this end he makes use of sounds and hearing. Occasionally also he uses
to a degree his eyes and gestures. That is why between the mute and the
blind there can never be any mutual comprehension, for whatever the
blind man says the deaf cannot hear, and whatever the mute makes
understood through gestures the blind man cannot see.

The creation of words and the naming of objects have been

accomplished with a material end in view. Expressions have been created
for those objects, states, and conditions which are material and
available to the senses or near to the sensible world. As can be seen in
those cases where the person addressed lacks one of the physical senses,
if we wish to speak of matters which can be comprehended through the
missing sense we employ a kind of allegory and similitude. For example,
if we wish to describe light or color to one who is born blind, or the
pleasures of sex to a child that has not reached the age of adolescence,
we seek to achieve our purpose through comparison and allegory and
through providing examples.

Therefore, if we accept the hypothesis that in the scale of Universal
Existence there are immense levels of reality which are independent of
the world of matter (and this is in reality the case), and that in each
generation there are among mankind but a handful who have the capability
of comprehending and having a vision of these realities, then questions
pertaining to these higher worlds cannot be understood through common
verbal expressions and modes of thought. They cannot be referred to
except by allusion and through symbolism. Since religious realities are
of this kind, the expression of the Quran in such matters must of
necessity be symbolic.

God says in his book, "Lo! We have appointed it a Lecture in Arabic that
haply ye may understand. And Lo! in the Source of Decrees, which We
possess, it is indeed sublime, decisive." (Common comprehension cannot
understand it or penetrate into it.) (Quran, XLIII, 3-4) He also says,
"That (this) is indeed a noble Quran, In a book kept hidden, Which none
toucheth save the purified" (Quran, LVI, 77-79). Concerning the Prophet
and his Household he says, "Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness
far from you, O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough
cleansing" (Quran, XXXIII, 33).

As proved by these verses, the Holy Quran emanates from sources beyond
the comprehension of common man. No one can have a full comprehension of
the Quran save those servants of God whom He has chosen to purify. And
the Household of the Prophet are among those pure beings.

In another place God says, "Nay, but they denied that (the Quran), the
knowledge whereof they could not compass, and whereof the interpretation
(in events) [ta'wil] hath not yet come into them" (Quran, X, 40)
(meaning the day of Resurrection when the truth of things will become
known). And again he says, "On the day (the Day of Resurrection) when
the fulfillment [ta'wil] thereof (of the whole Quran) cometh, those who
were before forgetful thereof will say: The messengers of our Lord did
bring the Truth!" (Quran, VII, 53)  
  

### Hadith

The principle that the hadith possesses validity, as attested by the
Quran, is not at all disputed among Shi'ites or in fact among all
Muslims. But because of the failure of some of the early rulers of Islam
in preserving and guarding the hadith, and the excesses of a group among
the companions and followers of the Prophet in propagating hadith
literature, the corpus of hadith came to face a certain number of
difficulties.

On the one hand the caliphs of the time prevented the writing down and
recording of the hadith and ordered any pages containing texts of hadith
to be burned. Sometimes also any increase in activity in the
transmission and study of hadith was forbidden.[[21]](#031) In this way
a certain number of hadiths were forgotten or lost and a few were even
transmitted with a different or distorted meaning. On the other hand
another tendency also prevailed among another group of the companions of
the Holy Prophet who had had the honor of seeing his presence and
actually hearing his words. This group, which was respected by the
caliphs and the Muslim community, began an intense effort to propagate
the hadith. This was carried to such an extent that sometimes hadith
overruled the Quran and the injunction of a Quranic verse was even
considered abrogated by some people through a hadith.[[22]](#032) Often
the transmitters of hadith would travel many miles and bear all the
difficulties of traveling in order to hear a single saying.

A group of outsiders who had worn the dress of Islam and also

some of the enemies within ranks of Islam began to change and distort
some of the hadith and thus diminished the reliability and validity of
the hadith that was then heard and known.[[23]](#033) For this very
reason Islamic scholars began to think of a solution. They created the
sciences concerned with the biography of learned men and chains of
transmission of hadith in order to be able to discriminate between true
and false hadith.[[24]](#034)  
  

### The Method of Shi'ism in Authenticating the Hadith

Shi'ism, in addition to seeking to authenticate the chain transmission
of hadith, considers the correlation of the text of the hadith with the
Quran as a necessary condition for its validity. In Shi'ite sources
there are many hadiths of the Prophet and the Imams with authentic
chains of transmission which themselves assert that a hadith contrary to
the Quran has no value. Only that hadith can be considered valid which
is in agreement with the Quran.[[25]](#035)

Basing itself on these hadiths, Shi'ism does not act upon those hadiths
which are contrary to the text of the Quran. As for the hadiths whose
agreement or disagreement cannot be established, according to
instructions received from Imams they are passed by in silence without
being accepted or rejected.[[26]](#036) Needless to say there are also
within Shi'ism those who, like a group among the Sunnis, act on any
hadith whatsoever which they happen to find in different traditional
sources.  
  

### The Method of Shi'ism in Following the Hadith

A hadith heard directly from the mouth of the Prophet or one of the
Imams is accepted as is the Quran. As for hadiths received through
intermediaries, the majority of Shi'ites act upon them if their chain of
transmission is established at every step or if there exists definite
proof concerning their truth, and, if they are con-

cerned with principles of doctrine which require knowledge and
certainty, according to the text of the Quran. Other than these two
kinds of hadith, no other hadith has any validity concerning principles
of doctrine, the invalid hadith being called "tradition with a single
transmitter" (khabar wahid). However, in establishing the injunctions of
the Shari'ah, because of reasons that have been given, Shi'ites act also
on a tradition which is generally accepted as reliable. Therefore it can
be said that for Shi'ism a certain and definitely established hadith is
absolutely binding and must be followed, while a hadith which is not
absolutely established but which is generally considered as reliable is
utilized only in the elaboration of the injunctions of the Shari'ah.  
  

### Learning and Teaching in Islam

To acquire knowledge is a religious duty in Islam. The Prophet has said,
"To seek knowledge is incumbent upon every Muslim."[[27]](#037)
According to fully established hadiths which elucidate the meaning of
this saying, knowledge here means the three principles of Islam : unity
or tawhid ; prophecy or nubuwwat; and eschatology or ma'ad. In addition
to these principles, Muslims are expected to acquire knowledge of the
subsidiary branches and the details of the injunctions and laws of Islam
according to their individual circumstances and needs.

It is clear that acquiring knowledge of the principles of religion, even
if it be in summary fashion, is possible to a certain extent for
everyone. But acquiring detailed knowledge of the injunctions and laws
of religion through use of the basic documents of the Book and the
Sunnah and technical reasoning based upon them (or what is called
demonstrative jurisprudence, fiqh-i istidlali ) is not possible for
every Muslim. Only a few persons have the capacity for demonstrative
jurisprudence, nor is such acquiring of detailed knowledge required of
everyone, for there are no injunctions in Islam requiring one to do what
lies beyond his abilities.[[28]](#038)

Therefore, the study of Islamic injunctions and laws through reasoning
has been limited through the principle of "sufficient

necessity" (wajib-i kifa'i) to those individuals who have the necessary
capability and are worthy of such study. The duty of the rest of the
people, according to the general principle of the necessity for the
ignorant to depend on the one who knows, is to seek guidance from
capable and worthy men of learning, who are called mujtahids and faqihs.
This act of following mujtahids is called imitation or taqlid. Of course
this imitation differs from imitation in the principles of religious
knowledge which is forbidden according to the very text of the Quran,
"(O man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge." (Quran, XVII,
36).

It must be known that Shi'ism does not permit imitation of a dead
mujtahid. That is to say, a person who does not know the answer to a
problem through ijtihad and through religious duty must imitate a living
mujtahid and cannot depend on the view of a mujtahid who is not living,
unless he had received that guidance while the mujtahid was alive. This
practice is one of the factors which have kept Islamic Shi'ite
jurisprudence alive and fresh throughout the ages. There are individuals
who continuously follow the path of independent judgment, ijtihad, and
delve into the problems of jurisprudence from one generation to another.

In Sunnism, as a result of consensus of opinion (ijma') that occurred in
the 4th/10th century, it was decided that submission to one of the four
schools (of Abu Hanifah, Ibn Malik, al-Shafi'i, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal)
was necessary. Free ijtihad or imitation of a school other than these
four (or one or two smaller schools that died out later) was not
considered permissible. As a result, their jurisprudence has remained in
the same condition as it was about 1100 years ago. In recent times
certain individuals in the Sunni world have turned away from this
consensus and have begun to exercise free ijtihad.  
  

### Shi'ism and the Transmitted Sciences

The Islamic sciences, which owe their existence to the ulama of Islam
who organized and formulated them, are divided into the two categories
of intellectual ('alqi) and transmitted (naqli). The intellectual
sciences include such sciences as philosophy and

mathematics. The transmitted sciences are those which depend upon
transmission from some source, such as the sciences of language, hadith,
or history. Without doubt the major cause for the appearance of the
transmitted sciences in Islam is the Holy Quran. With the exception of a
few disciplines such as history, genealogy, and prosody, the other
transmitted sciences have all come into being under the influence of the
Holy Book. Guided by religious discussions and research, Muslims began
to cultivate these sciences, of which the most important are Arabic
literature (grammar, rhetoric, and the science of metaphors) and the
sciences pertaining to the external form of religion (recitation of the
Quran, Quranic commentary (tafsir), hadith, biography of learned men,
the chain of transmission of hadith, and the principles of
jurisprudence).

Shi'ites played an essential role in the foundation and establishment of
these sciences. In fact, the founders and creators of many of these
sciences were Shi'ites. Arabic grammar was put into a systematic form by
Abu'l-Aswad al-Du'ali, one of the companions of the Holy Prophet, and by
Ali. Ali dictated an outline for the organization of the science of
Arabic grammar.[[29]](#039) One of the founders of the science of
eloquence (rhetoric and the science of metaphors) was Sahib ibn 'Abbad,
a Shi'ite, who was a vizier of the Buyids.[[30]](#040) The first Arabic
dictionary is the Kitab al-'ayn composed by the famous scholar, Khalil
ibn Ahmad al-Basri, the Shi'ite who founded the science of prosody. He
was also the teacher of the great master of grammar, Sibuwayh.

The Quranic recitation of 'Asim goes back to Ali through one
intermediary, and 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbas, who in hadith was the foremost
among the companions, was a student of Ali. The contributions of the
Household of the Prophet and their associates in hadith and
jurisprudence are well known. The founders of the four Sunni schools of
law are known to have associated with the fifth and sixth Shi'ite Imams.
In the principles of jurisprudence the remarkable advances accomplished
by the Shi'ite scholar Wahid Binbahani and followed by Shaykh Murtada
Ansari have never been matched in Sunni jurisprudence according to
existing evidence.

SECOND METHOD: THE WAY OF INTELLECTION AND INTELLECTUAL REASONING
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**Philosophical and Theological Thought in Shi'ism**

It has been mentioned before that Islam has legitimized and approved
rational thought, which it considers a part of religious thought.
Rational thought in its Islamic sense, after confirming the prophecy of
the Prophet, provides intellectual demonstrations of the validity of the
external aspect of the Quran, which is a divine revelation, as well as
of the definitely established sayings of the Prophet and his noble
Household.

Intellectual proofs, which aid man in finding solutions for these
problems through his God-given nature, are of two kinds : demonstration
(burhan) and dialectic (jadal). Demonstration is a proof whose premises
are true (accord with reality) even if they be not observable or
evident. In other words, it is a proposition which man comprehends and
confirms by necessity through his God-given intelligence, as for example
when he knows that "the number three is less than four." This type of
thought is called rational thought; and in case it concerns universal
problems of existence, such as the origin and end of the world and of
man, it becomes known as philosophical thought.

Dialectic is a proof all or some of whose premises are based on
observable and certain data, as for example the case of believers in a
religion for whom the common practice is to prove their religious views
within that religion by appealing to its certain and evident principles.

The Holy Quran has employed both these methods and there are many verses
in the Holy Book attesting to each type of proof. First of all, the
Quran commands free investigation and meditation upon the universal
principles of the world of existence and the general principles of
cosmic order, as well as upon more particular orders such as that of the
heavens, the stars, day and night, the earth, the plants, animals, men,
etc. It praises in the most eloquent language intellectual investigation
of these matters.

Secondly, the Quran has commanded man to apply dialectical thought,
which is usually called theological (kalami)[[31]](#041) discussion,
provided it is accomplished in the best manner possible, that is, with
the aim of manifesting the truth without contention and by men who
possess the necessary moral virtues. It is said in the Quran, "Call unto
the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason
["jadil," from jadal] with them in the better way" (Quran, XVI, 125).  
  

### Shi'ite Initiative in Islamic Philosophy and Kalam

As for theology, kalam, it is clear that from the beginning when the
Shi'ites separated from the Sunni majority they began to debate with
their opponents concerning their own particular point of view. It is
true that a debate has two sides and that both the opponents share in
it. However, the Shi'ites were continuously on the offensive, taking the
initiative, while the other side played the defensive role. In the
gradual growth of kalam, which reached its height in 2nd/8th and 3rd/9th
centuries with the spread of the Mu'tazilite school, Shi'ite scholars
and learned men, who were students of the school of the Household of the
Prophet, became among the foremost masters of kalam.[[32]](#042)
Furthermore, the chain of theologians of the Sunni world, whether it be
the Ash'arites, Mu'tazilites or others, goes back to the first Imam of
the Shi'ites, Ali.

As for philosophy,[[33]](#043) those who are acquainted with sayings and
works of the companions of the Prophet (of which the names of 12,000
have been recorded and 120,000 are known to exist) know that there is
little in them containing an appreciable discussion of philosophical
questions. It is only Ali whose compelling metaphysical utterances
contain the deepest philosophical thought.

The companions and the scholars who followed them, and in fact the Arabs
of that day in general, were not acquainted with free intellectual
discussion. There is no example of philosophical thought in the works of
the scholars of the first two centuries. Only the profound sayings of
the Shi'ite Imams, particularly the

first and eighth, contain an inexhaustible treasury of philosophical
meditations in their Islamic context. It is they who acquainted some of
their students with this form of thought.

The Arabs were not familiar with philosophical thought until they saw
examples of it during the 2nd/8th century in the translation of certain
philosophical works into Arabic. Later, during the 3rd/9th century,
numerous philosophical writings were translated into Arabic from Greek,
Syriac, and other languages and through them the method of philosophical
thought became known to the general public. Nevertheless, most jurists
and theologians did not look upon philosophy and other intellectual
sciences, which were newly arrived guests, with favor. At the beginning,
because of the support of the governmental authorities for these
sciences, their opposition did not have much effect. But conditions soon
changed through strict orders many philosophical works were destroyed.
The Epistles of the Brethren of Purity, which is the work of a group of
unknown authors, is a reminder of those days and attests to the
unfavorable conditions of that epoch.

After this period of difficulty, philosophy was revived at the beginning
of the 4th/10th century by the famous philosopher Abu Nasr al-Farabi. In
the 5th/11th century, as a result of the works of the celebrated
philosopher Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Peripatetic philosophy reached its full
development. In the 6th/12th century Shaykh al-Ishraq Shihab al-Din
Suhrawardi systematized the philosophy of illumination (ishraq) and
because of this was executed by the order of Salah al-Din Ayyubi.
Thereafter, philosophy ceased to exist among the Muslim majority in the
Sunni world. There was no further outstanding philosopher in that part
of the Muslim world except in Andalusia at the edge of the Islamic world
where at the end of the 6th/12th century Ibn Rushd (Averroes) sought to
revive the study of philosophy.[[34]](#044)  
  

### Shi'ite Contributions to Philosophy and the Intellectual Sciences

In the same way that from the beginning Shi'ism played an effective role
in the formation of Islamic philosophical thought, it was also a
principal factor in the further development and prop-

agation of philosophy and the Islamic sciences. Although after Ibn Rushd
philosophy disappeared in the Sunni world, it continued to live in
Shi'ism. After Ibn Rushd there appeared such celebrated philosophers as
Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi, Mir Damad, and Sadr al-Din Shirazi, who
studied, developed and expounded philosophical thought one after
another. In the same manner, in the other intellectual sciences, there
appeared many outstanding figures such as Nasir al-Din Tusi (who was
both philosopher and mathematician) and Birjandi, who was also an
outstanding mathematician.

All the sciences, particularly metaphysics or theosophy (falsafah-i
ilahi or hikmat-i ilahi), made major advances thanks to the
indefatigable endeavor of Shi'ite scholars. This fact can be seen if one
compares the works of Nasir al-Din Tusi, Shams al-Din Turkah, Mir Damad,
and Sadr al-Din Shirazi with the writings of those who came before
them.[[35]](#045)

It is known that the element that was instrumental in the appearance of
philosophical and metaphysical thought in Shi'ism and through Shi'ism in
other Islamic circles was the treasury of knowledge left behind by the
Imams. The persistence and continuity of this type of thought in Shi'ism
is due to the existence of this same treasury of knowledge, which
Shi'ism has continued to regard with a sense of reverence and respect.

In order to clarify this situation it is enough to compare the treasury
of knowledge left by the Household of the Prophet with the philosophical
works written over the course of the centuries. In this comparison one
can see clearly how each day Islamic philosophy approached this source
of knowledge ever more closely, until in the 11th/17th century Islamic
philosophy and this inspired treasury of wisdom converged more or less
completely. They were separated only by certain differences of
interpretation of some of the principles of philosophy.

### Outstanding Intellectual Figures of Shi'ism

Thiqat al-islam Muhammad ibn Ya'qub Kulayni (d. 329/940) is the first
person in Shi'ism to have separated the Shi'ite hadiths from the books
called Principles (usul) and to have arranged and

organized them according the headings of jurisprudence and articles of
faith. (Each one of the Shi'ite scholars of hadith had assembled sayings
he had collected from the Imams in a book called Asl, or Principles.)
The book of Kulayni known as Kafi is divided into three parts:
Principles, Branches, and Miscellaneous Articles, and contains 16,199
hadiths. It is the most trustworthy and celebrated work of hadith known
in the Shi'ite world.

Three other works which complement the Kafi are the book of the jurist
Shaykh-i Saduq Muhammad ibn Babuyah Qumi(d. 381/991), and Kitab
al-tahdhib and Kitab al-istibsar, both by Shaykh Muhammad Tusi (d.
460/1068).

Abu'l-Qasim Ja'far ibn Hasan ibn Yahya Hilli (d. 676/1277), known as
Muhaqqiq, was an outstanding genius in the science of jurisprudence and
is considered to be the foremost Shi'ite jurist. Among his masterpieces
are Kitab-i mukhtasar-i nafi' and Kitab-i sharayi', which have been
passed from hand to hand for seven hundred years among Shi'ite jurists
and have always been regarded with a sense of awe and wonder.

Following Muhaqqiq, we must cite Shahid-i Awwal (the First Martyr) Shams
al-Din Muhammad ibn Makki, who was killed in Damascus in 786/1384 on the
accusation of being Shi'ite. Among his juridical masterpieces is his
Lum'ah-i dimashqiyah which he wrote in prison in a period of seven days.
Also we must cite Shaykh Ja'far Kashif al-Ghita' Najafi (d. 1327/1909)
among whose outstanding juridical works is Kitab kashf al-ghita'.

Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi (d. 672/1274) is the first to have made kalam
a thorough and complete science. Among his masterpieces in this domain
is his Tajrid al-iteqed which has preserved its authority among masters
of this discipline for more than seven centuries. Numerous commentaries
have been written on it by Shi'ites and Sunnis alike. Over and above his
genius in the science of kalam, he was one of the outstanding figures of
his day in philosophy and mathematics as witnessed by the valuable
contributions he made to the intellectual sciences. Moreover, the
Maraghah observatory owed its existence to him.

Sadr al-Din Shirazi (d. 1050/1640), known as Mulla Sadra and Sadr
al-Muta'allihin, was the philosopher who, after centuries of
philosophical development in Islam, brought complete order and

harmony into the discussion of philosophical problems for the first
time. He organized and systematized them like mathematical problems and
at the same time wed philosophy and gnosis, thereby bringing about
several important developments. He gave to philosophy new ways to
discuss and solve hundreds of problems that could not be solved through
Peripatetic philosophy. He made possible the analysis and solution of a
series of mystical questions which to that day had been considered as
belonging to a domain above that of reason and beyond comprehension
through rational thought. He clarified and elucidated the meaning of
many treasuries of wisdom, contained in the exoteric sources of religion
in the profound metaphysical utterances of the Imams of the Household of
the Prophet, that for centuries had been considered as insoluble riddles
and usually believed to be of an allegorical or even unclear nature. In
this way gnosis, philosophy and the exoteric aspect of religion were
completely harmonized and began to follow a single course.

By following the methods he had developed, Mulla Sadra succeeded in
proving "transubstantial motion" (harakat-i jawhariyah),[[36]](#046) and
in discovering the intimate relation of time to the three spatial
dimensions in a manner that is similar to the meaning given in modern
physics to the "fourth dimension" and which resembles the general
principles of the theory of relativity (relativity of course in the
corporeal world outside the mind, not in the mind), and many other
noteworthy principles. He wrote nearly fifty books and treatises. Among
his greatest masterpieces is the four-volume Asfar.

It should be noted here that before Mulla Sadra certain sages like
Suhrawardi, the 6th/12th century philosopher and author of Hikmat
al-ishraq, and Shams al-Din Turkah, a philosopher of the 8th/14th
century, had taken steps toward harmonizing gnosis, philosophy and
exoteric religion, but credit for complete success in this undertaking
belongs to Mulla Sadra.

Shaykh Murtada Ansari Shustari (d. 1281/1864) reorganized the science of
the principles of jurisprudence upon a new foundation and formulated the
practical principles of this science. For over a century his school has
been followed diligently by Shi'ite scholars.

THIRD METHOD: INTELLECTUAL INTUITION OR MYSTICAL UNVEILING
----------------------------------------------------------

### Man and Gnostic Comprehension[[37]](#047)

Even though most men are occupied with gaining a livelihood and
providing for their daily needs and show no concern for spiritual
matters, there lies within the nature of man an innate urge to seek the
ultimately Real. In certain individuals this force which is dormant and
potential becomes awakened and manifests itself openly, thus leading to
a series of spiritual perceptions.

Every man believes in a permanent Reality despite the claim of sophists
and skeptics, who call every truth and reality illusion and
superstition. Occasionally when man views with a clear mind and a pure
soul the permanent Reality pervading the universe and the created order,
and at the same time sees the impermanence and transient character of
the diverse parts and elements of the world, he is able to contemplate
the world and its phenomena as mirrors which reflect the beauty of a
permanent reality. The joy of comprehending this Reality obliterates
every other joy in the eye of the viewer and makes everything else
appear as insignificant and unimportant.

This vision is that same gnostic "divine attraction" (jadhbah) which
draws the attention of the God-centered man toward the transcendent
world and awakens the love of God in his heart. Through this attraction
he forgets all else. All his manifold desires and wishes are obliterated
from his mind. This attraction guides man to the worship and praise of
the Invisible Deity who is in reality more evident and manifest than all
that is visible and audible. In truth it is this same inner attraction
that has brought into being the different religions within the world,
religions which are based on the worship of God. The gnostic ('arif) is
the one who worships God through knowledge and because of love for Him,
not in hope of reward or fear of punishment.[[38]](#048)

From this exposition it becomes clear that we must not consider gnosis
as a religion among others, but as the heart of all religions. Gnosis is
one of the paths of worship, a path based on knowledge combined with
love, rather than fear. It is the path for realizing the inner truth of
religion rather than remaining satisfied only with its external form and
rational thought. Every revealed religion and even those that appear in
the form of idol-worship have certain followers who march upon the path
of gnosis. The polytheistic religions[[39]](#049) and Judaism,
Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Islam all have believers who are
gnostics.

### Appearance of Gnosis (Sufism) in Islam

Among the companions of the Prophet, Ali is known particularly for his
eloquent exposition of gnostic truths and the stages of the spiritual
life. His words in this domain comprise an inexhaustible treasury of
wisdom. Among the works of the other companions which have survived
there is not a great deal of material that concerns this type of
question. Among the associates of Ali, such as Salman Farsi, Uways
Qarani, Kumayl ibn Ziyad, Roshaid Hajari, Maytham Tammar, Rabi'ibn
Khaytham.

However, there are figures who have been considered by the majority of
the Sufis, Sunni and Shi'ite alike, as the heads of their spiritual
chain (silsilah) after Ali.

After this group there appeared others, such as Tawus Yamani, Shayban
Ra'i, Malik ibn Dinar, Ibrahim Adham, and Shaqiq Balkhi, who were
considered by the people to be saints and men of God. These men, without
publicly talking about gnosis and Sufism, appeared externally as
ascetics and did not hide the fact that they had been initiated by the
earlier group and had undergone spiritual training under them.

After them there appeared at the end of the 2nd/8th century and the
beginning of the 3rd/9th century men such as Bayazid Bastami, Ma'ruf
Karkhi, Junayd Baghdadi and others like them, who followed the Sufi path
and openly declared their connection with Sufism and gnosis. They
divulged certain esoteric sayings based on spiritual vision which,
because of their repellent external form,

brought upon them the condemnation of some of the jurists and
theologians. Some of them were imprisoned, flogged, and even
occasionally killed.[[40]](#050) Even so, this group persisted and
continued its activities despite its opponents. In this manner gnosis
and the "Way" (Tariqah, or Sufism) continued to grow until in the
7th/13th and 8th/14th centuries it reached the height of its expansion
and power. Since then, sometimes stronger and at other times less so, it
has continued its existence to this very day within the Islamic world.

Gnosis or Sufism as we observe it today first appeared in the Sunni
world and later among the Shi'ites. The first men who openly declared
themselves to be Sufis and gnostics, and were recognized as spiritual
masters of Sufi orders, apparently followed Sunnism in the branches
(furu') of Islamic law. Many of the masters who followed them and who
expanded the Sufi orders were also Sunnis in their following of the law.

Even so, these masters traced their spiritual chain, which in the
spiritual life is like the genealogical chain of a person, through their
previous masters to Ali. Also the results of their visions and
intuitions as transmitted to us convey mostly truths concerning divine
unity and the stations of the spiritual life which are found in the
sayings of Ali and other Shi'ite Imams. This can be seen provided we are
not affected by some of the striking and even sometimes shocking
expressions used by these Sufi masters and consider the total content of
their teachings with deliberation and patience. Sanctity[[41]](#051)
resulting from initiation into the spiritual path, which Sufis consider
as the perfection of man, is a state which according to Shi'ite belief
is possessed in its fullness by the Imam and through the radiance of his
being can be attained by his true followers. And the Spiritual Pole
(qutb),[[42]](#052) whose existence at all times is considered necessary
by all the Sufis - as well as the attributes associated with him -
correlates with the Shi'ite conception of the Imam. According to the
saying of the Household of the Prophet, the Imam is, to use the Sufi
expression, Universal Man, the manifestation of the Divine Names and the
spiritual guide of the lives and actions of men. Therefore, one could
say, considering the Shi'ite concept of walayat, that Sufi masters are

"Shi'ite" from the point of view of the spiritual life and in connection
with the source of walayat although, from the point of view of the
external form of religion they follow the Sunni schools of law.

It is necessary to mention that even in classical Sunni treatises it has
sometimes been said that the spiritual method of the "Path,"[[43]](#053)
or the "techniques" whereby one comes to know and realize himself,
cannot be explained through the external forms and teachings of the
Shari'ah. Rather these sources claim that individual Muslims themselves
have discovered many of these methods and practices, which then have
become accepted by God, such as is the case with monasticism in
Christianity.[[44]](#054) Therefore each master has devised certain
actions and practices which he has deemed necessary in the spiritual
method, such as the particular type of ceremony of being accepted by the
master the details of the way in which the invocation is given to the
new adept along with a robe, and the use of music, chanting and other
methods of inducing ecstasy during the invocation of the Divine Name. In
some cases the practices of the Tariqah have outwardly become separated
from those of the Shari'ah and it may seem difficult for an outsider to
see the intimate and inward relation between them. But by taking into
consideration the theoretical principles of Shi'ism and then studying in
depth the basic sources of Islam, namely the Quran and the Sunnah, he
will soon realize that it is impossible to say that this spiritual
guidance has not been provided by Islam itself or that Islam has
remained negligent in clarifying the nature of the spiritual program to
be followed.  
  

Guidance Provided by the Quran and Sunnah for Gnostic Knowledge
---------------------------------------------------------------

God - exalted be His Name - has commanded man in several places in the
Quran to deliberate upon the Holy Book and be persistent in this effort
and not be satisfied with a merely superficial and elementary
understanding of it. In many verses the world of creation and all that
is in it without exception are called portents (ayat), signs and symbols
of the Divine.[[45]](#055) A degree of

deliberation upon the meaning of portents and signs and penetration into
their real significance will reveal the fact that things are called by
these names because they manifest and make known not so much themselves
but a reality other than themselves. For example, a red light placed as
a sign of danger, once seen, reminds one completely of the idea of
danger so that one no longer pays attention to the red light itself. If
one begins to think about the form or quiddity of the light or its
color, there will be in his mind only the form of the lamp or its glass
or color rather than the conception of danger. In the same manner, if
the world and its phenomena are all and in every aspect signs and
portents of God, the Creator of the Universe, they have no ontological
independence of their own. No matter how we view them they display
nothing but God.

He who through guidance of the Holy Quran is able to view the world and
the people of the world with such an eye will apprehend nothing but God.
Instead of seeing only this borrowed beauty which others see in the
attractive appearance of the world, he will see an Infinite Beauty, a
Beloved who manifests Himself through the narrow confines of this world.
Of course, as in the example of the red light, what is contemplated and
seen in "signs" and "portents" is God the Creator of the world and not
the world itself. The relation of God to the world is from a certain
point of view like (1 + 0) not (1 + 1) nor (1 x 1) (that is, the world
is nothing before God and adds nothing to him). It is at the moment of
realization of this truth that the harvest of man's separative existence
is plundered and in one stroke man entrusts his heart to the hands of
Divine love. This realization obviously does not take place through the
instrument of the eye or the ear or the other outward senses, nor
through the power of imagination or reason, for all these instruments
are themselves signs and portents and of little significance to the
spiritual guidance sought here.[[46]](#056)

He who has attained the vision of God and who has no intention but to
remember God and forget all else, when he hears that in another place in
the Quran God says, "O ye who believe! Ye have charge of your own souls.
He who erreth cannot injure you if you are rightly guided" (Quran, V,
105), then he understands that the

sole royal path which will guide him fully and completely is the path of
"self realization." His true guide who is God Himself obliges him to
know himself, to leave behind all other ways and to seek the path of
self-knowledge, to see God through the window of his soul, gaining in
this way the real object of his search. That is why the Prophet has
said, "He who knows himself verily knows the Lord."[[47]](#057) And also
he has said, "Those among you know God better who know themselves
better."[[48]](#058)

As for the method of following the path, there are many verses of the
Quran which command man to remember God, as for example where He says,
"Therefore remember Me, I will remember you" (Quran, II, 152) and
similar sayings. Man is also commanded to perform right actions which
are described fully in the Quran and hadith. At the end of this
discussion of right actions God says, "Verily in the Messenger of Allah
ye have a good example" (Quran, XXXIII, 21).

How can anyone imagine that Islam could discover that a particular path
is the path which leads to God without recommending this path to all the
people? Or how could it make such a path known and yet neglect to
explain the method of following it? For God says in the Quran, "And We
reveal the Scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things" (Quran,
XVI, 89).

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Editor's note: As indicated in the introduction there has been in the
Shi'ite world a continuous tradition oftheosophy or wisdom (hikmah),
which is also called falsafah, or philosophy, to which the author refers
often in this book. This school is, however, a traditional school of
philosophy wedded to metaphysics and to means of spiritual realization.
It should not he identified with profane or purely rationalistic modes
of thought and is therefore not the same as philosophy as currently
understood in the West. although it does use rational demonstrations and
the laws of logic. 2. We can deduce from this verse that worship in the
religion of God is sub servient to Unity (tawhid) and is based upon it.
3. To be able to attribute and describe depends on knowledge of that
which is to be described. From this verse it can be concluded that
except for those who are devoted in sincerity to God and those who have
become purified. no others can come to know God in the manner in which
He should be known. He therefore cannot be properly known or described
by others and is beyond whatever attri butes they give Him. 4. We can
deduce from this verse that there is no other way to meet the Lord
except through Unity and right action. 5. From this verse it can be
concluded that the true worship of God results in certainty (yaqin). 6.
We can conclude from this verse that one of the necessary conditions for
reaching certainty is to gain a vision of the."angelic" or "archetypal"
heavens and earth. 7. From these verses it becomes known that the
destiny of the righteous (abrar) is contained in a book called 'Illiyin
(the very elevated), known by those close to God through spiritual
vision. The verb "attested by" (yeshhaduhu in Arabic) shows that by "a
written record" is not meant a written book in the ordinary sense rather
it refers to the world of "divine proximity and elevation." 8. From this
verse it can be understood that the science of certainty ('ilm al yaqin)
results in the vision of the final end of those who are in a state of
wretched ness, this end being called jahim or hell. 9. It is with
reference to this truth that the Holy Prophet in a hadith accepted by
Sunnis and Shi'ites alike says, "We prophets speak to mankind according
to the degree of their understanding." Bihar al-anwar, vol.l, p.37; Usul
al-kafl, Kulayni. Tehran, 1357, vol.l, p.203. 10. The source for this
hadith has been mentioned in Part I of this work. 11. Nahj al-balaghah,
sermon 231. This question has been discussed in our work on the Quran
which is also to appear shortly in English. 118

12. Al-Durr al-manthur, vol.ll.p.6. 13. Tafsir al-safi. Mulla Muhsin
Fayd Kashani, Tehran. I269 p.8 Bihar al-anwar. vol. XIX, p- 28. 14.
Quran, XXVI. 173. 15. Quran, LIV, 34. 16. Editor,s note: It may be added
that this is the method employed by the author in his monumenental
Quranic commentary al-Mizan, of which seventeen volumes have already
appeared. 17. Tafsir al -safi, p. 4. 18. This has been recounted of the
Prophet in the Tafsir al-safi, p.15 Safinat al-bihar of Abbas Qumi,
Najaf, 1352-55, and other well-known commentaries. 19. Editor's note:
This is in reference to the Quranic verse, "We shall show them our
portents upon the horizons and within themselves, until it be manifest
unto them that it is the Truth" (XLI, 53). 20. Editor's note: This is a
direct reference to the practice of dhikr or invocation which also means
remembrance and is the fundamental technique of spiritual eaalization in
Sufism. 21. Bihar al-anwar, vol.l, p.117. 22. The question ofthe
abrogation or substitution of certain verses ofthe Quran is one ofthe
difficult problems of the science of the principles ofjurisprudence and
at least some of the 'ulama in Sunnism seem to have accepted abrogation
The incident of Fadak seems also to involve the question of different
kinds of inter pretations given to Quranic verses through the use of
hadith. 23. The proof of this question lies in the large number of works
written by traditional religious scholars on fabricated hadith. Also in
books dealing with the biography of learned men. some transmitters of
hadith have been described as unreliable and others as weak. 24.
Editor's note: The traditional Islamic criticism of hadith literature
and the creation of criteria for distinguishing between true and false
hadith must not be in any way confused with the criticism of European
orientalists made against the whole corpus of hadith. From the Islamic
view this is one of the most diabolical made against the whole structure
of Islam 25. Bihar al-anwar,vol.l.p.139. 26. Bihar al-anwar,vol.l.p.117.
27. See the discussion concerning "a single tradition" in works on the
science of the principles of jurisprudence (usul). 28. Bihar al-anwar,
vol.l. p.55. 29. In these matters one should refer to the discussions
concerning ijtihad and taqlid in works on the science of the principles
of jurisprudence. 30. Wafayat al-a'yan of Ibn Khallikan, Tehran, 1284
p.78: A'yan al-shi'ah of Muhsin 'Amili Damascus, 1935 onward. vol. XI.
p.231. 31. Wafayat al-a'yan. p.190,- A'yan al-shi'ah, and other works on
the biography of learned men. 32. Editor's note: Kalam is a special
discipline in Islam: the word is usually rendered into European
languages as theology, although the role and scope of kalam and theology
are not the same. Henceforth, the word kalam itself. which is now
gradually coming into use in English, will be employed in its original
Arabic form and will not be translated. 33. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, beginning
of vol.l. 34. Editor's note.' As pointed Out before, philosophy in this
context means tradi tional philosophy. which is based on certainty,and
not the specifically modern philosophy that begins with doubt and limits
the intellect to reason. 35. These matters are ampIy; treated in Akhbar
al-hukama' of Ibn al-Qifti. Leipzig, 1903, Wafayat al-a''yan. and other
biographies of learned men

36. Editor's note: These are all outstanding philosophers of the later
period (from the 7th/l3th to the llth/l7th centuries) and are nearly
unknown in the West, except for Tusi who is, however, known more for his
mathematical works than for his philosophical contributions. 37.
Editor's note: Earlier Muslim philosophers believed, like Aristotle,
that motion is possible only in the accidents of things, not in their
substance. Mulla Sadra asserted, on the contrary, that whenever
something partakes of motion (in the sense ofmedieval philosophy) its
substance undergoes motion and not just its accidents. There is thus a
becoming within things through which they ascend to the higher orders of
universal existence. This view, however, should not be confused with the
modern theory of evolution. 38. Editor's note: Islamic esotericism is
called Sufism (tasawwuf) or gnosis (irfan); the first word concerns more
the practical and the second the theoretical aspect of the same reality.
It has been common among Shi'ite religious scholars since the Safavid
period to refer to Islamic esotericism more often as irfan than as
tasawwuf. This is due to historical reasons connected with the fact that
the Safavids were at first a Sufi order and later gained political
power, with the result that many worldly men sought to put on the garb
of Sufism in order to gain political or social power, therefore
discrediting Sufism in the eyes of the devout. 39. The sixth Imam has
said. "There are three kinds of worship: a group worship Gnd in fear and
that is the worship of slaves; a group worship God in order to receive
rewards and that is the worship ofmercenaries; and a group worship God
because oftheir love a'nd devotion to Him and that is the worship of
free men. That is the best form of worship." Bihar al-anwar, vol. XV,
p.208. 40. Editor's note: The author has here in mind the religions of
India and the Far East in which different aspects of the Divinity are
symbolized by mythical and symbolic forms and deities and which
therefore appear in the eye of Muslims in general as "polytheism". 41.
See the works on the biographies of learned men and also Todhkirot al'
awliya-' of'Attar, Tehran. 1321 (A.H. solar), and Tara'iq al-haqa'iq of
Ma'sum 'Ali Shah, Tehran, 1318. 42. In the language of the gnostics,
when the gnostic forgets himself, he be- comes annihilated in God and
surrenders to His guidance or walayat. 43. The gnostics say that through
the Divine Names the world has gained an apparent existence and thus
runs its course. All the Divine Names are derived from the "Complete and
Supreme Name." The Supreme Name is the station (maqam) of the Universal
Man who is also called the spiritual pole (quth) of the Universe. In no
time can the world of man be without a quth. 44. Editor's note: The
spiritual path in Islam is called sayr Wa suluk (meaning "traveling and
wayfaring") to indicate the way or journey which symbolizes the movement
from man to God. 45. God- Exalted be His Name -says. "But monasticism
they [the Christians] invented -We ordained it not for them--only
seeking Allah's pleasure, and they observed it not' with right
observance." (Quran, LVII, 27) 46. Editor's note: There is a difference
between a sign which signifies a meaning through agreement and a symbol
which reveals the meaning symbolized through an essential and
ontological bond between the symbol and the symbolized. Here the author
is using the concept of signs and portents (ayat) in the world in the
sense of true symbols. 47. Ali has said, "God is not that which can
enter under one of the categories of knowledge. God is That which guides
reasoning toward Himself." Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll, p.186. 48. A famous
hadith repeated especially in works of well-known Sufis and gnostics.
Shi'ite and Sunni alike. 49. This hadith is also found in many gnostic
works, both Shi'ite and Sunni.
