Part Iii: Islamic Beliefs From the Shi'ite Point of View
========================================================

CHAPTER IV ON THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
----------------------------------

**The World Seen from the Point of View of Being and Reality ; The
Necessity of God**

Consciousness and perception, which are intertwined with man's very
being, make evident by their very nature the existence of God as well as
the world. For, contrary to those who express doubt about their own
existence and everything else and consider the world as illusion and
fantasy, we know that a human being at the moment of his coming into
existence, when he is already conscious and possesses perception,
discovers himself and the world. That is to say, he has no doubt that
"He exists and things other than he exist." As long as man is man this
comprehension and knowledge exist in him and cannot be doubted, nor do
they undergo any change.

The perception of this reality and existence which man affirms through
his intelligence, in opposition to the views of the sophist and skeptic,
is immutable and can never be proven false. That is to say, the claim of
the sophist and the skeptic which negates reality can never be true,
because of man's very existence. There is within the immense world of
existence a permanent and abiding reality which pervades it and which
reveals itself to the intelligence.

Yet each of the phenomena of this world which possesses the reality that
we discover as conscious and perceiving human beings loses its reality
sooner or later and becomes nonexistent. From this fact itself it is
evident that the visible world and its parts are not the essence of
reality (which can never be obliterated or destroyed). Rather, they rely
upon a permanent Reality through

which they gain reality and by means of which they enter into existence.
As long as they are connected and attached to it they possess existence
and as soon as they are cut off from it they become
nonexistent.[[1]](#011) We call this Immutable Reality, which is
imperishable (that is, the Necessary Being), God.

Another Point of View Concerning the Relation Between Man and the Universe
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The path chosen in the previous section to prove the existence of God is
a very simple and evident one which man treads with his God-given nature
and intelligence without any complication. Yet, for the majority of
people, because of their continuous preoccupation with material things
and their being drowned in the pleasures of the senses, it has become
very difficult to return to their God-given, simple, primordial, and
untainted nature. That is why Islam, which describes itself as
universal, and which believes all people to be equal in religion, has
made it possible for such people to find another way to prove the
existence of God. It seeks to speak to them and to make God known to
them by means of the very path through which they have turned away from
their simple, primordial nature.

The Holy Quran instructs the multitude of men in the knowledge of God
through different ways. Most of all, it draws their attention to the
creation of the world and the order which reigns over it. It invites men
to contemplate the "horizons" and "their own souls,"[[2]](#012) for man
in his few days of earthly life, no matter what path he chooses or what
state he loses himself in, will never step outside the world of creation
and the order which reigns over it. His intelligence and power of
comprehension cannot overlook the marvelous scenes of heaven and earth
which he observes.

This vast world of existence which stretches before our eyes is, as we
know, in its parts and as a whole continuously in the process of change
and transformation. At each moment it manifests itself in a new and
unprecedented form. It becomes actualized under the influences of laws
which know no exception. From the farthest

galaxies to the smallest particles which form the parts of this world,
each part of creation possesses an inward order and runs its course in a
most amazing manner under laws which do not admit any exceptions. The
world extends its domain of activity from the lowest to the most perfect
state and reaches its own goal of perfection.

Above these particular orders stand more universal orders and finally
the total cosmic order which brings together the countless parts of the
universe and relates the more particular orders with each other, and
which in its continuous course accepts no exceptions and permits no
breaches.

The order of creation is such that if, for example, it places a man upon
the earth, it constitutes him in such a way that he can live in harmony
with his environment. It arranges the environment in such a way that it
raises him like a loving nurse. The sun, the moon, the stars, water and
earth, the night and the day, the seasons of the year, the clouds, wind
and rain, the treasures beneath the earth and on its surface, in other
words all the forces of nature, use their energy and resources in
providing well-being and peace of mind for him. Such a relation and
harmony can be discovered among all phenomena and also between man and
his neighbors near and far, as well as within man's own habitat.

Such a continuity and harmony can also be observed within the internal
structure of every phenomenon in the world. If creation has given man
bread, it has also given him feet to seek it, hands to grasp it, a mouth
to eat it, and teeth to chew it. It has related man through a series of
means, which are connected with each other like the links of a chain, to
the final goal envisaged for this creature, which is subsistence and
perfection.

Many men of science have no doubt that the countless relations among
things which they have discovered as a result of several thousand years
of effort are but humble samples and a foretaste of the secrets of
creation and their myriad ramifications. Each new discovery declares to
man the existence of an endless number of unknown elements. Could anyone
say that this vast world of existence, all of the parts of which either
separately or in unity and interconnection bear witness to an infinite
knowledge and

power, need not have a creator and cold have come into being without
reason and cause? Or could it be said of these particular and universal
domains or order and equilibrium, and finally of this total cosmic order
which through innumerable interrelations has made the world a single
unit running its course according to laws which know no exceptions, that
all this has occurred without plan and only through accident and chance?
Or could anyone say that each of the phenomena and domains in the cosmos
has chosen for itself, before coming into being? Or could anyone claim
that this world, which is a single unit and which possesses complete
unity, harmony and the interconnection of parts, could be the result of
multiple and different commands issuing from different sources?

Obviously, an intelligent man, who relates every event and phenomenon to
a cause, and who sometimes spends long periods in investigation and
efforts to gain knowledge of a cause that is unknown to him, will never
accept the possibility of a world existing without a Being as its cause.
Such a person, who by observing a few bricks placed upon one another in
an orderly manner considers them to be the effect of an agent possessing
knowledge and power and who denies the possibility of chance and
accident in the putting of the bricks together and therefore concludes
that a plan and purpose must have existed beforehand, will not regard
the cosmic order as being the result of an accident or the play of
chance.

A deeper awareness of the order reigning in the world is enough to show
that the world, along with the order reigning over it, is the creation
of an omnipotent Creator who has brought it into being through His
limitless knowledge and power and who directs it toward an end. All the
partial causes which bring about individual events in the world
ultimately end in Him. They are in every way under His dominance and are
guided by His wisdom. Everything that exists is in need of Him, while He
has need of nothing and does not depend on any causes or conditions.

God, the Exalted, says, "Lo! in the heavens and the earth are portents
for believers. And in your creation, and all the beasts that

He scattereth in the earth, are portents for a folk whose faith is sure.
And the difference of night and day and the provision that Allah sendeth
down from the sky and thereby quickeneth the earth after her death, and
the ordering of the winds, are portents for a people who have sense.
These are portents of Allah which we recite unto thee (Muhammad) with
truth. Then in what fact, after Allah and His portents, will they
believe?" (Quran, XLV, 3-6).

Every reality in this world which we can possibly imagine is a limited
reality, that is, one whose actualization depends upon certain necessary
causes and conditions. If these do not exist that reality cannot exist
in the world. Every reality has a boundary beyond which it cannot extend
its existence. Only God is such that He has no limit or boundary, for
His reality is absolute and He exists in His Infinity no matter how we
try to conceive of Him. His Being does not depend upon and is not in
need of any causes or conditions. It is clear that in the case of
something limitless we cannot conceive of multiplicity, for any
supposedly second reality will be other than the first, as a result of
which each would be limited and bound and would set a boundary to the
reality of the other. For example, if we consider a limitless volume we
cannot conceive another limitless volume alongside it. And if we do
suppose another, it will be the same as the first. Therefore, God is one
and has no partner.

We have already mentioned the Bedouin who approached Ali in the middle
of the fighting during the Battle of the Camel and asked if he asserted
that God was one. In answer Ali said, "To say that God is one has four
meanings: Two of those meanings are false and two correct. As for the
two incorrect meanings, one is that one should say 'God is one' and be
thinking of number and counting. This meaning is false because that
which has no second cannot enter into the category of number. Do you not
see that those who said that God is the third of a trinity [i.e., the
Christians] fell into infidelity? Another meaning is to say that so and
so is one of this people, namely a species of this genus or a member of
this species. This meaning is also not correct when applied to God, for
it implies likening something to God and God is above all likeness.

"As for the two meanings which are correct when applied to God, one is
that it should be said that God is one in the sense that there is no
likeness unto Him among things. God possesses such uniqueness. And one
is to say that God is one in the sense that there is no multiplicity or
division conceivable in Him, neither outwardly nor in the mind nor in
the imagination. God possesses such a unity." (Bihar al-anwar, vol. II,
p. 65)

Ali has also said, "To know God is to know His Oneness." (Bihar
al-anwar, vol. II, p. 186) This means that the Being of God is unlimited
and infinite suffices to prove His Oneness, for to conceive a second for
the Infinite is impossible. There is therefore no need of any other
proofs, although there exist many others.

### The Divine Essence and Qualities

If we analyze the nature of a human being, we see that he has an essence
which is his individual humanity and also qualities through which his
essence is known, such as the quality of being born in such a land, or
being the son of such a person, or being learned and capable, or tall
and handsome; or he possesses the contrary of these qualities. Some of
these qualities, like the first and second, can never be separated from
the essence, and others, like being learned or capable, have the
possibility or separation and alternation. Yet all are different from
the essence and at the same time different from each other.

This point, namely the difference between the essence and qualities and
between the qualities themselves, is the best proof that an essence that
has qualities, and a quality that makes known an essence, are both
limited and finite. For if the essence were limitless and infinite it
would encompass the qualities as well, and also the qualities would
include each other, and as a result all would become one. For example,
the essence of man would be the same as capability and also capability
the same as knowledge; height and beauty would be the same; and all of
these would possess the same meaning.

From this example it is clear that the Divine Essence cannot be

conceived to have qualities in the sense that human beings have
qualities. A quality can come about only through setting limits and the
Divine Essence transcends all limitations (even the limitation of this
transcendence which in reality is a quality).

### The Meaning of the Divine Qualities

In the world of creation we are aware of many perfections which appear
in the form of qualities. These are positive qualities which, wherever
they appear, make the object of which they are the quality more perfect
and increase its ontological value, as can be seen clearly in the
comparison between the live being such as man and a lifeless one such as
a stone. Doubtless God has created and bestowed these perfections upon
creatures; if He had not possessed them in their fullness Himself He
could not have bestowed them upon others and perfected others through
them. Therefore, if we follow the judgment of sound reasoning we must
conclude that God, the Creator, has knowledge, power, and every other
real perfection. Furthermore, as has already been mentioned, the marks
of His knowledge and power and, as a result, the marks of life are seen
in the order of the cosmos.

But because the Divine Essence is limitless and infinite these
perfections which are shown to be His Qualities are in reality the same
His Essence and one with each other. The difference observed between the
Essence and the Qualities and at the same time between the Qualities
themselves is only on the plane of concepts. Essentially there is but
one Reality involved which is one and indivisible. [[3]](#013)

In order to avoid the inadmissible error of limiting the Essence through
attributing qualities to it or denying the principle of perfection in
it, Islam has commanded its followers to preserve a just balance between
affirmation and negation. It has ordered them to believe that God has
knowledge but not like the knowledge of others. He has power but not
like the power of others. He hears but not with ears. He sees but not
with eyes like those of men, and so on. [[4]](#014)

### Further Explanation Concerning Qualities

Qualities in general are of two types : qualities of perfection, and
qualities of imperfection. Qualities of perfection, as mentioned above,
are of a positive nature and give higher ontological value and greater
ontological effect to the object that they qualify. This is clear from
the comparison between a live, knowing and capable being and a dead
being which lacks knowledge and capability. Qualities of imperfection
are the reverse of such qualities. When we analyze these imperfect
qualities we see that they are negative and show a lack of perfection,
such as ignorance, impatience, ugliness, illness, and the like.
Therefore, it can be said that the negation of the quality of
imperfection is the quality of perfection. For example, the negation of
ignorance is knowledge and the negation of impotence is power and
capability.

For this reason the Holy Quran has related each positive quality
directly to God and negated every quality of imperfection from Him,
attributing the negation of such imperfections to Him, as He says: "He
is the knower, the Omnipotent," or He says, "He is the Alive" or
"Neither slumber nor sleep overtaketh Him," or "Know that ye cannot
frustrate Allah."

The point that must never be forgotten is that God, the Most Exalted, is
Absolute Reality without any limit or boundary. Therefore, a positive
quality attributed to Him will not possess any limitation. He is not
material and corporeal or limited to space and time. While possessing
all positive qualities He is beyond every quality and state which
belongs to creatures. Every quality which in reality belongs to Him is
purified from the notion of limitedness, as He says, "Nought is as His
likeness." (Quran, XLII, 11) [[5]](#015)  
  

### Qualities of Action

In addition, qualities are also divided into qualities of essence and
qualities of action. A quality sometimes depends only on the

qualified itself, such as life, knowledge and power, which depend on the
person of a living, knowing and capable human being. We can conceive of
man in himself possessing these qualities without taking into
consideration any other factor.

At other times a quality does not depend only on the qualified in
itself, but, in order to qualify, it also requires the existence of
something external as in the case of writing, conservation, desire, and
the like. A person can be a writer if he possesses ink, pen, and paper,
and he can converse when there is someone with whom to speak. In the
same way he can desire when there is an object of desire. The sole
existence of man is not sufficient to bring these qualities into
existence.

From this analysis it becomes clear that the Divine Qualities which are
the same as God's Essence, as already pointed out, are only of the first
kind. As for the second kind, whose actualization depends upon an
external factor, they cannot be considered as Qualities of the Essence
and the same as the Essence, for all that is other than God is created
by Him and so, being situated in the created order, comes after Him.

Qualities that pertain to God after the act of creation such as creator,
omnipotent, giver of life, giver of death, sustainer, etc., are not the
same as His Essence but are additional to it; they are Qualities of
Action. By Quality of Action is meant that after the actualization of an
act the meaning of a quality is understood from that act, not from the
Essence (that performs the act), such as "Creator", which is conceived
after the act of creation has taken place. From the creation is
understood the quality of God as Creator. That quality depends upon
creation, not upon the sacred Essence of God, the Most Exalted, Himself,
so that the Essence does not change from one state to another with the
appearance of that quality. Shi'ism considers the two qualities of will
(iradah) and speech (kalam) in their literal meaning as Qualities of
Action (will meaning wanting something and speech meaning conveying a
meaning through an expression). Most of the Sunni theologians consider
them as implying knowledge and thereby take them to be Qualities of
Essence.[[6]](#016)

### Destiny and Providence

The law of causality reigns throughout the world of existence without
any breach or exception.[[7]](#017) According to this law each
phenomenon in this world depends for its coming into being upon causes
and conditions which make its actualization possible. If all of these
causes, which are called the complete cause (the sufficient and
necessary cause), are actualized, the coming into being of that
phenomenon, or the assumed effect, becomes determined and necessary. And
assuming the lack of all or some of these causes, the actualization of
the phenomenon is impossible. Investigation and analysis of this thesis
will clarify this point for us.

(1) If we compare a phenomenon (or effect) with the whole, complete (or
sufficient) cause, and also with the parts of the complete cause, its
relation to the complete cause is based on necessity and relation to
each of the parts of the complete cause (which are called incomplete or
partial causes) is one of possibility and lack of complete determinism.
These causes provide the effect only with the possibility of existence,
not with its necessity.

The world of existence, in its totality, therefore, is governed
throughout by necessity because each of its parts has a necessary
connection with its complete cause by the very fact of coming into
being. Its structure is composed of a series of necessary and certain
events. Yet, the character of possibility is preserved in its parts if
we consider each part separately and in itself in the phenomena which
are related and connected to partial causes which are other than their
complete cause.

The Holy Quran in its teachings has called this reign of necessity
Divine Destiny (qada'), for this necessity issues from that Source that
gives existence to the world and is therefore a command (hukm) and
"Divine Decree" that is certain and is impossible to breach or disobey.
It is based on justice and accepts no exception or discrimination. God
Almighty says, "His verily is all creation and commandment" (Quran, VII,
54), and "When He

decreeth [qada] a thing, He saith unto it only: Be! and it is"

(Quran, II, 117), and also "(When) Allah doometh there is none that can
postpone His doom [hukm]" (Quran, XIII, 41).

(2) Each part of the cause provides the appropriate measure and "model"
for the effect, and the coming into being of the effect is in accordance
with the totality of the measures determined for it by the complete
cause. For example, the causes that make respiration possible for man do
not cause respiration in the absolute and unconditioned sense ; rather
they send a determined amount of the air around the mouth and nose
through the respiratory channel to the area of the lungs in a determined
time and with a determined shape. Likewise, the causes of man's vision
(including man himself) do not bring into being vision as such without
limits or conditions, but rather a vision which, through the means and
organs provided, is limited and measured for men in every respect. This
truth is to be found without exception in all the phenomena of the world
and all the events that occur in it.

The Holy Quran has called this aspect the truth "Providence" (qadar) and
has related it to God Almighty who is the origin of creation, as has
been said, "And there is not a thing but with Us are the stores thereof.
And we send it not down save in appointed measure [qadar]" (Quran, XV,
21).[[8]](#018)

In the same way that according to Divine Destiny the existence of each
phenomenon and even which occurs in the cosmic order is necessary and
cannot be avoided, so also according to Providence each phenomenon and
event that occurs will never trespass or disobey in the least degree the
measure which God has provided for it.

### Man and Free Will

The action which man performs is one of the phenomena of the world of
creation and its appearance depends, completely, like other phenomena in
the world, upon its cause. And since man in a part of the world of
creation and has an ontological relation with other parts of the cosmos,
we cannot accept the premise that other parts should not have an effect
upon his actions.

For example, when a man takes a bite of bread he needs not only the
instruments of his hands, feet, mouth as well as knowledge, power and
will, but also the existence of the bread in the external world, its
availability, the lack of obstacles and other temporal and spatial
conditions. If any of these causes were not actualized, the action would
not be possible. Conversely, with the actualization of all of them (the
complete cause) the occurrence of the action becomes completely
necessary. The necessity of the action in relation to all of the parts
of the complete cause is not contradictory to the possibility of the
relation of the action with respect to man, who is one of the parts of
the complete cause. Man has the possibility or free will (ikhtiyar) to
perform the act. The necessity existing in the relation between the
action and all of the parts of the cause does not mean that the relation
of the action to some of the parts of the cause, of which man is one,
should also be that of necessity and determination.

Man's simple and untainted comprehension also confirms this point of
view, for we see that people through their God-given nature and
intelligence distinguish between such things as eating, drinking, coming
and going on the one hand, and on the other, such things as health and
illness, age and youth or the height of the body. The first group, which
is directly related to man's will, is considered to be performed
according to the free choice of the individual so that people command
and prohibit them and blame or condemn them. But concerning the second
group man has no duty and is not under any Divine command because he
cannot exercise a free choice over them.

At the beginning of Islam among the Sunnis there were two schools that
were concerned with the theological aspects of human action. One group,
holding the view that human action is the result of the unbreakable will
of God, considered man to be determined in his actions and held human
free will to be devoid of any value and sense. The other group believed
man to be independent in his actions, which did not depend upon the
Divine will and were outside of the command of Providence (qadar).

But according to the instruction of the Household of the Prophet, which
is also in conformity with the literal instructions

of the Quran, man is free (mukhtar) in his actions but not independent
(mustaqill). Rather, God the Almighty through free will has willed the
act. According to our previous analysis, God the Exalted has willed and
made necessary the act through all of the parts of the complete cause,
of which one is the will and free choice of man. As a result of this
kind of Divine will, the action is necessary but in it man has also free
will, that is, the action is necessary with respect to all the parts of
its cause, and possible and free in choice with respect to one of those
parts which is man.[[9]](#019) The sixth Imam - upon whom be peace - has
said, "It is neither determination nor free will but something between
the two."

The fifth and sixth Imams said that "God loves His creation so much that
He will not force it to commit sin and then punish it. And God is so
powerful that whatever He commands comes to be." Also the sixth Imam has
said, "God is so generous that He does not make it a duty for men to do
what is not in their power. He is so powerful that nothing comes into
being in His kingdom which He does not will." (This is an allusion to
the two schools of predestination and free will.) (Bihar al-anwar, vol.
III, pp. 5, 6, 15)

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. In the Book of God reference is made to this reasoning in the verse:
"Can there be douht concerning Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the
earth?" (Quran, XIV. 10) 2. Editor's note: This is again in reference to
the Quranic verse, "We shall show them our portents..." referred to
above. Both the phenomena of nature and the realities within the human
soul are "signs" of God. See S. H. Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic
Cosmological Doctrines, Cambridge (U.S.A.), 1964, introduction. 3. The
sixth Imam has said, "God has an immutable Being. His knowledge was
Himself when there was nothing to he known. His hearing was Himself when
there was nothing audible. His vision was Himself when there was nothing
visible. His power was Himself when there was nothing over which to
exercise power." Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll, p.125. There are innumerable
traditions of the Household of the Prophet on this question. See Nahj
al-balaghah, Tawhid of Saduq, Tehran, 1375; 'Uyun al-akhbar of Ibn
Qutaybah, Cairo. 1925-35; and Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll. 4. The fifth and
sixth Imams have said, "God is a light that is not mixed with darkness,
a knowledge into which ignorance cannot penetrate, a life in which there
is no death." (Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll, p.129) The eighth Imam has said,
"Considering the question of Divine Attributes, people have followed
three paths. A first group conaiders God to have Attributes similar to
those of others. A second group negates the Attributes. The correct path
is that of the third group who affirm the existence ofthe Attributes
without their resemblance to the attiibutes of creatures." Bihar
al-anwar, vol.ll, p.94. 5. The sixth Imam has said, "God cannot be
described by time, space, motion, translation or rest; rather, He is the
creator of time, space, motion, translation and rest." Bihar al-anwar,
vol.ll. p.96. 6. The sixth Imam has said, "God was forever knowing in
his Essence when there was nothing to be known and was powerful when
there was nothing over which He could exercise power." The transmitter
ofthe tradition recounts, "I said, 'and He had speech.' He replied, 'The
Word (kalam) is created. God was, and He had no speech. Then He created
and brought into being the Word (kalam)."' Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll,
p.147. And the eighth Imam has said, "Will comes from the inner being of
people and following it action appears. In the case of God there is only
His act of bringing into being, for unlike us God does not possess
intention, purpose and dtscursive thought." Bihar al-anwar, vol.ll,
p.144.

7. Editor's note: Needless to say this assertion holds true whether
there is stric causality on the microphysical level or not, because on
the macrophysical plane strict causality is observed and is of the
greatest importance for the understanding of the nature of this plane of
existence. Causality also dominates over higher levels of existence than
the corporeal. 8. The sixth Imam has said, "When God, the Exalted, wills
a thing, He makes it predestined. and when He has made it predestined,
He decrees it, and when He decrees it, He executes it and puts it into
effect." Bihar a1-anwar, vol.lll, p.34. 9. Editor's note: The question
of free will and determinism is one of the most difficult to solve
theologically because it comprises a reality that transcends the
dichotomy of discursive reason. With respect to Absolute Reality there
is no free will because there is no partial reality independent of the
Absolute. But to the extent that man is real in the relative sense,he
possesses free will. From the point of view of causality there is
determination in relation to the total cause but free dom with respect
to man's action which is part of that total cause.
