Chapter V On the Knowledge of the Prophet
=========================================

Toward the Goal : General Guidance
----------------------------------

A grain of wheat that is placed within the bosom of the earth under
appropriate conditions begins to grow and enters upon a path of
development in which at every moment it takes on a new form and state.
Following a particular order and sequence it treads this path until it
becomes a grown plant with spikes of wheat ; if once again one of the
seeds were to fall upon the ground it would begin the previous cycle all
over again until it reached the final goal. Likewise if the seed is that
of a fruit placed within the bosom of the soil it begins its
transformation, breaking its shell, from which a green stem shoots out.
It follows an orderly and distinct path of transformation until finally
it becomes a fully grown tree, green and full of fruit. Or if it is the
sperm of an animal it begins to develop within the egg or in the womb of
the mother, following the line of development peculiar to that animal
until it becomes a perfected individual of that animal species.

This distinct path and orderly development is to be development is to be
observed in each species of creatures in this world and is determined by
the in ner nature of that species. The green wheat plant which has
sprung up from the grain will never bear oats or become a sheep, a goat,
or an elephant, and an animal that has become pregnant from its male
will never bear spikes of wheat or a plane tree. Even if an imperfection
were to occur in the organs or the natural functions of the newly born,
or if a lamp were to be born without an eye, or a wheat plant develop
without spikes of wheat, we would have no doubt that such an occurrence
was due to some

pest or to unnatural causes. Continuous order and regularity in the
development and generation of things, and the belonging of each species
of creatures in its generation and development to a particular order and
rule, is an undeniable fact.

From this evident thesis two conclusions can be drawn. (1) Between the
various stages that each species of creatures traverses from the
beginning to the end of its existence there is continuity and
interconnection, as if that species in each stage of its development
were pushed from behind and attracted by what is to come. (2) Due to the
above-mentioned continuity and interconnection, the last stage in the
development of each species is from the beginning of its generation the
goal and point of "existential attention" of that species. For example,
the "attention" of the walnut that sends out a green shoot from below
the earth is centered from that very moment on a fully grown walnut
tree. And a sperm in the egg or the womb is from the moment of its
generation moving toward the state of the perfected animal.

The Holy Quran, which teaches that the creation and the preservation of
things belong absolutely to God, considers this movement and attraction,
which each species in creation possesses in trading its path of
development, to be derived from Divine guidance. As He says, "Our Lord
is He Who gave unto everything its nature, then guided it aright"
(Quran, XX, 50).[[1]](#011) And also, "Who createth, then disposeth ;
who measureth then guideth" (Quran, LXXXVII, 2-3). And He refers to the
result of these sayings in these words: "And each one hath a goal toward
which he turneth" (Quran, II, 148).[[2]](#012) And also: "And We created
not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them in play. We
created them not save with truth, but most of them know not" (Quran,
XLIV, 38-39).[[3]](#013)

### Special Guidance

Obviously the human species is not an exception to this general rule.
The same guidance which rules over all species of creature governs man
as well. In the same way that each species through

its particular nature follows its path of perfection and is guided to
it, so must man with the help of this guidance be guided toward that
which is his real perfection.

Although man shares many elements with other species of animals and with
plants, the one special characteristic which distinguishes him is
intellect.[[4]](#014) It is with the help of his intellect and reason
that man is able to think and to make use of every means possible for
his own benefit, to fly into the endless spaces of the sky or swim in
the depth of the sea, or to bring under his service and command all
kinds of created things, whether they be minerals, plants or animals on
the surface of the earth, and to benefit even from members of his own
species to the greatest extent possible.

Owing to his primordial nature, man sees his happiness and perfection in
gaining complete freedom. Yet, he must of necessity sacrifice some of
his freedom because he is created as a social being and has endless
demands which by himself he can never satisfy, and also because he is in
cooperation and social intercourse with other members of his species who
themselves have the same instinct of self-centeredness and love of
freedom that he has. For the sake of the benefit he gains from others he
must in turn be of benefit to them. Equivalent to what he reaps from the
toil of others he must give of his own work. Or, in summary, he must of
necessity accept a society based upon mutual cooperation.

This point is clear in the case of newborn babies and children. At the
beginning, when desiring anything, they make use of no other means but
force and crying and refuse to accept any constraint or discipline. But
gradually, as a result of mental development, they realize that one
cannot succeed in the problems of life only through rebellion and force
; therefore, slowly they approach the condition of social beings.
Finally they reach the age when they become social individuals with
developed mental powers and are ready to obey the social regulations of
their environment.

When man comes to accept the necessity for mutual cooperation among
members of society he also recognizes the necessity for laws which rule
over society, clarifying the duty of each individual and specifying the
punishment for each offender. He

accepts laws through whose application each individual can realize real
happiness and find felicity in proportion to the social value of his
efforts. These laws are the same universal and applicable laws which
man, from the first day of his existence until today, has been
continuously seeking and to which he has always been attracted as the
foremost among all his desires. If the attainment of such a thing were
not possible and were not written upon the tablet of human destiny, it
would not have been the perennial yearning of man.[[5]](#015)

God, the Exalted, has referred to this reality of human society, saying,
"We have apportioned among their livelihood in the life of the world,
and raised some of them above others in rank that some of them may take
labor from others" (Quran, LXIII, 32).[[6]](#016) Concerning man's
selfishness and desire to monopolize things to himself He says, "Lo! man
was created anxious, fretful when evil befalleth him, and, when good
befalleth him, grudging" (Quran, LXX, 19-21).[[7]](#017)

### Reason and Law

If we delve into the matter carefully we will discover that man seeks
continuously those laws which can bring happiness in the world ; that
people as individuals and in groups recognize, in accordance with their
God-given nature, the necessity for laws which provide felicity for them
without discrimination or exception, laws which establish a general norm
of perfection among mankind. Obviously, up to now, during the different
periods of human history, there have not come into being any such laws
which are devised by human reason. If the laws of existence had placed
the burden of creating such human laws upon the shoulders of human
reason, then during the long period of history such laws would have been
established. In that case, each individual who possesses the power of
reasoning would comprehend this human law in detail in the same way that
everyone realizes the necessity for such laws in society.

In other words, if it had been in the very nature of things that

it be the duty of human reason to create a perfect common law which must
provide happiness for human society, and that man should be guided to
that perfect law through the process of creation and the generation of
the world itself, then such laws would have been apprehended by each
human being through his reason in the same way that man knows what is of
benefit or detriment to him throughout the determined course of daily
life. There is, however, as yet no sign of the presence of such laws.
Laws which have come about by themselves, or have been devised by a
single ruler, or individuals, or nations, and have become prevalent in
different societies are considered by some as certain, and by others as
doubtful. Some are aware of these laws and others are ignorant of them.
Never has it come to pass that all people, who in their basic structure
are the same in that they are endowed by God with reason, should have a
common awareness of the details of the laws which can bring about
happiness in the world of man.  
 Â 

### That Mysterious Wisdom and Consciousness Called Revelation

Thus, in the light of the discussion above, it becomes clear that the
laws which can guarantee the happiness of human society cannot be
perceived by reason. Since according to the thesis of general guidance
running throughout creation the existence of an awareness of these laws
in the human species is necessary, there must be another power of
apprehension within the human species which enables man to understand
the real duties of life and which places this knowledge within the reach
of everyone. This consciousness and power of perception, which is other
than reason and sense, is called the prophetic consciousness, or the
consciousness of revelation.

Of course the presence of such a power in mankind does not mean that it
should necessarily appear in all individuals, in the same way that
although the power of procreation has been placed in all human beings,
the awareness of the enjoyment of marriage and being prepared for this
enjoyment is possible only for those

who have reached the age of puberty. In the same way that the
consciousness of revelation is a mysterious and unknown form of
consciousness for those who do not possess it, the apprehension of the
joy of sexual union is a mysterious and unknown feeling for those who
have not reached the age of puberty.

God, the Exalted, makes reference in His Word to the revelation of His
Divine Law (Shari'ah) and the inability of human reason to comprehend
this matter in the verses: "Lo! We inspire thee as We inspired Noah and
the prophets after him, as We inspired Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and
Jacob and the tribes, and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon,
and We imparted unto David the Psalms; and messengers We have mentioned
unto thee before and messengers We have not mentioned unto thee ; and
Allah spoke directly unto Moses ; Messengers of good cheer and of
warning, in order that mankind might have no argument against Allah
after the messengers" (Quran, IV, 163-165).[[8]](#018)

### The Prophets - Inerrancy of Prophecy

The appearance of prophets affirms that conception of revelation
outlined above. The prophets of God were men who propagated the call of
revelation and prophecy and brought definitive proofs for their call.
They propagated among people the elements of the religion of God (which
is the same divine law that guarantees happiness) and made it available
to all men.

Since in all periods of history the number of people endowed with the
power of prophecy and revelation has been limited to a few individuals,
God - the Most Exalted - has completed and perfected the guidance of the
rest of mankind by placing the mission of the propagation of religion
upon the shoulders of His prophets. That is why a prophet of God must
possess the quality of inerrancy ('ismah). In receiving the revelation
from God, in guarding it and in making possible its reaching the people,
he must be free from error. He must not commit sin (ma'siyah). The
reception of revelation, its preservation and its propagation are three
principles of

ontological guidance ; and error in existence itself is meaningless.
Furthermore, sin and opposition to the claims of the religious call and
its propagation are impossible in a prophet for they would be a call
against the original religious mission ; they would destroy the
confidence of the people, their reliance upon the truth and the validity
of the call. As a result they would destroy the purpose of the religious
call itself.

God, the Exalted, refers in His word to the inerrancy of the prophets,
saying, "And We chose them and guided them unto a straight path" (Quran,
VI, 88).[[9]](#019) And also, "(He is) the Knower of the Unseen, and He
revealeth unto none His secret, save unto every messenger whom He hath
chosen, and then He maketh a guard to go before him and a guard behind
him, that He may know that they have indeed conveyed the messages of
their Lord" (Quran, LXXII, 26-28).[[10]](#020)  
 Â 

### The Prophets and Revealed Religion

What the prophets of God receive through revelation and as a message
from God and conveyed to mankind was religion (din),[[11]](#021) that
is, a way of life and human duties which guarantee the real happiness of
man.

Revealed religion in general consists of two parts : doctrine and
practice or method. The doctrinal part of revealed religion consists of
a series of fundamental principles and views concerning the real nature
of things upon which man must establish the foundations of his life. It
is comprised of the three universal principles of unity (tawhid),
prophecy (nubuwwat), and eschatology (ma'ad). If there is any confusion
or disorder in one of these principles the religion will not be able to
gain any following.

The practical part of revealed religion consists of a series of moral
and practical injunctions covering the duties man has before God and
human society. That is why the secondary duties which have been ordered
for man in different Divine laws are of two kinds : morals (akhlaq), and
actions (a'mal). The morals and actions related to the Divine are of two
kinds, such as: first, the

quality of faith, sincerity, surrender to God, contentment and humility
; and second, the daily prayers, fasting, and sacrifice (called acts of
worship and symbolizing the humility and servitude of man before the
Divine Throne). The morals and actions related to human society are also
of two kinds, such as: first, the quality of love for other men, wishing
well for others, justice and generosity ; and second, the duty to carry
out social intercourse, trade and exchange, etc. (called transactions).

Another point that must be considered is that since the human species is
directed toward the gradual attainment of perfection, and human society
through the passage of time becomes more complete, the appearance of a
parallel development must also be seen in revealed laws.[[12]](#022) The
Holy Quran affirms this gradual development, which reason has also
discovered. It can be concluded from its verses that each Divine Law
(Shari'ah) is in reality more complete than the Shari'ah before ; for
instance, in this verse where He says, "And unto thee have We revealed
the Scripture with the truth, confirming whatever Scripture was before
it, and a watcher over it." (Quran, V, 48)[[13]](#023)

Of course, as scientific knowledge also confirms and the Quran states,
the life of human society in this world is not eternal and the
development of man is not endless. As a result, the general principles
governing the duties of man from the point of view of doctrine and
practice must of necessity stop at a particular stage. Therefore,
prophecy and the Shari'ah will also one day come to an end when in the
perfection of doctrine and expansion of practical regulations they have
reached the final stage of their development. That is why the Holy
Quran, in order to make clear that Islam (the religion of Muhammad) is
the last and most complete of the revealed religions, introduces itself
as a sacred book that cannot be abrogated (naskh), calls the Prophet the
"Seal of the Prophets" (khatam al-anbiya'), and sees the Islamic
religion as embracing all religious duties. As He says, "And lo! it is
an unassailable Scripture. Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or
behind it" (Quran, XLI, 41-42).[[14]](#024) And also, "Muhammad is not
the father of any man among you but he is the messenger of Allah

and the Seal of the prophets" (Quran, XXXIII, 40).[[15]](#025)And, "We
reveal the scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things" (Quran,
XVI, 89).[[16]](#026)  
 Â 

### The Prophets and Proof of Revelation and Prophecy

Many modern scholars who have investigated the problem of revelation and
prophecy have tried to explain revelation, prophecy and questions
connected with them by using the principles of social psychology. They
say that the prophets of God were men of a pure nature and strong will
who had great love for humanity. In order to enable mankind to advance
spiritually and materially and in order to reform decadent societies,
they devised laws and regulations and invited mankind to accept them.
Since people in those days would not accept the logic of human reason,
in order to make them obey their teachings the prophets, according to
such modern scholars, claimed that they and their thoughts came from the
transcendent world. Each prophet called his own pure soul the Holy
Spirit ; the teachings which he claimed came from the transcendent world
were called "revelation and prophecy" ; the duties which resulted from
the teachings were called "revealed Shari'ah" ; and the written record
of these teachings and duties were called a "revealed book."

Anyone who views with depth and impartiality the revealed books and
especially the Holy Quran, and also the lives of the prophets, will have
no doubt that this view is not correct. The prophets of God were not
political men. Rather they were "men of God," full of truthfulness and
purity. What they perceived they proclaimed without addition or
diminution. And what they uttered they acted upon. What they claimed to
possess was a mysterious consciousness which the invisible world had
bestowed upon them. In this way they came to know from God Himself what
welfare of men was in this world and the next, and propagated this
knowledge among mankind.

It is quite clear that in order to confirm and ascertain the call of
prophecy there is need of proof and demonstration. The sole

fact that the Shari'ah brought by a prophet conforms to reason is not
sufficient in determining the truthfulness of the prophetic call. A man
who claims to be a prophet, in addition to the claim of the truth of his
Shari'ah, claims a connection through revelation and prophecy with the
transcendent world, and therefore claims he has been given by God the
mission to propagate the faith. This claim in itself is in need of
proof. That is why (as the Holy Quran informs us) the common people with
their simple mentality always sought miracles from the prophets of God
in order that the truthfulness of their call might be confirmed.

The meaning of this simple and correct logic is that the revelation
which the prophet claims is his cannot be found among others who are
human beings like him. It is of necessity an invisible power which God
miraculously bestows upon His prophets, through which they hear His word
and are given the mission to convey this word to mankind. If this be
true, then the prophet should ask God for another miracle so that people
would believe the truth of his prophetic call. It is thus clear that the
request for miracles from prophets is according to correct logic and it
is incumbent upon the prophet of God to provide miracle at the beginning
of his call, or according to the demand of the people, in order to prove
his prophecy. The Holy Quran has affirmed this logic, relating miracles
about many prophets at the beginning of their mission or after their
followers requested them.

Of course many modern investigators and scientists have denied miracles,
but their opinions are not based upon any satisfactory reasons. There is
no reason to believe that the causes which until now have been
discovered for events through investigation and experiment are permanent
and unchanging, or that no event ever occurs for reasons other than
those which usually bring it about. The miracles related about the
prophets of God are not impossible or against reason (as is, for
example, the claim that the number three is even). Rather they are a
"break in what is habitual" (kharq-i 'adat),[[17]](#027) an occurrence
which, incidentally, has often been observed in a lower degree among
people following ascetic practices.

  
 Â 

### The Number of the Prophets of God

It is known through tradition that in the past many prophets appeared,
and the Holy Quran affirms their multitude. It has mentioned some of
them by name or by their characteristics, but has not given their exact
number. Through definitive traditions also it has not been possible to
determine their number except in the well known saying which Abu Dharr
Ghifari has recited from the Holy Prophet, according to which their
number has been set at 124,000.  
 Â 

### The Prophets Who are Bringers of Divine Law

From what can be deduced from the Quran, it can be concluded that all
the prophets of God did not bring a Shari'ah. Rather, five of them -
Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and the Prophet Muhammad - are "possessors
of determination" (ulu'l-'azim), those who have brought a Shari'ah.
Other prophets follow the Shari'ah of those who "possess determination."
God has said in the Quran, "He hath ordained for you that religion which
He commended unto Noah, and that which We inspire in thee (Muhammad),
and that which We commended unto Abraham and Moses and Jesus" (Quran,
XLII, 13).[[18]](#028) He has also said, "And when We exacted a covenant
from the Prophets, and from thee (O Muhammad) and from Noah and Abraham
and Moses and Jesus son of Mary, We took from them a solemn covenant"
(Quran, XXXIII,7 ).[[19]](#029)  
 Â 

### The Prophecy of Muhammad

The last prophet of God is Hadrat-i Muhammad[[20]](#030) - upon whom be
blessings and peace - who possesses a book and a Shari'ah and in whom
Muslims have placed their faith. The Prophet was born fifty three years
before the beginning if the hegira calendar[[21]](#031) in Mecca in the
Hijaz amidst the family of Bany Hashim of the Tribe of Quraysh, who were
considered the most honored of the Arab families.

His father was called 'Abdallah and his mother, Aminah. He lost both
parents at the beginning of childhood and was placed under the care of
his paternal grandfather, 'Abd al-Muttalib, who also soon passed away.
At this time the Prophet's uncle, Abu Talib, took charge of him and
became his guardian, taking him into his own house. The Prophet grew up
in his uncle's house and even before reaching the age of adolescence
used to accompany his uncle on journeys by caravan.

The Prophet had not received any schooling and therefore did not know
how to read and write. Yet, after reaching the age of maturity he became
famous for his wisdom, courtesy, and trustworthiness. As a result of his
sagacity and trustworthiness, one of the women of the tribe of Quraysh,
well-known for her wealth, appointed him as the custodian of her
possessions and left in his hands the task of conducting her commercial
affairs.

The Prophet once journeyed to Damascus with her merchandise and as a
result of the ability he displayed was able to make an outstanding
profit. Before long she asked to become his wife and the Prophet
accepted her proposal. After the marriage, which occurred when he was
twenty-five years old, the Prophet began the life of a manager of his
wife's fortunes, until the age of forty, gaining meanwhile a widespread
reputation for wisdom and trustworthiness. He refused, however, to
worship idols, as was the common religious practice of the Arabs of the
Hijaz. And occasionally he would make spiritual retreats (khalwah) in
which he prayed and discoursed secretly with God.

At the age of forty, in the cave of Hira', in the mountains of the
Tihamah region near Mecca, when he was in spiritual retreat, he was
chosen by God to become a prophet and was given the mission of
propagating the new religion. At that moment the first chapter of the
Quran ("The Blood-Clot" [Surah-i 'alaq] ) was revealed to him. That very
day he returned to his house and on the way met his cousin, Ali ibn Abi
Talib, who after hearing the account of what had occurred declared his
acceptance of the faith. After the Prophet entered the house and told
his wife of the revelation, she likewise accepted Islam.

The first time the Prophet invited people to accept his message

he was faced with a distressing and painful reaction. Of necessity he
was forced henceforth to propagate his message in secret for some time
until he was ordered again by God to invite his very close relatives to
accept his message. But this call was also fruitless and no one heeded
it except Ali ibn Abi Talib, who in any case had already accepted the
faith. (But in accordance with documents transmitted from the Household
of the Prophet and extant poems composed by Abu Talib, Shi'ites believe
that Abu Talib had also embraced Islam ; however, because he was the
sole protector of the Prophet, he hid his faith from the people in order
to preserve the outward power he had with the Quraysh.)

After this period, according to Divine instruction, the Prophet began to
propagate his mission openly. With the beginning of open propagation the
people of Mecca reacted most severely and inflicted the most painful
afflictions and tortures upon the Prophet and the people who had become
newly converted to Islam. The severe treatment dealt out by the Quraysh
reached such a degree that a group of Muslims left their homes and
belongings and migrated to Abyssinia. The Prophet and his uncle, Abu
Talib, along with their relatives from the Banu Hashim, took refuge for
three years in the "mountain pass of Abu Talib," a fort in one of the
valleys of Mecca. No one had any dealings or transactions with them and
they did not dare to leave their place of refuge.

The idol-worshippers of Mecca, although at the beginning they considered
inflicting all kinds of pressures and tortures such as striking and
beating, insult, ridicule and defamation on the Prophet, occasionally
would also show kindness and courtesy toward him in order to have him
turn away from his mission. They would promise him great sums of money
or leadership and the rule of the tribe. But for the Prophet their
promises and their threats only resulted in the intensification of his
will and determination to carry out his mission. Once, when they came to
the Prophet promising him wealth and power, the Prophet told them, using
metaphorical language, that if they were to put the sun in the palm of
his right hand and the moon in the palm of his left hand he would not
turn away from obeying the unique God or refrain from performing his
mission.

About the tenth year of his prophecy, when the Prophet left the
"mountain pass of Abu Talib," his uncle Abu Talib, who was also his sole
protector, died as did also his devoted wife. Henceforth there was no
protection for his life nor any place of refuge. Finally the
idol-worshippers of Mecca devised a secret plan to kill him. At night
they surrounded his house from all sides with the aim of forcing
themselves in at the end of the night and cutting him to pieces while he
was in bed. But God, the Exalted, informed him of the plan and commanded
him to leave for Yathrib. The Prophet placed Ali in place of himself in
his bed and at night left the house under the Divine protection, passing
amidst his enemies, and taking refuge in a cave near Mecca. After three
days when his enemies, having looked everywhere, gave up hope of
capturing him and returned to Mecca, he left the cave and set out for
Yathrib.

The people of Yathrib, whose leaders had already accepted the message of
the Prophet and sworn allegiance to him, accepted him with open arms and
placed their lives and property at his disposal. In Yathrib for the
first time the Prophet formed a small Islamic community and signed
treaties with the Jewish tribes in and around the city as well as with
the powerful Arab tribes of the region. He undertook the task of
propagating the Islamic message and Yathrib became famous as "Madinat
al-rasul" (the city of the Prophet).

Islam began to grow and expand from day to day. The Muslims, who in
Mecca were caught in the mesh of the injustice and inequity of the
Quraysh, gradually left their homes and property and migrated to Medina,
revolving around the Prophet like moths around a candle. This group
became known as the "immigrants" (muhajirun) in the same way that those
who aided the Prophet in Yathrib gained the name of "helpers" (ansar).

Islam was advancing rapidly but at the same time the idol-worshippers of
Quraysh, as well as the Jewish tribes of the Hejaz, were unrestrained in
their harassment of the Muslims. With the help of the "hypocrites"
(munafiqun) of Medina who were amidst the community of Muslims and who
were not known for their holding any particular positions, they created
new misfortunes for the Muslims every day until finally the matter led
to war.

Many battles took place between the Muslims and the Arab polytheists and
Jews, in most of which the Muslims were victorious. There were
altogether over eighty major and minor battles. In all the major
conflicts such as the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq, Khaybar, Hunayn,
etc., the Prophet was personally present on the battle scene. Also in
all the major battles and many minor ones, victory was gained especially
through the efforts of Ali. He was the only person who never turned away
from any of these battles. In all the wars that occurred during the ten
years after the migration from Mecca to Medina less than two hundred
Muslims and less than a thousand infidels were killed.

As a result of the activity of the Prophet and the selfless effort of
the muhajirun and ansar during this ten-year period, Islam spread
through the Arabian peninsula. There were also letters written to kings
of other countries such as Persia, Byzantinum and Abyssinia inviting
them to accept Islam. During this time the Prophet lived in poverty and
was proud of it.[[22]](#032) He never spent a moment of his time in
vain. Rather, his time was divided into three parts: one spent for God,
in worshipping and remembering Him ; a part of himself and his household
and domestic needs ; and a part for the people. During this part of his
time he was engaged in spreading and teaching Islam and its sciences,
administrating to the needs of Islamic society and removing whatever
evils existed, providing for the needs of the Muslims, strengthening
domestic and foreign bonds, and similar matters.

After ten years of stay in Medina the Prophet fell ill and died after a
few days of illness. According to existing traditions the last words on
his lips were advice concerning slaves and women.

### The Prophet and the Quran

It was demanded of the Prophet,as it had been of other prophets, that he
produce a miracle. The Prophet himself also confirmed the power of
prophets to produce miracles as has been asserted clearly by the Quran.
Many miracles by the Prophet have been recounted, the transmission of
some of which is certain and can be accepted

with confidence. But the enduring miracle of the Prophet, which is still
alive, is the sacred book of Islam, the Holy Quran. The Holy Quran is a
sacred text consisting of six thousand and several hundred verses (ayah)
divided into one hundred and fourteen large and small chapters (surah).
The verses of the Holy Quran were revealed gradually during the
twenty-three year period of prophecy and mission of the Prophet. From
less than one verse to a whole and complete chapter were revealed under
different circumstances, both at day and night, on journeys or at home,
in war or peace, during days of hardship or moments of rest.

The Holy Quran in many of its verses introduces itself in unambiguous
language as a miracle. It invited the Arabs of that day to rivalry and
competition in composing writings of comparable truth and beauty. The
Arabs, according to the testimony of history, had reached the highest
stages of eloquence and elegance of language, and in the sweetness of
language and flow of speech they ranked foremost among all people. The
Holy Quran claims that if it be thought of as human speech, created by
the Prophet himself or learned through instruction from someone else,
then the Arabs should be able to produce its like[[23]](#033) or ten
chapters like it, or[[24]](#034) a single one of its verses,[[25]](#035)
making use of whatever means were at their disposal to achieve this end.
The celebrated Aram men of eloquence claimed that in answer to this
request that the Quran was magic and it was thus impossible for them to
produce its like.[[26]](#036)

Not only does the Quran challenge and invite people to compete with its
eloquence and elegant language, but also it occasionally invites rivalry
from the point of view of its meaning and thus challenges all the mental
powers of men and jinn,[[27]](#037) for the Quran is a book containing
the total program for human life.[[28]](#038) If we investigate the
matter carefully we will discover that God has made this vast and
extensive program which embraces every aspect of the countless beliefs,
ethical forms and actions of mankind and takes into account all of their
details and particularities to by the "Truth" (haqq) and to be called
the religion of the truth (din-i haqq). Islam is a religion whose
injunctions are based on the truth and the real welfare of mankind, not
the desires and inclina-

tions of the majority of men or the whims of a single, powerful ruler.

At the foundation of this vast program is placed the most cherished word
of God which is belief in His Unity. All the principles of the sciences
are deduced from the principle of Unity (tawhid). After that, the most
praiseworthy human ethical and moral virtues are deduced from the
principles of the religious sciences and included in the program. Then,
the countless principles and details of human action and individual and
social conditions of man are investigated, and the duties pertaining to
them which originate from the worship of the One are elaborated and
organized. In Islam the relation and continuity between the principles
(usul) and their applications (furu') are such that each particular
application in whatever subject it may be, if it is brought back to its
source, returns to the principle of Unity or tawhid, and Unity if
applied and analyzed becomes the basis for the particular injunction and
rule in question.

Of course, the final elaboration of such an extensive religion with such
unity and interconnection, or even the preparation of an elementary
index for it, is beyond the normal powers of the best authorities on law
in the world. But here we speak of a man who in a short span of time was
placed amidst a thousand difficulties concerning life and property,
caught in bloody battles and faced with internal and external obstacles
and furthermore placed alone before the whole world. Moreover, the
Prophet had never received instruction nor learned how to read and
write.[[29]](#039) He had spent two-thirds of his life before becoming a
prophet among a people who possessed no learning and had had no taste of
civilization. He passed his life in a land without water or vegetation
and with burning air, among a people who lived in the lowest social
conditions and were dominated by neighboring political powers.

Besides the above, the Holy Quran challenges men in another
way.[[30]](#040) This book was revealed gradually, during a period of
twenty-three years, under totally different conditions in periods of
difficulty or comfort, war or peace, power or weakness, and the like. If
it had not come from God but had been composed and expounded by man,
many contradictions and contrasts would be

observed in it. Its ending would of necessity be more perfect than its
beginning, as is necessary in the gradual perfection of the human
individual. Instead, the first Meccan verses are of the same quality as
the Medinan verses and there is no difference between the beginning and
the end of the Quran. The Quran is a book whose parts resemble each
other and whose awe-inspiring power of expression is of the same style
and quality throughout.

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. By this is meant guidance toward the goal of life and of creation. 2.
For each person there exists a goal which he pursues. 3. Creation with
truth means that there is a goal and purpose to creation. 4. Editor's
note: The author uses the Persian word khirad, which like 'aqlmeans both
intellect and reason depending on how it is used. But it certainly does
not mean just reason or the modern understanding of intellect as being
synonymous with reason. The traditional meaning ofintellect as a faculty
of immediate percep tion transcending reason, yet not irrational, is
inherent in it. 5. Even the simplest and most thoughtless ofmen wish by
their nature as human beings that human society should be such that all
can live in comfort, peace, and tranquillity. From the philosophical
point of view, want, love, attraction, appetite and the like are
relative qualities connecting two sides, such as that which wishes with
that which is wished, or the lover and the beloved. It is clear that
ifthere were to be no one to love, love would have no meaning.
Ultimately all this returns to the understanding of the meaning of
imperfection. If there were to be no perfection, imperfection would have
no meaning. 6. This means that each individual is responsible for a part
of life and receives an appointed portion oflivelihood. Men are
ofdifferent ranks in the sense that the manager dominates over the
worker, the director over his subordinates, the owner over the tenant or
the buyer over the seller. 7. The anxiety mentioned here is related to
man's being covetous. 8. This verse clarifies the insufficiency of human
reason without prophecy and revelation. If reason were sufficient to
provide argument for the existence of God, there would be no need of
prophets. 9. To have guided the prophets unto a straight path means that
they are directed wholly toward God and obey only Him. 10. A guard
before and a guard behind refers to conditions before and after the
revelation or the event of the life of the prophet himself. 11. Editor's
note: As we have already indicated, din is a most universal term in
Arabic and Persian and should be translated as religion only if we
understand the latter term in the widest sense possible, not as one
thing among others, but as a total way of life based upon transcendent
principles, or a tradition in the true sense of the word. 12. Editor's
note: Islam bases its argument upon the gradual development of man and
therefore "perfection" of successive revelations although from another

point of view it considers all prophets as equal. In any case this
argument should not be confused with modern evolutionism and belief in
indefinite historical pro gress which are the very antithesis of the
Islamic conception of time and history. 13. The Scripture at the
beginning of the verse refers to the Holy Quran, while the second
Scripture refers to such sacred books as the Torah and the Gospels. 14.
The "Unassailable Scripture" is the Holy Quran. 15. The idea of the
finality ofthe Quran as a sacred book which cannot be abro gated and the
aspect of the Prophet as the "seal of prophecy" are essentially aspects
of the same truth. 16. The Quran, according to the Islamic view,
contains the principle of all knowledge, and through it every domain can
be clarified and elucidated. 17. Editor's note: Miracle in Persian as in
Arabic is in fact called khariq aI-'adah, that is, that which breaks the
habitual relation between causes and effects in this world which because
ofits recurrencc and persistence appears to us as a closed and
unbreakable net of causality. The miracle represents the intrusion into
this habitual world of a cause from another world or state of being with
naturally different effects from what we have become accustomed to in
our everyday expe rience. It is therefore the "break of habit" or of
what has become habitual. 18. This verse is in the form of an
obligation. It is clear that in this case if there were prophets other
than the five mentioned in this verse who had brought a new Shari'ah,
they would have been mentioned. 19. There is again reference to the same
prophets who brought new Shari'ahs into the world. 20. Editor's note: In
Persian and other Muslim languages the name of the Proph et is usually
preceded by the honorific title Hadrat and followed by the formula,
"Upon whom be blessings and peace" (sall Allahu 'alaihi wa sallam).
Hadrat is also used for other prophets, for Shi'ite Imams and even for
some very eminent religious authorities. 21. Editor's note: The Islamic
calendar begins with the migration of the Prophet from Mecca to Medina
and is'thus called the hegira calendar, from the Arabic word hijrah,
meaning emigration. 22. In a famous hadith the Prophet has said,
"Poverty(faqr) is my glory." con cerning the material of this section
see the Sirah oflbn Hishim, Cairo, 1355-56; the Sirah of Halabi, Cairo,
1320; Bihar an-anwar, vol. VI, and other traditional sources on the life
of the Holy Prophet. 23. As He says, "Then let them produce speech the
like thereof, if they are truthful" (Quran, LII, 34). 24. As He says,
"Or they say: He [Muhammad] has invented it. Say: Then bring ten surabs,
the like thereof, invented, and call on everyone ye can beside Allah, if
ye are truthful" (Quran, XI, 13). 25. As He says, "Or they say: He hath
invented it? Say: then bring a surah like unto it ..." (Quran, X, 39).
26. As He recounts from the saying of one of the Arab men of letters,
"And said: This is naught else than magic from of old; This is naught
else than speech of mortal man" (Quran. LXXIV, 24-25). 27. Editor's
note.' The jinn referred to in the Quran are interpreted traditionally
as conscious, psychic forces that inhabited this worid before the Fall
of Adam and who still exist on the subtle plane. The terms jinn and ins
(mankind) are thus often used together in Islamic sources to refer to
the totality of conscious beings pos essing mental faculties in this
world. See Appendix IV. 28. As He says, "Say: Verily, though mankind and
the Jinn should assemble to produce the like of this Quran, they could
not produce the like thereof though they were helpers one of another'
(Quran, XVII, 88).

29. As He recounts from the tongue of the Holy Prophet, "I dwelt among
you a whole lifetime before it (came to me). Have ye then no sense?"
(Quran, X, 17). And He says, "And thou (o Muhammad) wast not a reader of
any scripture before it, nor didst thou write it with thy right hand,.."
(Quran, XXIX, 48). He also says, "And if ye are in doubt concerning that
which We reveal unto Our slave (Muhammad), then produce a surah of the
like thereof, and call your witnesses besides Allah if ye are truthful"
(Quran, II, 23). 30. As He says, "Will they not then ponder on the
Quran? If it had been from other than Allah they would have found herein
much incongruity" (Quran, IV, 82).
