Chapter Vii On the Knowledge of the Imam (imamology) (part-1)
=============================================================

### The Meaning of Imam

Imam or leader is the title given to a person who takes the lead in a
community in a particular social movement or political ideology or
scientific or religious form of thought. Naturally, because of his
relation to the people he leads, he must conform his actions to their
capabilities in both important and secondary matters.

As is clear from the preceding chapters, the sacred religion of Islam
takes into consideration and gives directives concerning all aspects of
the life of all men. It investigates human life from the spiritual point
of view and guides man accordingly, and it intervenes on the plane of
formal and material existence from the point of view of the life of the
individual. In the same way it intervenes on the plane of social life
and its regulation (i.e., on the plane of government).

Thus the imamate and religious leadership in Islam may be studied from
three different perspectives: from the perspective of Islamic
government, of Islamic sciences and injunctions, and of leadership and
innovative guidance in the spiritual life. Shi'ism believes that since
Islamic society is in dire need of guidance in each of these three
aspects, the person who occupies the function of giving that guidance
and is the leader of the community in these areas of religious concern
must be appointed by God and the Prophet. Naturally, the Prophet himself
was also appointed by Divine Command.

### The Imamate and Succession

Man through his God-given nature realizes without any doubt that no
organized society, such as a country or city or village or tribe or even
a household consisting of a few human beings, can continue to subsist
without a leader and ruler who puts the wheel of the society in motion
and whose will govern each individual's will and induces the members of
that society to perform their social duty. Without such a ruler the
parts of this society become dispersed in a short time and disorder and
confusion reign. Therefore, he who is the ruler and governor of a
society, whether it be great or small, if he is interested in his own
position and the continued existence of his society, will appoint a
successor for himself if he is to be absent from his function
temporarily or permanently. He will never abandon the domain of his rule
and be oblivious to its existence or annihilation. The head of a
household who bids farewell to his house and household for a journey of
a few days or months will appoint one of the members of the household or
someone else as his successor and will leave the affairs of the house in
his hands. The head of an institution, or the principle of a school, or
the owner of a shop, if he is to be absent even for a few hours will
select someone to represent him.

In the same way Islam is a religion which according to the text of the
Holy Book and the Sunnah is established upon the basis of the primordial
nature of things. It is a religion concerned with social life, as has
been seen by every observer near and far. The special attention God and
the Prophet have given to the social nature of this religion can never
be denied or neglected. It is an incomparable feature of Islam. The Holy
Prophet was never oblivious to the problem of the formation of social
groupings wherever the influence of Islam penetrated. Whenever a city or
village fell into Muslim hands he would, in the shortest time possible,
appoint a governor or ruler in whose hands he would leave the affairs of
the Muslims.[[1]](#011) In very important military expeditions ordered
for the Holy War (jihad), he would appoint more than one leader and
commander, in order of succession. In the war of Mu'tah he even
appointed four leaders, so that if the first were to be killed the

second would be recognized as the head and his command accepted and if
the second were to be killed, then the third, and so on.[[2]](#012)

The Prophet also displayed great interest in the problem of succession
and never failed to appoint a successor when necessary. Whenever he left
Medina he would appoint a governor in his own place.[[3]](#013) Even
when he migrated from Mecca to Medina and there was as yet no idea as to
what would occur, in order to have his personal affairs managed in Mecca
for those few days and to give back to people what had been entrusted to
him, he appointed Ali - may peace be upon him - as his
successor.[[4]](#014) In the same way, after his death Ali was his
successor in matters concerning his debts and personal
affairs.[[5]](#015) The Shi'ites claim that for this very reason it is
not conceivable that the Prophet should have died without appointing
someone as his successor, without having selected a guide and leader to
direct the affairs of Muslims and to turn the wheels of Islamic society.

Man's primordial nature does not doubt the importance and value of the
fact that the creation of a society depends on a set of common
regulations and customs which are accepted in practice by the majority
of the groups in that society, and that the existence and continuation
of that society depend upon a just government which agrees to carry out
these regulations completely. Any one who possesses intelligence does
not neglect of forget this fact. At the same time one can doubt neither
the breadth and detailed nature of the Islamic Shari'ah, nor the
importance and value the Prophet considered it to possess, so that he
made many sacrifices for its application and preservation. Nor can one
debate about the mental genius, perfection of intelligence, perspicacity
of vision or power of deliberation of the Prophet (beside the fact that
this is affirmed through revelation and prophecy).

According to established traditions in both Sunni and Shi'ite
collections of hadith (in the chapter on temptations and seditions and
others) transmitted from the Prophet, the Prophet foretold seditions and
tribulations which would entangle Islamic society after his death, and
the forms of corruption which would penetrate the body of Islam, and
later worldly rulers who would sacrifice

this pure religion for their own impure, unscrupulous ends. How is it
possible that the Prophet should not neglect to speak of the details of
events and trials of years or even thousands of years after him, and yet
would neglect the condition that had to be brought into being most
urgently after his death? Or that he should be negligent and consider as
unimportant a duty that is on the one hand simple and evident and on the
other significant to such a degree? How could he concern himself with
the most natural and common acts such as eating, drinking and sleeping
and give hundreds of commands concerning them, yet remain completely
silent about this important problem and not appoint someone in his own
place?

Even if we accepted the hypothesis (which Shi'ism does not accept) that
the appointment of the ruler of Islamic society is given by the Shari'ah
to the people themselves, still it would be necessary for the Prophet to
give an explanation concerning this matter. He would have had to give
the necessary instructions to the community so that they would be aware
of the problem upon which the existence and growth of Islamic society
and the life of religious symbols and observances depended and relied.
Yet there is no trace of such a prophetic explanation or religious
instruction. If there had been such a thing, those who succeeded the
Prophet and held the reins of power in their hands would not have
opposed it. Actually, the first caliph transferred the caliphate to the
second caliph by bequest. The second caliph chose the third caliph
through a six-man council of which he was himself determined and
ordered. Mu'awiyah forced Imam Hasan to make peace and in this way
carried away the caliphate. After this even the caliphate was converted
into a hereditary monarchy. Gradually many religious observances
identified with the early years of Islamic rule (such as holy war,
commanding what is lawful and prohibiting what is forbidden, the
establishment of boundaries for human action) were weakened or even
disappeared from the political life of the community, nullifying in this
domain the efforts of the Prophet of Islam.

Shi'ism has studied and investigated the primordial nature of man and
the continuous tradition of wisdom that has survived among men. It has
penetrated into the principal purpose of Islam which is to revivify
man's primordial nature, and has investigated such things as the methods
used by the Prophet in guiding the community ; the troubles which
entangled Islam and the Muslims and which led to division and separation
; and the short life of the Muslim governments of the early centuries,
which were characterized by negligence and lack of strict religious
principles. As a result of these studies Shi'ism has reached the
conclusion that there are sufficient traditional texts left by the
Prophet to indicate the procedure for determining the Imam and successor
of the Prophet. This conclusion is supported by Quranic verses and
hadiths of Ghadir, Safinah, Thaqalayn, Haqq, Manzilah, Da'wat-i
'ashirah-i aqrabin and others.[[6]](#016) But of course these hadiths,
most of which are also accepted by Sunnism, have not been understood in
the same way by Shi'ism and Sunnism. Otherwise the whole question of
succession would not have arisen. Whereas these hadiths appear to
Shi'ites as a clear indication of the Prophet's intention in the
question of succession, they have been interpreted by Sunnis in quite
another way so as to leave this question open and unanswered.

To prove the caliphate of Ali ibn Abi Talib, Shi'ites have had recourse
to Quranic verses, including the following: "Your friend [wali] can be
only Allah; and His messenger and those who believe, who establish
worship and pay the poor-due, and bow down (in prayer) [or, and this
reading is accepted by 'Allamah Tabataba'i: "....pay the poor-due while
bowing down (in prayer)"]" (Quran, V, 55). Shi'ite and Sunni
commentators alike agree that this verse was revealed concerning Ali ibn
Abi Talib, and many Shi'ite and Sunni traditions exist supporting this
view. Abu Dharr Ghifari has said: "One day we prayed the noontime
prayers with the Prophet. A person in need asked people to help but no
one gave him anything, 'Oh God! Be witness that in the mosque of the
Prophet

no one gave me anything.' Ali ibn Abi Talib was in the position of
genuflection in the prayers. He pointed with his finger to the person,
who took his ring and left. The Prophet, who was observing the scene
raised his head toward heaven and said: 'Oh God! My brother Moses said
to Thee, "Expand my breast and make easy my tasks and make my tongue
eloquent so that they will comprehend my words, and make my brother,
Harun, my help and vizier" [cf. Quran, XXVIII, 35]. Oh God! I am also
Thy prophet ; expand my breast and make easy my tasks and make Ali my
vizier and helper.'" Abu Dharr says, "The words of the Prophet had not
as yet finished when the verse [cited above] was revealed."[[7]](#017)

Another verse which the Shi'ites consider as proof of the caliphate of
Ali is this: "This day are those who disbelieve in despair of (even
harming) your religion ; so fear them not, fear Me! This day have I
perfected your religion for you and completed My favour unto you, and
have chosen for you as religion AL-ISLAM" (Quran, V, 3). The obvious
meaning of this verse is that before that particular day the infidels
had hopes that a day would come when Islam would die out, but God
through the actualization of a particular even made them lose forever
the hope that Islam would be destroyed. This very event was the cause of
the strength and perfection of Islam and of necessity could not be a
minor occasion such as the promulgation of one of the injunctions of
religion. Rather, it was a matter of such importance that the
continuation of Islam depended upon it.

This verse seems to be related to another verse which comes toward the
end of the same chapter: "O Messenger! Make known that which hath been
revealed unto thee from thy Lord, for if thou do it not, thou will not
have conveyed His message. Allah will protect thee from mankind."
(Quran, V, 67). This verse indicates that God commanded a mission of
great concern and importance to the Prophet which if not accomplished
would endanger the basis of Islam and prophecy. But the matter was so
important that the Prophet feared opposition and interference and in
awaiting suitable circumstances delayed it, until there came a definite
and urgent order from God to execute this command without delay and not
to fear anyone. This matter also was not just a particular

religious injunction in the ordinary sense, for to preach one or several
religious injunctions is not so vital that if a single one of them were
not preached it would cause the destruction of Islam. Nor did the
Prophet of Islam fear anyone in preaching the injunctions and laws of
religion.

These indications and witnesses add weight to the Shi'ite traditions
which assert that these verses were revealed at Ghadir Khumm and concern
the spiritual investiture (walayat) of Ali ibn Abi Talib. Moreover, many
Shi'ite and Sunni commentators have confirmed this point.

Abu Sa'id Khudari says: "The Prophet in Ghadir Khumm invited people
toward Ali and took his arm and lifted it so high that the white spot in
the armpit of the Prophet of God could be seen. Then this verse was
revealed: 'This day have I perfected your religion for you and completed
My favor unto you, and have chosen for you as religion AL-ISLAM.' Then
the Prophet said, 'God is great (Allahu akbar) that religion has become
perfected and that God's bounty has been completed, His satisfaction
attained and the walayat of Ali achieved.' Then he added, 'For whomever
I am the authority and guide Ali is also his guide and authority. Oh
God! Be friendly with the friends of Ali and the enemy of his enemies.
Whoever helps him, help him, and whoever leaves him, leave
him.'"[[8]](#018)

In summary we can say that the enemies of Islam who did everything
possible to destroy it, when they lost all hope of achieving this end,
were left with only one hope. They thought that since the protector of
Islam was the Prophet, after his death Islam would be left without a
guide and leader and would thus definitely perish. But in Ghadir Khumm
their wishes were brought to nought and the Prophet presented Ali as the
guide and leader of Islam to the people. After Ali this heavy and
necessary duty of guide and leader was left upon the shoulders of his
family.[[9]](#019)

Some of the hadiths pertaining to Ghadir Khumm, the investiture of Ali,
and the significance of the Household of the Prophet are cited here:

Hadith-i ghadir: The Prophet of Islam upon returning from the farewell
pilgrimage stopped in Ghadir Khumm, assembled the

Muslims and after delivering a sermon, chose Ali as the leader and guide
of Muslims.

Bara' says: "I was in the company of the Prophet during the farewell
pilgrimage. When we reached Ghadir Khumm he ordered that place to be
cleaned. Then he took Ali's hand and placed him on his right side. Then
he said, 'Am I the authority whom you obey?' They answered, 'We obey
your directions.' Then he said, 'For whomever I am his master (maula)
and the authority whom he obeys, Ali will be his master. Oh God! Be
friendly with the friends of Ali and enemy of the enemies of Ali.' Then
Umar ibn al-Khattab said to Ali, 'May this position be pleasing to you,
for now you are my master and the master of all the
believers.'"[[10]](#020)

Hadith-i safinah: Ibn 'Abbas says, "The Prophet said, 'My household is
like the ship of Noah ; whoever embarks upon it will be saved and
whoever turns away from it will be drowned.'"[[11]](#021)

Hadith-i thaqalayn: Zayd ibn Arqam has recounted that the Prophet said,
"It seems that God has called me unto Himself and I must obey His call.
But I leave two great and precious things among you : the Book of God
and My Household. Be careful as to how you behave toward them. These two
will never be separated from each other until they encounter me at
Kawthar (in paradise)."[[12]](#022) Hadith-i thaqalayn is one of the
most strongly established hadiths, and has been transmitted through many
chains of transmission and in different versions. Shi'ites and Sunnis
agree concerning its authenticity. Several important points can be
deduced from this hadith and its like: (1) In the same way that the Holy
Quran will remain until the Day of Judgment, the progeny of the Holy
Prophet will also remain. No period of time will be without the
existence of the figure which Shi'ism calls the Imam, the real leader
and guide of men. (2) Through these two great trusts (amanat), the
Prophet has provided for all the religious and intellectual needs of the
Muslims. He has introduced his Household to Muslims as authorities in
knowledge and has pronounced their words and deeds to be worthy and
authoritative. (3) One must not separate the Holy Quran from the
Household of the Prophet. No Muslim has a right to reject the "sciences"
of the members of the Household of the Prophet and remove himself from

under their direction and guidance. (4) If people obey the members of
the Household and follow their words they will never be led astray. God
will always be with them. (5) The answers to the intellectual and
religious needs of men are to be found in the hands of the members of
the Household of the Prophet. Whoever follows them will not fall into
error and will reach true felicity ; that is, the members of the
Household are free from error and sin and are inerrant. From this it can
be concluded that by "Members of the Household" and "progeny" is not
meant all the descendants and relatives of the Prophet. Rather, specific
individuals are meant who are perfect in the religious sciences and are
protected against error and sin so that they are qualified to guide and
lead men. For Shi'ism these individuals consist of Ali ibn Abi Talib and
his eleven descendants who were chosen to the imamate one after another.
This interpretation is also confirmed by the Shi'ite traditions. For
example, Ibn 'Abbas has said, "I said to the Prophet, 'Who are your
descendants whose love is obligatory [upon Muslims]?' He said, 'Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn.'"[[13]](#023) Jabir has transmitted that the
Prophet has said, "God placed the children of all prophets in their
'backbone' but placed my children in the backbone of Ali."[[14]](#024)

Hadith-i haqq : Umm Salmah has said, "I heard from the Prophet of God
who said, 'Ali is with the Truth (haqq) and the Quran, and the Truth and
the Quran are also with Ali, and they will be inseparable until they
come upon me at Kawthar.'"[[15]](#025)

Hadith-i manzilah : Sa'd ibn Waqqas has said, "The Prophet of God said
to Ali, 'Are you not satisfied to be to me what Harun was to Moses
except that after me there will not be another prophet?'"[[16]](#026)

Hadith-i da'wat-i 'ashirah : The Prophet invited his relatives for
luncheon and after the meal told them, "I know of no one who has brought
to his people better things than I have brought to you. God has
commanded me to invite you to draw toward Him. Who is there who will
assist me in this matter and be my brother and inheritor (wasi) and
vicegerent (khalifah) among you?" All remained silent, but Ali, who was
the youngest of all, exclaimed, "I shall be your deputy and aide." Then
the Prophet put his arms

around him and said, "He is my brother, inheritor and vicegerent. You
must obey him." Then the group began to depart laughing and telling Abu
Talib, "Muhammad has ordered you to obey your son."[[17]](#027)

Hudhayfah has said, "The Prophet of God said, 'If you make Ali my
vicegerent and successor - which I do not think you will do - you will
find him a perspicacious guide who will direct you toward the straight
path !"[[18]](#028)

Ibn Marduyah has said that the Prophet said, "Whoever wishes that his
life and death be like mine and that he enter paradise should after me
love Ali and follow my household, for they are my descendants and have
been created from my clay. My knowledge and understanding have been
bestowed upon them. Therefore woe unto those who deny their virtues. My
intercession [on the Day of Judgment] will never include
them."[[19]](#029)  
  

### Affirmation of the Previous Section

Much of the argument of Shi'ism concerning the succession to the Prophet
rests on the belief that during the last days of his illness the Prophet
in the presence of some of his companions asked for some paper and
ink[[20]](#030) so that something could be written which, if obeyed by
the Muslims, would prevent them from going astray. Some of those present
considered the Prophet to be too ill to be able to dictate anything and
said, "The Book of God is sufficient for us." There was so much clamor
raised over this matter that the Holy Prophet told those present to
leave, for in the presence of a prophet there should not be any noise or
clamor.

Considering what has been said above about hadiths concerning succession
and the events that followed upon the death of the Prophet, especially
the fact that Ali was not consulted in the question of selecting the
Prophet's successor, Shi'ites conclude that the Holy Prophet had wanted
to dictate his definitive views about the person who was to succeed him
but was not able to do so.

The purpose of the utterances of some of those present seems to have
been to cause confusion and prevent this final decision from

being clearly announced. Their interruption of the Holy Prophet's
discourse does not seem to be what it appears outwardly, that is concern
with the possibility that the Prophet might utter incongruous words due
to the intensity of his illness. For, first of all, throughout his
illness the Holy Prophet was not heard to have uttered any meaningless
or incongruous words and no such things has been transmitted concerning
him. Moreover, according to the principles of Islam the Prophet is
protected by God from uttering delirious or senseless words and is
inerrant.

Secondly, if the words mentioned by some of those present on that
occasion before the Prophet were meant to be of a serious nature there
would have been no place for the next phrase, "The Book of God is
sufficient for us." In order to prove that the Prophet might utter
incongruous words under unusual circumstances the reason of his serious
illness would have been used rather than the claim that with the Quran
there was no need of the Prophet's words. For it could not be hidden
from any Muslim that the very text of the Book of God considers the
obedience to the Holy Prophet to be obligatory and his words to be in a
sense like the Word of God. According to the text of the Holy Quran,
Muslims must obey the injunctions of both God and the Prophet.

Thirdly, an incident involving illness occurred during the last days of
the life of the first caliph, who in his last will and testament chose
the second caliph as his successor. When Uthman was writing the will
according to the order of the caliph, the caliph fainted. Yet the second
caliph did not repeat the words that had been uttered in the case of the
Prophet according to the hadith of "Pen and Paper."[[21]](#031) This
fact has been confirmed in a hadith related by Ibn Abbas.[[22]](#032)
And it has been accounted of the second caliph that he said, "Ali
deserved the caliphate but the Quraysh would not have been able to bear
his caliphate, for had he become caliph he would have forced the people
to accept the pure truth and follow the right path. Under his caliphate
they would not have been able to transgress the boundaries of justice
and thus would have sought to engage in war with him."[[23]](#033)

Obviously according to religious principles one must force him who has
deviated from the truth to follow the truth; one must not

abandon the truth for the sake of one who has abandoned it. When the
first caliph was informed[[24]](#034) that some of the Muslim tribes had
refused to pay religious tax, he ordered war and said, "If they do not
give me the tithes which they gave to the Prophet, I shall fight against
them." Eventually by this saying he meant most of all that truth and
justice must be revived at all costs. Surely the problem of the
legitimate caliphate was more important and significant than tithes, and
Shi'ism believes that the same principle applied by the first caliph to
this matter should have been applied by the whole early community to the
problem of succession to the Holy Prophet.

The Imamate and Its Role in the Exposition of the Divine Sciences
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In the discussion of prophecy it was mentioned that, according to the
immutable and necessary law of general guidance, each created species is
guided through the path of genesis and generation toward the perfection
and felicity of its own kind. The human species is not an exception to
this general law. Man must be guided through the very "instinct" of
seeking reality and through thought concerning his life in society in
such a way that this well-being in this world and the next is
guaranteed. In other words, to attain human happiness and perfection,
man must accept a series of doctrines and practical duties and base his
life upon them.

It has, moreover, already been said that the way to understand that
total program for life called religion is not through reason but through
revelation and prophecy, which manifests itself in certain pure beings
among mankind who are called prophets. It is the prophets who receive
from God, through revelation, the knowledge of men's duties and
obligations as human beings and who make these known to men, so that by
fulfilling them men may attain felicity.

It is evident that in the same way that this reasoning proves the
necessity for knowledge to guide men to the attainment of happiness and
perfection, it also proves the necessity for the existence

of individuals who preserve intact the total body of that knowledge and
who instruct the people when necessary. Just as the Divine Compassion
necessitates the existence of persons who come to know the duties of
mankind through revelation, so also it makes it necessary that these
human duties and actions of celestial origin remain forever preserved in
the world and as the need arises be presented and explained to mankind.
In other words, there must always be individuals who preserve God's
religion and expound it when necessary.

The person who bears the duty of guarding and preserving the Divine
message after it is revealed and is chosen by God for this function is
called the Imam, in the same way that the person who bears the prophetic
spirit and has the function of receiving Divine injunctions and laws
from God is called the Prophet. It is possible for the
imamate[[25]](#035) and prophecy (nubuwwat) either to be joined in one
person or to be separate.

The proof given previously to demonstrate the inerrancy of prophets,
also demonstrates the inerrancy of the Imams, for God must preserve His
true religion intact and in such a state that it can be propagated among
mankind at all times. And this is not possible without inerrancy,
without Divine protection against error.  
  

### The Difference Between Prophet and Imam

The previous argument about the reception of Divine injunctions and laws
by the prophets only proves the basis of prophecy, namely the receiving
of Divine injunctions. The argument does not prove the persistence and
continuity of prophecy, even though the very fact that these prophetic
injunctions have been preserved naturally raises the idea of persistence
and continuity. That is why it is not necessary for a prophet (nabi)
always to be present among mankind, but the existence of the Imam, who
is the guardian of Divine religion, is on the contrary a continuous
necessity for human society. Human society can never be without the
figure whom Shi'ism calls the Imam whether or not he is recognized and

known. God, the Most Exalted, has said in His Book: "So if these
disbelieve in it, We have already entrusted it to a people [i.e., the
Imams] who do not disbelieve in it" (Quran, VI, 90).[[26]](#036)

As mentioned above, the functions of prophecy and imamate may be joined
in one person who is then appointed to the functions of both prophet and
Imam, or to both the reception of the Divine law and its preservation
and explanation. And sometimes they can be separated, such as in periods
during which there is no prophet living but when there is a true Imam
living among men. It is obvious that the number of God's prophets is
limited and the prophets have not been present in every period and age.

It is also of significance to not that in God's Book some of the
prophets have been introduced as Imams such as the Prophet Abraham,
about whom is said, "And (remember) when his Lord tried Abraham with
(His) commands, and he fulfilled them, He said: Lo! I have appointed
thee a leader [imam] for mankind. (Abraham) said: And of my offspring
(will there be leaders)? He said: My covenant includeth not wrongdoers"
(Quran, II, 124). And God has also said, "And We made them chiefs
[imams] who guide by Our command..." (Quran, XXI, 73).

The Imamate and Its Role in the Esoteric Dimension of Religion
--------------------------------------------------------------

In the same way that the Imam is the guide and leader of men in their
external actions so does he possess the function of inward and esoteric
leadership and guidance. He is the guide of the caravan of humanity
which is moving inwardly and esoterically toward God. In order to
elucidate this truth it is necessary to turn to the following two
introductory comments. First of all, without any doubt, according to
Islam as well as other Divine religions the sole means of attaining real
and eternal happiness or misery, felicity or wretchedness, is by means
of good or evil actions which man comes to recognize through the
instruction of Divine religion as well as through his own primordial and
God-given nature and intelligence. Second, through the means of
revelation and prophecy God has praised or condemned man's actions
according to the

language of human beings and the society in which they live. He has
promised those who do good and obey and accept the teachings of
revelation a happy eternal life in which are fulfilled all desires that
accord with human perfection. And to the evildoers and in iniquitous He
has given warning of a bitter perpetual life in which is experienced
every form of misery and disappointment.

Without any doubt God, who stands in every way above all that we can
imagine, does not, as we do, possess "thought" moulded by a particular
social structure. The relations of master and servant, ruler and ruled,
command and prohibition, reward and punishment, do not exist outside our
social life. The Divine Order is the system of creation itself, in which
the existence and appearance of everything is related solely to its
creation by God according to real relations and to that alone.
Furthermore, as has been mentioned in the Holy Quran and[[27]](#037)
prophetic hadith, religion contains truths and verities above the common
comprehension of man, which God has revealed to us in a language we can
comprehend on the level of our understanding.

It can thus be concluded that there is a real relationship between good
and evil actions and the kind of life that is prepared for man in
eternity, a relation that determines the happiness or misery of the
future life according to the Divine Will. Or in simpler words it can be
said that each good or evil action brings into being a real effect
within the soul of man which determines the character of his future
life. Whether he understands it or not, man is like a child who is being
trained. From the instructions of the teacher, the child hears nothing
but do's and don'ts but does not understand the meaning of the actions
he performs. Yet, when he grows up, as a result of virtuous mental and
spiritual habits attained inwardly during the period of training, he is
able to have a happy social life. If, however, he refuses to submit to
the instructions of the teacher he will undergo nothing but misery and
unhappiness.

Or he is like a sick person who, when in the care of a physician, takes
medicine, food and special exercises as directed by the physician and
who has no other duty than to obey the instructions of his doctor. The
result of this submission to his orders is the creation of harmony in
his constitution which is the source of health

as well as every form of physical enjoyment and pleasure. To summarize,
we can say the within his outward life man possesses an inner life, a
spiritual life, which is related to his deeds and actions and develops
in relation to them, and that his happiness or misery in the hereafter
is completely dependent upon this inner life.

The Holy Quran also confirms this explanation.[[28]](#038) In many
verses it affirms the existence of another life and another spirit for
the virtuous and the faithful, a life higher than this life and a spirit
more illuminated than the spirit of man as we know it here and now. It
asserts that man's acts have inner effects upon his soul that remain
always with him. In prophetic sayings there are also many references to
this point. For example, in the Hadith-i mi'raj (hadith of the nocturnal
ascension) God addresses the Prophet in these words: "He who wishes to
act according to My satisfaction must possess three qualities : he must
exhibit thankfulness that is not mixed with ignorance, a remembrance
upon which the dust of forgetfulness will not settle, and a love in
which he does not prefer the love of creatures rather than My love. If
he loves Me, I love him ; I will open the eye of his heart with the
sight of My majesty and will not hide from him the elites of My
creatures. I will confide in him in the darkness of the night and the
light of the day until conversation and intercourse with creatures
terminates. I will make him hear My word and the word of My angels. I
will reveal to him the secret which I have veiled from My creatures. I
will dress him with the robe of modesty until the creatures feel ashamed
before him. He will walk upon the earth having been forgiven. I will
make his heart possess consciousness and vision and I will not hide from
him anything in Paradise or in the Fire. I will make known to him
whatever people experience on the Day of Judgment in the way of terror
and calamity."[[29]](#039)

Abu 'Abdallah - may peace be upon him - has recounted that the Prophet
of God - may peace and blessings be upon him - received Harithah ibn
Malik ibn al-Nu'man and asked him, "How art thou, Oh Harithah?" He said,
"Oh Prophet of God, I live as a true believer." The Prophet of God said
to him, "Each thing possesses its own truth. What is the truth of thy
word?" He said,

"Oh Prophet of God! My soul has turned away from the world. My nights
are spent in a state of awakedness and my days in a state of thirst. It
seems as if I am gazing at the Throne of my Lord and the account has
been settled, and as if I am gazing at the people of paradise who are
visiting each other in heaven, and as if I hear the cry of the people of
hell in the fire." Then the Prophet of God said, "This is a servant
whose heart God has illuminated."[[30]](#040)

It must also be remembered that often one of us guides another in a good
or evil matter without himself carrying out his own words. In the case
of the prophets and Imams, however, whose guidance and leadership is
through Divine Command, such a situation never occurs. They themselves
practice the religion whose leadership they have undertaken. The
spiritual life toward which they guide mankind is their own spiritual
life,[[31]](#041) for God will not place the guidance of others in
someone's hand unless He has guided him Himself. Special Divine guidance
can never be violated or infringed upon.

The following conclusions can be reached from this discussion :

(1) In each religious community the prophets and Imams are the foremost
in the perfection and realization of the spiritual and religious life
they preach, for they must and do practice their own teachings and
participate in the spiritual life they profess.

(2) Since they are first among men and the leaders and guides of the
community, they are the most virtuous and perfect of men.

(3) The person upon whose shoulders lies the responsibility for the
guidance of a community through Divine Command, in the same way that he
is the guide of man's external life and acts, is also the guide for the
spiritual life, and the inner dimension of human life and religious
practice depends upon his guidance.[[32]](#042)

### The Imams and Leaders of Islam

The previous discussions lead us to the conclusion that in Islam, after
the death of the Holy Prophet, there has continuously existed and will
continue to exist within the Islamic community (ummah), an Imam (a
leader chosen by God). Numerous prophetic

hadiths[[33]](#043) have been transmitted in Shi'ism concerning the
description of the Imams, their number, the fact that they are all of
the Quraysh and of the Household of the Prophet, and the fact that the
promised Mahdi is among them and the last of them. Also, there are
definitive words of the Prophet concerning the imamate of Ali and his
being the first Imam and also definitive utterances of the Prophet and
Ali concerning the imamate of the Second Imam. In the same way the Imams
before have left definitive statements concerning the imamate of those
who were to come after them.[[34]](#044) According to these utterances
contained in Twelve-Imam Shi'ite sources the Imams are twelve in number
and their holy names are as follows: (1) 'Ali ibn Abi Talib; (2) Hasan
ibn 'Ali; (3) Husayn ibn 'Ali; (4) 'Ali ibn Husayn; (5) Muhammad ibn
'Ali; (6) Ja'far ibn Muhammad; (7) Musa ibn Ja'far; (8) 'Ali ibn Musa;
(9) Muhammad ibn 'Ali; (10) 'Ali ibn Muhammad; (11) Hasan ibn 'Ali; and
(12) the Mahdi.

NOTES
-----

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi vol. III. PP .60-61: Sirah of Ibn Hisham. vol. IV.
p.197. 2. Torikh-i Ya'qubi vol. II. pp.52- 59.:Sirah of Ibn Hisham.
vol.ll. p.223. 3. Torikh-i Ya'qubi vol. II. pp.59-60 and p.44 Sirah of
Ibn Hisham. vol.ll, p. 251. vol IV. p.173 and p.272. 4. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi
vol.ll. p.29: Tarikh-i Abi'l-Fida', vol. I. p.126: Sirah of Ibo Hisham
Vol II p 98. 5. Ghayat a-maram; p.664. from the Musnad of Ahmad and
others. 6. Editor's note These refer to different sayings of the Prophet
in which the queston of the Imam is discussed. The most famous of these,
Hadith-i ghadir. as mentioned above is the traditional basis for the
celebration of the "Feast of Ghadir Since the Safavid period this feast
has acquired a particular political significince in lran in lran it
marks the formal transfer of political power to Ali under whose aegis
all Sh'ite kings have ruled. 7. Tabari Dhakha'ir al-'uqha, Cairo. 1356.
p.16. This hadith has been recorded with a slight variation in al.Durr
al-manthur. vol.ll, p.293. In his Chayat al maram p. 103 Bahrani cities
24 hadiths from Sunni sources and nineteen from Sh'ite sources
concerning the conditions and reasons for the revelation of this Quranic
verse 8. Bahrani, Chayat al-maram , p.336. where six Sunni and fifteen
Shi'ite hadiths oncerning the occasion and reason for the revelation of
the above Quranic verse are cited 9. For further explanation see
'AlIamah Tabataba'i, Tafsir al-mizan, vol. V, Tehran 1377, pp. 177-214
and vol. VI. Tebran, 1377. pp. 50-64. 10. al- Bidayah wa'l-nihayah, vol.
V. p. 208 and vol. VII, p. 346; Dhakha'ir al-uqba. p.67; al-Fusul
al-muhimmah of Ibn Sabbagh. Najaf, 1950. vol.ll, p.23: Khasa'is of
Nasa'i Najaf 1369, p.31. In his Chayat al-maram, p.79, Bahrani has cited
eighty.nine different chains of transmission for this hadith from Sunni
sources and forty- three from Shi'ite sources. 11. Dhakha'ir al-uqba
p.20: al.Sawa'iq al-muhriqah oflbn Hajar, Cairo, 1312, pp. 150(1 and 184
Ta'rikh al.khulafa' of Jalal al-Din Suyuti. Cairo, 1952, p.307; Nur
al-absar of Shiblanil Cairo. 1312. p. 114. In his Chalyat al-maram,
p.237, Bahrani cites eleven chains of transmission for this hadith from
Sunni sources and seven from Shi'ite sources. 12. al-Bidayah
wa'l-nihayah. vol. V. p.209; Dhakh'ir a1-'uqba, p.16; al-Fustul
aI.muhimmah. p.22: Khasa'is. p.30: al-Sawa'iq al.muhriqah, p.147. In
Chayat al-maram thirty-nine versions of this hadith have been recorded
from Sunni sources and eighty-two from Shi'ite sources.

13. Yanabi' al-mawaddah of Su]ayman ibn Ibrahim Qunduzi. Tehran, 1308,
p.311. 14. Yanabi' al-mawaddah, p.318. 15. Ghayat al-maram, p.539, where
the substance of this hadith has been re counted in fifteen versions
from Sunni snorces and eleven from Shi'ite sources. 16. al-Bidayah
wa'1-nihayah, vol. VII. p. 339; Dhakhad'ir- al-'uqba. p.63; al-Fusul
al-muhimmah, p.21: Kifayat al-talib of Kaoji Shafi'l, Najaf, 1356,pp.
l48-154: Khasa'is, pp.19-25; Sawa'iq al-muhriqah, p. l77. ln Ghayat
al-maram, p.109, one hundred versions of this hadith have been recounted
from Sunni sources and seventy from Shi'ite sources. 17. Tarikh
Abi'1-Fida', vol.l, p.116. 18. Hilyat al-awliya' of Abu Nu'aym Isfahani,
vol.l, Cairo, 1351, p.64; Kifayat al-talib, p.67. 19. Muntakhab kanz
al-'ummal, on the margin of Musnad-i Ahmad. Cairo, 1368. vol.V,p.94. 20.
al-Bidayab wa'l-nihayah, vol. V, p.227; al-Kamil. vol.ll. p.217;
Tarikh-i Tabari vol.ll, p.436; Sharh of Ibn Abi'l.Haadid. vol I,
p.l:133. 21. al Kamil, vol.ll, p.292; Sharh of lbn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l.
p.54. 22. Sharh of Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.l. p.134. 23. Tarikh-i Ya'qubi,
vol.ll, p.137. 24. al Bidayah wa'l-nihayah, vol. VI, p.311. 25. Editor's
note: In this context of course imamate refers to the specific Shi'ite
conception of Imam and not to the general Suni usage of the term which
in most instances is the same as caliph. 26. Eaitor'S note: The
translation of this Quranic verse is that of A. J .Arberry. The Quran
Interpreted. London, 1964. which corresponds more closely to the Arabic
original than Pickthall's. which is as follows: But if these disbelieve
therein. then indeed We shall entrust it to a People who will not be
disbelievers therein." 27. For example: "By the Scripture which maketh
plain Lo; We have appointed it a Lecture in Arabic that haply ye may
understand.And lo; in the Source of Decrees. which We possess, it is
indeed sublime,decisive (Quran. XLIll. 2-4). 28. Such as these verses:
"And every soul cometh.along with it a driver and a witness. (And unto
the evildoers it is said): Thou wast in heedlesness of this. Now We have
removed from thee thy covering, and piercing is thy sight this day"
(Quran, L, 21-22). "Whosoever doeth right, whether male or female. and
is a believer, him verily We shall quicken with good life... Quran, XVl,
97).)obey Allah, and the messenger when He calleth you to that which
quickeneth.you..." (Quran, VIII, 24). ''On the day when every soul will
find itself confronted with all that it hath done of good and all that
it hath done ofevil..."(Quran, lll,30). "Lo.' We it is Who bring the
dead to life. We record that which they send before (them), and their
footprints. And all things We have kept in a clear register" (Quran,
XXXVI, 12). 29. Bihar al-anwar, vol. XVII, p.9.. 30. al- Wafi by Mulla
Muhsin Fayd Kashani, Tehran, 1310-14 vol.lll. p 33. 31. "Is He who
leadeth to the Truth more deserving that He should be followed. or he
who findeth not the way unless he (himself) be guided. What aileth you?
How judge ye?" (Quran, X, 36). 32. "And We made them chiefs [Imams] who
guide by Our command. and We inspired in them the doing of good deeds
..." (Quran, XXI, 73). "And when they became steadfast and believed
tirmly in Our revelations, We appointed from among them leaders [Imams]
who guided by Our command" (Quran, XXXII, 24). one can conclude from
these that, besides being an outward leader and guide, the Imam
possesses also a kind of spiritual power to guide and attract which
belongs to the

world of the Spirit. He influences and conquers the hearts of people of
capability through the Truth, the light, and the inner aspect of his
being and thus guides them toward perfection and the ultimate goal of
existence. 33. "Jabir ibn Samurah has said that the he heard the Prophet
of God say, 'Until the time oftwelve vicegerents (khalifah) this
religion will continue to be powerful.' Jabir said, 'The people repeated
the formula "Allah is Great" and cried. Then the Prophet said something
softly. I asked my father, 'Oh Father, what did he say?' My father
answered, 'The Prophet said, "All the vicegerents will be from
Quraysh.""' Sahih of Abu Daud, Cairo, 1348, vol.ll, p.207; Musnad-i
Ahmad, vol. V, p.92. Several other hadiths resembling this are also
found. And "Salman Firsi said, 'I came upon the Prophet and saw
Husayn-upon whom be peace-on his knees as he - was kissing his eyes and
mouth and saying "Thou art a noble man, son of a noble man, an Imam, son
of an Imam, a 'proof' (hujjah), son of a 'proof,' the father of the nine
'proofs' of which the ninth is their 'support' (qa'im)."'" Yanabi
al -mawaddah, p.308. 34. See aI-Ghadir; Ghayat al-maram; Ithbat al-hudat
of Muhammad ibn Hasan Hurr al-'Amili, Qum, 1337-39; Dhakha'ir al-uqba;
Manaqib of Khwarazmi, Najaf, 1385; Tadhkirat al-khawss" of Sibt ibn
Jawzi, Tehran, 1285; Yanabi' al-mawaddah; al-Fusul al-muhimmah; Dala'iI
al-imamah of Muhammad ibn Jarir Tabari, Najaf, 1369; al-Nass
wa'l-ijtihad of Sharaf al-Din Musa Najaf, 1375; Usul al-kafi, vol.l; and
Kitab al-irshad of Shaikh-i Mufid, Tehran, 1377.
