The Second Imam
===============

He is .asan son of !Al: ibn Ab: ھ"lib (a.s.) and F"Uima al-Zahr"v
(a.s.) daughter of the Prophet Mu9ammad (N). He is the grandson of the
Messenger of Alla\>h (N) and the second of his successors and the leader
(im"m) of the people after his father !Al:, Amir al- Mo’mineen – the
Commander of the Faithful. He was born in the enlightened city of Medina
on a Tuesday, the 15th of the month of Rama+"n in the second or third
year of the 9ijra or migration of the Prophet (N), that is 2/3 A.H. or
624/625 C.E. He died as a martyr to poison on Thursday the 7th of the
month of £afar 49 A.H (17th March 669 C.E.). His funeral was undertaken
by his brother Imam .usayn (a.s.) and he was buried in the cemetery of
Baq:! in Medina where he lies to this day. He was the most devoted to
Alla\>h of his peers and the most knowledgeable and virtuous of them. He
most resembled the Prophet (N) of all people and he was the most
generous of the Prophet’s household in his time and he was the most
clement of people.226 An example of his generosity is that one of his
maidservants presented him with a bouquet of fragrant herbs so he said
to her: ‘You are free for the sake of Alla\>h.’ Then he said:

‘Such has Alla\>h taught us, for He has said: eAnd when you are greeted
with a greeting then greet with a better one or return itf.227 An
example of his clemency is that a Syrian once saw him riding and began
to curse him but Imam .asan did not reply to him. When the Syrian had
finished Imam .asan approached, greeted him and laughed and said: ‘O
master, you seem to be estranged and you may have mistaken me for
another. Were you to seek favour and goodwill we would show you favour
and goodwill, and were you to ask of us we would give you, and were you
to ask us for directions we would direct you, and were you to ask us for
a mount we would give you a mount, and if you are hungry we will let you
eat your fill, and if you have no clothes we will clothe you, and if you
are in poverty we will enrich you, and if you are in exile we will give
you sanctuary, and if you have any need we will fulfil it.’ When the man
heard these words he wept and said: ‘I testify that you are Alla\>h’s
vicegerent (khal:fa) on earth, eAlla\>h knows full well where he places
His missionf.229 230

**Hadith from Imam Hassan (AS)**

‘He who claims he does not like wealth is, to me, a liar, and if his
truth is established in this respect, then, to me, he is stupid.’ ‘Have
you seen an oppressor who is more like an oppressed one? The Imam was
asked: ‘How is that O son of Rasulollah?’ The Imam (A) replied: ‘He is
the jealous person who is in perpetual anguish whereas the envied is in
comfort.’

Imam Hassan (A) used to encourage the people to gain more and more
knowledge, and used to say: ‘Teach others and learn from others’
knowledge, in this way you would have perfected your knowledge and
learnt things you did not know . . . and to ask a question is half of
the knowledge.’

‘He who does not have intellect, does not have etiquette, and he who
does not have determination, does not have goodwill, and he who does not
have a belief does not have morality. The peak of intellect is to
socialise with, and treat the people nicely and kindly. Through
intellect you can achieve the prosperity of both worlds and without it
you would loose all.’ Someone asked Imam Hassan (A) about politics, the
Imam replied ‘Politics is to attend to the rights and duties of Allah
and to protect the rights of the people; dead or alive. As for the
rights of Allah, it is to fulfil what He ordered and abstain from what
forbade. And as for the rights of the living it is to discharge your
duties towards your Muslim brethrens and not to hesitate serving your
community, to be sincere towards leader as long as he is sincere to the
Ommah, and to raise your objection to him if he deviated from the
straight path. As for the rights of the dead, it is to commemorate their
good deeds and conceal their bad deeds, for they have their Lord to deal
with them.’ ‘There is no poverty like ignorance.’

‘The peak of wit and intelligence is the good conduct with the
people.’

‘The distance between right and falsehood is (the width of) four
fingers (i.e. the distance between the eye and the ear). What you see
with your eyes is the truth, whereas you could hear many false things.’
‘The people who practice consultation are guided (towards perfection).’
‘(The beneficences of) both worlds are achieved through reasoning.’ ‘Do
not hasten punishment for offence, and allow room for reason for the
offence.’

‘I am surprised at one who takes care at what he eats, but does not do
so about what he believes in. He avoids that which hurts him from
entering his stomach, but allows that which makes him inferior to enter
his heart (and mind).’ What others have said about Imam Hasan Anas ibn
M"lik, one of the Prophet’s companions said: ‘There was no-one among
them who more resembled the Messenger of Alla\>h than .asan.’231

AbY Hurayra said: ‘I always loved .asan ever since I saw how the
Messenger of Alla\>h used to treat him.’232 !Abdull"h ibn al-Zubayr
said: ‘Let me tell you of the person from his [the Prophet’s] family who
most resembled him and who was most beloved to him - it was .asan son of
Al:.’233 Ibn S:r:n said: ‘Often .asan ibn !Al: would reward a single
person with one hundred thousand coins.’234

W"Nil ibn !AU"v said: ‘.asan ibn !Al: had the mark of a prophet and the
aura of a king.’235 Abul-Fid"v ibn Kothayr said [of him]: ‘If only they
[the Muslims] knew, they would have venerated the blessings of Alla\>h
upon them when they swore allegiance to the son of the daughter of the
Messenger of Alla\>h and the chief of the Muslims and one of the most
knowledgeable and intelligent of the companions.’ 236

**The Third Imam**

He is .usayn son of !Al: ibn Ab: ھ"lib (a.s.) and F"Uima al-Zahr"v
(a.s.) daughter of Mu9ammad (N). He is the grandson of the Messenger of
Alla\>h (N) and the third of his successors and the progenitor of the
nine Imams who came after him and the leader (im"m) of the people after
his brother Hasan (a.s.). He was born in the enlightened city of Medina
on the 3rd of the month of Sha!b"n within a year of the birth of his
brother .asan and was killed unjustly by the sword and in dire need of
water at the battle of Karbala on the day of !wshYr"v (Ashura), Saturday
the 10th of the month of Mu9arram in the year 61 A.H. After three days,
his son Imam Zayn al-!wbid:n (a.s.) undertook his funeral and buried him
at Karbala in Iraq where his shrine is to this day. His virtues are
countless. He is the Messenger of Alla\>h’s rayh}a\>nah or (blessed)
flower, as he is quoted as saying regarding .usayn and his brother .asan
(a.s.): ‘Those two are my favourite blessed flower of this world.’237
Allah’s messenger also said: ‘.usayn is from me and I am from
.usayn.’238 He also said: ‘.asan and .usayn are the chiefs of the youths
of Paradise.’239

He also said: ‘.asan and .usayn are two Imams whether they rise up it
or not.’240 .usayn (a.s.) was the most knowledgeable of the people and
the most worshipful of Alla\>h and he used to pray one thousand units of
prayer every night as did his father Imam !Al: (a.s.). He often used to
carry sacks of food at night to the poor, which left their marks on his
body and they were visible after his death. He was noble, generous, and
clement, and he could not bear that Alla\>h be disobeyed.

By his brave and unique uprising he revivified the way of Islam and the
religion of his grandfather the Messenger of Alla\>h (N) which had
become corrupted so soon after his death. Indeed, he revivified the
entire world until the day of resurrection. He is the Masters of the
Martyrs and the best of mankind after his brother. Hadith from Imam
Hussain (AS)

‘I do not see death except prosperity and life along with the
oppressors except anguish.’ ‘O Allah! You know that all there was from
us was not in competition to seek power, nor to gain refuse of the world
(i.e. wealth), but it was nothing other than to present the signs and
essence of Your religion, and to promote reform in Your land, (so that)
oppressed members of your servants find safety and security, and Your
laws, orders and obligations are acted upon.’

‘I have not arisen for the purpose of exuberance, arrogance,
corruption, or oppression, but I have done so in order to seek reform in
the nation of my Grandfather, Muhammad (S). I want to enjoin Good and
forbid Evil, and I want to go down the path and tradition of my
Grandfather, Muhammad (S), and the path of my father Ali ibn Abi Talib
(A).

‘There are people who worship Allah out of desire (for reward), and
this is the worship of traders, and there are people worship Allah out
of fear (of punishment), and this is the worship of slaves. Whereas
certain people worship Allah out of gratitude, and this is the worship
of the free, and this is the best of the worships.’ ‘There are seventy
benefactions for saluting, sixty nine for the one who initiates it and
one for the replier.’ ‘Do not say about your brother in his absence
other than that which you would like him to say about you in your
absence.’ ‘(O Allah) . . . How can You be reasoned about with that that
is in need of You in its existence? ‘(O Allah) . . . What did he find he
who lost You? And what did he loose he who found You? Truly he has
failed who is contented with other than You.’

What others have said about Imam Husayn

!Umar ibn al-KhaUU"b said to Imam .usayn: ‘It is Alla\>h and then you
that have made us what we are today.’241 AbY Hurayra said: ‘.usayn ibn
!Al: entered the room wearing a turban and I thought that the Prophet
himself had been raised from the dead.’242 !Abdull"h ibn !Amr ibn al-!wN
said when Imam .usayn passed by him once: ‘Whoever wishes to see the
most beloved of the people of the earth to the people of the heavens
then let him look at this man who is passing by.’243 Mu!"wiya said: ‘I
cannot fault .usayn. I swear by Alla\>h that there is no fault in
him.’244

Ibn Sirin said: ‘After John son of Zechariah, the heavens never wept
for anyone except for .usayn (a.s.). When he was killed the sky became
dark and the stars appeared during the day and red dust fell.245 “On the
day of the martyrdom of al-Hussein (AS) the sky rained blood . . . .”246
“There was not a stone which was not lifted but underneath it was found
blood . . . . ”247 Records show that the skies wept blood for Imam
Husayn throughout the globe. Christian monks in Britain recorded the
following: “685. In this year in Britain it rained blood, and milk and
butter were turned into blood.”248

**The Fourth Imam**

He is Imam !Al: son of .usayn (a.s.). His mother was Sh"hezan"n,
daughter of the Persian king Yazdegird. He was born in the enlightened
city of Medina on the 15th of the month of Jam"d" I in the year 36 A.H.
(9th November 656 C.E.) the day that his grandfather the commander of
the faithful !Al: (a.s.) captured the town of Basra in Iraq.

He died of poison on Saturday the 25th of the month of Mu9arram in the
year 95 A.H. (20th October 713 C.E.) at the age of 57 years. His funeral
was conducted by his son Mu9ammad al-B"qir (a.s.) and he was buried in
the cemetery of Baq:! In Medina, Arabia. He was, in knowledge, worship
of Alla\>h, virtue, abstinence, and helping the afflicted the foremost
of his age. Jurists have used him as a source for abundant traditions
and he gave many sermons and taught a great many supplicatory
prayers.249

He used to go out in the dark of the night and carry a sack on his back
containing gold and silver coins as well as food and fuel until he went
to each door in turn of the poor people’s houses where he would knock
and give to whoever came to the door. He used to cover his face so that
the poor would not recognise him. When he died, the people of Medina
realised that it was him that was the bearer of the sack. He used to
love to host the poor and the orphans and the sick at his table.

Among his fine moral traits is that every month he would call his
maidservants and say to them: ‘Whoever wishes that I marry them off I
will marry them off; and whoever wishes that I sell them I will sell
them; and whoever wishes that I free them I will free them.’ Whenever
someone came to ask him something he would say: ‘Welcome to he who bears
my provision to the afterlife.’ His piety was such that he would pray
one thousand units of prayer every day and whenever the time for prayer
came he would get goose bumps and turn white and shake. Among his names
was ‘he of the calluses’ because of the effects of prolonged prostration
to Alla\>h on his forehead and palms and knees.’ Once a man swore at him
and said awful things to him but he was calm and didn’t reply. After a
moment he went over to the man and those present supposed that he was
going to give the man a taste of his own medicine. But he recited the
Qurv"nic verse: eAnd those who contain their anger and forgive the
people and Alla\>h loveth those who do goodf250 Then he stood before the
man and said: ‘My brother, you stood before me before and spoke and
spoke. If you said what is true about me then I ask Allah for
forgiveness; and if you have said what is not true about me then may
Alla\>h forgive you.’251

**Hadith from Imam Zayn al-A idin (A)**

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (A) said to his son, al-Ba\>qir (A): ‘Do good to
whoever seeks it from you. For if he deserved it then you have achieved
your goal, and if he did not deserve it, you are the kind to do so. If
someone swore at you, and he is on your right hand side, and he then
turns to your left and apologised to you, accept his apologies.’ On the
subject of trustworthiness and honesty, Imam Zayn al- Abidin (A) says:

‘By He who sent Muhammad (S), with the Truth (I swear that) if the
killer of my father al-Hussain (A) entrusts me with the sword which he
killed him (A) with, I would return it back to him.’ ‘Contemplate and
strife for what you have been created for, for Allah did not create you
in vain.’ ‘Do not have animosity towards anyone even if you thought he
would not harm you, and do not fail to befriend anyone even if you
thought he would not benefit you.’ ‘Indeed the ultimate knowledge and
the perfection of the religion (and way of life) of a Muslim is to avoid
talking about things which do not concern him, lack of his boasting, his
forbearance, perseverance, and well-manners.’

‘Do not stop from refraining from evil even if you have been known to
commit it.’ ‘The best keys to (one’s) affairs is truthfulness, and the
best endings is faithfulness and loyalty.’ What others have said about
Imam Ali Zayn al-Abidin AbY ."zim said: ‘I never saw a Hashimite more
meritorious than !Al: ibn .usayn nor more knowledgeable than him.’252
Al-Zuhr: said: ‘I never saw anyone more knowledgeable than Zayn
al-!wbid:n.’ If !Al: ibn al-.usayn was mentioned he would weep and say:
‘The adornment of the worshippers.’253 M"lik ibn Anas, the Imam of the
Maliki sect, said: ‘He was named “Zayn al-!wbid:n (the adornment of the
worshippers)” because of the great amount of his worship of Alla\>h.’254
The Ummayad Caliph !Umar ibn !Abd al-!Az:z said after he had just left
his presence: ‘Who is the most noble of people?’ Those around him said:
‘You.’ He said: ‘Not at all, the most noble of people is he who has just
left my presence.’ N"fi! said addressing Zayn al-!wbid:n: ‘You are the
chief of people and the best of them.’255


