The Fifth Imam
==============

He is Imam Mu9ammad al-B"qir (the splitter open of knowledge), son of
!Al: (a.s.) and his mother was F"Uima daughter of Imam .asan (a.s.). He
was born on a Monday the 3rd of the month of £afar (it is also said to
be on the 1st of Rajab) of the year 57 A.H. (16th December 676 C.E.). He
is the first of the Alids who is of Alid parents. He died of poison on a
Monday the 7th of the month of DhYl-.ijja in the year 114 A.H. (28th
January 733 C.E.) at the age of 57 years. His funeral was conducted by
his son Imam Ja!far al-£"diq (a.s.) and he was buried in the cemetery of
Baq:! in Medina.

He was extremely virtuous, noble, and religious. He had abundant
knowledge, great clemency, and beautiful character, and he was
worshipful, humble, generous, and tolerant. Once a Christian said to
him: ‘You are a cow (baqar).’ He said: ‘Rather I am b"qir. The Christian
said: ‘You are the son of a scullery maid.’ Imam B"qir said: ‘That was
her profession.’ The Christian said: ‘You are the son of a licentious
black negro woman!’

He said: ‘If you have spoken the truth then may Alla\>h forgive her,
and if you have lied then may Alla\>h forgive you.’ At this, the
Christian accepted Islam.256 He was a sea of knowledge and would answer
any question posed to him without hesitation. Ibn !AU" al-Makk: said: ‘I
have never seen anyone else before whom the scholars are so humbled more
than before Mu9ammad al-B"qir (a.s.). I saw al-.akam ibn !Utayba,
despite his greatness in the eyes of the people, before him like a child
before his teacher.’257 Mu9ammad ibn Muslim said: ‘Whenever anything
troubled my heart I would ask AbY Ja!far (Mu9ammad al-B"qir) until I
asked him about thirty thousand traditions.’258

He was constantly remembering Alla\>h. His son Imam £"diq said: ‘My
father remembered Alla\>h much. I would walk with him and he would
remember Alla\>h, eat with him and he would remember Alla\>h, and even
when he spoke to the people it would not distract him from remembrance
of Allah.’259 He was much disposed to night prayer and worship and wept
profusely.

**Hadith from Imam Baqir (A)**

‘The practice of Islam is founded on five matters: upholding of the
daily prayers, purification of the wealth (giving the Khums and
Zaka\>h), performing the Hajj pilgrimage, Fasting during the holy month
of Ramad}a\>n, and allegiance to the authority (wala\>yah) of the us the
Ahl-ul-Bayt. Exceptions are given in four of them but none is given for
the wala\>yah. He who does not possess sufficient wealth, does not give
Khums/Zaka\>h. He who does not possess sufficient wealth, is not obliged
to go to Hajj. He who is ill can perform the daily prayers in sitting
mode, and does not fast during the month of Ramad}a\>n. However the
walayah is obliged upon him regardless of his health and wealth.’

‘Three are amongst the noble values of this world and the hereafter: To
forgive he who transgresses against you, To bond ties with he who severs
ties with you, To forbear he who insults you.’ ‘The most regretting
individual on the Day of Judgement is he who preaches to others to do
good but does not practices it himself.’

‘He who says the truth, his acts would be purified, and he whose
intention is good, his sustenance will be increased, and he who is kind
to his family his lifespan would increase.’ ‘He who teaches guidance,
will have a reward similar to the rewards of all of those who act upon
it without reducing anything from their reward. He who teaches
misguidance, will have a punishment similar to the punishments of all of
those who act upon it without reducing anything from their
punishment.’

**What others have said about Imam Muhammad al-Baqir**

Ibn !Umar said indicating Imam B"qir (a.s.): ‘They, the people of the
house, are endowed with [Allah given] understanding.’260 Whenever Jabir
al-Juifi wanted to narrate traditions from the Imam he would say: ‘The
trustee of trustees and the heir to the knowledge of the prophets,
Mu9ammad ibn !Al: ibn al-.usayn, narrated to me . . .’261 Ibn Ab:
al-.ad:d said: ‘Mu9ammad ibn !Al: ibn al-.usayn was the chief of the
jurists of the .ij"z and it was from him and his son Ja!far that the
people learned jurisprudence.’262

**The Sixth Imam**

He is Ja!far al-£"diq (The Truthful), the son of Mu9ammad al- B"qir
(a.s.). His mother was F"Uima whose agnomen was ‘umm farwa’. He was born
in Medina on Monday the 17th of the month of Rab:! I in the year 83 A.H.
(20th April 702 C.E.) – the date of the Prophet’s (N) birthday. He died
of poisoning on the 25th of the month of Shaww"l in the year 148 A.H.
(14th December 765 C.E.) at the age of 65 years. His son MYs" al-K"dim
(a.s.) conducted his funeral and he was buried in the cemetery of Baq:!
in the city of Medina.

His knowledge and virtue, wisdom and understanding, abstinence and
piety, truth and justice, nobility, generosity and bravery and all his
other virtues are more than can be enumerated. Shaykh al-Muf:d said:
‘The learned scholars have transmitted on the authority of no other
member of the House (ahl al-bayt) as much as they have transmitted on
his authority. None of them met as many of the reporters of traditions
as he did, nor did the latter transmit on their authority to the same
extent as they transmitted on the authority of AbY !Abdull"h (Ja!far ibn
Mu9ammad), peace be on him. The specialists in traditions have gathered
together the names of those who narrated on his authority, who were
reliable - despite differences in views and doctrines - and they were
four thousand men . . .’263

Both AbY .anifa the Imam of the .anafite school and M"lik the Imam of
the M"likite school were students of his. His abstinence was such that
he used to eat [only bread with] oil and vinegar and would wear a very
rough and thick shirt and would often wear patched clothes. He used to
work by himself in his orchard. As for his worship of Alla\>h, he used
to pray a great deal and often fainted during prayer. One night he was
summoned by the Abbasid ruler H"rYn al-Rash:d whose servant, when he
went to his door, found him in solitude with his face and hands in the
dust and the dust had left marks on his face and cheeks. He was very
giving, of beautiful character, softly spoken, good company and a
delight to be with.

**Hadith from Imam Sadiq (A)**

‘Nothing other than three matters continue to bring an individual
rewards after death. A charity that Allah helped him establish during
his life and this (charity) continues after his death, a good practice
acted upon (by others), and an offspring who prays for him.’ ‘The right
of a Muslim upon another is that he is not full when his brother goes
hungry, and he does not quench his thirst when his brother is thirsty,
and he is not clothed when his brother is naked; it is most great the
right of a Muslim upon his brother.’ ‘Love for your Muslim brother what
you love for yourself.’ ‘Amongst the manners of the ignorant is to
answer before he hears (the argument), to oppose before he understands,
and to give a judgement upon what he does not know.’ ‘He who acts not in
accordance with a vision, is like he who is going down the wrong way,
and then speeding does not give him anything other than distancing him
further from the truth.’ ‘The most beloved of my brothers to me is he
who presents me my mistakes.’

‘Seventy sins of the ignorant are forgiven before one is forgiven for
the scholar.’ ‘Make bonds with he who sever ties with you, give to he
who denies you, be kind to he who was bad to you, salute he who swore at
you, be fair and just to he who fought you, forgive he who oppressed you
just as you would like to be forgiven, learn from Allah when He forgives
you; do you not see the sun shines upon the believers and the
non-believers, and the rain comes down upon the good and the bad?’

**What others have said about Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq**

Fuv"d Sam!"n said: ‘Imam Ja!far al-£"diq was a teacher for the other
leaders of the islamic juridical schools such as M"lik ibn Anas, A9mad
ibn .anbal, AbY .an:fa, and al-Sh"fi!: and other leaders of sects.’ AbY
.an:fa said: ‘I have never seen anyone more knowledgeable than Ja!far
ibn Mu9ammad.’264 Mu9ammad AbY Zuhra said: ‘The Imams of the Sunnites
who were his contemporaries received and took knowledge from him.’265
Ibn .ajar said: ‘The people transmitted knowledge from him far and wide
and his fame spread to all lands.’266 Dr. A9mad Am:n said: ‘Imam Ja!far
was one of the greatest personalities to have influenced his own time
and afterwards.’267

**The Seventh Imam**

He is Imam MYs" al-K"dim, the son of Ja!far al-£"diq (a.s.). His mother
was .am:da al-MuNaff"h. He was born at al-Abw"v which is a waystation
between Mecca and Medina on Sunday the 7th of the month of £afar in the
year 128 A.H. (8th November 745 C.E.), and died of poison in the prison
of the Abbasid ruler H"rYn al- Rash:d after an unjust imprisonment of 14
years, on the 25th of the month of Rajab in the year 183 A.H. (1st
September 799 C.E.). His funeral was conducted by his son !Al: al-Ri+"
(a.s.) and he was buried at K"dim:yya, Iraq where his shrine remains to
this day. He was the most knowledgeable of his peers and the most
virtuous, generous and valiant. He had a beautiful character and fine
qualities and was of obvious knowledge and virtue. He was high minded
and was disposed to much worship of Alla\>h and long prostrations to
Alla\>h. He was named ‘al-K"dim’ due to his containment of his anger,
and because of his righteousness he was called ‘the righteous servant of
Allah.’

The evidence of his knowledge in different fields is astonishing. An
example of this is the tradition narrated by Burayha the prominent
Christian who was defeated intellectually by the Imam and accepted Islam
and became a good Muslim.268 Once a poor person asked him for one
hundred silver coins. The Imam asked him a question to test his
knowledge and when he answered correctly he gave him two thousand silver
coins. He was the most beautiful of reciters of the Qurv"n and
worshipped Allah and recited the Qurv"n more than anyone else and
prostrated longer than anyone and wept for the sake of Allah more than
anyone. He died in a state of prostration to Allah.

**Hadith from Imam Kadim (A)**

‘Allah has given the people two proofs, an apparent one and a hidden
one. The apparent one is His messengers, prophets and Imams, and the
hidden one is the intellect.’

‘Learn thoroughly the teachings of Islam for this learning is the key
to the (correct) vision, perfect worship, the means to elevated
stations, and honourable ranks in this world and the hereafter. For the
merit of the learned scholar (Faqeeh) over the lifelong worshiper (Abid)
is that of the sun over the planets. And he who does not seek knowledge
about his religion, none of his achievements would be accepted by
Allah.’ ‘Endeavour to divide your time into four categories: one for the
supplication with Allah, another to make a living, the third for
socialising with the brethrens and those trustworthy individuals who are
honest to you and point out to you your mistakes in confidence, and the
fourth to seek in seclusion non-forbidden pleasures, and with this you
gain strength and vigour for the other three.’ 83 ‘. . . and the
believer is the brother of the believer even if not born by the same
parents. Cursed is he who accuses his brother, cursed is he who cheats
his brother, cursed is he who does not admonish and advise his brother,
cursed is he who backbites his brother.’ ‘He whose two days are equal is
a looser, and he whose second day is worse than his first is cursed. He
who does not observe progress in himself is in retreat and he who is in
retreat, death is better for him than life.’ Addressing one of his
disciples:

‘O Hisham! If you had a nut in your hand and the people said you have a
pearl, it would be of no benefit to you and you know it is a nut. And if
you had a pearl in your hand and the people said you have a nut in your
hand, it would be of no detriment to you and you know that it is a
pearl.’ ‘Any word of wisdom is sought after by the faithful Muslim, so
always seek knowledge . . .’

**What others have said about Imam Musa al-Kadim**

The Abbasid ruler H"rYn said to his son [referring to the Imam]: ‘He is
the leader (imam) of the people and Allah’s proof (9ujja) over his
creation and His vicegerent (khal:fa) for His servants.’269 Ibn Khall"l
the scholar of the Hanbalites said: ‘Whenever a matter concerned me and
I sought out the grave of MYs" ibn Ja!far and asked Alla\>h for a way
(was:la) through him, Allah always made what I wanted easy for me.’270
Al-Sh"fi!: said: ‘The grave of MYs" al-Kadim is a tried and tested
panacea.’271

**The Eighth Imam**

He is !Al: al-Ri+" (a.s.) son of MYs" al-K"dim (a.s.). his mother was
Lady Najma. He was born on Friday the 11th of the month of DhYl-Qa!da in
the year 148 A.H. (29th December 765 C.E.) in the enlightened city of
Medina, Arabia and died of poisoning on the last day of the month of
£afar of the year 203 A.H. (6th September 818 C.E.). His funeral was
undertaken by his son Mu9ammad al- Jaw"d (a.s.) and he was buried in
Mashhad (Meshed) in Khorasan, Iran where his shrine stands today.

His knowledge, virtue, nobility, generosity, good character, humility,
and worship of Allah is very well known. The Abbasid ruler al-MavmYn
requested of him that he assume the role of the Islamic Caliph in his
place but he preferred to abstain from the things of this world and did
not accept, understanding that it was not a sincere offer. Similarly,
his grandfather before him, Amir al-Mo’mineen !Al: ibn Ab: ھ"lib (a.s.)
had refused the Caliphate from the Council when it was offered to him
because it meant he would have to lie and say: ‘I accept your allegiance
on condition that I act upon the book of Alla\>h (the Qurv"n), the way
of the Messenger of Allah (N), and the way of the shaykhayn [i.e. the
two sheikhs; AbY Bakr and !Umar].’ Whereas the Imam would have acted
according to his own judgement after the Qurv"n and the Prophetic way.

When Imam Ri+" (a.s.) refused the caliphate, al-MavmYn coerced him into
accepting the regency, so he accepted on condition that he would not
interfere in any of the affairs of state.272 His great knowledge of
religions and schools of thought and philosophies was made evident in
the great debates that al- MavmYn and others hosted.

He used to keep vigil most nights and complete a recitation of the
entire Qurv"n every three days. He would often pray one thousand units
of prayer per day and prostrate to Alla\>h for long hours. He also
fasted often. He was very kind and giving and gave charity in secret
especially in the dark of the night. He never spoke harsh words to
anyone or insulted anyone, nor did he ever recline in front of anyone he
sat with. He was not given to raucous laughter and never spat in front
of anyone. When he sat at table he would invite all his family and
servants and he would eat with them.

**Hadith from Imam Rida(A)**

‘Socialise with one another, so that you get friendlier.’ ‘He who
repents is as he who has no sin.’ ‘Cleanliness and hygiene is one of the
traits and manners of the prophets.’

‘The most superior knowledge is the knowledge of the self.’ ‘(In the
Qur’an) Allah has commanded (us to do) three things which are linked to
another three. He ordered (us to perform) the daily prayers and Zaka\>h,
and he who performs the prayers but not the Zaka\>h, his prayers would
not be accepted. He ordered (us) to be thankful to Him and to the
parents, and he who is not thankful to his parents is not thankful to
Allah. He ordered (us) to be pious and have fear of him, and keep close
ties with the relatives, and he who does not keep close ties with his
relatives is not pious.’

‘He who likens Allah to His creations is a Mushrik (polytheist), and he
who attributes to Him something which He has forbidden is a Ka\>fir
(infidel).’ ‘The merit of Ema\>n (faith) is a grade higher than that of
Islam (Submission to Allah’s will), and the merit of Taqwa (Fear-of-
Allah) is a grade higher than that of Ema\>n, and the merit of Yaqeen
(conviction) is a grade higher than that of Taqwa, and the sons of Adam
(or human beings) are not given anything better than Yaqeen.’

‘Ema\>n has four pillars: Trusting and relying on Allah, Contentment
and pleasure with the will of Allah, Submittance to the ordinance of
Allah, and Delegation and turning over (the affairs) to Allah.’ ‘Ema\>n
is to discharge the obligatory duties and to refrain from committing
forbidden acts. Ema\>n is recognition by heart, admission by tongue, and
practicing, by all limbs, everything that has been ordered.’

‘The Qur’an is the sturdy rope of Allah and His firm grip, and His
perfect road that leads to paradise, and delivers from the fire. It does
not pall despite the passing of aeons, and does not dissipate despite
being oft repeated, because it was not created for one time rather than
another but it is the argument and proof for all humanity. Falsehood
does not approach it from before or from behind, a revelation from The
All Wise, The All Praised.’

A narrator reports, I asked Imam al-Rida(A) ‘What do you say about the
Qur’an?’ Imam Rida(A) replied:

‘It is the word of Allah, and so do not surpass it, and do not seek
guidance in anything else, for you will be deviated and go astray.’

**What others have said about Imam Ali al-Rida**

AbY al-£alt said: ‘I have never seen anyone more knowledgeable than
!Ali ibn MYs" al-Ri+" nor has any other scholar seen him without
testifying the same about him.’273 The Abbasid ruler al-MavmYn said: ‘He
is the most knowledgeable of the Hashimites.’274

Rajav ibn .a99"k said: ‘I swear by Allah that I have never seen a man
who was more mindful of Allah, nor remembered Allah more at all times,
nor was more in awe of Almighty Allah than him.’275 Al-£Yl: said: ‘I
have never seen or heard of anyone better than AbY al-.asan al-Ri+" and
I have witnessed from him what I have not witnessed from any other . . .
whoever claims to have seen the equal of him do not believe him!’276


