The Ninth Imam
==============

He is Imam Mu9ammad al-Jaw"d (a.s.) son of !Al: al-Rida (a.s.). His
mother was Lady Sabikah. He was born on the tenth day of the month of
Rajab of the year 195 A.H. (8th April 811 C.E.) in the enlightened city
of Medina, and died of poisoning in Baghdad on the 30th of the month of
DhYl-Qa!da of the year 220 A.H. (25th November 835 C.E.) at the age of
25 years. His son !Al: al-H"d: (a.s.) conducted his funeral and he was
buried by his grandfather MYs" ibn Ja!far al-K"dim (a.s.) at
al-K"dim:yya, Iraq where his grave remains to this day.

He was the most knowledgeable of his peers and the most virtuous and
magnanimous of them and the best company and the finest character.
Whenever he rode he would carry gold and silver with him and whenever
anyone asked him he would give to them. If any one of his uncles asked
him he would never give him less than 50 gold coins, and if any one of
his aunts asked him he would never give her less than 25 gold coins. An
example of his knowledge which was made manifest to the people is when
eighty scholars from all over the land gathered with him after the 9ajj
pilgrimage one year and asked him various questions all of which he
answered.

It is also related that a great many scholars and notables gathered
with him and, over a number of days, asked him thirty thousand questions
all of which he answered without failing or erring. It is related that
his age at that time was nine years. This, however, is not strange for
the household of the Prophet of revelation (N). The Abbasid ruler
al-MavmYn married him to his daughter after having examined him with
important questions all of which he answered as is related in a well
known tradition.

**Hadith from Imam Jawad (A)**

‘He who trusts upon Allah, He guides him to felicity and happiness. He
who depends upon Allah, He suffices him the matters of his life. The
trust in Allah is a fortress where no one other than the trustworthy
believer is housed. Reliance on Allah is salvation from all evil and
protection from all enemies. Islam is a source of honour. Knowledge is
treasure.

Silence is light. The utmost degree of Zuhd (abstinence) is avoiding
sin. There is no destruction for Islam like innovations (heresy).
Nothing is more decadent for man then greed. Through (the pious) ruler
the people are guided. Through supplication calamities are repelled. . .
.’ ‘If the ignorant keeps silent, people would not differ.’ ‘As the
beneficences of Allah upon a person increase, the needs of the people
towards him enhance. Thus he who does not meet those needs, exposes
those beneficences to annihilation.’

‘You should know that you never go out of sight of Allah, so watch in
what state you are.’ ‘The one who commits aggression and tyranny, and
the one who helps him to it, and the one who condones it, they are all
partners in crime.’ ‘Forbearance is the garment of the scholar, make
sure you clothe yourself with it.’ ‘The believer needs three qualities;
facility from Allah, selfadmonishing, and acceptance of constructive
criticism.’ ‘Three practices enable an individual to reach the pleasure
and approval of Almighty Allah: frequent repentance, leniency, and
giving to charity regularly.

And (there are) three qualities which if one possesses, he would never
regret: avoiding hastiness, consulting (with others), and to rely on
Allah once a decision is made.’

What others have said about Imam Muhammad al-Jawad The Abbasid ruler
al-MavmYn said of him: ‘I have chosen him due to his prominence over all
other virtuous and scholarly people despite his young age. He is a
prodigy. I would like him to display to the public what I have witnessed
from him.’277 An Archbishop said: ‘This man is probably either a prophet
or descended from a prophet.’278 Ibn al-Jawz: said: ‘He followed the
path of his father in terms of knowledge, piety, self-restraint and
generosity.’279 Al-£ifd: said: ‘He had a magnanimous nature and for this
reason he was given the name al-Jaw"d (the generous). He is one of the
twelve Imams.’280

**The Tenth Imam**

He is Imam !Al: al-H"d: (a.s.) son of Mu9ammad al-Jaw"d (a.s.). His
mother was Lady Sam"na. He was born in the enlightened city of Medina on
the 15th of the month of DhYl-.ijja, or, according to another narration,
the 2nd of the month of Rajab in the year 212 A.H. (27th September
827/6th March 828 C.E.). He died of poisoning at S"mar"v, Iraq on a
Monday the 3rd of the month of Rajab of the year 254 A.H. (18th July 868
C.E.) at the age of 42 years. His funeral was conducted by his son Imam
.asan al- !Askar: (a.s.) and he was buried at S"mar"v, Iraq where his
shrine is to this day. He was the best of his peers and the most
knowledgeable and virtuous and generous and most kindly spoken of them
and the most devoted to Alla\>h, the most pure hearted and the finest of
character.

Al-Arbal: relates that the Caliph once sent to Imam al-H"d: (a.s.)
30,000 silver coins. He gifted them to a Bedouin Arab from Kufa saying:
‘Pay off your debts with this and spend the rest on your family and
dependents and excuse me [for not giving you more].’ The man said: ‘O
son of the Messenger of Alla\>h, I didn’t ever hope for even a third of
this amount but Alla\>h knows well where he places his mission.’ Then he
took the money and left.281

**Hadith from Imam Had i (A)**

‘Better than the good-deed is he who performs it. More striking than
the beautiful words is he who says them. More worthy than knowledge is
he who conveys it. More evil than evil is he who causes it. More
frightening than fear is he who brings it.’ ‘Allah cannot be defined
except with what he has defined himself. How can He be defined when wits
are unable to perceive Him, imaginations fail to reach Him, minds cannot
explain Him, and the visions cannot encompass Him?’ ‘When justice is
dominant, one may not suspect another unless he is sure of his suspicion
about him, and when injustice is dominant, one should not assume good
thing about another unless he is sure of it.’

‘Jealousy erodes the good deeds and brings about the bad fortunes.’
‘Beware of jealousy for it will work against you and will have no effect
on your foe.’ ‘Indeed, both the scholar and the student share in
prosperity.’ ‘Allah has made the world a place of calamity and the
hereafter a place of outcome. He has set the calamities of the world to
be the cause of the reward of the hereafter, and has made the reward of
the hereafter a substitute for the calamities of the world.’
‘Self-conceit restrains (one) from seeking knowledge and brings about
scorn and ignorance.’ What others have said about Imam Ali al-Hadi
Al-Junayd: said: ‘I swear by Almighty Alla\>h that he is the best of the
people of the earth and the most virtuous of Alla\>h’s creation.’ The
physician Yazd"d said: ‘If any created being knows the unseen then he
does.’282 Al-Y"fi!: said: ‘He was a devoted worshipper of Alla\>h, a
learned jurist and an Imam.’

Ibn .ajar al-Haytham: said: ‘He was heir to his father’s knowledge and
magnanimity.’283 Ibn al-!Im"d al-.anbal: said: ‘He was a learned jurist,
an Imam, and a devoted worshipper.’284 Al-Shibr"w: al-Sh"fi!: said: ‘He
had many charisms (kar"m"t).’285 The Eleventh Imam He is Imam .asan
al-!Askar: (a.s.) son of Imam Mu9ammad al- H"d: (a.s.). His mother was
Lady Jadda. He was born on Monday the 10th Rab:! II in the year 232 A.H.
(4th December 846 C.E.), and died of poisoning on Friday the 8th Rab:! I
in the year 260 A.H. (1st January 874 C.E.) at the age of 28 years. His
burial was undertaken by his son Imam Mu9ammad al-Mahd: (a.s.) and he
was buried beside his father at S"mar"v, Iraq where his shrine remains
today.

His virtues and knowledge and nobility and his worship of Alla\>h and
his humility and all his other noble traits are well known. He was of
good stature, handsome and well proportioned and was very venerable
despite his young age. He was like the Prophet (N) in his character.

An example of his generosity is related by Ism"!:l who said: ‘I waited
for Aby Muhammad (hasan al-Askari) (a.s.) by the side of the road. When
he passed by I complained to him that I was in need and swore that I had
not a silver coin to my name let alone more than that nor lunch nor
dinner.’ He said: ‘Do you swear by Allah falsely when you have already
saved up 200 gold coins?! And I do not say this to get out of giving to
you. [Then he indicated to his squire] Give him what you have.’ Then his
squire gave me 100 gold coins.’286 Once a man went to him after he had
heard about his generosity and magnanimity and he needed 500 gold coins.
So the Imam gave him 500 gold coins and an extra 300 gold coins. The
Christians testified that he was like the Messiah, Jesus, in his virtue
and knowledge and miracles.287 He was very devoted to Alla\>h, kept
constant night vigils, was righteous and very venerable.

**Hadith from Imam Askari (A)**

‘No respectful individual abandons the truth unless he becomes debased,
and no abject individual pursues the truth unless he becomes
honourable.’ ‘He who advices and criticises his brother covertly, has
decorated him. He who does so in public has rebuked him.’ ‘The best of
your brothers is the one who forgets your sins and remembers your favour
to him.’ ‘The heart of the fool is in his mouth, and the mouth of the
wise is in his heart.’ ‘He who uses false means to achieve his ends
would regret his policy.’ ‘Rage is the key to every evil.’ ‘It is
sufficient politeness and courtesy for you to refrain from what you
dislike to see from others.’ ‘Be cautious about seeking fame and power
for they lead to annihilation.’

**What others have said about Imam Hasan al-Askari**

The vizier Ibn Kh"q"n said to his son: ‘O my son, were the leadership
of the Islamic nation (imamate) to be taken away from the Abbasid
Caliphs no-one from the Hashimites would deserve it except him [.asan
al-!Askar:] because of his virtue, his piety, his self-restraint, his
being guided, his worship of Allah, his beautiful character and his
righteousness.’288 The physician Bakht:shY! said: ‘He is the most
knowledgeable in our day than everyone on earth.’289 AnYsh the Caliph’s
scribe said addressing the Imam: ‘We have found reference to you [people
of the Prophet’s house] in this Gospel and you are like the Messiah
Jesus son of Mary in the sight of Allah.’ A monk of the monastery of
!wqYl said to him: ‘You are the equal of the Messiah in his signs and
proofs.’

**The Twelfth Imam**

He is ‘Alla\>h’s proof’ (9ujja) and the rightly guided Imam and the
Mahdi (mahd:) Mu9ammad son of .asan al-!Askar: (a.s.). His mother was
Lady Narjes. He was born at S"mar"v on the eve of the 15th of the month
of Sha!b"n in the year 255 A.H. (29th July 869 C.E.). This Imam is the
last of the proofs of Alla\>h on earth and the ‘seal’ of Messenger of
Alla\>h’s (N) successors and the last of the twelve leaders of the
Muslims. He remains alive and on earth since, by Alla\>h’s will, his
life has been prolonged and he is hidden from view. He will appear at
the end of days after the world has been filled with oppression and
injustice to fill it with justice and equity. He will take charge of the
entire world and propagate justice and dispose of the tyrants. As
Almighty Alla\>h has said: eIt is He [Alla\>h] who has sent His
Messenger with the guidance and the true religion to make it prevail
over all religion even though the Polytheists may detest itf290 There
are many widely known traditions in this regard related from the Prophet
(N) and the Imams (a.s.) which have been narrated by Sh:!a and Sunni
scholars alike.291 As for his longevity, this is not strange since the
power of Alla\>h is all encompassing: eAnd He has power over all
thingsf292 The prophet Noah (a.s.) also lived for a long time according
to the Holy Qurv"n which says: eAnd he [Noah] remained amongst them for
a thousand years save fifty yearsf293 Modern science also confirms the
fact that it is possible to live for thousands of years.

This great Imam became concealed from sight by the order of Almighty
Alla\>h while he was in his house, and since then, Muslims have taken
the place associated with him in S"mar"v, Iraq – known as sirdab
al-ghaybah – as a place of pilgrimage and worship.

O Allah! Hasten his victory, ease his reappearance, and make us amongst
his helpers and supporters.

**Hadith from Imam Mahdi (A):
**
‘Almighty Allah sent Muhammad peace be upon him as a Mercy to the
worlds, and with him He perfected His beneficence, and sealed His
prophets, and He sent him (with His message) to all people (to come).’
‘And as for the reason of the occultation, Almighty Allah says, .O ye
who believe! ask not questions about things which, if made plain to you,
may cause you trouble.1 ‘My benefit (to the people) during my
occultation is similar to that of the sun when it disappears from sight
behind the clouds.’

‘I am the Mahdi, and I am the leader of the time, I am the one who
would fill it (the earth) with justice after it has been overcome with
injustice and aggression. Indeed the earth never remains without a Proof
and Authority (of Allah).’ ‘I am the seal of the aws}iya\>’ (successors)
and through me Allah would remove the hardship from my people and my
followers (Shi’a).’

‘We have not ignored your consideration, and have not forgotten your
mention; otherwise hardship would have descended upon you and your
enemies would have exterminated you.’ 1 The holy Qur’an: The Table
Spread (5): 101.

‘. . . and if Allah give us the permission of speech, then truth will
manifest and falsehood would disappear.’ ‘As for the ongoing events,
refer to the narrators of our hadith (i.e. the Fuqaha\>’), for they are
my claim and proof upon you and I am the claim and proof of Allah upon
them.’ ‘Let every one of you do what brings closer to our love, and
abstain from what brings about our displeasure and anger.’ ‘Increase and
maintain the Du’a for the Faraj (the reappearance of the Imam) for that
is the relief for you too.’ ‘Allah insists that eventually Truth must
hold and Falsehood must decline.’ ‘Nothing like the daily prayers forces
the nose of the Satan to the ground, so perform the daily prayers and
force his nose to the ground.’

‘If our Shi’a (followers), may Allah help and succeed them to His
obedience, were united in wholeheartedly honouring the promise and
obligation that is upon them, there would have been no delay in meeting
us (i.e. in our reappearance), and bliss and felicity for them would
have hastened by seeing us with full knowledge and certainty of
testifying to our (leadership)’ ‘As for the Dawn of the Relief (i.e. the
reappearance of the Imam), this is for Allah to say, and those
foretellers (about the time of the dawn) say lies.’

‘None of my fathers, peace be upon them, but each of them had
(enforced) upon him an allegiance to the tyrant of his time. However
when I arise there will be no allegiance upon me for any of the
tyrants.’

‘O My Master! You are the One who bestowed upon me this position and
station, and with it favoured me over many of Your creatures. I ask You
to send your mercy and bliss upon Muhammad and his household, and to
fulfil what You promised, for You are truthful and You do not break Your
promise, and You are able upon everything.’ What others have said about
Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Rif"!: said: ‘.asan al-!Askar: had a child who
has the sird"b (vault) in S"mar"v. He is the awaited one, the proof and
friend of Alla\>h Mu9ammad the Mahdi.’

Al-J"m: said: ‘The Mahdi is a leader of the world.’294 Ibn .ajar said:
‘AbY al-Q"sim Mu9ammad is the 9ujja or proof of Alla\>h and he was five
years old at the death of his father. Alla\>h gave him wisdom at that
age and he is named “the Awaited One, who will rise”.’295 Ibn Kothayr
said in a tradition he narrates: ‘Jesus will pray behind the Mahdi.’296
Ibn Kothayr also said: ‘[With] black banners will come the companions of
the Mahdi.’297 The role of the Imams and their followers (Shi!a) The
Imams of the house of Mu9ammad (Ahl al-Bayt) gave the greatest of
services to Islam and the Islamic nation, and, were it not for this,
Islam would have been subject to the same storms which rocked previous
religions and diverted them from their true paths.

The Sh:!a themselves have strived in the path of Alla\>h throughout
history and helped to bring many people to the true religion of Allah.
They stood in the path of various adverse (ideological) trends and
currents and, were it not for the Sh:!a, Islam and the Muslims may well
have been swept away. All of this is detailed in the history books - a
glance at the books a!y"n al-sh:!" of al- !wmul:, and al-dhar:!a of
al-Tehr"n: is sufficient to prove this fact.

Human civilisation is, in many respects, indebted to the services of
Shi!ites and this has been recognised by secular and religious scholars
alike and the Sh:!a have finally gained the recognition they deserve.

**Evidence for the Shi!ite Point of View**

The Sh:!a have a great deal of evidence to support their point of view,
so much so that the great scholar al-.ill: composed a book named
al-alfayn ‘the two thousand’ in which he mentioned two thousand proofs
for the Sh:!ite point of view many of which are sourced from Sunnite
books and collections of traditions. In what follows, a few of these
evidences will be mentioned:298 The Evidence for the Successorship of
Ali The Messenger of Alla\>h Mu9ammad ibn !Abdull"h (N) alluded to and
indicated, stated and reiterated time and again about the successorship
of !Al: ibn Ab: ھ"lib (a.s.). For example:

**1. The Warning of his close family**

This occasion known as the day of warning (yawm al-indh"r) has been
documented by many top Sunnite scholars such as Ibn Is9"q, Ibn Jar:r,
Ibn Ab: ."tim, al-ھabar: and others.299 This happened at the beginning
of the Prophet’s mission, before Islam appeared openly in Mecca after
Alla\>h had revealed to the Prophet (N) the words: eAnd warn thy close
familyf300 The Messenger of Alla\>h (N) invited his relatives to the
house of his uncle AbY ھ"lib (a.s.) and there were forty men there more
or less, including his uncles AbY ھ"lib, .amza, al-!Abb"s, and AbY
Lahab. At the end of the discussions the Prophet said to them: ‘O sons
of !Abd al-MuUUalib, I swear by Alla\>h that I do not know of a young
man of the Arabs who has brought his people something better than that
which I bring you - I bring you the best of this world and the next.
Alla\>h has ordered me to invite you to this [Islam], so which of you
will aid me in this affair of mine so that he will be my brother and my
trustee and my successor amongst you?’

All were silent except for !Al: (a.s.) who was the youngest of them. He
stood up and said: ‘O Prophet of Alla\>h, I will be your aid in this
affair.’ Then the Messenger of Alla\>h (N) put his hand on !Al:’s
shoulder and said: ‘This is my brother and my trustee (waN:y) and my
successor (khal:fa) amongst you so hear him and obey him.’

**2. The Day of Ghadir**

The tradition of Ghad:r has been related by one hundred and twenty of
the companions of the Messenger of Alla\>h (N) and eighty-four of the
generation after them (al-t"bi!Yn). The number of prominent
traditionists who narrated this tradition exceeds three hundred and
sixty.301.302 Those who have written about this tradition in books from
both the Sunni and Sh:!a schools number more than 166 people. In brief,
when the Messenger of Alla\>h Mu9ammad (N) returned from the final
‘farewell’ .ajj pilgrimage he reached a location named ‘Ghad:r Khumm’.
There he halted the people and mounted a pulpit in the noonday heat and
delivered a long sermon in front of more than one hundred thousand
people. During this speech he took hold of the hand of !Al: (a.s.) and
said: ‘O people, Alla\>h is my master (mawla\>) and I am the master of
the believers and I have more authority over them than they do over
their own selves. So whoever I am the master of then this man - !Al: -
is his master. O Alla\>h, be allied with who is allied with him and the
enemy of he who is his enemy. I will surely ask you, when we meet again
[in the afterlife] about the two weighty matters (al-thaqalayn) and how
you act towards them after I am gone - the greater weighty thing is the
Qurv"n, the book of Almighty Alla\>h. It is a heavenly course (sabab)
one end of which is in the hand of Alla\>h and the other end is in your
hands so hold firmly on to it and go not astray and do not take any
substitute for it. And [secondly] my family, the people of my house, for
the Subtle and All-Aware [Alla\>h] has informed me that they will never
perish until they meet me at the well of Paradise.’303

Imam A9mad mentions in his musnad: ‘that the Prophet (N) took the hand
of !Al: (a.s.) and said to those present: ‘Do you not know that I have
more authority over the believers than they do over their own selves?’
They said: ‘Indeed we do.’ He said: ‘Do you not know that I have more
authority over every believer than he does over his own self?’ They
said: ‘Indeed we do.’ The he said: ‘Whoever I am his master (mawl": lit.
place of authority) then !Al: is his master. O Alla\>h, be allied to his
allies and be an enemy to his enemies.’ The narrator continues: ‘Then
!Umar went to him afterwards and said to him: ‘Congratulations O son of
AbY ھ"lib, you have now become the master of every believing man and
woman!’ 304

In his book al-wil"ya, al-ھabar: relates that after this the Messenger
of Alla\>h (N) ordered that his companions greet !Al: in acknowledgement
of him as commander of the believers. Hence, the companions used to come
to him and say to him ‘Peace be upon you O Commander of the Faithful
()!’

In answer to those who say that the Prophet (N) did not nominate a
successor we would say that this is not sensible or logical especially
as the Prophet was the most intelligent and sensible of people. He would
not ever leave Medina even for a few days without nominating someone to
lead the community in his place so when it came to his death it is not
possible that he should leave his community rudderless.305


