3. the Tradition of the ‘station’
=================================

The tradition of the ‘station’ (manzilah), which has been mentioned by
Imams A9mad and al-Nas"v: and others, was when the Messenger of Allah
(N) said to Ali (a.s.): ‘Will you not be content for your station to me
to be as that of Aaron to Moses except that there is no prophet to come
after me?’306 ‘I cannot go unless you are my successor (khalifa).’307
And there are great many other traditions and evidences to this
effect.

4. Successorship of other Imams from Prophet’s family The Messenger of
Alla\>h (N) spoke, by the authority of Alla\>h, about the successorship
of the Imams after him saying: ‘There will be twelve successors after
me.’308 This has been narrated by AbY D"wYd, Muslim, A9mad ibn .anbal,
and others.

The Prophet (N) nominated them and mentioned their names on many
occasions as is mentioned in the book yan"b:! almawadda 309 for example
related from the Messenger of Alla\>h (N) in a tradition where someone
asked him about the awsiya’ (trustees) those who would execute his will
after him. The person asked him, “inform me of your was }

i.” The prophet said: ‘My

executor is !Al: ibn Ab: ھ"lib, and after him my two grandsons .asan
and .usayn followed by nine Imams from the line of .usayn.’ The man
said: ‘O Mu9ammad, name them!’ He said: ‘When .usayn has gone there will
be his son !Al:; when !Al: has gone there will be his son Mu9ammad; when
Mu9ammad has gone there will be his son Ja!far; when Ja!far has gone
there will be his son MYs"; when MYs" has gone there will be his son
!Al:; when !Al: has gone there will be his son Mu9ammad; when Mu9ammad
has gone there will be his son !Al:; when !Al: has gone there will be
his son .asan; when .asan has gone there will be his son Mu9ammad – the
Mahdi – the Guided – the H{ujjah – Proof of Allah.’

**5. The tradition of the two weighty things**

The Messenger of Alla\>h (N) left two weighty things (al-thaqalayn) in
his will - the Qurv"n and his family, and he ordered the Muslims to
follow these two in a well known tradition which has been recorded by
both Sunni and Sh:!a schools. The Prophet (N) said: ‘I am leaving with
you the two weighty things - the book of Alla\>h and my family the
people of my house (Ahl al-Bayt). As long as you adhere to these two you
will never ever go astray after me.’310 In another tradition he said: ‘I
am leaving with you two successors (khal:fatayn) - the book of Alla\>h
which is a rope extending between heaven and earth, and my family the
people of my house (Ahl al-Bayt). They will never separate until they
join me at the well of Paradise.’311

He also said: ‘I am leaving with you two successors - the book of Allah
and the people of my house. These two will never separate until they
both join me at the well of Paradise.’312 He also said: ‘I am leaving
behind me two things so you will never go astray - the book of Alla\>h
and my lineage. They will never separate until they join me at the well
of Paradise.’313 He also said: ‘I shall shortly die and I have left with
you the two weighty things - the book of Alla\>h and the people of my
house. You will never go astray with these two things.’314

**6. The tradition of the Ark**

The Messenger of Alla\>h (N) likened the people of his house to the ark
of the prophet Noah (a.s.) saying: ‘The similitude of the people of my
house (Ahl al-Bayt) amongst you is as the ark of Noah amongst his
nation - whoever boards it will be saved and whoever lags behind it will
drown.’315 He also said: ‘The stars protect the people of the earth from
drowning. The people of my house protect my nation from disputing. If an
Arab tribe goes against them they will fall into dispute and they will
become the party of the devil.’316

**Shi!ism in the eyes of Sunni scholars**

Islam makes Muslim unity mandatory as Almighty Alla\>h has said: eThis
is your nation - a single nation, and I am your Lord so worship mef317

Therefore for Muslims to distance themselves from one another goes
against the commandments of Islam and goes against what the great Sunni
scholars have said throughout history. Here are some examples:

**Shams al-Din al-Dhahabi**

In his book mizan al-iatidal, al-Dhahab: said: ‘Shiism was frequent
amongst the generation after the Prophet (tabieYn) and in subsequent
generations together with religiosity, piety and truthfulness. Were the
traditions narrated by these people (the Sh:!a) to be rejected then the
whole body of the Prophetic traditions would be lost.’318 The great
scholar Sharaf al-D:n al-MYs"w: in his valuable book al-mur"ja!"t
mentions the names of one hundred Sh:!a men from whom the scholars of
traditions and others have obtained their sources.319

**Shaykh Shaltut**

Modern scholars are no different to their predecessors in this regard.
Take for example the great former rector of al-Azhar University in Cairo
Shaykh Mu9moud ShaltYt who declared in a edict that: ‘The Ja!fari school
of thought known as Twelve-Imam Sh:!ism is a school of thought legally
permissible to act upon similar to the other schools. It is necessary
for all Muslims to know this and to cease their unwarranted fanaticism
for particular schools of thought.’

The Edict in Full

A question was posed to Shaykh Mu9moud ShaltYt: “Certain people believe
that it is obligatory for a Muslim, so that his acts of worship and
social interactions be correct, to follow one of the four well known
schools of thought which do not include the Imami Sh:!ites or the Zaydi
Sh:!ites. Do you agree with this opinion and hence forbid following the
Twelver Sh:!ite school for example?”

Shaykh Muhmoud ShaltYt answered:

1. “Islam does not make it obligatory for any of its followers to
follow a particular school of thought. Rather we would say that every
Muslim has the right to begin to follow any of the schools of thought
that have been transmitted correctly and whose laws are recorded in that
school’s particular books. Also, any follower of a particular school of
thought has the right to change to another whatever that may be and
there is no problem for him in this.

2. The Ja!fari school of thought known as Twelve-Imam Sh:!ism is a
school of thought legally permissible to act upon similar to the other
schools. It is necessary for all Muslims to know this and to cease their
unwarranted fanaticism for particular schools of thought. The religion
and law of Alla\>h is not subject to or limited to a particular school.
All [scholars of schools of thought] are considered to have made their
efforts to reach their opinions and they are acceptable in the sight of
Almighty Alla\>h. It is permissible for those who are not able to study
and come to their own opinion to follow these schools of thought and to
act upon what is laid down in their jurisprudence without distinction
between acts of worship or social contracts.”

signature

Muhmoud Shaltut Many other modern Sunni scholars and leaders have
echoed the former rector of al-Azhar’s view.

**Sources for Information on Shiism**

In addition to the numerous books in Arabic written by or about the
Sh:!a, many of which have been mentioned in the endnotes of this book,
and some can be found in web resources in English on the subject of
Sh:!ite beliefs and practices.

Afterword Islam is a complete way and system of life which brought
happiness to humanity for centuries, then was confined to beliefs in the
minds of people. Recently, however, there are signs which show that
Islam will shortly return as a system for life for the Muslims are tired
of sectarianism and they are tired from the experience of other
philosophies and ideas and now nothing remains for them except to:

1. Unite the Islamic sects under the banner of the Qurv"n the book of
Allah, and the family of the Messenger of Allah (a.s.).

2. Propagate Islam in its practical form throughout the earth. When
this happens there will be an end to wars, anxiety, and unemployment and
there will be progress in all fields. We Muslims are in dire need today
of amity and mutual understanding. Therefore whoever believes in Alla\>h
and the last day and takes the Qurv"n as a syllabus and the Prophetic
traditions as a constitution must strive to put an end to these
sectarian disputes so that things may run their natural course and so
that the unity that the Muslims have lost may return to them. If not
then it will be like: eShe who unravels her spinning into strands after
it has become strongf320.

Islam has suffered from various calamities and the unbelievers have
plotted against it throughout history since the mission of the Messenger
of Alla\>h (N). The greatest of these was probably the Mongol invasions
of the lands of Islam. But Islam has withstood all these plots and has
moved forward with great and firm steps until the last dark century when
foreign powers confronted the lands of Islam with material and
intellectual attacks.


