The Author
==========

Grand Ayatollah Imam Muhammad Shirazi is undoubtedly the most eminent
Marje’ or authority on Islam in modern times. A charismatic leader who
is known for his high moral values, modesty and spirituality, Imam
Shirazi is a mentor and a source of aspiration to millions of Muslims;
and the means of access to authentic knowledge and teachings of Islam.
He tirelessly devoted himself, and his entire life, to the cause of
Islam and Muslims in particular, and to that of mankind in general. He
has made extensive contributions in various fields of learning ranging
from Jurisprudence and Theology to Government, Politics, Economics, Law,
Sociology, Human Rights. Through his original thoughts and ideas he has
championed the causes of issues such as the family, freedom of
expression, political pluralism, non-violence, human rights, and the
Shura or consultative system of leadership.

Born in Najaf, Iraq, in 1347 AH, 1928 CE, the young Muhammad Shirazi
continued his studies of different branches of learning under the
guidance of various eminent scholars and specialists, as well as his
father, the renowned Marje’ or the religious authority of the time,
Grand Ayatollah Mirza Mahdi Shirazi. In the course of his training he
showed an outstanding talent and a remarkable appetite for learning as
well as a tireless commitment to his work and the cause he believed in.
His extraordinary ability, and effort, earned him the recognition at the
age of 25, by the various Marje’ and scholars of the time, of being a
mujtahid, a fully qualified religious scholar and lawmaker in the
sciences of Islamic jurisprudence and law. He was subsequently able to
assume the office of the Marje’ at the age of 33 in 1380 AH, 1961.

Imam Shirazi is distinguished for his intellectual ability and holistic
vision. He has written various specialized studies that are considered
to be among the most important references in the relevant fields. He has
enriched the world with his staggering contribution of more than 1,100
books, treatise and studies on various branches of learning. His works
range from introductory works for the youth to literary and scientific
masterpieces. Deeply rooted in the Holy Qur’an and the teachings of the
Prophet of Islam, his vision and theories cover such areas as Theology,
Philosophy, History, Legislation, Management, Environment, Governance,
Law and Islamic Doctrine. His work on Islamic Jurisprudence (the al-Fiqh
series) for example constitutes 150 volumes, which run into more than
70,000 pages.

Imam Shirazi came to prominence in Iraq from the early 1960’s for his
works and his relentless efforts in setting up educational projects and
institutions throughout the country. He endeavoured to bring about a
renaissance amongst the Muslims and their countries through education
and reawakening the Muslim masses about the teachings of Islam. But
education of the masses is not something despotic regimes are fond of.
His works and efforts were ruthlessly crushed by the iron-fisted
tyrannical regime of the country’s Ba’thist regime run by the then
deputy president the notorious Saddam Hussein. Having arrested and
subjected his brother, Ayatollah Hasan Shirazi, to near death torture,
Saddam’s Ba’thist regime sentenced Imam Muhammad Shirazi to the death by
firing squad in absentia, which forced him to migrate to Kuwait in
1970.

Throughout the 1970’s in Kuwait Imam Shirazi continued his movement of
mass education as he had in Iraq. In 1980 Imam Shirazi moved to the holy
city of Qum in Iran, to continue his endeavour to disseminate the
teachings of Islam as taught by the Prophet Muhammad and his impeccable
descendents – the Ahl al-Bayt.

Throughout his life, because of his total dedication to the teachings
of Islam, and because of his views on various issues of concern, which
are based on those teachings, Imam Shirazi came under sustained
pressure. His views on, and his call for issues such as freedom of
expression, party political pluralism, peace and non-violence brought
about the wrath of the authorities. His freedom and activities were
restricted; his staff, followers, and family members were subjected to
continued harassment, arbitrary arrest and torture, throughout the
eighties and the nineties. Having spent the entire of his adult life
striving for the greater enlightenment of the Muslims and mankind, Imam
Shirazi died in the holy city of Qum, Iran, on Monday the 2nd Shawwal
1422 AH, 17th December 2001.

Imam Shirazi believed in the fundamental and elementary nature of
freedom in mankind. He used to call for freedom of expression, debate
and discussion, tolerance and forgiveness. He continuously called for
the establishment of the universal Islamic government to encompass all
the Muslim countries. These and other ideas are discussed in detail in
his works of more than 1,100 titles.


