The Shi!a in Brief
==================

The Shi!a (or Shi’ites) are those Muslims who follow [after the Prophet
Mu9ammad] !Al: ibn AbY ھ"lib Commander of the Believers, and his pure
progeny, peace be upon them.5 They constitute more than 500 million
people and are spread throughout all the Muslim lands and make up
minorities of differing number in most other countries of the world.
Their numbers have increased day by day particularly since the
crystallisation of Islamic thoughts and the opening of the door to
dialogue and the rejection of blind partisanship.

They believe in All"h as their Lord, Cherisher and Sustainer, in
Mu9ammad, blessings and peace be upon him6, as their prophet, in Islam
as their religion, in the Qur’"n as their holy book, in the Ka!bah in
Mecca as their direction of prayer (qiblah), in the questioning in the
grave by the angels Munkar and Nak:r, in the accounting on the day of
resurrection, in heaven and hell, and in all that Allah’s messenger –
Mu9ammad (N) – brought from his Lord.

They also establish the daily prayer (Nal"h), and pay the tithe (khums)
and obligatory alms (zak"h), and they fast the month of Rama+"n, and
make pilgrimage to the Holy House in Mecca, and they make it incumbent
to struggle with might and main (jih"d) in the way of elevating the word
of Islam, and they enjoin what is good and they forbid what is bad, and
they ally themselves with the friends of Alla\>h, and are against the
enemies of Alla\>h. They are foremost in good and charitable deeds, and
are steadfast in fulfilling extra and recommended acts of worship, and
adopting virtues and avoiding unlawful things and vices.

They believe that Islam is a complete religion which was revealed by
Alla\>h for the happiness of mankind. Hence, everything in Islam should
be implemented in the various areas of life since there is no happiness
without implementing the laws of Islam and having no need for the laws
of the east or the west.

Almighty Alla\>h has said: eAnd whoever desires other than Islam as a
religion, it will never be accepted from him and in the afterlife he
will be amongst the losersf7 Also, in the traditions it is said: ‘That
which Mu9ammad has declared lawful will remain lawful until the day of
resurrection and that which he has declared unlawful will remain
unlawful until the day of resurrection’8. They also believe that it is
obligatory to unite the Muslims under one banner as Almighty Alla\>h has
ordered: eAnd hold on firmly to the rope of Alla\>h and do not be
disunitedf9 and eAnd do not dispute amongst yourselves so that you will
fail and your power will gof10.

They also believe that it is necessary to solve the differences that
have arisen and caused disunity between Muslims, doing so in the light
of the book of Alla\>h and the authentic traditions (sunnah) far from
different groupings and hateful and unwarranted partisanships and
cliques.

They also believe that any law which goes against Islam is unlawful and
wrong and should not be acted upon, as Almighty Alla\>h has said: eAnd
whoever does not rule by what Alla\>h has revealed, then they are the
unbelieversf11.

The top scholars of the Sunni school of thought have ruled that it is
permissible to follow and adopt the Sh:!ite school of thought. They
include Shaykh Ma9mYd ShaltYt the former rector of the University of
al-Azhar in Cairo, Egypt and others.

The Sh:!a are distinguished in that they hold that the door to
independent legal judgement (ijtih"d) remains open; and in that reason
(!aql) is central to the divine law as well as the Qur’"n, the
traditions and consensus. They have a glowing history from the dawn of
the message of Islam until today. The Sh:!ite element was the most
active in establishing Islamic thought and in building Islamic
civilisation. They have to their credit innumerable writings.12 They
have a tremendous number of schools, institutes, libraries, scholars and
preachers in Islamic and non-Islamic lands.

They controlled [throughout history] a number of states in differing
lands.13 They distinguished themselves throughout history with their
long struggle against the unbelievers, the crusaders, the heretics, the
Zionists and the colonialists. All along the way there was between them
and their Sunni brothers brotherhood and friendship and interaction and
companionship.

They are found today in most if not all of the countries of the world.
However, the main Sh:!a population centres are Iraq, Iran, the Gulf
states, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan, Lebanon and Indonesia. Currently
thay have educational and cultural institutes and top scholars in Najaf,
Karbala, Baghdad, Kadhimiyyah, Samarra, Beirut, Cairo, Qum, Khurasan,
Tehran, Karachi, Mumbai, Jakarta, Kuwait, Qatar, Ahsa’ and QaUif
provinces (Arabia), Afghanistan, Damascus, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria,
Jordan, African countries, Europe, America and elsewhere.14


