Islam in the View of the Shi!a
==============================

Islam in the view of the Sh:!a consists of doctrine (aq:dah), law
(shar:!ah) and system (nid"m).

**1. Shi!a Doctrine**

The Sh:!a believe in Allah as their Lord, who is just and who has no
partner or associate (shar:k). They believe in Mu9ammad (N) as their
Prophet, in Islam as their religion, in the Qur’"n as their holy book,
in the Ka!bah in Mecca as their direction of prayer (qiblah), and that
all that Mu9ammad brought from his Lord was the truth, and that Allah
will bring back to life those who are in the graves, and that heaven and
hell are realities, and that mankind has freedom to choose in this life
(without compulsion or delegation) and that if he acts well he will be
rewarded for it and if he acts badly he will be punished for it.

The Sh:!a also believe that the religion of Islam is complete and lacks
nothing, as Allah revealed it and the trusty Messenger (N) and his pure
successors (a.s.) propagated it. It is the one religion which must be
followed in doctrine and in actions and any deviation from it brings
about calamity in this life and tribulation in the next life, while
adherence to it brings about happiness in this life and the next. It is
a complete way of life that addresses the human being in his entirety.
Hence it is concerned with nurturing the soul or spirit just as it is
concerned with nurturing the body, it deals with values as well as with
systems.

The fundamentals or roots of the religion in the view of the Sh:!a are
five in number:

1. Divine unity.
2. Divine justice.
3. Prophethood.
4. Imamate.
5. Resurrection.

Divine unity means that Allah is one and has no partner and no equal as
Almighty Alla\>h has said in the Qur’"n: eSay: He is Allah unique, Allah
the eternal, He begets not nor was He begotten, and there is none like
unto Himf29 Divine justice means that Allah is just and does not wrong
anyone or tolerate wrongdoing.

Prophethood means that Allah by His grace has sent prophets to mankind
to clarify the way of good and bad and to direct them to the good and
prevent them from the bad. Imamate means that the Messenger of Allah (N)
appointed, by order of Alla\>h, his twelve successors to come after him
and named them one after the other and specified them by name and
epithet and fathers’ and mothers’ names just as every Imam specified the
succeeding Imam. Hence it is obligatory to follow them and to take the
features of the religion from them. Their names were mentioned
previously [on page 13].

Resurrection means that Almighty Allah will revive creation on the day
of resurrection and reward those who do good and punish those who do
bad. eAnd whoever does a speck’s weight of good will see it and whoever
does a speck’s weight of bad will see itf30. tails of these five
fundamentals please refer to the books and encyclopaedias of the Sh:!a
such as: shar9 al-tajr:d31, !abaq"t alanw" r32, al-ghad:r33, al-fuNYl
al-muhimmah34, or al-mur"ja!"t35. These are amongst thousands of books
authored by the Sh:!a scholars in this regard.

**2. Shi!a View of Islamic Law**

In the view of the Sh:!a, Islamic law or shar:!ah consists of:

1. Acts of Worship. These are the acts by which nearness is sought to
Allah and include daily prayers (Nal"h), fasting (s}awm), tithe (khums),
almsgiving (zakah), pilgrimage (hajj), struggle (jihad), purification
(taharah), spiritual retreat to the Mosque (i‘tika f), and enjoining the
good and forbidding the bad etc.

2. Contracts (mu‘amila t) such as selling, renting, endowments and
mortgages etc.

3. Ethics (akhla\>q) which consist of: virtues which Islam has made
either obligatory or recommended such as truthfulness, honesty, bravery,
chivalry, activity and the like; and vices which Islam discourages
either by forbidding or by considering them reprehensible such as
betrayal, lying, cowardice, inactivity, causing corruption etc.

4. Etiquettes (a\>da\>b) which are the actions Islam considers to be
courtesies such as the courtesies of sleep and wakefulness, of marriage,
or of gatherings, travel and the like.

5. Laws (ah}ka\>m) which comprise obligatory (wa (haram), recommended
(mustah}ab), reprehensible (makruh), and neutral (muba\>h}). They are
also divided into takl:f:yah (duty bound) and wa+!:yyah (statuary) such
as the laws of marriage and divorce and inheritance, and justice, penal
codes and compensations.


