Shiite Doctrine
===============

Sh:!ite doctrines and beliefs are derived from two original sources of
Islam – the Qur’"n and the sunnah (the teachings of the prophet
Muhammad). They can be summarised as follows:

**Divine Unity (tawhid)**

The Sh:!a believe that Alla\>h (All"h) is the Lord and sustainer and
that he is the creator of this wide existence which contains millions of
galaxies in which are stars larger than our sun by sixty million times,
the sun being larger than the earth by thousands of times. This is
Alla\>h who has no partner or associate and He is just in his acts and
commands, everlasting and subsisting, eternally living, all knowing and
all powerful, giving of life and death. In His hands is all good and He
has power over all things.

**Prophethood (nubuwwah)**

The Sh:!a believe that Mu9ammad (N) is their Prophet and that he was
sent as a mercy to the worlds by Alla\>h, and that he is the last and
‘seal’ of the prophets. He came to the world with the religion of Islam
as Almighty Alla\>h’s chosen religion. The Prophet Mu9ammad (N) is the
one who teaches humanity what will benefit them in this world and the
next; beginning from the advent of his mission in the holy city of Mecca
until the end of time. His religion (Islam) abrogates all previous
religions.

**The Prophets**

The prophets according to Sh:!ite belief are the messengers of Almighty
Alla\>h to His creation. They were sent to the people with Alla\>h’s
laws, and Alla\>h authorised them to lead the people in their worldly
lives and direct them towards paradise in the next life. They are
124,000 in number; the first being Adam and the last and best of them
being Mu9ammad ibn !Abdull"h (N). May Alla\>h’s blessings be upon them
all.

There are five ‘Arch prophets’ meaning that their divine messages were
universal – Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Mu9ammad (Blessings and
peace be upon them all.). The prophets are all brothers in Alla\>h and
we venerate and are allied to them all and, as the Qur’"n says: eWe do
not distinguish between any of His messengersf123.

**Islam**

The Sh:!a believe that Islam is the religion of Alla\>h sent down from
the heavens to rescue mankind from all problems and to bring about the
people’s happiness in this world and the next. The Sh:!a believe that it
is obligatory to implement Islam in all areas of life – politics,
economics, education, society, war, peace, in the house, in the school,
in the workplace, in the barracks, and in all other stages of life.

Islam is a complete religion providing for all the needs of humanity in
every place and at every time. Almighty Alla\>h has said: eToday I have
perfected for ye your religion and completed my blessings upon ye and
have chosen for ye Islam as your religionf124. Therefore Islam lacks
nothing and it is the best of religions and principles. If humanity
implemented it eThey would eat from above them and beneath their
feetf125. Islam then is the true religion and none other will be
accepted by Alla\>h, and mankind will not find happiness in this world
and salvation in the next except by Islam. Almighty Alla\>h has said:
eAnd whoever desires a relgion other than Islam it will not be accepted
from him and in the next life he will be among the losersf126.

Implementing Islam in the world is the hope of the Sh:!a, for Islam
provides for every person: correct belief; freedom for individuals and
groups; happiness of life through being saved from poverty, illness,
ignorance and crime; complete peace between countries, individuals, and
nations. Every person has the right to free thought, free speech,
freedom to work, freedom to travel and settle, freedom to write, all of
this in a pure framework offered by tolerant Islamic law.

Islam consists of fundamentals (os}ool al-deen), ‘branches’ (foroo‘
al-deen), laws (ah}ka\>m al-deen), and morals (akhla\>q). Whoever denies
one of the fundamentals is considered to be an unbeliever. One is also
considered unbeliever if one denies – without being ignorant or subject
to ambiguity – any of the other three sections127. One who does not
follow the laws of Islam in his personal life without denying them is
considered to be a wrongdoer (f"siq) as Almighty Alla\>h has said:
eWhoever does not rule by what Alla\>h has revealed then they are the
wrongdoersf128. The Fundamentals of Islam are divine unity (tawh } id),
prophethood (nobuwwah) and resurrection (ma‘a\>d); and following on from
divine unity there is divine justice (‘adl) and from prophethood the
imamate (imamah).

The ‘Branches’ of Islam are prayer, fasting, tithe, alms, pilgrimage,
jihad, enjoining the good, forbidding the bad, allegiance to Allah and
His authorities (tawalli), and disassociation from the enemies of
Alla\>h and the enemies of His authorities (tabarri), as well as all
other types of acts of worship such as the ablutions (wudu’), ritual
bath (ghusl), purification with earth (tayammum), spiritual retreat to
the mosque (i‘tika), etc. The Laws of Islam are all of the systems and
laws which the Messenger of Alla\>h (N) brought from Almighty Alla\>h
such as the laws of buying and selling, mortgaging129, renting, divorce,
marriage, the judiciary, bearing witness, inheritance, retribution,
compensations and the like.

The Sh:!a believe that Islam has not neglected to make clear anything,
so politics, economics, education, society, peace, war, agriculture,
manufacturing, family life, government and all other affairs to do with
mankind from his birth to his death are all clarified in Islam and have
particular systems and just laws. If mankind implemented them they would
find happiness in this world and the next.

Also, ‘That which Mu9ammad has declared lawful will remain lawful until
the day of resurrection and that which he has declared unlawful will
remain unlawful until the day of resurrection.’130

**The Qur’an**

According to Sh:!ite belief, the Holy Qur’"n which is read by all
Muslims day and night is Islam’s holy book and it is the Messenger of
Alla\>h’s miracle. If the jinn and mankind gathered together to bring
the like of it they would not be able to do so even if they assisted one
another. The Qur’"n is that book which is existent today distributed all
over the world in many languages and is recited day and night in houses
and mosques and on the radio.

There has been no corruption of it and no substitution, no addition and
no subtraction and Alla\>h has protected it from those who seek to
corrupt it and no-one has been able to add even a single letter or
subtract a single letter. As Almighty Alla\>h has said: eVerily We sent
down the reminder (the Qur’"n) and We are its protectorsf131. The Sh:!a
believe that the Qur’"n was collated in the form we have it today –
beginning with the opening chapter (al-f"ti9ah) and ending with the
chapter entitled ‘mankind’ (al-n"s) – during the time of the Messenger
of Alla\>h (N) by order of Alla\>h and under the supervision of His
Messenger (N) without corruption or substitution, and without bringing
forward or putting back. What to it.

**Direction of Prayer**

The Sh:!a believe that the direction for prayer (qiblah) is the holy
house of the ka!bah in Mecca (may Alla\>h increase its holiness) and
that prayer is not correct unless directed towards it.


