The Building of Shrines
=======================

The Sh:!a believe that it is permissible to erect building around the
tombs and that it is recommended to build mosques and domes and shrines
around the graves of the Prophet (N), the Pure Imams (a.s.), the
faithful Companions of the Prophet (N), and the great Islamic
personalities. Indeed, this is considered to be one of the best ways of
drawing near to Almighty Alla\>h. This is part of what is meant by
Alla\>h’s words: eAnd whoever magnifies the symbols of Alla\>h it is
surely of the piety of the heartsf173, and also his words regarding the
youths of the cave: eAnd those who prevailed over their affair said: we
shall surely build over them a place of worshipf174 This is also
confirmed by traditions.

Building over tombs and graves was practiced by Muslims throughout the
generations from the beginning of Islam, and the grave of the Prophet
(N) in the holy city of Medina and the graves of the Imams (a.s.) and
those of the righteous scholars in various Islamic lands are the best
testimony to this.175

**The Visiting of Graves**

The Sh:!a believe that is permissible, rather, meritorious to visit
graves. This is because the practise of visiting graves provides a
lesson for those who wish to take heed or fear Alla\>h. There are many
traditions on this subject.176 Women and the Visiting of Graves The
Sh:!a also believe that it is religiously recommended for women to enter
the graveyard of Baq:! or other graves of Prophets, Imams, and righteous
persons since women are equal to men in divine law except where there is
a clear evidence to the contrary. In this case there is no evidence to
the contrary and in fact the evidence points to it being permissible.177
Prayer in the cemetery of Baqi!

The Sh:!a also believe that prayer in the cemetery of Baq:! or in the
resting places of the Prophets or Imams and righteous persons is
religiously recommended in Islam and that there is no evidence for the
prohibition of this.178 Almighty Alla\>h has said in the story of the
people of the cave: eWe shall surely make over them a prayer placef179

**Weeping and Mourning for Imam Husayn**

The Sh:!a believe in the permissibility, indeed, the merit of weeping
for the tribulations of the Prophet (N) and his pure family (a.s.) and
it is for this reason that they hold mourning ceremonies particularly
for the martyred Imam .usayn ibn !Ali ibn Ab: ھ"lib (a.s.). The Prophet
(N) ordered Muslims to weep for his uncle .amza the martyr of the battle
of U9ud180, and he also wept for Imam .usayn before his martyrdom.181
This has been a normal practice for Muslims since the advent of Islam.

No to Slandering and Excommunication

The Sh:!a, then, in all these aforementioned matters have religiously
legal and rational evidences which are mentioned in the detailed books
which have been printed and are distributed in all Islamic countries. So
we ask why is there, from some quarters, slandering of the Imami Sh:!a
and attributing impiety and unbelief to them? A Muslim should not call
another an unbeliever or impious or slander him or her simply because of
differences in legal opinion. Rather, one should try to understand the
evidences of the other party and its sources for religious rulings. In
our opinion, Muslims should use their energies to unite and combat the
enemies of Islam and rescue their lands from the pillagers, rather than
false accusations of impiety and infidelity.

**Mandatory Duties and Islamic Laws**

The Sh:!a believe that it is necessary to establish prayer (s}ala\>h),
and fasting (s}awm), and to pay the mandatory tithes (khums) and alms
(zaka\>h), and to make the .ajj pilgrimage, and to struggle in the way
of Alla\>h (jiha\>d), and to enjoin the good and forbid the evil, and to
be allied with the friends of Alla\>h (tawalli), and to be disassociated
with the enemies of Alla\>h (tabarri), and to fulfil all the mandatory
acts, and abstain from all prohibited acts, and to keep away from vices
and develop virtues. They believe that it is mandatory to implement all
laws of Islam in all areas: acts of worship, social contracts,
judiciary, testimonies, criminal punishments, reparations and all the
other laws which are recorded in the books of Islamic jurisprudence and
which come to almost one hundred thousand laws.

They also believe that all individual and social affairs should be
consistent with Islam, in politics and economics, state and nation,
morals and etiquettes, social interaction, marriage and divorce, crime
and punishment and so forth.

**Islamic Morals**

The Sh:!a believe that it is incumbent to adopt virtuous morals and
Islamic etiquettes and avoid ugly traits and religiously prohibited
things. This is their habit and practice. Islamic morals are all those
things which Islam promotes or makes mandatory such as truthfulness,
trustworthiness, modesty, chastity, bravery, generosity, activity,
action, good morals, spreading peace, solving disputes, amiability,
brotherhood, abstinence and the like. Ugly traits are those which Islam
warns against either by considering them to be undesirable or prohibited
such as lying, backbiting, betrayal, bad character, laziness,
drunkenness, eating prohibited things, usury, theft, adultery, sodomy,
hoarding, causing corruption, miserliness, cowardice, immodest dress,
improper singing, slander, inactivity and so forth. Morals are a way to
orient the behaviour of a person which have been set down by Alla\>h by
making virtuous qualities such as truthfulness, reliability, and
steadfastness recommended and keeping away from base qualities such as
lying, betrayal and deviation.

**The Single Nation**

The Sh:!a believe that the Muslims – despite differences in schools of
thought and their many different factions – are a single nation and that
they are brothers in faith. Almighty Alla\>h has said in the Qurv"n:
eYou are the best nation brought out for the peoplef182 He has also
said: eAnd you became, by the blessing of Alla\>h, brothersf183 And he
has said: eIndeed the believers are brothers, so make peace between your
two brothersf184 Any attempt to bring about disunity between them in the
name of minorities, nationalisms or sectarianism and the like is not
permissible either religiously or rationally. The Sh:!a believe that
differences in the ‘branches’ of religion between Islamic sects which
arise out of differences in legal opinion, providing that the
jurist-consult observes and adheres to the Qurv"n and the traditions,
are no cause for disunity amongst the Islamic nation.

They also believe that it is incumbent to exert all efforts to unite
Muslims under the banner of the Holy Qurv"n and the purified sunnah (or
traditions) and that any legal ruling which is not derived from these
two sources is false and should be rejected. It is also necessary to
consolidate all energies to propagate Islam in the east and the west,
and to raise it to the level of implementation. In this regard, as a
prelude to that, it is necessary to:

1. Educate Muslims comprehensively in matters of religion and worldly
affairs until they have a general awareness which leads in turn to a
general opinion.

2. Cultivate Islamic intellectuals which move towards ongoing
constructive action for the Islamic nation.

3. Co-ordinate efforts on various levels to move towards a common goal
in the light of a single system.

4. Found Islamic institutions on the widest possible scale whether
these be cultural, social, educational etc. These should be places for
spreading light and coming together.

5. Industrialisation of Islamic lands with light and heavy industry so
that they can be self-sufficient. Almighty Alla\>h has said: eAnd to
Allah belongs honour and to His Messenger and to the believersf185 The
Prophet (N) said: ‘Islam should be above all and nothing should be above
it.’186

**Cleaning up Society**

The Sh:!a believe that it is necessary to cleanse society from the evil
and harmful things which have been prohibited by Islam such as
intoxicants, singing, gambling, adultery, usury, hoarding, fraud, theft,
murder and other things which have been prohibited in the Qurv"n and the
traditions. They believe that rulers and people should combine their
efforts to do away with these things, as Allah has said: eYou are the
best nation brought out for the people, you enjoin the good and forbid
the evilf187

**Restoring the Glory of Islam**

The Sh:!a believe that it is necessary, and possible, to restore the
glory of Islam in society. Indeed Alla\>h has promised this: eAlla\>h
has promised those who have faith amongst ye and do good works that He
will surely make them successors in the land as he made those before
them successors and he will establish for them their religion which He
has chosen for them and He will replace their fear with security. They
will worship Me and not associate anything with Mef188 However, this is
conditional upon true faith and good works and among these good works is
amiability, and avoiding disunity, and struggling in the way of Alla\>h
with one’s wealth and by word and deed. Whenever these conditions are
fulfilled – faith and good deeds – the result promised by Alla\>h will
surely come about.

**Invitation to Islam**

The Sh:!ah believe that it is necessary to invite the people of the
east and the west to Islam as Almighty Alla\>h has said: eAnd let there
be amongst you a nation who invites to the good and enjoins what is
proper and forbids what is reprehensible. They are indeed the successful
onesf189 The guidance of a single person to Islam is better in the sight
of Allah than what is in the entire world as the Prophet of Islam has
said.190

It is necessary then to form institutions, collect donations, send out
missionaries, distribute books, and counter the attacks of the enemies
of Islam both within and outside Islamic lands.

**Awakening the Muslims**

The Sh:!a believe that it is the duty of every Muslim individual,
according to the words of the Prophet (N): ‘Each of you is a shepherd
and each of you is responsible for his flock’191, to work to awaken the
Muslims so that they become the leaders of the world as they were
previously. This is possible, indeed easy if the required effort is
spent. Muslims have a number of advantages including large fertile
populations, a strategic region, great wealth, healthy methodologies,
and a strong, progressive way of life. If they were to, as a whole, make
faith all encompassing, cleanse society of inappropriate things which
Islam has forbidden, ensure freedoms, open the door of deriving legal
opinions from the sources - the Qurv"n, the traditions, consensus and
reason and make these four the only source of legislation, make the
basis of government consultative with the just jurists who have
knowledge of worldly affairs and the exigencies of the time, and bring
back the idea of Islamic brotherhood as opposed to nationalism,
sectarianism, or parochialism etc.

then the Muslims would return to power in the twinkling of an eye by
the will of Allah. Almighty Alla\>h has said: eIf you assist Alla\>h He
will assist you and He will make your feet firm.


