Shia Culture
============

**General Statistics**

The latest statistics show that the Sh:!a number more than 500
millions.193 They are to be found in all countries of the world, in the
east and west, and are distributed throughout all Islamic lands and in
many non-Islamic countries. They have a civilisation which is derived
from the Holy Qurv"n, and the Prophetic traditions, and the conduct of
the household of the Prophet (N).

In Iraq, Iran, India, Pakistan, the Gulf, Lebanon, Syria, Afghanistan,
Turkey, Indonesia, Arabia, and the Yemen they have many scholars and
jurist-consults, religious schools, educational institutions, mosques
and Islamic centres, charitable bodies, libraries and centres with all
types of books, Qurv"n schools and many other Islamic projects. In one
Islamic land there are almost a quarter of a million scholars, speakers,
writers and students. Throughout Islamic history they have had
governments, scholars, writers, poets, philosophers, thinkers, schools,
writings, libraries, speakers and guiders.

Since the time of the Messenger of Alla\>h (N) they have taken noble
religious stances and that continues until today. Whoever seeks more
information about the precious knowledge of the Sh:!a, and their
dedication and struggle in the way of Alla\>h should refer to any
country where the Sh:!a are to be found.

**The Shia and the History of Islam**

The Sh:!a played a prominent role in the early Islamic conquests and
also in stemming the tide of attacks on Islam and the Muslims. They
helped to consolidate the pillars of Islam in the land and sent 47
missionaries and preachers to guide mankind and propagate the teachings
of the Qurv"n all throughout the history of Islam:'

1. The Buwayhids played a great part in propagating Islam in Iraq and
its environs.

2. The .amd"nids played their role in Syria and the surrounding area.

3. The Safavids did a great service to Islam in Iran and Afghanistan.

4. In India the kings of QuUb Sh"h: played their role.

5. The great statesman NaN:r al-D:n al-ھYs: had a great role in
stemming the attacks of the Mongols.

6. !All"ma .ill: did a great service in protecting the land from
deviation in the affair of ‘Khuda Bandeh’.

7. Sayyid Mu9ammad ibn !Al: al-ھab"tab"v: al-."vir:’s struggle against
the Tsarist Crusaders.

8. The struggle of M:rza Mu9ammad .asan al-Shirazi against the western
colonialists.

9. The struggles of Sharaf al-D:n al-MYs"w: to free Syria and Lebanon
from French colonialism.

10. M:rza Taq: Sh:r"z:’s fomenting of the 1920 revolt in Iraq to expel
the colonisers.

All of this and more is the best evidence to prove the continuing
struggle of the Sh:!a and their protection of the land, their concern
with propagating and protecting Islam, their sacrifices for it, and
their defending it against attack.

As for their efforts at the current time, it is sufficient to know that
a number of prominent Sh:!a scholars have spent their lives in exile or
in prison and under arrest in defence of Islam and protecting the
Muslims. Similarly they have played a well acknowledged part in
defending Palestine and Jerusalem and other occupied territories.

In addition, the services the Sh:!a have provided to Islamic culture
and economics, peace and politics, developing the land and industry, are
great in number and would require large volumes to enumerate.

**The Shia and Islamic Sciences**

The Sh:!a laid the foundation of Islamic sciences.194 For example, AbY
Aswad al-Duval: (605-688 C.E.) was the first to write about grammar
under the tutelage of Imam !Al: ibn Ab: ھ"lib (a.s.). Al- Khal:l ibn
A9mad195 was the person to lay down the science of prosody. J"bir ibn
.ayy"n the student of Imam Ja!far al-£"diq (a.s.) was the pioneer of
modern chemistry. In over 700 books he dealt with subjects such as:
metals and their oxides and salts; nitric, sulphuric, and chloric acids;
he also dealt with the preparation of alkalis and their purification
through crystallisation, distillation, filtration, and sublimation. He
added to Chemistry the fields of experiment and method and hence the
world considers him to be the father of Chemistry.

According to Abdul-Ra9m"n al-MiNr:, J"bir alluded to the radioactivity
present in bodies. He also discovered new chemical elements unknown to
the ancients. He would say: ‘I know from my experiments that there are
other elements present in earth. However, I do not have the means at
present to extract them.’ Historians say that J"bir pioneered the
telephone and telegraph. He had a kind of small box connected to another
box with wires with which he communicated with other people at long
distances. He also invented a small aeroplane in which Kh"lid al-Barmak:
used to sit and fly in the air. This aircraft could remain in flight for
extended periods of time and was perhaps was of the helicopter type.

He also invented a robotic doorkeeper made of iron for the abode of a
certain minister. This doorkeeper would move and walk and deal with
gatecrashers who did not obey the protocols for visiting a minister. In
sum, J"bir ibn .ayy"n had a far-reaching influence on many modern
inventions, and this age is indebted to him for his laying the
foundations of Chemistry. NaN:r al-D:n al-ھYs: was the founder of the
famous astronomical observatory at Mar"gheh. He produced some original
ideas about astronomical bodies and critiqued the Ptolemaic system in a
scientific manner. He was the first to lay down the science of triangles
and because of this he is considered by the west to be the founder of
the science of missiles. He had many new and useful ideas in all other
fields of mathematics. He also invented the new equipment which was used
in the observatory to great effect. Shaykh Bah"v al-D:n al-!wmil: (d.
1622 C.E.) discovered laws relating to sound waves which he put into use
in some mosques in Isfahan, Iran. He also made use of the laws of water
pressure and surface tension in the Fayn gardens in Kashan, Iran. He
laid down new principles in Arithmetic.

There are many other Sh:!a scholars and thinkers whose lifestories may
be found in the relevant literature.

**Successors of the Prophet**

As was mentioned previously, the Sh:!a believe that the Prophet
Mu9ammad (N) appointed twelve successors to come after him and made it
mandatory for the Islamic nation to follow them and learn from them and
refer to them. He said in a well known tradition: ‘My successors will be
twelve in number.’196 He also said: ‘I am leaving with ye the two
weighty things (thaqalayn); the book of Alla\>h, and my family; the
people of my house(Ahl al-Bayt). As long as you adhere to these two you
will never go astray after me ever’.197

These successors as appointed by the Prophet (N) in the tradition of
J"bir ibn !Abdull"h al-AnN"r: and others are in the following order as
in the table below, together with the dates of their births and deaths
and the location of their graves. The names of the other two of the
fourteen inerrant ones – the Prophet Mu9ammad (N) and his daughter
F"Uima (a.s.) are included.

The twelve Imams and F"Uima al-Zahr"v (a.s.) the foremost of the women
of the worlds (Sayyidato-Nis"’ al-!wlamin) the daughter of the Prophet
are all like the great Prophet Mu9ammad (N) as regards knowledge and
wisdom, virtue and morals, purity and inerrancy, and all other spiritual
virtues and perfections; all except the station of prophethood which is
particular to the Prophet Mu9ammad (N). They are all one light and
whoever adheres to them will be saved and whoever lags behind them will
drown and perish.198 F"Uima al-Zahr"v is the wife of the Imam, mother of
the purified imams, but she is not an imam.

**A Brief History of the Imams**

The Prophet Mu9ammad (N), his daughter F"Uima (a.s.) and the twelve
Imams, his successors who he ordered the Islamic nation to obey and
follow, laid down a complete plan for a good life. They provide a
complete constitution for a virtuous life and are role models for
mankind for all times and in all their affairs:

governmental, economic, political, commercial, moral, military,
agricultural, industrial, cultural, judicial, individual, familial and
so on. This is because they undertook different roles in life such as
ruler, minister, leader, soldier, revolutionary, teacher, educator,
reclusive, trader, farmer, defender, prisoner, exiled, warrior,
peacemaker etc. If the world were to follow the way of these leaders it
would become an earthly paradise. Such a day is in store at the coming
of Imam Mahd: (a.s.).

What follows is a brief history of each one of these twelve infallible
Imams and their mother F"Uima (a.s.), the wife of the first successor of
the prophet, with a selection of hadith from each one of them, together
with what notable people, including their enemies, have said about
them:

**Fatima al-Zahra’ daughter of the Prophet**

F"Uima al-Zahr"v (a.s.) is the daughter of the Prophet Mu9ammad ibn
!Abdull"h (N) and her mother was the great lady Khad:ja, Mother of the
Believers (a.s.). F"Uima al-Zahr"v was married to Amir al-Mo’mineen !Al:
ibn Ab: ھ"lib the master of the successors of the Prophet. Her sons and
grandsons are the pure Imams (a.s.). She was born on the 20th day of
Jam"d" I in the 45th year of the Prophet’s life. She died unjustly at
the age of 18 on Tuesday the 3rd of Jam"d" II in the 11th year of the
migration or 9ijra. She was prepared for burial by her husband who
buried her in a secret location in Medina according to her will. She was
like her father in her worship of Allah and in her asceticism and
virtue. Allah revealed a number of verses about her in the Holy
Qurv"n199. The Messenger of Allah (N) named her the ‘foremost of the
women of the worlds (Sayyidato-Nis"’ al-!wlamin)’200, and the ‘foremost
of the women of paradise.’201 The Messenger of Allah (N) used to love
her a great deal and whenever she came to visit him he would welcome her
and stand up for her and sit her in his place and would often kiss her
hands. He used to say that ‘Allah is pleased when F"Uima is pleased and
angry when she is angry.’202 He would also say: ‘Fatima is a part of
me.’203 She had a number of children to her husband !Al: (a.s.) who were
Imam .asan (a.s.), Imam .usayn (a.s.), Mu9assin (a.s.) who was
miscarried due to an injury she sustained [when she was brutally
assaulted], Lady Zaynab (a.s.), and Lady Umm KulthYm (a.s.).

**Hadith from Fatimah al-Zahra’(AS)**

‘He (Allah) invented all things not from a thing which existed before,
and designed them not by emulating other samples. He created them by His
might, and gave them life by His will; not because of a need He had for
their creation, or a benefit He had for their design, except for the
establishment of His wisdom, awareness (of His creation) about His
obedience, appearance of His might, (to invite) His creation to
servitude and worship, and to glorify His invitation.

‘ . . . So my father (Muhammad (S)) rose amongst the people to guide
them. He saved them from perversion and aberration, and turned their
blindness into enlightenment, and guided them towards the right
religion, and invited them to the straight path.’

‘The holy Qur’an . . . following it leads to the pleasure of Allah,
listening to it (implementing its teachings) results in salvation.
Through it can be achieved the clear and enlightening proofs and
evidences of Allah, His forewarned prohibitions, His conspicuous
arguments, His comprehensive reasoning, His desired virtues, His
bestowed permissions, and His written divine laws.’

‘Therefore Allah set faith as the purifier, for you, from polytheism,
And (He set) the daily prayers to distance you from arrogance and
egoism, And the (giving of) Zakah as the purity of your soul and the
growth of your sustenance, And rendered fasting for the firm
establishment of sincerity, And the Hajj pilgrimage for the
consolidation of the religion, And rendered justice for the
harmonisation of the hearts, And (He set) the obedience of us (the
Ahl-ul-Bayt) as the order (organising factor) for the religion, and our
leadership (the Ima\>mah) as the guarantor against disunity and
division, And Jiha\>d as the honour for Islam, and humiliating for the
infidels and hypocrites, And perseverance as an aid for obtaining
reward, And the ‘Enjoining good and forbidding evil’ for the interest
and correction of the society and the public, And He rendered kindness
to the parents as a shield from displeasure, And (He set) keeping bond
with the kinship the cause for lengthening of life span, ‘O Allah!
Belittle myself in my eyes, and glorify and magnify Your Station to me.
Inspire me Your obedience, and the practice which brings about Your
pleasure, and (inspire me) the avoidance of anything which may bring
about Your wrath, O most merciful of all.’


