Part 1: Physiognomy of the West
===============================

Genesis of Human Life and Civilization
--------------------------------------

The very advance in scientific research into the origins of life on this
planet pushes the date of its first appearance further back into remoter
ages while increasing the riddles to unravel and the puzzles to solve.

Despite the comparatively recent appearance of human life proper—an
infinitesimal fraction of the period for which the planet has nourished
living matter —much uncertainty obscures the etiology of its production.

Nonetheless, scientists and paleontologists have, by excavations and the
discovery of artifacts, corn and other relics of human handicraft, been
able to trace the course of man's upward progress through a series of
stages in history thus:

**1. Paleolithic**: marked by the use of simple weapons to kill animals
in self-defense or for food: stones, sticks and similar hunting tools:
savagery and brutishness in constant fear of the beasts: use of caves
and holes in the earth as shelter from voracious carnivores and from the
dark. Primacy went to the most capable hunter: all human effort was bent
to the conquest of foes— whether hostile nature or animals or humans.

**2. The Later Paleolithic**: man's first step up from the use of
existing objects as tools was to fabricate for himself, e.g. by binding
a stick to a stone to make a hammer, or manufacturing a sharp edge by
percussion of flints; from which he was led on to the discovery of the
art of kindling a fire; and so to the cooking of food; and the
overcoming of night and dark. Long centuries were spent on this series
of developments until the Paleolithic stage was finally surmounted, and:

**3. The Neolithic Age**: saw manifold and varied changes in human
living. Artifacts were still made of stone and wood, but the crude
clumsy devices of the Paleolithic were replaced by beautifully regular,
exact and polished tools. Huts were made to live in, woven wood
plastered with mud. Mud was molded into crocks and pots, dried first in
the sun and later on the fire.

Crops were grown and the soil cultivated in primitive fashion; certain
animals were domesticated. Man learnt which grains to sow for food,
which trees to protect for fruit and timber. He invented the bow and
arrow and so rid himself of some types of dangerous beast; and spears to
catch fish. Arrowheads, spears and axes were still of sharpened stone.
But skill increased over the centuries (which have left their relics for
us to find and so reconstruct their life) and finally led them out of
the stone Ages into:

**4. The Bronze Age**: with the use of metals, came the birth of
civilization justly so-called. For Civilization is from the same root as
"City" and connotes "social living". So does also "Tamaddun" the Arabic,
from the root M-D-N — city or community life: so do also "policy" and
"police" from the Greek "polis" : "urbane" from "urbs" and so on. For
with it human life assumed a novel aspect and entered a new phase.

Man was no longer a mere hungry animal always busied with the quest for
food. From concentration on his belly and its needs he emerged to dreams
and visions and an objective consciousness of the world around him. The
more victories he gained in his struggle with nature, the more his
desires and needs increased. Emerging from barbarism he found the final
road toward civilization: freed from the trammels of ignorance and
dullness imposed by his conditions, he set out on the pursuit of
learning and science.

The human animal's progress was distinguished from other species'
stagnation by a spiritual factor. An internal quality we call intellect
or reason, the most amazing of all phenomena, gave man hindsight and
foresight, to assess the past and improve on it, to be alert to fresh
methods and to innovations. Every forward step he took imprinted itself
on the memory banks of the race.

A sense of dissatisfaction over imperfections spurred him on to correct
them. Thus unfolded the effects of this invisible, indescribable,
marvelous phenomenon called "mind". Its light causes him to observe
objects and events, reflect on them, learn from experience and store the
information for future use in that astounding computer called "the
brain" as "memory", where it is available for the construction of new
hypotheses, visions, experiments and advances.

Two other revolutionary products of human ingenuity arose in the mists
of prehistoric antiquity:

**1.** The invention of the **Wheel** for transport — at first mere
rolling of heavy objects on logs— to the axle-tree between two
roundels—to the developed cart, set between true wheels with axle, hub,
spokes, felloes and tire: and

**2.** **Language**: noises accepted as means of conveying the impulses
arising in one human mind to another—mutual agreement to interpret
certain sounds each time uttered as of the same significance the grunt
of fear or warning—the roar of rage—the coo of love—and so to the names
of objects—to phrases— to orders like "come", "go", "fetch", "run" and
finally to abstractions, concepts, ideas, projects, worship of the
forces controlling capricious nature.

With language, social living and so true civilization came to birth.
When signs were accepted as representing the arbitrary sounds that
represented ideas, prehistory emerged into written history.

Prehistory is traced from vestiges and evidences dug up and
inter­preted. History starts when there are written records to consult.
This invention of writing was the most revolutionary stroke of genius.
It started with inventories of property, bills of exchange, composed by
drawing pictures of the objects (sheep, cattle, vessels, grain-measures)
then with a series of dashes to indicate number; then with symbols to
indicate the nature of the transaction—the names and addresses of
parties to it— and so gradually to symbols for every observed
phenomenon, for relationships between them, and, finally, for
abstractions like color, shape and concept.

Some races like the Chinese stayed in the pictographic stage, like the
ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic. Other races moved on to analyses the
sounds which composed words and to adopt signs to represent always the
same sound regardless of its meaning. It is these which carry all we
know of the past 6 millennia of humanity's history.

Meantime masonry also made great advances. Exact measurement became
possible. Men learnt to extract ores from rocks by smelting, and then to
mound and temper them — at first the softer metals like tin and copper
and their alloy bronze. When the same arts were applied to the harder
iron, the Bronze gave way to the "Iron Age" — the true start of modern
times.

Four thousand years ago true religion dawned through the obedience of
the Patriarch Abraham to the call of Almighty God in Babylonian
territory. The world's Creator charged Abraham with the task of leading
Babylon's society out of darkness. His was the first apostolate as God's
spokesman to rally mankind out of superstition and wrongdoing.

Naturally he met with opposition and resistance from those with vested
interests in falsehood and evil. But Abraham's prophetic proclamation of
Monotheism and ethical worship raised a force of followers far superior
to the united front of his adversaries, the advocates of Ahriman and the
would-be despotic tyrants on the spirit of man. Abraham obeyed the call
to leave his ancestral home, and finally after many thousand miles of
nomad travel found haven in the Hejaz where with his son Isma'il he set
up Monotheism's central shrine.

Seven and a quarter centuries before Christ, Rome was founded; and in
the succeeding centuries extended her rule far and wide. Not long after
Rome's foundation, Zoroaster (Zardusht) arose in Iran and substituted
for the magic of Magianism a rational and moral relationship between man
and the God of Good in the eternal battle against Evil.

In almost the same century Confucius and Lao-Tze in China and Gautama
the Buddha in Hind laid the basis of the philosophy which was developed
by Socrates, Plato and Aristotle in Greece during the succeeding
century. All this found consummation in the Birth and Life of Jesus
Christ, who proclaimed the call to reform human society, to rescue
mankind from the pollutions of Judaistic materialism, to extirpate
corruption and internecine combat, and raise humanity towards ethical
and spiritual purification. This age was marked by the growth of
intercommunication, of industries, and of building and medical skills.

AD 476 launched the Mediaeval period in Europe. The Church added
temporal power to its spiritual leadership and became ruler of the
thinking and living of society, while Europe fell into the dark ages of
barbarian invasion, ignorance, bloodshed, nationalistic and tribal
rivalries.

Meantime in the East, Islamic civilization established its sway (see
Part 2). In AD 1453 Sultan Muhammad Fateh captured Istanbul and a new
age began. In Europe the new independent nations— England, France,
Germany, Austria—vied with each other for expansion. The magnetic
compass enabled ships to cross the Atlantic Ocean and find America.

A Renaissance of thought and science swept over Europe and established
more orderly international relations, until the French Revolution of AD
1789 ended the Age; and the Industrial Age took over the 19th century
and changed the face of Europe. Invention followed invention. Discovery
pressed on the heels of discovery. European history entered its newest
and modern phase.

Evaluation of Modern Occidental Civilization
--------------------------------------------

The world we live in has been making giant strides, entailing a
revolution in thought because of science's daily advance in the study
and the satisfying of man's needs. Science and industry have unloaded
the work that yesterday imprisoned man in hard labor onto machine-tools.
These set man free to enjoy life's luxuries in ease and leisure. They
liberated his mind and spirit from the bonds of business to expand into
limitless research into Creation's mysteries.

So swift has been this progress that developments which took centuries
of the olden "time" measured in "nights and days" take only minutes or
even seconds of modern "time". Ships which took months and years to
cross oceans by the force of winds on sails, now by steam or electrical
power take days for the distance.

Land transport, once dependent on beasts of burden, now moves on trucks,
trains and planes with jinn-like speed. Man's gaze, no longer
earth-bound, explores our galaxy and outer space, plumbs sea-deeps and
penetrates to the earth's core. Old ignorance of this marvelous planet
yields to fascinating new knowledge of the facts of nature, from
infinite space to the atom's infinitesimal components, magnified a
million times and made visible by electronic microscope.

Modern Western civilization’s productivity, affluence, comfort and
leisure cannot be denied or decried. Advances in health and welfare,
childcare and maternity have cut infant-mortality, increased longevity,
produced cures for diseases deemed incurable, swept the plagues and
pestilences of the past into oblivion.

Nonetheless, although science and technology have moved mankind farther
and faster in the last century than in 10 previous millennia rolled into
one, we of the Jet, Atom and Space Age know we have only started to
learn the ABC of the writings in nature's mighty Book of Truth which
await perusal.

It must be regrettably acknowledged that Western civilization’s short
comings and weaknesses are no fewer than its advantages. Despite the
leisure and ease which knowledge and culture provide for society,
despite the new pages of history turned, human happiness has not
increased nor have social ills diminished.

Technology and industrialization have reached a zenith while moral and
spiritual life has sunk to their nadir. While science climbs, thought
declines, divisions proliferate, and the West, rejecting spiritual and
moral values, has bowed its neck under the yoke of worship of the
machine. Machine-worshippers will never lay hands on joy or peace or
happiness.

Science imposes an order on life which provides affluence but not
happiness, since happiness is outside its competence. Science does not
distinguish benefit from harm, or ugly from lovely, but only true from
false. The order imposed on human living by science alone will set Hell
on fire and must be resisted at all costs.

For civilization draws in the train of its priceless gifts a pernicious
and deadly insecurity, breeding-ground of crimes and corruptions. It
kindles a fire of lusts and longings that burns warp and woof of soul
and spirit. It bans calm of mind, spirit, faith. Far from lighting a
lamp to illumine human conduct, science has lunged it into deeper dark
and murk.

Science's conquests and victories, like those of war, leave an aftermath
of ruin and waste, sadness and suffering beyond the reach of remedy.
Beside every flower blooming in civilization’s garden grows a thorn that
wounds the soul.

Balance the boons of cars, planes, factories, surgery, wonder-drugs and
affluence against the banes of bombs, gas, jets and rockets, death-rays,
crime and violence. Within its own limits intellect is a good servant.
But it cannot grasp the non-material. Hence with the decline of virtue
many axioms of ethics have been consigned to oblivion beyond recovery.

The Islamic world, though not in midfield of the disturbances and
activities of science, does not escape their manifestations in personal,
social, educational or cultural life, and the flood of "civilization"
rushes upon us. For ideas and ethics know no national frontiers; they
infiltrate from land to land—good as well as bad. Man's inclinations
being what they are, the evil and corrupt go quicker and deeper. Hence,
though our society cannot compare in scientific or technological
advances, it manifests the complete pattern of Western decadence.

A society can suffer no worse disaster than the loss of the power to
distinguish good from bad; no society that has suffered this loss can
attain welfare or wellbeing.

Too many see only the fascinating externals of "civilization", but are
blind to the painful tragedies and the moral crisis of the modern age.
The "civilized" world displays its superficial charms, so that persons
who briefly sojourn there willingly abandon their discernment and
judgment and shut their eyes to unpleasant facts and wrongdoings,
feeling that the slightest difference in their own manners of habits or
talk from those that obtain in the West is shameful; and instead of
seeking the causes of Western progress and the means of reaching such
ends, bring home as gifts a load of moral degeneracy and spiritual
degradation. Such self-deception is the worst of defects, causing the
loss of personality, of independence of thought, and of appreciation of
the treasures of national culture, religion and nationhood.

This misleads thought away from religious conviction. It robs people of
the power to assess and analyses events by a deep and universal doctrine
that distinguishes good from bad. By this means many a truth is
obscured.

East-West Interaction
---------------------

The nations of Europe have been able to arrive at their modern welfare
states without rejecting their religion and manners.

Japan, too, has made notable progress while preserving her creeds,
customs and characteristics: and has with lightning speed soared up
towards a high level of civilization. From being, through centuries, one
of the world's backward lands, Japan has, in a mere 60 years, entered
the ranks of progressive nations.

Japan never leant towards the West, nor fixed eyes and ears on Europe as
a model to copy. She has clung fanatically to her heritage and
nationhood. Cherishing the traditions of the great men of her history,
she has continued to act as for centuries past, still preserving her
ancient "Shinto" and "Buddhism" and pursuing vehemently her own forms of
worship — however light-minded a sensible person might consider that
worship.

But revolutionary freethinking gives no basis for diagnostics. It cannot
analyses or unravel even the most obvious of social problems. Yet it
welcomes every form of protest against, or criticism of, religion, with
respect and joy, as being tokens of "enlightenment". Such negligence
will never be able to face life's realities with a free mind.

The vast extension of scientific exploration into all aspects of
material life has enabled human living to make an astounding leap
forward. But while scientists busy themselves laying bare nature's
powers and channeling their discoveries into technological industries,
they fail to notice that they are only occupying one corner of a vast
laboratory and neglecting all but the physical side of human nature.
Could this be the deep cause of the mounting tide of licence and excess?

The perfecting of material science has not been accompanied by
increasingly profound ethical insights. In fact the two disciplines
proceed on different courses — so different that progress along one
course may even precipitate retrogression on the other, from sheer
satiety.

Recently a European professor said to a science conference held in
Tehran: "In the field of morals the West envies the East. For the East's
moral achievements are richer and finer than the West's. While the East
profits from Western science and industry, the West needs to profit from
Eastern ethical achievements."

To keep alive, human society needs other principles alongside industrial
and technical culture. When the political and social set-up cuts the
human community off from its basic philosophy of living so that life is
bereft of altruistic ideas of mutual help and turns into a monotonous
unremitting pursuit of enough to eat, the masses fall prey to the type
of violence which the poet called "man's inhumanity to man."

Unfortunately mankind today is still in the kindergarten stage. We still
have to attain an adult intellectual level if we are to make full use of
the priceless reserves hidden in the heart of nature and at the same
time to invest our spiritual capital in ways that yield dividends of
happiness of heart and enhancement of spirit.

Infant mankind is childishly at the mercy of passing moods and passions
instead of obeying the dictates of mature common sense. The bulk of
humankind fails to recognize its prejudices and superstitions as idols,
but worships them as much as "progressive" people worship "science".

Millennia of unpalatable experiences, and constant fresh miss
adventures, must finally drive man to realize that the only alternative
to inevitable annihilation is self-committal to the Road of Right and of
Divine Guidance.

The sociologist Stanwood Cobb writes: , in his "Lord of 2 Ka'abas"
(p.1):

"Each vital facet of Western society's life, organization and culture is
marred by some extraordinary crisis. Its whole body politic and soul are
sick. Its nerves are on edge because the world is teetering on the brink
of the divide which separates the moribund age of materialist scientific
glory from the dawning age of tomorrow's moral culture.

We are experiencing the thoughts and deeds of the last minutes of a
6-centuries­ old materialist civilization; and glimpsing the first faint
rays of the new. They are still too weak to sustain a sure hope. The
long dark shadows cast by the old as it sinks below the horizon dim
nascent brightness, making the road towards the new even more difficult
to descry.

Human culture is experiencing that longest night of the winter-solstice
as it broods over our past culture, and torments our spirits with
nightmares and bogies and phantoms, ghosts and ghoulies and gooseflesh
and horrors. Yet beyond that night lies the morning of the new culture,
truly universal and moral, awaiting its chance to bless mankind." [^1]

We boast our "realism". But it is highly unrealistic blindly to accept,
to follow and copy, the manners and customs, the institutions and
formulae, of others. Such imitativeness merely binds a yoke of obedience
on its own neck. Initiative is the fount of independence. Imitation is
the parasite that devours independence.

The confusion in our ideas and ethics is due to the torpor caused by
imitation. Nor does our turning our back on our own historical and
spiritual traditions in favor of Western habits help us towards clarity.

In his book, "Islam and Others" (p.42) a great Islamic thinker wrote:
"We do not ask for intellectual or social seclusion. We do not draw
aside from the course which history compels civilization to follow, for
we are fellow-travellers and partners in mankind's caravan. But we have
been Muslims and, as such, have given great treasures to human culture.

The positive achievements of our great past laid the foundations of the
modern world edifice. Yet we fail, alas! to give this pioneering due
credit, and to preserve its esteem and dignity. When we learn to value
our past successes properly, we shall free our hearts of the inferiority
complex which bows the neck to tyranny, and take up the pure reasoning
of free men.

Instead, like beggars cap-in-hand on the rich man's threshold, we accept
gifts when we should throw them back in his face—or act so nobly that we
win him to imitate us. In fact, for us civilization has a two-fold
significance.

It comprises, first, our own far from undistinguished share in founding
civilization, which we must not consign to oblivion but preserve in the
stable practices and personality, the bright and shining extension of
human experience provided by our people's way of life : and, in the
second place, those fascinating manifestations of others' culture,
prepared and matured by them for themselves, from which we must choose
such a selection as will suit our needs without damage to our heritage.

"Civilization" derives from the same root as "city", and belongs to the
sublime side of human thought. To debase its creativeness for mere
imitation is to reduce whole communities to mere monkey-life."

Materialist Europe's Religious Practice
---------------------------------------

So far has the materialist spirit infiltrated civilized peoples that
today you will find hardly one European with any aim in life loftier
than scratching up a livelihood. Nonetheless many hold religious
beliefs, and cling to their inherited Christianity, however adulterated
it with heresies, and incapable of meeting anyone's spiritual or moral
needs.

It may seem odd that such a religion can still exercise any authority in
this "progressive" world: yet it has shaped and still shapes the
spiritual and ethical mound of Western civilization. On Sundays shops
and secular institutions are closed. Church bells ring out on all sides
with their distinctive clanging. Congregations of all social classes
gather and attentively listen to sermons. The TV gives special religious
broadcasts supervised by the churches.

The religious take their babies to church to be christened at the
priest's hands, and affirm their faith before him. Religious leaders are
respected and called "Father" i.e. spiritual father of the community.
During the long centuries of the Church's ascendancy, while all Europe's
economy was based on land-ownership, a tithe of all agricultural produce
was exacted to support the heavy expenses of religious institutions.

During the last 200 years or so, with the increasing secularization of
society and the shift of the economic base to industry and commerce, one
land after another has abolished the system of "tithing" and of the
parson's "Glebe Land". But huge endowments have remained, while the
faithful make regular voluntary contributions, often under a system of
"stewardship". This is how Christianity's spiritual leaders come to
command an adequate budget for their vast undertakings.

A committee on printed matters controls publications, and in this the
Church plays the leading role. The Church supervises educational
planning for nursery and primary schools. For all nine years of their
schooling, pupils are obliged to attend church on Sundays for services
specially prepared with religious instruction suited to their age-group.
Strangest of all, innocent babes have to go into the confessional and
admit their sins to a priest.

Films may not be shown without the permission of a board consisting of
church leaders, doctors, sociologists, economists and psychologists; and
the angles of religion, psychology, sociology and economics are all
taken into account.

An Iranian in Europe
--------------------

The writer had the misfortune to require medical aid in Europe. I was
taken into a Catholic hospital in Germany. I was welcomed and accorded
the attention they give to religious who come as patients; in my room,
as in all rooms, was a statue of Jesus and a painting of the Virgin and
Child. Regular prayers were offered in the chapel for the cure of the
sick!

One day I saw them lighting candles before the statue of Jesus in one of
the large halls of the place. Fancy that! Lighting a candle in broad
daylight beside a man-made statue — and that in the hub of science and
learning! What an outcry there would be if a simple peasant in Iran were
to light a candle on a dark night at the shrine of a saint! How our
"lessoned" youth would mock him and his "old-fashioned" ways!

I shall never forget one occasion when blood was needed for a
transfusion. The head of the hospital asked me: "What sort of blood does
Islam allow for transfusions? May Muslims accept non-Muslim blood? We
will prepare blood for you according to Islamic principles!"

Developed countries set voluntary limits in the true interests of
freedom. For the limits are intended to prevent misuse of the products
of civilization. Thus the TV shows sports matches, holds teaching
sessions, pictures the life of distant lands, and, in brief devotes the
major part of its screenings to educational programs.

In the name of freedom it is prohibited for anyone to turn up his radio
so loud that it bothers neighbors or passers-by. No-one may give parties
that last on into the small hours if they disturb his neighbors. In
fact, when you are in the streets you never hear a radio.

Though it is true that I did once hear a radio noise that made the
welkin ring. I was just leaving my hotel and was astounded; for this was
the first time I had ever heard anything like that in Europe. And what
type of sound fell on my ears?.

Iranian music! I decided to investigate. Next day I chanced to meet an
Iranian who had taken up residence near the hotel. In the course of
conversation I casually mentioned the event. Putting his finger to his
lips, he confessed with a smile that it was he who had perpetrated the
noise on the day before just to see what would happen!

It is truly sad that in Iran we have not mastered the right use of
modern amenities. This is because we have deviated from the track traced
for us by our ancestral principles, and plunged into disgrace. Everyone
knows the undesirable effects of TV's presentation of life. Much of the
blame for the decline of the morals of society lies at its door. All
that viewers gain from such films and programs is an increased urge
towards moral corruption and mayhem.

Everywhere in Iran radio noises reverberate from every side in
nerve-racking volume.

Industrial discoverers and inventors never meant to guarantee the sort
of profits now obtainable from the exploitation of their brain-children­
nor could they have offered any such guarantee, for nothing was further
from their thoughts than the idea their products, conceived for a
rightful use, might one day fall into the hands of people who would turn
them to purposes which are positively harmful and, for the population of
a country like ours, threaten mortal peril.

Without exception, all the phenomena of industry, its tools and its
products alike, are capable of falling victim to the process by which
mercenary profiteers squeeze personal advantage out of public demand.
The natural unreason of man, the tendency to mistaken attitudes, rapidly
makes selfishness epidemic, so that people compete in technological
profiteering to the tragic loss of others.

The root of this tragedy must be sought in the fields of learning and
wisdom rather of ignorance and folly! For a Muslim to desert the
humaneness and courtesy which his religion enjoins is surely a moral
blemish of shocking proportions! God forbid that in our country such
unbridled self-seeking and wrongdoing should be allowed in the name of
"Freedom" to spread its evil disease unchecked.

Reasons for Christianity's Advance
----------------------------------

Two sorts of religion exist — "Revealed" and "Natural". Today both
suffer from such deformities that nearly all their manifestations not
only have ceased to grow but in fact daily dwindle towards extinction.
Apart from Islam, Christianity is the only exception, since it makes
such enormous efforts on a world-scale that it is expanding all the
time, and therefore is coming to confront the almost equally widespread
Islam all over the place.

A conjunction of factors favors Christianity's spread. The world-climate
is propitious. Popular thinking is easily influenced by skillful
propaganda to move in any desired direction. This is due both to
mankind's innate suggestibility and also to the subliminal effects of
modern advertising techniques. The social renascence of recent centuries
has made these techniques a life-and-death matter. In this crisis
Christian leaders have launched a global campaign, with the full weight
of the various Christian bodies behind it, to put Christianity within
reach of everyone everywhere.

While waves of religious propaganda thus flood over these civilized
peoples, lust for the brilliance of materialism sets limits to men's
thinking and robs them of the ability to go deep into moral and
spiritual questions. Men are so fascinated by the manifestations of
material prosperity that they are turned aside from the pursuit of truth
and from the quest for the treasures of the spirit.

All the factors enumerated above have combined to help Christianity
flood the world with the irrational tenets that are so ineradicably
rooted in Western minds and spirits.

It cannot be said that our own Islamic efforts at propaganda have been
either energetic or effective. We have been so unschooled in the
elementary essentials of successful publicity that we have nothing to
declare. Yet the shining force of Islam's holy doctrines could be made
to meet the crying needs of man, if we changed.

For centuries, Islam has made no noteworthy effort at propaganda. After
the first outburst of its revolutionary up rush from the Arab homeland,
Islamic landowners and viziers have preferred to maintain the status quo
for their own comfort. Meantime schism split Muslim unity. As a
consequence Islam lost political supremacy in world affairs, and its
various portions fell victims to Western imperialism piecemeal.

Church Resources and Organization
---------------------------------

Christianity was launched without any definitive social principles, laws
or system for running affairs. This deficiency long prevented Christian
spiritual leadership from interfering in social, political or
governmental matters. So it continued until the sixth century of the
Christian era.

On Christmas Day AD 800 the king of the Franks was crowned "Caesar" and
transferred some of his territory to the over lordship of the Pope. With
this began the epoch of Christian leadership's supremacy and glory. The
Church grew in power and wealth. Conflicts over the control of power
arose between political and religious leaders. Europe fell prey to the
oppressive wars of Popes and Emperors.

People who regarded the Church as the manifestation of the spirituality
of Christ were stubborn partisans of the clergy: and by their help the
Church's temporal power and influence increased daily until its
unrivalled hegemony was fastened upon the nations of Europe.

In early days, before deep rifts split Christianity, each Christian city
had its "Bishop" and groups of neighboring cities were jointly
administered by an "Archbishop" or "Patriarch". he Bishop of Rome
gradually came to assume supreme authority as Pope (which means "papa"
of all Christians). He interfered in all religious matters, including
the appointment and dismissal of Bishops and Archbishops.

Finally this became too much for the "metropolitan patriarchs" of
Constantia (i.e. Byzantium, Constantinople, Istanbul), and they decided
to withdraw from Papal jurisdiction and set up a separate domain of
their own, in recognition of the fact that the imperial capital of the
Empire had been moved from Rome to Istanbul. After a series of violent
clashes between the Pope and Istanbul Patriarchs, final separation
occurred in AD 1052. Christianity split into two camps.

Eastern Europe was subject to the Constantinian clergy, self-styled
"Orthodox". Western Europe from Poland to Spain remained obedient to the
Pope as self-styled "Catholics". These two religious bodies followed
different rites and hurled charges of heresy at each other.

In the early 16th century a third body formed itself in Europe,
initiated by Luther and styled "Protestant". Luther and his followers
started by opposing the Pope's habit of selling sites in heaven together
with "indulgences" remitting sins: and went on to attempt to reform the
whole Church and purge it of errors and corruptions.

They only succeeded in creating another split in the unity and
simplicity of Christ's religion: the huge number of people who followed
Luther in rejecting papal authority and sacerdotal dogma became a third
sect including most of northern Europe.

The Pope's absolute power in Catholic Europe of the 12th and 13th
centuries provoked its inevitable reaction. A number of heretical
movements arose promoting doctrines condemned by the Papal Office. So
great became the anxiety of the Pope and of the Catholic party about
these insurrectionary movements that in 1215 AD the Pope set up the
"Inquisition" to combat and eradicate such heresies. The Inquisition had
branches in every city of France, Italy, Germany, Poland, Spain and
other Christian lands. Persons accused of heresy were hauled up before
the inquisitors, and, if condemned, suffered severe penalties.

This institution used its excessive powers in such a way as to suppress
all freedom of thought. Anyone suspected of ideas and opinions regarded
as contrary to those held by the Church was subjected to hellish
tortures. These courts even sometimes passed sentence for heresy on the
dead, ordering the disinterment of their coffins— a process described by
Will Durant in his "History of Civilization" (vol.18, p.35) thus:

"The 'Court for the Inspection of Ideas, Laws and Religion', had a legal
procedure all its own. Before a local assizes of the Court was held, the
'Faith-ace (Auto da Fe) was read from all Church pulpits, demanding that
information be laid against anyone suspected of atheism, irreligion or
heresy: and that such persons be hauled before the Court of Inspection.

Neighbors, friends and relatives were encouraged to turn informer.
Informers were promised complete secrecy and protection. Anyone who
harbored an atheist, or failed to denounce him, was himself
incarcerated, and threatened with the church's excommunication, curse
and ban. Sometimes the dead were charged with atheism and blasphemy.

Special ceremonies were employed for their judicial condemnation. Their
property was confiscated: their heirs were stripped of their
inheritance. From 30 to 50% of the property of a deceased person who was
condemned were given to the successful accuser. Trial by ordeal assumed
different forms in different times and places.

Sometimes the accused man's arms were bound behind his back and he was
suspended from them. Sometimes he was so bound that he could make no
movements and then water was poured down his throat so that he died of
suffocation. Sometimes ropes were tied so tight round arms and legs that
they cut through flesh to the bone."

So powerful did the Christian hierarchy become in Europe that no fewer
than ten kings and political leaders of Germany and France were
excommunicated by Popes. Some great landed proprietors lost all. Some
were compelled to do public penance. Thus in AD 1075 Pope Gregory VII
excommunicated the Emperor of Germany, Henry IV, for disregarding a
Papal Firman, and told him that he must give up his throne.

Henry promptly donned penitent's garb and hurried to the Papal Court,
where the Pope kept him waiting three days before receiving him,
accepting his repentance and granting him absolution.

In 1141 Pope Innocent II excommunicated Louis VII. In 1205 Pope Innocent
II excommunicated King John of England for attacking certain bishops.

Finally John felt compelled to send a message to the Pope saying: "An
angelic messenger bade me supplicate Jesus and His Apostle, our
benefactor Pope Innocent, and his catholic successors, on behalf of
England and Ireland. From henceforth we hold these kingdoms as Viceroy
of the Pope and the hierarchy, and have commanded that the sum of £1,000
English be paid to the Roman ecclesiastical coffers annually, in
half-yearly installments of £500 each, in silver. Should I or any of my
successors on the English throne transgress against the purport of this
decree, we forfeit right to the English sovereignty."[^2].

The same author writes: "During this period 5,000,000 people were
punished for offences against orthodox thought, or contravention of a
papal decree. They were hanged on the gallows; or left in the pitchy
dark of well-like dungeons. In the 18 years, 1481-99, the Inquisition
burnt 1,020 people alive, sawed 6,860 asunder, tortured 97,023 to
death." [^3]

Victor Hugo wrote: "The real history of the Church will be read not on
the pages, but between the lines, of the official annals. The Church
caused Parnili to be whipped within an inch of his life for declaring
that 'stars do not fall from their appointed paths.'

The Church cast Campland into prison 27 times for claiming that
innumerable other worlds besides earth exist. The Church tortured Harvey
for the crime of proving that the blood circulates through the arteries
and veins of the body.

The Church incarcerated Galileo for claiming that the earth orbits round
the sun, in contradiction of theories put forward in the Old and New
Testaments. The Church imprisoned Christopher Columbus for discovering a
land not mentioned by St. Paul.

They claimed that it was sacrilege to discover laws of the heavenly
bodies, or the orbit of the earth, or an unforeseen continent not
foretold in scripture. The Church excommunicated Pascal and Montey for
immorality, and Muller for sacrilege and immorality."[^4]

The Church also exercised her power against Islam. On the pretext of
treeing Jerusalem, she launched campaigns of bloodshed and atrocity in
what she called "Wars for the Cross" or "Crusades", during the years
1095 to 1270.

Although the prime cause of these wars was the hatred and jealousy of
Islam nursed by the Pope and the hierarchy, they stirred up the common
people to enlist by false promises of loot and by ingenious calumny
against the Muslims. Pope Urban II called a congress of clergy and
religious leaders to decree a war against Muslims: at which the Pope
ordered all bishops and clergy to enlist men for the battle against the
Muslims, and himself led the recruiting campaign in France.

So vast was the first army that started out for Jerusalem that it seemed
as if all Europe were afoot toward Asia. Some say there were as many as
a million men on the march. En route these plundered, burned, mutilated
and drowned the local citizens.

They slew soldiers and civilians alike, women and children included.
When they finally took Jerusalem in 1099, three years after the start,
only 20,000 survived out of the original million. Civil wars and
pestilence followed this "Christian" sacrifice of myriads of their own
and of other nationals.

In the words of Gustave Le Bon: "The atrocities committed by the
Crusaders against friends and foes, against soldiers and innocent
peasants, against women and children, against old and young, give them
top place in the annals of savagery.

One of their number, Robert the Monk, wrote: 'Our army raged through
alleys and piazzas and over the flat roofs of adjoining houses like a
mother lion robbed of her whelps, rampaging, tearing children to shreds
in savage delight. We put old and young to the sword. To speed up the
work we used one rope's loop to hang many people together.

Soldiers stole anything that came to hand, even ripping open the bowels
of corpses in their search for jewels or coins. Whatever they found they
pocketed. Finally, Bohemond assembled all the survivors—men and women,
maimed and helpless, together—in the castle, and butchered them all,
saving only the young for sale in the Antioch slave- market.'

And Godfrey Hardouinville reported to the Pope: 'In Jerusalem Muslims
who fell into our hands were slain by our people in Solomon's porch
until the temple precincts flowed knee-high with blood'." [^5]

The Inquisition's torture of the learned and thinking class of its day
roused an inevitable reaction against the Church. Independent-minded
scientists pushed on with their work, despite severe censorship, until
Church bigotry was compelled to beat a retreat and leave the road open
for enlightened study and investigation.

But by now scientists had come to regard all religion as the partisan of
superstition, of ignorance, and of the suppression of science and
erudition. The atrocities of the Crusades and barbarities of the
Inquisition aroused abhorrence and suspicion in the popular mind against
every form of religion.

In Russia, too, the Church's neglect of the poor and destitute, and
patronage of the rich, roused a reaction which aided the rise of the
communist movement, and caused its leaders to declare war on religion,
stigmatizing the religious as "capitalist lackeys and exploiters of the
working class," and declaring that it was only "by obliterating the myth
of God from the mind of man" that the revolution of liberty, equality
and fraternity could be realized.

Ferdof, in his book "Religion in the U.S.S.R." (p.7), writes: "In
Czarist Russia the Church owned vast properties in lands, buildings and
furnishings, with millions of robles in gold in the banks. She drew an
income from forests, pastures, fisheries, commerce, industry and much
else.

In fact, the Church was the biggest capitalist of all, the biggest
landowner, the biggest banker of Russia. She mercilessly exploited
merchants, small and large. She made no attempt to improve industrial
working conditions. So great was the hatred this conduct aroused amongst
working and shop keeping classes that the clergy were called \`wolves in
priests' clothing'."

Christianity, in its day the preserver of ancient manners and customs,
the conservative reactionary, has today learned to strengthen its own
foundations by adding to its brilliant historic past all that science
and culture has to offer to modern genius.

The Catholic Church alone wields 4,000 propaganda organs spread all over
the globe. Their budget enables them to extend their efforts at
conversion to darkest Congo, to remotest Tibet and to the most primitive
tribes of Australia.

The annual budget of the Church of England is well over 900,000,000
tomans.

Such figures, when compared with the pittance at Islam's disposal, pain
the heart.

The Gospel has been translated into more than 1,000 languages. In 1973
the American "Society for the Publication and Distribution of the
Gospel" put out 24 million copies.

The Vatican publishes its own newspaper "L' Osservatore Romano" with a
daily circulation of 300,000. It produces some 50 monthly periodicals
with a total circulation of several millions per month. It runs 32,000
primary schools, universities and hospitals. Four powerful agencies
dispatch missionaries to the other continents.

Christianity employs three methods of propaganda:

1. Translation of the books of the New Testament;

2. Erection of churches and places of worship;

3. Dispatch of missionaries to all parts of the world.

Protestant sects likewise exert remarkable efforts at spreading their
faith. "The Reader's Digest" wrote: "The revolutionary foundation of the
Protestant Church of America was a revolt against efforts in Europe to
renew the exaction of the 'tithe' which has been the Church's ancient
right.

Yet from 1950 on, the movement of 'stewardship' has been taken up
increasingly, so that many congregations have doubled or trebled their
contributions, and thus made possible hundreds of new church buildings,
and the reinforcement of missions at home and abroad.

Most important, congregations and their members have realized the joyful
results and unexpected rewards of the revival of this ancient custom."

Christianity and Islam in Africa
--------------------------------

The Christian religious establishment has no fears of Judaism, Hinduism
or Buddhism, since these are religions of national groups which exert
little influence outside their native environment. So the only danger
which they feel to be menacing is Islam. For it has an ideology and way
of thought which they know, some as friends, and some as enemies. The
"Suddeutscher Zeitung" reported the Pope as saying to the bishops
assembled at the Vatican Council 1: "Islam constitutes a more serious
threat in Africa to Christianity than does Communism."

Although Islam's missionary efforts are practically nil, its sheer
breadth of culture and emotional power win many converts in a number of
places, particularly in Africa, where oppressed blacks find its
inclusive brotherhood so attractive a refuge that the Church cannot fail
to take note of the numbers which it draws.

"Belgian Institutes" reports that, at the start of the 20th century,
there were 4,000 Muslims in one province of the Congo, and that by the
1960s in Maniyema and Stanleyville and Kivu this number had increased to
236,000.

The Paris periodical "Peru" quotes Marcel Corder, European expert on
Islam in Africa, as saying: "Islam, once the religion of chiefs and
princes, has recently become a faith of the masses, who like rushing
floods are on the move toward a better, quieter life ; and, carried on
this tide, the realism and urgency of Islam spreads from the north of
Africa to the south with irresistible speed."

"The Revue de Paris", assessing Islam, paganism and Christianity in
Africa, says: "Islam is advancing at a phenomenal rate, winning on the
average half a million new adherents annually, not on the ground of its
ancient roots, but of the new conditions of life developed in the last
century, so that a conservative estimate might reckon 50% of black
Africans as in some measure Muslims ... In 1950 four graduates of
Al-Azhar opened Muslim schools in Mabaku, which were making lightning
progress until the French government stepped in and swiftly closed them
down."

Dr. Laura Veccia Vaglieri, Professor at Naples University, writes: "What
is the reason why, despite the considerable freedom allowed to
non-Muslims.  
 \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  
 1 The Vatican Council draws Catholic leaders from every continent to
Rome, where it is held about style='font-size:6.0pt;line-height:110%;
once a century. Its object is to settle issues which may have arisen in
any part of the world. At the last vatican Council 7,000 Church leaders
assembled under the chairmanship of the Pope. Its discussions on church
affairs occupied three series of sessions, each two months long, at a
total cost of some 650 million Italian lire!

Islamic communities, and the total lack of any Muslim missionary work
nowadays, and the general weakness of all religions everywhere, Islam
has nonetheless been making great advances in Asia and Africa in recent
years? Today it is not the sword which compels acceptance. Indeed, many
lands once ruled by Muslims are now under non-Muslim governments which
push their own religions at the Muslim populations—yet in vain! What is
the power hidden in this faith? What in the inmost nature of humanity
finds contentment and satisfaction therein? What profound element in the
human spirit is moved to respond to Islam's call with so enthusiastic
and glad a shout of 'Here am I'?"

Christians stop at nothing in their efforts to destroy Islam. Professor
Muhammad Qutb writes: "A shipping line of English origin runs
establishments in South Africa. It once employed many South African
Muslims on its ships, but, being a Christian company, decided not to
employ Muslims. To achieve this end it paid part of its employees'
earnings with alcoholic drink. Since alcohol is forbidden to Muslims,
nor may they sell it, they lost this part of their wages. A Muslim
lawyer learnt of their plight and advised them to refuse to receive this
form of payment, unknown anywhere else in the entire world, and to take
the company to court if it objected to their protest. The company, as
soon as the protest was made, promptly made it a pretext for firing
every Muslim from their employ." Philanthropy indeed!

Muslim missionaries face a wide-open door in Africa. The people of that
continent are ready to embrace Islam with heart and soul if we would
show any sort of zeal in carrying the message to them. For all Africa is
seeking a religion that can harmonies the spiritual and the material,
promote social equity and equality, and call all mankind to peace, to
quiet and to truth.

Modern Christianity cannot, because of its own poverty and deficiencies,
meet this longing. The Church itself is a divisive factor, supporting
discrimination, not allowing black and white to worship the same God in
the same building at the same time! In fact, the Christian attitude to
the blacks is inhuman.

Lumumba, Congo leader now dead, once told a Paris newspaper: "I could
never understand why we were taught in our schools that Christian
principles merited our respect, while outside our schools Europeans
acted in ways entirely contrary to those principles and trod all
civilized humane precepts underfoot. The way the Europeans treated the
blacks gave the lie to all that their schools taught."

It is not only in Africa that Christianity is being challenged by
Islamic advance. In America Islam bids fair to win the allegiance of the
black population. Every effort is made to suppress Islamic agencies. The
Senate requested the president to ban the Black Muslims and make their
activities illegal. But preventive measures only increase Black Muslim
membership and strengthen the enthusiasm of their activities. They now
run 70 branches in 27 states. Islamic cultural centers exist in Chicago
and Detroit: while Islamic centers and mosques have been built in
numerous other cities of the U.S.A. The Muslims run a newspaper called
"Muhammad Speaks". They stage protest-demonstrations at which they carry
banners inscribed: "There is no God but Allah: and Muhammad is His
Prophet."

Black Muslims perform their religious duties with exemplary enthusiasm.
Their womenfolk wear the veil. They try to buy only meat slaughtered in
accordance with Muslim law, stamped with the "Moon and Star" guarantee.
The fact that certain individuals have made personal fortunes by
monopolizing sales of proper dress, foodstuffs and other Muslim
essentials in exploitation of the new piety; the fact that a few
extremists have resorted to irreligious violence; and the fact that many
of the new converts have still only a rudimentary grasp of the
theological truths underlying their faith — these facts do not negate
the blessings already brought to the converted masses. They are ills
which will be cured as instruction and practice deepen the newfound
faith. For Black Muslims eagerly learn Arabic and insist on schools and
colleges teaching their children Arabic to enable them to read the
Qur'an in the original. Amongst them thieves may be executed. Even
enemies admit that Islam has brought a change of heart to Black Muslims.

Christian missionaries in Africa do not attempt to assist the Africans
to progress to equal the whites. They wish them to remain subject to the
white church and state. As Professor Westermann "Imperialism and the
Gospel" writes: "Conversion to Islam raises the convert's social status,
increases his self-respect, shows him his possibilities, teaches him to
be a world-citizen, defines his relations with Europeans in dignity. The
black man who previously carried garbage on his head gains in Islam a
status which wins respect, even amongst Europeans. But a black man who
abandons paganism for Christianity sees himself in a different light
from the Black Muslims, since the foundation of our society is different
from that in which Africans were brought up. They see the outward
benefits of our civilization, but cannot grasp its inwardness because we
have not given them the requisite training to do so. Nor have they
grasped their own distinctive contribution and specialties, because we
have not understood our duty to study the black cultural background, and
to help the Africans progress on lines that are a natural continuation
of their historical development to date.

Comparing the African background with our own as superficially as the
African regards our way of life, we offer our fellow-Europeans an
unflattering and one-sided picture of the black man. We present him as
an inferior European. But Islam presents him as a black African to be
respected as such by himself and by others. Islam gives him a natural
equality which we fail to see. He is a human being with his own history
and tradition. But Christians, who think of their present level of
culture as natural to man, treat black converts to their religion with
the condescension due to poor savages living amid rubble and rubbish.
They provoke the blacks to vindicate their superiority. Here the Black
Muslims offer them their chance, while black Christians are pushed back
into inferiority. For this reason American Negroes surge towards Islam
and away from Christianity.":

Anti-Islamic Propaganda
-----------------------

Church leaders face the advance of Islam apprehensively. To prevent the
harmony of Islam's truth reaching men's ears, Christian leaders use
smear tactics in a world-wide propaganda of calumny and denigration
which stops at nothing.  
 I saw an example of this on German TV. A Yemeni Muslim described the
mosques of Yemen and the worship in them. Then the TV interviewer gave a
detailed description of the region's poverty and distress. He blamed
Islam for acting as an obstacle to the progress of the Yemeni people. "A
bigoted adherence to the tenets and principles of Islam," he said, "kept
the Yemen in primitive backwardness and weakness, lingering two
centuries behind the forward strides of civilization in the rest of the
world." This he called an example of "Islam's failure to keep pace with
the changes most of mankind are enjoying."

Imagine the effect of such poisonous propaganda, backed by skillfully
selected film, on European minds, either uninformed, scantily informed,
or wholly misinformed about the nature of Islam! Surely such distortions
are a betrayal of humanity.

These propagandists should be asked: "If the Yemen's lack of progress in
material living is to be accounted for on the background of their
religion, why is the south of Italy so backward when the Pope reigns
supreme there? Why do so many leave southern Italy to seek menial
employment in wealthier lands? Why is Christian Greece so far behind
many Muslim countries? Why did Greece, which before the rise of
Christianity pioneered man's upward road, itself go downhill towards
ruin after accepting Christianity, until it came under the Turkish flag
and started to rise again? Or again, why do the non-Muslim peoples of
Asia suffer miseries far worse than any Muslim land knows?"

In Bosnia, where Muslims, Orthodox and Catholics, live cheek by jowl,
the Muslims are the better off. In Russia Muslims are no whit inferior
to their Christian neighbors. Chinese Muslims are ahead of Buddhists
there. Singapore's Arabs enjoy greater material prosperity than any
other of that island's inhabitants, including the British.

Most Westerners present Islam in a false light, repeating baseless
fabrications which betray blank ignorance of Islam's principles: and
churches encourage such errors.

Muhammad Qutb "Islam and Misconceptions of Enlightened Thinkers" (p.298
Persian ed.) writes: "I spent some hours discussing Islamic matters in
Cairo with a U.N. delegate. Suddenly he exclaimed: \`All very fine! You
have made a powerful case for the rightness and truth of Islam. But I
can't give up the benefits of modern progress. For instance, I like
flying in supersonic planes...He added a few other technological
advantages until I broke in, astounded: 'But what's to prevent you
enjoying modern comforts?' He replied: 'Well, I thought you Muslims
advocate a return to tent life in the desert, and want me to go back to
nomadism and wilderness-living like a savage!"

In Germany I lodged in a hotel where the manager was a man who had
studied in English and French universities, gained high degrees, and
even studied Arabic. He said to me: "As a Unitarian I know my God well
and have implicit faith in Him. But I cannot accept the God whom the
religious establishment bid their followers serve and worship in their
buildings. It seems to me wholly alien to the rationality of a Creator
to expect His creatures to follow a path which runs directly contrary to
enlightened thought and to human nature itself." He added, with the
depth of his feelings written all over his face: "The worship of the One
God must decide man's destiny, eradicate the evil consequences of
misleading ideas, and raise human culture to pure monotheism."

This highly educated European knew nothing of Islam's creed of the pure
unity of God, nor of the basic difference between the Holy Qur'an on the
one side and the Old and New Testaments on the other. He imagined that
the Qur'an resembled Torah (O.T.) and Gospel (N.T.) in its presentation
of God. So I gave him a book in German on Islam to enable him to learn
its principles.

It is unfortunate that some of our compatriots commit acts when abroad
which Westerners attribute to Muslims in general, and on them judge
Islam, whereas the perpetrator acted (a) as an individual, and (b)
contrary to his religion. Indeed, my hotelier, on the ground of the
behavior of a few Iranians, had refused to accommodate any more
Iranians, and only made an exception in my case because an old and
trusted friend of his insisted. Even then he only agreed to a stay of a
few days. In the course of that visit he gained confidence in me, solely
because he never saw me overstep the bounds of decency and right, and
not because I made any extraordinary effort to win his regard. He
praised me (modesty forbids my quoting his exact words), and even
demonstrated his emotions and affection with presents. Sometimes a guest
came to his full hotel, to whom he gave my room, while offering me his
own private room instead, leaving his desk in it, open and piled with
documents of value!

Finally the day came that I had to go elsewhere. He took down my new
address, and from then on, whenever Iranians asked him for rooms, he at
once telephoned me and asked for my character guarantee. I went bail for
their good conduct, to save fellow-Iranians' difficulties (for
foreigners on their first visit to a foreign city, unless they have had
the wisdom to reserve ahead, find much trouble in discovering
accommodation in the early hours of the night).

One night the hotelier rang and asked about some newly arrived Iranians
on their first visit to Germany. I gave my customary guarantee of their
character. But next morning he rang me, and in a voice which betrayed
his disquiet and dismay, complained: "Those people you vouched for last
night proved shockingly bad guests." I shamefacedly apologized, and
decided: "Never again!"

The present world crisis gives Muslims a prime occasion for opening the
hearts of the civilized world to the inspiring tenets and programs of
Islam. The conditions for making this holy creed known in wide circles
are propitious. True, it is the congruence of a religion with the inmost
needs of human nature which insures that faith's spread, but
circumstances and environmental needs merit study on a world scale also,
for discernment of psychological moments favorable to its proclamation.
This study and this proclamation we have not yet, alas, undertaken as we
should. Yet without it, individual moves, inadequate actions,
hit-and-miss efforts, planless propaganda, uncoordinated institutions,
can never achieve a satisfactory result, nor advance far into
territories where opposition is traditional and deep-rooted.

We err in not grasping the supreme importance of intelligent propaganda
with sound organization. Despite the admirable force inherent in Islamic
culture for a revolutionary advance, and its specialized lore of
society, the factors that should realize this have vanished from our
midst. For all our heritage of the soundest canons and most rewarding
ideology, our plight is desperate, and of itself leaves a wide field of
action open to Islam's foes.

Morals in the West
------------------

Life is for Westerners "machine-made". It has lost spirit and warmth.
True, many material discomforts, deficiencies and difficulties have been
overcome and banished by "civilized" devices. But the social life that
results shows no evidence of the glory of the spirit of man.

The glaring divisions and dissatisfactions of modern civilization must
be patent to the merest dunce. The inventions and discoveries made to
ease life and advance civilization fail to ease man's disillusion and
disquiet of mind. Social difficulties and dangerous crises may have been
averted, but this has not sufficed to confer happiness and joy on the
generality of mankind.

Over and above his varied physical needs, man has a moral urge and a
spiritual yearning. The attraction of physical delights is no greater
than the pull of ethical impulses and intellectual quests. To confine
men's minds within the four walls of materialism is an unforgivable sin.

"The pursuit of happiness" is rightly included with "life and liberty"
among "man's inalienable rights". The first step towards happiness
involves preoccupation with the perfecting of personality, and not of
the material environment alone.

Parallel with his astounding advances in industrial and scientific
technology, man must equally advance his inner resources, his spiritual
powers and his force of soul. These have been allowed to fall behind.
There can be no true human perfection without equilibrium in life's
inner and outer aspects—both. If they are in imbalance, "civilization"
offers no base for hundred per cent happiness.

Modern ethical and social shortcomings demonstrate that the factors
which produce human perfection have not been allowed the attention they
warrant. Humanity has erred in failing to recognize and study the
factors of happiness and well-being.

History contains no nation so impregnated with total corruption in every
department of its life that no single sound section remained. So it is
with the West today. Alongside moral corruption, good qualities still
exist. There are many who faithfully follow the precepts of honesty,
decency and right. But these virtues do not make up for the sins and
wickednesses that abound.

Such virtues may be approached from different angles and practiced on
different grounds. The West's moral capital has been removed from the
Bank of Faith where it belongs. Divorced from its source in religion, it
depreciates both in intrinsic value and in interest returns. Where the
prevailing motive is profit, righteousness and goodness are judged by
their material profitability. Small wonder that they decline in the
West!

Sex in the West
---------------

In sexual conduct the West has stepped outside all moral bounds. In
life's beginnings everyone knew in his heart that purity and continence
in sex matters have a moral value of their own, and that transgression
leads to moral degradation. But this truth has either been gradually
forgotten, or else deliberately obliterated from men's consciences by
subversives.

Purity has lost its esteem, and been discarded by society, while all
sanctions for control of morals have been abandoned.

A friend told me that he heard a girl ask for advice on one of Germany's
regional radio stations. saying: "For some years I've gone steady with a
boy, but in the course of time tired of him and decided to take up with
another boy. Can I keep them both? Or should I give up the second
relationship and stick to the first?"

The Radio Counselor replied with the guidance (sic!): "Until the age of
28 you are at perfect liberty to enjoy the company of, and have
intercourse with, one friend or several, without any ties or conditions,
so have no scruples or worries in doing what you like!"

Where are we when the media, and other authorities, whose duty it is to
protect public morals and ban pollution, themselves recommend
fornication, and under the pseudonym of "a special relationship before
marriage" promote promiscuity ; or posing as "champions of freedom" cast
off morality and preach revolt against decency and self-esteem and
proper pride?

Will Durant, the sociologist, wrote in his "Pleasures of Philosophy":
"City life prevents men from observing the seasons, while sexual
passions increase and conditions make indulgence easier. A civilization
which makes marriage economically impossible before the age of 30 drives
a man to sexual deviation, weakens continence, and reduces purity from
its original esteem as a virtue to distant lip-service as an impractical
dream. Art enhances human beauties. Men cease to count their sins.
Women, claiming equality with men, fall prey to passions. Love affairs
unlimited and premarital cohabitation become the rule rather than the
exception. The streets may be free of prostitutes—but not through fear
of the police! It is because women have bankrupted prostitutes by taking
over their business for free!"

Human nature is made to desire control of its powers, so that they are
employed justifiably. To trespass on ground abhorrent to humanity's
essence cannot fail to raise a crop of undesirable growths. To trample
the laws of his own being underfoot in the name of freedom can never
yield the peace of heart and joy of mind men seek.

Western permissiveness has made licence public. Has this unbridled riot
of wantonness subsided? Crime, rape, neurasthenia, riots, strikes— what
generates all these but this same sexual "liberty" and licence?

Sweden has given total sexual freedom for a quarter of a century. Such
savagery now prevails amongst its youth that professors and responsible
authorities suffer from it. A Parliamentary commission was set up to
study this outbreak of savagery and its insurrectionary perils. The
Swedish Prime Minister frankly said: "We shall need at least a
generation to redress the disasters caused by an error lasting twenty
years."  
 Freud examined man's animal nature and traced all human actions to
font-family: "Bookman Old the sex urge. He thus divorced sex from
ethics. Chastity went by the board. No one could think up a frontier to
stop its downward rush. In its train it dragged many human values. Thus,
"The Reader's Digest" reports : "West German statistics show that
occupying troops of the victor nations have fathered 200,000 bastards,
5,000 of them black, on German women, all now in care at the German
government's charges. And this is 10% of the total number of
illegitimate children now a charge on the government, not to speak of
the unknown number unborn through contraceptives or abortions. Of East
Germany we have no facts, but it is more than probable that the problem
there, if not worse, is no better. Nor do other Western nations lag far
behind Germany. Most painful is a report from Northampton, in
Mid-England, that illegitimate births are of all living births, and that
this started when Northampton went over from agricultural to industrial
employment." [^6]

The psychologist, Dale Carnegie, writes in his "Mirror of Success":
"Statistics published by an American foundation show that husbands who
were known to be unfaithful to their wives were of all classes and all
ages. Some 50% of all husbands are unfaithful, some regularly. Most of
those who remain faithful do so perforce, through fear of disease or
lack of opportunity. Telephone-tapping in New York over a short period
revealed that New York wives are equally promiscuous."

"The Encyclopedia Britannica" says : "Of all U.S. hospitals, 650
specialize in V.D. and half as many more sufferers from V.D. apply for
help to their G.P. or local specialist."[^7]

Kinsey's book on "Habits of Sexual Behavior" (p.304), shows that
3,000-4,000 infants annually are born in the U.S.A. with venereal
disorders. And the proportion of deaths in the U.S. from these diseases
is greater than the total mortality rate of all other illnesses added
together—except for T.B.

The Tehran Daily "Ettela'at" (Tehran Journal) No. 10414 reports from
"Psychology" of December 1960: "The number of illegitimate 95%; births
in the U.S. has increased so rapidly that it is a headache for the 95%;
American government. The statistics for 1957 show more than 200,000.
95%; illegitimate births in the U.S.A. — an increase of 5% over twenty
years."

"Black, White" (No. 380), reports : "The annual abortions in the U.S.A.
exceed 1,000,000. 65% are due to free relationships outside wedlock, and
50% are of unmarried teenage girls."

Dr. Molenz of South London said, according to the Tehran Daily "Kayhan"
(No. 535): "Of every five girls attending church in England, one is
pregnant. Criminal abortions in London reach 5,000 per annum. One living
birth in twenty is illegitimate. Despite the annual improvement in the
standard of living, this number increases year by year. Illegitimacy is
most prevalent in well-to-do families; and girls in rich families are
more prone to become unmarried mothers."

These facts suffice to demonstrate modern civilized man's enslavement to
his sexual instincts. Sexual indulgence has reached such a pitch that
many moral and human values best learnt in family life have been
forgotten, so that people no longer acknowledge any bounds or limits
governing conduct.

Some years ago Tehran newspapers reported that in Idaho men exchanged
wives for three-week periods, and gave each other presents to "seal
their friendship". An outcry arose and the group was indicted in court
in order to safeguard future generations and punish fornication.  
 So -much for misconceptions in one area of human life, the sexual.

Social Drop-outs
----------------

In every nation it is the thoughts of their learned men and the way of
life of their leaders which shape the convictions of the public and the
thinking of the individual by direct influence. "Quis custodiet ipsos
custodes? Corruptio optimi pessima."

If the ruling class who are trustees and guides of society promulgate
filth, what can be expected of the lower orders? If the salt has lost
its savor, what will salt the mass? Lustful desires are natural in man.
The example set by the leaders who give such desires free rein overrides
all moral precepts. A person raised in the school of unbridled
self-indulgence conceives of total personal freedom as unrestrained
permissiveness. In this the ideas of chastity and purity have no place;
only the impulses of the feeling of any moment decides action.

Those who throw moral standards overboard raise a hedonist
insurrectionary posterity, helpless and hopeless in the face of
elemental carnal urges, turning a deaf ear to the calls of duty sounded
by reason and conscience.

Rajmohan Gandhi, grandson of the Mahatma, declared in 1962 in the U.S.A.
: "A painful future awaits America, since youth there is sunk in
sensuality, unwilling to perform their duties. Of seven young men called
up for the draft, six fail their medical because of capacity
deficiencies and weakened spirit caused by dissipation."

Khrushchev likewise in 1962 forecast : "The U.S.S.R. faces dangers ahead
because of the grip that sexual passions have fastened on our youth."

Strange that this age of scientific and industrial progress is being
driven to its knees by youth's preoccupation with the sexual problem, at
the core of a technological society depersonalized by the heartless
monotony of a machine-made environment.

The Beatles are one phenomenon the age has thrown up — undisciplined,
inelegant, imbecile, they draw youth in crowds. Next the hippies, like
tares in a cornfield of culture, revolt against the dry materialism of
the established environment. Rejecting ethical values and spiritual
sanctities as ungrounded superstition, they deride rational living, drop
out of society, and run riot; until, when they need a moral standard and
spiritual refuge, they find themselves destitute and forlorn.

Such social phenomena, results of youth's emotional derailment,
reflected in pollution and corruption, show that modern civilization,
which treats people as cogs in a machine, can never satisfy the innate
longings of human hearts, with their spiritual sensitivity and humane
sentiments. The rise in the suicide rate is further evidence that
material comfort and ease do not suffice.

Germany's annual "Police Report" (p.1974), lists 10,000 suicides in West
Germany, while over 6,000 men and 7,000 women made unsuccessful suicide
attempts.  
 In France, prime home of intellect, 35,000 suicide attempts are
recorded annually.

The consumption of hard drugs amongst American youth is so terrifyingly
high that recently New York police found the corpses of 38 youths, aged
from 16-35, dead through drug-taking. Some of the victims were drive to
such desperation by inability to get drugs that they slashed their
wrists. Heroin addicts are the most numerous-- 100,000 in New York
alone -- one addict in every 70 inhabitants! Among the rich of the
U.S.A., addicts rank high. A New York doctor said that one of America's
most famous actors injects himself with ten doses per 24 hours at $60
the dose! "Many deaths of high ranking personalities, officially
attributed to heart failure," he adds, "are, in fact, fatalities due to
drug addiction." (Ettela'at No. 13015.)

"The Spirit of Man" (p.32), says: "In the U.S.A. a major crime is
committed every 25 minutes; and every 24 hours 3 murders, 5 indecent
assaults, 30 major thefts and 3,000 petty larcenies. Four billion
dollars is spent on combating crime and upholding law, and of this
$100,000,000 is disbursed in New York alone."

Such is the life-style, self-emasculated, yet boasting its brains and
culture and elevation, which people seek to emulate, and choose as their
life-model!

Worship
-------

For all their propaganda machines and temporal power, the Western
churches' intervention in cultural and social matters, and their
religious preaching to refine morality and make men's hearts pure, has
had little effect. It has not redeemed the bankruptcy of spirit, nor
reined in the untrammelled self-indulgence that besets Westerners. How
can a religion which permits its adherents unlimited freedom to commit
shameful deeds hope to wrench their collar out of the talons of the
subversives' grip on the polluted, or uproot the noxious growths of
immorality?

Worship and godliness and true humanity must be approached with the sole
aim of drawing near to God in purity of intent. But these practitioners
have left the track and been perverted.

Religious leaders, who should constitute a staunch dam to hold back the
floods of corruption, have themselves fallen victims to the prevailing
fashion of permissiveness. How then can Christianity possibly produce
renascence and moral revolution in the West? How can such institutions
recall mankind to that purity of heart without which no man can know the
Lord? Yet the world can only emerge from its crisis of morals by that
road of purity via revolution and renascence.

The "Tehran Weekly Journal" (No. 1089) reported: "Church Fathers entice
the errant into the church with dancing and music. The Revd. Francis
Mieux of Montreal, Canada, 35 years ordained, is a skilled musician,
both as composer and player, author of 1,500 popular melodies, a priest
who combines the two callings of religion and art."

Surely to perform such works in a place of worship is to make a mockery
of religion? Amongst the most solemn pronouncements made by all the
prophets of God have been the asseverations that no man can serve both
God and Mammon; and that there is no escape from the pollutions of the
world, the flesh and the devil except by a resolute concentration of the
attention on God. Inordinate attachment to materialist considerations
must be set aside in favor of the quest for a personal knowledge of
God's being, if human life is to be soundly equilibrated. This is the
rock on which to build the house of life. All else is shifting sand.

True worship frees a man from the bondage of fleshly lusts, and draws
him into God's presence and to spiritual joys. Observe how this truth of
priceless inestimable worth has been squeezed out by the permissive'
preaching primacy of carnal desire.

Islamic worship has many aims. One of them is to rip away the curtains
of negligence and ignorance and so to usher in a mighty moral and
spiritual re-armament and revolution.

Stanwood Cobb, Christian savant, in his book "Lord of the Two Ka'abas"
p.227, compares Muslim and Christian worship thus : "I was," he writes,
"allowed to be present in Hagia Sofia Mosque in Istanbul to witness a
service of prayer and worship there. In such services repeated
genuflections (Rukoo') and prostrations (Sujood) play a large part as
the accompaniment to fixed forms of prayer and adoration. I was deeply
impressed by the solemnity, humility and reverence of the worshippers.
It far surpassed anything I have ever met in any Christian church in its
sincerity of veneration, depth of self-surrender, and dedicated devotion
to the Divine Essence.

I shared with other foreigners the privilege of watching the ceremonies
of the Night of Power (Leilat-ul-Qadr) on which the Qur'an was revealed
to the Prophet Muhammad. From a balcony in one of the squinches we
looked down on the 5,000 worshippers who crowded Hagia Sofia, performing
their rukoo's and sujoods in perfect unison, rhythm and order. The
rustle of their bending to genuflect or prostrate themselves, the sound
of their hands being placed on the floor before them, their united
uprising, made deep quiet waves of reverence fill the vast dome, and
ascend heavenward.

The sight was splendid, matchless; dignified, numinous, humble,
reverent, expressive of a sense of individual freedom, democracy,
equality, which allowed no discrimination of persons or classes. I saw
an itinerant carpet-vendor cheek by jowl with a Pasha in gorgeous robes,
in concord, without fear or favor, standing, kneeling, prostrating
themselves in common worship, while big-bellied dark-faced Negroes
busied themselves with their religious observances alongside the most
chic of the Turks of Istanbul. For Islam from its inception has pursued
a creed of brotherhood which it preserves today."

Western religion's biggest error has lain in treating faith as an
individual private affair, unrelated to daily life. This mistaken
doctrine casts its shadow over all aspects of Western society.
Pollution, national crises, permissiveness, corruption, are all ills
directly due to this divorce of religion from practical affairs.

Hence, too, the tug-of-war between inner spiritual values and the
outward struggle for a livelihood. A sound creed dictates a man's code
of conduct and draws guidelines for him which apply to every practical
eventuality of living.

Belief shapes thought and action. Living cannot evade the formative
effect of creed. Hence the downright sinfulness of separating religion
from practical life. Such a separation runs directly in the face of the
law of nature. As Dampierre writes in his book "The Conflict between
Science and Religion": "Constantine decreed that Christianity was an
official religion of the Roman Empire ; and, to please his pagan
subjects, permitted many customs of the earlier paganism to be taken up
into Christianity. Thus arose the idea, which prevailed in medieval
religious days, and still prevails in modern irreligious days, that
\`religion is a private matter' concerned solely with the individual
soul and its relations with God."

Alcohol
-------

A frenetic consumption of alcoholic beverages augments our social ills,
daily producing sinister perversions in manners and morals, and in
religious, psychological and medical health.

No sane thinking person can fail to remark these bitter facts. Hospitals
are filled with D.T. patients and with mentally deranged alcoholics,
while outside them thousands, under the influence of drink, take to
murder, suicide, theft, blackmail and character assassination.

Alcohol offers an escape from problems and worries: but always ends by
multiplying them. Instead of diminishing life's sufferings, it adds
material and moral bankruptcy to them, and crushes rather than relieves
the sufferer. It makes the bells of doom and disaster toll even louder
in his ears. He flees from their clamour back to his alcoholic solace.
He seeks to drown his sorrows, in the hope of enjoying an imaginary
paradise where his burdens will roll away, in the brief span of his
drunken stupor.

"Be not drunk with wine but be filled with the Spirit" is the motto of a
wise man who realizes that to resort to means which dull reason may lead
to insanity, and to the loss of all those intellectual powers which
raise man above the level of the beasts. For alcohol is indeed "the
poison that men put into their mouths to take away their brains."

In Hamburg I was able to gain admission to view the inside of a
synagogue to which I had been drawn by its splendid exterior. A guide
showed us its various parts. To our surprise, these included a special
room for wine and cheese parties. In consternation I asked: "Is wine
drunk even on these sacred premises?" He replied with serious mien:
"Only by a select group who have the right to drink wine in this room!"

So widespread has alcohol consumption become that universities and
health authorities have set up organizations to check it. But they have
not yet penetrated to the root of the problem — the cancer at the heart
of Western creeds which leaves individual free-will too much rein in
matters which should be of social concern, and so allows people to
imbibe a poison that breaks up sound family life and ruins nations. The
fear is growing that the working classes and the youth of tomorrow will
be turned into an alcoholic mob, to the tragic disaster of the sufferers
and of the peoples of the world.

Doctors attending the 24th International Congress for the Combating of
Alcoholism in France issued the following statement concerning the
effects of alcohol on mind and spirit : "20% of women and 60% of men
entering hospital are alcohol addicts: 70% of mental patients and 40% of
venereal patients were so afflicted as a consequence of misuse of
alcohol. In England, experts affirm, 95% of mental cases are due to
mental disease induced by alcoholic drinks." ('Health Magazine').

And the same magazine (No. 12, p.5) states: "French newspapers headline
as 'shaking' the report of the French Minister of Health on the number
of deaths due to alcohol, for it said that in one year 20,000 deaths in
France were due to excessive alcohol-consumption, and cited the
Secretary- General of the Committee for Combating Alcoholism as
authority for the statistic that 25% of industrial accidents and 57% of
automobile accidents in France were due to alcohol."

The former French President Poincaré was also head of the anti- alcohol
society, and stated in a book on the World War : "French youth! Your
biggest enemy is drink! Do more than skirmish with Germany! Take up arms
against drink! Drink caused more spiritual and material damage in 1870
than the war with Germany then cost France. The drink which pleases your
palate is a deadly poison. It ages you prematurely and robs you of half
your lifetime, rendering your body far more vulnerable to the attacks of
disease and infirmity of all kinds."

"The Reader's Digest" Persian edition reported that in Germany "in one
year some 150,000 cases are tried in the criminal courts on charges
arising from misuse of alcoholic drinks." A United States Cabinet
Secretary said, according to "Health Magazine" (No. 12, Year 5): "We
must keep an eye on the effect of alcoholism on our finances. Experts
tell us that their research fixes the cost to the state (apart from
private costs) at $15,000,000,000 in one year. Of this one billion
dollars goes to hospitalization, five billion to public assistance and
charity, two billion to police and similar costs, seven billion to
courts and prison charges. Over and above this must be set the fact that
the tax on alcohol only brings in $8 billion to the Treasury."

Nor is the Soviet Union immune. The Tehran Daily "Ettela'at" (No. 13108)
reports the institution of severe measures to diminish the dangerous
levels of alcohol consumption there, since, the Premier of the U.S.S.R.
declared: "Alcohol has caused an increase in the crime level, a rise in
absenteeism from factories, and a fall in production such that the state
must perforce undertake a far more severe campaign against this."

The same addiction must be blamed for many air-accidents. The industrial
psychology specialist Dr. Clement Korn Gould, in an article in the
Persian edition of "The Reader's Digest" (No. 37, Year 26), lays the
majority of accidents of U.S.A. airlines to this account, both amongst
hired pilots and private owners of planes and helicopters. He adds:
"Research has established that the majority of air crashes are due to
inattention, often due to alcoholic after-effects on the minds of pilots
and co-pilots, and this more among Americans than any other nationality.

"Further, investigation has demonstrated that a majority of pilots
involved in crashes had imbibed during the flight. The increase in air
crashes has made responsible authorities determined to get to the root
of the causes; and their researches have shown that a large number of
accidents during the last few years have been due to drunkenness in the
pilots or to their sexual indulgence before the flight."

Shortages and Uncharitableness
------------------------------

Daily increasing affluence and the technological revolution have
produced deep divisions in human living. One group of human beings rakes
in huge dividends from investments in trusts or cartels or companies,
and seems able to have anything it wants, to such an incredible extent
that some even provide luxury accommodation for their dogs and cats.
Another group scrapes up a miserable livelihood at subsistence level,
hardly able to lay hold of the barest essentials of life.

All thinking people feel pangs of conscience at the desperate sufferings
allowed in all parts of the world by modern social conditions. Many
misfortunes, which in the past would in a very short time have been
alleviated, now fester on as uncured tragedies. No wonder a violent hate
against those who enjoy excess riches invades the hearts of the
under­privileged!

The developed countries make a global effort to improve their economic
conditions: but with no advantage to the masses—indeed, even to the
disadvantage and decline of poorer lands. So the class difference gapes
wider. Many lands groan under poverty and famine.

"The Ferdosi Magazine" of July 28th, 1948, in an article on "Nutrition",
makes the following points:

1. Underdeveloped lands number 2,500 million inhabitants, of whom
500,000,000 suffer from undernourishment;

2. 1,500 million suffer from malnutrition;

3. As a direct or indirect consequence, 8,000,000 die of hunger
annually.

In Brazil alone a quarter of a million infants die annually from under­
nourishment. In India infant mortality balances the natural increase of
population. The food an average American family throws away as waste
daily, equals the food of the average Indian family for four days.

Worse, some unscrupulous and frivolous persons cause artificial
shortages of foodstuffs in order to raise prices and line their own
pockets, hard-heartedly ignoring the fact that these foodstuffs might
lengthen the lives of untold millions. Legislation to suppress such
inhuman prodigal self-indulgence could end hunger in the world very
quickly. So says the periodical "Enlightened Thought" (719): "In 1960
125 million tons of grain for bread disappeared from the warehouses of
America. It would have sufficed to fill the bellies of India's more than
500 million inhabitants for a year. America destroys a great deal of her
harvest annually simply to keep prices up. Capitalist institutions in
the West have deliberately caused starvation to increase throughout the
world. America fills silos and warehouses with foodstuffs. They then
compel poor nations to purchase at high prices to the detriment of their
economy. Thus a few selfish power-hungry persons pile up fortunes while
being, in fact, guilty of the murder —no less—of millions of innocent
fellow-humans."

Philosopher Bertrand Russell writes: "During the last 14 years America
has spent 4,000 million dollars on purchasing its farmers' surplus wheat
crops. Millions of tons of wheat, barley, maize, cheese, butter have
piled up in American storehouses and rotted, simply to keep up prices on
the world market : and now they are marking mountains of butter and
cheese 'unfit' with a color-code, to prevent the price of dairy products
falling."

Sociologist and philosopher Stanwood Cobb writes in his "Lord of Two
Ka'abas" (p.145/6): "Expansion in technology, industry and scientific
instruments has produced a deeper sense of our moral poverty. Developed
lands cannot boast of ethical superiority over backward nations. Modern
materialist civilization is full of inner contradictions and
incongruities, between words and actions, between thought and speech,
between reason and feeling. Materialist culture in its various
manifestations proclaims the theoretical equality of all human beings;
but in practice produces inequities and injustices in the ethical,
intellectual, social, spiritual and family spheres, and fanatically
vindicates these wrongs.

"Democracy claims to be 'Government of the people by the people for the
people'. But at its best it is oligarchy, and soon turns to dictatorship
of an individual.

"It claims to aim at 'the greatest happiness of the greatest number'. In
fact, it gives rise to frustration, failure, anxiety, misery.

"It encourages altruism and a social conscience in its rhetoric, but its
policies are selfishness run riot, with. no regard for the fate of
others. Individuals and groups that get in the way are trampled
ruthlessly underfoot. This age surpasses all others known to history in
exploitation, profiteering and power-hunger."

In "Sociology" (p.157), Samuel Konig writes: "The developed lands
comprise 25% of the world's population and own 85% of its capital
assets; leaving 15% for the remaining 75% of humanity. The lapse of time
only widens this gap. In affluent lands themselves, wealth is the
property of a minority only. A U.S. Senate Committee in 1946 affirmed
that 5% of America's great industrial concerns owned 80% of American
industrial capital, controlling 60% of the total work force and drawing
80% of the total industrial profits."

The world president of the United Nations' "Farming and Agricultural
Organization" says in an article entitled "Hungry Man" (by Jose de
Castro, No. 8, p.24): "Today two thirds of the inhabitants of the earth
live in constant hunger ; and about 1,500 million people live on the
subsistence level, suffering constantly from this most horrible of
social ills."

Savagery in a Civilized Age
---------------------------

Some sociologists held that war is inseparable from human life, which
"was from its inception cruel, brutal and nasty." Other sociologists and
psychologists deny this, holding that war can be removed from human
life, since bloodshed is caused by ethical derailments, social disorders
and economic disruptions; and is not an ineradicable ingredient in human
nature. Instruction and education in basic truths, and an equitable
ordering of social conditions, can remove the causes of war. The
terrible and irreparable damage which war brings down on the devoted
heads of innocent millions can thus be averted, they say.

The matchless triumphs of science and technology have made the 20th
century a bloody holocaust. It is stamped as the age of greed, ambition,
insurrection, violence, and of history's most inhuman wars. A glance
over the first 75 years of the 20th century is enough to make manifest
that in that short time our advanced and civilized peoples have
perpetrated more crimes than in the whole previous course of human
history.

The West possesses industrial techniques and atom bombs. Its knowledge
drives man through mud and blood. It turns once fertile lands to
deserts. The cry of the oppressed rises to high heaven, bewailing the
West's weakness of thought and decline in morals.

The aftermath of two world wars between imperialist powers pursuing
conflicting material interests has been dire for all mankind. No excuse
can wash the grime of wickedness, heartlessness and cruelty from this
century's warmongers' garments.

World War I lasted 1'565 days. Nine million died. Twenty-two million
were maimed and left unemployable for life. Such are the statistics of
casualties on the actual battlefield. The number of deaths and injuries
caused in crowded cities as a side-effect of the fighting is
incalculable. The cost of that war is reckoned as more than
$400,000,000,000.

The Carnegie Peace Trust, in its report "The Twentieth-Century World",
claims that that same sum could have built, at prices of that date, a
decent house for every family in England, Ireland, Scotland, Belgium,
Germany, Russia, the United States, Canada, and Australia. The survivors
weep, like Rachel for her children, "for they are not", and will not be
comforted. Its ravages were not repaired before World War II broke out.

Statistics say that in World War million were killed; 20 million lost a
limb; 17 million liters of blood were spilt; 12 million children were
born deformed; 13,000 primary and secondary schools, 6,000 universities
and 8,000 science laboratories were destroyed; 319 thousand million
bullets were fired.

In 1945 America dropped two small atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
In Hiroshima 70,000 people were vaporized and 70,000 others crippled. In
Nagasaki 40,000 died and 40,000 were maimed. Buildings were laid flat.
Nor were innocent babes or animals spared. Within five days Japan
surrendered unconditionally.

World press reports said that after the war Russian artificial-limb
factories placed an order with their American counterparts for 4 million
feet, to fit out those who had lost a foot in the war, since such levels
of production were beyond the means of their own industrial
installations. If so many feet were needed in Russia, how many
irreparable injuries must have occurred amongst her people, and how many
in other lands, for which no statistics can ever be affirmed?

The August 1945 bombs held 235 units of uranium, and 239 of plutonium,
the equivalent of 335,000 units of T.N.T. An average atom bomb of today
is 5,000 times more powerful, and a hydrogen bomb 5 million times more
destructive than an atom bomb. Yet one atom bomb would suffice to
flatten a city like New York, Paris, London or Moscow. They no longer
need manned planes. Guided missiles can deliver them right on target
2,000 miles away.

The seismographic echoes of one such explosion can be recorded 7,000
miles from its center. The Nobel Prize-winning U.S. chemist, Dr. Linus
Pauling, says that in the first hour of a new war 10,000 megaton bombs
would wipe out 175 million inhabitants of densely populated lands. The
U.S.A. had a stockpile of 24,000; the U.S.S.R. 80,000; England 15,000,
at the moment he was writing.

A future war, U.S. Army General Neumann writes, will claim as its
victims not so much soldiers as civilians. Entire communities, women and
children included, will perish. Our physicists have taken war out of
human hands and transferred it to fighting machines, which make no
distinctions of age or sex, belligerent or non-belligerent. The new
theatre of conflict will not be a field of battle or a fortress, but
those cities and villages in which manufacturing and commercial centers
exist. On these would hail down flying missiles filled with explosives,
incendiary devices, poison gas, and disease-bearing bacteria.

These two wars have cast all humanity into the vortex of
self-destruction. But their horrors have not had the slightest effect on
the moral attitudes of the West, nor changed its intoxication with
affluence and alcohol —witness the many regional wars today which might
at any moment coalesce into one total war of world annihilation.
Civilized nations use their mental, physical and financial powers, not
for the proper ends of peace and prosperity for all, but to prepare and
stockpile the instruments for everyone's destruction.

Bertrand Russell writes: "Governments competing in sending astronauts to
the moon and beyond will between them destroy this world. In past ages
sheer want drove tribes to attack their neighbors for the scanty
supplies available. Today affluent societies commit suicide in
competitive insanity."

The "Economic Record" reckons that 400 billion dollars were spent on
armaments in the first half of the 20th century —enough to feed every
human stomach for the same period and simultaneously provide housing for
one-third of humanity—all this in a world where two-thirds of the
population live barely at subsistence level in illiteracy and indigence.

The W.F.T.U. estimates that 70% of the world's working personnel are on
jobs which have some connection with armament manufacture.

So terrible are modern weapons that a Third World War would leave
neither victor nor vanquished, but only a funeral for all humanity.

Sociologist Petrim A. Sorokin writes: "The key question of our day is
not the superiority of capitalism or communism, nationalism or
internationalism, but the replacement of a materialist culture by a
superior philosophy of life. In World Wars I and II, each side claimed
that peace would ensue if its rival group were wiped out.

In World War I the Allies blamed Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany ; while he
held that the suppression of England was necessary for world peace. In
World War II differing views held that peace could only come by Hitler's
resignation or death; by Churchill's removal ; by Mussolini's never
having been born ; by Hirohito ceasing to be the deified ruler of Japan;
by Trotsky replacing Stalin in Russia. Yet now that all these persons
are departed, the fever of crisis and war still inflames the world ; and
men's hearts fail them for fear. For it was not the individual Kaiser
Wilhelm, or Hitler, or Mussolini, or Churchill, or Stalin who caused the
20th century's troubles.

They merely headed up the multitude of human passions which would have
produced similar leaders with other names in any case. A boiling pot
produces scum. The scum can be removed. But fresh scum soon covers the
brew unless a purifying element is introduced that eliminates the
cause."

True, our age has produced the "Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals" and prolonged human lives by heart-transplants. But its
deadlier products like atom bombs weigh heavy in the balance. The United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, vindicate the 20th
century's claim to be champion of the oppressed and enemy of the
oppressor. Yet millions starve to death or are killed off in wars
between hostile political groups, despite these idealist institutions.

Are the multifarious agencies that condemn war themselves wholly
blameless? Are not those who shout that "all differences should be
settled by diplomacy", themselves guilty of pressing their views on
others by unjust and forceful measures? Are not Christian leaders, who
preach "peace on earth and goodwill towards men" and "war shall be no
more", merely adding to the cynical disillusionment of the younger
generation, who see that violence and bloodshed are still countenanced
as instruments of policy, and do not forget how the Roman Church turned
a blind eye on the crimes of Nazism and Fascism?

Apartheid
---------

The theory of apartheid, based on the utterances of some innovating
thinker ("philosopher") denies racial equality. Its promoters want "the
superior race" to run the world while "weaker inferior races" serve
them.

Such a notion is, of course, totally incompatible with any philosophy of
man that professes principles of "freedom", individual and/or social, as
basic. Further, it prevents any growth in the weak. Most modern
investigators regard the doctrine of the superiority of one race of
humans over another as unfounded and artificial superstition, when
viewed in the light of history and of scientific research.

"No pure race exists. No scientific evidence proves the race theory
definitely. An "Aryan" race is a myth. History does not relate the
actuality of a race which called itself "Aryan". The "Aryan" family of
languages is a fact. But there are many instances of different racial
stocks employing the same language for communication." ("History of
Religion", p.219.)

National Socialism's rise was part cause of World War II. Hitler's
Germany's ideology was "One race shall rule" — of course the "German
Nordics"—who were to found a strong center of government in mid-Europe.
Its brief brutal regime, by means of Congresses at Nuremberg and
elsewhere, and fanatic racial propaganda, drew the loyalty of German
nationals who made great, if illusory, profit from their dominance of
the neighboring lands.

Dr. Gustaf le Bon in his "Bases of the Spirit of Dictatorship" (p.194)
writes: "Racism played a major social role, regarded as pivotal by
politicians, so that after much bloody conflict it settled to an armed
peace which burst out again in devastating violence. Behind all this was
the idea that the strongest nation, and that most secure from danger, is
that with the largest territories and most numerous population, whereas
it is just these nations that live nearest the verge of overthrow."

Today the most advanced nations consider "white" superior to "cultured"
and cherish racial superstitions. In the cradle of civilization "sin" is
called "black" : and cultured people are bereft of many human rights and
liberties. In some states of the U.S.A. no black man may marry a white ;
and schools, colleges, hospitals segregate black and white. So do many
associations, hotels, restaurants, public transport lines, and—most
shameful of all—even some churches.

"In 1954 the Supreme Court made integration of schools obligatory. But
white schools only accepted 4 blacks per 100 students, and the entry of
some even of them into their schools was only achieved by force and the
use of troops." ("Tehran Illustrated News", No. 1174.)  
 The whites resorted to brutal atrocity in their struggle to hold back
the blacks, reminiscent of the worst barbarities of the Middle Ages.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights has not had the power to
enforce its principles of racial equality. In the space-age earth is
torn by racial conflict based on the color of men's skins. Stahwood Cobb
("Lord of the two Ka'abas" p.198) writes: "I am against Kipling's
sentiment; \`East is East and West is West, and never the twain shall
meet'. Why not? What human difference exists between one man and
another? Christ taught us two millennia ago that virtue and humanity are
linked with good intents, good works and love. But 20th century people
know better, and say that superiority depends on skin color! Hitler is
called bad for exalting one race: but today's scene is peopled by little
Hitlers. Take S. Africa. Take our own America. Apartheid and
discrimination everywhere! Take Viet Nam. Was there not a racist element
in our pressure there, on the basis that 'the Western white race is
superior to the Asian yellow'?"

South Africa, where blacks outnumber whites by 7 to 1, has made racial
discrimination its law—apartheid makes whites, blacks, Indian
immigrants, cultured, live in separate communities. The identity cards
state which group they belong to. The separation applies in buses,
trains, churches, restaurants, telephone-kiosks, hospitals and
cemeteries. Interracial marriages are prohibited. A black may not work
in a white area nor take up a job of high intellectual or scientific
level. Menial tasks are reserved for blacks. Small wonder that sometimes
half a million are in prison! White judges preside over cases involving
blacks. "Keyhan" (the Tehran Daily) (No. 7013) reported that a black
girl, born in the house of a white S. African family, was only allowed
to remain in her father's home as a maid, according to the S. African
law, or else go and live in the black section of Johannesburg. The
father preferred to move house and home to a land where his daughter
could live with her parents, as she should, rather than bow to the
inhuman law enforced by the highest instance in S. African law.

"March 12, 1960, Sharpville was one of several S. African cities where
demonstrations protested against the law that all blacks must carry
identity cards and show them whenever ordered. Sharpville police fired
on a peaceful demonstration walking past the police H.Q., killing 69,
and wounding 180." ("Ettela'at" (Tehran Daily) No. 13149.) What is such
repression but the enforcement of slavery?

Harry Harwood, in his book on "Freedom", writes: "True, slavery in the
old form is abolished; but it lingers on in the form of class
enslavement in our society, with the endeavor to keep the blacks on the
lowest rung of the social ladder."

Landslide in Family Life
------------------------

The family is the community in microcosm. It is the root from which
nations grow. It is the basic unit of society. Its climate must be love
and its soil character. In it human life begins—and ends! It must be
happy, a citadel of heart-warming peace and quiet, where affection
reigns, which runs on oiled wheels of confidence and trust, security and
sincerity. The more firm its spiritual and moral edifice, the more sure
its joy and happiness in today's troubled, explosive, insurrectionary
atmosphere. Every human being has a greater need than ever for a home
and family which will provide a haven of quiet and a refuge for thought
and reflection.

The West pursued a simple agricultural life before the industrial
revolution. In those days the family was a center of consideration,
caring and constancy. Men went out to the fields to work for a living.
Women set the care and upbringing of their little ones above all else.
The family circle bounded the lives of all its members.

But industry needed hands. One of the first effects of its need was the
dispersal of men, women and children to industrial centers, government
offices, commercial houses and other large institutions. Conurbations
grew in which the sole object of existence was to increase the outward
comforts and luxuries of life.

This break-up of family life weakened the marriage bond. Gentleness and
affection grievously diminished. Women felt lost without the
single-minded devotion to their family and the upbringing of their
children which had been their sole preoccupation in previous epochs.
They spent their energy in exhausting factory work. The dual role of
factory worker and mother proved too much. The necessary time, the
adequate opportunity, for leisure of heart, for ordering family life,
was missing. She must clock in at the fixed time at work; and housework
lost its charm in the weary hours of exhaustion which were all she had
left to give to it.

Further, the new "freedom" was so limitless that it uprooted family
life, casting chastity and decency to the winds, leaving disaster and
division to replace the morality of family and social unity, which had
relied on religion and conscience for their sanctions.

The mounting tide of divorces is sweeping the civilized world on a
dangerous course, yet it is helplessly unable to stem the flood.

A petty difference in taste between husband and wife is found sufficient
ground for ending a marriage-contract. Minor conflicts and
incompatibilities are all treated as evidence that a marriage has
irretrievably broken down and that a family unit should be split. The
storm-clouds of passion and prurience, with hurricane force, blast the
tender growths of family oneness; and the most sacred inheritance of the
centuries falls victim to the violence of the most unstable and
ephemeral desires. Yet a modicum of common sense could solve the tiff
and quench the fire, while tolerance and unselfishness would stabilize
the relationship on a sure foundation of principle, justice and love.

An Iranian living in Germany told me that in the last few years all his
neighbors, without exception, had ended their marriages in the divorce
courts!

The Iranian national daily "Keyhan" (No. 6926), reported that marriage
guidance councils had been set up all over East Germany to check the
flood of divorces and broken families. Doctors and lawyers, too, had
joined the campaign. Newspapers were devoting column after column to the
matter. The rising curve of divorce statistics was blamed primarily on
the wives' employment in industrial jobs which kept them outside the
home.

Sheer economic need drove 70% of married women to take a job simply to
gain an adequate family income. Of these 60% had children. The toll of
the double call on her energies by job and family house holding on a
woman's nerves naturally is so severe that she and her husband quarrel
constantly, until their morale cracks and divorce seems the only
solution for an intolerably strained situation.

Tolstoj wrote: "One main cause of the upsurge in the divorce rate is
women's excessive freedom of choice, which the capricious and touchy
feminine nature cannot carry. Of course it is also true that the
machine-age does produce nervous strain, and throws men and women into
relationships of intimacy and familiarity which easily cross the bounds
of legitimate companionship, and may arouse jealousy within the family ;
while women's employment outside the house rouses a host of further
problems."

Statistics in New York and Washington show that divorce amongst
intellectuals (sic!) outnumbers those amongst all other classes; while
those in Hollywood were so shocking that the authorities refused to
publish them.

"Keyhan" on 28 Farvardin 1339 reported that divorces in the past year in
England were a record total-50% due to unfaithfulness, 50% to other
causes.

America's "Wake Magazine" reported that the divorce rate had increased
1,000% in the last ten years.

French courts heard 9,785 suits for divorce, 8,000 on the wives'
initiative.

World War I, and World War II still more, increased youth's rejection as
an expression of "freedom", of traditional moral standards, and divorces
increased in consequence. G. de Pels in his book "Matrimony and
Modernity" says : "The excess of divorces over first marriages is due to
the effects of World Wars I and II."

"The Reader's Digest", Persian Edition (No. 103, Year 25), reports a
request to the French government by the French Family Federation that
divorce be prohibited in the first three years of wedlock. England has
enacted the same law with two exceptions only: extraordinary brutality
by the husband, or extraordinary corruption in the wife.

In the U.S.A., 3,000,000 children's parents are separated (Tehran Weekly
Journal "Ettela'at" (No. 1206)). Lawson writes: "Anyone with a grain of
philanthropic sense must feel the pain of these terrifying figures and
seek to cure them. Since most separations are due to the women's
initiative, both cause and cure must be found in them."

Alas, Iran's own Westernized classes are afflicted with the same
divorce-disease. In the last decade in Tehran alone over 1,000 divorces
have occurred because of quarrels over money, and been reported in the
papers. Many more went unreported. Of 15,335 weddings in Tehran in 1339,
4,839 ended in divorce — almost one in three. 86% of these divorces were
demanded by the wives—all Westernized materialist intellectuals (save
the mark!). It is a warning of a menacing peril which must be averted.
The type of "civilization" which destroys the family cannot be left as
it is if we are not to see division cleave our people asunder and
unbridled passions annihilate our culture. It must be replaced by the
practice of Islam's stabilizing and constructive social lore.

Love of Animals
---------------

Certain Western nations are dog-lovers to the point of madness. An
Iranian scientist who took his medical degree in Germany wrote: "My
landlord loved his dog, kissed it and cuddled it. I tried to warn him of
the danger of infection with hydatid cysts. He dismissed my remarks as
unfounded, so I fetched him a medical book, which he studied with
dismay, and then asked me: 'If contact with a dog is so dangerous, why
do physicians and university professors keep dogs in their homes?' I
replied that there are many habits professionally recognized as harmful
to health which medical men indulge in because they like them, making a
mockery of commonsense, science and reason, preferring to risk their
welfare!"

Iran's National Society for the Protection of Animals, in its journal,
quotes an American magazine, which sent a questionnaire to all its
dog-loving clients (mostly women), asking:

1. Do you like your dog or your spouse best?

2. If you and your dog were both hungry, with insufficient food even for
one, would you give that little to your dog, or eat it yourself?

3. Does your dog sleep in your bedroom?

4. If your dog died would you shed tears?

5. Do you credit your dog with a personality above animal level?

6. If your dog bit your child and your child hit the dog with a stone
and both were howling, which would you rush to comfort?

7. If your dog and your husband both fell sick simultaneously, which
would you call the doctor to first?

8. Does your mind frequently wander to thoughts of your dog while you
are working at your office?

Of 75,000 replies, the answers worked out as follows:

1. Close on two-thirds loved their husbands when the husband loved the
dog. A number roundly stated that their dog was everything for them!

2. 60,000 said they'd give the dog the food, since it mattered less if
they starved to death themselves than if the dog should fail to survive.

3. 49,000 had their dog sleeping in the bedroom. "He's better than
anyone else," wrote the women.

4. Two-thirds would shed tears if the dog died, and give it a funeral
ceremony.

5. Practically all replies regarded their dog as more than an animal,
with a spiritual personality.  
 6. We'd try to quiet both."

7. "First the vet, then the doctor."

8. "Of course our thoughts frequently turn to our dogs while we're away
at work—or anywhere else, for that matter. The dog plays too important a
part in life for anyone not to keep on thinking of it."

Fancy crediting a dog with a spiritual personality and mourning its
death! These are idealists, who espouse the cause of freedom and
independence. Yet they condone the ruthless bombing with incendiaries
and atomic warheads of entire nations without a qualm. They let the dog
sleep in their bedroom yet they refuse entry into society to millions of
fellow-humans, just for the crime of having a black skin.

They call the vet as soon as the dog is ill and fix its cure yet they
let humans die, in groups, of famine, poverty and disease, without
compunction. In America the special shops for dogs stock ten kinds of
eau de cologne and even sell toothpaste, cosmetics, combs and all
beauty-specialties for dogs!

"Time Magazine" is quoted in "Ettela'at" (No. 13241), thus: "Some of our
great cities are literally 'the dog house' — e.g. London, Tokyo, Mexico
City. In these, dogs are so numerous that they cause discomfort and dirt
everywhere. They bite children in growing numbers and make confusion
more confounded. Tokyo has 280,000; Los Angeles 300,000; New York
500,000; London 700,000; Mexico City over a million. Dogs are making a
mess of the world."

The French periodical "Animal" reported that American dog-owners spend
$300,000,000 annually on beauty goods and garments for their pets. In
New York, San Francisco, Chicago, Los Angeles, beauty-shops for dogs do
a roaring trade. Their attendants have to take a six or twelve-month
course for a "Diploma of Dog-Beautician" to get the job! Most cities
have at least one dog cemetery with funeral-rites for dogs.

Meantime, five million unemployed suffer neglect and indigence.

Of course, Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals are
maintained by humane and tenderhearted people. Should they not extend
their humane care to their own kind? Dr. Alexis Carrel rightly voiced
the protest of all sane people against the contradictions tolerated in
this world. "This should ye have done; and also not have left the other
undone." Meaning "Do the lesser humane work (i.e. for animals) without
neglecting the greater humane work for people."

Childhood Traumas
-----------------

The physical and biological equipment of a woman fit her for certain
creative functions in life, peculiar to her sex, which she is called to
fulfill. Her capacity for motherhood carries with it certain emotional,
mental and nervous conformations of spirit. She is formed to care for
and to bring up children with supreme art and heart. The meeting of an
infant's many wants, and the careful nurture of its delicate instincts
in the secure climate of a loving home, is, amidst the raging passions
and deadly violence prevailing in our modern world, the most vital and
basic task offered to any human being. No nursery school, no infants'
crèche, however well-equipped or psychologically planned, can supply a
mother's place. A child deprived of mother-love suffers psychological
injuries.

Western women, busied with jobs outside the home, have abandoned
nature's destiny; and diverted the wonderful talents innate in the
feminine personality into unnatural and disastrous sidetracks. The
materialisms of East and West are alike incapable of changing the
ingredients of human nature. Both have removed woman from the role for
which she was designed. Untold malformations result —in personalities,
in communities, in moral conduct. Juveniles brought up without the
proper home-environment suffer incurable traumas. Nurseries run by
people whose only motive is to make a living and who lack the passion to
bring children up, treat their charges from the start as potential
rebels, and thereby rob them of patience and of self-respect.

Dr. Alexis Carrel writes:  
 "Modern society has committed a serious mistake by entirely
substituting the school for familial training. The mothers abandon their
children to the kindergarten in order to attend to their careers, their
social ambitions, their sexual pleasures, their literary or artistic
fancies, or simply to play bridge, go to the cinema, and waste their
time in busy idleness. They are, thus, responsible for the disappearance
of the familial group, where the child was kept in contact with adults
and learned a great deal from them. Children brought up in schools with
a crowd of other children of their own age [Carrel writes \`young dogs
brought up in kennels with others of the same age do not develop as well
as puppies free to run about with their parents'. Translator] do not
develop as well as those living in the company of intelligent adults.
The child easily molds his physiological, affective, and mental
activities upon those of his surroundings. He learns little from
children of his own age. When he is only a unit in a school he remains
incomplete. To reach full strength the individual requires the relative
isolation and the attention of the restricted social group consisting of
the family." [^8]

Tehran weekly "Ettela'at" (No. 1206) quotes a foreign report that in
America 25% of women in divorce suits suffer from mental ailments, while
150,000 children per annum fall victims to the ills consequent upon a
divided home. Women, after a day's work, go home tired out; while
home-life itself is so painful for many that they take tranquillizers or
other pills, and frequent psychiatric clinics, in search of relief from
nervous debility. Youth psychiatrist Dr. George Mally says: "Many
psychological ailments in young people are due to memories of babyhood
for which their mothers bear the blame. Lying, torturing dumb animals,
delinquency, appear in young people who have lacked a mother's care."

Where affection and love between father and mother is weak, children
feel less sense of duty to parents. In some families the members never
see each other for years, and children by the age of 17 turn surly and
rebellious. Some parents turn the children out of the home to fend for
themselves at the earliest age allowed by law. Others allow the children
to continue to live at home, if they contribute the expenses of their
board and lodging, and replace any crockery they break at once out of
their own pocket. Such treatment is worse for girls, who tend to seek
solace for the loneliness caused by lack of parental care in undesirable
friendships with boys.

Conurbations where machines do so much of the work have banished the
ancient warmth and joy of heartfelt affection in family and neighborly
relations. Townspeople forget what tenderness, unselfish­ness,
fellow-feeling and sympathy are; and come to count those they call
"friend" on the fingers of one hand. Civilized living has dried out the
wellsprings of humanity with its "new order". On the assembly-line,
cooperation is enforced by legal and financial sanctions. But the
team-work of heart, by which one person voluntarily helps another who is
in difficulties, vanishes amongst the depersonalized crowds of
un-neighbourly neighbors. "Bear ye one another's burdens", which for our
tribal forefathers was normal living, has nowadays become something
which few people will do unless they are paid for it.

While I was a patient in that German hospital, my visitors, though few,
were more numerous than those who visited native German patients, much
to the hospital staffs surprise.

Let me add a true story from my own experience. Some years ago a German
university professor accepted Islam under the tutelage of the Hamburg
Islamic community. Later the new Muslim fell ill and was hospitalized.
When the Islamic leader heard of this, he straightaway went to visit the
professor in hospital. He found him unexpectedly dejected and downcast.
After a long silence the professor broke out with a sad tale : "Today my
wife and son visited me. They had learned that I had an incurable
cancer, and said they had come to say 'goodbye' for the last time as
they understood I have only a few days more to live. It's not the fact
that I am dying that gets me down, but my wife and my son's
heartlessness."

"Never mind!" said the Imam, "Islam's your family now. And we believers
will come and sit around you here and see to your every need until the
end and after. To do this is for us a winning of merit in heaven, a
sacred duty, a divine command and sincere expression of our brotherly
love." This news made the patient's face light up. Thereafter he
gradually weakened and died.

The Muslim community undertook his funeral and escorted his body to
their cemetery. Whilst the cortege was proceeding with due solemnity, a
youth rushed up and angrily demanded the professor's corpse. They asked
"Why?" He said: "That's my father you are burying—illegally, for I sold
the hospital his body for 30 marks some days before he died!"

The scandalized Muslims stood firm. After some heated altercation the
young man had to withdraw his demand. Asked later what his job was, he
replied: "I work days in a factory and evenings in a dog-beauty-parlor."
To such depths can family love, human feeling and a sense of
proportionate values sink in a society that is "civilized"!

Conclusion of Part 1
--------------------

Mankind's downhill rush from moral levels plunges into a materialist
flood of social unrest and sedition. The greatest thinkers realize that
some way must be found to end the avalanche if the world is not to
collapse from its own depravity. Thinkers, as one man, declare that only
in a revival of faith and morality can there be found a safe ground on
which to build the new society, A change of heart in countless
individuals must precede, and lay the foundation for, family, community,
financial, national and international renewal. It is a hopeful sign that
the masses of ordinary people submerged in the sea of troubles caused by
materialist, heartless, machine-made living are beginning to realize the
inhumanity and hopelessness of such a way of life and type of society.

General Dwight D. Eisenhower, as U.S. President, voiced this realization
in powerful words: "Our affluent society rests on shaky moral grounds.
We reach the moon and pollute the earth. We long for peace and go to
war. An age that has split the atom must heal the splits in humanity.
Empty hands must be filled with work, empty stomachs with food, and
empty hearts with satisfaction. To cure the moral crisis that blights
our world, each of us need only look to ourselves. If we each listen to
the still small voice of conscience we shall soon perceive that simple
basic things, like goodness, purity, unselfishness, love, integrity, are
our greatest and most priceless treasure. Seek affluence in these, and
the tragedies of misused material affluence will end in happiness for
all."

Dr. Alexis Carrel in his "Way and Rule of Life" (pp.15 and 34): "We need
a world in which every person can develop their innate talents to the
full, with no separation between material and spiritual. We have learnt
that life cannot be lived right without a guide and a compass. But too
few are alert to the grave perils which await human life if we do not
follow that guide's directions. Too many are guided by their fleeting
passions, intoxicated by the materialist ease which technology provides,
unwilling to renounce even a small portion of those comforts, pursuing
pleasure, bobbing like corks on the flood of lust for gain and fun which
will soon drop us all over the falls.

Instead of letting the assumptions of an orderly universe, on which
science bases its work, shape our human institutions, and bear us upward
towards supreme truth, we have poured them into the molds of ideologies
which can never satisfy our real need. Putting the material first,
modern man sacrifices spiritual to economic affluence, and abandons
peace of heart for hedonism. We think 'freedom' includes independence of
nature's laws. Liberalism and Marxism preach doctrines which neglect the
fact that man was not made only for 'production and consumption'.

He was designed for pure love, religious feeling, intellectual
treasures, creative imagination, self-sacrifice and heroic living. To
live solely for economics is to amputate a vital part of his
personality, and this is why both liberalism and Marxism not merely
neglect but actually destroy and cast away the basic elements which
nature itself included in man's composition."

To eradicate the causes of these tragedies and miseries, the modern
world's sole hope is a return to Divine Truth as revealed by God's
inspiration through His Prophets. The next sphere for exploration must
be that interior space which is within the mind of man. For this we must
first disperse the storm-clouds of passion which darken it : we must
lose the fetters of lust which bind the human spirit : we must expel the
corruption and filth which confine him in the valley of the shadow by
means of a cleansing revolution which refines both thinking and living.
Only so can man regain true humanity and enter into his rightful
heritage of those spiritual values which should be his distinguishing
characteristic, by means of which alone the deep inward happiness Man
was made for can grow and expand to all his fellow humans everywhere.

[^1]: Stanwood Cobb, "Lord of 2 Ka'abas" p. 1.

[^2]: Marcel Cache "Social History," Vol. II.

[^3]: Marcel Cache "Social History," op. cit., Vol. II, p.123.

[^4]: "History of Free Thought", p.147. 

[^5]: "La Civilization Islamique et Arabe", p.407.

[^6]: "Divorce and Modernity", p.34.

[^7]: "The Encyclopedia Britannica", Vol. 23, p.45.

[^8]: Alexis Carrel, "Man, the Unknown", Harpers, New York : 50th
edition p.270.


