Part 2: Islam's Gifts to the World
==================================

Islam
-----

Islam stands for harmony and perfectibility with an unmatched depth and
breadth of scope that comprises all aspects of spirit and life. It knows
all the roads that lead to blessing and happiness. It has the cure for
human ills, individual and social, and makes them as plain as the wit of
man can devise or comprehend. It sets out to develop all sides of each
person : and therefore perforce includes every reality which impacts
human existence.

It has not given way, in its doctrine of man, to modern errors or
corrupt institutions. It does not set man in God's place. To do so is to
leave man with only himself to rely on in all his pride and egotism : or
else to reduce him to the slavery of being a beast of burden for his
fellows, powerless, will-less, helpless before nature's and matter's
tyrannies. This is precisely what modern heresies do with man. But Islam
vindicates man's unique nature vis-à-vis all other living creatures,
affirming that he is a special creation with a lofty calling all his
own.

Islam holds that a man's personality does not cease to exist with death,
but is continuous and eternal. "Worldly" and "other-worldly" are an
indivisible unity. Body and soul can therefore not be dissolved into
disparate elements. Islam, on these grounds, presents both worlds in
shining terms. It both trains a man for eternity and also finds the
guiding principles for its public institutions on earth in the sublime
destiny inherent in man's creation.

Eternity dictates universal principles, unchanging and unchangeable.
These Islam proclaims as tenets, convictions, commandments, statutes, in
its school of contentment, in its thrust for progress. It offers man the
perfection of freedom for thought, for concern, and for exegesis of the
divine law on matters of social necessity. It reverts to first
principles which provide the sure and unshifting basis of rock-bottom
truth in all the chances and changes of this mortal life.

Islam holds that man has certain characteristics which are his link with
the material world and certain others which connect him with realities
that are non-material and which motivate desires and aims of a more
sublime nature. Body, mind and spirit each has its proper propensities.
Each must be duly weighed, so that what one of these indivisible
elements desires does not conflict with the desire of another.

Islam takes all the elements and facets of human nature into account and
caters for the compound essence of man's combined material and spiritual
propensities. It draws him upward towards the highest without cutting
his roots in the material. It demands absolute purity and chastity
without denying the flesh and its needs. Its current flows from pole to
pole over a network of live wires—convictions and regulations which
preserve the integrity of all the innate human instincts while rejecting
the Freudian doctrine of total freedom which treats man as nothing but
animal.

Islam is not a mere set of ideas in the world of metaphysical
speculation: nor did it come into being simply to order man's social
living. It is a way of life so comprehensively meaningful that it shapes
education, society and culture to heights none other ever aimed at. It
forms a supreme court of appeal and rallying-point for East and West
alike, and offers them an ideology which can answer their divisive
materialisms. It can replace their inequities and contradictions with a
more universal, more perfect and more powerful idea.

Islam does not concede priority of any kind to material affluence or to
hedonistic comfort as basic for happiness. It finds its principles in an
analysis of man's true nature. With these principles it constructs a
plan for individual, social and international living, framed by fixed
and all-embracing moral standards, aimed at a goal for humanity far
loftier than the modern world's limited materialist aims.

Islam does not imprison man in the narrow confines of the material and
the financial. It sets him in a spacious and expansive air. There
morality, principle and the spirit reign. Its statutes are those which
spring from the nature of man himself. They encourage mutual help and
team-work. They pursue values outside the straitened boundaries imposed
on individual and on community by the petty pusillanimous pedestrian
patterns of materialist purposes. Instead it yokes man's strength and
striving to the change, advance, progress and perfecting inherent in his
creation.

Islamic training sets out to refine and enhance human qualities and to
harness them to right and reasonable objectives which direct and dictate
every forward step to the desired end. It focuses a man's motives, which
arise from his natural desires and basic needs, in such a concentrated
and streamlined beam that each talent is called in to exercise its
function in due succession and order. Impetuous uncoordinated impulses
are thus controlled so that no single instinct overrule commonsense nor
momentary urge replace reason. Instead man is made master of his fate
and captain of his soul. Excess is obviated and every person is accorded
his or her legitimate share in the common triumph of all. In this
employment every need of body, mind and soul is met and satisfied.

Whenever in history individuals have united in harmonious pursuit of
such aims, persons and communities have found themselves. "What is
right" has ruled thoughts, conduct and character; human living has been
orderly and secure. Reason dictates this training, and calls to a
religion with convictions superstition-free, canons practical, statutes
feasible and excellences virtuous. The God-given human intelligence
intuitively and logically perceives their truth.

No man is asked to perform a task above that which he is able. But his
powers are put at full stretch. Every possibility within him is
expressed to the full. And each is, at doomsday, judged; then the fire
itself shall prove each man's work of what sort it is.

Islam and Politics
------------------

Modern political theory exalts "the general will". Democratic government
attempts to put that general will into practice by making law out of the
policy voted for by "the majority" (which need only be 51%) leaving null
and void the will of the minority (which may be that of as many as 49%
of the voters). The minority is thus not "free" at all, even though in
some cases its will may be sensible, and in the circumstances right. But
"Government by the Will of the People" will never voluntarily strip off
the sanctity and splendor with which it has endowed "the general will",
giving that concept precedence over all other material and spiritual
values.

Islam, on the other hand, gives precedence to the Will of the Lord of
this world, rather than to the uncontrolled inclinations and sentiments
of a majority of humans. Islam refuses to strip the Godhead of control
of the legislative and jurisdictional power. Islam's conception of
Godhead and of divine government is wide enough to comprise everything
that goes to make up human life everywhere on this planet. This makes
Islam man's unrivalled guardian. It demands total obedience to its
statutes on the ground that these are God-given and that therefore no
human being has a right to allow his own desires to dictate any action
in breach of these statutes and rules of life.

How can God be proclaimed worthy of total commitment by people who
arrange their lives on precepts deriving from other sources than God
Himself? No person dare claim divine authority for a partner for God,
nor substitute another lawgiver for Him. Islam's aim is to champion
truth and right in everything in human society, since truth does not
specialize exclusively in social, political and financial matters but
also clothes the stature of man himself in its most beautiful vestments.

The human physique is fearfully and wonderfully made. So are the rules
and rights that govern human living. No-one can claim a complete
knowledge of all the mysteries of man's make-up, or of the complicated
social structure it generates. For this structure comprises the
specialized areas of the body and the spirit of all its individuals as
well as of all their relationships with each other. Nor dare anyone
claim to be innocent of sin, of a shortcoming, a fault or an error.
No-one is aware of all the elements which go to make up human happiness
and welfare.

Despite all the devoted efforts of scientists to penetrate the mysteries
of human being, the area they have succeeded in covering is still
extremely limited. To quote Dr. Alexis Carrel again ("Man, the Unknown"
p.4): "Mankind has made a gigantic effort to know itself. Although we
possess the treasure of the observations accumulated by the scientists,
the philosophers, the poets, and the great mystics of all times, we have
grasped only certain aspects of ourselves. We do not apprehend man as a
whole. We know him as composed of distinct parts. And even these parts
are created by our methods. Each one of us is made up of a procession of
phantoms, in the midst of which strides an unknowable reality."

Without insight into the human make-up man cannot frame laws 100% suited
to the-human condition, nor justly cure the troubles that arise: witness
the bewilderment of legislators, their constant alteration of their own
statutes in face of today's new problems and unexpected blind alleys.
Motives of personal advantage, self-interest, profit, ambition, power,
and even of environmental predilections, intrude to distort the
legislators' outlook consciously or unconsciously. Montesquieu said of
legislation that "none is ever wholly objective and impartial, for the
personal ideas and sentiments of the legislator influence his drafting".
Thus Aristotle, because he was jealous of Plato, influenced Alexander to
denigrate his great predecessor.

Modern slogans of "Liberty and Equality" and "the Public Will" are empty
words used by politicians to win support for their laws, laws which in
fact represent the interests not of the masses but of the landowners and
capitalists.

Henry Ford wrote of England, which boasts itself "the Mother of
Democracy": "We cannot forget the 1926 general strike or the way the
government tried to break it with every means in its power. Parliament,
tool of the capitalists, proclaimed the strike unconstitutional and
illegal, and turned police and army out against the strikers with
bullets and tanks. Meantime the media of radio and press declared the
government to be the servant of the workers, a plain subterfuge
contradicted by the fines imposed on the trade unions and by the
imprisonment of their leaders as soon as the opportunity offered."

Khrushchev declared in the 22nd Supreme Soviet Congress : "In the era of
the personality-cult (i.e. under Stalin) corruption infiltrated our
Party's leadership, government and finances; produced decrees which trod
the masses' rights underfoot; lowered industrial output ; filled men
with fear in their work; and encouraged sycophants, informers and
character-assassins."

Thus both Eastern and Western systems of government falsely appear in
the guise of the public will, Parliamentary rule, representation of the
masses: while capitalism and communism alike frame inequitable laws
because they neglect the heavenly decrees which establish fast what is
best for man.

Islam and Legislation
---------------------

Jean Jacques Rousseau wrote:  
 "To discover the rules of society that are best suited to nations,
there would need to exist a superior intelligence who could understand
the passions of men without feeling any of them, who had no affinity
with our nature but knew it to the roots, whose happiness was
independent of ours but who would nevertheless make our happiness his
concern, . . . in fact a divine lawgiver is needed."[^1]

By these standards the most competent legislator is the Creator of man
Himself, He knows all the mysteries of man's being, makes no profit out
of any human society, and needs no man. Hence the principles which can
shape equitable social regulations must be learnt from a person who
receives direct guidance from the Creator, whose teachings are the
inspired revelations of that unique Source, and who is wholly reliant on
that Infinite Wisdom.

Human laws aim only at the ordering of human society. They do not stray
outside those limits, nor touch non-social matters like personal
conditions, attitudes of mind, spiritual excellence. They do not try to
cure internal pollutions within the personality. It is only when
personality problems issue in social disorder in action that they enter
the scope of legal measures. A person may be filthy in thought and
spirit and still good in the eyes of Western law, which looks only upon
outward acts and not upon the heart.

Islam with its wide outlook aims not just at redressing what has been
done wrong but primarily at putting individual and society right from
inside, regarding the ethical personality as the basic unit, and its
perfecting as the priority. Islam aims at an orderly society composed of
sound morals, sane thinking, sensible action, serene psyches. It
therefore legislates for the inner life of the individual in as much
detail as for the outer life of society. It brings order and congruence
between large and small in creation, the natural laws and the spiritual,
the material and the metaphysical, the individual and the social, creeds
and philosophies. It helps man not to come into collision with the
natural laws which underlie the orderliness of the universe;
disobedience to which collapses and confounds all human affairs.

Man-made institutions pursue performance of the law: but in Islam the
trustee for the law's performance is a deep-rooted faith; and a Muslim
duly performs his obligations by the force of morality and faith, even
in matters where he is seen by no one save by God alone. Armed force is
only needed to control the tiny minority of criminal-minded hypocrites.
Islam thus pays due regard both to inner purity of heart and to outward
purity of action. It calls those deeds good, laudable and meritorious
which spring from sincerity and faith.

USA's Attorney General, in his introduction to his book on Islamic Law,
wrote: "American law has only a tenuous connection with moral duty. An
American may be accounted a law-abiding citizen even though his inner
life is foul and corrupt. But Islam sees the fount of law in the Will of
God as revealed to and proclaimed through His Apostle Muhammad. This
Law, this Divine Will, treats the entire body of believers as a single
society, including all the multifarious races and nationalities which go
to make it up in a far-scattered community.

This gives religion its true sound force and makes it the cohesive
element of society. No bounds of nationality or geography divide, for
the government itself is obedient to the one supreme authority of the
Qur'an. This leaves no place for any other legislator; so that no
competition or rivalry or rift can arise. The believer regards this
world as a vale of soul-making, the ante-room to the next: and the
Qur'an makes perfectly plain what are the conditions and laws which
govern believers' behavior to each other and towards society; and thus
makes the changeover from this world to the next a sure and sound and
safe transition."

Despite Westerners' small acquaintance with Islam, and their often
mistaken ideas, far removed from reality, a comparatively large number
of their thinkers grasp some of the depth and profundity of Islamic
teaching and do not conceal their admiration for its clear exegesis and
estimable doctrines.

A Muslim scientist's respect for Islam's laws and ordinances is no
surprise. But if a non-Muslim savant, despite his slavery to his own
religious bigotry, yet recognizes Islam's grandeur and greatness and its
lofty leading, that is a real tribute, especially when it is based on a
recognition of the progressive nature of Islam's legal systems and their
legacy to mankind. This is why this book quotes foreign verdicts on
Islam. We do so, not because we need their support, but because they can
help to open the road for seekers and enquirers so that who reads may
run its way.

Dr. Laura Veccia Vaglieri, Naples University professor, wrote: "In the
Qur'an we come across jewels and treasures of knowledge and insight
which are superior to the products of our most brilliant geniuses,
profound philosophers and powerful politicians. How can such a book be
the product of the brain of a single man— and that of a man whose life
was spent in commercial, not particularly religious, circles — far
removed from all schools of learning? He himself always insisted that he
was in himself an ordinary simple man like other men, unable, without
the help of the Almighty, to produce the miracle of such work. None
other than He whose knowledge compasses all that is in heaven and earth
could produce the Qur'an."

Bernard Shaw, in his "Muhammad, Apostle of Allah", said: "I have always
held the religion of Muhammad in the highest esteem simply from the
marvel of its living vigor. To my mind it is the sole religion capable
of success in mastering the multifarious vicissitudes of life and the
differences of culture. I foresee (it is manifest even today) that, man
by man, Europeans will come to adopt the Islamic faith. Mediaeval
theologians for reasons of ignorance or bigotry pictured Muhammad's
religion as full of darkness, and considered that he had cast down a
challenge to Christ in a spirit of hatred and fanaticism. After much
study of the man, I have concluded that Muhammad was not only not
against Christ, but that he saw in Him despairing mankind's savior. I am
convinced that if a man like him would undertake leadership in the new
world, he would succeed in solving its problems, and secure that peace
and prosperity which all men want."

Voltaire, who at the beginning was one of Islam's most obdurate
opponents and poured scorn on the Prophet, after his 40 years of study
of religion, philosophy and history, frankly said: "Muhammad's religion
was unquestionably superior to that of Jesus. He never descended to the
wild blasphemies of Christians, nor said that one God was three or three
Gods were one. The single pillar of his faith is the One God. Islam owes
its being to its founder's decrees and manliness; whereas Christians
used the sword to force their religion on others. Oh Lord! if only all
nations of Europe would make the Muslims their models."

One of Voltaire's heroes was Martin Luther. Yet he wrote that "Luther
was not worthy to unloose the latchets of Muhammad's shoes. Muhammad was
a great man and a trainer of great men by his example of virtue and
perfection. A wise lawgiver, a just ruler, an ascetic prophet, he raised
the greatest revolution earth has seen."

Tolstoy wrote: "Muhammad needs no other claim to fame than that he
raised a barbarous bloodthirsty people out of their diabolical customs
to untold advances. His Canon Law with its intelligence and wisdom will
come to be the world's authority."

Islam and Ideologies
--------------------

Our world is split into two blocs. They hold contradictory ideologies,
each backed by its own scientists and savants who, in a spate of
pamphlets and books, prove it right and its opponents wrong. Each claims
to be the sole sure road to happiness, and says its adversary is the
sole cause of confusion and catastrophe.

Both cannot be right. Both may be wrong! Each may be missing a vital
point. Yet both have made large contributions to human progress through
the brilliance of some of their scientists and technologists.

Progress in one field is no proof of equal progress in every field of
human life, any more than an individual's possession of one set of
talents indicates a competence in all occupations. An outstanding
physician is not ipso facto a brilliant musician! Nor does technological
advance ipso facto imply equal advance in thought, wisdom, religion,
government, morality.

Dr. Alexis Carrel writes ("Man, the Unknown" p. 27 and 28): "The
applications of scientific discoveries have transformed the material and
mental worlds. These transformations exert on us a profound influence.
Their unfortunate effect comes from the fact that they have been made
without consideration for our nature. Our ignorance of ourselves has
given to mechanics, physics and chemistry the power to modify at random
the ancestral forms of life. Man should be the measure of all.

On the contrary, he is a stranger in the world that he has created. He
has been incapable of organizing this world for himself, because he did
not possess a practical knowledge of his own nature. Thus, the enormous
advance gained by the sciences of inanimate matter over those of living
things is one of the greatest catastrophes ever suffered by humanity.

The environment born of our intelligence and our inventions is adjusted
neither to our stature nor to our shape. We are unhappy. We degenerate
morally and mentally. The groups and the nations in which industrial
civilization has attained its highest development are precisely those
which are becoming weaker, and whose return to barbarism is the most
rapid."

The perfection and sublimating of man in a whole series of different
areas requires a body of sound and universal teachings based on
realities of human life and free of all faults and errors. Such is only
to be found in the teachings of the prophets of God to whom revelation
was granted concerning the origins of the world's being.

Morality, to rely on sanctions higher than the natural and to be
inspired by what is beyond the material, must build solely on
fundamental and basic instructions.

From the moment that man was set upon the globe and laid the groundwork
of civilization, a cry rose to heaven from his inward depths. This cry
we call religion. Its truth is indissolubly connected with a moral
order.

Inhumanity, faction, inequity, tyranny, war, all testify to the truth
that governments and their laws have never sufficed to control the
sentiments and beliefs and feelings of man nor to establish an order of
justice, happiness, peace and quietude in society. Science and knowledge
can never solve the problems of human life nor prevent its derailment
except in alliance with religion.

Will Durant, American sociologist and philosopher, writes in his
"Pleasures of Philosophy" (pp.326/7): "Has a government such power in
economic and ethical matters to preserve all the heritage of knowledge
and morals and art stored up over generations and woven into the warp
and woof of a nation's culture? Can it increase that heritage and hand
it on to posterity? Can a government, with all the modern machinery at
its disposal, bring the treasures of science to those depressed classes
who still think of scientific utterances as blasphemy and witchcraft?

Why it is that such small men govern America's biggest cities? Why is
our administration conducted in such a way as to make one weep over the
lack of noble policies and true patriotism? Why do corruption and
deception enter into our elections and make havoc of public property?
Why has government's basic task dwindled today to an attempt merely to
prevent crime? Why do governments not seek to understand the causes of
war and the conditions of peace? Churches and families ought to
undertake the imposition of civilization on such governments."

Western society can only continue to tolerate moral confusion and its
ways of destruction because of its limited powers to take reform into
its own hands. But the continuation of this state of affairs already
tolls a warning bell. Peril lies close at hand, for civilization stays
stable only so long as there is a balance between ends and means,
between authority and aspiration. When this equilibrium breaks down,
such violence ensues that no goodness can stop it. It rushes headlong to
an inevitable disruption. You will find no nation throughout human
history which survived the corruption of indulgence and permissiveness.

Rome perished. The glory of Greece collapsed. France, because of the
indulgent lives of its citizens, turned soft and gave way to the first
Nazi assault. One of their most famous generals himself wrote that the
reason for their weakness was the inner erosion of character.

Spengler foresaw the downfall of Western civilization and said that
other lands would in the future see great cultures arise. Perhaps the
East will be one of the first to return to its ancient heritage. This
will not come by worshipping at the false shrine of misguided
civilizations. But the decline of one civilization can awaken men to the
divine plan and inspire them to follow it; and so, by means of this
sublime truth, to found an entirely new social life on sound
foundations.

Islam and Nationhood
--------------------

Today, alas, the symptoms of an inferiority-complex over Western
industrial prowess and its deadly consequences mark everything in
Eastern nations' life. Many a Muslim is so impregnated with Western
ideas that he wishes to see everything through Western spectacles, in
the belief that progress demands manners and morals, laws and
legislation, which copy Western styles. This total surrender welds the
ring of slavery in our ears.

We spread the red carpet of our self-respect, our material and moral
wealth, our religious and national heritage of good-breeding, before
their feet. This is what saps Muslim nations' strength, both physical
and spiritual. Muslims they may be: but they have lost the art of
thinking on Islamic lines, cast aside their Muslim outlook on world
events, alienated themselves from Islam's creed and culture, and want to
Westernize all Muslim ways. Mankind's greatest problems are not those
which can be solved in the laboratory.

Shall a foreign force prevent our taking our place in civilization’s
caravan? Suppose we follow neither the capitalist nor the communist
trail. Suppose perfect social justice rules the interior of our land,
and wins us an international regard, restoring our ancient prestige
amongst the assembly of national governments. Might this not save us and
mankind from further horrors of wars?

Why do we not let our religion's laws and statutes solve our internal
problems? If it can prevent us occupying the seat of a beggar at the
table of humanity, and instead install us as masters in that house to
the benefit of all, is this a small thing? Can a rich and generous giver
turn beggar? Can a man born to command turn submissive, cringe and crawl
as an inferior, and give up his right to choose the road he knows is
proper?

Our inherited treasures have blessed humanity in the past. Neither West
nor East dare disregard that fact, and despise us as backward and
helpless, however much they strive to turn our confidence into confusion
and our hope into hopelessness, so that we fall easy prey. Our long
experience over three thousand years of history has left us tired. We
have culled habits, thought, laws, manners from here and there over
centuries, and donned them in indiscriminate combination, so that we
make ourselves more like figures in a ridiculous carnival procession
than the dignified personalities that we should be, wearing our own
national garb with distinction and consuming our national dishes with
conscious nobility.

Take our present constitution. We first copied French models: then those
of other European nations were added; and later, on each occasion when
new legislation was called for, sought our mound in some other place
again, so that there is an endless conflict between the spirit of the
laws which we have borrowed from outside, and the national spirit for
which the laws are made. As a result, a transgressor of the law gains
national renown, hero-worship, and help unstinted in every way.

Why? Through ignorance in the community? Not so! For the educated do not
respond to the laws. No! It is the inconsistency between the national
spirit and the borrowed laws, unrelated to social needs, historical
antecedents, national consciousness, personal convictions that emerged
from an environment entirely alien to the spirit of our people. Each
borrowed law came from a community with its own history, religion, needs
and peculiar realities. Yet none of them can even give a wholly positive
answer to its own people, as continuous insurrectionary conditions show.

Professor Hocking of Harvard in "The Spirit of World Politics" writes:
"Islamic lands will not progress by merely imitating Western
arrangements and values. Can Islam produce fresh thinking, independent
laws and relevant statutes to fit the new needs raised by modern
society? Yes! — and more! Islam offers humanity greater possibilities
for advance than others can. Its lack is not ability—but the will to use
it. In reality the Shar'ia contains all the ingredients needed."

Iran's national daily "Keyhan" on 14th Day, 1345 reported: "Yesterday,
anniversary of the martyrdom of the Imam Ali, all Tehran practiced
Islam's laws 100%. Result : —no crimes; forensic offices unemployed ; no
murders; no violence ; no ripple on the calm surface ; borough officers
and police untroubled by any calls; even family quarrels within the
homes were quickly hushed in reverence for the martyred Leader of the
Faithful."

The Persian "Reader's Digest" (No. 35, Year 25) corroborated this,
saying: "The average number of corpses in Tehran mortuaries on any one
day of last year was 6 — fewer of course on religious holy days and more
on some other days. Last week's anniversary (Day 13th) of Ali's
martyrdom was total peace— a proof of the persistent strength of
religious conviction, and of the calm and sanity society attains on days
when sale of alcohol is banned and amusement houses are closed."

Such is the result of Muslims practicing their religion's laws for 24
hours. Could a single Western city report, if not 24 hours, even 60
minutes, without an accident, a theft or a murder? When will mankind
attain the adult maturity to learn the simple lesson from which so
easily comes the peace, the quiet, the unity that all want? It is plain
serendipity for us for, in the poet's words, I round the globe in search
of Heaven did roam: Returned, and found my Heaven was here at home."

Islam and Economics (1)
-----------------------

Man has always had to wrestle with the task of exploiting nature's
resources to extract his livelihood from there. In the primitive
centuries, as Aristotle said, life organized itself socially "to make it
possible to live: and continued, to make it possible to live well." In
the last four centuries a "science of economics" has been deduced from
the statutes regulating human relations and the exchange of goods which
developed through this social organization. Faced with the vast
expansion of a technology and affluence, this "science" has broken into
two opposing camps.

On the one side "Capitalism" or "free enterprise" believes that nature
should take its course in economics, so that an enlightened
self-interest causes the genius of some finally to level out to the
benefit of all. This is the doctrine for which the Western bloc stands.

On the other side "Communism" holds that the means of production must be
controlled by a proletariat state, so that a just and equal sharing of
all the benefits of human endeavor is imposed on society.

The rivalry for absolute power between these two ideologies hangs over
the modern world with a menace like the sword of Damocles.

We must ask Marxists whether their "classless society" can be ensured by
the single measure of making the means of production joint property and
abolishing a moneyed class, when in fact a diversity of classes exists
arising from other than economic causes. While in Soviet Socialist
Republics no bourgeois propertied class exists, other classes
distinguished by occupational and environmental differences do exist:
e.g. factory-workers, agriculturalists, civil servants, clerks, party
officials and numberless others. Do physician and nurse receive equal
pay? Or navy and engineer?

There are yet other differences amongst people which exist in reality —
Lenin's "reality in which we have to orient ourselves." People differ in
age, sex, inclinations, tastes, physical strength, appearance, reasoning
powers, ideas and outlooks.

A Soviet economist recently wrote ("Economics" Vol. 2, p.216): "It is
impracticable to impose absolute equality right across the board. If we
were to pay professors, thinkers, politicians and inventors exactly the
same as manual workers, the only end-result would be the abolition of
all incentives to brainwork of any kind."

Capitalism claims that only by private enterprise and personal property
can an economy be achieved such that the standard of living of all
classes constantly rises and the difference between rich and poor
constantly diminishes. Against this claim must be set the report of an
enquiry arranged by Walter Reuther, President of the U.S.A. United Auto
Workers Union, in his capacity as chairman of the "American Society to
Combat Hunger."

This committee affirms that ten million Americans suffer from under
nourishment; and asks the president of the republic to declare a state
of emergency in 256 cities, situated in 20 of the states, where the
danger is most grave. As causes of this under­ nourishment, the
committee cited the aftermath of World War II coupled with a number of
defects in America's internal economy. The Secretary of Agriculture took
extreme measures to purchase from abroad and commandeer from within all
foodstuffs he could lay hands on to fill the gap (UP).

We are bound to ask, therefore, how far any regime, whatever its claims,
has succeeded in equalizing the classes, eliminating differences and
building a sound and just society?

Both Socialist and Capitalist regimes base their systems on theories
which are reverenced without any regard to moral and spiritual values.
The aim of each is to increase affluence, and nothing more.

Islam's philosophy reverences the whole man in his world setting. It
orders society's material behavior and benefits, while at the same time
legislating for moral virtues, spiritual perfections, and a higher
standard of living. By this it means, not simply the material, but the
mental, the spiritual, the moral, the altruistic, the philanthropic
standards which enable all men to live each for all and all for each.

Western law supports property-rights and gives preference to those of
capitalists over those of workers. Soviet law, in their own words,
exists to strip the individual of all property rights and to extirpate
capital as a personal possession, giving preference to the workers'
group throughout. Both systems are grounded in human reasoning and
judgment.

But Islam's law is grounded in Divine Revelation. Its legislation is not
a human expedient. It does not set class against class; but helps each
group to respect the excellence of other groups. Dictated by the Lord of
all creatures for the general good and for the good of all, it permits
no class to lord it over others nor allows injustice to break in. A
ruler is in it only an ordinary person with a particular set of duties,
himself under law, wielding power solely to ensure that the Divine
commandments are obeyed in society. Since confidence reigns that God's
Law is sovereign, peace and quiet obtain.

Islam on the one hand opposes Capitalism's doctrine that the rights of
property-ownership lie outside the limits of state control, and its
permitting "free enterprise" to exercise aggression and tyranny of the
stronger over the weaker in an exaltation of the rights of the
individual to the detriment of the rights of society as a whole: and, on
the other hand, does regard the sanctity of property as a fundamental.

Prosperity is the stone on which independence and freedom are built
within a social order. The common good must be the regulating principle
governing personal ownership of property. Islam therefore equally
opposes the Communist total rejection of private enterprise and
property, which entrusts the key of bounty to the state, reducing the
individual to so subordinate a position that he is left with no
intrinsic value in himself as a person, being regarded as a state tool —
a stomach for the state to fill and thereafter exploit, as a farmer does
his horses and cattle.

Communists hold that private property is not natural to man. They aver,
without advancing evidence to support the thesis that the first
communities of primitive man held all things in common in cooperation,
love and brotherhood, neither did any man say that aught that he had was
his own. The human "community" started as communist with everything in
common and parted to each as his need required. The claim to personal
ownership of anything, they contend, only developed by slow degrees
until it reached the terrifying excesses it manifests in today's world.

Their utopian "Golden Age" is, alas, a pipe-dream: for the facts show
that personal ownership is not a result of the development of
acquisitive tendencies in a particular environment. Property is coeval
with the appearance of man on earth: it is as germane to human nature as
all the other innate urges, and no more to be denied than they are.
Modern economists say that the universal sense of ownership of property,
which is found in every tribe on earth and in every epoch, can only be
explained if it is a primal instinct.

Man wants to be the sole master of the goods that minister to his needs,
in order to feel truly free and independent. Further, a man feels that
goods which owe their existence to the hard work of his hands are in a
way an extension of himself, deserving of the same respect as he demands
for the integrity of his personality. Finally, he feels the inner urge
to build up a store to ensure his future and that of his family,
developing thereby a thrift and economy which make him lay up a
provision against a rainy day.

This store he thereafter guards jealously as "his own". The community's
wealth grows with the increase in private property and productivity, for
a social unit subsists by the industry of its individual members. The
incentive to hard work lies in its rewards in personal ownership and in
increased ease of living. Wherefore society must concede to the
individual the right to own what his toil has created, since society's
own welfare is itself a product of that toil.

Islam, with its practical and realistic approach to man as he is,
recognizes the importance of the urge to own as a creative factor for
all social progress; and therefore legislates to secure a man possession
of all that his hand has won for him by proper and lawful means,
regarding his productivity as the guarantee of his right to ownership.

Islam rejects the contention that oppression, exploitation and violence
are inevitable concomitants of private ownership; for they only appear
where the legislative power is held by the richest class, and by them,
as in Western lands, directed solely to the protection of their own
interests. Since Islamic Law derives solely from the supreme overarching
Authority of God, it is wholly impartial: so no law can be devised by it
with the aim of protecting the rich or injuring the poor. From its
inception, Islam has recognized private property, but always only under
such conditions that violence and oppression are ruled out of court.

Islam holds that it is wrong to wrest factories out of the hands of
those who founded them and who, by patient endurance of hardship and
toil, built them up to give labor to many, goods to society, and, of
course, also profit to themselves. For Islam holds that such resort to
violence in removing the means of production from the hands of men of
initiative is injurious to social security and to respect for the rights
of the individual. It discourages the spirit of invention and initiative
and enterprise. Nonetheless the government can and should so control the
administration of great industries and the establishment of factories
that social justice, equity in profit, public benefits and the
government's own finances are properly cared for.

In sum, Islamic economics gives joint primacy to both individual and
community. It equably balances the interests and rights of these two
elements by guaranteeing a free economy while safeguarding the freedom
of the individual member and the benefit of the whole community
simultaneously by certain reasonable and necessary regulations on
private ownership. The urge for such ownership it recognizes as innate,
and therefore germane to human nature, so that the only limits which may
be imposed upon it are those dictated by the general interests of the
whole society, which of course contains the best interests of each
single member.

Islam regards the instinct to possess as an incentive divinely implanted
to inspire men to hard work for the improvement of the means of
livelihood and of their increased production: yet regulates the
expression of this incentive with conditions that obviate violence,
oppression, exploitation, extortion and other forms of misuse of
freedom. These conditions safeguard the interests of society and are
limits on individual independence in no way injurious to liberty, since
both communal living and individual freedom must impose those limits on
behavior which will guarantee the survival of both individual and
community; and must therefore outlaw profiteering, embezzlement,
malversation, hoarding, miserliness, avarice, usury, forcible seizure of
other people's property and all similar criminal and anti-social methods
of amassing capital.

Islam and Economics (2)
-----------------------

Economic historians tell us that at its inception the capitalist system
was simple and beneficent: but that the habit of granting loans at
interest step by step grew to its present harmful excess. With this came
the bankrupting of small concerns and their amalgamation into huge
complex companies and financial structures. Islam labels such usury
"sin", as it does also the crises of boom and slump inseparable from the
system.

Islam has legislated for a payment of "Zakat" (the Poor Rate) of 20% on
capital gains by the rich for the support of the indigent. This helps to
level out differences, to draw economic extremes closer together and to
curb excessive piling up of wealth. Another Islamic regulation with the
same aim and same results is the government's right to tax wealth for
national finances, since Islam holds that God has put His good gifts
into this world for the benefit of all, as may be seen by the forests,
reedbeds, pastures, desert lands, mountain ranges, mines.[^2]

Estates, too, become public either through the intestacy of a deceased
owner or because they are paid as fines in restitution; so that they are
as much the property of all as God meant all things to be. Islam's
testamentary laws also curb undue accumulation of property in the hands
of one family from generation to generation.

The conditions, therefore, by which Islam limits its respect for the
rights of private ownership, are those which are dictated by the need to
assure that the individual's privileges never menace the wellbeing of
the Islamic community. Therefore, in emergency or disorder, the just
Islamic government can employ the legal powers put at its disposal both
to avert dangers which threaten the future and also so to administer
society as to meet the needs of the Muslim masses, any time it sees fit.

A country's land may not fall into the possession of a small handful of
proprietors. Indigence and malnutrition of the masses may not be
ignored. These points are fixed principles, frankly and firmly,
faithfully and forcefully, propounded by Islam. The Faith condemns the
injurious intrusion of modern capitalist practices into the Muslim world
and bans.

In the Qur'an it is written (Sura 59-"Al-Hashr" —"The Gathering of
Troops" verse 7 in part): ***"The dispositions we have revealed for the
distribution of property ... are ordained that capital may not merely
circulate round the group of capitalists amongst you."***

In addition to the legal enactments which ensure the correct use of
finances and resources by punishing transgressions, Islam also brings
entirely new motives to bear, as our Qur'anic quotation hints, by
directing men's aspirations towards God. It therefore streamlines their
conduct within the confines of the road that leads to Him. This road has
moral fences on either side over which the aspirant desires not to
stray. The road is paved with philanthropy, affection, and sentiments of
charity and self-sacrifice, which mean that no Muslim will voluntarily
be a party to courses of action which lead to injustice to others. Thus
the individual's conscience refuses to pile up excessive capital, and
the employer refuses to use tyranny or oppression to compel his workers
to produce.

This lofty spiritual challenge, directed towards helping the individual
come to a knowledge of God and so to love of his neighbor, is deeply
planted within the conscience, so that a man finds his pleasures and his
treasures in pleasing his Creator; and these excel all other values for
him. In truth it is the decline of faith today, and the diminution of
belief in doomsday and judgment, which led to the greed and cupidity and
maleficence and the forms of injustice and oppression which we see
around us. Unless men's relationships are right with God, their
relationships will not be right with one another. A revolution of
conscience It produces a revolution in the soul, in society, and in the
world. Such is the lesson of history in practice, as well as the
doctrine of religion.

The same considerations apply to the ideology of Communism, and it will
be readily seen that Islamic lore is superior to both the Western and
Eastern materialist excesses.

Modern philosophers like William James, Harold Laski, John Strachey,
Walter Lippmann, criticize Communists' total abrogation of personal and
social affairs in favor of the state authority, saying that the
individual's personality and initiative are suffocated in such an
ambience. While on the other hand capitalist democracy over-emphasizes
individual freedom to the detriment of social progress. This creates an
oligarchy of the rich, making them masters of the means of production
and turning all men into slaves of economics.

From opposing angles they come to a common conclusion that individuals
must impose an inner discipline on themselves if they are to enjoy true
freedom, contradictory as that may seem, and that the welfare of society
depends upon the responsible exercise by its members of that
self-disciplined freedom. What is their conclusion other than a
restatement of the doctrine which Islam has been preaching for 14
centuries? It is time that the lessons of history, the conclusions of
the philosophers and the doctrines of religion were made the guidelines
for the conduct of men and communities everywhere.

In AD 1951 the Paris College of Law devoted a week to the study of the
Islamic "Fiqh" (Canon Law). They called in experts from Islamic lands
round the world for elucidation of particular points, e.g.:

1. Islamic Canon Law on property;

2. Conditions for filing deeds of exchange on property to preserve the
welfare of society and the public;

3. Criminal responsibility;

4. The reciprocal influence of Islamic faith and Canon Law on each
other.

The head of the Parisian Lawyers' Society chaired the conference and
summed up at the end thus: "Whatever our earlier ideas about Islamic law
and its rigidity or incompetence in documenting transactions, we have
been compelled to revise them in this conference. Let me sum up the new
insights—new I think to most of us— the conference has given us, in this
week devoted particularly to the Fiqh, Islamic Canon Law.

We saw in it a depth of rock bottom principle and of particularized care
which embraces mankind in its universality and is thus able to give an
answer to all the emergencies and events of this age. In our final
communiqué we say: 'Islam's Canon Law should be made one of the
formative elements of all new international legislation to meet
present-day conditions, since it possesses a legal treasure of stable
universal value which fits its Fiqh, amongst the modern welter of
religious views and pronouncements, to cope with the exigencies imposed
by the new forms of living arising in the modern environment'."

Islam and Intellectual Advance
------------------------------

Most Westerners are ignorant of the debt their civilization owes to
Islam, even for modern industrial transformation, scientific advance and
philosophical enterprise.

Islam came into the world in the bosom of one of the most backward of
peoples. In a very short time it had raised those tribes to pre-eminence
in every field.

Its greatest miracle was its appearance as a full grown adult of the
spirit in so degraded and poverty-stricken an environment.

Its second miracle was the raising of that environment, by sheer force
of inspiration, without any extraneous aids, to an unmatched destiny.

Its third was to create a cultural focus from which strong waves
radiated, stimulating renascence in other peoples of every background
throughout the world.

The changes it wrought compose history's greatest revolution so far, a
revolution in sense and sensibility, in thought and intellect, in
relations of individuals and communities, and indeed in every department
of human life.

By the end of its first millennium Islam stretched from the Atlantic
coast of Africa in the west to the Great Wall of China in the east, from
the Mediterranean to the Sahara in Africa. In Spain its troops took
first Andalusia, then all Spain up to the Pyrenees, and even penetrated
the south of France as far north as Tours. All the "Jezirat-ul'Arab" was
of course Muslim. From Muslim Iran and Afghanistan other troops took
Sind, the Punjab and the Gobi— and this within a few short centuries.

In all its dominions the principles worked out in the Arab homeland were
applied to the new societies under its sway. In particular its justice,
equality and brotherhood, humane fruits of its meticulous care for the
individual and his place in society, which are the distinguishing marks
of Islam, set their stamp on the communities over this entire vast area.

The first task was the overthrow of tyrannies: the second was the
establishment of sound Islamic rule and respect for human rights: the
third was the illumination of intellect, research and thought : the
fourth was the propagating of the faith by its calm appeal to reason and
logic and by its profundity and breadth of vision: the fifth—and perhaps
the most glorious because the most anonymous —was the infection of other
nations, of all creeds and none, with its own superior moral, mental and
spiritual outlook.

This last achievement not merely raised the general level of peoples of
every religion throughout the world, but also drew many proselytes to
itself from the idolaters of Arabia, the animists of Africa, the Magians
and Zoroastrians of Iran, and the Christians of Egypt and Syria.

Pre-Muslim Arabia had no trace of culture, no science, no erudition, no
economics; for geographical reasons Arabs lived in penury and squalor,
the prey of superstitions, isolated from world currents. Islam changed
all that, and went on to open the hearts and brains of men everywhere to
new possibilities.

In far-off Andalusia a school of scholars, writers, mathematicians,
scientific researchers and philosophers arose, inspired by Islam to
revive the level of thought reached by the Greeks 1500 years earlier,
and to move on up from there to heights never before touched by man.

Modern scholars in every country, even those whose prejudices would make
them prefer to maintain a critical and hostile attitude to Islam, more
and more draw attention to the speed of the spread of the Muslim faith,
to its beneficent results for mankind's prowess in thought and study,
and the progressiveness of the ideas which it brought to other stagnant
civilizations.

It should be noted by all our "progressives" everywhere, that this
brilliant advance for all humanity was the concomitant of a moral
self-discipline, of an eschewing of the dissipation which follows upon
losing the reins of passion, and of a deliberate control of the creative
instincts, which channeled them into works of artistic, intellectual,
and social creativity worthy of mature human beings. This inner
discipline, which man needs, promotes the inner freedom he desires; and
it is one cause of Islam's wide dominion over the minds of men of the
early Middle Ages. For it offered not merely sounder outward forms of
living but reassurance to the inner core of the spirit. It abolished the
wild persecutions brought about by purblind bigotry and by narrow-minded
fanaticism.

It was for this reason that the Sultan Kemal-ul-Mulk, nephew of
Saladdin, talked as man to man, and as scion of the same spirit, to
Francis of Assisi when the Saint crossed the lines from the camp of the
Crusaders under King Louis, whom the Muslims had halted before Damietta.
It was the same universal humanity which caused the vast contrast
between Omar's merciful treatment of the Christians in Jerusalem when he
conquered it, and the barbarous massacre of Jerusalem's Muslim
inhabitants by the European Crusaders who took it back for a brief
period 300 years later. Islam replaced such savagery with a
constitutional rule, a humanely regulated society, an overarching
philosophy embracing all mankind.

In Europe's Dark Ages, while the Church established its power over the
different nationalities, and fettered them in restraining bonds in a
status quo, Islam was building up a many-sided culture which laid the
basis for that flowering of science, knowledge, and artistic and
technological creativity which is called the "Renaissance".

This was while the Church was condemning Galileo for confirming
Copernicus' theory of the orbiting of the earth round the sun, and
forcing him to his famous recantation : "I, Galileo Galilei, in the 70th
year of my age (1633 AD), on my knees before your Reverences (the Pope
and Bishops) with the Holy Scriptures before my eyes, take them in my
hands and kiss them while repenting and denying the foolish claim that
the earth moves, and regard that claim as a hateful heresy," even while
he muttered rebelliously sotto voce "Eppur si muove".

Yet 500 years previously our own great astronomer and mathematician Omar
Khayyam of Nishapur (floruit 2nd half of 11th century AD, when William
the Bastard was conquering England) had provided Iran with the Jalali
Calendar which to this day enables us to start our new year not merely
on the day, but on the exact hour, minute, and second that the earth
terminates one orbit and starts another round the sun at the vernal
equinox! How few Westerners know this! They think of him as a poet,
though he was an indifferent one, but do not realize that if they had
picked up his wisdom they might have avoided all their Gregorian
alterations of the Julian calendar, and the loss of their "11 days"!

Roger Bacon (1214-1292 AD) the Franciscans' "Doctor mirabilis", was in
the reign of Edward I of England compelled to give up the experimental
research into science to which his lectures in Paris on Aristotle's
works and in particular on the "Liber de Causis" had led him; and was
driven out from Oxford back to Paris to be kept under the Church's
eye—an eye too narrow and bigoted to see the wealth of the scientific
treasures he was offering them. He was arraigned as a dabbler in
devilish and satanic alchemy: and the mob was incited to yell for "this
sorcerer's hand to be cut off and this 'Muslim' (1) to be exiled."

Nowadays European and American historians and scholars all recognize and
relate the fundamental contributions made by Islam to all modern
advances in science, mathematics, technology, philosophy, in many ways
of which this brief chapter has only been able to touch the fringe.

Cultural Revolution
-------------------

No better evidence of the passion of Islam for the spread of erudition,
from its very inception, can be given than the words of the Prophet
himself who said, after the battle of Badr and the Muslims' victory, to
the huge crowds whom they had taken prisoner, that any of them who
wished to buy their freedom but had no cash for a ransom could employ
their literacy as their resources; and any polytheist who trained ten
Muslims to read and write should win freedom. His pronouncement was put
into practice; and it was thus that a large number of his original
adherents were started on the road of education.

His nephew and successor, the Imam Ali, on whom be blessing, declared
that the spreading of science and knowledge and culture and intellectual
ability was one of the merits to be coveted and achieved by every Muslim
government. In the record of his words it is reported that he said: "O
people! I have rights over you and you have rights over me. Your right
over me is to insist that I shall always give you guidance and counsel,
and seek your welfare, and improve the public funds and all your
livelihoods, and help raise you from ignorance and illiteracy to heights
of knowledge, learning, culture, social manners and good conduct."

215 years after the Hejra the Abbasid Caliph Ma'amoun founded a "House
of Wisdom" in Baghdad to be a center of science, and furnished it with
an astronomical observatory and a public library, for which he set aside
200,000 dinars (the equivalent of some 7 million dollars). He gathered
together a large number of learned men who were acquainted with foreign
languages and different disciplines, like Honain and Bakht-eeshoo' and
Ibn Tariq and Ibn Muqafa' and Hajaj bin Matar and Sirgis Ra'asi, and
others too numerous to mention, and set aside a large sum for them,
dispatching many of them to all the different countries of the world to
collect books on science, medicine, philosophy, mathematics, and fine
literature, in Hindi, Pahlevi, Chaldean, Syriac, Greek, Latin and Farsi.
It is said that the vast collections they sent to Baghdad exceeded 100
camel loads!

Europe had not one university or cultural center to show for itself in
those centuries when Islamic lands had large numbers staffed by experts
and specialists in all branches of knowledge. These Islamic centers were
beginning to radiate waves of brilliant new thinking to the world at the
very moment when the Crusades were launched. In fact it might be said
that it was the new learning fostered by Islam which itself furnished
the Europeans with some of their new thinking that made possible
whatever prowess they achieved in those disastrous wars and fired the
passion of jealousy and cupidity which made the West wish to seize for
itself the treasures which they saw Islam bringing to the nations under
its sway.

Dr. Gustave Le Bon writes on page 329 of volume III of his "History of
Islamic and Arab Civilization": "In those days when books and libraries
meant nothing to Europeans, many Islamic lands had books and libraries
in plenty. Indeed, in Baghdad's 'House of Wisdom' there were four
million volumes ; and in Cairo's Sultanic Library one million; and in
the library of Syrian Tripoli three million volumes ; while in Spain
alone under Muslim rule there was an annual publication of between 70
and 80 thousand volumes."

G. l'Estrange in his "Legacy of Islam" page 230 writes: "The
Mustansariyya University was furnished with equipment and built in a
huge campus with college edifices of such splendor that its peer exists
neither in the Muslim world nor elsewhere. Its four law-colleges, each
with 75 students and a professor who taught the pupils gratis, paid its
professor a monthly salary, while each of the 300 students was given a
gold dinar a month. A college kitchen provided the daily meals.
Ibn-el-Farat says that the library contained priceless and unique
volumes, on many branches of science, for any student to borrow. Pens
and paper were provided for the notes anyone might wish to take. The
university had hammams (baths) and infirmaries. Its doctors conducted a
daily inspection of the colleges, and wrote prescriptions for any who
were ill. The college stores were able to dispense drugs prescribed,
immediately. All this at the beginning of the 13th century AD!"

Dr. Max Meyerhof writes: "In Istanbul the mosques possess between them
more than 80 libraries, with tens of thousands of books and ancient
manuscripts. In Cairo, Damascus, Mosul, Baghdad, and in cities of Iran
and of India there are other great libraries full of treasures. A proper
catalogue of the precious volumes in all these has not yet been
published complete in print. Moreover, the Escorial library in the
Iberian Peninsula contains a huge section filled with books and
manuscripts produced by the Islamic scholars of the West, which also
awaits completion of its cataloguing."

Dr. Gustave Le Bon writes on pages 557/8 of his "Islamic and Arab
Civilization": "The Muslims pursued the sciences with profound
application. In any town they took, their first act was to build a
mosque and thereafter a college. This led to the production of majestic
institutions of learning in a vast number of cities. Benjamin Toole (ob.
1173 AD) said that in Alexandria he found more than 20 colleges at work.
Baghdad, Cairo, Cordova, and other places all had great universities
with laboratories, observatories, huge libraries and all the other
requirements for tackling intellectual problems. In Andalusia alone
there were 70 public libraries. The library of Al-Hakem II in Cordova
contained 600,000 volumes and it took 44 volumes to catalogue the
library's contents. When Charles the Just, four centuries later, founded
the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris he was only able to assemble a total
of 900 volumes, and that after great labors, while one-third of that 900
were books on religion."

The same author on page 562 adds: "The Muslims launched science on the
road of exactitude, experiment and forward-looking discovery by
hypothesis, with a particular enthusiasm, while producing books and
treatises and high schools that spread their intellectual prowess to all
corners of the world. They thereby opened for Europe the road to its
renaissance. So it is with justification that the title of 'Europe's
Professor' is given to the newly-arisen Islamic power, since it was
through them that the treasures of ancient Greek and Roman science were
rediscovered and enhanced and given back to Europe as she began to
emerge from the Dark Ages."

Josef Marc Kapp writes, concerning the first centuries of Islam's
progress in culture, in his book "Muslim Splendor in Spain" (p.170):
"Even the lowest classes in society were athirst to learn to read; and
humble workers limited their expenditure on food and clothing and spent
their last soul on buying books. One worker collected such a library
that men of learning flocked to him. Freed slaves and the children of
slaves entered the ranks of the learned; and men like Vafyat-ul-A'iyan
Ibn Khalkan laid the foundations for great progress".

Nehru wrote concerning the benefits conferred on social progress and the
cultural revolution of the Muslims in Andalusia in his book "A Glimpse
at World History" (p.413): "Cordova had over a million in­habitants, a
magnificent public park of about 20 kilometers and suburbs stretching 40
kilometers, with 6,000 palaces, mansions and great houses, 200,000
smaller houses of beauty, 70,000 stores and small shops. 300 mosques,
700 hammams with hot and cold baths for public use. There were
innumerable libraries of which the most comprehensive and important was
the Royal Library, which contained 400,000 volumes. Cordova University
was famous throughout Europe and in western Asia. At the same time
education was provided for the poor. Indeed one of their contemporary
historians writes that nearly everyone in Spain in those days could read
and write, while in the rest of Christian Europe, apart from the monks
and clerkly persons who were educated trough religious houses, no one,
including the highest members of the nobility, thought it worth his
while even to attempt to master basic arts of reading."

To illustrate these claims I append eight extremely brief chapters, each
on a different branch of science or culture; my debt I gladly
acknowledge to Arnold and Guillaume's "Legacy of Islam" (publ. O.U.P.
1931) to which I refer any reader who wishes to extend his information.

Medical Science
---------------

Dr Meyerhof writes in "The Legacy of Islam" (p.132): "Muslim doctors
laughed at the Crusaders' medical attendants for their clumsy and
elementary efforts. The Europeans had not the advantage of the books of
Avicenna, Jaber, Hassan bin Haytham, Rhazes. However they finally had
them translated into Latin. These translations exist still, without the
translators' names. In the 16th century the books of Averroes (Ibn
Rushd) and Avicenna (Ibn Sina) were put out in Latin translation in
Italy and used as the basis of instruction in the Italian and French
universities."

On page 116 of the same work he writes that after Rhazes' death the
works of Avicenna (AD 980-1037) were taken up. His influence on thought
and philosophy and general science was profound, and his medical works
(based on the works of Galen which he had found in the Samarqand library
in Arabic translation) had a sensational outreach. Other scientists
followed— Abu'l-Qais of Andalusia ; Ibn-Zahr of Andalusia ; Abbas the
Iranian; Ali ibn-Rezvan of Egypt ; Ibn Butlan of Baghdad; Abu Mansur
Muwaffaq of Herat; Ibn Wafeed of Spain; Masooya of Baghdad; Ali ibn-Esau
of Baghdad; Ammar of Mosul; Ibn-Rushd (Averroes) of Andalusia ; whose
works translated to Latin were used in European universities. Europe
knew nothing of the cholera bacterium when Islam entered Spain, and the
people there regarded the disease as a punishment sent from heaven to
exact the penalty of sins: but Muslim physicians had already proved that
even the bubonic plague was a contagious disease and nothing else.

Dr. Meyerhof writes of Avicenna's book "The Canon" that it is a
masterpiece of medical science which proved its worth by being printed
in a series of 16 editions in the closing years of the 15th century AD,
15 Latin and one Arabic. In the 16th century more than a score of
further editions were published, because of its value as a scientific
work. Its use continued throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, so that
it became the most widely known of all medical treatises. It is still
consulted in medical schools.

Will Durant writes that Mohammad ibn Zachariah Razi (Rhazes) was one of
Islam's most progressive physicians, author of 200 treatises and books
well worth studying today: in particular his  
 1. "Smallpox and Measles" (published in Latin and other European
tongues in 40 editions between 1497 and 1866), and

2. "The Great Encyclopedia" 20 volumes mostly unobtainable nowadays:
five volumes were devoted to optics ; translated into Latin AD 1279;
printed in five editions in 1542 alone; known as the most authoritative
work on the eye and its ailments and treatment for centuries; one of the
nine basic works on which Paris University composed its medical course
in 1394 AD.

Surgery made similar progress in the hands of Islamic practitioners, who
even used anesthetics, though these are assumed to be of modern origin.
They employed a henbane base.

Among Rhazes' innovations was the use of cold water to treat persistent
fever, of dry-cupping for apoplexy, of mercury ointment and animal gut
for wound sutures, and many others.

Further information on Islamic medicine can be sought from the many
books on the subject. The diagnosis of tuberculosis from the
fingernails, the cure of jaundice, the use of cold water to prevent
hemorrhage, the crushing of stones in bladder and kidney to facilitate
their removal, and surgery for hernia are among advances too numerous to
mention in detail. The greatest of Islamic surgeons was Abu'l-Qasem of
Andalusia, affectionately called Abu'l-gays, and sometimes Abu'l-Qasees,
floruit 11th century AD, inventor of very many surgical instruments and
author of books to describe them and their uses— books translated and
printed in innumerable editions in Latin and used all over Europe, the
last such edition being in 1816.

Pharmacology
------------

Gustave le Bon writes: "Besides the use of cold water to treat typhoid
cases — a treatment later abandoned, though Europe is taking this Muslim
invention up again in modern times after a lapse of centuries— Muslims
invented the art of mixing chemical medicaments in pills and solutions,
many of which are in use to this day, though some of them are claimed as
wholly new inventions of our present century by chemists unaware of
their distinguished history. Islam had dispensaries which filled
prescriptions for patients gratis, and in parts of countries where no
hospitals were reachable, physicians paid regular visits with all the
tools of their trade to look after public health."

Georgi Zeidan writes: "Modern European pharmacologists who have studied
the history of their profession find that Muslim doctors launched many
of the modern beneficial specifics centuries ago, made a science of
pharmacology and compound cures, and set up the first pharmacies on the
modern model. So that Baghdad alone had 60 chemists' shops dispensing
prescriptions regularly at the charges of the Caliph. Evidence of these
facts can be seen in the names given in Europe to quite a number of
medicines and herbs which betray their Arabic, Indian or Persian
origin." Such are "alcohol, alkali, alkaner, apricot, arsenic," to quote
some 'a's alone. all the tools of their trade to look after public
health.”

Hospitals
---------

Georgi Zeidan continues: "Within two centuries of the death of the
Prophet, Mecca, Medina and the other great Muslim cities all had
hospitals, while the Abbasid governors and their ministers competed each
for his own region to have the best such institution for the care of the
sick. Baghdad alone had four important hospitals. By three centuries
after the Hejra the governor Adhud-ud-Dowleh Deylamy had founded the
Adhudi Hospital with 24 specialists, each master of his own particular
field, a hospital which soon earned the reputation of excelling all
hospitals throughout Islam, though in the course of time it too was
surpassed.

"The order and arrangement of Islamic hospitals was such that no
distinctions of race, religion or occupation were recognized, but cure
was administered with meticulous care to any patient. Separate wards
were allotted for patients of specific diseases. These were teaching
hospitals where the students learned theory and observed practice. In
addition, there were travelling hospitals which carried doctors and
their gear by camel or mule to every district. Sultan Mahmoud the Seljuk
travelled with a hospital which required 40 camels for its transport."

Dr. Gustave le Bon writes: "Muslim hospitals went in for preventive
medicine and the preservation of health as much as if not more than for
the cure of the already diseased. They were well-aired and had plenty of
running water. Muhammad bin Zachariah Razi (Rhazes) was ordered by the
Sultan to seek out the healthiest place in the Baghdad neighborhood for
the construction of a new hospital.

He visited every section of the town and its environs, and hung up a
piece of meat which he left while he looked into infectious diseases in
the neighborhood and studied climatic conditions, particularly the state
of the water. He balanced all these various experimental tests and
finally found them all to indicate that the place where the portion of
meat was the last to putrefy and develop infectious bacteria was the
spot on which to build. These hospitals had large common wards and also
private wards for individuals. Pupils were trained in diagnosis and
brought observation and experience to the perfecting of their studies.
There were also special mental hospitals, and pharmacies which dispensed
prescriptions gratis."

Marc Kapp writes: "Cairo had a huge hospital with playing fountains and
flower-decked gardens and 40 large courtyards. Every unfortunate patient
was kindly received, and after his cure sent home with five gold coins.
While Cordova, besides its 600 mosques and 900 public hammams, had 50
hospitals."

Chemistry
---------

Jaber ibn Haiyan, disciple of the sixth Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, became
known world-wide as "the Father of Chemistry" and of Arab alchemy. His
influence on Western chemistry and alchemy was profound and
long-lasting. Some hundreds of his works survive. Of him the late Sayyid
Hebbat-ud-Din Shahristani of Kadhemain, once Iraq's Minister of
Education, writes: "I have seen some 50 ancient MSS of works of Jaber
all dedicated to his master the Imam Ja'far. More than 500 of his works
have been put into print and are for the most part to be found among the
treasures of the National Libraries of Paris and Berlin, while the
savants of Europe nickname him affectionately 'Wisdom's Professor' and
attribute to him the discovery of 19 of the elements with their specific
weights, etc. Jaber says all can be traced back to a simple basic
particle composed of a charge of lightning (electricity) and fire, the
atom, or smallest indivisible unit of matter, very close to modern
atomic science."

The blending of coloring matters, dyeing, extraction of minerals and
metals, steelmaking, tanning, were amongst industrial techniques of
which the Muslims were early masters. They produced Nitric Acid,
Sulfuric Acid, Nitro-glycerine, Hydrochloric Acid, Potassium, Aqua
Ammonia, Sal Ammoniac, Silver Nitrate, Sulphuric Chloride, Potassium
Nitrate, Alcohol, Alkali (both still known by their Arabic names),
Orpiment (yellow tri-sulfide of arsenic : arsenic is derived from the
Persian zar = gold, adjective zarnee = golden, Arabised with article
"al" to "al-zernee" pronounced "azzernee" and so taken into Greek where
it was turned to the recognizable word "arsenikon" which means
"masculine" since the gold color was supposed to link it with the sun, a
masculine deity!): and finally—though this does not close the list we
might cite—Borax, also an Arabic word booraq. Further, the arts of
distilling, evaporation, sublimation, and the use of Sodium, Carbon,
Potassium Carbonate, Chloride, and Ammonium were common under the
Abbasid Caliphate.

Industry
--------

The Abbasid Caliph Haroun-al-Rasheed sent Charlemagne in Aix from
Baghdad a present of a clock made by his horologists which struck a bell
on the hour every hour, to the great wonder and delight of the whole
court of the newly "crowned Holy Roman Emperor.  
 The massacre and expulsion of the Muslims of Andalusia by the
Christians carried with it the closure of many of the great factories
that had existed under Islamic rule, and the standstill of progress that
had been made in science, crafts, arts, agriculture, and other products
of civilization.

Towns began to fall into ruin because of the lack of skilled masons.
Madrid dropped from 400,000 to 200,000 inhabitants: Seville, which had
possessed 1,600 factories under the Muslims, lost all but 300, and the
130,000 workers formerly employed had no more jobs, while the census of
Philip IV showed a fall of 75% in population figures.

It was the Muslims also who brought about the substitution of
cotton-wove paper for the old parchments; and it was this invention
which formed the basis for Europe's later invention of printing, using
an old Chinese technique, and so for the vast uprush of learning which
came with the Renaissance. More, since monks were starved for parchment
on which to write their religious works, they were tending more and more
to scrape off priceless ancient scientific texts from old parchments and
to use them again as palimpsests. The introduction of paper put a stop
to this disastrous practice in time to save quite a number of texts
which would have otherwise been lost forever, as, alas, too many were.

A paper manuscript of the year AD 1009 was found in the Escorial
library, and claims to be the oldest hand-written book on paper still in
existence. Silk-wove paper, of course, was a Chinese invention, since
silk was native to China though rare in Europe; and the Muslim genius
lay in seeing the possibility of substituting cotton for silk, and so
giving Europe a plentiful supply of a practicable material for the
reproduction of books by the monkish scribes.

Philip Hitti writes in his "History of the Arabs" that the art of road
making was so well developed in Islamic lands that Cordova had miles of
paved road lit from the houses on each side at night so that people
walked in safety ; while in London or Paris anyone who ventured out on a
rainy night sank up to his ankles in mud — and did so for seven
centuries after Cordova was paved! Oxford men then held that bathing was
an idolatrous practice ; while Cordovan students reveled in luxurious
public hammams!

Mathematics
-----------

Baron Carra de Vaux, author of the chapter on "Astronomy and
Mathematics" in "The Legacy of Islam" (OUP 1931 pp. 376-398), points out
that the word "algebra" is a Latinization of the Arabic term Al-jabr ( =
"the reduction": i.e. of complicated numbers to a simpler language of
symbols), thereby revealing the debt the world owes to the Arabs for
this invention. Furthermore the numerals that are used are "Arabic
numerals" not merely in name but also in fact. Above all the Arabs'
realization of the value of the Hindu symbol for zero laid the
foundation of all our modern computerized technology. The word "zero",
like its cousin "cipher" are both attempts at transliterating the Arabic
"sefr", in order to convey into Europe the reality and the meaning of
that word in Arabic.

De Vaux writes: "By using ciphers the Arabs became the founders of the
arithmetic of everyday life; they made algebra an exact science and
developed it considerably; they laid the foundations of analytical
geometry; they were indisputably the founders of plane and spherical
trigonometry. The astrolabe (safeeha) was invented by the Arab
Al-Zarqali (Arzachel) who lived in Spain AD 1029-1087. The word
"algorism" is a latinization of the name of its inventor, the native of
Khiva called by the name of his home province Al-Khwarizmi. The Arabs
kept alive the higher intellectual life and the study of science in a
period when the Christian West was fighting desperately with barbarism."

This is not the place to go further into Muslim achievements in
mathematics and astronomy. Suffice it to refer once again to the Jalali
calendar of Omar Khayyam, with its formulae for exact calculation of the
timing of the earth's orbits round the sun, to which reference has been
made earlier.

Geography
---------

The Arabian Nights' tales of Sinbad the Sailor, and of his voyages to
China, Japan, and the Spice Islands of Indonesia, give quite enough
evidence of the brilliance of Arabic commercial shipping and the
knowledge of meteorology and geography which was at their disposal.
Small wonder that the Faith spread through them from Morocco to
Mindanao.

But, besides the SE Asian seas, Arabic sailors penetrated far down the
East coast of Africa, and also up the rivers which are channels from the
Black Sea into the distant interior of Russia. The Safarname (Travel
journal) of Suleiman, a sea-captain of Seraf, the port on the Persian
Gulf recently excavated by Dr. David Stronach of the British Institute
of Persian Studies, was published at the end of the 9th century AD with
accounts of his voyages to India and China. It was translated into
Latin, as giving some of the earliest first-hand knowledge of China
which ever reached Europe.

The geographer Ibn Hauqal (floruit circa AD 975) wrote in his preface:
"I have written the latitude and longitude of the places of this earth,
of all its countries, with their boundaries, and the dominions of Islam,
with a careful map of each section on which I have marked numerous
places, e.g. the cities, the kasbahs, the rivers, the lakes, the crops,
the types of agriculture, the roads, the distances between place and
place, the goods for commerce and everything else in the science of
geography which can be useful to sovereigns and their ministers and
interesting to all people in general."

Abu-Reihan al-Biruni, Ibn Batuta and Abu'l-Haussan are amongst other
names in the history of the science of geography whose worldwide travels
were accompanied by meticulous observation and painstaking notes, which
are amongst the proudest achievements of science in our world to this
day.

Art
---

Cordova Mosque is one of the finest monuments of Muslim art in Europe.
Its architect and masons were local talent, who introduced a number of
novelties. The Muslims excelled at mosaic, inlay, fretwork and applique
work of all types. Marvellous doors, pulpits, and ceilings are decorated
in many of the ancient mosques all over the Muslim world with a lacelike
design of mosaic, carved ivory and wood and plaster, and fitted pieces
of carved wood interlocking with each other with consummate artistry.

Chased and engraved wood and ivory are everywhere. Thus the Altar of the
Church of Saint Isidore Hispalensis (archbishop of Seville in the first
years of the 7th century AD) like the carved ivory jewel-case made for
Queen Isabella in the 11th century and the carved ivory box now in the
Church at Bayeux of the 12th century (obviously some Crusader's loot
from the East) inlaid with silver in chased gold, are examples of that
art which was the glory of Eastern lands. All this delicate and minute
handiwork was carried out with the crudest and roughest of tools, itself
a further tribute to the skill and artistry of the makers.

Jewel-studded boxes and cases and caskets are to be seen in many places,
though the best are on view in the museums of Damascus and Cairo. Well
said Sa'adi: "An Eastern artist may take 40 years to make one porcelain
vase: the West turns out 100 a day, all alike: the comparative worth of
the two products can be easily reckoned!"

The Muslims were also past masters of the art of carved and cultured
plaster work, in a style which still subsists though modern technologies
are, alas, rendering the skill rarer all the time. Tenth century
examples, some with enameled work also, are to be found in Andalusia.
The Alhambra has 13th century masterpieces of this work. They glitter
like the later Italian Majolica. The famous Alhambra flower-vase, 11/2
meters high, is unique in this line.

Conclusion of Part 2
--------------------

In this part of our book we have given the briefest of sketches of some
of the treasures of mind and spirit which mankind owes to the rise of
Islam.

They are not stated in braggadocio but as an assessment of facts of
human history. For too long they have been neglected and forgotten not
merely by those who benefited from them indirectly but even also by the
very descendants of their authors themselves.

Yet if mankind is to attain the power to live as one united family which
is our calling and destiny, it will happen on a basis of appreciation of
each other.

This adult assessment is growing. Modern scholars are now showing
gratitude that the Arab General Tareq-bin-Ziyyad in AD 711 landed his
troops by the mountain since called Jebel-al-Tareq (Gibraltar) after
him. His Moors were unwelcome invaders at the time. It was a moment when
Europe had lost most of the benefit of Roman unification and cultural
advance and sunk back into the Dark Ages under the barbarian hordes
overwhelming it from the North. With the Moors came in the fresh
stimulus of lively minds, bringing in Arabic the best thinking of
ancient Greeks and Romans, the impetus of scholarship and learning, the
desire for scientific and philosophic speculation, the aesthetic delight
of artistic creation again.

Islamic universities as far apart as Baghdad and Andalusia welcomed
Christian and Jewish students, many of whom profited by the instructions
to be obtained nowhere else in those days. They were received with
generous subventions and assistance by their Muslim hosts, who treated
them as honored guests. Dynamics, Statistics, Chemistry, Physics, were
among the lessons.

In his "Making of Humanity" Brilioth writes: "Modern European education
in all branches stems from the Muslims' curiosity and pertinacity in
investigating the secrets of nature."

If our brief summary opens the road for Westerners to the exploration of
Eastern discoveries we are content; and can so proceed to Part 3 and an
examination of Islam's treatment of some of the social problems which
afflict every human community.

[^1]: Jean Jacques Rousseau,"Social Contract" Book II: Chapter 6: "The
Lawgiver".

[^2]: The arid sunbaked expanses of the Islamic belt of territory which
stretches from the Mauritanian Atlantic coast nearly 6,000 miles through
the Soviet Muslim Republics of the Western Gobi, can support only a
scant human population, while the paucity of vegetation forces a nomad
migratory way of life upon livestock-owners, if they are to find
pasturage. Hence our author's list of the publicly owned benefits of
God's gifts: while his omission of sunlight and rain, which are natural
in the thought of Westerners as free for all, are not mentioned because
that belt has always too much sunshine and too little rainfall.
(Translator's note.) the greed and avarice which lead to enslavement,
war and imperialism. 


