Part 3: Islam and Social Problems
=================================

Islam and Alcoholic Drinks
--------------------------

Islam is a faith which appeals to reason and conscience. Since alcohol
is injurious to reason and diminishes a man's intelligence, moral sense,
logical powers and spiritual sensitiveness, any drop of it is strictly
forbidden to any Muslim.

It is tragic to think of the millions of liters of spirituous liquors
consumed. The sole result is that they deprive the world of a portion of
that mature manliness which distinguishes the human from the animal.
They can hinder mankind's attainment of that pure and acceptable destiny
of perfectness which was God's plan.

Islam appeared in a society in which alcohol was rife—and not only
forbade the filthy habit but was able to extirpate it with the ignorance
and corruption, the selfishness, violence and resultant misery which it
had caused. All this blessed benefaction to mankind was started by one
inspired man, one man of God who by the strength of his faith revolted
against the tyranny of addiction and called men to freedom from slavery
to such petty liquids, setting them on the royal road to life.

He showed that intoxication is a sin, explained its harmful nature and
destructive powers, and issued his prohibition in the light of an appeal
to commonsense and to conscience. In the Sura "The Table Spread" (Maida,
5, v.9) it was revealed through him:

***"Intoxicants excite enmity and hatred amongst you and hinder you from
the remembrance of God and from the fulfillment of His commands and
statutes; and slavery to them diverts you from the sole road of
happiness and leads to excess and abomination."***

A group who were busy drinking at the moment when this passage was
revealed and uttered, promptly under its influence went into the streets
and broke the vessels containing intoxicating liquors and spilt their
contents on the ground. It was related by Uns bin Malik that: "When that
verse was revealed we were holding a drinking party in the house of Abu
Talha when the Prophet's voice reached us, calling: 'O Muslims! Take
note that intoxicants are a forbidden sin and should be poured out in
the streets!' Abu Talha asked me to take all the intoxicants from his
house and pour them out for him, which I did, taking them into the
street where some of the bottles broke while others were washed and
cleansed. So much was poured out on the streets of Medina that day that
for a long time thereafter, whenever it rained, the color and smell of
the wine came up from the ground."

The prohibition was obeyed with rapidity throughout all the lands under
Islamic sway ; a swelling tide of character and pursuit of higher
intellectual, social and industrial objectives swiftly followed.

To this very day Muslims are to be found in every corner of the world
who have jealously guarded their lips and lives from the contamination
of alcohol. Indeed, for many of them the mere thought of touching the
stuff has never entered their minds. So profoundly endemic has the
sounder habit become.

One of the defects of human laws is that the capricious changeableness
of human nature affects them. For instance, when America introduced
prohibition and tried to enforce it by police methods, the result was
the opposite of that which was desired ; and bootlegging, contraband and
illegal consumption of liquor loosened respect not merely for that law,
but for all law, while social behavior and morals slid downhill at
avalanche speed. Islam was successful in enforcing prohibition because
it came with the force of a divine command, a God-inspired statute,
interpreted to men in the light of reason and commonsense.

It is true that in America many well-meaning people had undertaken a
far-reaching propaganda throughout the states against spirituous
liquors, with books and films and speeches, for a decade, trying to
explain the injuries to the spirit, to the body, to morals and to the
finances of the individual and the nation which alcohol causes. The
trouble was that the American efforts had their origin in the human
idealism of a majority, who voted the 18th (Prohibition) Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution in 1918. An agonizing reappraisal was forced upon
these idealists after 14 years of tragic experience: and in 1933 they
were compelled to revoke Prohibition.

Their experience proved the ancient rule that lawgiving which goes too
far beyond the moral level of the governed, provokes a human reaction
which not only brings the particular law into disrepute, but the whole
body of law with it ; and a foul mob of unscrupulous gangsters rises to
pander to the illicit desires which no legislation can extirpate. These
mobs fight each other for control of the vast profits which come from
moon shining and from bootlegging, and all the contraband that smuggles
the object of unregenerate human craving.

How different is Islam's dependence on basic unalterable principles
divinely dictated, germane to the inner essence of human nature in its
creation, talents and destiny, and therefore those by which any sound
human community must live. These are expressed in a flat, matter-of-fact
pronouncement which reason comprehends and commonsense accepts as true.
No propaganda —no expensive advertising—just a simple statement of a
divine decree by God's Prophet (on whom be peace). No man-pleasing—no
pandering to human frailty —no eye-service — no provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof. It is not fear of punishment but love of
God which keeps Muslims on the strait and narrow.

No human legislation can hope to track down every wrongdoer and
transgressor, let alone exact from each his condign punishment. It is
easy to dodge the eye of human law. But the eye of God is everywhere at
all times. The Muslim's conscience knows this, and in reverence obeys in
private as well as in public. The censor and the lawgiver is within him.
The orderliness of God's creations is spread before his eyes, and he
knows he should reflect a similar divine order in his private life and
in the life of the society of which he is a part. The same Providence
which supplies the commandment also supplies the spiritual power to put
it into practice. For He is "King of doomsday and Master of both worlds"
— this present and the next.

In such divinely inspired law, man finds the security which the mariner
or the traveller over the trackless desert finds in the unmovable
polestar. Such a law does not change with fashion or passion. It is
outside and above the chops and changes of human caprice. It is the
expression of a realistic assessment of man in the light of truth. It
calls him to express that truth in his living and thinking—truth which
is the sustenance of the soul, eternal, impassible, transcendent over
winds of change and the transports of self-will.

Civilization boasts its safeguarding of "freedom"; and the West bases
its government on "the public will" expressed in representative
government. But "representative" of whom? As we said above, a "majority"
of only 51% automatically means the suppression of the will of 49% of
the people "represented". On the principle of "one man, one vote", if
the 51% are gangsters, the nation will be represented 100% by gangsters.
Is there any difference between such "majority rule" and enslavement of
minorities?

Only obedience to the single sovereign authority of the transcendent
divine lawgiver will lead men "to respect one another and seek the
common good." Education will not do it. A thief is bad: an educated
thief is worse: a thief educated to wield all the weapons of modern
technology is worse still. An English leader proclaims that the West
must repent in dust and ashes for the disaster which its introduction of
alcohol to untutored and innocent races has caused. "Alcohol turns the
cool heads of the frozen north into blockheads: but the warm hearts of
sunnier lands into those of raging demons," he says.

Voltaire wrote: "Islam takes its faith seriously, and therefore puts the
ban of sacrilege on habits like gambling and alcohol; and dubs them mere
carnal gaming." Jules la Bourn writes: "Pre-Muslim Arabs drank to
excess, gambled, took as many women to wife as they liked, and divorced
whenever they felt like it. Widows were part of the patrimony of the
heir, who married or sold them as he saw most profitable. Islam changed
all that." Professor Edward Montay adds: "The Qur'an forbade human
sacrifice and the exposure of unwanted daughters, alcohol and many other
degrading practices. The consequent advance in culture is so great as to
win the Prophet the title of one of the biggest benefactors of the human
race known to history."

Islam and the Family
--------------------

While the warp of society is the individual person and the woof is
social order, the unit of the design is the family. Families in which
mutual understanding, sincerity and tenderness reign, form details of a
harmonious pattern. But a family in confusion and disarray distorts and
mars the pattern.

The instinct for survival is innate in human beings. Producing children
is the expression of one urge of this instinct, for a child seems like
an extension of one's own personality, and a guarantee of the
continuance of the same life-force. The primary origin of the urge to
found families is sought by many thinkers in this instinct for survival.

The need to feed and support a family incites a man to industrial
productivity.

Other thinkers hold that the primary urge towards family-founding was
merely the sex instinct; others favor the gregarious instinct; others
regard wedlock as a mere commercial transaction between families entered
into for the profit of both.

In fact, communal living in society requires families as its units of
construction. To degrade the pure love between husband and wife merely
to sex, profit or protection, is to deny human nature at its highest.

Some say that, since in the inchoate days of human living the woman as a
weaker being could not exist except under a man's protection, family
life is merely a feminine institution imposed on man. This is manifest
nonsense: for it ignores a man's need of woman, which may be different
from woman's need of man, but is just as deeply and inextricably a part
of his nature. True, man has to be the breadwinner in most cases. But he
needs his mate as a partner in happiness, in joy and in sound living. In
marriage is the end of loneliness. Each sex needs the other. This is why
"male and female made He them."

God implanted the sex instinct. God created sex differences. He created
the survival instinct, the security instinct and the society instinct of
gregariousness. All these were part of His providence in preparing
mankind to be His joyful family. Sociologists give each instinct its due
weight in the scheme. They say that the exact role of each instinct
varies with the changes in social structure. In primitive society the
need to find food and housing is of primary importance.

In the ancient agricultural community the need for children became
paramount since many hands make light work. Today the sex urge has come
very much to the fore, since humanity has devised means to achieve
adequate food, satisfactory housing and machines to do the work. But
over and above the instincts, the urge to love and the need to be loved
are amongst the highest attributes of human nature.

Islam answers the call of nature affirmatively, with its insistence on
the family as the best safeguard of public virtue, and its asseveration
that it is the only right and legitimate way. It is written in the Sura
16, Nahl - "The Bee" verse 72:

***"God has made mates for you of your own nature and made for you of
them children and grandchildren and posterity, and provided for you
sustenance of the best. Are they then going to believe in vain things
and not be grateful for God's favors?"***

Islam sets out to protect young people from being led astray by the
strength of the God-implanted sexual urge in the years before their
character and conscience have matured and their will is governed by
discretion. That is why it lays on parents the responsibility of
admonishing youth, and of imparting rules of life and guidelines of
prudence which will lead to godliness and the natural use of the power
of procreation.

It also holds parents responsible for arranging early marriages for
those who are mature enough to wed. Young people not yet economically
capable of supporting a family may find the thrust of the sex urge so
strong that, without the guiding hand of their parents on the reins, the
horses of nature may run away with them and carry them into danger or
into the trap of illicit sex. Parents must steer the life-force into its
God-given legitimate channels where peace of mind and calm of conscience
accompany the happiness of a shared life.

The Prophet is reported to have preached thus from the pulpit of the
mosque: "0 Muslim community! Your daughters are like ripe fruit on a
tree. Fruit must be picked at its optimum moment; otherwise the sun or
other agencies will rot or spoil it. You must likewise give your
daughters in marriage at the moment when they are ripe, and neither
later nor sooner. If you leave them hanging about too long, their
inevitable corruption will be your fault. They are human, and their
human needs must be met."

Ali bin Asbat wrote a reply to a letter which he had received from the
5th Imam, thus: "I find no young men who are suitable and fitted to be
husbands for my daughters. What then is my duty?" In answer the Imam
wrote: "Do not wait until you find young men who are exactly to your
liking in all respects.

For our Holy Prophet said: 'If you do not find young people to wed your
daughters who correspond with your personal desires, have regard only to
their character, especially their morals and their religion, and let the
qualifications you require in husbands for your daughters be faith and
morals alone, since with these a young man makes a satisfactory husband;
and if you choose someone without these qualifications you are
personally responsible for misleading and perverting your young people."

Thus Islam not only does not put obstacles in the way of matrimony, but
turns this force of nature to the advantage of society and of the
individual— for his physical wellbeing, mental health, calm of spirit
and contentment of heart. Islam regards marriage as a sacred union of
hearts, a source of serenity and security for both partners. To fulfill
this function it needs the qualities of purity, loving kindness,
humanity, gentleness, goodness and faith in the depths of the heart. As
it is written in Sura 30, "Rome" verse 21:

***"Amongst God's signs for you is this, that He created mates for you
from among yourselves for you to dwell with in tranquillity. It is He
who put love and compassion between you. Verily in these are signs for
those who reflect."***

Islam lays down clear rules to govern the relationships within the
family. Sura IV: Nisa'a —"The Women" calls marriage "the firm bond" and
is concerned throughout the first 42 verses with the practical details
of the contract of marriage and its fulfillment.

The sense of belonging together is nourished. Fairness governs the share
each partner gives and takes in the compact. Each gives according to
their ability and each takes according to their need. As Sura II: Baqara
—"The Heifer" affirms in verse 228:

***"Wife and husband, women and men, have reciprocal and commensurable
rights according to what is equitable."***

Islam pays the closest and most meticulous attention to the capacities
of each sex with regard to their occupation, profession and work. The
man has the duty of being the breadwinner and providing for material
needs and the production of things. The woman is the housekeeper with
the duty of providing for the family's needs and for the production of
new people, for nursing the new generation and caring for the upbringing
of posterity.

Islam recognizes the natural consequences of the way a woman is made,
and will not allow her to be demeaned or degraded in any way ; but
preserves her from the wickedness of those who would lead her astray
into corruption, and confers upon her a dignity, both at home and out of
doors, which is worthy of her calling.

It is of course possible that in an emergency a woman may be called to
undertake tasks outside her home. But Islam seeks to avoid the kind of
contacts between the sexes in the course of their employment which could
turn fellowship into familiarity and comradeship into concupiscence.
Therefore women must not dress in a provocative or enticing fashion nor
titillate men's sexual lusts so that the madness which leads to
promiscuity of intercourse is -aroused.

Like any other institution, the family and its home needs a responsible
head. Without a firm hand at the helm a family can drift in confusion.
Either the wife or the husband must therefore take the lead, and nature
shows that in general it is more fitting for the man to steer, even if
in exceptional cases the woman must take command.

The man, in accepting the responsibility of the household, its
livelihood, its wellbeing, its children and their care, merits the
authority of a head, because his greater strength, perseverance and
endurance make him more fitted than the woman to carry the heavy burden
of safeguarding the family from collapse and confusion. Further, woman
is a creature of emotion, and quicker to be swayed by feelings.

Woman is more ruled by her heart and man more by his head. So Islam
gives the prime responsibility to the person of reason, precisely as
Article 213 of the most recent constitution of France does. At the same
time, Islam lays down that teamwork, partnership, consultation and joint
planning are to be the rule.

The man is on no account to be left free to pursue his self-willed
desires regardless. He must definitely never tyrannize over his wife or
abuse or bully her. It is written in Sura IV: Nisa'a — "The Women" verse
19:

***"Believers! You may not take over a brother's widow without her
consent. You may not treat your wives harshly. You may not goad a wife
into suing you for a khula' (divorce) by which she has to forfeit part
of the dower which you gave her—save only if she be guilty of lewd
conduct. Nay! live with your wives in kindness and equity. Should you
dislike them for something, that very thing may be a point through which
God will bring much blessing."***

The husband, in shouldering the burden of external affairs for the
support of the family, has full control of everything relevant to his
task. But inside the walls of the home the wife is in full control, and
hers is the duty of arranging the details of daily living, the
disposition of the household effects and the upbringing of the children.
The Prophet said: "The man is the breadwinner responsible for the
family, while the wife has the responsibility for the house and for her
husband and for the children." (Majmoo'e wa ram p.6/Collections and
Remains.)

Modern disrespect for the bond of marriage is due to the negligence of
this high conception of wedlock. Instead it has been degraded by a mass
of petty dreams and twisted imaginations. Men's thinking about marriage
was in ruins before their families began to fall apart. Too many have
entered on the married state without a thought for the importance of
harmony of mind and spirit between man and wife. Fortune hunters,
Casanovas, women-chasers prizing a pretty face above all else, have
pushed the spiritual values out of sight and trodden their own best
interests underfoot.

The prevalence of such badly founded families forebodes a tragic future.
The deep incompatibility of thought between man and wife sets them as
far apart as the poles. The gap between them gapes wider daily.
Contentment and peace of heart flee from them. They get on each other's
nerves. The harmony which ethical values, unselfishness and human
affection bring, as both sides do all they can to strengthen the
spiritual life of each other, departs. A family must be founded firmly
on due consideration of the environmental conditions, the proper setting
for the wife, and the compatibility of the partners' ways of thinking
and of their moral standards. Marriage must be thought of as holy and
basic. Only from this correct viewpoint can the inevitable difficulties
of living together be satisfactorily settled.

Islam has paid due attention to all the deleterious consequences of
wrongly based marriage, its divisions and unhappiness. It therefore
founds the family not on fortune or passion or outward beauty or any
material things, but on faith and virtue, and chastity and purity, and
spiritual qualities and affections, and piety both in the man and in the
woman. The Prophet is reported to have said: "Whosoever takes a wife
merely because of her beauty will never find what he sought in her.
Whoso takes a wife solely for her fortune, the Lord will abandon him.

Seek therefore a wife whose beauty is that of faith and whose fortune is
purity of living." (Wasa’il ash-Shia, Vol. 3, p.6.)

In the book "Man la yandhur" (p.209), "There is no institution more
beloved than marriage" is stated as Islam's policy for matrimony.
Persons who seek to avoid founding a family on unreasonable or false
grounds are sternly rebuked, and condemned for every form of pretext to
which they resort for perverting the God-given force of sex from its
proper use. In the book "Safenatul- Bihar" (Vol. 1, p.561), we read:
"Wedlock and matrimony belong to my religion. Whosoever protests against
this way of life excludes himself from my religion and is not one of
mine."

Similarly Islam is against the wedding of people who lack the qualities
of personality and the excellences of spirit which are required: and
against wedding into families which do not profit from religious
upbringing in moral standards. As is written in the "Wasa’il ash-Shia" —
chapter 7 of the "Book of Wedlock", "the Prophet in a sermon said:
'Avoid beautiful plants and flowers which grow by the side of filthy and
polluted waters.' The Prophet was asked: '0 Prophet of Allah! what is a
plant by a stagnant pool?' He replied: 'A beautiful woman brought up in
a perverse family that has not known the restraints of instruction'."

It is natural that consorts who are not brought up on absolute moral
standards and religious laws can never be sure of true family happiness
and blessedness. The fruit of such marriages can only be delinquent
children, rough, violent, without serenity or security of spirit.
Therefore Islam, to ensure the happiness of both parties, lays
particular stress on matters of morals and of mentality. It is to guard
against the production of a generation that is corrupt and perverted
that Islam seeks to avoid matrimony with members of families that are
polluted and degraded.

If young people, at the moment when they have to choose their life's
partner, would do so in accordance with Islamic rules and regulations
instead of only looking at externals, and weigh the realities which are
vital to happiness, setting aside false thinking inspired by polluted
passions that so swiftly pass, there is no doubt that the unhappiness
and family disasters brought on family life by the devotees of sexual
freedom and permissiveness would all very rapidly disappear into thin
air. Yet some of today's youth have been taught that a trial-marriage,
to see if a couple suit each other in intercourse, is the right way and
the ideal preparation for happy life-partnership.

How can they think that a brief experience of a fleeting pleasure of two
bodies can plumb the depths of the spiritual qualities, mental
abilities, moral gifts and personality-traits of another soul? To expect
to found an eternal relationship on a few moments of pleasure is a
nonsensical piece of illogic. That should be enough to condemn it out of
hand, quite apart from all the moral and spiritual damage which such
temporary liaisons cannot fail to cause. The inner qualities of a
personality only appear in a long period of a shared life.

It is the ever-changing scene and stage of their living together which
reveals the truth of two partners' inward nature to each other.
Patience, forbearance, equanimity, steadiness, contentment,
selflessness, self- sacrifice are discovered when life's pressures crowd
in on the soul. How can brief moments of rest and fun and trips a deux
penetrate to the deep ethical characteristics? Can a visit to the cinema
or some other place of entertainment reveal their true selves to a
couple? Indeed, in trial-marriages both partners try to conceal their
bad sides and put on a good mask to fool each other.

Can a young man in the heat of passion make a decision which is the most
fateful of his life? Can a trial-marriage ensure that there is no
difference in spirit and no weak point in their relationship? And how
can a young person, ruled by the conditions of his years when the
inclination to satisfy sexual instincts is so strong, weigh the
essential conditions for a sound marriage dispassionately and
detachedly? How can he be sure that quarrels and differences will not
arise in the future?

It is for this reason that Islam recommends that, before the final
signing of a marriage contract, the young people should meet each other
and talk ; but also, and far more important, they should get an
assessment of their proposed partner's character and tastes and traits
and capacities from independent observers who are able to judge from
long acquaintance.

Or, since the family happiness depends in the first place on the
equality of the relations between man and wife in their shared life, the
firmer the spiritual and ethical bonds the surer the happiness of the
household and the greater its ability to stand the shocks of life in
selfless self-sacrifice and union. This is why the Prophet said: "Best
of my people is the man who shows his family not harshness but perfect
kindness and goodness." (Moral Excellence: p.247 "Makarem-ul-Akhlaq".)
And again ("Man la yandhur", p.625): "Best amongst you is he who treats
his family well: and I am kindest of all to my own family." Similarly
the wife should treat her husband with kindness, and this is called her
"Sacred Jihad" (Tafseer-ad-Dorr al-manthoor "Gems of Wisdom").

One of the sad obstacles to early marriages today is the difficulty
which finance poses for young people. Provision of the marriage portion,
expensive ceremonies, the high cost of houses, and a dozen other
extravagant charges are too much for the average youth. Islam insists
that the state should take steps to enable these difficulties to be
overcome in the interests of the institution of matrimony. The book
"Gems of Wisdom" reports the Prophet of Islam as saying: "It is an
auspicious and beneficent act that the bride's family should make their
demands for dowry and terms of the marriage contract mild and lenient."

Excessive demands may reveal not only that the bride's family but
possibly also the bride herself is grasping and hard. The chapter on
marriage portions in the book "Wasa’il ash-Shi’a " tells the following
story. One day the Apostle of God was seated with the assembly of his
companions when a young woman rushed in and after the customary
courteous salutations said: "0 Apostle of God I want a young husband."
The Prophet turned to all those present and asked: "Has anyone an
inclination to take this woman to wife?" One man said he was willing.
The Prophet asked what dowry he would give. He replied: "I have nothing
I can give." So the Prophet said : "No!" The woman returned on a later
occasion and requested to be married. No one replied. Finally the same
young man who had no fortune or property at his disposition made a sign,
and the Prophet addressed him thus: "Do you know the Qur'an?" He said:
"Sure!" The gracious Apostle then decreed: "I will marry you to this
woman at the price of the dowry which will consist in your teaching her
a portion of the Qur'an every day."

Islam therefore refuses to recognize that financial difficulties may put
obstacles in the way of young people's matrimony. It allows indigent and
needy persons to found families by law. Islam regards fear of poverty
and of involvement as false excuses for avoiding the divine law of life
in wedlock, and says that Providence knows a family's needs and will not
let them fall into deprivation.

It is written in Sura 24: Nur —"Light", verse 32:

***"Provide the means by which worthy and fitting persons who have no
spouse may marry. If they are poor and indigent God out of His gracious
care will supply their needs."***

Of course hard work and industry is the way in which a man should supply
his needs. When a man undertakes the responsibilities of matrimony, in
order to make both ends meet he must increase his activities and his
hard work. This is one of the functions of marriage in raising the
standard of living for the whole of society.

Islam and the Position of Women
-------------------------------

The West's vociferous partisans of Women's Lib. have no idea of the
revolutionary leap forward in women's position which Islam brought
about. In the days of Islam's first appearance the position of women was
that of chattels of the men— little above the domesticated animals. Yet
the West, for all their vaunted freedom, have added nothing to what
Islam gave to women, except liberty for increased corruption and
licentiousness. Islam prohibits debauchery, laxity, vulgarity,
debasement and demoralization. Is that to hinder women's upward advance?

Islam regards both man and woman as created by God to rise to the full
stature of the perfect human. This is in stern contrast with those
versions of the Heavenly Book which Jews and Christians have tampered
with and published as reading: "Amongst every thousand men appears one
beloved of God: but amongst all the women in the world there is not to
be found one who is included in God's grace and favor." (My quotation is
from page 519 of "Islamic and Arab Civilization", an authoritative work
to which due respect must be paid.)

Islam proclaims that in God's eyes there is no difference between man
and woman. Each is a precious soul. In His eyes all that makes people
stand out from one another is their excelling in virtue, piety,
reverence, spiritual and ethical qualities. It is open to both men and
women to achieve that type of excellence. At Doomsday each soul will be
judged, regardless of sex, according to the fruits of their actions, by
the above criteria. As it is written in Sura XXVII : Nahl —"Bee"

***"Whosoever bath faith and performs decorous actions, man or woman, I
decree as their destiny a life that will be satisfied and will win that
soul a reward better than the good deeds they have done."***

Compare Sura 28: Qasas — "The Narration" (verse 84):

***"To whosoever does good, the reward is better than the deed."***

Islam regards men and women as complementary to each other. As it is
written in Sura 3: Aal-i-Imran — "Imran's Family" (verse 195):

***"Their Lord hath accepted their prayer and answered: 'Never will I
suffer the work of any one of you, male or female, to be lost. Ye are
complementary to each other'."***

Many women possess such personal excellences and intelligence that they
attain great heights of true humanity and happiness. Many men, alas,
fall to the lowest depths because they flout reason and abandon
themselves to their passions.

It is related that on one occasion the Second Caliph, Omar, said from
the pulpit in the presence of a large crowd: "I will fine any man who
gives his bride 500 dirhams or more as dowry. He shall be made to give
the same amount as that by which his dowry exceeds the Mahr-as-Sunna
(traditional dowry) to the public treasury." At this a woman who was at
the foot of the pulpit cried out in a loud voice her objection to Omar's
statement saying : "Your proclamation contradicts God's law : for does
not the Sura IV : Nisa'a — 'The Women', say (verse 20): ***'But if you
decide to take one wife in place of another, even if you have given the
wife you put away a talent of gold as her marriage portion, take not the
least bit of it back.'?*** How can you, then, in contradiction of the
Divine Law which has stated that it is permissible to give more than the
legal minimum marriage portion, make your proclamation?" Omar could not
deny the impeachment and withdrew his proposition saying: "It was a man
who erred and a woman who uttered the truth."

Contrast with this the tragic depression of women in pre-Islamic Arabia.
What a height of dignity has been conferred by Islam on the female sex
to enable one of them to lift up her voice in public rebuke to a Caliph
and cause him to reverse his own public utterance! Islam took from men
the right to own women. It instituted equality of human souls, with due
regard to differences of male and female constitutions.

In the 19th century religious leaders of France, after long discussions,
decided: "Woman is a human being, but made to serve man." It was not
until recent years that women in European lands had any rights to own
property. In England it was not till about AD 1850 that women were
counted in the national population census.

It was in 1882 that a British law, unprecedented in the country's
history, for the first time granted women the right to decide how their
own earnings should be spent, instead of handing them over direct to
their husbands immediately. Until then, even the clothes on their back
had been their husband's property. Henry VIII had in his day even
forbidden women to study the Bible when the first English translations
began to appear.

Fourteen centuries ago Islam had decreed women's total financial
independence, their right to own and dispose of property without the
surveillance or control of any man, to conduct business, trade and all
the transactions concerning their profit and loss, including the
execution of deeds of gift, without having to check with anyone. As it
is written in the Sura IV: Nisa'a — "The Women", verse 33:

***"In no wise covet gifts bestowed by God seemingly more freely on some
than on others. What so­ ever a man earns is his own. Whatsoever a woman
earns is her own. Pray to God for the bounty of His Providence for He
knows all things."***

Besides property rights Islam bestowed dignity, liberty and freedom on
women. This is not least true in the matter of marriage. Marriage is the
most important and sensitive step in a woman's life. Islam did
everything to secure her in it, and to enable her to consider the
financial as well as all the other matters concerning the situation
before she accepted him in wedlock.

Thus the rights and privileges which European women extorted after
bringing forceful pressure to bear on the societies in which they lived,
and only recently achieved, Islam bestowed upon all women voluntarily
without any form of revolt or pressure many centuries back. Indeed there
is no moment of a woman's life, and no problem she is likely to face,
for which Islam has not made beneficent and wise provision.

It is true that today far too many women are condemned in the East to an
unsatisfactory way of life. But this is not due to Islam's regulations.
It is due to the neglect of religious precept in political, social and
financial institutions.

Poverty is one important reason for the bad conditions under which
Eastern women have to live. A few are too rich; but the majority far too
poor, victims of hunger and wretchedness. The resultant weakness has
deprived people of the strength to rise up and insist on a change in
their environment, for the sake of their families and children. Nor have
the women the power in such a situation to make use of their legal
rights and to take the men to court for the violence and tyranny of
their behavior. Women fear the difficulties of having to live without a
male companion in a man's world.

The same economic needs cause a diminution in morals and in human
affections. Violence and injustice replace moral values.

Although Islamic lands are amongst the worst sufferers from these modern
disasters, it is not Islam itself, but the deliberate neglect and
abandonment of Islamic principles by Muslims and their leaders which has
brought these tragedies upon us. For Islam is the very acme of the
counter forces to poverty and injustice, and insists that wealth must be
fairly divided amongst people of all classes, declaring that it is wrong
for people to have to live under the torture of indigence and its
pressure on hearts and souls, not least those of women and children.

Have we not men wise and just enough to eradicate these wrongs? To cure
the bitterness which they produce? To re-enact sound Islamic measures?
To restore respect for the dictates of piety and reverence for God and
men? Should not that same Islam which once rescued woman from degrading
depression, now raise her again by instituting a new -society?

What is the situation in the West? Women have fallen victims to the
bestial passions to which men have, abandoned themselves under the
influence of subversive propaganda of all kinds, in which the mass-
media, particularly cinema and TV, and the advertisements that disgrace
the hoardings of our great cities, play so tragically fateful a part.

Nowadays a woman's good reputation and dignity does not come, as it used
to, from her possession of moral excellences, education and knowledge.
Too often women of piety and learning are left in obscurity. Respect,
reputation go too much with the name of "artiste" which some women
arrogate to themselves. They perform no useful function in society. They
do not help the men forward. The name "artiste" seems to cover a
multitude of sins of incontinence and debauchery, which are the very
opposite of that virtue and chastity in which the honor of women once
resided. How many earn a shameful living as "models"?

An American sociologist writes that the modern strip teaser can earn a
million dollars a year: a fellow who is able to knock out another man
with one blow of his fist gets half a million: a man who has spent a
lifetime in the service of his fellows, in his white hairs finds hardly
enough to live on.

Professor Albert Connolly writes: "In 1919 England's women fought for
the right to be elected to Parliament, and in their battle went to
prison and suffered physically in fearless vindication of their sex.
What use are their grandchildren making of the privileges gained for
them by these courageous women pioneers?

And what would their grandmothers think of them? Maybe they are actually
turning in their graves at seeing the liberties they fought for
perverted to shameless license. This last half century has taught us
that the liberation of women is not enough. Besides all their other
sacrifices for their cause, women seem also to have connived at the
sacrifice of the respect and the ancient realities, the moral dignity
and the devotion to mankind's uplift which in former days brought honor
to the name of 'woman' and 'mother'."[^1]

Islam and Divorce
-----------------

The first point this chapter must make is that divorce is contrary to
the laws of nature. The annulling of the marriage-bond and the
separation of those who should be life-partners is a denial of the true
nature of man as created and as at his best. Any society in which
divorces become numerous, with the consequent break-up of families,
evidences its deviation from nature and her requirements.

Psychologists, jurists and sociologists, concerned by the effects of
divorce on the moral and juridical personality of those involved, have
gone deep into the subject, and given it as their considered verdict
that the ejection of a man and wife, let alone the children, from the
warmth of home-life into the cold unwelcome of any substitute
establishment they may find, deals a mortal blow to their spirits and
exposes their children to the onset of moral ailments and psychic
traumas against which family life had immunized and protected them.
These scientists further hold, almost to a man, that for these reasons
divorce should be rendered practically impossible by severe sanctions,
except in a few cases where some cause, generally from outside, like the
onslaught of insanity or criminality, makes an exception to the rule.

But what should be done in cases of irreparable breakdown of relation­
ships? Must the partners stay in the hell they have made? Or may a
way-out be found for them? Christianity says blankly: "No divorce!" But
Islam more realistically faces the consequences of irreparable breakdown
as a fact, and provides a way-out. Every possible safeguard is laid down
in the statute book to prevent such a way-out by divorce being abused.

But it is clear that the bankruptcy of the relationship is only worsened
by forcing the partners to stick together; and their misery is only
increased. Hence divorce, though stigmatized as "the most loathsome of
states in the eyes of the Lord" is made possible when it is the better
of two bad roads. It may even be that the very separation removes the
cause of the irritation between man and wife, while the lapse of time in
absence softens the hearts and recalls the good points which had been
lost under the pains of discord; so that the couple seek reunion, and in
some cases actually start the same partnership up again in pardon and
joy.

Since Islam's aim is the firm establishment of marriages, in the
interests of this objective certain liberties are denied. The right of
divorce is given to the man only, except in very exceptional cases. This
is to safeguard the best interests of women and save them from falling
victim to passions. Manifestly, if two people both have the right to
institute divorce proceedings, the basis of confidence is made very
shaky on both sides. What better safeguard can there be, therefore, than
to give the right of divorce proceedings primarily to the one who has by
nature more subjection to the powers of reason, and patience in the face
of lack of tenderness; and who stands to lose the sum he has given as a
marriage portion, as well as having to undertake the financial burdens
of the children's upbringing?

The differences in the constitution of a man and woman are manifest. The
head takes first place in the man's decisions and the heart in the
woman's. Reason and emotion are the gifts given to each respectively in
their creation. As Dr. Alexis Carrel puts it : "The differences between
men and women are, obviously, the physical ones: and then, less
obviously, the internal ones like the dispositions of the nerves, the
different mental and emotional talents, both of which are of supreme
importance for the future of civilization. Partisans of Women's
Liberation aim at a false conception of equality, as if that desirable
condition meant precise similarity and identity in upbringing,
employment, responsibilities and duties." ("Man, the Unknown" pp.
84-87).

It is for these reasons that Islam's Fiqh lays down: "Divorce is in the
hand of the man." And it is in consideration of the woman's delicacy of
spirit that the power of ending a shared life is not granted to her.
Islam, in addition to the manifold measures it has taken to make it
easier for people to enter the married state and start families, also
makes it more difficult to break up the home. Everything possible is
done to ensure happy sound home-life, for the sake of the family's
members and of the society to which they belong. It is therefore that it
is written in Sura IV: Nisa'a —"The Women" verse 19:

***"O men, live with your wives in kindness and equity. If you dislike
anything in them, that may be the very point which God will use to bring
about much blessing."***

In order to take away such feelings of dislike and prevent their turning
to hatred, and to remove their discomfort, Islam awakens the man's
conscience to live in kindness and equity with patience, and not to cast
off a wife who is temporarily in disfavor, since it may be that goodness
and blessing may come through those very wives; so that it would be
stupid to end the relationship hastily. As is written in the same Sura
IV: Nisa'a — "The Women", verse 128:

***"If a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's part, there is
no obstacle to their arranging an amicable settlement between them for
which the wife must renounce some of her rights. But if they return
through reconciliation and peace through such unselfishness, such a
settlement is better than separation and divorce."***

The same dislike of divorce, as the most detestable of extreme measures
to be adopted only in the direst emergency, is advanced by all Islam's
greatest scholars and leaders, an attitude summed up in. the sentence in
the book "Mustadrak" (Vol. 3, p.2): "Any woman who seeks to be divorced
from her husband, save in cases of extreme necessity, falls out of the
grace and mercy of the Lord." Or again in Vol. 3 of the "Wasa’il
ash-Shi’a " (p.144): "Enter upon matrimony: but do not divorce your
wives, since divorce shakes the very throne of God."

Islam fences in the man's power of divorce with many limiting
safeguards. A man may not put away his wife by violence, harassment,
injury or in a way which may drive her to a life of immorality and
corruption. Thus Islam has for centuries surpassed anything yet achieved
in Western countries, in its initiative to remove differences and
restore understanding in family life.

This is particularly true of the family courts, where well-meaning
relatives have a large say, and everything is done to bring about
reconciliation. Causes of differences are deeply studied; and, as
relatives, they are able to go deep into confidential matters without
either of the couple feeling that their private secrets are being
exposed or their feelings excoriated in too public an ambience.

When the causes of the difference have been brought into the light of
day, the members of the family court exert all their powers of sincerity
and heart and affection to bring about reconciliation and to quench the
fires of temper, exhorting both sides to unselfishness, tolerance, and
an effort to understand each other's point of view. Since both man and
wife respect these elders and have full confidence in their
compassionate affection, they frequently accept the family court's
recommendations for adjustments they should make in their relationships
and behavior towards each other. As it is written in Sura IV : Nisa'a
—"The Women" (verse 35):

***"Should you fear that division will arise amongst them, appoint an
arbitrator on the husband's side and an arbitrator on the wife's side
from amongst their relatives and send them to them. As soon as they
desire peace and reconciliation the Lord will vouchsafe it to them for
He is all-knowing and all-wise."***

Should the causes and roots of the initiation of divorce proceedings
prove to be too deep, so that there is an irreparable breakdown in
marital relationships, and all the efforts of the relatives fail to
bring about any sort of hope of reconciliation, Islam in its realism
recognizes that each party must take their own road. It must be plain
that such a family court is far more likely to succeed than all the
public courts of law or marriage guidance clinics.

In fact these only too often, being strangers to the family and not
privy to their inmost secrets, merely increase the rift, because of the
clumsiness of their well-meaning efforts. A public court has the duty to
hear the evidences produced by both sides; and then, in the cold dry
heartless atmosphere in which only exact truth and not mercy or clemency
reigns, decide which side has most right and give verdict accordingly.
It has neither the heart nor the spiritual influence of relatives to
press for reconciliation, and cure the causes of the quarrel. In the
Qur'an, Sura LXV "Talaq" — "Divorce" ordains in verse 2:

***"Two just persons from amongst yourselves shall bear witness to the
evidence before God when a divorce is settled."***

Without these two witnesses, there is no legal divorce. An advantage of
their appointment is that they can exert every pressure of affection and
wisdom to avert the final catastrophe for quite a period before
reluctantly, if they have to do so, agreeing that there is no other way
out. They frequently succeed in the better course.

It is further laid down that no divorce may be made absolute save after
the woman's period of purification after menstruation or childbirth is
completed. This need to wait awhile often proves a breathing-space in
which the man's feelings of tenderness once more assert themselves over
his irritations, and make him decide against divorce.

Further when a man finds sharing his life with a particular woman
wearisome and irksome and decides on divorce, this decision of his does
not suffice in itself to end their living together not does it become
effective until the expiry of the "Iddat", i.e. the period fixed by the
Fiqh during which a divorced or widowed woman may not be married to
another man: and this period also gives a breathing-space which
frequently results in the man's change of heart and decision to continue
the married bond with the wife he planned to divorce.

Finally, after the execution of the formalities for a "revocable
divorce" (Talaq-i-raj') a man may not expel his wife from the home until
the termination of the period of the "'iddat" which may last anything up
to three months, nor may the wife quit their joint home except in a
desperately exceptional case during that period. As the Sura LXV "Talaq"
—"Divorce" enacts (verse 1):

***"You may not expel women from their houses, nor may they themselves
quit, except if they have been proven guilty of some open lewdness
(during the "iddat' period). These -are limits set by God. Should any
man transgress these limits he does so at the peril of his own soul, and
to his own harm: for you know not whether God may bring about some new
situation later (than the decision to divorce)."***

No formalities are necessary to abrogate a revocable divorce during
these months. A mere indication of desire for renewal of the marriage
relationship by the man suffices.

Should the wife feel such hatred for her husband that she repays him the
statutory portion of marriage settlement he had given her, or a portion
of her own property, that counts as her divorcing him; but this type of
divorce is revocable within the stated period, so that if she changes
her mind, and her husband agrees, he can still take her back into their
home.

By these many means Islam safeguards the holy estate of matrimony from
shipwreck on the rock of hasty decisions onto which emotional storms may
drive some couples.

Islam had also done much to protect the wife's rights and to save her
from having to continue to live in an unhappy environment. Among
beneficent measures are the following:

1. The wife can insert a clause in the marriage contract ensuring that  
 (a) Incompatibility of temperament  
 (b) Maltreatment  
 (c) Refusal of maintenance  
 (d) Unannounced journeys  
 (e) The taking of another wife without consultation are so provided
against that if any of the above five conditions is broken she can
approach a lawyer to obtain a divorce for her through the courts;

2. The wife can make it impossible for her husband not to divorce her by
being intolerably refractory, vexatiously shrewish or deliberately
incompatible in relationships, familial, sexual or social;

3. the wife can resort to the courts if the husband has been incapable
or negligent in supplying her with maintenance or has put obstacles in
the way of her obtaining it; or if either partner deprives the other of
conjugal rights or fails in marital duties; the Muslim Qadhi, if the
woman's plea is proved, can compel the husband to treat her right, to be
reconciled, to disburse the proper sums, to confer her rights upon her
in every form : and if the husband proves recalcitrant, or refuses to
obey the judge's orders, the judge can then compel him to divorce his
wife;

4. The wife can enter a plea in the Islamic court and obtain an
injunction if the husband accuses her of lewdness, unchastity or
unfaithfulness, or denies his own paternity of her child : if the
husband cannot prove his case the judge will order the husband to
separate himself from his wife in accordance with the relevant
legislation;

5. the wife may, in the case of intolerable revulsion or aversion, in a
simple fashion bring about a discontinuance of their union by renouncing
a large part of her marriage portion, while freeing her husband from his
obligation to pay her alimony during the "'Iddat" breathing-space
period;

6. The wife, if the husband absents himself so that no news of him
reaches her and she falls into financial or other difficulties, can
resort to the courts and request a divorce; the judge will then perform
the necessary formalities to annul her marriage contract.

It is written in Sura II: "Baqara" —"The Heifer" (verse 229):

***"A divorce is only permissible twice: after that the parties should
either hold together in equity or separate in kindness. It is not lawful
for you men to take back from your wives any of that portion which you
have given them except when both parties fear that they would be unable
to keep the God- ordained limits. If you judges have reason to fear that
the parties will be unable to keep the God-ordained limits, so decree,
for there will be no blame on either of them if she hands over a sum in
exchange for her freedom. These limits are God-ordained so do not
transgress them since that is to wrong yourself as well as others."***

In the "Exegetical Collection" it is related in Volume I on page 167
that 'ibn Abbas reported that Jamila, wife of Thabit bin Qais, sought
audience of the Prophet and complained to him: "0 Apostle of God! I
cannot stand one moment more of life with Thabit bin Qais, nor shall my
head ever rest again on the same pillow as his." After a pause she
added: "I am not accusing him of a lack of faith or of moral and marital
virtues: but I am afraid that I myself will fall into infidelity and
blasphemy if I have to spend another minute with him.

I turned up the tent-skirting and my eye fell on my husband in the
middle of a crowd of other men. He looked so ugly, a black-vised,
dwarfish runt, and I hated him, and I can't go on. " She ran on thus,
and the Prophet, after absorbing her -outpouring, tried to advise and
admonish her, but she paid him no heed. So he sent for Thabit bin Qais
and laid the situation before him. Thabit was deeply attached to Jamila,
but self-sacrificingly and for her sake agreed to take back the marriage
portion he had settled upon her— a beautiful garden - and give her a
khul' divorce.

There are cases in which resort to the court by the wife is statutory.
There are also cases in which she can divorce her husband without legal
aid, as in cases of certain grave chronic diseases like leprosy or
elephantiasis; or because of the onset of lunacy, or of physical defects
which prevent marital intercourse, like impotence or castration of the
husband. For these Fiqh gives the wife haqq-i-faskh— the right to the
rescinding or annulment of the marriage, which "faskh" is not the same
as the khul' divorce, and does not involve the same financial
renunciations by the wife as khul' does.

Germany and Switzerland, in Europe, also recognize lunacy as grounds for
the annulment of a marriage or for separation. France does not admit
either grave chronic disease or lunacy as an adequate ground, and
insists that the healthy spouse must care for the leprous or lunatic
partner. Undoubtedly such longsuffering and loving kindness is highly
praise­worthy; while extolling it as a counsel of perfection, Islamic
realism prefers to leave the partners free to choose separation or
continued care, according to their own conscience.

The West is suffering terribly from the laxity it has allowed in the
break-up of marriages and the violently increasing incidence of divorce.
These disasters are really reactions to over-pressure by the churches,
which prohibited and condemned divorce one hundred percent for many
centuries, while the secular governments gave recognition to it.

For instance, divorce was totally prohibited in France until the French
Revolution of October 1789. In 1804, in response to popular demand,
divorce was legalised; but in the following 12 years it increased so
appallingly that the religious bodies brought renewed pressure to bear,
until in 1816 the law legalizing divorce was rescinded though physical
separation of the parties was permitted. However, public pressure built
up again so much that in 1884 divorce within certain limits was
legalised once more.

Here follow the conditions on which in Western lands divorce for wife
and husband was legal until recent times:

1. A criminal act committed by either party which involves the penalty
of life-imprisonment, exile, loss of civil rights or temporary
imprisonment with hard labor;

2. Physical violence, mercenary prostitution, and a few other similar
criminal acts of the one partner against the other;

3. Adultery by either partner—though in such cases the wife has the
right of divorce only if the man commits adultery with another woman in
the house which belongs to his wife and himself.

The following is the road by which a wife's infidelity was proved: note
it well! "The infidelity of a wife must be proved completely in the eyes
of the police. The wife or the husband plan to be in different places
for however a short time. They must agree about some third person to be
cited as co-respondent and this person must be prepared to undertake
this service. And then at the stated hour the wife must be caught in
flagrante delictu with the third party; and the husband must have the
police on the spot to catch her out and so prove her infidelity. Thus
the police accompany the husband to the trysting-place; and when they
catch the wife in flagrante delictu this is accounted adequate grounds
for her husband divorcing her." (The Law of Divorce and Renewal of
Marriage p.99).

See what a mass of further impurities the impurity which wrought the
need for divorce in the first place has carried in its train. And this
is the "civilized" world of the West, which allows women entry into
public and political life, and with the other hand takes away her honor,
her femininity, and the high standards which it should be her privilege
to set, and turns her chastity into a mercenary bargaining-point. It
must be admitted that since I first put pen to paper on this matter,
efforts have been made in many Western lands to eradicate the worst of
these abominations.

America makes divorce easier for both parties. It is not surprising,
therefore, that American divorce figures are the highest of all. The
wise tremble at the results: the wisdom of Islamic dispositions shines
by contrast like the sun in darkness. At a conference in Strasburg,
statistics of one year's divorces which could be attributed to the
over­whelming desire of wives to be "in the fashion", "a la mode",
"comme faut" and to "keep up with the Joneses" in modernity of garb and
guise were quoted as being:

1. in France, 27% of all divorces;  
 2. in Germany, 33%;  
 3. in Holland, 36%;  
 4. in Sweden, 17%.

Not every Parisienne is an excessive slave of fashion. Nonetheless it is
reckoned that the costs of unnecessary purchases made by women simply to
keep up with "mode" come to no less than 5,000 tomans per head
(£300-£400 per head per annum). Yet all this expenditure adds nothing to
the woman's natural beauty, moral stature, ease of spirit or calm of
mind!

European statesmen and responsible thinkers everywhere, are well aware
of the danger, and fear it acutely. All who possess the slightest sense
of philanthropy must seek the means of stemming the sweeping tide of
this flood of evil through the world.

Islam offers its regulations on family life, matrimony, and the
respective positions of men and women, as a way which all nations might
do well to follow, remembering that it was a Westerner, Voltaire, who
said : "The Prophet Muhammad reduced the unlimited harems of unfortunate
women maintained by pre-Islamic potentates to a maximum of four wives:
and his legislation on marriages and divorces is the most noble and
effective ever conceived, formulated and enacted by any authority at any
time in the world's history, religious, political or social."

Temporary Marriages
-------------------

Islam is a realistic and practical religion. Divinely inspired, it fits
human nature like a glove. It does not exalt, as ideals, ways of life
which are contrary to nature. It therefore rejected the doctrine (which
the Christian Church had promulgated during its first six centuries)
that celibacy was a desirable or meritorious way of life, estimable as a
work of supererogation (i.e. adding to the store of merit which could be
shared amongst the saints and even turned to the salvation of sinners
for whom they prayed) while marriage, though not an unlawful state,
falls in a moral category called "makruh" which lies halfway' between
the "mubah" or "indifferent" and the "haram" or totally forbidden.

Popes and Catholics tend to follow this doctrine to this day, as also do
the higher ranks of the Orthodox hierarchy. It was one of the Catholic
doctrines against which Luther and his Protestants revolted, and it is
forming a great source of controversy within the Church of Rome at this
very date at which we write. After long discussions at a Vatican
Congress, it was decided that "marriage is still less meritorious than
celibacy; and no alteration in the Church's doctrine can be allowed on
this point."

The sexual instinct has the deepest roots in human nature. Unless it is
properly catered for and regulated, it avenges itself. It responds to
suppression by psychological explosions that can be volcanic in their
effect if they take place simultaneously in large numbers of people. It
might well be held that the disastrous breakdown of the family
institution in the West is precisely such an explosive reaction against
Christian attempts to suppress the sex instinct instead of sanctifying
and subliminating it in its natural channels.

Christians must ask themselves whether they have not committed the very
sin of which their Lord and Master accused the Pharisees of His day,
that of "binding on men's backs burdens too heavy to be borne." Like
caged beasts escaping from captivity, the people of the West dash forth
from the bondage in which Christianity had tried to hold them, and in an
equal and opposite reaction go much too far in the other direction.

Islam makes a proper marriage, when a man and woman reach adult­ hood, a
merit and a virtue. Thus it turns the God-implanted instinct to its
correct operation in the strengthening of society. It bans bestial abuse
of the instinct, but exalts its truly human use in accordance with the
way in which God has made mankind. A man was made to love a wife and
children. This is acknowledged in every race in every clime.

It is written in Sura 3: Al-i-Imran — "Imran's Family" (verse 14, in
part):

***"Fair in the eyes of men is the love of objects which are the desire
of their instinct, women and sons.”***

Islam during the 14 centuries of its existence has done its utmost to
end the scandal of prostitution which takes such a heavy toll in family
and social life, and degrades both the women who are compelled to
practise it and the men whose incontinence exploits them. The law of
"the temporary marriage" (ezdevaj-i-muwaqat or mutä'a) by the formula
(or seeghe) laid down in it, was instituted to establish conditions
under which a man who was compelled by the necessities of his business
or for other causes to be away from home for long periods, or who
desired to give temporary assistance to a woman whose life had fallen
into difficulties, could undertake a union for a specified period under
strictly controlled conditions.

Remember that this beneficent piece of legislation was produced through
the Prophet of Islam in the environment of those "days of ignorance"
when men walked in darkness; and when illicit relationships were as
common as other types of immorality in those generations of unregenerate
and unenlightened persons. Most places had official "red-light
districts" and houses of ill-fame as a matter of course. To raise the
thinking and living of men, and to put an end to illicit sex, the
Prophet of Islam brought in this law of "temporary marriage",
to -canalise the sex instinct in sound channels.

The chapters on "Temporary Marriage" in the book "Wasa’il ash-Shi’a "
report that the Prophet posted an edict in the streets and bazaars which
read: "O people! God's Apostle has made temporary marriage permissible
for you, for the quenching of the fires of the sex instinct, and for
turning it to sound uses, that ye may not be the slaves of sexual
licence, fornication or illicit relationships."

By this law the man and woman enter upon a marriage, not of permanence,
but of a limited time, and live as man and wife until the expiry of the
stated period. The only difference in this type of marriage is that it
does not carry with it the same rights of inheritance, nor does the man
have to continue to provide the woman's food, clothing and shelter after
the termination of their relationship. But to preserve proper order all
the other rules that govern permanent marriage must also be observed in
the temporary marriage.

A woman who enters such a contract is counted as the man's real wife and
can claim all the rights which are legally specified as such. As it is
written in Sura IV: Nisa'a — "The Women" (verse 24):

***"To women whom you choose in temporary and conditional (muwaqat and
muta'a) marriage, give their dowry, as a duty."***

The only difference between permanent marriage and temporary marriage,
so far as its social status is concerned, is its duration. If the
contract specifies a definite and limited period, that is a temporary
marriage. But the wife is as much a wife as if the contract had
specified "a permanent and unlimited period."

The children of the temporary marriage are recognized on precisely the
same footing as those of a permanent marriage, and enjoy all the legal
and canonical and customary rights of children whose paternity is
recognized. One reason for prostitution is that some men find it not
within their reach to enter upon a permanent marriage, either because
their personality or their finances prevent them undertaking the heavy
lifelong responsibility, or because their stay in any one place can only
be short. Merchants, soldiers, students and even tourists find
themselves in these conditions. It is the realistic recognition of these
facts, and Islam's consistent "yes!" to life, which have produced the
institution of "temporary marriage".

What better solution could there be? Properly practiced, this
institution is a powerful antidote and preventative of ills like
prostitution and other social ailments. It blocks the way to women's
selling themselves, raises the general tone of public morality, and
gives needed assistance to women who, through no fault of their own,
either by the death of their husband or some other disaster, have fallen
on bad times. We say "properly practiced", because there are licentious
and ignorant persons who abuse this law, including opponents of Islam
who make misuse of it a basis for false propaganda and
misrepresentation.

Temporary marriage preserves the aspect of purity and saves people from
sin. That something right can be misused by wicked persons exposes those
persons' wickedness, but does not invalidate the right institution. The
answer is to change them by replacing their wickedness with piety of
spirit and absolute moral standards. The Prophet of Islam was "sent to
bring about the excellences of virtue", and it is to this end that all
Islam's efforts are directed.

There exists no law anywhere in the world which is not twisted by the
wicked to their own ends and against its original purpose. This is true
of laws which are of the greatest benefit to society. The law of
"temporary marriage" is one such. It should be backed with the full
authority of the state. Those who misuse it should be punished. Those
who use it right should be supported and aided in their righteous
living.

In the "Temporary Marriage" chapters of the book "Wasa’il ash-Shi’a " it
is reported that the Fifth Imam said, quoting the Imam Ali: "If the 2nd
Caliph had not prohibited temporary marriages, no Muslim, save perchance
a few utterly degraded lewd fellows of the baser sort, would have ever
committed fornication."

Close attention to the words of Omar (the 2nd Caliph) as reported by the
learned Islamic leaders and Ulema, and reflected in both the Sunni and
the Shia Fiqh, leaves no doubt that in the time of the Prophet himself
"temporary marriage" was both permitted and frequent; but Omar, for
reasons which are not clear, towards the close of his Caliphate
prohibited it in the notorious phrase: "There were two dispensations
which were both legal and frequently practiced during the time of the
Prophet of God (on Whom be blessing), both of which I cancel, annul,
prohibit and will punish; and they are (1) the dispensation permitting
enjoyments prohibited to wearers of Ehram (Hajji's white garments)
during the interval between 'umra' ('little pilgrimage') and the full
Hajj: (2) the dispensation allowing 'temporary marriage' in particular
circumstances."

Sunni Fiqh gives more information. But it is clear enough that in this
proclamation Omar was acting merely on a personal viewpoint, which was
far from carrying with it the assent of other companions of the Prophet,
who both held that temporary marriage is a true Islamic institution, and
also practiced it themselves in many instances.

Division is the hallmark of our age. Our magazines, newspapers, films
and television are filled with meretricious pictures: our radio with
salacious stuff: our hoardings with posters of erotic enticement, while
our -women dress seductively and go around half-naked. The whole
ambience entices youth off the path of virtue. Those who wish to be
chaste are in grave danger all the time. People of poor background, and
little knowledge of Islamic law, criticize the law of "temporary
marriage" in foolish and illogical ignorance and prejudice; and this
lays a further obstacle before the feet of our young people.

What then should we do? We can hardly expect even the best to master a
total control of themselves and stem this powerful flood, so stimulating
to sexual instincts, which, in the critical age of youth, are so close
to the surface and so impatient of outward control. Even if we imagined
that the ideal is the real, and that every one of our youth is endowed
with what amounts to a supernatural self-control, will this not of
itself annul the purpose of the creation of this instinct within
humankind, prevent the continuance of the race, prevent the use of that
vital sperm, prevent the spirit and teachings of Islam being truly
practiced, in accordance with the law proclaimed in Sura XXII: Hajj
—"Pilgrimage" (verse 78):

***"Strive in God's cause as ye should ; for He has chosen you, and has
in His religion not laid a difficult or insupportable task upon you"?***

Should we now return to the low morals of our pre-Islamic past, and to
that dirty habit of prostitution, with all the social ills and personal
misfortunes with which it has filled the Western world? Shall we leave
humanity to fall into that confusion of passions which is the law of the
jungle and the behavior of brute beasts?

It is written in Sura II: Baqara —"The Heifer" (verse 61):

***"Remember, O Israelis, that ye said: '0 Moses! We cannot keep on with
only one kind of food; so pray thy Lord to give us vegetables!' And he
replied: 'Will ye exchange the better for the worse? Go down to Egypt
and there find what you want!' They were covered with humiliation and
misery, for they had drawn upon themselves the wrath of God."***

We should merit Moses' rebuke if we, who have been shown that is good,
preferred to return to fleshpots of our own past and the West's present.
Shall we barter a heritage of glory for a mess of pottage?

It is to prevent precisely this disaster that the law of "temporary
marriage" was introduced. What better way could there be to rescue
millions of women, who are divorced or unmarried or widowed, from the
pressure to keep alive in wrongful ways and to prostitute their sex to
meet the cost of living? Some might be able to get a job and so a
livelihood.

But can that satisfy a woman's inmost feelings and spiritual needs? Can
it satisfy the emptiness left in her soul by the loss of a husband's
love and nearness? And what of her innate emotions and her instinct of
motherhood? Are not all these temptations to lead her astray unless
proper provision is made?

Men and women have taken up temporary marriages in the West without
legal, social or religious sanctions— and their society has been cast
into chaos. The West's thinkers are feeling after an institution like
Muslim "temporary marriage" to end this chaos.

Thus Bertrand Russell writes: "Modern social and financial difficulties
put obstacles in the way of youthful marriages, contrary to our liking.
A -century or two ago the student completed his studies between the ages
of 17 and 20; and, when the pressures of instinct and the age of puberty
made him marriageable, he was able to enter that state. Very few
remained unmarried until they were 30 or 40. But today students only
enter on their serious studies after the age of 20 and proceed to their
specialization in industry or science.

Even after they have got their degree and left college, they have to
spend quite a period securing their means of livelihood; so that they
may be 35 before they can afford to get married and found a family. The
long gap between adulthood and marriage causes emotional and instinctive
upheavals in the sexual life, and drives the victims to find relief
where they had better not.

Would it not be better for the sake of the proper order of human society
that we should end this touchy problem by finding some proper outlet for
the sexual instinct and the marital urge to replace or to fill in that
lengthy gap, and so safeguard public health, posterity, morality, the
principles of communication between men and women? Some sort of
temporary marriage for our girls and boys would be a solution and
prepare them for a permanent marriage later when they can afford it,
saving them from the corruptions of illicit sex and the spiritual pangs
of conscience which follow that type of wrongdoing as well as from the
venereal diseases which only too often result."

Wilhelm van Loom "Matrimonial Health as seen by Islam" (p.175) wrote:
"Psychology has confirmed that when men pass early marriageable age
without getting wed, tendencies to homosexuality or other forms of
sexual satisfaction beset them. Statistics show that some 65% of men who
have wives are unfaithful to them. To lessen their burdens the
government ought to introduce legislation making temporary marriage by
consent of both parties legal, with definite regulations and a proper
form for them to sign and register."

Multiple Marriages
------------------

Laws for the ordering of society are truly progressive and profitable
when they fit human nature and the Creator's laws, and take into account
the widest possible conspectus of human needs in each particular
society. Unless they fulfill these conditions they cannot be durable;
nor can the society they set out to regulate. Islam has taken these
points into consideration, and made reasonable and stable regulations,
not for any particular region of the world, but for all humanity in all
periods in every -clime. And so these laws will subsist and be
beneficial for man so long as he continues to exist on the face of the
earth.

Christians calumniate Islam as polygamous. The churches are hard put to
it to maintain their footing in this lubricious age, and use contumely
against Islam to bolster up their own position, exploiting the general
ignorance of the truth of Islamic law and the regulations about the
number of wives. In the West they go in for multiple marriages and
change partners by their own caprice without any attention to legal
conditions. But if they grasped the facts about Islam's law of marriage
and then practiced that law, they could save themselves a world of
troubles.

Before the rise of Islam the tribes went in for unlimited polygamy.
Indeed it was a status symbol to have many wives—the more wives, the
greater the man. The prophets of God in the early ages, and the sacred
scriptures of their different religions, reveal the same situation in
mankind's early centuries. In China the Li-Ki law gave every man the
right to have up to 130 wives. In Israel one man could have several
hundred.

Charlemagne had 400 and Ardeshir Babekan had about the same. Nor did the
Gospel, following the Torah, abrogate or condemn this practice or utter
a decree to ban it; so that up until the second half of the 8th century
AD and the time of Charlemagne polygamy was -customary in Europe and not
condemned by the Church. At that date, or soon after, the Church
promulgated a decree throughout Christendom which compelled men with
many wives to divorce them all save one. They may have obeyed; but they
were driven to fornication and adultery and prostitution in consequence.

In the days of ignorance the Arabs also practiced polygamy, and very
unpleasantly. It was possible for a man to take as many women as he
wanted into his harem; and these unfortunates had no rights at all of
any kind, financial or otherwise. A woman's value sank to pitiable
depths. All her legal and human rights were violated.

Islam changed all that. The number of wives was limited by law to a
maximum of four. The social needs of the day made it essential that men
should be prepared to take on more than 'one wife, if they could afford
it, since in a nomad desert society it was next to impossible for a
woman to make her own way through life unaccompanied by a man to stand
between her and the worst buffets of those difficult days.

Even this beneficent provision was hedged in by Islam with a number of
conditions, and in particular the basic demand that a man who took more
than one wife must be quite sure he would treat them all equally, and
not favor one above another in the dispensation of his own attentions or
in his care for their needs.

Note that the law permitting four wives was not a command that a man
must have more than one. On the contrary, if he did confine himself to
one wife he committed no crime. The number four was a maximum limit. It
was frequently charity and compassion for the widows of his comrades
slain in battle that compelled a man to offer the shelter of his home to
such a bereaved woman. Such was the case with several of the Prophet's
wives. Such compassion saved the women from a fate that was worse than
death.

If the numbers of nubile men and women were equal, there would be no
need for a man to take on more than one. But men are always fewer in
number in the world's population than women. For this there are numerous
causes. First, men are more prone to illness than women. -Second, it is
the men who are killed in war. Third, work in heavy industry or in the
mines often causes fatal injuries. And fourth, more girl-babies survive
infancy.

Thus, in France statistics show that for every 100 girls 105 boys are
born; and yet, out of France's population of 40 million there -are
1,765,000 more women than men. This is because 5% of the boys die during
the first year of their life. Another 5% have died before they are 25.
Male mortality continues until the final figure cited above is that of
the total living population at any one moment.

Furthermore, women live longer than men, so that for every 100 widowers
in France there are 150 widows.

In America there are 20 million girls without husbands. Because of this
deprivation many fall into unfortunate habits. Professor Peter Mudawar,
zoologist at London University, confirms this in his writings.

It is in the nature of woman to desire a home, a husband and children.
This need can only be met properly in a society which supports sound
family life. The same need is germane to the nature of man, though he is
also made to undertake a number of different tasks besides the basic one
of fathering a family. It is downright unhealthy for a woman to have to
live alone. Because of her nature a spinster always lives looking out
for the man who will be her partner.

The spinster is always living in the waiting-room of life. She begins to
cease to feed herself properly. Her natural care enjoys preparing food
to be shared with others, while it seems pointless to her to go to all
that trouble for herself alone. The spinster wakes to a purposeless day
with nothing to live for and goes to bed with a sense of emptiness and
of nothing done. So the psychologists tell us.

Islam is the only system which has deliberately set out to plan a
satisfactory life for all these supernumerary women, in allowing them to
become wives of men who have a wife already, and so save themselves from
a life of loneliness and multifarious deprivation. It must also be
remembered that men preserve their power of begetting children pretty
well to the end of their days, while a woman's physique is only capable
of bearing children for some 35 years in the middle period of her life.
Unless she can find a husband for that period, she is bound to live in
the misery of failing to fulfill a function for which she was made and
for which she longs.

Sometimes an unfortunate wife finds that she is sterile. Because she and
her husband love each other they do not wish to part. Yet both desire
children. Is the man to live in the burning hell of frustrated desire
for the whole of the rest of his life? Why should he not give the joy of
being a mother to a second wife? In practice the first wife, who is
herself sterile, frequently expresses her desire that he should do that
very thing.

Our national daily "Ettela'at" on the 20th of the month of Bahman, AHS
1348 (February 9th 1970) carried an interesting story from Rasht under
the headline: "A man's three wives accompany him to the registrar to
witness his fourth wedding".

The gentleman explained to the registrar that his three wives had all
proved barren, but all helped on the farm and were a happy company, so
he did not wish to divorce them; and it was with their full accord that
he now wished to marry a young woman who had taken his fancy in order
that he might have children. The young bride, for her part, said: "My
husband-to-be is one of the good men of our village, where there are
1,000 women and 400 men, half of whom are children below the age of 16:
that is one fifth of a man per woman. So you can see why I am very glad
to become a fourth wife."

A law which deprives a man of the right to fulfill his innate desire to
be a father violates his human rights; and a law which forces women to
live in solitary childlessness violates their human rights and
undermines society's institutions. How can these two injustices be cured
save by the legalisation of a limited polygamy? Realism; truth; social,
vital, and spiritual needs demand such a measure.

If a wife falls victim to a chronic disease, what is a charitable
husband to do? He does not wish to cast her off in her incurable
illness. Islam makes his way plain before him. If a husband falls to an
incurable and chronic disease which makes intercourse with him dangerous
for the wife lest she also be infected, she may go to the shari'a court
where the Islamic judge will order her husband to grant her a divorce,
and use the powers which the law gives him to enforce his decision even
on reluctant husbands. But many women themselves refuse to take this
way, saying that they have shared their husband's home in joy and
sorrow, and their conscience will not allow them to desert in his
illness a husband with whom they have enjoyed the days of his health and
wellbeing. A painful disease needs a nurse and care and kindness, so
that humanity and good sense both outline the path to be followed.

Financial poverty hinders marriage and family-founding. This too
prevents a number of nubile women from finding husbands. Why should
those who can afford it not relieve them both of poverty and
spinsterhood in an ordered union? Islam's law has conferred this
blessing on millions of women.

In World War II millions of men died leaving women husbandless. These
husbandless women in Germany formed an association which asked the
German government to enable a man to have more than one wife.
Unfortunately church opposition prevented the desired result (v.
"Ettela'at" for AHS 29/8/1340 — AD 20/11/1961).

More recently "Ettela'at" (AHS 3/3/1349 — AD 24/6/1970) carried an
article asking "if the fear of spinsterhood haunted 20-year-old girls,
what must the feelings of the 30- and 40-year-old spinsters be?" Eve
still looks for her Adam. For Eve, employment, which in Federal Germany
is easy for all women, does not replace the desire for marriage. Women
of 20 -find it hard to discover a husband: women of 30 and 40 almost
impossible: women of 50 despair. Yet in Germany only 50% of 30-year-old
women and 20% of 40-year-old women are married.

Six million women of 40 and over in Federal Germany are and will always
be husbandless. There are no unmarried men in this age-range; and the
total number of unmarried men in Germany is not above 350,000; so, even
if they all got married, not more than one in twenty of the unmarried
women has a hope even of the most unsuitable of husbands. Some emigrate
to find husbands. Nothing but a law allowing limited polygamy like that
of Islam could solve the problem of Germany's post-war women.

Why does not the West, which vaunts its respect and compassion for
women, and bows to the Women's Liberation movement, not also yield to
their desire for family life and for the fulfillment of their primary
function, the bearing and bringing up of children? We must leave the
answers to the consciences of our readers. The fact that so many women,
in lands where it is lawful, opt to marry men who already have a wife
proves that they think such a shared life better than spinsterhood. If a
man is prepared to undertake the added burdens of the responsibility for
a more numerous family, which will be for the benefit of so many, why
should the state prevent him from doing so?

A highly skilled woman lawyer, who took her doctorate in matrimonial
law, writes: "To be part of a family where there is more than one wife
brings no disadvantages to the first, the second, the third or the
fourth. The men, it is true, have to undertake heavier loads of
responsibility, and are bound by law, by morality, by statute and by
common usage to provide a fitting form of living for each wife with all
due respect to her dignity and position, insure her against illness, see
to her medical care and cure, and defend her rights and interests to the
last. Should he fall short of these duties, both canon and common law
can dictate penalties to compel him to their performance: while before
God and man he is held to his obligations. The women's silence, and the
absence of feminine objections to multiple wedlock bear its rightness
out.

"Some women parrot objections invented by men, it is true. Men do not
take naturally to permanent unions and the responsibilities they entail.
The worst of them put ideas into the heads of silly women who do not
grasp that their comments tend to undermine marriage and family-life as
such, and instead, to encourage illicit sex for the gratification of
male sexuality.

A woman does not suffer sexually from her husband having two wives: and
spiritually and mentally she is at rest in peace of mind. It is only men
who have played on some women's suggestibility to pretend otherwise. Men
are promiscuous. But from the dawn of history families with several
women and one man have lived happily under the feminine influence.
Islam's shari'a (religious law) brought order into these relations and
laid down beneficent regulations for their welfare. The institution of
multiple wedlock proves its worth from its ancient tradition and
practical application."

Western permissiveness frustrates its own ends, and denies nature. Islam
regards justice as the guarantor of human welfare and happiness, both
for the individual and for society. It therefore lays down just
regulations on which multiple marriage can be founded, and right be
observed. Islam's Fiqh establishes independence, equality and full
recognition for the rights of women in marriage. It is in this assurance
that so many women voluntarily enter on the marriage state with a
married man. The fact that they do so shows that the condition fits the
feminine nature. Those few women who object, do so on the grounds that
their husband's position does not permit him to do justice to the rights
of more than one woman. Such conflicts as arise spring from a man's
failure to do justice to his wives.

It is written in Sura IV: Nisa'a —"The Women" (verse 3):

***"If you fear that you will not be able to deal justly with the
orphans, marry women of your choice, two or three or four. But if you
fear you will not be able to deal justly with that number then take only
one."***

This verse was revealed after the battle of Uhud which left the Muslim
community with many widows and orphans, and some captives of war. In
order that the orphans and widows might be given the best protection and
perfect justice, the Muslim men were told to marry the number they could
deal with justly, up to the maximum of four. Their treatment was to be
governed by principles of humanity and equality. The precise occasion is
past, but the principles remain.

The fact that the behavior of some men is harsh and wrongful and causes
the breakdown of family life is the exception that proves the wisdom and
value of the rule. Islam's shari'a lays down a moral code of the duties
of husbands to wives, and decrees that the family must be the source of
love, kindness and sincerity. Without this it can be hell. Muslims who
contravene it must be recalled to Islam's lofty laws, to Islam's
profound principles, to Islam's fascinating philosophy. Then in the
light of its true face, corruption and wrongdoing will vanish and the
sound society come to view.

The laws governing a man's just treatment and equal care for each of his
wives lay down:  
 1. That he must provide enough for each wife to have the proper food;  
 2. That he must pay the same marital attentions to each;  
 3. That he must fulfill all the heavy responsibilities he has
undertaken for each wife and her children.

Human nature being what it is, a man may well feel more drawn to one of
his wives than to another. The three provisions above are meant to
ensure that such personal preference does not injure the rights of any
wife to her livelihood, her home and her conjugal rights, or to any need
of body, mind or spirit—all things which are within a man's reach quite
apart from his predilections.

By ensuring these rights to women, Islam provides the basis on which
heartfelt affection and loving-kindness can flourish, while the
necessities like food, clothing, a house and the other material needs
are properly cared for. It is written in Sura IV: Nisa'a — "The Women"
(verse 129):

***"It is not given to man to be able to be fair and just as between
women, even if it is your ardent desire to be so. But you must not turn
away so as to leave a woman hanging in the air (meaning if you have
married her and she in your house you must treat her in absolute
equality with your other wives, and not leave her as if she was an
unmarried woman). If you come to a friendly understanding and practice
self-restraint (you will find that) God is oft forgiving and most
merciful."***

Thus a man may not neglect one wife, or show her disfavor, or treat her
as a creature that is hanging, like a garment, on the wall of his house,
or deprive her of her conjugal rights.

In the days of the Apostle of God, on whom be peace, the enactment of
this commandment made men who had up to four wives, should they prove
unable to do due justice to each, reduce their household to one wife:
while ensuring that even those who could do justice to many married only
a maximum of four. Thus from the very beginning Islam brought order into
the multiple marriage which the society of the day made necessary,
outlawing neglect of a woman's rights, depriving the men of the
unlimited freedom and absolute authority which they had in earlier days,
and totally banishing the tyranny and oppression of women which
pre-Islamic Arabs had exercised.

We find exemplary histories of Muslims who religiously performed the
duties laid down for married men by Islam. In the "Majmu'-ul-Bayan"
(Vol. 3, p.121), we read that one of the companions of the Prophet named
Mu'az bin Jabal had two wives who both died of the same illness during
the plague at about the same moment. Mu'az was so desirous to maintain
true Islamic equality even after their death that he didn't want to bury
one before the other, in case it seemed to show an irreligious
preference, so he cast lots which should be the first to receive the
funeral rites.

Some Westerners have a just and realistic attitude towards marriage as a
social institution. Thus Arthur Schopenhauer in his book "Some Words
about Women", writes: "In nations in which multiple marriage is legal,
it is made possible for practically all women to have a husband,
children and a true family life which meets their spiritual needs and
satisfies their feminine instincts.

Unfortunately church laws in Europe have not allowed multiple marriage
and left many women to a lonely life of spinsterhood. Some died
unsatisfied; some were driven by their desires, or by the need to earn
their livelihood, into immorality; some perished with qualms of
conscience and broken hearts. Nor can I understand, after giving much
thought to the matter, why a man, whose wife falls ill of a chronic and
incurable disease or proves barren or unable to bear a living child,
should not take a second wife alongside the first.

This is a question the Church should answer. Unfortunately it cannot.
Good laws are those which ensure a happy life when obeyed, not those
which deprive people of happiness or bind them hand and foot in trammels
of unnecessary bondage or which incite people to despise them and so to
rush to the other extreme of corruption, prostitution or other kinds of
vice."

Mrs. Annie Besant, the theosophist, wrote: "The West claims to reject
multiple marriage. But Western men have found ways round the official
law, and take many women without the responsibilities of proper
marriage, so that they are able to throw off their unwanted mistress
when they have had their will with her, leaving her no alternative but
to take to the streets. He never meant to take any responsibility for
her future.

The fate of such a woman is a hundred times worse than that of one who
enters a multiple marriage, who although she shares her husband with
another woman, at least enjoys a husband's care and becomes a mother of
a family in a family. When I see the thousands of women on our streets
at night I am convinced that the West must learn from slam and cease to
be so hypocritically shocked by its dispositions concerning multiple
marriage; for Islam makes it possible for a woman to have a husband and
children in her bosom legally, with all due respect, instead of enduring
the shame of walking the streets trying to sell her body, probably
bearing an illegitimate child in circumstances in which the law will do
nothing for her, and she is simply the victim of the passions of men."

Dr. Gustave Le Bon writes: "Nothing has been more criticized in Europe
than Eastern customs of multiple marriage. No view held in Europe has
shown the same amount of ignorance and error as this criticism. Surely
the legal multiple marriage of the East is better than the hypocritical
secretive multiple marriage of the West. The clandestine nature of the
illicit relationship is degrading to both parties. The legalisation of
multiple marriage is far more seemly in every respect."

Islam and Racism
----------------

The "Unity" is the basis of Islamic theology: and therefore "Unity" is
the ground of its philosophy of society. All humanity is one; a great
unit. Its individuals are members of one society incorporate, which is
so comprehensive that it includes all differences within its oneness.
The many find within the one that brotherhood, affection, friendliness
and human blood-relationship which is of the essence.

Hence distinctions do not become differences -- not color, nor culture,
nor class, nor custom, nor conversational idiom. Mutual respect as
fellow-humans in pursuit of the common good is the rule throughout the
world-wide society of Islam, without superiority or inferiority, since
all mankind were created in one human soul to start with, from whom man
and woman, black and white, poor and rich, civilized and savage, all
evolve, sharing one common humanity. Truly "God made of one flesh all
the nations upon earth if haply they may feel after Him and find Him."

So it is written (Qur'an: Sura IV, Nisa'a ---- "The Women" 1st verse):

***"Reverence God Who created you all from one person", leaving no room
for nationalistic divisions. Differences in skin and tongue are merely
tokens of the Creator's power. They call on men to study the Holy Will
and Might of Him Who from one elemental root created so many variations
of color, countenance and conversation”***

As it is written (Qur'an: Sura XXX "Rome" verse 21):

***"Signs of His Power are His creation of heaven and of earth, and the
varieties of tongues and skins; in all of which are sermons for the
wise."***

It is further written (Qur'an: Sura II, Baciara —"The Heifer" verse
213):

***"Mankind was one single nation. Then we sent messengers to them to
give them glad tidings and warnings; and with them we sent the Book in
truth to judge between people in matters wherein they differed . . . and
God by His grace guided believers to the common truth on points about
which they differed; for God guides whom He will onto a path that is
straight."***

This verse reveals that in the beginning mankind was one single nation
without differences or splits or conflicts but enjoying unity,
cooperation and harmony.

The martyred Imam Ali left us the priceless legacy of the
Nahj-ul-BalaghA, amongst which is his historic address to Malik
Al-Ashtar in which he expresses this truth as follows: "Make thin heart
a throne of mercy towards thy people. Show them perfect love and care.
Never treat them as a ravening beast that tears and rends their
properties and their persons. For they are in one of two groups. Either
they are thy brothers in the Faith -or they are thy fellow-human beings
of one flesh with thin own." This broad view embraces all races, all
cultures, all -tongues.

Unity and union amongst individuals will subsist under the aegis of
unity of thought and spirit, oneness of conviction and aim; nor can any
unity obtain save under that orderliness. Should a society fall into
division of thought and conviction, its bonds of affection will be
loosened: and, when adversity arises, material needs will increase
differences, conflicts and tensions. That is why the strongest tie of
unity amongst nations is the religious bond.

It is in this bond of union that Islam has brought people and peoples
together, freeing them from the trammels of division and difference, and
calling them to establish the bases of accord and agreement in a society
of brotherhood which is the natural state of man.

Islam treats mankind as one great family of brothers and sisters. In the
human family the relationship of father and child is a stronger bond
than that of brotherhood. But the qualities of respect and of difference
of age deprive the father-child relationship of full equality. That is
why it is brotherhood which Islam exalts as the expression of that
perfect and heartfelt affection which should reign within the human
family. It should reign on the surface and in the depths. Brotherhood is
therefore the Qur'an's call.

The most sublime levels of love and the most sincere of friendships are
those which arise between Muslims. They are called brothers because of
their brotherhood, because of the existence of the fact of this most
tender and beautiful of manifestations of equality; it is not the
command to be brothers which called the fact into existence. The command
was uttered, but the natural upwelling of the spirit engendered by that
surrender (tasleem) to God (which Islam is) issues in brotherhood.

This brotherhood is deeper and higher than mere natural brotherliness,
for it is the unity of a shared aim, the unity of shared convictions,
the unity of joint beliefs, the unity of hearts.

It is written (Qur'an: Sura XLIX, Hujurat —"The Inner Apartments" verse
10):

***"Believers are a single brotherhood. Make peace amongst your brothers
and fear God that ye may receive mercy."***

The Prophet decreed: "The members of the assembly of the believers are
by love and affection one body, and any limb of that which is pained
causes all the other limbs to suffer in sympathy. If any individual
Muslim falls into a painful situation all the other members of the
community must run to his help and share in his sorrow."
(Safeenatu-l-Behar, Vol. I, p.13.)

Islam, Freedom, and Justice
---------------------------

Since all power and authority belongs to God, men in any office which
confers authority must exercise their delegated power as stewards and
ministers of God to men. Thus tyrants, imperialists, slave drivers and
exploiters of fellowmen are outlawed. Islam enhances each person's
self-respect: it establishes that true and only equality open to man—
the equality in surrender to God for His service amongst mankind. Such
surrender enables each to find his place in the whole without faction,
partisan rule or superiority. Each is his own master.

Islam champions and interprets human rights. It regulates every detail
of personal and community life in equity. It is the trustee and guardian
of freedom before the Lord. Its first and paramount thought is unity. It
excludes no one—though some exclude themselves: it opposes no one-
though some may oppose themselves to it: it makes no differences—though
some may insist on being different. Muslim calls to Jew who calls to
Mage who calls to Nazarene, saying: "Why stand apart? Let us join in our
common creed that 'God is One'."

It is written: (Qur'an: Sura III, Al-i-Imran —"Imran's Family" verse
62):

***"Say: O Peoples of the Heavenly Books! Resort to that word which is
common to us and you, which is that we worship none save God; that we
associate no partners with Him; that we exalt not from amongst ourselves
any lord or patron other than God."***

The peoples of today's world yearn for unity, justice and freedom. They
long to be saved from exploitation and war. They wander lost,
like -sheep gone astray. Let them turn to the sunshine of Islam's
regulations of life and living. Under that common sun, all —black,
white, red and yellow —are at one in justice, freedom and equality.

For Islam, true excellence lies, not in the intellectual or manual
attainments of people of differing gifts; but in the moral attainments
of a pure heart. These are equally open to all whatever their other
gifts. As it is written (Qur'an: Sura XLIX, Hujurat —"The Inner
Apartments" verse 13):

***"O, Mankind: We created you from a male and a female; and made you
into -tribes and nations that you may get to know each other : and
verily, most honored before God is the most virtuous."***

The Prophet (on Whom be Peace!) explicitly affirmed: "Arab is not more
privileged than non-Arab, nor white than black. Spiritual excellence and
true piety is the only distinction amongst humans recognized by God."

After the Prophet's victory at Mecca, a proud self-seeking group of
Arabs claimed privilege for their tongue and race. To them he said:
Thanks be to God that by the sublime doctrines of Islam He has freed you
from the times of ignorance, and stripped off pride, conceit and
power-lust. Know now that in the Courts of God only two groups
exist. -The group of the righteous who are precious in God's eyes: and
the group of the sinful who hang their heads in shame."

A man said to the 8th Imam: "There exists no man on earth with an
ancestry more noble than yours." To him the saint replied: "Their
greatness and honor lay in their piety and zeal to do God's will." By
these words the Imam rebuked the man who wished to flatter and
aggrandize the Imam's pedigree; and turned his mind to thoughts of
piety. Another said to the Imam: "By God! You're the best man alive."
The Imam replied: "No oaths, man! There lives a man who is better whose
piety is greater and obedience to God more complete. In God it is true
that verse of the Qur'an has not yet been abrogated which says: 'Most
honored before God is the most virtuous'."  
 God's service is perfect freedom. It is neither restrictive nor
limiting. Restrictions diminish a man's capacities and happiness. But to
serve God clothes the soul in the whole armor of God, protects when evil
attacks, and foils all the fiery darts of the wicked.

True, serving God means obeying His laws. But this obedience is the free
choice of love. And His laws are those absolute moral standards which
formulate the essence of man's true nature, as his Creator means him to
be at his best.

No man who has bowed his neck beneath the yoke of money-grubbing or
power-seeking can ever enjoy a free life in a free society. The Imam Ali
said: "Piety is the key to honesty and purity and to the acquirement of
merit in store against judgment-day. It is freedom from the chains of
every bondage; salvation from the blows of every adversity. Piety puts a
man's aim within his reach, wards off evil, his soul's foe, and assists
him to attain his heart's desires." (Nahjul-Balagha: 227.)

Remember that he gave this message in an epoch when violence,
oppression, wrong, class wars and racial strife raged amongst men.
Distinctions repugnant to reason, to virtue and to freedom were rife.
The weak and the poor were bereft of every human right and social
safeguard. With matchless moral courage the pioneer of Islam outlawed
all those differences and conflicts, so illegitimate, so superstitious
and so mistaken.

He replaced them with the command that equality and perfect equity
should be observed for all individuals. He ordained that, under the
auspices of total submission to the will of God, every sort of
reasonable freedom should be put within the possession of men; in such a
way that the underprivileged classes of society, which had never before
had any sort of power to express their desires but had merely provoked
the reaction of violence and oppression if they dared to protest against
the will of the powerful ruling classes, should now, under the
life-giving justice of Islamic laws, find the political and social power
they lacked, and shoulder to shoulder move forward until they had their
full and rightful share in the leadership of their nations.

Islam and Classes
-----------------

Anyone who thinks that other nations have raised up the under-privileged
classes in society in a way in the least like that which Islam has
successfully followed in its fight against tyranny and oppression misses
the point and shows that he has not the faintest perception of the inner
truth of Islam, and its humane social justice. No other system has
hitherto been able to bring such an ideology so effectively into
practice.

Even the Communists, who call themselves foes of religion, acknowledge
the amazing renascence brought by the powerful and fundamental doctrines
of Islam. The monthly "Mardum", organ of Iran's "Tudeh" (Marxist) party,
(No. 2, Year 3), wrote: "The appearance of Islam at the beginning of the
7th century AD is a turning-point of history. It changed the face of
community living. Its victorious progress, in the course of less than a
century, from the Arab -homeland as far as the Loire in the West and as
Sind and the Amu Darya in the East, forms a fascinating page.

The Jezirat-ul-Arab provided the center for the spread of the religious
ideologies of Judaism and Christianity. Yet the Arabs and Bedouin were
still idolaters. Mecca was a commercial center run by the moneymakers,
turning the nomad tribal way of life into feudalism: and it was here
that Arab nationalism first began to be felt and to break out. Its
people were money-grubbers and small farmers owning slaves.

To this world Islam came as a revelation and as a democratic revolution
against the money lending oligarchy, who drove the first Muslims out of
Mecca. Islam possesses the idiosyncrasies of all moralistic religions,
yet it has kept its feet firmly on the ground of this material world we
live in.

It eschewed mockery and concentrated its attention on the equality of
human beings regardless of race and tribe, -the equal rights of women
with men, the manumission of slaves, the care of the indigent; and
provided so simple a set of principles that it is distinguished from all
other religions. It was these qualities that enabled it to arouse a
social renascence of life-giving inspiration. It brought a heavy
pressure to bear on the minds of the bloodthirsty arrogant ruling class:
offered villagers and poor town-dwellers a road of salvation in this
world, expelled the troops of Roman and Persian emperors and installed
its own form of rule from the Himalayas to the Pyrenees."

Illustrations of Islamic Practice
---------------------------------

When we weigh the conduct of the pioneers of Islam against the behavior
and system of the socialist countries and of those of the "free" world,
we see a difference as great as chalk from cheese. Islam is against all
class distinction and renounces the conceptions of "boss" and
"underling".

A report was brought to the Imam Ali that a banquet had been held in
Basra in honor of the governor, Ali's representative, Uthman bin Hunaif.
He was wrathful that his governor should allow himself to be drawn into
a special relationship with Basra's "nobility", and be made the mark of
particular distinctions by the powerful class. He therefore sent a stern
letter to Uthman rebuking him, which letter is contained in the
Nahj-ul-Balagha.

After World War II all governments have had to occupy themselves with
the clamour for freedom and equality. They produced the "Universal
Declaration of Human Rights" to enshrine those ideas. Practice has been
slower than precept. Developed countries find it hard to admit that
differences of color and race are not criteria for excellence but that
only character counts. Islam has recognized this fact from the start.
The Prophet's first Mu'azzen was an Ethiopian: and he gave his
girl-cousin in marriage to Zaid bin Harethé, who was a slave.

One day the Prophet said to Juwaiber, a poor Negro of great piety: "How
good it would be if you could take a wife to share your life with you
and be a help in this world and the next!"

Juwaiber replied: "May my mother and father be your sacrifice! What
woman would be ready to become my wife? I have no health or wealth, no
books or looks."

The Prophet replied: "Our God annulled any rights of one man to be owner
of another as they were in the days of ignorance; and gave nobility to
those who had been the underprivileged and downtrodden before the coming
of Islam. Those who in the dark days of the night of ignorance were
despised are shown in Islam to be precious to Him. Pride of place, face,
race and grace ruled in the days of ignorance. Islam changed all that,
and made everyone, white or black, Qureish, Arab or non-Arab, equal, as
children of Adam, the man whom God made from dust. In God's thoughts,
most beloved is the most obedient and chaste. Juwaiber, we know no
person superior to you, save anyone, if such there be, whose chastity
and obedience excel yours. Go at once to Zyad bin Lubeid, most noble of
the Bani Biyande, and say: 'God's Apostle sent me to you to ask your
daughter's hand in marriage'."

Juwaiber went, and found Zyad sitting in his home with a group of his
fellow-tribesmen. He asked for an interview saying: "I am come from the
Prophet to confirm a principle, bearing a message. Should I pronounce it
in private or in public?"

Zyad replied: "Why not right here? A message from the Prophet is an
honor."

"Very well", said Juwaiber, "His Eminence the Prophet sent me to bid you
wed your daughter to me."

Zyad responded: "We Ansaris (i.e. the Prophet's helpers in his first
days) only wed our daughters to our peers. Go! carry my excuses to His
Blessedness."

While Juwaiber was returning, Zyad repented, and sent a man who caught
up with Juwaiber and brought him back. Zyad said with the greatest
courtesy: "Please be seated and wait here until I return." He then went
off to see the Prophet, to whom he said: "May my father and mother be
thy sacrifice! Juwaiber came from thee with a message to me to which I
wished to bring the reply in person. It is this. We Ansaris only wed our
daughters to our peers."

Islam's pioneer replied: "O Zyad! Juwaiber is a man of faith and is thus
the peer of a woman of faith; for a Muslim man is the peer of a Muslim
woman. Therefore wed thy daughter to him, and think it no disgrace to
have him as thy son-in-law."

Zyad went home and told his daughter what had befallen. She said: "Dear
papa! what has seemed good to the Prophet, and his command that you make
Juwaiber your son-in-law, is beyond price!" Zyad left his daughter's
room, took Juwaiber's hand and led him to stand in the midst of the men
of the tribe where he acknowledged him as his son-in-law and gave him
his daughter in marriage. He himself provided his daughter's dowry and
trousseau, and had a house made for them with all the furnishings and
equipments required. It was thus that Zyad's daughter became the mother
of one of the greatest of the Qureish tribe, and the black-skinned
Juwaiber father of the same, a man whose hands in this world were empty
but who was rich towards God and who has earned eternal fame for the
beauty of his soul.

It is told that once upon a time three Muslims of three different racial
stocks, to wit Salman the Irani, Saheeb the Byzantine and Balal the
Ethiopian, were sitting together when an Arab called Qais joined them.
This Arab, observing the precious sight of three Muslims of pure hearts
and humble souls, said: "Aus and Khazraj were Arabs who stood by the
Prophet in service and sacrifice. What have these three aliens to say?
Who asked them to be amongst the Prophet's aides?"

Qais' words reached the Prophet's ears. He rose and called his people to
assemble in the mosque where he said to them in wrath: "God is one.
Adam, common father of all, one. Your faith, one. Then Arabism, however
proud you may be of it, comes neither from your father nor your
mother—merely your tongue." The Prophet strove to crush racialism and
promulgated a decree making equality the law and condemning any contrary
reaction.

One day a Muslim whose father was a Negro was received by the Prophet.
One Abu-Zar Ghaffari, who was nourishing a long-standing grudge against
him, said to him in the Prophet's presence : "O son of a nigger!"
Immediately the Prophet, hearing this took him to task, saying: "Why is
his mother's black skin a reason for despising him?" Abu-Zar fell on his
knees, kissed the Prophet's feet and hands, repented in all humility and
poured dust over his head until he received the Prophet's absolution.

The institution of the Hajj, or annual pilgrimage to Mecca, incumbent on
all Muslims everywhere at least once in a lifetime, has also been a
profound influence for unification and equality above color and class.
In the words of the Lebanese professor Philip Hitti in his book on "The
History of the Arabs": "At the Ka'aba, to which the Lord of all men
calls them to assembly, Ethiopian, Berber, Chinese, Irani, Indian,
Syrian, and Arab, rich and poor, high and low, give each other the hand
of brotherhood and together pronounce the double creed that, 'there is
no God but God: Muhammad is His Prophet.' Thus for Islam the only
distinction that exists between people is that between belief and
unbelief. And the Hajj has done the greatest service in making equality
and brotherhood the rule of life for millions in every clime."

It is sad to have to admit that slogans of class or race-ideologies have
in recent years penetrated certain Islamic states, with the tragic
result of producing similar racial and class divisions to those in less
privileged lands. Our task is to restore the sound ideology of Islam and
make it worldwide within one generation.

Chapter 11 Equality Before the Law
----------------------------------

The equality which obtains in Islamic law courts should be taken as a
world model. Haroun-al-Rasheed, the Abbasid Caliph, had to testify on
oath in a court before a judge, and his servant Fazl bin Rabee'
witnessed in his favor. The judge refused to accept Fazl's testimony.
The Caliph demanded to know why. The judge replied: "Fazl himself says
he is your servant. If he is telling the truth, the Islamic court does
not accept a servant's testimony to the advantage of his master. If he
was lying, his testimony is void on that account."

The next Abbasid Caliph, Mansour, hired numbers of camels to make the
Hajj. On his return he made a series of excuses as pretexts for not
repaying the hire. The camel drivers took the Caliph into the courts.
The judge summoned him and sat him alongside the camel drivers. When he
had heard the evidence he judged against the Caliph, who was compelled
to pay the camel drivers what he owed them before he was allowed to
leave the court.

This immediate verdict and execution of sentence is recognized by
Western jurists as one of the greatest advantages of Islamic law courts.
It saves a great deal of time and expense, for plaintiff, defendant and
judge alike. Dr. Gustave Le Bon relates his own personal observation
from a court he attended in Marrakesh in Morocco. Plaintiff and
defendant with their lawyers and papers entered the court. The judge
entered. All rose. Straightaway each side presented its case. The judge
summed up. The verdict was given. Sentence was pronounced and
immediately executed, to the great benefit of all concerned. "If only
Western courts with their long delays would learn this art of dispensing
justice fairly, swiftly and economically!" he comments.

When litigants are all secure in the knowledge that the laws by which
their case will be judged are based on eternal principles revealed by
God Himself, and that therefore the powerful cannot swing judgment in
their own favor; and when the judge has principles of judgment to go on
which enable him with a detached impartiality to seek his guidance from
the law of God in total freedom from any emotional bias; the law is
observed and respected, injustices are cut out, certainty and security
reign in society and bring trust and confidence in their train.

Islam does not aim to level men down, but to level them up to an
equality on the highest level, where true affection and the real love of
one's fellowmen call the tune— a unity of heart based on a unity of
faith in the one God, Who is Maker of all and Judge of all, and Who
makes no distinctions save those of obedience between one of His
creatures and another. This is made plain by the Qur'anic verse 10 from
the Sura Hujurat already quoted where it is written:

***"We made you into nations and tribes that you might learn to know
each other."***

It is the practice of this creed which has produced that marvelous
hospitality which so many -Western travellers have noticed among Muslims
and of which they bewail the absence in the materialistic civilization
which has grown up in the West. One traveller commented: "I found in
Iran that if I walked into a village and knocked on any door, and
introduced myself as a stranger within their gates to whoever addressed
me through the lattice, the door was at once opened and I was welcomed
in as one of the family.

They sat me down to share whatever meal they were having, however
frugal, gave me a palliasse and lehaf for a comfortable sleep through
the night, and sent me on my way rejoicing after a breakfast of sweet
tea, fresh-made bread and sour milk (mast) next morning."

The Jihad and the Holy War
--------------------------

Islam's aim, in its wars, battles and national uprisings against
polytheism and materialism, has not been conquest, expansionism,
imperialism or the seizure of others' financial resources. The early
impact of Islam on Mecca caused loss to those vested interests which
profited from the service of the ancient idols in the Ka'aba and the
pilgrims who flocked to those shrines from all the Arab world. These
vested interests therefore revolted against the spread of the new pure
faith. The Qureish cut off relations with the Prophet and his adherents;
and forced them to flee into the mountains, where they hid starving,
until they finally found refuge in friendly Yathrib, 200 miles north.

Even here polytheists mounted further attacks. The necessity to defend
the believers and ensure the survival of the faith forced the Prophet to
elaborate and elucidate the concept of a "just war". His raids from
Yathrib (which from his adoption of it and its adoption of him won the
glorious name of "Madinat-an-Nabi" meaning "the City of the Prophet")
were made to prevent the Meccans mobilising large supplies of ammunition
and huge forces to attack and wipe out his faithful few.

This concept of "a just war" led to that of "the Jehad" or "Holy War",
and the first revelations on this subject to the Prophet are enshrined
in the Qur'anic texts (1) Sura XXII : Hajj —"Pilgrimage" (verses 39 and
40):

***“Those upon whom war is made by unbelievers are granted permission to
fight because they are being oppressed (Verily God is most powerful to
aid them) and have been expelled from their homes in defiance of right
for the sole 'crime' of saying 'Our Lord is God'."***

And (2) Sura II: Baqara — "The Heifer" (verse 190):

***"Fight in the cause of God against those who attack you. But be
careful to maintain the limit, since God does not love
transgressors."***

By "limit" is meant that the force used must be limited to that hich is
the minimum adequate to restrain the evildoers who attack. The force
used must never exceed that limit in order to exact revenge or impose an
imperialistic conquest.

As a world faith for everyone everywhere, Islam knows no geography; but
must extend to every last soul in every last region of the world, and
carry them its word of truth. History shows that no established order
was ever replaced by a new superior order without some warfare. Examples
are the revolutions in France, India, America, Russia, China. Since
Islam sets out to change men's living and thinking, and to end racialism
and exploitation, it is bound to run into opposition from people with
vested interests in corruption.

Indeed, the more successful it is in winning adherents by word of mouth
and of pen, the fiercer is the reaction of those who find themselves
losing their hold on people they have previously victimised. In the end
the victory of arms confirms the earlier victory already registered by
propaganda appealing to men's reason and conscience.

Addicts of uncleanness, dishonesty and power work up a violent
resistance in the endeavor to stifle the new faith and the sound society
it is producing, which is putting them out of business. Since they
refuse to attend to sense they must attend to the sword. As the Prophet
expressed it, according to "The Book of the Jihad and its Methods":
"Goodness and blessing flourish where law wields the sanctions of force
to prevent ill doing. For, alas, there are people who will not submit to
what is right unless they feel that sanctions threaten penalties for
transgression."

When freedom of thought and of choice of the best way of life is taken
from men, force, either of police or of army, must be called in. It was
to reduce oppressors and tyrants to subjection, in order that the
oppressed might be freed to listen to the challenge of Islam, that the
first Muslim battles took place. The masses must be given freedom to
make their own choice; for without that the truth cannot come to control
societies, nations and the world. As it is written in Sura IV: Nisa'a
—"Women" (verse 75):

***"Why should you not take up the Jihad in God's cause, and -for the
cause of the weak in Mecca, your own men, women and children, who cry
out: 'Our Lord! rescue us from this town of oppressors; and raise up for
us a protector, coming from Thee to aid us'?"***

Islam does not war against people. It wars against oppression, tyranny
and wrong. These false ideas it seeks to root out, and to replace them
by the superior ideas of purity and faith. It seeks not to win over
enemies, but to win enemies over to its—that is God's—side, in the
eternal battle between good and evil.

For humanity faces the choice between self-annihilation through evil on
the one hand or the kingdom of God on earth through obedience on the
other. There is no third way. To serve or to seek anything other than
God and His will is idolatry. The worship of possessions, pelf, or power
is as much idolatry as sacrificing to stock and stone. It is a negation
of man's true nature and destiny.

Therefore, before embarking on hostilities, Islam always sends a herald
to the enemy bearing the invitation to accept Islam and make peace on
the spot. Thus, when the Muslim armies entered Iran, the Muslim
Commander-in-Chief sent a messenger to the Iranian General Rustam
Farukhzaad inviting him to a conference at which the Muslims explained
to the Iranians why they were there, saying: "We have come to free your
people from slavery to false deities and vain superstition and to lead
them to the freedom of worship of the One God. In His Apostle's Name we
invite you, as you will face the dreadful day of judgment, to be saved
and replace your dark and inane customs with the justice and equity of
the true Faith."

These conferences lasted three days. All the Muslim spokesmen promised
that the Iranians should be left to run their own country in peace if
they accepted Islam as they were being invited to do.

It is related, in the book above quoted on the Jihad, Volume 2, page
421, that the Prophet said to Ali: "Never be the aggressor who starts a
war. First invite your enemy to turn to the true God. If God leads one
person through you to enter the life of faith, that will be of greater
benefit for you than if you owned all that the sun shines upon."

Islam's aim is that the knowledge of God should cover the earth as the
waters cover the sea, and His kingdom extirpate violence and lust and
degradation and oppression and injustice; and to this end Muslims are
prepared to give their lives in peace or, if necessary, in war. As it is
written in the first verse of Sura XXXVII : Saffat — "Those ranged in
ranks":

***"By those who range themselves in ranks and so are strong against
evil and in proclaiming God's message 'verily, verily your God is
One'."***

Similarly, in Sura VIII: Anfal — "The spoils of war" (part of verses 47
and 67) the Prophet sternly rebuked some of his fellow-fighters who
followed the dark customs of the age of ignorance after a victory saying
to them:

***"Be not like those who started from their homes insolently and to be
seen of men. Your lusts are for the goods and delights of this world
while the Lord desires for you an eternity of joy."***

In his book entitled "War and Peace in Islam", Dr. Majid Khadouri writes
on page 214: "Islam changed the old Arab conception of the 'Dar­ul-Harb'
or House of War into that of the \`Dar-ul-Islam' or House of Islam,
which truly sought to minister Islam to the people of the world. its
first success was in uniting the nations which accepted it within
themselves, so that civil wars ceased. It went on to found a family
of -Islamic nations at peace with each other. It aims to bring that
blessing to the whole world. Thus the aim of the Jihad is peace on
earth, and that will be its final result."

Western Crusaders developed their concept of chivalry from the conduct
of the Muslim paladins in war. One great principle was that the lives of
the many poorer folk should be saved by settling the issue of the
dispute in a single combat between two champions each chosen to
represent his own side.

A whole range of courteous attitudes and actions was developed to govern
such contests. They were carried over into the peaceful contests called
"jousts", in which knights fought each other to show their prowess
before their monarch and their people, and also to practice against the
day when they would be meeting the champion of an opposing army in
serious warfare. The chivalrous and knightly conduct towards the fallen
foe, which these contests taught, altered the entire manners of
renascent Europe as it emerged from the barbarism of its latest invaders
from the North. Ransoms were exacted and paid with honor.

Muslim armies were forbidden to cause the destruction of property, the
burning of houses, the wasting of crops and pastures, the filling of
wells or the deprivation of food. Mercy must be shown to the conquered.
The utmost consideration must be manifested towards the enemy's
children, aged, women and sick, whether mentally or physically
afflicted.

Professor Muhammad Hameed-ulla of Paris University in his book on "The
Prophet and War" (p.9) writes: "The Arabia which acknowledged the
Prophet and Islam is a peninsula of over one million square miles in
area—the size of all Europe west of Russia. Yet no more than 150 persons
lost their lives in the reduction of that entire peninsula, so that in
the course of ten years a maximum of 15 deaths per annum because of
fighting must be reckoned. Few other conquerors in history can show such
a record."

The Prophet, sending his troops to fight, is reported by the book on the
Jihad (Volume 2, p.424) to have addressed them in the following terms:
"Go in God's name for God's cause with God's aid, and act as God wishes
you to act. Show no treachery or falsehood towards His commands.
Mutilate no one. Show mercy to the aged, the incapable, women and
children. Only when it is inevitable cut down a tree. Grant sanctuary to
any prisoner from the least to the highest in order that they may hear
the word of truth. Whoso follows that truth becomes your brother. If he
refuses, release him to go to his home when peace is made. At all times
and in every situation pray for God's help and obey His guidance about
your conduct."

Similarly the Imam Ali, when the army of Mu'awiyah came to attack him in
Iraq, gave his final command to his troops as follows: "If your foe
takes to flight on the field of battle, pursue him not nor slay him.
Persons who have lost the power to defend themselves or have fallen
wounded on the field of battle must not be harmed. Women must be
respected and must not be caused to be afraid or to be troubled."

In war it sometimes happens that the enemy does something which moves a
Muslim to a desire for revenge; but the Muslim is bidden in such a case
to return to his first aims and basic principles and to fight against
the desire to transgress against the truth and against that excellence
which he has been tempted to forget, and to be first of all victor over
his own passions, which is the true victory, prerequisite for an Islamic
victory in war.

We were all brought up on the story of the Imam Ali laying an opponent
prone and sitting on his chest to reason with him about the true faith:
whereat the foeman spat in the saint's face. Ali at once rose and walked
away. His followers asked him why, and he said: "I felt rage rising in
my heart at that man's insult, and was tempted to slay him on the spot.
If I had done so, it would not have been a just execution of a
recalcitrant infidel because of his invincible ignorance, but an act of
personal revenge under the impulse of passion. What is the good of my
seeking to reason with him and bring him to a true faith unless I am
living that true faith with a pure heart and free from pollution
myself?"

In the Holy Qur'an such an attitude is enjoined in many places, for
instance in Sura II: Baqara —"The Heifer" (verse 194):

***"If anyone trans­gresses against you requite him with an exactly like
action and restrain yourself for God; and know that God is with those
who so restrain themselves."***

Or again Sura V: Ma'idé— "The Table Spread" (verse 9):

***"0 ye who believe! Stand out firmly for God, as witnesses to fair
dealing, and let not others' hatred of you make you depart from justice
and swerve towards wrong. Be just: for justice is next to piety. And
fear God; for God knows all you do."***

And again, in the same Sura (verse 3): "Let not the hatred of some who
shut you out of the sacred mosque lead you to transgression and
hostility. Help one another to righteousness and piety, not to sin and
rancour. Fear God, for punishment is God's and He is strict with all."
Or, in connection with conflict between believers, Sura XLIX: Hujarat
—"The Inner Apartments" (verse 9):

***"Should a group of believers split into two opposing parties, make ye
peace between them. If the violence of one against the other goes beyond
bounds, bring force to bear on the group which is transgressing so
badly, until it once again complies with God's commands. When such
compliance has been exacted, then make peace between the two parties
with justice. Be fair in arbitrating, for God loves those who are
fair."***

The emphasis of this passage on the blessing God gives to peacemakers,
and His command that Muslim fighters should be peacemakers, even if they
have to use force to bring the recalcitrant to heel, rather than ask the
weak to forgive and to renounce his rights as is too often thought
godly, is particularly worthy of remark.

Islam enjoins renunciation of one's own rights in the interests of
peacemaking, while still recognizing that human nature is bound,
willy-nilly, to feel resentment at injuries. It calls on believers to
replace the passion of resentment with the greater passion for God's
will, and with obedience to His calling to end division, violence and
the use of force on earth. It is in the light of this command that Islam
has always showed the utmost compassion towards nations which it has
conquered, and exerted itself to give them that true sense of real
independence which comes to people whose hearts are fixed on God and who
live to make His will regnant upon earth, starting with their own
community.

The people of Horns closed the gates of their city in the face of the
army of Heraclius. They told the Romans that the Muslim rule with its
justice and law courts was preferable to the tyranny and force they
feared.

When the Muslim army under the command of Abu 'Ubeida entered the
territory of Jordan the Christians of those parts sent a letter to the
Muslims which read as follows: "0 Muslims! You are preferable to the
Byzantines for us, even though they are of the same creed as ourselves.
You are more trustworthy, more just, more kindly, more beneficent to us.
They not only took dominion over us but also plundered our houses."

Philip Hitti writes in Vol. 2 of his "History of the Arabs" (p.638):
"Wherever the Islamic army set foot, the people of those parts received
them with open arms and brought them viands and water, and vied with
each other in leaving their entrenchments to join the Muslim—not
difficult to understand for those who realize what the tyranny of the
Visigoths had been!"

Nor did the Muslims force peoples of occupied lands to change their
religion.

Islam arranged a system by which they guaranteed freedom of religion to
believers in any of the heavenly books by forming them into "Millats",
semi-autonomous communities within the state with the right to their own
forms of worship, to their customs at birth, at marriage and at death,
to their own schools and the use of their own tongue if they had a
language of their own like Turkish, Armenian, Kurdish, or Aramaic. They
were exempt from the "Zakat" or "Tax in aid of the poor" which was
incumbent on all Muslims.

This exemption was because the Zakat has a religious as well as a
political side. Instead they paid a poll tax -because they were not
Muslims. Payment of the poll tax guaranteed their citizenship rights in
the whole community. Thus Islam guarded the tenderest scruples of
conscience of followers of the revealed religions. It extended this care
in its law giving to the treatment of criminals, of civil causes, of
commercial matters, as well as the strictly religious side of life, so
that the minorities were free and safeguarded in the following of their
convictions.

In the Qur'an rules are laid down for the relationships of Muslims with
non-Muslims. If the non-Muslims maintain a friendly attitude they are
well-treated, though of course hostilities must be repulsed, whether
overt or covert. But Muslims are forbidden to begin aggression of either
type. As it is written in Sura LX: Mumtahana "(The Believing Woman
Refugee) Who is to be tested" (verses 8 and 9):

***"God does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who are
not hostile to your faith and do not drive you out of your home. For God
loves the just. But God forbids you to turn to those who are against
your faith and drive you out of your homes or support others in driving
you out. Those who turn to such do wrong."***

Christian and Jewish minorities live under exemplary conditions
in -Islamic countries, in a coexistence where each respects the other's
rights. When the Prophet first came to Yathrib many Jewish groups lived
there, and dwelt alongside the Muslims without the least friction, a
condition which was continued by the Caliphs after the Prophet's death.
The Founder of Islam said: "Whosoever harms a tribute-paying infidel
living amongst us has harmed me." And again: "Beware! whosoever injures
a non-Muslim, or steals even a worn-out piece of cloth or takes the
smallest thing he owns without his consent, will find me on the side of
the prosecution when he comes to trial on the Day of Judgment."

When the Imam Ali was Caliph he one day came across a blind and helpless
old man and asked for information about him. His officials told him that
the old man was a Christian who in his youth and strength had been a
civil servant. The saint replied: "You used him for work when he was
young and cast him off when he is old and weak! He must be given a
pension from the public treasury to ensure his livelihood."

Dr. Laura Veccia Vaglieri writes that the words of the Prophet and the
Fatwas (ex-cathedra decrees) of the great Islamic jurisconsults show up
the falsehood of the story that Islam imposed its religion by the sword.
The Qur'an lays down that "compulsion has no place in religion."

The Prophet safeguarded the Christians of Nejran and ordered that
reverence should be shown for their place of worship. He further ordered
his commanders that even the fleas in the houses of the Jews were not to
be touched. Adam Metz writes that the Muslims showed a respect for
synagogues and churches which no European land in medieval times showed
for synagogues and mosques. And Professor Gustave le Bon writes -that
under Muslim rule in Spain great Christian conferences were held in
Seville (AD 872) and Cordova (AD 852). Nor was any post under the
government or any other job forbidden to Jews or Christians.

The Crusaders' capture of Jerusalem was a horror of brutality. Pyramids
of heads were constructed. 1,000 Muslims who had sought sanctuary in
their mosque were mercilessly put to the sword. Blood flowed knee-deep
in the Temple courts. Kenneth Clark writes that in the history of
mankind no worse warfare has been waged than the brutal -Crusades, with
the Normans' lust for lands and the Europeans' desire for the profits of
the fruitful Eastern luxury trades behind them.

The Crusaders held Jerusalem for 88 years, and lost it again after that
period to the Muslim armies led by the great Kurdish General Selah
ad-Deen Ayyoubi, whom the Christians called Saladin. This was in October
AD 1187 (AHL 583, Rajab month). Instead of massacring all the Christians
in imitation of the Christian massacre of its Muslims 88 years before,
peace-loving wise Saladin proclaimed a public amnesty ; and forbade the
execution, the plundering, or the torture of any Christian, so adding
another glorious page to the world fame of Islam.

The true spirit of Islam governed all its troops in this as in its other
wars. Saladin ordered a constitutional security for all the inhabitants
of Palestine. He gave one dinar to every man and to every woman and two
dinars to every child, with the permission to settle where they would.
Security was greater in Jerusalem than in any other city, so that the
Latin citizens preferred to stay there.

The Bishop, who had riches beyond the dreams of avarice, said he wished
to leave. Some Muslims asked Saladin to keep him and divide his riches
amongst the Muslims, but he refused, saying: "It is impossible that I
should perpetrate such a crime. I will take ten dinars from him and no
more."

The savagery shown by Christians in Andalusia in the West was no less.
After all the services which the Muslims had performed for Spain, the
religious leaders of the victorious Christian army ordered the execution
of every Muslim, old and young, woman and man, at the instigation of the
Pope and of Philip II. Not one in four of the Muslims escaped the
ensuing massacre. Even some of these were dragged before the Inquisition
and condemned for their beliefs.

John Davenport writes (p.133; "Apology to Muhammad and the Qur'an"):
"Who can fail to admire the chivalry shown by the Islamic rulers of
Spain or to wonder at the monuments of civilization, both architectural
and cultural, which they have left behind them? And who can fail to feel
shame at the conduct of Christians, the fanaticism and bigotry and
ignorance and barbarism which brought torture and oppression in its
train?"

Georgi Zeidan narrates that the Christian conquerors of Andalusia made
Muslims, Jews and criminals carry labels to make them known to all men
wherever they went: and even presented Muslims with a choice between
accepting Christianity or dying (p.282 of the 4th volume of his "History
of Islamic Civilization"). He adds that the Christians turned Muslims'
mosques into churches, deprived them of all freedom of religious
observances, destroyed their cemeteries, stripped them of the
necessities of existence, and smashed up their hammams.

In the time of Henry IV of Spain the 4,000 defenders of the town
of -Dulan were strangled by Christian hands. Such was the Christian
under­standing of the blessing proclaimed on peacemakers by the Messiah
Himself! Is modern imperialism in our civilized world much better? Does
it not tread underfoot the dignity and personality of those under its
dominion, and strip them of the benefits of its vaunted "civilization"?

Does it not enslave mind and soul and spirit as much as the body of its
underlings? In order to ensure its own profits, does it not suppress all
freedom of thought amongst the masses, so that they may never even think
of raising a finger against their tyrants, and so that any rising murmur
of a demand for justice may be stifled before it can be heard? Let the
great powers mouth fine words about peace as they will. When it comes to
action they set all that idealism aside. Even their so-called diplomacy
is merely an extension of their imperialistic aims. Idealists can do no
more than draw pictures on water until moral conditions of peaceful
coexistence are established worldwide in a family of nations.

The units of a social structure are individual men and women: a
harmonious structure can only be built with individual persons in accord
with each other, and each at one with and within the self. Islam's
primary endeavor is, therefore, to create that inner peace within
individuals by filling hearts with the faith and conviction that sets
the conscience at peace, and which streamlines all the gifts of brain
and body in a harmony of joint action towards a God-given end. Islam
applies faith practically, in such a way as to produce a world which
runs aright. For this reason its second task is to guarantee an
environment which will promote the certainty that justice prevails; and,
by obviating threats to health and property, to make all feel secure.

Islam deprecates the exploitation of one class by another. Islam instead
advocates co-operation and mutual aid in quiet neighborliness and
friendship. Islam propounds norms of behavior, and trains its citizens
in serene living as these norms, practiced, shape habits and customs. Of
course, the frailty of human nature and the limitations of human
ability, insight and purview, prevent these ideals from being always and
everywhere realized without error. Even the best of leaders can be so
busied with one set of events that he fails to notice another series
going awry, into error, division — even into violence and oppression.
But the will to redress the wrong and put things right again is always
there; and above all, God's guidance and illumination exist to enlighten
consciences and inspire restitution, reminding all that they will face
their Judge at Doomsday.

Islam and World Peace
---------------------

A peace imposed by an imperialist power controlling the masses for its
own benefit is no peace. "Divide and Rule" generates no peace.
Conferences, agencies and idealist slogans beget no peace. The U.N.
Security Council debates limitations of armaments and gets nowhere. The
Eastern bloc and the Capitalist camp both say they want a world-system:
but they cannot agree on its shape. Class differences rage in both their
camps. Both err in thinking that economics is the sole cause of
divisions, and in believing that economic measures will by themselves
suffice to eradicate conflicts and substitute peace.

For Islam, peace is only one among many ingredients in the effective
recipe for human happiness. People must be free to think what they will
as they will, to weigh all possibilities, and, having thought them
through in the light of reason, to decide on the best way to live
together. This is the Qur'anic prescription as laid down, for instance,
in verse 256 of the Sura II (Baqara —"The Heifer"):

***"In religion is no compulsion. Truth stands out clear from error,"***

etc. or Sura VI: Ana'am — "The cattle" (verse 104):

***"Proofs from your Lord come to you. He that hath eyes to see, let him
see. Whoso will see will do so for his soul: Whoso refuses, does so
against himself. I am not your guard or warder."***

Or again in verse 22 of Sura LXXXVIII: Al-Ghashiyya —"The Overwhelming
Events":

***"Admonish! Thou art for admonition, not for surveillance,
of -them!"***

Conviction and faith are matters of heart. No compulsion can force the
heart to conform. Education, training, instruction, logic,
demonstration, font-family: can help. But whatever the lips say, the
heart remains unmoved. Even Galileo murmured "Eppure si muove" after his
recantation! or so we are told. Only his lips and his pen recanted, in
effect.

Christian propagandists sedulously spread lying reports that Muhammad
forced his religion on people by the sword. They cite the Prophet's
proclamation of the Jihad, and his raids from Medina. We have shown how
false is this misinterpretation.

What of their own religious wars and nationalist wars and imperialist
and expansionist wars? What of the pressure brought by the Inquisition
font-family: on non-Christians and on Christians suspected of heresy?
Were they better than the Tartar barbarism of the ant-like hordes of
Genghiz and Tamurlane?

One item of the pact of Hudeibiyya made between the Prophet and the
Qureishi idolaters of Mecca read: "Any Qureishi who shall flee from
Mecca without the permission of his superior and join the Muslims and
accept Islam, the Prophet of Islam binds himself to send him back to the
Qureish. But if a member of the Muslim forces flees to the Qureishi
side, the Qureish are not obliged to return him to the Muslims."

Some of the Muslims, rendered uncomfortable by this clause, asked the
Prophet: "Why do we have to return refugees from the Qureish while they
are not obliged to return a fugitive to us?"

The Prophet replied: "Any so-called Muslim who is ready to desert the
banner of Islam in favor of idolatry, and to prefer an inhuman religion
and idolatrous environment to the sound sane environment and religion of
monotheistic Islam, simply proves that he had never entered into the
inwardness of Islam and that his faith had never been so real as to
satisfy his soul. Such are not the Muslims we need. Whereas we are quite
sure that the Lord of Heaven will Himself take measures for the
salvation of anyone whom we may hand back to the Qureish, if he was
sincere in his flight from them."

So true was this prophecy, and so shaking the series of events which
occurred amongst the Qureish on behalf of Muslims who had been sent back
to them, that in terror the Qureish themselves very soon requested that
this item he annulled, and that no more of their refugees be sent back
to them to become conscious missionaries or unconscious instruments of
divine action in this world.

Islam condemns the territorial and commercial wars of modern great
powers, with their merciless involvements of the innocent. Islam demands
that ethical values, humanity and respect for the rights of others, in
submission to truth and to what is right, shall be made regnant over the
thinking and living of all mankind, and insists that until that demand
is realized the world can never find its way to peace and quiet.

The more progress technology and the material side of civilization
makes, the more men quote the maxim "Si vis pacem, para bellum" as a
pretext for an arms race not merely in quantities but also in
destructive­ ness, the more obvious is the truth made that humanity
stands at a crossroads of choice between mass suicide or salvation by
faith, annihilation or acceptance of ethical principles, the brutal
dictatorship of a man or the merciful government of God.

When man wakes up to this situation — and the very horrors which face
him may themselves open his eyes—we pray that the light of reason and of
heavenly wisdom will lead him onto "the good road, the road of those to
whom God is gracious, hot the road of those who continue to grope in
darkness." It is our conviction that mankind will choose this superior
way.

On the warp of individual change Islam weaves the woof of social
structure. It brings to human living the delicate feelings of
brotherhood and of belonging together. It designs a beautiful pattern of
longsuffering, gentleness and goodness in the hearts of people; and
omits all the ugly tears and rents and weaknesses that injustice and the
pulling and hauling of rival interests cause in a fabric. The result is
a harmonious whole like that of the most beautiful carpet in which every
color and shape is fully itself and the ensemble so fitly joined
together that it presents a perfect picture.

Islam Today?
------------

What has happened to us, the heirs of so brilliant and magnificent a
civilization? What has reduced us to our present living conditions? Why
have we ceded the hegemony of our world to others? What has caused the
decline in our culture, in our science and our political power? What
stopped our progress in its tracks? Why have we yielded our leadership
in manufactures and science to Westerners so that we now need them where
they once needed us? Why must Muslims, with all their splendid past in
East and West, hang their heads in the modern world?

It was not blowing our own trumpet or banging our own drum that raised
Islam to world pre-eminence in its time. It was our culture, our
remarkable spiritual and social revolution. Shame that we should waste
our strength in conflicts amongst ourselves and in internecine
tugs-of-war which have reduced the glory of Unity to an empty phoneme.

A strong nation can only be built on firm principles of manners, morals,
order —sole sources of progress. Islam never owed its power to cannons
and tanks and weapons but to the pre-eminence in thought -amongst its
Ulema, in character amongst its peoples and in following the guidance of
God on the good road (for which we pray in the Fatiha 17 times a day),
the road of justice, fellowship, brotherhood.

History demonstrates unmistakably that whenever the Muslims have
constructed their philosophy of life in the spirit of the teachings
revealed to them by Heaven, they have prospered: and whenever they have
deserted those teachings, adversity and misfortune have been visited
upon them. The Muslims who founded the brilliant culture and social
wellbeing of the past followed those teachings more closely than we do,
individual, society and nation alike.

The sun of culture shone while just measure and proportion was given to
science, thought, matter and spirit. When we deserted those, the banner
of endeavor, diligence and combat for right fell from our hands, only to
be grabbed by the West in self-aggrandisement.

Where is the old Muslim sincerity, integrity, honesty and truthfulness?
These were once the fences on either side of our path. When we
transgressed across them we were lost in a trackless desert, and
abandoned the holy calling, announced as God's purpose for us, of
leading mankind to live as God wills. Abandoning that destiny, we sank
in the quicksands of corruption, ignorance and wretchedness which engulf
us today. Yet a truly united Islam could return to that heavenly
vocation and lead mankind's feet on to the spiritual road. This would be
a blessing for all.

Napoleon's companion in exile on the island of St. Helena wrote: "In
Egypt Napoleon constantly repeated his amazement at the blessings which
the Prophet of Islam and her other great men in history had brought to
the foreign lands they took under their sway. He looked with hope to
Islam as the force which might again confer such blessings on the world,
even saying: 'I think I will take up Islam as my religion'."

A true Islamic society would be very different from that which obtains
anywhere in the world. Its thinking and its living must once again
incarnate those heavenly principles of its inception. As the poet said:
"Islam's pure truth's from spot or blemish free:

Our Muslims blame for any fault you see."

To take its full share in that moral and spiritual revolution which must
come to the entire world, Islam must orient itself in today's global
realities. It must then undertake those internal reforms which will be
its -restitution for past backwardness. It must balance spiritual and
material conditions in the right proportion in accordance with those
principles of perfection which shaped the glories of its past and which
are dictated by the Lord of both worlds — this one and the next. In
these it will find, not merely its own internal stability, but also the
secret of stability for the world and the way to mediate it to all
mankind.

[^1]: Quoted from "The Enlightened Thinkers' Magazine", No. 829.


