Conclusion
==========

Let us sum up the topics treated in this volume and the conclusions to
which they lead. We started with man's ascent from a primitive animal-
like soul dwelling in holes and caves of the rocks up to the
sophisticated denizen of the atomic space-age and its affluent
technological society.

We evaluated that society as it manifests itself in the West, and
studied its interaction with the more leisurely Orient, illustrating
with an Iranian's reaction to his sojourn in Europe.

We examined the reasons for the growth of Christianity; and then
scrutinized the history of its rise, its split into sects, and the
effects of these things on the world, not least in anti-Islamic
propaganda honored with the ferocity only accorded to a rival who is
truly feared. We saw Islam and Christianity face to face in Africa.

We considered the pursuit of happiness in a machine-made culture, its
worship of sex, its wild seeking of sensations in materialistic ways,
and the reaction of drop-outs who revolt against its drab monotony.

We saw the effects of permissiveness over alcohol; the desperate
contrasts between the haves and the have-nots allowed in the world by
the irresponsibility of those whose religion should make them care; the
bloody wars conducted by partisans of the society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals; race discrimination, and the breakdown of
the -family; artificial shortages of vital goods engineered by vested
interests in certain essential commodities.

Part 2 turned to look at what Islam has to offer this disturbed world;
its doctrine of Man, of Eternity and Judgment, of social life on earth
and the individual's duties therein; its emphasis on reason; its
education program; its political implications, and its demand for total
self-alignment of each human will with the Supreme Will of the Creator
of all things visible and invisible.  
 Part 3 dwelt on Islam's way of dealing with social problems:
alcoholism, family life, racism, the class war and world peace.

Finally we asked: What is the position of Islam today, what is its task
and what role should it and could it be playing in helping mankind out
of the morass into which the divisive materialisms of East and West
threaten to plunge us one and all?

The endeavor has been made to be scrupulously fair, to relate only known
facts, to make deductions from such facts and to envisage the world as
it might be. On a merely materialistic and human plane there may seem to
be grounds for a disillusioned and despairing pessimism. But the marvels
of renascence which have happened again and again in mankind's history,
the knowledge of the great gifts which the Creator has implanted within
His creatures, the certainty of His pardoning and merciful compassion
towards all those whom He has set upon this earth, and above all that
faith which is given to those who set their trust in Him and seek in
daily prayer to put themselves at His disposal to be guided on the
straight road, provide us with the optimism of a sure hope.

We therefore end with "Insha'Allah all things shall be turned to good."
The Muslim's "Insha'Allah" is not, as some Westerners have falsely
claimed, a supine, fain√©ant fatalism which accepts whatever comes
without lifting a finger to shape the course of events: it is, on the
contrary, an active enlistment in God's service, to serve with the
obedience that a willing slave both owes and gives to a beneficent
Master who owns him heart and soul. If enough men and women in the world
adopt that militant obedience of the "Abedeen", who can doubt that
Almighty Providence will once again pour forth the bounty of His grace
upon a perishing world?


