Islam
=====

Islam stands for harmony and perfectibility with an unmatched depth and
breadth of scope that comprises all aspects of spirit and life. It knows
all the roads that lead to blessing and happiness. It has the cure for
human ills, individual and social, and makes them as plain as the wit of
man can devise or comprehend. It sets out to develop all sides of each
person: and therefore perforce includes every reality which impacts
human existence. It has not given way, in its doctrine of man, to modern
errors or corrupt institutions.

It does not set man in God's place. To do so is to leave man with only
himself to rely on in all his pride and egotism: or else to reduce him
to the slavery of being a beast of burden for his fellows, powerless,
will-less, helpless before nature's and matter's tyrannies. This is
precisely what modern heresies do with man. But Islam vindicates man's
unique nature vis-a-vis all other living creatures, affirming that he is
a special creation with a lofty calling all his own.

Islam holds that a man's personality does not cease to exist with
death, but is continuous and eternal. "Worldly" and "other-worldly" are
an indivisible unity. body and soul can therefore not be dissolved into
disparate elements. Islam, on these grounds, presents both worlds in
shining terms. It both trains a man for eternity and also finds the
guiding principles for its public institutions on earth in the sublime
destiny inherent in man's creation.

Eternity dictates universal principles, unchanging and unchangeable.
These Islam proclaims as tenets, convictions, commandments, statutes, in
its school of contentment, in its thrust for progress. It offers man the
perfection of freedom for thought, for concern, and for exegesis of the
divine law on matters of social necessity. It reverts to first
principles which provide the sure and unshifting basis of rock-bottom
truth in all the chances and changes of this mortal life.

Islam holds that man has certain characteristics which are his link
with the material world and certain others which connect him with
realities that are non-material and which motivate desires and aims of a
more sublime nature. body, mind and spirit each has its proper
propensities. Each must be duly weighed, so that what one of these
indivisible elements desires does not conflict with the desire of
another.

Islam takes all the elements and facets of human nature into account
and caters for the compound essence of man's combined material and
spiritual propensities.

It draws him upward towards the highest without cutting his roots in
the material. It demands absolute purity and chastity without denying
the flesh and its needs. Its current flows from pole to pole over a
network of live wires - convictions and regulations which preserve the
integrity of all the innate human instincts while rejecting the Freudian
doctrine of total freedom which treats man as nothing but animal.

Islam is not a mere set of ideas in the world of metaphysical
speculation : nor did it come into being simply to order man's social
living. It is a way of life so comprehensively meaningful that it shapes
education, society and culture to heights none other ever aimed at. It
forms a supreme court of appeal and rallying-point for East and West
alike, and offers them an ideology which can answer their divisive
materialisms. It can replace their inequities and contradictions with a
more universal, more perfect and more powerful idea.

Islam does not concede priority of any kind to material affluence or to
hedonistic comfort as basic for happiness. It finds its principles in an
analysis of man's true nature. With these principles it constructs a
plan for individual , social and international living, framed by fixed
and all embracing moral standards, aimed at a goal for humanity far
loftier than the modern world' s limited materialist aims.

Islam does not imprison man in the narrow confines of the material and
the financial. It sets him in a spacious and expansive air. There
morality, principle and the spirit reign. Its statutes are those which
spring from the nature of man himself. They encourage mutual help and
team-work. They pursue values outside the straitened boundaries imposed
on individual and on community by the petty pusillanimous pedestrian
patterns of materialist purposes. Instead it yokes man's strength and
striving to the change, advance, progress and perfecting inherent in his
creation.

Islamic training sets out to refine and enhance human qualities and to
harness them to right and reasonable objectives which direct and dictate
every forward step to the desired end. It focuses a man's motives, which
arise from his natural desires and basic needs, in such a concentrated
and streamlined beam that each talent is called in to exercise its
function in due succession and order.

Impetuous uncoordinated impulses are thus controlled so that no single
instinct overrule commonsense nor momentary urge replace reason. Instead
man is made master of his fate and captain of his soul. Excess is
obviated and every person is accorded his or her legitimate share in the
common triumph of all. In this employment every need of body, mind and
soul is met and satisfied.

Whenever in history individuals have united in harmonious pursuit of
such aims, persons and communities have found themselves. "What is
right" has ruled thoughts, conduct and character; human living has been
orderly and secure. Reason dictates this training, and calls to a
religion with convictions superstition-free, canons practical, statutes
feasible and excellencies virtuous. The God-given human intelligence
intuitively and logically perceives their truth.

No man is asked to perform a task above that which he is able. But his
powers are put at full stretch. Every possibility within him is
expressed to the full. And each is, at doomsday, judged; then the fire
itself shall prove each man's work of what sort it is.


**Islam and Political Theory**

Modern political theory exalts "the general will" Democratic government
attempts to put that general will into practice by making law out of the
policy voted for by «'the majority" (which need only be 51%) leaving
null and void the will of the minority (which may be that of as many as
49% of the voters).

The minority is thus not "free" at all, even though in some cases its
will may be sensible, and in the circumstances right. But '«Government
by the Will of the People" will never voluntarily strip off the sanctity
and splendour with which it has endowed "the general will", giving that
concept precedence over all other material and spiritual values.

Islam, on the other hand, gives precedence to the Will of the Lord of
this world, rather than to the uncontrolled inclinations and sentiments
of a majority of humans. Islam refuses to strip the Godhead of control
of the legislative and jurisdictional power Islam's conception of
Godhead and of divine government is wide enough to comprise everything
that goes to make up human life everywhere on this planet.

This makes Islam man's unrivalled guardian. It demands total obedience
to its statutes on the ground that these are God-given and that
therefore no human being has a right to allow his own desires to dictate
any action in breach of these statutes and rules of life.

How can God be proclaimed worthy of total commitment by people who
arrange their lives on precepts deriving from other sources than God
Himself? No person dare claim divine authority for a partner for God,
nor substitute another lawgiver for Him. Islam's aim is to champion
truth and right in everything in human society, since truth does not
specialise exclusively in social, political and financial matters but
also clothes the stature of man himself in its most beautiful
vestments.

The human physique is fearfully and wonderfully made. So are the rules
and rights that govern human living. No-one can claim a complete
knowledge of all the mysteries of man's make-up, or of the complicated
social structure it generates. For this structure comprises the
specialised areas of the body and the spirit of all its individuals as
well as of all their relationships with each other Nor dare anyone claim
to be innocent of sin, of a shortcoming, a fault or an error. No-one is
aware of all the elements which go to make up human happiness and
welfare.

Despite all the devoted efforts of scientists to penetrate the
mysteries of human being, the area they have succeeded in covering is
still extremely limited. To quote Dr. Alexis Carrel again ("'Man, the
Unknown" p.4): "'Mankind has made a gigantic effort to know itself.
Although we possess the treasure of the observations accumulated by the
scientists, the philosophers, the poets, and the great mystics of all
times, we have grasped only certain aspects of ourselves.

We do not apprehend man as a whole. We know him as composed of distinct
parts. And even these parts are created by our methods. Each one of us
is made up of a procession of phantoms, in the midst of which strides an
unknowable reality."

Without insight into the human make-up man cannot frame laws 100%
suited to the human condition, nor justly cure the troubles that arise :
witness the bewilderment of legislators, their constant alteration of
their own statutes in face of today's new problems and unexpected blind
alleys. Motives of personal advantage, self-interest, profit, ambition,
power, and even of environmental predilections,

intrude to distort the legislators' outlook consciously or
unconsciously. Montesquieu said of legislation that "none is ever wholly
objective and impartial, for the personal ideas and sentiments of the
legislator influence his drafting". Thus Aristotle, because he was
jealous of Plato, influenced Alexander to denigrate his great
predecessor.

Modern slogans of "Liberty and Equality" and "the Public Will" are
empty words used by politicians to win support for their laws, laws
which in fact represent the interests not of the masses but of the
landowners and capitalists.

Henry Ford wrote of England, which boasts itself "the Mother of
Democracy". "We cannot forget the 1926 general strike or the way the
government tried to break it with every means in its power. Parliament,
tool of the capitalists, proclaimed the strike unconstitutional and
illegal, and turned police and army out against the strikers with
bullets and tanks. Meantime the media of radio and press declared the
government to be the servant of the workers, a plain subterfuge
contradicted by the fines imposed on the trade unions and by the
imprisonment of their leaders as soon as the opportunity offered."

Khrushchev declared in the 22nd Supreme Soviet Congress: "In the era of
the personality-cult (i.e. under Stalin) corruption infiltrated our
Party's leadership, government and finances; produced decrees which trod
the masses' rights underfoot; lowered industrial output; filled men with
fear in their work; and encouraged sycophants, informers and
character-assassins."

Thus both Eastern and Western systems of government falsely appear in
the guise of the public will, Parliamentary rule, representation of the
masses: while capitalism and communism alike frame inequitable laws
because they neglect the heavenly decrees which establish fast what is
best for man.


**Islam and Legislation**

Jean Jacques Rousseau wrote ("Social Contract" Book II: Chapter 6: "The
Lawgiver"):

"To discover the rules of society that are best suited to nations,
there would need to exist a superior intelligence who could understand
the passions- of men without feeling any of them, who had no affinity
with our nature but knew it to the roots, whose happiness was
independent of ours but who would nevertheless make our happiness his
concern, ... in fact a divine lawgiver is needed."

By these standards the most competent legislator is the Creator of man
Himself, He knows all the mysteries of man's being, makes no profit out
of any human society, and needs no man. Hence the principles which can
shape equitable social regulations must be learnt from a person who
receives direct guidance from the Creator, whose teachings are the
inspired revelations of that unique Source, and who is wholly reliant on
that Infinite Wisdom.

Human laws aim only at the ordering of human society. They do not stray
outside those limits, nor touch non-social matters like personal
conditions, attitudes of mind, spiritual excellence.

They do not try to cure internal pollutions within the personality. It
is only when personality problems issue in social disorder in action
that they enter the scope of legal measures. A person may be filthy in
thought and spirit and still good in the eyes of Western law, which
looks only upon outward acts and not upon the heart.

Islam with its wide outlook aims not just at redressing what has been
done wrong but primarily at putting individual and society right from
inside, regarding the ethical personality as the basic unit, and its
perfecting as the priority. Islam aims at an orderly society composed of
sound morals, sane thinking, sensible action, serene psyches.

It therefore legislates for the inner life of the individual in as much
detail as for the outer life of society. It brings order and congruence
between large and small in creation, the natural laws and the spiritual,
the material and the metaphysical, the individual and the social, creeds
and philosophies. It helps man not to come into collision with the
natural laws which underlie the orderliness of the universe;
disobedience to which collapses and confounds all human affairs.

Man-made institutions pursue performance of the law. but in Islam the
trustee for the law's performance is a deep-rooted faith; and a Muslim
duly performs his obligations by the force of morality and faith, even
in matters where he is seen by no one save by God alone. Armed force is
only needed to control the tiny minority of criminal-minded hypocrites.
Islam thus pays due regard both to inner purity of heart and to outward
purity of action. It calls those deeds good, laudable and meritorious
which spring from sincerity and faith.

USA's Attorney General, in his introduction to his book on Islamic Law
, wrote: "American law has only a tenuous connection with moral duty. An
American may be accounted a law-abiding citizen even though his inner
life is foul and corrupt. But Islam sees the fount of law in the Will of
God as revealed to and proclaimed through His Apostle Muhammad. This
Law: this Divine Will, treats the entire body of believers as a single
society, including all the multifarious races and nationalities which go
to make it up in a far-scattered community.

This gives religion its true sound force and makes it the cohesive
element of society. No bounds of nationality or geography divide, for
the government itself is obedient to the one supreme authority of the
Qur'an. This leaves no place for any other legislator, so that no
competition or rivalry or rift can arise.

The believer regards this world as a vale of soul-making, the ante-room
to the next : and the Qur'an makes perfectly plain what are the
conditions and laws which govern believers' behaviour to each other and
towards society; and thus makes the changeover from this world to the
next a sure and sound and safe transition."

Despite Westerners' small acquaintance with Islam, and their often
mistaken ideas, far removed from reality, a comparatively large number
of their thinkers grasp some of the depth and profundity of Islamic
teaching and do not conceal their admiration for its clear exegesis and
estimable doctrines.

A Muslim scientist's respect for Islam's laws and ordinances is no
surprise. But if a non-Muslim savant, despite his slavery to his own
religious bigotry, yet recognises Islam's grandeur and greatness and its
lofty leading, that is a real tribute, especially when it is based on a
recognition of the progressive nature of Islam's legal systems and their
legacy to mankind. This is why this book quotes foreign verdicts on
Islam. We do so, not because we need their support, but because they can
help to open the road for seekers and enquirers so that who reads may
run its way.

Dr. Laura Vacciea Vaglieri, Naples University professor, wrote: "In the
Qur'an we come across jewels and treasures of knowledge and insight
which are superior to the products of our most brilliant geniuses,
profound philosophers and powerful politicians. How can such a book be
the product of the brain of a single man - and that of a man whose life
was spent in commercial,

not particularly religious, circles - far removed from all schools of
learning? He himself always insisted that he was in himself an ordinary
simple man like other men, unable, without the help of the Almighty to
produce the miracle of such work. None other than He whose knowledge
compasses all that is in heaven and earth could produce the Qur'an."

Bernard Shaw in his "Muhammad, Apostle of Allah" said: "I have always
held the religion of Muhammad in the highest esteem simply from the
marvel of its living vigour. To my mind it is the sole religion capable
of success in mastering the multifarious vicissitudes of life and the
differences of culture.

I foresee (it is manifest even today) that, man by man, Europeans will
come to adopt the Islamic faith. Mediaeval theologians for reasons of
ignorance or bigotry pictured Muhammad's religion as full of darkness,
and considered that he had cast down a challenge to Christ in a spirit
of hatred and fanaticism.

After much study of the man, I have concluded that Muhammad was not
only not against Christ, but that he saw in Him despairing mankind's
saviour I am convinced that if a man like him would undertake leadership
in tile new world, he would succeed in solving its problems, and secure
that peace and prosperity which all men want."

Voltaire, who at the beginning was one of Islam's most obdurate
opponents and poured scorn on the Prophet, after his 40 years of study
of religion, philosophy and history frankly said: "Muhammad's religion
was unquestionably superior to that of Jesus. He never descended to the
wild blasphemies of Christians, nor said that one God was three or three
Gods were one.

The single pillar of his faith is the One God. Islam owes its being to
its founder's decrees and manliness; whereas Christians used the sword
to force their religion on others. Oh Lord! if only all nations of
Europe would make the Muslims their models."

One of Voltaire's heroes was Martin Luther. Yet he wrote that "Luther
was not worthy to unloose the latchets of Muhammad's shoes. Muhammad was
a great man and a trainer of great men by his example of virtue and
perfection. A wise lawgiver, a just ruler, an ascetic prophet, he raised
the greatest revolution earth has seen."

Tolstoi wrote: "Muhammad needs no other claim to fame than that he
raised a barbarous bloodthirsty people out of their diabolical customs
to untold advances. His Canon Law with its intelligence and wisdom will
come to be the world's authority."


**Islam and Ideologies**

Our world is split into two blocs. They hold contradictory ideologies,
each backed by its own scientists and savants who, in a spate of
pamphlets and books, prove it right and its opponents wrong. Each claims
to be the sole sure road to happiness, and says its adversary is the
sole cause of confusion and catastrophe.

Both cannot be right. Both may be wrong! Each may be missing a vital
point. Yet both have made large contributions to human progress through
the brilliance of some of their scientists and technologists. Progress
in one field is no proof of equal progress in every field of human life,
any more than an individual's possession of one set of talents indicates
a competence in all occupations. An outstanding physician is not ipso
facto a brilliant musician! Nor does technological advance ipso facto
imply equal advance in thought, wisdom, religion, government,
morality.

Dr. Alexis Carrel writes ("Man, the Unknown" p. 27 and 28) : "The
applications of scientific discoveries have transformed the material and
mental worlds. These transformations exert on us a profound influence.
Their unfortunate effect comes from the fact that they have been made
without consideration for our nature. Our ignorance of ourselves has
given to mechanics, physics and chemistry the power to modify at random
the ancestral forms of life. Man should be the measure of all.

On the contrary, he is a stranger in the world that he has created. He
has been incapable of organising this world for himself, because he did
not possess a practical knowledge of his own nature. Thus, the enormous
advance gained by the sciences of inanimate matter over those of living
things is one of the greatest catastrophes ever suffered by humanity The
environment born of our intelligence and our inventions is adjusted
neither to our stature nor to our shape.

We are unhappy. We degenerate morally and mentally. The groups and the
nations in which industrial civilisation has attained its highest
development are precisely those which are becoming weaker, and whose
return to barbarism is the most rapid."

The perfection and subliminating of man in a whole series of different
areas requires a body of sound and universal teachings based on
realities of human life and free of all faults and errors. Such is only
to be found in the teachings of the prophets of God to whom revelation
was granted concerning the origins of the world's being.

Morality, to rely on sanctions higher than the natural and to be
inspired by what is beyond the material, must build solely on
fundamental and basic instructions.

From the moment that man was set upon the globe and laid the groundwork
of civilisation, a cry rose to heaven from his inward depths.

This cry we call religion. Its truth is indissolubly connected with a
moral order.

Inhumanity, faction, inequity, tyranny, war, all testify to the truth
that governments and their laws have never sufficed to control the
sentiments and beliefs and feelings of man nor to establish an order of
justice, happiness, peace and quietude in society. Science and knowledge
can never solve the problems of human life nor prevent its derailment
except in alliance with religion.

Will Durant, American sociologist and philosopher, writes in his
"Pleasures of Philosophy" (pp.326/7): '"Has a government such power in
economic and ethical matters to preserve all the heritage of knowledge
and morals and art stored up over generations and woven into the warp
and woof of a nation's culture? Can it increase that heritage and hand
it on to posterity? Can a government, with all the modern machinery at
its disposal, bring the treasures of science to those depressed classes
who still think of scientific utterances as blasphemy and witchcraft?

Why is it that such small men govern America's biggest cities? Why is
our administration conducted in such a way as to make one weep over the
lack of noble policies and true patriotism? Why do corruption and
deception enter into our elections and make havoc of public property?
Why has government's basic task dwindled today to an attempt merely to
prevent crime? Why do governments not seek to understand the causes of
war and the conditions of peace? Churches and families ought to
undertake the imposition of civilisation on such governments."

Western society can only continue to tolerate moral confusion and its
ways of destruction because of its limited powers to take reform into
its own hands. But the continuation of this state of affairs already
tolls a warning bell. Peril lies close at hand,

for civilisation stays stable only so long as there is a balance
between ends and means, between authority and aspiration. When this
equilibrium breaks down, such violence ensues that no goodness can stop
it. It rushes headlong to an inevitable disruption. You will find no
nation throughout human history which survived the corruption of
indulgence and permissiveness.

Rome perished. The glory of Greece collapsed. France, because of the
indulgent lives of its citizens, turned soft and gave way to the first
Nazi assault. One of their most famous generals himself wrote that the
reason for their weakness was the inner erosion of character.

Spengler foresaw the downfall of Western civilisation and said that
other lands would in the future see great cultures arise. Perhaps the
East will be one of the first to return to its ancient heritage. This
will not come by worshipping at the false shrine of misguided
civilisations. But the decline of one civilisation can awaken men to the
divine plan and inspire them to follow it; and so, by means of this
sublime truth, to found an entirely new social life on sound
foundations.


