Islam and Nationhood
====================

Today, alas, the symptoms of an inferiority-complex over Western
industrial prowess and its deadly consequences mark everything in
Eastern nations' life. Many a Muslim is so impregnated with Western
ideas that he wishes to see everything through Western spectacles, in
the belief that progress demands manners and morals, laws and
legislation, which copy Western styles. This total surrender welds the
ring of slavery in our ears.

We spread the red carpet of our self-respect, our material and moral
wealth, our religious and national heritage of good-breeding, before
their feet. This is what saps Muslim nations' strength, both physical
and spiritual.

Muslims they may be: but they have lost the art of thinking on Islamic
lines, cast aside their Muslim outlook on world events, alienated
themselves from Islam's creed and culture, and want to Westernise all
Muslim ways. Mankind's greatest problems are not those which can be
solved in the laboratory.

Shall a foreign force prevent our taking our place in civilisation's
caravan? Suppose we follow neither the capitalist nor the communist
trail. Suppose perfect social justice rules the interior of our land,
and wins us an international regard, restoring our ancient prestige
amongst the assembly of national governments. Might this not save us and
mankind from further horrors of wars?

Why do we not let our religion's laws and statutes solve our internal
problems? If it can prevent us occupying the seat of a beggar at the
table of humanity, and instead install us as masters in that house to
the benefit of all, is this a small thing? Can a rich and generous giver
turn beggar? Can a man born to command turn submissive, cringe and crawl
as an inferior, and give up his right to choose the road he knows is
proper?

Our inherited treasures have blessed humanity in the past. Neither West
nor East dare disregard that fact, and despise us as backward and
helpless, however much they strive to turn our confidence into confusion
and our hope into hopelessness, so that we fall easy prey. Our long
experience over three thousand years of history has left us tired.

We have culled habits, thought, laws, manners from here and there over
centuries, and donned them in indiscriminate combination, so that we
make ourselves more like figures in a ridiculous carnival procession
than the dignified personalities that we should be, wearing our own
national garb with distinction and consuming our national dishes with
conscious nobility.

Take our present constitution. We first copied French models : then
those of other European nations were added ; and later, on each occasion
when new legislation was called for, sought our mould in some other
place again, so that there is an endless conflict between the spirit of
the laws which we have borrowed from outside, and the national spirit
for which the laws are made. As a result, a transgressor of the law
gains national renown, hero-worship, and help unstinted in every way.
Why? Through ignorance in the community? Not so! For the educated do not
respond to the laws.

No! It is the inconsistency between the national spirit and the
borrowed laws, unrelated to social needs, historical antecedents,
national consciousness, personal convictions that emerged from an
environment entirely alien to the spirit of our people. Each borrowed
law came from a community with its own history, religion, needs and
peculiar realities. Yet none of them can even give a wholly positive
answer to its own people, as continuous insurrectionary conditions
show.

Professor Hocking of Harvard in "The Spirit of World Politics" writes:
"Islamic lands will not progress by merely imitating Western
arrangements and values. Can Islam produce fresh thinking, independent
laws and relevant statutes to fit the new needs raised by modern
society? Yes! - and more! Islam offers humanity greater possibilities
for advance than others can. Its lack is not ability - but the will to
use it. In reality the Shar'iya contains all the ingredients needed."

Iran's national daily "Keyhan" on 14th Dey, 1345 reported: "Yesterday,
anniversary of the martyrdom of the Imam Ali, all Tehran practised
Islam's laws 100%. Result: - no crimes; forensic offices unemployed; no
murders; no violence; no ripple on the calm surface; borough officers
and police untroubled by any calls; even family quarrels within the
homes were quickly hushed in reverence for the martyred Leader of the
Faithful."

The Persian "Reader's Digest" (No. 35, Year 25) corroborated this,
saying. "The average number of corpses in Tehran mortuaries on any one
day of last year was 6 - fewer of course on religious holy days and more
on some other days. Last week's anniversary (Dey 13th) of Ali's
martyrdom was total peace - a proof of the persistent strength of
religious conviction, and of the calm and sanity society attains on days
when sale of alcohol is banned and amusement houses are closed.

" Such is the result of Muslims practising their religion's laws for 24
hours. Could a single Western city report, if not 24 hours, even 60
minutes, without an accident, a theft or a murder? When will mankind
attain the adult maturity to learn the simple lesson from which so
easily comes the peace, the quiet, the unity that all want? It is plain
serendipity for us for, in the poet's words,

"I round the globe in search of Heaven did roam:

Returned, and found my Heaven was here at home."


**Islam and Economics**

Man has always had to wrestle with the task of exploiting nature's
resources to extract his livelihood therefrom. In the primitive
centuries, as Aristotle said, life organised itself socially "to make it
possible to live: and continued, to make it possible to live well." In
the last four centuries a "science of economics" has been deduced from
the statutes regulating human relations and the exchange of goods which
developed through this social organisation. Faced with the vast
expansion of a technology and affluence, this "science" has broken into
two opposing camps.

On the one side "Capitalism" or "free enterprise" believes that nature
should take its course in economics, so that an enlightened
self-interest causes the genius of some finally to level out to the
benefit of all. This is the doctrine for which the Western bloc
stands.

On the other side "Communism" holds that the means of production must
be controlled by a proletariat state, so that a just and equal sharing
of all the benefits of human endeavour is imposed on society.

The rivalry for absolute power between these two ideologies hangs over
the modern world with a menace like the sword of Damocles.

We must ask Marxists whether their "classless society" can be ensured
by the single measure of making the means of production joint property
and abolishing a moneyed class, when in fact a diversity of classes
exists arising from other than economic causes. While in Soviet
Socialist Republics no bourgeois propertied class exists, other classes
distinguished by occupational and environmental differences do exist:
e.g.

factory-workers, agriculturalists, civil servants, clerks, party
officials and numberless others. Do physician and nurse receive equal
pay? Or navy and engineer?

There are yet other differences amongst people which exist in reality-
Lenin's "reality in which we have to orient ourselves." People differ in
age, sex, inclinations, tastes, physical strength, appearance, reasoning
powers, ideas and outlooks.

A Soviet economist recently wrote ("Economics" Vol. 2, p.216): "It is
impracticable to impose absolute equality right across the board. If we
were to pay professors, thinkers, politicians and inventors exactly the
same as manual workers, the only end-result would be the abolition of
all incentives to brainwork of any kind."

Capitalism claims that only by private enterprise and personal property
can an economy be achieved such that the standard of living of all
classes constantly rises and the difference between rich and poor
constantly diminishes. Against this claim must be set the report of an
enquiry arranged by Walter Reuther, President of the U.S.A.

United Auto Workers Union, in his capacity as chairman of the "American
Society to Combat Hunger." This committee affirms that ten million
Americans suffer from undernourishment; and asks the president of the
republic to declare a state of emergency in 256 cities, situated in 20
of the states, where the danger is most grave.

As causes of this undernourishment, the committee cited the aftermath
of World War II coupled with a number of defects in America's internal
economy The Secretary of Agriculture took extreme measures to purchase
from abroad and commandeer from within all foodstuffs he could lay hands
on to fill the gap (UP).

We are bound to ask, therefore, how far any regime, whatever its
claims, has succeeded in equalising the classes, eliminating differences
and building a sound and just society?

Both Socialist and Capitalist regimes base their systems on theories
which are reverenced without any regard to moral and spiritual values.
The aim of each is to increase affluence, and nothing more.

Islam's philosophy reverences the whole man in his world setting. It
orders society's material behaviour and benefits, while at the same time
legislating for moral virtues, spiritual perfections, and a higher
standard of living. By this it means, not simply the material, but the
mental, the spiritual, the moral, the altruistic, the philanthropic
standards which enable all men to live each for all and all for each.

Western law supports property-rights and gives preference to those of
capitalists over those of workers. Soviet law, in their own words,
exists to strip the individual of all property rights and to extirpate
capital as a personal possession, giving preference to the workers'
group throughout. Both systems are grounded in human reasoning and
judgment.

But Islam's law is grounded in Divine Revelation. Its legislation is
not a human expedient. It does not set class against class; but helps
each group to respect the excellence of other groups. Dictated by the
Lord of all creatures for the general good and for the good of all, it
permits no class to lord it over others nor allows injustice to break
in.

A ruler is in it only an ordinary person with a particular set of
duties, himself under law, wielding power solely to ensure that the
Divine commandments are obeyed in society. Since confidence reigns that
God's Law is sovereign, peace and quiet obtain.

Islam on the one hand opposes Capitalism's doctrine that the rights of
property-ownership lie outside the limits of state control, and its
permitting "free enterprise" to exercise aggression and tyranny of the
stronger over the weaker in an exaltation of the rights of the
individual to the detriment of the rights of society as a whole: and, on
the other hand, does regard the sanctity of property as a fundamental.

Prosperity is the stone on which independence and freedom are built
within a social order. The common good must be the regulating principle
governing personal ownership of property. Islam therefore equally
opposes the Communist total rejection of private enterprise and
property, which entrusts the key of bounty to the state, reducing the
individual to so subordinate a position that he is left with no
intrinsic value in himself as a person, being regarded as a state tool -
a stomach for the state to fill and thereafter exploit, as a farmer does
his horses and cattle.

Communists hold that private property is not natural to man. They aver,
without advancing evidence to support the thesis, that the first
communities of primitive man held all things in common in cooperation,
love and brotherhood, neither did any man say that aught that he had was
his own. The human "community" started as communist with everything in
common and parted to each as his need required. The claim to personal
ownership of anything, they contend, only developed by slow degrees
until it reached the terrifying excesses it manifests in today's
world.

Their utopian "Golden Age" is, alas, a pipe-dream : for the facts show
that personal ownership is not a result of the development of
acquisitive tendencies in a particular environment. Property is coeval
with the appearance of man on earth: it is as germane to human nature as
all the other innate urges, and no more to be denied than they are.

Modern economists say that the universal sense of ownership of
property, which is found in every tribe on earth and in every epoch, can
only be explained if it is a primal instinct. Man wants to be the sole
master of the goods that minister to his needs, in order to feel truly
free and independent. Further, a man feels that goods which owe their
existence to the hard work of his hands are in a way an extension of
himself, deserving of the same respect as he demands for the integrity
of his personality.

Finally, he feels the inner urge to build up a store to ensure his
future and that of his family, developing thereby a thrift and economy
which make him lay up a provision against a rainy day: This store he
thereafter guards jealously as "his own".

The community's wealth grows with the increase in private property and
productivity, for a social unit subsists by the industry of its
individual members. The incentive to hard work lies in its rewards in
personal ownership and in increased ease of living. Wherefore society
must concede to the individual the right to own what his toil has
created, since society's own welfare is itself a product of that toil.

Islam, with its practical and realistic approach to man as he is,
recognises the importance of the urge to own as a creative factor for
all social progress; and therefore legislates to secure a man possession
of all that his hand has won for him by proper and lawful means,
regarding his productivity as the guarantee of his right to ownership.

Islam rejects the contention that oppression, exploitation and violence
are inevitable concomitants of private ownership; for they only appear
where the legislative power is held by the richest class, and by them,
as in Western lands, directed solely to the protection of their own
interests.

Since Islamic Law derives solely from the supreme overarching Authority
of God, it is wholly impartial : so no law can be devised by it with the
aim of protecting the rich or injuring the poor. From its inception,
Islam has recognised private property, but always only under such
conditions that violence and oppression are ruled out of court.

Islam holds that it is wrong to wrest factories out of the hands of
those who founded them and who, by patient endurance of hardship and
toil, built them up to give labour to many, goods to society, and, of
course, also profit to themselves. For Islam holds that such resort to
violence in removing the means of production from the hands of men of
initiative is injurious to social security and to respect for the rights
of the individual.

It discourages the spirit of invention and initiative and enterprise.
Nonetheless the government can and should so control the administration
of great industries and the establishment of factories that social
justice, equity in profit, public benefits and the government's own
finances are properly cared for.

In sum, Islamic economics gives joint primacy to both individual and
community. It equably balances the interests and rights of these two
elements by guaranteeing a free economy while safeguarding the freedom
of the individual member and the benefit of the whole community
simultaneously by certain reasonable and necessary regulations on
private ownership.

The urge for such ownership it recognises as innate, and therefore
germane to human nature, so that the only limits which may be imposed
upon it are those dictated by the general interests of the whole
society, which of course contains the best interests of each single
member.

Islam regards the instinct to possess as an incentive divinely
implanted to inspire men to hard work for the improvement of the means
of livelihood and of their increased production: yet regulates the
expression of this incentive with conditions that obviate violence,
oppression, exploitation, extortion and other forms of misuse of
freedom.

These conditions safeguard the interests of society and are limits on
individual independence in no way injurious to liberty, since both
communal living and individual freedom must impose those limits on
behaviour which will guarantee the survival of both individual and
community. and must therefore outlaw profiteering, embezzlement,
malversation, hoarding, miserliness, avarice, usury, forcible seizure of
other people's property and all similar criminal and anti-social methods
of amassing capital.

**Islam and Economics (2)**

Economic historians tell us that at its inception the capitalist system
was simple and beneficent : but that the habit of granting loans at
interest step by step grew to its present harmful excess. With this came
the bankrupting of small concerns and their amalgamation into huge
complex companies and financial structures. Islam labels such usury
'"sin", as it does also the crises of boom and slump inseparable from
the system.

Islam has legislated for a payment of "Zakat" (the Poor Rate) of 20% on
capital gains by the rich for the support of the indigent. This helps to
level out differences, to draw economic extremes closer together and to
curb excessive piling up of wealth. Another Islamic regulation with the
same aim and same results is the government's right to tax wealth for
national finances, since Islam holds that God has put His good gifts
into this world for the benefit of all, as may be seen by the forests,
reedbeds, pastures, desert lands, mountain ranges, mines.up

Estates, too, become public either through the intestacy of a deceased
owner or because they are paid as fines in restitution; so that they are
as much the property of all as God meant all things to be. Islam's
testamentary laws also curb undue accumulation of property in the hands
of one family from generation to generation.

The conditions, therefore, by which Islam limits its respect for the
rights of private ownership, are those which are dictated by the need to
assure that the individual's privileges never menace the wellbeing of
the Islamic community. Therefore, in emergency or disorder, the just
Islamic government can employ the legal powers put at its disposal both
to avert dangers which threaten the future and also so to administer
society as to meet the needs of the Muslim masses, any time it sees
fit.

A country's land may not fall into the possession of a small handful of
proprietors. Indigence and malnutrition of the masses may not be
ignored. These points are fixed principles, frankly and firmly,
faithfully and forcefully, propounded by Islam. The Faith condemns the
injurious intrusion of modem capitalist practices into the Muslim world
and bans the greed and avarice which lead to enslavement, war and
imperialism.

In the Qur'an it is written (Sura 59-"Al-Heshr"-"The Gathering of
Troops" verse 7 in part):

"The dispositions we have revealed for the distribution of property .
are ordained that capital may not merely circulate round the group of
capitalists amongst you." In addition to the legal enactments which
ensure the correct use of finances and resources by punishing
transgressions, Islam also brings entirely new motives to bear, as our
Qur'anic quotation hints, by directing men's aspirations towards God.

It therefore streamlines their conduct within the confines of the road
that leads to Him. This road has moral fences on either side over which
the aspirant desires not to stray. The road is paved with philanthropy,
affection, and sentiments of charity and self-sacrifice, which mean that
no Muslim will voluntarily be a party to courses of action which lead to
injustice to others. Thus the individual's conscience refuses to pile up
excessive capital, and the employer refuses to use tyranny or oppression
to compel his workers to produce.

This lofty spiritual challenge, directed towards helping the individual
come to a knowledge of God and so to love of his neighbour, is deeply
planted within the conscience, so that a man finds his pleasures and his
treasures in pleasing his Creator; and these excel all other values for
him.

In truth it is the decline of faith today, and the diminution of belief
in doomsday and judgment, which led to the greed and cupidity and
maleficence and the forms of injustice and oppression which we see
around us. Unless men's relationships are right with God, their
relationships will not be right with one another. A revolution of
conscience produces a revolution in the soul, in society, and in the
world. Such is the lesson of history in practice, as well as the
doctrine of religion.

The same considerations apply to the ideology of Communism, and it will
be readily seen that Islamic lore is superior to both the Western and
Eastern materialist excesses.

Modern philosophers like William James, Harold Laski, John Strachey,
Walter Lippmann, criticise Communists' total abrogation of personal and
social affairs in favour of the state authority, saying that the
individual's personality and initiative are suffocated in such an
ambience. While on the other hand capitalist democracy over-emphasises
individual freedom to the detriment of social progress.

This creates an oligarchy of the rich, making them masters of the means
of production and turning all men into slaves of economics. From
opposing angles they come to a common conclusion that individuals must
impose an inner discipline on themselves if they are to enjoy true
freedom, contradictory as that may seem, and that the welfare of society
depends upon the responsible exercise by its members of that
self-disciplined freedom.

What is their conclusion other than a restatement of the doctrine which
Islam has been preaching for 14 centuries? It is time that the lessons
of history, the conclusions of the philosophers and the doctrines of
religion were made the guidelines for the conduct of men and communities
everywhere.

In AD 1951 the Paris College of Law devoted a week to the study of. the
Islamic "Feqh" (Canon Law). They called in experts from Islamic lands
round the world for elucidation of particular points, e.g.:

1. Islamic Canon Law on property;
2. Conditions for filing deeds of exchange on property to preserve the
welfare of society and the public;
3. Criminal responsibility;
4. The reciprocal influence of Islamic faith and Canon Law on each
other.

The head of the Parisian Lawyers' Society chaired the conference and
summed up at the end thus: "Whatever our earlier ideas about Islamic law
and its rigidity or incompetence in documenting transactions, we have
been compelled to revise them in this conference. Let me sum up the new
insights - new I think to most of us - the conference has given us, in
this week devoted particularly to the Feqh, Islamic Canon Law.

We saw in it a depth of rock-bottom principle and of particularised
care which embraces mankind in its universality and is thus able to give
an answer to all the emergencies and events of this age.

In our final communique we say. 'Islam's Canon Law should be made one
of the formative elements of all new international legislation to meet
present-day conditions, since it possesses a legal treasure of stable
universal value which fits its Feqh, amongst the modern welter of
religious views and pronouncements, to cope with the exigencies imposed
by the new forms of living arising in the modern environment'."

\* The arid sunbaked expanses of the Islamic belt of territory which
stretches from the Mauritanian Atlantic coast nearly 6,000 miles through
the Soviet Muslim Republics of the Western Gobi, can support only a
scant human population, while the paucity of vegetation forces a nomad
migratory way of life upon livestock-owners, if they are to find
pasturage.

Hence our author's list of the publicly owned benefits of God's gifts :
while his omission of sunlight and rain. which are natural in the
thought of Westerners as free for all, are not mentioned because that
belt has always too much sunshine and too little rainfall (Translator's
note).


