Islam and Intellectual Advance
==============================

Most Westerners are ignorant of the debt their civilisation owes to
Islam, even for modern industrial transformation, scientific advance and
philosophical enterprise.

Islam came into the world in the bosom of one of the most backward of
peoples. In a very short time it had raised those tribes to pre-eminence
in every field.

Its greatest miracle was its appearance as a fullgrown adult of the
spirit in so degraded and poverty -stricken an environment.

Its second miracle was the raising of that environment, by sheer force
of inspiration, without any extraneous aids, to an unmatched destiny.
Its third was to create a cultural focus from which strong waves
radiated, stimulating renascence in other peoples of every background
throughout the world.

The changes it wrought compose history's greatest revolution so far, a
revolution in sense and sensibility, in thought and intellect, in
relations of individuals and communities, and indeed in every department
of human life.

By the end of its first millennium Islam stretched from the Atlantic
coast of Africa in the west to the Great Wall of China in the east, from
the Mediterranean to the Sahara in Africa. In Spain its troops took
first Andalusia, then all Spain up to the Pyrenees, and even penetrated
the south of France as far north as Tours. All the "Jezirat-ul' Arab"
was of course Muslim. From Muslim Iran and Afghanistan other troops took
Sind, the Punjab and the Gobi - and this within a few short centuries.

In all its dominions the principles worked out in the Arab homeland
were applied to the new societies under its sway. In particular its
justice, equality and brotherhood, humane fruits of its meticulous care
for the individual and his place in society, which are the
distinguishing marks of Islam, set their stamp on the communities over
this entire vast area.

The first task was the overthrow of tyrannies : the second was the
establishment of sound Islamic rule and respect for human rights : the
third was the illumination of intellect, research and thought: the
fourth was the propagating of the faith by its calm appeal to reason and
logic and by its profundity and breadth of vision: the fifth - and
perhaps the most glorious because the most anonymous-was the infection
of other nations, of all creeds and none, with its own superior moral,
mental and spiritual outlook.

This last achievement not merely raised the general level of peoples of
every religion throughout the world, but also drew many proselytes to
itself from the idolaters of Arabia, the animists of Africa, the Magians
and Zoroastrians of Iran, and the Christians of Egypt and Syria.

Pre-Muslim Arabia had no trace of culture, no science, no erudition, no
economics; for geographical reasons Arabs lived in penury and squalor,
the prey of superstitions, isolated from world currents. Islam changed
all that, and went on to open the hearts and brains of men everywhere to
new possibilities.

In far-off Andalusia a school of scholars, writers, mathematicians,
scientific researchers and philosophers arose, inspired by Islam to
revive the level of thought reached by the Greeks 1500 years earlier,
and to move on up from there to heights never before touched by man.

Modern scholars in every country,. even those whose prejudices would
make them prefer to maintain a critical and hostile attitude to Islam,
more and more draw attention to the speed of the spread of the Muslim
faith, to its beneficent results for mankind's prowess in thought and
study, and the progressiveness of the ideas which it brought to other
stagnant civilisations.

It should be noted by all our "progressives" everywhere, that this
brilliant advance for all humanity was the concomitant of a moral
self-discipline, of an eschewing of the dissipation which follows upon
loosing the reins of passion, and of a deliberate control of the
creative instincts, which channelled them into works of artistic,
intellectual, and social creativity worthy of mature human beings.

This inner discipline, which man needs, promotes the inner freedom he
desires; and it is one cause of Islam' s wide dominion over the minds of
men of the early Middle Ages. For it offered not merely sounder outward
forms of living but reassurance to the inner core of the spirit. It
abolished the wild persecutions brought about by purblind bigotry and by
narrow-minded fanaticism.

It was for this reason that the Sultan Kemal-ul-Mulk, nephew of
Saladdin, talked as man to man, and as scion of the same spirit, to
Francis of Assisi when the Saint crossed the lines from the camp of the
Crusaders under King Louis, whom the Muslims had halted before Damietta.
It was the same universal humanity which caused the vast contrast
between Omar's merciful treatment of the Christians in Jerusalem when he
conquered it,

and the barbarous massacre of Jerusalem's Muslim inhabitants by the
European Crusaders who took it back for a brief period 300 years later.
Islam replaced such savagery with a constitutional rule, a humanely
regulated society, an overarching philosophy embracing all mankind.

In Europe's Dark Ages, while the Church established its power over the
different nationalities, and fettered them in restraining bonds in a
status quo, Islam was building up a many-sided culture which laid the
basis for that flowering of science, knowledge, and artistic and
technological creativity which is called the "Renaissance".

This was while the Church was condemning Galileo for confirming
Copernicus' theory of the orbiting of the earth round the sun, and
forcing him to his famous recantation: "I, Galileo Galilei, in the 70th
year of my age (1633 AD), on my knees before your Reverences (the Pope
and Bishops) with the Holy Scriptures before my eyes, take them in my
hands and kiss them while repenting and denying the foolish claim that
the earth moves, and regard that claim as a hateful heresy," even while
he muttered rebelliously sotto voce "Eppure si muove".

Yet 500 years previously our own great astronomer and mathematician
Omar Khayyam of Nishapur (floruit 2nd half of 11th century AD, when
William the Bastard was conquering England) had provided Iran with the
Jalali Calendar which to this day enables us to start our new year not
merely on the day, but on the exact hour, minute, and second that the
earth terminates one orbit and starts another round the sun at the
vernal equinox!

How few Westerners know this! They think of him as a poet, though he
was an indifferent one, but do not realise that if they had picked up
his wisdom they might have avoided all their Gregorian alterations of
the Julian calendar, and the loss of their "11 days"!

Roger Bacon (1214-1292 AD) the Franciscans' "Doctor mirabilis", was in
the reign of Edward I of England compelled to give up the experimental
research into science to which his lectures in Paris on Aristotle's
works and in particular on the " Liber de Causis" had led him', and was
driven out from Oxford back to Paris to be kept under the Church's
eye-an eye too narrow and bigoted to see the wealth of the scientific
treasures he was offering them.

He was arraigned as a dabbler in devilish and satanic alchemy: and the
mob was incited to yell for this sorcerer's hand to be cut off and this
Muslim' (!) to be exiled."

Nowadays European and American historians and scholars all recognise
and relate the fundamental contributions made by Islam to all modern
advances in science, mathematics, technology, philosophy, in many ways
of which this brief chapter has only been able to touch the fringe.


**Cultural Revolution**

No better evidence of the passion of Islam for the spread of erudition,
from its very inception, can be given than the words of the Prophet
himself who said, after the battle of Badr and the Muslims' victory, to
the huge crowds whom they had taken prisoner, that any of them who
wished to buy their freedom but had no cash for a ransom could employ
their literacy as their resources; and any polytheist who trained ten
Muslims to read and write should win freedom. His pronouncement was put
into practice; and it was thus that a large number of his original
adherents were started on the road of education.

His nephew and successor, Imam Ali, on whom be blessing, declared that
the spreading of science and knowledge and culture and intellectual
ability was one of the merits to be coveted and achieved by every Muslim
government. In the record of his words it is reported that he said: "O
people! I have rights over you and you have rights over me. Your right
over me is to insist that I shall always give you guidance and counsel.
and seek your welfare, and improve the public funds and all your
livelihoods, and help raise you from ignorance and illiteracy to heights
of knowledge, learning, culture, social manners and good conduct."

215 years after the Hejra the Abbasid Caliph Ma'amoun founded a "House
of Wisdom" in Baghdad to be a centre of science, and furnished it with
an astronomical observatory and a public library for which he set aside
200,000 dinars (the equivalent of some 7 million dollars). He gathered
together a large number of learned men who were acquainted with foreign
languages and different disciplines,

like Honain and Bakht-eeshoo' and Ibn Tariq and lbn Muqafa' and Hajaj
bin Matar and Sirgis Ra'asi, and others too numerous to mention, and set
aside a large sum for them, dispatching many of them to all the
different countries of the world to collect books on science, medicine,
philosophy, mathematics, and fine literature, in Hindi, Pahlevi,
Chaldean, Syriac, Greek, Latin and Farsi. It is said that the vast
collections they sent to Baghdad exceeded 100 camel loads!

Europe had not one university or cultural centre to show for itself in
those centuries when Islamic lands had large numbers staffed by experts
and specialists in all branches of knowledge. These Islamic centres were
beginning to radiate waves of brilliant new thinking to the world at the
very moment when the Crusades were launched.

In fact it might be said that it was the new learning fostered by Islam
which itself furnished the Europeans with some of their new thinking
that made possible whatever prowess they achieved in those disastrous
wars and fired the passion of jealousy and cupidity which made the West
wish to seize for itself the treasures which they saw Islam bringing to
the nations under its sway.

Dr. Gustave Le Bon writes on page 329 of volume III of his "History of
Islamic and Arab Civilisation". "In those days when books and libraries
meant nothing to Europeans, many Islamic lands had books and libraries
in plenty. Indeed, in Baghdad's 'House of Wisdom' there were four
million volumes ; and in Cairo's Sultanic Library one million; and in
the library of Syrian Tripoli three million volumes; while in Spain
alone under Muslim rule there was an annual publication of between 70
and 80 thousand volumes."

G. l'Estrange in his "Legacy of Islam" page 230 writes: "The
Mustansariyya University was furnished with equipment and built in a
huge campus with college edifices of such splendour that its peer exists
neither in the Muslim world nor elsewhere. Its four law-colleges, each
with 75 students and a professor who taught the pupils gratis, paid its
professor a monthly salary, while each of the 300 students was given a
gold dinar a month.

A college kitchen provided the daily meals. Ibn-el-Farat says that the
library contained priceless and unique volumes, on many branches of
science, for any student to borrow. Pens and paper were provided for the
notes anyone might wish to take.

The university had hammams (baths) and infirmaries. Its doctors
conducted a daily inspection of the colleges, and wrote prescriptions
for any who were ill. The college stores were able to dispense drugs
prescribed, immediately. All this at the beginning of the 13th century
AD!"

Dr. Max Meyerhof writes: "In Istambul the mosques possess between them
more than 80 libraries, with tens of thousands of books and ancient
manuscripts. In Cairo, Damascus, Mosul, Baghdad, and in cities of Iran
and of India there are other great libraries full of treasures. A proper
catalogue of the precious volumes in all these has not yet been
published complete in print.

Moreover the Escorial library in the Iberian Peninsula contains a huge
section filled with books and manuscripts produced by the Islamic
scholars of the West, which also awaits completion of its
cataloguing."

Dr. Gustave Le Bon writes on pages 55778 of his "Islamic and Arab
Civilisation". "The Muslims pursued the sciences with profound
application. In any town they took, their first act was to build a
mosque and thereafter a college. This led to the production of majestic
institutions of learning in a vast number of cities.

Benjamin Toole (ob. 1173 AD) said that in Alexandria he found more than
20 colleges at work. Baghdad, Cairo, Cordova, and other places all had
great universities with laboratories, observatories, huge libraries and
all the other requirements for tackling intellectual problems. In
Andalusia alone there were 70 public libraries.

The library of Al-Hakem II in Cordova contained 600,000 volumes and it
took 44 volumes to catalogue the library' s contents. When Charles the
Just, four centuries later, founded the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris
he was only able to assemble a total of 900 volumes, and that after
great labours, while one-third of that 900 were books on religion."

The same author on page 562 adds: "The Muslims launched science on the
road of exactitude, experiment and forward-looking discovery by
hypothesis, with a particular enthusiasm, while producing books and
treatises and high schools that spread their intellectual prowess to all
corners of the world. They thereby opened for Europe the road to its
renaissance.

So it is with justification that the title of "Europe's Professor' is
given to the newly-arisen Islamic power, since it was through them that
the treasures of ancient Greek and Roman science were rediscovered and
enhanced and given back to Europe as she began to emerge from the Dark
Ages."

Josef Marc Kapp writes, concerning the first centuries of Islam's
progress in culture, in his book '"Muslim Splendour in Spain" (p.170).
"Even the lowest classes in society were athirst to learn to read; and
humble workers limited their expenditure on food and clothing and spent
their last sou on buying books. One worker collected such a library that
men of learning flocked to him. Freed slaves and the children of slaves
entered the ranks of the learned; and men like V afyat-ul- A'iyan lbn
Khalkan laid the foundations for great progress".

Nehru wrote concerning the benefits conferred on social progress and
the cultural revolution of the Muslims in Andalusia in his book "A
Glimpse at World History" (p.413): "Cordova had over a million
inhabitants, a magnificent public park of about 20 kilometres and
suburbs stretching40 kilometres, with 6,000 palaces, mansions and great
houses, 200,000 smaller houses of beauty, 70,000 stores and small shops,
300 mosques, 700 hammams with hot and cold baths for public use.

There were innumerable libraries of which the most comprehensive and
important was the Royal Library, which contained 400,000 volumes.
Cordova University was famous throughout Europe and in western Asia. At
the same time education was provided for the poor. Indeed one of their
contemporary historians writes that nearly everyone in Spain in those
days could read and write,

while in the rest of Christian Europe, apart from the monks and clearly
persons who were educated through religious houses, no one, including
the highest members of the nobility,

thought it worth his while even to attempt to master basic arts of
reading." To illustrate these claims I append eight extremely brief
chapters, each on a different branch of science or culture; my debt I
gladly acknowledge to Arnold and Guillaume's ."Legacy of Islam" (publ. O
U.P. 1931) to which I refer any reader who wishes to extend his
information.

**Medical Science**

Dr. Meyerhof writes in "The Legacy of Islam" (p.132). "Muslim doctors
laughed at the Crusaders' medical attendants for their clumsy and
elementary efforts. The Europeans had not the advantage of the books of
Avicenna, Jaber, Hassan bin Haytham, Rhazes. However they finally had
them translated into Latin. These translations exist still, without the
translators' names. In the 16th century the books of Averroes (Ibn
Rushd) and Avicenna (Ibn Sina) were put out in Latin translation in
Italy and used as the basis of instruction in the Italian and French
universities."

On page 116 of the same work he writes that after Rhazes' death the
works of Avicenna (AD 980-1037) were taken up. His influence on thought
and philosophy and general science was profound, and his medical works
(based on the works of Galen which he had found in the Samarqand library
in Arabic translation) had a sensational outreach.

Other scientists followed - Abu'l-Qais of Andalusia; lbn-Zahr of
Andalusia; Abbas the Irani ; Ali ibn-Rezvan of Egypt; Ibn Butlan of
Baghdad-Abu Mansur Muwaffaq of Herat. Ibn Wafeed of Spain; Masooya of
Baghdad; Ali Ibn-Esau of Baghdad; Ammar of Mosul; Ibn-Rushd (Averroes)
of Andalusia. whose works translated to Latin were used in European
universities.

Europe knew nothing of the cholera bacterium when Islam entered Spain,
and the people there regarded the disease as a punishment sent from
heaven to exact the penalty of sins : but Muslim physicians had already
proved that even the bubonic plague was a contagious disease and nothing
else.

Dr. Meyerhof writes of Avicenna's book "The Canon" that it is a
masterpiece of medical science which proved its worth by being printed
in a series of 16 editions in the closing years of the 15th century AD,
15 Latin and one Arabic. In the 16th century more than a score of
further editions were published, because of its value as a scientific
work. Its use continued throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, so that
it became the most widely known. of all medical treatises. It is still
consulted in medical schools.

Will Durant writes that Mohammad ibn Zachariah Razi (Rhazes) was one of
Islam's most progressive physicians, author of 200 treatises and books
well worth studying today. in particular his 1. "Smallpox and Measles"
(published in Latin and other European tongues in 40 editions between
1497 and 1866), and 2.

"The Great Encyclopedia" 20 volumes mostly unobtainable nowadays: five
volumes were devoted to optics; translated into Latin AD 1279. printed
in five editions in 1542 alone; known as the most authoritative work on
the eye and its ailments and treatment for centuries; one of the nine
basic works on which Paris University composed its medical course in
1394 AD.

Surgery made similar progress in the hands of Islamic practitioners,
who even used anaesthetics, though these are assumed to be of modern
origin. They employed a henbane base.

Among Rhazes' innovations was the use of cold water to treat persistent
fever, of dry-cupping for apoplexy, of mercury ointment and animal gut
for wound sutures, and many others. Further information on Islamic
medicine can be sought from the many books on the subject. The diagnosis
of tuberculosis from the fingernails, the cure of jaundice,

the use of cold water to prevent hemorrhage, the crushing of stones in
bladder and kidney to facilitate their removal, and surgery for hernia
are among advances too numerous to mention in detail.

The greatest of Islamic surgeons was Abu'l-Qasem of Andalusia,
affectionately called Abu'l-Qays, and sometimes Abu'l-Qasees, floruit
11th century AD inventor of very many surgical instruments and author of
books to describe them and their uses - books translated and printed in
innumerable editions in Latin and used all over Europe, the last such
edition being in 1816.

**Pharmacology**

Gustave le Bon writes : "Besides the use of cold water to treat typhoid
cases - a treatment later abandoned, though Europe is taking this Muslim
invention up again in modern times after a lapse of centuries-Muslims
invented the art of mixing chemical medicaments in pills and solutions,
many of which are in use to this day,

though some of them are claimed as wholly new inventions of our present
century by chemists unaware of their distinguished history. Islam had
dispensaries which filled prescriptions for patients gratis, and in
parts of countries where no hospitals were reachable, physicians paid
regular visits with all the tools of their trade to look after public
health."

Georgi Zeidan writes: "Modern European pharmacologists who have studied
the history of their profession find that Muslim doctors launched many
of the modern beneficial specifics centuries ago, made a science of
pharmacology and compound cures, and set up the first pharmacies on the
modern model.

So that Baghdad alone had 60 chemists' shops dispensing prescriptions
regularly at the charges of the Caliph. Evidence of these facts can be
seen in the names given in Europe to quite a number of medicines and
herbs which betray their Arabic, Indian or Persian origin." Such are
"alcohol, alkali, alkaner, apricot, arsenic," to quote some 'a's
alone.

**Hospitals**

Georgi Zeidan continues: "Within two centuries of the death of the
Prophet, Mecca, Medina and the other great Muslim cities all had
hospitals, while the Abbasid governors and their ministers competed each
for his own region to have the best such institution for the care of the
sick. Baghdad alone had four important hospitals.

By three centuries after the Hejra the governor Adhud-ud-Dowleh Deylamy
had founded the Adhudi Hospital with 24 specialists, each master of his
own particular field, a hospital which soon earned the reputation of
excelling all hospitals throughout Islam, though in the course of time
it too was surpassed.

The order and arrangement of Islamic hospitals was such that no
distinctions of race, religion or occupation were recognised, but cure
was administered with meticulous care to any patient. Separate wards
were allotted for patients of specific diseases. These were teaching
hospitals where the students learned theory and observed practice. In
addition, there were travelling hospitals which carried doctors and
their gear by camel or mule to every district. Sultan Mahmoud the Seljuk
travelled with a hospital which required 40 camels for its transport."

Dr. Gustave le Bon writes: "Muslim hospitals went in for preventive
medicine and the preservation of health as much as if not more than for
the cure of the already diseased. They were well-aired and had plenty of
running water. Muhammad bin Zachariah Razi (Rhazes) was ordered by the
Sultan to seek out the healthiest place in the Baghdad neighbourhood for
the construction of a new hospital.

He visited every section of the town and its environs, and hung up a
piece of meat which he left while he looked into infectious diseases in
the neighbourhood and studied climatic conditions, particularly the
state of the water. He balanced all these various experimental tests and
finally found them all to indicate that the place where the portion of
meat was the last to putrefy and develop infectious bacteria was the
spot on which to build. These hospitals had large common wards and also
private wards for individuals.

Pupils were trained in diagnosis and brought observation and experience
to the perfecting of their studies. There were also special mental
hospitals, and pharmacies which dispensed prescriptions gratis."

Marc Kapp writes: "Cairo had a huge hospital with playing fountains and
flower-decked gardens and 40 large courtyards. Every unfortunate patient
was kindly received, and after his cure sent home with five gold coins.
While Cordova, besides its 600 mosques and 900 public hammams, had 50
hospitals."

**Chemistry**

Jaber ibn Haiyan, disciple of the sixth Imam Ja'afar-i-Sadeq, became
known world-wide as "the Father of Chemistry" and of Arab alchemy. His
influence on Western chemistry and alchemy was profound and long
lasting. Some hundred of his works survive. Of him the late Sayyid
Hebbat-ud-Din Shahristani of Kadhemain,

once Iraq's Minister of Education, writes: "I have seen some 50 ancient
MSS of works of Jaber all dedicated to his master the Imam Ja'afar. More
than 500 of his works have been put into print and are for the most part
to be found among the treasures of the National Libraries of Paris and
Berlin,

while the savants of Europe nickname him affectionately 'Wisdom's
Professor' and attribute to him the discovery of 19 of the elements with
their specific weights, etc. Jaber says all can be traced back to a
simple basic particle composed of a charge of lightning (electricity)
and fire, the atom, or smallest indivisible unit of matter, very close
to modern atomic science."

The blending of colouring matters, dyeing, extraction of minerals and
metals, steelmaking, tanning, were amongst industrial techniques of
which the Muslims were early masters. They produced Nitric Acid,
Sulphuric Acid, Nitro-glycerine Hydrochloric Acid, Potassium, Aqua ,
Nitrate, Sulphuric Chloride,

Potassium Ammonia, Sal Ammoniac, Silver Nitrate, Alcohol, Alkali (both
still known by their Arabic names), Orpiment (yellow tri-sulphide of
arsenic: arsenic is derived from the Persian zar = gold, adjective
zarnee = golden, Arabised with article "al" to "al-zernee" pronounced
"azzernee" and so taken into Greek where it was turned to the
recognisable word "arsenikon" which means "masculine" since the gold
colour was supposed to link it with the sun,

a masculine diety!): and finally - though this does not close the list
we might cite-Borax, also an Arabic word booraq. Further, the arts of
distilling, evaporation, sublimation, and the use of Sodium, Carbon,
Potassium Carbonate, Chloride, and Ammonium were common under the
Abbasid Caliphate.


