Translatorâ€™s Note
=================

History of Caliphs manifests and presents undeniable facts associated
with History of Shiism, in addition to facts every Shiite Muslim and
individuals interested in the course of Shiism find necessary to achieve
an understanding of the History of Islam. To this aim, the book is
mainly written by the author and printed by the publisher, not to
mention the translator, knowing that the task in its entirety is a heavy
one with a substantial responsibility shouldered upon.

Certainly, there exists a mission and function before the Almighty God,
his Messenger (S), his progeny and the Shiite followers after, part of
which is encumbered here in this historically authentic publication.
Motives behind the task are legion and great but whatsoever they may be,
they lead every Ahlul Bayt enthusiast to a long road with unending
eternal truths.

Gratefulness must first be rendered to divine contributions, considering
that the accomplishment of such a heavy task including its translation,
requires plenty of time, energy, patience, knowledge, faith and aim. It
demanded a great deal of energy and time excluding other factors to
bring this to an end, but one thing drove me ahead and that was
assistance granted by my Lord who removed all hindrances and obscurities
and facilitated the task.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that knowledge, competence and
performance are the divine blessings bestowed upon me to fulfill this
mammoth task. It is hoped that through this publication and resource,
the Muslim world and the ensuing generations are able to greatly benefit
and transfer it to others.  
 A. Ebrahimi  
 Translator


