Iman as-Sajjad (a)
==================

'Ali Ibn Husayn Ibn 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib, known as Sajjad, the fourth
Shi'ites Imam, was as maintained in one narration born in 38A.H. and
poisoned by Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik in 94 A.H.[^1]

If the narrated date of birth be true, Imam should have evidently
perceived both Imam 'Ali and Imam Mujtaba as well as Imam Husayn (a) and
realized how Mu'awiya had been exercising pressure on the Shi'ite
Muslims living in Iraq and other lands. In the light of the reports
narrated from the event of Taff (Karbala) a number of writers concluded
that Imam's age must have been less than what reported ands his year of
birth had been 48. Such reports forebode that following Imam Husayn's
martyrdom some were determined to assassinate Iman as-Sajjad (a) also,
but they were impeded due to his immaturity.

Humayd Ibn Muslim, present in Karbala, said, “When Shimr came to kill
Iman as-Sajjad, I dissuaded him saying he was a little boy”.[^2]

Found in another version when 'Ubayd Allah decided to murder Iman
as-Sajjad (a), he commanded to examine the signs of his maturity. After
they attested to it, he issued the verdict of his murder.
Notwithstanding, Imam managed to change his mind by saying him “If you
claim that you are from among the Prophte's kins (as Abu Sufyan's
grandson), you are obliged to let a man accompany these women to
Medina”.[^3]

It is also quoted that Zaynab (a) averted Iman as-Sajjad's murder saying
“kill me first if you want to kill him”.[^4] Enumerating the Umayya
atrocities, Jahiz has alluded to their irreverence about Iman as-Sajjad
(a) by checking the signs of his maturity after the event of
Karbala.[^5] Supposing the narration true[^6], Imam should have been
younger since the maximum age of maturity was fifteen necessitated by
the current situation.

Although such kinds of reports are recorded in various sources, there
exists many a proof of hand which denies them. First, the renowned
historians have recorded Imam's birth in 38, based on which Imam had
been twenty-three years of age in the course of Karbala event. Secondly,
it had by not means been ignored by the expert historians, from the very
beginning they contradicted the common narration the genuineness of
which had been confirmed and come into question however.

Muhammad Ibn 'Umar Waqidi, a distinguished narrator of the Sunnis,
subsequent to a quotation from Imam as-Sadiq (a) as saying ”'Ali Ibn
Husayn (a) departed in 58” added that this utterance vindicated that
while 23 or 24, Iman as-Sajjad (a) had been with his father in Karbala
and those describing him under age are wrong. Imam was seriously ill in
Karbala; therefore, he was not able to participate in the war. How could
he ever be immature whereas his son, Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibn 'Ali
al-Baqir, had met Jabir Ibn 'Abd Allah Ansari and quoted hadiths from
him. Jabir had passed away in 78 A.H.[^7]

Thirdly, the way of Iman as-Sajjad's behaving towards 'Ubayd Allah Ibn
Ziyad and even Yazid Ibn Abi Sufyan corroborates that he had been old
enough and to discuss his maturity or immaturity in Karbala looked in
vain. The scene set for his delivering sermons on the pulpit, in its
turn, stemmed from his age as well. Such a ground could have never been
prepared by Yazid for an individual whose maturity was open to question.

Fourthly, with a glance at numerous narrations about Imam al-Baqir's
birth in historical books, it can be observed that he had been present
in Karbala as a four-year old boy. No one has declared it untrue. If
assenting these reports, there is no alternative but admitting the
common narration with a two-year-or-so discrepancy.

Three versions that certain figures like Biyhaqi have recorded telling
Imam's date of birth (33, 36 and 38) are not unconnected to that
mentioned above. The former was reported by Ibn 'Asakir.[^8] Zuhri also
has confirmed that 'Ali Ibn Husayn was beside his father in Karbala at
the age of twenty-three.[^9]

Another controversial issue the analysis where of would bear fruitful
results is the accurate name and pedigree of Iman as-Sajjad's mother.
Regretfully, after all extensive studies that a number of writers have
done in this respect, it is not still definite.

The notion that his mother had been one of Sassanids princesses was
recently denied lest the anti-Shi'ite Muslims as a consequence judge
that the spread of Shi'ism in Iran had been due to the association of
Imam's lineage with the Sassanids through Yazdgard III's daughter who
has been alleged to be Iman as-Sajjad's mother. Professor Shahidi, in
his foregoing book, has cited and criticized most of these narrations.

Further, there are few quotations suggesting that she be “Umm Walad” (a
bondswoman whose husband was not a bondsman). In spite of all
controversies about the reports or their incompatibility with the
reports of the contests and so forth, the genuine narration is
definitively worthy and is mentioned in the Shi'ites books belonging to
the ancient times such as Waq'a Siffin, Tarikh Ya'qubi and Basa'ir
al-Darajat, all written in the third century.

A hadith also has been quoted from Imam as-Sadiq(a) in Kafi[^10]as
reported by Qaďi Nu'man in the fourth century as well.[^11]
Acknowledging that there does exist skepticism, we shall examine the
illusory link between this issue and the spread of Shi'ism properly
later.[^12]

Consistent with what the Shi'ites hadith-narrators have narrated, Iman
as-Sajjad (a) is the successor of his father, Husayn Ibn 'Ali (a). These
are narrated by Sheikh Kulayni in Kafi and Sheikh Hurr 'Amili in Ithbat
al-Hudat, etc. It can also be detected from the Prophet's hadiths naming
the Shi'ites Imams. Heedless of it, approving Iman as-Sajjad (a) in
Shi'ites community as well as his Imama throughout history is an
original proof itself.

The one and the only mistrust at that critical point prevailing a small
number of Ahl al-Bayt's supporters was Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya's Imamate
which will be discussed in berries later. As specified by Shi'ites
hadiths, the Prophet's sword, armor and so on should be with Imams and
their being with Iman as-Sajjad was validated even in Sunnites
books.[^13]

The time at which Iman as-Sajjad lived was a special period that all
religious values were exposed to the Umayya distortin and Medina
residents, one of the religious centers, were all compelled to swear
allegiance to Yazid like his slaves. Islamic commandments had turned
into a plaything for people such as Ibn Ziyad, Hajjaj and 'Abd al-Malik
Ibn Marwan. In Hajjaj's view, 'Abd al-Malik was superior to Allah's
Messenger (S)!

Unlike Islamic narrations, he extorted “Jizya” (poll-tax) from Muslims
and with a slight calumny he handed over them to the executioners.

In the shadow of such rule it was inevitable that the less people's
religious training was elevated, the more disvalues were revived. Under
those circumstances, Iman as-Sajjad (a) was only a worshipper and his
most socially penetrating impact on establishing a link between people
and Allah was solely through Du'a (prayer).

So influential a characteristic had he that people were enamored of him.
A large number of knowledge-seekers were the narrators of his hadiths
and availed themselves of his overflowing spring emanated from the
Prophet and 'Ali's boundless body of knowledge. Describing Imam's
personality, Muhammad Ibn Sa'd, Sunnites historian and scholar, had
said, **كان علي بن الحسين ثقة مأمونا كثير الحديث عالياً رفيعاً
ورعاً**[^14] ”'Ali Ibn Husayn, trustworthy, said many hadiths. He was
magnanimous, superior and pious.”

In his thesis about the reliability of this unique narration, Shafi'i
had written, **وجدت علي بن** **الحسين - وهو أفقه أهل المدينة - يعوّل علي
خبر الواحد** [^15] ”'Ali Ibn Husayn who was the only outstanding
religious jurisprudent in Medina relied upon this unique narration.”

Although Ibn Shahab Zuhri was from the Umayya kins and regardless of the
dispute existing between the Umayya and Shi'ite Muslims, he was among
the scholars at Iman as-Sajjad's time. Getting zealously the most out of
Imam's presence, he had praised him in many sentences. In a letter
written by Imam, Zuhri was advised to reconsider his position as an
instrument for the Umayya sovereignty.[^16]

Once he was reproached by Iman as-Sajjad for his insultation to 'Ali Ibn
Abi Talib (S) [^17]; however, he was his narrator and his narrations
have been recorded in various books.[^18] Additionally he was enamored
with Iman as-Sajjad's worshipping and purity. As reported, **كان الزهري
إذا ذكر علي بن الحسين يبكي ويقول: زين العابدين**[^19] “As soon as Zuhri
heard the name of 'Ali Ibn Husayn, he wept and said, Zayn al-’Abidin the
worshippers' beauty.”

He was quoted as saying, **علي بن الحسين أعظم الناس منّة عليّ**[^20]
”'Ali Ibn Husayn was the most generous of all people.” **ما رأيت أحداً
أفقه من علي بن الحسين**[^21] “I have seen no one being more erudite than
'Ali Ibn Husayn.”

His commendation for Iman as-Sajjad (a) was to the extent that some of
the Marwanids told him, يا زهري! مافعل نبيّك يعني علي بن الحسين[^22] “O
Zuhri! What has your Prophet ('Ali Ibn Husayn) done for you?”

Abu Hazim, another hadith-narrator, had said, **ما رأيت هاشمياً أفضل من
علي بن الحسين ولا أفقه منه**[^23] “I have seen no one from the
Hashimites whose Knowledge and jurisprudence be higher than those of
'Ali Ibn Husayn.”

It is quoted from Jahiz as stating, “Concerning 'Ali Ibn Husayn's
characteristic, the Shi'ite Muslims, schismatics, the Kharijites were
all unanimous and not a single one of those was sceptical about his
superiority over others”.[^24]

As it will be discerned later, the most decisive reason for Imam's
popularity with the people was his eloquent sentences within the
framework of supplication engrossing people.  
 Sa'id Ibn Musayyib, an eminent hadith-narrator, described Iman
as-Sajjad (a), **ما رأيت أورع من علي بن الحسين** **“**I have never seen
one more pious than 'Ali Ibn Husayn so far.” [^25]

During his lifetime, Imam was called ”'Ali al-Khayr” (example of
goodness), ”'Ali al-Aqharr (outstanding 'Ali) and ”'Ali al-’Abid”
(Worshipper).[^26] At that time Malik Ibn Anas was of this belief that
there existed no one like Iman as-Sajjad in the Prophet's Ahl
al-Bayt.[^27]  
 Ibn Abi al-Hadid had said, **كان علي بن الحسين غاية في العبادة** [^28]
”'Ali Ibn Husayn was the highest in worshipping.”

On account of Imam's too many prostrations as well as of which mark on
his forehead he was called “Dhi l-Thafanat” (the Owner of
Calluses).[^29] Also, Ibn Hibban had described Imam as follows, **وكان
من أفاضل بني هاشم من فقهاء المدينة وعبادهم … يقال علي بن الحسين سيد
العابدين في ذلك الزمان** [^30] “He was one of the most learned of the
Hashimites, one of the jurisprudents and worshippers of Medina … it is
said that he was the master of worshippers at that time.”

Abu Zuhra also said, **فعليّ زين العابدين كان إمام المدينة نبلاً
وعلمًا** [^31] ”'Ali Zayn al-’Abidin was Imam of Medina from the
viewpoint of rank and knowledge.”

Reportedly, when Imam made ablution before prayer, he was noticed with a
pale complexion. After being inquired for the reason, he replied,
**أتدرون بين يدي من أريداً أن أقوم**[^32] “Do you know before whom I am
going to stand?”

It is recounted that at prayer time Imam began shivering while turning
pale. In his answer to the question for its ground, he stated, **اني
أريد الوقوف بين يدي ملك** **عظيم** [^33] “I want to stand in front of
the Great King.”

Heeded to nothing while he was engaged in performing prayers. Once his
child broke his arm. He was crying severely. An orthopedist was called
to set the bone. Later, after finding the child with his arm hung from
his neck, Imam realized the happening after all.[^34]

Zamakhshari has narrated that when 'Ali Ibn Husayn immersed his arm to
make ablution**,** **ثم رفع رأسه الى السماء والقمر والكواكب، ثم جعل
يفكّر في خلقها حتي أصبح وأذن المؤدن ويده في الماء “** He raised his head
staring at the sky, the moon and stars and pondering over as long as
morning appeared and the Mu'adhdhin started calling to prayer while his
arm was still in water.”[^35]

When his servant was questioned about him, she said, “Never ever did I
take him food during the day nor did I prepare bed for him at
nights.”[^36] It is narrated that while he was busy with his prayers, a
snake approached him. The snake crept along through Imam's two feet but
not a slight move or change of complexion was noticed.[^37]

In giving alms and aiding the underprivileged he was proverbial. It was
after his martyrdom when it revealed that a hundred families had been
living on his alms and charity.[^38] Imam al-Baqir (a) has been quoted
as saying that his father, Iman as-Sajjad (a), had been carrying food on
his back at dead of night for the destitute stressing that charity at
night-time mitigates Allah's wrath.[^39] People's affection for him
beggared description. Narratedly, the Qur'an reciters under on
conditions set out to Mecca unless Iman as-Sajjad came and one thousand
people on horseback followed him.[^40]

Sumptuously dressed, he left home but promptly returned and asked to
bring his previous robe pointing out, “As though I am not 'Ali Ibn
Husayn.”[^41] While he was passing the streets in Medina on horseback,
not once did he ever warn “let me through” in view of the fact that he
believed that the route was communal and he was never entitled to
outrun.[^42]

His son, Imam al-Baqir, was cited as saying, “My father sacrificed his
properties entirely for Allah's sake twice”.[^43]

At the moment of breathing his last, Muhammad Ibn Usama Ibn Zayd was
beside him. Muhammad was shedding tears when Imam asked the why.  
 “I am 15000 dhms in debt”, responded Muhammad.  
 “Do not agitate yourself, I pay it”, Imam stated.[^44])  
 All of these mentioned points look a drop from the ocean of Iman
as-Sajjad's virtues.

Iman as-Sajjad (a) and Shi‘ite Muslims
--------------------------------------

On the last day of the event of Karbala the Shi'ites's political and
ideological position was in a tragic situation both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Kufa which had always been considered the center of
Shi'ites tendencies had turned into a base for suppressing them. All the
vertical Shi'ite Muslims of Imam Husayn having been either in Medina, or
in Mecca or those from Kufa who could flourish to join Imam were
martyred in Karbala.

Although there were some living in Kufa, they could in no way express
themselves under the appalling circumstances exercised by Ibn Ziyad.
Karbala was as a matter of fact a debacle for the Shi'ite Muslims
psychologically. What was seemingly publicized was that the Shi'ite
Muslims could no longer raise their heads aloft.

A group of Ahl al-Bayt headed by Imam Husayn had achieved martyrdom and
the only remainng son from Imam Husayn and Fatima's issue was no one but
Iman as-Sajjad who was not famed at that time. Imam Husayn's eldest son,
'Ali Akbar, haf also been martyred in particular. Iman as-Sajjad's life
in Medina and being distant from Iraq did never allow opportunities to
be provided for him to lead the Shi'ite Muslims in Kufa.

In such a status which Shi'ites basis was determinedly targeted. Iman
as-Sajjad had to resume from Zero and absorb people towards Ahl al-Bayt,
Imam could successfully reach many achievements, however.[^45]

The achievements have been verified in history. Iman as-Sajjad could not
only breath new life into the Shi'ite Muslims but also lay the
foundations for both Imam al-Baqir's and Imam as-Sadiq's future
activities. It has been evidenced by history that he, during his
thirty-four-year activity, extricated the Shi'ite Muslims from the
thorniest periods of their lives, the period which had nothing save
Shi'ite Muslims' suppression by the Umayya and Ibn Zubayr.

Hajjaj's twenty-year sovereignty in Iraq together with 'Abd al-Malik Ibn
Marwan's dominance of the thorough Islamic realm had concentrated on
suppressing the Shi'ite Muslims and somewhere else suppressing other
Umayyads opponents including Kharijites and such insurgents as 'Abd
al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ash'ath. Hearing the term of Shi'ites was far
more irritating than the term of disbeliever for Hajjaj.[^46]

During these years, two Shi'ites movements were waged in Iraq either of
which-despite the temporary victory of one-was defeated. Subsequently
the Shi'ite Muslims were with all might put under the threat of murder,
torture and imprisonment by the Umayya. The penitents one of the
movements was that of Tawwabin led by Sulayman Ibn Surad Khuza'i with a
small number of the renowned Shi'ite Muslims of Kufa that we already
discussed. It is alleged that Tawwabin had yielded to 'Ali Ibn Husayn's
Imama.[^47]

We could find no proof for the allegation in primary sources. What is
worth consideration is that as a rule Tawwabin had been set to entrust
Imama to Ahl al-Bayt if succeeded and naturally there existed no one
from Fatima's issue but 'Ali Ibn Husayn (a). Not a report has been
traced in history whether they were precisely of this opinion or not. It
appears that no specific political relation between Iman as-Sajjad and
Tawwabin had been established.

Nevertheless, whatever had given Shi'ites spirit to the movement was the
active participation of the notable Shi'ite Muslims of Kufa as well as
its sentimental nature, that is, repenting for not defending Husayn Ibn
'Ali and getting martyred as the only way for the acceptance of their
repentance. Nowhere of the movement was the name of Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiyya mentioned.

Their poletical blunder was assessing not the status quo, abandoning
Kufa and leaving himself to the accidents. Believing that the leader of
the movement was incapable of estimating military and political issues,
not only Mukhtar did by no means collaborate but he also hindered a
number of Shi'ite Muslims to back the movement.

Iman as-Sajjad's association with the second movement, namely Mukhtar's
movement was as vague as the former one. Such a connection bore numerous
troubles both form the viewpoints of politics and ideology. It was said
that after attaining support from the Shi'ite Muslims in Kufa, Mukhtar
pleaded to 'Ali Ibn Husayn (a) for cooperation but Imam showed no
delight.[^48]

By taking Imam's abiding policy into account, the standing adopted
looked reasonable. Later than the event in Karbala, Imam had well
perceived that reviving such a dead community through securing the
leadership was beyond the bounds of practicability.

Besides, implicating in another political movement with the presence of
external powers might have preceded many a peril which was not worth
risking at all. By this reason, the entity of Imam's movement throughout
his Imamate elucidated that his was never merely a political one though
in many cases secession from politics exactly denoted a certain
political activity.

And the ideological aspect of the adventure commenced when Mukhtar asked
for Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya's assistance and advocacy. He consented but
not officially. From then on, it was rumored that Ibn Hanafiyya's
Imamate was accepted amongst the Iraqi Shi'ite Muslims. Although this
notion was not corroborated, later when a sect named the Kissanids was
founded, the story began from the time of Mukhtar.

With the infiltration of the Exaggerators' theories into the Shi'ites
nation in Kufa, Mukhtar also was subject to accusation later. It was
rumored that Mukhtar had played an influential role in emerging the
Exaggerators.

Based on noncount justifications, referring to which does not seem
convenient here and have been discussed elsewhere, all of these issues
even that a sect named the Kissanids believed in Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiyya's Imamate and Mahdavitism are open to doubt.

Notwithstanding, regarding Iman as-Sajjad's position-taking against the
Exaggerators there is evidence available. It was the predominant
deviation among Iraqi Shi'ite Muslims which compelled Imam to refrain
from taking a transparent stance and setting up a direct link with them.

Iman as-Sajjad (a) addressed a group of Iraqis saying, **أحبونا حبّ
الاسلام ولا ترفعونا فوق حدِّنا** [^49] “Adore us for the sake of Islam
but never promote us higher than we deserve.”

Somewhere else, **أحبونا حبَّ الإسلام ولا تحبُّونا حبَّ الأصنام**[^50]
**“**Adore us for the sake of Islam but never idolatize us.”

Abu Khalid Kabuli had recounted that he had heard Iman as-Sajjad (a)
saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن قوماً من شيعتنا سيُحبّونا حتى يقولوا فينا ما قالت اليهود في عزير
وما قالتِ النصاري في عيسى بن مريم، فلا هم منّا ولا نحن منهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“ “Some of our Shi'ite Muslims go to extremes in adoring us to the
extent that they repeat what the Jews and the Christians had declared
about Ezra and Jesus Christ saying, “Neither are we from them nor are
they from us” [^51]

In accordance with Shi'ites sources, Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya was on no
accounts a misled one and had assented Iman as-Sajjad's Imama. In order
as a consequence to verify that Ibn Hanafiyya had indeed introduced
himself as an Imam a few questions would be posed and solutions would be
presumed that he had taken this action with the aid of Imam to keep Imam
away although no historical proof supports such an assumption.

What merits to be borne in mind is that it beggars belief that Iman
as-Sajjad (a) had uttered such words about Mukhtar, **يكذب على الله وعلى
رسوله** [^52] “He attributes false things to Allah and the Prophet.”

Especially, when Mukhtar had sent 'Ubayd Allah's head to him, he had
averred, **جزى الله المختار خيراً**[^53] “May Allah award Mukhtar the
best!” Narratedly at that time, **لم يبق من بني ‌هاشم أحد الا قام بخطبة
في‌الثناء على المختار وجميل القول فيه**[^54] “There was no one from the
Hashimites who did not rise and admire Mukhtar.” Quoted from Imam
al-Baqir was, **لا تسبّوا المختار فأنه قتل قتلتنا وطلب ثأرنا وزوج
أراملنا وقسم فينا المال على العسرة**[^55]

“Insult not Mukhtar for he has killed our assassins, has had our orphans
marry and has allotted properties to us when in trouble.”  
 And in an answer to the question of Mukhtar's son, he described his
position about Mukhtar as positive.[^56]

As discussed before, Mukhtar's movement did not politically last long
and was suppressed by Ibn Zubayr followers in 67 AH. However, it had an
impact on stimulating and perpetuating Shi'ites emotions in Kufa and on
motivating Mawali to take part in political activities.

Due to the aforesaid deviation and even unlike Ibn Hanafiyya's possible
wish, some were ambivalent whom to choose as an Imam. Qasim Ibn 'Awf,
one of Iman as-Sajjad's disciples, who had initially been hesitant
whether to choose 'Ali Ibn Husayn or Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya ultimately
joined Iman as-Sajjad as confessed by himeslf.[^57]

According to Kashshi, Abu Hamza Thumali and Farat Ibn Ahnaf had been
among his disciples.[^58]

Although Sa'id Ibn Musayyib was controversial to be among them, he had
apparently been ruling in accordance with the Sunnism. In Rijal, Kashshi
has treated Sa'id's position as disentanglement from Hajjaj.[^59] His
veneration for Imam, at all events, is without a shadow of a doubt and
availing himself of Imam's presence scientifically and ethically is
confirmed. But he did not attend Imam's funeral ceremony and as a result
was objected to.[^60]

Aside from these individuals, there had been a number deemed steadfast
Shi'ite Muslims on the report of Shi'ites sources. At the starting-point
there had been only few with Imam such as Sa'id Ibn Jubayr, Sa'id Ibn
Musayyib, Muhammad Ibn Jubayr Ibn Mut'im, Yahya Ibn Umm al-Tawil and Abu
Khalid al-Kabuli.[^61] The number of Iman as-Sajjad's disciples was said
173 by Sheikh al-Ta'ifa.[^62]

Anyhow Imam could vastly contribute to Shi'ism eternity and its
dissemination. His style in Islamic jurisprudence domain was narrating
the Holy Prophet's hadiths through 'Ali (a). Only were these hadiths
authentic in Shi'ite Muslims' sight. By the same token, Shi'ites managed
to take his first strides in Islamic jurisprudence averse to the
existing deviations; nontheless, the main phase thereof procrastinated.

While calling for prayer (Adhan), Iman as-Sajjad inserted the sentence
of, **حيّ علي خيرالعمل** “Hasten to practice good deeds.”

When objections raised, he stated that Adhan had been that form since
the inception.[^63] Seceding from Iraqi deviations culminated in
maintaining the doctrinal bases of Shi'ism against deviations.

In spite of Imam's serious endeavor, which, of course, led to the
perpetual Shi'ism, Medina could never ever be disposed to Shi'ites
growth in the light of its deviations created from the Early Islamic Era
as well as its incitement against Shites. Iman as-Sajjad himself had
asserted that their vertical devotees both in Mecca and Medina had not
exceeded twenty people.[^64] Many lived in Iraq who were their
enthusiasts, however.

Imam’s Encounter with the Umayyads
----------------------------------

Imam's ever-first encounter with the Umayya rulers after Karbala event
was with 'Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad. Ibn Ziyad asked his name.  
 Imam replied, “This is 'Ali”.

“Did Allah kill not 'Ali Ibn Husayn?” Ibn Ziyad asked surprisingly.  
 “I had a brother whom people killed”, responded Imam.  
 “But Allah did kill him”, Ibn Ziyad added.  
 Iman as-Sajjad stated, **اللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنْفُسَ حِينَ
مَوْتِهَا.**  
 Concluding to murder Imam, Ibn Ziyad was heroicly stopped by Zaynab
(a).[^65]

Yazid also met him in Damascus[^66] and reproached him. In an excellent
sermon, Imam introduced himself and his family addressing the audience
in the mosque. People who had for a long time been ignorantly influenced
by the Umayya propagation and were not in the slightest acquainted with
the Prophet's household became awakened somewhat by his sermon.

Yazid had to interrupt Imam, demagogically imputed the wickedness to Ibn
Ziyad and respectfully saw off 'Ali Ibn Husayn along with other captives
of Karbala to Medina. Among the noteworthy points in Imam's sermon was
that he introduced his father, his family and himself as the Prophet's
descendants whereas both Mu'awiya and the Umayya have been constantly
striving to inroduce them 'Ali's descendants not the Holy Prophet's.

A while after the event in Karbala, revolting against the Umayya, the
people of Medina organized the riot of Harra, moreover. The leadership
of the riot lay with 'Abd Allah Ibn Hanzala, Aliyas Ghasil al-Mala'ika
whose character was anti-Umayyads and anti-Yazid and whose life style
was non-Islamic.

Iman as-Sajjad's as well as others' position from the Hashimites was not
positive; consequently, they abandoned the town with a number of their
families. In Imam's view, the aforementioned movement had not merely a
Shi'ites nature but was absolutely in line with Ibn Zubayr's intent,
someone who had been among those occasioning the war of Jamal. Since
Imam's any standing as a Shi'ites leader could precede the riskiest
consequence for the Shi'ite Muslims, he did not involve himself.

Besides, when people had expelled the Umayyads, Imam's manliness
entailed to give asylum to Marwan Ibn Hakam's wife at his request.
Tabari has written that Imam's old friendship with Marwan accounted for
Imam's action.[^67]

It is in actual fact a barefaced lie. At that age and under those
circumstances that his father and forefather had been in conflict with
this reign, Imam's intimacy with Marwan as the most wretched element
among the Umayyads was out of the question in a real sense of word.
Marwan was the one who from the outset of securing allegiance in Medina
had coerced the governor to either force Imam Husayn to swear allegiance
or take his life. Imam's reaction was a sportsmanlike answer to the
Umayyads' foulness so that history could compare the conducts.

After Muslim Ibn 'Uqba, Aliyas Musraf suppressed the movement of Medina
people and committed the greatest atrocities during the Umayya age, he
acted moderately towards 'Ali Ibn Husayn due to his absence in the
movement. Muslim secured allegiance from people in a way that they know
themselves Yazid's slaves; not withstanding, securing allegiance from
'Ali Ibn Husayn was quite normal.[^68] Prior to Imam's entry, Muslim was
cursing Imam and his forebear. But on Imam's arrival, he behaved calmly.

When Muslim was asked for his change subsequent to Imam's departure, he
responded**,** **ما كان ذلك لرأي منّي لقد ملیء قلبي منه رعباَ** [^69]
“My second conduct was not my wish. Fear had fully permeated into my
heart.”

Heedless of the fact that Imam's position-taking ought to be interpreted
by considering the political state, military oppositions and the
establishment of organizations, it had been the current situation which
necessitated any Imam's responsibility[^70] at any juncture. Every
politically rational man is cognizant that the approaches adopted vary
in various situations. As examined history evidences how Iman as-Sajjad
(a) reserved and proliferated Shi'ism for the future activites.

As far as the relations between the 'Alawites and the Umayya were
concerned, Imam was vehemently suspected by them and as Imam's slight
movement could bare negative outcomes, he naturally believed that
action-taking was not worth. One of the most significant
religious-political principles by using which Imam spent his political
life was Taqiyya (precautionary dissimulation).

It shielded the Shi'ite Muslims' lives throughout history as pointed out
by Imam over and over. Yet, in order to undermine the Shi'ite Muslims, a
group, not in need of manipulating it, denied it strongly although it
had been straightforwardly stipulated in Holy Qur'an. The Sunnis on
account of being in power required not Taqiyya and only for accusing the
Shi'ite Muslims did they delete it from among the incontrovertible
Islamic and Fiqhi commandments.

In a hadith, Iman as-Sajjad has stated that anyone not enjoining good
and forbidding evil is like one who has set the divine Book aside and
turned his back on it unless he follows Taqiyya. He was asked what
Taqiyya was. He answered, **يخاف جباراَ عنيداَ يخاف أن يفرط عليه أو أن
يطغى**[^71] “To fear from a cruel ruler to kill him or oppress him.”

Believing in Taqiyya as a Qur'anic principle was in terms of Islamic
jurisprudence accentuated more by Imams who had to practice it. Iman
as-Sajjad who lived an exceedingly difficult life had no other
alternative but Taqiyya. It was fundamentally Taqiyya which safeguarded
Shi'ism at that time, what of which Kharijites, the extremists, did not
avail themselves and as a result were struck hard. Narratedly, meeting
Imam, someone asked him how he spent his life.

Imam responded, “We pass the time among our people as Israelites were
among the Pharaoh's people. They kill our children and take our women as
bondwomen. People get nearer to our foes by insulting our lord. If
Quraysh prides itself on having Muhammad before other Arabs and if Arabs
consider themselves superior to non-Arabs for having Muhammad (S) and
they have approved such a virtue for Arabs and Quraysh, we, Ahl al-Bayt,
should be proud of ourselves before Quraysh because Muhammad has been
from among us. Yet, they usurped our rights and this is the way our time
goes by”.

The narrator added that Imam was speaking in a way that only those
nearby be able to hear him.

Overall, Imam's lenience with the Umayya provided a free life in Medina
for Imam and less was he center of attention on the part of the
opponents. Furthermore it manifested Imam's scientific dimention in
reserving the religion. The great admiration made by a Sunnites scholar
about him is a proof. Were Imam involved in politics, no one could
describe this aspect of Imam's character.

Iman as-Sajjad’s profiting from Du‘a (Prayer)
---------------------------------------------

When the community was deviated, the spirit of comfort-loving and
worldliness prevailed, it was confined by political, ethical and social
corruption and when there was no opening to breathe politically, Iman
as-Sajjad could partially express his beliefs throgh prayer and
reactivate the nation to pay heed to insight and worship. Although,
seemingly, the main aim within the prayers had been insight and worship,
in regard with the phrases it can be claimed that people could have
perceived the political concepts between the lines.

Al-Sahifa as-Sajjadiyya including more than fifty prayers is only a part
of Iman as-Sajjad's compiled prayers. The number of the collections
inclusive of his prayers is six with the above mentioned one. The
prayers inside some of them exceed 180.[^72] These prayers had been used
by the Sunnis in addition to the Shi'ite Muslims,[^73] so it can be
inferred how influential they had been at that time. Among all Shi'ites
Imams, Iman as-Sajjad (a) is more famous for his prayers.

Within the prayers there is a phrase repeatedly used and rarely can a
prayer be found excluding it. It is, **صلوات بر محمد وآل محمد “** Peace
be to Muhammad and his progeny.”

Basically it is an indication of genuine prayers. Once naming a baby
'Ali was decried and the Umayya could execute nothing without insulting
'Ali (a),[^74] observing such a phrase appeared virtuous.

Such phrases as, **محمد وآله الطيبين الطاهرين الاخيار الانجبين** [^75]
“Muhammad and his decent, clean, chosen and honored descendants.”

Imam's insistence on uniting Muhammad and his descendants was what Allah
had emphasized and it is of utmost importance for expressing Shi'ites
beliefs. Previous to narrating contents of some of his prayers it looks
proper to refer to a hadith on consolidating the link between Muhammad
and his Household.

Iman as-Sajjad has stated, “It is incumbent upon a learned to say
Salawat to Allah's Prophet. Allah has joined us to him as well. If
anyone say Salawat for the Prophet but excludes us, not only does he
make it imperfect but also he disobeys Allah.[^76]” The union of
Muhammad and his Household can substantially affect people's stance on
the Holy Prophet's household.

The issue of Imamate is one of the central religious-political contents
of as-Sahifa. The concept of Imama as a Shi'ites concept depicts the
divine aspects of infallibility along with profiting from the prophets'
body of knowledge in general and that of the holy Prophet in particular
in addition to its superiority over caliphate and leadership.We show
some examples.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربّ صلّ على أطائب اهل بيته الذين اخترتهم لأمرك وجعلتم خزنة علمك وحفظة
دينك وخلفائك في أرضك وحججك على عبادك وطهرّتّهم من الرجس والدّنس
تطهيراً بارادتك وجعلتهم الوسيلة اليك والمسلك الى جنّتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Lord! Bless those pure from Muhammad's progeny, those whom Thou have
chosen for ruling and those whom Thou have designated as Thy
depositaries of science and guards of Thy religion. Thou created tem as
Thy caliphs and proof for Thy servants on the earth. Thou not only
cleansed them from any impurity of Thy own volition, but also determined
them as a vehicle for reaching Thee and the abiding Heaven.” [^77] “

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهم انّ هذا المقام لخلفائك وأصفيائك وموضع أمنائك في الدّرجة الّتي
اختصصتهم بها قد ابتزوها… حتى عاد صفوتك وخلفائك مغلوبين، مقهورين
مبتزّين … أللهم العن أعدائهم من الاوّلين والاخرين ومن رضي بفعالهم
وأشياعهم وأتباعهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah! Caliphate does solely belong to Thy caliphs, the chosen from
creatures. The position Thou had assigned for Thy Trustee in sublime
ranks was usurped by others… until Thy caliphs and chosen ones were
vanquished by the oppressors and their rights were disregarded. O my
Lord! Thy malediction be upon their enemies from the beginning to the
end, upon those gratified with this oppression and upon their
followers.” [^78]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصلّ على خيرتك اللّهم من خلقك محمّد وعترته الصّفوةّ من بريّتك
الطّاهرين واجعلنا لهم سامعين ومطيعين كما أمرت اللهّم اجعلنی من أهل
التّوحيد والايمان بك والتّصديق برسولک والائمة الّذين حتمت طاعتهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Lord! Bless the best creature of all, Muhammad, and his chosen
kinfolks. Make us obedient to them as Thou have commanded. O Lord! Make
me one of the believers of the Prophet and Imams, those whose obedience
Thou have ordered.” [^79]

> اللّهم انّك ايّدت دينك في كلّ أوان بامام أقمته علماَ لعبادك ومناراً في
> بلادك بعد ان وصلت حبله بحبلك وجعلته الذّريعة الي رضوانك وافترضت طاعته
> وحذرت معصيته وأمرت بامتثال أوامره والانتهاء الي نهيه وأن لا يتقدّمه
> متقدّم ولا يتأخّر عنه متأخّر فهو عصمة للائذين وكهف المؤمنين وعروة
> المتمسكين وبهاء ‌العالمين ….2410 وأقم به كتابك وحدودك وشرائعك وسنن
> رسولك صلواتك اللّه عليه واله وأحي به ما أماته الظّالمون من معالم دينك
> وأجل به صداء الجور عن طريقتك وابن به الضّراء من سبيلك وأزل به
> النّاکبين عن صراطك وأمحق به بغاة قصدك عوجاَ … واجعلنا له سامعين
> مطيعين.2411

“O Lord! At any time Thou have appointed an Imam as a flag and a
guidance lamp for Thy servants on the earth. Through establishing a
direct link between Thyself and him, choosing him a way far drawing Thy
gratification, enjoining all to obey his commands and prohibiting all
from disobeying him, Thou did approve Thy religion. He is an Imam over
whom no one has priority and from whom no one has the right to separate.

An Imam for whom Thou have arranged a secure place for approaching Thee
is he. Thou have bestowed firm faith on him who resorts Thy leading and
favor and bestowed a highest honor in the world as he is a refuge for
the believers… O Lord! Safeguard Thy book, Islamic limits, religious
laws and Thy Prophet's Sunna by him, revive any of Thy religious tenets
which the oppressor dissolved by him and obliterate any corruption or
deviation in Thy straight path by him. Obviate the dangers in Thy way by
him, make us obedient to him and successful in satisfying him.”

It can be evidently inferred from the sentences above that Imam's
determination had been disseminating Shi'ites beliefs through the
concept of Imama as the most crucial in Shi'ism. Similar contents
admiring Ahl al-Bayt from Nahj al-Balagha had been presented in the
discussion about Imam 'Ali's caliphate.

As referred to the domain of the prayers is incredredibly vast and
contains other aims such as devotional, intellectual and political.
Brining an intellectual example would be appropriate here. Irbili
recounted that while Iman as-Sajjad was in the Prophet's mosque in
Medina he noticed that a group having a doctrinal discussion likened
Allah to his creature. Imam who was incensed, stood up, went to the
Prophet's grave and began praying from which the content of negating
comparison could be deduced. Shedding tears he was praying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الهي قد بدت قدرتك ولم تبد هيئتك فجهلوك وقدّروك بالتقدير على غير ما انت
به فشبّهوك وأنا بريء يا الهي من الذّين بالتّشبيه طلبوك …
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O my Allah! Thy might is revealed. They do not appreciate Thee. They
ordain despite what Thou have foreordained. They compare Thee with
mankind while I loathe it. O my Allah! Who are those who seek Thee with
comparison?” [^80]

One of the Imam's actions at different times was to make people
acquainted with the Prophet's Household about whom all the rights and
virtues were specified in Qur'an and Sunna. In Damascus the Umayya
introduced themselves the Holy Prophet's Household as in Hijaz some of
the Prophet's wives did so.

Since his wives died one after another and left no child, the existence
of Ahl al-Bayt was rendered null and void. And now no one but Fatima's
offspring was remained. Making them known was requisite especially in as
much as the incidents after the Prophet's departure had them keep silent
in political scenes. Iman as-Sajjad introduced the household when he was
taken to Damascus and it was in his famous sermon as confirmed by a
number of historical records.

In this regard, we present a narration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أتي بحرم رسول اللّه صلى الله عليه وآله حتي دخلوا مدينة دمشق من باب
يقال له «توماء»، ثم أتي بهم حتى وقفوا علي درج باب المسجد حيث يقام
السبي واذا الشيخ قد أقبل حتى دنا منهم وقال, الحمد لله الذي قتلكم
وأهلككم وأراح الرجال من سطوتكم وأمكن أميرالمؤمنين منكم. فقال له علي بن
الحسين, يا شيخ! هل قرأت القرآن؟ قال: نعم قد قرأته، قال: فعرفت هذه
الاية: قل لاأسئلكم اجراً الا المودّة في القربى؟ قال الشيخ: نعم. فقال
علي بن الحسين: فنحن القربى يا شيخ، قال: هل قرأت في سورة بني اسرائيل:
وآت ذا القربي حقه؟ قال الشيخ: قد قرأت ذلك،‌ فقال علي: نحن القربى يا
شيخ. وهل قرأت هذه الاية «واعلموا أنما غنمتم من شيء فان لله خمسه
وللرسول ولذي القربى، قال الشيخ: قد قرأت ذلك، فقال علي: فنحن ذو القربى
يا شيخ. ولكن هل قرأت هذه الايه:‌ انما يريد الله ليذهب عنكم الرجس أهل
البيت ويطهركم تطهيراً،‌ قال الشيخ: قد قرأت ذلك. قال علي: فنحن اهل
البيت الذي خصنا بآية الطهارة. فبقي الشيخ ساعة ساكتاً نادماً علي ما
تكلّمه؛ ثم رفع رأسه الي السماء وقال: اللهم اني تائب اليك في ما تكلمته
ومن بعض هولاء القوم،‌ اللهم اني أبرء اليك من عدّو محمد وآل محمد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet's Household were brought. [^81]They were entered Damascus
through a door called “Tuma''” They stood by the mosque door with other
captives.  
 An old man approached them and said, “I offer my appreciation to Allah
who killed you and let people relieve and Amir al-Mu'minin Yazid
overcame you”.  
 'Ali Ibn Husayn asked him, “Man, have you ever recited Qur'an?” “Sure,
I have” the old man answered.

“Have you ever seen the verse of Say, I do not ask of you any reward for
it (my mission) but love for my near relatives”, Imam asked.  
 “Yes, I have”, said he.

'Ali Ibn Husayn added, “Those near relatives are we, man”. Imam asked
again. “How about the verse in Bani-Isra'il Sura “Give the rights of the
relatives?”  
 “Yes”, he answered.

“We are those relatives”, stated Imam. “Have you ever read the verse of
'And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah and
for the Apostle and for the near of the kin' ”, asked 'Ali Ibn Husayn.  
 The man answered, “Yes”.

“How about this verse, man? Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O people of the House! And to purify you a
(thorough) purifying”, asked Imam.  
 “Yes, I have read it”, he said.

“These people of the house are we”. 'Ali Ibn Husayn added.  
 The man ashamed of whatever he had produced kept silent for a while.
Then he rose his head up to the sky and said, “O My Allah! I repent of
what I have said and of the grudge I have born them. I loathe the
enemies of Muhammad and his progeny”.

Iman as-Sajjad's lamentation as well as his real worship within the
frame of these prayers was an instructive lesson for the present
corrupted community wherein Islam was disdained by the Umayya. His
lamentation was also for the harrowing event of Karbala.

Imam had stated, “Although doubtful about his death, Jacob wept for
Joseph so hard that his eyes turned blind. How can I not help weeping
while sixteen people from the Prophet's Household were martyred in front
of my very eyes.”[^82] His lamentation did automatically make people
conscious of the event in Karbala though he himself recounted the
details of the event, moreover.[^83]

Iman as-Sajjad (a) and Slaves
-----------------------------

One of Imam's activities, both religious and political, was his heed to
a class who had been under socially vehement pressure from the caliph
II's tenure onward particularly during the Umayyads' term and had been
the most underprivileged group in the Islamic community in early
centuries. The bondsmen and bondswomen whether Iranian, Roman, Egyptian
or Sudanese suffering the most laborious tasks were humiliated by their
masters.

Like Amir al-Mu'minin (a), Iman as-Sajjad (a) absorbed a number of Iraqi
Mawali (freed slaves) through his Islamic conduct and attempted to
upgrade the social reputation of this class. Once Imam freed a
bondswoman and married her, in order to censure her, 'Abd al-Malik Ibn
Marwan reproached him for this marriage, Imam referred to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah's Messenger is a good model for you.”

Concerning the Prophet's approach about Safiyya. He also pointed out the
marriage of the Prophet's cousin with Zayd Ibn Haritha.[^84]
Accordingly, he breathed new life into Prophet's dead tradition afresh.

Sayyid al-Ahl has written that although Imam never needed slaves, he
purchased them regularly only for the purpose of their releasing.
Reportedly, some one hundred thousand slaves were freed by Imam.
Discerning Imam's intention, the slaves exposed themselves to him to be
purchased. Since Iman as-Sajjad had been purchasing them day in and day
out, a large group was formed in Medina like an army including male and
female slaves being all Imam's Mawali.[^85]

Narrated by 'Allama Amini, at the end of each fasting month of Ramaďan,
Iman as-Sajjad freed twenty slaves. He has added that never did he keep
a slave more than a year and even after setting free he granted some
properties to them.[^86]

During that period they personally got well acquainted with Iman
as-Sajjad's extensive knowledge, ethics and piety and their affection
for him was as a consequence natural. Some time a bondwoman with a bowl
of water was pouring water on Imam's hands.

All of a sudden it dropped down, knocked Imam on the face and injured
him. As soon as Imam took a look at her, she said, **والكاظمين الغيط** “
Those restraining their anger.” Imam said, “I restrained my anger”.
**والعافين عن الناس** “ Those forgiving people.”,added she. “I forgave
you”, Imam stated. **والله يحب المحسنين**[^87] “Allah loves the
benevolent,” she recited. Imam said, “For Allah's sake, I released
you”.[^88]

On stepping out of the mosque, Iman as-Sajjad (a) was insulted by
someone. When Imam's Mawali invaded him, Imam hindered them and stated,
“What has remained unrevealed about us is more than what he expresses”.
The man became ashamed after all and was pardoned by Imam
generously.[^89]

Now once again Imam's magnanimity is mentioned. It is worth recounting a
story.

'Abd Allah Ibn Muhammad Ibn 'Umar had narrated, “Hisham Ibn Isma'il, an
Umayya governor in Medina had ignored the neighbors' rights and had
begun annoying us specifically 'Ali Ibn Husayn. When he was deposed,
Walid commanded to expose him to the public so that any one willing
could take revenge on him.

Hisham confessed that he scared no one that much but 'Ali Ibn Husayn.
While being hung from the Marwan bulwark, he requested his friends not
to utter an insulting word when Iman as-Sajjad passed by. As soon as
noticing Imam going, Hisham yelled out, **الله اعلم حيث يجعل رسالته “**
“Allah truly knows with whom to lay His mission.” [^90]

The Hashimites after the Event of Karbala’
------------------------------------------

Aside from Iman as-Sajjad there existed two 'Abbasids and 'Alawites
figures who cooperated in political and collective activities. One was
Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya, 'Ali's son, and the other was 'Abd Allah Ibn
'Abd al-Muttalib whose fame was thanks to the narrations quoted from the
Prophet notably dealing with interpretation.[^91]

Not Fatima's son however, he was deemed high-ranking by the Shi'ite
Muslims due to his elderliness among the other 'Alawites as the leader
of political Shi'ite Muslims, propounding Ahl al-Bayt's leadership
politically.

Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya had been eminent and focus of Imam 'Ali's
attention in the course of wars at that Imam's term. The flag of Imam's
army in the war of Jamal was held aloft by Ibn Hanafiyya.[^92] His own
analysis was that both Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn were Imam 'Ali's eyes
and he was his hand and it was hand which ought to protect the
eyes.[^93]

Indicating the positions of these three brothers, Imam 'Ali had state,
**أين النجم من** **الشمس والقمر**[^94] “Where is the star of the sun and
the moon.”

Imam enlightened them why the flag was given to Ibn Hanafiyya. It had
been for the protection of the Prophet's descendants.[^95] That he had
not been from the Fatimids was an excuse for Ibn Zubayr to humiliate him
later[^96] although never did it affect the Shi'ite Muslims.

No one doubts that he had been one of the most steadfast Shi'ite Muslims
as his actions had verified the fact; nevertheless, no evidence could
ever be located from the historical sources about his claim for
leadership, though others might take advantage of him, even found a sect
and believe his Mahdavitism. Many individuals including a few Shi'ites
Imams had the same affliction too. Ibn Hanafiyya was the narrator of the
hadiths which could lead people more towards the Holy Prophet's
Household.

He has been quoted as saying, من أحبنا لله نفعه الله بحبنا ولو كان
اسيراً بالدّيلم[^97] “Any one who loves us, he will be benefited by
Allah even if he is imprisoned in Diylam.”

The devotees of the Household were many whereas the loyal to the verse
of, قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي. “Say, If you
love Allah, then follow me” were few.

Owing to this fact Iman as-Sajjad had stated, ما بمكة والمدينة عشرون
رجلا يحبنا “ “Our Faithful Shi'ite Muslims do not exceed twenty both in
Mecca and Medina.”[^98]

The number of the political enthusiasts was great, however.

When addressing him, Ibn Hanafiyya's followers usually said**,** **يابن
خيرالاخيار وابن ابرّ الابرار ما خلا النبيين والمرسلين** [^99] “O son of
the best of the best, son of the benevolent of the benevolent after the
prophets and the Apostles.”

More threatening of Ibn Zubayr's two adversaries namely, Muhammad Ibn
Hanafiyya and Mukhtar was Ibn Hanafiyya. The whys and the wherefores
were one, Mukhtar had risen up in Kufa under his banner and the other
was that the leadership of some part f Shi'ites movement apparently had
been undertaken by him. Ibn Zubayr who had determinedly bent his efforts
to smear their reputation banned reciting blessing to the Holy Prophet
(S) for 40 weeks.

Being asked for its reason, he said, **ان له أهيل سوء فان ذكر مدّوا
أعناقهم لذكره** [^100] “His family is small. Whenever he is
commemorated, all members of this family will say we are in this
family.”

He had made more offensive remarks in this respect as well[^101] like,
**بيت سوء لا أول لهم ولا أخر “** The sinister house for which there is
neither beginning nor end.”

It aroused Ibn 'Abbas's anger acutely banished by Ibn Zubayr to
Ta'if.[^102] Ibn Zubayr himself had made a confession that it had been
40 years he bore this family a grudge.[^103] He was the one who incited
his father to betray Ahl al-Bayt and stand against Imam 'Ali (a) in
Jamal.

Concerning him Imam 'Ali had stated, **ما زال الزبير منا اهل البيت حتي
نشأ ابنه المشؤوم عبد الله** [^104] “Zubayr always belonged to us, Ahl
al-Bayt until his inauspicious son, 'Abd Allah, emerged.”

As narrated by Ibn Abi al-Hadid, the only stimulater of 'Ayisha had also
been 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr according to Ibn 'Umar.[^105] It was not
unreasonable why she felt affection for him after his father and the
Prophet.[^106]

These was a testimony that how great was the grudge Ibn Zubayr bore the
'Alawites, Although his archenemy was the Umayyads, neverever did he
leave the Hashimites relieved. Since the Hashimites naturally swore no
allegiance to him, he emancipated Ibn Hanafiyya, Ibn 'Abbas together
with 24 people from among the Hashimites in the entrance to the well of
Zamzam. Mukhtar's envoys succeeded to release them in an ambush attack
with their bare hands.[^107]

Ibn Zubayr's determination had been to burn them to death. When 'Urwa
Ibn Zubayr, famous for narrating the Prophet's hadiths, was objected in
this regard, he reacted as saying that it had been done for the purpose
of maintaining Muslim solidarity and it had been what the caliph II had
adopted against those who opposed to swearing allegiance to Abu Bakr.
Even he had accumulated logs to set fire to their houses.[^108]

Nevertheless, Ibn Zubayr had not the audacity to do so in view of the
fact that a majority of his followers had turned to him merely due to
the Umayyads oppression and as a matter of fact they would rather be
with a corrupt man than be with a more corrupt one and on no accounts
would they allow him.[^109]

Time after time in his sermons, Ibn Zubayr cavilled Imam 'Ali (a) and
made Ibn Hanafiyya raise an objection. Consequently, verbal dispute
flared up between them.[^110] It resulted in Ibn Hanafiyya's expulsion
which was followed by Ibn 'Abbas's protest.[^111]

Seeking advantage by exploiting this dispute, 'Abd al-Malik wrote to Ibn
Hanafiyya inviting him to Damascus. Ibn 'Abbas admiring Ibn Hanafiyya's
character requested 'Abd al-Malik to make allowances for him. He
accepted his demand, hence Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya betook himself to
Damascus.

Anyone who passed by him on the way talked about his uprising. His
features had become proverbial. 'Abd al-Malik who predicted his menace
informed Ibn Hanafiyya while en route that he should swear allegiance to
him if coming to Damascus. Declining his proposal, he switched his way
to Mecca again and resided in Abu Talib mountain-pass with a group of
his Kufiyan friends.

The conflicts between him and Ibn Zubayr reignited and sparked off his
expulsion to Ta'if. Meanwhile Ibn 'Abbas was expelled from Mecca to
Ta'if too; therefore, both began propagating against Ibn Zubayr
together. It was where Ibn 'Abbas passed away in 68 and Ibn Hanafiyya
said prayer for him.[^112]

The final phases of Ibn Hanafiyya's life remained vague. Some people
known as followers of the Kissanids claimed that he had been alive and
living on Raďwa mount. In accordance with Ibn A'tham, he left Ta'if with
40 Shi'ite Muslims to Raďwa mount and disappeared without trace.[^113]

His going to Raďwa mount was mentioned by Ya'qubi as well.336 From
Sayyid Himyari's poems, once a believer of the Kissanids, a belief in
Ibn Hanafiyya's Mahdavitism and his disappearance from sight can be
inferred.

Alluding to the Prophet's hadith on Mahdavitism, “His name is like that
of mine and his nickname also resembles that of mine”, he had composed,
[^114]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يفوز بكنيتي واسمي لاني نحلتمـاه والمهدي من بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يغيّب عنهم حتى يقولوا تضمنه بطيبة بطـن لحــد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سنين وأشهر برضوى بشعب بيـن أنمـار وأسد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He will be in a grace that I have bestowed him with my name and
nickname. He will be the leader after me. He will disappear while people
say he has gone to his last resting-place. For years and months he will
be invisible in the valley among the lions and leopards and on Raďwa
mount.”

The lines below belong to Kuthayyir 'Azza about Kissanids tenets, [^115]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ان الائمة مـن قريش ولاة الحق أربعـة سـواء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي والثلاثه مـن بنيـه هم الاسباط ليس بهم خفاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فسبط، سبط ايمـان وبر وسبط غيّبتـه كربـلاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وسبط لا يذوق الموت حتى يقود الخيل يقدمه اللـواء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تغيب لا يري فيهم زمانـا برضوي عنده عسل وماء
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Be informed that Imams from Quraysh and the owners of rights are four,
'Ali and his three sons. These are his sons not anyone else. A son of
his was the example of faith and goodness while his another son was
removed in Karbala. The other one who has not yet tasted death in order
to lead cavalrymen having a standard at the front is disappeared from
view on Raďwa mount with honey and water.”

Some considered Mukhtar as the founder of the Kissanids which might have
been named after one of Imam 'Ali's slaves called Kissanids.[^116] Other
reasons have been presented for its denomination in various books
related to different sects and religions. No scientific research has
ever been done yet, but some are of this belief that the Kissanids have
been wholly fabricated by narrators.[^117]

As a number believed that Ibn Hanafiyya had shared in foundation of such
a sect, the 'Abbasids tried from the outset to secure power through
'Ali's succession, thus they declared a proportion for Ibn Hanafiyya. In
order to justify their caliphate, they announced that the Prophet's
authority transferred to 'Ali then to Imam Hasan and Husayn and
entrusted to Ibn Hanafiyya by Imam Husayn (a). After being transferred
to Ibn Hanafiyya's son, Abu Hashim, it was devolved to Muhammad Ibn 'Ali
Ibn 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas subsequent to Abu Hashim's death.[^118]

Connecting these two issues reveals that the Kissanids sect had been
beneficial to the 'Abbasids so that it could transfer the caliphate this
way to their lineage. Later on, that way went disadvantageous to the
'Abbasids. Accordingly, they decided to legitimize their caliphate with
recourse to 'Abbas and proving his inheritance from the Prophet.[^119]

'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas, another distinguished member of the Hashimites,
was among Ibn Zubayr's unyielding opponents in Mecca. Yazid, when alive,
had held him in high esteem for his opposition against Ibn Zubayr owing
to the fact that he had imagined he could use this opportunity in favor
of himself.

In response to his letter, touching upon Imam Husayn's and 'Abd
al-Muttalib's offspring's murders, Ibn 'Abbas reproved him as saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا أباًلك ! أنسيت قتلك الحسين وفتيان عبدالمطلب، مصابيح الدجي الذين
غادرهم جنودك مصرعين في صعيد واحد مرملين بالدماء مسلوبين بالعراء
غيرمكفنين … “
  </p>
</blockquote>

O fatherless! Have I forgotten Husyan's murder and 'Abd al-Muttalib's
youths who were lights in darkness, those whom your troops left while
shrouded in their blood and stripped off they had been fallen on the
ground?”

And about his father he added, **وقد أمات ابوك السنّة جهلاً وأحيا البدع
والاحداث المضلّة عمداً** [^120] “Your father did ignorantly dissolve the
Prophet's Sunna and did expressly revive the misleading heresies.”

Yazid in his answer accused Ibn 'Abbas of being an accomplice of
'Uthman's assassins. In return, Ibn 'Abbas said that the main culprit
had been his father, Mu'awiya, because he had delayed his assistance
until 'Uthman was dead.[^121]

Like Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya[^122], in Ibn 'Abbas's opinion caliphate had
been changed terribly from Prophethood and caliphate into monarchism. He
advised people to keep as far away from both Ibn Zubayr and the Umayyads
as possible, for they both drive them toward Hell.[^123]

Quite compatible was the position adopted by Ibn 'Abbas about the events
in Mecca during Ibn Zubayr's time with that of Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya.
Ibn 'Abbas mainly backed Ibn Hanafiyya and every now and then they both
got into argument with Ibn Zubayr over diverse issues.[^124]

One of their most considerable arguments was when Ibn Zubayr set Ibn
'Abbas against the people abiding by caliph II in the issue of
“temporary marriage ban” by accusing him on the pulpit of believing in
“temporary marriage”. Ibn 'Abbas stood up all at once and declared that
his belief in temporary marriage was based on what the Holy Prophet had
prescribed and if he (Ibn Zubayr) had doubted, he could have asked his
mother.[^125]

Ibn 'Abbas's oposition culminated in his expulsion from Mecca. Banished
to Ta'if, under no circumstances did he relinquish his struggle.

About Ibn Zubayr he told people**,** **بقي أقوام يطلبون الدنيا بعمل
الاخرة ويلبسون جلود الضأن تحتها قلوب الذئاب … ليظن الناس أنهم من
الزاهدين “** Those who are remained are seeking worldly life and are
wolves in sheep's clothing to pretend they are ascetic people.”

It caused Ibn Zubayr to write to him taking him to task.
Notwithstanding, Ibn 'Abbas, an eminent figure, never abstained from
answering him reproachfully.[^126]

Ibn Hanafiyya said prayer for 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas who passed away in
68 in Ta'if and announced, **اليوم مات رباني هذه الامة رحمه الله تعالي
“** Today a divine person from among this nation died. May Allah bless
him.”

Up to that time and even after a long while, there was no strife amongst
the Hashimites. As observed afterwards, conflict between the 'Abbasids
and the Talibites triggered off and developed so gradually that the
Talibites were deemed the 'Abbasids' archenemies at Mansur's time and
were under their heaviest pressure.

Whatsoever had been narrated regarding the Hashimites after 'Abd
al-Malik's sovereignty shows that he had adopted the policy of
condescension and had written to Hajjaj to avoid streaming the blood of
'Abd al-Muttalib's descendants. Since Abu Sufyan's family had lost their
power this way.[^127]

In the meantime, until Zayd Ibn 'Ali's uprising in 122 there had been no
openly political activity on the part of the Hashimites except what had
been said vaguely about the 'Abbassid's.

[^1]: al-Ithaf bi hubb al-Ashraf, p. 143; the date of martyrdom reported
by Mas‘udi is 95; see also Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 160

[^2]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 229 ‘Izz al-din publication

[^3]: Ibid vol. V, p. 231

[^4]: Ibid vol. V p. 231

[^5]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid,Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XV, p. 236

[^6]: ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn, Sayyid Ja’far Shahidi, pp 32, 33

[^7]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 222; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol.
XVII, p. 256; Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. II, p. 191 Not only can Jabir’s
demise be a cogent reason for Imam al-Baqir’s birth before the event of
Karbala, although it weakens the probability of his birth after Karbala
Waqidi’s reasoning has been the report of Imam al-Baqir’s birth not his
visit with Jabir

[^8]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 230

[^9]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq p. 231

[^10]: al-Kafi, vol. II, p. 369

[^11]: Sharh al-Akhbar, vol. III, p. 266

[^12]: See a concise paper about the relation between Shi‘ism and Iran,
Isfahan, 1365

[^13]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. I, pp 486, 488

[^14]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid,Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XV, p. 274

[^15]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 222

[^16]: Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 200

[^17]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. IV, p. 102

[^18]: For instance see Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VIII, p. 172; Hilyat
al-Awliya’, Vol III, p. 86; Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. II, p. 103

[^19]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol. III, p. 135

[^20]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 214

[^21]: Zayn al-Abidin, Sayyid al-Ahl, p. 43

[^22]: Sharh al-Akhbar, vol. III, p. 258

[^23]: Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 186; Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. II, p. 80

[^24]: ‘Umdat al-Talib, p. 193

[^25]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol. III, p. 141; Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol II, p.
80; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 236; Tahdhib al-Tahdhib,
vol. VII, p. 305; Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. IV, p. 391

[^26]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XV, p. 273

[^27]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. VII, p. 305

[^28]: Ibid Vol I, p. 27

[^29]: Mu‘jam al-Udaba’,, vol. XI, p. 103

[^30]: al-Thiqat, vol. V, p. 160

[^31]: al-Imam as-Sadiq, p. 22

[^32]: Sifat As-Safwa, vol. II, p. 55; Nur al-Absar , p. 127; Tabaqat
al-Kubra, Vol V, p. 216; al-Ithaf, p. 136; al-Fusul al-Muhimma, p. 201,
al-’Iqd al-Farid, Vol III, p. 114

[^33]: Sharh al-Akhbar, vol. III, p. 258

[^34]: Ibid vol. III, p. 263

[^35]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. III, pp 160, 163

[^36]: A’immatuna, vol. I, p. 263, Manaqib Ibn Shahr Ashub, vol. II, p.
255

[^37]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. X, p. 159

[^38]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, Vol III, p. 136; Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol II, pp
78; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, Vol XVII, p. 238

[^39]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 238

[^40]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, p. 117

[^41]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 58; Wasa’il Ash-Shi‘a, vol. II, p. 364; It
is also narrated that he occasionally wore impressive dress lest people
might assume that he acted contrary to what Allah had ordered, قُلْ مَنْ
حَرَّمَ زِينَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَ لِعِبَادِهِ وَالطَّيِّبَاتِ
مِنْ الرِّزْقِ “Say, who has prohibited the embellishment of Allah which
he has brought forth for these servants?” See Tafsir al-Ayyashi, vol.
II, p. 15, the second hadith; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. III, p. 203

[^42]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 246

[^43]: Ibid vol. XVII, p. 238

[^44]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 239; Sharh al-Akhbar,
vol. III, pp 261-262 (His name is mentioned Zayd Ibn Usama Ibn Zayd in
the second one

[^45]: Dirasat wa Buhuth fil-Tarikh wal-Islam, Vol I, p. 61 (lst
edition) the paper of al-Imam Sajjad Ba‘ith al-Islam min jadid

[^46]: See Imam al-Baqir’s remarks in Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi
al-Hadid, Vol XI, p. 44; al-Imam As-as-Sadiq of Abu Zuhra, pp 111-112

[^47]: Tashayyu‘ dar masir Tarikh, p. 286

[^48]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, p. 126

[^49]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, Vol III, p. 136

[^50]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, Vol XVII, p. 242

[^51]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, p. 102; Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol V, p.
214; Nasab Quraysh, Mus‘ab Zubayri, p. 58

[^52]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol V, p. 213

[^53]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, p. 127

[^54]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol V, p. 285

[^55]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, Ibid p. 128

[^56]: Ibid p. 126

[^57]: Ibid p. 124

[^58]: Ibid. p. 124.

[^59]: Ibid. p. 124.

[^60]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal p. 116

[^61]: Ibid p. 115; In another narration, they are ntroduced three, ارتد
الناس بعد قتل الحسين ثلاثة, يحيى بن ام الطويل، ابو خالد الكابلي، جبير بن
مطعم، ثم ان الناس لحقوا وكثروا… “After Husayn’s murder all people
apostatized but three, Yahya Ibn Umm al-Tawil, Abu Khalid al-Kabuli and
Jubayr Ibn MuT‘im People joined them then…” see also Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat
al-Rijal, p. 123

[^62]: Rijal al-Tusi, pp 81-102

[^63]: al-Musannaf, Ibn Abi Shayba, vol. I, p. 215 (published in India)

[^64]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. IV, p. 104;
Bihar, vol. XXXXVI, p. 143; al-Gharat, p. 573

[^65]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 231 (published by ‘Izz al-din);
Nasab Quraysh of Mus‘ab Zubayri, p. 58

[^66]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 131

[^67]: Tarikh at-Tabari, Vol V, p. 245; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I,
p. 208

[^68]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. III, p. 259;
Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 215; Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. II, p. 107;
Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, Vol II, p. 25

[^69]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, pp 70, 71

[^70]: The unseen knowledge is consistent with the duty mentioned not
separated from it

[^71]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 214; Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol. III, p.
140

[^72]: al-Dhari‘a, vol. XV, pp 18-21

[^73]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XI, p. 192; vol.
VI, pp 178-186; vol. V, p. 113

[^74]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XIII, p. 220;
Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. I, p. 184

[^75]: As-Sahifat As-Sajjadiyya, prayer 6, item 24

[^76]: Tarikh Jurjan, p. 188

[^77]: Tarikh Jurjan, prayer 47, item 56

[^78]: Ibid prayer 48, items 9-10

[^79]: Tarikh Jurjan prayer 34

[^80]: Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. II, p. 89

[^81]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 242-243

[^82]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 239

[^83]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 196, 212, (published by ‘Izz al-din)

[^84]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 24; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 140

[^85]: Zayn al-Abidin, Sayyid al-Ahl, pp 7, 47

[^86]: A‘yan Ash-Shi‘a, vol. IV, p. 468 (First Edition)

[^87]: Ale Imran, 134

[^88]: Sharh al-Akhbar, vol. III, p. 260

[^89]: Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. II, p. 101; al-Ithaf, pp 137, 138;
Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XVII, p. 243

[^90]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 526; Sharh al-Akhbar, vol. III, p.
260

[^91]: Hujjati, Muhammad al-Baqir, Si Maqalih dar Tarikh tafsir wa nahw
(three papers n history of Interpretation and Syntax), from p. 27 on
(Tehran, 1360

[^92]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. I, p. 243

[^93]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XI, p. 28 He had been one of the
bravest in the Hashimites; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid,
vol. XV, p. 285

[^94]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 245

[^95]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. IX, p. 111

[^96]: Ibid vol. IV, p. 63

[^97]: Ibid vol. IV, p. 105

[^98]: Ibid vol. IV, p. 105

[^99]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, pp 239, 240

[^100]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 29

[^101]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. IV, p. 62; pp
127, 129; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 161

[^102]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XX, p. 128

[^103]: Ibid, vol. IV, p. 62; vol. XX, p. 148

[^104]: Ibid, vol. XX, p. 102

[^105]: Ibid, vol. XX, p. 107

[^106]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XX, p. 110

[^107]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 261; They were 17 in another
narration; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, pp 123,
124

[^108]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, p. 147;
Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 86

[^109]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XX, p. 128

[^110]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 262

[^111]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, p. 252

[^112]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, pp 240-253

[^113]: Ibid, vol. VI, p. 253

[^114]: al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 234, It is reported that later Sayyid
Himyari changed his beliefs and became Imam as-Sadiq’s disciple and
composed, تجعفرت باسم الله والله اكبر وأيقنت بالله يعفو ويغفر “In the
name of Allah, the Great, I became Ja’far’s follower while certain of
Allah’s forgiveness” Although some expressed doubt about his conversion
from the Kissanids, al-Aghani, vol. VII, pp 231, 235, 241-242

[^115]: al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. I, pp 133, 134; Sharh al-Akhbar, vol.
III p. 297

[^116]: al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. I, p. 131

[^117]: Madhahib Ibtada‘atha As-Siyasia fil-Tarikh, ‘Abd al-Wahid
al-Ansari, published in Beirut 1973; Qamus al-Rijal, p. 452

[^118]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. VII, pp 149,
150

[^119]: al-Hayat As-Siyasiyya li l-Imam al-Riďa, from p. 37 on

[^120]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 248, 250; the letter is fully in
al-Ma‘rifat wal-Tarikh, by Fasawi, vol. I, pp 531-533

[^121]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 18

[^122]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, p. 238

[^123]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 196

[^124]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, pp 134, 148

[^125]: See al-Ziwaj al-Muwaqqat fil-Islam “Al-Mut‘a”, pp 99, 103 by
Kitab Muslim, vol. IV, p. 133; Nasb al-Raya, vol. III, p. 180; Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, p. 130

[^126]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, pp 125, 126

[^127]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 149


