The Marwanids’ Government
=========================

Al Marwan’s Rule
----------------

Yazid's demise (in Safar 64 A.H) was the origin of instability in the
Sufyanids's sovereignty. Such instability could be felt not only in the
lands distant from the capital but also inside Damascus, the center of
the Umayyads's caliphate. The instability was expanded when Mu'awiya II
after forty days or four months abdicated.

He announced,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا وان جدّي معاوية بن ابي سفيان نازع الامر من كان أولى به منه في
القرابة برسول الله وأحق في الاسلام، سابق المسلمين، اول المؤمنين وابن
عم رسول رب العالمين وأبا بقيّة خاتم المرسلين “
  </p>
</blockquote>

My forefather, Mu'awiya did battle with the one who was the closest to
the Prophet in kinship and had long record in Islam. The ever-first
Muslim, the ever-first believer, the Prophet's cousin and the father of
the Seal of the Prophet's Household was no one save he.”

Enumerating some of his father's and forefather's negative conducts, he
added, “They martyred the Prophet's kinfolks, profaned the sacred
sanctuary and set fire on Ka'ba. Neverever will I undertake your
responsibility.”[^1]

Marwan Ibn Hakam suggested that he organize a council like 'Umar. He
recoiled from the responsibility, however.[^2]

It was astonishing that he was Yazid's son especially when he described
his brother,'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Yazid as, **كان ناسكاً متألّها** [^3] “He
is a divine man and a worshipper.”

The principal threat to the Umayyads was in the oriental Islamic lands.
It was due to the emergence of a rather powerful substitute from 61 A.H.
in Mecca who bid his time to take advantage of the existing instability
and dethrone the Umayyads in that area. After Yazid's death, 'Ubayd
Allah Ibn Ziyad, the governor, tried to keep still Basra and Kufa under
his power but the riot of Basra people had him escape to Damascus.[^4]

From then on after Mukhtar until 72 A.H., Iraq was ruled by Ibn Zubayr
and the Umayyads contented themselves with only Damascus and Egypt.

With the prevailing instability in Damascus, some allied themselves with
Ibn Zubayr to eradicate the Umayyads. Nu'man Ibn Bashir Ansari governing
Hims turned to Ibn Zubayr. Dhahhak Ibn Qays, one of the most influential
Umayyads commanders, took control of Damascus.

In Palestine, Natil Ibn Qays Judhami joined Ibn Zubayr. 'Abd al-Rahman
Ibn Jahdam Fihri as Ibn Zubayr's agent began his activities in Egypt.
The one and the only land remained for the Umayyads was Jordan ruled by
Hassan Ibn Buhdal Kalbi.[^5]

And about the tribes, the Qaysids were on Ibn Zubayr's side and the
Kalbids on 'Amr Ibn Sa'id's and Marwan Ibn Hakam Ibn Abi l-'As's
side.[^6] The Qaysids included the tribes of Sulaym, Hawazin and Ghatfan
whereas the tribes backing Marwan were Kalb, Ghassan, Sakun, Saksak,
Tanukh, Tayy (from Damascus) and Qayn.[^7]

The conflict between these two wings occurred in 64. Marwan Ibn Hakam as
a leader from Quraysh and the Umayyads secured allegiance from his
followers as a caliph and together with the followers of 'Amr Ibn Sa'id
went to a war with Dhahhak Ibn Qays.

The violent battle done in Marj Rahit led to the Qaysids' defeat and
Dhahhak's murder, on one hand, and to Marwan's penetration into Damascus
and new sovereignty of the Umayyads under the name of the Marwanids, on
the other hand. It has been said that 'Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad had been
the main element who incited Marwan.[^8]

Anyhow, Marwan became the founder of the Marwanids dynasty. From
different standpoints, his rule as well as the way of his assuming power
gained a novelty. Although Mu'awiya had come into power by compulsion
and dissimulation, Marwan could secure it thoroughly by sword. According
to Mas'udi, he was the first one who procured the power by sword with
satisfying no group of people at least.[^9]

Marwan was in dilemma. One was from the side of 'Amr Ibn Sa'id who had
played a leading role in the course of this development and was of
course nominated as a successor after his son.[^10]

Nonetheless, he was later slayed by 'Abd al-Malik mercilessly. Another
problem was Khalid Ibn Yazid Ibn Mu'awiya who had secured allegiance
from a number of Jordanians in the turmoil of clashes. For the purpose
of disparaging him, Marwan married his mother. His affront was followed
by Khalid's objection to his mother and Marwan's assassination by his
new wife in 65.[^11]

Probably Marwan had staged a coup to conquer Hijaz although some sources
have ascribed it to 'Abd al-Malik. Overpowering Ibn Zubayr's army in
Medina, Hubaysh Ibn Dulaja entered the town and began eating dates on
the Prophet's pulpit. Afterwards, he set out to Rabaďa, where he battled
with the army dispatched by 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr. The majority of
Damascus came to be killed and captured.[^12] It is alleged that Hajjaj
had been in Hubaysh's army as well.

Marwan's background bears no luminous point. His first political
emergence was that as 'Uthman's son-in-law in the throes of 'Uthman's
conflict with people, he wrote a letter to the ruler of Egypt on behalf
of 'Uthman and without his awareness to decimate Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr
and his friends. Later on, he was the governor of Medina for years
during which he constantly insulted Imam 'Ali (a).[^13]

When Yazid after his father's death urged Medinans governor to secure
allegiance from Husayn Ibn 'Ali (a), Marwan suggested that he be killed
if balking at.

Morally, he was described, **كان مروان فاحشاً سباباً** [^14] “Marwan was
extremely foul mouthed.”

Marwan's rule lasted for nine months. After his assassination in 65 A.H
his son, 'Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan, assumed the caliphate. Before that
'Abd al-Malik was well known for his worship and Qur'an recitation in
Medina.[^15] No sooner had he heard about his caliphate than he shut
Qur'an and bid farewell to it forever.[^16]

His main internal problem was the existence of 'Amr Ibn Sa'id who was
supposed to succeed him at his father's behest. When 'Abd al-Malik went
to conquer Iraq in 68, 'Amr Ibn Sa'id revolted in Damascus and besieged
it. Returning halfway, 'Abd al-Malik introduced him as his successor
deceitfully and after a while killed him.[^17]

This action did divulge 'Abd al-Malik's profound deceitfulness in
history and such person as Ibn 'Abbas applied it to their propagation
against him.[^18]

Before Mukhtar rose up, 'Abd al-Malik had endeavored to conquer Iraq by
making use of 'Uthman-oriented individuals in Basra. He sent Khalid Ibn
'Abd Allah to Basra carrying a message for the nobles. Later, an army
headed by Malik Ibn Misma' was dispatched too, but both unable to
conquer Basra fled to Damascus. This event was recorded in history as,
**يوم الجفرة بالبصرة** [^19] “Yawm al-Jafra Bil-Basra”

This very event had likely been recorded by Ibn A'tham as being led by
Zahr Ibn Qays. He had written that 'Abd al-Malik had pleaded with the
Marwanids to adopt a measure and uproot Ibn Zubayr's dominion. He had
sent Zahr Ibn Qays accompanied by a one-thousand-soldier army to Basra;
however, the battle resulted in the Marwanids's serious defeat.

Mus'ab, Iraqi governor, compelled Basran Marwanids to divorce their
wives, he confiscated their properties and demolished their houses.[^20]
Yet, it indicated that he could not materialize his aim easily. To solve
his problems and reinforce his forces, he compromised the
Romans[^21] -as Mu'awiya had done so when at war with Imam 'Ali (a)- and
could suppress troubled areas of Greater Syria like Palestine ruled by
Natil Ibn Qays Judhami. After years in 72,he reached a decision to
conquer Iraq. Noticing how Natil Ibn Qays was vanquished, Mus'ab Zubayi
with an intent to conquer Damascus had to dispense with it.[^22]

While the Kharijites had been making so many obstacles for the Zubayrids
from the late 60s and early 70s, 'Abd al-Malik, determined to conquer
Iraq, was busy mobilizing troops. The Zubayrids's dominion in oriental
Islamic lands and Hijaz lasted nine years (eight years in Iraq).

Although 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr himself was far more popular than the
Umayyads, some of his specifications made all those able to be helpful
for him disperse.[^23] His miserliness[^24] and accusing others of being
worldly were what had all leave him on his own. It is said about his
jealousy,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدمت قريشا رضوا بك سيدا و أنت بخيل الكف غيرجواد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You killed the Quraysh who approved you. The miser is you.”

In spite of the pressure exerted by Mus'ab Ibn Zubayr, the Zubayrids had
not a firm foundation in Basra in the light of the fact that Basra
belonged to both Jamal participants and the Marwanids as well as the
'Uthmanids.

In Kufa, on the other hand, due to its relative Shi'ism, they had no
stronghold. The suppression of Mukhtar's uprising had bitterly agitated
the Shi'ite Muslims. 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr's enmity with the Hashimites
not least with Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya had doubled the Shi'ite Muslims'
disgust. It is said about Mus'ab Ibn Zubayr that he had been invariably
seeking after the Shi'ite Muslims' murder.[^25]

Consecutive wars with the Kharijites caused many other people to rebel.
A grudge which 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr bore his enemies ended in his
disreputation among people. Bearing the Hashimites a grudge (according
to himself from 40 years ago)[^26], he even was reluctant to recite
Muhammad (S) blessing in his sermons and said if so, his household would
show off that they were the prophet's progeny![^27]

These factors accounted for Ibn Zubayr's weakness in both Iraq and
Hijaz; nevertheless, his influence on Hijaz was more than Iraq. Although
his debacle might be blamed on Iraq's not support, 'Abd al-Malik's
might, his dependence on Damascus army, proverbial for their obedience
to the caliphs,[^28] and especially Hajjaj's coercion on Damascus people
to move to Iraq[^29] were considered as the reasons for Ibn Zubayr's
defeat and 'Abd al-Malik's victory.

Inasmuch as Ibn Zubayr's base was shakier in Iraq, 'Abd al-Malik moved
to Basra in 72. **لم يبق** **شريف الا كاتبه** “ There was no nobleman
who had not written to him.”

As all of the distinguished people had written to him but Muhallab Ibn
Abi Sufra,[^30]upon waging the war, a great number left Mus'ab's army
joining to that of Damascus.[^31] He resisted to the bitter end and
while breathing his last, he asked 'Urwa Ibn Mughira what Husayn Ibn
'Ali did when martyred. He responded that neverever was Husayn Ibn 'Ali
convinced to do Ibn Ziyad's bidding.

Mus'ab then said,

> إنّ الألي بالطف من آل هاشم تأسّوا فسنّوا للكرام التواسيا2491

“Those pearls in Karbala were from the Hashimites who chose the best as
their model.”

One ground for Mus'ab's fragility was Ibrahim Ibn Malik Ashtar's
murder.[^32] He defied however, until he was removed. As long as the
Zubayrids held sway in Iraq, he was the most important Zubayrids element
ruling there except a short while. He had Arabic racial prejudice
particularly he was more pessimistic about the Iranians who had
accompanied Mukhtar.[^33]

Following the clashes, Iraqi residents swore allegiance to 'Abd
al-Malik; therefore, the Marwanids became dominant entirely in oriental
Islamic lands. The only remaining land was Hijaz ruling by 'Abd Allah
Ibn Zubayr, 'Abd al-Malik, who had already perceived the sensitivity of
Hijaz due to the rite of Hajj (pilgrimage) and even had banned it,
contemplated how to seize that land, especially with Ibn Zubayr's
involvement in political scenes punctuation there existed some people
who had not yet deemed his caliphate legitimate.[^34]

Among them was 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar who neither had likely sworn
allegiance to 'Ali nor had he participated in his wars but immediately
after Ibn Zubayr's assassination, he nightly went to Hajjaj and swore
allegiance to him.[^35])

'Abd al-Malik sent Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf Thaqafi to Hijaz for conquering
Mecca. He stopped in Ta'if, center of Thaqif tribe, temporarily and then
betook himself to Mecca. It was the second military expedition that the
Umayyads made against Mecca for the purpose of overwhelming Ibn Zubayr.

The first time in 64 Husayn Ibn Numayr, the commander of Damascus army,
returned upon learning Yazid's death, but this time Hajjaj was engaged
in besieging Mecca with his troops as many as 12000 for eight
months.[^36]

During this period, catapults were installed around the town on the
heights targetting Ibn Zubayr and al-Haram Mosque under a rain of fire
and stones.[^37] It was carried on until Ka'ba caught fire. So insolent
was he that he even did not avoid throwing garbage on al-Haram
Mosque.[^38]

On Jumadi al-Thani 10th, 73 A.H Mecca was eventually blockaded by the
Umayyads. Subseqently, Hajjaj moved to Medina and narratedly he
affronted the remaining from the Prophet's disciples such as Jabir Ibn
'Abd Allah, Malik Ibn Anas, Sahl Ibn Sa'd, etc.[^39]

From then onwards, the Marwanids governed in all Muslim- populated
areas. A barbaric man, 'Abd al-Malik together with some other brutal
rulers including Hajjaj, Yazid Ibn Muhallab as well as Hisham Ibn
Isma'il[^40] made people feel sword. He believed that sword was the only
panacea for people.[^41]

He abominated “enjoining the lawful acts” and said, **والله لا يأمرني
أحد بتقوى الله بعد مقامي هذا الا ضربت عنقه** “If anyone enjoins me
fearing Allah, I will break his neck.”[^42]

Like any other person on the very last days of his lifetime, he wished
he had been born porter.[^43]

Hajjaj in Iraq
--------------

The main element that laid the foundation of caliphate was no one but
Hajjaj. Regarding him, 'Abd al-Malik told his sons later, “It was Hajjaj
who aided us to come to the throne”.[^44] Yazid Ibn Abi Muslim, Hajjaj's
scribe had said that he had bent his thoughts and efforts to serve the
Umayyads.[^45]

To reason the superiority of a caliph over the Holy Prophet (S), he
himself had affirmed, **أخليفة أحدكم في أهله أكرم أم رسوله في حاجته**
[^46] “In your sight, is the one as your substitute in the family dearer
or the one sent to do something?”

According to Jahiz, he had been annoyed when people paid homage to the
Prophet's tomb and said as a consequence, **هلا طافوا بقصر أمير المؤمنين
عبد الملك، الا يعلمون أن خليفة المرء خير من رسوله** [^47] “Why did you
not pay homage to the palace of Amir al-Mu'minin 'Abd al-Malik? Do you
not know the caliph is the best one after the Apostle.”

Hajjaj's this reasoning was repeated by many others too for
ingratiating.[^48]

Hajjaj had been so devoted to 'Abd al-Malik that he had said, “If I
learn that demolishing Ka'ba did never draw 'Abd al-Malik's
gratification, I shall break it into stones”.[^49]

Realizing his devotion, when 'Abd al-Malik designated Hajjaj as the
governor of Iraq, he told his scribe, **اكتب عهده علي العراقين واطلق يده
علي الرجال والسلاح والاموال “** Write the permission of his governorship
in both Basra and Kufa and make him fully authorized about people,
properties and weapons”[^50]

With Hajjaj's arrival in Iraq that had never had a taste of the
60s-peace could be returned for twenty years with Hajjaj's sword. Since
his roughness was extraordinary no one dared oppose him. However, it
would be seen how such a pressure sparked off riots at last. On arrival
in Kufa, he announced, “The caliph had given me two swords of mercy and
requital. On my way here, I lost the sword of mercy and the only sword
remained is of requital!”[^51]

In the same sermon, he indicted Iraqi people of schism, hypocrisy and
moral corruption[^52]; accordingly, he belittled the Kufiyans who were,
**ذو هيئة وعزة “** The respectful people.”

As stated by Ibn A'tham and took them under his yoke.[^53] His emergence
in Iraq had previously foretold by Imam 'Ali (a) when pronouncing the
malediction of **أللهم عجل عليهم بالغلام الثقفي** [^54] “O Allah! Hasten
the appearance of the man from the tribe of Thaqif.”

Yet, it had been later attributed to 'Umar.[^55]

Hajjaj's delight in homicide created a myth that when a baby, he was
notbreastfed but fed with blood and it had been Satan's suggestion under
the guise of a human.[^56] Ibn Khallakan has written, **و كان للحجاج في
القتل وسفك الدماء والعقوبات غرائب لم يسمع مثلها** [^57] “Many a story
has been recounted about massacre and torture done by Hajjaj that were
unparalleled at all.”[^58]

The aftermath of his great savagery in Iraq was the slaughter of more
than 120000 people.[^59] Nearly 50000 men and 30000 women, half of whom
unmarried, were confined in his mixed jails.[^60]

Characterizing him, Suyuti has written,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قد قتل من الصحابة والتابعين ما لا يحصي، فضلاً عن غيرهم وختم في عنق
انس وغيره من الصحابة ختماً “
  </p>
</blockquote>

He massacred countless Prophet's disciples and followers let alone
others. He made some gashes on Anas Ibn Malik's neck and other's.”[^61]

From 75 to 95 AH, Hajjaj was the absolute ruler in Iraq and oriental
Islamic lands including Khurasan, Sistan and all other Iranian areas.
Despite the existing hindrances, he had been so preoccupied with
suppressing the Kharijites, Shi'ite Muslims and any rebel Sunnites that
no conquest, except during the last years, was made. What ought to be
borne in mind is that Hajjaj had numerous rivals in Iraq but he removed
them all barbarically.

His first enemy was the Kharijites. Only Qatari Ibn Fuja'a, a Kharijites
leader, engaged him for years. After their defeat in Kirman and the
Kharijites' split, it was Shabib who occupied Kufa twice for hours.
Ultimately after a long clash, Hajjaj could accomplish to suppress them
with recourse to Damascus.[^62] The Kharijites were scattered in various
districts of Iraq as well. More than half of Hajjaj's prisoners were
either Kharijites or being accused of it.

Another group was the Shi'ite Muslims opposing Hajjaj in Iraq. As a
consequence of the penitents and Mukhtar's defeat in 65 and 67
respectively, Shi'ite Muslims were scattered losing their solidarity.
'Abd al-Malik who had no apparent fight with 'Abd al-Muttalib's progeny,
had advised Hajjaj in a letter to adopt the same strategy. As written by
Ibn 'Abd Rabbih not a single objection did Hajjaj raised to the
Talibites.[^63]

It never implied that he was not at odds with the Shi'ite Muslims but it
was on account of the fact that no Talibites lived in Iraq. Nontheless,
the Shi'ite Muslims residing in Kufa and other spots of the country were
under the worst pressure. As stated by Imam al-Baqir (a) hearing the
word ”'Ali's Shi'ites Muslim” was far less tolerable for Hajjaj than the
word dualism or “atheist”.[^64]

Whatever made him pleased was to hear a person from a tribe saying, “No
one in our tribe has ever cursed 'Uthman; in Siffin, seventy people from
our tribe had been with Mu'awiya while only one with Abu Turab; no woman
from women has ever felt in affection for Abu Turab; there has been
found no one in our tribe whom we urged to curse Abu Turab in addition
to Hasan, Husayn and Fatima and he disobeyed.[^65]

In order to pressurize them to curse 'Ali (a), Hajjaj whipped such
individuals as 'Atiyya Ibn Sa'd 'Awfi four hundred lashes for their
amity with 'Ali (a), 'Atiyya defied, however.[^66] Those intending to
wheedle Hajjaj, manipulated such values.

'Ali Ibn Asma' came up to Hajjaj and said, **انّ أبويّ عقّاني فسمَّياني
عليّاً فسمِّنِي أنت “** My parents have not only disowned me but also
named me 'Ali. Change my name. Changing his name, Hajjaj offered him
presents.”[^67]

Even the simplest Shi'ites idea was followed by Hajjaj perturbation. He,
for instance, summoned Yahya Ibn Ya'mur from Khurasan to Iraq due to
announcing that both Hasan (a) and Husayn(a) were the Prophet's
descendants.

He merely contented himself with his banishment once Yahya could
validate his notion through authenticating that Jesus Christ had been
Ibrahim's descendant too on the strength of Qur'an.[^68] As Hajjaj laid
stress on affection for 'Uthman, he, in his turn, murdered any one
suspected of participating in riots against 'Uthman before.[^69]

'Abd al-Malik and his agents had been persistently attempting to boost
the fights between the 'Alawites and the Zubayrids for the purpose of
keeping them engaged. It was in one of these certain meetings that Iman
as-Sajjad did not attend feigning illness.[^70] 'Ali's lineage was
coerced by 'Abd al-Malik to curse 'Ali while the Zubayrids were so to
curse 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr.[^71] His son, Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik,
perpetuated this policy pressurizing people to curse Imam 'Ali (a) under
threat of murder.[^72]

In such a financially tough situation did the Prophet's Household live
under the Umayyads pressure that later the Iraqi ruler had said
concerning them, **أن أهل هذا البيت من بني هاشم [بني علي] قد كانوا هلكوا
جوعاً حتى كانت همة أحدهم قوت يومه** “ This family from the Hashimites
was under threat of starvation to the extent that they only bent their
efforts to earn their daily bread.”[^73]

Besides the Shi'ite Muslims and the Kharijites, Hajjaj encountered other
adversaries who had risen up against the Umayyads's oppression or for
whatever reason. The first year Hajjaj came in power in Iraq, he cut out
the surplus proportion from Bayt al-Mal (public treasury) to Basra
people. This action culminated in Basra revolt in 75 led by 'Abd Allah
Ibn Jarud although it was immediately stifled.[^74]

Another movement was led by Mutarraf Ibn Mughira who himself and whose
father had been from the kins of the Umayyads and the governors of Kufa
and Ctesiphon but was affected by the Kharijites. When the
representatives of Kharijites Shabib met with Mutarraf, he proposed that
after gaining victory the caliph be determined by a council and be from
the Quraysh. Neither of his conditions was approved by the Kharijites,
however.[^75]

The motivations he himself had enumerated for his insurrection against
Hajjaj were, **الاستئثار بالفيء** **وتعطيل الحدود والتسلط بالجبريّة “**
Misappropriation of public treasury, transgression of divine limits and
despotism.”[^76]

He along with his followers left Ctesiphon to Qasr Shirin and after a
stop-over on the outskirts of Isfahan to Saman district and then to Qum
and Kashan.[^77] Gradually some people from Riy and Isfahan, naturally
many Arabs and likely a few Iranians, joined him.

In a letter, Isfahan governor wrote to Hajjaj if he wanted the city, he
should hasten. The Arab governor of Hamadan for his part asked for
Hajjaj's permission to suppress Mutarraf, since the scattering of Arabs
in the lands paying tax had appalled him, he declined his proposal.[^78]
By the same token, an army composed of Damascus and Riy people could
finally manage to chuckle down Mutarraf's movement in 77 AH.

Afterwards, 'Abd al-Malik entrusted all eastern lands up to Khurasan and
Sistan borders to Hajjaj. Hajjaj who had conquered nowhere as yet - even
halted from Yazid's time before him-decided to take an action in this
respect and bring further booties for the Umayyads. His determination to
dispatch an army for the conquests faced a hurdle for surmounting which
behooved him to devote one or two years.[^79]

‘Abd al- Rahman Ibn Ash‘ath’s Riot
----------------------------------

'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ash'ath Ibn Qays was selected as the
commander of a massive Iraqi army to launch his conquests while neither
he nor his household was good enough towards Ahl al-Bayt. As it was
mentioned by Imam as-Sadiq (a), Ash'ath was an accomplice in 'Ali's
martyrdom his daughter, Ju'da, was the murderer of Imam Hasan and his
son, Muhammad, was an agent in Imam Husayn's martyrdom.[^80]

'Abd al-Rahman was once appointed by the Zubayrids to amass alms in
Medina.[^81] Heading for Sistan in 80 A.H. along with his army, he made
up his mind to bring the fight to a standstill until the next year after
being somehow victorious. Proposing this to Hajjaj, he refused it;
consequently, neither 'Abd al-Rahman nor his army accepted to approve
Hajjaj's demand while knowing the laborious task encumbered upon them.
Later, this came to be an excuse for them the to be at odds both with
Hajjaj and the Umayyads.

Iraqi rebellious army, instead of conquering new lands, returned to Iraq
while being fully equipped to rebel against that country but since the
Arabs were not in Sistan, it would have been much easier for them to
gain victory if this riot had happened in Khurasan.[^82]

'Abd al-Rahman called upon people to adhere both to Qur'an and the
Prophet's Sunna, depose misleading leaders and combat the
unbelievers.[^83] His army entered Basra in 81 A.H. The residents of
Basra, both those who knew Qur'an by heart and the readers thereof as
well as the doyen altogether gave a helping hand in overthrowing 'Abd
al-Malik.

People in Kufa also joined him utterly.[^84] From among the rioters, the
followers of Ibn Ash'ath, there were huge numbers of Qur'an readers and
scores of Iraqi jurisprudents[^85] such as Ibn Abi Layla, someone who
was battered and pushed by Hajjaj to insult 'Ali (a).[^86] The majority
of those adoring 'Ali played a significant role in this uprising. Kumayl
Ibn Ziyad was a commander of a group of Qur'an readers.[^87]

Being embarrassed, 'Abd al-Malik, put forward the idea of unsenting
Hajjaj in order to maintain peace; however, owing to the fact that both
'Abd al-Rahman and his supporters who on one hand, had a taste of being
triumphant and, on the other hand, did not feel confident enough whether
he would carry out his undertaking or not, failed to accept his
suggestion.[^88] Moreover, they were not in opposition to Hajjaj but
basically to the Umayyads and it was reasonably evident from their
remarks in deposing 'Abd al-Malik.

To prompt people to revolt against the Umayyads, some vocalized 'Ali's
remarks. This was an indication of the presence of those tending to
Shi'ism.[^89]

Such a trend of this riot, in comparison to that of Tawwabin's and
Mukhtar's was not so noticeable.

Above all, someone was leading the riot who behaved not well towards Ahl
al-Bayt. The only reason for various parties to join hands was not more
than enmity to the Umayyads and to overthrow Hajjaj. From among the
notions they repeatedly were taking advantage in their campaign against
the Umayyads, one can name their brutality, disregarding the weak and
attempting to leave no trace of prayers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قاتلوهم على جورهم في الحكم وتجبرهم في الدين واستذلالهم الضعفاء
وإماتتهم الصلاة
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Fight them to get rid of their cruelty in ruling their bullyism in
religion, their violation of the rights of the weak and their attempt of
disregarding prayers.” [^90]

One of the prime reasons that brought about this riot was Hajjaj's
compulsion on the villagers who recently had embraced Islam and moved
into cities. Tax deduction, consequence of that migration, impelled
Hajjaj to drive them out of those cities and re-settle them where they
had been. Being under hard pressure, they cried out, “O, Muhammad!”[^91]
This caused them to tilt towards 'Abd al-Rahman to kill Hajjaj.

Besides, sending the Iraqis to the most remote areas to fight simply for
the booties which were handed to Hajjaj ultimately was another reason
for their rebellion.[^92] The impact of taking capitation from newlly
converted Mawali should also be taken into account. It was told that the
majority of the rioters were jurisprudent, Basra's soldiers as well as
Mawali.[^93]

'Abd al-Rahman's riot continued until 83 A.H. when Dayr al-Jamajim
event, one of the foremost strike, took place. Due to his defeat and the
captivity of extensive numbers of his supporters, 'Abd al-Rahman was not
able to withstand in the subsequent clashes. Eventually, he returned to
Sistan and on his way to Khurasan. Most of his supporters separated from
him. Then he took refuge by one of the kings in Harat. Ratbil, the king
of that land, concluded a treaty with Hajjaj in 85 A.H. in which he had
promised to send 'Abd al-Rahman's head to Hajjaj.

Massacring a large number of Dayr al-Jamajim's captives, Hajjaj set free
only those confessing that they were infidel. There, among them, were a
handful of Iraqi jurisprudents.[^94] Sha'bi was one of the
jurisprudents, who surrendered himself to Hajjaj after being defeated.

Another one was Sa'id Ibn Jubayr who was apprehended by the governor of
Medina, Khalid Ibn'Abd Allah Qasri. Inquiring about his viewpoint with
respect to the previous caliphs, which was an indication of being
skeptical of trusting them, Hajjaj put an end to his life. From then on,
Hajjaj was suffering from a severe psychical disorder because of Sa'id's
murder.[^95] They kept on killing the captives to such an extent that
'Abd al-Rahman himself complained about it to Hajjaj.[^96]

Ibn Ash'ath's clash with Hajjaj was the fourth one out of the strings of
clashes between Iraq and Damascus. The three previous ones were once
with 'Ali (a) and with the penitents and Mukhtar, another time with
Mus'ab and finally with Ibn Ash'ath. This time again the dispersed Iraqi
people failed to succeed and the people of Damascus, due to their
solidarity as well as unsparing contribution to the Umayyads Caliphs,
came to be triumphant.

'Abd al-Malik died in 86 A.H. while he had managed, with assistance of
Hajjaj, to eliminate monstrous problems facing the Umayyads and pave the
ground for the Marwanids. It is said that he was the initiator of some
event in the Islamic history. Being the first one ever to carve name of
Allah and His prophet on coins, the first and foremost jealous, cunning
and treacherous caliph, the first to proscribe speaking in the presence
of caliphs, to enjoin the good and to change the records of public
treasury tribunal account from Arabic to Persian.

He was also the first to include prayer call prior to performing the
prayers of two Festivals namely the Fast breaking and Sacrifice. [^97]
After him, his son, Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik came to power. Regarding
Walid and his agents 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz stated, “Walid in Damascus,
Hajjaj in Iraq, 'Uthman Ibn Hayyan in Hijaz and Qurra Ibn Sharik in
Egypt are all individuals prevailing oppression throughout the Earth.
**امتلاء الارض والله جورا**ً [^98] “While there is much cruelty on the
Earth.”

It has been told about Walid that, **اول من تجبّر من الخلفاء** [^99] “He
was the first ever cruel caliph.”

The Umawi mosque in Damascus is one of the most significant monuments
built in his term. The apparent tranquility of the period from Shawwal,
86 A.H. to Jumadi al-Thani, 96 A.H. all over the Islamic lands once
again led to conquering new lands to such an extent that, according to
Dhahabi, “The conquests of his term regained the same splendor as that
of 'Umar Ibn Khattab's term”.[^100] The most important assault was, on
one hand, against Constantinople and, on the other hand, against
Andalusia.

Walid, just the same as his father, was indebted to Hajjaj, one of his
best counselors. Once a crowd of Iraqi people went to Medina to meet
'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz, the governor, and he wrote a letter of
complaint to Walid. Thereafter, Walid in consultation with Hajjaj
deposed him from Medina's governorship. Then he singled out 'Uthman Ibn
Hayyan Marri instead of him. He sent Iraqi refugees kept in fetters to
Hajjaj.[^101]

The subsequent governor of the Islamic lands from Jumadi al-Thani, 96 to
Safar, 99 A.H., Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, selected 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz his successor. As it was touched upon formerly, this period
should be labelled as a peaceful one following constant attacks of 'Abd
al-Malik in stabilizing his position in the shadow of which the Umayyads
caliphs could not only expand their conquests but strengthen their
economy as well.

In addition, the internal political disputes, a severe strike on the
economy of the society, were eliminated too. That was why Walid was
widely known as the best caliph for Damascus.[^102] Annoying and chasing
the companions of Hajjaj were some of the actions of Sulayman, the main
reason of which was a dispute between Hajjaj and him when he was their
apparent.[^103]

Hajjaj was killed in 95 A.H.. To speak about him what Shurayh had said
will suffice. According to him, he was an unbeliever.[^104] Upon hearing
the news of his death, Hasan Basri prostrated to show his gratitude to
Allah.[^105]

‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz’s Administration
----------------------------------------

For the historians dealing with the Umayyads caliphs, 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz, ruling from 99 to 101 A.H. is an eminent figure. For in
comparison with them not others, he was a man of outstanding features.
In his studies about the approaches of kings, Ibn Athir stated that he
could not find anyone better than him in conduct succeeding to Orthodox
Caliphs.[^106]

He is usually regarded as the fifth member of them.[^107] This statement
of Imam al-Baqir (a) is probably right that he was the Umayyads's
nobleman.[^108] Being Medina's governor, as it was said, he was in touch
with traditionalists as well as jurisprudents, so he was also an
specialist in this regard.[^109]

However, he himself said that he could remember what he had learnt just
during the period he was in Medina and he forgot it no later than he
entered Damascus (assuming caliphate).[^110] Raja' Ibn Haywa, one of the
linked learned to the Umayyads' caliphs, did make great endeavor
bringing him to power.[^111] We had already spoken about him.

To know both him and his policy in ruling the Islamic society, no matter
Whether he had a political or religious aim in has term, a point of
great importance should be taken into account. He had made great
endeavor to bring justice to that society and not to be a cruel rule. He
also had directed his attention towards the accepted merits of a typical
Islamic society, observing religious tenets and respecting at least some
of the popular individuals.

He had tried to show a religious image of his caliphate too. Most
likely, he had understood that the situation of the society would lead
soon to overthrowing of the Umayyads. What was required then was a
radical change for the stabilization of them. It is worthwhile to review
his reactions towards different groups from various aspects.

Encountering the Shi‘ite Muslims
--------------------------------

Speaking about the Shi'ite Muslims, at first, does not imply that 'Umar
Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz wanted to be good towards them. Some of the sources
inclined to the Shi'ite Muslims had tried to show that he was adherent
of Imam 'Ali (a). They may have done so to say that no one from among
the Umayyads's caliphs had paid attention to Ahl al-Bayt as him.
Reviling 'Ali (a) in sermons formally and publicly prevailed at that
time.[^112]

He said that from then on, noone was permitted to do so. He himself, as
it was said, was doing so before, but later on, he came to know about
his bad habit and always recalled 'Ali as a good man.[^113] Upon coming
to power not only did he himself abandon this habit but also he had his
agents give it up.[^114] There is no doubt, based on historical sources,
that he had done so.[^115] Kuthayyir 'Azza, a Shi'ites poet, composed
some verses in praising 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz before him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وليت فلم تشتم عليّاً ولم تخِف بريئاً ولم تتبعْ مقالة مجرم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تكلمت بالحق المبين وإنما تبين آيات الهدي بالتكلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Thou came to power and did not revile 'Ali (a), thou did listen to no
culpable instead thou told the true word. Others came to know about
Allah's signs by listening to thy word.” [^116]

It was said that he gradually enlarged his understanding of Imam 'Ali
(a) specifically when he found 'Ali's letter in the Damascus public
treasury. Then he informed all about it.[^117]  
 He had been quoted as saying, **أزهد الناس في الدنيا علي** [^118] ”'Ali
is the most pious person in the world.”

However, it is doubtful whether he was courageous enough to be so on
that occasion or not even if one disregards all of those quotations what
was said about him is most likely true.

Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, on the other hand, while on the pulpit quoted
Allah's Prophet, regarding 'Ali (a) and rank tradition, as saying, “Your
status in comparison with me is like that of Qur'an in comparison with
Moses.”[^119]

It was also said that he was respecting Imam al-Baqir (a).[^120]

Another issue was returning Fadak to Fatima (a). It was a booty that was
given to Fatima (a), with no war, by his father Muhammad (S). This land
was taken from Fatima, thereafter, without any apparent reason.
Returning it to the 'Alawites was an indication of nullifying the order
of both caliphs I and II.

On the other hand, 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz, the upholder of a
jurisdiction that was mostly based on the conduct of the second caliph.
Such action by him, as it was said by some of the researchers, shows
that he was not following the second caliph but was somehow
independent.[^121]

Ibn Athir by giving false account of the ownership of Fadak during the
time of Orthodox Caliphs had tried to show that such deviation goes back
to the time of Mu'awiya in which he donated it to Marwan Ibn Hakam. It
was also said that 'Uthman had done this not Marwan. Since from the very
beginning of the first caliph's term, it was not under the ownership of
Ahl al-Bayt.

Ibn Athir said, “When 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz came to power, he returned
it to Fatima's descendants. Later on, it was taken from them once again.
Ma'mun, this time, gave it back to them.[^122]

There are other narrations regarding his attention to Fatima's children.
For instance, once he asked his governor in Medina to distribute 10000
diners among 'Ali's children. He wrote back saying that 'Ali has
children among various tribes. The caliph told him to share it out among
the children of Fatima.[^123]

Abul-Faraj Isfahani had mentioned some instances of his attention to
'Abd Allah Ibn Hasan Ibn Hasan Ibn 'Ali (a).[^124]

When the caliph was criticized for his action, he said, “I heard Allah's
Prophet said, **إنما فاطمة بضعة مني يسرّني من يسرها “** Fatima is part
of my body. Whoever makes her happy, he shall make me happy.”  
 The he added, **ليس أحد من بني هاشم الا وله شفاعة** [^125] “There is no
one from among the Hashimites who can intercede him before Allah except
her.”

When a Mawali of Imam 'Ali came to him, the caliph sat down on the
ground and said, **انا والله مولى علي “** Both Allah and I are 'Ali's
friends.”

Then he quoted this tradition from Allah's Prophet, **من كنت مولاه فهذا
علي مولاه** [^126] Taking the position of the caliph into account, one
doubts about the validity of those narrations. Some poets admired him
for what he had done. Sayyid Razi, for example composed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا بن عبدالعزيز لو بكت العيـ ن فتـيً مـن أميّة لَبَكيتـُك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غيـر أني أقول أنـك قد طبـ ت وإن لم يطب ولم يذك بيتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت نزهتنا عن السب والقذ ف فلو أمكن الجزاء جزيُتِك
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O, son of 'Abd al-Aziz, if eyes are to weep for one of the Umayyads's
youths, they will surely do this for thee. Thou have been purified but
not thy household. Thou had prevented us from hurling abuse at Ahl
al-Bayt. I would reward thee if I could.” [^127]

Since the 'Alawites were the Umayyads's successors, heading them and
subsiding their long-lived rage and hatred could be constructive in the
process of 'Umar II's reform movement targetting at the Umayyads's
stabilization.

At the same time, the Hashimites's call, the way paved by the 'Abbasids,
started. 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz tried hard to suppress them and by
justifying what they were doing guaranteed the survival of the Umayyads.

Encountering the Kharijites
---------------------------

Another group threatening Umayyads was the Kharijites. With their
constant revolts, they were almost always irritating Umayyads's rulers
and they could not stop them rising up against Iraqi governor and the
Kharijites could defeat them. After a while, another army was sent to
the battle.

This time, 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz, following his usual policy, wrote a
letter to their leader, Bastam from Banu Yashkur tribe, saying, “I was
informed that you had revolted just for the sake of Allah and His
Prophet. Bear in mind that I am superior to you in this regard but let's
debate. If we were right, you should follow us like others and if you
were right, we would take your advice.”

Bastam accepted what he said and sent a person to talk to him.

In this regard, Tabari stopped short of saying anything but touching
upon the fact that the Kharijites deemed it improper to pay allegiance
to Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik. Pretending not to know anything about this,
'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz said that he should think about it more. He also
went on to say that he was poisoned to death by the Marwanids for what
he had said.[^128]

In contrast, Mas'udi gave an extended account thereof stating,
“Admitting the caliph's approach as a fair and square one, the
Kharijites declared (at least as a debate) that if he were so, he would
be at adds with his tribe and as a result a cruel one.

So he should not only curse them but also turn away from them in
disgust. Attempting to reprove them, by setting an example, 'Umar asked
them whether they trusted Abu Bakr and him or not. They said that they
did.

Then he said, “Abu Bakr had fought against the infidels and held
captives, but once 'Umar came to power, he set them all free.”  
 As a result, he nullified what Abu Bakr had done.  
 Then he said, “Did he abhor him then?”  
 “No he did not”, the Kharijites replied.

Taking into account the Kharijites' reaction in just the same situation,
he asked them if they despised one another or not. He said that for the
very same reason he should not curse his dynasty. Out of those who were
sent to debate, one did join the Kharijites but the second one did not.

Mas'udi further says that there are other narrations about the
relationships between 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz and the Kharijites.
Besides, he has mentioned the debates and exchange of letters in his
book titled Akhbar al-Zaman and in other books.[^129]

Obviously, these actions have been taken during two years or so of
government according to a certain policy. This made the Kharijites lose
their agitation and not bother the community.

Standing Against Cruelty and Public Extortion
---------------------------------------------

Diminishing the pressure of the governors on individuals was another
performance of 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz. People were pessimist about the
governors. Since most of the time they were taking the biggest part of
the booties themselves, they also were the owners of vast lands.

These could give rise to an outburst of violence and provoke both the
Kharijites and Shi'ite Muslims to support such uprising as that of 'Abd
al-Rahman Ibn Ash'ath's. The caliph so gave back whatsoever the Umayyads
had taken from people to their real owners.[^130]

However, he was cautious not to take the possession of their lands. He
even ordered the residents of Damascus to pay more gifts to the Umayyads
but he refrained from doing the same to the residents of Iraq.[^131]

What is obvious is that he neither intended nor could do this since it
would disperse the Umayyads, on one hand, and remove pressure from some
individuals, on the other hand. Iraqis were from among those bearing the
brunt. Not only were the Mawali residing in Iran, oppressed all the time
leaving out 'Ali's term, but Arabs residing in Iraq as well were
pressurized by the Umayyads rulers, in particular, Hajjaj.

Tabari quoted a letter in which 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz had described
the situation of the residents of Damascus to their governor.

He said, “They were subject to ruthlessness, compulsion and malicious
conducts of inept governors while religion was in need of justice. Then
he ordered the governor of Kufa not to collect tax from those converted
to Islam and the destitute beyond their means. He also ordered them not
to take anything from the affluent but tax and not to ask people to pay
the salaries of tax-collectors and finally not to accept new year and
Mihrgan's gifts as well as the money that was taken under the name of
Darahum al-Nikah or fee for writing the books or wages for the family.
Also those who are converted Muslims shall not be received
tributes.[^132]

The above-mentioned letter shows that the Umayyads governors were
ransacking public properties. They were also taking unfair advantages of
Zoroastrian's customs namely, The New Year and Ancient Autumnal
Festivals by demanding presents from them on those occasions. This was
just what Mansur 'Abbasi was doing with the same intention. According to
Imam Kazim (a) what they were doing was reviving Zoroastrian's
customs.[^133]

One further point of prime significance was collecting tax and tribute
even form those who had embraced Islam. This action was prevailed by
Hajjaj to compensate for the public treasury's losses. The conversion of
many people to Islam and its consequence, tax reduction, he had faced
many financial problems.

'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz, on the other hand, by exempting those converted
to Islam from paying tax, a chief reason for most of Mawali to join 'Abd
al-Rahman Ibn Ash'ath, could prevent the re-occurrence of such riots.
Seemingly, it was feasible and resulted in expansion of Islam.

In 77, when Bukayr Ibn Wishah revolted against the governor of Khurasan,
Umayya Ibn 'Abd Allah who had gone to Bukhara for another war, he was
terrified that perhaps the number of his soldiers would not be
sufficient to withstand them.

However, he was told that it would suffice for him to have his town
herald announce among people that whosoever embraces Islam, he shall be
discharged from paying tax. In that case, he will see fifty thousand
people who are the best in obedience joining him.[^134]

How Islam's growth was brought to a standstill due to the severity of
this kind in Hajjaj's term is quite apparent. 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz
has followed the same policy.

Once an Arab and one of Mawali came to him. The second one told him, “O
caliph, twenty thousand of Mawalis are fighting side by side with Arabs
against unbelievers while they are not given anything of the spoils. An
identical number of protected people (Proteges in accordance with an
agreement) have embraced Islam but they are still paying tax.”

'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz commanded Khurasan's governor, Jarrah Ibn 'Abd
Allah to exempt whosoever accepts Islam from paying tax and soon many
people embraced Islam.[^135] The west barbars had confronted just the
same treatment as it quoted by Baladhuri.[^136]

From among sermons as well letters quoted by him, many cases can be seen
which depict the great importance attached to religion and piety. Even
if they were exaggerated to a great extent to justify the Umayyads at
least, on the whole, one can not deny them all.[^137]

It had been observed that he has been promoted to such an extent as
Allah's favorites but, as a matter of fact, it was only in comparison
with the other Umayyads governors that he could attract attention.
Anyhow, he was ruling while being among an Umayyads family, so his
attempt was directed towards consolidating such system.

Khalid Ibn Rib'i was quoted as saying, “I have read in Torah that both
the heaven and the earth will be weeping for forty days in 'Umar Ibn
'Abd al-’Aziz's mourning.[^138] It is quite obvious that following this
way, they were attempting to increase his virtues.

One of the scientific activities of 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz was the
issue of inscribing traditions proposed by him for the first time in
spite of the fact that others did not heed it later. He ordered his
commanders to commit the knowledge of their scholars on the paper for
him.[^139] Zuhri, a scholar linked to Umayyads and contemporary with him
was the first ever one embarking on it.[^140]

He himself had said that he was asked not only to write down traditions
but also dispatch some copies thereof to other cities.[^141] As it was
stated in another quotation, he wrote a letter to Abu Bakr Ibn Muhammad
Ibn Hazm Ansari, a hadith-narrator and Medina's ruller on behalf of
'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz saying to collect every single tradition he had
heard from prophet (S) as well as whatsoever being quoted by 'Umar and
send them all to him for fear that they may be forgotten.[^142] He has
written the same letter to the residents of Medina.[^143]

In spite of the fact that it was a positive movement, even up to the
midst of the third century A.H. most of the traditionalists were not
still interested in writing traditions and it was considered as a great
blow on prophet's biography among to the Sunnites.[^144]

In 101 A.H., 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz passed away. Then Yazid Ibn 'Abd
al-Malik who was adherent to the consistent policy of cruelty, extortion
and pressure came to power. There is a quotation indicating that he was
poisoned by the Umayyads, despite the probability of its occurrence, it
is nothing but a quotation which is based on assumptions.

Yazid Ibn ‘Abd al-Malik’s Succession
------------------------------------

Even if we accept that 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz had carried out some
reforms and improved people's attitude towards Umayyads. Thereafter,
Arab caliphate of the Umayyads was rehabilitated again and extortion,
cruelty towards people and inattentiveness to religion all re-appeared.
As it was stated by 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Yazid Ibn Aslami once, in 101
A.H., Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik took the place of 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz.
He ordered all to follow the same direction of 'Abd al-’Aziz.

On the other hand, **فأتي اربعين شيخاً فشهدوا له ما علي الخلفاء حساب
ولاعذاب** [^145] “Forty of the elderly men approached him and bore
witness before him that there would be neither chastisement nor accounts
for caliphs.”

Mas'udi has described him as,”Being a selfish man, he was after
libidinous pleasure and did not permit people to visit him. He was
neither conversant with the right work to do nor was he cognizant of
wrongdoing to refrain from.”[^146]

Before Yazid, 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz had undertaken some fiscal reforms
inspite of the damages incurred on the public treasury. He not only did
not ask for tribute from Muslims, something which both after and before
him was prevailing, but also exempted those from paying tax to some
extent. Once he was asked why prices were higher in his term while they
were not so before.

In a reply he said, “Those before me were demanding the protected people
to pay tax beyond their men means; consequently they were compelled to
pant with whatever they had and therefore became destitute. But I do not
do this, so they can sell at whatever price they want to.”[^147]

He was also called upon to collect tribute from Jews and Christians
newly converted to Islam but he did not consent to it.[^148] He also
ordered that the tax payers residing by the coast of the Euphrates be
authorized to wear golden rings as well as Taylusan (mantle) [^149] and
also be allowed to ride on horses while they were asked to pay the
surplus thereof.[^150]

It is visible that these undertakings were appeared to be rectifying
ones in comparison with prior severity which had driven the protected
people to their own native lands, then the names of those regions were
sealed either on their hands or their foreheads to prevent them from
going out of there. Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, on the contrary, put an end
to such reforms.

He in 105 A.H., commanded 'Umar Ibn Hubayra, Iraq's governor, to survey
once again all of the farming lands thereof something which was ignored
from the second caliph's term on, so previous statistics was utilized in
this regard. His agents were levying tax even on palm trees and this
incurred lots of damages on the people who were paying tax while looking
down on them.

He also was taking both their offerings and whatever they gave him on
such occasions as “New year as well as Mihrgan festivals and land tax
was paid based on the latest area being measured by Ibn Hubayra.[^151]

In Yemen, despite 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz's command to eliminate former
severety being exerted by Hajjaj's brother, once 'Umar came to power,
everything went back to its former states and he declared that they
would not be forgiven as long as they were alive.[^152]

The outcomes of such severety in Yazid's term were worse in Khurasan in
the eastern parts of which there were many governors as well as kings
who each had embraced Islam on their domains and agreed to pay tax.
Among them, Sughdiyan who were numerous were held to be a great
supporter for Muslim Arabs who were residing there and fighting with
Turks settling in Transoxania.

Re-imposing prior fiscal pressure in Yazid's term was the major cause of
their inclination to Turks with assistance of whom they managed to stand
against Muslims in 102 A.H.. In clashes between “Sa'id Khuzayna”,
Khurasan governor, and Turks, on one hand, and a group of Sughdiyan, on
the other hand, taking place concurrently, both Turks and Sughdiyan were
defeated.

At Sa'id's behest, Muslim forces stopped chasing them inasmuch as **فان
السغد بستان امير المومنين** “Sughd is flower garden of Amir
al-Mu'minin.”

Then he added, “We do not intend to force them to leave this area.” Even
subsequent to a minor skirmish Sa'id's herald once again put emphasis on
what he had said.[^153] Following Sa'id's displacement, “Sa'id Ibn 'Amr
al-Harathi” became Khurasan's governor. Feeling insecure due to Arab's
presence there, Sughdiyan migrated to “Farghana” and were settled there
by the king of that land.

Sughdiyan were so important to Arabs that Iraq's governor, Ibn Hubayra,
called upon them to go back to their former residence. Then he would
single out whosoever they want as their ruler but they avoided doing so.
From then on, clashes between Arabs and Turks, on one hand, and
Sughdiyan, on the other hand, escalated [^154]; as a result, the east of
Khurasan was no longer secure for Arabs. Later on, once Nasr Ibn Sayyar
was designated as Khurasan's governor, he received hard conditions on
the part of Sughdiyan and reconciled with them.[^155]

It can be inferred from what Mas'udi had mentioned that Yazid,
considering his personality, was a man after libidinous pleasures and
womanizing. Being in love with a woman, he kept her corpse several days
after her death.[^156] Suppressing Yazid's revolt, Maslama Ibn 'Abd
al-Malik came to power but after a while he was dismissed owing to the
fact that he had avoided paying tax. Subsequently, 'Umar Ibn Hubayra,
one of the rigid governors of Umayyads in Iraq took his place.

Yazid Ibn Muhallab’s Uprising
-----------------------------

During the last thirty years of Umayyads caliphate several uprisings
came about each of which had originated from various regions with
various objectives. From among those individuals and groups taking
advantage of the outcomes of such riots were opportunists such as Yazid
Ibn Muhallab, justice-seekers such as Harith Ibn Surayj, Kharijites, the
'Abbasids as well as Zayd Ibn 'Ali and his son, Yahya, from among
'Alawites.

In 102, Yazid Ibn Muhallab, the son of Muhallab Ibn Abi Safra and a
member of Azd tribe whose fame was thanks to his battles against
Kharijites during 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr and 'Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan's
term, was nominated as Khurasan's governor. He had some conquests not
only there but also in Gurgan. Owing to the fact that he had refused to
hand over war spoils in his possession, once 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz
took office, he was imprisoned.[^157]

He was still there when Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik came to power and was
apprehensive of being killed accordingly, so he escaped to Iraq. The
governor of Basra, 'Adi Ibn Artat at Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik's behest,
put his family under lock and key. Resorting to a proper policy, Yazid
Ibn Muhallab managed to attract not only some tribes to himself but
three thousand people as well by displaying his generosity to
them.[^158]

In a clash between 'Adi Ibn Artat and some of the people of Basra and
Damascus residing there, on one hand, and Yazid Ibn Muhallab on the
other hand, the Umayyads's army was defeated and Basra went under
Yazid's domination.[^159] Subsequently, the same happened to some other
eastern cities such as Ahwaz, Kirman, Makran, Sind and Hind as well.

He designated a governor for each; nevertheless, in the west the army of
Damascus termed as “Allah's soldiers”[^160] by the Umayyads was
threatening Iraqi rebels and prior experiences also endorsed it since
they had been defeated by them and this time, the same happened.

The residents of Basra being free form Umayyads's mischief paid
allegiance to Yazid, who had promised to follow Qur'an and the prophets
Sunna, and stipulated that he should not bring back conduct of Hajjaj,
the wrong-doer.[^161] Yazid told the people that fighting against the
Umayyads was worthier than waging war against unbelievers and a
courageous army.[^162]

It was obvious to some of the residents of Basra that Yazid Ibn Muhallab
was still attached to the Umayyads. Being ruthless toward people just
the same as them, he pretended that he was adherent to Qur'an as well as
the prophet's Sunna once he recognized his interests were at risk. From
among those individuals Hasan Basri was the one stimulating others to
leave off bolstering him saying that it was Yazid who was joining hands
with the Umayyads in public oppression.[^163]

In response people said, “He is calling us for following 'Umarayn
tradition.”

They asked Hasan Basri why he was supporting the wrongdoers of Damascus
who had destroyed sacred House of God and his prophet in addition to
liquidating the residents of Medina during three days.[^164]

Keeping silent as long as Yazid Ibn Muhallab was in Basra, Hasan Basri
launched his propagation once again upon Yazid's departure from Basra to
confront a dispatched army from Damascus. His position in Basra forced
some of his supporters to give up backing Yazid.

Marwan Ibn Muhallab, Yazid's brother and his successor said of him that
he could only attract some of ignoble residents of Uballa and 'Alwaj in
Basra who were most likely referred to non-Arabs. Upon hearing this,
people made up their minds to war with the alm of supporting Hasan Basri
but he prevented them form doing so.[^165]

Considering this threat a serious one, Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik sent
Maslama Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, who was leading the commander of
confrontations between Muslim Arabs and Romans, along with a corps to
Iraq. Being undecided how to fight with him, Ibn Muhallab sought advice
from his backers. Some were of the opinion that they advance eastward
and settle on the course connecting Fars with Khurasan's mountains.

Doing so, they would be secured and some will join them too. Another
suggestion was that they go to Musil[^166], but Yazid did not accept it.
The army of Damascus nearly consisted of fifty thousand soldiers but for
Yazid Ibn Muhallab it was insignificant.

Describing them, he told, “Most of them were from Jarajima, Saqaliba,
Anbat, Jaramiqa and other tribes being all either farmers or
ruffians.[^167] Considering the point being quoted from his brother
about 'Alwaj in Basra, this shows that Yazid's measure was of Arabic
aspect and even aristocratic and he took no effort to use Mawali.

At the early stages of the war, compromise was proposed to Yazid but he
preferred to fight. This war terminated while it left three thousand
killed. From among them were Yazid and four brothers of him as
well.[^168]

The majority of captives of Basra, who themselves uncovered that by
being remiss in that war they had paved the ground for the victory of
the army of Damascus, were also slaughtered.[^169] This came about in
Safar, 102 A.H. in 'Aqr nearby Kufa which later came to be known as Yawm
al-’Aqr, “Day of 'Aqr”.

The remainder of Ibn Muhallab's family ran away from Basra. Going
eastward, they confronted with the army of Damascus, then they were
massacred all in Qandabil in India. In that clash Iraqis such as Nu'man
Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Ashtar as well as Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Ash'ath were
also killed.[^170]

One further point which should be taken into consideration is that
almost all of the Umayyads's rulers were doomed either to be at the head
of the government or in jail, the latter of whom were slaughtered most
of the time. Once Yazid Ibn Muhallab was asked why he did not build a
house for himself.

What he said in reply was that, “My domicile is either a royal palace or
prison.”[^171] In all likelihood, he could not imagine that the grave
was his third choice.

From among the poets supporting him indirectly was “Thabit Qutna”,
celebrated poet who was among the Murji'ites. He also had a hand in some
conquests in the east where he incited people to back up Yazid Ibn
Muhallab. Abul-Faraj Isfahani considered him a Murji'ites in his brief
biography. In a poem, he has praised and has induced him to war with the
Umayyads.[^172] Later on, when Yazid was defeated, in a poem he
reproached those leaving him alone.[^173]

On the whole what can be said about Yazid Ibn Muhallab and his riot is
that he was an opportunist going on the rampage after years of
oppressing people merely because he was disfavored by the Umayyads.
People who were tired of the Umayyads's cruelties and contemptuous
attitude of the residents of Damascus toward Iraqis in particular were
supporting him for a while despite the fact that they were not serious
enough in that. That was why they could not be victorious.

In describing Yazid Ibn Muhallab's riot, it is importuned to refer to
another uprising in Africa. Tabari was quoted as saying that Yazid Ibn
Abi Muslim wanted to adopt the style of Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf Thaqafi in Iraq
in collecting tribute form the newly converted ones who were paying it
prior to embracing Islam.

Preventing him from following such policy, people put him to death. At
the same time, they did not overlook the Umayyads domination and singled
out Muhammad Ibn Yazid al-Ansari, their former governor, as their ruler
and wrote a letter to Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik saying that they did not
disobey him. In response, he mentioned that he was not gratified with
what Yazid Ibn Abi Muslim had done but he was pleased with Muhammad Ibn
Yazid.[^174]

It is worth saying that Yazid Ibn Abi Muslim was Hajjaj's scribe
formerly. Emulating him, he desired to put his policy into
practice.[^175]

Hisham Ibn ‘Abd al-Malik’s Succession
-------------------------------------

In Shawwal, 105 A.H., Hisham took the place of his brother and until the
year 125, he was in the some position for about nineteen years and seven
months. It was he who presided over one of the splendid and durable
administrations of the Umayyads's dynasty.

Mas'udi described some specifications of him in particular his interest
in horses.[^176] As Ya'qubi mentioned, he was renowned by such
attributes as prudence, intelligence, stinginess, jealousy, harshness
and so forth.[^177]

Dhahabi also described him by stating, **فيه ظلم مع عدل** [^178] “He was
both cruel and just.”  
 He also had quoted some others as saying that he strongly disliked
bloodshed.[^179] It is probable that for the very same reason he had
ordered to suppress “Zayd Ibn 'Ali's” riot.

'Abd Allah Ibn 'Ali, someone who had chased the remainder of the
Umayyads's corps and killed Marwan Ibn Muhammad, was quoted as saying,
“I collected the chanceries of the Marwanids but none was as systematic
as that of Hisham's.”[^180]

He was preventing the Marwanids from taking bounty out of public
treasury excluding the time when they could either participate in war
themselves or send someone else on their behalf.[^181]

There is a quotation from Tabari stating that how Hisham was rebuking
his son for his non-attendance in Friday prayers.[^182] Just in the same
way Sa'id dismissed his son, the governor of Hims because of
adultery.[^183]

On the other hand, Isfahani had touched on the ways Hisham treated Walid
Ibn Yazid, his lewd successor, and vice versa - the account of ewhich
will be given at a later time. These are all definite indications that
Hisham was a wine drinker too as well as being trapped by lewd
companions[^184] promoting people to bolster Yazid.

Some other quotations indicate that Hisham was following the same route
as Zuhri, an eminent traditionalist and linked to the Umayyads, or
possibly others were lending a helping hand in assassinating those who
were after bullyism.

As a case in point, Jahm Ibn Safwan's murder can be mentioned. In a
letter found later in Hisham's records, it is read that he had called
upon Nasr Ibn Sayyar, Khurasan's governor, to search for someone coming
from Dahris to that area and kill him.[^185] Somewhere else we will
comment on Jahm as well as “Ghaylan Dimashqi” both being murdered by
'Abd al-Malik in 119 A.H.

Apart from Zuhri who was much adored by Hisham, other traditionists such
as Mansur Ibn Mu'tamir were attracted by him.[^186] Abul-Zanad was also
an scribe of the Umayyads.[^187] Zayd Ibn 'Ali's riot was a momentous
incident in Hisham's term which will be discussed in more detail later.

Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah Qasri, an outstanding governor of Hisham in Iraq,
reigned there from the very early stages of his caliphate for almost
twenty years. To some, he was similar to a bunch of governors as Ziyad
Ibn Abih and Hajjaj.[^188]

This was not an extremist view. Just as Hajjaj, Khalid was trustworthy
and utterly loyal to the Umayyads. Being furious at him, Hisham
refrained from endorsing what his predecessor had stated so that to
accuse him of assisting the prophet's Household as well as being an
stimulating element in Yazid's movement.

In response, Hisham said to Yusuf Ibn 'Umar, “You are not more than a
lier and by no means do we accuse him of disobedience.”[^189] His
resemblance to Hajjaj will be quite apparent once the same utterance of
him was said by Khalid. That statement was, “The caliph is superior to
prophet.”[^190]

However later on Khalid bitterly said that some of the supporters of
Hisham had said this sentence.  
 Khalid was quoted as saying, “If, the commander of the believers -
Hisham - instructs me to knock down Ka'ba and dispatch every stone
thereof to Damascus, I will assuredly do the same”.[^191]

This was another feature bearing comparison with that of Hajjaj Khalid
presided over Iraq, just about the eastern part of the Islamic lands,
for almost fifty years at peace. It was Khalid who prevented Yazid Ibn
'Abd al-Malik from ousting his brother and substituting his son, Walid.

That was why Hisham had trusted[^192], adored and abided by him for
fifty years. In as much as his mother was a Christian, he had built a
synagogue for her, accordingly he was charged with propagating
“Christianity” and in consequence he was despised severely by some
poets. He was held to be responsible for “demolishing mosques,
establishing synagogues, having Muslims under Magian's domination and
having daughters of Muslims marrying the protected people”.[^193]

Isfahani declared, “He was a heretic and his mother a Christian one. He
had Muslims under Magians and Christians thumb and let them bother
Muslims. The protected people were paying for slave girls and had sexual
intercourse with them and yet Khalid did not show any objection.[^194]  
 Being imprisoned by him, Farazdaq wrote these verses in his reproach:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبلغ أميرالمؤمنين رسـالة فعجّل هداك الله نزعك خالد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بني بيعة فيها الصليب لأمّه وهدم من بغض الإله مساجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Hisham! Hasten to transfer this message to the commander of the
believers, May God guide you in Khalid's removal, he who dismantled
mosques out of his grudge against Allah and established a synagogue
instead. He put a cross therein too.” [^195]  
 Referring to the way of his ruling, he vocalized,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكيف يؤم المسلمين وأمّه تدين بأنّ الله ليس بواحد
  </p>
</blockquote>

How he leads Muslims while on no account is his mother a believer.
[^196]

Isfahani accused him of having association with heretics.[^197] Thinking
about his mother as well as his accusations, one should not be surprised
upon hearing that he was handling non-Muslims fittingly and in all
likelihood he was inclined towards them.

Dealing with the Shi'ite Muslims as well as the Commander of the
Believers in a harsh way, Khalid affronted Imam 'Ali (a) so openly and
bitterly that it is deplorable to be reiterated. He said that Imam was
in the midst of the hell. He was also paying money to people to curse
him. Isfahani has a number of quotations in this regard[^198] and after
mentioning each, he had damned Khalid by stating, **لعن الله خالدا ومن
والاه قبحهم صلوات الله علي اميرالمؤمنين “** May God curse Khalid and his
puppet rulers woe betide them.”

Khalid was ousted in 120 A.H., the reason of which is hardly relevant to
our discussion but as mentioned primarily it was owing to the fact that
Hisham was emulating Khalid in cereal production whose increase was a
threat to his profits.[^199]

Being dismissed, he headed for Damascus while he was tortured by Yusuf
Ibn 'Umar for a while just in the same way he had treated 'Umar Ibn
Hubayra once he came to power. In Damascus too, he was subject to
Hisham's persecution. When Walid Ibn Yazid took office, he handed him
over to Yusuf Ibn 'Umar By taking considerable amount of money, then, he
killed Khalid. Later on, one of his offsprings took the life of his
father's murderer in Yazid Ibn Walid's jail.[^200]

The prime reason that enabled Khalid to be the governor of Iraq as well
as the eastern parts of Islamic lands for over fifty tears was a special
privilege devoted to him in return for his total adherence to the
Umayyads's demands. From among them, one was absolute savagery, an one
of his outstanding attributes, accordingly he was labeled as “anti-truth
tyrant”.[^201]

Another one was hostility towards ”'Ali's lineage” which was notable in
him as well. He was so strongly loyal to the Umayyads that individuals
such as Yazid Ibn Muhallab were not comparable to him because once they
became powerful, they thought that they were independent.

Kharijites’ Rebellion in time of the Marwanids
----------------------------------------------

An interval between 60s and up to late 70s, known as “Ash-Shurat” by the
narrators thereof, was considered to be a crucial period of Kharijites'
activities, although they did remain in power and fought against the
'Alawites and the Umayyads thereafter. The leading centers for their
activities were Basra and Kufa's suburbs.

Being driven out from there, they settled down in Fars, Kirman,
Khuzistan and Sistan. What is more is that their settlement in each
region was a transient one so they were almost always relocating. They
managed to fortify themselves remarkably in a period between Yazid's
death in 64 A.H. and subsequent ineffectuality of the Umayyads in Iraq
up to the time it was conquered by 'Abd al-Malik. Kharijites's
advancement was mainly due to the Zubayrids's leniency for some years to
such an extent that in 68 A.H. they could freely pay for pilgrimage in
Mecca.[^202]

Subsequent to Mu'awiya's death and Karbala's event while 'Ubayd Allah
was reigning over Iraq, Mirdas Ibn Udayya from Kharijites ran wild and
was at a later time murdered by 'Ubayd Allah.[^203] Confronting a great
number of Kharijites in Iraq, 'Ubayd Allah started demonstrating harsh
treatment. He himself divulged that the worthiest action of him after
believing in Allah's Unity was assassinating the Kharijites.[^204]

Prior to deciding on a caliph for Damascus, he was shouldering this task
subsequent to Yazid's death during which he was capturing those under
suspicion. He termed that action, later on, as one of his significant
undertakings.[^205]

The relatives of those who were seized implored him to set them free and
he, due to his unsatisfactory situation, admitted it; as a result,
Kharijites were given more freedom. When he escaped to Damascus, there
was no longer any obstacle before them. During Ibn Ziyad's ruling over
Iraq, as it was quoted by Ibn Qutayba, he was searching for Kharijites
under suspicion and after their apprehension he took their lives.[^206]

What has been disclosed considering Ziyad and his son, 'Ubayd Allah, is
that they shed the blood of at least 13000 of them.[^207] Exerting such
pressure obliged some of the Kharijites to run away to Mecca that was
under 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr's control who not only had cordial
relationship with them but struggled diligently to take advantage of
them in the Umayyads's confrontation as well.

Thus, Kharijites who felt secure enough, then joined Ibn Zubayr. To
justify what they had done, they proposed the idea of “defending the
Sacred Territory of Allah”.[^208] Being adherent to 'Uthman, Ibn Zubayr
provoked his father strongly in Jamal war that started in revenge for
'Uthman's murder who was severely despised by Kharijites. The sole
reason for Kharijites to join Ibn Zubayr was their common interests.

Ibn Zubayr was quated as saying, **لو أعانني الشيطان علي أهل الشام
لقبلته** [^209] “Even if Satan protects me against the residents of
Damascus, I would accept his help.”

Once Yazid's corps left Mecca upon hearing the news of his death,
Kharijites went to Ibn Zubayr to inquire about his opinion regarding
'Uthman. Recognizing that he was loyal to 'Uthman left him alone.

Apart from those Kharijites being conducted by Nafi' Ibn Azraq, the
founder of Azariqa, another group also shaped up in Yamama, Bahrayn,
'Umman and Hajar under the leadership of Najda Ibn 'Amir Hanafi
subsequent to Imam Husayn's martyrdom. In 68 A.H., it was Najda who
supervised the pilgrimage service for Kharijites but for one reason or
another, he did not cooperate with Nafi' so he was dismissed by them.
Then, Abu Fudayk substituted him and was killed after a while.[^210]

The Zubayrids's leniency in Iraq was a justification for Kharijites
under the leadership of Nafi' Ibn Azraq (killed in 65 A.H.) to put the
residents of Basra in a great inconvenience so as to block the way to
commercial caravans in the east and northeast thereof.

Going out of patience, Basra's occupants considered Kharijites's threat
a serious one and prepared to fight them. After a slight clash which was
not a victorious one for them eventually, they, along with Muhallab Ibn
Abi Safra, whose reputation was due to his continual assaults on
Kharijites for extensive periods, launched an attack on them. Fiscal
support of Basra's merchants[^211] for Muhallab who was singled out as
governor by 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr could suppress them for a while. In
spite of the fact that they were not abundant in number in contrast with
Iraqis, Kharijites managed to resist them.

Muhallab in this regard said, **سبحان الله العظيم ما رأيت ولاسمعت بمثل
هولاء القوم ساعة قط كلما ينقص منهم أن يزيد فيهم** [^212] “On no account
had I seen or heard of such a tribe; the more they decrease in number,
it seems the more they increase.”

In clashes of this kind, they repeatedly retreated while they left too
many forces dead each time. Once they were chased up to Isfahan then
they entered Fars and camped in Arrajan while they were over thirty two
thousand.[^213]

Apparently, the majority of those joining them were Iranians opposing
the Umayyads. These clashed extended to Ahwaz and Nubandjan of Fars as
well. After a while, Ibn Ma'mar substituted commander of Iraqis army but
his continual defeats[^214] verified that no one can make this war a
victorious one but Muhallab.

Accordingly, once again he was designated as commander by Ibn Zubayr.
The Zubayrids were over thrown while the Umayyads still needed Muhallab
and he had been fighting the Kharijites for nearly three years or so
subsequent to Iraq's conquest. Then, they were divided into branches not
because of military failure but due to serious discrepancies among
themselves. As a result, they were defeated.

Qatari Ibn Fuja'a became their commander once Nafi' Ibn Azraq was killed
in a clash in Ahwaz. Opposing some of the Kharijites in Kirman, he
departed to Tabaristan and was murdered there.[^215] Two other groups,
one under the leadership of Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, the senior and the other
Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, the junior fought separately and both were beaten.
Prior to this, Muhallab had informed Hajjaj that one and the only way to
overcome the Kharijites was creating tension among them.[^216]

The Azariqa were still there, that Shabib Khariji, a valorous one from
the Kharijites, started combating Hajjaj. From 76 A.H. on, he defeated
the army of Iraq several times and conquered Kufa twice while in both
cases, Hajjaj concealed himself in his palace. He made some linked
individuals to the Umayyads such as Abu Burda, the son of Abu Musa
Ash'ari pay allegiance to him.[^217] At that time, only the army of
Damascus contributed to him.

Hajjaj himself made it known to 'Abd al-Malik,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد عجز أهل الكوفه عن قتال شبيب في مواطن كثيرة في كلٍّ يقتل أمراءهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

 “Kufiyans were incapable of fighting Shabib in verious instances, in
each of which their leaders were killed.” [^218]

This was in contrast with what Hajjaj had done to Iraqis, that is
pressurizing and mobilizing them against the Kharijites by force.[^219]
Once he gave them three days to attack the Kharijites led by Muhallab.
To prevent others from disobeying him, he killed an aged man regardless
of his acceptable reasons for not going to war.[^220]

Despite frequent vanquishments as well as losses that were imposed on
them during several years, the Kharijites managed to save themselves
from annihilation; nevertheless, considering their achievements of their
aims, one should say they were not triumphant since they were fighting
to overpower the Umayyads and by no means could they accomplish it.

Whenever they were united, soon they dispersed due to their enemy's
assault. Therefore, it can be inferred that they were both victorious in
that they protected themselves and defeated in achieving their
objectives. The reasons of both cases should be determined.

From among factors contributing to their survival, possible repelling of
their enemy's invasion as well as suppressing their opponents which
enabled them to exercise influence on people [^221] was their partisan
wars in which they were routing their enemies swiftly before they could
prepare themselves. They not only shocked their enemy but destroyed them
as well.[^222]

They uprooted their adversaries by taking advantage of internal elements
and those selected as the Kharijites's executioners by governors were
not secure from their revenge. To give an example, once they could not
kill the murderer, they killed his camel instead.[^223] Sometimes, they
succeeded in taking their lives.[^224]

Ibn Ziyad disclosed that, **ما أدري كيف اصنع ما أقتل رجلا من هذه المارقة
الا قتل قاتله** [^225] “I know not what to do, I kill none of the
Kharijites save they also killed the spies giving information about the
Kharijites to governors.”[^226]

Fighting against Hajjaj who was infamous, the Kharijites could somehow
achieve fame. Being a dictator who was distinguished for his corruption,
Hajjaj did not refrain from oppressing people and it was a typical
feature of all Umayyads that the Kharijites were taking advantage of in
provoking people both against them and themselves[^227] and even
obliging some pious people to follow them. From among them, one can name
Salih Ibn Masrah who, due to existing oppression, told his followers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متي انتم مقيمون هذا الجور قد فشا وهذا العدل قد عفي ولاتزداد هذه الولاة
علي الناس الا علواً وعتواً وتباعداً عن الحق وجرأةً علي الرب
  </p>
</blockquote>

“As long as you stay in power, cruelty runs, the justice disappears and
the rulers foment bullying and domination as well as they are
abstentious against the truth” and that was why the Kharijites did ask
him to join them. He ran wild in 76 A.H. and was killed later. Then
Shabib who was from Kharijites replaced him.[^228]

Another one leading man of Kharijites was 'Abd Allah Ibn Yahya who was
told as saying, **فرآى باليمن جوراً ظاهراً وعسفاً شديداً وسيرة في الناس
قبيحة “** There, I did observe apparent injustice an unpleasant behavior
towards people.”

Accordingly, for the very same reason he assembled his supporters and by
saying, **لا يحل لنا المقام علي** **مانري ولا الصبر عليه “** Beholding
these things, hesitation shall fly away he went on a rampage.”[^229]

Abu Hamza Khariji in his speech in 12 A.H. also touched upon governor's
cruelty as a stimulus factor [^230] and it is quite obvious that the
idea of combating cruelty could attract attention considerably.

In as much as Iran was the major center for their operations, a great
number of Mawali joined them in spite of the fact that it was not the
case for all Kharijites' parties. This was a crucial advantage for them
since Iranians were valorous enough to battle.

As it was told, **الموالي أشجع الخوارج وأشدهم جسارة** [^231]
“Kharijites, as Muhallab was informed, were mainly blacksmiths, dyers,
butchers, etc.”[^232] These people from the middle social strata, were
naturally acceding to style of the Kharijites since they were under hard
pressure. Additionally, Kharijites' fame for their piety[^233] was an
outstanding factor for them to absorb people. Some of them even were
considered ascetics.[^234]

People's apprehension of them was another element assisting them in
particular as regards to those tribes as well as the residents of some
cities who were doing so to protect their children and themselves since
they were not secure from their attack. Here, one should point out that
the very element was also one of the major hurdles in the way of their
progress.

Although people were contributing to the Kharijites fearing their lives,
they gradually turned to the Umayyads and assisted them to get rid of
the Kharijites who were hard-hearted in their views. The merchants of
Basra and probably other areas who deemed the Kharijites as a great
threat to their interests backed them openly.

The Kharijites frankness always made them lose their heads. Banning
precaution dissimulation by the Azariqa forced Khariji Azraqi to disobey
them in any form and under any circumstances. Then, he, along with fifty
or a hundred soldiers, set off untimely and irregular riots which led to
their defeat. In contrast, the Shi'ite Muslims succeeded in setting
themselves free from the Umayyads' mischief by observing the very
precautionary dissimulation.

Prevailing Islam in Iraq especially in Kufa was an obstacle to
Kharijites's domination. It has been said that the Shi'ite Muslims whose
Imam was martyred by Kharijites had strong spite towards them and the
Umayyads did take advantage of such feeling greatly and that was why the
Kharijites residing in Kufa were not as many as those in Basra.[^235]

The Foundation of the Kharijites Principles
-------------------------------------------

In formation of various sects most of the time the main controversial
issue would later on become the central belief of that sect.

At times, even the name of that sect would be derived thereof in spite
of the fact that occasionally the names of the leaders of sects would go
back to them. In Kharijites' case, the name of their sect originated
from their effort to revolt against the Commander of the Believers and
their endeavor in excommunicating both 'Ali (a) and 'Uthman was the
leading belief of their sect.

In fact, discussion about faith versus disbelief was an important point
over which different parties debated and became somehow problematic for
early sects. With reference to this, 'Uthman and the companions of Jamal
were measured, then, it was turn of the residents of Damascus. Once
Iraqis fought against Damascus people, knowing that they were infidels
but confronting Arbitration, they hesitated about continuing the war.

To eliminate this, they would rather believe in what the opponents had
accepted to such an extent that they described Imam 'Ali (a) as infidel
since he had endorsed Arbitration. One further point was that if someone
were disbeliever due to advocating Arbitration which was considered as a
cardinal sin, then what would happen to others committing cardinal sins?

Based on the same extremist view which was the main reason of their
defeat, they labeled them as unbelievers. It is known that Mu'tazila had
termed those committing cardinal sins neither as a Muslim wrongdoer nor
pious or infidel but purely as a wrongdoer. In contrast, in Imamiyya
whoever testifies that there is no God besides Allah and Muhammad is the
Allah's Prophet is Muslim and is entitled to enjoy the same rights as
Muslims accordingly. Considering the doer of cardinal sin one should
apply the term Muslim wrongdoer (not wrong-doer alone).

In this regard, Shahristani stated that, “All of them are of the opinion
that despising 'Ali (a) as well as 'Uthman is a must. Considering this
issue of prime importance they did hold their marriages to be true
merely when they were based on this belief.”[^236]

The dispute over belief versus disbelief regarding Imam 'Ali (a) and
'Uthman from then on turned out to be the main principle for Kharijites
and the other one was showing resistance to rulers whenever they
disregard Sunna.[^237]

The Azariqa who was active during that time was one the most extremist
groups of Kharijites who considered those men, women and even children
not being a member of the group as infidel and doomed to death.[^238]  
 They referred to this verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ نُوحٌ رَبِّ لَا تَذَرْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ مِنْ الْكَافِرِينَ
دَيَّارًا. إِنَّكَ إِنْ تَذَرْهُمْ يُضِلُّوا عِبَادَكَ وَلَا يَلِدُوا
إِلَّا فَاجِرًا كَفَّارًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And Noah said, “My Lord! Leave me not one of the disbelievers in the
land. If you leave them, they will mislead the slaves and will beget
none save lewd ingrates” [^239]

Moderate followers of the Azariqa such as Sufriyya sect were obtaining
from killing children. Banning “Taqiyya” was one of the fundamental
principles of the Azariqa over which they had discrepancy with the
Kharijites form Yamama and ultimately, it led them to be separated form
Najda Haruri.[^240]

Moreover, books concerning sects as well as scholastic theology and
jurisprudence compiled by their opponents were attributed to them. The
Kharijites who were dispersed due to continual wars and were secluded
from Muslims' scientific centers, as a result, less commented on this.

Other than the Abaďiyya that still has some followers in 'Umman and
North of Africa, all other sects have swept out and it is very difficult
to confirm the credibility of the principles attributed to them. In
addition, another feature of them was altering their principles. It
seems as if the Abaďiyya were dubious whether to renounce 'Ali (a) or
not and in the latest scripts of some of them they expressed their
devotion to 'Ali (a).

Since some books of various sects were at odds with principles of
Kharijites, there has been exaggeration about basic principles of them.
Inasmuch as Kharijites were mainly composed of Mawali, they made up a
new theory overlooking a condition for Imamate e namely being a member
of Quraysh, a principle which the Sunnites strongly upheld over six
hundred years later.[^241]

Some Arab tribes bolstering Kharijites probably had endorsed this
principle either because they did not value caliphate, which was
independent from tribal power or they did this to compete with Quraysh.

Yazidiyya, one of the Kharijites sects that, according to a few
fragmented Jarudites, had extremist Kharijites beliefs about non-Arabism
thought**,** **سيبعث الله رسولاً من العجم وينزل عليه كتاباً قد كتبت في
السماء ويترك شريعة محمداً المصطفي** [^242] It should be mentioned that
Qur'an was revealed in the second century A.H. as a result, the
Kharijites must have been following other sects in this regard. Anyway,
some ideas of Mu'tazilites can be traced back in the Kharijites'
ideologies.

[^1]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 254

[^2]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 254

[^3]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 72

[^4]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 85; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p.
387

[^5]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 255

[^6]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 16; the seed of discord between
these two groups was sown when Mu‘awiya married a woman from Kalb The
tribe of Qays not least ®ahhak Ibn Qays felt that their social
reputation was blackened The Kalbids turned to the Umayyads and the
Qaysids took position against them; Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p.
177

[^7]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 177

[^8]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, pp 138, 141

[^9]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 86

[^10]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 218

[^11]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, pp 144, 145; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II,
p. 257; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 146

[^12]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 153; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II,
p. 181; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 151

[^13]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, Ibn Sa‘d, p. 143 عن عمير بن اسحاق،
كان مروان اميراً علينا ستّ سنين فكان يسبّ عليا في كل جمعة علي المنبر… ثم
اعيد مروان فكان يسب عليا “‘ Umayr Ibn Ishaq narrated, “Marwan who was
our ruler for six years insulted ‘Ali every Friday on the pulpit… »

[^14]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 17

[^15]: ’Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 372; Tarikh al-Khulafa’ of Ibn Sa‘d,
p. 216

[^16]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 217

[^17]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 599; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, pp
137, 138; vol. V, p. 150

[^18]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 144

[^19]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 155, 157

[^20]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, p. 256

[^21]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 98; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 300

[^22]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 269; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p.
98

[^23]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 29

[^24]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 197

[^25]: ’Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 197

[^26]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, p. 147

[^27]: Ya‘qubi, vol. II, p. 261; al-Aghani, vol. II, p. 277

[^28]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. I, p. 252

[^29]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 158

[^30]: ’Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 333

[^31]: Loc cit

[^32]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, p. 266

[^33]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 5; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, pp 161,
162-163

[^34]: Suyuti had said that since he secured allegiance as his father’s
successor during Ibn Zubayr’s caliphate, his caliphate was not rightful
Once in power in Damascus and Egypt, later he seized power in Iraq until
Ibn Zubayr was killed in 73 From then on his caliphate was right; Tarikh
al-Khulafa’, p. 215

[^35]: al-Iďah, p. 34; al-Mustarshid fil-Imama, p. 16; concerning his
political votes we have discussed in detail in “the History of Caliphate
from Islam’s Emergence to the Sufyanids’ fall” (Tarikh tahawwul dawla wa
khilafat

[^36]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. III, p. 73

[^37]: al-Futuh, vol. VI, p. 276

[^38]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 486; ‘Uqala’ al-Majanin, p. 178 cited form
As-Sahih Min Sirat al-Nabi (S), vol. I, p. 23

[^39]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 35; Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 215

[^40]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 90 وكان له اقدام علي الدماء وكان
عمّاله على مثل مذهبه “ He was bloodthirsty and so were his agents

[^41]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 218.

[^42]: Ibid, pp 218, 219

[^43]: Ibid, p. 220

[^44]: Ibid, p. 220; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 58

[^45]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. II, p. 425

[^46]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 147 The same narration has been
asscribed to Khalid Ibn ‘Abd Allah Qasri, Mecca governor in 89 Comparing
Walid Ibn ‘Abd al-Malik with Prophet Ibrahim (a) on the pulpit, he
introduced Walid as the superior one He said that when Ibrahim asked for
water, Allah offered him salty water while He offered fresh water to
Walid Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 225

[^47]: al-Nasayih al-Kafiya li-man Yatawalla Mu‘awiya, p. 81; al-Bidaya
wal-Nihaya, vol. IX, p. 136

[^48]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 228

[^49]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 52

[^50]: al-Futuh, vol. VII, p. 3

[^51]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 32

[^52]: al-Futuh, vol. VII, p. 8; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 43; Muruj
al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 132; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 273

[^53]: al-Futuh, vol. VII, p. 4

[^54]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 142

[^55]: Shadharat al-Dhahab fi Akhbar min Dhahab, vol. I, p. 107

[^56]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. II, p. 30; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p.
132

[^57]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. II, p. 31

[^58]: Ibid, p. 30

[^59]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 183; Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. V, p.
349

[^60]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 166

[^61]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 221

[^62]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 274, 275

[^63]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 149

[^64]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. II, p. 44

[^65]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 144; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn
Abi al-Hadid, vol. IV, p. 61

[^66]: Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. I, p. 144

[^67]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. III, p. 175

[^68]: Ibid, vol. VI, p. 147

[^69]: al-Muwaffaqiyyat, p. 99

[^70]: Nasab Quraysh, Mus‘ab Zubayr, pp 47, 48

[^71]: Nasab Quraysh, Zubayr Ibn Bakkar, p. 83

[^72]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. II, p. 426

[^73]: Ibid, vol. VII, p. 106

[^74]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 46

[^75]: Ibid, vol. V, pp 108, 109

[^76]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 108

[^77]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 113

[^78]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 115

[^79]: In recent years, (1405 A H) a book entitled “al-Hajjaj Rajul
al-Dawlat al-Muftara ‘Alayh” was published in Iraq for defending Hajjaj

[^80]: Rawďa al-Kafi, p. 245

[^81]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 60

[^82]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 149

[^83]: Ibid vol. v, p. 149

[^84]: Ibid vol. v, p. 155

[^85]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 6, p. 293

[^86]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 1, p. 58

[^87]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 158

[^88]: Ibid vol. v, p. 157

[^89]: Ibid vol. v, p. 163; It has been told in a quotation in ‘Umdat
al-Talib, he had paid allegiance to one of the ‘Alawites

[^90]: Ibid vol. v, p. 163

[^91]: Tarikh at-Tabari vol. v, p. 182

[^92]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 225

[^93]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 364

[^94]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. v, p. 169; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. 2,
p. 47

[^95]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. 2, p. 54; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p.
156

[^96]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 133; Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 4,
p. 67; Wafayat al-A‘yan vol. 2, p. 35

[^97]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 218, It is uncertain whether he had mint
coins or not

[^98]: Ibid p. 223

[^99]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 216; Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 243

[^100]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 225

[^101]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 2, pp 1285,1261; quoted from Tarikh
al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya p. 247

[^102]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. v, p. 173

[^103]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, vol. v, p. 250

[^104]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. 2, p. 463

[^105]: Ibid vol. 2, (the footnote), al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. v, p. 49

[^106]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 403

[^107]: Ibid vol. v, p. 65

[^108]: Ibid vol. v, p. 62; Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, No 7, p. 589, vol.
v, p. 117

[^109]: al-Aghani, vol. 9, p. 273

[^110]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. v, p. 121

[^111]: Ibid vol. v, p. 123

[^112]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 4, p. 56

[^113]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 5, p. 117

[^114]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. v, p. 42; It was written in one of the
footnotes of the book entitled “Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya that
Wellhausen who was a researcher was doubtful about it but he had no
reason for being so, see, p. 299

[^115]: See, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 4, p. 56;
Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 305; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 184

[^116]: Dhahabi, Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 147; al-Aghani, vol.
9, pp 258,259; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 305; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh,
vol. v, p. 42; Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 4, p. 59

[^117]: Shrah Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid vol. 6, p. 72

[^118]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 401

[^119]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. VI, p. 278

[^120]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XIII, pp 77-78

[^121]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 287 (و معني هذا انه لم يكن
يتبعهما اتباعاً تاما

[^122]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. 2, pp 224, 225; See, also vol. 3, p.
63

[^123]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 184

[^124]: al-Aghani, vol. 9, pp 262-264

[^125]: Ibid vol. 9, p. 263

[^126]: Ibid vol. 9, p. 264

[^127]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 4, p. 60

[^128]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, pp 310, 311

[^129]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, pp 193-191; Ibn Athir also quoted the
same statement in addition to some other remarks, see al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. v, pp 46-48

[^130]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 331; Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vo 5, p. 129;
al-Aghani, vol. 9, p. 255

[^131]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 306

[^132]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 102

[^133]: Musnad al-Imam al-Kazim (a), vol. I, pp 51-52

[^134]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 129

[^135]: Ibid vol. v, p. 314

[^136]: See Wellhausen, Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 285; Futuh
al-Buldan, p. 233

[^137]: See, Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, pp 315, 316, 320, 322; al-Aghani,
vol. 9, pp 266, 269

[^138]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. v, p. 142

[^139]: ‘Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf, vol. 9, p. 337

[^140]: Jami‘ Bayan al-’Ilm, vol. 1, pp,88, 91

[^141]: Jami‘ Bayan al-’Ilm, vol.,1 P.,92

[^142]: Sunan al-Darimi, vol. 1, p. 126; Taqyid al-’Ilm, pp 105,106

[^143]: Sunan al-Darimi, vol. 1, p. 126; Akhbar Isfahan, vol. I, p. 312;
Tadrib al-Rawi, vol. I, p. 312

[^144]: Muqadami’i bar Tarikh tadwin hadith (An introduction to History
of Hadith Compilation), Qum

[^145]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 246

[^146]: al-Tanbih wal-Ishraf, p. 277

[^147]: al-Kharaj, p. 132

[^148]: al-Kharaj, p. 131

[^149]: An Iranian woolen garment that was used by the learned and
nobles

[^150]: ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol.,1, p. 53

[^151]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 313

[^152]: al-Nujum al-Zahira, vol. 1, p. 239

[^153]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 5, p. 355

[^154]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 5, pp 362-366

[^155]: Ibid vol. v, p. 508

[^156]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, pp 198-199; Tarikh Gudhidih, p. 283;
Tarikh Mukhtasar al-duwal, pp 115-116

[^157]: Al-Tanbih wal-Ishraf, p. 277

[^158]: al-Futuh, vol. 8, p. 3

[^159]: Ibid vol. 8, p. 5

[^160]: Ibid vol. 8, pp 7, 21

[^161]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 335; See, al-Futuh, vol. 8, p. 8

[^162]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 335

[^163]: Ibid vol.,5, p. 336

[^164]: al-Futuh, vol. 8, p. 9

[^165]: Ibid vol. 8, p. 14; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 341

[^166]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 337; al-Futuh, vol. 8, p. 13

[^167]: al-Futuh, vol. 8, p. 14

[^168]: Ibid vol. 8, p. 19

[^169]: Ibid vol. 8, pp 20-22

[^170]: Ibid vol. 8, p. 24

[^171]: ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. 1, pp 233, 312

[^172]: al-Aghani, vol. 14, pp 277-278

[^173]: al-Aghani, vol. 14, p. 279

[^174]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 359; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. v,
p. 101

[^175]: See, Nujum al-Zahira, vol. 1, p. 245

[^176]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 205, See, Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v,
pp 515-520; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. v, p. 192, about his interest in
wearing clothes

[^177]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 328

[^178]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. v, p. 352

[^179]: Ibid

[^180]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 516

[^181]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 515

[^182]: Ibid vol. v, p. 516

[^183]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. v, p. 195

[^184]: al-Aghani, vol. 7, pp 5-6

[^185]: Tarikh al-Jahmiyya wal-Mu‘tazila, p. 17

[^186]: al-Iďah, p. 91

[^187]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. v, p. 449

[^188]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 116

[^189]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 558

[^190]: al-Aghani, vol. 22, p. 18

[^191]: Ibid vol. 22, pp 16-17

[^192]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 314

[^193]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 458

[^194]: al-Aghani, vol. 22, p. 16

[^195]: Ibid vol. 22, p. 21

[^196]: al-Aghani, vol. 22, p. 21

[^197]: Ibid vol. 22, p. 24

[^198]: Ibid vol. 22, pp 15-18

[^199]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 468

[^200]: See, Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, pp 541,543, 559-561

[^201]: See, Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, pp 463-464

[^202]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 4, p. 515; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p.
263

[^203]: al-’Araq fil-’asr al-Umawi, p. 230

[^204]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 4, p. 109

[^205]: Ibid vol. 4, p. 116

[^206]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah

[^207]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 4, p. 403

[^208]: Ibid vol. 4, p. 436; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 4, p. 58

[^209]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 4, p. 94; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi
al-Hadid, vol. v, p. 131

[^210]: See, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 273; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol.
4, p. 267

[^211]: al-Kamil fil-Adab, vol. 3, p. 312; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn
Abi al-Hadid, vol. 4, pp 146,181

[^212]: al-Futuh, vol. 7, p. 44

[^213]: Ibid vol. 6, p. 19

[^214]: Ibid vol. 6, p. 31-46

[^215]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, pp 125-126

[^216]: Ibid vol. v, pp 121-122; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 276

[^217]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 77

[^218]: Ibid vol. v, p. 85

[^219]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 130

[^220]: al-Kamil fil-Adab, vol. 2, p. 212l; al-Aghani, vol. l4, p. 244

[^221]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. v, p. 83

[^222]: al-Hayawan, vol. I, from page 41onwards

[^223]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 4, p. 19

[^224]: Ibid pp 91-92

[^225]: Ibid p. 91

[^226]: Ibid p. 94

[^227]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.4, p.19.

[^228]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. v, p. 56

[^229]: al-Aghani, vol. 20, p. 97, vol. 6, p. 149; Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. v, p. 106

[^230]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. v, p. 114, See,
also pp 117,118,119

[^231]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p. 262; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. 3,
p. 373

[^232]: al-Kamil fil-Adab, vol. 3, p. 314; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn
Abi al-Hadid, vol. 4, p. 147

[^233]: The credibility of this statement is subject to debate since,
for instance, there is a quotation about Shabib regarding his intention
of joing the Kharijites indicating that he was a financial motive
‘Allama Ja’far Murtaďa also remained dubious about their asceticism In
his book which has not published yet, there is a chapter under the title
of “al-Kharijites Tami‘un am Zuhhad” in which he touched upon this
despite the fact that some of which are not quite valid In addition,
there have been several quotations indicating their piety in their
personal lives which were not written in that book Undoubtedly,
regarding those things what the writer has said seemed quite true

[^234]: al-Kamil fil-Adab, vol. II, p. 149; al-’Araq fil-’asr al-Umawi,
pp 227,230; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 4, p. 89; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn
Abi al-Hadid, vol. v, p. 106

[^235]: al-’Araq fil-’asr al-Umawi, p. 242

[^236]: al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 106; Tabsirat al-’Awam, p. 46

[^237]: al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 106

[^238]: Ibid vol. 1, pp 109,140; al-Aghani, vol. 6, p. 142

[^239]: Nuh, 71:26,27

[^240]: al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 112

[^241]: Ibid vol. 1, p. 107

[^242]: Tabsirat al-’Awam, p. 41; al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. I, p. 122


