Decline of the Marwanid
=======================

Harith Ibn Surayj in Khurasan
-----------------------------

Khurasan was the major troubled spot for the Umayyads since it was not
only far from the capital but also it had its own problems such as
tribal wars between the Arab immigrants, cruelties of the Umayyads
prevalent there and relative political and economic independence which
had made there an important center among the eastern provinces.

The formation of the crucial revolutions out there during the final
years of the Umayyads ruling was not something which could be easily
overlooked by them. And finally from the very same spot appeared a
massive army that overthrew the Umayyads. Now the riot of Harith Ibn
Surayj, one of the important riots, from 166 to 127 (A.H.) is to be
discussed.

One of the riots against the Umayyads in Khurasan was Harith's that
paved the ground for the 'Abbasids to do so and gain victory. Harith was
an Arab from Tamim tribe who opposied the Umayyads rulers from 116 to
128 (A.H).

Khurasan not only was far from the capital, as a crucial center, but it
was suffering from tribal discords as well. In addition the wrong
treatment of the Arab caliphate of the Umayyads towards Mawali (freed
slaves) was another problem. The cruelties of the Umayyads rulers, which
were increasing day by day except the brief period in which 'Umar Ibn
'Abd al-’Aziz ruled, had resulted in some extended riots.

Zayd's riot which happened after the riot of Yazid Ibn Muhallab was a
more significant one.[^1] His main intention was supporting religion and
bringing justice to the society. Being at odds with the Umayyads rulers,
Harith had repeatedly proposed the idea of counseling for appointing the
ruler.[^2]

The events regarding Harith's riot were described in Tabari and in other
sources they were disregarded either completely or partially.

When Junayd 'Abd al-Rahman died in 116, Harith appreciated this
opportunity and gave start to his uprising. Within a short period of
time he managed to seize some cities such as Balkh, Juzjan, Fariyab,
Taliqan, Marw al-Rudh.[^3]

Since the people of various cities hated the Umayyads rulers, they
surrendered to Ibn Surayj, as later on 'Asim Ibn 'Abd Allah who was
Khurasan governor said, easily at their own will.[^4] Accordingly, 'Asim
wanted to ask for help from Damascus army. This was a threat for most of
the Iraqi rulers as well as the rulers of other areas.

After some clashes between 'Asim Ibn 'Abd Allah and Harith, Harith was
defeated and escaped towards Iraq. Those farmers who helped him upon
hearing about his defeat went back to their own lands.[^5] Harith once
again equipped his army. When 'Asim became aware that he had been
deposed, he compromised with Harith.

He also suggested that they ask Hisham to follow Qur'an and Prophet's
Sunna and if he did not accept them, they would revolt against him. At
the end, those supporting 'Asim could not compromise after a clash with
'Asim, Harith retreated.

Knowing about Harith's riots, Hisham asked Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah Qasri,
the governor of Iraq, to send his brother Asad Ibn 'Abd Allah, the
former governor of Khurasan, to suppress his riot. He along with the
armies of Damascus and Iraq headed for Khurasan. After some clashes
between Harith and him and a war between the residents of Tirmidh and
again Harith, Harith was defeated and escaped eastwards to take refuge
by the Turkish kings who were called Khaqan.[^6]

One of the well-known Turkish kings helping him later on came to be
known as Abu Muzahim for he was a trouble-maker for Arabs.[^7] Asad Ibn
'Abd Allah by no means could disregard the behavior of the Turkish kings
in spite of the fact that in his clashes with them most of the time he
could defeat them.

There were still clashes with the Turks when Nasr Ibn Sayyar was chosen
as Khurasan's governor in 121. He had led some of these clashes in
Balkh. In those clashes Harith Ibn Surayj, along with the Turks, fought
with Nasr Ibn Sayyar[^8]. After his defeat in Balkh, Harith and his
supporters all settled in Takharistan. Yusuf Ibn 'Umar, the governor of
Iraq, asked then Nasr Ibn Sayyar to attack the city of Shash, that had
harbored Harith, and beat it to the ground.[^9]

Provoking people to help him, Nasr reached Shash after a minor clash.
Then he ordered the king of that city who had compromised with him to
expel Harith from there. He accordingly sent him to Fariyab.

Harith and his supporters stayed there up to the time that Yazid Ibn
Walid by killing Walid Ibn Yazid in 126 came to rule the Umayyads. He
wanted to reform the Umayyads affairs. Harith was one of the opponents
of the Umayyads whose motto just the same as Yazid was resorting to
Qur'an and Prophet's Sunna. Nasr who was fighting with Juday' Ibn 'Ali
Kirmani thought that Harith was a greater threat to him, so he intended
to compromise with him.

Accordingly, on behalf of Yazid Ibn Walid, he sent him a guarantee of
clemency so he could return to Khurasan. Yazid by stating that he had
revolted for Allah's sake and since Allah's orders were overlooked and
people were under constant oppression, then he could return to Khurasan
again. He also ordered the governor of Iraq to release his children and
return his properties confiscated[^10] up to that. time he had been
residing in the Turkish lands for 12 years.

In 127, Yazid Ibn Walid was killed. After him Ibrahim Ibn Walid also
could not stay in power for a long time. Marwan Ibn Muhammad was the
last Umayyads caliph who came to power after him. Knowing that Marwan
would not continue the same policy as Yazid, Harith clashed with Nasr
along with Kirmani. After a while, he had a clash with Juday' Ibn 'Ali
Kirmani and Harith and the Mudrids fought against the residents of Yemen
who joined the residents of Kirman. Harith was killed in that clash in
128. Some points regarding Harith's riot should be taken into account.

There have been, at least, two major reasons for Harith's riot, even if
he himself was not aware of them, they could attract public attention in
addition to some other minor ones which led to his revolt against the
Umayyads one of which was obeying both Qur'an and Prophet's Sunna and
the other one was putting an end to the Umayyads's oppression.

A brief look at Harith's utterances and behaviors will show clearly that
in his riot from the start two things were important namely obeying
Qur'an and Sunna and paying allegiance to someone who does so.[^11] He
did so to divulge that the Umayyads rulers were by no means religious.
Since the Umayyads for most of the Muslims were widely known
irreligious, at that time referring to Qur'an and Sunna in most of the
riots was useful.

Once Harith in 126 went to Nasr Ibn Sayyar, Nasr gave him some gifts but
he said, ” I am neither after the pleasures of this worldly life nor do
I intend to marry an Arab rather”. **انما أسأل كتاب الله والعمل بالسنّه
واستعمال أهل الخير والفضل** I want to obey Qur'an and Sunna and the
pious and learned people.” [^12]

He also said that he had left Khurasan for thirteen years just for
putting an end to cruelties.414 Many people joined him since he had
written the main objectives of his riot and ordered his agents to read
them for the public on the way to Marw and in mosques too.[^13]

When he joined Kirmani, some of his supporters who observed how they
were killed and their properties were plundered under the leadership of
Bishr Ibn Jurmuz, once one of the closest companions of Harith,
separated from him saying. **نحن الفئة العادلة ولا نقاتل الا من يقاتلنا
“** We are just people and we do fight with no one expect him who wages
war against us.”[^14]

What has been said shows that Harith's mottos in his riot were adhering
to Qur'an and Prophet's Sunna and putting an end to the Umayyads's
cruelties by which he could attract some people to himself.

Other than the Arabs, some of the farmers who were under the pressure of
the Umayyads rulers also joined him to get rid of their cruelties.[^15]
Actually he, as an Arab, accepted to defend non-Arabs who were in
difficult condition, against the Umayyads.

What he had done was of great significance both to non-Arabs and Mawali
especially when the Sughdiyan were pressurized to leave their homeland
and take refuge by Turks in spite of the fact that they had embraced
Islam. For a long period, Harith was among Turks.

The majority of them, as it seems, were the Muslims who had not accepted
the ruling of Arabs and wanted to get rid of the Umayyads who were
taking tribute even from the Muslims. On the other hand, some others did
not give up their previous beliefs.

They also fought against the Arabs. Gerlof Van Vloten by referring to a
Muslim judge among the supporters of Harith in the Turkish land, as it
had been stated by Tabari, concluded that there were some Muslims among
them.[^16] This is a significant point for removing the doubt of some
individuals as Nasr Ibn Sayyar who had accused Harith of fighting along
with the unbelievers against the Muslims.[^17]

The Murji‘ites and the Jahmites in Harith’s Uprising
----------------------------------------------------

The second point worthy of stating in Harith's riot is his relationship
with Jahm Ibn Safwan and his attitude towards the Murji'ites. He was
accused of being linked to both of them. Jahm who was from Mawali[^18]
after studying in Kufa for a while returned to Balkh. For some time, he
joined Muqatil Ibn Sulayman, an expert commentator. Disagreeing him, he
was exiled to Tirmidh. There he joined Harith and took part in his riot.

Jahm's participation in Harith's riot is a significant point not because
of his beliefs regarding Allah's attributes but because of the fact that
by his participation both of them were accused of being Murji'ites.
Politically, there are two opposite attitudes regarding the Murji'ites
one of which is that they were accused of being linked to the cruel
rulers since in their views, faith was an inner state and different from
good deed, accordingly he who commits a sin is still faithful. This was
a belief that the caliphs and other Mammonists after the wordly pleasure
took advantage of.

Another point which is opposite to what was said is that the Murji'ites
participated in many uprisings such as that of Yazid Ibn Muhallab's. Abu
Ru'ba, one of the leaders of the Murji'ites had taken part in Yazid Ibn
Muhallab's uprising against the Umayyads at the very beginning of the
second century.[^19]

The participation of some of the Murji'ites in Zayd's uprising and
accusation of Harith of being linked to them both reveal that the
Murji'ites were at odds with the Umayyads. So how can these two opposite
points be judged?

Despite the Kharijites who regarded the cardinal sinners as unbelievers
and also the Mu'tazilites who regarded them as the unbelievers, the
Murji'ites were of the opinion that they would be still assumed
believers if they believe in two principles of Islam namely unity of
Allah and Prophethood when they commit sins. This is a jurisprudic
principle which is accepted by all of the Islamic sects.

They had no distinct political stance regarding those who were
unbelievers in the Kharijites' view. According to them, they should be
left to Allah and be hopeful for His Mercy. This also was a
controversial point among Muslims regarding 'Uthman in Jamal and Siffin
wars.

During Hajjaj's tenure in Iraq (also in Africa) in which most of the
local residents of Iran embraced Islam, the Umayyads's agents could no
longer take tributes from them and increase their revenues. As a result,
Hajjaj in consultation with the Umayyads's caliphs declared that only
saying diploma is not enough for someone to be a believer.

Instead, someone is Muslim who is able to read Qur'an. In addition,
there might have been some other conditions, for example it must be
clear whether he had been circumcised or not. Based on what was said,
Hajjaj went on to collect tributes from those who had newly embraced
Islam. There once again the same belief of the Murji'ites was
beneficial.

The Murji'ites in contrast with them were of the opinion that saying
diploma was enough for being a Muslim and they declared the conditions
that Hajjaj had set was unvalued in this regard. Accordingly, the
Murji'ites started to support the Iranians who had recently embraced
Islam and the revolutionists took advantage of them.

Penetration of scholastic and jurisprudic theology of Abu Hanifa in the
East and the existence of the Murji'ites beliefs in Khurasan and even a
village which was called Murji Abad in suburb of Balkh, all are the
evidence regarding this matter. Being one of the leaders of the
Murji'ites, Abu Hanifa not only participated in Zayd's uprising but
during the 'Abbasids's term helped the 'Alawites who had joined him as
well.[^20]

Wellhausen by referring to the above-mentioned point regarding the
Murji'ites added, “They attempted to create a common ground among all
tribes and that was opposing tyranny and defining the gospel
truth”.[^21]

Van Vloten in his research about the Murji'ites by referring to their
role in solving this difficult problem among various tribes of Muslims
and also their emphasis on observing the rights of all Muslims both
Arabs and non-Arabs, said that he refrained from judging the caliphs. He
also had spoken about the Murji'ites taking part in Zayd's uprising who
had helped him.[^22] Anyway, Harith was among the Murji'ites according
to Tabari.

This verse from Nasr Ibn Sayyar, Khurasan's governor, is an evidence
indicating that he was from the Murji'ites,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وارجاءكم لزّكم والشرك في قرن فأنتم أهل اشراك ومرجونا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are Murji'ites and are the same as atheists.” [^23]

Tabari's narrations regarding Harith and his relationship with the
Murji'ites are mostly about the events taking place during this period.
It was said that Harith had asked Jahm to read a book in which Harith
way of conduct was described.[^24]

It was also said that once he came back from Takharistan he had a clash
with Nasr. Two people have been appointed as judge. One of them was Jahm
himself and the other one was Muqatil Ibn Hayyan. They said finally that
Nasr should not interfere so that they might themselves be able to
consult with each other.[^25] There also is another narration regarding
Jahm's participation in that uprising. Based on that he was captured and
killed then by Salm Ibn Ahwaz.[^26]

A positive point in Harith's movement was regarding its mental aspect
and this shows that although these movements shaped mostly in
Transoxonia, somewhere far from the scientific centers, they were not
merely political ones but they had their own mental principles.

At last, it should be said that the term Jahmi, based on the reaction of
its opponents, and in a lesser degree, accusation of being Murji'ites
are two curses that the traditionists had in their minds against their
opponents. Some of the Jahm's beliefs were against incarnation and the
subject narrations on simile, so the traditionists opposed him.
Gradually, this term as a scientific curse was used while referring to
most of the people with quite different beliefs. Khalid al-’Ali's book
which was previously referred to can make this point clearer.

Walid Ibn Yazid’s Caliphate and Extreme Corruption of the Umayyads
------------------------------------------------------------------

Without doubt, one of the main reasons of the overthrowing of Umayyads,
being considered mostly by the rioters, was that their rulers were
irreligious. In other words, since they were indifferent towards both
religious beliefs of the people and those of themselves, those religious
people were made rise up against them. Walid Ibn Yazid was among those
rulers. Being the worst of all, he was one of the last caliphs of the
Umayyads who came to power after Hisham in Rabi' al-Thani, 125 and was
killed one year and two months later.

There are some poems descriptive stories and almost all historical
sources indicating that he was a corrupted man.

Tabari, for example said, “There are many narration's regarding Walid's
insult to religion”.

He had not mentioned most of them to avoid circumlocution.[^27] Mas'udi,
on the other hand, had quoted some of them. He was very interested in
drinking wine and passing nights among different singers and debauchees
was his every day action.[^28] One of the worst actions, as it was told,
was after reciting this verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَفْتَحُوا وَخَابَ كُلُّ جَبَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And (Allah's Prophets) asked for solutions and at last each obstinate
tyrant became disappointed.”

He said that he disliked it. Then he put Qur'an somewhere and shot
toward it saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتوعد كلّ جبــار عنيد فها انا ذاك جبـار عنيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا ما جئت ربك يوم حشر فقل يارب حرقني الوليد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Are you threatening Jabbar, the fighter. I am Jabbar the challenger. On
the Day of Judgement, say to Allah to set fire on me[^29]

Somewhere else, Walid himself by denying Prophethood had openly said
that he was an infidel.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تلعب بالخلافة هاشمي بلا وحي أتاه ولا كتاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A man of the Hashimites played with succession without being revealed a
Book.” [^30]

Mustuwfi regarding his wrongdoing, had said, “It was said that on one
Friday he had drunk wine with one of his bondmaids then he had sexual
intercourse with her. Then she had forced the defiled drunken bondmaid
to put turban on her head to cover her ringlet once she heard Iqama,
then she preached sermon[^31].

Being a remiss, one who could not supervise the affairs of various
cities, Walid, according to Ya'qubi, did many wrong things. For
instance, he had in his mind to build a room upon the roof of Ka'ba for
his debauchery so he ordered someone to do so.[^32]

It seems that his relatives prevented him from doing so for they were
afraid of its consequences. Another time, he asked Nasr Ibn Sayyar to
send him musical instruments.[^33] His brother, and accomplice in the
murder of Yazid Ibn Walid, also endorsed that he was after sin and
iniquity.[^34] It is worth saying that this sentence, **يا وليد احذر
الموت** **“** O Walid, be afraid of death” Had been engraved on his
ring. [^35]

The Umayyads degraded day by day simply because of what Walid did.
**وظهر للناس منه تهاون بالدين** **واستحفاف به** [^36] “He was the cause
of public negligence in religion.”

Abul-Faraj regarding him had said, “There has been written many poems
about his wrongdoing.”[^37] In spite of the fact that nearly all of the
Umayyads rulers were sinful and people were aware of this matter more or
less, no one among them was comparable to Walid in this regard.

His remissness in state affairs raised discord among the Umayyads and
paved the ground for the opportunists among them to exert themselves
more to prevent that dynasty from being fallen. Because of his actions,
Walid was disgusted by others and they were ready to kill him.

Abul-Faraj Isfahani, at the beginning of the seventh volume of Aghani
had described him in detail. All of his life was past while he occupied
himself with wine, women and music. He was also accused of being
heretic. In Aghani there are some verses indicating that he had believed
that “Mani” was the first and the last prophet.[^38]

According to Mada'ini, he was disliked by people because of his
aspirations, drinking and annoying the children of Hisham Ibn 'Abd
al-Malik.[^39] Once his palace was surrounded by troops loyal toYazid
Ibn Walid, he asked people while he was there, “Why do you attack me
while I was open-handed among you?”

They answered, **انتهاك ما حرّم الله وشرب الخمور ونكاح أمهات** **اولاد
أبيك واستخفافك بامرالله “** Because you have disregarded what Allah has
regarded as being unlawful, you also married your father's bondwomen who
had children from him.”

He said, “You are wrong.” Then he added, **وان فيما احل الله لسعة عما
ذكرت** [^40] “What Allah has declared as being lawful are more than what
you are speaking about.”

When he was killed by a group of rioters, Yazid Ibn Walid who was also
called Yazid III came to power.

Ayyub Sukhtiyani, who knew Qur'an by heart said, “I wish our caliph were
alive”.  
 The narrator said, “He said this because he was afraid of being
killed”.[^41]

Later on, Rashid and his son Mahdi 'Abbasi, recalled Walid a good man
and cursed his murderer, Yazid.[^42]

Yazid Ibn Walid's Riot
----------------------

It was said that Yazid Ibn Walid, Yazid III, was similar to 'Umar Ibn
'Abd al-’Aziz in behavior. He, along with some of the Umayyads and
renowned figures of Damascus managed to resist Walid and finally killed
him in Jumadi al-Thani, 126 (A.H.). He was the first Umayyads caliph who
was killed in such a way that all people knew about it.

What distinguished him from other Umayyads caliphs was that he was among
the Qadarites.[^43] This term, according to the traditionists, is
referred to the Mu'tazilites. They were of the opinion that human beings
have free will.

The Mu'tazilites were at odds with the traditionists since they were
rationalists while the traditionists were superficial. Because of their
influence on the Umayyads, the traditionists provoked them to suppress
the Mu'tazilites, the Murji'ites and the Jahmites.

The formation of the Qadarites in Damascus goes back to the time of
Hisham Ibn 'Abd al-Malik. Ghaylan Dimashqi, the founder of this sect in
Damascus,[^44] was killed in 119 by Hisham 'Abd al-Malik.[^45] Ghaylan
was linked to the Murji'ites too.[^46]

There were others among the Murji'ites in Damascus too. Tabari had
quoted 'Amr Ibn Sharahil, who was himself among them, as saying, “In 126
some individuals interceded them with Walid but he praised Hisham's
actions in killing or exiling the Qadarites.[^47] In contrast with
Hisham and Walid, Yazid Ibn Walid was more inclined towards the
Qadarites.

According to Shafi'i, he had gathered some of them around himself. The
companions of Ghaylan Dimashqi were also among them.[^48] Abu Bakr
Khawrazmi in one of his letters had written that he backed the
companions of Ghaylan.[^49] Mas'udi also said that he was a Mu'tazilites
and like them believed in the five principles of them.[^50]

At that time, however, some of the Mu'tazilites believed in those five
principles completely. They, according to Mas'udi, resided in other
areas of Damascus namely “Dariyya and al-Mizza”. He also said that they
helped Yazid once they saw that Walid was a sinner.[^51] Since Yazid Ibn
Walid was inclined toward the Mu'tazilites, his status in comparison
with that of 'Umar Ibn Abd al-’Aziz was very high in their esteem.[^52]

It should be noted that the traditionists during the second and third
centuries were not rationalists at all. They only took into account the
surface meaning of both Qur'an verses and traditions which were mostly
fabricated ones. They believed in anthropomorphism. To oppose them, the
Mu'tazilites emphasized the role of intellect.

The first trend prevailed among the traditionists such as Zuhri,
Abul-Zanad, Raja' Ibn Haywa who were linked to the Umayyads. The other
one as a result opposed the Umayyads. Accordingly, they were attentive
to the role of intellect in contrast with those who were attentive to
the traditions that were written long ago and were mostly forged ones.

These groups were also experts in political affairs so they were
opposing the Umayyads both because of their religious and political
approaches. As it was touched upon before, Ghaylan Dimashqi, who was
killed in 119 A.H by Hisham, and Ja'd Ibn Dirham, who was sent to Khalid
Ibn 'Abd Allah Qasri by Hisham, were also among them. The latter was
killed by Khalid in the feast of sacrifice.[^53]

Since Ja'd Ibn Dirham was one of the scholars of Marwan Ibn Muhammad,
the last caliph of the Umayyads, he was also called Marwan Ja'di.[^54]

He was later on killed because he was at odds with the traditionists. He
opposed anthropomorphism, which was prevailed among the Muslims by Jews.
According to Shahristani, this was a belief of a Jewish sect called the
Readers. In Torah, also there were some words about
anthropomorphism.[^55]

The same statement was also said by Ibn Khaldun.[^56] Ja'd Ibn Dirham
could stand individuals such as Wahb Ibn Munabba and others who were
Jewish. Wahb said to him, “Allah Himself said that He has hands and
eyes, so we believe what he had said”.[^57] Ibn Kuthayyir said, “His
beliefs were identical to those of Lubayd Ibn al-A'tham.[^58] This
statement according to some researchers was not true. He was said to
have such beliefs since he opposed the Jews.[^59]

Jahm Ibn Safwan who was said to have, the same beliefs as Ja'd Ibn
Dirham had also taken the same stance as him. He stood up to Muqatil Ibn
Sulayman, who believed in anthropomorphism.[^60] These people were
killed not merely because of religious reseasons but because they
opposed the Umayyads.

To bring an example, we can refer to the companions of Ghaylan Dimashqi
who cooperated with Yazid Ibn Walid. As it was said Jahm Ibn Safwan had
joined Harith Ibn Surayj and was killed in his uprising. According to
Qasimi, Jahm was killed not because of his religious beliefs, as it was
said by some,[^61] but because of political reasons.[^62] It is quite
obvious that the traditionists were dominant during the Umayyads's time.
Based on legal decision, the name of those being killed by the Umayyads
should not be divulged.

Yazid Ibn Walid in his revolt against Walid Ibn Yazid wanted to carry
out some reforms. In his first sermon he said, “We did not rise up for
this worldly life to assert dominance over others rather for Allah's
sake. We ask all to obey both Qur'an and Prophet's Sunna since the
religious edicts have become outmoded, piety has been disregarded and
the unlawful turned to be lawful. He also said, “The Sunna has changed
and there are obvious innovations”.

Referring to social justice, he said that he wanted to carry out some
financial reform to, **حتى تستقيم المعيشة بين المسلمين وتكونوا فيه سواء
“** When Muslims live in parity enable all to take advantage of equal
rights.” He also added, “You can pay allegiance to me based on what I
told you.

If I break my promise, you can do whatever you want to and if you could
find someone more effective than I am, I myself will be the first one to
pay allegiance to him.[^63] When he nominated Mansur Ibn Jumhur as the
governor of Iraq, he ordered him not to be as Walid since he was killed
because of his cruelties towards people.[^64]

Yazid's intention, as he himself said, was not just ruling. He had this
sentence written and hung from a post, **انا ندعوكم الى كتاب الله وسنّه
نبيه صلي الله عليه وآله وسلم وأن يصير الأمر شورى “** I ask you to obey
Qur'an and Prophet's Sunna. I also want to solve the problem of ruling
by counseling [^65]

He also asked the residents of Hims who wanted to rise up against him in
revenge for Walid's death. **ولكنّه يدعوهم الى شورى** [^66] I want you
to take advantage of counseling.

It should also be mentioned that even before Walid's death, the
residents of Damascus had paid allegiance to him.[^67]

Yazid III was called “Imperfect” since he had cut the share of those who
had greater share in public treasury during Walid's time.[^68] For the
reason, he ruled just for six months. It seems that he could not put his
plan into practice.

However, he was somehow successful based on what he was saying and doing
in this regard. From among his financial reforms, the issue of taking
tribute from those who had recently embraced Islam during 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz's time can be taken into account.

He also had taken into account problems of those who were to send to
exile merely because they were asked to pay tribute beyond their means.
In this regard, he said, **ولا أحمل على جزيتكم ما اجليهم به عن بلادهم
واقطع به نسلهم “** I will not ask people to pay tribute beyond their
means so that I prevent them from leaving their home and become
extinct.”[^69]

He also ordered Harith Ibn Surayj to return from the Turkish land to his
home. He had risen up against the Umayyads for the same reasons that
Yazid had so he accepted to return home. However, when Yazid was killed,
everything returned to its former state. He was killed too.[^70]

After six months of his ruling, Yazid died in 126. According to Tabari,
before his death, the Qadarites were repeatedly asking him to select a
successor for himself. He asked others to pay allegiance to his brother,
Ibrahim, and 'Abd al-’Aziz Ibn Hajjaj Ibn 'Abd al-Malik.[^71]

The Impacts of Walid’s Death on the Umayyads and Their Fall
-----------------------------------------------------------

From 41(A.H.) up to the time when Yazid Ibn Walid came to power, the
Umayyads have been weakened twice. The first time was in 64 after the
death of Mu'awiya II when it was intended to transfer power from the
Sufyanids branch of the Umayyads to Marwanids having some clashes in
Iraq and Damascus, the Umayyads managed to stay in power.

Thereafter, the caliphs came to power one by one without any problem. It
means that the caliphs who ruled never dismissed their heir apparents
who were most of the time their brothers. Even if the caliphs sometimes
bothered them. It was believed that they would never dismiss them since
they had paid allegiance to them.

When, for example, Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik who had chosen his brother
Hisham as his successor, became regretful from doing so, then other
people such as Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah disapproved of what he wanted to
do. He said to Yazid, “What you want to do will sow the seed of discord
between you. So people will criticize you.” Yazid accepted what he
said[^72].

Some of the caliphs such as 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz, however, did not
choose either their brothers or their sons as their successors. One of
the main reasons for the Umayyads to stay in power was that they
respected those principles regarding paying allegiance. As long as they
themselves were loyal to those principles, there was no problem and
people obeyidg them too.

That was why the Umayyads could suppress even the most serious riots.
When Walid Ibn Yazid was killed and Yazid III came to power, most of the
Umayyads wanted to take his position without considering the issue of
allegiance. Upon hearing that Yazid Ibn Walid wanted to breach
allegiance before Walid's death, Marwan Ibn Muhammad wrote a letter to
Sa'id Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, who was probably a renowned figure of the
Umayyads dynasty, saying, “Do not let them breach allegiance”.

He also added, “I have heard that some stupid men among the Umayyads
want to breach allegiance. By their actions, there will be opened a gate
which would not be closed even by Allah unless much blood be shed.[^73]

Marwan knew if he breached allegiance, he would sow the seed of discord.
Previously, Yazid Ibn Walid had consulted with 'Abbas Ibn Walid who,
according to Isfahani, was honest just the same as 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz. He then prevented him from doing so too.[^74] After securing
allegiance, he said, **هلك والله بنو مروان** [^75] “By God, the
Marwanids came to be murdered.”

Once Yazid came to power, according to Ya'qubi, the country was in a
state of turbulence. 'Abbas Ibn Walid in Hims, Bishr Ibn Walid in
Qinnasrin, 'Umar Ibn Walid in Jordan and Yazid Ibn Sulayman in Palestine
revolted against him.

Ya'qubi went on to say, “During a five-month-caliphate of him nearly all
countries of the world were in a state of turbulence. The Egyptians
killed their ruler, Hafs Ibn Walid. The residents of Humas killed 'Abd
Allah Ibn Shajara and the people of Medina removed their governor, 'Abd
al-’Aziz Ibn 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz, from office.[^76]

That was why the issue of succession, allegiance and absolute obedience
all lost their significance among Arabs. They revolted against one
another, as a result, respecting caliphate, something which was very
important before was no longer important. This matter was so significant
for them that Walid Ibn Yazid in his letter, had reminded people to
select the successors of his sons Hakam 'Uthman.[^77]

In Armenia, Marwan Ibn Muhammad rose up against Yazid III to avenge for
Walid's murder. He headed for Iraq to remove Yazid from office, but on
his way to Harran he compromised with him on condition that he surrender
Armenia, Musil, Jazira and Adharbayjan to him.[^78]

Ibrahim Ibn Walid came to power after Yazid. The Umayyads caliphate was
so weakened that he was called “Amir”(commander) not caliph.[^79] This
term was used for the independent governors who were ruling only during
the time of transfering power. They wee neither caliphs nor were chosen
by a caliph.

Marwan Ibn Muhammad who understood that it was the right moment to
improve the situation, headed for Damascus. He could defeat their army
in Safar, 127. He asked others to pay allegiance to Hakam and 'Uthman,
Walid's successors. Knowing that both of them were killed in prison,
then people paid allegiance to Marwan Ibn Muhammad.

To justify their action then, people said that both Hakam and 'Uthman
had selected him as their successor and this was alluded in their poems
that was composed in prison. So the last caliph of the Umayyads came to
power.

Marwan Ibn Muhammad and the Decline of the Umayyads
---------------------------------------------------

Marwan Ibn Muhammad was the last caliph of the Umayyads. He left Armenia
and went to Damascus to prevent the Umayyads from overthrowing. He came
to power by deposing Ibrahim. He had many problems one of which was a
riot in Hims. Dhahhak Ibn Qays, one of the leaders of the Kharijites,
was a troublemaker for him.

Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik Ibn Hisham in Iraq and Thabit Ibn Na'im
Judhami in Jordan revolted aginst him. Marwan could suppress those riots
then he nominated 'Amr Ibn Hubayra Fazari as Iraq's governor. He killed
Dhahhak Ibn Qays so he had everything under his control. The Kharijites
who were from Yemen were so powerful that they could participate in Hajj
pilgrimage openly.

Abu Hamza Mukhtar Ibn 'Awf was one of them who managed to have Medina in
his control in Safar, 130 (A.H.) He was among the Abaďiyya. 'Abd Allah
Ibn Yahya Kindi who had called himself Talib al-Haqq (the seeker of the
truth). He said that he was the Commander of the Faithful.

He was among the Abaďiyya. In Medina Abu Hamza preached a sermon in a
literary style that is very famous. The residents of Medina, as Ya'qubi
said, said their prayer under the leadership of him. They were so proud
of themselves that they decided to attack Damascus. But the Umayyads
army defeated them. When they returned to Medina their residents rose up
against them. So they escaped to Yemen.

The city of Khurasan was in a state of chaos too. Kirmani advanced but,
according to Ya'qubi, Abu Muslim was more successful than him.

He quoted Abu Muslim as saying, “O, Allah, I help both Nasr and I
Kirmani, not to defeat each other”.[^80] Abu Muslim defeated Nasr and
died when he wanted to escape to Sawi. Abu Muslim then entered Niyshabur
in Ramaďan, 130. He selected some governors for various districts of
Khurasan.

The army of Khurasan under the leadership of Quhtaba and his son turned
toward west and could defeat those armies that were behind the Umayyads.
In Muharram, 132, this army defeated Ibn Hubayra in Iraq. The he escaped
to West. Quhtaba once again defeated him and he was drowned in the
Euphrates. So the Umayyads were doomed to decline. When Marwan Ibn
Muhammad heard the army of Khurasan had defeated the army of Iraq
without having commander, he said, “I swear by Allah that everything is
over. Who has ever heard that a dead body be able to defeat someone who
is alive?”

Abu Salama Khallal in Iraq, asked people to pay allegiance to the
'Abbasids, once the Umayyads were dethroned, he sent Abul-'Abbas to Kufa
and after a while, asked people to pay allegiance to him. Later on, he
was told to bring the 'Alawites to power so he was killed at Abu
Muslim's behest.

Saffah sent his uncle, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Ali to Damascus to fight against
the Umayyads and kill Marwan. In Dhi al-Hajja, 132 Marwan was killed in
a battlefront. It caused the downfall the Umayyads all over the east
except Andalusia. According to Mas'udi, they ruled for nearly ninety
years and eleven months and thirteen days that is nearly about a
thousand months.[^81]

Different aspects of the Umayyads's decline were taken into account
previously.[^82] To elaborate them in detail philosophical discussions
about history are needed. Historians do not discuss about them. In
philosophical and ideological discussion, individuals can not overlook
their personal attitudes so they might manipulate the historical
accounts. It should be mentioned that prior to the overthrowing of the
Umayyads, no one had spoken about their decline since it was not obvious
whether they could solve their problems or not. But after it, the issue
of their decline came to be discussed.

Some points regarding the Umayyads should be taken into account one of
which is their party demorality over which the Umayyads laid the
foundation of their political power. This was closely related to the
superiority of a specific tribe of Quraysh, which was called the
Umayyads. They were supported by the residents of Damascus in the
northern part of the Hijaz.

The skirmish between the tribes of northern and southern was almost
always troublesome. During the very last years of their ruling, their
hostility peaked such that it was not possible for them to improve the
condition of some cities especially Khurasan.

There were also some other clashes throughout Arabic land mainly in Iraq
and Iran, the residing places of most of the immigrant Arabs. In Iraq,
the northern tribe and southern one were at odds with each other. During
Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah Qasri's time, Arabs residing in the north that
were called the Muďrites were not satisfied with him since he was living
in the south.

When Yusuf Ibn 'Umar came to power, the opposite thing happened. He
killed Khalid and the condition was worse. Yusuf Ibn 'Umar then was sent
to prison and killed by Yazid Ibn Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah.[^83]

Tribal clashes, according to Mas'udi, were the main reason of the
Umayyads's overthrowing, he also said that Marwan Ibn Muhammad protected
the Nazarites against the residents of Yemen. His action then made the
residents of Yemen support his opponents from the Hashimites.[^84]

There were more problems in Khurasan. This city was an escape route
years before the Umayyads's overthrowing for Iraqi rebels. Harith Ibn
Surayj doubled the problem of that city. Constant clashes between Arabs
and the residents of Transoxania had weakened Arabs there.

This city also tackled a problem for decades that was Hajjaj's cruelties
to the newly embraced Muslims and taking tribute from them. In that
condition, the skirmish between the northern and southern Arabs
threatened the Umayyads. Nasr Ibn Sayyar backed the Nazarites and Juday'
Ibn 'Ali Kirmani supported northern Arabs and the residents of Yemen.

Their skirmish was advantageous to the opponents of the Umayyads. Abu
Muslim Khurasani could take advantage of the positive attitude of the
residents of Khurasan towards Shi'ism while he had asked the 'Abbasids
for their support. He was also a good commander.

The above-mentioned points altogether had paved the ground for a radical
change in Khurasan. Khurasan was far from the capital so the Umayyads
could not easily reach there. It also should be mentioned that the army
of Damascus could not help Nasr Ibn Sayyar since it was, fighting
against the Kharijites in Iraq. The Kharijites took advantage of the
clashes happening from 126 to 127.

Dhahhak Ibn Qays was among them who was at odds with Marwan Ibn Muhammad
for a long time. He was killed in 127. The Kharijites who were in Iraq
and south of Iran were great threat to the Umayyads too. The victory of
the 'Abbasids in Khurasan was the main reason of the Umayyads's decline.
It was not obvious why the 'Abbasids not others could take the place of
the Umayyads.

This has its own reasons related to their approaches not to the decline
of the Umayyads, since the Hashimites were far better than the Umayyads
in ruling, they could easily depose them. If they have not had this
power, no one could ever imagine that they would be able to remove
Quraysh from the scene. This tribe was so powerful that could survive
even after the overthrowing of the 'Abbasids by Mongols.

The Umayyads's fall was somehow because of their internal clashes too.
The internal clashes, as it said earlier, had paved the ground for both
the caliphs and their heirs apparent who were almost more than two
persons from the time of 'Abd al-Malik onward and they were plotting
against each other. The riot of Yazid III also a threat to their
influence. Killing those who were supposed to come to power from 126 to
127 reminds us of the Sassanids's kings during the very last years of
their rules.

The Umayyads was not held in high esteem by people because of their lack
of attention to religion in spite of the efforts being made by 'Umar Ibn
'Abd al-’Aziz and Hisham. Walid Ibn Yazid, on the other hand, made the
condition worse with his corruption and cruelties in ruling. In
historical sources, there is more information in this regard.

Some of these historical accounts, however, have been manipulated, for
the writers of them were either inclined toward the 'Abbasids or other
sects.

Another reason for the residents of Iraq and Khurasan to revolt against
the Umayyads was that they were under their domination both politically
and economically. The Umayyads were accused of being prejudiced toward
the Mawalis. Non-Arabs, as it was said, had some influence on the
Umayyads but it was not such that to let them progress.

Political Views of the Marwanids
--------------------------------

It is certain that some issues such as people's right to decide on a way
a caliph should be chosen, to reject or accept him as well as some other
matters were the bases of political system of the Sunnis. In addition,
the political stance of both Sahaba (The Companions of the Prophet) and
Tabi'in (The followers of Sahaba) during the first century should be
taken into account in this regard.

However, other events taking place thereafter during other centuries
were also important in the formation of their policy. But those
principles which were written by Mawardi (450 AD) and Abu Ya'la (458 AD)
under the title of al-Ahkam as-Sultaniyya during the fifth century were
mostly emanating from the political developments of the 1st century.

To emphasize some of the ordinances, some of political developments of
the second century were also mentioned there. For instance, whatsoever
both Sahaba and Tabi'in did or what the others were doing in their
presence without their objection were regarded as a “Divine Decree”
which should be obeyed by others too.

Mawardi said, “If what Sulayman had done is not proof endorsing both the
scholars from Tabi'in contemporary with him and those who do not fear
for Allah's sake will be proof”.[^85]

This attitude had emanated from the above-mentioned principle of the
Sunnis regarding “Divine Decree.”

The formation of the political system of the Sunnis and some other sects
was discussed in detail formerly. Now what had happened in this regard
during the period of the Marwanids is to be discussed.

There has been a significant change in the concept of caliphate
particularly during the Marwanids. The more the caliphs were separated
from the religion, the more the concept of caliphate was held in high
regard with the intention of deceiving people.

At first, the meaning of caliphate in its political sense was equal to
the succession of the Holy Prophet. Abu Bakr was not pleased to call
such a person “Allah's Viceroy”.[^86] But later on, gradually this term
came to be used both in poems and sermons.

Accordingly, caliphs were honored more and some sort of fatalism
prevailed regarding caliphate. The ground has been paved much more
during the Marwanids than in time of 'Uthman and Mu'awiya.

The poets of that time used some terms in reference to the Marwanids's
caliphs such as,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خليفة الله من الارض، الامين المأمون، امام المسلمين، امين الله، امام
الاسلام، جنه الدين، الخليفه المبارك، راعي الله في الارض، الامام
المصطفي، وليّ الحق، الامام العادل، ولي عهدالله ،‌امام الهدي، الامام
المبارك ، امام العدل، الامام المنصور، خيارالله للناس، الحكم المصفي،
امام الوري، ربّ الجنود، خليفه الحق، الخليفه الافضل، الملك المبارك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah's Viceroy, trustee and trusted, Muslims' leader, religion's
shield, auspicious caliph, public leader on behalf of God, selected
Imam, guardian of the Truth, just Imam, Allah's heir apparent, Imam of
guidance, auspicious Imam, leader led by God, selected ruler,supreme
chief of council, forerunner of troops, truthful caliph, superior caliph
and auspicious ruler, …[^87]

The poets played a significant role in making these terms known to the
public. Taking into account the fact that their poets were important to
Arabs, one can understand the impact of using such terms by them.[^88]
One of the Umayyads peoms, Akhtal by referring to 'Abd al-Malik said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقـد جعـل الله الخلافـة فيكـم بابيـض لا عاري الخوان ولا جدب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولكـن رآه الله مـوضع حقـهّا علـى رغم اعداء وصدّادة كـذب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou art Allah's successor, someone who is merciful and has a shining
face. Despite what your enemies desired Allah saw thee as the mere
truth[^89]

By referring to Bishr Ibn Marwan, he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعطاكم الله ما انتم أحق به اذا الملوك على امثاله اقترعوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah has bestowed thee something that Thou deserve while all other
kings have something (which they do not deserve) [^90]

By referring to 'Abd al-Malik, Jarir said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله طوّقك الخلافة والهدي والله ليس لما قضي تبديـل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وليّ الخلافة والكرامة أهلها فالملك أفيح والعطاء جزيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou have been appointed as Allah's vicegerent. What He had decided upon
could not be changed. Allah has given caliphate and greatness to someone
who deserves it. That is why thy kingdom is so vast and Thou art so
generous[^91]

Somewhere else to stress the caliphate of 'Abd al-Rahman as a “Divine
Decree” he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انت الامين امين الله لاسرف فيمـا وليـت ولا هيّابـه ورع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انت المبارك يهدي الله شيعته اذا تفرقـّت الاهـواء والشيّـع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا آل مروان ان الله فضلكم فضلاً عظيماً على من دينه البدع
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou art Allah's trustee, someone who does not waste what has been
given, someone who is fearless. Thou art the source of blessings.
Whenever different parties go astray, Allah will guide His followers. O
the Marwanids! Allah has regarded Thee. [^92]

He also composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله قدّر ان تكون خليفة خير البرّية وارتضاك المرتضى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah had chosen thee as His viceroy. Thou are the right man for
this[^93]

Farazdaq said about 'Abd al-Malik,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالارض لله ولاها خليفته وصاحب الله فيها غير مغلـوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

The owner of this land is Allah and thou art as His vicegerent. The
owner of Allah's land would not be defeated there[^94]

By referring to Walid Farazdaq said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
امّا وليد فانّ الله اورثه بعلمه فيه ملكاً ثابت الدّْعم
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for Walid, with the knowledge of God, he was granted a firm
monarchy[^95]  
 By referring to Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به أمّن الله البلاد، فساكن بكلّ طريد ليلها ونهارها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah selected thee as a peacemaker so a traveller can go whenever he
wants to no matter whether it is day or night  
 'Adi Ibn Riqa' regarding Walid said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ الوليد اميرالمومنين له ملك عليه اعان الله فارتفعا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Walid, the Commander of the Faithful, is a king. Allah assists him in
his ruling, so he has been dignified by Allah[^96]  
 Ahwas composed this verse about Walid,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تخّيره ربّ العباد لخلقه وليّاً وكان الله بالنّاس اعلمـا
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Lord of the world had nominated him as His guardian. Taking into
account that Allah is wiser than people[^97]  
 He said about Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سليمان اذ ولاك ربّك حكمنا وسلطاناً فاحكم اذا قلت واعدل
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Sulayman! Since thou have been chosen by Allah as our king, tell the
truth and be just whenever thou want to judge[^98]  
 Farazdaq composed this verse about Sulayman,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال الله انّك انـت اعلـي من المتلمسين لك الخبالا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأعطاك الخلافه غيرغصب ولم تركب لتغصبها قبالا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then Allah said, “Thou art far better than those who want to enervate
thee-so thou deserve to be appointed as His viceroy. Thou did not roll
thy sleeves to usurp it” [^99]  
 Jarir composed these verses about Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اما يزيـد فـانّ الله فهّمه حكماً واعطاه ملكاً واضح النور
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكفي الخليفه انّ الله فضّله عزم وثيق وعند غير تقريـر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah has given Yazid wisdom. Thou art as the source of light. Allah has
given thee priority over others in will and it suffices thee[^100]  
 Jarir Ibn Ayyub, Sulayman 'Abd al-Malik's son said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله اعطاكم من علمه بكم حكماً وما بعد حكم الله تعقيب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Since Allah knew thee, He had appointed thee as the ruler, no one is
permitted to disobey Allah's decree[^101]  
 He also said to 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ الذي بعث النّبي محمدا جعل الخلافه في الامام العادل
  </p>
</blockquote>

The One Who sent Muhammad as the Prophet,  
 Appointed the just Imam to the Khilafat.[^102]

Farazdaq said to Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعطي بن عاتكة الذي ما فوقه غيرالنبوه والجلال الاجلل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سلطانه وعصا النبي وخاتمـا القي اله بجرانه والكلكل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah bestowed something to son of 'Atika. Nothing is greater than it
except the Prophethood and monotheism. Allah had given him both the
stick and the ring. [^103]

These verses quoted by 'Atwan were composed by Farazdaq and Jarir and
others. There are many verses in this regard in Diwan[^104] Farazdaq.

The residents of Damascus also honored caliphate from the time of
Mu'awiya onward.[^105] During Ayyam al-Muwadi'a the years that the resid
ents of Damascus were going to Mecca for pilgrimage while they were
under the domination of Ibn Zubayr, 'Ubayd Ibn 'Umayr, the story-teller,
backbited their caliph. They said to him,”O the pious man! Retract what
you said and do not backbite Allah's Viceroy since he should be honored
even more than Ka'ba.[^106]

Hajjaj himself followed the same policy in Iraq. He told Hasan Muthanna,
“O Hasan! You have to remind him as a good man. He is Allah's vicegerent
on earth.[^107] In his first speech in Kufa he said, ان اميرالمؤمنين
عبدالملك بن مروان استخلفه الله عزوجل في بلاده وارتضاه اماماً علي عباده “
Almighty God placed Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan, His
Viceroy as well as His servants' leader.” [^108]

Hajjaj in his letter to 'Abd al-Malik by referring to him said, “You are
the Commander of the Faithful and Allah's Viceroy. You are infallible
both in speech and in practice. You have been nominated as his
guardian.[^109] Fatima, the daughter of 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz said,
after coming to power my father has not washed his body when sever he
was defiled.[^110]

The residents of Damascus were of the opinion that obeying him was equal
to obeying Allah. They did not believe that he should obey Allah.

Then they got angry and said,”You are disobeying the Commander of the
Faithful. He could get rid of him very hard.[^111] Hajjaj wanted to
treat the residents of Iraq in the same way.

He was told to say, “Do you believe that Allah does not reveal to me. O
people of Iraq! I do swear by him that he still does so”.[^112]

He was also told to say, “Which one is superior a Messenger or a
vicegerent?” Probably he wanted to say that he as Allah's viceroy was
superior to Allah's Prophet.[^113] It should be mentioned that it is not
certain whether these narrations are true or not. Mas'udi attributed the
very same statement to Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah Qasri, the governor of
Mecca in 89 AH.

According to him, he compared Walid with Ibrahim (a). He said, “When
Ibrahim asked Allah for water, he sent him salty water while upon
Walid's request, he sent fresh water to him.[^114] 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz was of the opinion that not only Sulayman was nominated by
Allah but he himself was as Allah's Viceroy too.[^115]

'Amr Ibn Hubayra Fazari, Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik's agent in Iran and
Khurasan, regarding Yazid told Hasan Basri and others,”Yazid Ibn 'Abd
al-Malik is Allah's Viceroy among people.”[^116]

Accordingly, they tried to say that Allah had helped them to defeat all
of their enemies such as the Zaydids and the Shi'ite Muslims, the
Kharijites as well as individuals such as 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Ash'ath and
Yazid Ibn Muhallab. For these reasons, he wanted to prove that the
Umayyads were not only legitimate but also invincible.[^117]

The holiness of the Umayyads strengthened by attributing Mahdawism to
their caliphs. This term was first likely to be used by Allah's prophet
in his speeches. It was also said that Mukhtar Ibn Abi 'Ubayd had used
this word in his letter to Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya. He had written,
**للمهدي محمد بن علي من المختار بن ابي عبيد؛ سلام عليك يا ایها المهدي
“** From Mukhtar Ibn Abi 'Ubayd to Muhammad Ibn 'Ali Ibn Mukhtar. Peace
be upon you. O Mahdi!” [^118]

Probably, they wanted to emphasize on their role in leading by using
this word, but overemphasizing it would decrease its probability.
Mujahid was quoted as saying, (probably these narration's were
attributed to them), “You would call Mu'awiya Mahdi if you could see
him.[^119] Farazdaq by referring to Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik used this
term for some of the Umayyads's caliphs.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن عبد شمس انت سادس ستة خلائف كانوا منهـم العمُّ والاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هـداة ومهديين عثمـان منهـم ومروان وابن الابطحين المطيب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou art the sixth caliph among the children of 'Abd ash-Shams. Some of
thy forefathers such as 'Uthman, Marwan and Mu'awiya were guided by
Allah and they guided others too[^120]  
 Farazdaq composed this verse about Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فان امامك المهديُّ يهدي به الرحمن من خشي الضَّلالا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mahdi is standing before thee. He is someone who at Allah's behest can
guide whosoever does not want to be led astray[^121]

He also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاجاب دعوتنا وانقَذًنا بخلافة المهديِّ من ضُرِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah accepted our prayers and protected us by His viceroy, Mahdi when
we were in trouble[^122]  
 Jarir composed this verse about Sulayman,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سليمانُ المبارك قد علِمْتُم هُوَ المهديُّ قد وضح السبيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou know that Sulayman is Mahdi, someone who guides thee[^123]  
 The word was attributed to 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz in some other
sources as well.[^124] Jarir composed this verse about him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انت المبارك والمهديُّ سيرته تعصي الهوى وتقوم الليل بالسور
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou are ominous and thy conduct is just the same as that of Mahdi. Thou
art not after carnal desire. Thou spend nights by saying prayer[^125]  
 He also composed this verse about Hisham Ibn 'Abd al-Malik,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت لها الخليفه غير شك هو المهديُّ والحكَمُ الرشيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then I said thou art Mahdi without doubt. Thou art a ruler who had been
guided[^126]  
 Farazdaq said about him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هو المالك المهديُّ والسابق الذي له اول المجد التليد وآخره
  </p>
</blockquote>

He is Mahdi and superior to others. Praise does solely belong to
thee[^127]

Referring to these verses, one can say for sure that in addition to
these verses there have been some other forged traditions in this regard
which all indicate that this word was deeply rooted in Mahdawism and it
did not come to common usage simply.

One of the main features of the Umayyads ruling that was mostly based on
the holiness of their caliphs was that their rulers were dictators.
During the times of the first caliphs, counseling was apparently
important in their ruling. But later on people interfered in their
ruling and by exerting influence on them they enervated rulers.

Once they managed to come to power by force, they became dictators so
they could suppress their opponents under the pretext of religion and
policy.

Ibn Tiqtaqa described 'Abd al-Malik Marwan by saying, “He was someone
who for the first time did not let peasants speak in front of caliphs
while previously they could do this.”[^128]

Suyuti said,”He was the first ever one forebode enjoining the good and
prohibiting the evil.”[^129]

In his first sermon 'Abd al-Malik said, “You are asking others to be
pious while you forget yourself. I swear by Allah that I will behead him
who tells me to be pious”.[^130]

By referring to those who wanted him to be the same as Muhajirun, he
said, “Do not ask me to be the same as them since you are not following
them yourself”[^131].

'Abd al-Malik supported Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf Thaqafi who was a dictator in
Iraq. What he was doing could uncover his despotic policy in
ruling.Entering Kufa, Hajjaj told people, “The caliph had given me both
a lash and a sword to come to you but on my way here I missed the lash
so what remained was a sword.”[^132]

'Abd al-Malik said,”He will not do either what the weak caliph ('Uthman)
or what the flattering caliph (Mu'awiya) did. He will just use his sword
when handling people.[^133]Before his death, 'Abd al-Malik told his son,
Walid, to kill those who had not paid allegiance to him.[^134]

Later on, Mansur who himself was also a dictator described 'Abd al-Malik
as being a dictator.[^135]

When Mu'awiya Ibn Farra and Hajjaj went to see 'Abd al-Malik, he asked
Mu'awiya,”What is Hajjaj doing”?

He replied,”If I tell you the truth, you will kill me. If not, God will
punish me”.  
 Then 'Abd al-Malik told Hajjaj, “Do not torture him instead exile him
to Sind.”[^136]

The Marwanids were well-known for being tyrannical but some of them were
somehow better in this regard.

People of the Book including the Jewsh and the Christians have strong
cultural influence on the credulous Muslims. This should be discussed in
detail somewhere else. What is relevant to our discussion is their roles
in the political developments and particularly regarding the issue of
caliphate.

The credulous Muslims believed that in their Books there are many
predictions about them, about their caliphs, even about their names,
some events of their lives as well as the sequence of them. What is to
be mentioned here is just a brief account of what was happening at that
time.

The Umayyads caliphs tried, by making use of either what the people of
the Book told to the Muslims or words they themselves put into their
mouths or any other means, to pretend that their names had been written
in the divine Books.

This matter was of great importance concerning the legitimacy of their
ruling. In addition, they could claim that such and such caliph had been
chosen at Allah's behest. It is said that Mu'awiya had coveted caliphate
once 'Uthman consulted with him and others about how to cope with his
opponents. During Hajj rite someone read this verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ الامير بعده عليُّ و في الزبير خلف رضيُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily 'Ali is Amir after him and Zubayr, too, is a good successor  
 Ka'b al-Ahbar told him,”You are telling lie. Mu'awiya will succeed
'Uthman”. Then Mu'awiya was informed about what he had said.  
 He said to Mu'awiya,”You will come to power after 'Uthman”.

He was very pleased with what he said to him.[^137] Someone whose name
was Yusuf and had embraced Judism prophesied that 'Abd al-Malik would be
caliph.[^138] Wahb Ibn Munabba on the other hand, called 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz the guilder of the nation.[^139] He, just the same as Ka'b
al-Ahbar, quoted some statements from the Books of the Jews and
Christians for the Muslims.

Suyuti quoted 'Abd Allah, the son of 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz who had
encountered a monk in Jazira, as saying, “The monk sat down just next to
me while he had never sitten next to anyone else.”

He told me, “Do you know why I came to meet you?”  
 He said, “No”.  
 The monk said, “Because of your father since (based on what was written
in our books) he is one of the just Imams.”

He is like Rajab among other Haram months are Dhi l-Qa'da, Dhil-Hajja
and Muharram they stand for Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman. Rajab is the
other one that is not after Muharram. It denotes 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz.[^140]

Accordingly, the name of those four caliphs-not the name of 'Ali-had
been mentioned in the Jewish books. It was also said that 'Umar Ibn 'Abd
al-’Aziz had told a Christian,”Who would be the next caliph, based on
your books, after Sulayman”?

“You”, he said.[^141] Hajjaj asked him about his successor.  
 He said,”Someone whose name is Yazid will be your successor.”  
 Hajjaj thought that he might be Yazid Ibn Muhallab so he deposed
him.[^142]

Khalid Ibn Rib'i said,”We have founded in Torah that both the earth and
the heaven will weep on 'Umar Ibn Abd al-’Aziz's death for forty
days.”[^143] Muhammad Ibn Ka'b Quraďi also by bringing an example from
the Israelis wanted to warn all of the consequences of disobeying
caliphs.[^144]

It was said that 'Abd al-Malik coined dhms and Dinars since Khalid had
told him,”O caliph! the Jewish and Christian scholars told me that
according to their books whosoever among caliphs carves the name of
Allah on coins, he shall be long-lived.” Thereafter, he, for the first
time, minted Islamic coins.[^145]

Observing these cases, the common people among the Muslims who were
mostly affected by the predictions of the people of the Book justified
the legitimacy of the Umayyads rulers. Referring to Ayyub, the son of
Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, Jarir who was an eminent poet of the
Umayyads composed these verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انت الخليفه للرّحمن يعرفه اهلُ الزًّبور وفي التوراة مكتوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله فضَّلـه والله وفَّقــَهُ توفيق يوسف اذا وصاه يعقوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thou art Allah's Viceroy. The Zoroastrians know thee and thy name had
been written in Torah. Allah had favored thee.Thou art just the same as
Yusuf who became triumphant after his father's will, would be triumphant
too[^146]

It was also said that the Umayyads caliphs were of the opinion that
their names had been written in Torah. Those who were familiar with the
divine Books of both the Jewish and Christians had the same opinion.

At the end, it seems appropriate to go over the treaty signed by Walid
Ibn Yazid for the heir apparentship of his sons Hakam and 'Uthman. This
treaty is a minute text which can reflect some of the formal beliefs of
the government. At the outset, he elucidated prophets' mission up to the
time when Allah appointed Muhammad (S) as a prophet.

It was after him, when his caliphs pursued his course of action. Allah's
caliphs came one after the other on the basis of what Allah bestowed
from the prophets' heritage and offered that caliphate.

Allah destroyed everyone who took a stand against their right, and
exterminated everyone who was separated from their company, and made the
caliphs dominate everyone who disparage their sainthood and considered
Allah's Judgment concerning them of a different kind, and made them a
lesson for others. Allah treated those being out of the obedience
ordered by him like this. Up to this point, the conquest of all
anti-Umayyads rebellions is deemed to be a reason for the Umayyads'
rightfulness.

Thereupon, for the purpose of setting forth the place of caliphate he
noted the verse of human being succession and angels' objection and
correlated it with caliphate by stating, “Thus, through caliphate Allah
preserves whatever is on the earth and via obedience makes humans
prosperous. And Allah knows that nothing is stable and strong unless

Allah keeps His truth through an obedient servant, resettles His work,
and hinders (the people) from disobedience, keep from unlawful matters
and defends His limits. And everyone who profits by this obedience, is
Allah's friend, and the obedient of His orders, and the one guided by
Allah.”

Afterwards, with further elaboration he points out the significance of
obedience stating, “It is through obedience that the prosperous attain
their position, and via disobedience, Allah destroy the misled,
rebellious and blind ones.”

He intermingled Allah's obedience together with that of caliphs.
Afterwards he spoke of “treaty” by which he meant that very heir
apparent ship. A treaty whose consolidation was inspired to caliphs by
Allah, so that there would remain a hope and means of unity and intimacy
amongst the people and the Satan would give up the hope of demolishing
religion.

This treaty is indicative of Islam integrity and is amongst Allah's
great grace the bondman has made indispensable for the servants. A
matter through which Allah hampered the people from disunity, destroyed
hypocrisy and kept them from any disparity. Further, there has been more
explanations on the significance of “treaty”.

Then he said, Amir al-Mu'minin, Commander of the Faithful, (Walid)
regarded nothing of much more importance than his treaty since Allah has
granted caliphate, inasmuch as he knew its position in Muslims' work and
at present asks Allah to make him succeed in this work. Amir al-Mu'minin
is of the belief that he ought to have two treaty in succession.
Afterwards, he made reference to his two sons Hakam and 'Uthman and
appointed them to heir apparentship one after the other.[^147]

The most salient point of this treaty is that attending to heir
apparentship has been deemed a momentous matter and a God-given gift
maintaining the security and reverence of the believers' community. This
importance is to the extent that he regarded it as a taken of Islam
integrity.[^148]

Belief in predestination and sanctifying caliphate has been repeatedly
mentioned in the treaty. As it's been pointed out, Allah's obedience has
been considered the same as caliph's obedience, on the grounds that it
was Allah who appointed caliphs as His Viceroys on the earth and who
inspired them with the idea of heir apparentship.

Scholars Serve al-Marwan
------------------------

At Umayyads's era, science was confined to al-Hadith, tradition,
knowledge incorporating juristic, ethical, historical and interpretative
narrations. After the death of the Prophet's companions, just a few
people showed some interest in science. In as much as the time was not
prone for such a matter; besides, Umayyads didn't show an interest in
that.

After a long time, it comes to the mind of some people that they collect
religious narrations and accounts so that it may be safeguarded against
deviation and defilement. The order to this action was issued by 'Umar
Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz at the beginning of the second century A.H.[^149]

And this very fact indicates the strong neglect of the leaders to the
religious science. In Mu'awiya times and after him, various types of
heresy and deviation in religion didn't trigger any opposition. The
reason behind this was that the people were not that acquainted with the
religious science to resist this matter.

Mu'awiya and Hajjaj[^150] went on with their efforts to revive the wrong
religious traditions founded by 'Uthman and the others. In the meantime,
on account of lack of attention to science in this era, even the people
took no notice of the religious rules of which they were in the utmost
need.[^151]

A number of traditions were in scholars' hands; however, afterwards this
number reached to one million.[^152] This very fact showed how the
forgotten tradition of the Prophet (S) was compensated by hadith making
in the next one or two centuries.

Umayyads were to be blamed for this, under the auspices of whose
government no attention was paid to science, and they tried to lead the
people to whatever path they wish through the policy of keeping them
ignorant.[^153]

In the meantime, most if those having acquaintance with the Islamic
science get to serve al-Marwan. Although a large number of those having
Shi'ites tendencies and being, for the most part, among Iraqi scholars,
fought against Umayyads.

Amongst the assenters, Muhammad Ibn Muslim Ibn Shahab Zuhri (124 A.C.)
who was taken thoroughly in the service of Umayyads ought to be
mentioned.

At the time when he went along with one of Umayyads rulers to Abu Hazim,
one of the last companions of the Prophet, Abu Hazim told him
sarcastically, “At times Banu Isra'il went along the right path and the
rulers were in need of the scholars … however, as the rascals acquiring
knowledge went to the rulers, the rulers got needless of them.”

Zuhri standing aside Sulayman, the son of 'Abd al-Malik said, “It seems
that you mean me in my action.” “That's what you've heard!” Replied Abu
Hazim.[^154]

For the most part, he dealt with Hisham Ibn 'Abd al-Malik. Hisham paid
his heavy loans,[^155] and sent his sons to him for education in return
for this service of Zuhri. Furthermore, before him, his brothers as well
as 'Abd al-Malik have given him financial assistance.

The sister of this very Zuhri told the people not to believe in Zuhri
speech. For, he has exchanged his religion for this worldly life and is
working for the Umayyads.[^156] Afterwards in the future, those
admitting the Umayyads's Islam, lauded Zuhri tremendously. Ibn Taymiyya
said that Zuhri safeguarded Islam for 70 years.[^157]

And it was undoubtedly obvious that this Islam was the one liked y the
Umayyads. Before him a lot of people were in the service if the
Umayyads, making hadith for them, such as Samura Ibn Jundab and Abu
Hurayra.[^158] At any rate, Zuhri was among those interested in Hisham
and other Umayyads,[^159] and was trying to propagate deviating beliefs.
It has been said that Zuhri and 'Awana Ibn Hakam who was follow of
'Uthman as well, relied upon predestination religion specifically.[^160]

It's interesting that Ibn Hibban said, “I knew no tradition narrated by
Zuhri concerning the virtues of Imam 'Ali by heart.”[^161]  
 Among other narrators being in the service of the family of Marwan, one
can refer to Ibrahim Nakha'i.

It's been narrated from Ibn 'Awn that, **كان ابراهيم ياتي الأمراء
ويسألهم الجوائز “** Ibrahim always came to the rulers calling them for
awards.”

According to what another one has written about him, Ibrahim himself
offered some gifts to the rulers![^162] Abul-Zanad, Medina jurist, was
among the narrators and Qur'an reciters who had some relationships with
Hisham Ibn 'Abd al-Malik.[^163] Mughira Ibn Muqsam is among other
Qur'an-reciters who was the follower of 'Uthman and treated Imam 'Ali
(a) aggressively as well.[^164]

Amongst the renowned Qur'an reciters and narrators in the service of the
Umayyads, Sha'bi ought to be pointed. He took part in 'Abd al-Rahman
revolt; however, later on was pardoned through surrendering himself to
Hajjaj and spent the rest of his life alongside him and 'Abd
al-Malik,[^165] making up untrue stories with regard to marring the face
of some of Shi'ite Muslims, such as Mukhtar, which Tabari has collected
in his book.

Also 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar who lived up to Hajjaj times was more or less
confirmed, particularly as 'Abd al-Malik wrote to Hajjaj that he might
obey him.[^166] Raja' Ibn Haywa, another narrator has been referred to
as “Sheikh Ahl ash-Sham”, Sheikh of Damascus people, and “Kabir al-Dawla
al-Umawiyya”[^167], the great of the Umayyads government.

He was one of 'Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan's relatives and it's been said
that he was in charge of the financial affairs when the rocks of Bayt
al-Muqaddas, Jerusalem, were being built.[^168] Wellhausen brought forth
a description of his impression on 'Abd al-Malik government and his sons
Walid and Sulayman and has pointed out how he instigated Sulayman to
appoint 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz as his successor.[^169]

The only service these people were in a position to give was the forgery
of those hadiths, traditions, which could be of benefit for the
adherents of this family regarding dispraising the Umayyads's foes and
narrating their own dignity.

Hadith-narration with regard to obeying the caliphs under any
circumstances,[^170] and being much efficient practically were among the
rights of which they won't be put on trial by Allah,[^171] on account of
their being caliphs. When Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik wanted to act in
accordance with 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz's conduct after him, forty old
men confirmed that, **ما على الخلفاء حساب ولا كتاب** “Caliphs won't be
questioned of their deeds.”[^172]

The son of Abu Musa Ash'ari, i.e. Abu Burda was among the other scholars
dependent upon the Umayyads; who became a judge after the death of Kufa
judge, Shurayh.[^173] Among the dominant duties of such hadith-reciters,
were to consolidate the position of Quraysh among the Arabs, and to make
some hadith aimed at justifying the unjust discrimination considered
lawful by the Umayyads, regarding the superiority of Arabs over
non-Arabs.

A hadith such as,**قدموا قريشاً ولا تقدموها “** Precede the Quraysh and
never let it precede you”[^174] was the continuation of a policy exerted
by Sulayman Ibn 'Abd al-Malik who ordered those addressing Quraysh
abusively to be whipped.[^175]

Refuting the traditions narrated by Iraqi scholars and calling them
hadith forgers was on the agenda of the Umayyads court.[^176] The reason
behind this perhaps is that Imam 'Ali (a)'s hadiths were usually
circulated in Iraq and this was not satisfying for the Umayyads.

In contrast with those scholars serving the Umayyads in Hijaz or
Damascus and sometimes even Iraq, a mass of Kufiyan scholars, both those
being pure Shi'ite Muslims or Mutashayyi', a newly converted Shi'ite
Muslims, on no account did they deal with the Umayyads, and instead they
put their efforts into preserving the correct traditions.

Amongst these traditions typically is, those with respect to the
Prophet's Household's virtues which have been preserved, for the most
part, by Iraqi traditionalists. It is noteworthy that the Iraqi were not
generically the followers of 'Uthmani religion, and were interested in
Imam 'Ali (a) and the household of the Prophet; even so they cannot be
deemed Shi'ite Muslims, although they were called so traditionally.

Anyhow, amongst these scholars so many were not compatible with the
Umayyads and took part in the riots at every opportunity. The
participation of a large number of Iraq scholars in Ibn Ash'ath as well
as Zayd Ibn 'Ali revolution demonstrates the power of such a position
among Iraqi scholars.

Circulation of Israelites and the Prevalence of Story-telling
-------------------------------------------------------------

Among the momentous difficulties of the Islamic culture during the first
century A.H., is the penetration of Israelites which have left deep
marks at extensive dimensions in both cultural and political areas, to
the extent that during 14 centuries its impacts have constantly remained
in the thoughts and various interpretive, historical, theological and
juristic writings.

The first person being tremendously active in this path was 'Abd Allah
Ibn Sallam, one of the Jewish scribes who embraces Islam at the
Prophet's (S) time. Sources as well as compilers of traditions have got
so many of his narrations concerning the circulation of Jew culture
among Muslims.

Ka'b al-Ahbar was more prominent than him, and given the influence he
had on the second caliph[^177], impressed so many companions of the
Prophet (S) who narrated traditions, and was able to induce more
pernicious damages to the Islamic culture and defile the world of
tradition by his baseless narrations from the Jewish books. He was even
highly praised by Mu'awiya.[^178]

'Akrama, one of the Mawalis of 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas, a prominent
traditionist has called him “Rabbani Hadhi al-Umma”, “The Devine of this
nation”.[^179] Among the companions of the Prophet (S), Abu Hurayra and
'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amr respected him more than the others, to the extent
that in some cases Abu Hurayra ascribed his narrations to the Prophet
(S) aiming to make them common. In our discussion of the caliphate of
the second caliph, we will speak of Ka'b al-Ahbar in detail.

Ka'b al-Ahbar's actual inheritor was Wahb Ibn Munabba in the late first
century and the beginning if the second century. According to what Zuhri
has written about him, he has got tremendous knowledge of the people of
the book, and extremely favored in this regard.[^180]

Wahb traditions have been compiled in Sahih Muslim and Bukhari through
Wahb's brother, Hammam, who himself was the narrator of traditions of
Abu Hurayra being himself under the influence of Ka'b al-Ahbar.[^181]

Taking into account the multi-dimensional relationship of Abu Hurayra,
Ka'b al-Ahbar, Wahb Ibn Munabba, and Hammam Ibn Munabba demonstrates
their contribution to the circulation of He was the Ka'b al-Ahbar of his
time, and Ka'b al-Ahbar is the most knowledgeable of the people of his
time. And now, what sort of a person is Wahb himself, having access to
both sciences?!”, said Dhahabi about Wahb.[^182] **كان كثيرا ينقل من كتب
الاسرائيات “** He frequently narrated from Israelites books.”[^183]

Wrote Dhahabi elsewhere about him. It's been narrated, by Wahb himself,
that he first believed in predestination; however, having read seventy
or so heavenly books, he recanted these beliefs.414

Elsewhere it's been noted that he has studied 92 heavenly books.[^184]
Ibn 'Imad Hanbali has written about him, **كان شديد الاعتناء بكتب
الاولين واخبار الملاحم وقصصهم بحيث كان يشبه بكعب الاحبار في زمانه “** He
took great heed of the books of the primacy people and accounts of the
bloody fights as well as their stories, to the extent that he resembled
Ka'b al-Ahbar in his time.”[^185]

After some years, Wahb gained such a high position in Sunnites culture
that they narrated from the Prophet (S), **يكون في أمتي رجل يقال له وهب
يهب الله له الحكمة** [^186] “There will be a man among my nation called
Wahb, to whom Allah will grant sagacity.”

He was definitely not heedless of the Umayyads, and he regarded 'Umar
Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz as Mahdi al-Maw'ud.[^187]

The Umayyads policy not only didn't hinder the publication of Israelian
articles and writings, but it did confine it as well. The Umayyads
rulers derived many benefits from their knowledge for the popularization
and application of their political thoughts in the society.

Mu'awiya himself had a Christian counselor namely Sirjawn Ibn Mansur. He
was that very person whom Yazid once made his doorkeeper and showed him
a treaty - whether true or lie - from Mu'awiya, so that if the people in
Kufa revolt, he would commission 'Ubayd Ibn Ziyad to go to Kufa.
Afterwards, Sirjawn Ibn Mansur became the counselor of Marwan Ibn Hakam
as well.[^188]  
 It seems likely that, his son was responsible for the crucial duty of
writing about the army and the tribute.[^189] According to some other
records, Mu'awiya has reconstructed a ruined church.[^190] If need be,
the caliphs referred to the narrations amongst whose narrators was
Zuhri, with regard to the virtue of Bayt al-Muqaddas, Jerusalem.

When Mecca was in 'Ubayd Ibn Ziyad's hand, Damascus people were faced
with difficulty during their pilgrimage to Mecca. According to Ya'qubi,
'Abd al-Malik prevented them from going on pilgrimage to Mecca, in as
much as Ibn Zubayr compelled them to pledge allegiance to him as the
Muslims' caliph. When opposed to, 'Abd al-Malik told the people that Ibn
Shahab Zuhri quoted from your Prophet to you, **لا تشد الرحال الا الي
ثلاثه مساجد, المسجد الحرام ومسجدي ومسجد بيت المقدس وهو يقوم لكم مقام
الكعبه “** Pack not off but towards the mosque: al-Haram mosque, al-Nabi
mosque and al-Aqsa mosque.”

It is the roach thereon the Holy Prophet allegedly stood during his
ascension. Take it in lieu of Ka'ba. Having built a dome for and hung
curtains around it, 'Abd al-Malik compelled the people to go around it
as they do around Ka'ba. Such a rite had been performed during the
Umayyads time.[^191]  
 According to Ibn Khallakan people had congregated there on the day of
'Arafa (the 9th day of Dhil-Hajja when the pilgrims perform specified
actions in 'Arafat).[^192]

It might not have been explicitly mentioned in Arabic sources that
performing Hajj in Bayt al-Muqaddas (Jerusalem) had been 'Abd al-Malik's
initiation but the only pieces of information reported had been
circumambulating around the rock as well as its holiness.

Nevertheless, in non-Arabic sources, Europeans, it is precisely stressed
that it had been 'Abd al-Malik's order. Utikhyus, one of the first
historians in Europe had written it in his book called Annales.[^193]
This action manifests how the Israelites had been made use of with the
Umayyads's policies side by side.

To hold Bayt al-Muqaddas in esteem, both 'Abd al-Malik and Hajjaj had
committed themselves to building two portals for it. The one built by
'Abd al-Malik was burnt to a crisp by a thunderbolt later. Hajjaj wrote
to him that the following Qur'anic verse was about them

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واتْلُ عَلَيْهِم بنا بني آذم بالحقّ اِذْ قَرّبا قُرْباناً فَتَقًّبَل
مِنْ أحَدِهما وَلًمْ يتَقَّبلْ من الآخر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And relate to them the story of the two sons of Adam with truth when
they both offered an offering, but it was accepted from one of them and
was not accepted from the other.” [^194]

Any other cases concerning the impacts on 'Abd al-Malik through people
of the Book are reported.[^195] During his long (twenty-year) rule over
the oriental Islamic lands, Hajjaj was not secure from the scientific
dignity of people of the Book therefore, he reinforced their influence
on the community through being impressed with them.

One of them dates back to the year 84 when he founded the town of Wasit
motivated by a Christian monk's prophecy as stated by Tabari. While he
had stopped there, accompanied by his troops, he noticed a monk crossing
the Tigris and urinating towards his mule at the same time. Dismounting
from his mule, the monk removed the polluted soil and threw it in out
the river. Hajjaj called him and asked about the reason.

He responded that he had read in their books that in this very place a
mosque would be built and Allah would be worshipped as long as there
were monotheists on that earth. Accordingly, Hajjaj laid the foundations
for the town of Wasit there and founded the principal mosque of the town
in….[^196]

The phrase “we have read in our books that …” was common while narrating
the Israelites statements. Some day when Hajjaj was on his way to
Damascus to meet 'Abd al-Malik, he asked a monk whether he had read
anything regarding the present status in their books.  
 He answered, “Yes”.

He asked again, “By name or description?”  
 “Sometimes by name without description and sometimes vice versa,”
replied the monk. After a series of questions, Hajjaj asked about his
successor. The answer was that a man called Yazid would succeed him.

“While I am dead or alive”? he asked.  
 “I do not know”, he answered.  
 Hajjaj asked, “Give a description of him!”  
 “He would be treacherous to you,” said the monk, “I know nothing more”.

Remembering Yazid Ibn Muhallab, Khurasan governor, who was also ousted
later.[^197] There is a strong probability that some merely with the aim
of deposing Yazid had conspired to incite the monk to utter such absurd
talks.

The Christian's penetration into the Umayyads's administration under the
name of amanuenses and so on and so forth cleared the way for the
Israelites expansion. Mothers of some rulers were Christian bondwomen,
in their turns, influential in disseminating Christian culture in Muslim
community.

Since Khalid Ibn 'Abd Allah Qasri's mother was a Christian, Khalid was
accused of his religion while being an Umayyads governor in Mecca and
Iraq for years. He had built a synagogue for his mother to worship.
Concerning him, Farazdaq had composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكيف يؤم الناس من كانت أمّه تدين بـان الله ليس بواحــد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بني بيعة فيها الصليب لامّــه ويهدم من بغض منارالمساجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

How can he ever be a leader for a nation while his mother is unbeliever
in monotheism? The man who had built a synagogue having a cross for her
and has ruined the minarets of the mosques spitefully[^198]

According to Isfahani, Khalid had been accused on his father's side as
well, one of whose forefathers had been a Jew joining the tribe of
Bujayla.[^199] Even Hisham had accused him of heeding more to Christians
and Zoroastrians and apportioning properties among them.[^200]  
 Khalid Rib'i, well-acquainted with the Israelites, had said,”We found
in Torah that sky and the earth had shed tears for forty days after
'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz”.[^201]

Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik also paid much attention to the Qur'an recites
of Bayt al-Muqaddas. As stated by Ibn Abi 'Ulba, Walid had given many
pieces of jewelry to him to distribute among them.[^202] A study of
Islamic history can reveal hundreds of impacts that Christian and Jewish
culture have had on Sunnites culture.

It has been also said why 'Abd al-Malik had for the first time coined
was that he had been told that based on their books, the followers of
the divine Books had been of this opinion that the caliphs who
sanctified Allah on the coins would outlive.[^203]

Imams took a position against such beliefs. Imam 'Ali (a) had stated,  
 “Anyone who has got a book from the early nations should dispose it as
soon as he can.”[^204] It was while these kinds of books had been spread
among Muslims. Imam as-Sadiq also in his turn reproached those scholars
after the Israelites.[^205]

Earlier, we noticed how Iman as-Sajjad prohibited Hasan Basri from
recounting stories. It was exactly the continuation of the Prophet's
policy that had emphasized,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تسألوا أهل كتاب عن شيء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Never ever ask the followers of the divine Books any question[^206]

These people made efforts to recount the stories respecting the former
prophets which had been distorted in Jewish books and usually contained
many insults at them as well as false narrations in terms of scholastic
theology and jurisprudence. It was already addressed that story-telling
became prevalent from caliph II onward.

Later, during 'Uthman's time, telling the Prophet's stories based on
Jewish books while interpreting the Qur'anic verses prevailed more than
before. Once Mu'awiya urged a story-teller to stand up after the prayer
and curse Imam 'Ali.[^207]

The policy of cursing 'Ali (a) was carried on during the Umayyads's
tenure by the story-tellers too. When the caliphs realized that the
story-tellers needed to be under control, they fabricated some hadiths
according to which story-tellers should have worked under the caliph's
supervision and personally appointed them in order to pursue their own
political and cultural aims.

It was the story-tellers who spread false hadiths among people and had
even more influence on people than hadith-narrators. Surprisingly,
regardless of their influence on Sunnites's religious culture,
hadith-narrators rejected them saying that it they are told one hadith
they will multiply it.[^208]

The caliphs were mainly proponents of the story-tellers and as mentioned
above they themselves appointed and dismissed them. Almost all stories
dealt with the narrations made by the followers of the divine Books and
were all discussed in detail elsewhere.[^209]

Conquests by the Marwanids Until Late First Century
---------------------------------------------------

Although conquests had been somewhat resumed during the time of Yazid
Ibn Mu'awiya, in this 60s and until even 73 when Ibn Zubayr was
overthrown, they were halted. However, the ground was repaved for them
subsequent to establishment of 'Abd al-Malik's broad-based government
and Ibn Zubayr's fall.

The conquests were limited to several areas, One was in theast including
both transoxania and Sistan and the other in the western lands of Islam
including Northern Africa and Northern Iraq and Syria called Armenia.
Bearing this fact in mind that no consensus is reached on the date of
conquests and the quality of their report which have been mingled with
irrelevant epics, we present a concise report respecting these
conquests.

Oriental Conquests
------------------

When 'Umar was caliph, the conquests in oriental lands of Islam peaked
following the overthrow of the Sassanids Empire. Arabs who considered
the conquests as a mission for expanding Islam and wiping off
non-Muslims did not content themselves with the Sassind's overthrow and
advanced towards the vast Khurasan, half of which is now in Iran and the
rest in Afghanistan and Middle Asian republics, so fast that they
reached Transoxania.

After years of clashes with the local dynasties in such lands, Arabs
could after all spread the religion deeply as near as China. It is worth
saying that aside from the motivation of both caliphs and rulers of the
aforesaid areas as well as the people to battle against non-Muslims, a
desire for gaining spoils was of central importance in Muslim's
resistance too.

Khurasan was under the Sassanids's power then. Nevertheless, the more it
was advanced towards the east, the less their influence grew and the
stronger the local rulers became. The residents of that land were like
Turks in Iranians' view. As soon as the conquests crossed the border of
Khurasan, Iranians became motivated to cooperate. By the same token, the
Iranian's all-out presence beside Arabs in the conquests was
eye-catching in the last quarter of the first century.

Although the impediments facing Arabs in such lands were by no means
few, their strength in defeating the Sassanids as a superpower together
with Islamic attraction and Muslims's treatment could undermine the
residents. Professor Gip commented, “Since Arabs' dominance often
followed neither murder nor plunder and they contented themselves with
the paid Jizya after the capture, the town was evacuated immediately
with no serious resistance.”[^210]

The existing disputes among the local rulers were another reason for the
fragility of these lands and consequently facilitative for Muslim Arabs.
Muslims's attack to Transoxania had in essence begun during Mu'awiya's
time by Ziyad, Iraqi governor, in the early 50s.

In 51 A.H. he was set to send 50000 Arab families residing in Basra and
Kufa out to Khurasan[^211] in order to materialize his aim which was
stabilization of conquests. The urgency of these Arabs' presence for
developing and stabilizing the conquered area was crystal clear.
Furthermore, such a movement could precede a number of lateral problems
for Muslims one of which was the protracted dispute among the Arab
tribes in Khurasan, the origin of most clashes.

The strife between the Mudrids and Rabi'a in Khurasan had ended in many
deep-rooted conflicts. While Ibn Zubayr in power, 'Abd Allah Ibn Khazim,
from among the Qaysids, was the governor. Succeeding Ibn Zubayr's
suppression by 'Abd al-Malik, 'Abd Allah was asked to stay there at 'Abd
al-Malik's demand.

He declined however. 'Abd al-Malik as a consequence invoked Bukayr Ibn
Wishah, an agent of 'Abd Allah's in Marw who accepted the request. In a
battle between him and 'Abd Allah Ibn Khazim, Ibn Khazim was killed and
'Abd al-Malik could succeed in dominating that land as well.[^212]

No sooner had 'Abd Allah Ibn Khazim been appointed by Ibn Zubayr as
Khurasan governor than the clashes among Arabs in Khurasan had Turks
dare advance as near as Niyshabur.[^213] The clashes among the Arab
residents of Khurasan were so prolonged even after Ibn Khazim's death
that both Sistan and Khurasan were also entrusted to Hajjaj. Proficient
enough during the war with the Kharijites, Muhallab Ibn Abi Sufra was
appointed by him in 78 to govern Khurasan.

The governorship of Muhallab's family father and two sons, Yazid and
Mufaďďal) in that land lasted about nine years. Nevertheless, following
the grudge Hajjaj bore this family, he ousted them and substituted
Qutayba Ibn Muslim for them. In 80, concurrent with the attack Muhallab
had launched on Kashsh, he stayed there for two years and combated
non-Muslims. According to Tabari, since there had been no probability of
conquest for him, his one and the only desire was to return the army
safe and sound to Marw.[^214]

Muhallab who passed away in 82 on his way back from Kashsh was replaced
by his son, Yazid. In 84, an influential Turk in a fort in Badaghays to
whom Yazid had laid siege had to hand over the entire treasure of the
fort in a compromise to him and leave with his family.[^215]

Hajjaj affected by an eminent follower of the divine Books suspected
Yazid Ibn Muhallab in 85 and designated his brother, Mufaďďal, in
place.[^216] As Yazid himself had perceived, such a measure was merely
for impairing this family's influence and eventually wiping them off the
political face of Khurasan and even oriental lands.

During his nine-month ruler, Mufaďďal invaded Badaghays and besides
conquering it, he brought spoils. Such conquests of Muhallab's family
appeared petty compared with those of Qutayba Ibn Muslim who stepped in
Khurasan in 86. At the same time 'Abd al-Malik died and his son, Walid,
succeeded him.

He was the one throughout whose age the greatest conquests were made
reminiscent of the primary stages of conquests. Qutayba carried on
conquering for nearly ten years during which he endeavored to capture
the lands in Transoxania whether south or north of Amudarya (Jiyhun).
Both Tabari and Baladhuri have addressed these conquests in their books
but the analysis of them is beyond the scope of this chapter.[^217]

The reports respecting such issues are evaluated by professor Gibbwithin
four units, Restitution of Takharistan (86), Conquest of Bukhara (87),
Growth of influence (91) and Military Expedition to the provinces[^218]
with Qutayba's death, conquests were halted for a long time although
Arabs were still dominant.

Embracing Islam had gradually become so prevalent that the conversion of
a number of monarchs to Islam by 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz's[^219]
invitation set the scene for the caliphs' absolute dominance.

Qutayba's conquests in the Orient reached China the most noticeable
areas of which were Shash and Farghana; however, Arab dominance in that
land was exposed to change. They all occurred during the last years of
his life, 94 and 95. As soon as he learned Hajjaj's death, he
relinquished conquering, upset, and returned to Marw[^220].

As reported by Narshakhi the principal mosque of Balkh was founded in
94[^221] indicative of Islam's widespread in the cities of Islamic land.
Southern transoxania from Kabul to the south and from Kirman province in
Iran to the east was called Sijistan.

Two abortive attacks of Arabs one by 'Abd Allah Ibn Umayya and the other
by 'Ubayd Allah Ibn Abi Bakra have been reported by Baladhuri. As far as
the mountainous position of the area was concerned, the monarch named
Ratbil or Zanbil could each time force Muslim Arabs to withdraw.[^222]

When Hajjaj dispatched an army headed by 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn
Ash'ath to Sijistan in 80, Zanbil asked for a compromise but 'Abd
al-Rahman declined. Arabs could conquer a large part of Sijistan and
gain spoils subsequent to Zanbil's withdrawal.[^223]

Contenting himself with these numbers, 'Abd al-Rahman informed Hajjaj of
his decision. Hajjaj urged him, nevertheless, to keep on conquering.
'Abd al-Rahman as well as the Iraqis who had a potential dissatisfaction
with Hajjaj revolted discussed elsewhere in detail.

After being defeated, 'Abd al-Rahman sought refuge by Zanbil but in an
agreement and under Hajjaj's threat 'Abd al-Rahman's head was sent to
him under the conditions of a seven-year or nine-year truce and
indemnity. As this period passed by Ashhab Ibn Bishr traveled there on
Hajjaj's behalf but his harsh behavior toward Zanbil made him send him
back.

Dominant in Khurasan and Sijistan, Qutayba Ibn Muslim sent his brother,
'Amr, to Sijistan. Muslims' former defeats in that land which had cast a
spell over it according to 'Amr resulted in a compromise. When Zanbil
felt that Muslims had no longer the ability to attack there, he
discontinued paying to the rulers succeeding Hajjaj.[^224]

In 94, Muslims could advance toward India by the Sea of 'Umman and
conquer a part of it in addition to Sijistan, under Zanbil's rule.[^225]
Among the Indian key cities conquered first by Muslims in 95 was Multan.
Until then modern western Pakistan had entirely been governed by
Muslims.[^226]

Occidental Conquests
--------------------

The conquering of Egypt was the start of Muslim conquests in Africa and
their penetration into Spain. Egypt was conquered late during 'Umar's
caliphate in 20 and 21 A.H. Two years later Tripoli was conquered but
not staying there, Muslims came back to Barqa. After a while, the civil
wars waged among Muslims had them miss the chance of more conquests in
Africa.

Muslim disputes in that land were mostly with the rulers designated by
East Roman Emperor for Egypt, Ifriqiya (modern Tunasia) and littoral
areas of the Mediterranean. Although the local tribes called Barbars
were among the greatest obstacles to conquests, they gradually embraced
Islam as conquests multiplied.

As already discussed, while Mu'awiya in power, 'Uqba Ibn Nafi', resumed
conquering and established the town of Qirawan in 50 as a base for
Muslims' next conquests. Nonetheless, in an ambush among the Barbarians,
he was killed in 64. With successive attacks, he could penetrate into
modern Morocco as near as Fas but he was killed en route back.

Once 'Abd al-Malik had suppressed various riots and dominated the whole
Islamic lands, conquests in Africa were resumed in 76. At the same time,
Hasan Ibn Nu'man launched his conquests by conquering Qartajanna and
advanced towards Morocco. Meanwhile, Romans occupied Qartajanna but
Hasan who could take it back in 79 razed it to the ground not to allow
them to infiltrate into it again. This time, the Barbarians united
behind a woman, named Kahina, later, against Muslim Arabs and could
succeed to get them to retreat as far as the primary conquests. The only
place where Kahina and the Barbarians were overpowered was Tabarja in
83.

To pursue Hasan Ibn Nu'man's conquests, Musa Ibn Nusayr resumed them in
Africa in 86 and consequently conquered modern Morocco wholly. At the
same time, as the Barbarians have been gradually embracing Islam the
ground was getting fully prepared for Arabs' through dominance in
northern littoral lands of Africa.[^227]

'Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan was the caliph until then who was succeeded by
his son Walid whose endeavors in conquests were the most considerable
among the former caliphs according to Suyuti.

One of the commanders of Musa Ibn Nusayr's army was Tariq Ibn Ziyad who
has been allegedly a Barbarian although what his father's name indicated
was that he might have converted to Islam long time ago. Due to his
excellent competence as a commander, Tariq overstepped the bounds of
North Africa and took Muslims to Spain for the first time in 93.

A year later Musa Ibn Nusayr set out to Spain as well and maintained the
act of conquering there. Among the conquered lands were Tulaytala,
Marida, etc. Most areas with no war surrendered to Muslims and as a
result Spain became entirely Muslim Arabs'.

Walid's death in 97 and his succession by Sulayman made Musa Ibn Nusayr
return to Damascus and be blacklisted by the Umayyads. He wished he had
pursued conquests in Italy and France through Spain and then in Greece
and constantinople. Walid's death as well as his deposal, however,
caused Arabs to remain in Spain and even entrust the land to the
Europeans after a couple of centuries.

Armenia was among the lands the conquests of which had been begun from
'Umar's time and had been under heavy clashes in the late first century.
A vast land was called Armenia by Muslims. Baladhuri has divided it into
four parts including such cities as Shimshat, Qaliqala, Busfurjan,
Dubayl, Jurzan and Sijistan.[^228]

When 'Uthman in power, Habib Ibn Maslama Fihri attacked Qaliqala and not
only he conquered it but also based on a treaty the residents were
duty-bound to pay Jizya(tributes).[^229] Tiflis, Eastern Armenia, was
also surrounded by Habib.

While 'Abd al-Malik and Ibn Zubayr were in clashes, the residents of
such areas appreciated the opportunity and revolted, but they were
suppressed after some time and ruled by the Umayyads.[^230] During
Walid's and Sulayman's age many attacks were made on the Roman central
territory. Although in their attacks they even reached as near as the
gates of Constantinople, Muslims could never succeed in conquering it.

In a nutshell, it can be said that Muslims lost their primary
magnificence from the late first century but in return Romans resumed
their attacks and were still superior in the second century.
Nevertheless, they could by no means conquer Eastern Rome entirely. It
was done by 'Uthmanids later in the 10th century after Hijra.

[^1]: Yazid Ibn Muhallab’s riot, as it was touched on before, was a
political one, emanating from his opportunism

[^2]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, pp 2-3

[^3]: al-Futuh, vol. VIII, p. 106; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 429

[^4]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 429

[^5]: Ibid vol. V, p. 430; The word “farmers” here refers to the owner
of big farms who had great power locally

[^6]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 438

[^7]: Ibid vol. V, p. 443

[^8]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 493

[^9]: Ibid vol. V, pp 494-495

[^10]: Ibid vol. V, pp 591-592

[^11]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 428; Van Vloten in “As-Siyadat
al-’Arabiyya” (p. 62) said that he was inclined towards the Prophet’s
Sunna He also referred to an article in Majallat al-asiwiyyat
al-Firansiyya (october, 1835, p. 327) in which the same matter had been
pointed out But in “Tabari”, the main source for Harith’s riot, this
matter was told by no means This was told probably because of the
condition of Khurasan at that time A piece of poem being quoted from
Kumayt Ibn Zayd Asadi in Harith’s praise in “Tabari” also can be an
evidence in this regard Although in this poem it was not told that
Harith was a Shi‘ite, but the phrase Rayat Sud (The black Flags) was
used and based on some narrations “Malahim wa Fitan” regarding a riot in
Khurasan and using black flags there was used The use of the phrase
“Black Flags” indicates that Kumayt wanted to liken the uprising of
Harith to a shi’i uprising It is mentioned in a report that Harith
considered himself as “the man of the black flags ” (Tarikh at-Tabari,
vol. IV, p. 3) However, thereis no evidence that Harith was a Shi’i.

[^12]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 606

[^13]: Ibid vol. VI p. IV

[^14]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. X

[^15]: Ibid vol. V, pp 429-430 He especially had taken into account the
farmers of Juzjan

[^16]: As-Siyadat al-’Arabiyya, p. 66

[^17]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 6

[^18]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 2

[^19]: Ibid vol. V, p. 340

[^20]: To know about the beliefs as well as scholastic theology of the
Murji‘ites, refer to a book entitled “The Murji‘ites, Tarikh wa
Andishih” from the writer of the very same lines

[^21]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya pp 441, 442

[^22]: As-Siyadat al-’Arabiyya, pp 64, 65

[^23]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 433

[^24]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 2

[^25]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 3

[^26]: Ibid vol. VI, p. 6; al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. I, p. 79

[^27]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 538

[^28]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 213; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p.
197; See, Tarikh Mukhtasar al-duwal, p. 118; al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 46

[^29]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 216; Tarikh Gudhidih, p. 286;
al-Hur al-’Ayn, p. 190; Bahj As-Sabaqa, vol. V, p. 339; al-Aghani, vol.
V, p. 49; Nujum al-Zuhra, vol. I, p. 299

[^30]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 216; al-Hur al-’Ayn, p. 190; Bahj
As-Sabaqa, vol. V, p. 239

[^31]: Tarikh Gudhidih, p. 286; al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 47

[^32]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 335; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p.
521 He wanted to take wine to that room Bahj As-Sabaqa, vol. V, p. 340

[^33]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 533

[^34]: Ibid vol. V, p. 555

[^35]: Ma’athir al-Inafa fi Ma‘alim al-Khilafa, vol. I, p. 156

[^36]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 521; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p.
206

[^37]: al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 2

[^38]: al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 72, see, 74

[^39]: Ibid p. 73

[^40]: al-Aghani vol. VII, 80

[^41]: Ibid p. 82

[^42]: al-Aghani, p. 83

[^43]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 336; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p.
581; Tarikh Gudhidih, p. 287

[^44]: al-Firaq Bayn al-Firaq, p. 117; al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. I, p. 51

[^45]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 516

[^46]: al-Firaq Bayn al-Firaq, p. 205

[^47]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 539

[^48]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 253; Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. V, p.
376

[^49]: See, Tarikh al-Jahmiyya wal-Mu‘tazila, p. 70 from Abu Bakr
Kharazmi

[^50]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 221

[^51]: Ibid vol. III, p. 226 Because the residents of Mizza had paid
allegiance to Walid before his death; al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 75

[^52]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. V, p. 376

[^53]: Ibid vol. V, p. 433

[^54]: Ma’athir al-Inafa, vol. I, p. 163; Nujum al-Zahira, vol. I, p.
322

[^55]: al-Milal wal-Nihal, vol. I, p. 93; see also, p. 106

[^56]: Maqdamat Ibn Khaldun, p. 415; see Buhuth ma‘a Ahl As-Sunna
wal-Sulafiyya, pp 76-91

[^57]: Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. V, p. 433

[^58]: al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya, vol. X, p. 19

[^59]: See, Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. V, p. 432 (footnote)

[^60]: Ibid vol. VI, p. 27

[^61]: Ibid vol. VI, p. 27.

[^62]: Tarikh al-Jahmiyya wal-Mu‘tazila, p. 16

[^63]: al-Akhbar, vol. II, p. 249; al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II, p. 70

[^64]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 576

[^65]: Ibid vol. V, p. 553

[^66]: Ibid vol. V, p. 565

[^67]: Ibid vol. V, p. 545

[^68]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 335

[^69]: ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. II, p. 249

[^70]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 592, 591

[^71]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 593

[^72]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 314

[^73]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 455; see also p. 581

[^74]: al-Aghani, vol. VII, p. 73

[^75]: Ibid vol. VII, p. 79

[^76]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 35

[^77]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 529-532

[^78]: Ibid vol. V, p. 595

[^79]: Ibid vol. V, p. 596; Siyar a‘lam al-Nubala’, p. 377; Ma’athir
al-Inafa, vol. I, p. 161

[^80]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 341

[^81]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 234

[^82]: Muhammad Kazim Khajawiyan has listed different attitudes of this
kind in an article of the magazine of Mashhad’s Faculty of Literature
year, 19 pp 503-530

[^83]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 338

[^84]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 232

[^85]: Mawardi, al-Ahkam As-Sultaniyya, p. 13 (Sulayman Ibn ‘Abd
al-Malik is regarded here)

[^86]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. I, pp 10-11

[^87]: al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, pp 19-21

[^88]: Farazdaq was among those poets Despite his well-known poem in
praising Iman as-Sajjad, he had composed many verses in praising both
the Umayyads’s rulers and their relatives By taking a glance at his
poems, one can understand his great rule in the Umayyads stabilization
There are many verses in sanctifying the Umayyads caliphs in his Diwan
See, Diwan Farazdaq, vol. I, pp 261-268 There are some verses in
praising Sulayman Ibn ‘Abd al-Malik Some of his poems regarding the
stabilization of the Umayyads were mentioned before

[^89]: Diwan Akhtal pp 21-24; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 30

[^90]: Diwan Akhtal p. 37; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 30

[^91]: Diwan Jarir, vol. I, p. 95; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa

[^92]: Diwan Jarir, vol. I, p. 295

[^93]: Ibid vol. II, p. 620

[^94]: Diwan Farazdaq, vol. I, p. 24

[^95]: Ibid vol. II, p. 210

[^96]: al-Aghani, vol. I, p. 299

[^97]: Shi‘r al-Ahwas, p. 193

[^98]: Ibid p. 173

[^99]: Diwan Farazdaq, vol. II, p. 100

[^100]: Diwan Jarir, vol. I, p. 145; Regarding the poets of these
verses, see al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 31-35

[^101]: Diwan Jarir, vol. I, p. 349

[^102]: Diwan Jarir, vol. II, p. 737

[^103]: Diwan Farazdaq, vol. II, p. 125; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 36
The second line is about camels They put their bellies and necks on the
ground as a sign of obedience

[^104]: Quoted from Dawlat wa hukumat dar Islam “Government and Ruling
in Islam” written by Lambton, p. 110, vol. III Montigomeri Watt also had
quoted some verses regarding the meaning of the time, Allah’s Viceroy
during the Umayyads’s time See Watt, God’s caliph, Qur’anic
Interpretations and Umayyads claims in Iran and Islam, Edinburgh, 1971,
pp 571-572, see also Watt Islamic Political Thought, Edinburgh, pp 33,
137, No 5, see also, Khalifa wa Sultan, pp 16-17

[^105]: Prior to this Hassan Ibn Thabit had used the term “Allah’s
viceroy” in his poem written in 36 about ‘Uthman Diwan Hassan Ibn
Thabit, p. 96, quoted from Government and Ruling in Islam, p. 110 the
third part of the footnote No 7

[^106]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 345

[^107]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. VI, p. 222

[^108]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 40

[^109]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 25; Ash-Shura fil-’Asr al-Umawi, p.
35

[^110]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 235

[^111]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. VI, p. 76

[^112]: Ibid vol. VI, p. 214

[^113]: Ibid vol. VI, p. 214; See al-Niza‘ wal-Takhasum, p. 69;
al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya vol. IX, p. 136; al-Nasa’ih al-Kafiya li man
Yatawalla Mu‘awiya, p. 31; Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. I2, p. 228

[^114]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 147

[^115]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 567; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. V,
p. 60; Ash-Shura fil-’Asr al-Umawi, p. 35

[^116]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 212; Ash-Shura fil-’asr al-Umawi,
p. 35

[^117]: Farazdaq in praising Hisham Ibn ‘Abd al-Malik said (Diwan, vol.
I, pp 89- 88) ابي الله الا نصركم بجنوده وليس بمغلوب من الله صاحبه فما
قام بعد الدار قواد فتنه ليشعلها الا ومروان ضاربه ابی الله الا ان ملککم
الذی به نيت الدين الشديد نصابه Somewhere else he composed (Diwan, vol.
I, p. 215) غلبتم الناس بالحق اذا ضربوا عليهم وبضرب غير تعذير

[^118]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, p. 62

[^119]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, p. 53

[^120]: Diwan Farazdaq, vol. I, p. 80; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa p. 22

[^121]: Ibid vol. II, p. 99

[^122]: Ibid vol. I, p. 262

[^123]: Diwan Jarir, vol. II, p. 771

[^124]: See, Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 333; al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya,
vol. IX, pp 196, 192; Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. I, p. 119; al-Umawiyyun
wal-Khilafa, p. 23; Tarikh al-Khulafa’, pp 235, 234, 233

[^125]: Diwan Jarir, vol. I, p. 416

[^126]: Diwan Jarir vol. I, p. 228

[^127]: Diwan Farazdaq, vol. I, p. 281; al-Umawiyyun wal al-Khilafa, p.
24

[^128]: al-Fakhri, p. 122

[^129]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 219

[^130]: Ansab al-Ashraf(manuscript) vol. I, p. 1164 quoted from
al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, pp 120, 122; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p.
522; Fawat al-Wafayat, vol.,II p. 404

[^131]: Amali Qali, vol. I, p. 11; See also al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya, vol.
VIII, p. 316; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 122

[^132]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 273

[^133]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 218

[^134]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 280-281; Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p.
220

[^135]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XV, p. 243; and
see al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 128

[^136]: al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya, vol. IX, p. 139

[^137]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 343; al-Niza‘ wal-Takhasum, p. 78;
Ansab al-Ashraf al-Juz’ al-rabi‘, al-Qism al-Awwal, p. 495, No, 1278;
al-Bad’ wal-Tarikh, vol. V, p. 208 (There, the word “Marďiyy” was used
instead of “Raďiyy”) al-Kamil fil-Tarikh vol. III, p. 123, Ka‘b al-Ahbar
was one of the advisors and companions of ‘Uthman; see Ansab ul Ashraf,
al-Ajuz’ al-Rabi‘, al-Qism al-Awwal, p. 542

[^138]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, pp 216-217

[^139]: Ibid p. 233

[^140]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 233

[^141]: al-Muwaffaqiyyat, p. 352

[^142]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VI, pp 393-94

[^143]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 245

[^144]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. II, p. 843-844, see also About Muhammad Ibn
Ka‘b to, Qissikhanan dar Tarikh Islam, (Story-tellers in the History of
Islam), pp 69-68

[^145]: al-Nuqud al-Islamiyya, p. 11, there is much to say in this
regard, see al-’Iqd al-Munir fi ma yata‘alluq bi l-dirham wal-dananir

[^146]: Diwan al-Jarir, vol 1, p. 349.

[^147]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. VII, pp 219-224 (a report like
translation

[^148]: Compare with the verse, اليوم اكملت لكم دينكم “ This day have I
perfected for you, your religion” According to some traditionists and in
the view of Shi‘ites Imams and Imamiyya scholars, refers to Imam ‘Ali
(a) Imamate Perhaps that’s because of a sort of apposition, that they
have put aside the stipulated Imamate which is indicative of religion
integrity and replaced it with heirapparentship

[^149]: al-Musannaf, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, vol. IX, p. 221

[^150]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 146; al-Iďah, p. 182

[^151]: See, al-Ahkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, vol. II, p. 131; Naďrat ‘Amma fi
Tarikh al-fiqh al-Islami, p. 10; al-Imam al-al-Baqir (a), vol. I, pp
215-216; Dirasat wa buhuth fil-Tarikh wal-Islam, vol. I, p. 56-57

[^152]: See, Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, whenever confronted by a reciter,
Dhahabi counted the number of his traditions, and in this way the number
increased.

[^153]: See, Dirasat wa buhuth fil-Tarikh wal-Islam, vol. I, p. 56

[^154]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, pp 108-109

[^155]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. I, p. 109;al-Majruhin, vol. I, p. 40;
Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 162

[^156]: Ansab al-Ashraf (footnote), vol. I, p. 26

[^157]: Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. I, p. 163

[^158]: See, al-Iďah, p. 210; Abu Hurayra; Sayyid Sharaf al-Din, pp
42-45

[^159]: In this regard and other information concerning Zuhri see,
Tarikh Abi Zar‘at al-Dimashqi, vol. II, p. 538, Turathuna magazine, No
23, pp 9-27

[^160]: al-Tarikh al-’Arabi wal-Mu’arrikhun, vol. I, p. 173

[^161]: al-Majruhin, vol. I, p. 258

[^162]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. I, p. 72

[^163]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 135

[^164]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 145

[^165]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 78

[^166]: Jami‘ Bayan al-’Ilm, vol. I, p. 146

[^167]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. I, p. 118

[^168]: Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 209; qtd in, Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya,
Wellhausen, p. 209

[^169]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, pp 256-257

[^170]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, al-Musannaf, vol. I, pp 229-230

[^171]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 223

[^172]: Ibid p. 246

[^173]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. I, p. 95

[^174]: Tarikh Baghdad, vol. II, p. 61

[^175]: al-Fa’iq fi Gharib al-Hadith, vol. I, p. 135

[^176]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VI, p. 342

[^177]: Previously we’ve discussed this in noting the mental life of the
second caliph

[^178]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. II, p. 358

[^179]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 370

[^180]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. I, p. 101

[^181]: loc cit

[^182]: loc cit

[^183]: Mizan al-i‘tidal, vol. IV, p. 353, Mu‘jam al-Udaba’, vol. XIX,
p. 259

[^184]: Shajarat, vol. I, p. 150; Mu‘jam al-Udaba’, vol. XIX, p. 259;
Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 543

[^185]: Shajarat, vol. I, p. 150

[^186]: al-Majruhin, vol. I, p. 176

[^187]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, pp 233-235

[^188]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 141

[^189]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 148

[^190]: See, Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. I, pp 205-228 (Leiden); al-Tanbih
wal-Ishraf, pp 302-307 (Leiden) quoted in Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya

[^191]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. II, p. 261; al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya, vol.
VIII, pp 280, 281; Hayat al-Hayawan, vol. I, p. 66

[^192]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. III p. 72

[^193]: Tarikh al-Dawlat al-’Arabiyya, p. 206

[^194]: Wafayat al-A’yan, p. 206

[^195]: Ibid vol. VII, pp,681-781

[^196]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 184,185

[^197]: Tarikh at-Tabari vol. V, p. 191

[^198]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. II, p. 229; concerning ruining the
minarets see Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. I, p. 328

[^199]: al-Aghani, vol. V, p. 17; Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. II, p. 230

[^200]: al-Muwaffaqiyyat, p. 292

[^201]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 245

[^202]: Ibid p. 224

[^203]: al-Nuqud al-Islamiyya, al-Miqrizi, p. 11

[^204]: Jami‘ Bayan al-’Ilm, vol. I, p. 72

[^205]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. II, p. 108

[^206]: al-Iďah, p. 311 (published by Tehran University)

[^207]: Qissi khanan dar Tarikh Islam, p. 46

[^208]: Ibid pp. 86-96

[^209]: Ibid pp. 65-72

[^210]: Futuhat a‘rab dar asiyay markazi, p. 41

[^211]: Futuh al-Buldan, p. 400

[^212]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 21, 22; Futuh al-Buldan, p. 405

[^213]: Futuh al-Buldan, pp 404, 405

[^214]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 139

[^215]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 186, 187

[^216]: Ibid vol. V, p. 191

[^217]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, the events during 88-95; Futuh
al-Buldan, pp 409-411

[^218]: Futuhat a‘rab dar asiyay markazi, from p. 52 on

[^219]: Futuh al-Buldan, p. 415

[^220]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 263

[^221]: Futuhat a‘rab dar asiyay markazi, p. 65

[^222]: Futuh al-Buldan, p. 390, 391

[^223]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 141-142; Futuh al-Buldan, p. 391

[^224]: Futuh al-Buldan, p. 392

[^225]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 257

[^226]: ImpiraTuriyyat al-’Arab, p. 260

[^227]: ImbiraTuriyyat al-’Arab, p. 214

[^228]: Futuh al-Buldan, p. 197

[^229]: Ibid p. 203

[^230]: Ibid pp 207-208


