Imam ‘Ali’s Imamate
===================

Imam ‘Ali alongside the Prophet
-------------------------------

In the first version of the book, we proportionately and briefly
discussed about Imam 'Ali (a)'s role in the changes of Prophet's
significant time. Imam's position and his reliability to the Messenger
(S) is briefly discussed. Imam 'Ali (a) had the honor to be brought up
in the house of Messenger (S).[^1]

In this regard, a great deal of attractive narrations collected by Ibn
Abi al-Hadid exist. Among them, in a narration by Zayd Ibn 'Ali Ibn
Husayn, he said that in that time the Messenger made meat and date soft
by putting it in his mouth for being easily eaten and then it was put in
Imam 'Ali's mouth.[^2] Imam 'Ali (a) was the first one who believed in
the Messenger (S) due to this kinship.

He said, “No one but the Messenger took me the lead in prayer.”[^3]

Since, in this regard, a great deal of witnesses and evidence exists;
therefore, there is no room for doubts of equitable people. Concerning
Imam's embrace Islam, it is reportedly said that he was invited by the
Messenger (S) to embrace Islam and this indicates Imam's mental
maturity.[^4]  
 Mas'udi says, “Some said that Imam in the time of his embrace Islam was
not old enough so he was only an infant in that time.”[^5]

The prophet truly knew the value of devoted companions, while Imam's
self-sacrifice in all the fields was observed, hoe the prophet can
consider him like the others. This triggered that in every right time,
Imam's reliability and value was expresses to people through the
prophet's remarks about Imam's features and characteristics.

These are the issues available to us in reliable sources of history and
hadith under the title of Imam's virtues. Later on when in second
century, the books of hadith were compiled, their compilers and
narrators were to the most part influenced by tendencies of 'Uthman's
followers who couldn't tolerate any virtue for Imam.

Additionally what the Umayyads and 'Uthman supporters in the Umayya time
made about caliphs and companion defenders was narrated. Some of these
fakes ascribed to caliphs were, in essence, Imam's virtues. These
distortions came to a deadlock for Imam's narrated virtues and their
narrators were respectively serious and reliable to be remained in
books. Narrators of Kufa, in this regard, played a significant role in
keeping these virtues.

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said, ”'Ali is the one for whom a great deal of true
virtues is said.”[^6]  
 He said, **إن ابن أبي طالب لا يقاس به أحد** [^7] “No noe deserves being
compared to 'Ali.”

Among these virtues, some narrations for whose correctness there is no
doubt can be mentioned. Significance of some is to the extent that
through them Imam's personality in the Messenger's eyes can be imagined.

Abu Sa'id Khudri said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان لعلي من النبي (ص) دخلة ليست لأحد وكان للنبي (ص) من علي دخلة ليست
لأحد غيره فكانت دخلة النبي (ص) من علي ان النبي (ص) كان يدخل عليهم كل
يوم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No one met the prophet more than 'Ali, so did the Prophet. The
Prophet's meeting was to come up to them every day.” [^8]

Also Zayd Ibn Thabit said to Imam, **أنت من رسول الله (ص) بالمكان الذي
لا يعدله أحد** [^9] “No one owns thy dignity in front of the Messenger
(S).”

These words were said by Zayd when he used to tenaciously support
'Uthman. This caused Imam to know the Prophet (S) as long as none of the
other companions did so.[^10] One evidence indicating the Prophet's heed
to Imam was that he married Fatima (S), world selected women, to him.
Abu Bakr and 'Umar had popped the question to Fatima before but they
were rejected by the Prophet.

But Imam (a) proposing marriage to Fatima was accepted and said, **لست
بدجال**[^11] “I'm not deceiver.” “Fatima is yours.”

Having married Fatima, Imam (a) was asked to find a house but it was far
from the Prophet's. And this was done through Harith Ibn Nu'man's
devotion and leaving his house for 'Ali.[^12]

Perhaps due to such a reason, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar said, “For knowing
'Ali's status to the prophet, you'd better see location of his house to
that of the prophet.”[^13]

In the course of the brotherhood, the Messenger selected 'Ali (a) as his
“brother”.[^14] When the Messenger made sermon, Imam 'Ali (a) used to
repeat his remarks in a farther distance.[^15] And in the time of the
Prophet's anger, no one but 'Ali (a) dared to talk to him.[^16] People
made 'Ali (a) as their mediator in solving their problems.[^17]

Quoting 'Ayisha, the Sunnites said, “Fatima among the women and 'Ali
among the men were the most beloved to the Messenger.” [^18]

In Manzalat tradition which is one of the most definite merits of Imam,
the Messenger regarded his relationship with 'Ali (a) as that of Moses
with Aaron.[^19] In case of any problem, when someone was to be sent for
settling things, The Messenger sent 'Ali (a).[^20]

Once Imam was asked, why is it that you quote traditions more than the
other companions? He answered,

**  
**

لأني كنت إذا سألته أنبأني وإذا سكتّ ابتدأني “

  

Because When I asked the Messenger a question, He taught me the
knowledge and when I kept silent, he started to speak himself.”[^21]

Imam used to say, I faced nothing unknown unless I asked of the
Messenger about it and committed the answer to my memory[^22]. I
memorized everything he said and never forgot anything.[^23] In a letter
he wrote,

**  
**

وأنا من رسول الله كالصنو من الصنو والذراع من العضد “

My relation with the Messenger is that of one branch with another or of
the wrist with the arm.”[^24]

He said, “I followed the Messenger just as a baby camel follows its
mother.”[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني لم أردّ على الله ولا على رسوله ساعة قطّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I never disobeyed God or his Messenger at all.”[^26]

Concerning the declaration of aquittance, God told His Messenger, This
message must be delivered either by you or someone on behalf of you.
That is why he made Abu Bakr return midway and handed the message to
Imam 'Ali so that it might be read on “Greater Pilgrimage”.[^27] There
are beautiful sentences, in Qasi'a sermon, about Imam's intimacy with
the Messenger. Here are some of his remarks,

“You know my position of close kinship and special relationship with the
Prophet. From the very beginning of my life he took me in his lap and
kept me embraced to his chest. He used to lay me beside him in his bed,
bring his body close to mine and make me smell his fragrance. He used to
feed me with his hands often chewing something for me. He never heard me
lying nor did he see me doing something wrong. When he was weaned, God
appointed his greatest angel to be with him day and night so that he
might cover the paths of greatness and avail himself of the worldly
virtues.

And I used to follow him like a young camel following in the footprints
of its mother. Every day he showed me in the form of a banner some of
his high traits and commanded me to follow them. Every year he used to
go in seclusion in Hara'.I saw him and no one did so but me. In those
days, Islam was the religion of Holy Prophet and his wife, Khadija
exclusively. I was the third of the trio. I beheld the divine light of
revelation and prophethood and smelled the heavenly fragrance of
messengership.”[^28]

Being on such intimate terms with the Messenger, Imam said, “By God,
there is no verse revealed unless I know about what and where in it was
sent.[^29] According to Ibn 'Abbas, no verse was sent by God unless 'Ali
(a) was Amir and noble. God reproved Muhammad's companions but always
spoke highly of 'Ali (a).[^30]

Regarding those who wondered at 'Ali (a) being the divider of Heaven and
Hell, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said, “Hasn't this been narrated that the
Messenger told 'Ali (a), **لا يحبك إلا مؤمن ولا يبغضك إلا منافق** “Only
the believer loes thee and only the hypocrite loathes thee.” “Yes”, they
said. Continued he, “As the believer abides in the heaven and the
hypocrite abides in the Hell, 'Ali (a) is the divider of the Heaven and
the Hell.”[^31]

'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz used to say, “If this ignorant people were
informed of what we knew about 'Ali (a), not two of them would obey
us.”[^32]

As Salman states, “Should 'Ali (a) leave you, there would remain nobody
to inform you of the prophet's secrets.”[^33] How right Ibn Abi al-Hadid
is to say, “No one helped the Prophet as much as Abu Talib and his
sons,'Ali (a) and Ja’far did.”[^34]Once somebody complained to the
Prophet about 'Ali (a) and he stated three times, Leave 'Ali (a)
alone.[^35]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن علياً مني وأنا منه وهو ولي كل مومن
  </p>
</blockquote>

”'Ali is from me and I am from him; he is guardian of every faithful.”

At the night of immigration, 'Ali (a) saved prophet's life [^36]. In the
battle of Badr 30 polytheists were put to death by him. In the battle of
Uhud, where many escaped the battle, he remained with prophet and saved
his life. One stroke of 'Ali's sword inflicted on 'Amr Ibn 'Abdiwad in
Khandaq was considered by the Prophet to be worth more than the worship
of Jinn and mankind. This blow put the enemy to rout.[^37] In most
battles, Imam was the flag bearer of Muslim's army.[^38]

Undoubtedly, Imam's knowledge had no parallel in Prophet's companions.
This is an issue cited by the prophet and his companions, and testified
by history.

This word of the Messenger, **انا مدينه العلم وعلي بابها “** I am the
city of knowledge and 'Ali (a) is its door,” bears abundant evidence of
this. Uttered on the pulpit, Imam 's remark, **سلوني قبل ان تفقدوني**
“Ask me before you miss me,”[^39] was also indicative of the superiority
of his knowledge. This claim, according to Sa'id Ibn Musayyib, was laid
by no one but Imam.[^40]

The Prophet (S) charged him with the duty of teaching ablution and
tradition to people.[^41] 'Ayisha, whose animosity toward Fatima and
'Ali (a) dated back to prophet's time, said, **علي أعلم الناس بالسنة**
[^42] ”'Ali is most conscious of Sunna.”

According to one of the well-known successors called 'Ata', 'Ali is the
most impoverished one among the Prophet's companions.[^43]

'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz also called him the most devout of the
companions.[^44] Hundreds of pages can be written about Imam's virtues
but this amount will suffice our book which is a short review of Islam's
history.

Imam ‘Ali and Caliphs
---------------------

If it is true to assume that at Messenger's time, Muhajirun were of two
different political fronts and some were trying to win the caliphate,
then one must accept that the relations between Imam and Sheikhs were
rather strained.

Reports say nothing to prove their disputes, but nor does any
reminiscence show their friendship. On 'Ayisha's own confession, her
being at enmity with Imam went back to Prophet's time and this can be
considered as bearing witness to the differences between the families of
'Ali and Abu Bakr.

It has been said that when Fatima passed away, all Messenger's wives
attended the Hashimites mourning ceremony except for 'Ayisha who
feigning illness, didn't participate and even was told to be expressing
joy of that.[^45]

Anyway, Immediately after Abu Bakr's caliphacy and Imam's insistence on
proving his rightfulness, unfriendly relations between them were
developed. Attacking Imam's house, Fatima's being in sulk as well as not
permitting Sheikhs to attend Imam's funeral,[^46] all aggravated the
differences, following that, Imam secluded and went on with his own
life.

The administration expected Imam, in addition to taking the oath of
allegiance, to refrain from assertion of rightfulness and embark on
consolidating their authoritative realm while having swords in hand but

He refused to do so. Naturally, adopting such a position Imam was to be
humiliated by the administration in front of people. This policy could
result in Imam's further solitude.

Cursing Quraysh, Imam said,”Oh God, I seek your help against the Quraysh
and those supporting them.” **فإنهم قطعو رحمي وصغروا عظيم منـزلتي
وأجمعوا على منازعتي أمراً هو لي “** They have cut asunder my
kinship,lowered my high position and joined together to contest the
right to which I was entitled.”[^47]

Continues he, “I looked around but found no one to shield and help me
except the members of my family. I refrained from fighting them to
death, so I overlooked with grieved eyes”[^48]

This remark refers to Caliphs' policy of humiliating Imam. In sermon of
Shiqshiqiyya, referring to the consultation Imam states, “When he
('Umar) was due to die, he selected a group of candidates and included
me among them. Oh, good Heavens! What had I to do with this
consultation? I wonder why they never equaled me to the first of them
but to these people while I was as competent as him.”[^49]

It was intolerable for Imam to be among Talha, Zubayr and 'Uthman who
held him in contempt. Strange to say, 'Umar blamed all 6 men chosen by
him for some wrongdoings. What Imam was blamed for, in this regard, was
extremely unfounded and humiliating. He was blamed for being kind of a
joker, **فيه دعابة**[^50]. Later, based on this very remark of 'Umar,
Mu'awiya[^51] and 'Amr Ibn 'As told about Imam, **فيه تلعابة** [^52] “He
is a humorous man.”

Seroiusly rejecting this accusation laid against him by 'Amr Ibn 'As,
Imam in fact rejected 'Umar's remark. [^53] The life of Imam who was
secluded in Medina caused him to remain unknown. The time went by fast,
and the Imam, by himself, in Medina, particularly among the old
companions of Prophet (S) seemed as acquaintance. Yet, no one knew Imam
in Iraq and Damascus. Just a few Yemeni tribes seeing him since his
few-month-long trip to Yemen were acquaintance to him.

Jundab Ibn 'Abd Allah said, “Once after swearing (on oath of) allegiance
to 'Uthman I went to Iraq, therein I quoted 'Ali's virtues for the
people. The best answer I heard from the people was, “Discard these
remarks. Think of something of your benefit.”

I answered, “These issues are beneficial for both of us.” Yet, after my
statement, he was to stand up and leave.[^54]

According to Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Muhammad Ibn Sulayman's interpretation
was that one of the factors leading to discard in 'Uthman's era was the
constitution of council. For, each member of the council had serious
aspiration for caliphate. Typically, Talha was among those who looked
forward to caliphate.

Besides, Zubayr not only helped him but also regarded himself as
deserving of governing. Their hope for the caliphate was more than that
of Imam 'Ali (a). Inasmuch as the two Sheikhs discredited him and held
him in low esteem.

Hence, he was forgotten. Most of those knowing his virtues had been died
at the time of the Prophet (S), and a new generation was found that
deemed him the same as other Muslims. What merely left among his honors
was that he is the cousin of the Prophet (S), his daughter's husband and
his grandchildren's father. The remainder of facts was forgotten.
Quraysh also felt such a hatred for him that was never felt for anyone.
To the same extent, Quraysh loved Talha and Zubayr, since there was no
reason for abhorring them.[^55]

Ibn Abi al-Hadid himself, having pointed out that the people in Siffin
were waiting to regard 'Ammar's presence in a front as the rightfulness
of that front, said, “How surprising the peoples are! Since they accept
'Ammar as the criterion of truth and error; however, they don't regard
the very 'Ali (a) as a criterion about whom the Prophet (S) has cited
the hadith of sainthood and also said, لا **يحبك إلا مؤمن ولا يبغضك إلا
منافق “** Only the believer loves thee, and only the hypocrite loathes
thee.”

This is because all Quraysh tried to, from the very beginning, cover his
virtues, remove public memory from him, ruin his features and eliminate
his high status in the hearts of people.[^56] Ibn Abi al-Hadid nicely
analyzes the reasons behind the Quraysh's grudge against Imam 'Ali
(a).[^57]

Once Imam was asked:“Do you think if the Messenger (S) had a mature son,
Arabs would hand the governorship over to him?”

Imam responded: “If he had done something different from what I did, he
would have been killed.”  
 Arabs hated what Muhammad (S) did and felt envious of what God had
granted him… they from that time attempted to disentitle Ahl al-Bayt
after his departure. Quraysh found his name a means of domination and
ladder of promotion and if other wise, they never worshipped God even
one day after him and would become apostate.

A while after, conquests, come one after another, no hunger and poverty
remained after starvation and destitution. This led to popularity of
Islam and they kept religion in their many a heart because, however,
truth brought this about. Afterwards, these conquests were attributed to
strategy and thought of emirs. Among them, some were magnified and some
others were forgotten,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فكنا ممن خمل ذكره وخبت ناره وانقطع صوته وصيته، حتى أكل الدهر علينا
وشرب، ومضت السنون والاحقاب بما فيها، ومات كثير ممن يعرف ونشأ كثير ممن
لا يعرف “
  </p>
</blockquote>

We were from someone whose memory was last whose luminosity was cut and
whose outcry was stopped as if time swallowed us. Years passed this way,
many known figures were dead and those unknown came into stage.

Under these conditions, what curled the son's son do? You know that the
Messenger (S) never kept me close to himself for his kinship, with me
but he did it in time of Jihad ad and advice.[^58] It was just for the
same reason of Imam being forgotten in Muslim community he, in his
caliphate time, tried to use every chase to introduce himself and speak
about his efforts for Islam in the Messenger's time.[^59]

Imam held cold relationship with Abu Bakr with no seemingly left memory.
In his contact with 'Umar, Imam's memories are many available, that
mainly relied upon his judiciary assistance to 'Umar as well as response
to some consultations discussed earlier. 'Umar refused to blatantly
slander Imam and probably Imam did so.

But 'Uthman was different and never did he bear Imam's ideas and once he
told Imam:“You are not better than Marwan Ibn Hakam to me?”[^60]

'Abbas asked 'Uthman to stand by Imam.

'Uthman said:“What I first fell you is that if 'Ali wants, no one stands
dearer to me than him.[^61] Of course, Imam was unwilling to overlook
deviations for his friendship with him. For this, Imam's relationship
with 'Uthman was partly closer and partly harsher.”[^62]

Once an Ansari woman had a quarrel with one of the Hashimites women and
when she was acquitted, she was told by 'Uthman, “This is your cousin,
'Ali's decision!”[^63]

Opposition to government was difficult for Imam. He attempted, in early
years, to resort to seclusion to avoid faring the government. Sa'd Ibn
'Ubada was a good experiment. He failed to pay allegiance and
immediately in time of caliph I or II, he was told to have been killed
by Jinns. Previously mention was made from some sources that his murder
had been politically planned.[^64]

According to Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Abu Ja’far Naqib (Yahya Ibn Abi Zayd) was
asked:“I am amazed how 'Ali survived this long after the Messenger's
demise, from all Quraysh's vengeance.”  
 Abu Ja’far said:“Had he not belittled and isolated himself, he might
have been killed.”

He let himself off memories and became engaged in worshipping, Qur'an
reading and prayer, leaving his first state of mind and sword as if he
were like a sinner who had repented, probing the earth and living on the
mountains like a monk. He survived because he obeyed rulers of the time;
other wise he would have been killed”.

He then refers to Khalid's action to kill Imam.[^65] Mu'min al-Taq also
believe that Imam made no political effort in this time because he
feared being murdered by jinns (like Sa'd).[^66]

Of course, this did not mean that Imam never tried to use chances to
take back his rights. From the very outset, he refused to swear
allegiance for a few months.[^67] Further, from early times, he joined
his family to homes of Ansar to revert back his rights. He insisted so
much that he was blamed for having a greedy eye on caliphate.

Imam quoting someone said:“O son of Abu Talib! You raise a greed on
this!

He said:“No, by God, you are greedier than I am. You are for from the
Messenger (S) and I'm closer to him. I asked for the right I possessed,
but you refrain me from having it”.[^68]

Imam made reasoning of this kind a lot,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا معشر قريش! إنا أهل البيت أحق بهذا الامر منكم، أما كان فينا من يقرء
القرآن ويعرف السنّة ويدين بدين الحق؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Quraysh people! We, Ahl al-Bayt deserve more than you in caliphate!
Are there no people among us who read Qur'an and follow Sunna and true
religion.”[^69]

On Imam's evaluating successorship of three caliphs, it is to be said
that he was in no time free to offer his appraisal of Sheikhs. Unlike
'Uthman, what he believed, he found a chance to retell it. It was why
his troops in Kufa were included of those, except a few, had approved of
Sheikhs and he could not talk freely about them. Once he found a chance
to talk some part of his sufferings but he was stopped talking. Upon
'Abbas's insistence, he kept on talking, **تلك شقشقة هدرت “** No, Ibn
'Abbas! What you heard was flame of grief that rose.”[^70]

Imam with all caution was never prepared to adopt conditions of 'Abd
al-Rahman Ibn 'Awf for caliphate during council of caliphate. Ibn'Awf
conditioned that if Imam were willing to act upon conduct of Sheikhs, he
would place him caliph.  
 Imam said:“I would act according to my Ijtihad”.

Imam openly rejected conduct of Sheikhs and believed that it was in the
most part against conduct of the Messenger (S) and based on improper
Ijtihad. Imam says he has obeyed Abu Bakr in affairs he obeyed God.[^71]
Imam's words and his approach here show that he never admired past
manners.  
 In later times, Mu'awiya wrote to Imam that he felt envious of early
caliphs and rebelled against them!

Imam wrote back, “you think I am against them an dwant to take revenge.
If so, why are you worried to be inquired? You are not blamed… and you
said you found me like a camel harnessed to swear allegiance. By God,
you wanted to scold, praise and scandalize but you're scandalized
yourself. What belittles a Muslim who is oppressed and assured of his
religion. His certainty is strong and his hesitation is aside? … And I
never apologize for caviling 'Uthman because of innovations.[^72]

Despite Imam's explicit criticism, particularly his attitude in council,
one cannot refer to Imam's familial relationships with 'Umar, or 'Uthman
for his belief in their proper rule. Even his praise of some caliphs
compared to others cannot be a reason for his basic approval of them.

When he learned that he could not face the party and a campaign waged is
not beneficial to Islam, he chose to compromise. Imam justified his
allegiance to Abu Bakr and his approval according to Muhajir and Ansar
as to a necessity and preservation of unity among Muslims.[^73]

Imam referred to Aaron's speech in front of Moses(a) for justifying his
silence, Aaron said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي خَشِيتُ أَنْ تَقُولَ فَرَّقْتَ بَيْنَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I feared lest thou shouldst say: Thou hast caused division among the
Children of Israel.”[^74]

Imam said of Saqifa,

**  
**

بل عرفت أنّ حقي هو المأخوذ وقد تركته لهم، تجاوز الله عنهم “

  

When I learned I am withdrawn with my rights, I left to them, may God
punish them.”[^75]

In the past, Sunnis never accepted that Ahl al-Bayt found themselves
more qualified for caliphate than others, that is early caliphs. Yet,
now somewhat broad-minded factions of Sunnis admit that 'Ali (a) simply
pledged allegiance just for unison with Abu Bakr while knowing himself
rightful for caliphate.[^76]

Anyway, Imam's isolated life in that society indicates that both Imam
and caliphs knew they can not treat others in such a way that it might
mean confirmation of their view, particularly about caliphate.
Meanwhile, frequenting to the mosque and even establishing familial
links like 'Umar's marriage to Umm Kulthum had been usual.

This marriage was insisted by 'Umar and Imam agreed in spite of his
early opposition. Not to mention, Imam married Abu Bakr's wife, that is
Asma', daughter of 'Umays to himself after Abu Bakr died and brought up
Muhammad, Abu Bakr's son in his house.

Shi‘ism During Imam’s Caliphate
-------------------------------

Muslims' disagreements over caliphacy as well as other fields were dealt
with in previous parts in detail. Now in the light of carrying out more
precise researches, it is not fair of anyone to deny the existence of
the 'Alawites and Quraysh parties in Messenger's time let alone denying
it from Saqifa on. al-Duri approves the two parties being present
earlier than Saqifa.[^77]

This political disagreement which, from the very beginning, had a
religious root, fomented the religious differences. For example, it was
of great importance that initially, some companions considered merely
Qur'an as proof.

In other words, not deeming the decrees of prophet as proof and
prohibiting people from writing and quoting traditions did influence
theology.'Abd al-Rahman Ibn 'Awf's laying it down that caliphate will be
turned over to anyone accepting to act according to the conduct of
Sheikhs, and Imam's stating that he will act only in accordance with his
own individual reasoning, indicate the aggravation of religious
differences.

As long as 'Umar was in power, the majority of people, excluding Imam's
supporters, believed in rulership.

But when 'Uthman, because of heretical religious deeds, was denied by a
large number of companions, the problematic question was it that whose
words should people regard as the religion and whom should they imitate.

Imam 'Ali replaced 'Uthman. In the very beginning he was not accepted by
the people of Damascus. Little by little, though temporarily, Basra went
a different way as well. In Medina proper, though few, some companions
balked at obeying or swearing allegiance to Imam.

Apart from political issues, the important case was elucidating the
religion especially in the case of differences or novel matters. Here
two political and naturally religious parties began to emerge. The first
group consisted of those having accepted Imam and deeming it necessary
to obey him. The second group, motivated by 'Uthman's oppressedness,
didn't accept Imam's leadership and opposed him.

In this regard, Apostates and Deviators had no difference. At this point
two terms, religious and political, were coined ”'Ali's Shi'a and
'Uthman's Shi'a” were gradually distinguished as respectively “Shi'a or
al- Shi'a” and “Uthmani or al-’Uthmaniyya”.

Generally “Shi'a” was in opposition to “Uthmani”. But this title was not
applicable to all individuals. There were some Shi'ite Muslims who were
called so merely because they opposed 'Uthman or stood for Imam as the
Shi'istically legitimate caliph.

There were also some who regarded Imam as basically appointed by the
Messenger and believed in a kind of divine right for his leadership.

Of course this doesn't necessarily mean that they should have refrained
to cooperate with the early caliphs. Conditions being so, Imam himself
had kept silent for Muslim interests and had repeatedly notified this
point. What should be told about 'Uthmanids is that upholding the idea
of Imam's illegitimacy, the Umayyads managed to dominate this view over
a great part of Muslim community.

But except for Basra, this opinion was not favored in Iraq. By contrast,
in every appropriate accasion, the belief in 'Alawi's rightfulness
emerged in the field of politics. Hijaz also did not fully surrender to
the Umayyads, but tried to maintain another idea, content with Sheikhs.
During the first to third century, religious and political changes
triggered a great transition in that classification.

Now, the matter related to our discussion is to show that the group
known to us as Shi'ite Muslims did believe in 'Ali's divine designation.
After swearing allegiance to 'Ali, Khuzayma Ibn Thabit said,” We chose
one whom God chose for us.”[^78]

In response to 'Umar who said, “Quraysh refrained from choosing 'Ali
because they abominated both prophethood and caliphate being in my
family.”

Ibn 'Abbas replied, “They abominated what God had sent down.”[^79]

Opposing Mu'awiya, Darimiyya Hajuniyya said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واليت عليًا على حبّه المساكين وإعطائه أهل السبيل وفقهه في الدين وبذله
الحق من نفسه وما عقد له رسول الله من الولاية “
  </p>
</blockquote>

He loved 'Ali because the Messenger confined the sainthood to him.”[^80]

According to Tabari, once 'Ali returned to Kufa from Siffin and
Kharijites parted with him, The Shi'ite Muslims remained with him saying
that they are charged with another allegiance, نحن **أولياء من واليت
وأعداء من عاديت “**We are amiable to your friends and opposed to your
enemies.”[^81]

According to Iskafi, the majority of people, based on the Book and
tradition, and Imam's Shi'ite Muslims, on being amiable to the friends
and enemies with the enemies, swore allegiance to 'Ali.[^82]

The emphasis on such an allegiance as the second allegiance and its
content implies that allegiance-swearers tended toward Shi'a. In the
original tradition, the emphasis is put on the allegiance of ”'Ali's
Shi'a”.

Abu Dharr, passed away at 'Uthman's time, called people toward the
People of House and commemorated Prophet's family this way,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ايها الناس! إن آل محمد هم الأسرة من نوح والآل من إبراهيم والصفوة
والسلالة من إسماعيل والعترة الطيبة الهادية من محمد، فأنزلوا آل محمد
بمنـزلة الرأس من الجسد بل بمنـزلة العينين من الرأس فانهم منكم كالسماء
المرفوعة وكالجبال المنصوبة والشمس الضاحية وكالشجرة الزيتونة اضاء زيتها
وبورك زندها “
  </p>
</blockquote>

The family of Muhammad (S), is the family of Noah and Ibraham and the
selected progeny of Isma'il and saint posterity. Regard them as the head
attached to body and the eyes attached to head, the high sky, firm
mountains, shining sun and olive tree.” Added he**, “**Muhammad (S) is
the heir of Adam, other prophets are not superior to him and 'Ali Ibn
Abi Talib is the legatee of him and the heir of his knowledge.”

Addressing people he said,” If you, the folk astounded after the Prophet
had preferred whom God had preferred, deferred whom God had deferred and
confined sainthood and heritage to the People of the House, you would
have benefited from all blessings.”[^83]

Elsewhere Abu Dharr has been quoted, “Oh, people! In case of being
involved in prospective seditions, resort to Imam 'Ali and the
Book.[^84]When he was to be exiled to Rabaďa and Imam and his children
went to see him off, having a look at Imam, Abu Dharr said, seeing you
and your children reminds me of what Prophet told about you and makes me
cry.[^85]

Expressing regret for people not benefiting from Imam while he lives,
Salman said,” I swear by God, after him, no one will inform you of the
secrets of your Prophet.”

Quoting the Messenger of God, Miqdad said, “knowing the family of
Muhammad (S) is the released from fire, loving his family is the pass
from the Path and sainthood of his family is the security from
chastisement.[^86]

'Ammar also narrated a tradition from the Messenger, I advice the one
believing in God and admitting me with the guardianship of 'Ali, son of
Abi Talib, “Anyone loving 'Ali, loves me and anyone loving me, loves
God.”[^87]

There are lots of these quotations from Abu Dharr, Salman, 'Ammar,
Miqdad indicating their Shi'istic beliefs. Abu Hatim Razi puts the
definition of “Shi'a” this way,” This is the title of those who loved
'Ali during the Messenger's time, for instance, Salman, Abu Dharr,
Miqdad Ibn Aswad, 'Ammar Ibn Yasir and etc.

Commenting on these four, The Messenger stated, “The Heaven looks
forward to four men, Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad and 'Ammar.[^88]

Describing 'Ali, Umm Sanan, the daughter of Khaythama Ibn Kharasha,
composed this,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قدكنت بعد محمد خلفاً لنا أوصى إليك بنا فكنت وفيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are Muhammad's remainder to us, He made his will to thee about us
and thou art the faithful.”[^89]

Inciting 'Ali's troops at Siffin,Umm al-Khayr said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هلموا رحمكم الله إلى الإمام العدل والتقي الوفي والصديق الوصي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May God bless you. Hasten toward the sincere, pious and just
successor.”[^90]

The point that Imam 'Ali is regarded by these and many of his companions
as “the Successor”, shows that they imagined him far beyond a caliph who
has gained the caliphacy through public allegiance.

The sources contain lots of poems indicating the use of this comment by
Hujr Ibn 'Adi, Ibn Tayyihan, Ibn 'Ijlan and other Shi'ites companions of
Imam.[^91]

Inviting the people to swear allegiance to 'Ali, Malik Ashtar stated,
**هذا وصيّ الأوصياء ووارث علم الأنبياء** “ O people! He is “the
successor of the successors” and “The heir of Prophets' knowledge.”[^92]

In Siffin, he composed this,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من رآى عزة الوصيّ عليّ إنه في دجى الحنادس نور
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Everyone knows 'Ali, the chief successor, he is the very man who
illuminates dark night.” [^93]  
 Lamenting over 'Ali's martyrdom, Umm 'Irban said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكنا قبل مقتله بخير نرى مولى رسول الله فينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We had a good life before he was killed because we stayed with the
Messenger (S).” [^94]

A lot of poems composed by the Messenger's companions some of which were
'Ali's supporters, interpret Ghadir tradition as sainthood and
leadership. For instance, the poems of Qays Ibn Sa'd Ibn  
 'Ubada, Hassan Ibn Thabit as well as Imam 'Ali himself.[^95] Qays Ibn
Sa'd composed this about Ghadir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعـليّ إمامـنا وإمـام لسـوانا أتى به التنـزيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوم قال النبي من كنت مولا ه فهذا مولاه خطب جليل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ ما قاله النبيّ على الأمـ ة حتم ما فيـه قال وقيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

”'Ali is our Imam and everyone's, he is the one who has introduced
Qur'an  
 It was on a great day when the Prophet (S) said, ”'Ali is the lord of
whomever I am his lord”  
 What the Prophet (S) said to Umma ends up all babbles” [^96]

Hassan Ibn Thabit also composed this one about the same,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يناديهـم يوم الغدير نبيهم بخــم واسمع بالرسول مناديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له قم يا علي فاننـي جعلتك من بعدي اماما وهاديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Their Prophet called them to obey God at Ghadir Khum, a great herald
whose call must be heard  
 'Ali was told, “O rise up! For I placed thee an Imam after myself.”
[^97]

The combination of these quotations indicates the recognition of 'Ali as
an Imam introduced by the Messenger. They regarded Imam's rightfulness
in his legation on the part of Messenger and asked the others to follow
him as the legatee of the Messenger.

According to Ibn Tayyihan, verily our Imam and guardian, is the legatee
of the Messenger.

Ibn 'Ijlan used to say, “How possibly can we separate while the guardian
is our Imam.”[^98]  
 According to Hujr, the son of 'Adi, he is the guardian after the
Messenger, and the prophet consented to his being the legatee.[^99]

A newly converted man called Zadan Farrukh came upon Kharijites on his
way. They asked him about 'Ali, he said, “The Commander of the Faithful
is the legatee of the Messenger and the lord of mankind”.[^100]

They killed him. In his well-known letter to Mu'awiya, Muhammad Ibn Abi
Bakr mentioned Imam as **وارث رسول الله ووصيه “** T he Heir of the
Messenger and his successor.”[^101]

There is also a poem quoted from 'Ubayda Ibn Samit which is composed
during Saqifa.[^102]

The measures taken by Imam for propagating the idea of “Divine
leadership” are among the most important reasons of Shi'istic
propagation and its distinction from his caliphate. He himself has
composed a poem about the content of Ghadir Tradition, in which he has
interpreted the mentioned tradition as indicating the necessity of
sainthood over people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأوجب لي ولايته عليكم رسول الله يوم غدير خم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Messenger (S) deemed his sainthood for you obligatory on the of
Ghadir Khum.”[^103]

In a lengthy letter to Mu'awiya, Imam has explained this issue in
detail. The letter contains significant points about Imam's contribution
to the propagation of Shi'istic sainthood. Some major parts of the
letter are quoted here for its great importance in terms of “Imamate
Thought”.

“The Almighty God says, “Obey God and execute the commands of the
Messenger as well as Holders of Authority”. This verse addresses us, The
People of the House, not you. Then, Qur'an forbade affray and disunity
and ordered surrender and unity. You are the folk acknowledging God and
his prophet and admitting them. God informed you that” Muhammad (S) is
the father of none of your men, he is the God's Messenger and the Seal
of The Prophets “and also said, “Retreat if he is killed or dead ” and
Mu'awiya, you and your companion retreated, apostatized and broke your
pledge to God as well as your allegiance, and all these will not harm
God.

Oh, Mu'awiya! don't you know that Imams are from among us not you. God
informed you that Holders of Authority must be capable of deducing the
knowledge and you must refer to God, his Messenger and Holders of
Authority, the bearers of knowledge, in all that you disagree. So anyone
keeping his pledge to God, shall find Him faithful to His promise.

We are the family of Ibrahim envied by all and you are those who envy
us. There was a party of Banu Isra'il who told their prophet, “Send us a
king; we will fight for God's sake.”[^104]And when God sent Saul as a
king for them, they envied him and said,” How can he hold control over
us?” [^105]and deemed themselves more deserving of kingdom.

These all are the past happenings and now we narrate them to you and
their interpretation and esoteric exegesis are available to us, and
anyone ascribing lies to us will fall into despair. You are typical of
that… Let it be known to you that we, the People of House, are the
envied family of Ibrahim. We were envied as our fathers were envied
before.

The Almighty God said, “The family of Ibrahim, the family of Lot, the
family of Jacob, the family of Moses, the family of Aaron and the family
of David; we, too, are the family of our prophet, Muhammad (S). “Oh,
Mu'awiya, don't you know that Allah says, “The closest people to Ibrahim
are those who follow him as well as this prophet and the believers, God
is the believer's patron.” [^106]

We are kins by blood cited in this verse,”The prophet merits more than
the believers to themselves and his wives are the mothers of believers
and according to the holy Qur'an the genealogical relatives are merited
over Muhajirun and Ansar (Helpers).”[^107]

We are the People of House, God has chosen us “Nabuwwat”, prophethood,
is ordained to us the Book, wisdom and knowledge belong to us and Ka'ba
and Isma'il's House and Ibrahim's abode belong to us. So we deserve
sovereignty. Woe is to you Mu'awiya. We are more deserving of Ibrahim,
we are his family and the family of 'Imran are more deserving of Him…
and the family of Muhammad (S) are more deserving of him…We are the
people of house from whom God has removed all impurity.[^108]

Every prophet has an invitation exclusive to him, his progeny and family
and every prophet leaves a testament for his family. Don't you know that
Ibrahim gave his last testament to his son Jacob and when Jacob was due
to die, he also left a will and Muhammad (S) made a will.This was the
tradition of Ibrahim and other prophets and Muhammad (S) followed them
by order of God.

The Book is sent down to us and the Messenger has been raised up from
among us and the verses have been read to us. We depend on, witness,
call to and uphold the Book. Oh, Mu'awiya! Do you seek another God but
Allah or another book except Allah's Book? Or another Qibla but Ka'ba,
the House of God, home of Isma'il and abode of our father, Ibrahim.

Do you want another religion but that of Ibrahim or another sovereign
and commander but God? God has placed this sovereignty and commandership
in us. You revealed your animosity toward us, well showed your spite and
jealousy and proved that you break your pledge to God and distort his
verses as this one revealed to Ibrahim, “God has selected your religion
for you.”[^109]

Do you turn away from Ibrahim's religion while God has selected him in
this world and he is from among the virtues in the Hereafter. Do you
seek another decree but that of Allah? Or another Imam not from our
family? The leadership belongs to Ibrahim, his progeny and the believers
who follow them and do not turn away from his religion. It was also
said, anyone who follows me is from me.”[^110]

Agitated at Imam's calling himself the relative of all prophets,
Mu'awiya wrote in response,

“Not content with your kinship with the Messenger, now you relate
yourself to all the prophets. Beware that Muhammad (S) was one of the
prophets raised up for all, he delivered God's messages and had nothing
more. Now tell us what is the merit of your kinship and the superiority
of your right and where in the Book did you find your name? Wherein is
your sovereignty, leadership and superiority mentioned?

Yes, you as well as us, follow the previous Imams and caliphs.”

Then he mentioned his being 'Uthman's heir. Repelling him, Imam accused
him of animosity toward the prophets and interest in his unbelieving
forefathers and added,

“Beware that we are the People of Messenger's House. The infidel
dislikes us and the believer bears us no grudge. You have denied
Muhammad's leadership and regarded him as Messenger not Imam This denial
makes you deny the leadership of all prophet's. But we testify that he
was both Messenger and Imam and about your denying my kinship with the
Messenger and my right, verily our due and right is mentioned in the
Holy Book, and God mentions us as having an equal share with the Prophet
where he says,” A fifth of anything that you acquire as spoils belongs
to God, the Messenger and the relatives.”[^111]

And elsewhere is said, “so give the relative his due.”[^112] Don't you
see that our due is mentioned with that of God and Messenger and yours
is mentioned with the strangers…you deny my leadership and sovereignty.
Haven't you seen that in the Book, the almighty God says he has made the
family of Ibrahim superior to the world.[^113] He is God who has exalted
us over all mortals. If you can, separate us from Ibrahim, Isma'il,
Muhammad (S) and his family, in the Holy Book.[^114]

The aforesaid letter is quoted by Abu Ishaq Thaqafi, a Shi'ites
historian of the third century A.H.(283 A.D.) The belief in “divine
leadership” of the Commander of the Faithful is completely obvious in
the letter and different deductive aspects of it are outstanding.

The most important part is the relation and link between prophethood,
succession, and leadership as a noble course of action in the history of
prophets. Mu'awiya's denial of the Messenger's leadership is also
remarkable in this letter. Anyhow,in his words, Imam has tried his very
best in proving the superiority of “The People of House “over others and
having a “divine right.”

Proving such a right, Imam considers leadership as an integral part of
it, to which the other caliphs are not entitled. There are also some
other proofs indicating the Shi'ite thought in works handed down by Imam
In a sermon about the People of the House, Imam says, “They (the
descendants of Muhammad) are the trustees of his secret.

Anyone taking refuge to them will be led towards God. They are the
center of knowledge about him, the preachers of his religious
commandments, the protectors of Qur'an and Sunna, and mountain -like
citadels which guard the religion and make the Islam stable, firm and
powerful.”[^115]

Elsewhere he states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأين تذهبون وأنى توفكون والأعلام قائمة والآيات واضحة والمنار منصوبة
فأين يتاه بكم بل كيف تعمهون وبينكم عترة نبيكم وهم أزمة الحق وأعلام
الدين وألسنة الصدق فأنزلوهم بأحسن منازل القرآن وردوهم ورود الهيم
العطاش “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Where are you going and when are you due to return? The landmarks are
fixed, beacons are lighted and direction indicators are set up. To what
extent are you being misled and confused? The descendants of the holy
Prophet (S) are amongst you. They are the reins of right, ensigns of
faith and speakers in the language of truth. Place them in the best
Qur'anic positions turn to them as thirsty camels gather round water
springs.”[^116]

“We are the tree of prophethood, the centers which receive the messages
of God and descending place of blessing angels.

We are mines of knowledge and springs of wisdom. Our friend awaits
blessings of God and our enemy awaits punishment and wrath.” [^117]

Elsewhere it is said, “Muhammad's progeny revives the knowledge and
kills the ignorance; you are informed of their knowledge because of
their prudence, their appearance out of their inward, and their silence
because of their philosophy of expression. They are neither at odds with
the gospel truth nor render it wrong.

They are pillars of religion and the shelter that harbor the people;
upon their return, the gospel truth re-settled and the credal error,
from there, was driven away and cut off with tongue. They knew, learned
and applied the religion as they had to, not just lending an ear to it.
Religion narrators are legion but its protectors are few in
number.”[^118]

Elsewhere it has been stated, “Beware, when infant, my saint progeny is
the most patient and when adult they are the most knowledgeable of all.
Beware that we are from among the People of House whose knowledge and
decree is rooted in God's knowledge and decree. In case, you follow us,
you will be guided through our wisdom and if not, God will have you
brought to ruin.”

Elsewhere it goes to say, “They embarked on seas of sedition, adopted
heresies and abandoned traditions. The faithful were isolated and wicked
liars got loud in declaring their views. We are particular people,
companions, the treasures of prophethood and the pearls of prophetic
mission.

Houses should be entered through their doors and whoever stepping into
the house not through their doors should be called a thief. They are
true applications of long Qur'anic verses and treasures of beneficent
Allah; Once they speak, they tell naught but the truth and in case they
remain quiet, they are not outpaced.”[^119]

Elsewhere he states this way, “Where are those, who falsely and unjustly
deemed themselves and not us as the most knowledgeable. God raised us in
position and kept them inferior to us. He has conferred on us the
eminence of which he deprived them.

He allowed us the entry to sphere of divine favor from which he
dismissed them. With us guidance is to be sought and blindness (of
misguidance) is to be changed into brightness. Verily Imams are from
among the Quraysh, the tree of which is planted in the family of H?shim.
The others do not deserve it nor would others be suitable as heads of
affairs.”[^120]

In these sentences as well as the previously mentioned letter, a kind of
prophetic inheritance for transferring the right of leadership is put
forth by Imam This is not the inheritance used for transferring the
material rights but the one accompanied by executorship, knowledge,
wisdom, purity and inerrancy.

This is the culture raised up by Qur'an among prophets and the right
Ibrahim wants for his progeny. God says,” The despots never access to my
mission.” Despite the key role that “selection” plays, God considers the
prophets as each others descendants. Treating it as an ordinary
heritage.

The Sunnites accuse the Shi'ite Muslims of having such an idea about
leadership while Shi'a approves of the text which is within the
framework of divine heritage existing in Qur'anic culture. In a letter
indicating his dispute with Quraysh, Imam wrote about his being
insistent on caliphacy, “Am I greedy to ask for my inheritance and the
right granted to me by the Messenger and God?”[^121] In this phrase,
inheritance and divine right are cited together.

More important is Imam's reference to the Ghadir tradition at the
threshold of entering Kufa- After suppressing those who broke their
allegiance in the battle of Jamal. As several Sunnites sources specify,
The people of Kufa as well as Messenger's companions were brought
together by Imam at the mosque of Kufa and all those who had witnessed
and heard the Messenger uttering the Ghadir tradition were asked to
stand up and give evidence of that.

A large number, only twelve of which had participated the battle of
Badr, bore witness. Referring to this tradition publicly in fact implied
his reference to “divine right “on “Sainthood”.[^122] The culture of
“Proof” in Qur'an confirms the leading attitude of Imam This concept is
applicable only to the Prophet (S) and those chosen by God and
resembling them in rank.

Imam has stated, “God never allowed the creation to remain without a
prophet deputed by Him or a Book sent down from Him or a binding
argument.”[^123]

Elsewhere he said, “Verily the earth is never devoid of those who
maintain God's binding argument either openly and reputedly or fearfully
and secretly so that God's binding argument and proof should not be
rebutted or his signs overlooked.”[^124]

In a letter to the one in charge of collecting alms, Imam included
instructions for treating people and telling them,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبادالله! أرسلني ولي الله وخليفته لآخذ منكم حق الله في أموالكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O servants of God! The vicegerent of God and His caliph sent me to you
for collecting God's share in your properties.”[^125]

The comments “The vicegerent of God and His caliph” Imam attributed to
himself are totally Shi'ite concepts. Anyhow, having been formed during
the caliphate of Imam, this theory constitutes the main identity of
Shi'ites thought about Imamate.

During his caliphate, by referring to upcoming incidents entitled
“Malahim wa Fitan” in various sermons, he turned out to be a figure not
rivaling an ordinary caliph, he foretold the future but not as a
political analyst.

The charisma of Imam's personality in the eyes of gnostic and Sufism,
was deeply rooted in the conception leading the public to deem him
deserving of “sainthood” in its full sense and also in remarks and
conducts of him who officially claimed to be omniscient and asked all
people to question him before they miss him.[^126]

At the end of these proofs, it will be proper to mention another
important narration. When 'Ayisha was ready to revolt against 'Ali, the
Messenger's graceful wife, Umm Salama, tried to stop her going.

'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr said objectingly, “You harbor old animosity
towards the family of Zubayr.”  
 Umm Salama answered, “Do you think people will turn to Talha and your
father while 'Ali about whom God said, **عليّ وليّ كل مؤمن ومؤمنة** ”
'Ali is the guardian of all believing men and women” is present.

'Abd Allah said, “We haven't heard him saying such a thing.”  
 Umm Salama replied, “You may have not, but your aunt, 'Ayisha, has.”  
 I myself heard the Messenger saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليّ خليفتي عليكم في حياتي ومماتي فمن عصاه فقد عصاني
  </p>
</blockquote>

Alive or dead, I place 'Ali as my caliph to you, so whoever disobeys
him, he has disobeyed me.” 'Ayisha has also confirmed this.[^127]

Based on things mentioned, what should be said about the interpretation
of comments written in Nahj al-Balagha on the allegiance of Muhajirun
and Ansar is that at that time, the allegiance of these two was the
principle behind selecting a caliph, and Imam enjoyed this principle.
Facing the opposition of deviators and apostates Imam Ali had to refer
to this principle.

With this deduction of Imam lots of people followed him and fought his
enemies. There is a poem quoted from one of Imam's adherents who
compared his pledge to that of early caliphs to prove his rightfulness
and public commitments to him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
له في رقاب النـاس عهد وذمـة كعهد ابي حفص وعهد ابي بكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فبايع ولا ترجع علي العقب كافراً أعـيذك بالله العزيز من الكفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“People owe him just as 'Umar and Abu Bakr do. So swear an allegiance
and avoid infidelity, do you excuse yourself in atheism!” [^128]

But neither Imam considered this as a legitimate way of leadership nor
did his close companions who deemed his leadership far beyond the
allegiance of Muhajirun and Ansar, accept such a basis. In conclusion,
the differences from Saqifa to the martyrdom of Imam have been
influential in many of the Islamic thoughts, but related to our
discussion are issues concerning ruler ship and caliphate.

Here, a brief conclusion is drawn from the effects these events had on
forming of political views. Obviously, as mentioned earlier, in the
course of murdering 'Uthman and 'Ali's caliphacy, Shi'ism changed both
in quality and quantity.

Previous to this, only a few companions tended towards Shi'a but because
of aforesaid reasons it spread in Iraq. This trend is called ”'Alawites
and Shi'ites”. Its full version can be regarded in 'Uthman's rejection
and the proof of 'Ali's caliphate. The full version of it includes
'Ali's Imamate after the Messenger and his superiority over the other
caliphs. There has been some controversy over the quality and quantity
of some exaggerated trends emerging at that time.[^129]

The other trend was called ”'Uthmanids”. This trend was crystallized
during to wars of Jamal and Siffin.The aforesaid course of action came
to a dead end in Jamal but its impacts on Basra remained to be seen and
the people of that city were reckoned as ”'Uthmanids”.[^130]

The second trend prevailed over Damascus and Iraq during the Umayyads.
The Umayyads ruling was the manifestation of 'Uthmanids sect's
prevalence. This sect deemed no legitimacy for 'Ali's caliphacy on the
pretext of the third caliph being murdered either by 'Ali himself or at
his instigation.

They also said not all of the people had approved of him. This has been
a common belief among the ancestors of Sunnites who were called the
'Uthmanids. During that period “Shi'ite Muslims” and ”'Uthmanids” were
opposed to each other. The 'Uthmanids believed that 'Uthman was to
replace Mu'awiya in caliphate. Their legitimacy was based on Mu'awiya 's
claim to be a relative of 'Uthman and consequently his blood-wit.[^131]

Basra and Kufa, tending towards 'Uthmanids and Shi'a respectively, were
rivals to each other. The distinction between Shi'ism and 'Uthmani's
sect was the interesting point about the battle of Jamal.

The murderer of one of Imam's companions called Zayd Ibn Suhan said he
had killed him while he believed in 'Ali.

Opposing 'Ammar he composed this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تبرح العرصة يا بن اليثربي حتى اقاتلك على دين علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Yathrib-born! Leave not the battlefield so that I might fight you by
relying on 'Ali's religion.” [^132]

”'Uthman's religion” was coined versus ”'Ali's religion”. A poet from
Damascus, told about the Damascus army:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثمانين الف “دين عثمان” دينهم كتائب فيها جبرئيل يقودها
  </p>
</blockquote>

“80 thousands are those whose religion is that of 'Uthman's, troops who
are led by Gabriel.” [^133]

A poet participating in Siffin, introduced himself this way,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انا ابن ارباب الملوك غسان والدائن اليوم به دين عثمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am son of king of kings and today I follow 'Uthman's religion.”
[^134]  
 In a poem Rufa'a Ibn shaddad told,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انا ابن شداد على “دين علي” لست لعثمان بن اروى بولي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am Ibn Shaddad, a follower of 'Ali's religion and never am I guardian
of 'Uthman Ibn 'Arwa.” [^135]

It has been said that 80 thousand of Damascus army believed in
”'Uthman's religion ”.[^136] There was also a third trend, in addition
to Shi'a and 'Uthmani, called “Qa'idin”. Nashi' Akbar recognizes this
group in two different names and trends. The first one was “Hulaysiyya”
who believed that when a sedition is raised one must stay around his/her
house.

They deemed both groups as misled and infernal. To them religion was
seen as tarry to war and sedition as getting involved in it. 'Abd Allah
Ibn 'Umar, Muhammad Ibn Maslama and Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas belonged to this
group. They believed that only one of the two groups was right but the
righteous group was unknown to them. Abu Musa Ash'ari, Abu Sa'id Khudri
and Abu Mas'ud Ansari were from among this group.

As Nashi' Akbar clarifies,these were called “Mu'tazilites”. Later, Wasil
Ibn 'Ata' and 'Amr Ibn 'Ubayd also thought the same about Talha and
Zubayr.[^137]Considering the situation of that time, these groups put
the emphasis on the concept of “Sedition”, to them, being ”'Abd Allah,
the murdered” was preferable to being ”'Abd Allah, the murderer”.[^138]

People’s Allegiance to ‘Ali (a)
-------------------------------

Without doubt, during the caliphacy of the first three caliphs, Imam was
not politically active in the current affairs and except for counseling
some Judicial cases and, to a lesser extent political issues, did not
take an active part in politics. In other words, he did not take part in
the ruling system of caliphs, but just led the opposition party
indirectly.

His victory after 'Uthman, in large measures, indicated the domination
of anti-Quraysh and anti-Umayyads. These opponents enjoyed the support
of Iraqi tribes, Egyptian migrants and also the assistance of Ansar and
native Medinans. Some of Muhajirun at the head of which was 'Ammar Ibn
Yasir, were reckoned among this group. These formed a part of 'Uthman's
adversaries.

But because of 'Uthman's being inattentive to a group of Quraysh itself
and his over attention to Umayyads, the former had also joined the
opposition party. Talha, Zubayr and 'Ayisha were presiding over this
group. 'Amr Ibn 'As who was deposed from Egyptian rule, opposed 'Uthman.
Of course all these claimed that 'Uthman had stood aloof from the
practice of Prophet.

Therefore the overall direction of the rebellion was returning to the
Prophet's conduct, fostering justice and not being cruel or unjust to
people. The head companions who had lived up to that time, and
participated in 'Umar's election council- especially Talha who was
supported by 'Ayisha were candidates for caliphate.

Their joining to the opposition party was a glimmer of hope for
caliphate. Despite their fame in Iraq and Hijaz, concerning records,
knowledge and piety none of them could hold a candle to 'Ali; moreover,
'Uthman's failure as the representative of Quraysh naturally resulted in
the power of 'Ali, the representative of the opposition party who had
opposed the ruler's policy from the very beginning.[^139]

From the starting-point of public opposition to 'Uthman, Imam 'Ali (a)
was as the mediator of the two parties or on the other hand, opponents'
spokesman and he transferred people's oppositions to 'Uthman. Although
being considered as the mediator, Imam (a) acted moderately. Having
objected to 'Uthman's some indecent behaviors[^140], Imam (a) under the
conditions of being mediator obeyed 'Uthman's rights, took him on oath
of promise and calm opponents along with obeying opponents' conditions.

It was natural that although Imam (a) didn't play any role in 'Uthman's
murder and his coming to power, the Umayyads and some parties of Quraysh
accused him of doing so. In spite of it, most of those being of Imam's
close companions ranked among the opponents and even being accused of
having a hand in 'Uthman's murder.

Imam's supporters were all anti-'Uthman. And as indicated before, this
was the starting-point of Shi'ism forming among people of Kufa whose
important political activity was opposition to the ruling caliphate.
They were indeed satisfied with Abu Bakr and 'Umar.

At any rate, Imam's supporting party consisting of Ansar, the majority
of companions as well as Kufa's Qur'an reciters was strong to the extent
that Talha and Zubayr weren't allowed any appearance. Also there existed
no reference to Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas[^141]. In continuation of Sa'id Ibn
Musayyib's long narrations concerning 'Uthman's murder, it's mentioned
that after that 'Ali (a) came to his house and all the people rushing to
his house asserted 'Ali (a)'s caliphate.

They wanted him to reach out his hand to people for allegiance but Imam
(a) said, “Allegiance is Badr's companions' not yours. And the caliph is
the one they choose.”

After that, all the people of Badr who were alive came to 'Ali (a) and
called for allegiance to Imam (a).[^142]

Confronted by the insistence of the Prophet (S) 's companions, Imam
averted the admission of caliphate. Tabari quoted from Muhammad Ibn
Hunayf that after 'Uthman's murder, a number of companions came to my
father saying "that we know no body more deserving of caliphate than
you."

'Ali (a) said, “It's better for me to be your vizier rather than your
emir”.  
 They answered, “We admit nothing but swearing allegiance to
you.”[^143]  
 Imam said that his allegiance ought to be in mosque rather than in
secrecy.

According to Ibn 'Abbas, “I feared lest a problem might be arisen in the
mosque.”[^144] When he went to the mosque, Muhajirun and Ansar went
there and pledged allegiance to him. Besides, Abu Bashir 'Abidi has been
quoted as saying that after the assassination of 'Uthman, the people
went repeatedly to 'Ali (a) till they managed to compel him admit the
caliphate.

Imam ascended the pulpit and said, “He was not in want of caliphate and
he admitted it reluctantly, and shall accept to govern them providing
that people will adhere thoroughly to him.”

It's been noted in the narrations that Talha and Zubayr were within this
throng of the people as well. When all gathered in the mosque, Talha was
the first to swear allegiance. Averting allegiance, Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas
said that he won't swear allegiance as well.

Tabari points out a narration with respect to the belief that Talha and
Zubayr's allegiance arose from their fear of Malik's sword. However, the
narration is not in conformity with the other ones. Imam asked them to
be caliph themselves, and he shall swear allegiance to them.

Yet, in so far as, by no means, they found themselves apt, they were
satisfied with swearing allegiance to Imam, in order that they hereby
find a position for themselves. By chance, their later remarks made it
known that by compelled allegiance they meant that they didn't have
anybody at Medina to whom they swear allegiance, whereas Imam 'Ali (a)
has had abundant number of supporters.

Previously, in our discussion on allegiance, we've pointed out that, in
principle, Imam was among those compelling others to swear allegiance.
As after the riot of Jamal rebels, he never forced Marwan to swear
allegiance as quoted by him.[^145]

Immediately after allegiance Imam was asked to turn over Basra and Kufa
but he refused to do so.

Muhammad Ibn Hanifa says, “All Ansars except a few, swore the oath of
allegiance to 'Ali. The opponents consisted of Hassan Ibn Thabit, Ka'b
Ibn Malik, Maslama Ibn Mukhallad, Muhammad Ibn Maslama and some others
reckoned among the 'Uthmanids, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, Zayd Ibn Thabit and
Usama Ibn Yazid were among non-Ansar opponents who all benefited from
generosity of 'Uthman's caliphate.

Tabari says, “As far as we know, not even one of Ansars infringed the
allegiance to 'Ali. Hence, some who allegedly did not swear allegiance
to 'Ali were probably those not taking part in battles of Jamal, Siffin
and Nahrawan not those not taking the oath of allegiance to 'Ali.[^146]

As Diyar Bakri relates, All the Badr participants who had lived up to
that time swore allegiance to 'Ali.[^147]'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abzi has
been quoted, 800 of us who were present at Riďwan allegiance, took part
at Siffin 63 of whom including 'Ammar were killed.[^148] As Ibn A'tham
narrates, at first Imam rejected the allegiance saying, “I beheld in
everything a profound disintegration which neither hearts can stand nor
intelligence can accept.”

Then, accompanied by people, he went to Talha and asked him to accept
the caliphate.  
 Talha said, “There is no one more deserving than you.”  
 The same happened to Zubayr and both of them undertook not to do
anything contrary to Imam's will.[^149]

Ibn A'tham talks about the role of Ansar in taking the oath of
allegiance to 'Ali and about their deputies who addressed the people in
the mosque some of whom where Iraqi and Egyptian migrants.

People said,” You are “God's helpers” and we will do what you say.”

They too introduced 'Ali as the caliph and the cheering people approved
him as well. That day people left the mosque and next day Imam entered
the mosque and said, choose someone that fits your purpose and I shall
follow you.

They said, “We haven't changed our mind since yesterday.”

At first, Talha who was paralyzed in hand took the oath. This was
considered as ill omen! Then Zubayr took the oath and following him
Muhajirun and Ansar and all Arabs, non-Arabs and kinsfolk present in
Medina did so. Imam Ali's words, better than anything else are
expressive of why he refused to accept the burden of people's
allegiance.

The first reason was that to him, the society was so decadent that he
couldn't either lead it or enforce his criterion and intentions. On the
day of allegiance he told:

“Leave me alone and go in search of someone else. We are facing a matter
with several faces and colors, which neither hearts can stand nor
intelligence can accept The clouds of sedition have darkened the skies
thoroughly and the right path can't be discerned. Let it be known to you
that if I accept your request I shall make you act according to my own
judgments and will not care about the suggestions and blames of the
reproachful.”[^150]

Imam knew that amidst those sedition, leading the society properly was
beyond the bounds of possibility. Once he got that people won't leave
him to himself, he managed to place them under the obligation of obeying
him fully and resigning themselves to his will.[^151]

Following happenings made the hardships of working within sedition and
doubts dawn on Imam Once he said, “If I knew the heightened situation, I
would have never got involved in it from scratch.”[^152]

Later on, he wrote about the day of allegiance, “When you revolted
against 'Uthman and killed him, turning toward me you wanted to swear
allegiance to me. I balked at doing so and held my hand back. You
struggled to open my hand and I prevented it.

You pulled my hand and I resisted. You crowded so densely round me that
I thought you will either kill each other or me, you said” we swear
allegiance to you for we find no one but you and will consent to no one
except you and after the allegiance we will neither get separated nor
will there be in any disagreement between us.” so I felt compelled to
accept your request and called the people to take the oath of
allegiance.

I accepted the allegiance of any one swearing at will. Not taking
aversion to the one not willing to take the oath, I left him to himself.
Talha and Zubayr were from among those swearing allegiance to me and if
they didn't want to do so, I would compel neither them nor any one
else.”[^153]

Once, in Kufa, Imam saw a man called Abu Maryam from whom he asked the
reason for his coming there.

He answered,” I have come for my promise to you because you said if you
had come to power, you would have done so and so.”

Imam said, “I have kept my word, but I am in grips with the most
malignant people who do not obey me at all.”[^154]

There are some significant points about 'Ali's election as the Community
leader. First, people's participation in the first Caliph's election was
initially confined to the participants in Saqifa and evidence shows some
sort of previous conspiracy or at least coordination of anti-Hashimites
party earlier than allegiance.[^155] 'Umar was appointed through a will
and 'Uthman, too,was selected by a confined council. By contrast, 'Ali's
election was largely demanded by Medinans.

As a matter of fact, this was the only allegiance and election which can
be called a public one. The new point about this allegiance was the
participation of Iraqi and Egyptian delegates in addition to Muhajirun
and Ansar. Of course, based on the common, well-established tradition of
those days, according to which only Muhajirun and Ansar were of good
standing, no credence was attached to their choice.

Despite of that, their presence did increase public turnout in Imam's
election. This was not an unknown phenomenon for Imam and the others.
During a sermon Imam said,  
 Your allegiance to me was not a hasty and precipitate action nor is my
and your position the same. I seek you for Allah's sake and you seek me
for your own benefits.[^156]

This, according to Ibn Abi al-Hadid[^157] is an allusion to Abu Bakr's
election. In order to prevent the idea of opportunism and conspiracy in
public opinion, Imam didn't allow people to take the oath at his house,
stating that, “There can be no allegiance without Muslim's
consent.[^158]

The allegiance should not take place secretly. I go to the mosque,
anyone who wishes can come there to take the oath to me.” Then he
entered the mosque and people took the oath to him. [^159]This is one of
the reasons of Imam's delay in accepting people's request.

Secondly, Apart from what was set forth about Imam and his true Shi'ite
Muslims' belief in his Imamate, the “tradition of allegiance” was fully
established and Imam could not trespass it. This was a good proof
against Imam's opponents and for him who was publicly selected.

According to Dinwari, during a speech following allegiance Imam stated,
“Oh, people! You took the oath of allegiance to me in accordance with
the previous traditions. Prior to the allegiance, the choice was yours
but after that you have no choice. Imam must be firm and the folk must
resign themselves to his will. This was a public allegiance, anyone
denying it, has in fact denied Islam, allegiance to me was not
precipitate.[^160]

Notwithstanding, Imam was determined not to force anyone to take the
oath. He even didn't call to account those who had sworn the oath but
were inattentive in settling the case of apostates. When Sa'd Ibn Abi
Waqqas, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, Muhammad Ibn Maslama and Usama Ibn Zayd
made some excuse for not performing Imam's command, Malik Ashtar said,
“Oh, the Commander of the Faithful! Although we are not from among the
Muhajirun and Ansar but we are from “The followers of
righteousness”.[^161]

Despite Muhajirun and Ansar's superiority in Islam, they are not supreme
in what they share with us. This has been a public allegiance, anyone
going back upon it deserves to be reprimanded. Coax those who intend to
violate the allegiance and imprison them in case they refuse.

Imam stated, “I call them but they are decided in their very
votes.”[^162]

Hasan and Husayn told their father,” Marwan -who after 'Uthman's murder,
had sworn allegiance and now was taken into captivity in the battle of
Jamal - will take the oath to you.”

Imam answered, “Did he not swear me allegiance after 'Uthman's murder? I
don't need the allegiance of such a treacherous person with a hand like
that of Jews.[^163]

According to Baladhuri, following Jamal, Marwan told 'Ali (a), “Unless
forced, I won't swear allegiance to you.” [^164]

Obviously, not taking the oath differs form rebelling. Once according to
the accepted standards the oath is taken and the public allegiance is
accomplished anyone disobeying rebelliously or claiming caliphate, must
be restrained;otherwise, what the caliphate would mean?[^165] Despite
this, Imam gloried in not forcing anyone to take the oath to him.[^166]

'Adi Ibn Hatim also told Mu'awiya, ”'Ali (a) compelled no one to take
the oath.”[^167]

The third point is that the accepted method of allegiance, was that of
Muhajirun and Ansar based on which, Imam was nationally accepted as the
caliph and apostates were rejected.[^168] Even it has been said that
even if Imam were the one killing 'Uthman, he remains the caliph, for
Muhajirun and Ansar who dominate over people have taken the oath of
allegiance to him.[^169]

Obviously, Imam relied on this method with the purpose of convincing his
opponents who, based on the same method, approved Muhajirun and Ansar
and the legitimacy of previous caliphs. Not to mention that in addition
to Muhajirun and Ansar, the delegates from Iraqi tribes and some
Egyptians had also sworn allegiance to 'Ali (a), and this point was
taken into consideration by Malik Ashtar.[^170]

In a letter to Mu'awiya Imam wrote, “Those who took the oath of
allegiance to Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman, have sworn allegiance to me
in the same way.” Now he who was present at the election have no right
to go back upon his oath and he who was absent has no right to deny the
oath of participants. Consultation is confined to Muhajirun and Ansar.

God feels satisfaction at they gathering round a man and selecting him
as their caliph. Should anybody go against such decision or fall into
heresy, they will return him to the position from where he kept away and
should he refuse to fall in line with others, then war is the only
course left open to be adopted against him.[^171]

As far as the initial caliphs were in power, this was deemed as an
acceptable principle, except for the time when some 'Uthmanids relied on
a few companions not swearing the oath and they also, making an excuse
of Muslims fratricide, evaded to act in obedience to the orders of 'Ali
(a) in combating his enemies.[^172]

Mu'tamir Ibn Sulayman narrated, “I told my father, people say the
allegiance to 'Ali (a) was not accomplished." He answered, “My son,
allegiance belongs to the people of Mecca and Medina who did take the
oath.”[^173]

Another point is that on what allegiance was sworn. 'Uthman was
recognized as outcast because he violated divine rules and in early
caliphs time, it was an acceptable principle to act upon the Book and
the Prophet's tradition.

Although a few of them disregarded some dimensions of the Prophet's
biography and even Qur'an, after 'Umar, condition of Sheikhs biography
was included in allegiance that Imam 'Ali rejected. According to Tabari,
swearing allegiance to 'Ali happened to say that Book of God has to be
referred about the close, the mean, the endeared and the stranger.[^174]
This position reflects issues during 'Uthman.

An Egyptian, Ibn A'tham says, named Sudan Ibn Hamran Muradi who is to be
murderer of 'Uthman said, “O Abu Hasan! we swear allegiance to you
provided that if you acted like 'Uthman,you'll be killed”.

That's right, replied 'Ali (a), then people acted according to Book of
God and the Prophet's tradition.[^175]

One person insisted on including Sheikhs biography as terms of
allegiance in addition to above two, yet Imam disapproved and saying
that even if Abu Bakr and 'Umar act upon something except the Book and
the tradition, they are untruthful.[^176]

Imam merely found himself yielded to Qur'an and tradition and unwilling
to disobey it and so were his companions and commanders.

O people!, said Qays Ibn Sa'd, we swore allegiance to a man better of
whom we never know after the Prophets (S). Rise up and swear allegiance
to the Book and His Prophet. If we failed to do so, allegiance is
withdrawn.[^177]

Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr, Egyptian ruler said if you observe in my deeds
obedience and fear from God, I praise God because of this gift bestowed
upon me and it has guided me. If not, I have to be scolded.[^178]

Imam himself disapproved those who wanted to condition the allegiance to
make Imam overlook what they have in their hands and said the only right
they have in front of him is to comply with the Book and the tradition
and nothing else.[^179]

Qa'idin and no Congregation Formation
-------------------------------------

There emerged no agreement like that of Sheikhs time in the course of
swearing allegiance to Imam and despite allegiance of the Ansar and
Muhajirun. A few people opposed in the course of allegiance to Abu Bakr
but congregation formed since, later, opponents also swore allegiance.

Then, 'Umar claimed that the opponents must join “congregation”. This
congregation faced no problems in time of 'Umar. It wasn't first time
when a rebellion shaped in time of 'Umar and congregation split apart.
'Uthman's improper attitude led to fragmentation in the Islamic
community.

In that time Kufiyans and a major part of Egyptians found 'Uthman a
wrongdoer if not willing to kill him, they did not consider him to be
qualified for caliphate either. This idea wasn't strongly rooted in Kufa
and 'Uthman was never admitted by people. Later on, it wasn't known that
if anyone wants martyrdom, he shall go to Dar al-Bittikh in Kufa for
compassion of 'Uthman.[^180] Medinans were hesitant about this and they
are said to be followers of Abu Bakr and 'Umar. They never approved
'Uthman.

There were people of Damascus and Umayyads who retained sanctity of
'Uthman and founded ”'Uthmanids”[^181], recalled as “anti-Shi'a
religion”. As a matter of time, the Sunnites approved 'Uthman. From
third century on, the 'Uthmanids with a gradual change of name into
people of Sunnat and Jama'at approved 'Ali (a).

Anyway, “Jama'at” persisted till 'Umar and up to mid-rule of
'Uthman[^182] and broke up into branches. This congregation in a real
sense ceased to return until Mu'awiya that strangled all opposition by
force and trick. However, it is obvious that the congregation differed
from that of the old one foundationally.

Allegiance to Imam 'Ali met the requirements of a proper one. Muhajirun
and Ansar in addition to emissaries of Iraq and Egypt swore allegiance
to him. But due to disagreements continued by Qa'idin, the wicked ones,
the deviators and the apostates and that a full-scale congregation came
not to be formed, the subject congregation wasn't so legitimate in the
eyes of the majority of the companions through support of which the
disagreements can be challenged and their founders can be called
“rebels”.

This wasn't accepted by the Sunnites save the basis of the mentioned
rebellions on the part of the companions that wasn't regarded as
“Ijtihad”, exertion, and so they were exonerated. They didn't analyze
the Kharijites this way calling them real rebels.

The “legitimate congregation” resisted against “rebellion” through
support of a Qur'anic verse in the chapter of Hijrat that says, “If two
groups of the faithful began to fight each other, try to bring them to a
compromise. And if one offended the other, try to fight the offender to
bring it back to bow to God. If it did so, make a just peace between
them and exert justice for God love just people”.[^183]

If, Abu Hanafiyya said later, Amir al-Mu'minin(a) had no conduct of
Jihad with the rebels, we didn't know the rules of fighting with
them.[^184]

The Commander of the Faithful held that the mere swearing no allegiance
and even expressing dissent verbally can not justify armed campaigning
against them. The first disagreement came from Qa'idin, those who likely
swore allegiance to 'Ali but refrained from helping him in his war with
the Infidels and the Deviators. Baladhuri narrates that they didn't
swear allegiance.

Some of such as 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar said that they will be the last
people to swear allegiance.[^185]  
 These people believed that “congregation” is not organized.

Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas said, “I will swear allegiance when I'm the last
one”.[^186]

Imam left them alone in front of these oppositions. Here it is to be
noted that there must be a distinction between the particular and
general allegiance when a forcible allegiance is in question.

In fact, when the “particular” people swear allegiance, caliphate is
established, afterward all must attend the general allegiance. Malik
Ashtar's speech against the disagreement of Qa'idin denotes such a case.
Imam rejected force too.[^187]

When the Kharijites opposed, they were said to be silent, if they want
to be safe. If they say something, they will be given reasons and in
case they turn to swords, they will be resisted.

And he further said, “As long as you remember Allah, we keep our mosques
open to you and as long as you stay with us, we keep your share of booty
but if you pull your swords out, we launch a war with you.”[^188]

Anyway, Qa'idin regarded “congregation” incomplete to justify their
opposition and naturally questioned 'Ali's caliphate. They said people
of Damascus would complement this congregation whilst until then
allegiance of people of Haram wasn't considered sufficient. Mu'awiya too
having a large number of Damascus people in his control denied forming
of “congregation” along with 'Ali and naturally rejected his caliphate.

In front of 'Ali's call, Mu'awiya wrote to people of obedience and
congregation, “The community you're talking about is also available to
us.” He accused 'Ali of murdering their caliph and dispersing their
community.[^189]

There is no reasonable justification about the Infidels. The evidence
show that these people opposed merely because of authoritarianism
despite the commitments they had in allegiance. Imam tried hard to
rehabilitate peace and in no case he resorted to weapon. Imam regarded
their launching war the only permit to wage war.[^190]

Aside from all incentives and internal problems, the events in period of
caliphate resulted in different sectarian and religious tilts that left
behind works not only in jurisprudic-ideological matters but also in the
field of Imamate issues.

Later, “political community” came to posed again and the Sunnites
calling themselves independent of “people of innovation” and devaluing
their participation in or separation from “congregation” named
themselves “people of congregation.”

Abu Hatim Razi writes about the term of congregation for the Sunnites,
“Since the majority of people accepted caliphate of the Umayyads during
Mu'awiya and after in Marwanids time, people from the followers
asserting this called themselves people of congregation…. And saying
that “if anyone opposes us, he breaks apart the unity, opposes Umma and
abandons the tradition.

By “people of Sunnat and Jama'at”, they meant that they named themselves
so because they were unanimous by the same Imam despite all sectarian
differences they had.[^191] The pivotal role in “congregation” is in
fact the same Imamate.

According to a Sunnites mind, community appears when all people
generally agree on an Imam who is in power in whatever way. Such an Imam
is entirely legitimate according to a Sunnites. In Shi'a thinking, Imam
is beyond a mere political consensus and community normally has its
given sense.

Allegiance wasn't sworn to Imam on Friday, Dhil-Hajja 18,36 H.

Imam’s Problems
---------------

When Imam took charge of caliphate, he faced tremendous problems. These
obstacles in addition to political disorder after death of 'Uthman
darkly imaged the future. Here, problems are reviewed and the solutions
ahead of Imam will be discussed.

Before everything it is to known that these problems were important for
a person like Imam who showed more sensitivity to observing principles
and applications than anybody else. Some time earlier, every caliph had
opened a way temporarily and just for the purpose of expanding the
conquests.

But now it wasn't obvious that many of those ways were off the roads and
time passed had shown this. Typically, 'Umar considered tribal tenets in
regulating chancery. Presently after fifteen years, its social and even
political negative consequences have turned up. To arrange the issue
more, Imam's problems are multi-dimensionally dealt with,

(1) The first problem wasn't to follow economic justice. Earlier
referred that 'Umar set the chancery in accordance with the Islamic
records of people and tribal shape. Those of the companions who had
embraced Islam sooner than others shared more. The same condition kept
on during 'Uthman as well.

He began his generosity leading to greater rich-poor distance in the
community. All this property includes the fifth of booties and tributes
that were annually received and came from the conquered territories
belonging to all people. When Imam came to power, he raised equal
sharing of this property. His reason rested upon what the Prophet (S)
had done.

Imam in his very speech referring to the point that he will act upon the
Prophet's biography spoke of his fiscal policy and called virtue of
Muhajir and Ansar superior over others, that is kept and rewarded by
God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإني حاملكم على منهج نبيكم صلى الله عليه وآله
  </p>
</blockquote>

But in this world, anyone who accepts call of God and His Messenger (S)
and becomes a Muslim and pray before Qibla, he will benefit from all
rights and Islamic rules. You're servants of God, Imam added, and
property is God's that will equally be divided among you. The pious
people are well rewarded by God.

Underlining his policy, Imam said, “Lest someone tomorrow say”, **حرمنا
علي بن ابي طالب حقوقنا** [^192] Imam tomorrow that day ordered 'Ubayd
Allah Ibn Abi Rafi', Anyone came, give him three Dinars.  
 In there Sahl Ibn Hunayf said, this man wasn't my slave who wasn't set
free yesterday.

Imam said, “All are given three Dinars and no one is over another.”

A group of Umayyads elites as well as Talha and Zubayr did'nt turn up to
get their share. Tomorrow that day, Walid Ibn 'Uqba with a number of
people came to Imam and referring to his father's murder by 'Ali in
Uhud, murder of Sa'd Ibn 'As in there, humiliation of Marwan's father in
front of 'Uthman and….

Asked Imam not to take back at least what has been given to them of the
property. Besides, 'Uthman's murderers are retaliated. Imam turned him
down and so they started to reveal their discords.

Tomorrow again, Imam made a sermon and based his sharing of property on
the Book out of wrath. Imam came down the pulpit and after rendering two
units of pray sat with Talha and Zubayr on the corner of mosque. These
two people spoke of first, Imam's not consulting with them and second,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خلافك عمر بن الخطاب في القسم
  </p>
</blockquote>

A major disadvantage is that you disagree on the way of division
comparing 'Umar. You gave our share just like that of others who took no
sufferings for Islam.

Imam said, ؛As long as there is a rule in Qur'an, consultation is not
required. Otherwise, I would've consulted with you. As for equal
sharing, we all witnessed that the Messenger (S) did as the Book
says.”[^193]

Zubayr said, “This is our reward? We acted in this way for him! To have
'Uthman killed and he today puts people over us whom we were
over.”[^194]

Ibn Abi al-Hadid regards public habit a major problem for disagreement
of companions with Imam while Abu Bakr had the same manner as the
Prophet's and nobody opposed him.

Imam in response to companions who objected to his method and referred
to 'Umar's manner said, **أفسنّة رسول الله أولى بالاتباع أم سنة عم**ر “
Does obeying the Prophet's tradition stand first or that of 'Umar's.”
[^195]

Serious disapproval of this manner induced some companions of Imam to go
to Imam to ask him to prefer Arab and Quraysh noblemen than Mawali and
non-Arabs.

He rejected them and said, “Are you telling me that I gain victory
through cruelty.”[^196]

Later, Ibn 'Abbas writing to Imam Hasan said, “People left your father
alone and went to Mu'awiya because he equally shared the property among
them and they never endured this act of your father.”[^197]Some people
explicitly reasoned their opposition as that 'Ali failed to observe
their equal rights.[^198]

Anyway, one feature Imam became known after wasn't that, **قسم بالسوية
وعدل في الرعية**[^199]

(2) Elsewhere it wasn't referred that one of the consequences of
conquests wasn't that different races of Arab, Iran, Nabat, Byzantine
and Barbar were intermingled with one another. Many of them were gone or
taken to other regions by migration or for war.

A large number of them were prisoners from Arab tribes brought to
Damascus, Iraq and Saudi Arabia from different parts. The captives
released were called “Mawali”. This meant that the prisoner belonged to
this Arab tribe and now he is linked to that tribe in one way or
another. It wasn't natural that Mawali were of lower class of Arabs and
enjoyed less rights.

One of the difficulties the government had wasn't how it should treat
this case. What is certain is when Imam came to power, the community had
assumed Arab superiority over Mawali a definite principle. This
disturbed Imam's justice-seeking morale that never found religiously a
reason for veracity of the above-mentioned distinction but adversely
equality of Muslims had clear reasons.

'Umar had said that the Arab slaves be released by means of public
property,[^200] thus differentiating diverse races, Imam rejected the
distinction. Two women are said to have come to Imam 'Ali and expressed
their destitution.

It is, Imam said, up to us to help you in case you tell the truth. Then
he sent a man to market to buy them dress and food and pay them one
hundred dhms.

One of them said in objection, “I'm an Arab while the other is Mawali,
why should we be treated equally?”

Imam replied, “I read Qur'an and I thought, there I noticed no
superiority, as small as a mosquito's wing, of Isma'il children over
those of Isaac.”[^201]

Once Imam intending to divide some property said, “Adam gave birth to
neither a male slave nor a female one, servants of God are all free and
now some property is with me and I'll divide it among the black and
white people equally with no distinction.”[^202]

Treating Arabs and non-Arabs in parity was not something endurable for
Arabs. Umm Hani, Imam 'Ali's sister, came to Imam to get her grant and
Imam granted her twenty dhms. Her non-Arab slave also came to Imam and
he gave her twenty dhms. When Umm Hani heard this, she went to see Imam
in fury. Imam's response to her accorded with Qur'an that he has not
seen any differentiation between Arabs and non-Arabs there.[^203]

Imam elsewhere told Muhajirun and Ansar that he never gives anybody
anything aimlessly and, **لأسوين بين الأسود والأحمر “** The black and
the white will be treated in parity.”[^204]

Imam's just treatment towards Mawali and non-Arabs raised protest of
prejudiced people like Ash'ath Ibn Qays.

When Imam wasn't up on pulpit, Ash'ath shouted, **غلبتنا عليك الحمراء**
“The white Mawali has overcome us and you see that.” 'Ali became angry
hearing that.

Ibn Suhan said, “It'll become clear today what status Arabs are placed
in.”

'Ali said, “Who excuses me to penalize these sturdy-body people resting
in their beds till mid-noon while a group of people stay away their beds
because of vigil nights? Are you telling me that I should abandon them
and become an oppressor. I swear to One that grew the seed and created
the creatures and I heard Muhammad (S) saying,

I swear to God they beat you (Arabs) to return to religion just as you
did to them to accept Islam.[^205] Mughira Dhabbi says, 'Ali (a) was
interested in Mawali and was kind to them but 'Umar loathed them and
kept away from them.”[^206]

Included in Imam's poetry, there is a piece of poem that talks about
negating the effect of racial problems on divine and human honor,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لعمرك ما الإنسـان إلاّ بـدينه فلا تترك التقوى اتكالاً علي الحسب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقد رفع الإسلام سلمان فارس وقد هجن الشرك الشـريف أبا لهب
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Religion, swear by thy soul, brings value to man  
 Thou not for a lineage seek divine piety Whilst Abu Lahab was down for
no deity.”[^207]

(3) More important problem ahead of Imam was religious deviations and
the very thing companions accused 'Uthman of that under title of
innovationism. Apart from the innovations, the other major problem was
that many people were not well-informed about religion and no action was
taken to religiously inform them. A few objective typical distortions
Imam was engaged are mentioned herein,

One of the problems earlier talked about is that a group of companions
and a number of caliphs brought up rules despite availability of Qur'an
and tradition and merely based on “expediency”.

Inter alia, this regarding tradition is more clearly and substantially
is cited in historical and hadith sources. Perhaps what Abu Ja’far Naqib
said could be the clearest statement one moderate Sunnites has expressed
about.

The companions, he says, unanimously rejected most of the verses {the
words of the Messenger (S) and it was because of the interest they
discovered in rejecting them such as sharing portion of Dhawi al-Qurba
and that of Mu'allafa Qulubuhum.[^208]}

Imam criticized this approach while making a detailed speech and at the
same time showed his commitment to the tradition. Referring to the fact
that for resolving one problem there has been given different views and
the ruler has proved all those views, he says this is when their God is
One, their prophet is one and their Book is one.

God said to them to go a different direction and they have obeyed His
command? Or they have been prohibited from disagreement and they have
disobeyed Him? Or what God sent is an incomplete religion and He asked
them to help for making it complete? Or they are His partners and they
have right to say and God must be pleased of the path they seek? Or the
religion God sent was complete and the Prophet (S) has failed in
conveying it?

This is while God say, “We avoided not a thing in the Book”.[^209]

Imam expresses amazement in his another speech about the wrongs of
different groups and that, “They neither receive a prophet nor the deed
of a successor… they follow sceptisism and go after passion and lust.

Well-known to them is something that they know and are pleased of and
deny what they are not happy with. In tribulations they only rely on
themselves and in undoing the problems they depend on their own ideas.
It seems each of them is his Imam who finds, in his rule, to have
snatched and used the sturdiest means.”[^210]

What was interesting was that “according to caliph II and III” they had
the right to have their own special divine legislation in some affairs
and put aside the tradition (like 'Uthman who, unlike the prophet and
his own pre-caliphs, performed completely his praying service in Mina).
Yet, Muslims as a matter of time deemed the actions of caliphs
unbreachable as a religious tradition.

'Umar himself when dying said, “Assigning not a successor is a tradition
(Prophet!) and assigning is also a tradition (Abu Bakr).”[^211]

Therefore, to him, what Abu Bakr did had also been considered
“tradition”. After his death, 'Abd al-Rahman had conditioned that he
would leave the caliphate to someone who practices the tradition of the
Prophet and Sheikhs.

One clear typical response of Imam to these innovations was his approach
towards nightly prayers of Ramaďan that 'Umar set up accepting it to be
an innovation-though he believed it was a good innovation. When Imam was
in Kufa, some people came to ask him to designate an Imam to perform
their nightly prayers of Ramaďan. He banned them doing so. At night they
cried out, “O Ramaďan”.

Harith A'war came to Imam and said, “People are moaning and are upset
about what you said.”  
 Imam said, “Leave them alone to do whatever they want and whomever to
choose for congregational Imam.”[^212]

This quotation shows that what tribe Imam has been dealing with and how
they have been following him.

Imam in a letter to Malik, referring to selection of righteous people
and about the worldly-minded religious people said,

**  
**

فإنّ هذا الدين كان أسيراً في أيدي الأشرار ، يعمل فيه بالهوى وتطلب به
الدنيا

**  
**
.

  

“This religion has been in the shackles of the wrong people, they moved
forward out of passion and captured the world under the name of
religion.”[^213]

One of the important deviations that essentially led to other ones was
that scribing was prevented. Rashid Riďa referred to point that this has
irreparably damaged the Islamic culture.[^214] Such an action as
mentioned earlier was because of disregarding the tradition.

The action of caliphs to collect Qur'an and disregard the Qur'an 'Ali
brought as well as to comment and downgrade its verses indicated
inattention to the Prophet's speech Imam recorded.

Imam 'Ali regarded doubt and scepticism among people a major cause for
emerging civil wars among Muslims,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولكنّا إنما أصبحنا نقاتل إخواننا في الاسلام على ما دخل فيه من الزيغ
والإعوجاج والشبهة والتأويل “
  </p>
</blockquote>

We today fight our Muslim brethren because they mixed Islam with
deviation, scepticism and distraction.”[^215]

Imam underscored the concept of scepticism. He elsewhere said,
“Scepticism is called scepticism for it resembles the right.”[^216]

(4) Another problem Imam had wasn't social corruption. Serious public
welfare triggered loosening of religious ideals and values in society
and religion wasn't just valued in appearance. When caliph III turned to
serious welfare, His subjects also turned to it and this created a
problem for society in respect of religion. The society involved in
sedition and corruption cannot simply turn back to moral balance. Imam
in one of his speeches introduces his society like that of ignorant one.

He says, “Your condition today looks like the day God raised up His
Messenger (S).”[^217]

Imam there spoke of reversed values in that society and of the necessity
to change it. This society has to be screened, those moved forward be
brought back and those left behind be driven ahead.  
 Know that, he also said, after Hijra -and learning from Shari'a- you
were back to nomadic nature and following compromise you were
fragmented….. knowing that you cast off your link to Islam, went beyond
its limits and failed to follow its rules.[^218]

Imam also stated about corruption of the time:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعلموا رحمكم الله أنكم في زمان القائل فيه بالحق قليل واللسان عن الصدق
كليل واللازم للحق ذليل. أهله معتكفون على العصيان، مصطلحون على الادهان،
فتاهم عارم وشائبهم آثم وعالمهم منافق وقارئهم مماذق لا يعظم ضعيرهم
كبيرهم ولايعول غنيهم فقيرهم “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know that may God bless you! You are living at a time the truth- seeker
is little and tongue falls short of truth. Those following truth are
humiliated and people are grappling with disobedience and ready to
accept compromise. The young are bad-tempered and the old are sinful,
the reciter is after profit. Neither the small respects the aged nor do
the potent aid the destitute.[^219]

Emergence of Mu'awiya as a deceitful and deviated man in the field of
Islamic politics wasn't itself the greatest element of sedition and
corruption in society, so were the 'Uthmanids tendency in Basra as well
as the Kharijites in Kufa. These were ill currents that blocked the way
of followers of truth at times by knowing that they were wrong and at
other times imagining that they are going after truth.

Observing Mu'awiya's sedition, Imam began to say, “I verified the case
and I learned that I have no way but fighting or I stand infidel against
what Muhammad (S) said.”[^220]

Reformation, Imam’s Fundamental Policy
--------------------------------------

Imam considered his major mission a reformation. This was because he
abided by religion and tradition. In addition, it is to be noted that
Imam was basically brought to power by those who had murdered the former
caliph due to his corruption and hoped that the new caliph reform the
shortcomings.

The aim of this group in proportionate to character of Imam was one of
the main reasons of their approach towards him. The policy of early
caliphs was to expand the conquests. This also expanded Islam and
naturally could be an advantage for caliphs, not to mention, it would
fill the pockets of people with dhms and Dinars.

Imam now had to make up for the shortcomings of this time. It was very
difficult for him to do so because he had to stand against many of the
noblemen and influential people. Here, Imam's reformational actions are
reviewed.

First, it is to be noted that these actions contained two parts. One
part was to be done by means of speech and peaceful social actions, but
the second part was to be carried out through war with those who were
not ready to observe the rights of the legitimate ruler of society and
had rebelled against him. Some of the actions taken in the first part
are dealt with here.

One of the moral problems in the society Imam was engaged in was
mammonism, welfarism and acquisitiveness of triumphant Arabs. This case
had engaged them so much that it can be said Jamal war was resulted and
Imam was not prepared to raise shares of Talha and Zubayr more than the
others. Under such circumstances, Imam was determined to speak in detail
in his speeches about this and protract people from mammonism.

By contrast, he prohibited them from sitting at the majestic
entertainment tables by writing letters to his agents, something that
was very natural in time of 'Uthman. In case Imam's words about
reproaching the world outright, it would become a detailed book.[^221]

Nahj al-Balagha is replete with these words and this, in great number,
shows that Imam insisted very much in this regard. Presenting an
outstanding paradigm of man with a piety is seen in the sermon known as

″Hammam″. In some of the sermons, Imam explicitly scolds people due to
mammonism, “You have forgotten the death in your hearts and deceiving
aspirations have been substituted. This world has captured you more than
the other world.”[^222]

Imam placed elucidation of religion atop of his reformational actions
and tried to lead the society to improvement by raising up the Prophet's
tradition as well as resuscitating the forgotten rules and positive laws
of religion. Imam on explaining his activities for reforming the society
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألم أعمل فيكم بالثقل الأكبر وأترك فيكم الثقل الاصغر وركزت فيكم راية
الايمان ووقفتكم على حدود الحلال والحرام والبستكم العافية من عدلي
وفرشتكم المعروف من قولي وفعلي وأريتكم كرائم الأخلاق من نفسي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Did I not raise rule of Qur'an among you and my two offsprings - who are
the lamp of religion path after me - and did I not leave for you the
selective jewels that is the Prophet's progeny. I set up banner of faith
among you and separated you from limits of legal and illegal. I clad you
in garment of health out of justice and spread the known among you
through my word and deed and revealed to you the best ethics through my
ethicality.”[^223]

Imam in his speech emphatically referred to practicing the Book and the
Prophet's tradition. The Imam's faithfulness to the Messenger's
tradition is an important point in his reformational policies.
Basically, violating the tradition according to him, is one of the
blatant signs of deviation.

In the early times when Talha and Zubayr complained of Imam's not
consulting with them, Imam said, “By God I had no inclination to
caliphate and no need of rulership, but you made me be in charge of
that. As I came to power, I looked at the Book and what it has
prescribed to us and the rules we are bound to obey and I did so. I
followed the tradition set by the Messenger (S). I required not to ask
you of your idea about this but you.”[^224]

Imam in his contact with 'Uthman about being clothed in a pilgrim state
during Hajj or about doing the same in the visitation and Hajj together
says on the tradition of the Messenger (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كنت لأدع سنّة رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم لأحد من الناس
  </p>
</blockquote>

I never leave tradition of the Messenger (S) because of anybody.”[^225]

'Uthman was sick one year of the years he used to perform his prayers in
Mina so he asked Imam to perform prayers instead.

Imam said, “If I perform prayers, I'll do it as the Prophet did.”  
 'Uthman said, “No. Do as I do.”  
 Imam rejected his request.[^226]

Imam said, “If I'm absent, then who will be among you to act upon the
Prophet's conduct?”[^227]

I was doing prayer service, Mutrif Ibn 'Abd Allah says, along with
'Imran Ibn Husayn (one of the Prophet's companions) behind Imam 'Ali.
After the service 'Imran held my hand and said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد صلى صلاة محمد، ولقد ذكّرني صلاة محمد (ص(
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He performed the service like that of the Prophet's. He reminded me of
how the Prophet said the prayers.”[^228]

Abu Musa Ash'ari who performed the service just behind Imam said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذكرنا علي بن ابي طالب صلاة النبي (ص(
  </p>
</blockquote>

”'Ali reminded us of the Prophet's prayers.”[^229]

It was very important to revive the Prophet (S) 's biography for Imam's
reformational policies. The pure companions of Imam realized this fact
as well.

'Ammar said about the constructie measures of Imam,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو أن علياً لم يعمل عملاً ولم يصنع شيئاً الا أنه أحيا التكبيرتين عند
السجود لكان قد أصاب بذلك فضلاً عظيماً '
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali has done nothing but reviving two “Allah Akbar” when prostrating
back, for this, he has achieved a high virtue.”[^230]

Imam declared up on pulpit in the face of 'Umar's policy of not scribing
hadith, “Those who are willing to put down knowledge, they can bring
paper and pen”.

Harith A'war provided means of writing and wrote what Imam said.[^231]
Afterwards, Imam Hasan(a) also advised his offsprings to write the
Prophet (S) 's hadith.[^232] We know that Imam 'Ali himself wrote the
Messenger's hadiths. After that, his hadith booklets were available to
Ahl al-Bayt and they regularly narrated hadith for Shi'ite Muslims from
”'Ali's booklet”.[^233]

As seen in time of caliph II, the story reciters alongside preventing
from scription of hadith were permitted to narrate for people in the
mosque about the Jewish sagas on former prophets and Christian priests.
Imam stood against the development of story reciting and banned it while
spreading hadith scription. Imam in principle opposed narration of
Jewish works.

He is quoted to say, “Whoever has a book from the antecedent, he shall
ruin it”.

Imam stood against someone who had narrated story of Rev. David (a) with
Awriya from Jewish sources and said, “If someone says it, he'll be
executed Hadd, whipping”.[^234]

It is known that Rev. David is attributed to murder by intention and
adultery in this fake story. When he came to Basra, the story reciters
were expelled out of mosque.[^235] After him, Imam Hasan (a) was also
hindered from story reciting.[^236] Iman as-Sajjad (a) stopped Hasan
Basri,once being a story reciter, reciting stories and he admitted to do
so.[^237]

Imam in one of his first speeches said, **وإني حاملكم على منهج نبيكم صلي
الله عليه وآله “** I will spread tradition of the Prophet (S) among
you.”[^238]

One of the reasons that caused Imam 'Ali, more than the other
companions, to describe the personality and morality of the Messenger
(S) in historical books, is that he himself followed the Prophet's
manner. For the same reason, he kept in his mind all actions of the
Prophet (S) from the very beginning and later he tried to delineate his
personality most eloquently.[^239]

Hasan Basri in response to someone who asked him of Imam said, **أراهم
السبيل وأقام لهم الدين اذا اعوجّ** “He showed the way to people and
straightened religion when it went astray.”[^240]

This very well-considered statement made by Hasan exactly accorded with
the policy Imam adopted during his caliphate.

Another poet, addressing Imam, composed this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوضحت من ديننا ما كان مشتبها جزاك ربك عنا فيه إحسانا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“What was skeptical is now clarified by you, may God grant thee virtues
and benevolence.”[^241]  
 Abu Dharr when describing Imam said, **علي رز الدين ”**'Ali strengthens
religion.”[^242]

Imam himself insisted on matching his conduct with that of the Messenger
(S) 's. After Jamal war, he talked about his attitude towards Basrans,
“I acted in treating Basrans as the Prophet did to Meccans.[^243] Imam
mentions resuscitation of tradition as one of the functions of
“Imam”.[^244] Elsewhere, he regards the best servant of God a just Imam
who attempts to revive the tradition and the most evil-doing servant of
God a cruel Imam who destroys it.”[^245]

In general, Imam 'Ali seriously avoids the concept of innovation and
says, in this regard, that a tradition fades away when an innovation
emerges.[^246]

Imam poses two points as his testament, stop blasphemizing and
preserving tradition of the Prophet (S).[^247]

He considers the saints those people who, **يحيون سنن الله وسنن رسوله
“** Revive traditions of God and His Messenger (S).”[^248]

He says hypocrite dissidents are those who swim in the sea of sedition,
use innovations and put aside traditions.[^249]

Imam says people are divided in two groups,[^250] **متبع شرعة ومبتدع
بدعة**

These statements and the like in Nahj al-Balagha reveal Imam's strong
mind in following tradition and avoiding the innovation. This position
was adopted in front of those who created innovations at least in some
cases and when they were objected, they said, “If they are innovations,
they are good ones”.

Imam was not willing to cheat in the field of religion and he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله لا أدهنت في ديني “
  </p>
</blockquote>

I swear by God I never cheated in the field of religion.”[^251]

Once a man of Banu Asad was brought to Imam for execution of whipping
(retribution). Banu Asad asked Imam to dispense with his whipping.

Imam said, “Ask me to do something at my discretion.”  
 They came out while being contented.

Imam executed whipping for the man and said, “This was owned by God and
I had no control over it.”[^252]

Imam said about his role of guiding Umma, “O people! I gave you advice
the prophets did to their Umma and I let out what the legatees spread
out after themselves. I behaved you with the lash of “preaching”, but
you rejected and I called you with the speech to bar you from
disobeying, yet you failed to do so. By God! Do you expect an Imam but
me to join you in the straight path?”[^253]

Also, he said of himself, “Verily I look like a lamp in the dark among
you; one who steps in the dark, he shall use light of that lamp.”[^254]

Anyway, Imam insisted on exact compliance with the Prophet (S) 's
tradition such that he even tried to act like the Prophet (S) in his
actions.

When Imam objected why he serves people in the mosque with good food but
he himself eats wheat germ with bread at home, he weepingly replied, “I
swear by God I had never seen bread without wheat germ in the Prophet
(S) 's home.[^255] What Imam said meant that he attempted to have his
food like that of the Prophet (S) 's.

Imam in the Face of Infidels (Jamal War)
----------------------------------------

Only several months after Imam came to power in 36H., the first civil
war happened in Jumadi al-Thani of that year among Muslims instigated by
a group of promise-breachers led by Talha, Zubayr and 'Ayisha. To
further clarify the historical background of this bitter event, it is to
review the political lines of then Medina.

It was mentioned in the post-demise of the Messenger (S) that there had
been two tendencies of the Umayyads and the Hashimites none of which
could attain caliphate after Imam, The Umayyads due to being
long-standingly anti-Islam and the Hashimites because of Quraysh's envy
and problems they had with Imam 'Ali.

The middle faction of Quraysh, that is Abu Bakr and 'Umar, came to power
leading to this group being set aside. No matter what happened during
these two men, a suitable ground was prepared for 'Uthman, one of the
Umayyads, among all Quraysh.

As said in the section relating to selection of 'Uthman, he was so
popular among Quraysh people. When 'Uthman dealt with just the Umayyads
around Quraysh, the middle line once again was capricious of caliphate.
Among them, Talha, a fellow-tribe of Abu Bakr of Banu Taym, wanted to
attain caliphate with the support of 'Ayisha. Zubayr also helped him for
a while and he himself was eager to grab caliphate.

When Jamal war was waged, Ibn 'Abbas said to Zubayr, ”'Ayisha wants the
government for Talha, what are you doing here?”[^256]

This middle line failed to find an opportunity in Medina and observed
that 'Ali of the Hashimites, after abdication of the Umayyads, assumed
power. Now what had to be done?

It first approved of the new government assuming that it can play a
major role in the new government. Talha and Zubayr suggested to rule
over Basra, Kufa or Damascus. Imam smartly said that they were more
needed in Medina.[^257]

This aim was not fulfilled and Talha and Zubayr, leaders of the middle
line, departed to Mecca to do the lesser pilgrimage and there they could
talk to 'Ayisha, gone to Mecca before the death of 'Uthman and was still
there.

Up to now there are three political lines. The Hashimites, the Umayyads,
and the middle line of Quraysh that long time after appeared as “Abna'
al-Muhajirun” in rebelling against 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr. Jamal movement
crystallized showdown of Quraysh's middle line knowing itself follower
of Abu Bakr and 'Umar.

Talha and Zubayr could satisfy 'Ayisha to join them and this was the
greatest breakthrough for them. 'Ayisha both had familial relationship
with Talha and showed mercy on her nephew. In this trip, 'Abd Allah
played a major role in accompanying 'Ayisha. They could absorb three
thousand people and move up to Basra.

The infidels made excuse for three reasons. First, 'Uthman was
oppressedly murdered. This was posed while Talha, Zubayr and 'Ayisha
were among those who mostly contributed to rebellion resulting in
'Uthman's murder. They recklessly said that they had repented and now
they were ready to make up for what they have done by seeking revenge
for oppressed caliph!

Certainly, this was raised for stupefied Muslims who were unaware of the
real story. Another point was that they were forced to swear allegiance
in Medina; therefore, the allegiance is improper and Imam's government
is illegitimate at least to them as they are not committed to obey
caliph because of the forcible allegiance according to what they said.
The solution they brought up was that everything should be resolved in a
way raised in the end of 'Umar's lifetime, that is “Shura”.

When 'Ayisha asked Talha and Zubayr of her duty, she was told, “Go and
tell the people that 'Uthman was oppressedly killed and the affairs have
to go back to council of Muslims meaning the situation created by
'Umar.”[^258]

The council in which Talha and Zubayr took part raised a hope for their
caliphate. This council caused Talha, Zubayr and Waqqas to imagine that
they are fully illegible for caliphate. Zubayr in the midst of Jamal war
told Imam 'Ali that he was not more illegible for caliphate than
them.[^259]

The Umayyads residing in Hijaz rushed to help this group
opportunistically. Marwan Ibn Hakam, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir,'Abd al-Rahman
Ibn 'Attab Ibn Abi l-'As and Sa'id Ibn 'As were among those who
instigated people. A little while after, Sa'id Ibn 'As and Mughira Ibn
Shu'ba, initially one of the defenders, abdicated.[^260]

The Umayyads's assistance, at this time, was just because of opportunism
and for believing in what Talha and Zubayr said. We know that Marwan at
the end of Jamal war spear-killed Talha in revenge for 'Uthman.

More contemplation has to be made about 'Ayisha, wife of the Prophet
(S). 'Ayisha had a high status during her father's rule and 'Umar's, her
father's friend. 'Umar gave her share more than the other wives of the
Messenger (S) and this wasn't because she played a leading role in
changes of his caliphate.[^261] 'Ayisha is said to have owed a lot to
'Umar.[^262]

'Ayisha said, “During mourning service of 'Umar, she heard jinns[^263]
elegizing for him. Even in her sleep, she dreamed as if 'Umar were
endowed with prophethood.”[^264]

By taking advantage of her talent in narrating hadith and credited with
being the Prophet (S) 's wife, she maintained this to the end, although
she and Mu'awiya could not get along well. 'Ayisha, during these years,
tried to recognize herself as the dearest wife of the Messenger (S)
leaving behind an acceptable image of herself and her father. She said
she was six or seven when engaged and nine when married.[^265]

Despite the news that the Prophet (S) at times excused her from Abu
Bakr,[^266] she said, “Her marriage to the Prophet (S) ordained from
God.[^267] This is while we know that Zaynab, daughter of Jahsh, was the
only wife of the Prophet (S) who was so proud of that.[^268]

In the later times of 'Uthman's caliphate, 'Ayisha challenged him hard.
Having been influenced by anti-'Uthman opposition as well as her own
criticisms, she stood against him.

Unlike other wives of the Prophet (S), 'Ayisha primarily became involved
in politics and naturally had a political personality. She could not
remain silent in front of a wave of anti-'Uthman rebellion. The
considerable point is that what compelled her to engage in such a
venturous political action in spite of a lot of problems she faced?

To us, as far as her disagreement with Imam was concerned, the only
incentive she had to take part in this was the vengeance she exerted
against the Hashimites, Fatima and 'Ali within the years of the Prophet
(S) 's lifetime. Sheykh Mufid has mentioned a few examples of 'Ayisha's
grudge.[^269] Otherwise, we know that she wasn't the most conscious
people to be concerned with 'Ali's exoneration from 'Uthman's
murder.[^270]

In addition, she wasn't interested in reversion of caliphate to Banu
Taym. When anti-'Uthman opposition peaked, 'Ayisha had gone to Mecca for
the Hajj. There, she heard that 'Uthman wasn't murdered and Talha
succeeded him. She became happy and went up to Medina to reach Saraf.
She wasn't told there people have sworn allegiance to 'Ali.

Hearing this news, she returned to Mecca and cried out, “O the oppressed
'Uthman.”[^271]

When 'Ayisha heard that people swore allegiance to 'Ali, she said, “One
night of 'Uthman equals the entire lifetime of 'Ali.”[^272]

After Imam wasn't martyred, 'Ayisha named the child brought to her ”'Abd
al-Rahman!”[^273]

After Jamal war came to a defeat, 'Ayisha said to Ibn 'Abbas, “No town
I'm more angry at than the one where you, the Hashimites, live
in.”[^274]

'Ayisha also said when informing about the Prophet (S) 's arrival in
ending days of his life, “Two people helped him by his arms. One of them
wasn't Qutham Ibn 'Abbas and there wasn't another man!” According to
narrator, by another man she meant 'Ali.[^275] Of course, she sometimes
confessed that the dearest man to the Prophet (S) was 'Ali and the
dearest woman was Fatima. When she was questioned why she did so, she
said with a brown face, “It was something done!”[^276]

'Ali himself mentions the reasons why she exerted vengeance against him:

**First,** the Messenger (S) had preferred him than her father in
different cases.

**Second,** there wasn't brotherhood between Imam and the Prophet (S)
and so 'Umar wasn't selected for Abu Bakr.

**Third**, keeping doors of companions' houses closed into the mosque
and leaving Imam's house door open to it.

**Fourth,** when Abu Bakr failed to do anything the day before, banner
of triumph wasn't handed to Imam in Khaybar war.

**Fifth,** there wasn't the story of declaring the exoneration for which
the Prophet (S) firstly dispatched Abu Bakr, but he wasn't brought back
as ordered by God and Imam took charge of it.

**Sixth,** it wasn't 'Ayisha's grudge against Khadija whose daughter,
Fatima, also had experienced that.

**Seventh,** there wasn't popularity of Imam towards the Prophet (S) in
such a way that once 'Ali came up to the Prophet and he wasn't given a
seat next to him.

The Prophet (S) praised him in response to 'Ayisha's objection. This
greatly raised her vengeance against Imam.[^277] Sheykh Mufid in his
ending part of his book “al-Jamal” details another chapter on why
'Ayisha rendered grudge against Imam.[^278]

Later on, when Imam Hasan (a) was to be buried near the Prophet (S), she
opposed and said, “Why do you want to bury in my house someone whom I
dislike?”[^279]

Ahmad Amin explains about the reasons why 'Ayisha exerted vengeance
against Fatima(a).[^280]  
 Talha and Zubayr came to Mecca and well learned that they couldn’t do
anything without 'Ayisha.[^281]

They said to her, “If Basrans meet you, they will be united with
you.”[^282]  
 Imam said about 'Ayisha, “She is most obeyed among people.”[^283]

Through various talks, 'Ayisha was convinced to join them to Basra. It
was not so easy to go because she had to, in the first place, respond to
her blatant disagreement on this Qur'anic verse that obligates the
Prophet (S) 's wives to stay in their homes, **وقرن في بيوتكن.**

This verse clearly bans the Prophet (S) 's wives from leaving their
homes meaning their participation in political struggles. As said that
'Umar even was doubtful about their going on the Hajj and he only once
permitted them to do this by setting a lot of restrictions. Some wives
such as Suda and Zaynab were not willing to go on pilgrimage for the
same reason.[^284]

Umm Salama tried hard to stop 'Ayisha going. Interesting to know is that
'Ayisha had asked her to join them to Basra. She said to Umm Salama
quoting from 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir, “One hundred thousand swords are
ready in Basra. Have you come to fix this?

In revenge for 'Uthman!, Said Umm Salama, were you not the hardest
against him? Were you not the one who called him “Na'thal”, the old
stupid man?

Umm Salama described a few virtues of Imam 'Ali and asked him not to
oppose someone to whom Muhajir and Ansar have sworn allegiance.

She referred to this speech of the Prophet (S), **عليّ ولي كل مؤمن
ومؤمنة.**

'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr standing at the door said, “We haven't heard the
Prophet say such a thing”.  
 But your aunt, said Umm Salama, has heard that and this speech of the
Prophet who said**,** **علي خليفتي عليكم في حياتي ومماتي.** **'**Ayisha
confirmed that she has heard such a thing[^285].

'Ayisha spoke of her action taken for the improvement of Muslims'
affairs! She attempted to absorb Hafsa.

He has the same idea, Hafsa said, as 'Ayisha's. In this way, he decided
to go to Basra but 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar stopped him helping Jamal
companions.[^286]

Umm Salama, one of Ahl al-Bayt enthusiasts, wrote to Imam telling about
the action of rebels, “By God if the Prophet (S) 's wives had not been
banned leaving their homes, I would have come with you. Now I let the
most beloved of my loved ones, that is my son, 'Umar Ibn Abi Salama,
come with you.”[^287]

Umm Salama began to publicize Imam 'Ali among Meccans and said to them,
“I call you to seek after divine piety and in this time I know no one
better than 'Ali.”[^288]

When Maymuna, another wife the Prophet (S), heard about Talha and
Zubayr's rebellion, she told the bearer of the news, “Join 'Ali because
he has never gone astray and nobody has been let astray by him”. She
repeated this three times[^289].

Umm Faďl, daughter of Harith, in a letter by a courier to Imam, told him
about the readiness of rebels.[^290]

Medina was already in control of the Hashimites and the rebels could not
return. Damascus was also under the yoke of Mu'awiya and it was obvious
that they would not benefit from going to Damascus.[^291]

Because Mu'awiya is obeyed there and they will become only his
plaything. On the other hand, they had the common aim with Mu'awiya and
that was they had to prevent from Imam's caliphate. Now that Damascus is
in the hands of Mu'awiya, Iraq must be decontrolled by Imam. People like
'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir, who was after rule of Basra, insisted more on
that.

Walid Ibn 'Uqba is said to have stopped them from going to Damascus
since Mu'awiya was not ready to help 'Uthman, then how could he leave
everything to a guess?[^292] Mu'awiya also faild to take any interest in
their coming to Damascus, so he falsely wrote to Zubayr that he has
secured allegiance of Damascus people.

He asked Zubayr to seize Iraq, Damascus will be ready for him. In that
case, there remains nothing for 'Ali. These talks led to their moving on
to Basra hoping that friends of Talha and Zubayr in Basra and Kufa
[^293] to assist them. Ya'la Ibn Umayya arriving with a lot of property
from Yemen, gave them all to rebels and they mobilized a group and
mounted them on Ya'la Ibn Umayya's horses and moved up to Basra.

Referring to the fact that she is Umm al-Mu'minin and a rightful mother
of Muslims, 'Ayisha tried to attract people towards the rebels.[^294]

When the rebels came to Basra, Ka'b Ibn Sur, leader of Azd tribe,
intended to abdicate. 'Ayisha came up to him and invited him. He
initially insisting on his abdication said that he could not help but
fulfilling what his mother said.[^295] Anyway, 'Ayisha's name was very
effective in attracting the people.

Later, Talha in his speech in Basra said, “God has brought 'Ayisha to
you. You know that how dignified she was in front of the Prophet (S) and
what status she had in Islam.”  
 Basrans just for the sake of 'Ayisha declared they would defend the
rebels.[^296]

When fighting began, Talha said, “O people! 'Ali has come to shed the
blood of Muslims. Tell not that he is the Messenger's cousin. Someone
who is with you is wife of the Prophet and trustworthy Abu Bakr's
daughter, she is the one whose father was the most beloved to the
Prophet.”[^297]  
 On the day of attack, one of Basran companions of rebels said in a
piece of poetry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نحن نوالي أمّنا الرضية وننصر الصّحابة المرضية
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We hold sainthood of our contented mother and help Companions pleased
by God.” [^298]

In Basra, 'Abd Allah Ibn Hukaym Tamimi, brought to Basrans the letters
Talha wrote to them and used them against 'Uthman and said to him, “Do
you know these letters?”

Talha said, “Yes, but I knew repentance and revenging for 'Uthman the
only way to compensate!”[^299]

Jamal troops moved on. In midway, in Huw'ab region, 'Ayisha heard dogs
barking. She all of a sudden recalled a report from the Prophet (S) that
he kept away his wives from a sedition trap when hearing barking of the
dogs on the way. 'Ayisha became determined to go back but 'Abd Allah Ibn
Zubayr brought to her fifty people of Banu 'Amir to testify that the
region was not called Huw'ab.[^300]

'Uthman Ibn Hunayf was ruler of Basra on behalf of Imam (a). He
dispatched Abu al-Aswad Du'ali and 'Imran Ibn Husayn to Jamal rebels
near Basra. They asked Jamal companions why they had gone there.

They replied, “We have come in revenge for 'Uthman and that the
caliphate be left to Shura.”

'Uthman Ibn Hunayf ordered the people to bear arms. The rebels came to
Basra reaching Mirbad region and in there Talha first spoke of the
oppressedness of 'Uthman.

He said, “People have sworn allegiance to 'Ali only by force.” He
further said that now he must abdicate the resign from caliphate and
selection of caliph in Shura be the same tradition of 'Umar Ibn
Khattab.[^301]

Zubayr and after him 'Ayisha made speech. Some people acknowledged him
and some others shouted that he is telling lies. At this time the crowd
parted in two and attacked each other with shoes. This resulted in an
armed figting.[^302]

One of the opponents, of 'Abd al-Qays great men, cried out, “These
people were the harshest against 'Uthman. After that they swore
allegiance to 'Ali and we were told about that and we too did so.”

Talha ordered to catch him and shaed his head and face.[^303] According
to Ibn Khayyat, some of the people sheld them with stones when arriving
in Basra.[^304]

At any rate, after relatively controlling Basra, they signed a contract
with Ibn Hunayf saying that they wait for Imam 'Ali to come provided the
royal residence, public property and mosque remain in the hands of
'Uthman Ibn Hunayf.

Despite the contract being signed, the rebels breached the contract
fearing that Imam might come and they could not stand against him, so
they nightly marched into the mosque and arrested 'Uthman Ibn Hunayf
while he was up at doing the night prayer. They shaved his head and face
and overlooked killing him[^305], instead expelled him out of the city
merely because they feared his brother Sahl Ibn Hunayf whom Imam had
placed instead of himself. Observing him in this condition, Imam began
to cry.[^306]

The rebels looted the public property after killing about fifty
people[^307] as well as its watch-outs.

When Talha and Zubayr saw the public property, they said, **هذا ما وعدنا
الله ورسوله!**.[^308]

According to a narration, Talha at the very beginning of his arrival in
Basra, asked about dhms that had been promised to him.[^309]

With the relative control of rebels over Basra, there emerged a
disagreement between Talha and Zubayr over saying the prayers. This
conflict temporarily came to an end with a compromise over their saying
the prayers each on a day. At this time, Hukaym Ibn Jabala, commander of
'Uthman Ibn Hunayf-led forces, began to fight with the rebels with
several hundred people. This fighting led to his martyrdom and his three
brothers.[^310]

From Basra, 'Ayisha wrote letters to people of Medina and Yamama and
called them to support Jamal rebels.

In her letter to people of Yamama, she wrote, “The deviated 'Uthman Ibn
Hunayf calls people on the way to hell while we call people to the Book
of God.”

She had written this letter before Imam's arrival to justify the crimes
of rebels in Basra event.[^311] She also wrote to Medinans telling them
about the victory of rebels in Basra. The letter dated Rabi' al-Awwal
5th, 36 H.[^312]

When Imam (a) heard about the departure of rebels, he substituted Sahl
Ibn Hunayf in place of himself and quickly moved to Iraq accompanied by
a large number of the Prophet's companions and some other Medinans who
are reportedly considered to be four thousand people.[^313] According to
Sa'id Ibn Jubayr, eight hundred people of Ansar and four hundred of
those who attended the Riďwan allegiance, joined Imam (a) in
Jamal.[^314]

When Imam sent Hashim Ibn 'Utba Ibn Abi Waqqas from Rabaďa to tell Abu
Musa to mobilize people to join Imam. Abu Musa disagreed on Kufiyans
support from Imam. By saying that this is a sedition and being absent in
sedition is better than attending it[^315], he did not allow people to
rush to support Imam (a).

In addition, he threatened Hashim as well. Hashim came up to Imam and
Imam sent 'Abd Allah and Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr to mobilize people in
Kufa, but they failed to do so. This time, Imam sent his son, Imam Hasan
(a) along with 'Ammar to Kufa. Besides, he deposed Abu Musa and posed
Qaraza Ibn Ka'b Ansari over Kufa.

The enthusiastic speech of Imam Hasan (a) caused nine thousand six
hundred and fifty people of Kufa to join Imam's troops.[^316] Hujr Ibn
'Adi, of Kufa pure and virtuous men called people to support Imam.
Afterwards, people were set to back their Imam up under any
circumstances.[^317]

Imam Hasan (a) appearing as the Prophet's descendant played a key role
in inciting Kufiyans. Similarly, 'Ammar, once ruller of Kufa, was known
after piety and people recognized him as a criterion of credal error and
gospel truth based on the narration, [^318] **الحق مع عمّار يدور معه حيث
دار**  
 Kufiyan troops joined Imam in Dhi Qar and moved towards Basra.

Basran tribes were subdivided in three groups. One group including
Rabi'a joined Imam. Another group such as Banu Dhabba joined 'Ayisha and
the other one such as Ahnaf Ibn Qays, of Banu Tamim leaders, resigned
from the war.[^319]

Abdication of a large number of tribes showed that it is very difficult
for many to make decisions. Some of the tribes appearing in the two
sides brought about to some extent tribal disputes.

Talha in his speech in time of war said, “Some of the Muďari hypocrite
dissidents, Rabi'a Christians and Yemeni foot soldiers helped Imam 'Ali
(a).

His speech raised objection of those who had come to war imagining
defense of cause of rebels and this made them resign.[^320]

Many people deemed rebellion right merely because it was led by Talha,
Zubayr and 'Ayisha.  
 Harith Ibn Hut told Imam, “Do you think that Talha, Zubayr and 'Ayisha
are unrightful?”  
 Imam replied,[^321] **اعرف الحق تعرف اهله، واعرف الباطل تعرف اهله**

Apart from ten thousand Kufiyans with two thousand people from 'Abd
al-Qays and twelve thousand people comprising Imam's troops,a large
number of Basran tribes in addition to a great multitude of Medinans
among whom there were scores of the Prophet (S) 's companions,
accompanied Imam.[^322]

Imam 'Ali by no means was willing to wage this war. Hence, three days
after arrival in Basra, by sending frequent massages, he asked the
rebels to join back to “congregation” and “obedience”. But he received
no positive response from them.[^323]

Imam sent Sa'sa'a Ibn Suhan with a letter to Basra. He spoke with Talha
and Zubayr but when he talked to 'Ayisha, he felt that she intended to
raise wrong doing more than the other two. After Imam's return, 'Abd
Allah Ibn 'Abbas was sent to Basra.

He said to Talha, “Haven't you sworn allegiance?”  
 Talha said, “I was forced by sword to do so.”  
 Ibn 'Abbas said, “I myself observed that you voluntarily swore an
allegiance.”  
 Talha spoke about 'Uthman's blood.

Ibn 'Abbas said, “Was it not true that 'Uthman drank water from his own
house well for ten days? and you did not let him drink fresh water. Then
'Ali came to you asking you to let him drink water.”  
 After that, Ibn 'Abbas talked to 'Ayisha and Talha.

'Ayisha was so confident about her victory that she did not show any
flexibility.  
 Ibn 'Abbas attempted by making sound reasoning to warn them of the
danger waiting for them, yet they failed to accept it.[^324]

However, Imam insisted that war not take place. He stopped his
companions launching the war and officially announced that no one has
the right to launch war.[^325] Even on the day of war, before noon, Imam
(a) handed a Qur'an to Ibn 'Abbas to go to Talha and Zubayr and talk to
them while calling them to Qur'an.

Ibn 'Abbas talked to Talha and Zubayr but 'Ayisha even did not permit
them to talk and said, “Go and tell your lord that sword will rule
between us.”

Ibn 'Abbas says, “I was not very far from them when they showered us
with their spears.”[^326]

On the morning of Jumadi al-Awwal 10th [^327], Imam's division was
prepared. Khurayba was the region of fighting where existed before Basra
and later it became a place of Basra. That day up to noon, Imam resisted
against the rebellion troops and advised them.

Imam (a) said to 'Ayisha, “God ordered you to stay at home, fear God and
go back.”

Imam scolded Talha and Zubayr for bringing 'Ayisha. Malik was placed
commander of the right wing, 'Ammar Yasir as the commander of the left
wing, Nu'man Ibn Rib'i Ansari, according to some sources, Jundab Ibn
Zuhayr Azdi was placed over the infantry and the banner was given to
Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya Khariba.

Imam (a) with his fiery speech prepared the troops for battling the
enemy.[^328]  
 On the other side, 'Ayisha rode on camel-litter covered with armor. She
appeared in the battlefield and made speech regularly talking about the
oppressedness of 'Uthman.

Imam primarily handed a Qur'an to one of the 'Abd al-Qays people to go
to the battlefield calling the rebels to Qur'an and warning them of
disunity. The rebels speared him martyred. Mother of this young man
present there jumped herself over her son. The companions helped bring
his body to Imam.[^329]

Imam (a) who, until that time, had ordered his troops not to launch the
war by observing martyrdom of that man commanded Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya
to attack the enemy.[^330] Fighting kept on from noon to night. It was
most intense around 'Ayisha's camel and as said over seventy hands were
amputated wanting to reach her camel's reins. 'Ayisha picked a handful
of soil and tried to stupify people and did just as the Prophet (S) had
done. She spattered the soil towards Imam's troops and said, “Woe betide
you!”

Imam said to her, **وَمَا رَمَيْتَ إِذْ رَمَيْتَ وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ
رَمَى**. “One who speared was not thee but the devil.” [^331]

When rebelling troops were defeated, Marwan Ibn Hakam knowing that the
murderer of 'Uthman is nobody but Talha, speared him killed.[^332]

Interestingly, Ibn Khayyat says, “Once the war was begun, the first one
killed was Talha.[^333] This shows that Marwan mainly has come to war to
kill Talha. Later on, he felt proud of this such that he himself told
the story to Iman as-Sajjad (a).[^334]

It has been said that Imam (a) called Talha in a battlefield and said to
him, “Go Abu Muhammad! Do you remember what the Prophet said about me?”
**اللهم وال من والاه وعاد من عاداه “** O Allah! Love his friends and
loathe his enemies.” Talha replied, “I ask the repentance from God! If I
had remembered that, I would have never risen up.[^335]

Zubayr stayed with the troops to the insistence of his son, 'Abd Allah
and did not leave the battlefield even with the Imam's speech. In one
case, Imam (a) remembered what the Prophet had said, “Your aunt's son,
that is Zubayr, will rebel against you.”

Zubayr acknowledged the report.[^336]

The sources saying that Zubayr anyway had run away from the stage of
fighting[^337] or had deserted the battlefield while being remorseful,
are in clash with each other.

After Imam's speech, Zubayr intended to go back, but returned to the
battlefield by the insistence of his son, it is probable that this might
have caused his last run away to be assumed as his repentance. While if
he were really remorseful, he would make his serious decision to return
in the very beginning. When he left the battlefield, a person named Ibn
Jurmuz chased and killed him in the right occasion.

Imam said about him, “Zubayr was closer to me than Talha. He was always
from us, Ahl al-Bayt, so long as his son 'Abd Allah grew up and
separated us.”[^338]

Malik played a role in Imam's caliphate as much as when he came in grips
with 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr, he was almost to kill him but in front of
those of his troops whom he was separated from, 'Abd Allah said, “Kill
me with Malik Ashtar.”[^339] His purpose was to have Malik killed.

'Adi Ibn Hatim Ta'i was among Imam's defenders who lost both one eye and
one of his sons in this war. 'Amr Ibn Himaq Khuza'i was another
companion of the Prophet (S) who stayed close to Imam in this war. He
was, according to Dinwari, among the pious people of Kufa and many pious
people joined him.

Observing the resistance of Basrans around Jamal, Imam ordered the camel
to be killed. Some of Imam's companions surrounded the camel and killed
it.

Later on, 'Ayisha said, “I could see 'Ali from inside the camel litter
who was engaged in war shouting, al-Jamal, al-Jamal.”[^340]

Imam neared the camel litter and blamed 'Ayisha addressing her, “Ya
Shaqira'.” [^341]

One point is worth saying that 'Ayisha watched outside from inside the
camel litter through the hole made.  
 Once she asked a person who had the reins of the camel in hand, “Is
'Ali present among the people?”

He replied, “Yes.”  
 'Ayisha asked him to show 'Ali to her. When 'Ali was shown to her, she
said, “How identical he is to his brother!”  
 The man questioned, “Whom do you mean?”  
 She said, “The Prophet.”  
 Once the man heard that, he let the camel's reins loose and joined
Imam's troops.[^342]

After the war came to an end, 'Ayisha who was motionless like a stiff,
was taken out and sent along with her brother, Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr, to
Basra and after some days she could leave there. Afterwards, she was
sent to Medina with a number of Basran men and women.[^343] A long time
after, 'Ayisha frequently expressed remorse of what she had done.[^344]
When she read the verse**, وقرن في بيوتكن** she cried so much that her
veil became wet.[^345]

Ibn Qutayba says, “A woman came to 'Ayisha and said, What do you say
about the woman who has killed her little child?”

'Ayisha said, “She must go to hell.”  
 The woman said, “What do you say about the woman who has killed (that
is 'Ayisha) twenty thousand of her elder children?”[^346]

'Ayisha herself when dying, said, “I have created events after the
Prophet. Bury me near other wives (rather than beside the
Prophet).”[^347]

According to another narration, 'Ayisha said, “My absence in Jamal would
have been better than having ten sons of the Prophet.”[^348]

Many Basrans from different tribes were killed in this war. According to
Baladhuri, only two thousand five hundred and fifty two people of Azd
tribe were killed.

Eight hundred from Bakr Ibn Wa'il, five hundred from Banu Dhabba and
seven hundred people from Banu Tamim had been killed.[^349]

There seem to be other exaggerative numbers given. For example, Jamal
war victims are said to be totally twenty thousand people.[^350]

'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr also says that there have been fifteen thousand
people killed.  
 According to Sheykh Mufid, the same number of twenty thousand people
seems correct.[^351]  
 Abu Hatim Nami quoting from his grandfather that the people killed in
Jamal numbered twenty thousand people.[^352]

This number seems incorrect because in a war lasting only five to six
hours, there could be not many casualties to this extent. Imam's troops
martyrs are said to number between four hundred to five hundred
people.[^353]

Known figures among martyrs of Imam's companions number six. Among them,
Zayd and Sayhan are children of Sawhan. There are two more people called
Saq'ab and 'Abd Allah, brothers of Salim Ibn Mikhnaf (Abu Mikhnaf's
grandfather) as well as two others named 'Alba' Ibn Harith Sadusi and
Hind Jamali.[^354]

What is certain is that the immediate defeat of Basra troops (five
hundred people killed compared to over nineteen thousand people of the
rebels killed) shows that rebelling troops had no strong incentives
although Umm al-Mu'minin was present among them. Major problem was that
Talha and 'Ayisha despite the fame they won in the affair of 'Uthman,
were more notorious than that they can deceive people of Basra
considering themselves as avengers for 'Uthman.

After the war was put to an end, Imam (a) ordered his troops not to
chase anybody. Whoever gave in, he shall not be killed and no wounded
shall be murdered. Imam set free even people like Marwan and children of
'Uthman.

At that time, Marwan said, “He will not swear allegiance unless he is
forced to do so.”

Imam said, “Even if he swears allegiance, like Jews, he will violate his
allegiance.” [^355]  
 Imam did not let people take advantage of private property of people
except what the enemy had used in war. This was amazing to the people
who up to now gained booties after any victorious war. Imam was objected
concerningly, and he ashamed them by saying that who would take 'Ayisha
if the property is to be shared?

However, simple-minded Arabs had this problem in mind that how it is
rightly possible to kill people of a tribe but their property seizure is
forbidden.[^356]

Imam (a) began to search among those killed. When he saw Ka'b Ibn
Thur-former judge of Basra on behalf of 'Umar-he had Qur'an hang from
his neck. Imam said to take Qur'an off his neck.

He then ordered to have Ka'b be seated in front of him, and talked to
his dead body just as the prophet had done to Quraysh's killed people in
Uhud, “O Ka'b! I found what my God had promised. You also found what
your God had promised you!”[^357]

After Jamal fracas came to an end, Imam (a) entered congregation mosque
and began to reproach the Basran infidels who were the first people
standing against their Imam.

Imam called them[^358] womanish troops and animal followers: **جند
المراةً واتباع البهيمةً.**

Imam wrote in letters to Medina and Kufa about the story of Basra.[^359]
Then he ordered to have the public property shared among his companions
who are said to number twelve thousand people. Unlike Talha and Zubayr
who said when observing Bayt al-Mal, “This is the same promise of God
and his messenger”, this time Imam (a) said, “O white and yellow jewels,
deceive people but me.”[^360]

After some time, sojourning in Basra, Imam went up to Kufa on Monday,
Rajab 12th or 16th, year 36 H.[^361] after appointing 'Abd Allah Ibn
'Abbas as the ruler of Basra. His arrival in Kufa is said to be on
Monday, 12th of Rajab.[^362]

Imam Stays in Kufa
------------------

Imam departed to Kufa after subsiding rebellion of infidels.

Imam stayed over in Kufa until his martyrdom. It is outlandish to say
that Imam generally decided to leave Medina, although it is even far
from fact his return to Medina might have been possible after his stay
in Kufa. His departure to Kufa has to be considered as some kind of
action to safeguard religion from the harm of infidels such as Mu'awiya.

Iraq was in a touchy situation. In principal, after beginning of
conquests and expansion of Islamic realm, two points triggered increased
importance of Damascus and Iraq over Medina and in other words Hijaz.
First, a large number of tribes had come to Damascus and Iraq from Hijaz
among whom there were seen many of companions. Second, the extent,
possibilities and hidden talents in this regions had been incomparable
to Hijaz.

When infidel rebels began their movement in Mecca, they well came to
this conclusion to move towards Iraq before 'Ali (a) captures it. In
case they could succeed in seizing Kufa and Basra, Hijaz would come in
their hands. The problem was that they first assumed power in Basra but
an incomplete one. Second, Kufa was taken totally out of their control.

In contrast, Imam could bring Kufa under his control, placing it as a
base for his Shi'ite Muslims in the future. Regretfully, the same action
of the infidel rebels caused Basra not only to tilt towards 'Uthmani
religion but there emerges a permanent enmity between Basra and Kufa in
Iraq, fading out solidarity in this region.

It was not easy for Imam to get out of Madinat al-Nabi and there was no
way out just as when the Prophet (S) left Mecca with all sanctity and
his sense of patriotism. In that time, he had not so many followers in
Mecca. In contrast, Medina bowed to him knowing that it was economically
reliable.

Now Imam 'Ali (a) had felt that his two strong enemies, one having
Damascus in control and another Basra, trying to take Kufa out of his
control. Seizure of these two cities meant that the whole Iran with all
of its economic capacities has come under their control.

Imam (a) was not the man to become discouraged in the face of these
problems and to abdicate from caliphate, something the rebels thought of
and imagined that Imam leaves the affairs to Shura by observing this
condition. On the contrary, he was determined to fight with the rebels
and for the same reason he swiftly moved towards Iraq.

The major reason was that Medina could not stand and resist for some
factors.

> First, economically speaking, Hijaz was unable to bear confrontation
> with Iraq or Damascus. Medina, the best region, could not properly
> meet the needs of its people. Now how could it feed a huge army?

> Second, Medina was not able to endure an all-out war with Damascus in
> terms of human power. The maximum number of those Medinans who aided
> Imam (a) in Jamal war is four thousand people.1236 This population
> could not undo the problems of succession in facing his plenty of
> enemies.

> Third, Medinans save Ansar were not so much interested in Imam 'Ali
> (a). Muhajirun (immigrants), their children as well as Meccans were
> great number of people who had departed to this city after departure
> of the Prophet (S). Families of the Umayyads and those of Jamal rebels
> did not allow people to completely assist Imam (a).

The people of this city, during 'Uthman period, suffering from increased
desire of welfare took away their fighting spirit. Moreover, the
citizens, particularly some companions, like 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, Sa'd
Ibn Abi Waqqas, Muhammad Ibn Maslama, Usama Ibn Zayd, Zayd Ibn Thabit
and many others did not show the least interest to Imam (a), knowing
themselves more religious jurist than that they lend an ear to his
speech. When Imam was in Kufa, Sahl Ibn Hunayf, Imam's ruler in Kufa,
told Imam that many people are attracted by Mu'awiya.

Imam in a letter wrote to Sahl: “I have been told that people staying
with you some of whom secretly go to Mu'awiya. Do not feel sorry that
number of your men is decreased and their assistance is stopped. Their
deviation and your release from their suffering suffice to say that they
are escaping from the truth and rushing to ignorance. They are people of
this world and they are after it. They have seen and heard the justice
and knew that people are equal in front of justice. So, they ran away to
have their own ends meet alone. May they be far from the blessing of
God”[^363]

Meccans had no better situation either. When Imam (a) wrote to Khalid
Ibn 'As to secure allegiance from Meccans but they refused to do
so.[^364]

Kufa in different ways and just in the face of Medina had an entirely
good condition. In the first place, Iraq had no problem of population.
There were many tribes living there, those who had shown their military
power in conquering Iran. Iraq economically was the most important
source for people of this land. Furthermore, there were a lot of tax and
tribute from Iran and Iraq, an unlimited wealth, in the hands of
Muslims. When 'Uqba Ibn 'Amir asked Imam not to leave Medina and get
somebody else to go.

Imam said, **إن الأموال والرجال بالعراق “** The properties and the men
are in Iraq.” [^365]

This was quite clear for others. 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir leaving Basra for
Mecca after 'Uthman was murdered, he was told in a piece of poetry by
Walid Ibn 'Uqba, “You left Iraq, center of men and came to a silent
city!”[^366]

Ibn A'tham presents importance of Iraq as if Damascus has been only a
corner of it.[^367] Fundamental aim of Imam (a) was to face Mu'awiya
after stifling of Jamal rebellion. It was impossible to do this without
Imam's appearance in Iraq that was near Damascus.[^368]

Besides, Imam had a lot of supporters from among Yemeni tribes who were
actually his devotees. They played a very important role in the war when
Imam assumed caliphate and they stood in all battle scenes to the very
end.

Of course it is to be noted that Iraq had its own specific problems.
Later on, more explanation will be given about Iraqis on the occasion of
confusion in this city at the beginning of Imam Hasan (a)'s succession.

It is only to refer that Kufiyans were recognized the most controversial
people over trifles. They were enthusiastic people and not showing
moderation in this regard. Also, the strong force of tribes headmen was
one of the serious problems of Imam during his caliphate.

War with oppressively perverse people in Siffin
-----------------------------------------------

Upon his arrival in Kufa, Imam did not go to ruler's palace. The palace,
in many years, had been converted to an aristocratic one.

When Imam was asked to go there, he said, “I'll never go to palace of
the owls.”

He then went to altar of Kufa mosque and temporarily resided there.
Afterwards, he went to Ju'da's house, son of his sister, Umm Hani.[^369]

Kufiyans as the victorious people in Basra warmly red-carpetted
Imam.[^370] At this time Damascus was the most important problem for
Imam to think of.

From the years before Imam assumed caliphate, Damascus belonged to the
Umayyads. Perhaps 'Umar who had placed Damascus at the discretion of
Yazid and next Mu'awiya, children of Abu Sufyan, thought that the
Umayyads deserve having Damascus if not rightful of seizing caliphate
but because they were leaders of Quraysh. Henceforth, as earlier said,
he did not make any changes to Damascus and even never remained critical
of Mu'awiya.

With the arrival of 'Uthman, Mu'awiya was completely stabilized in
situation. At this time, he regarded Damascus to be his own kinghood and
mainly the imagination that he someday is deposed never occurred to him.
Mu'awiya was very vigilant to have Damascus people be mentally fed by
him and not by any other people. For the same reason he never let Abu
Dharr stay there.

Subsequently, whoever came to Damascus intending to effect the minds of
the people as Mu'awiya thought, he would be expelled out of there.[^371]
Anti-'Uthman rebellion on the part of the companions and other people
made him treat the case cautiously.

On one hand, he never decided to stand against the companions. In this
case, it was hoped that if someone came to power, he would have no
pretext to demote Mu'awiya because of supporting the deviated caliph. On
the other hand, with the confidence Mu'awiya took in Damascus people, he
could count on this point that he would have an excuse for rebellion
given the fact that he is being set aside. It happened to be so.

Having come to power, Imam (a) was up to send 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas to
rule over Damascus. He primarily wrote a letter to Mu'awiya in which he
asked Mu'awiya to accompany the aristocrats of Damascus to Medina,
informing him that people murdered 'Uthman without his consultation but
now they have selected him as caliph with consultation and consensus.

Mu'awiya failed to reply Imam's letter and he only sent him a white
letter writing, “From Mu'awiya to 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib.”

The person who had carried the letter to Imam (a) said, “I am coming
from the people who believe that you have murdered 'Uthman and they are
pleased with nothing else but killing you.”[^372]

This story was linked to the beginning affair of Jamal rebels that
engaged Imam's mind for some time. In this time, the story of Jamal
provided Mu'awiya with another propagandistic chance. By referring to
turbulence of Talha, Zubayr and 'Ayisha, as the Prophet's wife, he could
fix Imam's having a hand in murder of 'Uthman in the minds of Damascus
people better than before.

After Jamal story came to an end, Imam (a) settled in Kufa because it
was obvious that he would soon fight with Damascus troops. In this case,
it was only Iraq that could do such a thing. In the very moment Imam
arrived in Kufa, Shann Ibn 'Abd Qays composed, “Now we are relieved from
war with the infidels, but there is a horrendous snake in Damascus that
if stinks anyone, he'll be filled with a dead fatal venom in his body;
therefore, in order to remedy, before it stinks, smash its head and
throw it aside.[^373]

It is to be noted that challenge between Damascus and Iraq, in
principle, predated the Sassanids period. Arabs of these two regions,
each was engaged in fighting in support of one of the two great powers
of that time, that is Romans and the Sassanids. Of course, presently new
immigrants entered this region and had different incentives compared to
the past, but the old grounds could also affect it. Damascus surrender
meant that its people had yielded to Iraqis. This could be true in the
other way round. Ka'b Ibn Ju'ayl composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أرى الشام تكره ملك العراق وأهل العراق لها كارهونا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكل لـصاحبـه مبغـض يرى كلّ ما كان من ذاك دينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Damascus people dislike Iraq's rulership and so do Iraqis, they call
each other enemies and dismiss each other's doings as bad.” [^374]

This was not an easy confrontation and it was clear from scratch that
Iraqis and Damascus people will have hard days ahead.

'Amr Ibn 'As, some time in the midst of Siffin war, wrote to Ibn 'Abbas,
“The situation has become very critical and know that,

**  
**

إن الشام لا تملك الا بهلاك العراق، وأن العراق لا تملك إلا بهلاك الشام

**  
**
.

  

“Damascus is only captured by destroying the Iraqis and so is Iraq by
killing Damascus people.” [^375]

Shurahbil Ibn Simt objected to Imam's envoy saying that, “You have come
to annex Damascus to Iraq?”[^376]

In this time, other towns except Damascus and its suburbs swore
allegiance to Imam [^377] and Imam in Kufa designated rulers for
different regions of Iraq and Iran.[^378] Malik Ashatar was dispatched
to Jazira (including Musil, Nasibayn, Dara, Sinjar, Amid, Hit and
'Anat). This region was specifically a key region because it was
situated near Damascus and Dhahhak Ibn Qays was in power there on behalf
of Mu'awiya.

Jazira people held 'Uthmani religion[^379] and those of “the 'Uthmanids”
having fled from Kufa and Basra, had taken shelter in some parts of
Jazira cominated by Mu'awiya.[^380] Dhahhak-controled regions included
cities of Raqqa, Ruha and Qirqisiya'. When Malik Ashtar went to Jazira,
he prepared troops and attacked Haran. He had an intense fighting with
Dhahhak troops in this invasion. He could bring this region under his
control.[^381]

It goes to say that Imam (a) on his arrival in Kufa tried to brighten
public minds about different matters and prepare them for supporting him
in the subsequent developments. He talked to the great people and
noblemen and asked their support for himself against Mu'awiya. Iraq was
then dominated by the same noblemen.

Headmen of tribes were more powerful than the ruler of the city and Imam
(a) could not reorganize things without attracting their attention. At
the same time, Imam's procedure was not to make progress in the affairs
without consultation of people. This for people with no political
perception created more desire of cooperation.

In response to Imam who said that he intended to write a letter to
Mu'awiya calling to his obedience, people said, “Whatever you do, we
obey you. We obey you just as we obeyed the Prophet.” [^382] Imam also
decided to reveal the fact to those rulers of the cities who were
appointed by 'Uthman and had no certain problems. Included among them
were Jarir Ibn 'Abd Allah Bajali, ruler of Hamadan and Ash'ath Ibn Qays,
ruler of Adharbayjan.

According to Dinwari, one of the reasons of anti-'Uthman rebellion was
to give rulership of Adharbayjan to Ash'ath. This happened after 'Uthman
married Ash'ath's daughter to his son.[^383] Ash'ath decided to flee to
Damascus and only the shame he had from the side of his friends and
their opposition to this action he took caused him to stay there.[^384]

Noblemen of Kufa and other parts were given an audience by Imam and made
excuses for justifying their no support of Imam in Jamal while
strengthening their allegiance to him. Speaking about preparing to join
Mu'awiya was something they were engaged in. for example, cooperation of
Ahnaf Ibn Qays on behalf of Imam led to coming of Banu Sa'd and Banu
Tamim tribes to Kufa from Basra and this largely affected consolidation
of Kufa[^385].

By sending a letter to Mu'awiya from Kufa, Imam attempted to convince
him to obey Imam of Muslims. Imam in a letter told him that his
caliphate was based on then criteria and he had to admit it. Imam wrote:

“verily the allegiance people in Medina swore to me is mandatory for you
in Damascus too. The same people who had sworn allegiance to Abu Bakr,
'Umar and 'Uthman have done so to me similarly, so everybody present
here has no way but to decide upon allegiance and everyone absent has no
alternative except abandoning it. Shura is the right of Muhajirun and
Ansar and when it is formed and the members agreed on leadership of a
man called Imam, then this is the very consent of God.[^386]

If you are rebellious, I'll fight you asking help of God. You've talked
a lot about murderers of 'Uthman. First, go on the way Muslims cover and
come with them to me for trial, so I oblige you and them to follow Book
of God…and know that you're released on parole and the liberated
prisoners do not deserve caliphate and participating in Shura”.[^387]

When Jarir Ibn 'Abd Allah handed Imam's letter to Mu'awiya in which he
asked him to stop his seditious actions and join the community of
Muslims, Mu'awiya asked people to assemble in the mosque.

While praising Damascus as “sacred territory”, he said, “I am your
caliph on behalf of 'Umar Ibn Khattab and 'Uthman. I am guardian for
blood of 'Uthman who has been oppressedly killed. What do you say about
blood of 'Uthman?”

All people declared their support of his revenge for 'Uthman. This was
Mu'awiya's response to Imam (a). What was more interesting in Mu'awiya's
speech was that he said he had been appointed to rule Damascus on behalf
of 'Umar.[^388]

'Uthman also said, “How should I depose Mu'awiya from Damascus while
'Umar has appointed him?”

This was while he had demoted many of 'Umar's agents from different
cities.[^389] By deceiving Shurahbil Simt Kindi, one of Damascus
noblemen and headman of Yemenis[^390], Mu'awiya could draw support of
many of Damascus people.[^391] Mu'awiya regularly sent people to him to
give testimony that 'Ali has murdered 'Uthman. Account of this deception
shows stupidity of Shurahbil and those who followed him and
Mu'awiya.[^392]

Mu'awiya told Jarir Ibn 'Abd Allah, representative of Imam, “Write to
'Ali to set Damascus and Egypt for me and when he passed away, he should
not leave allegiance of anybody to me. In this case, I entrust
everything to him and know him a caliph.” Jarir wrote this to Imam and
Imam replied, “Mughira in Medina suggested this to me and I rejected. I
do not do such a thing because, **لم يكن الله ليراني أتّخذ المضلين عضداً
“** God never sees me in a position of taking advantage of the deviators
as my arms.”[^393]

In fact, Mu'awiya tended to capture Damascus unequivocally and even if
Imam 'Ali is caliph, the region should be in his control in the form of
an independent emirate. When Mu'awiya made speech in Damascus, he said,
“Why is 'Ali in caliphate superior to me. If Hijaz people have sworn
allegiance to him, Damascus people have done so to me. These two regions
are equal in this regard.”

He also in a letter wrote to Imam, “As long as people of Hijaz observe
the truth, they were more preferred than Damascus people. But now since
they have abandoned the truth, the truth belongs to the Damascus
people.”[^394]

Replying him, Imam wrote, “As for what you said about “now people of
Damascus are superior to people of Hijaz”, show me a man from Quraysh
who can be approved in Shura or his caliphate can be legal. If you claim
so, Muhajirun and Ansar deny you … allegiance to me is generally sworn
and nobody can oppose it and there will be no revision.” [^395]

At this time, Mu'awiya was called emir rather than “Amir al-Mu'minin” in
Damascus; nevertheless, there were people who applied this term to
Mu'awiya. The first man to call Mu'awiya Amir al-Mu'minin was Hajjaj Ibn
Khuzayma who in his first meeting with Mu'awiya said, “Your uncles
descendants from Banu 'Abd al-Mutallib killed your Sheikh.” [^396]

However, Jarir Ibn 'Abd Allah Bajali returned from Damascus to Kufa
after four months.[^397] Malik punished him hard and blamed him for
selling his religion to Mu'awiya in Damascus. A short while later, Jarir
left Kufa for Qirqisa while a large number of people from
Bajala-excluding nineteen people-joined him. After Jarir along with
Thuwayr Ibn 'Amir left for the place, Imam set ablaze their
houses.[^398]

This time, 'Amr Ibn 'As lived in Palestine. He stood aside and went to
Palestine after his opposition to 'Uthman that essentially emanated from
'Abd Allah Ibn Sa'd Ibn Abi Sarh who was put in his place in Egypt. From
there, he provoked people and even serfs against 'Uthman.[^399] He is
said after murder of 'Uthman to have asked his children what he must do.

His son said, “Go to 'Ali.”  
 'Amr said, “If I go to 'Ali now, he'll say, “You are like one of the
Muslims enjoying equal rights as they do”, “but Mu'awiya considers me as
his partner.”[^400]

Mu'awiya felt that he could be of an important help to him. At the same
time, Mu'awiya as in all cases, by touching 'Amr's weak point that is
government of Egypt, asked his accompaniment. Mu'awiya, it is said,
asked 'Amr to rush to him after he received Imam's letter through Jarir
Ibn 'Abd Allah.[^401]

It is also said that his son, 'Abd Allah, bewared him of his action
[^402], but Muhammad, his another son, induced him to do that. 'Amr
himself expressed his initial hesitation in a piece of poetry.[^403]

However, 'Amr Ibn 'As was more corrupt than to overlook government of
Egypt. He was primarily one member of Abu Bakr and 'Umar's band. He
commanded the conquests and 'Uthman had set him aside because he used
the help of his relatives in this regard. In essence, 'Amr was one of
the organs of Quraysh party who was at odds with the Hashimites.

He quickly made his decision and joined hands with Mu'awiya after being
assured that he could gain the world, that according to him was
government of Egypt, by selling his religion. Talking to Mu'awiya, he
composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معاوي لا اعطيك ديني ولم أنل بذلك دنيا فانظر كيف تصنع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإن تعطني مصراً فأربح بصفقة أخذت بها شيخاً يضرّ وينفع
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Mu'awiya! I sell not my religion for you and I sought not a benefit
from your world, now this is you and all this, so if you give rulership
of Egypt to me, I am fully benefitted.” [^404]

It was a great success for Mu'awiya to see 'Amr joining him. The first
thing Mu'awiya consulted was about Roman troops. 'Amr proposed a
compromise and said that Romans would quickly accept it.[^405] Mu'awiya
put this into effect and Imam (a) mentioned it in one of his
speeches.[^406]

'Ubayd Allah Ibn 'Umar joining Mu'awiya in Damascus- that was because he
feared Imam retaliating him for murder of Hurmuzan and two other people
in Medina[^407]- complemented Mu'awiya's excuse in having son of caliph
II in his hands and this was publicly and highly important to Mu'awiya
who counted on this.[^408]

Mu'awiya began his propaganda for betraying people of Medina and Mecca
as well as the renowned authorities in different cities. He wrote to
Medinans that we have risen up in revenge for 'Uthman. If we become
victorious, we will settle everything as Shura manipulated by 'Umar and
we are not after caliphate.

Medinans were irritated by what Mu'awiya and 'Amr said about caliphate
and mentioned this important principle to them that “Tulaqa” (those
released on parole) have no right to speak about caliphate.[^409]

Mu'awiya made an effort to deceive people like Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas, 'Abd
Allah Ibn 'Umar, Muhammad Ibn Maslama and Usama Ibn Zayd whom he heard
had not sworn allegiance to Imam (a) or had been unwilling to obey him
in his wars. He in these letters regularly talked about Shura. None of
the people mentioned responded him favorably.

Sa'd Waqqas also wrote, ”'Umar let no body in Shura unless those who
were rightful of the caliphate. Presently, there is some disagreement
with 'Ali on the fact that it would be good if Talha and Zubayr stayed
home.” [^410]

We know that the bottom line of all Sa'd's speech was that he deserved
caliphate because 'Ali (a) has a problem and others are all dead. The
only person remaining is Sa'd Waqqas!

'Ali's idea about “Qa'idin” was that, **خذلوا الحق ولم ينصروا الباطل “**
These people downgraded the gospel truth and assisted not the credal
error.”[^411]

Mu'awiya wrote to 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, “He does not want caliphate for
himself but he wants it for you. 'Abd Allah rejected his suggestion.”
[^412]

This time, Imam (a) and Mu'awiya exchanged two detaile letters which
contained important points.

Mu'awiya in his letter wrote to Imam that, “After the Prophet there were
caliphs who came to power and you were envious of them and rebelled
against them and we realized that rebellion in your wrathful look, your
outcry, your sigh and in your delayed allegiance to caliphs, seeing that
you were pulled like a male nose-ringed two-humped camel by force to
reluctantly pay allegiance to them.”

Further, Mu'awiya spoke about Imam's enmity to 'Uthman and the fact that
he was killed in his house and he remained quiet.

Mu'awiya also said that, “If 'Ali wanted to stop 'Uthman's murder, he
could do it, but he did not. Now if 'Ali tells he truth, he can leave
'Uthman's murderers to me for allegiance.”

In his response, 'Ali (a) by referring to the victory God bestowed on
the Prophet (S) and that He suppressed his enemies, mentioned that, “The
people who mostly insisted on provocation against him were his family.”
Imam further said that they, Ahl al-Bayt, was the first people who
believed the Prophet (S) while his tribesmen were up to kill their
Prophets, wanted to uproot them and leave them in their hearts with
sorrow and did the intemperate things to them.

He also added: “We were banned from having good food and drinking fresh
clean water and granted us dismay. We were placed spies and guards, were
forced to climb up unevenly impassable mount and were waged war. They
put down a treaty not to eat, drink, marry and trade with us and never
join hands with us, leaving us unsafe unless we hand them the Prophet
(S) to be killed.”

By mentioning what pains he had taken in the wars in time of the Prophet
(S), Imam further said: “You spoke of my envy of caliphs of my belated
allegiance to them and of my rebellion against them. As for rebellion, I
invoke by God if that could be true. Concerning my delayed approval of
them as well as being displeased with what they did, I never apologize
anybody for this.”

Imam (a) continued to say his reason for his rightfulness of caliphate.
He also talked about his no implication in murdering of 'Uthman, citing
Abu Sufyan's idea about Saqifa event and that he asked Imam not to let
Abu Bakr capture caliphate but to make him pay allegiance to him. “I
refused, Imam added, to do so because people were almost close to days
of infidelity and I strongly feared disunity among Muslims.” [^413]

This letter is a major proof of Imam's attitude towards caliphs and his
idea about his rightful caliphate. After this, he wrote letters to
Mu'awiya and 'Amr Ibn 'As, trying to keep them away from the wrong way
they were after.[^414]

Imam (a) became determined to Jihad with Mu'awiya. He repetitively
recited this to himself, **امرت بقتال الناكثين والقاسطين والمارقين**
“Now, it is turn of the deviators, the apostates and the infidels to be
launched a Jihad by Imam.” [^415]

Imam called his outstanding companions of Muhajirun and Ansar, asking
them to express their idea about going to Damascus. Hashim Ibn 'Utba,
nephew of Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas said that those people allegedly claim
about revenge for 'Uthman. They seek after this world and they must be
suppressed as soon as possible.

'Ammar said that if they rushed one day earlier, it would be better. He
composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سيروا إلى الأحزاب أعداء النبي سيروا فخير الناس أتباع علي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Move towards the parties and enemies of the Prophet because the best
people are 'Ali's followers.” [^416]

Qays Ibn Sa'd said, “Making Jihad with them is more obligatory than the
one with the Turks and Romans.

Sahl Ibn Hunayf also declared Ansar's readiness for joining and obeying
Imam (a). Among the people there, one person objected and said, “You
want to dispatch us to kill our Damascus brethren as you took us,
yesterday, to kill our Basran brothers!” People began to crack him down.
The man ran away and the people after him leading to his murder in
public turbulence in Bazar.[^417]

Malik Ashtar said, “You shouldn't be fretted with what this wretched
traitor said. All people are your Shi'ite Muslims.” [^418]

Kufa environment was, at this time, so good that no one dared disagree
or even express dissent. Among the people, one who raised such and idea
was Hanzala Ibn Rabi'a. His tribesmen put him under so much pressure
that he nightly fled and joined Mu'awiya though he seemed not to have
taken part in the war.[^419]

However, even people who were fairly decent more or less remained in
doubt. Abu Zubayb Ibn 'Awf asked Imam to officially testify that the way
followed to cut off Wilayat's link to Damascus troops and replaced with
enmity to them is a true one. Imam attested that. After Imam (a), 'Ammar
attested that and he became assured of his way, relying on the two
testimonies.[^420]

Some people from companions of 'Abd Allah Ibn Mas'ud - once in charge of
Kufa's Bayt al-Mal - came to Imam and said, “We come with you but our
division base will be independent. This is because we want to see who is
after the credal error and embarks on rebellion.”

Imam approved of their idea. One group of four hundred people led by
Rabi'a Ibn Khuthaym, expressing doubt about the war, asked Imam to send
them to one of the borderlines. Imam sent them to Riy borderline and
Bahila people who were displeased with Imam (a) and nor was Imam pleased
with them were sent to Diylam frontier after he granted them their
bounties.[^421]

'Abd Allah Ibn Badil while in his speech confirming Imam's position said
to Imam, “Their opposition to you is because of your previous strikes
against them.” He then said to people, “How should Mu'awiya pay
allegiance to 'Ali while his brother, Hanzala, his uncle, Walid and his
grandfather, 'Utba are all killed in one war?” [^422]

Hujr Ibn 'Adi and 'Amr Ibn Hamiq marched and began to curse Damascus
people. Imam summoned them and said that he did not like them to be
known after curses. Instead, they could ask God to stop bloodshed and
make peace.

'Amr Ibn Hamiq stressed over hid friendship with Imam and Imam prayed
for him.[^423] 'Amr stood on his pledge until he was martyred by Ibn Umm
al-Hakam, Mu'awiya's ruler in Jazira.

Imam in a public sermon called all people to Jihad after he was assured
of the fact that Mu'awiya receives nothing but force and on the other
hand, lords of Kufa defend him in war with Damascus.

After him, Imam Hasan (a) began to speak, “God prepared for battling
against your enemy, Mu'awiya and his troops because he is already in
state of alert. Leave not your spirit of campaign that, if abandoned,
casts off bonds of hearts and that careering of sword and spear assures
assistance and prevention of defeat.”

After him, Imam Husayn (a) induced people, in a speech, to fight with
Damascus people. [^424]

Imam wrote to Ibn 'Abbas to ask for Basrans' help. Many Basrans, after
being called by Imam, joined Ibn 'Abbas to Kufa. Ibn 'Abbas put
Abul-Aswad Du'ali in his place in Basra. He wrote to Mikhnaf Ibn Salim
to put somebody in his place in Isfahan and join Imam and he did so.

At this time, Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr was ruler of Egypt on behalf of
Imam. Writing a detailed letter to Mu'awiya, he blamed Mu'awiya for
countering with Imam.

Muhammad wrote as to Imam 'Ali's background: “Now I see that you talk
about being his counterpart while you're you and he's he who beats all
with his unique record of all alms and virtues. He is from the people of
the first man who has embraced Islam, more reliable in faith, more
purified in family, having an honorable wife who stands higher than all
people and he is of the best people to his cousin.

Whilst you are damned of the cursed son. You and your father flamed
seditions against religion of God and attempted to put out glow of
Islam. You organized factions and parties, collected properties and for
so doing, you held familiar company with anti-Islam tribes.

Your father died after this way and you substituted him and the evidence
is that the remaining groups, opposition parties, hypocrite leaders who
have taken refuge in you are against the Prophet (S) and you have
supported them. And the evidence for 'Ali, in addition to his public
superiority and his Islamic initiative, is his companions of Muhajirun
and Ansar whose virtues are cited in Qur'an and left in memories and God
praised them ….

Woe unto you! How do you parallel yourself to 'Ali whereas he is legatee
of the Prophet (S) and his descendants and is the first man who obeyed
him and stood up to his promise until his last days of life. The
Messenger (S) kept him his confidant and his partner.”

Replying him, Mu'awiya wrote: “To one who reproaches his father. Your
letter is received … You charged your father intemperately … We and your
father were together in the lifetime of the Prophet. We know that we
have to respect the right of son of Abu Talib and his supremacy over us
is apparent, …

After the Prophet in that time, your father and his discriminator were
the first people who disentitled 'Ali of his right and opposed him and
they both unanimously allied with each other in this regard … They never
let him in their works and never revealed their secrets to him as long
as they passed away…

Therefore, if what we are up to is true, your father initiated it and if
it is cruelty, your father again founded it. We are his partners and we
followed his guidelines. In case your father had not covered this way
before us, we would have never opposed son of Abu Talib and would have
surrendered ourselves. But we observed what your father did and we too
followed his foot-prints and modeled his manner.” [^425]

Kufa poised for battle with Damascus. Imam ordered the warriors in
Nukhayla, a military camp in Kufa, to come together. Decorating pulpit
of Kufa with the bloody garment of 'Uthman, while seventy thousand
Sheikhs weeping around it, Mu'awiya was made to prepare Damascus people
for battling Iraqi troops.[^426]

Imam's uprising from Nukhayla happened on 5th of Shawwal, 36 H.[^427]
The first dispute raised in Imam's troops was conflict over headmanship
of Yemeni tribes. Imam (a) deposed Ash'ath and posed Hassan Ibn Makhduj.
This spurred conflict between Kinda and Rabi'a.

Upon hearing about this conflict, Mu'awiya compelled one of Kinda poets
to stimulate Ash'ath against Imam but he obtained no luck in that time
and this was finished by placing him over the left wing of Iraqi
troops.[^428]

Unfortunately, the enfeebled, spoiled and opportunist spirit of Ash'ath
caused him to stand against Imam. It has been said that he had been
writing letters to Mu'awiya ever since Imam called him to Adharbayjan
and ordered to have his properties appraised.[^429] Ya'qubi has
mentioned his relationship with Mu'awiya when Qur'ans were raised
up.[^430]

Imam (a) en route arrived in Ctesiphon and asked the citizens to join
his troops. Behind Imam, eight hundred people along with Qays Ibn Sa'd
and a short while later about four hundred people along with his son,
Yazid, joined Imam's troops. Imam on the way turned down all gifts of
Iranian headmen and bewared them of welcoming emirs in such a way.[^431]

Upon request of his companions, Imam wrote another letter to Mu'awiya
and called him to Book of God, tradition of the Prophet (S) and
prevention of bloodshed but Mu'awiya poetically responded him that there
rules sword between them.[^432] On the way, Imam (a) demanded Raqqa
'Uthmani - religion people[^433] who were supporters of Mu'awiya to
install a bridge over the river for the troops to pass.

Citizens refused to do so and they finally did it under the threat of
Malik. Imam kept three thousand people with Malik until all the forces
pass through. In the end, Malik was the last one who crossed the
bridge.[^434] On passing through Iraq, when Imam reached Karbala, he
reported about the horrendous event that would happen to Ahl al-Bayt of
the Prophet (S) in this land.[^435]

In northern Iraq and Syria, front troops at Roman border, by passing
through Hit, Qirqisiya' and Raqqa faced front forces of Damascus led by
Abul-A'war Sulami.

Imam sent Malik forward to counter with them reaffirming to him that he,
at any rate, should not initiate the war. Upon his arrival, Damascus
troops launched fighting and the two sides were engaged in combat for
some time. Afterwards, Damascus troops pulled back.

Concerning the time of Siffin war, there appear contradictory historical
reports.

It seems that there exist two quotations. Baladhuri has cited Imam's
arrival in Siffin to be on Dhil-Hajja (36).[^436] He reports the war
from Dhil-Hajja (in the year of 36), referring to fightings in this
month and after in Safar when major war took place.[^437]

Ya'qubi says water dilemma goes to Dhi l-Hajja, 36 H. and that war in
the year of 37 H. lasted forty days. However, he says arbitration goes
to Ramaďan, 38 H.[^438] he means that the arbitration happened in Safar,
37 H. about one and a half year after Siffin war! Based on this report,
a treaty was put down in Safar and as prescribed it will be brought to
an end by Ramaďan.

Ibn Athir began events of Siffin from Dhi l-Hajja, 36 H. and ended in
Safar, 37 H., referring to arbitration within events of the same
year.[^439]

According to Khalifa Ibn Khayyat, Siffin war intensely lasted from 7th
to 10th of Safar, 37 H.[^440] It seems war exceeded those days.

According to another report by Nasr Ibn Muzahim, the first date
specified is that when Imam (a) reached Siffin, he had correspondences
with Damascus troops in the region of Siffin during months of Rabi'a
al-Akhir to Jumadi al-Thani.[^441] Following this, Ibn Muzahim mentions
events of Rajab. This condition continued up to Dhil-Hajja during which
forces from the two sides fought with each other.

After that, in Muharram, hostilities came to a cessation and the main
war was waged in Safar.[^442] Naturally, months of Rabi' al-Awwal and
the two months of Jumadi can not be said to relate to the year of 36H.
because Imam had arrived in Kufa in Rajab of that year.

As Nasr said, Siffin war was launched from the second month of the year
37, lasting up to Safar of next year. In this way, Ibn Muzahim's mention
of dates exceed one year beyond those of Baladhuri's and some other
historians. Dinwari's dates are exactly what Nasr mentioned.[^443]

This is while Dinwari has set date of arbitration in Safar of the year
37 despite his reference to Rabi'a al-Awwal and the two Jumadis and it
can not be true according to his previous settings. As his book's
proofreader said, Muharram of the year 37 H. is the month when war
stopped.[^444] It is to be said that Ibn A'tham regards arrival of
Imam's troops to be in Muharram of the year 38 H.[^445] That seems
untrue.

If this statement that Kharijites selected 'Abd Allah Ibn Wahb their
leader in Zayd Ibn Husayn's house in the late Shawwal, 37 H. and that
Imam 'Ali's war with them happened in Safar of the year 38 H. is
true[^446], it is inevitably to be accepted that what Nasr Ibn Muzahim
said is not true. Overally, it is to be said that the majority agree on
major fighting happening in Safar of the year 37 H.

The region of fighting was in Siffin after which the war was known.
Siffin is a cramped village of Roman villages that stands at a rifle -
shut of the Euphrates. Alongside the Euphrates, there rest trees around
which water surround and in the wilderness of two Farsangs (leagues) and
there was no passing way except the Euphrates that is restricted and
paved. [^447]

When Iraqi troops approached Damascus troops, they noticed that they had
stationed in the region having the paved route, passing through swamp,
under their control. They had positioned bowmen and horsemen to prevent
Iraqis from frequenting to the coast of the Euphrates.

Number of Damascus troops is said to be amounting to one hundred twenty
thousand people.[^448]

Imam's troops moving out of Kufa also numbered eighty thousand people
who were added by many of Ctesiphon people on the way.[^449] Imam (a)
sent Sa'sa'a to Mu'awiya to tell him that his troops launched the war
whereas Imam was up to talk to him again make an ultimatum.

“Now, Sa'sa'a said, you have barred us from water and Iraqi troops can
not remain silent, with all this, Imam doesn't want to launch the war.”

Mu'awiya rejected what Sa'sa'a said. 'Amr Ibn 'As opposed Mu'awiya's
decision. He spoke about 'Ali's valor and also said that, “You - that is
Mu'awiya - and I have heard 'Ali when Fatima's house was inspected
saying if he had forty men … [^450].”

But Mu'awiya could not admit that and fighting began. The story of
banning the water, on one hand linked to that of the water not reaching
'Uthman[^451] and on the other hand it was associated with the event of
Karbala.

Iraqi troops dominated the water through fighting with the courage of
Malik[^452] and Imam ordered the troops not to ban Damascus forces from
using water. By breaking out a news (through a spear on which there was
a letter sent to Imam's troops but the sender was anonymous, perhaps it
was from a friend!) that Imam controlled region will be enundated,
Mu'awiya displaced Iraqi troops.

Imam who opposed the displacement of troops yielded to Iraqi's decision
and Iraqi troops could only control the water after re-fighting. What
Ibn A'tham said about these events slightly differ from Nasr's
report.[^453] In all these events, Malik played a pirotal role and
strongly treated the Damascus troops.[^454]

Large numbers of forces had been killed in the fighting about which Nasr
has given an account in the form of boastful speeches and wars. A number
of Qur'an reciters from Iraq and Damascus mediated between the two
armies, trying to resolve the dispute through talks. These mediatory
attempts continued for a long time.

As referred, with Dhil-Hajja coming to an end, Muharram came and war was
supposed to come to a cessation.[^455]

Negotiations of Imam's envoys with Mu'awiya came to a deadlock.
Murdering of people such as 'Ammar, 'Adi Ibn Hatim, Malik and those who,
according to him, had a hand in murder of 'Uthman, was set by him as his
condition. This was something unacceptable both by Imam and by Iraqi
tribes. Imam (a) once in front of Abu Muslim Khawlani asked murderers of
'Uthman to be prepared. In that time, mosque became filled with crowds
saying that they were the murderers of 'Uthman.[^456]

In Siffin, the same thing happened and about twenty thousand people of
Iraqi troops stood away and said that they were 'Uthman's killers.[^457]

Mu'awiya's insistence on this condition was because he knew they would
never accept that. He attempted to deceive those who had come as
representatives and had been apt to be deceived. He said to Ziyad Ibn
Hafsa, “I want you to join us with your family and I make a pledge,
after victory, to dispose you with each one of the two cities you want.”

Ziyad said, “I have an axiom from my God for what He betowed me and I
want not to be patron of wrongdoers.” [^458]

With the elapse of Muharram, month of illegals came to an end and Siffin
war was launched between Malik and Habib Ibn Muslim in the first day of
Safar, that as said, had been Wednesday! [^459] In the night of war
being launched, Imam advised all his forces:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تقاتلوا القوم حتـى يبدءوكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

> “Avoid fighting these people until they start the fighting.” 1334

> Imam (a) here intended to leave a chance for return of Damascus troops
> to truth. Imam advised his troops this way: “If they did not initiate
> war, you don't fight them because you have full proof as to praise of
> God and as you leave them to launch the war, this is another proof for
> you and against them. If you fought and defeated the enemy, do not
> kill any fugitive and wounded, keep the pudenda veiled and do not
> mutilate any killed.

In case you rushed into enemy camp, disgrace not anybody and enter not
any house unless under my order. Take not away any of their property
save what exists in the division camp. No woman has to be harmed
although your honor is abused and your commanders and good relatives are
charged with abuse because those women are weak in respect of soul and
wisdom. We had the duty (in time of the Prophet «s») not to harm them
when they were pagan.”[^460]

However, war began on Safar 1st [^461] and the two sides intensely
fought with each other. It seemed that each day one of Imam's commanders
led the frontline. Malik on first day, Hashim Ibn 'Utba on second day,
'Ammar Yasir on third day, Muhammad Hanafiyya on fourth day and 'Abd
Allah Ibn 'Abbas on fifth day commanded the frontline.[^462]

War escalated in the next Thursday and the left wing of Iraqi army split
apart but it was compensated with bravery of Imam himself.[^463] Imam
himself was present among the troops and regularly called them to
resistance by praying and preaching.[^464] Nasr Ibn Muzahim carefully
formulated most of his invocations and speeches and portrayed
two-peopled war scenes as far as possible.

Qays Ibn Sa'd, each day, spoke for Ansar and incited them against
Damascus people[^465], emphasizing that companions of the Messenger (S)
are with them. Seventy people, he said, of those in Badr stay with us
and our commander is cousin of the Prophet (S), “a trustworthy person of
Badr.”[^466]

Ya'qubi has put that seventy people of Badris, seven hundred people of
Riďwan allegiance - prayers as well as four hundred people of Muhajir
and Ansar stayed with Imam 'Ali (a). From Ansar, there stayed nobody
with Mu'awiya except Nu'man Ibn Bashir and Maslama Ibn Mukhallad.[^467]
Just as Imam once brought Ansar together, moving towards Damascus
troops, so Mu'awiya readied those two people and moved ahead.[^468]

'Ammar Yasir was among the people who directly talked against
Mu'awiya.  
 In response to some one who asked him how he would fight these Muslims
while the Prophet (S) said, “I have a duty to fight as long as they
declare monotheism, then their life and property is secure.”

'Ammar said, “This is true, but these people have not embraced Islam.
They inwardly rendered blasphemy until they found helpers today.”[^469]
In another speech in Siffin, he rightly stressed over the point that
these people deceitfully posed blood of 'Uthman, yet their aim is,
**ليكونوا بذ لك جبابرة وملوكاً** He may become a tyrant by doing this.”
[^470] “

In Siffin, 'Ammar seemed to many a sign of distinguishing gospel truth
from credal error. The Prophet (S) said about him, **تقتلك الفئة الباغية
“** You will be killed by an aggressive group.” [^471]  
 This successive narration led some people to see in what front 'Ammar
stands and is martyred.

'Amr Ibn 'As himself had narrated this hadith. Mu'awiya objected why he
had narrated that. 'Amr composed a piece of poetry saying, “I didn't
know this would happen in Siffin.”[^472]

This made a problem for Damascus troops as 'Amr was supposed to arrange
a face-to-face debate with 'Ammar at the presence of a number of people
from the two sides. 'Ammar said to 'Amr who, in the very beginning, made
a profession of faith (Tashahhud), “You had abandoned this from time of
the Prophet (S) and on.”

'Amr who in deceit was saying, “What are we fighting for?”  
 Was told by 'Ammar, “You are the most obeyed among the troops. Do
something to stop bloodshed.”

He said, “Now I tell why I am fighting you.The Prophet (S) ordered me to
fight with the infidels as well as with the deviators who are the very
you, as for the apostates “Kharijites” …. I wonder if I have to consider
them or not. O You who are devoid of good qualities! Do you know not
that the Messenger (S) said for 'Ali (a), **من كنت مولاه فهذا عليّ مولاه
، اللّهم وال من والاه وعاد من عاداه “** I love God, his Messenger (S)
and after him 'Ali.” 'Ammar continued to talk about 'Uthman, “He opened
to you gates of evils.”

'Amr asked, “Did 'Ali kill him?” 'Ammar said, “No, but God of 'Ali
killed him.” He said, “Were you among the murderers?” 'Ammar replied, “I
helped those who killed him and this day I fight with enemy helping
them.”[^473]

'Amr Ibn 'As said to accompanying Damascus troops, “He confesses to
murder of 'Uthman.” 'Ammar was martyred in one of the days of intense
fighting. Several people of Damascus troops claimed responsibility for
his murder.[^474] It is also said that some Damascus people said prayers
over his stiff ![^475]

To Mu'awiya, murder of 'Ammar Yasir was “conquering the
conquests.”[^476]  
 'Ammar composed about war with Damascus troops in a poetic line,
religious justification of which is said to be interesting,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نحن ضربناكم على تنـزيله فاليوم نضربكم على تأويله
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Earlier, We beat thee for his descension and now we beat thee for his
interpretation.” [^477]

It meant although Damascus people have embraced Qur'an and Islam, they
really never confessed to it. Muslims also made use of sense of
“rebellion”.  
 Mughira Ibn Harith Ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib said in a poem,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أهل الصلاة قتلناهم ببغيهم والمشركون قتلناهم بما جحدوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Prayer-holders are killed for their rebellion and the atheists are
murdered for their denial.” [^478]  
 In the midst of fighting, Imam handed a Qur'an to one of his troops to
go to Damascus troops and call them to Qur'anic arbitration, but they
killed him.[^479]

Imam's troops superiority was utterly apparent. Once, 'Abd Allah Ibn
Badil neared Mu'awiya's settlement and made him retreat. Another time,
'Utba Ibn Abi Sufyan suffered so much a defeat that he took aback as far
as twenty leagues.[^480]

Of course, in some cases, left or right wing of Iraqi army temporarily
disintegrated. Reports say that Imam himself fought and killed different
people, one of whom was Hurayth, Mu'awiya's Mawali and a very strong
man. He himself defied Imam and in the very beginning was sworded killed
by Imam.[^481]

'Urwa Dimashqi asked Imam for a challenge and was split in halves by
Imam.[^482] Another report says that Imam had trace of three strikes on
his head and two on his face.

Nasr Ibn Muzahim reporting this says that Imam (a) was never
wounded.[^483] Imam asked Mu'awiya for a combat. Whoever wins the
battle, he shall assume power. Mu'awiya turned down his request.[^484]
Imam once faced 'Amr but he could run away the battle by unveiling his
genitals because Imam was very ashamed of what he did.[^485] The same
thing happened to Busr Ibn Artat.[^486]

Fighting was so intense that these days only in one battle over five
hundred people (Ibn A'tham, One thousand) confronted with the same
number of Damascus troops and none survived the battle![^487]

Siffin war was tribally formed. Many tribes half of whom in Iraq and
another half in Damascus stood against each other. Rabi'a[^488] and
Hamdan tribes, headman of the latter of which was Sa'id Ibn Qays
sacrificed in the most part in as much as Imam said in a piece of
poetry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلوكنت بوّاباً على باب جنة لقلت لهمدان ادخلوا بسلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If I were gate keeper of Heaven, I would tell Banu Hamdan people to
enter there in goodness.” [^489]  
 Imam said about Rabi'a as well, **وكان علي (ع) لا يعدل بربيعة أحداً من
شدة محبته لهم ”** ‘Ali never equaled Banu Rabi'a to anyone for his love
extended to them.”[^490]

Mu'awiya advised Damascus troops to aim at no people but Hamdanis since
they stand as 'Uthman's adversary.[^491]

The truth is that Mu'awiya feared them and he was at weakening them.
'Ubayd Allah Ibn 'Umar, one of Damascus troops commanders, was murdered
by one of Hamdanis in one of these battles. Dhi l-Kila', one of the
greatest commanders of Damascus troops, was killed in Siffin.

He is said to have heard through 'Amr Ibn 'As, in time of 'Umar,
(seemingly through a person named Abu Nuh who quoted this to him from
'Amr Ibn 'As in Siffin)[^492] the Prophet (S) saying that 'Ammar is
killed by an aggressive tribe, so he used to fight while being in doubt.
Mu'awiya liked very much to kill him fearing that he might be a trouble
for Damascus troops.

In contrast, a good many of marked troops of Imam (a) were also
martyred. One of Siffin martyrs, Uwiys Qarani[^493], is the noted
Gnostic who was and, still is, highly ranked among Muslims. Ibn A'tham
while reporting his martyrdom in Siffin made an account of him.[^494]

Hashim Ibn 'Utba, known as Hashim al-Mirqal, who had lost one eye in
conquests, was the most devoted companions of Imam being martyred in
Siffin. He was Sa'd Waqqas's nephew and unlike his position of being
among Qa'idin stayed with Imam with complete assurance until he was
martyred.[^495]

Khuzayma, another companion of Imam, was also martyred in Siffin and
Imam approved his one testimony as two, for which he was known after
“Dhu ash-Shahadatayn” meaning two witnesses.

After their martyrdom, there were still seen famous people in troops,
like Ashtar (who was nicknamed by Mu'awiya as lion of army)[^496], 'Adi
Ibn Hatim and Qays Ibn Sa'd.

It is to be noted that a number of Kufiyan women also attended Siffin
war, exhorting Iraqi forces against those of Damascus by making poems in
which Imam was praised and his virtues were retold. Among them, there
were Suda, daughter of 'Umara Hamdani, Umm Sanan[^497], Zarqa', daughter
of 'Adi Hamdani[^498] and others whose biographies are mentioned in
various sources.  
 Umm Sanan addressed 'Ali in Siffin and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كنت بعد محمد خلفاً لنا أوصى اليك بنا وكنت وفيّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“After Muhammad (S), he was his successor among us and he kept his
promise well in front of us.” [^499]

One of these women named Umm al-Khayr said in Siffin:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنها إحن بدريّة وضغائن جاهلية وأحقاد احديّة، وثب معاوية عند الغفلة
ليدرك بها الفرصة من ثارات عبد شمس
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Mu'awiya's waging war comes from his vengeance in Badr, Uhud and from
his ignorant bigotry and it is because he wants to take revenge for
'Abd-e Shams.” [^500]

Another woman was Jurwa, daughter of Murra Ibn Ghalib Tamimi who was
later brought by Mu'awiya to Damascus. When she was asked by Mu'awiya
about Imam 'Ali (a), she said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاز والله الشرف حتى لا يوصف ، وغاية حتى لا تعرف,
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By God, he attained an indescribable nobility and reached a station
beyond imagination.” [^501]

Mu'awiya tried to break apart Iraqi army in ways except war. Writing
different letters to Abu Ayyub Ansari, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas and others
under the pretext of stopping bloodshed and even of promising caliphate
to Ibn 'Abbas[^502], he attempted to force them to oppose Imam (a).
Besides, he changed the condition by frequently granting money to his
troops,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لم يبق من أهل العراق أحد فى قلبه مرض إلاّ طمع فى معاوية “
  </p>
</blockquote>

There remained no one but the problematic Iraqis who joined Mu'awiya in
his caprice and this was such that Imam was bothered.”[^503]

Mu'awiya also wrote to Imam asking him to leave Damascus to him without
wanting to obey him. This was the same thing he had demanded before and
as mentioned, he intended to establish an independent emirate in
Damascus. Imam turned him down.[^504]

This time, Damascus people strongly spoke about severe bloodshed and
publicized their aim of ending the war. Such a measure was taken just to
hinder Damascus conquest, and probably to bring about a gap and discard
in Iraq's army. This was what Mu'awiya failed to do repeatedly; yet as
we shall wee later, he finally made it. In one of these days, one of the
Damascus people came between the two armies and proposed that Iraq any
return to Iraq and Damascus army to Damascus, so to avert a bloodshed.

Confirming his truthfulness, Imam said: “I know that you made this
proposal out of benevolence and pity; however, I have considered well,
contemplated carefully and assessed the dimensions of this deed haunting
me, and I have found no way but submitting to was, or refuting what
Allah has inspired the Prophet (S).

Indeed, Allah, the blessed and exalted, doesn't like His friends to
remain reticent and submit while tyranny and mutiny are prevailing on
the earth, and not to enjoin the good and forbid from the evil. That's
why I realized that to me, the war (with all its hardship) is easier
than enduring the hell with its chains.”[^505]

In one of the last war days, the battle became so intense that it
started by the morning prayer and continued up to the mid-night. During
all this period, Ashtar was busy provoking the army. This night was
called “Layla al-Harir”, the night of clamor. Again the war started from
the middle of that night and continued up to the noon of the next day.

“The enemy fought to its last grasp”, said Imam, in a sermon.

Mu'awiya and 'Amr thinking that everything was finished and feeling that
they cannot be so hopeful of Damascus army, embarked on a trick. The
next day after the night of clamor, when the war lasted to the moon of
that day,[^506] 500 Qur'ans were raised above the spears of the Damascus
people.

There were loud voices crying, “O group of Arabs! Think of your women
and girls. If you'll be killed, who will stand up to Romans, Turks and
Persians tomorrow?” [^507]

As a result of this measure, little by little, this proclamation was
heard within the Iraqi army that the enemy has admitted the arbitration
of Qur'an, and we don't have the right to fight them. Imam defined this
remarks strongly and announced that this deed is nothing but a trick.
Sa'sa'a said that Mu'awiya took this measure after he heard Ash'ath Ibn
Qays reminding of the women and girls at the night of clamor, and that
Arabs are collapsing.[^508]

Besides, Ash'ath was the first person opposing Imam on the continuation
of the war. We've previously pointed out that the account of his
correspondence with Mu'awiya, since his dismissal from Adharbayjan has
been mentioned in historical records. Here, Ya'qubi as well clarified
that Mu'awiya conciliating Ash'ath wrote to him and invited him
there.[^509] Ash'ath's measure was supported by the Yemeni.[^510]

The minimum problem concerning Ash'ath was that he was apt to deviation
from the outset, and was drawn to this path. In the thick of the
clashes, we have in hand some of his remarks against Mu'awiya and with
respect to instigating Iraq army.[^511] It ought to be known that tribal
obstinacy played a crucial role and in all likelihood, Imam's true heed
to Malik caused Ash'ath to take umbrage.

The escalation of the discrepancy amongst the army of Imam, has induced
much more hardships for him. Imam felt that he is no more the commander,
and the people have tied his hands, and turned out to be his emir.

Even so, Imam stood up and said, “I deserve to admit the arbitration of
Allah's book more than the others; however, Mu'awiya and his companions
are not the companions of religion and Qur'an. I know them better than
you. I was with them since my childhood.”

At this moment, about 20000 of the Iraq army came to Imam, and without
calling him “Amir al-Mu'minin”, asked him to accept the arbitration of
Qur'an. Among these people were a group of Qur'an-reciters being
contented with Qur'an recitation, and a number of whom joining the
Kharijites's range.[^512]

At this time, Ashtar at the front line approached Mu'awiya division camp
while fighting. War dissenters asked Imam to order Ashtar back. Imam
sent Yazid Ibn Hani for him.  
 Ashtar sent a message that, “Now it is not the time for a return.”
“You've prompted him to fight, if Ashtar doesn't return, we'll kill
you.” Said the dissenters.

As a result of this statement, Ashtar returned and he was stopped. In a
letter to Mu'awiya, Imam noting that we know you're not the follower of
Qur'an, pointed out the acceptance of Qur'an arbitration.[^513]

Ash'ath went to Mu'awiya asking him regarding the way of executing
Qur'an precept. He said that it's better that one of our people and one
of yours sit together and express their opinion concerning Qur'an
precept in this regard. He forwarded this opinion to Imam.

Afterwards, a group of Damascus and Iraq Qur'an-reciters came between
the two armies and recited Qur'an for some time and agreed to revive
what the Qur'an has revived. Thereafter, Damascus people appointed 'Amr
Ibn 'As. Ash'ath and a number of those joining the Kharijites later,
proposed Abu Musa Ash'ari.

Imam refused him on account of his opposition to him in Jamal battle,
but they insisted in this regard. Imam's proposal was either Ibn 'Abbas
or Ashtar, but they said that Ashtar believes in war, Ibn 'Abbas
shouldn't be either, for 'Amr Ibn 'As is from Mudhar tribe, so the other
side should be Yemeni.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا والله لايحكم فيها مضريان حتى تقوم الساعة “
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah, two persons from Muďrids won't judge in that until the Day of
Resurrection.” [^514]

Imam saw that insistence is out of place and said, “Do whatever you
want.”[^515]

Later on Ibn 'Abbas said, “Had at that time some companions been
patient, the victory would have been imminent.”[^516]

So it was agreed that a convention will be written. In this convention
pointing to the appointment of these two persons by Damascus and Iraq
people, it was mentioned that these two persons are due to comment on
the matter of their disagreement:

“Provided that these two abide by the divine covenant and pledge in the
firmest and greatest manner which Allah has extracted promise from each
of his creatures. And that during the duty on which they were
dispatched, they put Qur'an before themselves, and do not exceed, I
their judgment, what has been written in the Qur'an, and if they don't
find, they will act on the basis of the comprehensive Sunna of the
Prophet (S), and they should in no way, act in conformity with their
desires, neither should they be entangled in suspicion.”

Besides, it was agreed that in case of the death of one of these two,
before judgment, the commander of the aforesaid side would be able to
appoint somebody else. During this span of time, if one of the two
commanders passed away, the people of that area will appoint another
just person instead of him.

Further, it was stated that: “it is compulsory for the judges to adhere
to the divine treaty and pledge and not to offer an interpretative
judgment of their own in opposition to the Qur'anic text, and not to
oppress deliberately and not to be entangled in suspicion and not to
overlook the order of Qur'an and Sunna of the Prophet (S) in their
judgment. And if they don't do so, the people won't submit to their
judgment, neither will they admit the treaty and the liability approved
by those two.”

In the convention, the date of the arbitration was sset on the end of
the next Ramaďan (to wit eight months from Safar to Ramaďan) and it was
agreed that the issue will be resolves anyhow up to the pilgrimage
season. “If they don't judge on the basis of the Qur'an and Prophet's
(S) Sunna till the end of the season, the Muslims will remain at war as
they were from the onset, and there is no condition between the two
groups in this regard.” The aforesaid treaty was concluded on Wednesday
(according th Abu Mikhnaf, on Friday)[^517], on Safar 17, 37 A.H.[^518]

In this convention, equal rights were been determined for Imam and
Mu'awiya. In the first stage, Imam's name was accompanied by the title
“Amir al-Mu'minin”, the Commander of the Faithful, but it was not
acceptable for Mu'awiya.

Ash'ath insisted on the elimination of this title, Imam said, “Glory be
to Allah, A Sunna like The Prophet's (S) one, where Suhayl Ibn 'Amr, the
representative of polytheists, insisted on the ommition of “Rasul
Allah”, the Messenger of Allah, in Hudaybiyyah peace pact.”[^519]

Anyhow, the convention was written, but among a group of Imam's
companion, a riot broke out which paved the way for Kharijites incidents
later. Some disagreed with the convention there except for those being
truly among the Shi'ite Muslims of Imam, and bearing the arbitration
course for Imam's sake.

Malik was among them, when Imam (a) was told that Malik is not satisfied
with this convention, Imam (a) said, “When I will be satisfied, Malik
will be so as well, and I'm satisfied. You said he has kept himself
aloof from me, but I don't reckon that he'll do so. There are not two
persons or even one person amongst you like him, who think so about
their foe.”[^520]

Imam returned to Kufa along with the army on Rabi' al-Awwal 37
A.H.[^521] In Kufa, loud voices of cries and weeps were heard from each
house, and Imam confirming the martyrdom of their martyrs, offered his
condolence to them. Finally, Imam sent Abu Musa to the arbitration site.

Imam dispatched 400 persons along with Abu Musa Ash'ari, accompanied by
Shurayh Ibn Hani as their commander, and 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas as their
congregational prayer leader. Additionally, Imam notified Abu Musa of
the defiled nature of Mu'awiya and advised him tremendously.[^522]

At this time, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, Mughira Ibn Shu'ba, 'Abd Allah Ibn
Zubayr had to come to Mu'awiya and were present at the meeting incident
of 'Amr Ibn 'As and Abu Musa.[^523] 'Amr Ibn 'As, when meeting Abu Musa,
spoke of the virtues! of Mu'awiya and noted that Mu'awiya is the
blood-wit of 'Uthman, and Allah has put a “Sultan” for blood-wit.

Abu Musa relied on the revival of 'Umar tradition concerning the issue
of council. Once he spoke of 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, but 'Amr said that a
weak person like him could not take the responsibility of such a deed.
It was not only unclear under which principles this council being
regarded as a pretext by the dissenters, ought to be shaped, but not
obvious who should be the member of such a council. Once 'Umar relying
on his own power has placed caliphate among six persons so that they
will choose one out of them. What was the connection of this matter to
leaving the work to the “Council among Muslims”, so to select one for
themselves?

Abu Musa insisted on this matter and an account of that he was of the
belief that firstly we ought to leave this belief aside that one of the
two persons either Imam or Mu'awiya should be the caliph, so that
thereupon we shall select some one. Hence, for Abu Musa's part, the
declaration of these two commands' deposition of Imam's commentary on
the pulpit, 'Amr Ibn 'As announced that he has just the right to depose
'Ali (a); however, I have the caliphate to Mu'awiya!

Abu Musa cried out in protest and insulted 'Amr Ibn 'As. Abu Musa called
'Amr a dog, and 'Amr called Abu Musa a donkey and the session turned out
in chaos. So hereby, without speaking of the Qur'an and the Sunna of the
Prophet (S), and merely under the pretext of 'Umar tradition, the
arbitration course itself gave rise to another disagreement between
Damascus and Iraq.[^524]

From that time on, the people of Damascus called Mu'awiya “Amir
al-Mu'minin”, and this was the most significant outcome of the
arbitration for the Damascus people. Abu Mikhnaf stated that when Iraqi
people were going to Siffin, they were all amiable and kind towards each
other. When they returned, however, they all had hostility and hatred
towards each other.

The Kharijites said, “You were flaccid in implementing Allah's order”,
and another group told them, “You disobeyed Imam and our group.” Imam
became sorrowful on account of their remarks.[^525]

War with Extremist Kharijites
-----------------------------

Exactly when Ash'ath Ibn Qays read the arbitration convention for
various groups of the army, a group of the army cried out in front of
him, **لا حكم الا لله “** The only judgment is that of Allah's.”[^526]  
 According to Nasr Ibn Muzahim, some people from Banu Murad, Banu Rasib,
and Banu Tamim chanting aloud, and expressing their disgust concerning
the arbitration of men said, “Just Allah merits arbitration.”

Among the dissenters, 'Amr Ibn Udayya (and in another narration 'Urwa
Ibn Judayr)[^527] attacked Ash'ath. His sword was quietly dropped on
Ash'ath's horse. Shortly after the coming of Ash'ath to Imam and his
declaring that all but few of the people were satisfied, the shouts of
“the only judgment is that of Allah” grew louder.

Their question was, “What about our murdered persons?” Allah has settled
Mu'awiya's work, and Allah's order is nothing but suppressing Damascus
army. It is obvious that in front of some people like Ash'ath, many
people of Iraqi army were not ready to submit themselves to Damascus
people whatever reason there might be when one group won't do so?

They asked Imam to forsake the issue of arbitration, and in principle,
to report of his former opinion which has led to polytheism. Imam by
referring to the verse, **اوفوا بالعقود “** Fulfill the obligations,”
said that now the agreement has been reached and we have no remedy but
patience up to the end of the duration of this convention.[^528]

Imam said to them, “As you see, most of this crowd are not in line with
war, and if you wage war these people will be together than Damascus
people towards you.”[^529]

In their way back to Siffin, the people were divided into two groups, a
group protesting against the arbitration, and another group accusing
them of being separated from the company. Near to Kufa, a group was
little by little separated from the army and went to Harura' area half a
league away from Kufa.[^530] That's why later on these people were
referred to as Haruriyya.

The most outstanding persons of Kharijites were as follows, Hurqus Ibn
Zuhayr Tamimi, Shurayh Ibn Awfi al-’Absi, Farwa Ibn Nawfal Ashja'i, 'Abd
Allah Ibn Wahb Rasibi. These people came to Imam, after his entering
Kufa, and asked him not to dispatch Abu Musa for the arbitration.

Imam said, “We have admitted something that we cannot violate.”[^531] As
it seems from the names of these persons, no one amongst them was from
the renowned people of Iraq. In contrast, they belonged typically to a
nomadic tribes such as Bakr Ibn Wa'il and Banu Tamim.[^532]

The Kharijites, for the most part, were from nomads who, in principal,
had no idea concerning Imamate and politics as being matters beyond
tribal issue. They demonstrated this tendency of theirs within a
framework out of a deviated interpretation from the slogan “the only
judgment is that of Allah”. Amongst the Kharijites was 'Itris Ibn 'Arqub
Shaybani who was from the companions of 'Abd Allah Ibn Mas'ud.[^533]

Kharijites put forward some crucial issues. Their first question was
that how Imam consented to the arbitration of “men” in the act of
“religion”. Their second question was that why Imam was contented to
have his title of caliphate, to wit Amir al-Mu'minin, omitted. Their
problem, as Ya'qubi puts it, was that Imam spoilt his executorship
through this measure.[^534]

Their another question was that why Imam didn't give the permission of
distributing booties after their triumph over the infidels. How is it
that their killing was permissible, but taking their possessions was not
lawful?[^535]

With respect to the omission of the title “Amir al-Mu'minin”, Imam
invoked the omission of the title “Rasul Allah”, Allah's Messenger, in
the Hudaybiyya peace pact.

Besides, he said regarding arbitration, “I disagreed with this
arbitration from the outset, later, as well, when I yielded to it on
account of the people's compulsion, I stipulated that I will abide by
their judgment provided that they judge on the basis of Allah's book,
inasmuch as we have originally admitted the arbitration of Qur'an rather
than that of men.”

Moreover, Imam announced his decision concerning the continuation of war
against Damascus, after the collection of tribute. Thus hereby, many of
those joining the Kharijites, joined Imam's adherents' group.[^536]

Yet, there were a lot still sticking to their own beliefs. They
disagreed with the arbitration by referring to the only judgment is that
of Allah. Sticking to appearances, and drawing hardline deductions
through **ضرب القرآن بعضه ببعض “** He put Qur'an aside,” were considered
among Kharijites' peculiarities.

Imam said in front of those chanting this slogan and protesting against
him in the mosque, **كلمة حق يراد بها الباطل “** This is a truthful
statement aimed at drawing an untruthful interpretation from it.”

Imam, encountering his foreign dissenters, said that if they remained
reticent, we would leave them on their own. If they propagated and spoke
in return, we would speak with them and if they revolted against us, we
would wage war against them. At this moment, one of the Kharijites stood
up and said, “O Allah! We seek refuge with you from submitting to
abjectness in your religion, this is a frailty and shall lead to Allah's
wrath.”[^537]

According to another narration, it's been pointed out that the
continuation of Kharijites protest lasting for six months after Imam's
return from Siffin resulted in Imam's dispatch of 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas
and Sa'sa'a Ibn Suhan to them for the purpose of discussion. They didn't
submit to these two persons' request concerning their return to the
group. Imam asked them to select 12 persons and he himself separated
this number and held talks with them.

Initially, Imam spoke with them about the Qur'an evidence with regard to
arbitration and said, “I, 'Ali, despite disagreeing with their request,
was fearful that they might invoke those verses concerning the
admissibility of arbitration.”[^538]

Kharijites' orator stood up and said, “We fought side with you so far as
you were confident of your action at Jamal and Siffin battle; however,
at present you are dubious. You must repent and attest to the fact that
you've been misled. In that case, we will be with you.”

Imam said, “From the moment when I embraced Islam, I was not a bit
doubtful about it. Allah has basically guided you and rescued you from
infidelity, through us. I had said that two judges ought to judge on the
basis of Allah's book. If they didn't do so, to me, their judgment will
be of no value.”[^539]

Their leader, Ibn al-Kawwa' detached himself from them along with 500
persons. Some have noted that he was with the Kharijites in Nahrawan,
and therein was involved in a wrangle with Imam.[^540] Kharijites'
problem was that they regarded the acceptance of arbitration as
infidelity, and therefore they asked Imam to witness his infidelity and
repent of it,[^541] not that he has merely committed a sin. Hence, Imam
said in a poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا شاهد الله عليّ فاشهد آمنت بالله ولي احمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من شك في الله فاني مهتد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O thou, Allah's witness!  
 To me, thou be a witness!  
 I believed in Allah, the Master of Ahmad  
 Whoever doubts Allah  
 I have been guided”[^542]

Anyhow, the repeated remarks of Imam and his companions failed to bring
a number of Kharijites back from the path they've chosen. On Shawwal, 31
A.H. the Kharijites gathered at Zayd Ibn Husayn's house and selecting
'Abd Allah Ibn Wahb Rasibi as their leader,[^543] they resettled their
political and military situation.

This decision was made after Ramaďan month in which Abu Musa was
dispatched for arbitration. Following the arbitration, they didn't allow
staying in Kufa and decided to go to Mada'in. There from, they wrote to
their Basri co-thinkers inviting them to come round to them.

Some of them didn't deem it advisable to go to Mada'in on account of the
presence of Imam 'Ali's (a) Shi'ite Muslims and chose Nahrawan. After
the announcement of arbitration result, Imam 'Ali (a) declaring his
opposition to the arbitration result, asked the people to congregate to
the division camp for fighting the infidels.[^544]

Imam sent for the Kharijites and told them, “These two judges acted in
opposition to the Qur'an, and I'm leaving for Damascus. You accompany me
as well.”[^545]

They said, “we are not allowed to appoint you as Imam.” After the
congregation of people in Nukhayla, Iraq moved to Anbar city and left
there for Shahi village, and therefore they went to Dabaha and to
Dimimma.[^546]The Kharijites gathering at Nahrawan by now, encountered
'Abd Allah the son of Khabbab Ibn Arat on their way. They asked 'Abd
Allah's opinion concerning Imam 'Ali (a).

He said, “Amir al-Mu'minin and Imam of the Muslims.” They killed 'Abd
Allah along with his pregnant wife. It's been said that the Kharijites,
on their way, asked everybody encountered by them, about his opinion
regarding arbitration. They killed him in case of not being in line with
them. This movement led Imam to decide to confront them.[^547]

The reason behind this matter was that Imam was not able to leave Kufa
alone with such criminals, while therein there were just the women and
children. Imam went over to Mada'in and there from headed for Nahrawan.

Imam, in a letter to Kharijites invited them to return to the group.
'Abd Allah Ibn Wahb, in the answer of Imam's letter, pointing to what
has so far taken place, notified of the same former remarks concerning
Imam's doubt in religion and the necessity of his repentance. Qays Ibn
Sa'd and Abu Ayyub Ansari were against them and asked them to join them
for fighting Mu'awiya.

Kharijites said that they didn't admit the Imamate of the Imam. They
will be ready to accompany them, only if their leadership will be in the
hands of some like 'Umar.[^548] As soon as Imam realized that these
people were not submissive, he put his troops being 14000 in number,
into array against Kharijites.

At that moment, Farwa Ibn Nawfal along with 500 persons of Kharijites
were separated from the Kharijites and resided in Bandanijayn and
Daskara.[^549] Another number of them left gradually, to the extent that
just 1800 cavalry men and 1500 infantry men remained alongside 'Abd
Allah Ibn Wahb.[^550]

At this time, Imam also asked his companions not to initiate the
war.[^551] Kharijites started the war. They were overthrown, and their
leader was very swiftly killed.[^552]

Apart from the fugitives, four hundreds of those having been fallen in
the battlefield were delivered to their families. This clash took place
on Safar 9, 38 A.H.[^553]

When the war was terminated, Imam asked the people to head for Damascus
to fight the infidels. The people, however, showed signs of fatigue, and
the remarks of Ash'ath Ibn Qays led Imam to return to Nukhayla, the
people went to Kufa, and just 300 persons remained with the Imam.[^554]

Consequently, Imam returned to Kufa. From that time on, Imam invited the
people for Jihad, holy was, against the Damascus people once in a while,
but no one gave a favorable answer. It was here where Imam in his long
sermons, reproached Kufa people and spoke repeatedly of their disloyalty
up to the end.

Here another movement ought to be taken into account as well, a movement
somewhat resembling that of Kharijites. Khirrit Ibn Rashid, taking part
in Siffin battle, in his way back to Kufa, objected to Imam and said
that he won't pray along with him anymore.

His objection was similar to Kharijites' remarks. He considered
arbitration a mistake. At night, he left Kufa together with his
companions for Kaskar. Qaradha Ibn Ka'b, the governor of Sawad areas,
wrote a letter to Imam reporting that an army from Kufa has arrived this
area and when encountering a person from the peasants of Euphrates areas
namely Zadhan Farrukh, have asked him about his religion. He said that
he was a Muslim. They asked his opinion concerning Amir al-Mu'minin (a).
He replied that he was the commander of the faithful and the successor
of Allah's Messenger (S). Hence, they cut him into pieces by their
swords.[^555]

This measure of theirs was exactly the same as Kharijites' when
encountering 'Abd Allah Ibn Khabbab. Imam wrote to Ziyad Ibn Khasafa
commissioning him to suppress Banu Najiya under the leadership of
Khirrit Ibn Rashid. Subsequent to the sever clash during which five
companions of Khirrit were killed and two persons of Imam's army were
martyred,[^556] the rebels headed towards Ahwaz.

Therein some natives as well as some Kurds joined them. Imam was
compelled to dispatch a separate force to suppress them. Ma'qil Ibn Qays
Riyahi was selected for this commission, and he headed towards them
along with some armies.

When the rebels were moving towards Ramhurmuz, Ma'qil, on his way
reaches them and fought them. During this conflict, 70 persons from Banu
Najiya and 300 of Kurds and the other natives accompanying him were
killed. Khirrit headed hurriedly towards the coast, and therein he was
able to deceive a number of people from Banu 'Abd al-Qays.

Imam wrote a letter to the residents of that area calling them for
“obedience”. They scattered from around Khirrit too. Once again, Ma'qil
clashed with him, and this time Khirrit and most of those along with him
were killed.

According to Baladhuri, Khirrit acted in such a way that the Kharijites
assumed that he is of their opinion.[^557]

The Kharijites, Formation and Characteristics
---------------------------------------------

The Kharijites' emergence in religious sects arenas, is one of the
significant political and mental alterations in the history of Islam. In
fact, the advent of this group is the symbol of hard-line tendencies of
the Islamic world in the political and mental areas.

A sect which strived for having a place in the realm of politics along
two or three countries through applying their extreme view points, but
exactly due to this very extremity, were not able to gain a privilege.
The important question is that how these incidents appeared.

Generally, it ought to be said that when some discrepancies appeared in
the Islamic society, various stands were adopted to confront the
disputable issues. Some stands had some principal aspects and some
others were within the two extremes.

If we separate the deviation of apostates and infidels from the Islamic
current, the tarring of some people like 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar and Sa'd
Waqqas and some others in front of that stand deems a sort of extreme
act. In opposition to that, Imam's act was a realistic and principled
one.

In a stage where this movement failed to pursue its natural course on
account of some people's opposition, the hard-line tendency displayed
itself. This tendency ought to resist all the currents. Apart from the
infidels and fronting the principled movement of Imam, every moment such
a stand had a tendency to more extremity and was obliged to separate all
the dissenters from its front by the hallmark of infidelity, and to
justify its holy war against them.

The tendency towards extremity amongst the Kharijites was not merely due
to the political and intellectual currents, but it had its own specific
social and mental aspects as well. Some points should be taken into
consideration for understanding the conditions leading, in principle, to
such a branching in the society,

(1) During the years when the nomad immigrants had come to Iraq, every
time, through participating in the conquest, they gained some noticeable
victories, and took the possessions of some countless booties.

The front being against them was that of fidelity, the war against which
was lawful easily justifiable. They were the mere truth, and the
opposite front was the mere error. Jamal battle was the first action
during which the Muslims clashed with their coreligionists.

In this war despite the victory, there was not any booty and this issue
brought about a problem for the aforesaid. Their question was that how
it was possible that shedding somebody's blood was allowed, whereas
taking his money was not so.[^558]

This problem demonstrated itself at Jamal battle and naturally caused
the primary interpretation of the Muslim nomads to be altered from the
holy war and the forces opposing them. The aforesaid problem was
attributed to Imam 'Ali (a) by Kharijites through their objections.

Later on, this issue caused the Kharijites not to leave a medium between
infidelity and faith (say unbeliever and infidel libertine, or even a
Muslim libertine), rather to bring the problem to an end and to call
some (including just themselves) believers and the opposite group
unbeliever whose blood was allowed to be shed and whose money to be
taken as well.

(2) The other problem arose from the reasons behind revolting against
'Uthman and finally his murdering. This caliph was accused of religious
heresies and his stands caused two diverse deductions from Islam to be
drawn among his dissenters and assenters.

Such issue have not been recorded before then. In principle, this
measure caused the monotonous religious attitude among Muslims to be
changed and some suspicions regarding which one is the right of Islam to
be induced. It is obvious that this issue itself called for positions
against it, which inevitably showed itself within the two extremes.

'Uthman's murdering caused the religious leadership to be out of the
hands of the government and to be in the hands of some personally
claiming to be theologians. One of these clans was Kufa and
Damascus[^559] “Qur'an reciters” that through relying on this Qur'an
recitation, restrained themselves from taking part in the battle, and
stood between the two armies to see which one is the rightful!

The contribution of the Qur'an-reciters to the conversions leading to
the Kharijites's appearance and even the presence of a number of them
amongst the Kharijites is indicative of this very point. Besides, the
independent positions of 'Abd Allah Ibn Mas'ud refusing to follow the
Imamate of the society have been pointed out. They observed that 'Abd
Allah himself took a stand against 'Uthman and has called 'Uthman's
legitimacy into a serious question, through not allowing 'Uthman to say
his prayers.

Through repudiating Imamate, the Kharijites indicated that they have
been impressed with this point. That is to say, they believed that they
themselves ought to make decisions on the religion and even their other
political affairs, and that, in principle, there is no need to have an
Imam.

The superficial justification of this matter was that Qur'an makes them
dispense with the need for having an Imam. This arose from the hard-line
attitude of the Qur'an reciters who considered themselves to surpass
others and determine their way more properly.

(3) The problem of tribes' domination over the central sovereignty is
not an issue to be overlooked easily. This matter was crystallized
firstly through the fact that the tribes were not content with Quraysh's
domination. Even their admitting of Imam to this extent, was due t the
fact that Imam himself was against rather than alongside Quraysh. This
is well obvious from the Imam's remarks. Imam regarded Quraysh as his
foe.[^560]

However, ultimately Iraq tribes refused to accept even the Imam,
inasmuch as their animosity was far more sever than that permitting them
to accept a person having a blood retaliation with Quraysh anyhow. It
should be kept in mind that the Kharijites were a sect not accepting
being from Quraysh as a condition for caliphate.

As it's been noted, one of the motives behind revolting against 'Uthman
was Egyptian and Iraqi tribes' concern over the indisputable domination
of Quraysh, and the Umayya, in particular, over the Muslims'
regulations, and specially their financial affairs.

The tribal structure in the new Islamic community, had preserved its
power. During the first years, the prevalence of central power via
religion had somewhat outshined the tribal criteria. However, presently
by the victories subsiding, the Iraq tribes have taken notice of
themselves, and after revolting against 'Uthman, their power has been
enhanced.

When one could dethrone a caliph on account of the crimes he has
committed, one could stand up to the next caliph and threaten him with
death. Imam (a) was exposed to this issue. He went to Iraq, so to
suppress the infidels' riot. Thus he was naturally in need of Kufiyan
tribes' forces. They assisted him to extinguish the sedition.

Afterwards, the heads of the tribes having a worthy influence in their
own tribe, benefited from this power as a lever in confronting Imam.
Having undermined the central power, finally this issue led to the
defeat of this power against Damascus enemy. At Siffin battle, each
tribe resisted, in an orderly way, its enemy through preserving its own
tribal structure.

From the onset of the establishment, the composition of Kufiyan
population was also on this basis. The influence of tribes' needs was
very sweeping and was regarded as a government in a government. Tribes'
mutiny against the first two caliphs was unprecedented. 'Uthman as well
withstood these tribes as before.

However, his killing demonstrated that he has been defeated against the
tribes. It ought to be known that this situation was repeated in Imam
'Ali's (a) caliphate. When the Qur'ans were raised above the spears, the
head of Kinda tribes, Ash'ath Ibn Qays said, “You have to send for
Ashtar to stop fighting; otherwise, we will kill you as we killed
'Uthman.”[^561]

Both he and those later being ranked amongst the Kharijites, compelled
Imam to accept Abu Musa Ash'ari as his representative.[^562] Another
group known as Qur'an-reciters, and having a party under this title in
'Uthman killing incident, withstood 'Ali (a) and asked him to accept
Damascus army request concerning invitation to Qur'an.

Those later on joining the Kharijites, threatened him that if he won't
accept their request, they will kill him just like 'Uthman.[^563] So
hereby, the arbitration was imposed on Imam and Imam pointed out
repeatedly his unwillingness in this regard,[^564] and he regarded this
that, **لا امر لمن لايطاع “** The one not obeyed, can give no
order,”[^565] as his problem.

When a man went out of the houses of his tribe and went to those of
another tribe, and while shouting, sought help from his tribe, his
target is to induce disturbance and sedition. The people of the tribe he
was among whom, attacked him and beat him. He returned to his tribe and
kicked a great disorder, a chaos in which the swords were drawn from the
sheaths and a war was waged.[^566]

Amir al-Mu'minin himself introduced the “aged”, and the elders as the
main foundation of obstinacy, and the chief pillars of sedition.[^567]
Thereafter, Imam was entangled with these tribes. Some groups from the
Iraqi Arabs stood up to him, they were the Kharijites who not only
resisted him, but also wounded his son Imam Hasan (a) after him.
Supposing that, he has taken no notice of their request concerning the
war against Mu'awiya.

(4) All these incidents happened in an area where, before Islam, there
were diverse Christian, Zoroastrian, Mazdaki and various Christian and
Jewish tendencies that had crucial influence on the present mental
disturbances in these areas. It is not strange to see that major
sectarian trends appeared in Iraq.

Even amongst the Sunnis, various theological and juristic trends are the
fruits of scientific efforts of Iraqi cities. In this regard, Damascus
can in no way be compared with Iraq. In contrast, Damascus under
Umayya's control chose an easy way in accordance with what the Umayya
propagated. As a result of this matter, Damascus dominated Iraq without
any trouble and it owed this victory to its unity. Besides, this point
should be taken into account that, that number of companions coming to
Iraq didn't go to Damascus. This issue was influential in bringing about
diverse and apposing courses in Iraq.

(5) The significant concept which can notify of these mental and
political disturbances is that of sedition from which every group
benefited for their own benefit. Imam 'Ali (a) dissenters, in Imam's was
against apostates, believed that this war was nothing but sedition. They
believed that in sedition, one ought to be ”'Abd Allah, the murdered”,
rather than ”'Abd Allah, the murderer”.[^568]

For Imam 'Ali's (a) part, “sedition” title referred to a disturbance in
the political circumstances, as well as disobedience to the former
caliph of the Muslims. According to the application of sedition in Nahj
al-Balagha, Imam called those acts leading to Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan
battles seditious[^569], and asked those being alongside it to be like
an adolescent camel that has neither a back strong enough for ridding,
nor udders for milking.[^570]

This means that lack of obedience on the part of a rebelling group is
called sedition.[^571] “Doubt” is the concept resembling sedition, in
which the truth and error are intermingled together and remained
unknown.[^572]

Thus, in this way, Jamal and Siffin battles ought to be regarded as one
of the most basic incidents influencing Muslims' political thoughts and
making evaluation more difficult for the masses of people due to those
doubts raised later on.

The emergence of doubt and sedition had an important impact on the
formation of hard-line sects trying to bring the work to an end and wipe
sedition off the society by drawing clear lines. The application of
equivocal concept made the work much more difficult. The extreme use of
“infidelity” concept arose from this need.

(6) The main problem if this group's formation is based on two
interrelated implications. The first point is that “judgment” is merely
confined to Allah and it is not correct to leave arbitration to “men”.
The second point is that this incorrectness is not a simple one, rather
it is at the extent of “infidelity” and those learning arbitration to
“men” became “infidel”.

At the outset, this infidelity was put forward with regard to Imam.
Supposing that, as it was natural, 'Uthman should have been considered
an infidel too. Talha and Zubayr as well, were not immune to that.
Hence, in this way, the concept of “infidelity” took a crucial role in
their thought.

As for the issue of *the only judgment is that of Allah*, the problem
lied in defining the term “judgment” According to the evidences, it
seems that they have defined “judgment” as “judge”. As a result of this
issue, not only the arbitration of Abu Musa Ash'ari was rejected, but
also the “Islamic ruler” existence was doubted. Such a matter sounded
unnatural, but it was declared and was repudiated by Amir al-Mu'minin
(a).

Imam said, “They stated that there is no need for governance, whereas,
there is no escape for men from “Imam” pure or impure.”

This sentence, (the only judgment is that of Allah) is a truthful
statement, but what (they think) it means, is wrong.[^573] Is it
possible that the Kharijites thought concerning not being in need of
Imam, arose from their spirit of tribalism and pan-Arabism? It should be
known that they had some Qur'anic reasons, however, their hasty
interpretation, originally arising from their harsh morale, resulted in
extremely unified meanings.[^574]

The Kharijites, during the Imamate of Imam 'Ali (a), didn't have
opportunity to put forward their other viewpoints. However, later on,
they put forth novel viewpoints in the arenas of political affairs and
specifically Imamate. It's noteworthy that their belief concerning
“infidelity” had such a profound impact on the theological discussions
that it forced the Islamic sects to react to the subtle definition of
faith and infidelity.

The Kharijites extremity with regard to generalizing the concept of
infidelity caused all the groups to express their opinion in this
regard. One of these groups was Murjiyan who said that it is not
possible for them to clarify precisely the truth and error, and all
ought to be deemed Muslims, and the Shi'ite Muslims and 'Uthmani
disputes as well as judging cardinal sinners should all be left to
Allah.

Thabit Qutna, a Murji'i poet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نرجي الامور اذ كانت مشبهة ونصدق القول فيمن جار أو عندا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We leave (to Allah) all the dubious affairs, and we judge correctly the
oppressor or obstinate.”[^575]

This curse tried to regard all the opposing groups as Muslim, and hereby
to decrease the differences.  
 Fighting the Kharijites was not a simple measure. The Kharijites, for
the most part, were among the Qur'an reciters and those being apparently
people of Qur'an and prayer, and their leader, 'Abd Allah Ibn Wahb was
renowned as Dhu al-Thafanat (the one whose forehead has been marked by
prostration.)

In spite of that, he was the most pious of all of them. Hence, he could
easily persuade the people of Kufa and his Shi'ite followers into
fighting them. Imam's opinion concerning the Kharijites has been noted
in various sermons. Amongst these remarks, there is an interesting
narration. Imam was asked whether the Kharijites are infidel.

Imam replied, “They have escaped infidelity.”  
 Again he was asked, “Are they hypocrite?”  
 Imam said, “The hypocrite remember Allah just a bit, whereas these
people call Allah day and night.”  
 He was asked, “So what kind of people are they?”  
 Imam said, “They are a group who have been entangled in sedition and
thereupon have become blind and deaf.”[^576]

Imam 'Ali narrated that once the Prophet of Allah (S) said, “O 'Ali,
people will fall into sedition through their wealth, will show
obligation on account of their religion, will desire his mercy, and will
feel safe from his clout, and regard his unlawful matters as lawful by
raising false doubts and by their misguiding desires. They will then
hold lawful (the use of) wine by calling it barley water, a bribe by
calling it a gift, and taking if usurious interest by calling it sale.”

Imam added, “I asked the Prophet of Allah (S), how should I deal with
them at that time, whether to hold them have gone back in heresy or just
in sedition?”  
 He said, “Sedition.”[^577]

Perhaps this very remark of the Prophet of Allah (S), caused Imam's
attitude with respect to sedition to be so strong that he indeed
regarded the incidents facing him as sedition. The Kharijites themselves
were unable to comprehend this meaning. They expected all to be either
faithful or infidel. Anyhow, perhaps on account of the asceticism and
the warship that the Kharijites displayed out of themselves, fighting
them was more difficult. However, Mu'awiya's sedition was far stronger
and more dreadful than them.

Hence, Imam said elsewhere, “I have put out the eye of sedition. No one
except me advanced towards it when its gloom was swelling and its
madness was intense … when seditions come they refuse (gospel truth
against credal error) and when they clear away they leave a warning.
They cannot be known at the time of approach but are recognized at the
time of return. They blew like the blowing of winds, striking some
cities and missing others. Beware that the worst sedition for you in my
view, is that of the Umayya, since it is blind dim.”[^578]

That's why Imam asked his Shi'ite Muslims not to waste their energy
fighting the Kharijites:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تقتلوا الخوارج من بعدي فليس من طلب الحق فاخطأه كمن طلب الباطل
فأدركه
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not kill the Kharijites after me, since the one seeking the gospel
truth, but going the wrong path is not like the one seeking the credal
error and finding it.”[^579]

By the second group, Imam exactly meant Mu'awiya and Damascus people.
Imam's remark concerning the Kharijites was that you thought the
Kharijites have been eliminated, but they still exist in the loins of
men and wombs of women. Whenever a chief would appear from among them,
he would be cut down till the last of them would turn thieves and
robbers.[^580]

The Kharijites remained, they went to remote cities, plundering
everywhere under the pretext of infidelity. Finally, they went to
Sijistan, and were ranked among those calling themselves 'Ayyar,
wanderer.

A point proved to be true regarding Kharijites and other hardliners is
that, their aims may sound more eminent from some aspects; however,
their way if action is in such a manner that masses of people cannot be
compatible with them. This issue that they regard every cardinal sinner
as infidel, is, in itself, a matter that the society cannot admit.

Even the Mu'tazilites who considered cardinal sinner neither a faithful
nor infidel, rather a libertine person, couldn't influence masses of
people. Superficialism is another Kharijites characteristic. They were
amongst the Qur'an-reciters and even some of Kufiyan worshipers. Such
members of the society are always threatened with being entangled in the
risk of extremity.

Invasions of Damascus Army
--------------------------

It was already discussed how Imam's endeavor was focused on
re-mobilization of the Iraqis for a battle against Damascus; however,
those declaring readiness were few. Though Imam, in his sermons, asked
people for an aid, rarely ever did they follow.

In a sermon he has stated: “I come in grips with the crowd laying
disobedient when ordered and remaining silent when called. O wrong
crowd! Why on earth thou keep waiting? Why thou stand still in helping
divine religion? Where is thy religion that prepares thee? Where is thy
fervor that outrages thee?

Cry I make and help I seek. Neither to my word thou lend an ear nor my
order, thou obey until the end comes and the evility turns up. Neither a
reprisal thou can join nor can thou lend a hand for an aim to stop thee
leaving. Moan thou nipped and move thou never made.”[^581]

And in another sermon: “O people in diversity with distressed hearts in
reversity! In bodies thou are nude, in intellect thou are dude. In
knowing the Truth I cherish thee like a foster-mother. From the Truth
you trotter away as goats from a roaring lion. Alas! with thee off
justice the darkness I clear, uncrooked path of Truth I gear.”[^582]

“O people laying disobedient if ordered and remaining silent if called!
The provided chance never thou take, the challenge never thou dare, thou
reproach when likely the crowd prepared behind an Imam, thou withdraw
when unwillingly involved in a hard task. O cowards! Why on earth thou
keep waiting? Why thou stand still in aiding and taking back thy rights?

May thou be dead or despised! By Allah, far away from me thou shall
remain if my hour comes, for thy company I hate. With thee when I am,
without help really I am. Who on earth in truth art thou? Thou hast no
religion to prepare thee? Thou hast no fervor to propel thee? Not a
surprise rogues follow Mu'awiya when called enjoying no benefit a bit.
Thee I call the survivors of Islam and piety to benefit thee a lot. On
me thou turn back and with me thou art at odds… What I adore more is
death to come forth”.[^583]

Addressing the people these speeches were delivered by Imam in 39 and
40. They manifest his firm will before the Qasitin (the oppressors).
Mu'awiya, conscious of the prevailing state in Iraq as well as the
resident's weakness, was set to undermine Imam's might and set the scene
for entering Iraq through attacking on areas ruled by Imam in Hijaz and
even in Iraq. He expressed his intention as follows, “The Iraqis will be
overawed with such murders and plunder, the dissidents and the
secessionists will become valorous and those saved of disputes will be
absorbed”.[^584]

The attacks known as “Gharat” were repeated every now and then and
martyred many a real Shi'ite Muslim anywhere. Abu Ishaq Thaqafi Shi'i
(born in 283) has presented a list of the Gharat in his book authored in
the third century under the same title. The reports of such attacks can
be found in other historical sources too.

Egypt was the first attacked land. When elected as the caliph, Imam
appointed Qays Ibn Sa'd Ibn 'Ubada to Egypt governorship. Nevertheless,
when he left for Iraq to suppress the Nakithin, (allegiance breachers)
he urged him to return from Egypt.[^585] Qays set out to Medina and then
to Iraq[^586] to participate in Siffin. Subsequent to Siffin once Egypt
was in unrest and an uprising against Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr was likely,
Imam determined to dispatch Malik to Egypt.

Appointed for the second time as the governor of Hijaz after Siffin,
Malik received a letter to go to Egypt. As soon as Mu'awiya was
informed, he wrote to the treasurer in Qulzum to remove Malik in any way
possible and in exchange not to deliver the remainder of treasure.
Accordingly, he martyred Malik with poisonous honey.[^587] Where he was
martyred was called 'Ayn Shams.

Upon learning Malik's muder, Mu'awiya said, ”'Ali had got two arms one
of which was 'Ammar cut off in Siffin and the other was Malik cut off
now.”[^588]

On the other hand, when Imam heard the news, sorrow was visible on his
face for a number of days stating, “What good features Allah had granted
Malik! Who Malik really was! If a mountain, a great mountain he was. If
a rock, a solid rock he was. O Malik! By Almighty Allah, over your
demise many are grieved while many are thrilled. For such a person tears
should be shed. Shall any one be ever re-born like Malik?”[^589]

Now Damascus had access to Egypt, agitated. It not only was ajacent to
Damascus but also had many from among the 'Uthmanids who could back the
Damascus army. In addition, it was the time to fulfill the promise
Mu'awiya had given to cunning 'Amr Ibn 'As, the governorship of Egypt.
Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr was the governor in Egypt then.

'Amr Ibn 'As who had led the Arabs' army when conquering Egypt before
advanced with a massive army. In a letter, he warned Muhammad to
surrender if willing to remain secure. Another threatening letter was
sent by Mu'awiya reading, he knew no other enemy for 'Uthman but
Muhammad, so the time was ripe for a reprisal.

Writing to Imam, he enclosed the two letters with his. Imam recommended
him to resist and ordered him to send Kinana Ibn Bishr (allegedly the
one who hit 'Uthman on the head with a mace[^590]) to Damascus
accompanied by an army but stay with another army in the city. Kinana
left with two thousand soldiers and Muhammad stayed there on alert with
the same number.

In bravely clashes with Damascus army, Kinana along with his troops were
martyred. Muhammad who was left all alone in Egypt took refuge in a
ruined place. The commander of the vanguards in the army was Mu'awiya
Ibn Khudayj who traced Muhammad, beheaded him, set him inside a carcass
and then burned it.[^591] It was the policy that Mu'awiya and his
followers pursued in martyring the divine figures under the pretext of
'Uthman's murder.

As soon as Imam was told, he turned so gloomy that he made very pungent
remarks addressing Kufa people.

In his sermon, he pointed out, “It exceeded fifty days that I seek help.
After such a long period the army recruited is the least mighty
one.”[^592]

It was in this very sermon when Imam declaimed, **ألا دين يجمعكم ألا
حميّة تغضبكم**؟ “Where is thy religion that prepares thee? Where is thy
fervor that outrages thee? ” [^593]

When asked for what his grief was Imam responded, “He was as dear as my
sons”.[^594] Suffering the loss of Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr, one of his
closest companions, as well as Egypt, Imam wrote to all Muslims in
various spots recounting the agonies he had suffered since the Prophet's
departure.

He, in the letter, referred to the unjust attitude that there had been
concerning the Prophet's household following his departure, nation's
allegiance, how Nakithin breached their allegiance, how the war of
Siffin was waged and how the Kharijites stood against him. Then touching
upon the excuses people made he added:

“What thou nagged was Blunt art our swords and blank art our quiver. No
bayonets do our spears hast and sticks at what we call spears. Let us
return to get prepared with the best of horses and weapons…' I did order
thee to dismount in Nukhayla, set up a camp and stay there on standby …
A crowd of thee stayed with me making unjustifiable excuses and another
group left me disobeying.

Neither firm were those who stayed nor returned those who left. Once
noticing the camp, less than fifty soldiers I found. I headed for Kufa
disappointedly but as yet, out hast thou never stepped. Why on earth
thou keep waiting? A blind eye hast thou turned to that thy lands get
shrunk, thy towns get occupied and my Shi'ite Muslims get slayed? Not a
border guard is seen on the borders but enemy's.” Furthermore, Imam
urged them to prepare against the rival.[^595]

Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr's murder was considered as a triumph for the
'Uthmanids around the globe in Mu'awiya's view.[^596] Egypt which was
now out of Imam's hand was ruled by 'Amr Ibn 'As as late as his death in
43 for three or four years who preferred the worldly life in exchange
for the abiding one in the Hereafter.

Mu'awiya was hopeful about Basra as well, as Basra 'Uthmanids had
written to him seeking for help. He was well aware of the grudge Basra
people bore Imam 'Ali (a) for they had lost many in Jamal war.

According to Thaqafi, in order to consult 'Amr Ibn 'As Mu'awiya wrote,
“Nowhere can a belligerent and invincible crowd be found as many as
Basra people.” Mu'awiya called upon 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir Haďrami to
travel to Basra to mobilize Mu'awiya's followers under the slogan of
revenge for 'Uthman's murder and occupy the town. Meeting the Tamimites
in Basra, 'Abd Allah talked to the 'Uthmanids having gathered.

On propounding his aim Dhahhak Ibn 'Abd Allah Hilali objected to him as
saying, “Do you order us to unsheathe our swords once again (after
Nakithin) and battle with one another in order to let Mu'awiya still be
on the throne and you be his minister and to breach the allegiance we
have sworn to 'Ali (a)? By Allah, one single day of 'Ali's lifetime
spent when the Prophet alive was far much better than whatsoever
Mu'awiya and his lineage have ever carried out.” Some were in 'Abd Allah
Ibn 'Amir's side and some in Dhahhak's.

As a rule, the majority backed Ibn Amir other than a few like Ahnaf Ibn
Qays. Between the Muďari and Yemeni Arabs there was a strife; however,
Mu'awiya had previously advised 'Abd Allah to trust the Muďari ones. It
upset the Azdites. At the same time Ziyad Ibn 'Ubayd who was the
vicegerent of Basra governor resorted to Sabra Ibn Shayman Azdi and
wrote to 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas, Basra governor, in Kufa; as a result,
the news of Basra spread.

On the one hand Ziyad supported by the Azdites led Friday prayer and
urged then to back Amir al-Mu'minin with whom Ansar and Muhajirun were
and stand against the Tamimites. On the other hand Ibn 'Amir organized
an army in Basra and took the possession of some properties. The news of
the Azdites' support for Ziyad and the Tamimites' for Ibn 'Amir created
chaos in Kufa.

Imam was demanded by Shabath Ibn Rib'i not to let the Azdites overcome
the Tamimites. Nonetheless, Mikhnaf Ibn Sulaym advocated the Azdites.
Urging them to back the principles of the religion, Imam advised, “Thou
should restrain from battling and insulting one another for the sake of
Islam and its reputation and unite”.

Imam sent Ziyad Ibn Dhubay'a from the tribe of Tamim to Basra for
hindering the Tamimites to support Ibn 'Amir. His attempt was a little
fruitful. Bu while asleep at night, a number of the Kharijites attacked
him and killed him running away.

Sent by Imam together with fifty of the Tamimites to Basra, Jaria Ibn
Qudama met with the Shi'ite Muslims and read out Imam's letter to them.
Regarding the allegiance people had sworn Imam had written:

“If keep thy allegiance, if follow my advice and if obey my order, in
line with the Divine Book and the Prophet's tradition I shall treat thee
and the path of Truth I shall raise among thee. By Allah, no other ruler
do I know to be well aware of his tradition but myself since Muhammad
passed away. The gospel truth is what I tell. I intend neither to
reproach the deceased nor to find fault with their deeds.”

Then Imam had added that if they breached their allegiance, he would
suppress them with his army. To make up the incident of Jamal, the
Azdites declared their readiness for a battle against Ibn 'Amir. After a
time of being under siege, the 'Uthmanids's houses were razed to the
ground at Jaria's behest. In a letter Ziyad notified Imam that a number
were burned, a number who fled fell prey to swords and a number who
surrendered were pardoned.[^597]

The movement led by Dhahhak Ibn Qays, a well-known commander of Damascus
army, is among Damascus invasions. As reported by Thaqafi when the
Kharijites revolted against Imam, 'Umara Ibn 'Uqba Ibn Abi Mu'ayt wrote
to Mu'awiya: “A group of the Qur'an reciters and the devout from among
'Ali's followers have stood against him. Combating them, 'Ali has killed
them. And now since his army and the inhabitants of his town have taken
up arms against him, the seeds of discord are sowed among them.”

Mu'awiya, extremely delighted, sent Dhahhak Ibn Qays along with a
three - or four - thousand soldier army to Iraq and ordered him to loot
anywhere he went, kill any Shi'ite Muslim he noticed and then leave
there promptly for another place. Dhahhak who went to Kufa not only
plundered people's properties but also rushed a caravan of pilgrims and
killed a number. Imam 'Ali (a) in Kufa called upon people to defend
themselves.

When Imam found them that indifferent, he told them, “By Almighty Allah,
I wish I had one of thee in lieu of a hundred men of thee.” Once more
Imam desired to be dead! Then Imam sent Hujr Ibn 'Adi with four thousand
troops to stop Dhahhak. Hujr encountered him in Tadmur and in their
clash, nineteen soldiers from the rival army were killed and two people
on Hujr's side were martyred. With Dhahhak's overnight escape another
invasion of Damascus was ended.

In the meanwhile 'Aqil Ibn Abi Talib wrote to Imam to be kept abreast of
the latest developments. Describing Dhahhak's invasion abortive, Imam
referred to the injustice Quraysh had done to him and wrote: “O Allah! A
calamity thou descend for Quraysh to sever their kinship with me, for
those allying and usurping my right of ruling left behind by my brother,
Muhammad. To the one they gave it whose neither kinship with the Prophet
(S) nor record in Islam was like those of mine”. The letter indicates
how Imam constantly mentioned his usurped right any chance he got.[^598]

The other invasion made by Damascus army to Iraq was the one headed by
Nu'man Ibn Bashir with two thousand soldiers. He was supposed to attack
on 'Ayn al-Tamr, on the outskirts of the Euphrates. He was the one and
the only one from Ansar who had joined the 'Uthmanids. Although there
were a number of Ansar who had balked at supporting Imam 'Ali (a), never
did they join Mu'awiya.

When Malik Ibn Ka'b deployed with a hundred heard about Bashir's
probable attack, he asked Sulaym for help who was the treasurer in that
side of the Euphrates. Imam learning the news of Nu'man's attack on the
one hand and observing the Kufiyans hesitant to rise on the other hand
objected to them as uttering,”O Kufiyans! When the vanguards of Damascus
army thou notice, the doors thou shut and into homes thou creep like a
lizard in to its hole and a hyena in to its den. By Allah, how abject is
the one whose helpers art thou!”

Sulaym sent fifty of his troops led by his son, 'Abd Allah, for Malik's
aid. Damascus army afraid of the aid army upcoming fled after a short
clash. Mu'awiya said his intention of sending the army had been “To
jeopardize the Iraqis”. Anyhow, this attack was fruitless as well.

Following Imam's remarks it was 'Adi Ibn Hatim who accompanied a
thousand people from the tribe of Tayy to Nukhayla. Another a thousand
also joined him and they advanced towards the banks of Euphrates and
made several attacks on southern part of Damascus.[^599]

Mu'awiya sent an army to Dumat al-Jandal to have them, obedient to
neither Damascus nor Iraq, pay tax alms (statutory Islamic levy on
specified items to be used for Muslims' welfare). Another army led by
Malik Ibn Ka'b was sent by Imam too. A fight was started between them
which lasted a whole day long. Next day Damascus army returned while
Malik stayed there for ten days inviting people to help. Not being
helped, he returned disappointedly as well.[^600]

One of the other invasions made against Iraq was led by Sufyan Ibn 'Awf
Ghamidi along with six thousand toward Hit and then toward Anbar. Imam's
adherents were few there none of whom were willing helpers except a very
small number with Ashras Ibn Hassan Bakri who resisted unit being
martyred.

After plundering Anbar, the invaders went back. On being informed, Imam
on the pulpit of the mosque, summoned people to gather in Nukhayla and
move to stop them. In the answer, nothing came up but silence. Imam left
the mosque and sent Sa'id Ibn Qays Hamdani together with an
eight-thousand army to stop them but they had already arrived in
Damascus.

When Sa'id returned, he found Imam so seriously sick that he could in no
way stand on the pulpit. Imam therefore wrote a letter complaining about
Kufiyan people, sat on the platform by the mosque gate and asked Sa'd,
one of his Mawalis (freed slaves) to read it out loud. “If any other
option there were, never a word would I breath to blame thee …

O people, Jihad (holy Islamic war) is a portal of the Heaven portals
opened to Allah's special friends, attire of piety, chain mail of
solidity and a shield of inflexibility… Be informed, daily and nightly,
overtly and covertly for a battle with thy foes I invited thee, to
attack them before being attacked …?

Enable thou remained and disobedient thou laid until the enemy occupied
thy homeland. It was Ghamidi who assaulted Anbar, slayed Ashras Ibn
Hassan, plundered the weapons and massacred the righteous men. Even I
heard no one stopped the man, from among thy foes, who invaded the house
of a Muslim woman, under our protection, took her anklets off her ankles
and her earrings off her ears.

Yet, safe and sound they returned with not a single injury. If this life
a Muslim man departed ashamed and saddened of such an act, never should
he be blamed for my part. Wonder! What grief I suffer and what pain I
bear when in accord I find them in credal error and in discord I find
thee gospel in Truth …!

O wrong crowd under the guise of right men! O gang of the foolish like
the kids and the brides in bridal chambers! Allah solely knows how
dejectedly I keep living amongst thee! I beg Him from thee to take me
and toward Himself to ascend me…”.[^601]

These remarks could merely persuade three hundred to gather in Nukhayla.
Imam's next sermons bore no fruit as well.[^602]

Prior to Hajj season in 39 AH. Mu'awiya dispatched an army to Mecca with
Yazid Ibn SHajara Rahawi as the head to absorb people to Mu'awiya during
Hajj period. On the other hand, Imam being told of his intention, sent a
group commanded by Ma'qal Ibn Qays Riyahi to Mecca. Qutham Ibn 'Abbas
who was the governor imagined that no one would defend him, so decided
to leave Mecca first but they trusted its holiness and stayed.

It was Dhil-Hajja 7th when Damascus army arrived in Mecca. To avoid
clashes, the commander for whom observing the holiness of the city was
allegedly significant sent a message to Qutham that both give up leading
the congregational prayers and let people pick one out.

As soon as Hajj ritual terminated, Damascus army returned. Following the
Damascus army, Ma'qal Ibn Qays went to Mecca and moved as far as Wadi
al-Qura. They could only capture a few numbers of the fatigued ones who
were exchanged later for Iraqi captives.

After the event, Imam told people: “Defeated thou hast become be this
nation … for the more active they get, the more passive thou go; the
harder they try, the lazier thou become. I do behold disunity among thee
as unity among them…”[^603]

One of their most notorious attacks was Busr Ibn Artat's on Hijaz and
Yemen. He, a ruthless criminal, was ordered by Mu'awiya to massacre
'Ali's Shi'ite Muslims anywhere he traced. Why Busr was dispatched was
the 'Uthmanids living in Yemen had revolted against 'Ubayd Allah Ibn
'Abbas, the governor, after realizing weakness within Iraqi troops.

They had written to Mu'awiya seeking for help. First Busr entered Medina
of which governor, Abu Ayyub Ansari, had been appointed by Imam. Having
no troop he had to flee. Busr set fire to his and others' houses,
secured allegiance from people by force, designated Abu Hurayra as the
governor and sent him to Mecca.

Qutham Ibn 'Abbas also left there and fled. Busr then set out to Ta'if
where he sent a man from Quraysh to Tabala therein many a Shi'ite Muslim
resided. At his behest, all were slayed and their possessions were
plundered. Mecca residents, panic-stricken, had to flee among whom were
'Ubayd Allah Ibn 'Abbas's wife along with his two sons, Sulayman and
Dawud captured and both beheaded.

It is said that they were murdered in Yemen concealed in an Iranian-born
man's house. Keeping on his trip, he went to Najran where he killed
'Ubayd Allah Ibn 'Abbas's father in law, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abd al-Muddan.
This very event is very considerable in Mu'awiya's shameful political
life. When Busr arrived in Yemen, 'Ubayd Allah had already left.
Although a number of Shi'ite Muslims defied for a while many were
martyred. Busr committed countless crimes.

He beheaded one hundred Iranian-born Shi'ite Muslims. Then he moved
toward Haďramawt where allegedly numerous Shi'ite Muslims resided. He
had said he would kill one out of four. Upon being informed, Imam sent
Jaria Ibn Qudama with an army to follow him. When Jaria heard that Busr
had gone to Mecca, he went there but he had already left. When arriving
in Kufa, Jaria found Imam 'Ali (a) martyred, so he swore allegiance to
Imam Hasan (a).

Imam who was extremely annoyed with the Kufiyans, pronounced a
malediction, for not only had they left Imam helpless but also they
never protected their wives and daughters and allowed Damascus wicked
men to access them. As an instance we narrate a malediction of Imam
'Ali's here,”I saw 'Ali (a) speaking to people”, Abu Salih Hanafi,
“While having the Holy Qur'an on his head, the papers of which
rustling”. 'Ali was uttering, “O Allah! From whatever written in this
Book they prevented me. Upon me thou bestow any what of this Book”.

O Allah! In disfavor I hold them as so they hold me and of them I hast
become tried as of me they haste become so. Unlike my nature is what
they force me to act, an action unknown to me as yet. O Allah! Better
than them grant me helpers but worse than me to them. O Allah! Dissolve
their heart like salt in water.[^604]

Imam Ali’s Martyrdom
--------------------

In was Ramaďan, 19th 40 A.H. at dawn when Imam was preparing to head for
Siffin to battle once again with Mu'awiya but he was wounded by the most
black-hearted man in the world named 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muljam Muradi
and martyred three days later on Ramaďan 21st.

As reported by Ibn Sa'd, three Kharijites called 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn
Muljam, Burak Ibn 'Abd Allah Tamimi and 'Amr Ibn Bukayr Tamimi allied in
Mecca to kill Imam 'Ali (a), Mu'awiya and 'Amr Ibn 'As.

To visit his Kharijites' friends, 'Abd al-Rahman went to Kufa. Once he
went to meet a group from the tribe of “Taym al-Rabbab”, he saw a girl
called Qutam Bnt Shajanna Ibn 'Adi whose father and brothers had been
killed in Nahrawan. When Ibn Muljam proposed to her, she declared that
her marriage portion should be 3000 (Dinar!) in addition to Imam 'Ali's
murder. He told that by accident with this very aim he had traveled to
Kufa.[^605]

He smeared his sword with poison and attacked Imam on the head. The
deepness of the wound as well as the poison of the sword martyred Imam.
Reportedly, Ibn Muljam had been in Ash'ath Ibn Qays's house that
night.[^606]

Various narrations indicate that Imam was attacked by Ibn Muljam inside
the mosque.[^607] In accordance to other ones, he attacked Imam while he
was waking people up for prayer.[^608] Many historical sources have
referred to the former although many reports recorded say Imam was
attacked while doing prayer.

Maytham Tammar had reported that Imam had started his Dawn Prayer and no
sooner had he recited eleven verses of the Sura of “the Prophets” than
Ibn Muljam wounded Imam on the head.[^609] As narrated by one of Ju'da
Ibn Hubayra's descendants, Imam was wounded while doing his
prayer.[^610]

The man above-mentioned, Ju'da, had been Umm Hani's son who every so
often had led the prayers as a substitute leader and narratedly he had
been the one who completed the prayer when Imam was attacked. Sheikh
Tusi has also confirmed the aforesaid narration.[^611] Yet, Muttaqi
Hindi's report had been that Ibn Muljam had hit Imam when Imam was
prostrating back.[^612]

Ibn Hanbal[^613] together with Ibn 'Asakir[^614] has confirmed the
report. Ibn 'Abd al-Barr stated that there had been no consensus on
whether Imam was attacked while doing the prayer or before it and
whether any one substituted him or he himself led the prayer to the end.
Many are of the opinion that Imam had Ju'da Ibn Hubayra lead the
incomplete prayer.[^615]

A great number of hadiths have been narrated by the Holy Prophet's
Household and the Sunnis concerning how Imam felt during the night
before being wounded. Ibn Abi l-Dunya quoted Imam al-Baqir (a) as saying
that Imam had been fully aware of his martyrdom.[^616] As soon as being
injured, Imam shouted out, **فزت ورب الكعبة** “ By Allah of Ka'ba, to
salvation I reached.”[^617]

Ibn Abi al-Dunya has narrated Imam's will in different ways which
included both financial and religious issues. The salient issues
recommended by Imam were as follows:

Observation of kinship, heed to the orphans and the neighbors, following
the guidelines of the Holy Qur’an, performing prayers as the pillar of
the religion, Hajj, fasting, Jihad, Zakat (tax alms) following the Holy
Prophet’s infallible Household, serving Allah’s servants, enjoining to
good and forbidding from evil.

Reportedly, on Ramaďan 21st, while Imam was whispering, **لااله الا الله
“** There is no God but Allah” and the verse of, **فمن يعمل مثقال ذرة
خيراً يره ومن يعمل مثقال ذرة شراً يره “** So he who has done an atom’s
weight of good shall see it. And he who had done an atom’s weight of
evil shall see it” Breathed his last. [^618]

According to another narration, after Imam's martyrdom, Imam Hasan (a)
and Imam Husayn (a), Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya, 'Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far as
well as few numbers from the household took Imam (a) out of Kufa nightly
and hiddenly from sight buried him. It was because the Kharijites and
the Umayyads might exhume Imam.[^619]

Upon hearing the news of Imam 'Ali's martyrdom, a group of the
Exaggerators in Ctesiphon did never believe their ears. This group is
the initiator of the exaggerating thoughts among the Shi'ite Muslims
whom we will address later. Ibn Abi l-Dunya's report in this respect
referred to a person named Ibn as-Sawda' from the tribe of Hamdan know
as 'Abd Allah Ibn Saba'.

Elsewhere, the name of 'Abd Allah Ibn Wahb as-Saba'i, was mentioned and
that such a claim had been made in Ctesiphon.[^620] Both narrations
reveal that the person had even been anonymous. See also 'Uthman's
Opponents.

Imam ‘Ali’s Life
----------------

The analysis of Imam's lifestyle as a paragon seems beyond the
possibility here; yet, we refer to some aspects for luck in brief.

Imam's political and social life is so exemplary that it can be deemed
utopian. At times, so uniquely firm was he regarding divine decrees that
not a single one could ever emulate him as he himself had pointed to it
in a letter.[^621]

For those yearning to be faithful to it, his lifestyle is a perfect
pattern. Every time we can learn from it but the way is still too long
to go. In other wards, Imam's lifestyle has been the best during man's
life. It belongs to a perfect man who can indeed be called human and
Allah's successor on the earth. Such an engrossing life did he have that
it had his friends reach the zenith of amity and his enemies reach the
zenith of enmity in front of him.

In this regard, the Prophet (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يهلك فيك الرجلان محب مفرط ومبغض مفرط
  </p>
</blockquote>

His withstanding for the sake of the path of Truth does incense the
enemy that it makes him go to extremes whereas it does fan the blames of
his friend's love that he may go to extremes. [^622]

The one feeling affection for him can ascend as highly as the rank to be
called a devoted Shi'ite Muslim but if he neglected slightly he would be
affected by the exaggerating tendency. Rarely ever has it be seen that
divinity be attributed to a person. 'Ali (a), however, in a community
where Allah had underscored the humanity of the prophet Muhammad (S) was
targeted by such attribution although Imam opposed it severely.

Imam's asceticism is what overshadowed all his life. He was an ascetic
man who turned back on anything though he was entitled to possess
everything. A group asked about the most ascetic man in the presence of
'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-’Aziz. Some named Abu Dharr and 'Umar but 'Umar Ibn
'Abd al-’Aziz said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أزهد الناس علي بن ابي‌طالب (ع(
  </p>
</blockquote>

“No one is the most ascetic but 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib.”[^623]

Imam not only associated with the poor but also behaved kindly towards
them.[^624] He was sometimes seen doing prayer or delivering a sermon
wearing his one and the only shirt wet. Repeatedly, Imam has referred to
his simple life in Nahj al-Balagha. Noticing that Imam ate very frugal
food, one of his disciples told him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبالعراق تصنع هذا؟ العراق أكثر خيراً وأكثر طعاماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do you eat such food in Iraq where the best food can he found?”[^625]

Imam was the first one who practiced what he peached objecting to
'Uthman Ibn Hunayf in Nahj al-Balagha or in his public sermons
concerning this worldly life.

Aswad Ibn Qays recounted that Imam 'Ali (a) fed the Kufiyans on the
fertile land of the mosque but he himself ate the food in his house.

One of his disciples said, “I said to myself that 'Ali eats more
delicious food at home than what he gives people. So I left my food half
eaten and followed him. He called Fiďďa and asked her to prepare the
food. She brought a loaf of bread and yogurt diluted with water. He
dipped the pieces of bread in the liquid while it was with bran. I asked
him why he had not asked for bread baked with flour without bran.
Shedding tears, he answered, “By Allah, neverever bread without bran was
found in the Prophet's house.”[^626]

'Uqba Ibn 'Alqama narrated,”When I met Imam 'Ali (a), there was sour
yogurt diluted with water in front of him that was so sour and watery
that it upset me. I asked him whether he would eat it.O Aba l-Khabub,
worse than this was the prophet's food and rougher than mine was his
clothes.

Imam answered, “I fear if I did not do what he had done, I would never
join him”.[^627] When a special food was brought for Imam, Imam stated,
“Never do I eat what the Prophet (S) had never eaten”.[^628]

It does not imply that eating such food is unlawful but sheer act of
following Allah's Messenger is of supreme importance for an Imam.

Presenting another example appears appropriate. As recounted by
Abul-Sheikh Ansari, born in 369, Imam appointed 'Amr Ibn Salama as the
governor of Isfahan. When setting out for Kufa, 'Amr was intercepted by
the Kharijites. With the tributes and the gifts, he had to settle in
Hulwan. As soon as the Kharijites went away, he left the tributes in
Hulwan and took the gifts with him to Kufa.

Imam ordered him to lay them on the fertile land by Kufa Mosque and then
distribute among Muslims. Umm Kulthum, Imam's daughter, sent for 'Amr to
send her some honey brought. He sent her two cans then.

When Imam came to the mosque for prayer, he realized that the honeys
were two less. He called 'Amr and asked where the two others were. He
answered, “Do not ask what happened”, then he went and brought two cans
of honey and added to them.

Imam repeated,”I only wanted to know what happened to those two”.  
 “Umm Kulthum demanded to send honey to her”, answered 'Amr.  
 “Not have I told you to distribute the gifts among people?” Imam asked.

He sent for her to send the honey back. When brought back a little was
consumed. He sent for the traders to estimate the price of the
subtracted amount. It was three or so dhms. Imam sent for Umm Kulthum to
pay for it. Then, the honey was distributed among Muslims. [^629]

Numerous examples can be found in al-Gharat and other books.

It is Imam's own statement, **أنا الذي أهنت الدنيا** [^630] **“**I am
the one who despised this world.”

That manifests his stance against this worldly life. Imam's behavior
towards the agents is another dimension of his life addressed in
historical sources. From any point of view, Imam supervised his agents
and during his short term, many letters were written by him reprimanding
them. After 'Ali's martyrdom, Suda, 'Umara Hamdani's daughter, came up
to Mu'awiya. She had participated in Siffin.

For a short while, Mu'awiya talked her about Siffin. She requested him
to depose Busr Ibn Artat oppressing them. He declined, however. Suda
consequently prostrated and an hour later rose up. Mu'awiya asked her
what it was for.

She responded,”When I went to 'Ali to complain about the man responsible
for our alms, he was busy with praying. After his prayer, he asked me
what I wanted. On hearing with no delay he took a piece of skin out of
his pocket and urging him to observe justice he wrote, “As soon as
receiving the letter, do what ordered until I send one to replace you.
He gave the letter to me to hand in him. He was deposed
accordingly.”[^631]

[^1]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 90

[^2]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XII, pp 198-201

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 131

[^4]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, pp 68-69; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. I, p. 112

[^5]: al-Tanbih wal-Ishraf, p. 198

[^6]: Ibn Juzi, Manaqib Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, p. 160; Tabaqat al-Hanabila,
vol. I, p. 319

[^7]: Manaqib Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, pp 163

[^8]: ‘Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf, vol. X, p. 140; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.
II, p. 98 and in the footnote of Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXXVIII, p. 33;
Amali Ibn Ash-Shiykh, p. 33; Hadith III, section 27

[^9]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 165

[^10]: See Subul al-huda wal-Rishad, vol. VI, p. 642

[^11]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VIII, p. 22 this can be read in two ways “
لست’ lastu” and “ ´لست lasta” Ibn Sa‘d considered the first one and
interpreted as I am not deceiver It means that the prophet had pledged
‘Ali of his marriage to Fatimah A research in the narration of proposal,
show there existed no promise So what does the Prophet’s remark mean?
Hence the reading lasta seems to be more probable, implying a reference
to the previous suitors

[^12]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VIII, p. 22

[^13]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 180-181

[^14]: Sahih Tirmidhi, vol. XIII, p. 170; Ibn Abi Shayba, al-Musannaf,
vol. XII, pp 62 – 82; al-Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 14; Rabi‘ al-Abrar,
vol. I, p. 807; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. I, p. 270, vol. II, p. 145

[^15]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. III, p. 732

[^16]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 107; al-Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 130

[^17]: al-Taratib al-idariyya, vol. I, pp 56-58

[^18]: al-Isti‘ab, vol. I, p. 378; Tarikh Jurjan, p. 218

[^19]: As mentioned in the text, no one doubts this tradition

[^20]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VII, p. 435; al-Taratib al-Idariyya, vol.
I, p. p. 443,444;3

[^21]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 98

[^22]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 208

[^23]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 121

[^24]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter 45

[^25]: Tasnif Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 355

[^26]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 195

[^27]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. I, p. 382; vol. II, p. p. 123,155

[^28]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon192

[^29]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 99

[^30]: Ma‘rifat As-Sahaba, vol. I, p. 298; al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. XI,
p. 264; Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol. I, p. 64

[^31]: Tabaqat al-Hanabila, vol. I, p. 320

[^32]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. I, p. 499

[^33]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 183

[^34]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. VII, p. 174

[^35]: al-Amali fi Athar As-Sahaba, p. 80, footnote of Musnad Ahmad,
vol. IV, p. 437, Sahih Tirmidhi, no 3796; Musnad Tayalisi No 829; Traits
of ‘Ali (a), Nasa’i, p. 65; al-Hilyat al-’Awliya’, vol. VI, p. 294;
al-Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 110; al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. XVIII, p. 128;
and see→, vol. IV, p. 322

[^36]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. I, p. 260

[^37]: Tarikh Mukhtasar al-duwal, p. 95; Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah vol. V, p. 7

[^38]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 91,94; Hayat sahaba, vol. II, p. p.
514-515

[^39]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 189

[^40]: Tarikh Yahya Ibn Mu‘ayn,vol. III,p. 143

[^41]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. IV, p. 52

[^42]: Tarikh al-Kabir, Bukhari,vol. II, p. 255

[^43]: Maqtal al-Imam al-Amir al-Mu‘minin (a

[^44]: Ibid, p. 107

[^45]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,, vol. IX, p. 198

[^46]: See, al-Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 162; Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VIII,
p. p. 29-30; al-Tanbih al-Ashraf, p. 250; Wafa’ al-wafa’, p. p.
995-996,1000

[^47]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 172; al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 309

[^48]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 217; some parts have been added to this
sermon of Nahj al-Balaghah; See,al-Jamal, p. 123;Ibid footnote of,
al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 155; al-Gharat, p. 204

[^49]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 3

[^50]: Tarikh Mukhtasar al-duwal, p. 103

[^51]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. I, p. 25

[^52]: al-Imta‘ wal-mu’anisa, vol. III, p. 183

[^53]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 84; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p.
127,145,151; Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. II, p. 88

[^54]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. IX, p. 58

[^55]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. IX, p. 28

[^56]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. VIII, p. 18

[^57]: Ibid vol. XIII, p. 299-300

[^58]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XX, p. 298-299

[^59]: For example, Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. II, pp 222,314

[^60]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 342

[^61]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 14

[^62]: Tarikh al-Madinat al-Munawwara, vol. III, pp 1045-1046

[^63]: Tarikh al-Madinat al-Munawwara vol. III, p. 967; Muntakhab Kanz
al-’Ummal, vol. II, p. 204

[^64]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XVII, p. 62

[^65]: Ibid vol. XIII, p. 301-302

[^66]: Ibid vol. XVII, p. 62

[^67]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1, p. 585; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. 2, p.
325

[^68]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 172, al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 307

[^69]: Al-Gharat, vol. 1, p. 307

[^70]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 3, Nathr ad-Durr, vol. I, p. 274

[^71]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 307

[^72]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 28; Waq‘at Siffin, pp 86-91 Here,
Mu‘awiya’s letter to Imam and Imam’s reply are fully mentioned

[^73]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 281; al-Gharat, pp 110-111

[^74]: Taha, verse 94; al-Muqni‘, p. 109

[^75]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 91

[^76]: Tafsir al-Manar, vol. VIII, p. 224

[^77]: Muqadama fi Tarikh Sadr al-Islam, p. 48

[^78]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 51

[^79]: al-Iďah, p. 88; Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.
XII, p. 53

[^80]: al-Wafidat min l-Nisa’ Ala Mu‘awiya, p. 41

[^81]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 64; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 348

[^82]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 194

[^83]: Nathr ad-Durr, vol. V, p. 77; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 171

[^84]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 118

[^85]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 173

[^86]: Sunan Ibn Maja, vol. II, p. 1270; … 3862

[^87]: al-Muwafiqiyyat, p. 312; Dhakha’ir al-’Uqba, p. 95

[^88]: Kitab al-Zina, p. 259

[^89]: al-Wafidat, p. 24

[^90]: al-Wafidat, p. 29; Balaghat al-Nisa’, p. 67; Tarikh Dimashq,
Tarajim al-Nisa’, p. 531

[^91]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 18,23,24,46,381,385,416,436; Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah, vol. I, pp 143-150; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XI, p.
229; al-Fusul Mukhtara, pp 217-218; See, Nahj As-Sabagha,vol. III, p. p.
55-57; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 246; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 484; vol.
III, pp 246,270 246,270

[^92]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 179

[^93]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 226

[^94]: Maqtal al-Imam al-Amir al-Mu‘minin (a), Ibn Abi l-Dunya,
Turathuna Magazine,no 12; p. 126

[^95]: See, al-Ghadir, vol. II, p. p. 25,34,78 from different sources,
al-Muqni‘ fil-Imama, p. p. 75-76 and in the footnote of different
sources This has been quoted from Hassan, in Tarikh al-Ya’qubi ( vol.
II, p. 128) and al-Muqni‘ (p. 133) as well as other sources, حفظت رسول
الله فينا وعهده إليك ومن أولى به منك، من ومن ألست اخاه في الاخاء ووصيه
وأعلــم فهرا بالكتاب وبالسنن Thou safeguarded the Prophet ‘s religion
left to thee After all, who transcends thee in front of him Are you not
his brother and successor and not the most learned one of Banu Fahr
about the Book ans Sunna

[^96]: al-Ghadir, vol. II, p. 68

[^97]: al-Ghadir, vol. II, p. 34

[^98]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. I, p. 143,149

[^99]: Ibid,vol. I, p. 145

[^100]: al-Gharat, p. 123

[^101]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. p. 118-119 for more uses of the word
“Legation”,see,Ma‘alim al-Madrisatayn,vol. I, pp. 295-328

[^102]: al-Muqni‘ fil-Imama, p. 125 for more poems about the same, see,
Ibid, pp. 126-127

[^103]: al-Ghadir, vol. II, p. 25 of Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. II, p.
377; Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 62 and other sources

[^104]: Al-Baqara, 2:246

[^105]: Ibid, verse 247

[^106]: Ale Imran, 3:68

[^107]: Al-Ahzab, 33:60

[^108]: “Tatheer” verse, see, Al-Ahzab, 33:33

[^109]: Al-Baqara, 2:132

[^110]: Ibrahim, 14:36

[^111]: Al-Anfal, 8:41

[^112]: Rum, 30:38

[^113]: Referring to the Ale Imran, 3:33

[^114]: al-Gharat, p. p. 67-71; al-Gharat, Urmawi, vol. I, p. p. 195-204

[^115]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 3; Rabi‘al-Abrar, vol. III, p. 536

[^116]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 87

[^117]: Ibid, sermon 109

[^118]: Ibid, sermon 239

[^119]: Nahj al-Balaghah,sermon 154

[^120]: Ibid, sermon 144

[^121]: al-Gharat, p. 111

[^122]: Facing Talha in the battle of Jamal, Imam referred to this
tradition;Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XI, p. 204

[^123]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 1

[^124]: Ibid, sayings, No 147

[^125]: Ibid, letter 25

[^126]: See Nahj As-Sa‘ada fi Mustadrak Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. II, p. p.
314,627

[^127]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 282-283

[^128]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 46

[^129]: See Ibn Abi Dunya,, Maqtal al-Imam Amir al-Mu‘minin, p. 92

[^130]: This has been stated about Basra, قطعة من الشام نزلت بيننا
Tabaqat al-Kubra,vol. VI,p. 333

[^131]: al-Gharat, p. 70

[^132]: al-Jamal, p. 346

[^133]: al-Jamal, p. 346

[^134]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 43

[^135]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 233

[^136]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. VIII, p. 52

[^137]: Masa’il al-Imamah, p. p. 16-17; See, Murji’a, Tarikh wa
Andishih, 19-26; al-zina, p. 273; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. p. 57-58

[^138]: Masa’il al-Imamah, p. 16

[^139]: From fabricated narrations in Tarikh at-Tabari

[^140]: Sa‘id Ibn Musayyib said, “I witnessed ‘Ali (S)’s rebel
contention and that of Uthman until Uthman wanted to scourge ‘Ali (a)
and I caused them to make up with each other See Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.
IV, p. 132, No 112

[^141]: Sa‘id in the conflict of arbitration claimed that no one but he
is of superior quality in caliphate, for having no hand in Uthman’s
murder and the recent seditions See Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 344

[^142]: Ansab al-Ashraf, al-Juz’ al-rabi‘, pp 559-560, No 1419

[^143]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 429; see Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II,
p. 219

[^144]: In Iskafi’s narration it’s been cited, I was afraid that some of
the ignorants might say something in mosque or the ones who have lost
their own fathers or uncles in the Prophet’s Maghazi might object,
al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 50

[^145]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 263

[^146]: Herein some other evidence will be mentioned According to
Ya‘qubi, All people took the oath except three of Quraysh one of whom
swore the oath thereafter See, Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. p. 178-179

[^147]: Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. II, p. 261 About the allegiance of
Muhajirun and Ansar see, al-Jamal, p. p. 102-110

[^148]: Tarikh Khalifa Ibn Khayyat, p. 196

[^149]: These two were also tied to seizing caliphate and Talha was
supported by ‘Ayisha Baladhuri states, When ‘Uthman was murdered,
‘Ayisha was on her way from Mecca to Medina Hearing about people
swearing allegiance to Talha she cheered up, but being informed of
‘Ali’s caliphate, she returned to Mecca and declared she would take
revenge for ‘Uthman, Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 213

[^150]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 92

[^151]: Tarikh at-Tabari,vol. IV,p. 428

[^152]: Ansab al-Ashraf,vol. II,p. 213

[^153]: al-Gharat, p. 112

[^154]: Akhbar al-Buldan, Ibn Faqih Hamadani, pp 4-5 (Sezgin
publication)

[^155]: ‘Abd al-Aziz al-Duri denies Lammens’s belief considering Saqifa
as the result of Abu Bakr,‘Umar and Abu ‘Ubayda’s conspiracy but
confirms the former agreement of Anti-Hashimites party Muqadama fi
Tarikh Sadr al-Islam,p. 56

[^156]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 136

[^157]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. IX, p. 31

[^158]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 427

[^159]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 210

[^160]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 140; See, al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 105

[^161]: This refers to the verse 100,Mu’minun

[^162]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 143 See, al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 106

[^163]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 73

[^164]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 262

[^165]: In a letter to Mu‘awiya, Imam wrote,…and now the fact about
deeming yourself different from Talha and Zubayr is that there exists no
difference between you Because mine has been a “public allegiance” to
which no body disagreed So necessarily it is to be accepted by all
Waq‘at Siffin, p. 58

[^166]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 52; al-Jamal, p. 131 This has been
stated in the first letter in Nahj al-Balaghah,“People swore me
allegiance freely and willingly ” Trying to emphasize the role of Malik,
‘Uthmanids and Umayyads intend to prove that people took the oath for
fear of him

[^167]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 65

[^168]: Ibid, p. 16

[^169]: Ibid, p. 45

[^170]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 143, No 10

[^171]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter 6

[^172]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 207

[^173]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 208

[^174]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 435

[^175]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 246-247

[^176]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 76

[^177]: al-Gharat, p. 75

[^178]: Ibid p. 83

[^179]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 178-179

[^180]: Tarikh Yahya Ibn Mu‘ayn, vol. II, p. 238

[^181]: This sect was also called” Sufyaniya”,”Nabita” and” Nawasib”

[^182]: Al-Risalat al-Nabita dar Rasa’il al-Jahiz (al-Rasa’il
al-Kalamiyya),p. 239

[^183]: al-Hujurat, 49:9

[^184]: Sharh Usul al-Khamsa, p. 141; al-Bahr al-ra’iq, vol. VI, pp
151,153; Ahkam al-qur’an, Jassas, vol. III, p. 400, Jawahir al-kalam,
vol. XXI,p. 332

[^185]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 207

[^186]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 207; Iskafi says that they said
that they accept allegiance but they resent to war with the people of
prayer In return, Imam said, “Abu Bakr permitted war with them(Imam
meant people who refused to pay tax alms) How didn’t you oppose him? See
al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazana,p. 106

[^187]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 72-73

[^188]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 106; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 143

[^189]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, p. 35

[^190]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 240; al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 158

[^191]: Kitab al-Zina, p. 225

[^192]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. VII, pp 36-37

[^193]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. VII, pp 37-42;
al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 111-114; Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol. I, p. 384;
Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. I, pp 200,415 and Ibid from, Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p.
125;Amali, Ibn Ash-Shiykh, section 44, p. 91, No 5, Rawďa al-Kafi, No
551

[^194]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. VII, pp 37-42

[^195]: Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol. I, p. 384; Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. I, p. 229

[^196]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 75; Nathr ad-Durr, vol. I, p. 318

[^197]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 16, p. 23;
al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 149

[^198]: Bahj As-Sabaqa, vol. II, pp 197-203

[^199]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 227; see,Hayat As-Sahaba, vol. II, p.
113

[^200]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. III, p. 342

[^201]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 141; al-Gharat (And in footnote
from Wasa‘il Ash-Shi‘a, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Bihar al-Anwar) Tarikh
al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 183

[^202]: Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. I, p. 189

[^203]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 212

[^204]: Ibid, vol.1, p. 212 – 213; from: al-Ikhtisas, p. 151; Bihar,
vol. 41, p. 106; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 11, p. 93

[^205]: al-Gharat, p. 186 – 187; Gharib al-Hadith, Abu ‘Ubayd, vol. 3,
p. 484; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 19, p. 184

[^206]: al-Gharat, p. 187 (Persian translation)

[^207]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 10, p. 46

[^208]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 12, pp 82-90

[^209]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 18

[^210]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 88

[^211]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol.III, p.342.

[^212]: Mustatrafat As-Sara’ir, p. 146, and in its footnote, Bihar, vol.
96, p. 38; Wasa’il Ash-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 193; Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. I,
p. 175

[^213]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 53

[^214]: al-Manar, vol. 6, p. 288

[^215]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 123

[^216]: Ibid sermon 38

[^217]: Ibid sermon 16

[^218]: Nahj al-Balaghah sermon 192

[^219]: Ibid sermon 233; Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. 1, p. 96

[^220]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 54

[^221]: Zamakhshari has mentioned some parts in Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. 1
from page 41 on

[^222]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 113

[^223]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 87

[^224]: Nahj al-Balaghah sermon 205

[^225]: Tarikh al-Madinat al-Munawwara, vol. 3, pp 1043-1044

[^226]: al-Amali fi Athar sahaba, p. 50

[^227]: al-Musannaf, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, vol. 10, p. 124

[^228]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 180

[^229]: Tarikh al-Kabir, Bukhari, vol. 4, p. 33; al-Ghadir, vol. 9, p.
66, vol. 10, p. 201

[^230]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 179; al-Musannaf, Ibn Abi Shayba,
vol. I, p. 204 (printed in India

[^231]: Taqyid al-’Ilm, p. 90; Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. III, PP 226,294;
Tarikh Baghdad, vol. 8, p. 357; al-Taratib al-Idariyya, vol. II,p. 259;
Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 6, p. 116

[^232]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Hasan (a), Ibn Sa‘d, p. 156

[^233]: concerning “ Kitab ‘Ali bi Imla’al-Nabi (S) ”,Ahmadi Miyaniji,
the master, completed a detailed research about “Makatib al-rasul” and
extracted some cases narrated by the Infallible Imams from ‘Ali’s
booklet

[^234]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 8, p. 472

[^235]: Qut al-Qulub, vol. II, p. 302; Wasa’il Ash-Shi‘a, vol. II, p.
515; al-Tahdhib, vol. II, p. 486; al-Kafi, vol. II, p. 312; Nathr
ad-Durr, vol. I, p. 312; Akhbar Isbahan, vol. I,p. 89

[^236]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 227-228

[^237]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol. I, p. 70 Concerning positions of other
Imams, “Qissih khanan dar Tarikh Islam wa Iran”,pp 93 - 102, Qum, 1999

[^238]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 7, p. 36

[^239]: See one detailed example of that in, Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. I, pp
74-79 and the sources in there We mentioned other sources in the first
vol.ume of the book under the topic of “ the historical role of the
Messenger (S) ”

[^240]: al-Musannaf, Ibn Abi Shayba, vol. 12, p. 36

[^241]: Naqď,p. 496; Tuhaf al-’Uqul, pp 338-342; Musnad al-Imam al-Hadi,
p. 207; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 38, p. 245

[^242]: al-Fa’iq fi Gharib al-Hadith, vol. II, p. 108

[^243]: Ansab al-Ashraf, ol II, p. 273

[^244]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 105

[^245]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 164

[^246]: Ibid sermon 145

[^247]: Ibid sermon 149

[^248]: Ibid sermon 192

[^249]: Ibid sermon 154

[^250]: Ibid sermon 176

[^251]: Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. II, p. 537

[^252]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. I, p. 530

[^253]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 182

[^254]: Ibid sermon 187

[^255]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 187

[^256]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 252(footnote)of, Tarikh Dimashq,
vol. 28, p. 67; Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 5, p. 364

[^257]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 4, p. 429; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p.
218

[^258]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 223 Major source on Jamal war is
the book of “al-Jamal” by Sheykh Mufid who has prepared it out of tens
of sources accessible to him in that time We have used this book as well
as others previously written

[^259]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 255

[^260]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 222-223; Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5,
p. 34

[^261]: As earlier said, when Abu Bakr said prayers, just one, instead
of the Prophet (S), according to Imam ‘Ali, ‘Ayisha was the one who,
from inside of home, introduced Abu Bakr

[^262]: Hayat As-Sahaba, vol. II, p. 300

[^263]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. III, p. 274

[^264]: Tarikh al-Madinat al-Munawwara, vol. III, p. 942

[^265]: Concerning different statements and what she herself said in
contradiction to this idea, Hadith al-Ifk, from p. 158 on

[^266]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 8, p. 81

[^267]: Ibid, vol. 8, p. 68

[^268]: Ibid, vol. 8, p. 103

[^269]: al-Jamal, pp 157-160

[^270]: See the section on “‘Uthman’s Opponents”

[^271]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 217-218; vol. 5, p. 91; Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 6, p. 215

[^272]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 5, p. 91

[^273]: al-Jamal, p. 160 and in the footnote from,Ash-Shafi,vol. 4, p.
356; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 32, p. 341

[^274]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 337; Nathr ad-Durr, vol. 4, p. 21

[^275]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. 6, pp 34, 38

[^276]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. I, p. 821

[^277]: al-Jamal, pp 409-412

[^278]: Ibid, pp 425-434

[^279]: Ibid, p. 438

[^280]: Zahr al-Islam, vol. 4, pp 38-39

[^281]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 4, p. 451

[^282]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 144

[^283]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 238

[^284]: al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 24, p. 34

[^285]: al-Futuh, vol. II, PP 282-283

[^286]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 4, p. 451; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 284

[^287]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 284

[^288]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 224

[^289]: al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 24, p. 10; Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9,
p. 135

[^290]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 286

[^291]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 221

[^292]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 279-280

[^293]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 221-222

[^294]: Nathr ad-Durr, vol. 4, p. 15-16

[^295]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 144; al-Jamal, p. 322

[^296]: al-Jamal, p. 304

[^297]: al-Jamal, p. 329

[^298]: Ibid p. 345

[^299]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 229-230; al-Jamal, p. 305

[^300]: al-Musannaf, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, vol. 11, p. 365; Ansab al-Ashraf,
vol. II, p. 224; al-Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 120; al-Isti‘ab, vol. 4, p.
361; (Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr says, “This hadith is among the reasons of the
Prophet’s prophethood and it is more correctly documented requiring no
discussion ”) Futuh al-Buldan, p. 549; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 288; Nathr
ad-Durr, vol. II, p. 227; Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 234

[^301]: al-Jamal, p. 306

[^302]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 226-227

[^303]: al-Jamal, p. 307

[^304]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 182

[^305]: al-Jamal, p. 284

[^306]: Ibid p. 285

[^307]: al-Ma‘arif, p. 208

[^308]: al-Jamal, p. 401

[^309]: al-Musannaf, Ibn Abi Shayba, vol. 15, p. 283

[^310]: al-Jamal, pp 283-284

[^311]: al-Jamal, pp 301-302

[^312]: Ibid pp 299-300

[^313]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 184

[^314]: loc cit

[^315]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 145

[^316]: Ibid p. 145; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 234-235

[^317]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 145

[^318]: Dinwari (Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 147) says, “when Zubayr heard that
‘Ammar is with Imam ‘Ali, he remained doubtful due to hadith of «الحق مع
عمار» and hadith «تقتلك الفئة الباغية » This statement seems incorrect
thanks to Zubayr’s spoiled soul ‘Ammar was from the very beginning with
Imam, how has Zubayr not thought of this so far?”

[^319]: Concerning the tribes and their positions, Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.
II, p. 237

[^320]: al-Jamal, p. 330

[^321]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 239,274

[^322]: About the attendance of the Prophet’s companions, Ansab
al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 267-269 (footnote).

[^323]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 147

[^324]: al-Jamal, pp 314-318

[^325]: Waq‘at al-Jamal, p. 36

[^326]: al-Jamal, pp 336-339

[^327]: Ibid p. 336; According to Baladhuri, war happened on Jumadi
al-Thani 10th Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 238; Imam’s letter to Kufiyans telling
about the triumph over Jamal companions is dated Jumadi al-Awwal
al-Jamal, p. 399

[^328]: al-Jamal, p. 334

[^329]: al-Jamal, pp 339-340; al-Musannaf, Ibn Abi Shayba, vol. 7, p.
537; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 241

[^330]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 240-241

[^331]: al-Jamal, p. 348; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. I, p. 257

[^332]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 246-247

[^333]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 185

[^334]: al-Jamal, p. 383

[^335]: Waq‘at al-Jamal, al-Ghallabi, p. 42; Tarikh Mukhtasar Dimashq,
vol. 11, p. 204

[^336]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 255; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 147

[^337]: Abu Mikhnaf comments that Zubayr left the battlefield after
troops failure and he was killed on his way to Medina Ansab al-Ashraf,
vol. I, p. 254; This means that he has left the battlefield and nothing
else

[^338]: al-Jamal, p. 389; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 9, p. 24

[^339]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 150

[^340]: Al-Jamal, p. 379

[^341]: Ibid p. 369

[^342]: SamT al-Nujum al-’Awali, vol. II, p. 440

[^343]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 249

[^344]: Ibid vol. II, p. 265

[^345]: Ibid vol. II, p. 266

[^346]: ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. I, p. 202

[^347]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 8, p. 74

[^348]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 241; Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5, p. 6

[^349]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 248

[^350]: Ibid. vol.II, p.265.

[^351]: al-Jamal, p. 419

[^352]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 186

[^353]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 186.

[^354]: Ibid p. 190

[^355]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 263 (context and footnote

[^356]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 151

[^357]: al-Jamal, p. 392

[^358]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 151; al-Jamal, p. 407; Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol.
I, p. 308

[^359]: al-Jamal, pp 395-399

[^360]: Ibid pp 401-402

[^361]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 374; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 152; Ansab
al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 273; It is to be said that Imam has written
letter to Qara¨a Ibn Ka‘b, ruler of Kufa, to inform about the victory in
Rajab 36 H al-Jamal, p. 404

[^362]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 153

[^363]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 70

[^364]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 210-211

[^365]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 143; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 268; al-Mi‘yar
wal-Muwazina, p. 98

[^366]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 271

[^367]: al-Futuh, vol. I, p. 134

[^368]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. I, p. 47

[^369]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 3,5; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 349 It is to be
said that the most comprehensive work on the event of Siffin is the
valuable book “Waq‘at Siffin”, written by Nasr Ibn Muzahim, dead in 212
Ibn A‘tham has mainly used this book in reporting about Siffin and he
has condensed the book Sources such as Tarikh at-Tabari and Baladhuri
have quoted mainly from Abu Mikhnaf except a few sporadic reports

[^370]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 347

[^371]: Ibid vol. II, pp 360-361

[^372]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 211-212

[^373]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 8

[^374]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 56; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 432; Akhbar
al-Tiwal, p. 160

[^375]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 411

[^376]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 403

[^377]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 212

[^378]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 12-13

[^379]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 350

[^380]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 297

[^381]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 350; Waq‘at Siffin, p. 113; Akhbar
al-Tiwal, p. 167

[^382]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 352

[^383]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 156

[^384]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 21; al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 370-371

[^385]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 27

[^386]: ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn Ghanm Azdi who was known as “Afqah ahl
Sham”(Horizon of Damascus people) said to Shurahbil in Damascus, “Even
if ‘Ali has murdered ‘Uthman, he would be caliph of Muslims since
Muhajirun and Ansar have sworn allegiance to him and they are “superior
to people” Waq‘at Siffin, p. 45

[^387]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 29; al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 374-375; Akhbar
al-Tiwal, p. 157

[^388]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 380

[^389]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 32

[^390]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 411, he was proud not because of being
from Damascus but because he was a Yemeni

[^391]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 406-407; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 160

[^392]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 44-52; al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 397-401; Ansab
al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 275-276 (footnote); Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 159

[^393]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 52; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 392

[^394]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 429-430

[^395]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 58; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 432

[^396]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 77

[^397]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 404

[^398]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 61

[^399]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 283

[^400]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 284; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 157

[^401]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 382

[^402]: In Sunnites sources ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘As, one of Sahaba
hadith-writers, is defended while ‘Abd Allah was present in Siffin arm
in arm with his father ‘Abd Allah commanded the left wing of Damascus
troops Waq‘at Siffin, p. 206 It goes to say that when his father asked
him to hold the banner, he first rejected and said, “I’ll never fight
anyone who has not been even one moment an atheist ” His father
obligated him to hold the banner, he took it and said, “If the Prophet
had not said, “Obey your father”, “I would have never done this!!”
al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 35

[^403]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 35; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 285; Tarikh
al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 185

[^404]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 39; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 288; Tarikh
al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 186 ‘Amr lived only until 43 H and was ruler of
Egypt

[^405]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 37,44; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 386

[^406]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 441

[^407]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 294; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 161

[^408]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 82-83; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 413

[^409]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 63; al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 416-417

[^410]: Waq‘at Siffin, vol. 75; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 187;
al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 421

[^411]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sayings, No 18

[^412]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 418-419

[^413]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 86-91; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 277-282;
Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 15, p. 73; al-Futuh, vol.
II, pp 474-475; Nahj As-Sa‘ada, vol. 4, p. 185

[^414]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 110-111; al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 477-480

[^415]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 460

[^416]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 101; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 460

[^417]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 293; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 362;
Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 164 Imam paid his blood money out of public property

[^418]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 92-96

[^419]: Ibid pp 98-99; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 444

[^420]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 101

[^421]: Ibid p. 115; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 165, he seems to be the same
Khajih Rabi‘ whose tombstone, in Mashhad is visited very much

[^422]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 102; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 447

[^423]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 103; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 448, Akhbar
al-Tiwal, p. 165

[^424]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 114-115

[^425]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 118-121; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 393-397
and in the footnote of Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol.
III, p. 188; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 10; SamT al-Nujum al-’Awali,
vol. II, p. 465

[^426]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 127

[^427]: Ibid p. 131

[^428]: al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 105-107

[^429]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 296-297

[^430]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 188-189

[^431]: Waq‘at Siffin, vol. II, p. 144; al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 468

[^432]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 150-151; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 297

[^433]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 187

[^434]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 298; al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 487-488

[^435]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 462-466; Waq‘at Siffin, pp 140-142

[^436]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 299

[^437]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 303

[^438]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 188,190

[^439]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, pp 293,321

[^440]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 191

[^441]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 190

[^442]: Ibid p. 196

[^443]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 169-172

[^444]: Ibid p. 171

[^445]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 495

[^446]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 362

[^447]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 168

[^448]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 439

[^449]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 166-167

[^450]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 163

[^451]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 298; al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 2

[^452]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 13

[^453]: Ibid vol. III, p. 15

[^454]: Nasr Ibn Muzahim says, وكان اكثر القوم حروباً الاشتر Waq‘at
Siffin, p. 195

[^455]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 196

[^456]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 163

[^457]: Ibid p. 170

[^458]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 199

[^459]: Ibid p. 214; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 303

[^460]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 203-204

[^461]: Despite mention of the date in several sources, 12th of Safar is
regarded by Baladhuri (Ansab, vol. II, p. 323) to be on Friday that is
inconsistent with this date But regarding the report by Nasr about the
citation of arbitration agreement of Wednesday 17th of Safar,
Baladhuri’s reference to Friday 12th of Safar is approved

[^462]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 303-305

[^463]: Ibid vol. II, pp 305-306

[^464]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 230-232

[^465]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 447

[^466]: Ibid p. 236; Ashtar in his speech said that roughly one hundred
people from Badr stay with us Waq‘at Siffin, p. 238

[^467]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 188

[^468]: al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 180-181

[^469]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 215

[^470]: Ibid p. 319

[^471]: Concerning the sources, Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 312-313
(footnote) in the following pages ‘Amr Ibn ‘As is quoted to have said
the afore-mentioned hadith

[^472]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 131

[^473]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 239; al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 124-125

[^474]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 311-313

[^475]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 5, p. 236

[^476]: al-Muhabbar, p. 296

[^477]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 340; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 310

[^478]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 271

[^479]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 244

[^480]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 360

[^481]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 41; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 176

[^482]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 187

[^483]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 363

[^484]: Ibid p. 274; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 176

[^485]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 407; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 330; Akhbar
al-Tiwal, p. 177

[^486]: al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 173-174

[^487]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 293; al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 55

[^488]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 325; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 186

[^489]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 437; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 322;
al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 43 – 44

[^490]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 163

[^491]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 163

[^492]: al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 119-120

[^493]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 324; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 320
Baladhuri hesitates to report about martyrdom of Uwiys The proof reader
mentions on pages 320-322 various sources in which this undeniable
report is referred

[^494]: al-Futuh, vol. II, pp 451-460

[^495]: He is reported in detail in Waq‘at Siffin including, pp 346-356

[^496]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 67

[^497]: Ibid vol. II, p. 101

[^498]: Ibid vol. III, p. 142

[^499]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 103

[^500]: al-Wafidat min l-Nisa’ ‘ala Mu‘awiya, p. 29

[^501]: Ibid p. 36

[^502]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 307

[^503]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 435; al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 221-222

[^504]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 470-471

[^505]: Ibid, p. 474; al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 264-65

[^506]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 323

[^507]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 478

[^508]: Ibid, p. 481

[^509]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp 188-89

[^510]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 189

[^511]: al-Futuh, vol. II, p. 74

[^512]: Waq‘at Siffin

[^513]: Ibid, pp 490-494

[^514]: Regrettably Muďri and Yemeni competition induced problem at
Siffin battle

[^515]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 499-500

[^516]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 331

[^517]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 337; see, p. 338

[^518]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 194-196, Waq‘at Siffin, pp 504-570, see,
Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 334-335

[^519]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 508; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 189

[^520]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 521; see, Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 236

[^521]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 237

[^522]: Nathr ad-Durr, vol. I, p. 421

[^523]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 540-541

[^524]: Waq‘at Siffin pp 545-546; Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 199-201; Ansab
al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 350-51

[^525]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 342

[^526]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 196

[^527]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 339

[^528]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 413-414; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 351

[^529]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 331-338

[^530]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 191

[^531]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 359

[^532]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 350

[^533]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 363

[^534]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, p. 192

[^535]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 360

[^536]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 349

[^537]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 352

[^538]: The verses, Al Imran 3:23; al-Ma’ida 5:95; al-Nisa’ 4:35

[^539]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 354

[^540]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 209

[^541]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 361

[^542]: Ibid, vol. II, pp 356-369

[^543]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 364

[^544]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 366, and in its footnote from,
al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 143

[^545]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 206

[^546]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 367

[^547]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 362-368

[^548]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 370; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 207

[^549]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 210

[^550]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 371

[^551]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 210.

[^552]: One of them is Yazid Ibn Nuwayra Ansari whose being a heavenly
man was witnessed twice by The Prophet (S) (al-Isaba, vol. II, p. 348)
The list of the martyrs of this war has been noted by Ibn A‘tham (vol.
IV, p. 121) and Ibn Abi al-Hadid (vol. II, p. 29) See their narrations
with martyrs’ names at Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 314, (footnote

[^553]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 374-375 It’s been noted in Futuh
(vol. III, p. 277) that when Imam ended his war with Kharijites and went
to Kufa, 17 days were remained from Ramaďan

[^554]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 319

[^555]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 346.

[^556]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 346.

[^557]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 413-418

[^558]: al-Fa’iq,vol. IV,p. 129

[^559]: See, Waq‘at Siffin, following al-Qurra’ at the list of tribes
and clans

[^560]: See, al-Irshad, vol. I, p. 254

[^561]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 50

[^562]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 51

[^563]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 49, Waq‘at Siffin, pp 489-490, Mukhtasar Tarikh
Dimashq, vol. X, pp 56,60,239; Tatawwur al-Fikr As-Siyasi ‘Ind ahl
As-Sunna, pp 43-44

[^564]: Ibid, vol. V, pp 84-85

[^565]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 27

[^566]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. XIII, pp 167-168

[^567]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 192

[^568]: Masa’il al-Imamah, p. 16

[^569]: See, Nahj al-Balaghah, sermons 93,101,121,192; letters 1,65;
Qisar al-Hikam, No 1

[^570]: Nahj al-Balaghah, see, Kalamat Qisar, No 1

[^571]: For sedition, see, Bernard Lewis, article “Mafahim Inqilab dar
Islam”, Tahqiqat Islami Magazine, No 2/7, pp 93-97

[^572]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermons 38,122, Qisar al-Hikam, No 113

[^573]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 361-377; Nahj al-Balaghah

[^574]: For instance they regarded all those accepting arbitration, and
subsequent to that, everyone not considering ‘Ali (a) infidel, as
infidel, by referring to the verse وَمَنْ لَمْ يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنزَلَ
اللَّهُ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْكَافِرُونَ “and whoever did not judge by
what Allah revealed, those are they that are the unbelievers” and
ordered their dissenters’ women and children to be murdered by referring
to this verse رَبِّ لَا تَذَرْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ مِنْ الْكَافِرِينَ
دَيَّارًا “My Lord! Leave not upon the land any dweller from among the
unbelievers” which was Noah’s prayer See, Masa’il al-Imamah, p. 19

[^575]: al-Aghani, vol. XIV, p. 269; see, Murji’a, Tarikh wa Andishih,
pp 32-39

[^576]: Lisan al-’Arab, vol. IV, p. 461 (following religion)

[^577]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 157

[^578]: Ibid, sermon 93

[^579]: Ibid, sermon 61

[^580]: Ibid, sermon 60

[^581]: Futuh al-Buldan, sermon 39

[^582]: Ibid sermon 131

[^583]: Futuh al-Buldan, sermon 180

[^584]: al-Gharat, p. 176 (Persion version)

[^585]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 390-392

[^586]: As reported by Baladhuri in Ashraf, vol. II, pp 300-301 when
Qays arrived in Medina, Imam had written to Sahl Ibn Hunayf to go to
Kufa Meanwhile, Marwan and Aswad Ibn Abi al-Bakhtari were active in
acting against Imam in Medina They threatened Qays with murder Without a
moment’s hesitation he left there for Iraq It proves that except Ansar
accompanying Imam to Iraq how much Medina was against Imam

[^587]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, pp 398-399

[^588]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 264; in Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 399
the name of Qays Ibn Sa‘d is referred to mistakenly

[^589]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 265 (The Persion translation is adapted
from Ayati’s book

[^590]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 401

[^591]: al-Gharat, vol. I, pp 276-289

[^592]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 404

[^593]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 291

[^594]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 404 Muhammad’s mother, Asma’ Bint
‘Umays, was first Ja’far’s wife after whose martyrdom got married Abu
Bakr After Abu Bakr’s demise she married Imam ‘Ali (a), thus Muhammad
was cherished in Imam’s family

[^595]: al-Gharat, vol. I, pp 302-322

[^596]: Ibid vol. II, p. 377

[^597]: al-Gharat, vol. II, pp 373-412

[^598]: al-Gharat, vol. II, pp 416-442

[^599]: al-Gharat, vol. II, pp 445-459

[^600]: al-Gharat, vol. II, pp 459-461

[^601]: al-Gharat, pp 179-181 (Persian version); Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp
211-212

[^602]: al-Gharat, pp 464-503

[^603]: Ibid vol. II, pp 504-516

[^604]: al-Gharat p. 174 (translated by Ayati)

[^605]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 3, pp 35-38

[^606]: Maqtal al-Imam Amir al-Mu‘minin, p. 36, No 13

[^607]: Ibid p. 29, No 4; p. 35, No 12

[^608]: Ibid pp. 28,33, No 11

[^609]: Ibid p. 30, No 5

[^610]: Ibid p. 30, No 6

[^611]: al-Amali, al-Juz‘ al-Thalith, No 18

[^612]: Kanz al-’Ummal, vol. XV, p. 170 (2nd edition); al-Amali fi Athar
Sahaba, pp 103-104

[^613]: al-Faďa’il, p. 38, No 63 (published in Qum)

[^614]: Tarjamat al-Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a), vol. III, p. 361 (2nd
edition)

[^615]: al-Isti‘ab (in the margin of al-Isaba), vol. III, p. 59

[^616]: al-Isti‘ab pp 33-34, No 12; Abu Nu‘aym along with many others
have narrated that the Prophet had already foretold his martyrdom
Ma‘rifat As-Sahaba, vol. I, pp 295-296

[^617]: Ibid p. 39, No 20; footnote, al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, p. 160,
Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 499

[^618]: Maqtal al-Imam Amir al-Mu‘minin, pp 45-46

[^619]: Ibid p. 79, No 68

[^620]: Ibid p. 92, No 85; p. 96, No 91

[^621]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 45

[^622]: This Hadith is the one repeated many times Imam also stated,
يهلك فيك الرجلان، محب مفرط ومبغض مفرط Two people are murdered for me,
extremist friend and hardline foe Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 127

[^623]: al-Mi‘yar wal-Muwazina, p. 240

[^624]: Ibid p. 240

[^625]: Ibid p. 244

[^626]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II p. 187; al-Gharat, vol. I, pp 85,87,88

[^627]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 85

[^628]: Ibid pp 88-89; the footnotes of the same pages

[^629]: Tabaqat al-Muhaddithin bi-Isbahan, vol. I, Akhbar Isbahan, vol.
I, p. 72

[^630]: Hayat As-Sahaba, vol. II, p. 310

[^631]: al-Futuh, vol. III, pp 90-92


