Mu‘awiya’s Monarchy
===================

Mu‘awiya, the Founder of the Umayyad Monarchy
---------------------------------------------

Upon seizure of Iraq, center of government since 36, all Islamic
territories came under the yoke of Mu'awiya, who took power thirty years
after the Prophet's demise.

Before becoming a caliph, he governed Damascus and the Greater Syria for
roughly twenty years. The Umayyads martially leading the Quraysh in Dark
Age, stood against Islam as far as possible and they embraced Islam only
when they had no way but this. Not only through their behavior but also
by knowing about Abu Sufyan and Mu'awiya, in particular, Imam 'Ali's
statement shall be acknowledged as to the fact that they embraced Islam
only because of interests.[^1]

Zubayr also thought of Abu Sufyan in the same way.[^2] Yazid Ibn Abu
Sufyan commanded the troops when conquering. Greater Syria and Abu Bakr
granted Mu'awiya sainthood besides his brother.[^3]

After Yazid died, Mu'awiya was designated as the ruler of Damascus in
'Umar's tenure. As mentioned before, 'Umar's rigorlessness to Mu'awiya
had astonished a number of people.[^4]

According to Ibn 'Asakir, 'Umar entrusted Damascus thoroughly to
Mu'awiya[^5] and by the same token, Mu'awiya affirmed that by Almighty
Allah he could accomplish to dominate over people merely through his
high esteem by 'Umar.[^6]

Once encountering Mu'awiya going and accompanied majestically by his
retinue, 'Umar asked about the ground. Mu'awiya responded that the more
the enemy spies multiply, the more our grandeur has to heighten; yet, I
will abide by what you command.

“By no means do I enjoin him nor prohibit him”, said 'Umar.[^7]

Mu'awiya himself deemed his firm standing as consequence of 'Umar's way
of behaving towards him.[^8] Reacting against objections to Mu'awiya,
'Uthman said that how he was ever able to depose him designated by
'Umar.

Nevertheless, Imam 'Ali's response to him in this respect was, “Although
Mu'awiya held 'Umar in reverence, he now does perform whatever without
taking counsel with you”.[^9]

What 'Umar frequently stated was, “You are naming Kasra (title of
Sassanian kings) and Caesar whereas Mu'awiya is amongst you.”[^10]

Succeeding 'Uthman's assassination, in his remarks addressing people,
Mu'awiya announced that he has been the caliph of 'Umar as well as
'Uthman amongst them.[^11] In 'Uthman's tenure Damascus was regarded as
his security zone. He did banish Kufa reciters along with Abu Dharr
there.[^12]

Mu'awiya did expel them from Damascus soley owing to retaining his
position and likewise avoiding their influence on nation. Damascus has
been trained by Mu'awiya and in the course of the Umayya's governorship
the in-depth devotion of its dwellers to them clearly manifested the
fact.

It is quoted that the Umayya rulers have attested in the presence of
“Saffah” that they considered no relative for the Holy Prophet (S) save
the Umayya.[^13]

Mu'awiya has been quoted as stating,[^14] **(نحن شجرة رسول الله (ص** “We
are from the lineage of Allah's Apostle.”

Furthermore, under the guises of the revelation amanuensis and Khal
al-Mu'minin (the uncle of the faithful) he did strive in order to
fortify his religious stance. He compelled a number of hadith
(tradition) narrators as well to fabricate tens of hadiths concerning
his supremacy and disseminate them among people.[^15]

Mu'awiya's rule was the one and the only experience of a ruler who
flourished to secure the sovereignty by employing coercion as well as
devising political stratagems vis-a-vis all prevailing
political-Religious or perhaps tribal and regional disputes. Until then
neither a military expedition had been occurred, nor had duress been
officially manipulated in order to obtain the political authority.

And now how can it be ever justified whereas the rule was thoroughly
established by force? It should be borne in mind that this very fact had
to be endorsed like other political facts emerging at the beginning of
caliphate term that afterwards did turn legitimately into a governmental
theory.

In order to secure allegiance, when a sovereign could suppress all the
dissenters through his political authority, Jama'a (congregation) has
subsequently appeared. What dilemma was now there for those who stressed
the concept of community and said that they would be the last ones
swearing an oath of allegiance?

Under the pretext of the self of Community, they, heedless of how the
ruler has secured the authority, swore allegiance to a caliph with whom
all were agreed. Mu'awiya himself declared that he had secured the
caliphate neither through nation's amity, nor with their gratification
but by sword.[^16]

Mu'awiya named that year as “the year of Jama'a”. Touching upon that
Mu'awiya not only secured the authority that year, but also he held sway
over other members of the Shura (council), Muhajiruns and Ansars, Jahi’
has stated, “Mu'awiya named that year as **عام الجماعة “**The year of
Community” whereas that year was, **عام فُرقةٍ وقهر وجبر وغلبة** “The
year of separation, wrath, constraint and predominance.”

The year therein Imamate turned into monarchism and Kasra system and
caliphate became usurped and Caesarean.[^17] Afterwards, the principle
of “Sovereignty does belong to the one who suppress others” turned an
incontrovertible principle in political Fiqh (religious jurisprudence)
of Sunnism.

Since the inception of his revolt against Imam 'Ali (a), Mu'awiya's
legal mainstay has been his recourse to his kinship with 'Uthman in
addition to his self-introduction as his next of kin. He alleged that
the assassin of 'Uthman had been 'Ali (a) and he as his next of kin
would retaliate his assassins.

And gradually it turned into hereditary transfer of caliphate from
'Uthman to Mu'awiya in the view of Damascus dwellers, for materializing
which Mu'awiya himself played a pivotal role. Prior to this, it should
be taken into consideration that Mu'awiya deemed himself the successor
of Qurayshi power which had transferred from Abu Bakr and 'Umar to
'Uthman. We earlier referred to Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr's letter to
Mu'awiya therein the former had reproached him for his insistence on
inequity about 'Ali (a).

As its response, Mu'awiya wrote, “Your father and I during our prophet's
lifetime had held 'Ali's right incontestable and had indeed discerned
his supremacy; nevertheless, usurping his right, your father and 'Umar,
after prophet's departure, were the ever-first ones who summoned him to
swear allegiance to them.

He did swear allegiance under duress, they two, yet, granted naught as
an allotment to him. After those two, 'Uthman secured the authority. If
it were assumed a blunder, your father had blundered for the first time
and we were all his accomplices, yet if it were approved, we emulated
your father. If you intend to reproach, you had better reproach your
father first.”[^18]

From the beginning of his revolt against 'Uthman, Mu'awiya was doing his
utmost to exploit him. Once he requested 'Uthman to proceed to him in
Damascus in order to be immune from the dissenters, 'Uthman rejected
however.[^19] Later on, when the revolt aggravated, Mu'awiya found no
alternative except 'Uthman's assassination.

He could abuse the people's confidence in Damascus in this regard.
Mu'awiya accordingly never aided 'Uthman until 'Uthman eventually
perceived it when deeply in trouble, hence he wrote a reproving letter
to him.[^20] Immediately in the wake of 'Uthman's assassination as well
as his wife's escaping to Damascus, Mu'awiya proposed to her but she
declined.[^21]

He, in his letters to Imam 'Ali (a), asserted, “Our caliph 'Uthman is
assassinated oppressedly and since Allah has said, 'When one is murdered
oppressedly, we have assigned a power for his guardian', we are more
preferable to 'Uthman and his descendants.”[^22]

Mu'awiya's stress on 'Uthman's succession had culminated in an influence
on Sunnis' historical-political line of thinking that for two centuries
thereafter Kufa Shi'ite Muslims, other than the Shi'ite Muslims and few
Sunnis, imagined that Orthodox Caliphs were merely three and following
them the only possible and legitimate caliph was Mu'awiya. Afterwards,
the notion of “Tarbi'” was broached by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal wherein 'Ali (a)
had been introduced the fourth caliph.

Having composed numerous verses of poems as laudation for the Umayya,
Farazdaq has manifested in his poetry the assumption that the Umayya
regarded themselves as 'Uthman's heirs apparent. In a poem addressing
'Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan, he has composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تراث عثمان كانوا الاولياء له سربال ملك عليهم غير مسلوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They are the custodians of 'Uthman's inheritance and this royal robe
can by no means be divested.” [^23]

He in another poem addressing Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik, has certified
that his caliphate has been transferred from 'Uthman[^24] and elsewhere
he has composed addressing Yazid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik that the caliphate
has been transferred from 'Uthman to Mu'awiya and then to him among the
Umayya[^25],

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورثت ابن حرب وابن مروان والذي به نصـر الله النبـي محمـدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are the heir of Harb's son, Marwan's son and the heir of the one
with whose assistance Allah made Muhammad (S) vanquish (he has probably
meant 'Uthman by the last one)” [^26]

And for Walid Ibn Yazid he has composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورثوا مشورُتها لعثمان التي كانت تراث نبينا المتخيّر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They are the heirs of Shura (the council) which designated 'Uthman, the
Shura which is the inheritance of the Chosen Prophet's caliphate.” [^27]

Jahiz has also specified that Mu'awiya justified his right for caliphate
through 'Uthman's blood.[^28]

Mu'awiya, from the outset of his opposition to 'Ali (a), announced that
he did never seek after caliphate but as a matter of fact he had already
prepared himself for securing caliphate. At the very starting point of
caliphate, Imam 'Ali (a) urged Mu'awiya's envoy to inform him that under
no circumstances was he was contented with his emirate over Damascus,
nor would the nation be gratified with it.[^29]

His inward aim was overt for the majority but seemingly he commenced to
delude them. Prior to Jamal war, he wrote to Zubayr that he had secured
allegiance from Damacsus people for him and if he accomplished to
conquer Iraq, he would definitely encounter no trouble in Damascus.
Zubayr became very thrilled at the letter.[^30]

Irrespective of Zubayr, Mu'awiya must have elaborated to what way he had
acceded for an admissible caliph to be designated. Consequently, he
propounded “Muslims' Council” in this respect. Within the letters
written to a number of celebrities of Medina from Siffin, he had
referred to this issue already discussed in Siffin event.

Mu'awiya was determined to absorb one of the political figures of
Quraysh mainly from those attending the councilin order to exploit him
politically because Imam had censured him for neither of those from
Quraysh in Damascus was permitted in the council and their caliphate was
unauthorized.[^31]

In a letter to Imam 'Ali (a) as well, Mu'awiya did propound the issue of
Council.[^32] There matters were on no accounts serious on the part of
Mu'awiya.

Reportedly, the dwellers of Damascus at first had sworn allegiance to
him as an emir not Amir al-Mu'minin (the Commander of the Faithful) but
in the wake of 'Ali's martyrdom he pretended to the caliphate, so the
nation did swear allegiance to him as Amir al-Mu'minin.[^33]

Since the inception, he decided to secure allegiance as the one seeking
retaliation for 'Uthman's blood and as the emir coveting not caliphate
so that this responsibility would be entrusted to the Council.[^34] It
is hinted in “Al-Imama wal-Siyasah” that prior to Siffin, Mu'awiya had
secured allegiance as an emir.

Mu'awiya wrote to Hims governor to secure allegiance for him in the same
way Damascus people had sworn. Affirming that they would certainly not
assemble for retaliating 'Uthman's blood without a caliph, the nobles of
Damascus were not convinced to swear allegiance to Mu'awiya as an emir.

As a result, the dwellers of Hims were the ever-first ones swearing
allegiance to Mu'awiya as a “caliph”. After the spread of the news in
Damascus the people thereof did swear allegiance to him as well.[^35] It
is stated that Hajjaj Ibn Wasma had been the first one addressing him as
a caliph and being gratified at it.[^36]

Procuring caliphate for Mu'awiya had been confronted with another
hindrance and it was that he was by no means among the precedented
Muslims. He together with his father as well as most members of the
family had battledwith Islam and subsequent to his conversion to Islam
he was among Tulaqa (the captives whom Allah's Apostle set free after a
triumph). It was a contemptuous lable.

Although Mu'awiya had fulfilled to reinforce his position somewhat in
Damascus by introducing himself as “Khal al-Mu'minin” and “the
revelation amanuensis” as well as relying on 'Umar's232 and 'Uthman's
assistance, Hijaz and Iraq were both well-acquainted with his nature.
Once 'Umar had saud that caliphate did only belong to Badr participants
but if neither of them were survived, caliphate would be for Uhud
participants as long as even one were alive, yet, caliphate would
neverever be entrusted to Tulaqa, nor to their descendants.[^37]

It is probable that this narration had been ascribed to 'Umar; however,
it should have been engraved in Muslims' minds after him. In his remarks
in Siffin, 'Ammar had said that they, the Umayya, had no background in
Islam in order to be entitled to be the guardians of the nation or be
abided by.[^38] Even 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar responding Mu'awiya's letter
also wrote, “O Mu'awiya, what do you have to do with caliphate? You are
from Tulaqa!”[^39]

Enclosing with the letter of 'Umar's son, a number of verses belonging
to a poet from among Ansar were dispatched reading that Mu'awiya was too
minor to converse about the council participants.[^40] And once 'Ali (a)
reprimanded Mu'awiya when he expressed his ideas about allotments among
Muhajirun and Ansar and told him that such affairs have no pertinence to
Tulaqa![^41]

When Mu'awiya set out to Medina to assure the opposers of Yazid's
succession to the throne, 'Ayisha dissented and accused him of her
brother Muhammad's murder. She reiterated, “You are from among Tulaqa
for whom caliphate is interdicted.”[^42]

This defect was not of significance for Mu'awiya, however, who had
surmounted more formidable hurdles. Not only did he designate himself
enforcedly as Muslims' caliph, but he nominated his son, infamous for
being a debauchee, for that very rank as well.

The Umayya' rule was also a kind of Qurayshi one; therefore, it was on
no accounts distinct from the former ones. This circumstance was
perpetuated in the 'Abbasids dynasty too. Now what merits consideration
is to perceive when the prerequisite of being from Quraysh had become
one of the indispensable prerequisites for caliphate.

We already discussed that the prerequisite of being from Quraysh had
never been stipulated among prerequisites of Fiqh for caliphate.
Although the Shi'ite Muslims, the Twelvers, had faith in Imamate
belonging exclusively and citedly to 'Ali (a) and his descendants, those
even believing not in citation never considered the element of being
from Quraysh a prerequisite for caliphate. Hudhayfa had been quoted
subsequent to swearing allegiance to 'Ali(a) as saying that he had would
in no way swear allegiance to any Qurayshi after him.[^43]

This utterance by one of the renowned Companions (disciples) does
justify that the prerequisite of being from Quraysh had by no means been
treated legitimate and incontrovertable. Nontheless, the Umayya who were
the principal substructure of Quraysh with securing the authority,
propounded the prerequisite of being from Quraysh in earnest and
Hadith-fabricaters began fabricating Hadiths in this respect. It has
been quoted from Mu'awiya as alleging that this empire and caliphate has
been laid amongst Quraysh except whom no other one has the eligibility
of a caliph.[^44]

Addressing the dwellers of Medina who hesitated to swear allegiance to
Yazid, Rawh Ibn Zinba' belonging to the tribe of Judham and from among
the devotees of the Umayya in Damascus said, “We are not soliciting you
to swear allegiance to the tribes of Lakhm, Judham or Kalb,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولكنا ندعوكم الى قريش ومن جعل الله له هذا الأمر واختصّه “
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are summoning you toward Quraysh and the one for whom Allah has
uniquely assigned this authority, namely Yazid Ibn Mu'awiya.”[^45]

The counterfeit Hadiths prevailing were plentiful among which were “The
one disdaining Quraysh has indeed disdained Allah”.[^46] “The formost
Imams for the nation are the ones from Quraysh.”[^47] It is astonishing
that to substantiate their nobleness, they availed themselves of their
consanguinity with Allah's Apostle (S) [^48], though they antagonized
his close kins.

The Umayya's Quraysh-oriented policy was manifest in Umayya's
ruthlessness against Ansar.

Akhtal, an Umayya poet, had composed, “Quraysh is the possessor of the
entire virtuousness and greatness whereas contemptability is under the
turban of Ansar.[^49] Enumerating the grounds for his triumph over 'Ali
(a), Mu'awiya referred to his fine relation with Quraysh.[^50]

Mu'tazila has indicted Mu'awiya for initiating fatalism in the Islamic
world.[^51] It can be avowed that faith in fatalism in Arab world has
had it's antecedent in Dark Age as those of a number of Christians and
the Jews of Hijaz.

Also succeeding the emergence of Islam, much or less, a number of people
have inflamed the subject of fatalism; on the contrary, the fact is that
this belief predominated in the Umayya's tenure and gradually turned
into a principle in tribal disputes. Employing this principle on
caliphate has been revealed in the well-know utterance ascribed to
'Uthman. The revolters' insistence was his dethrone but in return
'Uthman acknowledged that he would never ever remove the robe which
Allah had made him wear.

It was wholly evident that he attributed his caliphate to Allah whereas
it was in reality emanated from 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn 'Awf's notion.
Mu'awiya did take considerable strides in this regard. Mu'awiya is
quoted as saying, as the entire affairs are under Allah's control,
endeavors are all in vain.[^52]

Elsewhere he said, “This caliphate is a decree from among Divine decrees
along with a destiny from among Divine destinies.”[^53]

Reacting to 'Ayisha's dissent from the succession of Yazid, Mu'awiya
responded, “This affair is a Divine destiny but which no one has any
other alternative.”[^54]

In his famous sermon, Ziyad Ibn Abih, Mu'awiya's governor in Basra and
Kufa declaimed, “O people, we are all the politicians and the advocates
of yours. We govern you with recourse to the power bestowed by
Allah.”[^55]

In addition, Yazid in his inaugural sermon, stated that since his father
had been a servant from among Allah's servants, Allah, magnanimous
enough, bestowed him the caliphate. Now He has laid it with him.[^56]

In an answer to 'Uthman's son who objected to Yazid's succession and
said, “It was our father after whom you secured the authority”.

Mu'awiya said, “This sovereignty is what Allah has granted us.”[^57]

To induce Mu'awiya to introduce his son a caliph, Miskin Darami
composed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بني خـلفاء الله مهـلاً فأنّما يُبوئها الرّحمن حيث يزيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا المنبـر الغربي خلّاه ربـّه فـإن اميرالمؤمنين يزيـد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O descendants of Allah's caliphs, slow down, Allah will rest the rule
anywhere He ordains. When the western pulpit of Damascus voided (when
Mu'awiya passed away), Yazid would be Amir al-Mu'minin.”[^58]

Eventually we will find out how the caliphate simply denoting the
succession of Allah's Apostle (S) at first, gradually conveyed the sense
of Divine caliphate. The cardinal matter in Mu'awiya's caliphate was
that he did abolish the tradition of caliphate and declared monarchism
officially in stead.

By “officially” what we intend is that prior to that in 'Uthman's tenure
the ground had been paved for monarchism (discussed earlier in the
section concerning 'Uthman). Narrated by Ibn 'Asakir, on hearing the
news of 'Uthman's murder, Thumama Ibn 'Adi, one of the prophet's
disciples, wept and stated that he was among those taking the “Prophetic
caliphate” from “Muhammad's household” and turning it into a despotic
monarchy.[^59]

Although of 'Uthman's was murdered, a great number of people dissented
him, later on account of the Umayya dominion they acquitted and cleansed
'Uthman of all those flaws. Nevertheless, they still did somewhat cleave
to the principle that Mu'awiya's dominion equals a termination to
caliphate era and a commencement to monarchism. This conversion by no
means did make them doubt its legitimacy. As a matter of fact, they
justified that legitimacy is something and the perfectness of the rule
something else.

Regarding this very conversion, a Hadith is attributed to the Holy
prophet (S) as stating, **خلافة النبوة ثلاثون سنة**. “Prophetic
caliphate lasts for thirty years,” [^60] and elsewhere as, **الخلافة
ثلاثون عاماَ ثم يكن بعد ذلك الملك** **“**Caliphate is for thirty years
after which monarchism appears.” [^61] “

These Hadiths do never seem authentic. What should be taken into account
is that Mu'awiya was pleased with using the term of monarchism about
himself. Mu'awiya constantly repeated, **أنا اول الملوك “** I am the
first monarch.”

In order to fortify his authority and erase all traces of caliphate, it
was possible for him to counterfeit such a Hadith as many other
instances have been seen. Ka'b al-Ahbar one of the admirers of 'Uthman
and Mu'awiya stated that in the Old Testament he had found Allah's
Apostle (S) as the one who would be born in Mecca, migrate to Taba and
whose rule is in Damascus.[^62]

And this might have made Mu'awiya think of transmitting the Holy
Prophet's pulpit as well as his waking-cane from Medina to
Damascus.[^63] It is also quoted from Abu Hurayra as stating,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الملك في قريش والقضاء في الانصار “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Monarchism is for Quraysh but governorship for Ansar” [^64] and

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخلافة في قريش والحكم في الانصار “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Caliphate is for Quraysh but governorship for Ansar.” [^65]

And in another narration, one of those possesing bibles had told to
Mu'awiya that he had noticed his attribute within the Divine Books as
the one who would for the first time turn caliphate into monarchism,
yet, Allah is merciful and forgiving after all.[^66] The Hadith
according to which caliphate would last for thirty years had been
narrated by Sufayna who was reportedly one of the prophet's Mawali
(freed slaves).

He affirmed that he had heard from the prophet (S) saying, **الخلافة
ثلاثون عاماَ ثم يكون بعد ذلك الملك** “Caliphate lasts for thirty years
and after which monarchism appears.”

Consequently, he reckoned that two years for Abu Bakr, ten years for
'Umar, twelve years for 'Uthman and six years for 'Ali (a).[^67]

However, it is known that Imam's authority did merely lasted for four
years and nine months not longer. A further reckoning was narrated by
Mas'udi as follows, two years, three months and eight days for Abu Bakr,
ten years and six months for 'Umar, eleven years, eleven months and
thirteen days for 'Uthman, four years, seven months minus afew days for
'Ali (a) and eight months and ten days for Hasan (a) that altogether
equals precisely thirty years.[^68]

Primarily other Hadiths dealing with caliphate are virtually of this
category unless, the conclusive evidence vindicate their authenticity
otherwise.

The narration of, **ان الخلفاء من قريش الى أن تقوم الساعة** “ “Caliphate
does belong to Quraysh until the Day of Judgement” [^69] would be of
this type as well unless in compliance with our belief it corresponded
to Nass (textual nomination) of Imam 'Ali (a) together with his
succeeding Imams.

Heedless of the origin of the Hadith, the historical evidence indicated
the start of a thoroughgoing monarchism within the domain of the Islamic
caliphate. The term of monarchism as a substitute for caliphate equates
to the existence of despotism which is deemed as one of the fundamental
features of the rule. As the completion of the narration of this very
Hadith “after thirty years” has come, **ثم تكون ملكاَ عاضاَ جبرية “**
After which monarchism forcibly appears.”[^70]

The noticeable instances of which were Kasra's rule in Iran and those of
Caesar's and Heraclitus's in Rome and Damascus. Mu'awiya was a great
enthusiast for the background of Damascus in particular. Muslims were
all well acquainted with these two rulers.

In one of his sermons concerning Qasitin (the oppossers), Imam 'Ali (a)
said, “Combat Allah's foes, those striving to extingish Allah's light.
Battle against the misled wrongdoers, the felons who are neither Qur'an
recitors, nor religious jurisprudents, scholars of paraphrase and those
having no background in Islam. I do swear by Almighty Allah that if they
could secure the authority, they would undoubtedly perform what was done
by Kasra and Heraclitus.”[^71]

'Ammar also regarding Qasitin said that 'Uthman's assassination was a
pretext to them until, **ليكونوا بذلك جبابرةَ ملوكا “‏‏‏** The
oppressors became monarchs.” [^72]

It was the approach that Mu'awiya had singled out in order to secure the
authority and govern an Islamic land. He himself divulged, “By Almighty
Allah I did neverever combat for the sake of performing prayers,
observing fast, pilgrimage nor paying Zakat (poor-rate as prescribed by
Islam). You yourself were acting them all. I did combat to dominate you
and although Allah bestowed it to me, you never contented.”[^73]

On entering Kufa he announced that the one swearing not allegiance to
him would in no way be secure. He set a three-day respite for
allegiance.[^74] Quoted from Ibn 'Abd al-Barr and Jahiz, he did secure
allegiance from the nation as loathing for 'Ali (a).[^75]

In a letter to 'Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far to swear allegiance to Yazid, he
had written, “If you swear allegiance, you will be adored; otherwised,
you will be coerced.” [^76]

Allegedly, he had ordered to slay the one who avoids swearing.[^77]
About figures like Qays Ibn Sa'd, having a kind of influence, he secured
allegiance by clasping his hand and compelling him to pat his hand
whereas Qays was refraining.[^78]

Mu'awiya's aristocratic lifestyle and his procedures adopted in
caliphate, pompted Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas as well to address him a
“monarch” when meeting.[^79] In Damascus he was determined to find the
works created about ruler's biographies in Damascus.[^80]

Later on, Jahiz recorded that Mu'awiya turned the rule into the rule of
Kasra and Caesar.[^81] Historians have also introduced him as the
ever-first monarch.[^82] And Sa'id Ibn Musayyib affirmed that Mu'awiya
was the first one converting caliphate into monarchism.[^83]

Mughira Ibn Shu'ba described Mu'awiya as an emir and specified that
there should be a difference between a peasant and an emir.[^84]
Reportedly, the first one who substituted, **ملك يوم الدين “** Master of
the Day of Judgment” for **مالك يوم الدين “** Owner of the Day of
Judgment” was Mu'awiya.[^85]

Ya'qubi has enumerated what he did as indications of monarchism as
follows, being seated on a platform and making others sit in a lower
position, singling out the best propertys of the people and allotting
them all to himself.[^86] He commanded to devote whatsoever Iranian
kings had possessed in farmlands or anywhere else to him.[^87]

Mu'awiya's status was so conspicuous that 'Umar had named him Kasra in
his tenure.[^88] It should be asserted that Mu'awiya was set to
establish a “caliphate of Islamic royalty”. He considered himself as a
king but described as a caliph concerning old traditions. Making efforts
to transport Prophets' pulpit from Medina to Damascus, he intended to
fortify his Islamic strength although he could never succeed.[^89]

Mawdudi has itemized a number of characteristics for clarifying the
distinction between Mu'awiya's monarchism and his predecessors'
caliphate as follows, first, the way of designating a caliph converted.
In spite of his predecessors who never rose up for caliphate, Mu'awiya
in any way exerted to gain the caliphate. As soon as he secured the
authority, no one was able to dissent him. Anyone had to swear on oath
of allegiance to him.

It was what Mu'awiya himself had confessed, “I was absolutely aware of
nation's discontent with my caliphate; however, I secured it by
sword”.[^90]

It gradually culminated in hereditary caliphate by Mu'awiya. Secondly,
the lifestyle of the caliphs converted. Following the approaches of
monarchism of Iran and Rome did commence from Mu'awiya's tenure on. The
third feature is concerned with Bayt al-Mal (public fund). At this
juncture, public treasury changed in to the king's and his lineage's
personal wealth. No one had the right to reprimand the government for
the accounts thereof.

Fourthly, it was the termination of freedom of speech. At this period,
not a single one had an ability to enjoin the good nor prohibit the
evil. This new process began in Mu'awiya's term after Hujr Ibn 'Adi's
assassination. Fifthly, it was the end of freedom of judiciary branch.
The end of the council-oriented government was the sixth characteristic
of a monarchical government. The seventh was the emergence of racial and
tribal prejudices. And also elimination of superiority for law has been
deemed as the eighth feature.[^91]

Mawdudi has presented many historical instances for each characteristic.

Shi‘ite Muslims in Mu‘awiya’s time
----------------------------------

In Mu'awiya's term, one of the crucial issues was the Shi'ites beliefs
amongst a number of people specifically Iraqis. We have already
discussed the emergence of Shi'ism. Now we are to evaluate the
interactions between Shi'ite Muslims and the Umayya.

Beyond any doubt, Shi'ite Muslims have always been Mu'awiya's
archenemies as the Kharijites were considered as other foes for him.
Nevertheless, the Kharijites were not of great significance. The
universal pessimism on the part of Muslims about them, their oppression
as well as their baseless position-taking had resulted in having no
support among people. On the contrary, Shi'ite Muslims particularly in
Iraq were all endowed with a mighty support like Imam 'Ali (a) and
others from Ahl al-Bayt (Prophet's infallible household).

The culture disseminated by Imam 'Ali (a) in Iraq was indeed thoroughly
Islamic and although people had to keep silence under Mu'awiya's
compulsion, they were all able to distinguish 'Ali's truthfulness and
Mu'awiya's wrongfulness.

Mu'awiya and with his agents confronted this process with diverse ways,
from reconciliation and gentleness to vast harshness. The latter was
wide-ranging especially in Iraq. Creating hatred for 'Ali (a) was one
the most critical approach used. Mu'awiya and other Umayyads succeeding
him have persistently been endeavoring to wipe 'Ali (a) off the face of
the earth and introduce him as an element, aggressive, bloodthirsty and
the like.

In Holy Prophet's term and later on in caliphs' terms and his own
caliphate especially, Imam 'Ali's life verified his unique glory in both
scientific and practical domains. His sermons were narrated chest by
chest. The statements regarding his scientific supremacy, the Hadiths
quoted from the Holy Prophet (S) concerning his excellence as well as
his praiseworthy and extraordinary judgments were all recounted by
people to one another in hadith assemblies.

These all led to dissemination of that culture among people, the culture
which prompted Imam 'Ali's disciples to retain this affection for him
even at the cost of their martyrdom. And above all, this culture could
naturally perpetuate among Imam 'Ali's descendants, from Prophet's
household. In as much as the Umayyads had perceived this fact, they
consequently were determined to stigmatize the Imam, express their
disgust for him in every assembly and curse him. Ibn Abi al-Hadid has
written a chapter entitled “the hadiths counterfeited by Mu'awiya
concerning 'Ali (a) through stimulating a number of disciples and
Tabi'in” in his book.[^92]

When Marwan Ibn Hakam was asked why they were doing so, he responded,
**لا يستقيم لنا الامر الا بذلك** Our governorship will on no accounts be
abiding but through this way.” [^93] “

Principally, the Umayya's sovereignty could never perpetuate except the
policy of insulting 'Ali (a). Cursing His Excellency, highlighting other
caliphs as well as introducing them as superior to 'Ali (a) were
constantly pursued. As stated by some, since Hadith-fabricators aimed to
approach the Umayya with recourse to these Hadiths, most Hadiths
concerned with disciples' virtues had been fabricated in the Umayya's
tenure.[^94]

At this juncture, individuals like 'Ayisha were introduced as a source
for Hadiths[^95] and others like Zayd Ibn Thabit, being on 'Uthman's
side, were appointed to be the source of advice on legal or religious
matters for Mu'awiya.[^96]

Attributing Hadiths by Imam 'Ali (a) to himself or others was among what
Mu'awiya did so that others could at times attribute them to Mu'awiya as
well. Jahiz who had realized the fact denied the attribution of such
Hadiths to Mu'awiya owing to the fact that he had no relation with the
devout.[^97]

This Hadith narrated by Imam, **ما رأيت سرفاَ الا الي جانبها حق مضيّع
“** I have seen no lavishment unless someone's right was disregarded
therein” [^98] was ascribed to Mu'awiya.

In another case, one of Imam's Hadiths was attributed to a Bedouin.[^99]
“We ascribe 'Ali's letter to Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr to Abu Bakr”,
Mu'awiya himself had confessed.[^100]

'Ali's malediction to the Kufiyans was attributed to 'Umar.[^101]

Insulting and cursing 'Ali was prolonged as a tradition until it was
ceased in 'Umar 'Abd al-’Aziz's time.[^102] Mu'awiya himself stressed
that it must be spread to the extent that the offspring mature with this
slogan, the youths grow old and no one narrates his excellence.[^103]

From among the disciples, some contributed to Mu'awiya in this regard.
There existed a Hadith by Abu Hurayra concerning the mischief-making
among the nation that says it is about 'Ali, yet, the Holy Prophet (S)
has cursed such a person.[^104]

It has also been narrated that Mu'awiya rewarded Samura Ibn Jundab with
400,000 dhms to alege that the following verse (2:204) had been revealed
about 'Ali (a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ النَّاسِ مَنْ يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ عَلَى مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ وَهُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And among men is the one whose speech about this worldly life causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries.”[^105]

Ibn Abi al-Hadid has written that Mu'awiya had stimulated a number of
disciples to narrate some Hadiths against Imam 'Ali(a) among whom were
Abu Hurayra, 'Amr Ibn 'As, Mughira Ibn Shu'ba and 'Urwa Ibn
Zubayr.[^106]

In his letters to his agents in cities, Mu'awiya wrote, “The Hadiths
regarding 'Uthman's virtues are being augmented in cities, as soon as
you received my letter, urge people to begin narrating the excellences
of companions and caliphs and also narrate a Hadith contradicting any
Hadith narrated concerning Abu Turab's (Imam 'Ali) virtues.”

Accordng to Ibn Abi al-Hadid, most of them in order to get closer to the
Umayya fabricated Hadiths expressing disciples' excellences.[^107] To
replace the Hadith about the brotherhood between 'Ali(a) and the Holy
Prophet (S), they counterfeited it therein the Prophet (S) stated, “If I
intended to designate a successor for myself, he would undoubtedly be
Abu Bakr.”

They had fabricated the hadith of “Khawkha” opposite to Hadith of “Sadd
al-Abwab”.[^108]

Mu'awiya was extremely bound to curse Imam 'Ali (a) as the conclusion of
his sermons.[^109] He even compelled Imam's disciples to go up the
pulpit and curse him.[^110] Any agent of Mu'awiya who did not abide by
the tradition of cursing was deposed and replaced right away.[^111] He
had eaniced people into daring not to name their babies 'Ali[^112] but
call them Mu'awiya instead.[^113]

He had announced that if anyone narrated the excellences of 'Ali, he
would never warrant his security. Subsequently all preachers expressed
their disgust for Imam 'Ali (a) and cursed him.[^114] However, in return
he commanded his agents to support the one narrating 'Uthman's
excellences.[^115]

A great number also lived either in Damascus or Iraq who loathed Imam
'Ali (a) for their kins' murder. And now the opportunity was provided to
them to disclose their rancor by insulting and cursing him. When Hariz
Ibn 'Uthman was asked why he cursed Imam (a) seventy times every morning
and night, his response was, “How can I abstain from it whereas he has
beheaded my forefathers with suspicion.”[^116]

We will discuss later that the pressure exercising on Ahl al-Bayt was
wholly for the sake of hindering 'Ali's name to be commemorated. As one
of the reasons for murdering Hasan Ibn 'Ali(a) by poison, Ibn Jawzi has
pointed to his entry into Damascus[^117] which was naturally
intolerable.

All of these harsh treatments in order to wipe 'Ali's name off the face
of the earth occasioned people not to have the courage to narrate 'Ali's
virtues. Awza'i, a renowned traditionist, did narrate nothing concerned
with Ahl al-Bayt's virtues save the Hadith to inform the revelation of
the verse of “Tathir” (purification) about them[^118], the same as Zuhri
who narrated not more than a virtue.[^119]

It seemed quite natural that all these repeated and universal curses
could eventually influence people's hearts, particularly in Hijaz and
Damascus, and gradually change public opinions. It was, in every
respect, what Mu'awiya sought. Because Islamic leadership lay with Imam
'Ali, eliminating him could lead to elimination of the religion from the
society. As an emphasis, Mu'awiya secured allegiance from people by
prerequisite of loathing 'Ali (a)[^120] in the same mannar that he had
forced them for the first time to swear.[^121]

Mu'awiya's another action facing Shi'ite Muslims was excercising
compulsion. The manifestation of his rancor to Imam and Shi'ite Muslims
was in his brutal treatments. Imam Hasan Mujtaba's martyrdom, a
conspiracy by Mu'awiya, was in line with this very policy. It is what
historical sources have reported and accordingly, they have in truth
discredited Mu'awiya among Muslims. The opposition of Umm al-Mu'minin
(mother of the faithful, 'Ayisha) in Imam's burial beside the Prophet
(S) exhibited the immense oppressedness of Imam together with his
Shi'ite Muslims.[^122]

Mu'awiya who believed that it was not feasible to delude the people of
Iraq in the same way as silly people of Damascus, he had to choose the
route of slaying and chastizing. Besides, Iraqi dwellers, including both
Shi'ite Muslims and non-Shi'ite Muslims, were so sensitive that even a
slight irritation could result in chanting bitter slogans against the
Umayya although they were all obedient under the sword of Ziyad and
Hajjaj.

The common term describing Shi'ite Muslims was “Turabiyya” in the
Umayya's tenure.[^123] It was derived from “Abu Turab”, (the father of
soil), the title use by the Umayya for scorning Imam 'Ali (a);
nevertheless, later on a number of “Ghulat” (the Exaggerators) availed
themselves of it for proving the Divinity of Imam 'Ali.

Slaying Shi'ite Muslims had begun since Imam 'Ali's term. After Imam's
forces dispersed and there was no security found but in Iraq, Mu'awiya
deployed his troops along with some envoys to various areas among whom
were Busr Ibn Artat, Sufyan Ibn 'Awf Ghamidi and Dhahhak Ibn Qays. Their
responsibility in cities was to trace and, **فيقتلوا كلّ من وجده من شيعة
علي “** Kill any Shi'ites they noticed at Mu'awiya's behest.”

Busr set out to Medina were he martyred many of 'Ali's disciples and
enthusiasts and demolished their houses as well. He then went to Mecca
and Sarat respectively and slayed any Shi'ite Muslim he discovered.
Ultimately, he left there for Najran and martyred 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abd
al-Muddan as well as his son. Earlier we presented a profile of his
crimes.

Among areas that Busr passed en route and plundered was an area the
residents of which were from the tribe of Hamdan, 'Ali's Shi'ite
Muslims.

Ambushing them, Busr killed numerous men and captured a number of women
and children. For the ever-first time Muslim women and children were
captured.[^124] These measures were once again adopted later in Karbala.
About Busr, Mas'udi has written that he slayed a number from the tribes
of Khuza'a and Hamdan together with a group known as al-Abna' (from
Iranian race) in Yemen. **ولم** **يبلغه عن أحد انه يمالي علياَ او يهواه
الا قتله** He killed anyone of whose attachment to 'Ali he heard.”
[^125]

Setting out to Anbar, 'Awf Ibn Sufyan martyred Ibn Hassan al-Bakri in
addition to Shi'ites men and women.[^126]

After Hasan Ibn 'Ali (a) had to compromise with Mu'awiya, one of the
menaces Imam felt was the security of 'Ali's Shi'ite Muslims. Hence it
was stipulated within the contract that 'Ali's disciples should be all
endowed with security. Although Mu'awiya had conceded it, immediately on
the same day he announced that he would disregard the entire
commitments.

Since Kufa was the center of Shi'ite Muslims' political and religious
tendencies, Mu'awiya had to appoint one who can curb such people.
Following the clashes between 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amr Ibn 'As and Mughira
Ibn Shu'ba who could keep up with Mu'awiya in deception, Mughira
eventually flourished to be appointed as the governor of Kufa.

Mu'awiya's endeavor was to have politically peaceful treatments towards
the opponents as much as he could. The bases of two groups of the Umayya
adversaries such as the Kharijites and Shi'ite Muslims were in Iraq. The
Kharijites revolted several times but were suppressed with all possible
haste.

But on the other hand, Shi'ite Muslims by virtue of the contract signed
between Hasan Ibn 'Ali and Mu'awiya, did not permit themselves to
transgress. Mughira also intended to take no action except against the
one revolting. As a result, even the Kharijites of Kufa also had
apparent relations with one another.[^127]

Among the Iraqi tribes, the tribes of Rabi'a, Hamdan[^128], Banu 'Abd
al-Qays and Khuza'a (few in Iraq) had Shi'ites inclination.

In his remarks addressing the tribe of Banu 'Abd al-Qays, Sa'sa'a Ibn
Suhan said, “When apostasy was common, you did remain beside the
religion and when some followed 'Ayisha, Talha, Zubayr and 'Abd Allah
Ibn Wahb Rasibi, you declared that, **انا لا نريد إلا أهل البيت الذي
ابتدأنا الله من قبلهم** **بالكرامة** “ You seek naught save Ahl al-Bayt,
at first by whom Allah had granted you blessing.” [^129]

Sa'sa'a under other circumstances availed himself of the opportunities
provided for spreading his beliefs which were mostly censuring 'Uthman
and eulogizing 'Ali (a).

When Mughira was notified of such movements, he summoned Sa'sa'a and
told him, “Far more than you we are acquainted with his excellences but

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذه السلطان قد ظهر وأخذنا بإظهار عيبه للناس فندع كثيراً مما أمرنا به
ونذكر الشيء الذي لانجد منه بداً نرفع به هؤلاء القوم عن أنفسنا تقيّة “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Because as soon as this ruler appeared, we had to denounce 'Ali and
relinguish many of what we were ordered to merely in order to extricate
ourselves from this race (the Umayya).” [^130]

Anyhow Mughira the same as other agents were compelled to denounce Imam
'Ali (a) and exonerate 'Uthman. Owing to this fact

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يتعرّض لعليٍّ في مجلسه وخطبه ويدعو لعثمان ويترحّم له “
  </p>
</blockquote>

He variably denounced 'Ali (a) in every assembly and sermon in the
mosque but commemorated 'Uthman and pled mercy for him.” [^131]

Subsquent to Mughira's death (probably in 49 or 50 A.H.) the status quo
converted. Although Ziyad Ibn Abih was the governor of Basra at that
time, Mu'awiya added Kufa to this realm as well. At the time of Imam
'Ali (a), Ziyad Ibn Abih was the governor of Fars. Since Mu'awiya's
intention was deluding 'Ali's disciples, he decided to delude Ziyad too.
His defect was lacking a definite begetter that Mu'awiya solved the
problem by naming him Ziyad Ibn Abi Sufyan. Despite Imam 'Ali's
forewarning to him[^132], Ziyad did never resent it and ultimately a
while after of compromising he took refuge in Mu'awiya's side.

Ziyad as well as his toughness were quite well known to Mu'awiya. He
also knew that Ziyad had been in Iraq for some time and knew 'Ali's
Shi'ite Muslims all well. Accordingly, first he despatched him to Basra
and added Kufa to his realm after Mughira's death. Mu'awiya might
realize that the Shi'ite Muslims in Kufa enjoyed relative freedom and at
times could openly object in presence of Mughira in the mosque. It was
considered a real threat which Mu'awiya removed by Ziyad's dispatch.

The first measure taken by Ziyad was cutting off the hands of those
(nearly eighty) who were not convinced to swear allegiance to him.[^133]
Ziyad's harsh treatment in Basra, with a group of the Kharijites in
addition to Shi'ite Muslims, was proverbial. He had declared a kind of
martial law in Basra.

At nights, following the night prayer, the opportunity people had for
staying outdoors was as long as reciting the Sura (chapter) of The Cow.
During the curfew, Ziyad's soldiers slayed anyone they traced.[^134]
Historians have introduced Ziyad as the ever-first one who drew his
sword to people, arrested them by accusing them and chastized them with
suspicion.[^135]

Among the Shi'ite Muslims martyred by Ziyad were Muslim Ibn Zaymur and
'Abd Allah Ibn Nuja who were both from the tribe of Haďram. In a letter
to Mu'awiya succeeding Hujr's martyrdom, Imam Husayn (a) had
commemorated their martyrdom too.[^136]

Ziyad's main mission was to suppress the Shi'ite Muslims of Kufa
throughout Iraq.  
 “He was always seeking after Shi'ite Muslims and anywhere tracing he
slayed them”, Ibn A'tham said.

He cut off the limbs of people and blinded them. Mu'awiya himself
murdered a great number as well.[^137] Elsewhere it has been written
that Mu'awiya had issued the verdict of executing a group of Shi'ite
Muslims.[^138] Ziyad assembled Shi'ite Muslims in a mosque in order to
make them express loathing for 'Ali.[^139] He also searched for Shi'ite
Muslims in Basra to kill.[^140]

In a letter Imam Hasan (a) objected to Mu'awiya in this regard.[^141]
Treating the same way, Samura Ibn Jundab, a substitute for him in Basra,
had allegedly augmented the number of orphans in Basra and massacred
nearly 8000 people until Ziyad objected him.[^142]

Although the accuracy of the abovementioned figures is not definite, it
manifests a profile of their atrocities. Ziyad's treatment towards
'Ali's friends was unjust, in a real sense[^143] exactly the same as
that of 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir, Mu'awiya's another governor.[^144] Nu'man
Ibn Bashir, ex-governor of this area, on account of his acute rancor to
dwellers of Kufa did not even want to obey Mu'awiya's order to increase
their provisions from Bayt al-Mal (public fund).[^145]

Under the guise of a peace-seeking character, Mu'awiya had commanded
Ziyad to decimate anyone at 'Ali's religion.[^146]

“Kill anyone amongst you who is from 'Ali's Shi'ite Muslims or accused
of his amity”, he wrote to his agents, “and for it find evidence even
hidden under the rocks even though it was solely an assumption”.[^147]
“Exclude the name of the one for whose amity to 'Ali you found any proof
from Bayt al-Mal”, he added, “and discontinue his provision.”

He then wrote in conclusion, **من اتهمتموه بموالاة هولاء القوم فنكّلوا
به واهدموا داره** “Kill any one from among yourselves who is accused of
having devotion to 'Ali and demolish his house as well.” [^148]

Ibn Abi al-Hadid has also written that as far as Ziyad was
well-aquainted with Shi'ite Muslims,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قتلهم تحت كل حجر ومدر وأخافهم وقطع الأيدي والأرجل وسمل العيون وصلبهم
على جذوع النخل وطرًّدهم وشردّهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He massacred them all anywhere whom he noticed, intimidated them, cut
off their limbs, blinded them, hung them from tree branches and banished
them.” [^149]

The impetus of such treatments was totally obvious. According to Ahnaf
Ibn Qays, one of the headmen of Banu Tamim tribe had told about Mu'awiya
that he had captured Iraq not by force but through commitement and
contracts;[^150] Anytime it was probable for people to revolt against
Mu'awiya or “a catastrophe”, as he called it, take place.[^151]

It was as a result, necessary that any rebellion be suppressed.
Dissatisfied with the Umayya's the people of Iraq had to yield to them
reluctantly. Imam Hasan (a) also had reminded Mu'awiya of this
point.[^152] By the same token, as mentioned by Jahiz it was in truth a
blunder that Mu'awiya had named 41 A.H. as **عام الجماعة “**The year of
congregation” on the contrary, it must have been named as, **عام التفرقة
“**The year of separation”[^153]

These all accounted for the lack of factual collaboration and even the
potential enmity of the Kufiyans towards Mu'awiya. In spite of the
compulsion exercised by individuals like Ziyad and deception practised
by Mughira to impede the growth of adversaries, Shi'ite Muslims were
still wholeheartedly faithful to their allegiance.

Imam 'Ali (a) had recommended them to curse him if they were under
duress, but neverever loathe him.[^154] Anyhow, Kufa was like fire under
ashes that should have been thwarted with great effort not to catch fire
again.

The Suppression of Hujr Ibn ‘Adi’s Shi‘ite Movement
---------------------------------------------------

Hujr al-Khayr or Hujr Ibn 'Adi who had been among the Holy Prophet's
disciples, did later range himself with 'Ali's firm and devoted Shi'ite
Muslims. He belonged to the tribe of Kinda, a southern tribe in Hijaz,
who had migrated to Iraq in 17 A.H. This tribe was involved in Iraqi
events as participants in Siffin and later on in Mukhtar's
uprising.[^155]

A crowd from among them was at odds with Husayn Ibn 'Ali (a) in Karbala.
In the course of Siffin, his activity was utterly broad and he played a
role as a commander in 'Ali's army, yet when many abandoned Imam
(a)[^156], up to the very last moment he stayed beside him.[^157] Hujr
could be found amid the most pious disciples of Allah's Apostle (S).
Hukaym Niyshaburi called him the monk of Prophet's disciples.[^158]

After 'Ali's martyrdom, he was amongt the ones stimulating the nation to
swear allegiance to Hasan Ibn 'Ali (a). In the process of compromising,
Hujr seemed discontented but Imam elaborated that he had to consent
merely due to protecting the lives of individuals like him.[^159]
Nontheless later Mu'awiya by no means remained faithful to his pledge
and martyred both Hujr and his followers.[^160]

During the governorship of Mughira over Kufa that lasted until the
beginning of 50s, in spite of relative freedom, insults were still
hurled at Imam 'Ali (a) in the masque. The leadership of 'Ali's Shi'ite
Muslims was lain with the characters such as Hujr Ibn 'Adi and 'Amr Ibn
Hamiq Khuza'i.[^161]

Hujr was among those who frequently objected to Mughira accustomed to
insult Imam 'Ali (a). When Mughira was paved the way to send a caravan
carrying some properties to Mu'awiya who was in need, Hujr intercepted
the caravan and declared that as long as he has not granted the rights
of the rightful, on no accounts would he allow these properties to be
conveyed.[^162] At Mu'awiya's behest, Mughira had commanded them to take
part in the congregational prayer at the mosque.[^163]

Once Hujr was urged by Mughira to go up the pulpit and curse Imam 'Ali
(a) he went up and said, “Mughira propels me to curse 'Ali (a), curse
him you all.”[^164]

Immediately, the congregation perceived that his intention had been
Mughira himself. Mughira, however, had already declared that he never
intended to be the first one murdering the celebrity of Kufa and as a
result contribute to Mu'awiya's grandeur in this world and his own
abjectness in the Hereafter.[^165] This statement was the response to
those objecting why he did not arrest or harass Hujr.

Following the demise of Mughira and Ziyad's governorship over Kufa, the
status quo altered perceptibly.

Ziyad, from the very first night of his governorship, did commence his
rigors. His exceptional sermon for threatening Kufa people, has been
recorded as a typical Arab sermon in historical sourcesat that juncture.

Well acquainted with Hujr Ibn 'Adi, he warned him stating, “You and I
have been in the same situation that you know yourself (concerning
'Ali's amity) but today anything has converted. Hold your tongue and
stay at your home. My throne can be yours too. I will doubtlessly meet
all your demands provided that you get along with me although you are
rash”.

Seemingly, Hujr who was convinced went away.[^166]

Once again the status quo changed. It is said that one time Hujr
interrupted Ziyad's remarks protracted and the time of prayer was
elasping, yelling out, “Al-Salat” (prayer).[^167] It is also narrated
that he along with other Shi'ite Muslims had been convening meetings
after Ziyad's departure to Basra. Ziyad's substitute, 'Amr Ibn Hurayth,
wrote to Ziyad that if he desired to maintain Kufa, he should return
without delay.[^168]

In this respect, Hujr was not merely solitary, but also he was under any
circumstances accompanied by a number of Shi'ite Muslims. Quotedly, when
Hujr protested against Mughira in the mosque, more than one- third of
the audience validated his remarks.[^169]

As written by Abul-Faraj, in the absence of Ziyad, being in Basra, Hujr
together with his companions occupied one-third or half of the mosque
and began denouncing and vilifying Mu'awiya.[^170] Ziyad himself had
denounced the nobles of Kufa that **أنتم معي وإخوانكم وأبنائكم وعشائركم
مع حجر** **“**You are on my side whereas your brothers, offspring and
tribes are on Hujr's side.” [^171] “

After a while, a multitude of those on Hujr's side dispersed since the
chiefs of tribes had menaced the members of the tribes. Therefore, there
was no more companion remained with Hujr.

When a group was sent to arrest him, he addressed his friends as saying,
“Since you are by no means able to defy them, there is no way for any
struggle.[^172] Eventually, Hujr conceded to surrender provided that for
drawing deduction he should be taken to meet Mu'awiya.[^173]

Having accepted the condition, Ziyad was making an attempt on the other
hand to expose him to murder. By the same token, he compelled four
characters having been appointed as the chiefs of the tribes in Kufa to
make an affidavit against Hujr. It was stipulated in the affidavit that
Hujr had formed some assemblies wherein Mu'awiya had been cursed.

His belief was that no one merited the caliphate save those from Talib's
lineage. As stated by them having caused chaos within the town, he had
expelled 'Amr Ibn Hurayth, the governor; furthermore, he had not only
saluted 'Ali, but expressed his disgust for his foes and those having
combated him.

Ziyad who had on no accounts approved the aforesaid affidavit ordered
Abu Burda, son of Abu Musa Ash'ari, to prepare a more pungent one. What
he wrote as a result was,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن حجر خلع الطاعة وفارق الجماعة ولعن الخليفة ودعا إلي الحرب والفتنة
وجمع إليه الجموع يدعوهم إلى نكث البيعة وخلع اميرالمؤمنين معاويه وكفر
بالله كفرة صلعاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Hujr has declined to comply with the caliph and seceded from “Jama'a”.
He has cursed the caliph and summoned all to a battle and sedition.
Having congregated the people around himself, he has urged them to
breach their pledges. He dethroned Mu'awiya, Amir al-Mu'minin, from the
caliphate and blasphemed against Allah in addition.”[^174]

This time Hujr was labeled a blasphemer. Abu Burda who was one of the
eminent Sunnites traditionists bore the witness of it.[^175] Ziyad
persuaded others to sign it too. Among the signitories were Ishaq and
Moses, sons of Talha, Mundhir, Zubayr's son, 'Umar, son of Sa'd Ibn Abi
Waqqas and 'Umara, son of 'Uqba Ibn Abi Mu'ayt.[^176]

As narrated by historians, while Hujr was being arrested, he yelled out,
“I am still faithful to my allegiance”. He was absolutely right because
he neverever intended to revolt againt Mu'awiya. What he insisted on was
about 'Ali not to be insulted. And it was precisely what had been
stipulated in Mu'awiya's commitment and conceded by him.

Fascinatingly, it was specified in the affidavit that Hujr believed that
caliphate was well deserved to no one but those from Talib's lineage. It
was the manifestation of Hujr's purifiedly Shi'ites belief. “Purified
Shi'ite Muslims” denotes those being religious Shi'ite Muslims. The
belief of such Shi'ite Muslims is that Imamate does solely belong to
prophet's household (Ahl al-Bayt).

In a poem quoted from Hujr we read, **فإنه كان له وليًّا ثم ارتضاه بعده
وصيّاً ”'** Ali was a friend of the Prophet's (S) and he was gratified
with his executorship.”[^177]

Hujr described 'Ali as Prophet's friend and executor. At that time many
were of this belief in Iraq. When Abul-Aswad Du'ali was sneered due to
his in-depth enthusiasm for 'Ali, he stated in a poem,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحب محمداً حبّاً شديداً وعباساً وحمزة والوصيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I adore Muhammad (S), 'Abbas, Hamza and the executor ('Ali)” [^178]

He did introduce 'Ali as the Holy Prophet's executor manifestubg his
successorship. Corresponding to it is Malik's statement regarding 'Ali,
**هذا وصي الأوصياء ووارث علم الأنبياء “**The executor of the executors
and the inheritor of all prophets' body of knowledge is he.” [^179]

This description was also what Imam al-Baqir's Shi'ite Muslims like
Jabir Ibn Yazid Ju'fi uttered about 'Ali (a).[^180] Further instances
have been presented earlier in discussion of Shi'ism at Imam 'Ali's
time.

Ultimately, Hujr along with his fourteen companions, known as the heads
of Hujr's followers[^181], was sent to Damascus. A few of them were
interceded and forgiven by Mu'awiya in Damascus.

Although Hujr also was interceded, Mu'awiya did in no way accept.
Reportedly, Mu'awiya was at first ambivalent and on this account he had
already written to Ziyad that he believed that Hujr should never be
murdered but Ziyad had replied that liberating him would result in
corruption of Iraq[^182], and he could allow Hujr to return Iraq on the
condition that he did not require Kufa.[^183]

Mu'awiya eventually made a decision to assassinate Hujr;
notwithstanding, since he was terrified to meet him face to face, he
commanded to detain them in Marj 'Adhra' a few Farsangs far away from
Damascus.[^184]

Later he read out the affidavit of dwellers of Kufa to those of Damascus
and appealed to them to voice their opinions! It was utterly evident
that what they could ever say when the disciples' descendants were of
that opinion!

Mu'awiya deployed a number to Marj 'Adhra' to carry out what they were
supposed to. They were at first duty-bound to propose them that if they
expressed their loathing for 'Ali (a), the verdict would be declared
null and void. Under no circumstances did Hujr and his companions agree.
And it might have been owing to this fact that Imam 'Ali (a) had
asserted that after him if they were impelled to insult him, they should
abide by but neverever express loathing for him.[^185]

Subsequently, digging their own graves, Hujr and his companions spent
dusk to dawn in worshiping. Eight out of them were set free but six of
them announced their readiness for martyrdom.

Next morning they were again requested to express their idea about
'Uthman, **أول من جار في الحكم** “The ever-first one who did injustice
was 'Uthman”, they retorted. They were asked whether they would
pronounce disgust for 'Ali. They responded, **لا، بل نتولاه ونتبرأ ممن
تبرأ منه “** No, never, we do all love him and hate those who hate him.”

Then they prepared themselves for being martyred. Hujr who was prominent
among the devout of Iraq said a very-long-two-Rak'at prayer (Rak'at,
unit of prayer consisting of three postures) and stated, **والله ماصليت
قطّ أقصر منها ولولا أن تروا أن ما بي جزع من الموت أحببت أن استكثر منها
“** As yet, I have never performed a prayer shorter than this and I
yearned to prolong it if you did not accuse me of being scared of
decease.”

Six of them were martyred. Karim Ibn 'Afif Khath'ami and 'Abd al-Rahman
Ibn Hassan al-’Anzi were both taken to meet Mu'awiya. Karim was
interceded but when it was 'Abd al-Rahman's turn, Mu'awiya questioned
him about 'Ali (a).

“You had better not enquire any question”, he responded. When Mu'awiya
insisted, he declared,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أشهد أنه من الذاكرين الله كثيراَ ومن الآمرين بالحق والقائمين بالقسط
والعافين عن الناس “
  </p>
</blockquote>

I do attest that he was among the ones bearing Allah invariably in mind,
enjoining good, establishing justice and being magnanimous.” And when he
was asked about 'Uthman, he replied, **هو اوّل من فتح باب الظلم وارتجع
ابواب الحق “**He was the first one who opened the door of injustice and
closed the doors of justice.”

Mu'awiya sent him to Iraq and instructed Ziyad to kill him brutally.
Then, he was buried alive at Ziyad's behest.[^186]

Repercussions of Hujr’s Martyrdom
---------------------------------

Hujr's martyrdom did mar the reputation of Mu'awiya as well as other
Umayyads incredibly. As far as his fame for devoutness and worship among
the Prophet's disciples was concerned, rarely could anyone be found
unacquainted with his piety. Being among the chiefs of the tribe of
Kinda had magnified his eminence too.

Therefore, eruption of objections against the Umayya in general and
Mu'awiya in particular seemed quite natural. Although the heavy pressure
exerted could impede the occurance of probable riots in Iraq, it could
on the contrary intensify the nation's devotion to Shi'ism on the one
hand and their rancor to Mu'awiya on the other hand. Later, a multitude
including Hujr's sons such as 'Abd Allah and 'Abd al-Rahman took part in
Mukhtar's uprising.[^187]

On hearing the news of Hujr's martyrdom, even a number of Ziyad's agents
like the governor of Khurasan, Rabi' Ibn Ziyad Harithi, deplored
greatly. It is said that Rabi' prayed for being died soon and by
accident, he did fall down and pass away on the same day.[^188] 'Ayisha
was also among the protesters. She had dispatched 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn
Harith to Mu'awiya to recommend him not to murdering Hujr but prior to
his arrival Hujr had been martyred.[^189]

Later, 'Ayisha reproached Mu'awiya for Hujr's murder[^190] as saying, “I
would object to you for Hujr's murder if it were not the case that
anything we dissented occurred in a worser form”.[^191]  
 Hujr's devoutness had prompted 'Ayisha to object to Mu'awiya in this
regard though his standing in Jamal War was for Imam 'Ali (a) and
against 'Ayisha.

As usuall, Mu'awiya resorted to deception and deniedthat he had murdered
him.  
 “Those who testified against him were his murderer”, he added.[^192]

The consequences of such a claim in sight of some like Hasan Basri[^193]
were their disbelief in the Umayya and then their discredit among
people.

It was quoted from Mu'awiya as declaring, “Anyone whom I slayed I knew
why I did it except about Hujr.”[^194]

Abi Zur'a has narrated, “Whenever I met Mu'awiya, he recalled
Hujr.”[^195]  
 While in the agony of death, he had stated, **أي يوم من حجر وأصحاب
حجر** “Where are those days with Hujr and his followers.” [^196]

In his very last breath, Hujr had requested to be buried with the same
shirt owing to the fact that he desired to stand before Mu'awiya with
that state on the Day of Judgment. [^197]

Historians have said, **أول ذل دخل الكوفة قتل الحجر وقتل الحسين ودعوة
زياد** “The first abjectness for Kufa was the martyrdom of both Hujr Ibn
'Adi and Imam Husayn plus Ziyad's claim to be Abu Sufyan's son.” [^198]

Gragually the relation between Imam Husayn and his Shi'ite Muslims
improved rapidly. Having paniced, in a letter, Mu'awiya warned Imam not
to creat separation, sedition and corruption among the nation. As a
riposte, Imam protested against martyring 'Ali's Shi'ite Muslims, the
foremost of whom Hujr Ibn 'Adi, and deplored for he never took up arms
against Mu'awiya. We will show the letter later concerning Imam Husayn's
stance against Mu'awiya.

One of the other followers of Hujr martyred at the same juncture was
'Amr Ibn Hamiq Khuza'i who was among Prophet and 'Ali's disciples and
later deemed as the pivot of the Shi'ite Muslims in Kufa.[^199]

When Ziyad had ordered his guards to trace Hujr and his companions, 'Amr
Ibn Hamiq along with Rufa'a Ibn Shaddad escaped to Ctesiphon and then to
Musil. The governor of the district sent a mission to arrest them who
were aliens. Rufa'a fled but 'Amr was taken to Musil governor, 'Abd
al-Rahman Ibn 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Uthman Thaqafi. Recognizing 'Amr, he wrote
to Mu'awiya what the proper course was to pursue.

Mu'awiya wrote, ”'Amr himself had confessed he had given nine lashes to
'Uthman, thus whip him nine times.” And since 'Amr was sick, with the
very first lash he achieved martyrdom. Then he was beheaded and sent to
Damascus. It was the first head carried from one town to the
other.[^200]

Later it was repeated about the head of Imam Husayn and his disciples.
That it has been written that he was found dead in a cave and they
beheaded him[^201] seems to be for acquitting Mu'awiya of the charge of
Companions-cide Muhammad Ibn Habib has narrated that his head was showed
around in Bazar.[^202]

Conquests in Mu‘awiya’s time
----------------------------

With the five-year civil wars in 'Ali's term, conquests in east and west
of the Islamic land ceased. Inasmuch as 'Ali's policy was improving the
internal status quo and deposing seditious figures, the process of
conquests was ceased. Mu'awiya who required great might to combat
'Ali(a), had to compromise the Romans.[^203] Accordingly, war was ceased
there as well. After victory of the Umayya, conquests leading to
economic benefits for the government were resumed.

The areas ruled by the East Roman Empire were frequently under attack
that lasted for almost all years of Mu'awiya's dominion. In 49 or 50
A.H., Mu'awiya deployed a massive army consisted of 'Abd Allah Ibn
'Abbas and Abu Ayyub Ansari together with another group of disciples and
their descendants to that area. They could advance as near as the
enclosures of Constantinople; Nevertheless, they could not conquer it.
Abu Ayyub Ansari passed away there.[^204]

Another war site was Africa thereon Muslims advanced ceaselessly in the
course of conquering Egypt from the time of caliphII on. Sudan in Africa
was conquered in this period. Observing the constant apostasy of the
dwellers, the governor, 'Uqba Ibn Nafi', established a town called
Qirawan in order to guarantee the stability of the region through Muslim
residents there.[^205] This town did play a crucial role in maintaining
Muslims' conquests in that land.

Islamic East was also subject to conquering. For a while Said, 'Uthman's
son, was involved in conquering Bukhara and the suburbs. He clashed with
the Soghdids in Samarqand but later he compromised with them.

He had taken a number of hostages from the queen of Bukhara to set them
free after return from conquering Samarqand. In spite of his pledge he
took them to Medina and exploited them. Afterwards Sa'id was
assassinated by them.[^206] The war had been continuing during the
following years.

India and Indus River were exposed to consecutive wars as well. These
areas, between Kabul and Multan, were hit in 43 A.H. and onwards which
preceded a great deal of loot.[^207]

In farther areas like Ghawr, conquering had been also kept on. In 47,
when the dwellers of the region violated their compromise, the attacks
on them were recommenced.[^208]

From this time on, no considerable contest can be found for Muslims and
it is in view of the fact that the Romans had prepared themselves to
battle more valiantly on the one hand and the remoteness of war sites
particularly Islamic East inhibited the Muslims to adopt serious
measures for conquering the land, on the other hand. The problems
originated from such conquests as well as Arabs' tribal disputes in
conquered lands such as Khurasan, gradually impeded more troops to be
equipped for pursuing conquests.

The constant apostasy in conquered areas undermined the Muslim Arabs.
Civil riots in the Islamic land such as Kharijites movements, Shi'ites
oppositions and so forth can be considered as another facter in
debilitating the central authority.

The Kharijites in Mu‘awiya’s time
---------------------------------

Succeeding Imam's martyrdom, Kufa was composed of classes with various
schools of thought, the mojority indifferent, those on Mu'awiya's side,
those regarded as Kharijites or Imam 'Ali's Shi'ite Muslims. As many
people had lost their close kins in “Nahrawan” War, they naturally could
not remain faithful to 'Ali's descendants.

However, due to their enmity towards Mu'awiya, they got ready to join
the army organizied by Imam Hasan (a) against Mu'awiya. After appearing
indifference and inclinations on the part of the Kufiyan nobles towards
Mu'awiya specificly in the process of compromising, the Kharijites
decided to assassinate Imam, although their attempt failed.

At the same time, Mu'awiya predominated all over the Islamic land
especially Iraq. The Kharijites considered both enmity towards 'Ali (a)
and practical disgust for Mu'awiya and his agents as their principal
responsibilities. On account of their disbelief in Taqiyya
(precautionary dissimulation), a few[^209] were assembled in a 40 or
70-people small group to clash with an army.

Moreover, owing to their deep-rooted beliefs, even if deviated, they
were never seeking after a means of escape. They, in light of their
distinctive morale, in no way approved leniency.[^210] If the Kharijites
hesitated over combating 'Ali (a) formerly but later they even those who
were not convinced to combat 'Ali (a) in Nahrawan[^211], had no doubts
about battling against Mu'awiya.

'Urwa Ibn Sakhr had stated, “Due to my long and close affinity with 'Ali
(a) I did abstain from battling against him and now I shall definitely
rise up against Mu'awiya.[^212]

In the face of such remarkable deviation as the Umayya's sovereignty,
tyranny and oppression that the people of distinct classes sustained,
the existence of the Kharijites appeared evident. Since many of the
oppressed regarded them as a group able to stand against the Umayya
beside them, the continuity of their movement throughout this
sovereignty was incontestable.

No sooner had Mu'awiya left Iraq than the Kharijites revolted. Nearly
five hundred of them who had already gone to Shahrzur with Farwa Ibn
Nawfal returned Kufa following the compromise. Mu'awiya himself had the
people of Kufa combat them.[^213]

Subsequenly, small groups of the Kharijites like Mu'in al-Khariji and
Abu Maryam from among the Mawali of Banu al-Harith Ibn Ka'b and Sahm Ibn
Ghalib revolted against Kufa governor, Mughira, so were all
massacred.[^214]

The leniency of Mughira toward the Kharijites culminated in their
gathering from various regions in Kufa. Therefore, they could confer
with one another.[^215] Having fled with four hundred of the Kharijites
to Riy, Mustawrid Ibn 'Ullafa after 'Ali's martyrdom returned Kufa and
together with Hayyan Ibn Zabyan convened meetings with other the
Kharijites.

Hayyan Ibn Zabyan who was a leader for the Kharijites in Riy proposed
them, “Let's return our homelands, towards our brothers in order to
enjoin them good, forbid them from evil and summon them to battle
against the parties. We have no excuse not to rise up while our governor
generals are all tyrants, the tradition of guiding is abandoned and all
those slaying our brothers are alive. We ought to avenge”.[^216]

When gathering in Kufa, the Kharijites negotiated about designating an
emir. Three figures were nominated, Mustawrid Ibn 'Ullafa, Mu'adh Ibn
Juwayn and Hayyan Ibn Zabyan. The report of negotiation is presented by
Abu Mikhnaf. The aforesaid report is consisted of their opinions
concerned with the eligibility of an emir.

Mustawrid said, “Elect anyone you like. It does make no difference for
me whom from among you be my governor-general.”

“I have no request for it. I shall be gratified with and swear
allegiance to any one designated”, said Hayyan. Mu'adh Ibn Juwayn also
declared, “When you two, Muslims' Sayyid (chiefs) with renowned
lineages, and as the high-qualified and pious ones say so, who shall
then undertake Muslims' responsibility? If all are equal in virtues, the
most well-informed in wars, the most intelligent in religion and the
most liable of whom ought to be designated for Muslims' guardianship.
Since both of you merit this position, thus one of you two should
consent.”

In return they, two, suggested it to him.  
 “You are my senior”, he added.  
 The audience of the Kharijites announced, “We approve you all three.
Elect one from among yourselve.”

Hayyan Ibn Zabyan told Mustawrid, “I do agree with Mu'adh. You are my
senior too. Give your hand to swear allegiance to you”.

In this way Mustawrid was designated. The Kharijites swore allegiance to
him all.[^217] Mughira who had perceived the probability of revolt
arrested Hayyan Ibn Zabyan. Mustawrid and his followers rose in revolt,
although Mughira had warned the chiefs of all tribes earlier to banish
them from themselves and not allow them to influence on their tribes.

Tabari's report and that of Mubarrid's varies concerning the Kharijites
first clashes with Mu'awiya. Yet, all are unanimous that the Kharijites
with a few numbers battled against Damascus army but were immediately
defeated.[^218]

Mubarrid and Baladhuri have recounted many adventures about the
Kharijites in Mu'awiya's tenure that manifest the scope of their
infiltration into diverse tribes.[^219] At any war whether mini or
massive, the Kharijites had commanders.

After the Kharijites' suppression, 'Ali (a) recommended his followers,
**لا تقاتلوا الخوارج من بعدي “** “Under no circumstances should you
enter into confilict with the Kharijites after me.” [^220]

This instruction was given by Imam to Shi'ite Muslims to bear their main
enmity towards the Umayya in mind and not to waste their strength on
combating the Kharijites who were among the Umayya foes. Regretfully,
this instruction was not heeded on the part of the Shi'ite Muslims.

Addressing his tribe and reiterating that they were faithful to Shi'ism
and the leadership of the Prophet's household, Sa'sa'a Ibn Suhan, an
eloquent chief of the Shi'ite Muslims said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا قوم أعدى لله ولأهل بيت نبيّكم ولجماعة المسلمين من هذه المارقة
الخاطئة الذين فارقوا امامنا واستحلوا دمائنا وشهدوا علينا بالكفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Not a single group like this group shows enmity towards Allah, the Holy
Prophet's household and Muslims; the wrongdoing Mariqin (the deviators)
who seceded from our Imam, declared shedding our blood lawful and
considered us infidel.” [^221]

This statement of Ibn Suhan foreboded that the Shi'ite Muslims' hatred
of the Kharijites made them not only remain indifferent in the face of
their revolt but conversely become set on suppressing them. And it was
exactly beacause almost all Shi'ite Muslims knew them as the fundamental
cause for the failure of the Shi'ites movement. 'Adi Ibn Hatim, another
Shi'ites leader, had made the same remarks on aversion to the
Kharijites.[^222]

The command of war against the Kharijites was undertaken by Ma'qal Ibn
Qays who was a commander in Imam 'Ali's army.

As soon as being informed of the Shi'ite Muslims' inclination for a
battle with the Kharijites, Mughira as well as his advisors became
pleased and it was emanated from this fact that, **وهم أشد استحلالاَ
لدماء هذه المارقة وأجرأ‌ عليهم وغيرهم وقد قاتلوا قبل هذا بمرة** “since
they had battled with them once before, they could have shed their blood
more daringly and severely.” [^223]

Whatever its outcome might be even the Shi'ite Muslims' failure could be
for the Umayya benefit because both rivals, the Umayya adversaries, had
enfeebled each other.

Not merely had Imam 'Ali (a) realized and warned about such
perils[^224], but Imam Hasan (a) also had considered it wrong via his
conduct practically. Subsequent to the compromise, when Imam (a) set out
to Medina, a riot had been triggered by the Kharijites. Mu'awiya urged
Imam to prepare for a battle against the Kharijites.

In his reaction he stated, **لو آثرت أن أقاتل أحداَ من أهل القبلة بدأت
بقتالك “** “If I were supposed to combat anyone, I would start from you
first.”

By the same token, in the course of Mustawrid Ibn 'Ullafa's revolt,
along with three thousand from **نقاوة الشيعة “** The most purified
Shi'ite Muslims.”

Ma'qal Ibn Qays moved to him. While the Kharijites were in the vicinity
of Basra, the Umayya governor of Basra, 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir, did
emulate Mughira and dispatched three thousand Shi'ite Muslims led by
Sharik Ibn A'war who was a renowned Shi'ites of Basra towards
them.[^225]

Upon hearing the news of the strike by Kufa army, Mustawrid took
“counsel” from people. Some suggested battling and some other
“retreating”.

The decision, however, was to keep away from the army and refrain from
confronting provided that they were faced unexpectedly which would
result in a conflict.[^226] The details of this conflict are delineated
by Tabari that Mustawrid was killed on the one hand and Ma'qal Ibn Qays
on the other hand. At this juncture, the Kharijites, who under no
circumslances were eradicated, dispersed.

It is worth reminding that the Kharijites of this period of time had an
extremely harsh treatment towards other Muslims. The only caliphates
confirmed in their sight were those of Abu Bakr and 'Umar so that they
had laid them both beside “Kitab” (Qur'an) and “Sunna” (Tradition). In
his narration, one of the Kharijites has referred to a letter from
Mustawrid to the governor of Ctesiphon whereas naming him Amir
al-Mu'minin”.[^227] It denoted that he must have been regarded as a
caliph by the Kharijites.

It has been cited that the first one who propounded in earnest the
subject of blasphemy on the part of the members of the tribe was Sahm
Ibn Ghalib Hujaymi who revolted against 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amir in Basra in
44 A.H.[^228] This very issue could play a cardinal role in making the
Kharijites secede from the Islamic community. Basra was among the areas
accommodating a multitude of the Kharijites in those days.

Rising up in this region, accompanied by some seventy people, Qarib Azdi
and Zahhaf Tayi were murdered in 50 A.H. following a clash. As recorded
by Ibn Athir, Ziyad who was too rigorous and unyielding towards the
Kharijites had prescribed his substitute in Basra, Samura Ibn Jundab, to
treat them relentlessly. They clashed with a mass number of the
Kharijites and flourished to decimate them.[^229] Their considerable
number in Basra did account for such severe actions.

Once more rioting in 58 A.H. a group of the Kharijites were instantly
suppressed near to Kufa. Ibn Ziyad's dealing towards the Kharijites was
also such a tough one that he at times incited them to slay one another.
Concurrently a throng of them who were imprisoned by him became
slaughtered after a while.[^230]

At this stage like the succeeding ones the firm defiance of the
Kharijites against Umayya troops is utterly perceptible as once at the
end of Mu'awiya's caliphate, a forty-member group caused Ibn Ziyad's
two-thousand-soldier army to flee and make the commander of which be
humiliated for a lengthy time.[^231]

Mu‘awiya’s Endeavor for Hereditary Caliphate
--------------------------------------------

Earlier it was quoted from Muhammad Rashid Riďa that Abu Bakr's action
in delegating a successor paved the ground of making caliphate
hereditary.[^232] As Marwan Ibn Hakam too reasoned Abu Bakr's measure in
designating 'Umar while recommending succession to the throne.[^233]

A hereditary authority bore two features one of which was designation of
a successor by the former monarch and another was designation of a son
or a member from monarch's lineage as a successor. The latter was
submitted from Mu'awiya's time on. Under the pretext of his kinship with
'Uthman, he not only addressed his heritance in order to justify his
caliphate but also he proposed the subject of making caliphate
hereditary by appointing his son, endowed with no religious, political
or military trait.

Although this matter has always been unusual among Muslims, hereditary
caliphate later became the most fundamental principle in a caliph's
designation. Merely when the Umayya's administration was converting into
that of the 'Abbasids and the 'Abbasids' administration into that of
'Uthmanids the theory of hereditary caliphate was declared null and void
through transfer of caliphate from a lineage to another, yet replaced by
violence and force.

Except the cases aforesaid the hereditary succession was treated as a
radical principle for appointing a new caliph. Deviation from the
traditional system, at least nominally claimed to be established on
“consultation” and nation's vote, was intolerably disagreeable for
believing Muslims. However, the status quo was in a way that all
endorsed it and but a minority no one defied. The internal coherence of
the Umayya reinforced by 'Uthman's charity in addition to conveyance of
farmlands impelled the Umayya to adopt a measure for safeguarding their
power.

If it were let to take its normal course, 'Uthman would beyond question
designate Mu'awiya as his successor. And because it was delayed by his
assassination, Mu'awiya did afterwards withstand obstinately. It stood
to reason that when securing the power, he on no accounts would allow
the monarchy to make an exit from his family.

Except the Shi'ite Muslims and the Kharijites, throughout the Islamic
world, in the face of the official caliphate not only no Sunnites laid
claim to the caliphate but also he did never credit that through power
and wealth one could become a caliph. Such regions as Spain, North
Africa and Egypt experienced further caliphs later.

In Mu'awiya's tenure, not simply did Damascus people never stood against
approving of Yazid's succession but they also insisted on it because
their entity before claimants emerging from Arabia Petrae or Iraq
depended upon aiding the Umayya to remain in power. Persuading the
people of Medina however who were, from among disciples' descendants,
seemed thorny.

On one hand, Iraq was naturally opposed to Damascus and besides Kufa
Shi'ite Muslims, Iraqi the Kharijites were thoroughly opposed to the
Umayya on the other hand. Realizing the public opinions about
governorship at that time shall appear convenient through a review of
the reasoning on the part of Mu'awiya and his opponents in regard with a
hereditary caliphate.

It was already discussed that Mu'awiya's rule had lost its nature of
caliphate and transformed into monarchism of which nature necessitated
the subsequent caliphate or designation to be hereditary. 'Umar himself
had by that time likened Mu'awiya's rule in Damascus to those of Kasra
and Caesar. When Mu'awiya secured the authority freelance, people named
him “Heraclitus”.[^234]

The matter of making caliphate hereditary as well as Mu'awiya's endeavor
regarding it are set forth in detail in “Al-Futuh” and “Al-Imama wa
as-Siyasa”. Others also have referred to it concisely. The ground for
the notion of Yazid's succession to throne could be paved following Imam
Hasan Mujtaba's martyrdom.[^235]

Despite the fact that there existed no unanimity on who had for the
first time suggested this notion, many a look was at Mughira Ibn Shu'ba.
In late 40s A.H. Peeling that he might be deposed by Mu'awiya due to his
oldness and inability in running Kufa, he set out to Damascus to
stimulate Yazid to talk about his did so to his father and he succeeded
after all. Mughira also on his part told Mu'awiya that he feared that
the recent events, sedition and divergence, in the course of 'Uthman's
caliphate might reoccur once again.

“You had better designate a successor and it would be far better if he
were Yazid, your son”[^236], he added.

Admitting his proposal, Mu'awiya delegated Mughira to gradually prepare
the ground in Kufa. He dispatched a number to Damascus for this
reason.[^237]

Beyond any doubt such a notion had been in Mu'awiya's mind for a long
time, but Mughira's was a sparkle for making it public. After Ziyad Ibn
Abih became the governor of Kufa, Mu'awiya propounded the issue of
successorship. Totally negligent of Mu'awiya's intention, he did his
utmost by a trick to change Mu'awiya's and even Yazid's mind in this
respect.[^238]

From 55 on the effort Mu'awiya made to stabilize Yazid's position
multiplied. On a trip to Mecca and Medina, religious centers Mu'awiya
exerted himself to engross the people through substantial
open-handedness. It does surprisingly merit consideration that people
seemed gratified, however.

The poets such as 'Uqayba al-Asadi and 'Abd Allah Ibn Hammam as-Saluli
who hated Yazid composed some verses of poems for reproaching him
although Mu'awiya could muzzle them with paying hush-up money.[^239]

When he returned to Damascus to keep on his activities, he summoned
groups of people from Kufa and Basra. Mu'awiya compelled Dhahhak Ibn
Qays to address the congregation and advance the issue of successorship.
Consequently, indicting Iraqi people for being hypocritical and
schismatic, he denounced them.[^240] In the same meeting, Ahnaf Ibn Qays
announced, “As long as Hasan Ibn 'Ali is alive, the people of Iraq and
Hijaz will neverever swear allegiance.”

Accusing the Iraqi of hypocrisy, Qays Ibn Dhahhak said, “Hasan and ones
like him have nothing to do with divine king whom He has appointed;
caliphate is not inherited collaterally from a daughter.”

Ahnaf Ibn Qays, in his response, reminded Mu'awiya's commitments
promised to Hasan Ibn 'Ali and referred warningly to Iraqis' loathing
for Mu'awiya which might cause the swords to rise up from Iraq. After
that, Mu'awiya kept silence about allegiance to Yazid until 50 (Imam
Hasan was martyred in 49 A.H).[^241]

Mu'awiya appointed Dhahhak Ibn Qays and 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn 'Uthman,
advocating Yazid strongly in that very meeting, as the governors of Kufa
and Hijaz respectively to pave the way.[^242]

Mu'awiya was of this opinion that from the standpoint of religion the
main problem lies in Medina. Were it feasible to persuade Iraq by force,
reasoning would definitely be required for Medina to get satisfied.

Already written to Mu'awiya by Sa'id Ibn 'As was, “…People follow these
few individuals therefore as long as the latter have not sworn
allegiance, the former would by no means do so.”[^243]

Ibn Qutayba had also written that but few, all did hesitate to swear
allegiance. Typically they were the Hashimites neither of whom did
so.[^244] Before he came, Mu'awiya had sent various letters mingled with
either menace or allure to all those opposing allegiance.[^245]

In a session convened on this occasion following Mu'awiya's arrival in
Medina, opposers voiced their diverse opinions.

'Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far addressed Mu'awiya as saying, “If you have
recourse to Qur'an, Ulu al-Arham (relatives) enjoy priority over one
another; if you practice the Prophet's Sunna (tradition), they are the
kins of Allah's Apostle (S) ; and if you practice the Sunna of Abu Bakr
and 'Umar, who would ever be more deserved than the Prophet's household?

By Almighty Allah, if Wilayat (Islamic jurisprudential guardianship)
were lain with them after the Prophet, 'Amr (authority) would have been
properly conveyed to the rightful. Caliphate does belong to Quraysh. O
Mu'awiya, fear from Allah! Here are 'Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far, 'Abd Allah
Ibn 'Abbas, Hasan and Husayn, 'Ali's sons, and it is me, Zubayr's
son.[^246] You are well aware of our positions!” Warned 'Abd Allah Ibn
Zubayr.

'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar stated that caliphate was not those of Heraclitus
or Kasra to be inherited from fathers.

“If it had been the case, I should have as a result secured the
authority after my father. This caliphate not only belongs to Quraysh
but also to those whom Muslims comply with and are more pious
furthermore,” he added.

Irrespective of securing allegiance for Yazid, in his response, Mu'awiya
uttered, “This belongs to 'Abd Manaf's descendants since they are from
among the Prophet's kins. People themselves aided Abu Bakr and 'Umar to
secure the power. Although they were brought up by no monarch or caliph,
they had extremely admirable lifestyles and conduct.

Monarchism was transferred to 'Abd Manaf after them and it will remain
perpetually among them until the Day of Judgment. And you! O sons of
Zubayr and 'Umar! Allah has deprived you from this authority.”
Afterwards he returned to Damascus.[^247]

According to some sources, at the very same meeting, somewhere else in
his intimidating speech, Mu'awiya had warned that if they did not swear
allegiance, **لأفعلن كذا وكذا “** He would do so and so.”[^248]

Mu'awiya told Imam Husayn (a), “I procrastinated this city's allegiance
owing to the fact that they are from among the kins of mine. If I could
feel that there existed anyone else better than my son among Muhammad's
Umma (nation), I would neverever let him be picked out.”

Imam (a) who had been agitated for his remarks, accused Yazid of being
debauchee and drinking wine.

Menacingly, Mu'awiya warned him as saying, “Be cautious lest someone
from Damascus (accompanying Mu'awiya)[^249] hear your voice.”[^250]
Later he threatened others concerning the people of Damascus.[^251]
'Ayisha was among the oppossers.

Regarding the lawfulness of Yazid's successorship Mu'awiya told her, “It
is a Divine destiny about Yazid. No one has the option. The nation has
considered swearing allegiance to him as its duty and has sworn to him.
Do you think they must breach their allegiance?”[^252]

Another reasoning on the part of Mu'awiya vis-a-vis the opponents was
the Imamate permit for an inferior over a superior. Addressing Imam
Husayn (a) and a number of disciples and contrasting them with Yazid and
qualifying him to be well acquainted with Kitab and Sunna, he stated
that in the war of Dhat as-Salasil, Allah's Apostle (S) had singled out
'Amr Ibn 'As as superior over Abu Bakr and 'Umar and appointed him as
the commander.

Accordingly, if the Prophet (a) were a good model, such an action i.e
the superiority permit of an inferior over a superior would certainly
appear reasonable then. By the same token, they should concur with
Yazid's caliphate.[^253]

In return, Imam Husayn in his lengthy sermon alluded to the extorted
right of his lineage after prophet's demise as well as Yazid's black
records and added, “O Mu'awiya! How can you reason out by what is
already abrogated.”[^254]

Dissenting 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar, Mu'awiya replied, “You have declared
yourself that you can never go to bed while swearing allegiance is on
your responsibility. This issue is divine destiny about Yazid and there
is an option for noone. People have sworn allegiance to him.”

'Abd Allah touching upon the predecessor's manners pointed out, “The
caliphs preceding you had surely have offsprings. Although theirs must
have been for better than your son, they at no time did what you do
about yours.”

'Abd al-Rahman, Abu Bakr's son, recommended this job be assigned to a
council.[^255] What else Mu'awiya in his public speeche to dwellers of
Medina vocalized was that Allah's Messenger (S) did designate no
successor to himself; howevere, Abu Bakr did and neither did 'Umar
behave like him. He assigned it to a six-member council. Inasmuch as
neither Abu Bakr did like the Prophet nor 'Umar like Abu Bakr, I am,
therefore, able to do what they had never done both, I do designate my
successor.[^256]

Another question Ibn Zubayr posed was whether it was credible to swear
allegiance to him where as his father, Mu'awiya, was alive. He voiced to
Mu'awiya that he would be ready to swear allegiance to his son provided
that he abdicates himself. If he swore allegiance to his son while he
himself is alive, whom should he abide by?[^257]

This problem was solved after a while though it was the starting-point
of the process at that time. It is quoted from Ibn Zubayr that on the
strength of the hadith, **لا طاعة لمخلوق في معصية الخالق “** No one is
entitled to be obeyed while the creator was disobeyed” he contradicted
the allegiance to Yazid.[^258]

In order Mu'awiya to allure a group of eminent opponents, he sent gifts,
nevertheless, Husayn Ibn 'Ali declined.[^259]

Being unable to flourish in Medina, he left it for Mecca. He guessed new
schemes now. Mu'awiya made those coming from various spots for
pilgrimage come together and he proclaimed later that a few swore
allegiance to him for Yazid privately.

A number of people from Damascus with their swords sheathed out yelled
out that have to do so openly, but Mu'awiya made them silent. Climbing
down the pulpit, he distributed a many present among them and set out
for Damascus. Although those individuals were present at the assembly,
they dare not deny.

However, later they revealed that it has been naught but a trick and
they had never sworn.[^260] Since Mu'awiya had not sent any present to
the Hashimites, the 'Abbassids intimidated him. That he would go around
Damascus and stimulate people against him. Mu'awiya had to concede and
send [^261] but Imam Husayn (a) declined them all once again.[^262]

A few years later, not merely he himself re-secured allegiance for Yazid
but he also wrote to the governor of Medina to do so from people.
“People are all conforming to these few ones such as Husayn (a), 'Abd
Allah Ibn Abi Bakr, 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr as well as 'Abd Allah Ibn
'Umar and not a single one of them can be convinced to swear allegiance
to me,” wrote Sa'id Ibn 'As, the governor, to Mu'awiya.[^263] The
dwellers of Damascus propounded the issue of inheritance and admitted it
as a principle in caliphate. A poet had composed as follows,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فان تأتوا برملة أو بـــهند نبايعـها أميـرة مؤمنيـنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أذا ما مات كسـرى قام كسرى نعـد ثـلاثـة متنـاسقينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Were Ramla or Hind introduced as the caliph, we would swear allegiance
to her as Amira al-Mu'minin (the Commanderess of the Believers) and if a
Kasra passed away and another Kasra replaced him, they would be all
three equal at our sight.”[^264]

And also 'Abd Allah Ibn Hammam as-Saluli had composed for Yazid as,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعزّوا يا بني حَرْب بِصَبْر فمن هذا الذي يرجو الخلُودا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تلقَّاها يزيدٌ عن أبيــه فخذها يا معـاوِي عن يزيدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أديروها بني حرب عَلَيْكم ولاترموا بها الغرض البعيدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Soothe yourself with patience. Who does ever expect an eternal life in
this world? Yazid inherited the caliphate from his father and you O
Mu'awiya Ibn Yazid assume it from your own father, Yazid. O Harb's sons,
do maintain the caliphate amongst yourselves and never relinguish it.”
[^265]

What has been observed within the poems belonging to Umayya poets was
that they have treated Umayya caliphs as the successors of Allah's
Messenger (S).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الوليد وليُّ عهد محمّد كلَّ المكارم بالمكارم يَشْتَري
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Walid being in the position of Muhammad's successor responds with
good), had composed Farazdaq regarding Walid Ibn 'Abd al-Malik.” [^266]

It has been ignored that this approach was perfectly unknown for the
disciple's descendants and what 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar had asserted, “This
caliphate is dissimilar to those of Heraclitus and Khusraw that anyone
who departs a son of his replaces him”.

'Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr also stated, “We desire to hear not a word
about Roman's tradition according which any Heraclitus passed away,
another Heraclitus substituted him.[^267] Here, it has been endowed with
the narrations from those following the Divine Books as well in order to
forebode the indubitability of Mu'awiya's and Yazid's caliphate though
it does not stand to reason whether such narrations have solely been
manipulated at that time or the Umayya's adherents had fabricated them
later. A typical narration of Ka'b al-Akhbar in light of Mu'awiya's
caliphate has been subsequent to 'Uthman's assassination.[^268]

'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amr Ibn 'As famed for dealing with the books written by
followers of the divine Books had conducted a survey of books in
Christians' churches in Damascus before he informed Ibn Zubayr, “In
conformity with my research on books, you will claim caliphate, yet you
are not a caliph but Yazid Ibn Mu'awiya is. Also quoted from him is,
**ملك الارض المقدسة معاوية وابنه “** Mu'awiya and his son are the kings
of the holy earth”[^269]

In course of such a process, counterfeited hadiths can be traced, as an
instance, “The Holy Prophet had prophesied Mu'awiya's future
caliphate.”[^270]

All endeavors made on the part of Mu'awiya to stabilize Yazid's position
fulfilled whilst large numbers of those at odds in Iraq and Hijaz still
remained like fire under ashes.

It was mentioned that the dwellers of Damascus persisted on Yazid's
successorship and it was in view of the fact that first, Umayya Islam
was predominant and the Umayya was deemed as the manifestation of Islam
and secondly their benefits in comparison with those of Iraq
necessitated to advocate the Umayya. Ultimately, they pressured
Mu'awiya, in his last days of life, into introducing his son. Making him
wear the caliphate robe, Mu'awiya officially appointed him as his
successor.[^271]

In an account written to Yazid, appointing him as the next caliph after
him, Mu'awiya wrote, “Bear in mind, the Umayya along with the family of
'Abd Shams must be granted priority over the Hashimites and so must the
family of 'Uthman over the family of Abi Turab as well as the
descendants”[^272] and in such a way the future policy for the Umayyads
was specified by him.

While Mu'awiya was expressing his regret and sorrow for shedding the
blood of Hujr Ibn 'Adi and 'Amr Ibn Hamiq under his breath, he resigned
his shameful life after nineteen years and three months of rule in
Rajab, 60 AH.

[^1]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XX, pp 298-299;
Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 454 of ‘Ali to Mu‘awiya; concerning Mu‘awiya’s
ignoring insult of one Jew towards one Muslim; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV,
p. 160

[^2]: al-Aghani, vol. VI, p. 355; some time Abu Sufyan, at the Hamza’s
grave, said, “God bless thee ”; You fought us over something that came
under control; al-Amta‘ wal-Mu’anisa, vol. II, p. 75

[^3]: Rasa’il al-Jahiz, al-Rasa’il As-Siyasiya, p. 344

[^4]: Tathbit Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, p. 593 Hasan Basri has said, لقد تصنّع
معاويه للخلافة في ولاية عمر بن خطاب Mu‘awiya had been preparing Himself
for caliphate since ‘Umar’s tenure Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV,
p. 24

[^5]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, pp 17,18,20; Rasa’il al-Jahiz,
al-Rasa’il As-Siyasiya, p. 344

[^6]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. IX, p. 161

[^7]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. I, p. 15, vol. V, p. 114; Mukhtasar Tarikh
Dimashq, vol. XXV, p. 18; once Mu‘awiya was complained at the presence
of ‘Umar ‘Umar said, “Leave us away from reproaching Quraysh’s young man
and his son of the prophet’s descendant Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol.
XXV, p. 18 This is most likely to be attributed to ‘Umar

[^8]: al-Ghadir, vol. IX, p. 35 From Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 88,90
Jahiz said, “One of the most significant reasons of the Sufyanids for
substantiating Mu‘awiya’s caliphate was his own statement He stated,
“This is a position thereto ‘Umar has designated me Never did he depose
me since he designated me whereas he designated no emir unless he
deposed him or at least he was incensed by his actions and summoned him
Neither did he depose me nor was incensed He did consign Damascus
thoroughly to me and succeeding him ‘Uthman did reinforce me; Rasa’il
al-Jahiz, al-Rasa’il As-Siyasiya, p. 385

[^9]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 550

[^10]: al-Fakhri, p. 77, Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, Vol XXV, p. 30

[^11]: Waq‘at Siffin p. 32; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, p. 30

[^12]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. IV, p. 229; al-Ghadir, vol. VI, p. 304;
vol. IX, p. 373

[^13]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 33; al-Niza‘ wal-Takhasum, p. 28

[^14]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XI, p. 87; It has been narrated
that there were some in Damascus saying; “If Mu‘awiya is not a prophet,
he is at least half of a prophet”; See also Bahjat al-Majalis, vol. I,
p. 550 And once one of his devotees met him, he, as a salutation,
addressed him, “O Allah’s Messenger!” See also al-Awa’íl, Tustari, p.
163; Regarding the person who cursed ‘Ali in front of Mu‘awiya, Ahnaf
Ibn Qays asserted, “By Allah if he knew your gratification was in
cursing all the prophets, he would certainly do so ”; al-’Iqd al-Farid,
vol. IV, p. 113

[^15]: As an instance, it has been quoted from the Holy prophet as
stating, والأمناء عندالله ثلاثة, جبرئيل وأنا ومعاويه “ In sight of Allah
the trustees are three, Jibri’il (Gabriel), Mu‘awiya and me” Such
narations have been discussed in detail by Ibn ‘Asakir; Mukhtasar Tarikh
Dimashq, vol. XXV, pp 5-16

[^16]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. IV, p. 81

[^17]: Risalat al-Jahi¨ fi Banu Umayya, p. 124 in al-Niza‘ wal-Takhasum

[^18]: Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol II, pp 393-397; Waq‘at Siffin, p. 118, Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. III, p. 188; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 10;
SamT Nujum al-’Awali, vol. II, p. 465

[^19]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p. 157 Mu‘awiya definitely
intended to prepare the ground for his succession through his coming to
Damascus

[^20]: Being requested for an aid by ‘Uthman, Mu‘awiya along with two
others came to Medina and went to ‘Uthman overnight “Have you brought
any helper?”, ‘Uthman questioned

[^21]: Nathr ad-Durr, vol. IV, p. 62; Balaghat al-Nisa’, p. 139; al-’Iqd
al-Farid, vol. VI, p. 90

[^22]: al-Gharat, p. 70

[^23]: Diwan Farazdaq, Vol I, p. 25

[^24]: Ibid, vol. II, p. 210

[^25]: Diwan farazdaq, vol. II, p. 210

[^26]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 114

[^27]: Diwan Farazdaq vol. I, p. 336; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, pp
13-15, other verser are mentioned besides the aforesaid poems

[^28]: Rasa’il al-Jahiz, al-Rasa’il As-Siyasiyya, pp 345-346

[^29]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 28

[^30]: A‘yan Ash-Shi‘a, vol. III, Section 2, p. 12

[^31]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 58

[^32]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 121

[^33]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. V, p. 161 ; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol.
XXV, p. 27

[^34]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 82

[^35]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, Vol I, p. 100

[^36]: Waq‘at Siffin, pp 78,80

[^37]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. III, p. 342; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq,
vol. 25, p. 42

[^38]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 39

[^39]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 63

[^40]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 64

[^41]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 28.

[^42]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 237

[^43]: Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol II, p. 216

[^44]: al-Fitna wa waq‘at al-Jamal, p. 109; from: Min dawlat ‘Umar ila
dawlat ‘Abd al-Malik, p. 109

[^45]: al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, Vol I, p. 300; Ash-Shura fil-‘Asr al-Umawi,
p. 34; Later on, when two Umayya (‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz
with Sulayman Ibn Hisham) performed their prayers led by one of
Kharijites, an outsider composed, الم تر انّ الله أظهر دينه وصلّت قريش
خلف بكر بن وائل Not you know Allah’s religion won while Quraysh
performed its prayer behind the tribe of Bakr Ibn Wa’il al-Bayan
wal-Tabyin, vol. I, p. 343, vol. II, p. 265; Shi‘r al-kharijites, p.
208, from Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. VIII, p. 365, vol. III, p. 137; Tarikh
at-Tabari, Vol II, p. 1913

[^46]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. III, p. 318, vol. VI, p95;
al-Basa’ir wal-dhaka’ir, p. 35

[^47]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. VI, p. 148

[^48]: al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II, p. 67

[^49]: al-Aghani, vol. XVI, pp 35-36; Ash-Shi‘r wal-Shu‘ara’, p. 302;
see: al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. I, p. 63

[^50]: al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II, p. 115

[^51]: Tabaqat al-Mu‘tazila, p. 6; Faďl al-I‘tizal wa Tabaqat
al-Mu‘tazila, p. 143, al-Awa’íl, Abu Hilal Askari, vol. II, p. 125

[^52]: Hayat As-Sahaba, vol. III, p. 529

[^53]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. IX, p. 85 (هذه الخلافة أمر من
أمرالله وقضاء من قضاء الله)

[^54]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 205, Aswad Ibn Yazid narrated,
he enquired ‘Ayisha “Is not it surprising that a man from Tulaqa (the
released) is disputing with Muhammad’s companions on caliphate?” “No
need to surprise” ‘Ayisha replied, It is سلطان الله “ a Divine power”
that Allah grants to both debauchees and the righteous; as Pharaoh ruled
Egypt for four hundred years; Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XV, p. 42

[^55]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 180, al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II, p. 49;
Tarikh at-Tabari, vol.,V, p. 220; al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. IV; al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p. 449; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Vol XVI, p. 202;
Jamharat Khutab al-’Arab, vol. II, p. 273; al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p.
25

[^56]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 225; Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 226;
Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 299, No 798

[^57]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 214

[^58]: al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 65 From Ash-Shi‘r wal-Shu‘ara’, vol.
I, p. 544; al-Aghani, vol. 20, p. 212; Khazanat al-Adab, vol. III, p.
59; Shi‘r Miskin, p. 33

[^59]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 344

[^60]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 344

[^61]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. IV, p. 273; vol. V, p. 44,50,404; al-Jami‘
As-Sahih (Sunan al-Tirmidhi) أنا اول الملوك وآخر خليفه “ I am the first
monarch and the last caliph;” Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, p. 55;
Kitab al-Fitan, No 48

[^62]: Sunan al-Darimi, vol. I, p. 6

[^63]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 237-238; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 463, 464

[^64]: Ibid, vol. IV, p. 346

[^65]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. IV, p. 185

[^66]: al-Kamil fil-Lughat wal-Adab, vol. II, p. 191

[^67]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. V, p. 220,221; Tirmidhi has narrated the
aforegoing quotation from Sa‘id Ibn Jamhan quoted from “Sufayna”; He
quoted from Sa‘id telling Sufayna, “The Umayya is of this opinion that
caliphate belongs to them ” “They are lying, they are the kings and from
the worst kinds” he answered Al-Jami‘ As-Sahih, vol. IV, p. 503;
al-Niza‘ wal-Takhasum, p. 70; Tirmidhi has added that the Umayya had
claimed that caliphate was lain among them by the Holy Prophet (S)

[^68]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 429 It merits consideration that
those fabricating Hadiths have been trying to be accurate in calculation

[^69]: al-Jami‘ As-Sahih, Kitab al-Fitan, No 49

[^70]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. IV, p. 273; Kitab Muslim, Kitab al-Zuhd, No 4

[^71]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 78

[^72]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. V, p. 39

[^73]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. 16,46; Mukhtasar
Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, pp 43,45

[^74]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 47

[^75]: Bahjat al-Majalis, vol. I, p. 99; al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II,
p. 105

[^76]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 201

[^77]: Hayat As-Sahaba, vol. II, p. 441

[^78]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XVI, p. 48-49

[^79]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. VIII, p. 210; Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol.
II, 217; al-Musannaf, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, vol. I, p. 291

[^80]: Muntakhabat al-Tawarikh li-Dimashq, p. 81 quoted from Min dawlat
‘Umar ila dawlat ‘abd al-Malik, p. 146

[^81]: Rasa’il al-Jahiz, Rasa’il al-Kalamiyya, p. 241

[^82]: Tarikh Khulafa’, pp 196,203

[^83]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. II, p. 232

[^84]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VI, p. 20

[^85]: Akhbar Isbahan, vol. II, p. 255

[^86]: al-Bad’ wal-Tarikh, vol. VI, p. 6; Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. II, p.
232

[^87]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. II, p. 233

[^88]: al-Isaba, vol. III, p. 434

[^89]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 230-240

[^90]: al-Bidaya wal-Nihaya, vol. VIII, p. 132

[^91]: Khilafat wa Mulukiyyat, pp 118-207

[^92]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. IV, p. 63

[^93]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. I, p. 184

[^94]: Fajr al-Islam, p. 213

[^95]: al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II, p. 303

[^96]: al-Musannaf, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, vol. X, p. 267

[^97]: al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol. II, p. 61

[^98]: Tarikh Khulafa’, p. 247

[^99]: Majma‘ al-Amthal, vol. I, p. 651

[^100]: al-Gharat, vol. I, p. 251

[^101]: al-Bad’ wal-Tarikh, vol. VI, pp 27-28

[^102]: Tarikh Khulafa’, p. 243

[^103]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. IV, p. 57;
al-Nasa’ih al-Kafiya, p. 72

[^104]: al-Iďah, pp 210-211; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid,
vol. IV, p. 63 It is probable that this Hadith is attributed to Abu
Hurayra and he Himself has not narrated it

[^105]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid,vol. I, p. 361 (the
four-volume edition).

[^106]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid,vol. I, p. 63

[^107]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XI, p. 44

[^108]: Ibid, vol. XI, p. 49

[^109]: Ibid, vol. IV, pp 56-57

[^110]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. II, p. 298; Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal,
pp 66,101-102; Ma‘rifat Sahaba, vol. II, p. 236

[^111]: Turathuna, No 10, pp 143-144

[^112]: Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. I, p. 148

[^113]: Concerning Mu‘awiya Ibn ‘Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far; Ansab al-Ashraf,
section 4

[^114]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XI, p. 44; Bihar,
vol. IV, p. 125

[^115]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.I, p.184.

[^116]: al-Majruhin, vol. I, p. 268

[^117]: Tadhkirat al-Khawas, Ibn Sa‘d, p. 212

[^118]: Usd al-Ghaba, vol. II, p. 20

[^119]: Usd al-Ghaba, vol.II, p.20.

[^120]: Bahjat al-Majlis, vol.I, p.99; al-Bayan wal-Tabyin, vol.II,
p.105.

[^121]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 550

[^122]: al-’Iqd al-Farid, vol. V, p. 115

[^123]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Hasan, p. 184

[^124]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Hasan, vol. V, p. 11

[^125]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 22 “Busr also was determined to
slay anyone who might have had a hand ‘Uthman’s assassination” Tarikh
at-Tabari has written Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 134

[^126]: al-Aghani, vol. XVI, pp 266, 267

[^127]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 132

[^128]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 379

[^129]: Tarikh al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 379

[^130]: Tarikh al-Dhahab, vol. IV, p. 144

[^131]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 188; Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, vol. III,
pp 10,11

[^132]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, vol. III p. 559

[^133]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p. 462

[^134]: Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, vol. III, p. 8; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 450

[^135]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 174; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 167;
Ibn Khaldun, vol. III, p. 18; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p. 450

[^136]: al-Muhabbar, p. 479, Muhammad Ibn Habib has written, “Ziyad Ibn
Abih executed Muslimm Ibn Zaymur and ‘Abd Allah Ibn Nuja, both Shi‘ite
Muslims, at the doors of their houses at Mu‘awiya’s behest

[^137]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 203; see also Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn
Abi al-Hadid, vol. XI, p. 44

[^138]: al-Muhabbar, p. 479

[^139]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. IX, p. 88

[^140]: Ibid, p. 88

[^141]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. IX, p. 86

[^142]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 176, Ibn Khaldun, vol. III, p. 10;
see also Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 217; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 462

[^143]: al-Aghani, vol. XII, p. 312

[^144]: Ibid, pp 317,336

[^145]: al-Aghani, vol. XVI, pp 29,30

[^146]: Bahj As-Sabagha, vol. III, pp 179,180; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,
Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. IV, p. 57; this sentence has authentically come
in Husayn Ibn ‘Ali’s letter which will be discussed later

[^147]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 150; Bahj As-Sabagha, vol. III, p.
180

[^148]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. XI, p. 45;
al-Ghadir, vol. XI, p. 29

[^149]: Ibid, vol. XI, pp 44,46

[^150]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, pp 156,158; Bihar, vol. XXXXIV,
p. 108

[^151]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. XXXXIV, p. 104

[^152]: Manaqib Ibn Shahr Ashub, vol. IV, p. 22; Bihar, vol. XXXXIV, p.
104

[^153]: Risalat Jahiz fi Umayya published with al-Niza‘ wal-Takhasum,
Miqrizi

[^154]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, vol. IV, p. 106

[^155]: Mu‘jam Qaba’il al-’Arab, vol. IV, p. 999; Waq‘at Siffin, p. 104

[^156]: Ibid

[^157]: al-Gharat, vol. II, p. 481

[^158]: A‘yan Ash-Shi‘a, vol. XX, pp 60,67

[^159]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 45

[^160]: Ibid, p. 47

[^161]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 175

[^162]: Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq, vol. IV, p. 84

[^163]: al-Kamil

[^164]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, pp 69,101,102

[^165]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 189

[^166]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol., p. 218; al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 134,
135

[^167]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 190

[^168]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VI, p. 218

[^169]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 189; Ibn Khaldun, vol. IV, p. 11

[^170]: al-Aghani, vol. 17, p. 135

[^171]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 191; al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 36

[^172]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV

[^173]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 190; Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, vol. IV,
p. 14

[^174]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 199,200; al-Gharat, vol. II, p.
565; al-Kuna wal-Alqab, vol. I, p. 15; al-Aghani, vol. 17, p. 146;
Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, vol. IV, pp 12,13 “Sal‘a’” might refer to ‘Ali (a)
who was well-Known as Asla‘ or might mean “intensely”

[^175]: Concerning Abu Barda has come in Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. I, p.
95 as follows انه النقيه احد الأعه الاثبات “ He has been one of the
eminent Islamic jurisprudent”

[^176]: al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 146; Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, vol. IV, pp
12,13

[^177]: Waq‘at Siffin, p. 381

[^178]: al-Aghani, vol. XII, p. 321

[^179]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. II, p. 151

[^180]: al-Irshad, p. 280

[^181]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 199

[^182]: Tarikh at-Tabari, p. 204

[^183]: Ibid, p. 203; al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 149

[^184]: It is quoted that in conquering Damascus, Hujr Himself had
conquered this area; al-Muhabbar, p. 292 ان حجراً اول من وحد الله عزوجل
بمرج عذراء حين افتتحت on conquering Marj ‘Adhra’, the first one who
glorified Allah by saying “Allah Akbar” was Hujr

[^185]: al-Irshad, p. 169; Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, p. 101

[^186]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 205,206; al-Aghani, vol. XVII pp
151, 152, 153

[^187]: al-Isaba, vol. I, p. 315, A‘yan Ash-Shi‘a, vol. 20, p. 61 (From
Mustadrak and Tabaqat al-Kubra

[^188]: Futuh al-Buldan, pp 400,401

[^189]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VI, p. 219; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p.
208; al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 154

[^190]: al-Isaba, vol. I, p. 315

[^191]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 208; al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 154

[^192]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 208

[^193]: Ibid

[^194]: Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq, vol.IV, p.84

[^195]: al-Mustadrak, vol. III, p. 469

[^196]: A‘yan Ash-Shi‘a, vol. XX, p. 58

[^197]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. VI, p. 220

[^198]: al-Aghani, vol. XVII, p. 13

[^199]: Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, vol. III, p. 10

[^200]: al-Aghani, vol. XVII, pp 143-144; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p.
197; al-Darajat al-Rafi‘a, p. 343; al-Muhabbar, p. 292

[^201]: al-Darajat al-Rafi‘a, p. 432

[^202]: al-Munammaq, p. 490

[^203]: al-Fa’iq fi Gharib al-Hadith, vol. I, p. 46; al-Muwaffaqiyyat,
p. 301

[^204]: Fi l-Tarikh al-kamil, vol. IV, p. 461

[^205]: Fi l-Tarikh al-Kamil, vol. III, p. 465

[^206]: Fi l-Tarikh al-Kamil, vol. IV, pp 193-197; Futuh al-Buldan, pp
401,402

[^207]: Ibid, vol. III, p. 446

[^208]: Ibid, vol. III, p. 456

[^209]: But one time some groups of the Kharijites believed in Taqiyya
See also al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III pp 516, 518

[^210]: They talked at availing themselves of “Taqiyya”; al-Kamil
fil-Lughat wal-Adab, vol. II, p. 201; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 181

[^211]: Because they had no proof for combating ‘Ali; Akhbar al-Tiwal,
p. 210

[^212]: al-Kamil fil-Adab, vol. III, p. 276

[^213]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 126 (The events in 41

[^214]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, pp 412,417

[^215]: Ibid, vol. III, pp 409,420

[^216]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 173-174

[^217]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 175

[^218]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, pp 165-166; al-Kamil fil-Lughat
wal-Adab, vol. II, pp 195-196

[^219]: al-Kamil fil-Lughat wal-Adab, vol. II, pp 198-212; Ansab
al-Ashraf, vol. IV, pp 163-186

[^220]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 61

[^221]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 142; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 427

[^222]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 143; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 429

[^223]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 144

[^224]: From the view point of fiqh (jurisprudence) Imam had stated, ان
خرجوا على امام عادل او جماعة فقاتلوهم وان خرجوا على امام جائر فلا
تقاتلوهم Kill those who rise up against a just Imam and people, but
never kill those rising up against an unjust ruler Wasa’il Ash-Shi‘a,
vol. XI, unit 26, Hadith 3

[^225]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p. 431

[^226]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 193

[^227]: Ibid, vol. V, p. 191

[^228]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 172

[^229]: Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 463; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 177

[^230]: Ibid, vol. III, pp 515,517

[^231]: Ibid, vol. III, p. 519

[^232]: Andishih siyasi dar Islam mu‘asir, p. 150

[^233]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, pp 196,203

[^234]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 233; vol. V, p. 101; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh,
vol. III, p. 506, such governorship was left as inheritance for Muslims’
future This approach was exercised not only for the ‘Abbasids and
FaTimids in Egypt but also even from the Safawids on in Shi‘ites Iran

[^235]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 209; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p.
175; what is narrated in al-Futuh is that ‘Amr Ibn ‘As had been the
stimulater By the some token since ‘Amr Ibn ‘As had passed away in 43 A
H, it cannot be correct

[^236]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 187

[^237]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 224; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol.
I, p. 165; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p. 503

[^238]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 224,225

[^239]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, pp 225,226; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. III, p.
508

[^240]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 28; al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 231;
al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, pp 166-169

[^241]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, pp 187-194

[^242]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 171; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. I, p. 182

[^243]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 182

[^244]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 177

[^245]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 178,179,180,181

[^246]: Mentioning the name of Imam Hasan does not seem incorrect
because this narration referes to the year after his martyrdom

[^247]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, pp 194-196

[^248]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 236

[^249]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 183; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 508

[^250]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, pp 240,241

[^251]: Ibid, vol. IV, pp 243,244; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, Vol I, p. 188

[^252]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 205

[^253]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 208; later on Sufyaniyya also
in order to substantiate the legitimacy of Mu‘awiya’s caliphate and
although there existed some having previous record in Islam, had
narrated that ‘Umar had preferred Abu ‘Ubayd Ibn Mas‘ud to forty
participants of Badr; Rasa’il al-Jahiz, al-Rasa’il As-Siyasiyya, pp
391-392

[^254]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 209

[^255]: Ibid, vol. I, p. 210; Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, pp 213-214

[^256]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 212

[^257]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 214

[^258]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. II, p. 228

[^259]: Ibid, vol. IV, p. 240

[^260]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, pp 248,249

[^261]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 191; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol.
III, p. 511

[^262]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 245

[^263]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 204

[^264]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 37; al-Bad’ wal-Tarikh, vol. VI,
p. 8

[^265]: al-Umawiyyun wal-Khilafa, p. 73; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, part
2, p. 5; Tabaqat Futuh Ash-Shura, p. 626; Nasab Quraysh, p. 129

[^266]: Diwan Farazdaq, vol. I, p. 336

[^267]: Amali, Abu ‘Ali al-Qali, p. 175; Tathbit Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, p.
575

[^268]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, pp 24-25

[^269]: Tarikh Khalifat Ibn Khayyat, p. 218

[^270]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, vol. XXV, pp 16-17

[^271]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 255

[^272]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 257


