Karbala’s Movement
==================

Imam Husayn Before Karbala
--------------------------

Although far too many remarks have been constantly made in light of Imam
Husayn's features as yet, purely for luck and good omen, Several of
which shall be referred too.

This magnanimous Imam was born on Sha'ban 3,4 A.H. And having been
intimately beside the Prophet, his forefather, he could never detach
himself from him even at the prayer time. Allah's Messenger, who adored
him and his brother exceedingly, could demonstrate a profile of their
virtues through his statements to his disciples. In hadith books many
virtues describing Imam Husayn (a) can be detected. Mostly like the
hadith of, **الحسن والحسين سيدا شباب أهل الجنّة “** Hasan and Husayn are
both the masters of the youth of Paradise dwellers.”

They are repeatedly narrated by successive generations and considered
authentic. The Prophet's extreme affection for these two sons was
entirely overt to all disciples. As hinted at concerning with Imam
Hasan, the Prophet has been doing his utmost so hard to make the nation
conscious of his true attachment to them both that he stated, **من أحبني
فليحب هذين**[^1] “O Allah, adore the one who adores these two” **من أحب
الحسن والحسين فقد أحبني، ومن أبغضهما فقد أبغضني**[^2] “The one feeling
affectionate for Hasan and Husayn, feel so for me; nonetheless, the one
making them wrathful, has made me too” **هما ريحاني من الدينا**[^3]
“These two are my fragrant flowers from universe.”

Among the virtues exclusively narrated about Imam Husayn the most
well-known of all is, **حسين منّي وأنا من حسين**[^4] “Husayn is from me
and I am from Husayn.”

It has been narrated by Yahya Ibn Salim Mawsili, Imam Husayn's governor,
as saying, “As we were walking accompanying Imam, he stopped to knock on
a door and ask for water. A bondswoman came out holding a bowl of water.
Prior to drinking, he took out a piece of silver and offered it to her
and then said, “Give it to your family”. He drank afterwards.[^5]

Abu Bakr Ibn Muhammad Ibn Hazm has recounted that when Imam Husayn had
been passing by the platform whereon a group of the underpriviliged was
having food, he was requested to have a share in.

“Under no circumstances does Allah love the arrogant”, stated Imam and
dismounted to eat. Later, Imam told them, “You invited me and I replied
in the affirmative. Now I invite you and I expect you to comply with”.
Addressing his wife, Rubab, he demanded her to provide what she had
prepared.[^6]

It is quoted from Imam al-Baqir (a) that for pilgrimage, Imam Husayn
inclined towards moving on foot whereas his horses were all going behind
him.[^7]

Attending the wars of Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan, Imam Husayn battled
against those breaching their promise and exerting oppression with his
father side by side. A sermon is narrated from him in Siffin whereby he
persuaded people to struggle.[^8]

From the very nitrating stages of Siffin, Imam Husayn had such a
determining role in capturing the route of water from the soldiers of
Damascus that after the victorious result Imam 'Ali asserted: **(هذا اول
فتح ببركة الحسين (ع** **“**It was the ever-first conquest for the sake
of Husayn's blessing.” [^9]

After Imam was called and told by 'Ubayd Ibn 'Umar that his father had
done such and such to Quraysh, Imam accused him of abiding by Qasitin
(the apostates) and added that these kinds of individuals have consented
to Islam reluctantly but as a matter of fact they are in no way
Muslims.[^10]

The one who earnestly and thoroughly upholded Imam Hasan's policy during
his tenure was Imam Husayn (a). In spite of frequent demand by Iraq for
Imam's travel to Kufa even after his brother's Matyrdom, His Excellency
did never incline and warned that it shall look irrational taking an
action as long as Mu'awiya is alive.

This utterance denoted that for a ten-year interlude Imam endured
Mu'awiya compulsorily. This point can be regarded as of significance in
Imam Husayn's political standings although rarely is it taken into
account. And the reason might be due to the fact that we notice Imam
Husayn merely from the standpoint of his revolutionary action in
Karbala.

Both the relations between Imam and Mu'awiya and the conversation that
they have had under various conditions profoundly manifest Imam's
politically unyielding manner in acceding the legitimacy of Mu'awiya's
rule. One of the most credible evidence is Imam's lengthy letter to
Mu'awiya therein numerous facts about Mu'awiya's atrocity against 'Ali's
Shi'ite Muslims has been revealed. “Never do I intend to oppose you nor
combat you”, Imam wrote.

Then he added:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأيم الله لقد تركت وأنا أخاف الله في تركه وما أظن الله راضياَ مني بترك
محاكمتك اليه ولا عاذري دون الاعتذار اليه فيك وفي اوليائك القاسطين
الملحدين حزب الظالمين وأولياء الشياطين…أولست قاتل حجر بن عدي وأصحابه
المصلين العابدين الذين ينكرون الظلم ويستعظمون البدع ولا يخافون لومة
لائم، ظلماَ وعدواناً بعد اعطائهم الأمان بالمواثيق والايمان المغلظة، أو
لست قاتل عمرو بن الحمق الخزاعي، صاحب رسول الله الذي أبلته العبادة
وصفرت لونه وانحلت جسمه،… أو لست المدعي زياد بن سمية المولود علي فراش
عبيد عبد ثقيف وزعمت أنه ابن أبيك وقد قال رسول الله صلي الله عليه وآله
وسلم, الولد للفراش وللعاهر الحجر، فتركت سنة رسول الله صلي الله عليه
وآله وسلم وخالفت أمره متعمداً واتبعت هواك مكذباً بغير هدى من الله، ثم
سلطه على العراقين فقطع أيدي المسلمين وسمل أعينهم وصلبهم علي جذوع
النخل،
  </p>
</blockquote>

> أولست صاحب الحضرميين الذي كتب اليك ابن سميه أنهم على دين علي، فكتبت
> اليه، اقتل من كان على دين علي ورأيه، فقتلتهم ومثل بهم بأمرك؛ ودين علي،
> دين محمد صلي الله عليه وآله وسلم الذي كان يضرب عليه أباك والذي انتحالك
> اياه اجلسك مجلسك هذا ولولا هموا1981 كان أفضل شرفك تجشم الرحلتين في طلب
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الخمور…فلا أعلم لنفسي وديني أفضل من جهادك، فان أفعله فهو قربة الى ربي
وان أتركه فذنب أستغفرالله منه في كثير من تقصيري… فابشر يا معاوية
بالقصاص وأيقن بالحساب واعلم أنّ لله كتاب لايغادر صغيرة ولا كبيرة الا
أحصاها وليس الله بناس لك أخذك بالظّنة وقتلك أوليائه علي الشبهة والتهمة
للناس بالبيعة لابنك غلام سفه يشرب الشراب ويلعب بالكلاب ولا أعلمك الا
قد خسرت نفسك وأوبقت دينك وأكلت أمانتك وغششت رعيتك وتبوأت مقعدك النار
فبعداَ لقوم الظالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By Almighty Allah, I relinquished combating against you meanwhile I
have fear of Him. I surmise not that Allah would be gratified with me
unless I allow Him to ajudicate about you the atheist and ruthless party
as well as the devils' supporters. Were you not the one who slayed Hujr
Ibn 'Adi and his followers brutally, those who struggled in a bid to
abolish oppression and oppose the heresy while dreading no jeopardy? But
then with recourse to swearing oaths, you gave them a quarter.

Were you not the assassin of 'Amr Ibn Hamiq Khuza'i, he who was among
the Prophet's disciples and whose too much worshpping had emanciated and
enfeebled his physique and transformed his expression…? Were you not the
one who claimed brotherhood with Ziyad Ibn Sumayya, a newborn whose
begetter was 'Ubayd 'Abd Thaqif where as you declared that he was your
father's son? It was while the Holy Prophet had affirmed that the
newborn belongs to the one who does beget it and it is requisite that
the adulterer be stoned to death.

Deliberately, you ignored the Prophet's Sunna and disobeyed him and with
no divine guidance you still sought after your carnal desire. Heedless
of the fact that Ziyad cut out Muslims' hands, blinded them and hung
them from the palm trees, you gave him predominance in Kufa and Basra.
Did you not slay those two from Haďram, attributed to Haďr Mawt, those
about whom Ziyad wrote to you that the, two, believed in 'Ali's religion
and you responded that anyone being of the same religion and belief as
'Ali ought to be slaughtered?

As a result, he did slay and mutilate them at your behest. It's the fact
other than this that 'Ali's religion is in every respect Muhammad's, the
one against whom our father battled? And this religion was what thereby
you won this position and if it were not of existence, your only virtue
would be merely the tolerance of difficulties during the summer and
winter trips seeking for intoxicating drink…

I deem naught more momentous than Jihad against you for myself and my
religion. I shall draw nearer to my Lord if I do accomplish it but I
should ask Him for forgiveness for my neglect and error unless I did
accomplish it …

O Mu'awiya! I give you glad tidings of retaliation for Hujr's murder!
Never doubt and be informed that there exists a book for Allah wherein
any sin whether minor or major is accurately recorded.

Yes, never ever will Allah fail to remember you for all those whom you
have cynically arrested and skeptically slayed; for all those whom you
compelled to swear allegiance to your insane, wine drinker and
dog-fancying son.

What I can say is that you let yourself sustain losses, rendered your
religion futile, abused what has been left in your custody, deceived
your peasant and consequently you fill you grave with fire to
overflowing. May Allah keep the oppressors away from us!”[^11]

Elsewhere, Baladhuri has brought the letter in brief having an
additional sentence, **وما أعلم فتنة أعظم من ولايتك هذه الامة “** I know
of no sedition being more dreadful than your rule over this
nation.”[^12]

Later, no sooner had Mu'awiya faced Imam Husayn than he inquired, “Have
you heard what we did for Hujr, his followers and your father's Shi'ite
Muslims?  
 “What?” asked Imam.

We murdered them, Mu'awiya replied, wrapped them in shroud, performed
prayers for them and interred them.

Imam stated in return, “Neither would we wrap them in shroud, perform
prayers for them, nor bury them, if we killed your followers.”[^13]

By the same token, Mu'awiya resorted to any means to suppress the
opponents. He even put the holiest figures to the test through alluring.
In this way, once he had strivde to silence Abu Dharr in Damascus. Here,
we demonstrate an amazing example about Mu'awiya's policy toward Imam
Husayn (a), the policy that Mu'awiya had adopted to relieve Imam's wrath
about the Umayya by sending presents.

Narrated by Asma'i is that a gorgeous bondswoman was brought for
Mu'awiya. When he questioned her price, he was told “100,000 dhms”.
Mu'awiya purchased her. Taking a look at 'Amr Ibn 'As, he asked who
deserved that woman.

'Amr and all those present said, ” Amir al-Mu'minin does”.

“No”, Mu'awiya contradicted, “She is solely appropriate for Husayn Ibn
'Ali.” “For his family dignity, he deserves her the most”, he added. “It
can remove the indignation stemmed from the contention between his
father and I.” He commanded that they dispatch her to Imam as a gift.

Making her ready for a journey after forty days, they sent her along
with a great deal of goods, clothes and so forth. In a letter, Mu'awiya
wrote to Imam that Amir al-Mu'minin purchashed a bondswoman and although
he loved her, he granted her to him generously. After the bondswoman was
brought in, upon seeing her, Imam who was astonished at her charm,
inquired what her name was.

“Hawa (passion)”, she responded.  
 Imam stated, “How becoming is the name to you! Can you read
anything?”  
 Yes, I can, she replied, both Qur'an and poem.  
 Imam demanded that she recite Qur'an. She prefaced,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِنْدَهُ مَفَاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لَا يَعْلَمُهَا إِلَّا هُوَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“All means for discovering the hidden things are with Allah and no one
else knows them but He…”  
 Being requested by Imam to read poems if she knew, the bondwoman asked
“Am I immune enough?”

“Certainly”, Imam answered.  
 The woman read,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت نعم المتاع لو كنت تبقي غير أن لا بقاء للانسان
  </p>
</blockquote>

“What a precious property you would be if you survived, what a pity no
one will survive.”

In regard with the content of the poem, Imam burst into tears and said,
“Not only are you liberated, but also all sent goods are yours.”  
 “Have you composed anything concerning Mu'awiya?” he asked.  
 “Sure, I have,” She responded,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رأيت الفتي يمضي ويجمع جهده رجاء الغني والوارثون قعود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ما للفتي الا نصيب من التقي اذا فارق الدنيا عليه يعود
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I saw a youth passing by and dreaming about riches while his heirs were
waiting in an ambush. There is no one higher for a youth but piety, for
when passing away it would give him a hand.”  
 Imam, ordering to offer her 1000 dhms as well, stated that his father
had also composed regarding it,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و من يطلب الدنيا لحال تسـرّه فسوف لعمري عن قليل يلومها
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا أدبرت كانت علي المرء فتنة وان اقبلت كانت قليلا دوامها
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Anyone, who seeks after this world to make him cheerful for a moment,
by myself, he will regret presently; when he turns back on it, he faces
problem and when he turns toward it, it will be transient.”

Afterwards, Imam wept and stood up to pray.[^14]

Earlier when discussing the issue of making caliphate hereditary, we
elucidated Imam's stance against Mu'awiya's measures. Imam was one of
the most notable opponents at that juncture who spared no effort for
expressing his opposition in this respect.

Throughout the years when Imam Husayn and his brother were in Medina,
Marwan was the governor of the city whose abomination and abusiveness
was proverbial and searched for an occasion to slander and insult Imam
'Ali (a).

Abu Yahya has recounted, “I was present while Marwan and Imam Husayn
were wrangling. Imam Hasan (a) could cease his brother but Marwan kept
on so courteously that he said “You, Ahl al-Bayt, are all cursed.” This
utterance was the manifestation of Marwan's innate and deep-rooted
malice. Upon hearing, Imam Hasan reacted that, **والله لقد لعن الله أباك
علي لسان نبيه وأنت في صلبه “** Allah had cursed your father with the
tongue of His Messenger where as you were still in his loins.”[^15]

Accordingly, in this way came Marwan's vengeance towards the Prophet
(S).

Once Mu'awiya did his best to persuade the daughter of 'Abd Allah Ibn
Ja’far Ibn Abi Talib to marry his son, Yazid. When 'Abd Allah consulted
Imam Husayn (a), Imam advised, **أتزوجه وسيوفهم تقطر من دمائنا؟ “** Do
you intend to offer your daughter to the one down whose swords our blood
drips?”

“Convince her to marry your nephew, Qasim Ibn Muhammad”.[^16]

In compliance with another narration, Mu'awiya's intention for this
action was creating reconciliation between the Umayya and the Hashimites
in other words, making the Hashimites surrender to the Umayya.[^17]

Imam Husayn’s Opposition to Yazid’s Caliphate
---------------------------------------------

As preplanned, Yazid became the caliph subsequent to Mu'awiya's death in
Rajab, 60 A.H. No sooner had this news spread through Medina than Yazid
exerted himself to secure allegiance from all those opponents whose
opposition might wage a revolt against him.[^18]

Writing a letter to Walid Ibn 'Utba Ibn Abi Sufyan, governor of Medina,
Yazid urged him to secure allegiance from 'Abd Allah Ibn Zubayr and
Husayn Ibn 'Ali (a). Marwan also commanded that Walid dispatch the
soldiers to them at that very night and if they defied, they should
decapitate them all on the spot in view of the fact that night seemed an
opportunity to suffice to revolt and summon people.[^19]

Imam Husayn who was informed of Mu'awiya's death through the
message-bearer of the governor of Medina, proceeded to the palace
accompanied by a number of followers armed to guard Imam against any
probable menace. Being asked by Walid to swear allegiance to Yazid, Imam
stated that such a figure like him ought not to swear privately but
openly in a mosque.

Walid concurred, but Marwan made an attempt threateningly to provoke him
into arresting Imam. Imam, furious with Marwan, addressed Walid as
saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيها الامير! انا اهل بيت النبوة ومعدن الرسالة ومختلف الملائكة ومحطّ
الرحمة وبنا فتح الله وبنا ختم ويزيد رجل فاسق شارب خمر، قاتل النفس
المحرمة معلن بالفسق ومثلي لا يبايع مثله “
  </p>
</blockquote>

O emir! We, Holy Prophet's household, are the mine of Prophetic mission,
angels' companions and the fountain of mercy. Allah has commenced with
us and so will He terminate with us. By no means will I swear allegiance
to Yazid who is libertine, wine-drinker, murderer of the venerated and
the one debauching in public.”

It was at the same session where Imam affirmed in reaction to Marwan's
insistence in securing allegiance, “The knell of Islam will be rung if
Yazid is supposed to secure the power, **وعلى الاسلام السلام.**
Vindicating through the verse of Tathir (purification), he commented on
Ahl al-Bayt's meritedness in obtaining the caliphate.[^20] This
vindication was what had been narrated by Imam 'Ali(a) and Imam Hasan
(a) as well.

At the same night, Ibn Zubayr departed from Medina and was pursued by
the governmental guards next day. Next night Imam Husayn did so[^21] in
a trip along with all Ahl al-Bayt and the only one remained in Medina
was Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya.[^22] It is told that the date of departure
was Sha'ban 3, 60 A.H. concurrent with his birthday.

When Imam stepped into Mecca, the residents became quite delighted and
even Ibn Zubayr who was a leader himself took part in Imam's
congregational prayers and hadith sessions.[^23] Since Mecca was assumed
a religious base for Islam, it was naturally the center of attentions
where Imam was in touch with various distinguished and ordinary
individuals and interpreted the reasons of not swearing allegiance to
Yazid.

Looking forward to experiencing such a day for quite a long, the Shi'ite
Muslims of Kufa became elated by hearing Imam's resistance against Yazid
and his arrival in Mecca. They had already condoled Imam Husayn on Imam
Hasan's martyrdom in a letter and invited him; nevertheless, Imam had
refused.

In the held meeting, such Shi'ites leaders as Sulayman Ibn Surad, and
the others made speeches and propounded Imam's invitation to Iraq.
Despite the agreement all announced, Sulayman stressed all to undertake
and not to violate; they renounced their commitment.[^24] And then a
joint letter was written by a few regarded as Shi'ites leaders such as
Sulayman, Musayyib Ibn Najba, Habib Ibn Mazahir, Rufa'a Ibn Shaddad as
well as 'Abd Allah Ibn Wal inviting Imam to come to Kufa.[^25]

Their letter remained unanswered on Imam's part. After a while, other
letters were consecutively sent and above all Qays Ibn Musahhar Saydawi,
'Abd Allah Ibn Wal and several others personally travelled to Mecca.

On account of the additional letters received by Imam one after another
the status quo modified in such a way that it was something beyond the
bounds of possibility for Imam to pay no heed to the inviters.[^26] When
Hani Ibn Hani went to Mecca, he reported people's presence in general
and the distinguished's readiness in particular and it managed to be a
confirmation and emphasis on letter's contents.

Dispatching Muslim to Kufa
--------------------------

The first action Imam took was dispatching Muslim to Kufa. Imam
addressed him as saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وان رأيت الناس مجتمعين على بيعتي فالعجل لي بالخبر حتى أعمل علي حسب ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Notify me swiftly to adopt a measure in case you perceived that the
people are totally willing to swear allegiance to me.” [^27] “

Muslim, around 40, was singled out from among Ahl al-Bayt for this vital
mission. As stated by historians, en route to Medina and then to Iraq
from Mecca, Muslim lost his way and one of or both couriers conducting
him breathed their last. He, in a letter, asked permission to return but
Imam's response was to accomplish his mission.[^28]

Muslim entered Kufa and resided in Mukhtar's house, being renowned among
Shi'ite Muslims. He commenced to secure allegiance. Summoning to Divine
Book, Prophet's Sunna, Jihad against the oppressors, defending the
oppressed, aiding the needy, fair distribution of Bayt al-Mal (public
treasury) among Muslims, backing prophet's household, compromising the
one whom they compromise, battling the one against whom they battle,
abiding by Ahl al-Bayt's word and action and not practicing the
contrary, were all among the stipulated conditions of allegiance.[^29]

In an interval of thirty five days after Muslim's arrival, Shawwal 5,
60, nearly 18.000 people swore allegiance to him. In addition to Shi'ite
Muslims, ordinary people were among them too, as an example Muhammad Ibn
Bashir said, “I'd like Allah to assist my friends although I do never
like to be killed, nor do I like to lie”. The gap formed succeeding
Mu'awiya's death among the Umayya opponents in Iraq was filled by
Muslim's arrival. All surrounded Muslim. While the might of government
had mitigated, Muslim could openly visit people more easily than before.

The Umayya's spies who were discontented with the status of Nu'man Ibn
Bashir, in a letter wrote to Yazid that the more he required Kufa, the
sooner he should adopt a measure.[^30] Muslim also was engaged in
recruiting forces and preparing military weapons. About Abu Thumama
Sa'idi it is narrated, **يشتري لهم السلاح وكان به بصيرا “** As far as
his full acquaintance with weapons was concerned, he was delegated to
purchase them.”[^31]

Later on, Ibn Ziyad had accused Hani, “Your house has been a refuge for
Muslim's followers and a cache for the weapons”.[^32]

Yazid appointed Ibn Ziyad as the governor of Kufa while he was the
governor in Basra as well. According to historians, in a will given to
his servant to transfer to Yazid later, Mu'awiya had appointed Ibn Ziyad
to confront any probable riot in Iraq.[^33]

Having executed Husayn Ibn 'Ali's message-carrier in Basra, Ibn Ziyad
set out for Kufa to suppress the insurgents through harshness he had
inherited from his father.

The most practical and efficient tool resorted by Ibn Ziyad for
suppression of the Iraqi was nothing save threat. Since the inception,
he summoned the distinguished of the city and ordered that they are
duty-bound to introduce the aliens and those whose arrest is pleasant
for Yazid, Kharijites and all those willing to create disunion and
conflict and also register their names. And if one did not carry out his
own responsibility, any mischief done by aforgoing persons would be upon
his conscience and the ruler would on no accounts protect him. In that
sense, shedding his blood and confiscating his possessions would be
presumed lawful.[^34]

The pressures from the side of Ibn Ziyad propelled Muslim to change his
residence and act in secrecy. The new place was Hani Ibn 'Urwa's house,
one of the chiefs of the tribe of Madhhij and it seemed to be more
secure. Ibn Ziyad was searching for him confusedly. Appointing a spy to
claim amity with Ahl al-Bayt, he could locate his whereabouts. Ibn Ziyad
apprehended Hani first and urged him to hand over Muslim. At the same
time, those belonging to the tribe of Madhhij rose up. But Shurayh Qaďi
treacherously assured them that Hani was alive and Ibn Ziyad's guest;
therefore, he could dispel them.[^35]

Muslim took an action and demanded a few numbers that they summon their
friends by chanting the slogan of “O the helper of nation” which was one
of the slogans of the Prophet at the time of wars. While making a sermon
in the mosque, Ibn Ziyad heard the voices.

He who crawled into the palace, concealed himself behind all the locked
portals. Muslim's army besieged the edifice but by reason of something
indefinite the back portal remained unbesieged through which the
distinguished of Kufa were regularly in touch with Ibn Ziyad. That door
was known as “Bab al-Rumiyyin”. The throng accompanying Muslim was such
a countless number at first that it could terrify Ibn Ziyad and his
people and confine them in the palace.[^36]

Incited by Ibn Ziyad, the distinguished of Kufa began menacing.
“Tomorrow, an army will arrive from Damascus and will do such and such,”
they warned people.[^37] Another group made the members of their own
tribes secede from among Muslim's followers, Going after their husbands
and children, the women said preventively, **والناس يكفونك “** Others
are present.” [^38] “They will fill the gap of your absence.” After a
couple of hours many dispersed,[^39] **وصلي المغرب وما معه الا ثلاثون
رجلاً “** Only did thirty people participate in his congregational
evening prayer.” Afterwards they also dispelled!

Ibn Ziyad, daring not to exit from terror, commanded to check inside the
mosque which was joined to the edifice from the roof to see whether
someone was there or not. With throwing down a torch, they made sure
that no one was there; therefore, they commenced searching for Muslim in
the city. Ibn Ziyad had commanded to inspect all the houses in Kufa door
to door and arrest Muslim.[^40]

Ultimately he was traced and after a short clash he was taken to Ibn
Ziyad. **يا شاق! خرجت علي امامك وشققت عصا المسلمين “** Have you come
from your Imam's side,” inquired Ibn Ziyad, to remove Muslims' union?

Muslim replied that he in no way recognized not only Mu'awiya's
caliphate but also beyond any question his son's as legitimate because
he oppressively usurped the caliphate from Prophet's successor.[^41]

“The inhabitants of this city are all of this belief that your father
has shed the blood of their kins and misbehaved like Caesar and Kasra”,
he added, “we have come to establish justice and summon people to
Allah's and the Prophet's decrees.”[^42]

In order to mar Muslim's reputation among people and to put his
deception in practice, Ibn Ziyad said, “In Medina, you have been
drinking!”

Sedately, Muslim asserted, “Someone like you for whom slaying innocent
people is insignificant will be superior to me if I drink”.[^43]

Muslim whose whole perturbation was for the sake of Imam Husayn (a),
called 'Umar Ibn Sa'd being from Quraysh and claiming to be Muslim's
relative to make his will. What he recommended him was, first, to
dispatch one to Husayn and hinder him from coming to Kufa; secondly, to
wrap his corpse in a shroud and bury him and thirdly, by selling his
sword and other belongings, to pay for his debts. Then Muslim was
martyred.

Although beyond any doubt Muslim was a chaste and pious man, Imam
Husayn's confidence in him, on one hand, and his debt in Kufa, on the
other hand, proves the point. He did never ask someone for a loan[^44]
and all this time with 700 dhms he had already loaned could make ends
meet. At the threshold of his martyrdom he was determined to sell his
belongings for clearing his debt.

Another point in his characteristic was that once the ground was
prepared for Muslim to kill Ibn Ziyad but he did not. After Ibn Ziyad
had gone to Kufa with Sharik Ibn A'war, a Shi'ites in Basra, Sharik
became sick and had to rest in Hani Ibn 'Urwa's house who was one of the
Shi'ite Muslims as well. Ibn Ziyad was set to visit Sharik while Muslim
was concealed there.

Prior to his arrival, Sharik proposed Muslim to take this golden
opportunity and attack Ibn Ziyad after a special cue, which was reading
verses of poem. Never did Muslim do so however. Being reproved by Sharik
after Ibn Ziyad left, Muslim stated that Hani did not feel like Ibn
Ziyad to be murdered in his house. Also, he referred to a hadith from
the Prophet that, **الايمان قيد الفتك “** Such a murder is not confirmed
in Islam at all.”[^45]

The firstly abovementioned point can not be that acceptable about Hani
unless presumably he might have been dreading that with arrival of the
dwellers of Damascus later his life might be wholly lost. And about the
second one, even though Muslim had reasoned through that hadith, now it
merits consideration due to the fact that killing Ibn Ziyad who was a
corrupt and criminal man at that moment could change the future of Iraq
and Karbala effectively.

The Holy Prophet (S) himself in Medina had delegated a group to go to
Mecca and kill Ka'b Ibn Ashraf and Abu 'Afak were both killed in the
same manner. Killing not Ibn Ziyad had a political motivation, some
pointed out. And people would have gone from Damascus to Kufa,
afterwards, for taking vengeance and plundering it.[^46]

It should not remain untold that they would go there whether Imam Husayn
was victorious or not and it had no relevance to Ibn Ziyad's
assassination. And later in the process of besieging his palace, why
people left Muslim alone simply was never disclosed. Should this
accident be blamed on the people of Kufa only or was it because the
leader of the movement could not persuade the people to remain?

How Muslim's whereabouts was located is very interesting. In order to
locate Muslim's hiding place, Ibn Ziyad had paid one of his servants.
The servant who went to the mosque was looking for him according to the
criteria he had heard about the Shi'ite Muslims. A person, performing
prayers continuously, drew his attention. **ان هولاء الشيعة يكثرون
الصلاة وأحسب هذا منهم “** Since the Shi'ite Muslims pray innumerably I
guess that man is a Shi'ites”[^47] he said to himself.

The man was Muslim Ibn 'Awsaja. After several testings, he could not
detect his dastardly plot and while deceived took him to Muslim. The
utterance evidently manifests that Shi'ite Muslims have been famed for
asceticism and worship.

Imam’s Movement Towards Iraq
----------------------------

As Imam's official representative had verified the readiness of Kufa,
there was no longer enough time for a moment's hesitation. With regard
to the letters received as well as Muslim's letter the scene was beyond
question set for rising against the Umayya; therefore, Imam hastened in
such a way that on 8th Dhil-Hajja and exactly in thick of Hajj
(pilgrimage) he changed ”'Umra Tamattu'” (a kind of Hajj) into ”'Umra
Mufrada” (another kind of Hajj) and then set out to Iraq.

Wasting a moment could influence the status quo in Iraq. Furthermore, in
view of the fact that Imam's assassination was probable in Mecca, his
stay looked by no means proper. Reportedly, Imam's fellow-travelers were
80 people; nonetheless, they are to be more suggested by some other
narrations. The number might denote only those accompanying Imam as far
as Karbala.

En route, Imam's first encounter was with a caravan moving from Yemen to
Damascus. What it was transporting were presents for Yazid's court.
Intercepting the caravan, Imam appealed to them for joining him if
willing; otherwise, they ought to return.[^48] Imam from Na'im, the area
where he encountered the caravan, proceeded to as-Safah and it was where
he met Farazdaq, a young poet at that time. After Imam asked him about
the conditions in Kufa, he responded, **قلوب الناس معك وسيوفهم عليك “**
The people's hearts are with you whereas their swords are drawn at you
too.”

When he arrived at Batn al-Ramma in a letter while touching upon
Muslim's letter informed the people of Kufa to prepare for his
entry.[^49] Qays Ibn Musahhar who had become responsible for taking the
letter on his way to Kufa encountered Husayn Ibn Numayr's army and was
arrested. Eating the letter on the spot, Qay was then martyred by Ibn
Ziayd.

In another area, called Zadud, Imam saw Zuhayr Ibn Qayn. As soon as he
heard of Imam's invitation and with his wife's persuasion he became one
of Imam's close followers though he was an 'Uthmanid. He later asked his
friends if they had enthusiasm for martyrdom they could join him;
otherwise, they could take their way to Mecca.[^50]

It was Dhat 'Irq where Imam Husayn (a) informed of both Hani's and
Muslim's martyrdom in a message given by a man from Banu Asad.[^51] As
quoted, Imam came to a decision to return but Muslim's brothers impeded.
Never does it seem that Muslim's brothers either intended or were
capable of compelling Imam to go on to Kufa if he were reluctant. Owing
to the fact that in order to stimulate Imam to go, some had said,
**والله ما أنت مثل مسلم بن عقيل ولو قدمت الكوفة لكان الناس اليك أسرع
“**You are not Muslim, upon stepping into Kufa all will unite behind you
at speed.”[^52]

Imam was still decisive. The message Muslim had left to 'Umar Ibn Sa'd
prior to his martyrdom and had pleaded to him for transferring it to
Imam was received in Zabala.[^53] No sooner had the time elapsed than
the martyrdom news of Qays Ibn Musahhar[^54] and 'Abd Allah Ibn Yaqtur,
Imam's foster-brother spread.

What these reports could indicate was that everything has changed in
Kufa and the present status was utterly distinct from that of the past
reported by Muslim. At this very moment, Imam brought together all
accompanying him and addressed them, **أيها الناس قد خذلتنا شيعتنا فمن
أراد منكم الانصراف فلينصرف “** O people, our Shi'ite Muslims left us
alone. Anyone willing to return can return.”[^55]

A number of people who had joined Imam halfway went back and the only
ones remained were Imam's special friends.[^56] They were those who not
only were with Imam from Mecca,231 but also before that from
Medina.[^57] Nevertheless, those detaching from him were Arabs who had
imagined that they would enter a town with Imam therein all were his
followers.231 When the reality was revealed, they returned without
hesitation.

After this stage, Imam kept on moving again. Here, it had become fully
explicit for Imam that going to Kufa was under no circumstaces rational
according to political evaluations; however, there existed an issue
that, beyond politics, should differently be taken into account. Imam
proceeded to Sharat where he made an overnight stay. He was moving next
day that Ibn Ziyad's army led by Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi appeared from the
distance and blocked Imam's way.

The People of Kufa and Karbala Event
------------------------------------

Here, it would seem convenient if we analyze the position taken by the
people of Kufa towards the event of Karbala.

Among the historical sources as well as common people, the dwellers of
Kufa have been introduced infamous and treacherous. What has been
described concerning them was that being faithful to promises was
invisible amongst them. While enumerating a few features of the people
of Kufa, we referred to their rashness and it could invariably be to the
detriment of them and their rulers at the time of decision-making. To be
easily resented and easily persuaded, from one hand, and simply
surrendering and disobeying, from the other hand, were all a profile of
their split personalities.[^58] Here, let's consider their standing.

The population in Kufa included those from various tribes each of which
enjoyed different arrangements during the different rulers' terms. The
expediency the rulers regarded accounted for the variety in the
classifications of tribes. Yet, the rulers mostly made allowances for
the chiefs or the distinguished of the tribes bearing the fact in mind
that in some situations their might was far more than that of
governors'.

Merely a part of the population was formed by Shi'ite Muslims. Although
a number of tribes were famous for Shi'ism, hardly ever could they be
deemed to be first class Shi'ites tribes. They who were dispersed among
the tribes had no unity. Since in addition to tribal morale they had a
certain kind of Kufiyan morale; as a result, no discrepancy was
conspicuous between them and others.

The count of Shi'ite Muslims was not considerable at all then.
Reportedly, when in the mosque, Hujr Ibn 'Adi dissented Ziyad's remarks
only a half or a third was concordant. With reference to Shi'istic
morale of the town and assuring that the beliefs of a number of people
were based on a kind of political Shi'ism according to which they only
assented to join 'Ali's descendants relatively in political issues, the
Shi'ites process of the town consisted of at least a fourth of the total
population.

No one doubts that Kufa had invited Imam Husayn but did not assist him
and later conducted his murder. Notwithstanding, it ought to be
perceived who they have been, who had written the letters and how many
from Kufa participated in the battle against Imam. It is also worth
mentioning that, later on, Kufa turned into a hub for 'Ali's Shi'ite
Muslims and even reacted against Banu 'Abbas who usurped the sovereignty
of 'Ali's descendants.

Aside from the historians and hadith-narrators affiliated to the Umayya
who loathed the people of Kufa, those of Banu 'Abbas had the same
feeling. The oppressedness of the Shi'ite Muslims was not only political
but also cultural. With the cultural sovereignty of Banu 'Abbas such a
thing appeared thoroughly natural. Accordingly, much attention should be
paid to the fact that the trend of narrating the events is observed
through a pair of spectacles the color of which is as dark as disgusting
Kufa for the sake of its Shi'ism.

Taking the aforesaid point into consideration, it should also be noted
that such historians are all doing their utmost to prove that Shi'ite
Muslims are unfaithful to the promises; in other words, Shi'ism foes are
determined to attribute the advocating not of Kufa to Shi'ite Muslims.

On the contrary, the elaboration below will somewhat indicate that, at
that time, only a minority of people remained Shi'ites and they were in
a position that they could not defend Imam Husayn (a) although they
would if they sacrificed devotedly. This utterance is what we present
proofs for, in brief.

Visualizing the status quo of Kufa, it could be as to say that Yazid was
a man who seemed, although tolerable for Damascus, he was extremely
intolerable for Iraq. As soon as he secured the power, Shi'ite Muslims
in Kufa began protesting. Since many in Kufa found no appropriate
substitute for Yazid and while affected by the public atmosphere, they
elected Husayn Ibn 'Ali (a). Besides, Iraq was normally unwilling to
concede the domination of Damascus.

When the invitation was made on the part of Shi'ite Muslims, not simply
did the common people, having special morale, expressed their advocacy,
but also those who either assumed their positions in peril or were
influenced by others, announced their support behind Husayn Ibn 'Ali
(a).[^59] It resulted in an artificial but public atmosphere of support
for him. The Umayya was also incapable of filling the political gap
created subsequent to Mu'awiya's demise for a while. This atmosphere was
continuously expanding and particularly, as a result of Nu'man Ibn
Bashir's governorship, who was no strict at all, prevailed as long as
Ibn Ziayd entered Kufa.

By taking a glance at a hadith by Imam Husayn, a further likelihood
about the invitation on the part of the distinguished may be regarded
that they intentionally added fuel to the flames to take Imam to Iraq
and martyr him. The hadith was as follows, **وما كانت كتب الي الا مكيدة
لي وتقرباَ الى ابن معاوية “** They wrote nothing but for trickery and
keeping closer to Ibn Mu'awiya.”[^60]

Anyhow, the atmosphere was prepared so positively that upon realizing
it, Muslim felt that Imam should set out to Kufa as soon as possible.

Kufa Under the Pressure of Ibn Ziyad
------------------------------------

Scarcely ever can a person be at variance or rebel while the ruling
system is of domineering and audacious dictatorship. When Nu'man Ibn
Bashir, compassionate somehow, was the governor of Kufa, people dared
reveal their Shi'ism without constraint and when Muslim entered the
town, they warmly welcomed him with the Ibn Ziyad's substitution for Ibn
Bashir, the tide turned against all at once. Ibn Ziyad's great savagery
had terrorized many a person. Those who were oversensitive and made
decision impetuously no only were they menaced by Ibn Ziyad, but also
they were terrified by the present propaganda about pending arrival of
an army from Damascus.

No sooner had few days passed than the withdrawal on the part of
Muslim's supporters expedited. The nobles of the town who were now
certain about the dominion in Kufa and had no doubt about the Umayyads's
stability, stood up for them overtly. They have kept all silence as yet.
Many others also looked not it expedient to be at odds with the chiefs
of their tribes. These nobles were the ones who minimized Muslim's
allies through alluring and threatening when Muslim attacked Ibn Ziyad's
palace and they intended to manifest their power in controlling the
people.[^61]

The status in Kufa had taken such a new shape that before Ibn Ziyad's
despotism even if a chief had defied, the members of the tribe would
have never dared to be on his side. As recounted by historians, when
Hani Ibn 'Urwa, chief of Banu Murad, was arrested “four thousand
cavalrymen and eight thousand infantrymen” were his supporters. If the
allies of Banu Murad joined them from Kinda, the total would be thirty
thousand people. Despite the fact when he was dragged along in Bazar
with his hands tied and while he was imploring one to help, no single
helper appeared.[^62]

After a short time, he was martyred whereas no one dissented at all.

During Imam Husayn's sojourning in Karbala, in his remarks Ibn Ziyad
ordered the people to left Kufa for Karbala. He threateningly warned
that, **فأيّما رجل وجدناه بعد يومنا هذا متخلّفا عن العسكر برئت منه
الذمّة “** “From today on whoever disobeys the army, he shall no longer
be protected by us.” [^63]

It denoted that his punishment would be murder. In order to search in
the town for anyone not complying with the army, Ibn Ziyad delegated
Qa'qa' Ibn Suwayd. Qa'qa' while inspecting traced a man from the tribe
of Hamdan who had come there to secure his father's inheritance. After
he had been taken to Ibn Ziyad, he issued the verdict of his
assassination. Later, **فلم يبق محتلم بكوفه** **إلا خرج الى العسكر
بالنخيلة** Not a matured one could be seen in Kufa unless he had joined
the army, Nukhayla.” [^64]

It was now when all swords were pulled against Imam Husayn (a).
Assuredly, if people were free in their actions, by no means would they
do so, since a great number were in the same condition.[^65]

And now what Farazdaq had composed can be perceived concerning Kufa,  
**قلوبهم معك وسيوفهم عليك** “Their hearts are with you while their
swords are drawn against you” [^66] or **أنت أحب الناس إلي الناس والقضاء
في السماء والسيوف مع بني أمية** “ “You are the dearest of all, amongst
people, but divine decree is in the sky and swords are beside the
Umayya.” [^67]

For delineating the sense of this utterance, we can reason to Mujamma'
Ibn 'Abd Allah al-’A'idhi quotation, that joined Imam from Kufa as
saying “The nobles are all in opposition to you and though the hearts of
the rest are with you, tomorrow they will pull the swords against
you”.[^68]

Under those existing circumstances, people could not help going to
Karbala owing to the fact that their stay coincided with their slay. The
Shi'ite Muslims or those being reluctant to do so had two alternatives,
one, to ally themselves with Imam, two, to flee from Kufa and Karbala.

It can be well detected from varying reports that the group of people,
who were coercively sent to Karbala for a battle against Imam Husayn,
either fled halfway, or did not appear in Karbala at all. The total
number of soldiers recruited for Ibn Ziyad's army and announced in
Karbala was the census, which was taken while dispatching them to
Karbala; nonetheless, a throng of them had fled halfway.

There must have been some ten thousand people or less in Karbala whereas
compared with the population of Kufa it was considerably few. It is said
that Kufa mosque had been accommodating forty thousand people.[^69] What
this fact does disclose is that many had either concealed themselves in
Kufa or fled halfway.

Baladhuri has written, **وكان الرجل يُبعث في ألف فلا يصل إلاّ في ثلاثماة
أو أربعمأة وأقل من ذلك كراهة منهم لهذا الوجه** “ “A commander was sent
with a thousand troops but when entering Karbala the troops were reduced
to as few as three hundred, four hundred or even less. And it stood for
the disgust people bore for moving there.” [^70]

“When a commander along with a great many was sent to Karbala by Ibn
Ziyad”, wrote Dinwari, **يصلون إلي كربلاء ولم يبق منهم إلا القليل كانوا
يكرهون قتال الحسين فيرتدعون** **فيتخلّفون** “ “A great few arrived in
Karbala and it was due to the aversion they had to battle against
Husayn, hence they preferred to return and secede from the army.” [^71]

In addition to fleeing, a number's endeavor was to join Imam Husayn for
his support. When Imam entered Karbala, it could be eight days before
his martyrdom. No one could ever dream about occurrence of a war and
Imam's martyrdom. It was 'Ashura morning when Hurr Ibn Yazid perceived
how serious the situation was and allied himself with Imam. Many people
might have had the same idea as Hurr. He told Imam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بابي أنت وأمي! ما ظننت الأمر فينتهي بهؤلاء القوم إلى ما أرى وظننت أنهم
سيقبلون منك إحدى الخصال التي عرضتها عليهم فقلتُ في نفسي لا أبالي أن
أطيع القوم في بعض أمورهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“May my parents be sacrificed for you! I could never imagine that
people's conditions might be culminated in such a phase I observe. I
presumed that they might consent to one of the several alternatives you
proposed. I said to myself that I would not mind if I abide by them in a
few affairs, but now…”[^72]

It was merely Hurr who joined Imam together with a few numbers. Although
some might have it in mind, they could not make their decision. Even if
Shi'ite Muslims intended to defend, they did not hasten and only did
special ones draw decisively a conclusion and could join Imam at the
very beginning. Among those who joined Imam were Nafi' Ibn Hilal Muradi,
'Umar Ibn Khalid Saydawi, Sa'd, one of 'Umar Ibn Khalid's governors and
Mujamma' Ibn 'Abd Allah al-’A'idhi from the tribe of Madhhij.[^73]

By the day of 'Ashura, Muslim Ibn 'Awsaja and Habib Ibn Mazahir could
reach there. As written by Ibn Sa'd, in 'Ashura morning, some twenty men
joined Imam.[^74] Ibn Qutayba has reported the number as many as
thirty.[^75] Further names are referred to by historians.[^76]

Noticing such escaping and joining, Ibn Ziyad had to prevent them;
consequently, he took an action. Ibn Sa'd who was one of the first
narrators has written, **وجعل الرجل والرجلان والثلاثة يتسللون إلى حسين
من الكوفة “** When Ibn Ziyad was notified that people were joining
Husayn individually or in two people or three-people groups.”

Commanding to prepare the barracks, he appointed 'Amr Ibn Hurayth to
drive the people into Nukhayla. His order was also keeping watch on the
bridge not to allow one to flee.[^77] Husayn Ibn Numayr was duty-bound
to patrol the area between Qadisiyya and Qutqutana to identify anyone
proceeding to Hijaz inasmuch as under this pretext they might join
Imam.[^78]

Ibn Ziyad wrote to his governor in Basra to send a signal man to control
the routes and if anyone traversed, he should arrest him.[^79] It is
absolutely obvious that whom they meant were those who might come to aid
Imam. Similarly, Ibn Ziyad had commanded that the routes between Waqisa
and Damascus up to the route of Basra be tightly restricted, **ولا يدعون
أحد يلج ولا يخرج “** and not to allow anyone to move and exit through
it.”[^80]

Once Habib Ibn Mazahir prompted the tribe of Banu Asad, being in the
vicininty, to help but 'Ubayd Allah's army alienated seventy of them
from Imam's army and did not permit them to join Imam.[^81] At this
juncture, many were in prison. Among the prisoners was Mukhtar Ibn Abi
'Ubayda who was apprehended and whipped by Ibn Ziyad. Whipping caused
Mukhtar's one eye be blinded for ever.[^82] This tight control could
play an influential role in hindering the people of Kufa to support
Imam.

Alluring was also applied by Ibn Ziyad in addition to threatening. Prior
to people's departure, Ibn Ziyad told them, “in order to persuade you to
prepare for battling against his foe, Yazid has sent four thousand
Dinars and two hundred thousand dhms to give you”.[^83]

People's reliance on financial generosity provoked a group of them to
stand against Imam in Karbala. When Imam conceived that people were in
true intent on assassinating him, he affirmed, **يا** **هؤلاء! إسمعوا
يرحمكم الله، مالنا ولكم، ما هذا بكم يا أهل الكوفة؟ قالوا خفنا العطاء
“**Lo! What has occurred between you and us? O people of Kufa! What has
happened to you? They responded, “We fear the generosity.” Imam added,
**ما عند الله من العطاء خير لكم** “Whatsoever is from Allah is the best
for you.”[^84]

But no one heeded what Imam said

The evidence so far is wholly to confirm this fact that a group of
people including the distinguished and their adherents were all
criminals who merited the abusiveness and harshness on the part of those
reproaching them. Yet, concerning the specific despotism that
predominated, there existed a large number who intended to join Imam but
were not able to.

What Baladhuri has written appears appealing that Sa'd Ibn 'Ubayda was
quoted as saying, “Standing on the hills, many a clergyman in Kufa were
praying, **أللهم أنزل عليه نصرك “** O Allah reveals your aid to Husayn.”

Sa'd added that he told them,**يا أعداء الله ألا تنـزلون فتنصرونه “** O
Allah's foes! Why don't you climb down to aid him?”[^85]

Anyway, there is no doubt that Imam was martyred by the people of Kufa
while there was only one from Damascus among them.[^86] Notwithstanding,
the people of Kufa should not be deemed as a single group.

Assessing the Travel to Iraq
----------------------------

Now, we ought to consider whether Imam's travel to Iraq was expedient or
not in that situation. Regardless of the aspect of indivisibility of
Karbala event, here we are to assess Imam Husayn's travel to Iraq
politically in a few words. The first question raised is whether there
was any other measure to be adopted for Imam other than travelling to
Iraq and whether it could be anticipated that conducting such a
revolution against Yazid was feasible.

A deep glance at the existing historical sources will indicate the
frequent objections voiced denoting that by no means had a travel to
Iraq been expedient. The objections were from the very beginning. When
people of Kufa, subsequent to Imam Hasan's martyrdom, invited Imam
Husayn to that town, Imam replied that he would never consent to any
revolution as long as Mu'awiya was alive.[^87]

His justification might have been Iraq's inability to resist Mu'awiya's
tricks because they have already been tested in 'Ali's and Hasan's
terms. Following Imam's opposition to the issue of allegiance and when
Imam set out for Mecca, a travel to Iraq was probable. Quotedly, 'Abd
Allah Ibn Muti' forewarned Imam against his travel to Kufa on the way
from Medina to Mecca.[^88]

When Imam entered Mecca, the objectors were innumerable. 'Abd Allah Ibn
'Abbas suggested Imam to waive proceeding to Iraq and go to Yemen's
mountains for preference due to various reasons as it is a mountainous
area and more secure therein and that his fathers Shi'ite Muslims are
abundant.[^89] It was quoted by Ibn A'tham from Ibn Hanafiyya.[^90]

“People are partial to Dinar and Dirham which are both in the ruler's
hands. Lest you might go to Iraq”, said 'Amr Ibn 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn
Hisham.[^91] The objection raised by 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar was on account
of his extreme fear of bloodshedding.[^92] Touching upon his martyrdom
in Iraq, 'Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far had written,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إني أخاف أن يطفيء نور الارض روح الهدى وأمير المؤمنين، فلا تعجل الى
العراق فاني آخذ لك الامان من يزيد “
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have a foreboding that the light of the earth will be extinguished as
a result of your murder. The spirit of guidance and Amir al-Mu'minin is
no one but you. Hasten not toward Iraq, I can seek quarter for you from
Yazid.”[^93]

Abu Sa'id Khudri is also quoted as saying, **لا تخرج على امامك “**
“Never revolt against your Imam.” [^94]

Miswar Ibn Makhrama who was among the protesters as well wrote to Imam,
“Be not deluded by Iraqi people”.[^95] What Abu Waqid Laythi had stated
was like that of above.[^96] Moving from Iraq to Hijaz, Farazdaq opposed
the travel.[^97]

All of these objections plus some more are recorded in historical
sources and many spiteful narrators might have been endeavoring to
multiply them to substantiate that Imam had been truly deceived and
traveled to Iraq with not a least rational reason. Prior to reflecting
Imam's justification of why going to Iraq was requisite, it is worth
presenting an introduction.

Political history shows that it rarely happened when a revolutionary man
rose up politically he, in all probability, could foresee a definite
triumph or an achievement of the goal with no peril. Those who struggle
to assume a power either benevolently or malevolently always deal with a
probability.

In politics, even the most tiumphant and popular ones are invariably
subjected to various probabilities of hardness and defeat. In no way
should it be assumed that a movement be conducted with a high certainty.
Such a notion is not only inconsistent with the historical realities,
but also it is emanated from the simple-mindedness regarding the nature
of political activities.

And now we ought not to presuppose that Imam should have inevitably had
a high certainty to win in the travel. On the one hand, those who deemed
Imam's travel inexpedient never must they notice the proof which
demonstrate the probable defeat; as an instance, the people of Kufa had
already been tested once.

On the other hand, those who deemed it expedient neither should they
suppose that there had been no probability of defeat. Taking them all
into consideration, Imam Husayn's position should be gauged in that
situation first and then the travel to Iraq be evaluated considering
both historical evidence and Imam's remarks.[^98]

Imam by no means assented to Yazid and his sovereignty no matter if it
might have preceded his martyrdom. Nevertheless, he was seeking for an
opportunity to rise up against Yazid and secure the sovereignty. From
the framework being made in Imam's mind one probability should have been
preferably singled out and he should have naturally reacted to any
suggestion or objection voiced. Since the plan was not flexible at all,
any suggestion that could spoil it in any way was condemned on the part
of Imam.

In such a situation, there existed particular specifications for the
Islamic world politically. Imam had to adopt measures in such a way that
he could under those circumstances achieve his goal successfully in a
bid to defend the religion and establish a just government. In diverse
levels were Imam's objectives.

Procuring the rule could have been treated as a considerable victory for
him having been thought of it. As the one enjoying the good and
prohibiting the evil, he could have accomplished his mission even though
his goal had become unattainable. Given that if he were not able to
reach such an achievement he had no doubt that with his blood streamed
he was able to irrigate the lofty tree of Islam and enlighten the nation
as to the tough environment they live in.

The reality was that Yazid never allowed anyone like Imam Husayn who
abstained from swearing allegiance to him to live at ease. Owing to the
fact that Imam was not a man who lives calmly, Yazid's only resort was
to take his life in case he was not convinced to swear.

Moreover, Damascus, Medina and Mecca in particular and Hijaz in general
were not the ones which could resist Yazid having such an intention.
Imam must have turned his attention to elsewhere. Although proceeding to
Mecca seemed rational for the time being thanks to its sacred nature
wherein his safeti was warranted for a short while, it could certainly
not be a permanent refuge for him.

Above all, Mecca was not on Imam's side and even in the course of
allegiance to Amir al-Mu'minin, it swore with hesitation. At this
juncture, the only place as a focal point of attention could be Iraq
that was a center for Imam's Shi'ites Muslims. In different respects, it
was a foe to Damascus as well. The demand made by Kufa for Imam's travel
reinforced the probability of victory. The more the invitation was
stressed, the more the percentage of the probable victory was augmented.

Never does it mean that there was no jeopardy in Iraq. However, the
question posed is that if Imam was set to settle in somewhere, where
could he select? Was Imam Husayn ever a man to swear allegiance? Or was
Yazid a man who permits him to survive without allegiance? If Imam had
not gone to Iraq, would not the historians have written that if he had
gone, he would have gained a victory?

Would not they have inquired why he had not given a positive answer to
the letters? How could he allow Yazid's agents to martyr him in Hijaz
whereas he could take an action? These questions together with some more
are the ones that would be raised by any wise individual were a travel
to Kufa not taken place.

What merits consideration is that the consequence of objector's demands
for Imam's not going was approving Yazid's sovereignty even if
temporarily and never ever could it be practical for Imam. Accordingly,
since seeking quarter from Yazid that had been recommended by 'Abd Allah
Ibn Ja’far was on the condition that Imam swears allegiance to him it
was on no accounts tolerable for Imam. Now let's take a glance at Imam's
own response and how history has reflected it.

Among the points Imam (a) had been regularly hinting at was that Yazid
with his agents would in no way allow him to remain alive in Mecca and
definitely they would murder him. In an answer to Ibn 'Abbas's
objection, Imam stated, **ان أقتل خارجاً منها بشبرين أحب الي من أقتل
خارجاً منه بشبر “** I would rather be killed two inches farther from
Mecca than one inch farther.”[^99]

It highlights not only the reverence of Mecca had to be observed but
also Imam's life was at risk and he should have taken an action. In
reacting to Ibn 'Umar, Imam had asserted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ القوم لايتركوني … فلا يزالون حتي أبايع واني كاره فيقتلونني “
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This group will never stop insisting on swearing allegiance on my part.
As I will never do so, they will kill me.” [^100]

The situation wherein Imam was, is well-described in above utterance.
Elsewhere Imam had made it clear, **ولو كنت في جُحر هامة من هوام الأرض
استخرجوني ويقتلونني “** “Even though I hide in the hole of a desert
animal, they will trace and murder me.” [^101]

When Imam was questioned why he hastened, he answered, **لو لم أعجل
لاخذت** “ “I will be arrested, unless I hasten.” [^102]

Somewhere else he stated, **إنّ بنى أميّة أخذوا مالي فصبرت، وشتموا عرضي
فصبرت وطلبوا دمي فهربت “** The Umayya confiscated my properties. I had
to tolerate, marred my reputation but I tolerated, when they decided to
shed my blood, I had to flee.” [^103]

All these narrations confirm that they were determined to take Imam's
life and there was no hope of survival left provided that he contented
to swear allegiance. The other side of the coin was traveling to Iraq.
What spot should have been chosen by Imam?

In an interval between Sha'ban and Dhil-Hajja when Imam lived in Mecca,
he received many letters from Iraq. These letters were the ones which
later turned into Imam's main reason for a travel to Iraq. Any time any
objection to going was raised, Imam referred to the letters.[^104] When
Imam faced Hurr and when he was asked by 'Umar Ibn Sa'd why he came to
Iraq, he reasoned those very letters.

Once Bujayr Ibn Shaddad asked Imam for the reason of going, he replied,
**هذه كتب وجوه أهل المصر**[^105] “These letters are all from the
distinguished of this city.”

'Ashura morning, he again referred to the letters.[^106] He showed the
letters to 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar too.[^107] His response to any objection
was, **خلفي مملوءة بالكتب** “ “The sack on my horse is overflown with
their letters.” [^108]

This wide-ranging invitation was seemingly serious particularly because
in addition to the mass ordinary people, the distinguished of Kufa had
written the greater number of letters, those whom people follow. This
crowd included many other distinguished figures as well as the Shi'ite
Muslims. Were it only formed by the Shi'ite Muslims, it would take
little notice in light of the fact that the number of them was truly
inconsiderable. It was solely its broadness that gave a serious shape to
invitation.

Beyond the invitation were the results of two tests Kufa had taken in
the times of Imam 'Ali and Imam Hasan, in both of which they had failed.
Which one should have been attended by Imam, their black record or their
present state? Regarding our previous remarks, if we assume that the
probability of Imam's victory was less than fifty percent, there was no
other altentive for him?

It does appear that in normally political conditions there was no other
way the probability of victory of which to be as equal as that in Kufa,
neither was there in Yemen if proceeding there. It was thanks to the
fact that not only the Shi'ite Muslims in Yemen were never as many as
those in Kufa, but it was within the realm of Mu'awiya as well. Even
when Imam 'Ali's governor was there, an army invaded Yemen from Damascus
and massacred the Shi'ite Muslims.

The fundamental reason of probable victory was the letters showing that
not only a great number would guard him but also they would battle
against his foe. Furthermore, nowhereelse did invite him. Those who
wrote letters first were such Shi'ite Muslims as Sulayman Ibn Surad,
Musayyib Ibn Najba, Habib Ibn Mazahir, Rufa'a Ibn Shaddad and others.

With a short opportunity available to Imam, he selected a way
reasonably. At this stage, he let the letters unanswered inasmuch as
Mecca was flooded with frequent letters. Besides, the representatives of
the writers went to Mecca and offered their invitations personally. Any
letter received in Mecca had many a name and signature at the bottom.
According to a few narrations, the number of the letters had been one
hundred and fifty. Notwithstanding, Imam gave no answer to them up to
the end[^109] but he only contented himself with dispatching Muslim.

To assess public support better, Imam dispatched an envoy, Muslim Ibn
'Aqil who was trustworthy to Kufa. In a letter he wrote to Kufa,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اني بعثت أخي وابن عمي وثقتي من أهل بيتي مسلم بن عقيل وقد أمرته أن يكتب
الي بحالكم ورأيكم فقدموا مع ابن عمّي وبايعوه وانصروه “ “
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have sent my brother, my cousin and the most truthful in my family,
Muslim Ibn 'Aqil to you. I have demanded that he write about the
conditions there to me. Help him and, swear allegiance to him.” [^110]

After Muslim had entered the town, people swore allegiance to him group
by group. Recording their names, he had them make a pledge to back Imam
and not be treacherous. The recorded number was twenty thousand and
more.[^111] Muslim who found the situation well wrote to Imam Husayn,
**فاني أخبرك أنه قد بايعك من الكوفة نيف وعشرون ألفا فاذا بلغك كتابي هذا
فالعجل “** “As soon as you have received my letter, hurry for more than
twenty thousand people who swore allegiance to you.” [^112]

When Imam departed, he had received a letter informing that eighteen
thousands in Kufa have sworn allegiance to Muslim.[^113]

What was Imam able to do upon receiving such a letter? In advance of
dispatching Muslim, by no means was he certain. But now it was the
letter his envoy had written and could be the evidence of people's to
him. At the last stage reacting to Ibn 'Abbas's objection, Imam said, I
know that your intention is naught except advising but,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولكن مسلم بن عقيل كتب الي باجتماع أهل المصر على بيعتي ونصرتي وقد أجمعت
على المسير اليه “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Since Muslim has written to me that all have congregated to aid me and
swear allegiance to me, I am decisive to travel.” [^114]

In another narration, Muslim had written to Imam, **والناس كلهم معك ليس
لهم في آل معاوية رأي ولا هوى**[^115] “Everyone is with you and no one is
attentive to Mu'awiya's family.”

It was exactly what Muslim had witnessed and reported. Although he had
assuredly noticed public ignorance towards Mu'awiya and their
inclination to 'Ali's family, with Ibn Ziyad's arrival and black shade
of his despotism the tables were turned. Threatening Kufa was a serious
affair for the Umayya. In a letter to Yazid, spies wrote, **قد بايع مسلم
الترابية** [^116] “Turabiyya- a label given to Shi'ite Muslims after
naming 'Ali as Abu Turab- have all sworn allegiance to Muslim and
entreated him to come to their rescue in Kufa.”

Dispatching 'Ubayd Allah accounted for it. It had become totally overt
that they would be deprived of Kufa unless they make haste. Notably,
when according to a narration Nu'man Ibn Bashir, in addition to his
indifference, had stated, **لابن بنت رسول الله أحب الينا من ابن
بجدل**[^117] “Allah's Messenger's descendant is more popular with us
than Ibn Bajdal's[^118] son.”

As quoted by Ibn A'tham, in the course of Muslim's coming to Kufa,
Nu'man was on his own in the palace. No one attended Friday prayers andP
no one paid tax to him. Anyone whom he summoned did never care and
anyone whom he commanded did not comply with.

Imam Versus Iraqi Army
----------------------

The ever-first army Imam encountered was a one-thousand- soldier army
the head of which was Hurr Ibn Yazid Riyahi; Then, Hurr was a
subordinate commander at Ibn Ziyad's service and did not interfere in
political affairs. By the same token on account the belief he enjoyed he
along with his army performed his prayer led by Imam Husayn. Hurr's
accountability was to escort Imam to Kufa and never allow him to return.

In a sermon delivered Imam addressed the worshippers as saying, “I had
in no way intended to come here until your letters and message-carriers
came to me. I will step into your town if you guarantee that no breach
of promise will be made; otherwise, I return to where I came
from”.[^119]

As already mentioned, as soon as Imam received Muslim's Letter, he left
Mecca with all possible haste for Kufa. Moving ahead was kept on until
the news of Muslim's martyrdom spread. No sooner had the caravan learned
it[^120] than it slackened its pace and consequently exchange of views
began among Imam, his household and the followers.

It is alleged that Imam changed his mind about going onwards.
Nonetheless, Muslim's brothers were not convinced but decisive to
retaliate.[^121] If presumably they had such an intention, they must
have been definitely hopeful about the victory. And it might have
influenced Imam to become apparently persuaded to proceed. It is hardly
rational to assume that they sought revenge for their brother's murder
while being certain of their defeat.

There existed another matter apart from political victory and it was the
fact that Imam Husayn should have taken a stance on Mu'awiya after all
even though it cost his martyrdom and to his eye this kind of martyrdom
was equated with condemning Yazid. To confirm the probability of
victory, many might have made some remarks.

Quotedly a number said, “You and Muslim Ibn 'Aqil are not alike. Upon
seeing you, the people of Kufa will warmly welcome you”.[^122]

They meant that perhaps Muslim could not accomplish to prompt people for
whatever reason but his personality will unequivocally captivate them.
In view of all letters and ten-year requests on the part of Kufa, never
did it seem unlikely. Accordingly Imam consented to keep on.

In consistent with a narration in al-Futuh, the letter sent by Imam
through Qays Ibn Musahhar for urging Kufa to observe their
commitment[^123] had been possibly after being informed of Muslim's
martyrdom though doubt about Kufa had been remarkably prevailed in
Imam's army its impact on returning was uncovered only when it
encountered Hurr's army.

The coming of Hurr together with his army, hearing that enemy's
four-thousand- soldier army being enroute to Qadisiyya as well as the
previous news from Kufa given by Ibn Sa'd's envoy about Muslim's
recommendation all propelled Imam to disregard going to Kufa. Being
arrested and noticing how people left him alone, Muslim tried to
dissuade him from coming at all costs with a message as he had already
tried to persuade him. He had appealed to 'Umar Ibn Sa'd for leaving his
message to Imam.

A while after receiving the message in early Muharram, Imam's caravan
encountered Hurr's army in Iraq. Although Imam was set to return, Hurr
impeded him, for his duty was to escort Imam to Kufa. Imam who had
become aware of the real status in Kufa, rejected his request. In order
to refrain from any clash for which he had no mandate, he decided to
lead the army towards Karbala, an arid land, in lieu of Hijaz or
Kufa.[^124]

Heedless of what was adopted practically, Imam propounded the matter of
returning when meeting Hurr and demanded him to allow them to
return.[^125] Once more he repeated the same proposal to Ibn Sa'd
later,[^126] and frequently he stated,

**  
**

يا أيها الناس إذا كرهمتموني فدعوني أنصرف عنكم إلى مأمني الأرض

  
“

O people! If you are reluctant to support me, at least let me return to
the secure land, Mecca.”[^127]

As narrated by a number of historians, Imam's suggestions were three,
Returning to Hijaz, Damascus or to oriental land of Islam, on the
outskirts of the Islamic land. The tradition just mentioned in addition
to others all manifest that Imam requested to only return to Hijaz,
either Mecca or Medina, not to Damascus. Baladhuri has stipulated that
his insistence was only on returning to Medina when seeing 'Umar Ibn
Sa'd.[^128]

It has been also quoted from 'Uqba Ibn Sam'an supportedly as saying,
“Contrary to popular belief under no circumstances did Imam ask
permission to visit Yazid and swear allegiance to him though I was
beside him at all times. What he urged was,

**دعوني أرجع إلي مكان الذي أقبلت منه، أو دعوني أذهب في هذه الأرض العريضة
حتى تنظر الى ما يصير اليه أمر الناس**

“Let me either return where I came from or live in this extensive land
to find out what the destiny of such people would be.” [^129]

According to Baladhuri Imam appealed to Hurr for permitting him to go to
Damascus and swear allegiance to Yazid. [^130] It is as plain as day
that Imam endured such sufferings as the homelessness for the sake of
not swearing allegiance to Yazid, and were this narration genuine
supposedly, it could never be interpreted as corroborating Yazid's
caliphate, but in all probability as keeping away from Ibn Ziyad's realm
who was a libertine and bold man. Imam was certain that his not swearing
allegiance would prompt Yazid to assassinate him; therefore, it seemed
irrational to go to Damascus intentionally.

Yazid personally had written to Walid, **وليكن جوابك إليّ رأس الحسين** “
Your response to me has to be Husayn Ibn 'Ali's head.” [^131]

Walid detested to murder him in person and later on he expressed regret
on Imam's martyrdom.[^132] It is by no means admissible that even if
Imam had made such a remark, his aim could have been swearing allegiance
or proceeding to Damascus at all.

When Imam for the purpose of enlightening Hurr refereed to the pile of
letters from Kufa as the motivation of his travel, Hurr was totally
unaware of the letters. After the letters were all displayed, he again
pointed out that he was duty-bound to take them to Kufa. Imam who was
never ever convinced to go to Kufa took the route of Hijaz.[^133] Hurr's
army blocked his way then. They compromised to take a midway neither to
Hijaz nor to Kufa but to the area of al-’Udhayb.[^134]

It was this point where Tirimmah Ibn 'Adi proposed Imam to go towards
Tayy mountains but on account of the presence of Hurr's army and the
agreement they had reached, Imam refused it[^135].

On his way Imam made an attempt to switch to way to the desert and keep
as far away from Kufa as possible. Hurr was regularly the one who
prevented him until they arrived at Banu Muqatil's palace and then
Naynawa.[^136] Exactly it was here where the command of ceasing was
received by Hurr from Ibn Ziyad, **و لا تحلّه إلا بالعراء على غير خضر
ولا ماء** “ Keep him awaiting solely in an arid desert.” [^137]

Here a number of the Shi'ite Muslims of Kufa could join Imam and despite
Hurr's opposition remained beside him.[^138]

While Hurr was with Imam, Zubayr Ibn Qayn suggested Imam to attack them
who were few then. Declining Imam affirmed, **إني اكره أن أبدئهم
بالقتال** “I loathe to be the one who wages war.” [^139]

Arriving in Karbala coincided with the second of Muharram, Wednesday or
Thursday. According to Dinwari, Muharram 1st was the day of arriving in
Karbala.[^140]

As written by Mas'udi, when Imam arrived in Karbala, five hundred
cavalrymen and one hundred infantrymen were accompanying him.[^141]
During the eight-day period and above all on the eve of 'Ashura, the day
after which war would undoubtedly break out, these men turned their back
on Imam. Although the number of whom at that night might have been fewer
than that reported by Mas'udi, beyond any question a number left Imam an
his own at this interval.

The day after Imam's arrival in Karbala, Ibn Ziyad's troops were
gradually deployed to this land. All tribes were group by group
dispatched to the spot due to the fact that Ibn Ziyad insisted that each
one of Kufa participate in the process.

Such a policy was to hinder a few tribes to be accused later and to try
to make all have a hand in Imam's murder and it could be a hindrance to
the people of Kufa to engage in any movement in 'Alawites' favor. Those
having been dispatched were some twenty two thousand according to Ibn
A'tham[^142] although Baladhuri,[^143] Dinwari[^144] as well as Ibn Sa'd
have described that some had fled halfway.

In view of the fact that Ibn Ziyad had announced, **أيّما رجل وجدناه بعد
يومنا هذا متخلفاً عن العسكر برئت منه الذّمة** “ Anyone who abstains from
joining the army, from today onwards, will in no way be protected by
me.” [^145]  
 And this menace was what made the crowd set out to Karbala.

'Umar Ibn Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas was due to proceed to Riy and do battle
with Daylaman, a polytheist; however, it was resolved to move to Riy
after finalizing the plan in Karbala. As the commander of Kufiyan troops
in spite of his and Banu Zuhra's[^146] reluctance, he eventually opted
the governorship of Riy in return for streaming Imam's blood and then
went to Karbala.[^147]

At first Ibn Sa'd sent an envoy to Imam to ask for the ground of his
coming. Imam who refereed to the letters received from Kufa stated that
if they had retracted, he would return where he had come from. Seeking
refuge, 'Umar Ibn Sa'd reported the suggestion to Ibn Ziyad, “Husayn has
made a pledge to either return or go to one of the extremities of
Islamic land and live a quiet life and it is satisfactory for you and is
for the good of the nation, [^148] **هذا لك رضا وللأمة صلاح**
“Nevertheless, Shimr tried to dissuade Ibn Ziyad willing to accept the
suggestion and told him that if he let Husayn go, under no conditions
could he be found any more.”

Ibn Ziyad in a letter to Ibn Sa'd wrote, “I have not sent you to
condescend but to secure allegiance for Yazid presently. If he
refrained, take his life”.[^149]  
 As soon as receiving the message, Imam stressed, **لا أُجيب ابن زياد،
لا ذلك ابداً، فهل هو إلا الموت فمرحباً به** “Never ever will I reply Ibn
Ziyad's proposal in affirmative. Will there be any other consequence
save demise? Demise is very welcomed, however.”[^150]

A couple of days to 'Ashura, Ibn Ziyad commanded emphatically to keep
water beyond Imam Husayn's reach, **حل بين الحسين والماء فلا يذوقوا منه
قطرة كما منع بالتّقي الزّكي عثمان** “ “Keep him far away from water so
that he cannot take a drop as they did so to 'Uthman.” [^151]

He also had written to Ibn Sa'd, “I have learned that Husayn with his
companions have sunk wells and water is within reach. Upon receiving the
letter, stop their digging as far as possible and by no means allow them
to consume the water of the Euphrates.”[^152]

During the last days Imam had some clandestine meetings with Ibn Sa'd
attempting to dissuade him. Yet as demonstrated by historical
narration's he could in no way disregard the governorship of Riy.

Shimr due to consanguinity he had with 'Abbas Ibn 'Ali's mother, made
Ibn Ziyad to write guarantee of clemency to him as well as his brothers.
Under no circumstances were they able to be prevailed upon to leave Imam
Husayn alone.[^153]In another case a guarantee of clemency is reported
for 'Ali Akbar and it was also for the sake of his mother. 'Ali Akbar
had asserted, **أما والله لقرابة رسول الله (ص) أولى أن ترعى من قرابة أبي
سفيان “** Deferring to consanguinity with the Prophet (S) is more
superior than that with Abu Sufyan.” [^154]

Ibn Ziyad who was determined to attack in the evening of Tasu'a (the
ninth day of the month of Muharram) admitted to procrastinate it till
tomorrow at the request of Imam. At night Imam made some remarks to his
companions. He declared that he ignored their allegiance, they are free
to leave and they can take a few members of his family with them as
well. However, companions did announce their steadfastness.[^155]

On the eve of 'Ashura, Imam commanded to dig out trenches all around the
tents but one side to avert the enemy's attacks from all sides. From
early morning of 'Ashura, both armies arrayed against one another. No
imperfection could be noticed in Imam's army.

Without consideration of facts, divine predestination or the political
privileges of which subsequent to Imam Husayn's martyrdom, taking the
household with him exposes to view the intention Imam had for procuring
Yazid the sovereignty.

Even their transferring from Mecca to Kufa had seemingly originated from
political certainty and it was the submission of Kufa to Imam.
Accordingly their staying in Hijaz was never politically expedient in
view of the fact that it could be envisioned how the Umayya would behave
towards them following securing Arabia Pertae if the victory were
supposedly gained in Iraq.

On the eve of 'Ashura Imam addressed his companions as saying, “Tomorrow
there shall be naught but martyrdom,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأنتم في حل مني وهذا الليل قد غشيكم، فمن كانت له منم قوة فليضم رجلاَ
من أهل بيتي اليه وتفرقوا في سوادكم، فعسى الله أن يأتي بالفتح أو أمر من
عنده فيصبحوا على ما اسرّوا في انفسهم نادمين “
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are all at liberty and it is the night at which you feel secure. Any
of you who is more courageous can take one from my household with him
and abandon so that Allah can either grant us the triumph or adopt
another measure to deter them from materializing their plan.” [^156]

It is alluded here that it was probable for them to gain victory or for
the foes to change their minds although such a probability did never
appear politically strong. Under such circumstances, there existed no
other alternative other than martyrdom. Hurr's as well as thirty
individuals' joining to Imam[^157] in addition to political
broad-mindedness on the part of Imam in 'Ashura morning both implied
that such a development was not beyond the bounds of possibility.

Not withstanding 'Umar Ibn Sa'd's villainous nature whose father was
among the Qa'idin[^158], the malice fo such Kharijites-featured
individuals as Shimr Ibn Dhi l-Jawshan[^159] along with the pressure
exerted by Ibn Ziyad altogether engendered one of the most gruesome
felony in the Islamic world.

Imam's army as narrated by Ibn Sa'd, included fifty men but later twenty
others joined him.[^160]

Prior to the clashes, Imam delivered a speech to the opposite army,
“Thanks to the request of you and others I came here. You had written
that the Prophet's Sunna (tradition) was being neglected and discord was
being sown. My coming here was at your demand to guide my forefather's
Umma (nation). If now you feel disinclined, allow me return at least.

Think twice! Do you ever consider shedding the blood of the Holy
Prophet's son legitimate? The son of Prophet's cousin who was the ever
first believer? The one whose uncles were Hamza, 'Abbas and Ja’far? Have
you ever not heard how the Prophet (S) had characterized my brother and
me as, **سيدا شباب أهل الجنّة “** They both are the masters of the youth
in Heaven.”

Question Jabir Ansari, Abu Sa'id Khudri and Zayd Ibn Arqam if you do not
believe me”.[^161]  
 The reasoning Ibn Huďayr had refereed to are like those
mentioned.[^162] Zuhayr Ibn Qayn, a renowned figure, pronounced an
ultimatum as well.[^163]

So for presuming that it might never be culminated in blood letting not
least streaming the blood of Allah's Messenger's son, Hurr Ibn Yazid
perceived the reality all at once.  
 He went to Ibn Sa'd asking, “Was none of his remarks convincing for
you?”

“I would never murder him if I could,” 'Umar Ibn Sa'd responded, “now
there is no other alternative.”

Upon hearing such comments, Hurr without delay went to Imam, begged for
forgiveness, stood to defend him and ultimately after killing two people
achieved martyrdom.[^164] Among the ones who allied themselves with Imam
and became martyred was Yazid Ibn Abi Ziyad, too.[^165]

Since it was by no means Imam 'Ali's approach to be the beginner of the
war, Imam also was not the one who commenced it in Karbala. It was 'Umar
Ibn Sa'd who put on arrow in his bow and shot at Imam's army first. And
afterwards he announced that they should wear witness to Ibn Ziyad that
he was the first shooter.[^166]

When the battle started, the members of Imam's army went to the
battlefield one by one. After a while the enemy's death toll had risen
to more than the martyrs. Therefore, touching upon the fact that they
were combating Arab heroes, 'Amr Ibn Hajjaj forewarned, “You will all be
slaughtered unless you put them under a rain of arrows”.[^167]

Under a heavy barrage of arrows and in the course of several clashes,
Imam's adherents and the members of his household were martyred
respectively. The details of the conflict have been inscribed by a
number as inscribed by Ibn Sa'd in Tabaqat. Eventually the event of
Karbala, resulting in martyring Imam and more than seventy of his
followers and killing some eighty eight people of the opposite army,
came to an end.[^168]

The Element of Invisibility in Karbala
--------------------------------------

Among the factors that have played pivotal roles in the historical
dimension of ideological epic in Karbala is the element of
“invisibility”. This very element is what not merely has created
friction in analyzing this historical event but has contrasted a subject
in scholastic theology with a historical one. There are many narrations
in this regard in most of which Allah's Messenger has foretold Imam
Husayn's martyrdom. 'Allama Amini has compiled a number of such
narrations in Siratana wa Sunnatana. Moreover, they can be found
innumerably in Sunnites books.

In addition to[^169] these narrations which are historical by
themselves, there are other ones having explicitly or implicitly
predicted the incident in Karbala. Below we present some adapted from
the historical books.

As recounted, a night before emigrating from Medina to Mecca, when Imam
went to pay a visit to the Prophet's tomb, he fell asleep. He dreamed
about the Holy Prophet together with a group of angels. Hugging him, the
Prophet stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا حسين! كأنك عن قريب أراك مقتولاً مذبوحاً بأرض كرب وبلا من عصابة من
أمتي وأنت في ذلك عطشان لا تسقى… يا حسين إن أباك وأمك قد قدموا عليَّ
وهم اليك مشتاقون وأن لك في الجنة درجات لن تنالها الا بالشهادة “
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Husayn! I foresee that in a near future you will be killed by a group
from my Umma in Karbala while thirsty…. O Husayn! Your parents who are
both with me are looking forward to meeting you. A rank is determined
for you in Paradise to which you can reach merely through martyrdom.”

According to another narration, Imam Husayn (a) had stated in Mecca,
**انّي رأيت جدي (ص) في منامي وقد أمروني بأمر وأنا ماض لأمره “** I had a
dream about my forefather. He commanded something for implementing which
I am going.” [^170]

On the strength of this very dream Imam wrote a letter to Sa'id Ibn 'As
saying, **وأعلمك أنّي رأيت جدي في** **منامي مخبرني بأمر وأنا ماض له** “I
inform you that I had a dream about my forefather. Since he notified me
of something I am seeking for.” [^171] “

In Khuzaymiyya, Zaynab (S) came to Imam and said, “At midnight I heard a
yell, What was it?” Imam inquired. She replied “An invisible speaker was
yelling out,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا يا عيـن فاحتفلي بجهد ومن يبكي علي الشهداء بعدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على قـوم تسوقهم المنايا بمقدار الـي انجـاز وعـدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O eye! Rejoice as much as you can. Who shall shed tears for the martyrs
after me? Death is approaching this tribe in order to make my vow
unconditional.”

“Whatsoever Allah has foreordained will assuredly materialize”, Imam
stressed.[^172]

Others are when Imam arrived in Karbala. After he asked what the area
was called, he stated,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد مرّ أبي بهذا المكان عند مسيره الى صفين وأنا معه فوقف فسأل عنه
فأخبر باسمه؛ فقال ها هنا محطّ ركابهم وها هنا مهراق دمائهم، فسئل عن
ذلك،‌ فقال: ثقل لآل بيت محمد ينـزلون هاهنا “
  </p>
</blockquote>

Once my father on his way to Siffin asked the name of this area. When he
was answered and while I was with him, he expressed that here would be
where they would dismount and their blood would be shed. Being asked, he
replied that a group from the Prophet's Ahl al-Bayt would dismount
here.” [^173]

It was in the afternoon when Imam in Tha'labiyya lay down and fell
asleep. As soon as he woke up he began sobbing. After 'Ali Akbar asked
the reason, he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّي رأيت فارساً على فرس حتى وقف عليّ فقال: يا حسين! انّكم تسرعون
المسير والمنايا لكم تسرع الي الجنّة. فعلمت أن أنفسنا قد نعيت الينا “
  </p>
</blockquote>

There was a man on horseback who came nearer and stopped before us
saying, “O Husayn! The fast you are proceeding on this way, the fast
your death is moving towards Paradise,” I realized that our souls are
bidding farewell to us.” [^174]

In 'Ashura morning, Imam told his sister,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أختاهّ اني رأيت جدي في المنام وأبي علياً وفاطمة أمي وأخي الحسن
عليهم السلام فقالوا: انّك رائح الينا عن قريب وقد والله يا أختاه دنا
الامر في ذلك لا شك
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O sister! Last night my forefather, my father 'Ali, my mother Fatima
and my brother, Hasan, were all in my dream saying that I will join them
soon. O sister! By Almighty Allah and beyond any doubt the time is
ripe.” [^175]

Concerning the eve of 'Ashura, it is quoted from Imam as stating that he
had a dream about the Holy Prophet along with a number of his companions
who had said, **يا بني! أنت شهيد آل محمد وقد استبشرت بك السماوات وأهل
الصفح الاعلى فليكن افطارك عندي الليلة تعجل ولا تؤخر “** O my son! A
martyr of Muhammad's family is you. The heavens and the dwellers of the
lofty heavens have given you glad tidings. Tonight you are supposed to
break your fast beside me, so hasten.” [^176]

Elsewhere Mujahid has narrated from Amir al-Mu'minin delivering a sermon
in Kufa, **كيف أنتم اذا أتاكم أهل بيت نبيكم يحمل قويهم ضعيفهم “** “What
will you do if you see your Prophet's household while the stronger one
carries the weaker one.”  
 “We will do so and so”, the audience responded.

Shaking his head, Imam added, **توردن ثم تعرّدون ثم تطيعون البراءة
ولابراءة لكم** “ You accept and then change your mind. You prefer to
disgust whereas you are not disgusted.” [^177]

These examples all imply Imam's knowledge about the event in Karbala
previous to his martyrdom. Notwithstanding, it is by all means natural
that neither Imam Husayn, nor the Prophet manipulated the factor of
invisibility in their political lives. Except the time of substantiating
the fact of Prophethood and Imamat, the Prophet's and the twelve Imams'
conduct was compatible with the existing political evaluation.

This kind of Divine knowledge was what they have been informed by Allah
through distinct ways either by Gabriel, in a dream or alike owing to
the fact that the principle of invisibility is beyond all's power but
Allah's. Deeming the Prophet (S) as well as Imams' role models and
vanguards is founded on the existing state and ostensible evaluation not
the unseen.

It has been the policy of all the prophets and Imams in their natural
lives. In this respect many historical and scholastic analyses are done
but they are beyond the capacity of this concise book and require an
independent study.

The Role of Religious Deviations in Karbala Event
-------------------------------------------------

The Islamic community in the year the event of Karbala took place, had
greatly differed from that in the last year of Prophet's life. The trend
of deviation has been however gradual, according to many of researchers,
the basis thereof was established from the first years after the
Prophet's departure.

The foregoing deviations were in such a way that the politicians could
avail themselves of them to not only delude the people but also justify
their despotism. The ones who played a crucial role in the origination
and the development of such deviations were the Umayyads. The power
notably secured by Yazid revealed the fact that neverever had the Umayya
believed in a genuine Islam and their belief was merely a covering
people had spread in order to justify and concede their sovereignty.

Having accused the Umayya of oppression and enmity,[^178] Imam Husayn
(a) had described them as those who “obey Satan, disobey Allah,
propagate misdeeds, disregard Allah's specified rules and also encrouch
upon Bayt al-Mal (public treasury)”.[^179] In addition to creating
corruption and ignoring divine limits, they had distorted a large number
of religious concepts and misused them. Here let's discuss a few of them
which had impacts in the course of Karbala according to historical
evidence.

“Obedience to Imams, the necessity of Community and unlawfulness of
breach of allegiance was three common political terms used by caliphs.
It may be claimed that the above-mentioned terms could have guaranteed
the base and the persistence of the caliphate.

Anyhow, these three terms were right principles among the religious,
political and Islamic concepts of which observing for the sake of the
community was reasonably incumbent. Obeying an Imam denotes obeying the
ruling system. The question raised is that to what extent the ruler
should be complied with. Is it imperative that a just Imam be followed
or an unjust monarch ought to be obeyed too? Earlier we discussed it in
detail while considering 'Uthman's caliphate.

Upholding Community implies avoiding disturbance or taking no action to
undermine the unity or pave the ground for the emergence of a shaky
Islamic community. The considerable question is whether silence should
be kept before despotic monarchism or a libertine ruler under any
circumstances in other words, should any objection be suppressed relying
on the fact that it spoils “Community” and causes “disunion”?

Unlawfulness of breach of allegiance, namely fulfilling a pledge is
heavily underlined in Islam. Since breaking a pledge or an allegiance is
prohibited seriously, it stands to reason how much the role of which in
political affairs can be positive.

But if the allegiance were not sworn to caliphs like Yazid or it were
breached and consequently Community was spoiled, would it again follow
the principle of unlawfulness of breach of allegiance or would it
basically be an exception to the rule? As already alluded to the Umayya
caliphs and later those of Banu 'Abbas by manipulating such concepts,
however distorted and unconditional, compelled the people to acquiesce
their sovereignty.

After Mu'awiya had secured allegiance for his son, Yazid, he went to
Medina to coerce the opponents to swear. 'Ayisha was among in view of
the fact that his brother, Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr, had been martyred by
Mu'awiya.

When the issue of allegiance was propounded, Mu'awiya told her, “I have
secured allegiance for Yazid from all Muslims, if you will, **اني لا أري
ذلك ولكن عليك بالرفق والتأني “** Never do I pronounce it lawful but act
moderately toward people instead.”[^180]

This case in point demonstrates how 'Ayisha was ever convinced. Let's
consider one other instance. As stated by Ibn Ishaq, they were doing
prayers (perhaps in al-Haram mosque) they noticed that Shimr Ibn Dhi
l-Jawshan, being with them, had raised his hands saying “O Allah! You
are well-aware of my nobleness, so forgive me.”

“I told him, added Ibn Ishaq, how could you ever be forgiven whereas you
have aided and abetted in murdering the Prophet's son?”  
 “What have we preformed?” Shimr reacted.

“It was the mandates of our commanders and we could in no way defy
them”. If disobeyed, **كنا شراَ من هذه الحمر السقا** “We would be far
more inferior to water carrier beasts.” [^181]

Apprehending him, Ibn Ziyad told Muslim Ibn 'Aqil, **يا شاق! خرجت علي
امامك وشقفت عصا المسلمين “** O outlaw! You have seceded from your Imam
and have sowed the seeds of discord among Muslims.” [^182]

Muslim who never yielded to such a digression, riposted that Mu'awiya
not only did not procure the caliphate through the consensus of opinions
of the nation at all, but he overcame the Holy Prophet's successor
through deception and usurped his caliphate.

When Imam Husayn was about to leave Mecca, the deputies of 'Amr Ibn
Sa'id Ibn 'As, the governor, said, **الا تتقي الله تخرج عن الجماعة بين
هذه الامّه “** ”Do you not fear from Allah for seceding from the Muslim
congregation and for causing disunion among the nation?” [^183]

“We have neverever ignored disobeying Imam, nor have we seceded from
Community” affirmed 'Amr Ibn Hajjaj, a commander of Ibn Ziyad's.[^184]

Advising Ibn Ziyad's army, he added, **ألزموا طاعتكم وجماعتكم ولاترتابوا
في قتل من مرق عن الدين وخالف الامام** “Not ever fail to remember
obedience and union and at no time do you doubt about killing the one
seceding from the religion and being at variance with Imam (ruler).”
[^185]

Figures like 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar who was among the Sunnites religious
jurisprudents and hadith-narrators, had imagined that if entire people
acquiesced to swear the oath of allegiance to Yazid, they would consent
too.

He had given his assurance to Mu'awiya, **فاذا اجتمع النّاس على ابنك
يزيد لم أخالف** [^186] “I shall oppose you unless people all swear
allegiance to your son, Yazid. He also had addressed Imam as saying, “Do
cause not disunion among Muslims!”[^187]

Such individuals as 'Umar and 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn 'Awf's daughter had
written to Imam to regard obedience with reverence and treat Community
and its upholding as urgent.[^188]

Another religious deviation in the Islamic community was “belief in
fatalism”. Previous to the event of Karbala this belief has been
misused. In Early Islamic Era, however, Mu'awiya had been the reviver of
which or according to Abu Hilal 'Askari he was the initiator of
which.[^189]

Referring to the fact that Mu'awiya is the founder of “fatalism”, Qaďi
'Abd al-Jabbar has quoted Mu'awiya making as remarkable remarks[^190] as
follows, **ان أمر يزيد قضاء من القضاء وليس للقضاء الخيرة من أمرهم**
[^191] “This matter concerning Yazid is a destiny from among Divine
destinies and no one has any volition in this regard.”

'Ubayd Allah Ibn Ziyad asked Iman as-Sajjad (a), **أو لم يقتل الله
علياَ؟ “** Was Allah not the One who killed 'Ali Akbar?”  
 Imam's response was, **كان لي أخ يقال له علي، اكبر مني قتله الناس “** I
had an elder brother whom people killed.”[^192]

Once 'Umar Ibn Sa'd was objected why he killed Imam Husayn solely for
the sake of Riy governorship, he replied that such an affair had been
predestined.[^193]

When alive, Ka'b al-Ahbar had been foretelling that under no conditions
would authority be secured by the Hashimites, (although later both the
'Abbasids and 'Alawites could secure it as an instance in Tabaristan).
It has been quoted from 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar as well, as saying, **فاذا
رأيت الهاشمي قد ملك الزمان فقد هلك الزمان “** “Any time you realized
that one from the Hashimites has secured the authority, conclude that it
is that end of the world.” [^194]

The consequences of these kinds of deviations for the future generations
were that Imam Husayn's movement has never been considered as an
uprising against immorality in Sunnism but an illegal insurgency.[^195]

Political Impacts of the Event of Karbala on Shi‘ism
----------------------------------------------------

The event of Karbala is among the determining incidents in the process
of Shi'ites genesis in history. It was ealier mentioned that Shi'ism
theories in general and its most elementary principle namely Imamat in
particular can thoroughly be traced in the Holy Qur'an and Sunna both.
Notwithstanding, the historical separation of Shi'ite Muslims from the
other existing parties occurred quite gradually.

Both lifestyle and the ideas left as memorials from Imam 'Ali's
caliphate could to much extent cohere Shi'ism intellectually. The Umayya
advocating their self-fabricated Islam the nature and the discrepancy of
which from the authentic Islam never revealed by Mu'awiya's policies
could evidently be unveiled in the course of Yazid's caliphate.

Throughout the vent of Karbala, the historical separation of Shi'ite
Muslims from others affected by the Islam backed by the Umayya
finalized. From then onwards, distinguishing Shi'ite Muslims as the
followers of Sunna, 'Ali and his successors seemed truly a simple task.

Amongst the Shi'ite Muslims there, existed a number who were from all
standpoint followers of Imam and regarded them as the Prophet's
successors elected by him. The limit of Shi'ism, on the other hand, on
the part of other groups from Iraq, etc was only the superiority they
believed for 'Alawites over Umayyads.[^196]

Those who achieved martyrdom beside Imam Husayn in Karbala were among
the Shi'ite Muslims describing Imamate as the only prerogative of 'Ali
and his descendants. Imam himself on various occasions had frequently
recommended people to leave the right to the rightful and contribute to
him as well. The Umayyads were in truth the usurpers this very
right.[^197] Somewhere he had stated, **أيها الناس أنا ابن بنت رسول الله
ونحن أولى بولاية هذه الامور عليكم من هولاء المدعين ما ليس لهم229** “O
people! This is I, a son of Prophet's daughter'. We are superior in your
guardianship to the false claimants.”[^198]

Elsewhere, أنا أحقّ من غير لقرابتي من رسول اللّه[^199]“And I deserve it
more than any one else for my kinship with Allah's Messenger.”

Furthermore, Imam's disciples had appreciated different opportunities by
presenting such a belief either in verses of poem or prose. Said by
Muslim Ibn Ziyad was that by Almighty Allah on no accounts was it
Mu'awiya's right to be a caliph. He overcame the Prophet's successor by
deception and usurped his caliphate.[^200] 'Abd al-Rahman Ibn 'Abd Allah
Yazani, one of Imam's companions in Karbala, had composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنا بن عبدالله من آل يزن ديني على دين حسين وحسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am 'Abd Allah's son from Yazan family. My religion is the same as
those of Husayn and Hasan.” [^201]  
 Addressing Imam Husayn (a), Hajjaj Ibn Masruq had composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم أباك ذا الندى عليّا ذاك الذي نعرفه الوصيّآ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You father, 'Ali, is sportsman like. He is the one whom we consider as
the Prophet's successor.” [^202]

It was composed by Hilal Ibn Nafi' Bajali,

> أنا الغلام التممي البجلي ديني على دين حسين وعلي2174

“This is from Banu Tamim and Bajali and I believe in the religion Husayn
and his father, 'Ali believe.

In some verses 'Uthman Ibn 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib had composed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اني أنا عثمان ذو المناخر شيخي علي ذو الفعال الطاهر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ابن عـم النبي الطاهر أخو حسيـن خيـرة الاخائـر
  </p>
</blockquote>

> و سيد الكبار والاصاغر بعد الرسول والوصي الناصر2175

“The possessor of honor is no one but me. My master, 'Ali, is the actor
of all purely good deeds. The causin of the immaculate Prophet is me. I
am the brother of Husayn, the most chosen of the chosen and the master
of the youngest and the eldest after the Prophet and his successor.”

After Nafi' Ibn Hilal had said, **أنا الجملي أنا على دين علي “** My
religion is the religion of 'Ali.”

A person from the rival army said, **أنا على دين عثمان** [^203] “My
religion is that of 'Uthman.”

What can be easily discerned from these verses and others quoted from
'Abbas Ibn 'Ali and others is the Shi'ites belief of Imam's followers
not only in political arena but also in ideological one.

[^1]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 135

[^2]: Ibid p. 136

[^3]: Ibid p. 131

[^4]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 137; see Fara’id As-Simtayn, a
precious reference, for more information concerning these two Imams
Among the recently published books in “Faďa’il al-khamsa fi Sihah
As-Sitta”, Ahl Bayt’s virtues are compiled from Sunnites’ famous books

[^5]: Ibid Ibn Sa‘d, p. 146

[^6]: Ibid p. 149

[^7]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 145

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. XXXII, p. 405

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. XXXXIV, p. 266

[^10]: al-Futuh, vol. III, p. 35

[^11]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, pp 154-155, footnote; Akhbar al-Tiwal,
p. 224; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 180-181; al-Ihtijaj, vol. II,
p. 20; pp 48,49; al-Darajat l-rafi‘a, p. 434; Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat
al-Rijal, vol. II, p. 121; a part of the letter in al-Muhabbar, p. 479
therein the names of the two from Haďram whose martyrdom was mentioned
by Imam are referred to as Muslim Ibn Zaymur and ‘Abd Allah Ibn Nuja

[^12]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, Ibn ‘Asakir, p. 198

[^13]: al-Darajat al-Rafi‘a, p. 429; Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, vol. II, pp
231-232

[^14]: Tarikh Madinat Dimashq, Tarajim al-Nisa’, pp 469-470

[^15]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, Ibn Sa‘d, pp 145-146

[^16]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, Ibn Sa‘d, p. 149

[^17]: Ibid p. 150

[^18]: Akhbar al-Tiwal,p. 227

[^19]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 11

[^20]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 17

[^21]: Dinwari, p. 228

[^22]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 16; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p.
15

[^23]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 37

[^24]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. V, p. 260-261; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 46
This emphasis was because they were infamous for not supporting ‘Ali and
his son, Hasan

[^25]: The letter is fullyread in al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 20

[^26]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 49,50

[^27]: Ibid vol. V, p. 53

[^28]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 263-264 Some researchers deny such
events Mab‘uth al-Husayn, p. 90

[^29]: Ash-Shahid Muslim, p. 104; these sentences are not in historical
books but Muqarram by availing Himself of narrations related to
allegiance of ‘Aqaba and Yawm al-fath has referred approximately to them

[^30]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 59,60

[^31]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 271

[^32]: Ibid vol. IV, p. 273; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 28

[^33]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 265; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV,
p. 21

[^34]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 267; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV,
pp 24, 25

[^35]: Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p. 242 Later on Shurayh had said, “As Ibn
Ziyad had appointed an agent to watch me, I scared to give Hani’s
message to the members of the tribe that he was under duress ”

[^36]: al-Kmail fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 31

[^37]: al-Irshad, p. 210, Around 4000 people is reported

[^38]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 277; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 87;
al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 31

[^39]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 227

[^40]: al-Irshad, p. 212

[^41]: Al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 98

[^42]: Ibid vol. IV, p. 35

[^43]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 98,99; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 283

[^44]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 57; Maqtal al-Husayn, vol. I, p. 197;
Mab‘uth al-Husayn, p. 123

[^45]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 27

[^46]: Mab‘uth al-Husayn, pp 152, 153

[^47]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 249

[^48]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 164; Akhbar al-Tiwal, 245; Tarikh
at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 289-290

[^49]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 245

[^50]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 247

[^51]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 120

[^52]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 300

[^53]: The message was that Imam Husayn should return to Hijaz as soon
as possible

[^54]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 247, 248

[^55]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 169

[^56]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 248

[^57]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 300, 301

[^58]: See, Acquaintance with the people of Kufa at the beginning of
discussion about Imam Hasan’s Caliphate

[^59]: Men such as ‘Amr Ibn Hajjaj and Shabath Ibn Rib‘i who were
commanders of Ibn Ziyad’s army in Karbala were among those writing
letters to Imam Husayn See al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 50-51

[^60]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 185; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 169

[^61]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 277, Ibn A‘tham, writing the letter
was a trick against me and for becoming nearer to Yazid

[^62]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 59

[^63]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 178; Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 245, 255

[^64]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 179

[^65]: It was noticed, in Iraqi war against Iran, how it compelled Iraqi
people to combat Iranian Muslims By the same token, such people are
culprit and we do never intend to acquit the people of Kufa this way,
But there is a vast difference between the one who goes freely and the
one going under duress However, many chiefs and nobles and those
affiliated with the Umayya whom later Zaynab and Umm Kuthum blamed went
to Karbala willingly.

[^66]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 290; al-Futuh vol. V, pp 120,124;
Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 245; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 165

[^67]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn of Ibn Sa‘d, p. 171; Tarjamat
al-Husayn, Ibn ‘Asakir, p. 206

[^68]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 48

[^69]: Tashayyu‘ dar masir Tarikh, p. 160

[^70]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 179

[^71]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 254

[^72]: Tajarib al-Umam, vol. II, p. 70

[^73]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 172

[^74]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn of Ibn Sa‘d, p. 178

[^75]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 7

[^76]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 73

[^77]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn of Ibn Sa‘d, pp 178-179

[^78]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 243

[^79]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 263; Imam had already asked some of
the Shi‘ites distinguished in Basra for help in a letter, vol. IV, p. 23

[^80]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, pp 173,179; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV,
p. 295

[^81]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 180; al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 159,160

[^82]: al-Muhabbar, p. 303

[^83]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 157

[^84]: Tarjamat al-Imam Husayn of Ibn Sa‘d, p.178.

[^85]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 226

[^86]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 28; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III,
p. 61 (Even this one is not mentioned either)

[^87]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, Ibn ‘Asakir, p. 197; Akhbar al-Tiwal
pp 222-224

[^88]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 36,37; Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 228,246; al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 19 on p. 41 Imam’s meeting with Ibn MuTi‘ eroute
from Mecca to Kufa is referred

[^89]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 224; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 113; Tarikh
at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 287; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 161; al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 39

[^90]: Ibn A‘tham, vol. V, p. 32

[^91]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 161; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 110;
Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 287

[^92]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 163; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 39;
Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn of Ibn Sa‘d, p. 166

[^93]: Ibn A‘tham, vol. V, p. 116; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 291;
Ibn Athir, vol. IV, p. 40

[^94]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn of Ibn Sa‘d, p. 167

[^95]: Ibid p. 167

[^96]: Ibid p. 166

[^97]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 165

[^98]: As mentioned earlier, this matter is beyond the scholastic aspect
of Imamate

[^99]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 164; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p.
289; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 113; Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, the first Ibn
‘Asakir, p. 190; al-Ma‘rifat wal-Tarikh, vol. I, p. 541; Majma‘
al-Zawa’id, vol. I, p. 192; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 55; al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 38

[^100]: loc cit

[^101]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 116; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 38

[^102]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 290

[^103]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 124

[^104]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, pp 163-165

[^105]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 173

[^106]: Ibid p. 181

[^107]: Ibn ‘Asakir,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 192

[^108]: Ibid pp 209, 210

[^109]: See, al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 46, 49, 50, 51; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol.
IV, p. 262

[^110]: See, al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 52; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 262

[^111]: See, al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 68, see also Tarikh at-Tabari, vol.
IV, p. 259; Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, 207; Muruj
al-Dhahab, vol. III, p54, (The number recorded was 12000); see also,
al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 5 (The recorded number was 30000

[^112]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 174; Tarikh at-Tabari,
vol. IV, p. 281; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 77

[^113]: Ibid p. 174

[^114]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, pp 54, 55

[^115]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 281

[^116]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 281

[^117]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 5

[^118]: Ibn Bajdal refers to Yazid

[^119]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, see also Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 170; Al
Futuh, vol. V, p. 135

[^120]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 247 it is narrated that two people belonging
to Banu Asad who were coming from Kufa informed them That the one giving
the news of Muslim’s martyrdom was either Farazdaq or Hurr is not true
See Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 61; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 125

[^121]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 168; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p.
292;Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 176; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah,
vol. II, p. 6

[^122]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 300; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV,
p. 42

[^123]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 304

[^124]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. II, p. 170; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 139;
al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, pp 47, 48

[^125]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 170; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 135;
Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 250

[^126]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 311; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 155

[^127]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 323

[^128]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. II, p. 182

[^129]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 54

[^130]: Ibid p. 173; in footnote, this tradition is declared untrue by
Editor

[^131]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 26

[^132]: Ibn Sa‘d,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 192

[^133]: Ibid p. 250

[^134]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 250; al-Futuh, vol. V,
pp 130, 141; vol. II, p. 170

[^135]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 307; Baladhuri, vol. II, p. 173
the tribe of Banu Tayy was the tribe of Hatam Tayi whose son, Adi, was
from among the Prophet’s and later ‘Ali’s companions and now his son,
Tirimmah, made such a suggestion for his Shi‘ism

[^136]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, pp 250, 251

[^137]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 176;Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 251

[^138]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 172.

[^139]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 252

[^140]: Ibid p. 253

[^141]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. II, p. 61

[^142]: Hurr with one thousand, Husayn Ibn Numayr with tour thousand,
Shabath Ibn Rib‘i with one thousand, Shimr Ibn Dhi l-Jawshan with four
thousand, … ; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 159

[^143]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 179.

[^144]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 254.

[^145]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 178

[^146]: Sharaf al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 178

[^147]: Imam sent an envoy to dissuade Ibn Sa‘d but the response given
to him was رفي ابن سعد أن يقتلك بملك اسري Ibn Sa‘d to battle against you
in return Riy Al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 173

[^148]: al-Irshad, p. 229

[^149]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 166; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III,, p. 183
فانظر فإن نزل الحسين واصحابه على الحكم فابعث بهم اليّ سلماً وإن أبوا
فازحف إليهم حتى تقتلهم وتمثل بهم فانهم مستحقون لدنك

[^150]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p.254.

[^151]: This order was given three days after Imam’s arrival See also,
Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 255; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 180, what Ibn
Ziyad has stated about ‘Uthman was on no accounts true because when
‘Uthman was under opponents’ pressure, it was Imam ‘Ali (a) who provide
water for him Earlier, we have discussed this in this regard

[^152]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 162; Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 311
Reaction to some objections as saying because with digging two or three
metersof water could be found in Karbala and there was no need for the
water of the Euphrates; there fore, no one suffered from thirst It is
absolutely evident that Ibn Ziyad’s army was so ruthless that it did not
allow them to sink wells Nevertheless, Imam’s army could take water from
the Euphrates several times until a couple of days prior to Ashura

[^153]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 184; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 168

[^154]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 182

[^155]: Ibn Sa‘d,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn,, p. 178; al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, pp 58,59

[^156]: Ibn Sa‘d,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, pp 179, 180

[^157]: Ibid pp 178, 181; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. II, p. 7

[^158]: Those who had been described well by Imam ‘Ali (a) as خذلوا الحق
ولم ينصروا الباطل They have not only forgotten the gospel truth but also
they never back the credal error

[^159]: Notorious of being Kharijites

[^160]: Ibn Sa‘d,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 178

[^161]: Ibn Sa‘d,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 181 see also al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, pp 60, 61

[^162]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 182

[^163]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 63

[^164]: Ibid vol. IV, pp 64-65

[^165]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 73

[^166]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 326; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 183

[^167]: Tarkih Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 331; al-Kamil fil-Tarikh,
vol. IV, p. 67

[^168]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 184; see also Muruj
al-Dhahab, vol. III, p. 63 It has been the true historical narration and
consistent with the status quo at that time and the mutual manners

[^169]: See Ibn Sa‘d, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, pp 154-161 and the
footnotes of the pages

[^170]: Ibid vol. V, p. 51

[^171]: Ibid vol. V, p. 116; see also Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 291,
he had written the same to ‘Abd Allah Ibn Ja’far as well See also
Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 202

[^172]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 122

[^173]: Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 253

[^174]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 177; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 123

[^175]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 175-176

[^176]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 181

[^177]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. IV, p. 82

[^178]: al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 137

[^179]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 171; al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 144-15;
Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 304; elsewhere, Imam had stated, الا ترون
أن الحق لا يعمل به وأن الباطل لا يتناهي عنه Not you see how the gospel
is not practiced but the credal error is endlessly practiced? Tarikh
at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 305; Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn,p.
214 Also Imam had said, فان السنة قد أميتت وان البدعة قد أحييت The
Prophet’s Sunnah is dissolved while heresies are revived Tarikh
at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 266

[^180]: al-Futuh, vol. IV, p. 237; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, p. 183

[^181]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 197; al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, Lisan
al-Mizan, vol. III, p. 151 (Al-Humayr As-Saqqa’at

[^182]: al-Futuh, bol 5, p. 98

[^183]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, p. 289; such adverse publicity had
made, the majority of people specially those from Damascus to consider
Imam Husayn as an outsider (the one seceding) and to accuse him of
heresy

[^184]: Tarikh at-Tabari, p. 275

[^185]: Ibid p. 331

[^186]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 167, as described by Mu‘awiya,
Ibn ‘Umar was a coward (Ibn A‘tham, vol. IV, p. 260) He advised Imam
Husayn saying “Do not rise up, be patient, compromise as others did See
also al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 39; Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 166

[^187]: al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, vol. IV, p. 17

[^188]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 167

[^189]: al-Awa’íl, Askari, vol. II, p. 125

[^190]: Faďl al-I‘tizal wa Tabaqat al-Mu‘tazila, p. 143

[^191]: al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, vol. I, pp 183, 187

[^192]: Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 188

[^193]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. V, p. 148

[^194]: Ibn ‘Asakir,Tarjamat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 193

[^195]: Tarikh Islam, Cambridge University, vol. I, p. 81 (English
text); See also al-Ikhtilaf fil-laf¨, pp 47-49

[^196]: In “Tarikh tashayyu‘ dar Iran” we have discussed in detail

[^197]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. III, p. 170; al-Futuh, vol. V, p. 135

[^198]: al-Futuh, vol.V, p. 137

[^199]: al-Futuh, vol. V, pp 144-145

[^200]: Ibid vol. V, p. 98

[^201]: Ibid vol. V, p. 194

[^202]: Ibid vol. V, p. 199

[^203]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. IV, pp 331, 336


