History of Masjid Jamkaran
==========================

The learned Shi'ite research scholars and historians in their books have
narrated from Hasan b. Mathleh Jamakarani - a righteous man of upright
conduct and noble character, and a lover of the family of the revelation
and Prophethood (i.e. the Ahlul Bayt, the holy progeny of the Prophet
[s]) - regarding the construction of the Holy Jamkaran Mosque in the
outskirts of Qum as follows:

“I was sleeping at my home in the village of Jamkaran on Tuesday night,
the 17th day of the blessed and holy month of Ramadhan of 393 A.H.
(Lunar Calendar). It was after midnight that a group of people came to
my home and awakened me up and said:

'O Hasan! Wake up and arise, and obey the command of your Lord and
Master of the Age - Imam al-Mahdi [a] who has summoned you.' After
hearing this command, I woke up immediately to get ready and said:

'Please permit me to put on my clothes', and being amazed and confused
in total darkness, I picked up a shirt to put on then I heard a voice
saying:

'Hasan don't put it on, because it does not belong to you.' After
removing it and putting on my own shirt, I picked up a trouser, then
again I heard the voice saying: 'Hasan. This is not your trouser don't
put it on', and finally I was able to dress up wearing my own shirt and
trouser in the darkness. Then I started looking for the key to open the
door, when again I was told not to search for the key as the door had
already been opened.

When finally I came out of the door I saw a group of pious personalities
and offered them salutations. They reciprocated my salutations and spoke
to me kindly and with appreciation. Then they directed me to a place -
the present location of the Holy Jamkaran Mosque - and after looking
carefully I saw a couch covered with fine carpets and pillows.

A young man of approximately thirty years with grandeur and special
dignity was sitting on that couch resting his back against those pillows
and besides him an old man was holding a book in his hand reading for
the young man. There were more than sixty people, some of them dressed
in white, while others dressed in green who had surrounded the couch,
and were busy in offering prayers and praises of God Almighty.

Suddenly it occurred to me that this young man is the Lord and Master of
the age, Wali al-Asr [a] (may our soul be sacrificed for him) and the
old man with beautiful features sitting besides him was Prophet Khizr
[a], who asked me to be seated; and then the Lord of the Age, Wali
al-Asr [a] commanded me as follows:

'Oh Hasan! You must go to see Hasan bin Muslim - the farmer of this
land - and tell him that for five continuous years he has been farming
on this Holy Land, in spite of my warning signals during all these
years. This is a blessed holy land and God-Almighty has distinguished it
over other lands by bestowing it distinction and dignity; even this year
he is intending to cultivate this land, while he has neither any rights
over this land nor is authorized to do so.

Therefore, till now whatever financial earnings he has earned and all
relevant benefits achieved because of commissioning this land must be
returned by him for the building of a Holy Mosque at this sacred land.

Also, emphasize upon him that because of his transgressions for annexing
this Holy Land into his own estate, God Almighty had taken away his two
young sons as punishment for his offense. But it seems that even this
severe punishment has not awakened him. You must warn him that if he
still persists and does not change his course, he must be ready for a
horrible catastrophic punishment beyond his imagination, from God
Almighty.

After carefully listening to these heart-appealing words of my Master I
replied:

'Oh my Master and Lord! I must have some unique convincing signs for
delivering your message, because otherwise people will not believe my
words, and it will be quite difficult to convince them.'

The Imam [a] replied:

'We will mark some special signs showing the boundaries of the Holy
Mosque, which will prove the truthfulness of your statement. Go and
convey my message to the people.'

The Imam [a] further added: 'Go and see Sayyid Abul Hasan and ask him to
accompany you to visit Hasan bin Muslim, and together you both collect
from him the earnings of that farm land for past couple of years; and
use this money for laying the foundation of the mosque structure. For
the remaining expenditure, you may collect it form the village of Rehaq
in the Ardhaal region (near the city of Kashan), which belongs to me;
and in this manner, complete the remaining super structure of the Holy
Mosque. Also, half of the estate of the village of Rehaq has been made
as an endowment for the maintenance of the Holy Mosque, and the yearly
income of the said endowment should be spent for its improvement and
habitation.'“

![](/sites/default/files/Jmkrn1.gif)

*Picture of Masjid Jamkaran*


