How to Pray at Masjid Jamkaran
==============================

Imam al-Mahdi [a] said to Hasan b. Mathleh: “Call the people to visit
this place and should adore (Allah) by offering four units (*rakats*) of
prayer as follows:

(1) Salutation Prayer of the Holy Mosque
----------------------------------------

The first two units (*rakats*) should be offered with the intention
(*niyat*) of paying one's respects to the mosque and should be offered
in the following manner:

In each unit (*rakat*), after recital of Surah al-Hamd, Surah al-Ikhlas
should be recited seven times. Also, during the genuflection (*rukoo*)
and prostration (*sujud*) the invocation (*dhikr*) “subahana rabbi
al-adhimi wa bihamdih” (Glorified is my Lord, the Cherisher, the Highest
with Glory) or “subhana Allah” (Glory be to Allah); and “subhana rabbi
al-a'ala wa bihamdih” (Glorified is my Lord the Cherisher, the Highest
with Glory) or “subhana Allah” (Glory to Allah), should be repeated
seven times respectively.

(2) Prayer of the Lord of the Age (Wali al-Asr [a])
---------------------------------------------------

After offering the first two unit (*rakats*) salutation prayer of the
Holy Mosque, another two units with the intention (*niyat*) of “the
prayer of Wali al-Asr [a]” should be recited in the following manner:

In each unit (*rakat*), whilst reciting Surah al-Hamd, when you reach at
the verse: “iyyaka na 'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in” (You alone we worship
and You alone we ask for help), repeat it one hundred times (you can
count using a rosary) and then finish the rest of Surah al-Hamd. Then
recite Surah al-Ikhlas only one time, but during the genuflection
(*rukoo*) and the prostration (*sujud*), the invocation (*dhikr*) should
be recited seven times (like the Prayer of the Salutation of Mosque).

After completing the prayer, the words “la ilaha illalah” (there is no
god but Allah) should be recited once. Later on recite the Tasbih of
Sayyida Zahra [a] (the daughter of the Holy Prophet [s]) which is as
follows:

Allahu Akbar (Allah is Great): 34 times

Alhamdu lillah (All praise to Allah): 33 times

Subhanallah (Glory be to Allah): 33 times

Finally, prostrate and recite one hundred times: “Allahumma salli 'ala
Muhammad wa aali Muhammad” (Oh Allah! bless Muhammad and his progeny).

After prescribing the above acts of worship to Hasan b. Mathleh (see
History of the Mosque), Imam al-Mahdi [a] said: “O Hasan! Anyone who has
offered these prayers in this Holy Mosque is tantamount to having
offered prayers in the Holy Kaba.”

Hasan b. Mathleh says: “As soon as I started to convey this message and
having taken only a few steps, again I was commanded by the Lord of the
Age (Wali al-Asr [a]) as follows:

“O Hasan! There is a goat in the herd of the shepherd Jaffer Kashani - a
goat partly colored and hairy, having seven black and white spots
altogether, three being on the right side, and the remaining four on the
left side - you must purchase this goat with your own personal money,
and with the help of other people bring this goat to this place the next
night for sacrifice. After sacrificing the goat distribute the meat of
sacrifice on Wednesday the 18th day of the blessed month of Ramadhan
among the sick people. God Almighty will cure them through this meat of
sacrifice (insha Allah).”

Hasan says: “After receiving these signs I returned home, and remained
restless thinking about this episode throughout the night, and after
offering the morning prayer I started off to complete my assignment.”

Because, our aim is to present only a brief summary of the above story,
therefore it would not be appropriate to continue the remaining story as
narrated by Hasan-bin-Mathleh, but in summary:

Hasan b. Mathleh described the previous night's episode to one of his
close friends Ali b. Mandar, and together they went to visit the sacred
place, which was shown to Hasan by the Imam [a]. As promised, they
encountered the signs in the form of nails and chains marking the
boundaries of the Holy Mosque; immediately they returned to Qum to see
Sayyid Abul Hasan, who was eagerly awaiting for their arrival, because
of his having seen the same whole episode in a dream the previous night.

Together, they started towards Jamkaran and encountered the herd of
Jaffer Kashani. As soon as Hasan b. Mathleh approached this flock he saw
a goat with the exact signs as described by Imam [a] coming behind the
herd towards him. He approached the shepherd Jaffer Kashani for the
payment of the goat, who in turn was completely surprised and swore that
he had never before noticed this particular goat in his flock.

Finally, they brought the said animal towards the sacred place as
directed by the Imam [a] for sacrifice and distributed the meat among
the sick people who were cured. Then they started laying the foundation
of the Holy Mosque of Jamkaran, and with the earnings of the real
estates of Ardhaal, completed the roof of the mosque. The nails and
chains left by the Imam [a] were taken by Sayyid Abul Hasan to his house
and every time sick people, with sincerity and belief, neared themselves
to these things, they became cured.

After Sayyid Abul Hasan's demise, one of his children became sick and
seeking to get cured, he opened the box containing these chains and
nails, only to find them missing; his search for finding these missing
items produced no positive result. The story of Hasan b. Mathleh
Jamkarani and his being assigned by the Imam [a] for the building of the
Holy Jamkaran Mosque has been narrated in the following books:

1. Bihar-ul- Anwar, Vol. 53, p. 230.

2. Ambaqari al-Ahsan Vol. 2, p. 143.

3. Najam ath-Thaqib, p.294.

4. Alzam an-Nasib, Vol.2, p.55.


