Chapter 8: Realistic Conception of the World
============================================

Islam is a realistic religion. The word "Islam" means submission. This
indicates that the first condition of being a Muslim is to submit to the
realities and truths. Islam rejects every kind of obduracy,
stubbornness, prejudice, blind imitation, bias and selfishness, and
regards all of them as contrary to realism and realistic approach to
truth. From the point of view of Islam a man who seeks truth, but fails
in his efforts may be excused, but the acceptance of truth by virtue of
imitation or heredity by a man who is otherwise stubborn and arrogant
has no value.

A true Muslim, whether a male or a female, eagerly accepts truth
wherever he or she may find it. As far as the acquisition of knowledge
is concerned, a Muslim shows no bias. He may go even to the farthest
corner of the world for acquiring knowledge. His efforts to gain
knowledge and to find truth are not confined to any particular period of
his life nor to any territorial region. Nor does he insist to acquire
knowledge from any particular person. The Holy Prophet has said that to
seek knowledge is the duty of every Muslim, whether a man or a woman. He
has also asked the Muslims to receive it even from an idolater.

There is another saying of the Holy Prophet which exhorts the Muslims to
seek it even if they have to go to China for that purpose. He is also
reported to have said: *"Continue to seek knowledge from the cradle to
the grave"*. Superficial and partial notions of the problems, blind
imitation of the forefathers and submission to the absurd hereditary
traditions, being contrary to the spirit of submission to truth, are
censured by Islam and regarded as misleading.

Allah is Absolute Reality and Source of Life
--------------------------------------------

Man is a realistic being. A new-born human child from the very first
moments of its life, while looking for its mother's breast, seeks it as
a reality. Gradually the body and the mind of the infant develop to the
extent that it can distinguish between itself and other things. Though
the new-born child's contact with other things is established through a
series of its thoughts, it knows that the reality of the things is
distinct from that of the thoughts which it entertains and uses as a
medium only.

Integral Characteristics of the World
-------------------------------------

The realities which man can perceive through his senses and which we
call the world, have the following integral characteristics:

### (i) Limitation

Everything perceptible, from the smallest particle to the biggest star
has spatial and temporal limitations. Nothing can exist outside a
particular space and a particular period of time.

Certain things occupy a bigger space and last longer while some others
occupy a smaller space and last comparatively for a shorter time. But in
the final analysis they are all limited to a particular portion of place
and a particular period of time.

### (ii) Change

Everything is subject to a change and is indurable. Nothing perceptible
in the world is in a standstill state. It is either growing or decaying.
A material and perceptible being throughout the period of its existence
passes through a constant course of change as a part of its reality. It
either gives something or takes something or gives as well as takes. In
other words, it either takes something out of the reality of other
things and adds it to its own reality or gives something out of its
reality or performs both the actions. In any case, there is nothing that
remains static. This characteristic also is common to all things
existing in this world.

### (iii) Attachment

Another characteristic of the perceptible things is their attachment. We
find that they all are conditional. In other words the existence of each
one of them is attached to and , conditional on the existence of one or
more other things. None of them can exist if those other things do not
exist. If we look deeply into the reality of the material and
perceptible things, we will find that many 'ifs' are attached to their
existence. We do not find a single perceptible thing which may be
existing unconditionally and independently. The existence of everything
is conditional on the existence of something else, and the existence of
that something else in its turn is also conditional on the existence of
something else, and so on.

### (iv) Dependence

The existence of all our perceptible things depends on the fulfilment of
the numerous conditions attached to it. The existence of each of these
conditions again depends on the fulfilment of a series of some other
conditions. There is no perceptible thing which may exist independently,
i.e. in the absence of the conditions on which its existence depends.
Thus dependence pervades all existing things.

### (v) Relativeness

All perceptible things are relative as regards to their existence a well
as to their qualities. When we attribute to them greatness, power,
beauty, antiquity and even existence, we say so in comparison to other
things. When we say, for example, that the sun is very large, we mean
that it is larger than the earth and other planets of our solar system.
Otherwise this very sun is smaller than many other stars. Similarly when
we say that such and such ship or such and such animal is powerful, we
compare it with man or something weaker than man.

Even the existence of a thing is comparative. Whenever we speak of any
existence, perfection, wisdom, beauty, power or grandeur, we take into
consideration a lower degree of that quality. We can always visualize a
higher degree of it also and then a further higher degree. Each quality
as compared to its higher degree is changed into its opposite. Existence
becomes non-existence, perfection is changed into defectiveness.
Similarly wisdom, beauty, greatness and grandeur are changed
respectively into ignorance, ugliness and despicability.

The thinking power of man, the scope of which, contrary to that of the
senses, is not confined to the exterior features, but also penetrates
what is behind the screen of existence, tells us that existence is in no
way confined to these perceptible things which are limited, changing,
relative and dependent.

The scenery of existence which we observe appears on the whole to be
self-existing and self-dependent. Hence there must be an everlasting,
unconditional and ever-present absolute and infinite truth behind it on
which everything must depend. Otherwise this scenery of existence could
not stand so firmly. In other words nothing would have existed at all.

The Holy Qur'an describes Allah as Self-existing and Self-dependent, and
thus reminds us that all existing things, being conditional and
relative, are in need of a Self-existing truth to support and sustain
them. Allah is Self-dependent because everything else depends on Him. He
is Perfect, for everything else is hollow from within and needs a Truth
which may fill it with existence.

The Holy Qur'an describes the perceptible things as 'signs'. In other
words everything in its turn is a sign of an Infinite Being and His
knowledge, power and will. From the viewpoint of the Holy Qur'an the
world is like a book composed by a wise and sagacious being, every line
and every word of which is a sign of the wisdom and sagacity of its
author. From the point of view of the Holy Qur'an, the more a man comes
to know the reality of the things, the more he gets acquainted with
Divine wisdom, power and blessings.

From one angle every natural science is a branch of cosmology. From
another angle and from a deeper way of looking at things, it is a branch
of the knowledge (recognition) of Allah.

To elucidate the Qur'anic point of view in this respect we quote here
just one verse of the Holy Qur'an out of so many similar verses:
***"Surely in the creation of the heavens and the alternation of night
and day, the ships which sail on the sea with (cargoes) beneficial to
man, the water that Allah sends down from heaven with which He revives
the earth after it is dead and replenishes it with all kinds of animal
life, in the movement of the winds and in the clouds held between the
sky and the earth, there are signs for the people who have sense."***
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:164)

In this verse the Holy Qur'an invites the attention of the people to
general cosmology, to the ship-building industry, to tourism and its
financial advantages, to meteorology, to the

origin of winds and rain, to the movement of clouds, to biology and
zoology. It regards the pondering on the philosophy of these sciences as
something leading to the recognition of Allah.

Attributes of Allah
-------------------

The Holy Qur'an says that Allah has all the attributes and
characteristics of a perfect being.

***"He has the most beautiful names."*** (Surah al-Hashr, 59:24).

***"His is the sublime similitude in the heavens and in the earth"***
(Surah ar-Rum, 30:27)

As such Allah is Living, Almighty, All-Knowing, Master of His Will,
Merciful, Guide, Creator, Wise, Forgiving and Just. There is no sublime
quality which He does not possess.

On the other hand He is not a body nor a compound. He is neither weak
nor cruel.

The first group of the sublime attributes of Allah, denoting His
perfection is called His affirmative attributes and the second group of
His attributes denoting His freedom from every kind of defect and
imperfection is called His negative attributes. We both praise and
glorify Allah. When we praise Him we mention His affirmative attributes
and when glorify Him, we say that He is free from all that is not worthy
of Him. In both the cases we affirm His Knowledge to our own benefit and
thus uplift ourselves.

Monotheism
----------

Allah has no associate or partner. There is none like Him. It is
basically impossible that there should be anyone like Him, for in that
case we shall have two or more Gods instead of one. To be two, three or
more is a characteristic of the limited and relative things. Plurality
has no meaning in regard to an absolute and infinite being.

For example, we can have one child. We can also have two or more
children. Similarly we can have one friend. We can also have two or more
friends. A friend or a child is a limited being, and a limited being can
have a like of him and can be multiplicable. But an infinite being is
not multiplicable at all. The following example, though not adequate may
be found useful for the purpose of elucidating the point.

In respect of the dimensions of the material world, that is the world
which we can see and perceive, the scientists have two theories. Some of
them maintain that the dimensions of the world are limited. In other
words this perceivable world reaches a point where it ends. But some
others are of the opinion that the dimensions of the material world have
no middle, no beginning and no end. If we accept the theory that the
material world is limited, a question arises as to whether it is one
world or more than one? But if we maintain that this world has no
limits, the question of the existence of another world becomes absurd.
Whatever we may presume to be another world, it will either be identical
with this world or a part of it.

This examples applies to the material world as well as the material
beings which are limited, conditional and created. The reality of none
of them is absolute, independent and self-existing. The material world,
though limitless from the viewpoint of its dimensions, is limited from
the viewpoint of its reality. But as its dimensions are limitless, we
cannot presume the existence of another world.

Almighty Allah has an infinite existence. He is an absolute reality, and
He pervades everything. No space or time is devoid of Him. He is closer
to us than our jugular vein. Hence it is impossible that He should have
a like of Him. We cannot even suppose the existence of another being
like Him.

Furthermore, we see the signs of His wisdom and attention prevailing
everywhere and pervading everything. We observe that one single will and
one single system govern the entire world. That shows that our world is
unicentred, not multicentred.

Furthermore, had there been two or more Gods, evidently two or more
wills would have applied to everything and two or more realities having
a different centre would have existed in every existing thing. As a
result everything would have become two or more things. This being an
absurd proposition, in fact nothing would have existed at all. This is
what the Holy Qur'an means when it says: ***"If there were therein (in
the Universe) Gods besides Allah, then surely both the heavens and the
earth had been discorded."*** (Surah al-Ambiya, 21:22)

Worship and Adoration
---------------------

The acknowledgement of One Allah as the most perfect being, having the
most sublime attributes and free from every defect and deficiency, and
the recognition of His relation to the world consisting in His
creatorship, guardianship, munificence, compassion and mercy, create a
reaction in us which is called adoration and worship.

Worship is a kind of relationship which man establishes with his
Creator. It consists of man's submission to Allah and extolling and
thanking Him. It is a relationship which man can establish with his
Creator only. The establishment of such a relationship with anyone else
is neither conceivable nor permissible.

The acknowledgement of Allah as the only source of existence and the
only Master and Lord of everything makes it incumbent on us not to
associate any creature with Him in adoration. The Holy Qur'an insists
that Allah alone should be worshipped. There is no sin more deadly than
associating anyone or anything else with Him.

Now let us see what is worship and what kind of relationship is that
which is peculiar to Allah and which cannot be established with any
other being.

Definition of Worship
---------------------

To make the meaning of worship clear and in order to define it
correctly, it is necessary to mention two points as a prelude:

(i) Worship may consist either of words or of actions. The former kind
consists of a series of words and sentences which we recite, such as
praising Allah, the recitation of the Holy Qur'an or the recitation of
the formulas normally recited while offering prayers, and pronouncing
*'Labbayk'* during Hajj.

The worship which consists of actions is represented by such acts as
standing, bowing and prostration in prayers, circum-ambulation of the
Holy Ka'bah, and staying at Arafat and Mash'ar. Most of the acts of
worship, such as prayers and pilgrimage (*Hajj*) comprise words and
actions both.

(ii) Human acts are of two kinds. Some acts have no remote purpose. They
are not performed as a symbol of something else, but they are performed
for their own natural effects. For example, a farmer carries out the
functions connected with farming in order to secure their natural
results. He does not carry them out as a symbol or to express any
feelings. The same is the case with a tailor when he is doing his
tailoring. When we proceed to school, we have nothing in mind except
reaching there. With this act we do not intend to convey any other
purpose or meaning.

But there are acts which we perform as a symbol of a series of some
other objects or in order to express our feelings. We lower our head as
a sign of confirmation, we sit in the doorway as a sign of humility and
bow to someone as a sign of reverence.

Most of the human acts are of the first kind and only a few of the
second. Anyway, there are acts which are performed to express our
feelings or to show some other objectives. These acts are used in place
of words to express an intention.

Now keeping in mind the above two points, we may say that worship,
whether it is performed by means of words or acts is a meaningful deed.
Man by means of his devotion gives expression to a truth. Similarly by
means of such acts as bowing, prostration, circumambulation etc. he
wants to convey what he says when he pronounces devotionals and liturgy.

Spirit of Adoration and Worship
-------------------------------

Through his worship, whether it is performed by means of words or acts,
man conveys certain things:

(i) He praises Allah by pronouncing His peculiar attributes having a
sense of absolute perfection, such as absolute knowledge, absolute power
and absolute will. Absolute perfection means that His knowledge, power
and will are not limited by or conditional on anything else and are a
corollary of His total and complete independence.

(ii) He glorifies Allah and declares Him free from every defect and
deficiency such as death, limitation, ignorance, helplessness,
stinginess, cruelty etc.

(iii) He thanks Allah, considering Him to be the real source of
everything good and of all bounties, and believing that all favours are
received from Him alone. Others are only intermediaries appointed by
Him.

(iv) He expresses total submission to Him and acknowledges that
unconditional obedience is due to Him. He, being the Absolute Master of
all that exists, is entitled to issue orders and we being slaves, it is
our duty to obey Him.

(iv) In regard to His above attributes Allah has no associate or
partner. None other than Him is absolutely perfect and none other than
Him is absolutely free from every defect. None other than Him is the
true source of all bounties and none other than Him deserves to be
thanked for all of them. None other than Him deserves total submission
and to be obeyed unconditionally. Every other obedience like that of the
Prophet, the Imam, the lawful Muslim ruler, the parents and the teachers
must culminate in His obedience and be subject to His good pleasure to
be lawful. That is the appropriate response which a man should show to
his Almighty Lord. Except in the case of Allah this kind of response is
neither applicable nor permissible.


