Chapter 13: Revelation and Prophethood
======================================

Universal Guidance
------------------

A belief in revelation and Prophethood emanates from a particular
conception of the world and man, which involves a belief in the
universality of Divine guidance. The principle of universal guidance is
a part of the monotheistic conception of the world as presented by
Islam. As Allah, the Almighty is a compulsorily self-existing in every
respect and absolutely Beneficent, He extends His favour to every
species of the existing things in accordance with its capability and
guides it on its evolutionary journey. This guidance covers everything
from the tiniest particle to the largest star and from the lowest
lifeless existence to the highest living being known to us, that is man.
That is why the Holy Qur'an has used the word revelation in connection
with the guidance of inorganic material, plants and animals as it has
used it in connection with the guidance of man.

No existing thing in this world is at rest. Everything is moving towards
its goal. At the same time all indications show that everything is
pushed to its goal by a mysterious force existing within it. It is this
force that is called Divine guidance. The Holy Qur'an reports that
Prophet Musa said to the Fir'awn of his time:

***"Our Lord is He who gave everything its distinctive nature and then
guided it."*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20:50)

Our world is a world of goals. Everything is being attracted to its
evolutionary goal by an inner force, or Divine guidance.

The word *wahi* meaning revelation has been repeatedly used in the Holy
Qur'an. The way how it has been used and the occasions on which it has
been used, show that the Holy Qur'an does not consider the revelation to
be confined to man. The Holy Qur'an believes it to be effective in the
case of everything, at least in the case of all living beings. That is
why it talks of revelation even to the bee. All that may be said is that
revelation and guidance have degrees which vary in accordance with the
degree of the evolution of the different things.

The highest degree of revelation is that which is made to the Prophets.
This kind of revelation is based on man's need of Divine guidance so
that he may proceed towards a goal beyond the perceptible and material
world, to which he must go in any case. In addition, revelation meets
man's requirements in his social life which needs a Divinely sanctioned
law. We have already explained man's need to an evolutionary ideology
and his inability to frame such an ideology himself.

The Prophets are a sort of a receiving set in human form. They are
chosen individuals capable of receiving guidance and knowledge from the
invisible world. It is Allah alone who can judge who is fit to be a
Prophet. The Holy Qur'an says.

***"Allah knows best whom to entrust with His message."*** (Surah
al-An'am, 6:124)

Though revelation is a phenomenon, which is beyond the purview of direct
human perception and experiment, its impact can be felt, like the impact
of many other forces, in the effects which it produces. Divine
revelation produces a deep and tremendous impact on the personality of
its recipient, that is the Prophet. It 'raises' the Prophet to truth. In
other words, it. stimulates his talents and faculties and brings about a
deep and big revolution in his person for the good of humanity. It
endows him with an absolute conviction. History has not witnessed such a
conviction as that of the Prophets and the persons produced by them.

Characteristics of Prophets
---------------------------

The Prophets who through revelation come in contact with the source of
existence, have certain distinguishing characteristics to which we refer
below:

### (i) Miracles:

Every Prophet raised by Allah was endowed with a kind of supernatural
power by means of which he worked one or more miracles to prove the
truth and Divinity of his message and mission.

The Holy Qur'an calls the miracles wrought by the Prophets by the will
of Allah, '*Ayat'* that is the sign of Prophethood. The Holy Qur'an says
that in every age the people have asked the Prophets of their time to
work some miracles for them. The demand being reasonable and logical,
the Prophets acceded to it, because otherwise it was not possible for
those who sought truth, to acknowledge their Prophethood. Anyway the
Prophets declined to accede to a request for a miracle if it was made
with an intention other than seeking truth. For example, if an offer was
made in the form of a bargain and the people said to a Prophet that they
would embrace his faith only if he worked a particular miracle, their
request was ignored. However, the Holy Qur'an has recounted many
miracles of the Prophets, such as bringing the dead to life, curing the
incurable, speaking in the cradle, turning a staff into a serpent,
describing the unknown and foretelling future events.

### (ii) Infallibility:

Another distinguishing feature of the Prophets is their infallibility,
that is their immunity from committing a sin or making a mistake. The
Prophets are not carried away by their personal desires. They do not
err. Their infallibility is indisputable. But what does their
infallibility actually mean? Does it mean that whenever they are about
to commit a sin or to make a mistake, an angel comes and stops them in
the same way as a father prevents his child from going astray?

Or does it mean that the Prophets have been created in such a way that
they are incapable of doing anything wrong just like an angel who, for
example, cannot commit adultery for he has no sexual desire, or like a
machine, which makes no mistake because it has no brain?

Or is it that the reason why the Prophets do not sin nor do they err is
that they have been endowed with a particular degree of intuition, faith
and conviction?

Yes, that is the only right explanation. Now let us take up each of
these two kinds of immunity separately.

#### Immunity from Sins:

Man is a free being. He himself determines what is beneficial to him and
what is harmful, and on that basis he decides what he should do. His
judgement plays an important role in his choice. It is impossible that
he should choose to do a thing which according to his judgement is
rather harmful to him than beneficial. For example a sensible man
interested in his life would never throw himself down from a hilltop nor
would take a lethal poison.

Individuals vary from the viewpoint of the strength of their faith and
the extent of their consciousness of the consequences of a sin. The
stronger their faith and the keener their consciousness, the less sins
they will commit. Should the faith of a man be so strong that while
committing a sin he feels as if he was throwing himself down from the
top of a hill, the chance of his sinning will be nil. We call this state
infallibility. Here infallibility originates from the perfection of
faith and piety. To be infallible and immune, man does not require an
external force to restrain him from committing sins, nor is there any
need of his being powerless by nature. Not to commit a sin is not
commendable if a man is unable to commit it, or is prevented from
committing it by an external force. The position of a man who is unable
to commit a sin is similar to that of a prisoner who is unable to commit
a fraud. Naturally a prisoner cannot be described as an honest and
upright man.

Immunity of the Prophets from sins and errors is an outcome of their
intuition. A mistake occurs when a man comes into contact with a reality
through his internal and external senses and forms some mental pictures
of it which he analyses with the help of his mental faculties. In that
case he may make a mistake in arranging his mental pictures or applying
them to the external reality. But when he comprehends an external
reality direct through a special sense, having no need of forming any
mental picture of it, and his very apprehension of a reality means his
direct contact with it, the question of making any mistake does not
arise.

The Prophets have, a contact with the realities of the world from within
themselves. Naturally no mistake can be imagined to exist in a reality
itself. For example, if we put 100 rosary beads in a receptacle, then
put another 100 beads in it and repeat this act 100 times, we may not be
able to keep the count correctly and may not be sure whether we have
repeated the action 100 times, 99 times or 101 times. But the actual
reality cannot be different from what it is. Though the action has been
repeated 100 times, the actual number of the beads can neither be less
nor more than what it is. The men who are in the midst of reality and
close to the root of existence are immune from making any kind of
mistake. They are infallible.

#### Difference Between Prophets and Geniuses

From here the difference between the Prophets and the geniuses also
becomes clear. The geniuses are the persons of exalted intellectual
power and extraordinary understanding. They work on their own mental
data and arrive at a conclusion by means of their intellectual power.
They sometimes make mistakes in their calculations.

The Prophets besides being blessed with their intellectual and
calculating powers, are equipped with an additional power called
revelation, which the geniuses lack. Hence there can be no comparison
between the geniuses and the Prophets. They belong to two different
categories. We can make a comparison between the seeing or the hearing
power of two persons, but we cannot compare one man's seeing power with
another man's hearing power and say which is stronger. The geniuses have
an extraordinary thinking power, whereas the Prophets have quite a
different power called revelation. They maintain a close contact with
the Source of existence. Therefore it is wrong to draw a comparison
between the two.

### (iii) Guidance:

The Prophethood begins with a spiritual journey from the creation to
Allah and gain proximity to Him, which implies turning away from the
externality to the internality. Anyhow, eventually it ends by the
Prophet's returning to the people with a view to reforming human life
and guiding it to the right path.

In Arabic there are two words for the Prophet, *Nabi* and *Rasul*. The
first literally means a bringer of news and the second a messenger.

A Prophet conveys the message of Allah to the people and awakens and
organizes their dormant powers. He invites them to Allah and to all that
pleases Him, namely peace, cordiality, reformation, non-violence,
veracity, uprightness, justice, emancipation from everything ungodly,
love and all other virtues. A Prophet delivers humanity from the
shackles of submission to base desires and false gods.

Dr. Iqbal describing the difference between the Prophets and all other
individuals having 'unitary experience' says: "The mystic does not wish
to return from the repose of his 'unitary experience'; and even when he
does return, as he must, his return does not mean much for mankind at
large. The Prophet's return is creative. He returns to insert himself
into the sweep of time with a view to control the forces of history, and
thereby to create a fresh world of ideals. For the mystic the repose of
'unitary experience' is something final; for the Prophet it is the
awakening within him and the unleashing psychological forces, calculated
to completely transform the human world." (The Reconstruction of
Religious Thought in Islam, p. 124).

### (iv) Sincerity of Purpose:

As the Prophets have a trust in Allah and are never oblivious of the
mission entrusted to them by Him, they accomplish their duty with utmost
sincerity. They have no aim other than the guidance of humanity as
ordered by Allah, and ask for no remuneration for the performance of
their mission.

The Holy Qur'an in Surah ash-Shu'ara has summed up what many of the
Prophets said to their peoples. Of course every Prophet had a message
for his people which was suited to the problems they faced. Anyhow there
was a point which was revealed in the message of every Prophet. Each of
them said: "I want no remuneration or wages from you". Therefore
sincerity is one of the distinguishing features of Prophethood; and that
is why the message of the Prophets has always been so firm.

As the Prophets felt that they had been 'raised' and they did not
entertain the least doubt about the fact that they had been entrusted
with an essential and useful mission, preached their message and
defended it with unprecedented firmness and utmost conviction.

When Prophet Musa and his brother, Harun went to Fir'awn, they had no
appurtenances with them except the woolen clothes on their body and
their wooden staffs in their hands. They asked Fir'awn to accept their
message and told him firmly that if he would accept it, his honour would
be safeguarded, otherwise he would lose his government. Fir'awn was
stunned by what they said.

In the early days of his Prophethood when the number of the Muslims did
not exceed that of the fingers of the two hands, the Holy Prophet of
Islam one day, known in history as the Day of the Warning, assembled
elders of the Bani Hashim, conveyed his message to them and firmly and
expressly told them that his religion was going to spread throughout the
world and that it was in their own interest to embrace it. To them these
words were unbelievable. They looked at each other with wide open eyes
and dispersed without uttering a word.

When his uncle, Abu Talib conveyed to him the message of the Quraysh,
saying that they were willing to select him their king, to give to him
in marriage the most beautiful daughter of the tribe and make him the
most wealthy member of their society, provided he gave up his
preachings, the Holy Prophet said in reply that he was not going to
budge an inch from his sacred mission even if they put the sun in one of
his hands and the moon in the other.

Just as infallibility is a necessary outcome of a Prophet's
communication with Allah, similarly sincerity and firmness are also the
essential characteristics of Prophethood.

### (v) Constructiveness:

The Prophets harness all the forces at their disposal and set them in
motion for constructive purposes, that is to reform both the individual
and society or in other words, to ensure human welfare. It is impossible
that their activities should corrupt any individual or cause harm to
society at large. Therefore if the preachings of a claimant of
Prophethood lead to corruption or indecency, paralyze human power or
cause decline of society, that is clear proof of his being an imposter.
Dr Iqbal in this connection has very aptly said: "Another way of judging
the value of a Prophet's religious experience would be to examine the
type of manhood that he has created, and the cultural world that has
sprung out of the spirit of his message". (The Reconstruction of
Religious thought in Islam, p. 124)

### (vi) Struggle and Conflict:

His struggle against idolatry, myths, ignorance, false ideas and tyranny
is another sign of the truth of a Prophet. It is impossible that in the
message of a person selected by Allah to be His Prophet there should be
anything smacking of idolatry, supporting tyranny and injustice or
tolerating polytheism, ignorance, myths, cruelty or despotism.

Monotheism, reason and justice are some of the principles which have
been preached by all the Prophets. The message of only those who preach
these principles is worth consideration and they alone can be asked to
produce a proof or a miracle. If the message preached by a person
contains an element indisputably unreasonable or contrary to the
principles of monotheism and justice, or supporting tyranny, then it is
not worth consideration at all. In such a case it is absolutely
unnecessary to ask him to produce a proof of his claim. Similar is the
case of a pretender, who commits a sin, makes a blunder or is unable to
guide people because of a physical defect or some loathsome disease like
leprosy, or because his teachings do not have constructive effect on
human life. Even if such a pretender works miracles, it is absurd to
follow him.

### (vii) Human Aspect:

The Prophets, in spite of having many supernatural qualities, such as
infallibility, the power of working miracles, the incomparable power of
guidance, and reconstruction and the power of making unique struggle
against polytheism, myths and tyranny, are after all human beings. They,
like all other men eat, sleep, walk, beget and eventually die. They are
subject to all essential human needs. They are obligated to perform the
same religious duties as others. They like others are subject to all the
religious laws conveyed through them.

Sometimes they have even some additional duties. The pre-dawn prayers
which are supererogatory for others were obligatory for the Holy
Prophet. The Prophets never considered themselves to be exempted from
any religious injunctions. They, more than others had fear of Allah and
they more than others worshipped Him. They offered prayers; kept fast;
took part in the holy war; paid zakat and showed kindness to others. The
Prophets worked hard for their own weal as well as the weal for the
others. They were never a burden on anyone else in their life.

The revelation and the features connected with it constitute the only
difference between the Prophets and others. The fact that they receive
revelation does not exclude them from the category of human being. On
the other hand it makes them a model of the perfect man. That is the
reason why they are so fit to guide others.

### (viii) Prophets Having A Divine Legal Code:

Generally speaking, the Prophets can be divided into two categories: The
first category, which is in minority, is composed of those Prophets to
whom independent codes of law were revealed, and who were ordered to
guide the people on the basis of these codes. The Holy Qur'an has termed
them the 'high-minded' Prophets. We do not know their number exactly.
The Holy Qur'an expressly says that it has recounted the stories of only
a few of the Prophets. Had it recounted the stories of all of them or at
least had stated that it had recounted the stories of all those who were
important among them, we might have known the number of the high-minded
Prophets. Anyhow, we know that Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, 'Isa and Muhammad,
the last Prophet (Peace be on them) are included among them. Independent
codes of law were revealed to all 'high-minded' Prophets, who were asked
to train their followers on the basis of them.

The second category of the Prophets consists of those who had not their
own independent codes of law but were asked to preach and propagate the
already existing Divine laws. Most of the Prophets belong to this
category which includes such names as those of Hud, Salih, Lut, Ishaq,
Yaqub, Yusuf, Yushu, Shuayb, Harun, Zachariyyah and Yahya (may peace be
upon them).


