Chapter 14: Historical Role of the Prophet
==========================================

Have the Prophets any positive or negative role in the movement of
history? If they have, what is that? Is it positive or negative?

Even the anti-religious people admit that the Prophets have had an
effective role in history. In the past they represented a great source
of national power. In olden days the national power, was distinguished
from blood relationships, tribal affinities and patriotic feelings or
from religious tendencies and doctrinal bonds. The tribal heads and the
national chiefs represented the first tendency and the Prophets and
religious leaders the second. There are no two opinions about the fact
that the Prophets constituted a force because of their religious
influence. Anyhow, there are several views as to how this force worked:

(i) A section of people in their writings generally argue that as the
Prophets had a spiritual and anti-temporal outlook, their role has been
negative. These people hold that the central point of the teachings of
the Prophets has been the renunciation of this world, concentration on
the next, and introspection and escape from the external realities. That
is why the force of religion and the Prophets, who have been a symbol of
this force, have always discouraged people from taking interest in the
worldly life and have applied a brake to progress. Thus the role of the
Prophets has always been negative in history. This is the view which is
expressed generally by those who claim to be broad-minded.

(ii)There is another section of people, who also maintain that the
religious people have played a negative role, but the argument advanced
by them is quite different. They maintain that the religious people are
actually worldly-oriented and their spiritual orientation is merely a
disguise to deceive the simple-minded. The efforts of the religious
people have always been, directed toward securing the interests of the
oppressors and, beguiling the oppressed. They have endeavoured to
maintain the status quo, and opposed the evolution of society.

The supporters of this view say that history like any other phenomenon
has a dialectical movement, which originates from its internal
contradiction. With the emergence of proprietorship society was divided
into two conflicting classes, one of them being the ruling and
exploiting class and the other the deprived and exploited. With a view
to protect its own special position the ruling class has always been
anxious to maintain the existing situation and in spite of the
inevitable development of production implements has wanted to keep
society as it is. But the subjugated class in consonance with the
development of the production implements wants to change the existing
situation and to replace it with a more developed one.

The ruling class has used various tactics, and to achieve its nefarious
ends has employed the three factors of force, wealth and deceit. In this
game the role of the man of religion has been to hoodwink the people in
the interest of the tyrants and exploiters. The people of religion have
not been seriously interested in the Hereafter. Their pretention of
godliness is only a disguise to conceal their worldliness and is
intended to divert the attention of the underprivileged and the
revolutionaries.

Thus the role of the men of religion has always been negative for they
have always supported the wealthy and the powerful people interested in
maintaining the existing institutions. This is the theory put forward by
the Marxists to explain historical development. According to Marxism the
three factors of religion, government and wealth are coeval with private
property and all over history have played a role against the interests
of the masses.

(iii) Some other people interpret history in a way different from that
of the Marxists. Anyhow they too consider the role of religion and the
Prophets to be negative. They hold that the law of natural evolution and
the law of the development of history are based on the domination of the
strong and the elimination of the weak. The strong have contributed and
are contributing to the progress of history, whereas the weak have been
and are responsible for its stagnation and decline. Religion has been
invented by the weak to apply a brake to the strong.

The proponents of religions have invented such slavish moral conceptions
as justice, freedom, virtue, love, compassion, cooperation etc. They did
so in the interest of the weak, that is the lower classes and to the
disadvantage of the strong, that is the upper classes which bring about
progress and development. The people of religion brought the
psychological forces of the strong under their control and prevented the
elimination of the weak. Thus they have hampered the improvement of
human race and the birth of the heroes.

Therefore the role of religion and the Prophets who represent it has
been negative, because they have supported the slavish mentality against
the masterly qualities which contribute to the advancement of history
and society. This is the view of the German philosopher, Nietzsche.

(iv) Besides the above mentioned three groups, there are others which
also include some anti-religious people. They admit that the role of the
Prophets in the past has been positive and fruitful and contributed to
the progress of history. These groups give due consideration to the
social and moral content of the teachings of the Prophets and to the
historical events connected therewith. They admit that in the past the
Prophets played the most fundamental role in the reform, welfare and
progress of their society.

Human culture has two aspects: Material and Spiritual. The material
aspect of culture is its technical and industrial aspect which has
continued to develop in every age till today. Its spiritual aspect
concerns the mutual relations of the human beings, for the correct
determination of which humanity is indebted to the teachings of the
Prophets. As it is under the shadow of the spiritual aspect of culture
that its material aspect gets an opportunity to grow and develop on
correct lines, the role of the Prophets in the development of the
spiritual aspect of civilization is direct and in the development of its
material aspect indirect. According to these groups there can be no
doubt about the positive role of the teachings of the Prophets in the
past.

Anyhow some of these groups are of the opinion that the time of the
positive role of the teachings of the Prophets is now over. They assert
that with the advancement of science the religious teachings have lost
their validity a great deal and in future also they will continue to
lose their vitality. In contrast certain other groups hold that the role
of faith and religious ideology can never be replaced by science,
howsoever progress it may make. Science will always be as unable to
replace religion as philosophical schools have been.

The Prophets have had various roles in the past. It is true that there
are certain cases in which the collective human conscience is no longer
in need of a religious support. But the most fundamental roles performed
by the Prophets are those which will be as much required in future as
they were in the past. Here are some instances in which the teachings of
the Prophets have influenced historical development

(i) Education:
--------------

In the past education had a religious motive, and it was this motive
which encouraged the teachers and the parents. With the development of
social conscience the need of religious motive has been eliminated in
this field.

(ii) Affirmation of Agreements and Covenants:
---------------------------------------------

Social life of man stands on the respect of the treaties, covenants and
agreements and on abiding by the promises and undertakings. Respect of
the agreements and promises is one of the mainstays of the human aspects
of culture. To ensure this respect is a role which religion has always
shouldered and for which no replacement has been found till today. Will
Durant, an atheist, as he is, admits this fact in his book, Lessons from
History. He says: "Religion with the help of its rituals has conferred
the reverence of man-God relations on human compacts and in this way has
brought about constancy and firmness to them".

On the whole religion has provided a strong support to the moral and
human values. Moral values minus religion are like currency notes having
no financial backing. Such notes soon lose their value.

(iii) Emancipation from Social Bondage:
---------------------------------------

The role of the Prophets in the fight against despotism, tyranny and all
aspects of oppression and persecution is the most basic. The Holy Qur'an
lays stress on this role of the Prophets. It describes the establishment
of justice as the main object of their being raised. The Holy Qur'an
again and again recounts the stories of the conflict between the
Prophets and the representatives of despotism. In a number of verses it
has expressly mentioned that those who constantly opposed the Prophets
belonged to this class.

The view expressed by Marx and his followers to the effect that
religion, government and wealth are the three facts of the coercion of
the ruling class against the underprivileged and the oppressed, is
nothing but humbug. It is contrary to the indisputable historical facts.
Explaining the view of Marx, Dr Arani says: "Religion has always been a
tool in the hands of the dominating ruling class of society. In order to
overpower the suppressed classes the rosary and cross always move side
by side with the bayonet".

To be able to accept such an interpretation of history one will have to
shut his eyes and overlook the historical facts. Imam Ali is the
champion of the sword and the rosary both. He is a swordsman as well as
a man of rosary. But he did not use them to suppress the
underprivileged. His motto was: *"Oppose the oppressor and help the
oppressed"*.

Throughout his life Imam Ali was a votary of the sword against those who
possessed pelf and power. As Dr Ali al-Wardi has pointed out in his
book, Comedy of Human Intellect, Imam Ali with his personality has
refuted the philosophy of Marx.

The view of Nietzsche, which is diametrically opposed to that of Marx,
is even more absurd. According to him, religion is a factor of
stagnation and decline because it supports the weak while it is the
powerful who form the most progressive class responsible for the
development of society. It appears that in the opinion of Nietzsche
human society makes speedy progress only when it is governed by the law
of jungle. According to Marx the underprivileged people are the factor
of development and the Prophets were against this class. But Nietzsche
thinks that powerful are the factor of development and the Prophets
opposed them. Marx says that religion is an invention of the powerful
and the wealthy.

Nietzsche, on the other hand maintains that it is an invention of the
weak and the underprivileged. Evidently Marx was wrong on several
counts. Firstly he interpreted history merely on the basis of the
contradiction of class interests, and overlooked its human aspect.
Secondly he regarded the underprivileged alone as the factor of
development. Thirdly he considered the Prophets to be the supporters of
the ruling class. As for Nietzsche, he has made the mistake of regarding
the factor of force as the factor of the development of history in the
sense that he has equated the more powerful man with the superior man
and has believed that the more powerful man alone is the factor that
carried history forward.


