Chapter 15: The Object of Prophethood
=====================================

As now the role of the Prophets in the development of history has been
made clear to a certain extent, we take up another question. The
question is: What is the main object or the final goal for which the
Prophets were raised and the Divine Books sent down?

In general terms it may be said that the main object is the guidance,
salvation, well-being and prosperity of people.

There is no doubt that the Prophets were raised for guiding people to
the straight path and saving their souls. But that is not the point. The
point is to what final goal this straight path leads. What does the
well-being of people imply according to the school of the Prophets? From
what restraints and impediments does this school want to deliver man?
What constitutes the ultimate good and prosperity according to it?

The Holy Qur'an in a number of verses has either expressly dealt with
this subject or has hinted at it. It has mentioned two definite points
which constitute the ultimate object of Prophethood, while the teachings
of the Prophets are a prelude to them. These points are:

(i) The acknowledgement of Allah and coming close to Him and

(ii) The establishment of justice and fairplay in human society.

The Holy Qur'an says: ***"Prophet, We have surely sent you as a witness,
a bringer of good tidings, a warner, a summoner to Allah by His
permission and as a lamp that gives light."*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:45 -
46)

It is evident that out of all the qualities mentioned in this verse, the
only quality which is fit to be considered the main object is that of
summoning to Allah.

The Holy Qur'an in respect of the Prophets says: ***"We surely sent Our
Messengers with clear proofs and revealed on them the Book and the
criterion (to judge what is right and what is wrong) so that people may
establish justice."*** (Surah al-Hadid, 57:25)

This verse expressly describes the establishment of justice as an object
of raising the Prophets.

Summoning people to acknowledge Allah and to come close to Him implies
preaching the theoretical and individualistic form of practical
monotheism, and to establish justice and fairplay in society implies
establishing practical monotheism on social level.

Now the question arises whether the main object of the coming of the
Prophets is the acknowledgement of Allah, and all other things including
the establishment of social justice are a prelude to it, or the main
object is the establishment of social justice and the acknowledgement
and worship of Allah are the means of the realization of that idea? If
we use the same terminology as used by us earlier, we can thus recast
this question: Is the main object theoretical monotheism and practical
monotheism on individual level or is it practical monotheism on social
level? Several answers have been given to this question:

(i) From the viewpoint of the object, the Prophets were dualists. In
other words their object was two fold. One of their objects concerned
the next worldly life and human success in the Hereafter (theoretical
monotheism and practical monotheism on individual level). The other
object concerned human success in this world (social monotheism). In
order to ensure the prosperity of mankind in this world the Prophets
preached social monotheism and to ensure human well-being in the next
world they preached theoretical monotheism and practical monotheism on
individual level, which is purely a spiritual and intellectual matter.

(ii) Another view is that the main object of the Prophets is social
monotheism. Theoretical monotheism and practical monotheism on
individual level are essential preliminaries to it. Theoretical
monotheism concerns the acknowledgement of Allah. Man as such is in no
need of acknowledging Him. It is immaterial for man whether the force
motivating his spirit is Allah or thousands of other things. Similarly
it makes no difference to Allah whether man acknowledges Him or does not
acknowledge, worships Him or does not worship.

Anyhow perfection of man depends on his adherence to collective
monotheism, which in its turn cannot be achieved without the
materialization of theoretical monotheism and practical monotheism on
individual level. Allah has enjoined on man to acknowledge Him and
worship Him so that collective monotheism may take a practical shape.

(iii) The third view is that the main object is the acknowledgement of
Allah and coming near to Him. Social monotheism is the means of
achieving this noble object. As we mentioned earlier, according to the
monotheistic conception of the world its nature is 'from Him' 'to Him'.
Hence man's perfection lies in going to Him and gaining His nearness.
Man has one special distinction. Allah has said: ***"I have breathed
into him My spirit."*** (Surah al-Hijr, 15:29)

As such man's, reality is Divine. By nature he seeks Allah. His
well-being, evolution, safety and prosperity all lie in the
acknowledgement and worship of Allah and in making an advancement
towards Him. The Prophets have undertaken to establish justice and to do
away with tyranny and discrimination, because man being social by
nature, we can have no conception of him apart from society. He cannot
strive to seek proximity to Allah also, if a just system does not
prevail in society. In fact such social values as justice, freedom,
equality and democracy and such moral qualities as generosity,
forgiveness, love and charity have no intrinsic value of their own. They
in themselves are not the qualities denoting human excellence. They are
simply the means of gaining excellence and perfection, not the ends.
They pave the way for prosperity and salvation but do not constitute
salvation.

(iv) The fourth theory is similar to the third one in so far as
according it also the goal or the highest degree of excellence not only
of man but of every existing thing is to move towards Allah. But
according to it, it is polytheistic to assert that the Prophets have had
a twofold object. Similarly it is a materialistic idea to say that the
ultimate object of the Prophets is this worldly prosperity, which is
nothing but the enjoyment of the gifts of nature in an atmosphere of
justice, liberty, equality and fraternity. Anyhow, according to this
theory, though social and moral values are only a means of reaching the
real value, that is the acknowledgement of Allah and His worship, they
do not totally lack an intrinsic value of their own.

The relationship between a preliminary and the main object is of two
kinds. In certain cases the preliminary serves only as a prelude and
after the object is achieved, its existence or nonexistence becomes
immaterial. For example, a man wants to cross a water channel and for
that purpose he puts a stone in the middle of it. Evidently after he has
crossed the channel, the existence or the non-existence of that stone is
of no importance to him.

The same is the case with the ladder used to climb to a roof and the
mark-sheet of a class for the purpose of promotion to the next higher
class. In some other cases a preliminary does not lose its value even
after the main object has been achieved. Even after the realization of
the main object, its existence still remains necessary. For example, the
information which is acquired by a student in class I and class II is
still required by him when he reaches a higher class. He cannot afford
to forget all that he had learnt in these classes. He can continue to be
in a higher class only if he retains the knowledge that he acquired in
these lower classes.

The explanation is that in some cases a preliminary is a lower stage of
the object itself, whereas in some other cases it is not. A ladder is
not a stage of getting to the roof. Similarly a stone put in the middle
of a channel is not a stage of crossing it. But the knowledge gained in
lower classes and the knowledge to be gained in higher classes are the
various stages of the same reality.

The relation between the moral and social values on the one hand and the
acknowledgement and worship of Allah on the other is of the second type.
A man who acknowledges Allah and worships Him cannot afford to be
indifferent to honesty, righteousness, justice, charity, sincerity,
munificence and forgiveness. All high and noble moral qualities are
Divine.

There is a hadith which says: *"Adopt the moral qualities of Allah".* In
fact the noble moral qualities are a part of the acknowledgement and
worship of the Divine Being, for their adoption emanates from an
inherent desire to have Divine attributes, though man may not be
conscious of that fact. That is why according to Islamic teachings the
good deeds of even the polytheists will not go in vain in the next world
if they have such noble qualities as justice, generosity, philanthropy
etc. They will be recompensed in some way or other provided their
disbelief is not due to stubbornness. In fact such people attain a
degree of godliness unconsciously.


