Chapter 1: Man and Animals
==========================

Man himself being a kind of animal, has many things in common with other
animals. At the same time he has many dissimilarities which distinguish
him from other animals and make him superior to them.

The main and basic features distinguishing man from other living beings,
on which his humanity depends and which constitute the source of what is
known as human culture, pertain to two spheres: attitudes and
inclinations.

Generally speaking the animals are endowed with a quality of perceiving
and knowing themselves and the outer world, and in the light of this
knowledge they strive to secure what they want and desire.

Like other animals man also has many wants and desires and in the light
of what he knows and understands, he makes efforts to secure and realize
them. Man differs from other living beings in that he knows more,
understands better and his wants and desires are of a higher level.

This characteristic of man distinguishes him from all other animals and
makes him superior to them.

Awareness and Desire in Animals
-------------------------------

An animal knows the world through its external senses only. That is why,
firstly, its knowledge is superficial and seeming. It does not penetrate
the things and has no access to their internal relations. Secondly, it
is partial and particular, and is neither universal nor general.
Thirdly, it is regional, for it is confined to the living environment of
the animal, and does not go beyond that. Fourthly, it is limited to the
present and is unconcerned with the past and the future. As animal is
not aware of its own or world's history, it neither thinks of the future
nor does it plan for it.

From the viewpoint of knowledge, an animal cannot come out of the
framework of the exteriors, the particularity, the living environment
and the present time. It never escapes from these four prisons. If by
chance it does, it does so instinctively and unconsciously, and not by
its own choice and will.

Like the range of its knowledge, the level of the wants and the desires
of an animal also has a limited scope. Firstly, all its desires are
material and do not go beyond the limits of eating, drinking, sleeping,
playing, mating and building a home or a nest. For an animal there is no
question of any spiritual needs, moral values etc. Secondly, all its
desires are personal and individualistic, pertaining to the animal
itself or, at the most, to its mate and the young ones. Thirdly, they
are regional related to its living environment only. Fourthly, they are
instantaneous, pertaining to the present time.

In other words, the dimension of the desires and inclinations of an
animal's existence has the same limitations as the dimension of its
perceptive existence. From this point of view also, an animal has to
live within specific limitations.

If an animal pursues an objective which is outside these limitations and
which, for an example, pertains to its species in general and not to one
individual or pertains to the future and not to the present, as is
observed in the case of certain gregarious animals like bees, it does so
unconsciously, instinctively and by the direct order of the power which
has created it and which manages the whole world.

Awareness and Desire in Man
---------------------------

Man's domain both in the sphere of his knowledge, information and
outlook and in the sphere of his desires, wants and inclinations is very
vast and lofty. Man's knowledge passes from the exterior of the things
to their inner reality, their mutual relations and to the laws governing
them. His knowledge does not remain confined to any particular place or
time. It surpasses all such limitations.

On the one hand, his knowledge extends to the events which took place
before his birth, and on the other, it extends to other planets and
stars. He gets acquainted with his past as Well as his future. He
discovers his own history and that of the World, that is the history of
the earth, the sky, the mountains, the rivers, the plants and the living
organisms. Not only he thinks of the remote future, but also applies his
thought to infinities and eternities, some of which he recognizes. Man
goes a step further from identifying the individuality and
particularity, and with a view to control nature, discovers universal
rules and general truths prevailing in the world.

From the viewpoint of his ambitions and aspirations also man holds an
outstanding position, for he is an aspiring, high thinking and
idealistic being. He seeks objectives which are not of material and
profitable nature; objectives which are in the interest of entire
humanity and not confined to himself and his family or to any particular
region or to a particular period of time.

Man is so idealistic that he often gives more importance to his creed
and ideology than to any other value. He may consider service to others
to be of more consequence than his own welfare, and may regard a thorn
stuck into the foot of someone else as being stuck into his own foot or
even his own eye. He feels sympathy with others and shares their joy and
grief. Man becomes so devoted to his creed and sacred ideology that he
easily sacrifices his life for them.

The human aspect of the human culture which is considered to be its true
spirit is the outcome of such feelings and desires.

Basis of the Distinction of Man
-------------------------------

Man's vast and extensive conception of the world is a product of the
collective human effort made through so many centuries. The information
so acquired has been piled together and developed. This information
after it has been processed and regulated has come to be known as
"science" in the wider sense of the term, that is the sum-total of human
ideas about the cosmos. It includes philosophy, a product of the
collective human effort which has been given a special logical form.

Spiritual and higher human tendencies are born of man's belief in
certain realities of this world and his devotion to them. These
realities are neither individualistic nor material. They are
comprehensive and general involving no question of any economic gain,
and are in their turn the outcome of certain conceptions of the world
either presented to mankind by the Divine Prophets or produced by a sort
of idealistic thinking initiated by some philosophers.

In any case the higher spiritual and super-animal tendencies of man if
based on a doctrinal and intellectual infrastructure take the name of
faith.

Hence we come to the conclusion that knowledge and faith constitute the
main and the basic difference between man and other living beings and
that knowledge and faith form the basis of man's humanity which depends
on them.

Much has been said on the distinction between man and other species of
animals. Some hold that there is no basic difference between the two.
According to them the difference of knowledge is that of quantity or at
the most of quality, but not that of essence. They attach little
importance to man's vast, wonderful and marvellous achievements in the
field of knowledge, which have attracted the attention of the great
philosophers of the East and the West.

This group of scholars maintains that from the point of view of his
wants and desires man is no more than an animal.[^1] Some others believe
that the main difference is that of life. Man is the only fully living
animal. Other animals have no feelings, and are not conscious of
pleasure and pain. They are just semi-living machines. Therefore the
true definition of man is that he is the living being. [^2]

Other thinkers do not believe that, and maintain that there are basic
differences between other living beings and man. It appears that each
group of these scholars has concentrated on one human characteristic and
distinction. That is why man has been defined in so many different ways.
He has been described as a rational animal, an absolute-seeking being,
an unending being, an idealist, a seeker of values, a metaphysical
animal, an insatiable being, an indefinite being, a responsible being, a
forward-looking being, a free agent, an insurgent, a social order loving
being, a beauty-loving being, a justice-loving being, a double-faced
being, an amorous being, an obligated being, an intuitive being, a being
believing in double standard, a creator, a lonely being, an agitated
being, a fundamentalist, doctrinaire, a tool-maker, a supernaturalist,
an imaginative being, a spiritualist, a transcendentalist etc.

Obviously each of these descriptions is true in itself, but if we want
to find out an expression inclusive of all the basic distinctions, then
we should say that man is an animal endowed with knowledge and faith.

Is Humanity a Superstructure?
-----------------------------

We know that man is a sort of animal. He has many things in common with
other animals. But he has many distinctive features also.

Because of his similarities and dissimilarities with other animals man
has a double life; an animal life and a human life, or in other words, a
material life and a cultural life.

Here a question arises: What is the relation between man's humanity and
his animality, his human life and his animal life? Is one of these
qualities of primary importance and the other of only secondary? Is one
of these the basis and the other only a reflection of it? Is one of
these the infrastructure and the other the superstructure? Is the
material life the infrastructure and the cultural life the
superstructure? Is the animality of man the infrastructure and the
cultural life the superstructure? Is the animality of man the
infrastructure and his humanity the superstructure?

This question nowadays is initiated from a sociological and not
psychological point of view. That is why the discussion centres round
the point whether among the social characteristics of man, his economic
tendencies related to production and productional relations are more
important than all other characteristics of his, especially those which
reflect his humanity, and whether his other characteristics and
tendencies are only a superstructure of his economic nature? Another
interconnected question is whether it is true that science, philosophy,
literature, religion, law, ethics and art of every age are only a
manifestation of the economic relations of that age and have no
intrinsic value of their own?

Though this question is initiated from a sociological point of view, its
discussion inevitably leads to a psychological result and a
philosophical discussion of the nature of man known in modern terms as
humanism. Generally the conclusion drawn is that humanity of man is of
no importance. What is important is his animality only. In other words
the view of those who deny the existence of any basic difference between
man and animal is supported.

This theory not only denies the importance of human tendencies towards
realism, virtue, beauty and belief in Allah, but also denies the
importance of man's rational approach to the world and truth. It may be
pointed out that no approach can be neutral. Every approach inevitably
represents a certain material outlook.

It is surprising that some of the schools that support the theory that
man is basically an animal, simultaneously talk of humanity and humanism
also!

The fact is that the evolutionary march of man begins from his animality
and proceeds towards the highest point of humanity. This principle
applies to individuals as well as to society. In the beginning of his
existence man is no more than a material organism. With a basic
evolutionary movement he is changed into a spiritual substance. Human
spirit is born in the lap of human body and then attains independence.

Animality of man is the nest in which his humanity develops and matures.
It is a characteristic of evolution that the more a developing being
evolves, the more that being becomes independent, self-existing and
effective and the more it influences its environment. As the humanity of
man develops, it makes an advance towards independence and gains control
of all other aspects. This is true both in the case of an individual and
that of a society. A developed individual controls both his internal and
external environment. His development means that he has been emancipated
from the subjection of internal and external environment and attached to
creed and faith.

Evolution of society takes place exactly in the same way as the
evolution of soul in the lap of body and the evolution of the humanity
of an individual in the lap of his animality.

The development of society mostly begins under the impact of its
economic organizations. The cultural and spiritual aspects of society
are tantamount to its soul. As the effect of body and soul is
reciprocal, there is a similar mutual relationship between spiritual and
material arrangements also. Just as the evolutionary progress of an
individual means his march towards freedom, independence and greater
supremacy of soul, the evolutionary progress of a society also means the
same thing. In other words, the more a human society is developed, the
more its cultural life becomes independent of its material life. The man
of future will be a man of culture and a man of faith, creed and
ideology and not a man of economy, bodily needs and sensual enjoyments.

Of course all this does not mean that human society necessarily advances
along a straight line towards the perfection of human values, nor does
it mean that at every stage of time it is one step advanced further than
it was at the previous stage of time. It is possible that mankind passes
through a stage of social life in which despite all technical and
technological advancement it is pushed a stage or two backward from
spiritual and moral point of view, as is alleged to be the case with the
man of our century.

Actually man on the whole is marching forward both from material and
spiritual points of view. But his spiritual movement is not regular
along a straight line. It is a movement which involves occasional
stoppages, retrogressions and deviations to the right and to the left.
Nevertheless it is on the whole an evolutionary and forward movement.
That is why we say that the man of future will be a man of culture and
not a man of economy and the man of future will be a man of faith, creed
and ideology and not a man of bodily needs and sensual enjoyments.

According to this theory the human aspects of man because of their
fundamentality, developed along with and even prior to the development
of the production implements. Consequent upon their development the
human aspects have gradually reduced man's dependence on his natural and
social environment and have diminished his amenability to the
environmental conditions. The freedom so obtained enhanced man's
attachment to faith and ideology and added to his capacity of
influencing his natural and social environment. In future as a result of
gaining complete independence, man will become more attached and devoted
to faith and ideology.

As in the past man was less equipped with the gifts of nature and was
not capable of fully utilizing his own faculties, he was a captive of
nature and his own animality. But in future man will be able to exploit
better the gifts of nature and his own inherent capabilities. Thus to a
great extent he will be liberated from the captivity of nature and his
own animal tendencies and will add to his sway over nature and himself.

According to this view though man's human reality emerges along with and
in the lap of his material and animal evolution, it is in no way the
reflection of and subservient to his material development. It is an
independent and progressive reality. Though it is affected by material
aspect, it influences them also. What determines the final destiny of
man is his cultural evolution and his human reality, not the
evolutionary progress of the production implements. It is human reality
which in the course of its progress causes the development of the
production implements along with the development of other human affairs.
It is not true that production implements develop automatically and that
humanity of man changes with a change in the tools directing production
system.

[^1]: That is what the English philosopher Thomas Hobbs maintains

[^2]: Well-known theory of Descartes


