Chapter 17: Finality of Prophethood
===================================

We have said that despite the differences in details all Prophets have
delivered the same message and belonged to the same ideological school.
The principles and teachings of this school were explained to human
society gradually in proportion to its development till the humanity
reached the stage when the entire teachings in a comprehensive form were
presented. At this point Prophethood came to an end. The Holy Prophet,
Muhammad bin Abdullah (Peace be on him and his progeny) was the person
through whom the complete ideology was conveyed, and the Holy Qur'an was
the last celestial Book. The Holy Qur'an itself says:

***"In truth and justice has been perfected the word of your Lord. None
can change His words."*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:115)

Now let us see why in the past the Prophethood was renewed from time to
time and so many Prophets were raised in succession, though most of them
were not given a new and independent code of law and were sent to
promulgate then existing code? Why did this procedure come to an end
with the last Prophet since whose time no Prophet, neither a law-giving
one nor a preaching one has come, nor will ever come? Here we touch upon
the reasons briefly.

Reasons of the Renewal of Prophethood
-------------------------------------

Though Prophethood is one continuous process and the Divine message, as
the religion is not more than one reality, the reasons of the appearance
of so many law-giving and preaching Prophets in succession and the
termination of Prophethood after the advent of the last Prophet are as
under:

Firstly the ancient man because of his intellectual immaturity was
unable to preserve his celestial Book. Usually the Divine Books were
either altered and corrupted or were lost totally. Therefore it was
necessary that the message should be renewed from time to time. The
revelation of the Holy Qur'an corresponded with a period when humanity
had passed the period of its childhood and had become able to preserve
its intellectual heritage. That is why there could be no alteration in
the last Divine and Holy Book. The Muslims committed to memory and
recorded in writing every verse of it as it was revealed, and did away
with every possibility of addition, omission or alteration in it. Thus
one of the reasons of the renewal of Prophethood disappeared.

Secondly, humanity being immature, it was not previously competent
enough to have a comprehensive plan for its guidance, and hence it was
necessary that it should be guided by the Prophets piecemeal and step by
step.

Anyhow, by the period of the final Prophethood humanity had developed to
the extent that it was able to have a comprehensive plan of conduct and
it was no longer necessary that it should receive guidance stage by
stage. Besides the extinction of the old celestial Books and the
alteration in them, another reason for the continual renewal of
Prophethood was that man in olden days was not able to receive a
comprehensive plan. When his ability sufficiently developed, a
comprehensive scheme was put at his disposal and this reason of the
renewal of Prophethood also disappeared. Now the Muslim scholars who
were specialists in this field, can guide the Muslims in the light of
this scheme and can frame the rules and procedures for them to suit
every occasion.

Thirdly, the overwhelming majority of the Prophets consisted of the
preaching and not the law-giving Prophets. The number of the law-giving
Prophets did not exceed the number of the fingers of one hand. The task
of the preaching Prophets was to propagate, interpret and promulgate the
religious law prevailing during their time. Now the religious scholars
of the age of the finality of Prophethood, which is the age of
knowledge, are capable of applying the general principles of Islam to
the requirements of the time and place and deducing the rules of
religious laws.

This process is called ijtihad. The outstanding Muslim divines in this
way perform many duties of the preaching Prophets and some of those even
of the law-giving Prophet without being the law-givers themselves. They
guide the Muslim Ummah. Thus, though the need of religion still exists
and is expected to be ever increasing with the further cultural
development of humanity, the need of the new Prophets and the new
revealed Books has ceased to exist. And hence Prophethood has come to an
end with the final Prophet.

It is clear from what has been mentioned that intellectual and social
maturity of mankind has played a big role in the finality of Prophethood
in several ways:

(i) It has enabled man to keep his celestial Book unaltered.

(ii) It has enabled him to receive his evolutionary programme all at
once and not by stages.

(iii) It has enabled him to undertake the task of preaching and
propagating religion, to set up religious institutions, to exhort people
to do what is good and to restrain them from what is evil. Thus there is
no longer any need of preaching Prophets who used to preach and
propagate the teachings of the law-giving Prophets. This need is now
being adequately fulfilled by the religious scholars and Divines.

(iv) From the viewpoint of mental development man has now reached a
stage that in pursuance of his *ijtihad* he can interpret the revealed
words and can apply the relevant principles to all the changing
circumstances. This task is also being performed by the religious
scholars.

It is evident that the finality of Prophethood does not mean that man is
no longer in need of Divine teachings received through revelation.
Prophethood has not come to an end because as the result of his mental
development man is now able to dispense with religion.

The eminent scholar and great Muslim thinker, Dr Iqbal, in spite of his
extraordinarily intelligent discussions of the Islamic questions by
which we have personally been greatly benefited and of which we have
made use in this and other books, has been involved in a great
misunderstanding while explaining the philosophy of the finality of
Prophethood. He has based his conclusions on certain points, which we
mention below, point by point:

(i) The word *'wahi'* (revelation) which literally means 'to whisper',
has been used by the Holy Qurâ€™an in an expanded sense to include every
kind of inspired guidance whether its recipient be inorganic material,
plants, animals or man. He says: "This contact with the root of his own
being is by no means peculiar to man. Indeed the way in which the word
*'wahi'* is used in the Holy Qur'an shows that the Holy Qur'an regards
it as a universal property of life, though its nature and character are
different at different stages of the evolution of life. The plant
growing freely in space, the animal developing a new organ to suit a new
environment, and a human being receiving light from the inner depths of
life, are all cases of inspiration varying in character according to the
needs of the recipient, or the needs of the species to which the
recipient belongs". (The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam,
p. 125)

(ii) *Wahi* or revelation is a sort of instinct and the guidance by
means of revelations is a sort of instinctive guidance.

(iii) *Wahi* is a guidance from collective point of view. Human society
being a moving unit and subject to the laws of motion, is definitely in
need of guidance. The Prophet is just like a receiving set which
instinctively receives what is required by mankind in this respect. Dr
Iqbal says: "The world-life intuitively sees its own needs and at
critical moments defines its own direction. This is what, in the
language of religion, we call Prophetic revelation". (The Reconstruction
of Religious Thought in Islam, p. 147)

(iv) In their primitive stages the living beings are guided by their
instinct. As they go to the higher stages of evolution and their
faculties of feeling, imagination and thinking develop, the power of
instinct is reduced and is replaced by feeling and thinking Power. Thus
the insects have the most numerous and the strongest instincts and man
the weakest and the smallest in number.

(v) From sociological point of view human society is passing through an
evolutionary process, Just as the animals in their primary stages have
been in need of instinct and have gradually developed their faculties of
feeling and imagination, and in certain cases of thinking also, and
their instinctive guidance has been replaced by the guidance through
feeling and imagination, similarly man in his evolutionary process has
gradually reached a stage in which his rationality has so developed that
his instinctive power (*wahi* or inspiration) has weakened. Dr Iqbal
says: "During the minority of mankind psychic energy develops what I
call Prophetic consciousness - a mode of economizing individual thought
and choice by providing ready-made judgements, choices and ways of
action. With the birth of reason and critical faculty, however, life in
its own interest inhibits the formation and growth of non-rational modes
of consciousness through which psychic energy flowed at an earlier stage
of human evolution. Man is primarily governed by passion and instinct.
Inductive reason, which alone makes man master of his environment, is in
itself an achievement. Once born it must be reinforced by inhibiting the
growth of other modes of knowledge". (The Reconstruction of Religious
Thought in Islam, p. 125).

(vi) Basically the world has passed through two ages: the age of
inspiration and the age of rational thinking and reflection on nature
and history. The ancient world produced a few great systems of
philosophy (like Greek and Roman). Anyhow their value was limited as
humanity was still passing through the period of its minority. Dr Iqbal
says: "There is no doubt that the ancient world produced some great
systems of philosophy at a time when man was comparatively primitive and
governed more or less by suggestion. But we must not forget that this
system-building in the ancient world was the work of abstract thought,
which cannot go beyond the systematization of vague religious beliefs
and traditions, and gives us no hold on the concrete situations of
life". (The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam, p. 126)

(vii) The Holy Prophet with whom Prophethood came to end, belonged to
the ancient as well as the modern world. As the source of his
inspiration was revelation and not the experimental study of nature and
history, he belonged to the ancient world; but as the spirit of his
teachings called for rational thinking and the study of nature and
history with the birth of which the job of revelation is terminated, he
belonged to the modern world. Dr Iqbal says: "Looking at the matter from
this point of view, the Prophet of Islam seems to stand between the
ancient and the modern world.

In so far as the source of his revelation is concerned, he belongs to
the ancient world; and in so far as the spirit of his revelation is
concerned, he belongs to the modern world. In him life discovers other
sources of knowledge suitable to its new direction. The birth of Islam
is the birth of inductive intellect. In Islam prophecy reaches its
perfection in discovering the need of its own abolition. This involves
the keen perception that life cannot forever be kept in leading strings;
hence, in order to achieve full self-consciousness, man must finally be
thrown back on his own resources. The abolition of priesthood and
hereditary kingship in Islam, the constant appeal to reason and
experience in the Holy Qur'an and the emphasis it lays on Nature and
History as sources of human knowledge, are all different aspects of the
same idea of finality". (The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in
Islam, p. 126)

These are the main points of the philosophy of the finality of
Prophethood as conceived by Dr Iqbal. Unfortunately this philosophy is
unsound and several of its principles are incorrect.

The first objection to which it is amenable is that if this philosophy
was accepted, that would mean that not only there was no longer any need
of a new Prophet or a new revelation, but that there was also no need of
any guidance by revelation at all, for experimental intellect had taken
its place. This philosophy is the philosophy of the end of religion and
not that of the finality of Prophethood.

If this philosophy was accepted, the only thing that Islamic revelation
could do was to proclaim the end of the era of religion and the
beginning of the era of reason and science. Evidently this idea is not
only contrary to the belief in the necessity of Islam but is also
contrary to the view held by Dr Iqbal himself. All his efforts in fact,
are directed to prove that reason and science though necessary for human
society are not enough. Man requires faith and religion as much as he
requires science and knowledge. Dr Iqbal says in clear terms that life
is in need of fixed principles as well as changing minor factors, and
that *ijtihad* is meant to apply the set principles to the specific
situations.

He says: "The new culture finds the foundation of world-unity in the
principle of 'Tawhid' (monotheism). Islam as a polity is the only
practical means of making this principle a living factor in the
intellectual and emotional life of mankind. It demands loyalty to Allah,
not to thrones. And since Allah is the ultimate spiritual basis of all
life, loyalty to Him virtually amounts to man's loyalty to his own ideal
nature. The ultimate spiritual basis of all life, as conceived by Islam,
is eternal and reveals itself in variety and change.

A society based on such a conception of reality must reconcile, in its
life, to the categories of permanence and change . It must possess
eternal principles to regulate its collective life; because eternity
gives us a foothold in the world of perpetual change. But eternal
principles when they are understood to exclude all possibilities of
change which, according to the Holy Qur'an, is one of the greatest signs
of Allah, tend to immobilize what is essentially mobile in its nature.
The failure of Europe in political and social science illustrates the
former principle; the immobility of Islam during the last 500 years
illustrates the latter. What then is the principle of movement in Islam?
This is known as *'ijtihad'*. (The Reconstruction of Religious Thought
in Islam, p. 147)

According to the above statement, guidance of revelation will always be
required, and the guidance provided by experimental intellect will never
be able to take its place. Dr Iqbal himself supports the principle of
the permanent need of guidance. But the philosophy he has put forward to
explain the finality of Prophethood, requires that not only there should
be no need of any new Prophet and new revelation, but that religion
itself should come to an end.

This misleading interpretation of finality by Dr Iqbal means that man's
need of guidance and education by the prophets is of the same nature as
the need of a class by a child.

The child every year goes to the next class and changes his teacher.
Similarly man in every period has gone to the next stage, and required a
new code of religious law. When the child reaches the final class, he
completes his education and gets a certificate to that effect.
Thereafter he is no longer in need of a teacher and can carry on his
research independently. In the same way the man of the age of finality
with the proclamation of the end of Prophethood has secured the
certificate of the completion of his education. He can now undertake the
study of Nature and History independently. That is what *ijtihad* means.
With the end of Prophethood man has reached the stage of
self-sufficiency.

There is no doubt that such an interpretation of the finality of
Prophethood is wrong. The consequent results of this sort of
interpretation are acceptable neither to Dr Iqbal himself, nor to those
who have drawn these conclusions from what he has stated.

Further, should the view of Dr Iqbal be correct, the thing which he
calls 'inner experience' (spiritual light and inspirations received by
saintly persons) should also cease to exist, for it is also supposedly a
part of the instinct which languishes with the appearance of
experimental intellect. But according to Dr Iqbal that mystic experience
still continues to exist. He asserts that from Islamic point of view
inner experience is one of the three sources of human knowledge, the
other two being Nature and History. Personally also Dr Iqbal has a
strong mystic tendency.

He firmly believes in inspiration. He says: "The idea however, does not
mean that mystic experience, which qualitatively does not differ from
the experience of the Prophets, has now ceased to exist as a vital fact.
Indeed the Holy Qur'an regards both '*Anfus*' (self) and *'Afaq'*
(world) as sources of knowledge. Allah reveals His signs in inner as
well as outer experience, and it is the duty of man to judge the
knowledge yielding capacity of all aspects of experience. The idea of
finality, therefore, should not be taken to suggest that the ultimate
fate of life is complete displacement of emotion by reason. Such a thing
is neither possible nor desirable.

The intellectual value of the idea is that it tends to create an,
independent critical attitude towards mystic experience by, generating
the belief that all personal authority, claiming a supernatural origin
has come to an end in the history of man... Mystic experience then,
however unusual and abnormal, must. now be regarded by a Muslim as a
perfectly natural experience open to critical scrutiny like other
aspects of human experience"., (The Reconstruction of Religious Thought
in Islam, p. 126)

What Dr Iqbal means to say is that with the end of Prophethood the
inspirations and miracles of the saintly persons have, not come to an
end, though they are no longer so authoritative, as they were in the
past. Prior to the birth of experimented intellect, miracles had a
perfectly natural authority. They were not open to any doubt. But for
the intellectually developed man (of the age of finality) these things
have ceased to be authoritative, and are now like other occurrences and
phenomena open to critical scrutiny. Pre-finality period was that of
miracles and supernatural events, but the age of finality is the age of
reason, which does not regard any supernatural occurrence as a proof of
anything. It judges every reality discovered through a mystic experience
in accordance with its own standards.

This part of the remarks of Dr Iqbal is also not sound neither in regard
to the pre-finality nor in regard to the post-finality period. We will
make our comments on it under the following heading:

**Miracles of the Final Prophet**

Furthermore, the view expressed by Dr Iqbal that revelation is a sort of
instinct, is also wrong. This view has led him to make several other
mistakes. As Dr Iqbal himself is fully conscious, of the fact, an
instinct is a purely innate, unacquired and unconscious propensity. It
is a faculty lower than senses and intellect with which the primitive
animals such as insects and other animals of a class lower than that of
insects, have been provided according to the law of creation. With the
development of other means of guidance such as senses and intellect,
instinct is weakened and becomes dormant. That is why man who among the
animals enjoys the highest degree of thinking power, has the weakest
instinctive power.

In contrast, revelation is a means of guidance which ranks higher than
senses and intellect and to a great extent is something which is
acquired. Above all, it is the highest degree of consciousness, and the
field in which it makes discoveries is far vaster than the field in
which experimental intellect can work.

In a previous section of this book, while discussing the question of
ideology, we have proved that in view of the variety of the individual
and social capabilities of man, complexity of his social relations and
the dubiousness of the end of his evolutionary journey, the ideologies
propounded by the philosophers and sociologists are misleading and
bewildering. There is only one way open to man to have a sound ideology
and that is the way of revelation. If we do not accept the way of
revelation, we shall have to admit that man is unable to have an
ideology at all.

The modern thinkers believe that the future line of the development of
mankind can be determined through human ideologies only stage by stage.
In other words, at every stage only the next stage can be determined,
and that too according to the belief of these gentlemen. As for the
subsequent stages and whether there exists any final stage at all,
nothing is known. The fate of such ideologies is evident.

We wish that Dr Iqbal, who more or less studied the works of the Muslim
gnostics and was especially devoted to the Mathnavi of Rumi, could have
gone deeper into these works and found a better explanation of the
finality of Prophethood. The gnostics say that Prophethood terminated
because all the individuals and social stages of human development along
with the way that man should follow to attain them were revealed all
together. As thereafter none could discover anything additional, it was
the duty of everyone to follow this last message.

The sufis say: that the final is he, who has finalized all stages, and
leaves no stage uncovered. This is the basis of finality, not the
development of the experimental intelligence of society as conceived by
Dr Iqbal. If he had made a deeper study of the works of only those sufis
to whom he himself was devoted, (like Rumi), he could know that
revelation is not an instinct. It is a spirit and soul superior to the
rational spirit. Rumi, the mystic poet says:

"Know that the soul of man is different from that of a cow and a donkey,
and again the soul of a Prophet and a saint (holy man) is different from
that of an ordinary man."

"The body is visible, but the soul is hidden. Again intellect is more
hidden than soul. The spirit of revelation is still more hidden. The
intellect of the Holy Prophet could be perceived by anybody. But the
spirit of his revelation was not so perceptible".

"He was guided by the Protected Tablet and that is why was protected
from any mistake and error. Divine revelation is neither astrology nor
geomancy nor a dream. It is a fact and reality".

It appears that Dr Iqbal has unconsciously made the same mistake as was
made by the Western world, which holds that. knowledge has replaced
faith. Of course Dr Iqbal was severely opposed to this theory of
replacement. But his philosophy of the finality of Prophethood somehow
leads to the same conclusion. Dr Iqbal describes revelation as a sort of
an instinct. He also asserts that instincts cease to function when
intellectual and thinking faculties begin to work. This remark of his is
correct but is applicable to those cases in which thinking power
performs the same function that was previously performed by an instinct.
But in those cases in which their functions are different, there is no
reason why an instinct should cease to work when thinking power becomes
active. Therefore even if we suppose that Divine revelation is a sort of
instinct whose function is to put forward a sort of world conception and
an ideology not produced by intellect and thinking power, there, is no
reason why with the development of inductive intellect, in the words of
Dr Iqbal, the function of this instinct should come to an end.

The fact is that Dr Iqbal in spite of all his outstanding talent,
extraordinary intelligence and love of Islam is basically a product of
Western culture, for his entire education was Western, though he made
some studies in Islamic culture, especially in Islamic law, mysticism
and philosophy. That is the reason why he sometimes makes grave
mistakes. In the preface of our book, Principles of Philosophy and
Method of Realism, vol. V, we have referred to the faultiness of Dr
Iqbal's ideas about deep philosophical questions. That is why it is not
proper to draw a comparison between him and Sayyid Jamiluddin Asadabadi.
[^1] Though from the viewpoint of mental endowments Jamaluddin is not
comparable to Dr Iqbal, his original education was Islamic and Western
education was only his secondary acquisition. In addition, the late
Jamaluddin, owing to his vast travels in the Muslim countries and a
close study of their affairs was more conversant than Dr Iqbal with the
situation in the Muslim world. Therefore unlike Dr lqbal he did not make
any grave mistakes in evaluating certain events which took place in some
Muslim countries like Turkey and Iran, for he could judge them better.

[^1]: Popularly known as Jamaluddin Afghani.


