Chapter 18: Miracle of Finality
===============================

The Holy Qur'an is the everlasting miracle of the last Prophet. The
miracles of the former Prophets like Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa and
Prophet 'Isa, each of whom had a revealed Book and also wrought
miracles, were distinct from their revealed Books. They wrought such
miracles as the transformation of a blazing fire into 'coolness and
peace', the conversion of a dry piece of wood into a serpent and
bringing the dead to life. Obviously each of these miracles, was
temporary and passing. But in the case of the last Prophet his Book
itself was his miracle. It is the proof of his Prophethood. As such, the
miracle of finality, unlike any other miracle, is everlasting, not
passing nor meant only for the time being.

The fact that a Divine Book is the miracle of the last Prophet is
absolutely in comformity with his time, the age of the advancement of
science, knowledge, culture and education. The eternity of this Holy
Book is also in consonance with the eternity of its message which is
never to be abrogated.

The Holy Qur'an in several verses of it has expressly proclaimed this
extraordinary and superhuman aspect of itself. One of these verses says:

***"If you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our bondman, then
bring a chapter like it."*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:23)

It has also expressly mentioned several other miracles wrought by the
last Prophet.

The Holy Qur'an has dwelt on a number of questions related to the
miracles. It declares that a Divine message must be accompanied by some
miracles, that a miracle is a decisive evidence and definite proof, that
the Prophets work the miracles by the will of Allah and that they work
them to prove the veracity of their claim, and that they are not bound
to accede to every request of everybody in this respect. In other words,
the Prophets are not expected to hold an exhibition of miracles or to
set up a factory of them.

As the Holy Qur'an has dealt with these questions, it has also expressly
recounted the stories of the miracles of many of the former Prophets
like Nuh, Ibrahim, Lut, Salih, Hud, Musa and 'Isa, and has categorically
confirmed them.

Some orientalists and Christian clergymen on the basis of those verses
in which the Holy Qur'an responded negatively to the demand of the
idolaters to work the miracles proposed by them, have claimed that the
Prophet of Islam told the people that he had no miracle other than the
Holy Qur'an, and if they did not accept it, he could do nothing further.
Some 'liberal-minded' Muslim writers also have accepted this view, and
explaining it, they say that the miracle is an argument which can
convince only immature humanity looking for something extraordinary and
fantastic. A mature man is not impressed by such things and is concerned
only with the things rational.

As the age of the Prophet of Islam was that of rationality, not of myths
and fancy, he declined by the will of Allah to accept any request for a
miracle besides the Holy Qur'an. One writer says: "To seek the help of
the miracles was unavoidable for the former Prophets, for in those days
it was almost impossible for them to convince people with any rational
arguments. At the time the Prophet of Islam appeared, humanity had
passed the period of its minority.

It had reached the stage of its intellectual majority. The child of
yesterday no longer depended on his mother and was able to stand on his
own feet and use his brain. In such circumstances it was not
unreasonable that the Prophet of Islam resisted the pressure of the
disbelievers and his opponents demanding from him to work miracles. To
prove the truth of his mission he solely relied on rational arguments
and historical evidence. In spite of the insistence of the disbelievers
the Prophet of Islam by the order of Allah refused to work miracles
similar to those of the former Prophets.

He relied on the Holy Qur'an alone as an incomparable miracle. Its
incomparability is in itself a proof of the finality of Prophethood. It
is a Book that contains truths, teachings and guidance in complete
conformity with all aspects of life. It is a miracle worthy of mature
humanity, not an immature humanity believing in myths and fables.

The so called our liberal-minded Muslim writer adds: "The atmosphere in
which the ancient man lived was always full of myths, idle stories and
supernatural ideas. Hence he was not impressed by anything unless it was
contrary to what was reasonable and perceptible. That is why we find
mankind throughout history to be fond of what is unknown and in search
of what is supernatural. This sentimental attitude towards what is
imperceptible and unreasonable is more acute among the more uncivilized.
The more men are close to nature, the more they are fond of what is
extra-natural. Myths are an evil outcome of this situation.

The man of the desert is always looking for a miracle. His world is full
of spirits and wonderful mysteries. The spirit of a primitive man is
moved only by what is marvellous and mysterious. That is why we see that
not only the Prophets, but also the kings, the heroes and the sages of
every nation have resorted to something supernatural to justify what
they claimed. In these circumstances the Prophet whose mission was based
on the invisible had to have recourse to a miracle more than others, for
at this period of history supernatural events were more effective than
logic, science and indisputable facts".

However, the life of Prophet Muhammad (Peace be on him and his progeny)
is an exception to this rule. He announced that his miracle is a Book.
He made this announcement in a society, in the largest commercial city
of which the number of those who knew the art of writing was not more
than seven. This society never thought of anything other than boasting,
the sword, the camel and the male child. It is in itself a miracle that
in this society he announced that his miracle was a Heavenly Book.

He announced this in a country where no Heavenly Book ever existed. His
Lord, Allah, the Creator swears by the ink, the pen and the writing
before a people who regarded the pen as the tool of a few helpless and
weak persons. This is a miracle in itself. Only that Book is a miracle
which can always be seen. Unlike any other miracle it is the only
miracle the marvellous and extraordinary nature of which can be more
accurately understood and appreciated by those who are more wise and
more learned in comparatively advanced and cultured societies. It is the
only miracle the belief in which is not confined to those who have faith
in supernatural things.

Its supernaturalness can be acknowledged by any knowledgeable person. It
is the only miracle which is not for the common people. It is for the
intelligentsia, unlike other miracles it is not intended to stimulate
the admiration of the onlookers and to persuade them to accept a message
on that basis. It is meant to educate those who accept it. It is a
message in itself. The miracle of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (Peace be on
him and his progeny), though not a human product, is not something not
concerned with the human beings. Unlike the miracles of the past, it is
not a device used only to make people believe, and having no other use.
But his miracle represents a sort of the display of the highest human
talent. It is also the best model for exercise and training, and for
that a model which is always available.

The Holy Prophet tried to divert human inquisitiveness from what was
extraordinary and supernatural to the rational, logical and intellectual
problems and social and moral questions. His task was not so easy,
especially in view of the fact that the people with whom he had to deal
were not willing to submit to anything except what was unnatural.

It is really astonishing how he called himself a Prophet, invited people
to accept his Divine message and at the same time admitted formally that
he was not aware of the "unknown". Apart from the human value of this
admission, what is striking is the extraordinary truth which is felt in
his actions and which compels every heart to bow to him in admiration
and respect. Some people asked him to foretell what price their goods
were to fetch so that they might plan accordingly to be able to earn
profit and make money.

The Holy Qur'an ordered him to say: ***"I have no power to acquire for
myself a benefit or to avert any trouble except by the will of Allah. If
I had the knowledge of the unknown, I would have certainly acquired for
myself much that is good and no harm would have touched me. I am no more
than the one who gives warning and brings good news to a believing
people."*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:188)

A Prophet who could make no prophecy, who did not converse with the
spirits, the fairies and the jinn and who did not work a miracle
everyday, was no good in the sight of the people of the desert. The Holy
Prophet called upon them to look into the universe, to observe piety,
uprightness and faith, to acquire knowledge and to understand the
meaning of life and destiny, but they ceaselessly continued to ask him
to work a miracle and make a prophecy. On the other hand Allah prompted
him to say: ***"Glory be to my Lord! I am no more than a human
messenger."*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:93)

Those who deny the occurrence of miracles rely mostly on the following
Qur'anic verses saying: ***"They say: We will not believe you unless you
make a spring gush forth from the earth for us; or you have a garden of
date-palms and cause rivers to flow abundantly in their midst; or you
cause the sky to fall on us in pieces as you have asserted, or you bring
Allah and the angels before us; or you have a house of gold; or you
ascend to heaven. But even then we will not believe in you until you
bring down for us a book which we can read. Say: Glory be to my Lord. I
am nothing but a human messenger."***"(Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:90 - 93)

They say that these verses show that the idolaters asked the Holy
Prophet to work a miracle other than the Holy Qur'an, but he declined to
accede to their demand.

Unfortunately we cannot agree to this theory, especially in view of the
points mentioned above and in view of what we have said in regard to the
superiority of the Holy Qur'an to all other miracles. From our point of
view the disputable points are as under:

(i) The Prophet of Islam had no miracle other than the Holy Qur'an. He
refused to fulfil the demand of the idolaters who wanted him to produce
some other miracle. The verses of the Surah Bani Isra'il prove this
point.

(ii) As for the value and effectiveness of miracles, it may be said that
they were compatible with the period of the minority of mankind when
reason and logic were not effective. Even the sages and the kings had
recourse to supernatural things to justify themselves. The Prophets also
had to resort to them to convince their people. The Prophet of Islam
whose miracle is a Book is an exception to this rule. He justifies
himself by means of a Book or actually by reason and logic.

(iii) The Prophet of Islam tried to divert the attention of the people
from the unusual and supernatural things to the rational and logical
questions and to turn their sensitivity from wonders to the actualities
and facts.

Now let us discuss one by one the points made by the opponents of the
miracles: Is it true that the Prophet of Islam had no miracle except the
Holy Qur'an? Apart from the fact that this view is unacceptable from the
viewpoint of history and traditions reported by numerous authorities, it
is contrary even to what the Holy Qur'an itself says. The miracle of the
split of the moon is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an itself. Suppose
someone explains away the verse mentioning this miracle, though it is
not amenable to any explanation, how will the story of the ascension of
the Holy Prophet mentioned in the Surah Bani Isra'il be explained? The
Holy Qur'an expressly says: ***"Glory be to Him who carried His slave by
night from the Masjidul Haram (in Makkah) to the Masjidul Aqsa' (in
Jerusalem), the precincts of which We have blessed. (We took him on this
journey) to show him some of Our signs."*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:1)

Is this occurrence not a supernatural event and a miracle?

In Surah at-Tahri'm there is an event saying that the Holy Prophet told
a secret in confidence to one of his wives who divulged it to another
wife of his. The Holy Prophet asked the first wife why she disclosed the
secret to the second one and recounted a part of the conversation which
had transpired between the two. That wife was surprised and asked the
Holy Prophet how he came to know all that. The Holy Prophet replied that
Allah had apprised him of the event.

When the Holy Prophet confided a fact to one of his wives and when she
afterwards divulged it and Allah apprised him thereof, he made known to
her of part thereof and passed over the rest. And when he told it to
her, she said: "Who has told you?" He said: "The Knower, the Aware has
told me". Does this not mean telling the unknown? Is this not a miracle?
What has been mentioned in Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:90 - 93 and some other
verses does not at all indicate what has been inferred from it. The
idolaters were not asking for a proof of Prophethood and sign with a
view to gain satisfaction. They were actually asking for something else.
These verses as well as Surah al-'Ankabut, 29:50 throw ample light on
the unique mentality of the idolaters who were apparently demanding a
miracle. These verses also make clear the philosophy of the Holy Qur'an
about the miracles of the Prophets.

In Surah Bani Isra'il the idolaters begin their talk saying virtually:
***"We will not join you unless you on your part make a spring gush
forth for us in this arid land of Makkah."*** This is just a bargain.

They further say: ***"Or you have a garden of date palms with rivers
flowing in their midst or you have a house full of gold, so that we may
share these things with you."*** This is again a bargain, as they wanted
these things for their own benefit.

They say: ***"Or you cause the sky to fall on us in pieces as you think
that it will fall on the Day of Resurrection."***

This is asking for a punishment and the end of everything, though
apparently they asked for a miracle.

***"Or you ascend to heaven or you bring Allah and the angels be fore
us."*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:90 - 93)

This is again a bargain, though this time they were not asking for
riches, but were asking for something they could be proud of. Anyhow,
they ignored the fact that it was impracticable to fulfil their demand.

The words actually used by the idolaters are notable. They did not says:
*'Lan numina bika'*, that is we will not believe you. Instead they said:
*'Lan numina laka'*, meaning we will not join you to your advantage.
This difference in meaning has been pointed out by the scholars of the
principles of jurisprudence while explaining similar expressions in
Surah at-Tawbah, 9:61. Further, the intention of the idolaters is clear
from the way they put their demand. They asked the Holy Prophet to make
a spring gush forth for them in exchange for their support and expedient
faith. Evidently this is a demand for remuneration and not for a proof
and a miracle. The Holy Prophet came to make the people believers, not
to purchase their opinion and faith.

The writer whom we quoted above, himself says: "The idolaters asked the
Holy Prophet to foretell the price their goods would fetch so that they
could earn profit". Evidently this demand for a miracle was not made in
order to know the truth. They wanted to use the Prophet as a means of
making money. Naturally his reply was: "If I had the knowledge of the
unknown , I would have certainly used it to acquire for myself much that
is good in this world. Obviously miracles are not meant for such
purposes. I am a Prophet. I only give warning and bring good news to a
believing people".

The idolaters, thought that the Prophet could work a miracle to order,
any time and for any purpose. That is why they wanted him to make a
spring gush forth, to have a house of gold and make a prophecy about the
market rates. But the fact is that a miracle is just like a revelation.
Its occurrence is determined from "that side", not "from this". Just as
a revelation is not subject to the wish of the Prophet and is a process
which influences his will, similarly a miracle is also a process that
proceeds from the other side and influences the will of the Prophet,
though it is worked by him. That is what the words, 'by the will of
Allah' signify both in the case of a revelation and a miracle. And that
is what is meant by the following verse of Surah al-'Ankabut, which has
been misinterpreted by the Christian missionaries: ***"The signs are
with Allah alone. I am nothing but a plain warner".*** (Surah
al-'Ankabut, 29:50)

The same is the case with the revealing of the unknown miraculously. As
far as the personality of the Holy Prophet is concerned, he is not aware
of the unknown. The Holy Qur'an says: ***"Say: I do not say to you that
I am an angel, nor am I aware of the unknown."***

But when he comes under a supernatural influence he tells of what is
hidden, and when he is asked how he knew that, he replies that Allah,
the All-knowing apprised him of the unknown matter.

When the Holy Prophet says that he does not know the unknown and if he
had known it he would have earned a lot of money through that knowledge,
he wants to refute the false presumption of the idolaters; and makes it
clear that the knowledge of the unknown falls within the range of a
miracle for he receives it through Divine revelation only. Had his
knowledge of the unknown been automatic and had he been able to use it
for any purpose he liked, he would have used it to fill his own coffers
instead of telling the future market rates to others in order to enable
them to fill their pockets.

In another verse the Holy Qur'an says: ***"He is the knower of what is
hidden and He reveals His secret to none, except to a Messenger He has
chosen."*** (Surah al-Jinn, 72:26 - 27)

The Holy Prophet was certainly His chosen Messenger.

Furthermore, the Holy Qur'an has recounted many miracles of the former
Prophets like Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa and Prophet 'Isa. Then how
was it possible that the Holy Prophet when asked to work a miracle like
that of the former Prophets; should say that he was no more than a human
messenger? Had not the idolaters a right to retort and say: "You
yourself describe the miracles of the former Prophets so eloquently.
Were they not human beings or were they not Prophets?" Is it possible
that such a glaring contradiction should exist in the Holy Qur'an? Is it
imaginable that the idolaters did not take notice of such a glaring
contradiction?

Should the thinking of these liberal-minded be correct, the Holy Prophet
instead of saying: "Glory be to Allah! I am no more than a human
messenger", should have said: "Glory be to Allah! I being the last
Prophet, am excluded from the rule applicable to other Prophets.
Therefore do not ask me to do, what the other Prophets were asked to
do". Anyhow, he did not say so. On the other hand he said: "I am a
messenger like all other messengers".

This shows that what the idolaters, demanded from the Holy Prophet was
not a miracle or a sign with a view to find out the truth. They were
asking for something else and their demand was such that the Prophets
usually do not accede to it. That is why the Holy Prophet declined to
give a positive reply to their selfish and arrogant demand. They were
actually asking for something impossible.

We admit that the common people are inclined to invent the stories of
the miracles and ascribe them not only to the Prophets and the Imams but
even to any grave, stone or tree. But that is no reason why we should
deny that the Holy Prophet had miracles other than the Holy Qur’an.

Further, there is a difference between a Prophetic miracle and a saintly
miracle. A Prophetic miracle is a Divine sign and a proof to prove that
there is a Divine assignment. It is always linked together with a
challenge. It has certain special conditions and takes place for a
special purpose. As for a saintly miracle, that is a supernatural event
which is purely an outcome of the spiritual power and personal sanctity
of a perfect or a semi-perfect man and does not take place to prove the
truth of any Divine mission. It is almost an affair with no special
conditions attached to it. A Prophetic miracle is the voice of Allah in
support of a particular person. But that is not the case with a saintly
miracle.

Value and Effect of a Miracle
-----------------------------

What is the value of a miracle? The logicians and the philosophers
divide the material that is used to argue a case into several kinds.
Some arguments have a proving value. They are something beyond any
reasonable doubt, as is the case with the data used by a mathematician.
Some other arguments have only a persuasive value, as is the case with
the arguments advanced by the rhetoricians. If the arguments of the
latter are analysed, they often do not prove to be convincing. But so
long as they are not dissected, they prove quite moving. Some other
arguments are merely emotional or have some other value.

Value of a Miracle From the Viewpoint of the Qur'an
---------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an describes the miracles of the Prophets as the signs and
clear proofs, and regards them as a convincing and logical evidence of
the existence of Allah in the same way as it regards the creation as the
incontrovertible proof of His existence.

The Holy Qur'an has elaborately dwelt on the question of the miracles.
It considers the demand of the people for a miracle and their refusal to
submit to the Prophets unless a sign was shown to them, to be reasonable
and justified, provided the demand was not made for ulterior motives or
just as a pastime. It has eloquently narrated many stories of the
practical response of the Prophets to such demands. The Holy Qur'an has
nowhere indicated that a miracle is only a persuasive argument suitable
to the simple-minded people and appropriate to the period of the
minority of mankind. On the other hand it has called it a clear proof.

Nature of the Holy Prophet's Guidance
-------------------------------------

The miracle of the 'Finality' being a Book, a piece of literature and a
treasure of culture and knowledge, is an everlasting miracle. Many of
its miraculous aspects are still gradually coming to light. Some
wonderful features of the Holy Qur'an which have become known to the
people of our times were not known and could not be known in the past.
The value of a Book-miracle is better grasped by the thinkers than by
the common people. It is true that this miracle because of its special
merits, is appropriate to the period of the finality, but, is it also
true that this miracle has the nature of a Book because it is intended,
among other things, to divert the attention of man from the unknown to
the known, from the unreasonable to the reasonable and logical, and from
the supernatural to the natural, Does the Holy Prophet try to draw of
the inquisitiveness of people from the unusual and supernatural things
to the rational, logical, intellectual, scientific, social and moral
questions and to turn their sensitivity from wonders to the realities?

That does not appear to be true. Should it be true, that would mean that
all other Prophets were inviting people to the unknown and only the Holy
Prophet invited them to the known. If this is the case, then why have
hundreds of the verses of the Holy Qur'an been devoted to the
description of miracles?

Undoubtedly it is one of the basic distinctions of the Holy Qur'an that
it calls for the study of nature and describes the natural phenomena as
Divine signs. But a call for the study of nature does not mean diverting
the attention of people from everything that does not pertain to nature.
On the other hand a call for the study of natural phenomena as signs
means passing from nature to what is beyond nature and from what is
perceptible to what is intelligible.

The importance of the work of the Holy Prophet lies in the fact that
just as he calls the people for the study of nature, history and
society, he also persuades those who submit to nothing but supernatural
to submit to reason, logic and science also. He similarly tries to make
those who are fond of reason and logic and submit to nothing but what is
natural and perceptible, to get acquainted with a higher logic as well.

The basic difference between the world presented by the religion on the
whole, and especially by Islam, and the world depicted by purely human
sciences and philosophies, is that as William James has put it, in the
construction of the world of religion certain other elements have gone
in addition to the material elements and the laws generally recognized
by mankind.

The Holy Qur'an does not want to divert the attention from natural and
perceptible things to supernatural and imperceptible things. The
importance of the Holy Qur'an lies in the fact that besides paying
attention to what is natural or in the words of the Holy Qur’an, is the
seen, it puts the belief in the unseen in the forefront of its
teachings: ***"This is the Book about which there is no doubt. It is a
guidance to the pious, who believe in the unseen."*** (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:2 - 3)

How can the Holy Qur'an divert the attention of people from what is
supernatural when it is itself a miracle, and so many other miracles
have been described in more than hundred verses of it.

We are unable to understand what is meant by saying that the Book is the
only miracle, the belief in which is not confined to those who believe
in the supernatural things.

What belief? Does the writer mean the belief that the Holy Qur'an is a
Book the contents of which are very valuable and sublime, or the belief
that it is a miracle? The belief that a thing is miraculous in the sense
that it is a Divine sign, amounts to the belief in its supernaturalness.
How can a man have a belief in a miracle and at the same time not have a
belief in anything supernatural?

It has been said that the miracle of the Prophet of Islam does not
belong to the category of non-human matters though it is a non-human
act. To us the meaning of this statement also is not clear for it can be
interpreted in two ways. Firstly it may mean that the Holy Qur'an being
a revealed Book, not having been composed by the Holy Prophet is a
non-human act, but though it is the word of Allah, not of any human
being, it belongs to the category of human matters and is an ordinary
act, like other human acts.

It appears to be improbable that this is what the writer means, for in
the case of the acceptance of this view, the Holy Qur'an would have no
distinction over other revealed Books. All the other revealed Books have
also issued from the same source of revelation, but as they have no
supernatural aspect, they not belong to the category of superhuman acts.

There is a category of the sayings of the Holy Prophet known as *Hadith
al-Qudsi*. These sayings are the revealed words of Allah but still they
are neither miraculous nor superhuman.

The Holy Qur'an is distinguished from other revealed Books and from
*Hadith al-Qudsi* in that it is superhuman. It is revealed as well as
superhuman and supernatural. That is why the Holy Qur'an says: ***"Say:
If all human beings and jinn were to combine to produce the like of the
Qur’an, they would surely fail to compose the like of it, even if they
helped one another."*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:88)

The other interpretation of the above-mentioned statement may be that
unlike the miracles of other Prophets such as converting a staff into a
serpent and bringing the dead to life which definitely do not belong to
the category of human acts, the miracle of Muhammad (Peace be on him and
his progeny) being a sort of learned speech and dissertation, belongs to
that category, but it is still superhuman, having sprung from a
supernatural source. Should this interpretation be what is intended, and
it should be, then this statement in itself is an admission that there
exists what is supernatural and extraordinary and that there are things
which are unseen and unknown. Then why should we think of a miracle as
if it is something mythical and irrational. Why should we not from the
very beginning distinguish between the miracles on the one hand and the
myths and superstitions on the other, so that the less-informed people
may not form that impression of the miracles which we do not want them
to form. Why instead of saying clearly and in a straightforward manner
that the Book of the Prophet of Islam is a miracle, should in a
roundabout way say that his miracle is a Book?

In one of the last works of the same writer an article has been
published under the heading: 'The Qur’an and the Computer'. This article
may be considered to be a correction of his earlier view about the
miraculousness of the Holy Qur'an and a sign of the gradual development
of his thinking.

In this article he has proposed the replacement of the letters of the
Holy Qur'an by the computerized signs and the use of this great
manifestation of human culture for the discovery of the Qur'anic
knowledge. This is a timely and sound suggestion. The writer has hinted
at the endeavours made and being made by some Egyptian and Iranian
scholars in this field. He has also made an interesting discourse under
the caption: 'How to Prove the Inimitability of the Qur'an'.

In this article he has referred to a valuable book entitled, 'The
Process of the Development of the Qur'an', which has lately been
published and in which its learned author has proved that the size and
the length of the verses and the words revealed to the Holy Prophet in
over 23 years form and exact and regular curve. Commenting on the
discovery made in this book the writer says: "Is there any speaker in
the world the year of whose sentences may be ascertained from their
length, especially when these sentences do not form the text of any
literary or scientific book produced by an author in a regular manner?

In contrast, they are the sentences which came from time to time on the
lips of a man over a long period of twenty-three years of his busy life.
They do not form a book written on a particular subject, nor do they
pertain to even any pre-conceived field. They cover multifarious
questions which arose in society from time to time. Some of them answer
the specific queries made, and some others deal with the problems that
came up in the course of a long-drawn struggle. They were revealed to a
great leader and were collected and arranged later".


