Chapter 21: The Holy Prophet
============================

The Holy Prophet, Muhammad bin Abdullah (Peace be on him and his
progeny), with whom Prophethood came to an end, was born in 570 AD at
Makkah. He was raised as a Prophet when he was 40 years of age. For 13
years He preached Islam in Makkah, where he underwent great many
difficulties and hardships. During this period he trained a few selected
persons. Thereafter he migrated to Madina where he established his
centre. For ten years he openly propagated Islam there. He fought a
number of successful battles against the arrogant Arabs whom he finally
subdued. By the end of this period the entire Arabian Peninsula had
embraced Islam.

The Holy Qur'an was revealed on him piecemeal over a period of 23 years.
The Muslims showed a wonderful devotedness and reverential attachment to
the Holy Qur'an and the person of the Holy Prophet, who passed away in
11 A.H. in the 23rd year of his Prophetic mission when he was 63 years
of age. He left behind a nascent society full of spiritual zeal,
believing in a constructive ideology and conscious of its world
responsibility.

There were two things which gave this new-born society a spirit of
enthusiasm and unity. One was the Holy Qur'an which inspired the
Muslims. It was always recited by them. The other was the lofty and
penetrating personality of the Holy Prophet of which they were greatly
enamoured. Now we briefly discuss the personality of the Holy Prophet:

His Childhood
-------------

He was still in his mother's womb, when his father, returning from a
business trip to Syria died in Madina. Thereafter Abdul Muttalib, his
grandfather took over his custody.

From his very childhood the signs of the Holy Prophet's great future
were evident from his features, his conduct and his demeanor. Abdul
Muttalib intuitively detected that his grand son had an exceptionally
bright future.

The Holy Prophet was only 8 years old when his grand father also passed
away and according to the will of the old gentleman, the guardianship of
the child passed to his elder uncle, Abu Talib, who was also surprised
to see that the boy's behaviour differed from that of other children.

Unlike the children of the neighbours he was never covetous of food, and
unlike the prevailing custom of those days he always kept his hair
combed and his face and body clean.

One day Abu Talib wanted him to change his dress in his presence before
going to bed. Muhammad (Peace be on him and his progeny) did not like
the idea. But as he could not flatly refuse to obey the order of his
uncle, he asked him to turn his face away, so that he could take off his
dress. Abu Talib was naturally surprised, as even the Arabs of mature
age during those days were not averse to become totally naked in the
presence of others. Abu Talib says: "I never heard him telling a lie,
nor did I see him doing anything indecent. He never laughed
unnecessarily, nor was he desirous of taking part in the games of the
children. He preferred to be alone and was always modest".

Abhorrence of Idleness and Lethargy
-----------------------------------

He disliked idleness and laziness. He used to say: *"Allah! I take
refuge in You from laziness, lethargy, disability and worthlessness"*.

He always exhorted the Muslims to work hard and to be industrious, and
used to say that adoration had seventy parts, the best of them is to
earn one's livelihood lawfully.

Honesty
-------

The Holy Prophet, prior to his being raised to Prophethood, made a
journey to Syria on behalf of Khadija who subsequently became his wife.
This journey, more than ever before made his honesty and efficiency
clear. His honesty and reliability became so well known that he received
the epithet of Muhammad, the trust-worthy. People entrusted their
valuables to him for safe custody. Even after his being raised to
Prophethood despite all their hostility to him, the Quraysh continued to
deposit their valuables with him, for safe keeping. That is why at the
time of his migration to Madina he left behind Imam Ali for a few days
to return the deposits to their original owners.

Combat with Tyranny
-------------------

During the pre-Islamic period a pact was concluded by the victims of
cruelty and tyranny with a view to make common efforts for the
protection of the oppressed against the unjust tyrants. This pact which
is known as *"Hilful Fuzul"* was arranged in the house of Abdullah ibn
Jad'in in Makkah by certain important personalities of the time. Later
during the period of his Prophethood, the Holy Prophet often mentioned
this pact and said that he was still willing to participate in a similar
pact and not to violate its provisions.

Family Behavior
---------------

He was kind to his family. To his wives he was never harsh. The Makkans
were not generally familiar with such a good behavior. He tolerated the
stinging remarks of some of his wives, though they were resented by
others. He emphatically counseled his followers to be kind to their
wives for, as he often remarked, men and women both had good and bad
traits. Man must not take into consideration only the unpleasant habits
of his wife and divorce her for that reason. If he disliked some
qualities of his wife, she must be possessing some other qualities which
he liked. Thus the whole thing was balanced. The Holy Prophet was
extremely affectionate to his children and grand-children and showed
love and tenderness to them. He loved them, seated them on his lap, put
them on his shoulders and kissed them. All this was contrary to the
custom and usage of the Arabs of those days.

The Holy Prophet showed love and affection to the children of the common
Muslims also. He seated them on his lap and passed his hand on their
heads. Mothers often brought their children to him for his blessing.
Sometimes it so happened that some child urinated on his clothes. On
such occasions mothers were upset and felt ashamed. Some of them tried
to stop the child from making water. But the Holy Prophet asked them not
to interrupt the child and said that he himself would clean his clothes,
if they became dirty.

Treatment of Slaves
-------------------

He was extraordinarily kind to the slaves. He told people that the
slaves were their brothers. He said: *"Give them of the same food of
which you eat yourselves, and provide them with the same kind of clothes
as you put on yourselves. Do not force them to do jobs which are too
difficult for them. Share with them their jobs and help them in the
performance of them. Do not call them slaves, for all men are the
bondsmen of Allah, who is the real Master of everyone. Call your male
slaves young man and your female slaves young woman.*"

Islam gives to the slaves all possible facilities leading to their
complete liberation. The Holy Prophet described the slave-trading as the
worst occupation and said that those who traded in human beings were the
worst people in the sight of Allah.

Cleanliness and Use of Perfume
------------------------------

The Holy Prophet was greatly interested in cleanliness and was fond of
the use of perfume. He urged his friends and followers also to keep
their body and house clean and perfumed. He especially exhorted them to
have bath and use perfume on Fridays so that bad odor might not cause
inconvenience to the congregation.

Social Behavior
---------------

In his social life the Holy Prophet was always kind, cheerful and
courteous to the people, took a lead in greeting all, including the
children and the slaves. He did not stretch his feet in front of anyone
and did not recline in the presence of others. In his company all sat in
a circular form, and none had any distinct place or position. He was
watchful of his companions and if he did not see anyone of them for two
or three days, he inquired about him.

If anyone of them was ill, he went to see him and if anyone had any
trouble, he made every effort to solve his problem. In a gathering he
did not address or pay attention to any one individual, but equally
attended to all. He did not like that he should be sitting and others be
serving him. He personally took part in all that was to be done. He used
to say that Allah hates to see a man who considered himself to be
superior to others.

Soft as well as Tough
---------------------

In his personal matters the Holy Prophet was soft, sympathetic and
tolerant. His tolerance on many historical occasions was one of the
reasons of his success. But in the matters of principle where a question
of public interest or of law was involved, he was tough and never showed
any leniency. At the time of the conquest of Makkah and his victory over
the Quraysh he overlooked all the wrongs which they had committed
against him over a period of 23 years and declared general amnesty.

He accepted the apology of the murderer of his well-beloved uncle,
Hamzah. But on that very occasion he punished a woman of Banu Makhzum,
who had committed theft. This woman belonged to a very respectable
family, who regarded the enforcement of a punishment against her as a
great insult to them. They persistently requested the Holy Prophet to
pardon her. Some prominent companions of the Holy Prophet also
interceded on her behalf. But the Holy Prophet said angrily that the
Divine law could not be suspended for the sake of any individual. In the
evening on that day he delivered a speech and said:

***"Former nations and communities declined and ceased to exist because
they discriminated in the enforcement of the Divine law. If an
influential person committed a crime, he was let off and no action was
taken against him, but if an unimportant and weak person committed it,
he was punished. I swear by Allah in whose hands my life is that I will
be ruthless in the enforcement of justice even if the culprit be one of
my own relatives".***

Worship
-------

He devoted a part of every night, sometimes half of it and sometimes one
third or two thirds of it, to worship and adoration. Though his whole
day was preoccupied, especially during his stay at Madina, he never
curtailed the time of his worship. He found complete satisfaction in his
worship and communication with his Lord. His worship was an expression
of love and gratitude and was not motivated by a desire of securing
paradise or by a fear of Hell. One day one of his wives asked him why
after all he was so devoted to his worship? His reply was: *"Should I
not be thankful to my Lord?"*

He fasted very often. In addition of fasting during the whole month of
Ramazan and a part of the month of Sha'ban, he kept fast every other
day. He always passed the last 10 days of the month of Ramazan in
seclusion in the mosque, where he devoted his whole time to worship.
Nevertheless, he told others that it was enough to observe fast for
three days every month. He used to say that each one should carry out
the acts of worship according to one's capacity and should not exert
oneself more than one can bear, for such an exertion has an adverse
effect. He was against monastic life, escape from worldly involvement
and renunciation of family life. Some of his companions had expressed an
intention to lead a monastic life, but he censured and reproved them. He
used to say: *"Your body, your wife, your children and your friends all
have a claim on you and you must fulfil your obligations".*

He prolonged his acts of worship while performing them singly, and
sometimes was busy with his pre-dawn prayers for hours. But he tried to
shorten his prayers while in congregation. In this respect he considered
it essential to have a regard for the aged and weakest among his
followers, and counseled others also to his follow his example.

Austerity and Simple Living
---------------------------

Simple living was one of the principles of his life. He took simple
food; wore simple clothes and travelled in a simple manner. He slept
mostly on a mat, set on bare ground and milked his goat with his own
hands. He mounted saddle-less animals and did not like anybody to walk
by his side while he was riding. His staple food mostly comprised barley
bread and dates. He mended his shoes and patched his clothes with his
own hands. Though he led a simple life, he did not advocate the
philosophy of asceticism, and believed that it was necessary to spend
money for the good of society and other lawful purposes. He used to say:
*"What a nice thing wealth is, if obtained through legal means by a man
who knows how to spend it".*

He also said: *"Wealth is a good aid to piety"*.

Resolution and Perseverance
---------------------------

He had a wonderful willpower which permeated among his companions also.
The total period of his Prophethood was entirely a lesson in resolution
and perseverance. In his lifetime several times the conditions so
developed that no hope was apparently left, but he never allowed the
idea of failure to enter his mind, nor was his conviction of his final
success ever shaken for a moment.

Leadership, Administration and Consultation
-------------------------------------------

Though his companions carried out every order of his without any
hesitation and repeatedly said that they had an unflinching faith in him
and were willing even to plunge themselves into a river or a fire if he
ordered them to do so, he never adopted any dictatorial methods. In
regard to the matters about which he had received no specific
instructions from Allah, he consulted his companions and respected their
views, and thus helped them develop their personality. On the occasion
of the Battle of Badr he left the questions of taking military action
against the enemy, choosing the camping ground, and as to how the
prisoners of war should be dealt with, to the advice of his companions.
On the occasion of Uhud he made consultation as to whether the Muslim
troops should fight from within the city of Madina or should go out of
the city. He consulted his companions on the occasion of the Battles of
Ahzab and Tabuk also.

The kindness and tolerance of the Holy Prophet, his anxiety to seek the
forgiveness of the sins of his community, his giving importance to his
companions and his consultations with them were the main factors which
contributed to the wonderful and great influence that he exercised over
his companions.

The Holy Qur'an points out this fact when it says: ***"It is by the
mercy of Allah that you (the Prophet) were lenient to them, for if you
had been harsh and hard-hearted, they surely would have left your
company. Therefore pardon them and implore Allah to forgive them. And
hold*** ***consultations with them in regard to the conduct of affairs.
Once you are resolved, put your trust in Allah. Allah likes those who
put their trust in Him"*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:159)

Regularity and Orderliness
--------------------------

All his actions were governed by regularity and orderliness. He worked
according to a well drawn time-table, and urged others also to do
likewise. His companions under his influence were fully disciplined.
Even when he considered it necessary not to disclose certain decisions
lest the enemy should get an inkling of them, his companions carried out
his orders without any argument. For example, once he said that they
would move the next day.

Next day all those who were ordered proceeded with him without knowing
the final destination of which they came to know only in the last
moments. Sometimes he ordered some people to move in certain direction,
gave a letter to their commander and said that he should open it on
reaching such and such point and act according to the instructions given
in it. They acted accordingly. Before reaching that particular point
they did not know what was their destination and for what purpose they
were going. In this way he kept the enemy and his spies in the dark and
often took them unawares.

Capacity to Listen to Criticism and Dislike of Flattery and Undue Compliments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes he had to face the criticism of his companions, but without
being harsh to them, he explained his decision and gained their
agreement and concurrence.

He absolutely disliked flattery and undue compliments. He used to say:
*"Throw dust on the face of the flatterers".*

He liked solid work. He was in the habit of doing things correctly and
firmly. When Sa'd ibn Mu'az died and was laid in his grave, the Holy
Prophet with his own hands placed the bricks and stones in their right
place on the grave and made them firm. He said: *"I know that before
long all this will be mined, but I like things to be done correctly and
efficiently".*

Fight Against Weak Points
-------------------------

He did not exploit the weak points and the ignorance of his people. On
the other hand he tried to rectify their weaknesses and acquainted them
with what they did not know. The day his 17 months old son expired, by
chance the sun was eclipsed. People said that the solar eclipse was due
to the calamity suffered by the Holy Prophet. He did not keep quiet in
the face of this silly notion, but ascended the pulpit and said: *"Men!
the moon and the sun are the two signs of Allah. They are not eclipsed
on account of the death of anybody".*

Possession of the Necessary Qualities of Leadership
---------------------------------------------------

He had the maximum qualities of leadership such as the sense of knowing
men, firmness, determination, boldness, having no fear of the possible
consequences of a necessary action, foresight, capacity of bearing
criticism, recognition of the ability of others, delegation of powers to
others in accordance with their ability, flexibility in his personal
matters, rigidity in regard to the matters of principle, giving
importance to others, promotion of their intellectual, emotional and
practical talents, refraining from despotism, not demanding blind
obedience, modesty and humility, simplicity and contentment, dignity and
elevation of manners and great interest in organizing human resources.
He used to say: *"If three persons of you travel together, choose one of
you as your leader and commander".*

At Madina he organized a special secretariat, and appointed a group of
persons for performing specific job. There were scribes of revelation
who wrote the Holy Qur’an. Some people were entrusted with the job of
drafting and writing special letters. Some recorded the deeds of legal
transactions. Some others were made responsible to keep financial
records. Still some others were responsible for drafting agreements and
treaties. All these details are recorded in the books of history such as
Tarikh by Ibn Wazih, al-Ya'qubi, at-Tanbih wal Ishraf by Mas'udi, Mu'jam
al-Buldan by al-Bilazari and at-Tabaqat by Ibn Sa'd.

Method of Preaching
-------------------

In preaching Islam his method was gentle and mild, not harsh and severe.
He mostly relied on arousing hope and avoided threatening and
frightening. To one of his companions, whom he sent for preaching Islam,
he said: *"Be pleasant and do not be harsh. Tell the people what may
please them and do not make them disgusted"*.

He took active interest in the propagation of Islam. Once he went to
Taif for this purpose. During the Hajj season he used to call upon
various tribes and convey the message of Islam to them. Once he sent
Imam Ali and on another occasion Mu'az bin Jabal to Yemen for preaching.
Before going to Madina himself he sent there Mus'ab bin Umayr to preach
Islam. He sent a good number of his companions to Ethiopia. Besides
escaping from the persecution of the Makkans, they propagated Islam
there and paved the way for the acceptance of Islam by the Negus, the
king of Ethiopia and 50% of the population of that country. In the sixth
year of migration he wrote letters to the heads of a number of States in
the various parts of the world and intimated them about his Prophethood.
About hundred letters which he wrote to various personalities are still
extant.

Encouragement of Knowledge
--------------------------

He encouraged his companions to acquire knowledge and literacy and with
this end, he made it compulsory for their children to learn reading and
writing. Further, he ordered some of his companions to learn the Syriac
language. He often said: *"It is obligatory on every Muslim to seek
knowledge".*

Some of his other sayings are: *"Wherever you find a useful piece of
knowledge, acquire it. It does not matter if you find it with a
disbeliever or a hypocrite".*

*"Acquire knowledge even if you have to go to China for that purpose"*

This emphasis on knowledge was the reason why the Muslims so speedily
spread to all corners of the world in search of it and secured the
scientific works wherever they found them. The Muslims not only
translated these works, but took to research themselves also, and thus
they became a connecting link between the ancient cultures of Greece,
Rome, Iran, Egypt and India and the modern culture of Europe. In the
course of time the Muslims themselves became the founders of one of the
grandest civilizations and cultures in human history, known to the world
as the Muslim civilization and culture.

The Holy Prophet's character and behaviour like his sayings and his
religion were comprehensive and all-sided. History does not at all
remember any personality who like him ever attained perfection in all
human dimensions. He was really a perfect man.


