Society and History
===================

Introduction
------------

The outlook of a school of thought on society and history and the
opinion that it forms about these two, plays a decisive role in the
ideology of that school. Hence it is essential to find out how Islam
looks at society and history in the perspective of its conception of the
world.

It is evident that Islam is neither a school of sociology nor a
philosophy of history. In its revealed Book no social or historical
problem has been dealt with in the language of these two sciences. The
Holy Qur'an also has not used the usual terminology of the relevant
sciences while dwelling on any moral, juristic or philosophical subject.
None the less, Islamic view on a large number of questions pertaining to
these sciences can be derived and deduced from the verses of the Holy
Qur'an.

Islamic thinking in respect of society and history, being of special
importance, it deserves an elaborate study and investigation. Like many
other teachings of Islam, its views on these subjects are also a sign of
the depth and profoundness, of its precepts and doctrines. For the sake
of brevity we propose to deal with Islamic thinking about society and
about history together in one chapter and confine our discussion to only
those questions which in our opinion are essential for the
identification of Islamic ideology.

We shall begin with society and then take up history. In this respect
the relevant questions are as under:

(i) What is society?

(ii) Is man a social being by nature?

(iii) Is the individual that is basic and society only a drawn idea, or
the other way round? Or is there a third alternative?

(iv) What is the relationship between society and tradition?

(v) Has the individual a free choice of action in the face of society
and social environment?

(vi) What are the basic divisions of society?

(vii) Are all human societies on the whole of one and the same nature
and essence, the dissimilarities existing between them being like those
existing between the individuals belonging to one species? Or have they
divergent natures varying according to their rational differences,
temporal and spatial conditions and cultural levels? If so, naturally
the various societies shall have various sociologies and in that case
each of them can have its own peculiar ideology.

We know that all human beings in spite of their regional, racial and
historical differences from physical point of view belong to one
species, and that is why the same medical and physiological laws apply
to all of them. Now the question is whether they form one species from
social point of view also and consequently are governed by one moral and
social system? Can one ideology be applicable to all mankind or should
each society have a special ideology conforming to its special regional,
cultural, historical and sociological conditions?

(viii) Are human societies which have been from the dawn of history to
the present time scattered, independent of each other and subject to
multiplicity and divergence of at least individual nature, advancing
towards unity and uniformity? - Is the future of humanity unity of
society, uniformity of culture and the disappearance of contradictions
and conflicts? Or is humanity doomed to remain culturally and
ideologically diverse and divergent?

These are some of the questions about which, from our point of view, it
is necessary that the Islamic point of view should be made clear. We
propose to discuss these questions one by one briefly.

What is Society?
----------------

A group of human beings linked together by certain common systems,
traditions, conventions and laws and leading a collective life, forms a
society. A collective life does not mean that a group of men should
necessarily be living side by side in a particular region and should be
utilizing the same climate and consuming the same kind of foodstuffs.
The trees of a garden live side by side, utilize the same climate and
consume the same type of nourishment. Similarly the herd of deer graze
together and move together. But neither the deer of one herd nor the
trees lead a collective life nor do they, form a society.

Human life is social in the sense that it has a 'social nature'. Human
needs, achievements, enjoyments and activities all have a social nature,
for they all are closely linked with certain customs, usages and systems
of division of work, division of gains and division of the fulfilment of
needs. There are certain dominating thoughts, ideas and habits which
keep a particular group of people united. In other words a society is a
collection of people who are compelled by certain pressing needs and
influenced by certain beliefs, ideas and ambitions, to be amalgamated
together and lead a common life.

Common social needs and the special relations of human life so unite
people that they become like passengers travelling together in one
automobile, in one aeroplane or aboard one boat heading towards a
particular destination where either they all reach or none of them
reaches. On their way if they face any danger they face it together and
have a common destiny.

The Holy Prophet while describing the philosophy behind exhortation to
what is good and restraining from what is evil, has used a beautiful
similitude. He has said: *"A group of people embarked a boat which
sailed and cleaved the bosom of the sea. Every passenger was sitting in
his own place. One of the passengers on the plea that the place where he
was sitting exclusively belonged to him, began to make a hole at his
place. If other passengers immediately caught hold of his hand and
restrained him from making a hole, they would not only save themselves
but would save him also".*

Is Man Social By Nature?
------------------------

The question, what fact ors have made man social, has been under
discussion from ancient times. Has man been created social from the very
beginning? In other words, has he been created as a part of a whole, and
is instinctively inclined, to join its whole? Or is it that he has not
been created social, but social life has been imposed on him by external
f actors? In other words, is it that man in accordance with his inborn
nature tends to be free and is not willing to accept the restriction of
collective life, but having learnt by experience that he is unable to
lead a lonely life, has perforce acquiesced in the limitations of a
collective life?

Another theory is that although man is not social by nature, it is not a
factor of compulsion which has induced him to become social. But man
through his intellect and reason has discovered that by means of
cooperation and collective life he can enjoy the bounties of nature in a
better way. According to this theory man has agreed to cooperate with
his fellow beings by his own choice. Thus man is social either by
nature, or by compulsion or by choice.

According to the first theory the social life of man can be compared to
the domestic life of husband and wife. Each of the two spouses is a part
of a whole and has a natural tendency to join its whole.

According to the second theory, social life is comparable to the
alliance and cooperation between the two countries which feel that they
are unable to face the common enemy singly, and hence are compelled to
conclude a treaty of alliance and cooperation in their mutual interest.
According to the third theory, social life is comparable to the
partnership of two capitalists who voluntarily agree to set up a
commercial, agricultural or industrial concern in order to earn better
and higher profits.

In accordance with the first theory the main factor that has made man
social is his inner nature; according to the second, it is some external
force; and according to the third, it is his rational and calculation
faculty.

According to the first theory to be social is a general goal which human
nature instinctively aspires to attain; according to the second, it is
something accidental and non-essential or in the terminology of the
philosophers, a secondary objective; and according to the third theory
it is one of the intellectual objectives and not one of the natural
goals.

Some verses of the Holy Qur'an indicate that sociality of man is a part
of his creation. The Holy Qur'an says: ***"0 mankind! We have created
you of a male and a female, and have made you nations and tribes so that
you may know one another. Surely the noblest of you in the sight of
Allah is the most pious of you."*** (Surah al-Hujurat, 49:13).

In this verse in the course of a moral teaching the social philosophy of
the creation of man has been enunciated. The verse says that man has
been created in such a way that various nations and tribes have been
formed. People are identified by means of a reference to the nations and
the tribes to which they belong. Thus the verse resolves a social
problem, for it is an essential condition --of social life that people
should be able to know and distinguish each other.

Had there been no national, tribal' and similar other affinities, which
are a uniting as well as a distinguishing feature, identification of
people would have been impossible and consequently there would have been
no possibility of the existence of a social life based on the mutual
relations of men. National and tribal affiliations and such other
distinctions as those of shape, colour and size fix the identity of each
individual. Had all individuals been of the same shape, the same colour
and the same features and there had existed no difference of
affiliations among them, all individuals would have been identical like
the machine-made goods produced by a factory and would have been
indistinguishable from one another.

Consequently their identification would have been impossible and as a
final result no social life could be established on the basis of mutual
relations and the exchange of ideas, goods and services. Therefore man's
affiliation to different tribes and communities has a goal and a
purpose. This kind of distinction is an essential condition of social
life. Anyhow, affiliation to a particular race or family is not a matter
of pride or the basis of claiming any superiority. In fact the basis of
superiority is nothing but human nobility and individuals piety. The
Holy Qur'an says: ***"And He it is Who has created man from water and
has appointed for him kindred by blood and kindred by marriage."***
(Surah al-Furqan, 25:54)

This verse describes the blood and marriage relationships which bind the
individuals to one another and form the basis of their identification,
as a creational scheme designed for a sound and wise purpose. At another
place the Holy Qur'an says:

***"Is it they who apportion the mercy of your Lord? We have apportioned
among them their livelihood in the life of the world and raised some of
them above others in rank so that some of them may take labour from
others; and the mercy of your Lord is better than what they amass."***
(Surah az-Zukhruf , 43:32)

In the course of our discussion on monotheism (Monotheistic conception
of the world) we have already explained the meaning of this verse.
Briefly it may be said that the verse indicates that men have not been
created alike in regard to their potentialities and talents. Had they
been created alike, everybody would have had what the others had and
would have lacked what the others lacked. In, that case naturally there
would have been no question of reciprocal need of each other and
reciprocal service to each other Allah has created men dissimilar to
each other in regard to their talents an their physical, spiritual,
intellectual and emotional potentialities.

He has made some of them superior to some others in certain respects,
while those others are often superior to these in some other respects.
In this way all depend on each other and are naturally desirous to join
hands with each other. Thus Allah has paved the way for social life of
men. The above verse shows that social life is something natural. It has
neither been forced upon man, nor has it been adopted by him of his own
choice.

Is the Existence of Society Real and Substantial?
-------------------------------------------------

Society is composed of individuals. Had there been no individuals, no
society could exist. Now let us see what is the nature of the
composition society and what kind of relation there exists between
society and man. In this respect the following theories have been put
forward:

I. Composition of society is only fictitious and not real. In other
words, no actual compounding has taken place. Actual compounding occurs
only when as a result of the action and reaction of two or more things a
new phenomenon emerges with its own characteristics as we see in the
case of chemical compounds. For example, as a result of the action and
reaction of the two gases, classed oxygen and hydrogen, a new phenomenon
called water emerges with its own properties and characteristics.

It is essential that after their combination and amalgamation the
original components should lose their individual properties and effects
and be totally dissolved into a new compound. In their social life men
are never amalgamated in this way, and they are not dissolved into
society. Therefore society has not real and substantial existence. Its
existence is only fictitious and imaginary. It is individual alone that
has a real existence. Therefore, in spite of the fact that human life in
society has a social form, the individuals do not make a real compound
by the name of society.

II. The second theory is that although society is not a real compound
like natural compounds, yet is a synthetic compound. A synthetic
compound is also a kind of a real compound, though not a natural one. A
synthetic compound is an interconnected whole like a machine, the parts
of which are assembled and put together. In a natural compound its
component parts lose their identity and their independent effect, and
are dissolved in the whole; but in a synthetic compound, the components
lose their independent effect but not their identity.

They combine in a particular manner and consequently their effects are
also combined. They assume the form of some new effects which are not
exactly the total of the independent effects of the components in
question. For example an automobile transports goods or persons from one
place to another, but this effect neither relates to any part of it, nor
to the total of the effects of all the parts in the unassembled state.
In a motor vehicle all parts of it are compulsorily interconnected with
each other and they all work together. But there is no question of the
loss of their identity in the whole. In fact in this case the whole has
no existence independent of the parts. The whole vehicle is actually
equivalent to the sum-total of its parts plus the special connection
existing between them.

The same position is held by society. Society consists of primary and
secondary systems and arrangements. The systems and the individuals to
whom they are related, are interconnected. Any change in any one of
these systems - cultural, religious, economic, legal or educational -
bring about changes in other systems also. Thus, social life is the
final product of the entire social process. But in this process the
individuals do not lose their identity, neither in society as a whole
nor in any system of it.

III. The third theory is that society is a real compound like any other
natural compound. But it is a combination of minds, thoughts, emotions,
desires, wills and lastly of cultures, and not that of physical. Just as
the material elements as a result of their mutual action and reaction
pave the way for the emergence of a new phenomenon, or as the
philosophers say, able to assume a new form, and thus give birth to a
new compound, similarly individual human beings with their individual
inborn and acquired attainments enter the social life, are spiritually
amalgamated and acquire a new spiritual identity known as 'collective
spirit'.

This compound is natural but of a unique kind. It is natural and actual
in the sense that its component parts mutually act, react, cause a
change and become the parts of a new identity. Yet it differs from other
natural compounds, because in this case the 'whole' or the compound does
not exist as a 'real unit'. In the case of other compounds the
combination is real, because their component parts mutually act and
react in a real manner and in such a way that the identity of the parts
is changed, and the resulting compound appears in the form of a real
unit, for the plurality of the parts is changed into the unit of the
whole.

But in the case of the combination of individuals into society, though
this combination is again real because as the result of their actual
action and reaction, the individuals acquire a new identity, yet their
plurality is in no way transformed into a unity. Any 'overall man'
incorporating all individuals does not exist as a unit. Only the
aggregate total of individuals can be called the overall man. But his
existence is only imaginary.

IV. According to the fourth theory, society is a real compound and, for
that matter, a compound par excellence. In the case of all natural
compounds their component parts before being combined have their own
identity. Apart from their social existence, men are mere animals having
only potential humanity or the feeling of human ego.

Human thinking and human feelings such as human emotions and desires
appear only in the wake of the emergence of collective spirit. It is
this spirit which fills a vacuum and gives man his personality.
Collective spirit has at all times been with man and its manifestations
have always been visible in ethics, religion, science, philosophy and
art. Men influence each other spiritually and culturally and are
influenced through and in the wake of this collective spirit, not at any
stage prior to it.

In fact the sociology of man precedes his psychology, contrary to the
previous theory which maintains that psychology of man precedes his
sociology. This theory holds that if man had not acquired social
existence and sociology, he would not have reached the stage of
acquiring human psyche and individual psychology.

The first theory is purely of the fundamentality of individual only.
According to it, society has neither a real existence, nor any law, norm
or destiny. It is only individuals who have actual existence and can be
identified. The destiny of every individual is independent of the
destiny of other individuals.

According to the second theory also what is basic is the individual. The
proponents of this theory do not believe that society as a whole and as
a combination of individuals has an actual existence. Anyhow, they
maintain that the bond existing between the individuals is real and
similar to a physical bond. According to this theory though society has
no existence independent of the individuals and it is only the
individuals who have an actual existence, yet in view of the fact that
the individuals in a society are linked with each other like the various
component parts of a factory and all their actions are intertwined in a
mechanical chain of causes and effects, these individuals have a common
destiny, and society being composed of interconnected components, has
also identity independent of that of its component parts, that is the
individuals.

As for the third theory, it holds that both the individual and society
are basic. It maintains that as the existence of its component parts
(individuals) is not dissolved into that of society, and the component
parts do not cease to exist, as is the case with the chemical compounds,
the individual is basic. But society is also basic for the combination
of the individuals from spiritual, intellectual and emotional point of
view is similar to a chemical combination.

The individuals in society acquire a new identity, that is of society,
though they retain their own identity as well. According to this theory,
as a result of the mutual action and reaction of its component parts, a
new and living reality emerges in the form of society. In addition to
the individual conscience, will, desire and thinking, a new conscience,
a new will, a new desire and a new thinking appear which predominate the
individual conscience and consciousness.

According to the fourth theory only society is basic. All that exists is
collective spirit, collective conscience, collective consciousness,
collective will and desire and collective psychic. Individual conscience
and consciousness are only a manifestation of collective conscience and
consciousness.

As for the Qur'anic verses, they support the third theory. As we pointed
out earlier, the Holy Qur'an does not deal with human questions in the
same way as a book of science or philosophy would. It deals with these
questions differently. Anyhow, it mentions the questions concerning
society and individual in a way that substantiates the third theory.

The Holy Qur'an maintains that the peoples (societies) have a common
destiny, a common deed-sheet, and an understanding and consciousness.
They obey and disobey. It is evident that if a people were to have no
actual existence, there would have been no question of their destiny,
understanding, consciousness, obedience and disobedience. This proves
that the Holy Qur’an believes in some sort of collective and social
life. Collective life is not a mere allegory. It is as much a reality,
as collective death. The Holy Qur'an says: ***"Every nation has a term;
when it comes, they cannot put it back a single hour, nor can they put
it forward."*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:34)

The Holy Qur'an says: ***"Every nation shall be summoned to its
record."*** (Surah al-Jathiyah, 45:28)

This shows that each nation has a record of its deeds, and as a living,
conscious and responsible being, shall be summoned to render an account
of what it did.

The Holy Qur'an says: ***"To every nation We have made their deeds seem
fair."*** (Surah al-An'am, 6: 109)

This verse indicates that every nation acquires a special outlook, a
special way of thinking and some special standards. Each nation has a
special way of looking at things and understanding them. The judgements
of each nation are based on the special standards adopted by it. Each
nation has its own taste. The acts which seem fair to one nation, appear
to be unfair to another. It is the social atmosphere of a nation which
determines the taste of its individual members. The Holy Qur’an says:

***"Every nation tried to seize their Prophet and argued falsely with a
view to refute the truth. Then I seized them, and how awful was My
punishment."*** (Surah al-Mu'min, 40:5)

This verse refers to a shameful collective decision with a view to fight
the truth. In it, there is also a mention of a general punishment for
this collective offence.

In the Holy Qur'an there are instances in which the act of one
individual in society has been attributed to the whole society or the
act of one generation has been attributed to the subsequent generations.
[^1] This is possible only in the cases in which a particular people may
be of one collective way of thinking and may be having, so to say, one
collective spirit. For example, in the story of the tribe of Thamud, the
action of one man who hamstrung the she-camel of Prophet Salih, has been
attributed to the whole tribe. The Qur'an says: ***"They hamstrung
her"***. Thus the whole tribe has been regarded as culpable and
deserving punishment. ***"So your Lord destroyed them"***.

Explaining this point in one of his sermons Imam Ali says: *"Men! The
only thing which unites people and provides them with a common destiny
is happiness and resentment"*.

When people collectively feel pleased or displeased with something which
might have been done by one single person, they are to be regarded as
one man and they have a common destiny. The she-camel of Thamud was
hamstrung by one individual, but Allah punished the whole tribe, because
they all were pleased with his action. Allah has said: ***"They
hamstrung her and so they had to regret."*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara',
26:167)

Allah punished them all because they all approved the decision taken by
that one man. Hence, when that decision was put into practice it was
actually the collective decision of them all. Though hamstringing was
the action of one man, Allah has ascribed it to them generally. He said
that they hamstrung the she-camel, and not that one of them hamstrung
her.

Here there is another point worth-remembering. To be merely pleased with
a sin without practically committing it, is not regarded as a sin. If a
person feels happy on knowing that some other person has committed or is
about to commit a sin, that person himself will not regarded as guilty.
Even if a person decides to commit a sin himself, but does not commit it
actually, he is not to blame.

The approval of a sin committed by another individual is considered to
be a sin only when this approval amounts to some sort of participation
in the decision about that sin or in the commitment of it. That is the
nature of all collective sins. First the social atmosphere and the
collective spirit of people approve the commitment of a particular sin
and pave the way for it. Then one member of society whose decision is a
part of the decision of other members and whose approval is a part of
the approval of others, perpetrates that sin actually. In this case the
sin of that individual is the sin of all members of that society. What
has been stated by Imam Ali visualizes this kind of situation and inter
alia explains the meaning of the above quoted verse. Otherwise mere
happiness or resentment not involving participation in the decision and
the action of the actual perpetrator is not regarded as a sin.

In the Holy Qur’an occasionally the deeds of one generation also have
been attributed to the subsequent generations. For example the past
deeds of the Israelites have been attributed to the Jews contemporary to
the Holy Prophet. The Holy Qur'an says that these people deserve
humiliation and ignominy because they used to kill the Prophets. That
was said because from the viewpoint of the Holy Qur'an the Israelites of
the time of the Holy Prophet were a continuation and an extension of
their predecessors who used to kill the Prophets.

Not only that, but from the point of view of collective thinking they
were exactly those people of the past who still continued to exist. The
French philosopher, Auguste Comte says: "Human society consists more of
the dead than of the living". In other words, in all periods of history
the people of the past influence mankind more than the living people.
The statement that "the dead more than ever continue to rule over the
living", means the same thing. (Vide: Raymond Aron's Main Currents in
Sociological Thought, Vol. I, p. 91)

Al-Mizan, the celebrated commentary on the Holy Qur'an, discussing the
question that a society having one spirit and one collective thinking
assumes the position of just one human being and all its members become
as if they are the organs of one person, says that all the members of
society become so absorbed into the personality of society that their
joys and griefs become the joys and griefs of society and their
prosperity and misery become its prosperity and misery. Al-Mizan
continues to say: "The Holy Qur'an has expressed this view regarding the
nations and societies having a collective thinking as a result of their
religious or national bias, by declaring the subsequent generations
accountable for the deeds of the preceding generations. The Holy Qur'an
blames the present people for the deeds of their fore-fathers. Obviously
this is the only correct way of passing judgement on the people having a
collective thinking and a collective spirit". (al-Mizan, vol. IV, p.
112)

Society and Tradition
---------------------

Should society have a real existence, it must also have its own laws and
conventions. But if we accept the first theory about the nature of
society as mentioned above, and deny its actual existence, we have to
admit that society has no laws or conventions. In case we accept the
second theory and hold that the combination of society is synthetic and
mechanical, society will certainly be having laws and conventions, but
only those which relate to the causative system of its component parts
and their mutual mechanical effects.

It will not be having any signs or characteristics of life. In case we
accept the third theory, society should be having its laws and
conventions independent of the laws and conventions of its component
parts (individuals), for in this case society enjoys a sort of
independent collective life, although not removed from the life of the
individuals, but scattered in it. On getting organized into society, the
individual human beings lose the independence of their identity only
comparatively. Otherwise they retain it to a very large extent.

The individual life and individual endowments and acquirements are not
totally dissolved in the collective life. In fact according to this
theory man lives with two lives, two spirits and two egos, - one being
his human life, human spirit and human ego born of his basic nature and
the other his collective life, collective spirit and collective ego born
of his collective life and absorbed into his individual ego. That is why
man is governed both by psychological and sociological laws. According
to the fourth theory, the only laws and conventions that govern man as
such are the social conventions.

The first person among the Muslim scholars, who mentioned the laws and
conventions governing society and distinguished from the laws and
conventions of the individuals, and consequently maintained that society
had a personality, a nature and a reality, was Abdur Rahman Ibn Khaldun
of Tunis. He in his celebrated *Introduction to History* has discussed
this question in detail. Among the modern scholars the first person who
discovered the conventions governing the communities, was the French
philosopher of the 18th century, Montesquieu. About him Raymond Aron
says: "His purpose was to make history intelligible.

He sought to understand historical truth. But historical truth appeared
to him in the form of an almost limitless diversity of morals, customs,
ideas, laws, and institutions His inquiry's point of departure was
precisely this seemingly incoherent diversity. The goal of the inquiry
should have been the replacement of this incoherent diversity by a
conceptual order. One might say that Montesquieu, exactly like Max
Weber, wanted to proceed from the meaningless fact to an intelligible
order. This attitude is precisely the one peculiar to the sociologist".
(Raymond Aron, Main Currents in Sociological Thought, vol. 1, p. 14)

The gist of this statement is that behind the so many forms of social
phenomena apparently inconsistent with each other, a sociologist
discovers such a unity that all the varying phenomena are recognized to
be the manifestations of that unity.

In the same way, all the similar social events and phenomena have their
origin in a similar sequence of analogous causes. Here is a passage from
the observations on the causes of the rise and fall of the Romans: "It
is not fortune that rules the world.

We can ask the Romans, who had a constant series of success when they
followed a certain plan, and an uninterrupted sequence of disasters when
they followed another. There are general causes, whether moral or
physical. . . which operate in every monarchy, to bring about its rise,
its duration and its fall. All accidents are subject to these causes,
and if the outcome of a single battle, i.e. a particular cause, was the
ruin of a state, there was a general cause which decreed that that state
was destined to perish through a single battle. In short, the main
impulse carries all the particular accidents along with it". (Raymond
Aron, *Main Currents in Sociological Thought*, vol. I, p. 4)

The Holy Qur'an declares specifically that the nations and societies as
such have laws and norms according to which they progress or decline.
When it is said that a nation or a community has a common destiny, that
amounts to saying that society has its law. In respect of the Israelites
the Holy Qur'an says: '

***"In the scriptures We decreed for the Children of Isra'il: Twice you
shall create disorder in the land and you shall become great tyrants.
When the time of the punishment of your first transgression came, We
sent against you, Our slaves of great might who ravaged your country.
Thus the prophecy was fulfilled. Then We granted you victory over them.
We heaped you with wealth and sons and made you a greater host. (We said
to you): If you do good, it shall be to your own advantage; but if you
do evil, you yourselves shall suffer. So when the time of the punishment
of your second transgression came, (We sent against you other slaves of
Ours) to ravage you and enter the Masjid in the same way as had the
former army entered it, utterly destroying all that they laid their hand
on. (And We said): It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but
if you repeat (the crime), We shall also repeat (the punishment). We
have Hell, a prison for the disbelievers."*** (Surah Bani Isra'il,
17:4 - 8)

The sentence: *"If you repeat (the crime), We shall also repeat the
punishment"*, has been addressed to a community and not to any
individual. Hence it clearly shows that the laws governing societies are
universal.

Compulsion or Volition
----------------------

One of the basic questions which have been under discussion among the
scholars, especially during the last century, is the question of the
compulsion or volition of individual spirit vis-a-vis collective spirit.
If we accept the first theory concerning the composition of society,
regard its composition as merely imaginary and hold that it is only
individual who is basic, then there can be no question of collective
compulsion, for in that case there would be existing no collective force
or power. Hence if there were any compulsion, that would be on the part
of an individual or individuals only. No individual would be compelled
by society in that sense in which the supporters of the theory of
collective compulsion talk of it.

But if we accept the fourth theory, look at the individual only as raw
material and an empty receptacle from the viewpoint of human
personality, think in the terms of exclusive basis of society and regard
the entire human personality, human intellect and human will, which from
the basis of the volition of an individual, as a manifestation of the
collective will and intellect and as a guise which the collective spirit
has assumed to promote its ends, there will be left no room for a
conception of free will of the individual in social matters.

The French sociologist, Emile Durkheim, who believes that society is
basic and of prime importance says: "Unlike such things as eating and
sleeping which have animal aspect, all social and, in fact human matters
are the product of society, and not that of individual thinking or will.
These matters have three characteristics: they are external; they are
compulsive and they are general. They are external because they are
imposed on an individual by society from outside. They actually existed
in society even prior to an individual's being born. The individual
accepts them under the influence of society.

That is how an individual accepts moral and social customs, religious
precepts and the like. The social matters are compulsive in the sense
that they impose themselves on the individual and give their own colour
to his conscience, judgement, feeling, thinking and sentiments. As these
matters are compulsive, they are automatically general and universal
also."

However, if we accept the third theory and hold that both the individual
and the society are basic, that would in no way mean that the
individuals are helpless in human and social matters even if it is
conceded that the force of society predominates the force of the
individuals. Durkheim believed in compulsion because he ignored the
importance of human nature, the development of which is due to basic and
substantial human evolution. This human nature gives man a sort of
freedom which enables him to resist the impositions of society. That is
how a sort of balance exists in the relations between society and the
individual.

The Holy Qur'an maintains that society has a nature, a personality and
an actuality. It holds that society lives and dies. It has conscience
and the power of obeying and disobeying. At the same time the Qur'an
also maintains that the individual has enough power to ignore the
dictates of society, if he so desires, and bases its doctrine on what it
calls (human) 'nature framed by Allah'.

There were some people in Makkah who described themselves as weak and
put forward their weakness as an excuse to shirk their responsibility.
In fact they said that they were helpless and could not defy society.
The Holy Qur'an says that their excuse was not acceptable because at
least they could migrate from that social atmosphere: ***"Was not
Allah's earth spacious so that you could have migrated therein."***
(Surah an-Nisa, 4:97)

At another place the Holy Qur'an says: ***"Believers, look after your
own souls because he who goes astray cannot harm you if you have the
right guidance."*** (Surah al-Mai'dah, 5:105)

In the famous Qur'anic verse there is a reference to a trait of human
nature. In that verse of the Holy Qur'an after declaring that He has put
the covenant of monotheism in the nature of man, Allah has added: ***"So
that you may not say that our forefathers were pagans and we, being
their posterity, had to follow them."*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:172 - 173)

Therefore, with this kind of human nature, there can be no question of
any compulsion.

The teachings of the Holy Qur’an are based absolutely on, a sense of
responsibility - responsibility towards oneself and towards society.
Exhortation to what is good and restraint from what is evil are a
manifestation of the individual's revolt against the corruption and
weaknesses of society. The stories related by the Holy Qur'an mostly
represent this element of individual's revolt against the atmosphere of
social corruption. The stories of Prophet Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, 'Isa, the
Holy Prophet, the People of the Cave, the Believer of the tribe of
Fir'awn, all contain this element. .

The root cause of the misconception about the helplessness of
individuals in relation to society and social atmosphere is that it has
been wrongly presumed that in the case of a real compound its components
are fully dissolved and with the emergence of a new reality their
plurality is assimilated to the unity of the whole. It is said that
there are only two alternatives: either the existence of the
personality, freedom and independence of the individuals be admitted and
consequently it should be denied that society is an actuality and it is
a real compound; or alternatively it should be admitted that society is
a real com

pound. In the case of the first alternative the position will be in
conformity with the first and the second theories, and in the case of
the second alternative it will have to be denied that individuals have
any personality, freedom or independence. That is what the proposition
of Durkheim states. Anyway, it is not possible to combine both these
alternative theories. As all indications and sociological arguments
support the actuality of society, the counter-theory must be regarded as
invalid.

As a matter of fact all real compounds are not alike from philosophical
point of view. In the lower grades of nature, that is in the case of
inorganic matter and lifeless beings, according to the philosophers,
each existing thing is governed by one absolutely simple force, and
nature has dealt with all of them in a like manner. In their case the
component parts are assimilated fully and the existence of the parts is
dissolved absolutely into the existence of the whole.

That is what we see in the case of water which is a compound of oxygen
and hydrogen. But the more the level of a compound goes up the more its
components acquire relative independence of the whole, with the result
that a sort of plurality in the unity and a unity in the plurality is
established. We find that man in spite of his unity enjoys a wonderful
plurality. Not only his faculties and subordinate forces retain their
plurality to a great extent, but there also exists a sort of permanent
conflict and struggle between his inner forces. Society is the most real
being in nature, and its component parts relatively enjoy a great deal
of independence.

The component parts of society are human beings, who are equipped with
their innate intellect and will. Their individual and natural existence
precedes their social existence. In addition, as we said earlier the
components of the high grade compounds retain their relative
independence. In view of all these facts the individual spirit of man is
not helpless against the collective spirit of society.

[16] "Therefore woe to those who write the scripture with their own
hands and then say: ***'This is from Allah, in order to make some paltry
gain. Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for
what they earn thereby!'"*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:79)

***"Ignominy shall attend them wherever they are found, except in cases
in which they came to terms with Allah and people. They have incurred
the wrath of Allah and humiliation has been stamped on them. That is
because they used to disbelieve the revelations of Allah and kill the
Prophets wrongfully. That is because they disobeyed and used to
transgress."*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:112)

[^1]: "Therefore woe to those who write the scripture with their own
hands and then say: 'This is from Allah, in order to make some paltry
gain. Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for
what they earn thereby!'" (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:79) "Ignominy shall
attend them wherever they are found, except in cases in which they came
to terms with Allah and people. They have incurred the wrath of Allah
and humiliation has been stamped on them. That is because they used to
disbelieve the revelations of Allah and kill the Prophets wrongfully.
That is because they disobeyed and used to transgress." (Surah Ale
Imran, 3:112)


