Chapter 2: Knowledge and Faith
==============================

Relation Between Knowledge and Faith
------------------------------------

We have studied the relation between man's humanity and his animality,
in other words, the relation between man's cultural and spiritual life
and his material life. It is now clear that man's humanity has an
independent existence and is not a mere reflection of his animal life.

It is also clear that knowledge and faith are the two basic parts of the
humanity of man. Now let us see what mutual relation these two facets of
humanity have or can have.

Unfortunately certain parts of the Old Testament have in the Christian
world created an idea of contradiction between knowledge and faith. This
idea which has cost dearly to knowledge and faith both has its root in
the Book of Genesis of the Old Testament.

Narrating the story of Adam and the Forbidden Tree, the Book of Genesis,
Chapter II, verses 16 and 17 says:

***"And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die".***

In the Chapter III, verses 1 - 7 it says:

***"Now the serpent was more subtile than any beast of the field which
the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said,
Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?***

***And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden:***

***But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God
hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye
die. And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely for God
doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.***

***And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it
was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she
took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband
with her; and he did eat.***

***And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were
naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons".***

In the verse 22 - 23 of the same chapter it says:

***"And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to
know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: "***[^1]

According to this conception of man, God, knowledge and disobedience,
God wants that man should not be aware of good and evil. The Forbidden
Tree is the tree of knowledge. Man attains knowledge only if he rebels
against God's command (disobeys the teachings of religion and the
Prophets), but for that very reason he is driven out of God's Heaven.

On the basis of this conception all evil insinuations are those of
knowledge, and reason is the insinuating Devil.

In contrast, we learn from the Holy Qurâ€™an that Allah taught all names
(realities) to Adam and then ordered the angels to prostrate themselves
before him. The Devil was condemned because he refused to prostrate
himself before the vicegerent of Allah, who was aware of the realities.
The Prophetic traditions have told us that the Forbidden Tree was that
of avarice, greed and such like things, that is the things related to
the animality of Adam, not to his humanity. The insinuating Devil always
insinuates what is against reason and what answers the base desires. It
is concupiscence and not reason that represents the Devil within man.
Contrary to all this what we find in the Book of Genesis is really very
amazing.

It is this conception which has divided the European history of culture
during the past 1500 years into two distinct periods, namely the age of
faith and the age of science, and has placed science and faith in
opposition to each other.

In contrast the Islamic history of culture is divided into the period of
advancement of knowledge and faith and the period in which both of them
declined together. We Muslims should keep ourselves away from the wrong
conception which has caused an irreparable loss to knowledge, faith and
humanity, and must not blindly regard the contradiction between
knowledge and faith as an indisputable fact.

We now propose to make an analytical study of this question and see
whether each of these two facets of humanity exclusively belongs to a
distinct period or age, and whether man in every age is condemned to be
only a semi-man and always to suffer the evils ensuing either from
ignorance or from infidelity.

As you will see every faith is inevitably based on a particular way of
thinking and a special conception of cosmos. There is no doubt that many
conceptions and interpretations of the world, though they may be the
basis of a faith, are not acceptable because they are not in consonance
with rational and scientific principles. Therefore the question is
whether there exists any conception of the world and interpretation of
life which is rational and at the same time fit to be the infrastructure
of a felicitous faith.

If it is found that such a conception does exist, then there is no
reason why man should be supposed to be condemned for ever to suffer the
evils ensuing either from ignorance or infidelity. The relation between
knowledge and faith can be discussed from two angles. One of them is to
see whether there exists a faith, producing conception which arouses
faith and is rational too, or all the ideas which are scientific are
contrary to faith, give no hope and produce no optimism. We will discuss
this question later under the heading, **Conception of Cosmos.**

The second angle from which we can discuss the relation between faith
and knowledge is the question as to how each of these two affects man.
Does knowledge draw us to one thing and faith to something contradictory
to that? Does knowledge want to mould us in one way and faith in
another? Or do faith and knowledge supplement each other, taking part in
making harmonious whole of us? Let us see what knowledge gives us and
what faith gives.

Knowledge gives us light and power; faith gives us love, hope and
warmth. Knowledge helps make implements and appliances and accelerates
progress; faith determines the purpose of human efforts and gives
direction to them. Knowledge brings about outer revolution; faith causes
inner revolution. Knowledge makes the world man's world; faith makes
life the life of humanity. Knowledge expands the existence of man
horizontally; faith lifts it up vertically. Knowledge trains man's
temperament; faith reforms man. Both knowledge and faith give power to
man; but the power given by faith is continuous, whereas the power given
by knowledge is disjointed. Knowledge is beauty; faith is beauty too.
But knowledge beautifies reason and thought; faith beautifies spirit and
feeling. Both knowledge and faith give man security. But knowledge
provides outer security, whereas faith provides inner security.
Knowledge gives protection against diseases, floods, earthquakes and
storms. Faith provides security against restlessness, loneliness, sense
of insecurity and low thinking. Knowledge harmonizes the world with man,
faith harmonizes man with himself.

The need of man to both knowledge and faith has attracted the attention
of religious as well as secular thinkers.

Dr Muhammad Iqbal says:

***"Humanity needs three things today, a spiritual interpretation of the
universe, spiritual emancipation of the individual, and basic principles
of a universal import directing the evolution of human society on a
spiritual basis.***

Modern Europe has, no doubt, built a realistic system on these lines,
but experience shows that truth revealed through pure reason is
incapable of bringing that fire of living conviction which personal
revelation alone can bring. This is the reason why pure thought has so
little influenced man while religion has always elevated individuals and
transformed the societies. The idealism of Europe never became a living
factor in her life and the result is a perverted ego seeking itself
through mutually intolerant democracies whose sole function is to
exploit the poor in the interest of the rich. Believe me, Europe today
is the greatest hindrance in the way of man's ethical advancement. The
Muslim, on the other hand, is in possession of these ultimate ideas on
the basis of a revelation, which, speaking from the inmost depths of
life, internalizes its own apparent externality. With him the spiritual
basis of life is a matter of conviction, for which even the least
enlightened man among us can lay down his life". *(Reconstruction of
Religious Thought in Islam).*

Will Durant, the well-known author of the History of Civilization,
despite his being a non-religious man, says:

***"The ancient world differed from the new machine world only in means,
not in aims. What will you say if it is found that all our progress
consists in the improvement of methods and means and not in the
betterment of the aims and goals?"***[^2]

***He also says, "Wealth is boring; reason and wisdom are only a cold
dim light. It is only love which with indescribable tenderness warms the
hearts".***[^3]

It is now more or less realized that scienticism or pure scientific
training is not to make a full man. It can produce a semi-man not a
full-fledged one. This training turns out raw material of man, not a
finished man. It can produce a strong, healthy and the unilateral man
but not a virtuous and multilateral being. It is now recognized by all
that the period of pure science has now come to an end. Society is now
threatened with an idealistic vacuum. Some people want to fill this
vacuum with pure philosophy and some others are seeking the help of
literature, art and humanitarian sciences for this purpose.

In our country also there is a suggestion to fill the gap with
humanizing literature, especially the mystic literature as produced by
Mowlawi, Sa'di and Hafiz. The proponents of this scheme forget that this
literature itself has been inspired by religion and its humanizing
spirit, which has made it attractive, is Islamic. Otherwise how is it
that some modern literature in spite of its loud claim of being
humanistic, is so insipid, and lacking in spirit and attractiveness. In
fact the human content of our mystic literature is the result of its
Islamic conception of the universe and man. If we take the Islamic
spirit out of these masterpieces, nothing but a carcass of them will be
left.

Will Durant is one of those who realizes the existence of vacuum. He
suggests that literature, philosophy and art should fill the gap. He
says: "The damage done to our schools and colleges is mostly due to the
education theory of Spencer,[^4] who has defined education as bringing
man in harmony with his environment. This definition is lifeless and
mechanical, and it stems from the philosophy of the superiority of
mechanics. Every creative spirit and brain is averse to it. The result
is that our schools and colleges have been filled with theoretical and
mechanical sciences and have remained devoid of such subjects as
literature, history, philosophy and art, which are being considered to
be useless. An education which is purely scientific, can produce nothing
except tools. It alienates man from beauty and estranges; him from
wisdom. It would have been better for the world if Spencer had not
written a book". [^5]

It is very surprising that though Will Durant admits that this vacuum is
in the first place an idealistic one, resulting from a sort, of wrong
thinking and lack of faith in human aims and goals, he is still of the
opinion that the problem can be solved by anything non-material though
it may be merely imaginative. He thinks that occupation with history,
art, beauty, poetry and music can fill a vacuum originating from the
depths of man's instinct of looking for an ideal and seeking perfection.

Can Knowledge and Faith Take the Place of Each Other?
-----------------------------------------------------

We have learnt that there is no contradiction between faith and
knowledge. They rather supplement each other. Now there arises one more
question: Is it possible that they fill the place of each other?

This question need not be answered elaborately for we already know the
respective roles of faith and knowledge. It is evident that knowledge
cannot take the place of faith which gives love and hope besides light
and power. Faith elevates our desires, and in addition to helping us in
realizing our aims and objects, removes the element of selfishness and
individualism from our desires and ideals and puts them on the basis of
love and spiritual and moral relations. Besides being a tool in our
hands, it basically changes our essence. Similarly faith also cannot
fill the place of knowledge, which makes us familiar with nature,
reveals its laws to us and makes us aware of ourselves.

Historical experience has shown that separation between knowledge and
faith has caused irreparable losses. Faith should .be identified in the
light of knowledge, which saves it from being mixed up with myths. Faith
without knowledge ends in ,stagnation and blind prejudice, and can
achieve no purpose. Where there is no knowledge, faith of the believer
becomes a tool in the hands of the clever hypocrites. We saw an example
, of this contingency in the case of the Khawarij (Kharijites) of the
early Islamic era. Other examples in various forms we have seen in later
periods and are still seeing.

Knowledge without faith is a sharp sword in the hand of a drunken brute.
It is a lamp in the hand of a thief to help him pick up the best
articles at midnight. That is why there is not the least difference in
the nature and conduct of the faithless man of today who has knowledge
and the faithless man of yesterday who had no knowledge. After all what
is the difference between the Churchills, Johnsons, Nixons and Stalins
of today and the Pharaohs, Genghis Khans and Attilas of yore?

It may be said that as knowledge is light as well as power, it has no
special and exclusive application to the external world. It illuminates
our internal world also and consequently gives us power to change it.
Therefore knowledge can make the world and man both. It can perform its
own task, that is world-making as well as the task of belief, that is
man making. The answer is that all this is true, but the basic point is
that knowledge is a sort of implement and its use depends on the will of
man. Whatever man does, he can do that in a better way with the help of
knowledge. That is why we say that knowledge is helpful in securing
objectives and traversing the path man chooses for himself.

It is obvious that implements are used for achieving a predetermined
goal. Now the question is on what basis the goal should be determined?

As we know, by nature man is an animal. Humanity is his acquired
quality. In other words, human talents of man are to be nurtured and
promoted gradually in the light of faith. By his nature man moves
towards his animal and selfish objectives which are material and
individualistic. He employs the implements available to him for this
purpose. Hence he is in need of a separate driving force which may
neither be his objective nor his tool. He needs a force which may
explode him from within and put his hidden talents into action. He
requires a force which may bring about a revolution in his conscience
and give him a new orientation.

This task cannot be performed by discovery and knowledge of the laws
governing man and nature. The performance of this task is possible only
if the sanctity and importance of certain values are embedded in the
soul of man. For this purpose man must have a number of noble tendencies
ensuing from a particular way of thinking and certain conceptions of the
universe and man. These conceptions and the contents of their dimensions
and proofs cannot be made available in any laboratory, and, as we shall
explain, are out of the reach of science.

The past and present history has shown what evil consequences the
dissociation of knowledge and faith from each other has produced. Where
there was faith but no knowledge, the efforts of the humanitarian people
were directed to the matters which either were not much fruitful or did
not produce good results. These efforts were often the source of
prejudices and obscurantism, and occasionally resulted in harmful
conflicts.

Where there has been knowledge but faith has been lacking, as in the
case of some modern societies, the entire force of knowledge has been
used to serve the cause of self-aggrandizement, amassing wealth, and
satisfying the lust of power, exploitation, subjugation and craftiness.

The past two or three centuries may be regarded as the period of
attaching too much importance to scientific knowledge and ignoring
faith. Many intellectuals thought that all human problems would be
solved by science, but experience has proved the contrary. Today there
is no intellectual denying that man needs some sort of faith. Even if
that faith is not religious, it is bound to be ultra-scientific.
Bertrand Russell has materialistic outlook, yet he admits that: "The
work that merely aims at earning income shall not produce good results.
For this purpose one should adopt a profession that implants in the
individual a faith, a purpose and a goal".[^6]

Today the materialists feel compelled to claim that they are
philosophically materialists and morally idealists. In other words they
say that they are materialists from theoretical point of view and
spiritualists from practical and idealistic point of view. Anyhow, the
problem remains as to how it is possible that a man should be a
materialist theoretically and a spiritualist practically? The
materialists themselves should answer this question.

George Sarton, the world famous scientist and the author of the
well-known book, History of Science, describing the inability of science
to humanize the mutual relations of mankind and underlining man's urgent
need of the force of faith, says: "In certain fields science has made
wonderful progress. But in other fields related to the mutual relations
of human beings, for example the fields of national and international
politics, we are still laughing at ourselves".

George Sarton admits that the faith man needs is a religious faith. He
says this of man's need for the triad of art, religion, and science:
"Art reveals beauty; it is the joy of life. Religion means love; it is
the music of life. Science means truth and reason; it is the conscience
of mankind. We need all of them art and religion as well as science.
Science is absolutely necessary but it is never sufficient". (George
Sarton, *Six Wings: Men of Science in the Renaissance*, p. 218. (London,
1958).

[^1]: Extracts from The Holy Bible, AD 1611. The British and Foreign
Bible Society London.

[^2]: The Pleasures of Philosophy pp. 240

[^3]: The Pleasures of Philosophy pp. 114 (New York, 1953).

[^4]: Celebrated English philosopher of the 19th century.

[^5]: The Pleasures of Philosophy, pp. 168, 169 (New York, 1953)

[^6]: Bertrand Russell, Marriage and Morals, p. 102. (London 1929)


