Chapter 26: What is History?
============================

History can be defined in three ways. In fact there are three branches
of history closely linked with each other.

I. History is that branch of knowledge which deals with the past events
and the conditions connected with the people of the past as
distinguished from the present day conditions and circumstances. All
events which relate to the existing time, that is the time when they are
recorded, are called the events of the day, are judged, reported, and
recorded by daily newspapers. But as soon as its time passes, every
event becomes a part of history. So in this sense history means that
branch of knowledge which deals with the past events and occurrences and
give an account of the past people. Biographies, narratives of the
conquests and the stories of the eminent people as compiled by all
nations come under this category.

In this sense history means, firstly, the knowledge of the individual
matters and the events concerning the individuals, not of general laws,
and rules of mutual relations. Secondly, it is a transmitted science.
Thirdly, it is a knowledge of 'being', not that of 'becoming'. Fourthly,
it is related to the past, not to the present. We in our terminology
call this sort of history 'transmitted history'.

II. In another sense history signifies that branch of knowledge which
deals with the rules and the traditions which governed the life of the
peoples in the past. These rules and traditions are deduced from the
study and the analysis of the past events. The subject of the
transmitted history and the questions with which it deals, namely the
past events and occurrences, serve as the preliminaries of this branch
of history. In fact the past events, for the purpose of history in this
sense, can be compared to the material which a physicist collects in his
laboratory for his study, analysis and experiment in order to find out
its characteristics and properties and to discover general laws
concerning it. The job of a historian in this second sense is to
discover the nature of historical events and to find out their causative
relations in order to be able to deduce some general rules applicable to
all similar events of the past and the present. We call this branch of
history 'scientific history'.

Though the past events are the subject of study in scientific history,
the general rules which are drawn from these events do not exclusively
belong to the past. They are equally applicable to the present and the
future as well. This aspect of scientific history makes it very useful
to man as a source of knowledge and helps him control his future.

The difference between the work of a research scholar of scientific
history and a natural scientist is that the subject of study of a
natural scientist is the material which actually exists at present and
hence his entire study and analysis are physical and experimental;
whereas the material which is studied by a historian, though existed in
the past, is extinct now. Only some information about it and some
documents connected with it are at the disposal of the historian. As far
as his findings are concerned, he can be compared to a judge of a court
of justice pronouncing his judgement on the basis of documentary
evidence, not in the basis of the evidence of eye-witnesses. As such the
analysis of a historian though logical and rational is not physical. He
carries out his analysis in his mental laboratory with the instruments
of reasoning and inference. In this respect the job of a historian is
like that of a philosopher rather than like that of a natural scientist.

Like transmitted history scientific history also relates to the past,
not to the present. It is the knowledge of 'being' not of 'becoming'.
But unlike transmitted history it is general, not particular, and it is
rational not merely transmitted.

Scientific history, in fact, is a branch of sociology. It is sociology
of the past societies. The contemporary societies and the past societies
both form the subject of study of sociology. But if we confine our
sociology to the study of contemporary societies, scientific history and
sociology, become two different branches of knowledge, though still
closely related to each other and dependent upon each other.

III. The word, history in its third sense is used to denote philosophy
of history, that is the knowledge of the development of society from one
stage to another and the knowledge of the laws governing these changes.
In other words, it is the science of 'becoming' of societies, not of
their 'being' only.

Here the reader may ask whether it is possible that societies should
have the two qualities of 'being' and 'becoming' and that 'being' be the
subject of one branch of science, named scientific history and
'becoming' be the subject of another branch of science named philosophy
of history, while we know that it is not possible to combine these two
qualities, for 'being' indicates rest and 'becoming' indicates movement.
Societies can have only one of these two qualities. The picture we form
of societies can depict either 'being' or 'becoming'.

The respected reader may pose this point in a better and more
comprehensive form and say: The picture we form of the world and of
society as a part of the world, can on the whole be either a static or a
dynamic. If it is static, it can have the quality of 'being', not that
of 'becoming'; and if it is dynamic, it will have the quality of
'becoming', not that of 'being'. We find that on this very basis there
exists a clear division of philosophical schools. One system of
philosophy believes in 'being' and the other in 'becoming'. The school
which believes in 'being' maintains that 'being' and 'non-being' cannot
exist together for they are contradictory and the simultaneous existence
of contradictories is impossible. If there is 'being', 'non-being' does
not exist, and if there is 'non-being' 'being' does not exist. In each
particular case either of these two must be chosen. As the world and
society being existent, obviously have the quality of 'being', naturally
they are governed by stillness or motionlessness. In contrast to this
view, the school which believes in 'becoming', maintains that 'being'
and 'non. being' can exist at the same time, for the idea of 'becoming'
implies motion, which means nothing but that a thing is and at the same
time it is not.

The philosophy of 'being' and the philosophy of 'becoming' reflect two
completely opposite outlooks on existence. One has to choose either of
these two philosophies. If we choose the first one, we must presume that
societies have the quality of 'being' only not that of 'becoming'. On
the contrary if we choose the second philosophy, then we must presume
that societies have the quality of 'becoming' and not that of 'being'.
This means that either we have scientific history in the above mentioned
sense and do not have philosophy of history or we have philosophy of
history and do not have scientific history.

The answer to this question is that this view about existence and
non-existence, about stillness and motion, and about the principle of
the impossibility of the simultaneous existence of contradictories, is
purely a figment of Western idea. This way of thinking is actually due
to ignorance of many vital questions concerning existence, especially
its fundamentality and some other relevant matters.

Firstly, to say that 'being' is tantamount to stillness, or in other
words that stillness means 'being' and motion' means a combination of
'being' and 'non-being' that is a combination of two contradictories, is
a grave error, in which some philosophical schools of the West have
fallen.

Secondly, the question under discussion has nothing to do with the above
mentioned philosophical question. What has been brought out here is that
society like any other living being has two types of laws. The first
type is that which governs species within the framework of its class,
and the second is that which becomes applicable to it with its evolution
and transformation to another species. We call the first type the laws
of 'being' and the second type the laws of 'becoming'.

Incidentally some sociologists have taken due notice of this point.
Auguste Comte is one of them. Reymond Aron says: "Statics and dynamics
are two basic categories of Auguste Comte's sociology . . . Statics
consists essentially in examining, in analyzing what Comte calls the
social consensus (social unanimity). A society is comparable to a living
organism. It is impossible to study the functioning of an organ without
placing it in the context of living creature. By the same token it is
impossible to study politics of the state without placing them in the
context of the society at a given moment.... As for dynamics at the
outset it consists merely of the description of the successive stages
through which human societies pass". (Raymond Aron, *Main Currents in
Sociological Thought, vol. I. pp. 85, 86*)

If we take into consideration every species of living beings, from
mammals, reptiles and birds to all others, we find that there are
special laws which relate to each class. So long as the members of a
particular species continue to belong to it, they are governed by its
special laws, such as the laws relating to the embryonic stages of an
animal, its health and sickness, its mode of nutrition, its mode of
reproduction, its way of rearing its young ones, its instincts, its
migration or its mating habits.

According to the theory of the development and evolution of species, in
addition to the special laws peculiar to every species and operating
within the fabric of its own class, there exist a number of other laws
which relate to the process of the evolution of the lower species to the
higher species. These laws have assumed a philosophical form and are
sometimes called the philosophy of evolution instead of biological laws.

By virtue of its being a living thing, society also has two kinds of
laws: biological laws and evolutionary laws. There are some laws of
societies which relate to their social life and the origin and decline
of their cultures. They govern all societies in all stages of their
development. We call these laws the laws of 'being'. There are other
laws which relate to the development of societies from one stage to
another and from one system to another. They are known as the laws of
'becoming". When we later discuss both these kinds of laws, the
difference between them will become clear.

Thus history in the third sense is the study of the evolution of
societies from one stage to another. It is not merely the knowledge of
their living conditions at any particular stage or all stages. Not to
confuse it with the questions, we call scientific history, we have named
this knowledge the philosophy of history. As most people do not
differentiate between the questions of non-evolutionary movements dealt
with by scientific history, and the question of evolutionary movements
of history dealt with by philosophy of history, confusion crops up and
leads to misunderstanding.

Like scientific history, philosophy of history is also general, not
particular and is rational, not transmitted. But unlike scientific
history it is the knowledge of 'being', not of 'becoming'. Moreover,
unlike scientific history, the questions with which it deals are not
considered to be historical because they relate to the past events
alone. They are considered to be so because they represent a process
which began in the past, though it still continues and will be drawn to
the future. Time is one of the dimensions of these question, not merely
the period of their duration.

The knowledge of history in all these three senses is useful. Even
transmitted history, that is the knowledge of the conditions and the
events connected with the life of the individuals can be useful,
inspiring, instructive and constructive. Of course the usefulness of
transmitted history depends on the persons whose life account it is, and
on the points which are drawn from their life. Man by virtue of the law
of imitation is influenced by the behaviour, conduct, habits and customs
of his companions and contemporaries. Just as he learns manners and
rules of behaviour from the actual life of his contemporaries and
sometimes like Luqman learns politeness from the rude and goodness from
the wicked, by virtue of this very law he is benefitted by the account
of the people of the past also. History like movies turn the past into
the present. That is why the Holy Qur'an mentions useful points from the
life of those persons who are fit to be a model for others. About the
Holy Prophet it says: ***"Surely in the Messenger of Allah you have a
good example."*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:21)

About Prophet Ibrahim it says: ***"There is a good example for you to
follow Ibrahim and those who are with him."*** (Surah al-Mumtahinah,
60:5)

When the Holy Qur'an mentions any individual as a pattern or a paragon
of perfection, it does not take into consideration their worldly
personality. It refers to their human and moral personality only. The
Holy Qur'an describes as a sage even a black slave, who is not a king,
nor has he the reputation of being a philosopher, nor is he a wealthy
person. He is only a clear-sighted slave. The Holy Qur'an makes his name
synonymous with sagacity. The believer of the tribe of Fir'awn and the
believer of al-Yasin also belong to this category.

In this book we have discussed society and history from the viewpoint of
the Islamic conception of the world. Here our attention is confined to
scientific history and the philosophy of history, for only these two fit
in within the framework of world conception. For this reason we propose
to discuss these two subjects a little further. We now begin with
scientific history.

Scientific History
------------------

Let us recall that, as we pointed out earlier, scientific history is
based on the idea that independently of individuals, society has its own
personality and primary importance. Should it be presumed that society
has no independent personality, nothing will be left except the
individuals and the laws governing them, and consequently scientific
history, which is the knowledge of the rules and the norms governing
societies will become meaningless. History can have laws only if it has
an independent nature and it can have an independent nature only if
society also has a nature. In connection with scientific history the
following questions are to be examined:

(i) As mentioned earlier, scientific history is based on transmitted
history, which may be called the material to be analyzed in the
laboratory of scientific history. Therefore, first of all it must be
ascertained whether transmitted history is reliable. If it is not
reliable, any investigation into the laws governing societies would be
absurd and meaningless.

(ii) But if it is admitted that transmitted history is reliable and that
society has a nature and a personality independent of the individuals,
then it will be possible to deduce laws and general rules from
historical events provided it is also admitted that the law of causation
is operative in the domain of human affairs, that is the matters which
are subject to human will and choice, and that such matters include
historical events.

Otherwise, historical events cannot be considered to be subject to any
rule or regulation which may be generalized. So the vital question is
whether history is governed by the law of causation, and if it is, how
man should use his will and choice?

(iii) Is the nature of history materialistic? Is it mainly governed by a
material force, all spiritual forces being subsidiary to this main
force, or is the case other way round, the main force by which history
is governed being spiritual, and the nature of history being idealistic?
Or, as a third alternative, is the nature of history multilateral, and
it is governed by two or more material and spiritual forces, operating
in a more or less harmonious or sometimes conflicting system?

### I. Reliability or Unreliability of Transmitted History

There are some people who hold a very poor opinion about transmitted
history. They are of the view that all reporters of historical events on
account of their selfish interests, or their national and religious bias
or because of their social associations and attachments, have more or
less distorted and falsified almost all descriptions of historical
events, and brought history into a form of their own liking. Even those
who regarded it as immoral to forge and alter history intentionally,
exercised selection in the narration of events and invariably reported
only that which was not inconsistent with their own objectives and
ideas.

Though they did not add anything of their own while narrating events,
they refrained from reporting that which was contrary to their feelings
and beliefs. By making selections of their own liking, they shaped
history as they liked. An event or a personality can be objectively
studied and properly analysed only when complete relevant material is
placed at the disposal of the researcher. If only a part of it is shown
to him and another part is concealed, the result will obviously be a
one-sided and defective picture.

These pessimists have the same opinion about transmitted history as some
pessimistic jurists have about the hadith and religious traditions. The
attitude of these jurists has been termed 'closing the door of
knowledge'. The critics of transmitted history can also be described as
obstructionists. Someone of them has sarcastically remarked that history
is an account of the events which never took place, compiled by someone
who did not witness them. A journalist is reported to have said: "Facts
are sacred, but one has freedom of faith". There are others who are not
so pessimistic, but still prefer to accept the philosophy of scepticism.

In the book '*What Is History?'* Sir George Clark has been quoted to
have said:

Knowledge of the past that has come down through one or more human
minds, and has been processed by them, and therefore cannot consist of
elemental and impersonal atoms which nothing can alter .... The
exploration seems to be endless, and some impatient scholars take refuge
in scepticism, or at least in the doctrine that, since all historical
judgements involve persons and points of view, one is as good as another
and there is no 'objective' historical truth. (*E. H. Carr, What is
History? p. 8*)

The fact is that although it is not possible to trust blindly the
reports of even the reliable transmitters, yet history contains a good
number of such indisputable facts that they are as good as the
principles of other sciences and which can easily be checked by any
researcher. Secondly, a researcher can himself scrutinize the relevant
details in order to ascertain the veracity of many reports and then
draws his own conclusions.

Today we find that the researchers have proved the unreliability of the
reports of many events which were for centuries widely accepted as
facts. The story that the books of the Alexandrian library were put to
fire, appeared for the first time in the 7th century of Hijrah era -
yes, in the 7th century - and gradually gained so much currency that it
found its way into most of the books of history. But in the last century
the researchers proved that this tale was totally baseless and an
invention of some prejudiced Christians. It also happens that for
sometime a truth remains concealed, but subsequently it becomes known to
everybody. For these reasons one must not be totally pessimistic about
historical reports.

### II. Principle of Causation

Is history governed by the principle of causation? If it is, the
occurrence of every event must be considered to be inevitable and
unavoidable, and it must be conceded that a sort of compulsion rules
over history. If it is so, then where does the principle of human
freedom and volition stand? If historical events are really inevitable,
then no individual can be accountable, and no individual deserves any
appreciation and praise or any reproach and censure. If the principle of
causation is not admitted to be operative, then there can be no
universal laws, and if there are no universal laws, history can have no
law or norm, for the laws are a subsidiary of generality and generality
depends on the principle of causation.

That is the problem with which scientific history as well as philosophy
of history are confronted. Some people who tend to believe in the
principles of causation and generality, reject the principle of human
freedom and volition in its true sense. What they accept in the name of
freedom is not actually so. In contrast, some others accept the
principle of freedom, but deny that history is subject to any definite
law. Most sociologists hold that the principles of causation and freedom
cannot exist together. They generally tend to accept causation and to
reject freedom.

Hegel following the example of Marx, supports historical compulsion.
From the view-point of Hegel and Marx freedom is nothing except
consciousness of historical necessity. In the book, *'Marx and Marxism'*
Engels has been quoted as having said: "Hegel was the first to state
correctly the relation between freedom and necessity. To him freedom is
the appreciation of necessity. Necessity is blind only in so far as it
is not understood. Freedom does not consist in the dream of independence
from natural laws, but in the knowledge of these laws and in the
possibility this gives of systematically making them work towards
definite ends. This holds good in relation both to the laws of external
nature and those which govern the bodily and mental existence of men
themselves".

After describing briefly that under special historical conditions man
can and he should step forward in the direction determined by these
conditions, the same book says:

"Identifying and understanding these given conditions, render human
action more effective. Every act in the opposite direction amounts to
resisting and obstructing the historic course. To act in the direction
determined by the historic course means moving within the course of
history and participating in the process. But the question, as to what
is meant by freedom, still remains to be answered. The Marxist school
answers that freedom of the individual lies in his appreciation of the
historical necessity, and the social movement towards which the whole
course of history is directed".

It is evident that these statements do not solve any problem The real
question is whether man has the power to control the historical
conditions. Is he able to give them a direction of his choice or to
change their course?

If man is unable to direct the course of history or change it, then
obviously for his survival and evolution he has no alternative but to
follow the course of history. Otherwise he cannot survive. Now the
question is whether man has any choice to follow or not to follow the
course of history, and whether in view of the principle of the
superiority of society to man and the theory that the conscience,
feelings and sentiments of an individual are solely the product of
social and historical conditions, especially the economic conditions, is
there any scope left for man's freedom?

Further, what after all does the statement that freedom is the knowledge
of necessity mean? Is a man who has been entrapped in a flood and knows
fully well that in a short while he would be swept to the depth of the
river or a man who has fallen from the top of a hill and knows that
because of the force of the law of gravity in a few moments he will be
smashed into pieces, free in being plunged into the river or falling on
the side of the hill?

According to the theory of historical materialism, the social conditions
put restrictions on man, give him direction, build his conscience and
personality and determine his will and choice. In the face of the social
conditions he is just like an empty receptacle and merely a bundle of
raw material. When man is believed to be a product of his social
conditions, not a producer of them, and it is alleged that from existing
social conditions determine the subsequent lot of man, evidently it is
not man who determines the future course of social conditions.

Obviously this kind of freedom can have no meaning at all. The fact is
that human freedom cannot be imagined without accepting the theory of
natural human disposition which means that in the process of basic and
general movement of the world man has an additional dimension which
forms the preliminary basis of his personality and which matures under
the impact of external factors. This existential dimension gives man his
human personality and enables him to dominate history and determine its
course. We have already discussed this point earlier while discussing
society under the heading, *'Determinism and Volition'* and shall
explain it further while dealing with the role of the heroes under the
heading, *'Dimensions of History'*.

Freedom of man is not incompatible with the law of causation nor with
the universality of historical questions, nor with the fact that history
is subject to certain laws. That man may choose a definite and
irreversible course in his social life out of his own free will means
compulsion with volition and is different from blind compulsion swaying
man and his will.

There is another difficulty about the universality of historical
questions and their being subject to certain laws. The study of
historical events shows that occasionally some minor and accidental
events have changed the course of history. Of course accidental events,
contrary to the notion of some uninformed persons, do not mean the
events having no cause. They are only the events that are not brought
about by a general and universal cause and hence have no general rule.
Now it is evident that if it is admitted that the events having no
general rule play an effective role in historical movements, history
will be devoid of every law, rule, norm and definite course. But we know
that accidental historical events have affected the course of history.
They are proverbially known as Cleopatra's nose. Cleopatra was a famous
queen of Egypt. The examples of minor and accidental events which have
changed the course of history in the world are innumerable.

Edward Hallett Carr in his book, What is History? says: "The other
source of the attack is the famous crux of Cleopatra's nose. This is the
theory that history is, by and large, a chapter of accidents, a series
of events determined by chance coincidences, and attributable only to
the most casual causes. The result of the Battle of Actum was due not to
the sort of causes commonly postulated by historians, but to Antony's
infatuation with Cleopatra.

When Bajazet was deterred by an attack of gout from marching into
central Europe, Gibbon observed that "an acrimonious honour falling on a
single fibre of a man may prevent or suspend the misery of nations".
When King Alexander of Greece died in the autumn of 1920 from the bite
of a pet monkey, this accident touched off a train of events which led
Sir Winston Churchill to remark that "a quarter of a million persons
died of this monkey's bite". Or take again Trotsky's comment on the
fever contracted while shooting ducks which put him out of action at a
critical point of his quarrel with Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Stalin in the
autumn of 1923: "One can foresee a revolution or a war, but it is
impossible to foresee the consequences of an autumn shooting - trip for
wild ducks".

In the world of Islam the event of the defeat of Marwan bin Muhammad,
the last Umayyad Caliph is a good example of the intervention of an
accident in the destiny of history. In his last battle with the Abbasids
he strongly felt the need of passing water. For that purpose he went
aside to ease himself. By chance an enemy soldier passed by that place
and seeing him alone, killed him. The report of his having been killed
spread like wild fire among his soldiers and as they had not anticipated
such an eventuality, they were so upset that they took to their heels.
Thus the rule of the dynasty of Umayyad came to an end, and it was on
this occasion that it was said: "A kingdom was swept away by urine".

After explaining that every accident is the outcome of a sequence of a
cause and effect that annuls another sequence of a cause and effect and
not a happening without any cause at all, Carr says: . . . "How can one
discover in history a coherent sequence of cause and effect, how can we
find any meaning in history, when our sequence is liable to be broken or
deflected at any moment by some other, and from our point of view,
irrelevant sequence?"

The answer to this problem depends on the question whether society and
history by nature have or have not a direction. If history by nature has
a direction, the impact of minor incidents will be insignificant. In
other words minor incidents may change the position of some pawns on the
chess board of history, but they cannot affect the general course of
history. At the most they can accelerate or slow down its course for a
moment. But if history is devoid of nature, personality, and a course
determined by that nature and personality, then it will have no definite
course and no universal law, and will be totally unpredictable.

From our point of view, as we believe in the nature and personality of
history and maintain that its nature and personality are the product of
a combination of the personalities of human individuals and hence
evolutionary, the accidental events do not harm to the universality and
compulsion of history.

Montesquieu has beautifully described the role of accidents in history.
We reproduce below a part of what he has said in this respect: . . . "If
the outcome of a single battle, i.e. a particular cause, was the ruin of
a state, there was a general cause which decreed that, that state was
destined to perish through a single battle".

He also says: "It was not the affair of Poltava that ruined Charles. Had
he not been destroyed at that place, he would have been in another. The
casualties of the fortune are easily repaired; but who can be guarded
against events that incessantly arise from the nature of things?"

### III. Is History Materialistic in Nature?

What is the nature of history? Is the real nature of history cultural,
political, economic, religious, or moral? Is it material, spiritual or a
combination of the two? These are the most important questions
concerning history. We cannot have a correct and sound understanding of
history unless these questions are resolved.

It is evident that all the above mentioned material and spiritual
factors have been and are effective in the texture of history. The
question is which factor is of primary importance and determining
nature? The question is which of these factors forms the real spirit of
history and indicates its identity? Which of these factors can explain
and interpret all other factors? Which of these factors forms the
infrastructure of history and all other factors being its
superstructure?

Generally speaking the informed people are of the opinion that history
is a multi-motored machine in which all motors are independent of each
other. What they mean is that history is multi-natured, not uni-natured.
But the question is: if history is really multi-motored and
multi-natured, what will happen to its evolutionary progress and
advancement?

History cannot move along a definite evolutionary line if it is driven
by several independent motors, each motor generating its own movement
and driving history in a direction of its own choice, unless we presume
that the above-mentioned factors are mere instincts of history, which
has a spirit transcending these instincts and it is that spirit which
with the help of its various instincts drives history in a definite
direction and forms its real identity. Anyhow, in this case history will
be uni-natured, for its nature will be that which has been described as
its spirit and not those factors which have been termed its instincts.

In our times a new theory has gained many supporters. It is known as
historical materialism or dialectic materialism. Historical materialism
means economic interpretation of history and economic and historical
interpretation of man, but not human interpretation of economics or
history. In other words, historical materialism means that history has
material nature and dialectic existence. What is meant by material
nature of history is that the basis of all historical movements and
phenomena of a society is its economic organization which covers its
material products and the forces, relations and the system of its
production. According to this theory it is economic organization which
gives shape and direction to all social and moral phenomena, including
science, philosophy, ethics, religion, law and culture. With a change in
the economic organization all these things undergo a corresponding
change.

As for dialectic existence of history, that means that the evolutionary
movements of history are caused by a series of dialectic contradictions,
having a special interrelationship. A dialectic contradiction is
different from non-dialectic contradiction for in the case of a
dialectic contradiction, every phenomenon compulsorily nourishes within
itself a negation of it, and as the result of this inner contradiction,
develops to a higher stage which is a synthesis of the two earlier
stages.

Thus historical materialism implies two ideas. Firstly that the nature
of history is materialistic; secondly, its movements are dialectical
movements. We propose to discuss in a subsequent chapter dealing with
the development and evolution of history.

The theory of the materialistic nature of history is based on a series
of certain principles which are either philosophical, psychological or
sociological, and this theory in its turn, leads to a number of other
theories, concerning ideological problems. In order to make this
important point clear, especially in view of the fact that certain modem
Muslim writers have claimed that though Islam does not accept
philosophical materialism it does accept historical materialism, and
have built their historical and social theories on this presumption, we
feel that it is necessary to deal with this point in somewhat detail.
For this purpose we propose first to discuss the two principles on which
this theory is based and the results which ensue from them. Then we will
study this theory from scientific as well as Islamic point of view.

Basic Principles of Historical Materialism
------------------------------------------

### I. Priority of Matter over Spirit

Man has body as well as spirit. Human body is a subject of biological,
medical, physiological and other studies, whereas his spirit and
spiritual affairs are the subject of philosophical and psychological
studies. Ideas, beliefs, feelings, tendencies, theories and ideologies
are all psychological subjects. The principle of the priority of matter
over spirit means that psychological matters are not basic. They are
only a series of material reflections emanating from actual matter and
cast on the nerves and the brain.

The value of the psychological matters is limited to their being a link
between man's inner material faculties and the outside world, are not
to, be treated as a force separate from other material forces governing
the existence of man. For the purpose of illustration, psychological
matters may be compared to an automobile lamp. An automobile cannot move
at night without a lamp. It proceeds only in the light of its lamp, But
what brings an automobile into motion is its engine not its light.

If psychological matters, that is ideas, beliefs, theories and
ideologies fall in line with the process of the material forces of
history, they help history move forward. But they themselves cannot
cause any motion, nor are they considered to be a force independent of
other material forces. Basically, psychological matters are not a force.
Hence it is not correct to say that they are a force, but have no
material reality. The real forces which affect human existence, are only
those forces which are known as material forces and which may be
measured by material standards.

Thus psychological matters are not capable of initiating any movement or
giving a direction to a movement. They are not regarded as a lever for
the movement of society. Psychological values can support and direct
material values, but they cannot become the source or the object of any
social movement.

On this basis we should go deep while interpreting history and should
not be deceived by the appearances. At some historical juncture it may
appear that an idea, a doctrine or a belief has stirred society and
driven it to an evolutionary stage, but on correct dissection of history
we will find that beliefs or doctrines are not of primary importance.
They are merely reflection of those material forces of society which
stir society sometimes in the garb of doctrines and beliefs also. The
material force which pushes history forward is, from technical point of
view, the system of production and from human point of view the
underprivileged and exploited classes of society.

Feuerbach, a well-known materialist philosopher, from whom Marx picked
up many of his theories says: "What is a theory? What is a praxis? What
is the difference between the two?" He himself answers this question as
follows: "Everything which is confined to the mind is theoretical.
Whatever moves the minds of many is practical necessity. It is action
which unites many minds together and organizes the masses, and in this
manner finds a place for itself in the world".

His disciple Marx writes: "It is obvious that the weapon of criticism
cannot replace criticism of weapons. A material force can be crushed
only by a material force".

Marx, who does not believe in the independence of nonmaterial forces,
maintains that non-material forces can do no more than enhancing the
value of material forces. He says that as soon as a theory or a doctrine
is deeply rooted among the masses, it turns into a material force. The
principle of superiority of matter to spirit and of the body to mind is
one of the basic principles of philosophical materialism, which holds
that mental forces and spiritual and moral values are not basic.

In contrast to this principle there is another philosophical principle
based on the fundamentality of spirit. According to this principle, it
is not possible to explain and interpret all the real dimensions of
existence through matter and material aspects. Spirit is a reality in
the domain of man's existence and spiritual energy is independent of all
material energies. Accordingly all psychological forces, that is
intellectual, doctrinal, religious and sentimental forces are regarded
as an independent factor inducing certain movements both on the level of
the individual and society. It is possible to use these levers for the
movement of history. In fact many movements of history have actually
originated exclusively from these levers. Especially the human movements
of lofty character, whether individual or social, spring direct from
these forces, and that is how they acquire their nobility.

The psychological forces often bring the physical and material forces
under their influences and give them direction not only on the level of
voluntary activities, but even on the level of mechanical, chemical and
biological activities also. The effectiveness of psychological
suggestions in the treatment of physical diseases and the extraordinary
effectiveness of hypnotic operations belong to this category and are
undeniable.

The powers of knowledge and faith, especially the power of faith and
more particularly where these two powers harmonize, are a great and
useful force. They can play an extraordinary and dynamic role in pushing
forward or changing the course of historical movements.

The prime importance of spirit and spiritual powers is one of the
fundamental principles of philosophical realism.

### II. Precedence of Material Needs to Spiritual Needs

Man, at least as far as his social existence is concerned, has two kinds
of needs. His material needs include food, water, shelter, clothing,
medicines and the like. His spiritual needs are education, knowledge,
literature, art, philosophical ideas, faith, ideology, adoration, moral
principles and such like things. Man always has both kinds of these
needs. The only question is that of precedence.

Which kind of needs has precedence of the other, material or spiritual?
Or are both of them of equal importance? The advocates of the
fundamentality of material needs hold that material needs have a
precedence not only in the sense that man attends to them before
attending to his spiritual needs but also in the sense that his
spiritual needs are a by-product of his material needs. Man has not been
born with two kinds of needs, or two kinds of instincts. He has been
born with only one kind of needs and one kind of instincts. The only
thing is that his spiritual needs are his secondary needs, and in fact
only a means of meeting his material needs in a better way.

That is why his spiritual needs in regard to their form, quality and
nature are subservient to his material needs. In every age man's
material needs have assumed a particular form and quality in accordance
with the development of the implements of production. His spiritual
needs being a by-product of his material needs, naturally have a form, a
quality and the characteristic in agreement with his material needs. As
such there exist two kinds of precedence between material and spiritual
needs, one pertaining to the existence of the needs and the other
pertaining to their nature. Man's spiritual needs are a by-product of
his material needs. They are also subordinate to his material needs in
their form and other characteristics. In his book *Historical
Materialism* P. Royan quotes Hymen Louis as having said as under in his
book, *Philosophical Ideas*:

"Man's material course of existence led him to propound theories
corresponding to the material needs of the time about his world,
society, art, and morality; all intellectual manifestations are the
resultant products of material conditions and the mode of production".

That is why every individual's way of thinking on scientific matters,
his philosophical ideas, his taste, his aesthetic and artistic sense,
his moral evaluation and his religious inclination follow his way of
living and earning his livelihood. This principle when applied to an
individual, is expressed thus: "Tell me what he eats, I shall tell you
how he thinks". When this principle is applied to a society, it is said:
"Tell me to what extent the implements of production have developed in
that society and what kind of economic relations exist between its
members, I shall tell you what ideology, what philosophy, what moral
principles and what religious tenets are popular in it".

Directly contrary to this theory is the theory of the independence of
spiritual needs. According to that theory, although in a human being
material needs appear earlier from the point of view of time as is
evident from the state of the infant who immediately after it is born,
looks for milk and the breast of mother, yet gradually the spiritual
needs which are latent in human nature unfold themselves and bloom in
such a way that in his mature age man sacrifices his material needs for
the sake of his spiritual needs.

In other words, for man his spiritual pleasures are basic as well as
stronger than his material pleasures and material urges. This point has
been magnificently discussed by Ibn Sina in his book, *al-Isharat*. The
more a man receives human education and human training, the more his
spiritual needs, his spiritual pleasures and finally his spiritual life
overshadow his material needs, his material pleasures and his material
life. In primitive societies of course material needs prevail upon
spiritual needs, but as a society develops, spiritual needs attain
greater importance. They secure the position of a human goal, whereas
the material needs are reduced to that of mere means.

### III. Precedence of Action to Thought

Man is a being who thinks, understands and acts. What is more important,
his action or his thought? Which one of these two constitutes his
essence? Does the dignity of man depend on his action or his thought?
Which of these two makes him?

Historical materialism believes in the independence of action and its
precedence to thought. It regards action as fundamental and thought as
subsidiary. On the other hand ancient logic and philosophy considered
thought to be the key of thinking. According to the old system of logic
thought was divided into perception and affirmation, and each of them
was further divided into axiomatic and theoretical. According to that
system of logic and philosophy the essence of human ego was regarded as
a mere idea. The perfection and nobility of man consisted in his wisdom.
A perfect man was equal to a man of wisdom.

But historical materialism is based on the principle that action is the
key and the criterion of thought. The essence of man is his productive
activity. Man is known by his activity which moulds him. Marx has said:
"The entire world history is nothing but a creation of man through human
labour".

Engels has said: "Man himself is a creation of action", for instead of
brooding on natural hardships he exerts himself to conquer his external
environment and in this way (through a revolutionary action against
aggressive tyrants) he dashes forward and makes a society of his own
choice".

The author of *Marx and Marxism* says: "Whereas in the philosophy of
being (a philosophy that interprets the world in terms of 'being' as
opposed to the philosophy of 'becoming', which interprets the world in
terms of motion. Marxism belongs to the group of the philosophies of
'becoming') it was customary at first to set forth the ideas and the
principles from which practical conclusions are derived; praxis
(practical philosophy), on the other hand, regards action as the origin
and basis of all thought. It replaces the faith in thought by the
philosophy of power". In agreement with Hegel, it asserts: "The real
being of man, in the first instance, is his own action". In this belief
he joins the German thinker who reversed the famous phrase, "In the
beginning there was the Word" - in which the Word signifies spirit, for
it is through the word that the spirit expresses itself - and declared:
"In the beginning there was the Act".

This theory is one of the principles of Marxist materialism and is known
as practical philosophy. Marx picked it up from his materialist
predecessor and preceptors, Feverbach, and Hegel.

Entirely contrary to this principle is the philosophical principle of
realism, which holds that thought and action influence each other
reciprocally, though thought has precedence to action. According to this
philosophy the essence of man is thought (essential knowledge of one's
own existence). Man through his action and contact with the outside
world acquires his informative material about the world. He cannot
embark on any activity of knowing things unless his mind is enriched
with this raw material. After collecting his material his mind uses the
data provided by action in different ways such as generalization,
deduction and demonstration.

Thus action paves the way for the acquisition of correct knowledge.
Knowledge does not mean merely a simple reflection of external material
on mind. Knowledge becomes available subsequent to this reflection
through a mental process emanating from the immaterial substance of
spirit. Thus action is the source of thought. But at the same time
thought also is the source of action. Action is the criterion of thought
and at the same time thought is the criterion of action. Anyhow, this is
not a case of vicious circle. It is nobility of his character, his
knowledge, his faith, his dignity, his self-respect and his action that
make a man a human being. Man accomplishes action and is himself
produced by it. This is a distinguishing feature of man. No other being
shares with him in this feature, which springs from his special Divine
creation.

Anyhow, man performs action in the creative sense, whereas action makes
man in the preparatory sense. Man actually creates his action, but
action does not actually create man. Anyhow, action and its practice and
repetition paves the way for the creation of man from within. In all
cases in which the mutual relationship between two things is creative
and imperative on one side and preparatory and potential on the other
side, the creative and imperative side always has precedence.

In short man whose essence is a sort of knowledge (essential knowledge
of one's own existence), has a reciprocal relation with action in the
sense that man creates and develops action and action develops man. But
in view of the fact that man is the creative and imperative cause of
work whereas action is merely a preparatory and potential cause of man,
man has precedence to action, not action to man.

### IV. Precedence of Social Existence of Man to His Individual Existence

In other words, the principle of the precedence of man's sociology to
his psychology.

From biological point of view, man is the most perfect of all animals.
He is capable of making a particular kind of evolution and self-building
called human evolution. He can enjoy a special personality formed by
human dimensions. Under the impact of a series of experiences and
learning, man acquires an intellectual, philosophical and scientific
dimension, and under the impact of certain other factors he gets another
dimension, called moral dimension. It is in this dimension that he
creates values and moral 'musts' and 'must nots'. Similarly there are
man's artistic and religious dimensions also. In his intellectual and
philosophical dimension man discovers a number of principles and general
laws which thenceforth form the basis of his thinking. Similarly in the
course of his moral and social appreciation he gets at some absolute and
semi-absolute values. All these human dimensions combined together
constitute human existence.

Human dimensions are entirely the consequence of social factors. Man
lacks all these dimensions when he is born. At the time of his birth he
is merely a bundle of raw material capable of assuming any intellectual
or emotional shape, his final shape depending on the factors which
influence him later. In the beginning he is like an empty vessel which
is to be filled from outside. He is like a blank magnetic tape on which
any sound can be recorded and which plays back whatever is recorded on
it. In short, it is external social factors called social work which
build man's personality and convert him from a thing to a person. Man in
himself is only a 'thing' and only under the impact of social factors,
becomes a 'person'.

In his book , *Historical Materialism* P. Royan reproduces what
Plekhanov has said in his book, *Fundamental Problems of Marxism*. He
says: "The characteristics of a social system are determined by the
current level of development of the means of production of society. It
means that when the stage of development of the means of production is
determined, the characteristics of the social order and the psychology
(of the people) related to it, and all the other corresponding relations
within the system, on the one hand, and the ideas and the pace of
progress, on the other, are also (of their own accord) determined".

In the same book, it is further stated that: "When psychology, through
the means of production, is determined, ideology too, which is deeply
rooted in the psychology of the people, is also consequently determined.
But as the ideology at a particular historical stage is the product of
social requirements, and as it always continues to protect the interests
of the ruling class, it necessarily strengthens and perfects the
existing social structure. Hence the social structure in
class-societies, which comes into existence for protecting the ruling
class and propagating its ideology, is in reality. the result of the
social order and its requirements, and, in the last analysis, is the
product of the character of the modes and the means of production.

For instance, the church and the mosque are for preaching of the
religious beliefs, which in all the religions are based upon the faith
in the final judgement or resurrection. The belief in resurrection is
the logical outcome of the particular social order that is based upon
the division of society into classes, which in its turn is the product
of a particular stage of development of the means of production. Hence,
belief in resurrection is the product of the means of production (at a
particular stage of social development)".

In contrast to this principle there is another anthropological principle
which is based upon the view that the foundation of human personality,
is the basis of man's thinking and higher tendencies, and is itself
inherent in his creation. It is true that contrary to Plato's well-known
theory, man does not come to the world with a ready-made personality,
but still he receives the basic features of his personality from his
creation, not from society. If we wish to use philosophical terms, we
may say that the main ingredients of the human dimensions, whether
religious, moral, philosophical, artistic, technical or amorous, are the
form and the distinctive features of man's species and his rational soul
which are formed simultaneously with the factors of creation.

Depending on the personal capabilities of a man, society either tends
him and brings him up or distorts him. In the beginning the existence of
rational soul or intellectual faculty of man is only potential. It
becomes actual gradually. From the viewpoint of his thinking, his
tendencies and his material and spiritual leanings and sentiments man is
like any other living being. In the beginning all his faculties exist
potentially and then in the wake of certain basic developments gradually
shoot up and grow. Man under the impact of external factors nurtures his
natural personality and brings it to perfection or sometimes distorts it
and turns it away from the normal course. This is the same principle
which in Islamic sciences is described as the principle of *fitrat*
(natural state) and is considered to be the most basic principle.

According to this principle man's psychology has precedence to his
sociology. In fact man's sociology depends on his psychology. According
to the principle of nature, when a child is born, though he has neither
perception nor conception, neither confirmation, nor human aptitudes, he
comes to this world with human dimensions in addition to animal
dimensions. It is these dimension which gradually form the basis of
human thinking. Without them logical thinking would not be possible. It
is these dimensions which bring high and noble tendencies into
existence. It is these dimensions which are regarded as the real basis
of human personality.

According to the theory of the precedence of man's sociology to his
psychology, man is merely a receiving being and does not automatically
move in any particular direction. He is a bundle of raw material. To him
it makes no difference what shape is given to him. He is a blank tape,
to which it is immaterial what sound is recorded on it. This raw
material does not tend to any particular shape, nor can any shape be
called its natural shape. This tape does not require the recording to
any particular sound and it cannot be said that if any other sound will
be recorded on it that sound would be inconsistent with the reality of
the tape. As the raw material bears the same relationship to all shapes,
this tape bears the same relationship to all sounds.

But according to the principle of the basicity of nature and the
precedence of man's psychology to his sociology though man in the
beginning lacks any actual perception and any actual tendency, yet from
within himself he dynamically advances towards a series of primary
judgements known as a *priori* or primary principles and towards a
series of higher and sublime values which constitute the standards of
his humanity. Following the entry from outside into his mind of a number
of simple conceptions forming the basic material of thinking, these
principles shoot up and grow into theoretical or practical affirmations
and the latent tendencies become conspicuous.

In the present circumstances, man, for example, asserts that 2x2=4 and
thinks that this rule is absolute and true in all times and all places.
According to the first theory this judgement of his is the product of
the special conditions of his environment. These special conditions have
given him this rule, and his judgement is his reaction to the
environmental conditions. In a different environment and under different
conditions he could have thought differently. For example, he could have
believed that 2x2=26.

But according to the second theory, what the environment gives to man is
only the conception of 2,4,8,10 etc. As for the judgement that 2x2=4 or
5x5=25, that is something inseparable from the structure of human
spirit, and cannot take any other form under any circumstances.
Similarly the human desire to attain perfection is also an essential
part of human spirit.

### V. Precedence of Material Aspect of Society to Its Intellectual Aspect

Society has many sectors and consists of various organizations:
economic, cultural , political, administrative, religious and judicial
organization etc. From this viewpoint society is like a full-fledged
building comprising the drawing-room, the bed room, the kitchen, toilet
etc.

Among the social organizations there is one organization which is
virtually the real foundation of the whole of society, for its whole
structure stands on it. If it were to collapse, the whole building would
collapse automatically. This is the economic structure of society, or in
other words, all that relates to the material production of society
including the production implements, economic resources, production
relations etc.

Implements of production are the most basic section of the structure of
society. They continuously change and develop, and each stage of their
development leads to a paticular kind of change in the production
relations, making them different from what they were previously.
Production relations include all the rules and regulations regarding the
form of ownership and the contractual relations between man and the
products in a society. Any compulsory change in these relations
automatically leads to a change in all legal, intellectual, moral,
religious, philosophical and scientific principles of man. In short it
may be said: 'Economy is the foundation of society'.

In the book, *'Marx and Marxism'*, Marx has been quoted as having said
to the following effect in his book entitled Critique of Political
Economy:

"In the social production of their life, men enter into specific
relations that are indispensable and independent of their will,
relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of
development of their material productive forces. The sum total of these
relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society,
the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure
and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode
of production of material life conditions the social, political, and
intellectual life-process in general. It is not the consciousness of man
that determines their being, but on the contrary, their social being
that determines their consciousness".

The same book quoting a letter of Marx says: "Assume a particular state
of development in the productive facilities of man and you will get a
corresponding form of commerce and consumption. Assume particular
degrees of development of production, commerce, and consumption and you
will have a corresponding organization of the family, or orders or of
classes, in a word a corresponding civil society".

Peter explains the views of Marx as under:

"In this fashion Marx has compared the society to a building, the base
and foundation of which are the economic institutions, whose
superstructure (the building itself) is comprised of political,
religious, and legal patterns, customs and norms. As in the case of a
building, it depends upon the position of its base and foundation, the
economic forms (relations of production) and technical modes are also
dependent upon and associated with the modes of thinking, the political
system and the customs, and each of them is subject to economic
conditions".

The same book quotes from Lenin's book, Marx-Engels Marxism as having
written in the *Capital*, vol. III as under: "The mode of production
manifests itself in the human activity in relation to nature and,
following that, in social conditions and intellectual patterns resulting
from them".

In the Preface to a *Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*,
Karl Marx says:

"My investigations led to the result that the legal relations as well as
forms of the state are to be grasped neither from themselves nor from
the so-called general development of the human mind, but rather have
their roots in the material conditions of life... the anatomy of civil
society is to be sought in political economy".

Marx in his book, *Poverty of Philosophy* has written: "Social relations
are closely bound up with productive forces. In acquiring new productive
forces, men change their mode of production; and in changing their mode
of production, in changing the way of earning their living, they change
all their social relations. The hand-mill gives you a society with the
feudal lord; the steammill, a society with the industrial capitalist".

The theory of the precedence of the material arrangements of society to
all other social systems is in keeping with the theory of the precedence
of action to thought. In fact the two theories are identical with the
only difference that the first theory is operative on individual level
and the second on social level. In view of the fact that the supporters
of this theory also hold that the sociology of man has precedence to his
psychology, it may be said that the precedence of individual action to
individual thought is a manifestation as well as a result of the
precedence of material arrangement to all other social arrangements. On
the contrary if we maintain that the psychology of man has precedence to
his sociology, the precedence of the material arrangement of society
would be the result of the precedence of individual action to individual
thought.

The material arrangement of society which is described as the economic
structure and economic basis also, consists of two parts, the first part
being the implements of production which are the outcome of man's
contact with nature, and the other part being the economic relations of
the members of society in the field of the distribution of wealth. These
relations are sometimes described as productive relations also. The
implements of production and the productive relations put together are
mostly described as the mode of production or the method of production.
Incidentally it may be noted that these terms as used by the leaders of
historical materialism are not free from ambiguity and their meanings
have not been exactly defined. When they say that economy is the
infrastructure and the material arrangement of society has precedence to
all other arrangements, by economy they mean the complete production
system, that is the implements of production as well as the productive
relations.

Here there is a point to be noted well. As it is evident from what the
leaders of historical materialism have said, the infrastructure of
society in itself is a two-storied structure. Its real base and
foundation is formed by the implements of production which in reality
are the labour embodied. It is the embodied labour which necessitates
the growth of special economic relations for the purpose of the
distribution of wealth.

These relations reflect the degree of the development of the implements
of production and in the beginning not only are in harmony with them,
but also encourage their use and provide the best means of their proper
utilization. They are just like a dress that fits the body of the
implements of production. But the implements of production continue to
develop, and with their development the harmony between the two parts of
the productive machinery is upset. The productive and economic
relations, that is the laws which were previously in harmony with the
implements of production become too tight a dress for their developed
form and become a barrier for their further progress.

Thus a contradiction arises between the two parts of the production
machinery. At last new productive relations, corresponding to the new
implements of production develop, and thus the infrastructure is totally
changed. In the wake of its change the entire legal, philosophical,
moral and religious superstructure also undergoes a corresponding
change.

If we take into consideration the prime importance of embodied labour,
that is the implements of production and pay attention to the fact that
Marx is one of those sociologists who maintain that the sociology of man
has precedence to his psychology and that man as such is a social being
or, in his own words, is a "sui generis" being, we can determine the
philosophical role of labour from the view-point of Marxism. It may be
mentioned that the philosophical role of labour is the main point of
Marxist philosophy. Nevertheless scant attention has been paid to it.

Marx thinks about human existence or work and working existence of man
much in the same way as Descartes, Bergson and Jean Paul Sartre
respectively thought about rational, continuous and revolting existence
of man.

Descartes says: "I think; therefore I am". Bergson says: "I continue.
therefore I am". Sartre says: "I revolt; therefore I am"; and Marx wants
to say: "I work; therefore I am" .

By employing these diverse methods none of these philosophers intends to
prove the existence of human ego in matters other than thinking,
continuity and revolt. Some of them even do not believe in any existence
of man not related to these matters. They only want to define inter alia
the essence of humanity and the existential reality of man.

Incidentally Descartes wants to say: "My presence is equal to the
presence of thought; eliminate thought and I am nothing". Bergson wants
to say: " The existence of man is just the same as the existence of
continuity and time." Saitre says: "The essence of humanity and the real
existence of man lies in his spirit of revolt. If you take away this
spirit from him, he will no longer be a man. " Marx also wants to say:
"The entire and real existence of man is his work. Work is the essence
of humanity. I am for I work, not in the sense that work is the proof of
my existence, but in the sense that work is tantamount to my very
existence. In reality work is my existence."

That is what Marx wants to point out when he says: "To a socialist the
entire so called history of the world is nothing but man's creation
through human labour;" or when he differentiates between man's
consciousness and his real existence and says: "It is not the
consciousness of men, that determines their existence; on the contrary
it is their social existence that determines their consciousness". He
also says: "It is not their will on the basis of which people make
decisions. The real basis is the individuals and their material and
existential conditions".

Explaining the real individuals, he further says: "They really are not
what they can imagine themselves to be. They are how they produce and
make. In other words, they are how they act within definite material
conditions and limits quite independently of their will. Engels says:
"Economists say that labour is the source of all wealth. In fact labour
for man is more than that. It is the basic condition of the existence of
entire human life. At first sight it may be said that it is labour that
has created man himself".

Marx and Engels have, in fact, took over this theory of the role of
labour in the existence of man from the writings of Hegel, who for the
first time said: "In the first instance man's real existence is his
work".

From the above, two points are clear: (i) that from the point of view of
Marxism, human existence of man is social, not individualistic, and (ii)
that the existence of social man is his social work, that is his
embodied labour, and his individual work like his individual feelings
and every other social work, such as philosophy, ethics, art, religion
etc. are a mere manifestation of his real existence and not his real
existence itself.

Hence, man's real evolution is the evolution of his social action. As
far as his intellectual, sentimental and emotional evolution or the
evolution of the social system is concerned, it is a manifestation of
the real evolution, not the real evolution itself. In fact the material
evolution of society is the criterion of its immaterial evolution, just
as work is the criterion of thought. The correctness or incorrectness of
a thought should be measured by the standard of work and not by any
intellectual or logical standard.

The criterion of the immaterial things is the evolution of the material
things. If it is asked which philosophical, moral religious or artistic
school is more progressive, no intellectual or logical standard can
provide an answer to this question. The sole criterion by which the
progressiveness of any school may be judged is to find out what
conditions and which degree of social work, that is the development of
the implements of production, have produced that school.

To us this way of thinking appears to be amazing, for we hold that the
real existence of man is his ego, which is an immaterial substance, and
that this ego is an off-shoot of the essential movements of nature, not
a product of society. But a man like Marx who thinks in material terms
only and does not believe in any immaterial substance, should interpret
man and his reality from biological point of view and say that the
essence of man is nothing but his physical structure, as was asserted by
the past materialists like those of the 18th century.

Yet, Marx rejects this view and asserts that the essence of man
materializes in society, not in nature. What materializes in nature is
potential and not actual man. Apart from that, Marx should either
consider thought to be the essence of humanity and regard action as its
manifestation; or the other way round consider action to be the essence
of humanity and regard thought and ideas as its manifestation. Marx has
to choose the second alternative, for he thinks in material terms only.
He not only believes in the fundamentality of matter and denies the
existence of any immaterial substance in the individual, but believes in
the materiality of history also.

In fact, Marx is so engrossed in the philosophy of labour and holds such
an idea of social labour that it may be said that according to his way
of thinking men are not those who walk in the streets, think and choose,
but the real men are the tools and the machines which, for example, run
the factories. The men who speak, walk and think are only the images of
the real men, not the men themselves. According to the idea that Mark
holds of social labour and the implements of production, these things
may be described as living beings which automatically, blindly and
unaffected by the will of the 'image of man' (not man himself), grow and
develop and bring the 'show men' despite their will and thinking power,
under their control and pull these show-men behind them.

It may be said readily that what Marx has said about the supremacy and
domination of social labour over man's consciousness and will, is the
same thing as what the philosophers have said about man's unconscious
physical activity, such as the activity of the digestive system, the
heart, the liver etc. under the influence of a hidden will. According to
these philosophers all desires, inclinations and all the functions of
bodily systems which appear at the level of conscious mind, are in
reality a network of natural needs. They are arranged by a secret
psychical power and the conscious mind does not know where and how they
occur. This psychical power appears to be similar to what Freud has
termed unconscious mind which, according to him, dominates the conscious
mind.

But actually what Marx asserts is different from what Freud or past
philosophers have maintained. What they have said relates to a part of
the conscious mind and the domination of a hidden mind over it. Further,
what they speak of, is not a thing outside the existence of man, but
what Marx says is outside of it. If the theory of Marx is correctly
adjudged, it will be found extremely amazing from philosophical point of
view.

Marx calls his theory a discovery and compared it to the well-known
biological theory of Darwin, who proved that the developments outside
the will and consciousness of animals gradually and unconsciously bring
about changes in their bodies over a long period. Marx also claims that
some blind event (the real existence of man itself is a blind event)
gradually and unconsciously brings about changes in man's social
structure, that is in all those things which Marx calls superstructure
and in many of those which he calls infrastructure, that is
socioeconomic relations.

Marx says: "Darwin has called the attention of scientists towards the
history of natural selection, the formation of organs in plants and
animals corresponding to the means of production necessary for their
survival. Isn't the history of generation and formation of organs
producing the social human being, i.e. the material basis of all types
of social organizations, worthy of such a treatment? ... Natural
selection lays bare the modes of human action vis-a-vis nature; the mode
of production lays bare man's material existence, and as a result, the
source of social relations, thought, and intellectual products that
spring from it".

Hence, from what has been said it is clear that the theory of historical
materialism is based on several other theories, some of them being
psychological, some sociological and some others philosophical and
anthropological.

### Conclusions

From the theory of historical materialism we may draw a number of
conclusions which affect the strategy and the shape of the social aims
in a practical manner. It is not hypothetical or speculative theory
having no effect on social behaviour. Now let us see what conclusions we
may draw from it.

I. The first conclusion relates to ascertaining the identity of society
and history. On the basis of the materiality of history the best and the
most satisfactory way of analysing and understanding the historical and
social events is the study of their economic basis. Without knowing this
economic basis it is not possible to understand the historical phenomena
accurately, for it has been presumed that the nature of all social
changes is economic, though they may appear to be exclusively cultural
religious or moral. In other words, all cultural, religious and moral
developments are a reflection of the economic position of society and
are caused by it.

The old philosophers were also of the view that the best and the most
perfect way of knowing the identity of the things was to know the causes
which produced them. Therefore if we admit that economic structure of
society is the main cause of all social developments, then its
socioeconomic analysis is the best way of understanding history. As a
cause has precedence to its effect at the stage, of occurrence,
similarly it also has precedence at the stage of knowing and proving.
Hence economic situation is not only the cause of other developments but
its knowledge helps in understanding them and proving their existence.

Discussing this point the book, *Revisionism from Marx to Mao* says:
"For analysing social revolutions, one must not judge social conflicts
in political, legal, or ideological terms; on the contrary, they are to
be interpreted in terms of the contradiction between the productive
forces and relations of production.

Marx has seriously warned us of the dangers of such a judgement, firstly
because such a judgement is not realistic, for it replaces the cause,
which economic changes and contradictions are, by the effect, i.e.
political, legal, and ideological forms, which are the effects.
Secondly, such an interpretation is superficial; as instead of probing
deeply into the real causes, it only touches upon the surface, and what
is apparent reality is considered to be sufficient for explanation.
Thirdly, it is illusory; because the superstructures, which are on the
whole ideological, are nothing but inaccurate images of the reality.
Depending on inaccurate image instead of a realistic analysis of the
problem under study, will no doubt leads us into confusion and error."

The same book, reproduces from another book containing the important
writings of Marx and Engels as follows: "As in the case of an individual
mere self-introspection does not help us to make any judgement, in the
same way, during the period of disturbance and chaos, the ideas of that
period should not be treated as helpful for judging its character."

Marx tries to negate the role of knowledge, thought and the tendency of
innovation which are normally considered to be the basic factors of
development. For example, Saint Simon, many of whose ideas have been
adopted by Marx, in respect of the role of the tendency of innovation in
development says: "Societies are governed by two moral forces which are
equally strong and operate alternately. One is the force of habit or
custom, and the other is inclination towards innovation and creativity.
After some time customs necessarily become evil ... At such times, the
need for something new begins to be felt. It is this need which really
constitutes the revolutionary situation."

In respect of the role of beliefs and ideas in the development of
societies Proudhon, another teacher of Marx says: "Political forms of
nations have been the manifestations of their beliefs. Movement of the
forms, their transformation and annihilation are the tests which reveal
the value of the underlying ideas, through which an absolute and
unchangeable reality is revealed to us gradually. But we see that all
political institutions necessarily seek adjustment with the existing
social conditions in order to be saved from inevitable death."

Despite all that his preceptors have said Marx asserts that every social
change is above all a socio-economic necessity resulting from the
polarization of the nature and the form of civic society, productive
forces and social relations.

Marx wants to say that the instincts of innovation and belief and faith
are not stimulating enough to bring about social, changes. On the
contrary it is socio-economic necessity that gives birth to the tendency
of innovation or belief and faith.

If in the light of his view about the materiality of history, we
analyse, for example, the Iranian - Greek wars, the Crusades, the
Islamic conquests, the Renaissance of the West or the constitutional
Revolution of Iran, it will be a mistake if we confine our study to the
superficial forms of these events, which may be political, religious, or
cultural, and adjudge the events on the basis of these forms. It will be
equally wrong to judge them even by the feelings of the revolutionaries
themselves who may have regarded their movement, as political, religious
or moral. In order to arrive at a correct conclusion, we must pay
attention to the real nature of these movements which is economic and
material.

Even today the young contemporary Marxists try to interpret every
historical movement by uttering a few sentences about the economic
situation of the period concerned even if they have no knowledge of it.

II. The law that governs history is inexorable, unexceptionable and
beyond the will of men. In previous chapters we discussed whether
history is governed by some causative laws implying causative necessity.
There we pointed out that some philosophers on the plea of accident and
some on the plea that man had a free choice, denied the supremacy of
causative law and consequently the existence of causative necessity and
the inexorable norms of society and history. But we proved that the
theory of these philosophers was baseless, and that the law of causation
and the causative necessity governed society and history as much as all
other things.

At the same time we also proved that history being a unit endowed with
real existence and having a special nature, was governed by a number of
universal and compulsory laws. We termed this kind of compulsion as
philosophical compulsion. This compulsion requires that the course of
history should proceed according to some definite and compulsive laws.

As for the compulsion of history in which the Marxists believe and which
is also described as economic compulsion, it is a special variety of
philosophical necessity. This theory of compulsion of history is a
mixture of two other theories. One of them is that of philosophical
necessity which requires that no phenomenon comes into existence unless
it is necessary and that every phenomenon becomes inevitable and
unavoidable with the appearance of its causes. Conversely the existence
of a phenomenon is impossible in the absence of its causes.

The other theory is that of the precedence of the material basis of
society to all other determining factors of it. We have already
explained this theory. The essential result of these theories is the
theory of the material compulsion of history, which means that
superstructure of society is bound to follow its understructure, that
with a change in its understructure, its superstructure must also
definitely change, and that without a change in its understructure no
change is possible in its superstructure.

The Marxists claim that it is this principle which has rendered Marxist
socialism scientific and gave it the form of a natural law, for
according to this principle the implements of production, which are the
most basic section of the economic structure of society continue to
develop in accordance with certain natural laws in the same way as
different species of plants and animals all over history have continued
to develop gradually for millions of years and at particular junctures
have transformed into new species. As the development and evolution of
plants and animals has not been the result of the will or desire of
anybody, same is the case with the development and evolution of the
implements of production.

The implements of production in the course of their gradual development
pass through several stages, and at every stage they bring about a
compulsory and unavoidable change in all affairs of society. There is no
possibility of any change in the social superstructure until and unless
the implements of production reach a particular stage of their
development. The efforts of those socialists and the advocates of a just
order, who out of sheer emotionalism wish to socialize society and
establish a just order without considering whether the development of
the implements of production warrant such a change, are merely an
exercise in futility. Karl Marx in his preface to the *Capital* says:

"The country that is more developed industrially only shows to the less
developed the image of its own future. .... And even when a society has
got upon the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of its
movement ultimately .... it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor remove
by legal enactments, the obstacles offered by the successive phases of
its normal development. But it can shorten and lessen the birth pangs."

In the last part of his statement Marx mentions a point to which either
attention has not been paid or very little attention has been paid. In
fact he wants to answer an implied question. Somebody may say: The
phased development of society in the wake of regular and phased
development of nature is compulsory and inevitable only so long as man
does not discover the course of natural laws. As soon as he understands
these laws, nature comes under his control and he becomes master of it.

That is why it is said that so long as nature is not understood, it is
master of man, but it becomes his servant in proportion to his
understanding of it. Take the case of an epidemic disease. So long as it
is not known what causes it and how it can be eradicated, it rules
supreme over man's life. But as soon as these things are known as they
have been today, incidence of the disease is checked and there are no
more any fatal cases. Same is the case with flood, storm etc.

In his statement Marx wants to assert that the regular and phased
movements of society are of dynamical character. In other words they are
automatic and from within like the regular movements of the growth of
plants and animals, not mechanical changes brought about by outside
factors, as are all technical and industrial changes.

The eradication of pests by means of pesticides and the annihilation of
disease germs by means of a medicine also belong to this category. In
all those cases in which the discovery of a law of nature brings nature
under man's control, the relation of the laws is mechanical. But in the
case of dynamical and inner movement of the things the role of man's
knowledge is nothing more than that man adapts himself to the course of
the relevant laws and is benefited thereby. With the discovery of the
laws regulating the growth and development of plants and animals
including the growth of the foetus in the womb, man comes across a
number of compulsory and inexorable laws to which he can do nothing but
to submit.

Marx wants to say that social development of man which follows the
development and evolution of the implements of production is a
dynamical, inner and automatic self-development. Knowledge and
consciousness cannot change it nor can they give it a form of their
choice. Man is compelled to accept social development along a definite
line and the stages through which it has to pass unquestioningly in the
same way as he has to accept the development of a foetus along a
definite line. He must put out of his head any idea of changing its
course. Society cannot reach the final stage of its development without
going through the middle stages, nor can it reach the final stage by any
way other than the way fixed for it.

The Marxist view that the movement of social development is an
automatic, unconscious, natural and compulsory movement, resembles the
view held by Socrates about human mind and its natural creative
capability. In his teachings Socrates used the method of objective
questions. He believed that if graded questions were put in a regular
manner and with accurate know ledge of the working of human mind, the
human mind would automatically move to answer those questions. Human
mind was in no need of any instructions from outside. The mother of
Socrates was a midwife. He used to say that he did with the minds
exactly what his mother did with the women in parturition. It is not a
midwife who causes the delivery of a child. Delivery is caused at the
right moment by mother's nature. Still the services of a midwife are
required to makes it sure that nothing abnormal takes place, and no harm
is done to the mother or the child.

Although from the view-point of Marxism, the discovery of the laws of
sociology and history of philosophy can bring about no change in
society, yet importance must be attached to these sciences. Scientific
socialism is nothing but the discovery of the laws of sociology and
history of philosophy. At least they help in doing away with whimsical
socialism and wishful thinking about setting up a just order. Though
dynamical laws can change nothing, yet they have one good point about
them and that point is that their effect is predictable.

In the light of scientific sociology and scientific socialism the stage
of the development of any society can be studied and its future can be
foretold. It can be ascertained at what stage the baby of socialism is
in the womb of a society and what can be exactly expected of it at each
subsequent stage. Thus unnecessary and undue expectations can be
avoided. As the immediate delivery of a four-month old foetus cannot be
expected, similarly it is not possible that a society which is still at
the feudal stage should suddenly be shifted to socialism.

Marxism tries to discover and describe the natural and dynamical stages
of society and the compulsory laws of its development from one period to
another.

From the view-point of Marxism on the whole societies have to pass
through four stages to reach socialism. These stages are the periods of
primitive socialism, slavery, capitalism and scientific socialism.
Sometimes instead of four periods, five, six or seven periods are
mentioned, for each of the periods of slave-holding, capitalism and
socialism can be split into two periods.

III. Each historical period has its own distinguishing features and is
different in its nature from other periods. From biological point of
view when animals are transformed from one species into another species,
they change their nature. The same is true of the historical periods.
Each age has its own special laws and the laws of a previous or a
subsequent age cannot be applied to it. Take the case of water. So long
as it is water, the law peculiar to the liquids, apply to it, but as
soon as it is changed into steam, it is no longer subject to those laws.

Then it becomes subject to the laws of gases. Similarly so long as a
society is at the stage of feudalism, it is governed by one set of laws.
But as soon as it passes that stage and reaches the stage of capitalism,
it will be absurd to try to retain the laws of the period of feudalism.
As such society cannot have any eternal and everlasting laws. According
to historical materialism, which believes that economy is the
infrastructure of society, any claim to eternity on the part of any laws
is totally unacceptable. This is one of those points of historical
materialism which are inconsistent with religion, especially Islam which
believes in an eternal code of law.

In the book, *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, quotes from an appendix to
the second edition of the *Capital*, the author says: "Every period of
history has laws of its own... accordingly as life passes from one stage
to another stage, it evolves and is governed by a new set of laws.
Economic life, in the course of its historical development, brings forth
a phenomenon that we come across in various branches of biology ....
social organisms are distinguished from one another in the same way as
animal and plant organisms are differentiated."

IV. It was due to the development of the implements of production that
private property came into being and society was divided into two
classes of the exploiters and the exploited. From the dawn of history
till today these two classes have been and still continue to be the main
divisions of society. A conflict between them has always existed.
Anyhow, this division does not mean that all groups of society are
either exploiters or the exploited. Some of them may not belong to
either of these two categories. What we mean to say is that these two
are the categories effective in the destiny of society and form the
chief divisions of it. All other groups of society follow one of these
two main groups.

The author of the *Revisionism from Marx to Mao* writes:

"We find two different patterns of division of society according to
classes and their conflicts; according to Marx and Engels: one is
bipolar, and the other is multipolar. Definition of class also differs
in both the patterns. In the first pattern it is an imaginary class,
while in the other it is a real class. The rules regarding the divisions
of classes are also different. Engels, in his preface to *The Peasants'
War in Germany* tries to reconcile these two patterns by evolving a
uniform standard for class division. He distinguishes various classes in
society, and, within each class, he differentiates various subgroups.
But according to his belief, there are only two classes who accomplish a
definite historic mission: the bourgeois and the proletariat; because
they form the really opposite poles of society."

As, according to the Marxist philosophy, it is impossible that the
superstructure of society should go ahead of its infrastructure,
similarly it is also impossible that the superstructure of society
should remain intact when society, from the viewpoint of its
infrastructure, that is its social and economic relations, is divided
into two opposite classes of the exploiters and the exploited. In these
circumstances social conscience is also divided into the conscience of
the exploited and that of the exploiters and consequently two world
conceptions, two ideologies, two moral systems and two kinds of
philosophy appear. The social and economic position of each class
inspires a separate way of thinking, a separate taste and adherence to
separate ideas.

Neither of the two classes can have a conscience, a taste or a way of
thinking which is not in keeping with its economic position. The
religion and the government are the things which are controlled
exclusively by the class of the exploiters. These are the institutions
which have been invented by this class with a view to perpetuate its
control of the class exploited by it. As the class of the exploiters
controls all the material resources of society, it imposes its culture
including its religion on the exploited class. Thus the culture of the
rulers, which includes their world conception, their ideology, their
morality, their taste their feelings, and above all their religion, is
the culture of the exploiters. As for the culture of the exploited it
like themselves is always subdued and not allowed to grow and make
progress. In German Ideology Marx has said: "The ideas of the ruling
class are in every epoch the ruling ideas; i.e. the class which is the
ruling material force of society is at the same time its ruling
intellectual force.

The class which has the means of material production at its disposal.
The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the
dominant material relations, the dominant material relations grasped as
ideas, hence of the relations which make the one class the ruling one,
therefore, the ideas of its dominance. The individuals composing the
ruling class possess among other things consciousness, and therefore
think. In so far, as they rule as a class and determine the extent and
compass of an historical epoch, it is self-evident that they do this in
its whole range; hence among other things they rule also as thinkers, as
producers of ideas, and regulate the production and distribution of
ideas of their age: thus their ideas are the ruling ideas of epoch."

A ruling and exploiting class as such is reactionary, conservative, and
conventional. It looks to the past. Its culture which is the ruling
culture and which it imposes on its subjects is also reactionary,
conventional and looking towards the past. As for the exploited and the
subjugated class, it is revolutionary, iconoclastic, future-looking and
progressive. Its subdued culture is also revolutionary and
unconventional. To be exploited is a prerequisite of being
revolutionary. In other words only an exploited class is capable of
bringing about a revolution.

After reproducing the above-quoted passage from the preface to *The war
of German Peasants*, the author of the *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*
says: A year after the publication of this prefatory note, (prefatory
note to *The Peasants' War in Germany*) the Congress of the German
Socialists has written in its Gotha Program that all classes from a
reactionary front against the labour class. Marx severely criticized
this statement. But if we are logical, we should admit the fact that
since these miserable socialists could not possibly differentiate
between his bipolar or multi-polar patterns after what Marx had written
in the Manifesto. In the Manifesto (*Manifesto of the Communist Party*),
Marx presents the class conflicts of those days as the war between the
proletariat and the bourgeois. He writes: "Of all the classes that stand
face to face with the bourgeois today, the proletariat alone is a
revolutionary class."

Somewhere Marx has said that only the proletarian class fulfils all the
conditions and has the characteristics necessary to become
revolutionary. These conditions are as under:

i. to be exploited by producers;

ii. to be having no property (the peasants also have these two
characteristics);

iii. to be organized, for which concentration at one place is necessary.
(This characteristic applies to industrial workers only who work
together in a factory etc. It does not exist in the case of the peasants
who are always scattered in the various sectors of land.)

In respect of the second characteristic Marx has said: "A worker is free
in two sense. He is free to sell his labour and he is not tied to any
kind of property." In respect of the second characteristic Marx has said
in his *Manifesto*: "Growth of industry has not only increased the
number of the proletarians, but has also concentrated them in
considerably large masses. The force of the proletarians is increasing
and they are becoming aware of their power."

The above mentioned principle may be called the principle of conformity
of the ideological basis with class and social basis. According to this
principle every class produces only that kind of ideas, moral
principles, philosophy, art, poetry and literature which conforms with
its way of life, its means of living and its interests. This principle
may also be called the principle of the conformity of the urge of
thinking with the direction of thinking.

Every idea and doctrine and every moral or religious system that arises
in a class, is always directed to the advantage of that class. No
intellectual system arising in a particular class can be for the benefit
of another class or for the good of the humanity at large. It is
impossible that any idea or any system should have no class bias.
Thinking can be humanistic and classless only if classes are abolished
as the result of the development of implements of production. Only the
negation of the contradiction of class basis can lead to the negation of
the contradiction of ideological basis, and only the negation of the
contradiction of intellectual drive can do away with the contradiction
of intellectual orientation.

In some of his earlier works written in young age (*Contribution to the
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right*) Marx lays more stress on the
political aspect of the classes (rulership and subjection) than on their
economic aspects (exploitation and the exploited). He says that the
class struggle aims at freedom and liberation from bondage. He is of the
opinion that there are two stages of this struggle. The first stage is
partial and political, and the other stage is universal and human. Marx
says that the proletarian revolution, which is the last stage of the
revolution of the bondmen of history is a basic revolution in the sense
that it is for the complete emancipation of man and the total abolition
of the system of rulership and subjection in all its forms.

Explaining how a class in its social orientation can think of some thing
that is far beyond its class position and how it can adopt an objective
which is universal and humanistic as well as in conformity with the
principles of historical materialism, Marx says: "As the bondage of this
class is basic, revolution is also basic. It is injustice itself which
has bee imposed on it. That is why it seeks justice itself and endeavour
for the liberation of mankind."

This is a poetic and not a scientific statement. What meant by saying
that "injustice itself has been imposed?" Has the exploiting class been
doing injustice for the sake of injustice and not for the sake of
exploitation and making gains, so that the proletarian class seeks
justice itself? Furthermore, it is contrary to the conception of
historical materialism and somewhat idealistic to suppose that the
exploiting class has assumed its present attitude only during the
capitalistic age.

As the principle of conformity of ideological basis with the class basis
makes it necessary that there should be harmony between an ideology and
the orientation which it causes, it a makes it necessary that there
should be harmony between the inclinations of an individual and the
ideas of his class. In other words every individual is naturally
inclined towards the ideas the school that arises from his own class and
whose orientation is to the advantage of his class.

Anyhow, the view-point of Marxist logic, this principle is extremely
useful for the purpose of understanding the nature of ideologies and the
inclination of the social classes.

V. The fifth conclusion is that such superstructural matters as
ideology, guidance, propagation and exhortation etc. play only a limited
role in giving direction to society or to social classes. Usually it is
understood that ideology, preaching, arguments, teaching, training,
propagation and advice can change the conscience of man and mould it in
any desired way. But it is true that conscience is an involuntary
reflection of class position, then the conscience of every individual,
every group and every class is invariably and exclusively shaped by the
social and class position of that individual, group and class, and it
would be only an idealistic conception of society and history to think
that the superstructural matters such as mentioned above can be a source
of any social change.

That is why it is said that intellectuality, as well as seeking reforms
and staging revolutions have an aspect of autosuggestion. It is a sense
of class deprivation, not any external factor such as teaching and
training, that inspires people to seek reforms and to become
revolutionaries. At least the real ground for these things is prepared
by class position, and the role of ideology, guidance etc. is at the
most confined to making the deprived class conscious of the class
contradictions and its own position, or to turning a particular class
into a class having a class consciousness.

Thus in a class-dominated society the only intellectual basis that moves
a class to action is its awareness of its position and its realization
that it is being exploited. In the class dominated societies in which
men have been divided into the two categories of the exploiters and the
exploited, and in which social conscience has been split into two types,
such basic human values as justice and love of humanity can have no
role. Of course when as a result of the development of the implements of
production a proletarian government will be established, classes will
vanish and man will return to his true humanity having no class
frontiers.

Then his conscience will not be split by the system of private property
and it will be possible that intellectual and human values reflecting
the position of the development of the implements of production, play a
definite role. From the view-point of historical periods, socialism is
the superstructure of a particular age. It is not possible to introduce
it at will in any age prior to it. (As some whimsical socialists wanted
to do.) Similarly in an age in which society is divided into two
classes, it is not possible to impose the special consciousness of one
class on the other class. At present common human consciousness does not
exist.

Therefore in a class dominated society a general and universal ideology
having no class orientation cannot exist. Every ideology which appears
in a class dominated society must invariably have a tinge of a
particular class. Even if we suppose that there can be a general
ideology having no class characteristic, it is certain that such an
ideology practically will play no role. As such the mission of the
religions and at least of the guidance, the counsel and the preaching of
equality and justice to mankind in their name is at least eccentric, if
not fraudulent.

VI. Another conclusion which we may draw is that the revolutionary
leaders always come of the exploited class. It has already been proved
that only this class is mentally prepared to seek reforms and stage a
revolution. The only factors which bring about this preparedness are
exploitation and deprivation. At the most there may be a need of some
superstructural factors to create consciousness of class contradictions.
It is evident that the prominent individuals who create this awakening
and self. consciousness in the exploited class should belong to this
very class and have sympathy with its cause. They should be those
members of this class who have already become self-conscious.

As it is impossible that as regards time the superstructural position of
a society should precede its infrastructural position, and it is
impossible that the level of the social thinking of a class, should be
higher than its social position, it is also impossible that a leader
should make any demands which reflect some thing above the actual
aspirations of his class. As such it is impossible that any member of
the exploiting class should rise against his own class for the sake of
the exploited class.

The author of the *Revisionism from Marx to Mao* says: "Another original
contribution of *The German Ideology* is analysis of class
consciousness. Here Marx, contrary to his earlier works, regards class
consciousness as the product of the class itself; it does not come from
outside. The real consciousness is nothing but an ideology, because it
is bound to give generalized form to the interests of a particular
class. But does not exclude the fact that this consciousness, which is
based upon the awareness of its own conditions, strengthens the
interests of the class. In any case, the class cannot attain maturity
without producing its specific class consciousness.

Marx's view affirms the division of labour within the working class
itself, i.e. the intellectual work (the ideological work, leadership)
and manual work. Some individuals become thinkers or ideologues of the
class, while others rather passively accept and act upon the ideas and
concepts provided for them."

The same book analysing the views of Marx expressed in his *Manifesto*
and in his *Poverty of Philosophy* says: "In this way, awakening class
consciousness and organizing it in the form of a 'class-for-itself' is
the task of the proletariat and also the result of its self-fuelled
economic battle. This upheaval is neither brought about by any
intellectual theory which is alien to the workers' movement, nor by any
political party. Marx condemns Utopian socialists who despite their
proletarian -inclination do not see the historical self-propulsion of
the proletariat and their specific political movement . . . and try to
replace with their fancies the gradual and self-motivated organization
of the proletariat into a class."

This principle of self-development is of special importance in Marxist
logic and may be regarded as a guiding principle with regard to knowing
society, its social tendencies and the leanings of the individuals,
especially of those who claim to be the leaders and reformers of
society.

From the foregoing it is clear that Marx and Engels do not and cannot
believe in an independent super-class of intellectuals. The principles
of Marxism do not allow such a belief. If in some of his works Marx has
expressed an opinion to the contrary, that may be on the occasions when
he does not want to be a Marxist. We shall show later that such
occasions are not rare. Now the question rises how Marx and Engels
explain their own position as intellectuals in the light of the Marxist
principles. Neither of them belongs to the proletarian class. They are
the philosophers and not the workers. Nevertheless, they have originated
the greatest workers theory.

The answer of Marx to this question is note-worthy. The author of the
*Revisionism from Marx to Mao* says: "Marx has spoken little about the
intellectuals. He apparently does not regard them as a special stratum
of society, but a part of certain other classes, particularly the
bourgeois. In *The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte*, Marx
considers academics, journalists, university teachers, and lawyers as
the part of the bourgeois class, like priests and army men. In the
*Manifesto*, when he wants to mention the names of the theorists of the
working class who by origin do not belong to it - like Engels and
himself - he does not call them intellectuals, but regards them as
'groups of people from the ruling class. . ., who have embedded
themselves amongst the proletariat,' and 'have brought many elements for
the education and training of that class.'"

Marx does not explain how he and Engels slipped from the apogee of the
ruling class and descended among the ruled, bringing with them valuable
gifts for the education and training of this humble class described by
the Qur’an as the ***" downtrodden and the destitute"*** (Vide Surah al
Balad 90:17)

Really the good luck bestowed on Marx and Engels and through them on the
down-trodden class of the proletariat never fell to the lot of Adam, the
progenitor of the human race, who according to the religious traditions,
descended from, the heaven to the earth! Adam did not bring with him any
such gifts.

Marx does not explain how a theory of the liberation of the proletariat
can develop in the very core of the ruling class nor does he say whether
this descent was a speciality of these two individuals or was possible
in the case of others also. Now when it has been established that the
doors of the heaven and the earth can be opened to each others, although
in a very special case, it is not clear whether there is a possibility
of decent only, or the members of the lower classes can ascend to the
position of the heavenly region. Anyhow, if they do ascend, they have
not any suitable gifts to carry with them.

Basically it is absurd to carry any gifts from the earth the heaven. But
if one succeeds in ascending to the heaven is not totally absorbed in
the heavenly region, one is likely bring gifts on one's descent to the
earth as Messrs. Marx and Engels did.

Criticism and Comments of Historical Materialism
------------------------------------------------

As we have now explained the basis of the theory historical materialism
and drawn certain conclusions from it, it is right time to make some
comments on it.

Let us first make it clear that we do not propose to discuss critically
the total views of Marx as expressed by him in all his works, nor do we
intend to criticize Marxism as a whole. Here we propose to critically
review only historical materialism, which is one of the fundamental
principles of Marxism. Basically it is one thing to criticize the views
of Marx or to criticize Marxism as a whole, and it is a different thing
to criticize a particular principle of Marxism such as historical
materialism.

A critical study of all the views of Marx as scattered in the numerous
works compiled by him during the various periods of his life, shows many
contradictions. Such a study has been undertaken by several individuals
in the West. In Iran, as far as we know, the best book available on this
subject is the *Revision of views from Marx to Mao*,[^1] from which we
have extensively quoted in this chapter.

The criticism of Marxism as a whole or any of its fundamental principles
is unexceptionable even from the view point of the personality of Marx.
The criticism of those principles, which are not considered to be final
by Marx himself and about which he has expressed contradictory views, is
also justified in those cases which are concomitant with the basic
principles of Marxism and the contrary views expressed by Marx himself
may be regarded as his deviation from Marxism. While dealing with
historical materialism in this book, we have kept this principle in
mind.

Here our criticism is based on the indisputable principles propounded by
Marx, irrespective of the fact whether in his contradictory works and
writings, he himself has or has not expressed any view to the contrary,
for our main aim is to comment on historical materialism and not on the
views of Marx.

It is an irony of history that in his philosophical, social and economic
books Marx has more or, less supported the theory of historical
materialism. But while analysing and interpreting the contemporary
events he has paid little attention to the principles of this theory.
Why so? Varied answers have been given to this question, and that is not
a thing peculiar to this problem only. In many cases Marx has adopted a
contradictory attitude, and has theoretically or practically deviated
from Marxism. Therefore what is required is a general answer.

Some attribute this weakness to the immaturity of Marx during the early
periods of his life. But this explanation is indefensible at least from
the point of view of Marxism, for many of his theories, which are today
regarded as the recognized principles of Marxism, are related to the
periods of his youth or middle age, and many of his deviations,
including some of his interpretations of the contemporary events, are
related to the last period of his life.

Some others attribute this contradiction to his double personality. They
assert that on the one hand he was a philosopher, an ideologue and the
founder of a school. Hence it was natural for him to regard the
principles enunciated by him as firm and final and to use all the force
at his disposal to reconcile between the actualities and his
forethoughts. On the other hand Marx also had a learned personality and
a scholarly spirit. This spirit compelled him to always submit to
actualities and not to adhere to any definite principle.

Some others differentiate between Marx and Marxism. They claim that Marx
and his ideas are only a stage of Marxism. Essentially Marxism is an
evolutionary school, and hence there is nothing wrong if Marxism has
gone ahead of Marx himself.

In other words, if the Marxism of Marx which is only an early stage of
Marxism, is found to be defective, it is not fair to conclude that
Marxism itself is faulty. Anyhow, these people do not explain what forms
the main essence of communism. A school can be called evolutionary if
all its preliminary principles are definite and firm. Only the
subsidiary matters can be disputable. Otherwise there will be no
difference between the abrogation of a theory and its evolution. If firm
principles are not accepted as an essential condition of evolution,
there is no reason why we should not begin with pre-Marx theorists and
thinkers such as Hegel, Saint Simon, Proudhon or some other personality,
should not call Hegelism or Proudhonism a school in the developing
state, and regard Marxism as a stage of that school.

In our opinion the contradictions of Marx are due to the fact that he
himself is a less Marxist than most of the other Marxists. It is said
that once at a meeting of the Marxists, he defended a view contrary to
his own earlier theory. His audience were very much upset. Marx said: "
I am not as much a Marxist as you are" . It is also said that during the
last days of his life he declared that he was not a Marxist at all.

Marx did not agree with certain views of Marxism because he was too
clever to be a hundred per cent Marxist. To be a standard Marxist
requires more than a little gullibility. Historical materialism, which
is now under discussion, is a part of Marxism. It has certain principles
which lead to certain results to which neither Marx the scholar could
subscribe nor Marx the philosopher and thinker could adhere to these
principles and results. Now here are our comments on historical
materialism.

### i) Baselessness

The first objection is that this view is not more than mere 'theory'
without any proof. A historio-philosophical theory should either be
based on contemporary historical evidence and then extended to other
periods or should be based on historical evidence of the past events and
extended to the present and the future; or should have valid scientific,
logical or philosophical arguments to prove it.

The theory of historical materialism does not follow any of the above
methods. The events of the time of Marx and Engels cannot be explained
by it; so much so that Engels himself has admitted that he and Marx
committed certain mistakes while dealing with the importance of economy
in some of their books. But they could commit no such mistakes while
analysing the contemporary events because at that time they were facing
reality. Further, the events of the past thousands of years also do not
support the theory of historical materialism in any way.

### (ii) Revision of Views by Its Founders

As we have repeatedly mentioned, Marx calls the economic basis of
society its infrastructure and other bases its superstructure. This
expression is enough to show that other bases of society are subordinate
to its economic basis and depend on it. Furthermore, many of the
statements of Marx quoted by us earlier make it clear that according to
him this dependence is one-sided. It is economic factors alone which
influence all other social matters.

It is a fact that even if Marx had not specifically stated so, his views
regarding the precedence of matter to spirit, precedence of material
needs to spiritual needs, precedence of psychology to sociology and the
precedence of work to thought would have led us to the same conclusion.

Anyhow, in many of his writings Marx has expressed a different opinion
in regard to the basis of dialectic logic. This may be regarded as a
sort of a change in his views and to some extent a deviation from the
absolute materiality of history. The opinion to which we refer is his
theory of reciprocal influence. On the basis of this theory the
causative relation should not be considered to be unilateral. If A is
the cause of B and influences it, in its turn B is also a cause of A and
influences it. According to this principle there exists a sort of
reciprocal dependence and influence among all parts of nature and all
parts of society.

At present we are not concerned as to whether this dialectic principle
in the form in which it has been advanced is correct or not. But we must
say that, according this principle, it is basically meaningless to speak
of any precedence in the relationship between any two things whether
they be matter and spirit, work and thought or economic basis of society
and all other social institutions; for if each of the two things is
dependent on the other and is essential for its existence, the question
of precedence and being infrastructure does not arise.

In some of his statements Marx does not mention the influence of the
infrastructure of society over its superstructure, but simply allots a
role, whether essential or nonessential to the economic basis of
society. Still in some other statements of his he speaks of the
reciprocal influence of the infrastructure and the superstructure, but
still maintains that the main and the final role is that of the
infrastructure. While making a comparison between the two books of Marx,
*The Capital* and *The Critique of Political Economy* the *Revisionism
from Marx to Mao* says that in both of these books Marx describes
economy as the determining factor. The book further says: " In spite of
this, Marx, consciously or unconsciously, has added a new dimension to
this definition by stating that superstructures, despite primacy of the
base over infrastructure, can play an essential role in society."

The author further asks: What is the difference between the governing
and determining role that is always performed by the economic
infrastructures and this main role ascribed to the superstructures here?
Even if the superstructures play the main role only occasionally, their
role must be determining in those cases in which it is played. Not only
that, but in those cases what we call the infrastructure should be the
superstructure and what we call the superstructure should be the
infrastructure.

In a letter written by him towards the end of his life to Joseph Bloch,
Engels remarked as under: " . . . . According to the materialist
conception of history, ultimately determining element in history is the
production and reproduction of real fife. More than this neither Marx
nor I have ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that
the economic element is the only determining one, he transforms that
proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase.

The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the
superstructure: political forms of the class struggle and its results,
to wit: constitutions established by the victorious class after a
successful battle, etc., juridical forms, and then even the reflexes of
all these actual struggles in the brains of the participants, political,
juristic, philosophical theories, religious views and their further
development into systems of dogmas, also exercise their influence upon
the course of historical struggles and in many cases preponderate in
determining their form. There is an interaction of all these elements in
which, amid all the endless host of accidents the economic movement
finally asserts itself as necessary."

Strangely enough, if the theory that the economic factor alone is the
determining factor is a hollow fiction, it is amazing that this
proposition has been advanced by none other than Marx himself. Moreover,
if it is true that the so called superstructural factors in many cases
seriously determine the form of historical struggle, then the economic
factors are not the only determining factors. As such it is out of place
to say that economic movement necessarily makes its way through an
endless mass of contradictions.

What is more amazing is that in this very letter Monsieur Engels puts
the responsibility for this mistake or, in his own words, distortion,
partly on himself and Marx. He says:

"Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger
people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it.
We had to emphasize the main principle vis-a-vis our adversaries, who
denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or opportunity to
allow the other elements involved in the interaction to come into
light."

But some other interpret, that too much emphasis laid by Marx and Engels
on the economic factors, in a way different from what Engels has stated.
They say that this excessive stress was not directed against the
opponents of this theory, but was meant to disarm those rivals who
supported it.

In *The Critique of Political Economy* Marx has laid more stress on the
role of economic factors than in any other works of his. We have already
reproduced a well-known extract from the preface of this book.
Describing the circumstances in which this book was written, the
*Revisionism from Marx To Mao* says: " Another cause of writing the
*Critique of Political Economy*, was the publication of a book by
Proudhon, *Manuel du speculateur a la Bourse*, and another book by
Darimon, the follower of Proudhon. . . . When Marx saw that his rivals
in the camp of Proudhon from one side, and the followers of Lassalle
from the other side were relying upon the economic element in a
reformative (not revolutionary) way, he endeavoured to seize this weapon
from their hands and used it for the purpose of revolution. This
necessitated a rigidity suited to the purpose of popularizing his
beliefs.

To meet the requirements of the special conditions of China and to
justify the needs of his practical experience in leading the Chinese
revolutionary movement, Mao so much changed the conceptions of
historical materialism and the supreme importance of economy that
nothing was left of them or of socialism based on historical
materialism, except quibbling and play of words.

Under the heading, *'The Principal Contradiction and the Principal
Aspect of Contradiction'*, Mao in his treatise on "Contradiction" says:
"The principal and the non-principal aspects of a contradiction
transform themselves into each other and quality of a thing changes
accordingly. In a certain process or at a certain stage in the
development of a contradiction, the principal aspect is A and the
non-principal aspect is B, at another stage of development or in another
process of development, the roles are reversed - a change determined by
the extent of the increase or decrease in the strength with which each
of the two aspects struggle against the other in the development of a
thing."

Some people think that this is not the case with certain contradictions.
For example in the contradiction between productive forces and the
relations of production, the productive forces are the principal
aspect;. . . in the contradiction between the economic foundation and
its superstructure, the economic foundation is the principal aspect and
there is no change in their respective positions. This is the view of
mechanistic materialism. True, the productive forces, practice, and the
economic foundation generally manifest themselves in the principal and
decisive roles; whoever denies this is not a materialist. But under
certain conditions, such aspects as the relations of production, theory,
and superstructure in turn manifest themselves in the principal and
decisive role; this must also be admitted.

When the productive forces cannot be developed unless the relations of
production are changed, the change in the relations of production plays
the principal and decisive role. As Lenin put it, without a
revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary movement. The
creation and advocacy of the revolutionary theory plays the principal
and decisive role. . . . When the superstructure (politics, culture and
so on) hinders the development of economic foundation, political and
cultural reforms become the principal and decisive' factors. By saying
this, are we running counter to materialism? No. The reason is that
while we recognize that in the development of history as a whole it is
the material essence of things that determines spiritual things, and
social existence that determines social consciousness, at the same time
we also recognize and must recognize the reaction of spiritual things
and social consciousness on social existence, and the reaction of
superstructure on economic foundation. This is not running counter to
materialism; this is precisely avoiding mechanistic materialism and
firmly upholding dialectical materialism."

Actually what Mao says goes totally against the theory of historical
materialism; when he says: "At the time that production relations impede
the growth and development of productive forces" , or says: " At the
time that revolutionary movement is in need of a revolutionary theory" ,
or says: " If the superstructure hampers the growth and development of
infrastructure" he mentions what always happens and must always happen.
But according to the theory of historical materialism such situations
should never arise, for according to it the development of productive
forces compulsorily changes the production relations; revolutionary
theory invariably emerges automatically; and the superstructure
compulsorily changes under the impact of infrastructure.

Has not Marx in his preface to the *Critique of Political Economy*
expressly said: " At a certain stage of their development, the material
productive forces of society come in conflict with the existing
relations of production, or what is but a legal expression for the same
thing -- with the property relations within which they have been at work
hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces, these
relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an epoch of social
revolution. With the change of economic foundation, the entire immense
superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed."

A change in the production relations prior to the development of the
productive forces, the formation of a revolutionary theories prior to
the automatic revolutionary insurgence and a change in the
superstructure to pave the way for a corresponding change in the
infrastructure, all this means the precedence Of thought to work, the
precedence of spirit to matter and the importance and independence of
political and intellectual basis of society as compared to its economic
basis. Thus the idea of historical materialism is nullified.

Mao says that dialectic materialism would be violated, if it is hold
that influence is only one-sided. That is true. But the problem is that
scientific socialism is based on this very one-sided influence which is
contrary to the dialectic principle of reciprocal dependence. Hence we
have either to accept scientific socialism and to ignore dialectic logic
or to accept dialectic logic and to ignore scientific socialism and
historical materialism on which it is based.

Furthermore, what does Mao mean when he says that he admits that
generally in the course of the development of history material essence
of things determine spiritual things and social existence determines
social consciousness. To admit that the main aspect of contradictions is
subject to an occasional change, amounts to saying that sometimes the
productive force determines the production relation and sometimes vice
versa, i.e. the process is reversed. Sometimes a revolutionary creates a
revolutionary theory and sometimes vice versa. Sometimes education,
politics, religion, force etc. change the economic basis of society and
sometimes the process is reversed. Therefore sometimes matter determines
spirit and on some other occasion determines matter. Sometimes social
existence determines social consciousness and sometimes social
consciousness determines social existence.

In fact, what Mao has said about the change in the place of the main
aspect of contradictions, is a Maoist theory which practically goes
against the Marxist theory of historical materialism. It is not an
interpretation of the Marxist theory as Mao claims. Mao has practically
shown that like Marx himself he is also too clever to be always a
Marxist. The Chinese Revolution led by Mao practically violated
scientific socialism as well as historical materialism, and hence
Marxism itself.

Under the leadership of Mao, China overthrew the old feudal system and
set up a socialist regime instead of it, whereas according to scientific
socialism and historical materialism a country passing through the stage
of feudalism must pass over to the industrial and capitalistic stage
first. It can step forward to socialism only when it has reached a high
level of industrialization. As a foetus in the womb cannot reach a stage
without passing through the earlier stage, similarly society cannot
reach the final stage without passing through the earlier successive
stage.

But Mao has shown practically that he is a midwife who can bring to this
world a four-month old foetus in a healthy, perfect and flawless
condition. He has shown that contrary to what Marx has said, a leader
may ignore what scientific socialism teaches, totally change the
production relations and industrialize a country by means of party
teachings, political formations, a revolutionary theory, and social
information. These are the same things which are called by Marx a kind
of consciousness and superstructure and not a kind of existence and
infrastructure. According to Marx they are not basic. Mao has shown that
productive relations can be overturned and a country can be
industrialized, ignoring the so-called scientific socialism for all
practical purposes.

In another way also Mao exploded the Marxist theory of history.
According to the Marxist theory and at least from the personal point of
view of Marx, the peasant class fulfils only the first two conditions of
being a revolutionary class. It is an exploited class and it holds no
property. But it does not fulfil the third condition of being
concentrated, having mutual cooperation and mutual understanding and
being conscious of its power. For this reason the peasant class is not
fit to initiate a revolution. At the most in a semi-agricultural and
semi-industrial society the peasants may become the followers of the
revolutionary proletariat.

Not only that, but from the point of view of Marx, the peasant class is
basically mean and reactionary. It totally lacks every kind of
revolutionary initiative. In a letter to Engels, on the revolution in
Poland, Marx made this remark about the peasants: "The basically
wretched and reactionary peasants should not be called upon to
struggle." But Mao converted this very mean and reactionary class into a
revolutionary class and with its help overthrew the old regime.
According to Marx the peasants not only cannot lead a country to
socialism, but they also can make no contribution in the shifting of a
country from feudalism to capitalism.

It is the bourgeois class which brings about a social revolution at a
historical moment. But Mao jumped directly from feudalism to socialism
with the help of the so-called reactionary class of the peasants.
Therefore it was appropriate that in order to make a distinction between
Maoism and Marxism, Mao should advance his own theory of a change in the
place of the major aspect of contradictions. Anyhow, Mao himself does
not speak of Maoism and he advances his views only as a learned
interpretation of Marxism, historical materialism and scientific
socialism.

Mao learnt from his distinguished predecessor, Lenin, the lesson that a
Marxist when necessary should practically secede from Marxism. It was
Lenin who before Mao brought about a revolution in Russia at the time
when that country was semi-cultural and semi-industrial. It was Lenin
who for the first time founded a socialist State.

Lenin did not expect that during his lifetime Czarist Russia would ever
be fully industrialized and turned into such a capitalist country where
the exploitation of workers might reach its final so that automatically
a self-conscious and dynamical movement could bring about a total
change. So he felt that it would be too late if he waited for the period
of pregnancy to be completed before he undertook the job of midwifery.
Hence he started with the superstructure and used party, politics, a
revolutionary theory, a war and force in order to convert the
semi-industrialized Russia of that day into the Soviet Socialist country
of today.

Lenin practically proved the truth of the famous proverb that a bird in
hand is worth two in the bush. He did not wait for the two birds of Marx
and the automatic and dynamic readiness of the economic basis of the
Russian society for insurrection. He fully exploited the one bird in
hand and brought about a successful revolution by means of force,
politics, party teachings and his own political insight.

### (iii) Demolition of the Principle of Compulsory Harmony Between Infrastructure and Superstructure

According to the theory of historical materialism there should always be
some sort of harmony between the infrastructure of a society and its
superstructure, so that it may be possible to know the infrastructure by
knowing the superstructure (by employing the deductive method, which
provides semi-perfect knowledge) and to know the superstructure by
knowing the infrastructure (by employing the inductive method, which
provides perfect knowledge). If the infrastructure is changed, this
harmony will naturally be destroyed, social equilibrium will be
disturbed and such a crisis will begin that sooner or later it will ruin
the superstructure. In contrast, so long as the infrastructure remains
as it is, the superstructure will remain intact.

The contemporary historical events have proved the invalidity of the
above proposition. Consequent to a number of political and social
revolutions which accompanied the successive economic upheavals which
occurred during the period from 1827 to 1847 Marx and Engels came to
believe that social revolutions were an inevitable result of the
economic crises. But according to the author of the *Revisionism from
Marx to Mao*: "It is the irony of history that there has not been any
economic crisis accompanied with a revolution in industrialized
countries since 1848. In the very lifetime of Marx, before his death,
four times forces of production rebelled against relations of production
without bringing about any revolution ... later, some economists like
Joseph Schumpeter have gone to the extent of naming, these crises caused
by technical innovation as 'gales of creative destruction, and as safety
valves for reestablishing economic equilibrium and economic growth."

The countries like Britain, France, Germany and America have made
stupendous industrial progress, They are at the zenith of capitalism.
But contrary to the prediction of Marx that these countries would be the
first to experience workers' revolution and would be converted into
socialist countries, their so-called superstructure has gone under no
change from political, legal or religious point of view. The child which
Marx hoped to be born has completed nine months, has crossed not only
nine but even ninety years, but still it has not seen the light of the
day. Now no hope is left that this child will ever be born.

Of course there is no doubt that the present regimes in these countries
will sooner or later be overthrown, but the awaited revolution of the
workers will never come about and the Marxist theory of history will
never prove correct. For that matter the regimes which are governing the
so-called socialist countries of today will also be overthrown one day
or other. Anyhow, it is certain that the future regimes in these
countries will not be capitalistic.

We find that several countries in Eastern Europe, Asia and South America
have reached the stage of socialism without passing through the phase of
capitalism. Today there are countries which resemble each other from the
point of view of their infrastructure, but still they differ widely as
far as their superstructure is concerned. The two superpowers, that is
America and Soviet Russia are the best example of this phenomenon.
America and Japan have the same economic system, but their political,
religious, moral, cultural and artistic systems different. On the other
hand, there are countries whose political, religious and other
superstructural systems are almost the same, but still their economic
condition are totally similar. All this shows that the compulsory
conformity of the superstructure of society with its infrastructure as
conceived by historical materialism is merely a figment of imagination.

### (iv) Nonconformity of the Basis of Class Ideology

As we have mentioned earlier, according to historical materialism
superstructure of any period cannot go ahead of its infrastructure at
all. As such the knowledge of every period is absolutely confined to
that period. With the lapse of time it becomes old and obsolete, and is
deposited in the archives of history. Ideas, philosophies, plans,
predictions and religions, all are by-products of the special
requirements of the age in which they appear and cannot be consistent
with the requirements of any other age. But practically it has been
proved otherwise. Not to say of creeds and religions, many philosophies,
personalities, ideas and branches of knowledge appear to have been ahead
of their times or their class. There are so many ideas which were
produced by the material needs of a particular period, but though the
times have since changed, the ideas still shine on the horizon of
history.

It is amazing that in this case also Marx in some of his remarks has
dissociated from Marxism. In his well-known book, the *German Ideology*
he says: " Consciousness sometimes is seen to precede the contemporary
empirical relations, to the extent that it is possible to find the
evidence for the conflicts of a later age in the writings of
theoreticians of the preceding age."

### (v) Independence of Cultural Development

According to historical materialism, like any other basis of society
such as political, judicial and religious, its cultural and scientific
basis also depends on its economic basis and cannot develop
independently. Science develops only in the wake of the development of
the implements of production and the development of the economic basis
of society.

In fact, we know that implements of production, minus man, do not
develop automatically. They develop as the result of man's contact with
nature and his inquisitive efforts. Their growth and development is
accompanied by man's own scientific and technical development. Now the
question is which of these two things comes first; whether man first
makes a discovery and then implements it to produce the relevant tools
and instruments or first the tools come into existence and then man
makes the relevant discovery? There is no doubt that the second
alternative is correct.

It is obvious that scientific laws and technical principles are
discovered in the course of man's inquisitive and experimental contact
with nature. If man does not make an inquiry and does not undertake
experiments, he cannot discover any scientific or natural law. There
cannot be two opinions about that. The only question is whether after
inquiry and experiment man first develops scientifically within himself
and then creates technical implements or the case is the other way
round? There is no doubt that the first alternative is correct.

Moreover, when the word, development is used in respect of man, it is
used in its literal and real sense, but when it is used in respect of
the technical and productive instruments and tools, it is used in its
metaphorical sense. In its real sense development means evolution of a
thing from a lower stage to a higher stage. But in the case of its use
in its metaphorical sense, change is not in the stage of the same thing,
but one thing disappears or is abolished and another thing takes its
place.

When a child grows there is an actual development . But if a class
teacher is changed and replaced by a better educated and more efficient
teacher, of course there is a development in the teaching of the class,
but this development is metaphorical only.

In the course of tool making the development of man is real. Man
develops mentally in the actual sense. But the development of an
industry, such as the development of motor industry which every year
brings to the market an improved new model is only metaphorical, for in
this case nothing has actually gone from a lower stage to a higher
stage. The car of the last year has not been equipped in a better way
but actually it has been discarded and replaced by other cars of better
design and latest model.

In other words an imperfect unit has been cast away and replaced by a
perfect unit. In this case the same unit has not shifted from a stage of
imperfection to the stage of perfection. Obviously where there is a real
development and a metaphorical development at the same time, the real
development will be primary and the metaphorical development subsidiary.

Furthermore, this is the position in respect of technology. As far as
other sciences like medicine, psychology, sociology, philosophy, logic
and mathematics are concerned, this kind of one-sided dependence cannot
be confirmed. The development of sciences depends on the economic
position as much as or even less than the economic position depends on
the development of sciences. Criticizing Marxism K. Schmoller says: "No
doubt, the material and economic conditions are essential for the
attainment of higher culture, but to the same extent it is also
undoubtedly true that intellectual and moral development follows an
independent course."

If we overlook this one fault in the doctrine of the French philosopher,
August Comte that he sums up man's humanity in his 'mind', which is only
a part of his capabilities and only one half of his human spirit, August
Comte's theory about social development is more valuable than that of
Marx. August Comte asserts: " Social phenomena are subject to a strict
determinism which operates in the form of an inevitable evolution of
human societies - an evolution which is itself governed by the progress
of the human mind."

### (vi) Historical Materialism Is Self-contradictory

According to historical materialism every idea, every view, every
philosophical or scientific theory and every moral system, being a
manifestation of special material and economic conditions, depends on
the fulfillment of its own particular conditions and has no absolute
value. Every idea, every theory and every moral system loses its
validity with the passage of its time and a change in the material and
economic conditions which made it inevitable. With a change of
circumstances every idea and every theory must be replaced by a new idea
or a new theory.

Obviously this universal law must also apply to the theory of historical
materialism, propounded by some philosophers and sociologists. In case
it does not, that would mean that there are some exceptions to this law
and that there are some philosophical and scientific laws which operate
independently and are not subject to any economic infrastructure. And if
it is admitted that this law applies to the theory of historical
materialism as well, the validity of this theory would be confined to
only a particular period, that is the period during which it appeared,
and it will have no value during any previous or subsequent period. Thus
in each case this theory stands quashed.

If historical materialism as a philosophical theory does not apply to
itself, it is self-contradictory, and if it applies to itself as well as
to other theories, its validity is confined to a limited period. The
same objection may be raised against dialectic-materialism also,
according to which the principles of dynamism and magnetism apply to
every thing including the philosophical theories and scientific laws. We
have dealt with this point in *The Principles of Philosophy and the
Method of Realism, vol. I & II*. All this shows how baseless is the
claim that this world is a spectacle of dialectic materialism and
society is a spectacle of historical materialism

The theory of historical materialism is amenable to other objections
also, which we overlook for the present. It is really astonishing how
such baseless and unscientific theory could become famous as a
scientific theory ! Its reputation appears to be nothing but the outcome
of a propaganda trick.

[^1]: This book was first written in French and then translated into
Persian by Dr Anwar Khameh'i. He has exhibited profound wisdom in the
treatment of the subject and praiseworthy capacity for evaluation and
analysis of the problems involved. He himself has been once an ardent
supporter and exponent of this school for many years.


