Chapter 27: Islam and Historical Materialism
============================================

Does Islam accept the theory of historical materialism? Are the Qur’anic
analysis and interpretation of historical questions based on historical
materialism? Some people think that they are, and maintain that at least
one thousand years before Marx Islam based its analysis of history on
this idea. Dr Ali al-Wardi, a Shi'ah scholar of Iraq who wrote several
controversial books, including the one entitled *Manzilat al-Aql
al-Bashari* (The Position of Human Intellect), is one of them. Perhaps
he is the first person who originated this idea. Now among a certain
section of Muslim writers it has gained popularity and it is regarded as
a mark of being broad-mindedness and a fashion of the day to analyse
history in Islamic phraseology from this point of view.

But from our point of view those who think on these lines either do not
understand Islam or historical materialism or both. In view of the five
basic points of historical materialism mentioned by us earlier and the
six conclusions drawn from them, it is easy for those who are conversant
enough with Islamic thinking to conclude that historical materialism and
Islam's way of thinking are diametrically opposed to each other.

The material conception of society and history, especially if it is
given the false colour of Islamic authenticity, is a great danger to
Islamic teachings and Islamic culture. Therefore we think that it is
necessary to study carefully the problems which have given or may give
rise to the notion that Islam regards the infrastructure of society as
economic and the nature of history as materialistic in essence.

It may be pointed out that in our study of the subject we have used more
points than used by the supporters of this notion. They have based their
arguments on two or three verses of the Holy Qur'an and the traditions
of the Holy Prophet, but we in order to make a full and comprehensive
study, have included some other points also, which although not used by
the supporters of this idea, may be adduced in its favour.

I. The Holy Qur’an has given various social conceptions to the world. In
the course of our study of society we have counted about 50 terms having
a social significance. A study of the social verses of the Qur’an and
the use of these terms in them indicates that from the view-point of the
Qur’an, societies consist of two diametrically opposite categories of
people.

The Qur’an from one angle suggests the existence of a bipolar state of
society on the basis of material prosperity. It designates one pole as
the *Mala'* (self-indulgent, ruling clique) *Mustakbirun* (the arrogant,
oppressors, tyrants, the immoderates and the voluptuaries), and the
other *Mustaz'afun* (the under-privileged, oppressed and deprived),
*Nas* (the masses) *Zuriyya* (the plebeians, ignoble, the means and
insignificant- as opposed to *Mala'*). [^1] T

he Qur'an puts these two poles or these two categories opposite each
other. From another angle the Qur’an envisages the bipolar state of
society on the basis of spiritual and moral conceptions, and divides
society into two distinct groups. The first group consists of the
infidels, the polytheists, the hypocrites and the wicked, and the second
group consists of the pious, the righteous, the reformers, and of those
who fight for a sacred cause and those who lay down their lives for it.

If we carefully consider the meaning of the Qur’anic verses signifying
the existence of these two material and two spiritual categories, we
will find a sort of conformity between the first material and the first
spiritual category and similarly between the second material and the
second spiritual category. The infidels, the polytheists, the hypocrites
and the wicked are the same people as the self-indulgents, the
arrogants, the immoderates and the voluptuaries. They are none else.
Similarly the *Mu'minun* (believers and faithful), the *Muwahhidun* (the
monotheists), the *Salihun* (the righteous, virtuous) and the
*Mujahidun* (the warriors and fighters for a sacred cause.) are none but
the under-privileged, the poor, the helpless the servile, the oppressed
and the deprived. Therefore on the whole, society has only two and not
more than two poles or diametrically opposite categories. The first
category comprises the opulent, the exploiters, the tyrants and the
oppressors; who are the infidels and disbelievers. The second category
is that of the oppressed and the underprivileged. It comprises the
believers and the faithful. From this it is clear that it is the
division of society into the oppressors and the oppressed, which brings
into existence the two categories of the believers and the disbelievers.
It is oppressiveness that begets infidelity, hypocrisy, wickedness and
depravity; and it is the state of being oppressed that gives rise to
faith, piety and righteousness.

To comprehend this equation clearly it is enough to study the Surah
al-A'raf, 7:59 - 137. In these verses the stories of Prophets, like Nuh,
Hud, Salih, Lut, Shu'ayb and Musa have been briefly recounted. In all
these stories, with the exception of the story of Lut, it may be
observed that the class which joined with the Prophets was that of the
underprivileged and the class which opposed them and resorted to
disbelief was that of the arrogant and aristocratic gentry. This
equation can have no explanation other than that of class conscience,
the existence of which is essential and natural according to the theory
of historical materialism. Therefore from the view-point of the Qur’an
the confrontation between faith and infidelity is only a reflection of
the confrontation between the oppressors and the oppressed.

The Qur’an expressly says that property, described by the Qur’an as
'riches', is the cause of oppression and arrogance, the qualities which
are totally against the teachings of the prophets, who preach piety,
modesty and peace. The Qur’an says: ***"Remember that man is rebellious
when he thinks himself independent and rich."*** (Surah al-Alaq, 96:7)

In order to underline the evil effect of property the Qur’an has
recounted the story of Qarun (Korah). He was an Israelite, not a Copt
and belonged to the tribe of Prophet Musa. He was one of those
underprivileged people whom *Fir'awn* (Pharaoh) considered to be
inferior and of low cast. But as he acquired great amount of wealth, he
misbehaved with his own people and looked down upon them. The Qur’an
says: ***"Qarun was a man from the people of Musa, but he oppressed
them.*** (Surah al-Qasas, 28: 76)

Does this not make it clear that the Prophets' opposition to oppression
was in fact a confrontation with the property, the proprietors and the
proprietorship? In some of its verses the Qur’an itself says expressly
that the chief opponents of the Prophets were those who were deeply sunk
in ease and luxury. In the following Qur’anic verse this point has been
expressed as a general rule: ***"We did not send to any township a
warner, but its pampered ones declared: Lo! We are disbelievers in that
which you brings to us."*** (Surah as Saba 34:34)

All this shows that the mutual confrontation of the Prophets and their
opponents and the mutual confrontation of faith and infidelity are a
reflection of the confrontation of two social classes of the oppressed
and the oppressors.

II. The Qur’an calls its addresses the *'Nas'* or the masses, that is
the underprivileged common people. That shows that the Qur’an believes
in class conscience and thinks that only the downtrodden masses are fit
to give ear to its call to Islam. That (also shows that Islam has a
class bias. It is the religion of the weak and the underprivileged.
Islamic ideology is addressed only to the masses suffering deprivation.
That is another proof

of the fact that according to Islamic point of view economy is the
infrastructure of society and the nature of history is material.

III The Qur'an declares that the leaders, the reformers, the martyrs and
even the Prophets rise from among the masses, not from among the
aristocratic and well to do class. In respect of the Prophet of Islam
the Qur’an says: ***"He it is who sent among the masses of people
(people belonging to the ummah) a messenger of their own."*** (Surah al
Jumu'ah, 62:2)

These masses could be none other than the underprivileged masses.
Similarly in respect of those who sacrifice their life for a right
cause, the Qur’an says: ***"We shall raise from every people a witness
and then ask them to produce their proof."*** Here also the word people
refers to the deprived masses. It is because of the necessity of harmony
between the ideological and social basis in the one hand and the
economic and class basis on the other, that the leaders of all social
movements and revolutions invariably rise from among the underprivileged
masses. This necessity cannot be explained except on the basis of the
materialist conception of history and the prime importance of economy.

IV. The nature of the movement conducted by the Prophets and their
confrontation as described in the Qur’an, is infrastructural, not
superstructural. The object of the Prophets' mission has been to
establish justice, fair play and social equality and to pull down the
walls of class distinctions. The Prophets always paid their first
attention to infrastructural matters and only subsequently turned to the
superstructural matters such as doctrines, beliefs, and the reform of
morals and behaviours, which have been their second objective.

The Holy Prophet said: *"He who has not the means of living, cannot
prosper in the Life Hereafter"*.

In other words there can be no spiritual life without a material life.
This maxim leads to the conclusion that the material life has precedence
to the spiritual life and that the spiritual life is the superstructure
and the material life the infrastructure of society. Similarly the Holy
Prophet has also said: *"0 Allah! Bless our bread with abundance; for
had there been no bread, we would have given no alms, nor would we have
offered our prayers."*

This saying of the Holy Prophet also leads us to believe that
spirituality depends on materiality.

It is absolutely wrong to say, as most of the people now think, that the
activities of the Prophets were confined to the superstructural matters,
that they were keen only to reform people and improve their moral
conduct, and had nothing to do with infrastructural matters or at the
most attached a secondary importance to them.

It is also wrong to say that the Prophets thought that when the people
should embrace faith, everything would be all right automatically,
justice and equality would be established and the exploiters would of
their own accord restore the rights of the underprivileged to them. In
short most of the people have the wrong notion that the Prophets pushed
forward their objectives with the weapon of faith and therefore, their
followers also should go along the same path.

This idea has been fraudulently invented by the exploiting class of the
religious leaders in order to make the teachings of the Prophets
ineffective and has been imposed on other people in such a way that it
has been accepted almost unanimously. In the words of Marx, those who
issue material goods to society, issue intellectual goods also to it. As
a matter of fact those who are the material rulers of society are its
spiritual rulers also and control its thinking.

The working method of the Prophets was contrary to what most of the
people believe now. The Prophets first delivered society from social
polytheism, social discrimination, tyranny and behavioral polytheism.
They only later paid attention to the belief in monotheism and practical
piety.

V. The Qur’an mentions the arguments adduced by the opponents of the
Prophets all over history along with the arguments of the Prophets and
their followers. The Qur’an clearly points out that the logic of the
opponents has always been that of conservatism, conventionalism, and
looking to the past, whereas the logic of the Prophets and their
followers has been unconventionalism and looking towards the future. The
Qur’an makes it clear that from sociological point of view the opponents
of the Prophets used the same arguments which in a society divided into
the exploiters and the exploited were usually used by the class of the
exploiters. On the other hand the Prophets and their followers used
those arguments which had throughout history been used by the sufferers
and the deprived.

The Qur’an carefully recounts the for and against arguments of the
opponents and the supporters of the Prophets and shows what kind of
logic they had. Like these two groups their two sets of arguments have
existed side by side all over history. The Qur’an has recounted these
arguments in order to set a standard by which the theories of even today
may be adjudged. In the Qur’an there are many scenes where the arguments
of the Prophets and their opponents stand side by side with each other.
[^2] As an example we quote here some Qur'anic verses with short
explanation of them:

***" And they say: If Allah had so willed, we would not have worshipped
the angels.*** (As we now do, and our worship of the angels means that
Allah has willed so. Doctrine of predestination.) ***They have no
knowledge whatsoever of that.*** (Of what they say about predestination.
What they say is not based on any logical argument.) ***They do nothing
but guess. Did We give them any Scripture before the Qur’an, so that
they were holding fast thereto?*** (There is no such thing. They have no
revealed Book to support their idea of predestination.) ***In fact they
say only: We found our fathers following a way, and we are guided by
their footprints. And even so we did not send a warner before you (Holy
Prophet) to any township, but its luxurious ones said: Surely we found
our fathers following a way and we are following their footprints. The
Prophet said to them: Even though I bring you better guidance than that
you found your fathers following?*** (And you know for certain that
logically the guidance I have brought is better, but you stiff follow in
the footsteps of your fathers.) ***They answered: In any case we reject
what you have brought."*** (Surah al Zukhruf, 43:20-24)

We see that the opponents of the Prophets often use the argument of
predetermination and fatalism. As sociology points out, this is the
logic of the beneficiaries of the existing situation, who want to
maintain the status quo, and use predetermination as a pretext to
prevent any change. They often use the practice of their forefathers as
a plea to justify their action and describe the past as sacred and worth
following. To them it is enough to prove the propriety and validity of a
thing that it has some connection with the past. This is nothing but the
logic of the conservatives and the beneficiaries of the existing
situation.

In contrast, the Prophets instead of supporting predetermination and
conventionalism, advocate that which is more logical, more scientific
and more beneficial. That is the logic of the revolutionaries who have
suffered under the existing situation. When their opponents lose in
their arguments against the Prophets, the last thing they say is:
Whether predetermination is or is not a valid theory and whether
conventional practice is or is not to be respected, we are against your
message, your mission and your ideology, because your message is against
our existing social and class interests.

VI. Most significant is the Qur’an's orientation in the conflict between
the underprivileged and the arrogant. Just as historical materialism
predicts on the basis of its dialectic logic, the Qur’an also believes
that in this conflict the final victory must be of the underprivileged.
In this connection the Qur’an underlines the inevitable direction of the
course of history, and points out that the class which possesses the
quality of being revolutionary invariably gains victory in its
persistent conflict with the class which by its nature has the quality
of being reactionary and conservative and that the former succeeds the
latter in the possession of the land.

The Qur’an says: ***"We desire to show favour to those who are oppressed
in the earth, and to make them leaders and to make them inheritors."***
(Surah al-Qasas, 28:5)

Similarly in the following verse it says: ***"We caused those people who
were despised to inherit the eastern parts of the land and the western
parts thereof which we had blessed. And the fair word of the Lord was
fulfilled for the children of Isra\`il because of their endurance; and
We annihilated all that Fir'awn and his people had done and that which
they had contrived."*** (Surah al A'raf 7:137)

The view of the Qur’an that history advances towards the victory of the
oppressed and the exploited, is in complete agreement with the rule we
inferred earlier from the theory of historical materialism to the effect
that reactionism and conservatism were the characteristics of
exploitation. This quality being against the law of evolution,
exploitation is bound to vanish sooner or later. It will not be out of
place here to cite with some comments a part of an article published
recently and written by some intellectuals who have passed from
intellectualism to Marxism. The last quoted verse of the Qur’an has been
used as the heading of this article. Under this heading the article
says:

"What is more interesting is the support given by Allah and all the
phenomena of the world to those who are despised. There is no doubt that
according to the Qur’anic way of thinking these despised ones are the
subjugated and oppressed masses who have no say in determining their
destiny. In view of this position of the masses and the support given to
them by Allah, who wills to favour them, the question arises: Who are
the people who carry out this Will of Allah? The answer is evident.

When it has been admitted that society has been so organized that it is
divided into the two opposite classes of the oppressors and the
oppressed and it is also known that it is the Will of Allah that
ultimately the oppressed should inherit the land and be its leaders and
the oppressors should perish, it becomes clear that the Will of Allah is
to be implemented by the oppressed themselves under the leaders and the
intellectuals who rise from among themselves.

In other words, it is the Prophets and the martyrs from among the
oppressed class who take the first steps to fight against the tyrannical
and oppressive system, and pave the way for the establishment of the
leadership and the supremacy of the oppressed. This whole idea is
actually a reflection of what we know about the Qur’an's conception of
religious revolutions and historical changes. As, from social point of
view, monotheists' revolutions revolve round the leadership of the
oppressed and their inheritance of the land, the leaders and the
pioneers of their movement must rise from among themselves and their
social ideology must be their own."

The above thesis comprises several points.

i. From the point of view of the Qur’an society is bi-polar and has
always been divided into the two opposite classes of the oppressors and
the oppressed.

ii. The Will of Allah (or in the words of the above cited article the
support given by Allah and all the phenomena) is directed to the
establishment of the leadership and inheritance of the oppressed as a
universal rule. In this respect there is no difference between the
faithful and the infidels or between the monotheists and the
polytheists. The above quoted verse lays down a general and universal
rule. Allah always grants victory to the oppressed as such against the
oppressors. In other words all over history there has always been a
conflict mainly between the oppressed and the oppressors and the law of
evolution requires that the former gain a victory against the latter.

iii. In society Allah's will is realized through the oppressed
themselves. The leaders, the pioneers, the Prophets and the martyrs rise
from among the oppressed class, not from among any other class.

iv. There is always a sort of harmony between the intellectual and
social basis of society on the one hand and the class basis in the
other.

Thus we see how from the above quoted Qur’anic verse several Marxist
principles about history have been derived, and how the Qur’an has been
made to reproduce the philosophy of Marx 1,200 years before Marx was
born.

As this idea about history has been allegedly derived from the Qur’an,
let us see what conclusions are drawn from its application to
contemporary history. The gentlemen who have derived this so-called
Qur’anic idea, have immediately and without any delay applied it as a
test case to the analysis of the present religious movement. They say
that the Qur’an tells them that the leaders of any revolutionary
movement must necessarily rise from among the oppressed. But today it is
observed that the divines who constitute one of the three dimensions of
the system that corrupts history, have become revolutionaries. So how to
solve this anomaly?

According to these intellectuals the answer is simple. There can be no
doubt that there is a conspiracy. As the rulers felt that their
existence was in danger, they in order to save their skin ordered the
divines depending on them to play the role of the revolutionaries. This
is the conclusion that is drawn from this Marxist idea (excuse me, the
Qur'anic idea). It is obvious to whose advantage such conclusions are
drawn.

Comments
--------

What has been said to justify the theory of historical materialism from
the view-point of the Qur’an is either totally incorrect or is correct
in itself but the conclusion drawn from it is wrong. Now let us study
the foregoing arguments.

First, it is absolutely false to say that the Qur’an has divided society
into two mutually opposite material categories and two mutually opposite
spiritual categories and these two divisions correspond with each other.
In other words, it is wrong to say that from the Qur’anic point of view
the infidels, the pagans, the hypocrites, the wicked and the corrupt are
the same as the aristocrats, the arrogants and the tyrants, and
similarly the faithful, the monotheists and the martyrs are the same as
the oppressed and the underprivileged. It is a lie to assert that the
confrontation of the infidels with the faithful is a reflection of the
confrontation of the oppressors with the oppressed. Such a
correspondence cannot be inferred from the Qur’an, at all. In contrast
what can be inferred from the Qur’an is quite contrary to that.

In its lessons of history the Qur’an shows that there have been
believers who rose from the arrogant and aristocratic class itself and
they fought against their own class and its values. The 'believer of
Fir'awn's family' whose story is related in one of the chapters of the
Qur’an by this very name, is an example. The Qur’an has also mentioned
Fir'awn's wife who was his life-partner and enjoyed all the privileges
and comforts enjoyed by Fir'awn himself, but, still she was a believer.

The Qur’an has related the striking story of Fir'awn's magicians. This
story shows how man's natural instinct of seeking truth revolts against
falsehood and fraud, spurning all his personal interests. These
magicians were not frightened by Fir'awn's threat that they would be
hanged and their hands and feet would be cut off from alternate sides.

According to this story as related by the Qur’an the uprising of Prophet
Musa is basically an uprising that demolishes the theory of the
materiality of history. It is true that Prophet Musa was an Israelite,
not a Copt. He did not belong to Firawn's family. But from his early
childhood he was brought up in Fir'awn's palace like a prince. Still he
revolted against the Fir'awnic system in the midst of which he himself
lived and of which he was a beneficiary. He left Firawn's palace and
preferred to be a shepherd of the old man of Madyan. He was later raised
to Prophethood and then he formally came into collision with Fir'awn.

The Holy Prophet of Islam was an orphan in his childhood and a poor man
till his early youth. He was well-off only following his marriage with
Khadijah. Referring to this point the Qur’an says: ***"Did He not find
you an orphan and protect you? Did He not find you needy and suffice
you?"*** (Surah az-Zuha, 93:6,8)

According to the principles of historical materialism, during the period
when the Holy Prophet was well-off, he should have changed into a
conservative justifying the status quo. But it was during this very
period that his revolutionary mission began, and he revolted against the
capitalists, the usurpers and the slave-owners of Makkah and fought
against idol-worship, a symbol of that way of life.

It is not true that all the believers, the monotheists and the
monotheistic revolutionaries belonged to the under-privileged class.
From the class of the oppressors also those whose nature was unspoiled
or less spoiled and persuaded them to revolt against themselves
(repentance) or against their class (revolution). Similarly the whole
oppressed class was not with the believers, nor were all the oppressed
the monotheistic revolutionaries. Therefore it is clear that neither all
the believers belong to the oppressed class nor all the oppressed have
been the believers. It is absurd to claim that these two categories
correspond with each other. However, it is true that most of the
followers of the Prophet belonged to the oppressed class or at least to
the class whose hands were not polluted with oppression. Similarly most
of the opponents of the Prophets were oppressors.

Though the human nature which prepares the ground for the acceptance of
the Divine message is common to all human beings, yet the aristocratic
oppressors living in luxury and ease become so accustomed to their
existing position that their way of life becomes a great hindrance in
their way. To be able to accept truth it is necessary for them to free
themselves from the polluting effect of wealth and power, but very few
succeed in doing that. In contrast the oppressed class does not have any
such impediment in its way. Its members by accepting truth, not only
respond to the call of their true human nature but by doing so they
regain their lost rights also. For them to join the group of the
believers is a good augury as well as a good entertainment. However it
is correct that the majority of the followers of the Prophets come from
the oppressed class and only a minority from other classes. But the
question of alleged correspondence is absolutely absurd.

The Qur’anic conception of the nature of history is different from what
the principles of historical materialism say. From the view-point of the
Qur’an, spirit is basic and matter can in no way have precedence to it.
Spiritual needs and spiritual urges exist in man quite independent of
his material needs and do not depend on them. Thought is as basic as
work.

The psychic personality of man is far more important than his social
personality. The Qur’an believes in the basicity of real human nature
and holds that within every man, even within a distorted man like
Fir'awn, there exists a natural man, this natural man may be in a
captive state. The Qur’an is of the opinion that there always a
possibility even for the most distorted man to move the right direction
and accept the truth, though this possibility may be very slight. That
is why the Prophets have orders to exhort the tyrants in the first
instance by means of advice and counselling to change their ways and
call on their natural personality to revolt against their filthy social
personality. In many cases such efforts have been crowned with success.
This success is called repentance (tawbah).

At the first stage of his mission Prophet Musa was ordered to go to
Fir'awn and try to awaken his dormant human nature. He was to fight
against Fir'awn only in the case of his failure in this attempt. From
Musa's point of view Fir'awn was keeping a natural man prisoner inside
himself as he was confining many people outside. In the first instance
Musa went to Fir'awn to instigate his inner prisoner, that is natural
Fir'awn or whatever was left of him, to revolt against the social Firawn
or the Fir'awn as he had been made in society. Allah says to Prophet
Musa: ***"Go to Firawn, for he has rebelled, and say to him: Are you
interested in reforming yourself.? (If you are), I will guide you to
your Lord, so that you may have a fear of Him."*** (Surah al-Nazi'at,
79:17-19)

For the purpose of guidance the Qur'an believes in the value and
effectiveness of preaching, reminding, counselling and logical arguments
(in the words of the Qur’an itself: wisdom). From the view-point of the
Qur’an these things can reform man, change the course of his life,
transform his personality and bring about a spiritual revolution in him.
The Qur’an does not believe that the role of ideology is limited,
whereas according to Marxism and Materialism the role of guidance is
confined to making people conscious of class contradictions only.

Secondly, it is also wrong to assert that the Qur’an is addressed to the
common people who are the same as the under-privileged masses and that,
as such, the message of Islam is addressed to the oppressed class only,
or that the ideology of Islam is that of the oppressed and Islam gets
its followers and soldiers exclusively from among the oppressed masses.
Actually the addressees of Islam are *'nas'* which mean men in general.

No dictionary gives the meaning of *'nas'* as the oppressed masses, nor
is this word used by the Arabs in that sense. In fact this word has no
class significance. The Qur’an says: ***"It is obligatory on the 'nas'
(people) to go on a pilgrimage of the House (of Allah); (this is for)
those who can afford it."*** (Surah Ale Imran 3:97)

Can the word *'nas'* in this verse signify the oppressed masses? The
Qur’an in many places has used the phrase, *'Ya ayyuhannas'* vocatively.
No where this expression refers to the underprivileged masses. It has
always been used to address the men in general. The generality of the
address of the Qur’an springs from the theory of true human nature as
mentioned in the Qur’an.

Thirdly, it has been claimed that the Qur’an has stated that all
leaders, pioneers and martyrs rise exclusively from among the oppressed
masses. This is also a wrong assertion.

It is ridiculous to claim on the basis of the Surah al Jumu'ah, verse 2
that the Holy Prophet rose from among the ummah and that ummah signifies
the masses of people. The word used in the verse is *ummiyyin*, a plural
of *ummi*, which means unlettered. This word is an adjective from
*'umm'* and not from *"ummah"* . Furthermore, even the word ummah means
society consisting of multifarious groups, frequently mutually
incongruous. It does not mean masses at all. Even more ridiculous is to
cite the following verse as an argument. It has been wrongly interpreted
(rather distorted) to mean: ***"We rouse from every ummah (mass of
people) a martyr, (revolutionary). Then ask each one of the ummahs to
produce their proof, (the revolutionary killed in the way of Allah.)***
" (Surah al Qasas, 28:75)

Firstly, this verse follows another verse. Both the verses are
interconnected and refer to the events of the Day of Resurrection. The
preceding verse is this: ***"The day Allah will call the pagans and say:
Where are my partners you alleged (that they existed)?"***

Secondly: The word, "*naza'na"* in the verse means 'We take away', and
not 'We rouse'.

Thirdly: the word *'Shahid'* in this verse does not mean martyr. It
means a witness. According to the Qur’an every Prophet is a witness of
the deeds of his community. In the Qur’an not a single instance can be
found in which the word *Shahid* has been used in the sense of martyr as
it is generally used today. Anyhow, in the sayings of the Holy Prophet
and the Imams it has been used in this sense. But not in the Qur’an in
any case. From the above it is clear how the verses of the Qur’an are
misinterpreted to justify a stray notion of Marx.

Fourthly, we must know the objective of the Prophets. Is their first and
main objective to establish justice and fairplay or establish a bond of
faith and spiritual knowledge between man and Allah or to establish both
of them? In other words, are the Prophets dualists as regards to their
objective or is there any other possibility also? We have already dealt
with this point while discussing the topic of Prophethood and hence need
not repeat here what we have already said. Here we confine ourselves to
an inquiry into the method used by the Prophets to achieve their
objective. As we pointed out while dealing with practical monotheism,
the Prophets neither concentrate all their efforts on freeing man from
within and severing his relation with other things as the mystics claim,
nor on improving and modifying his outside relations as some other
schools of thought assert. The Qur’an in a concise form says:

***" Come to an agreement between us and you: that we shall worship none
but Allah and that we shall ascribe no partner to Him and that none of
us shall take others for Lord beside Allah."*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:64)

Now the question is whether the work of the Prophets begins from within
or from without.

Do the Prophets first undertake to bring about an inner revolution by
creating faith and spiritual zeal and then rouse those who have been
intellectually and emotionally prepared to establish social monotheism,
social reform and social justice. Or do the Prophets first pay attention
to the questions of social injustice and rouse the people to do away
with social polytheism and social discrimination and only subsequently
work for the inculcation of faith and doctrinal and moral virtues.

A little study of the method of the Prophets shows that unlike the
reformers, the Prophets and the Imams (Divine Guides) begin with the
inculcation of faith, belief and spiritual earnestness and reminding the
people of the beginning and the end of human race. A study of the order
in which the surahs (chapters) and the verses of the Qur’an were
revealed and a study of the questions to which the Holy Prophet paid
attention during his 13-year mission at Makkah and 10-year mission at
Madina respectively, will throw ample light on this subject.

Fifthly, it is but natural that the opponents of the Prophets generally
had a conservative outlook. But it cannot be inferred from the Qur’an
that all of them without any exception had such an outlook, or that all
of them belonged to the well-to-do class of the exploiters. All that can
be inferred from the Qur’an is that conservatism was the logic of the
leaders of the opponents. They no doubt were aristocratic arrogants and
in the words of Marx, being the masters of the material goods of
society, issued to others the intellectual goods also.

It is also but natural that the logic of the Prophets was that of
dynamism, reason and indifference to the old customs and usages. But
their way of thinking was not an inevitable result and reflection of any
sense of their being underprivileged and deprived of their rights, but
was due to the fact that they were perfect human beings and their
reasoning and sentiments were fully mature. We will show later that as
man attains maturity in his humanity, his dependence on his natural
environment, social atmosphere and material conditions is reduced and he
becomes independent of them. The Prophets' independent way of thinking
made it necessary for them that they should not be tied to old customs
and traditions and should deliver others also from their blind
observance.

Sixthly, what has been said about the 5th verse of the Surah al-Qasas is
also not acceptable, because some other verses of the Qur’an describe
the destiny of history differently, and incidentally throw light on the
evolution of history. Even if it is presumed that this verse signifies
exactly what has been stated, it is further explained and qualified by
some other verses. Further, basically this verse does not lay down any
universal rule, and as such, it is not necessary to explain or qualify
it while comparing it to other verses.

Actually this verse is closely connected with a preceding and a
following verse and if all the three verses are considered together, it
becomes quite clear that in this verse no universal rule has been
mentioned as has been argued. We deem it convenient to consider this
verse in two parts. In the first part we will consider it apart from the
verses preceding and following it on the presumption that it
independently lays down a universal rule of history. Then we will
compare it to other verses from which some contrary rule of history can
be derived, and see what can be inferred from all the verses put
together. In the second part it will be shown that basically this verse
does not mention any rule of history as has been claimed.

**First part:** In several of its verses the Qur’an refers to the
evolutionary course of history, and says that the destiny of history is
the final victory of faith over infidelity, of piety over
licentiousness, of virtue over corruption and of good deeds over bad
deeds. In the following verse we read:

***"Allah has promised such of you as believe and do good deeds that He
will surely make them succeed (the existing rulers) in the earth as He
made those who were before them succeed (others); and He will surely
establish for them their religion which He has approved for them, and
will give them in exchange safety after their fear. They worship Me and
ascribe nothing as partner to Me."*** (Surah an Nur, 24:55)

In this verse a promise of a final victory and succession in the earth
has been made to the virtuous believers. Unlike the verse of the Surah
al-Qasas, in this verse the emphasis is on ideological and moral virtues
instead of on being oppressed. In fact it has been declared that the
final victory will be that of a particular sort of belief and a
particular sort of conduct. In other words, the final victory will be of
the man who is faithful, upright and virtuous. In the final victory
three things have been promised. The first is the succession which means
the attainment of power by the faithful and the final defeat of those
holding it at that time. The second is the materialization of such moral
and social values, as justice, chastity, piety, boldness,
self-sacrifice, love, adoration, earnestness and self-purification. The
third thing promised is the negation of every kind of polytheism,
whether connected with worship or obedience.

The Holy Qur'an says: ***"And Musa said to his people: Pray to Allah for
help and be patient. The earth belongs to Allah. He gives it to those of
His slaves whom He will. Happy shall be the end of the pious."*** (Surah
al-A'raf, 7:128)

***"We have written in the Psalms once more that My righteous slaves
will inherit the earth."*** (Surah al-Ambiya 21:105 )

There are some other verses also on the subject.

Now what to do? Should we take as an authority the verse of succession
of (Surah an Nur) or the verse of oppression of (Surah al Qasas)? Can it
be said that although the significance of these two verses is apparently
different, they still describe the same truth, because the believers and
the pious are the same as the oppressed, for the state of being
oppressed is their social and class symbol and faith and piety are their
ideological symbols? Of course not!

In the foregoing we have proved that the theory that the so-called
superstructural terms of faith, virtue and piety are analogous to the
terms of being oppressed and being underprivileged, is not correct from
the view-point of the Qur’an. From its point of view it is possible that
some groups be believers, but not oppressed. It is also possible that
some other groups be oppressed but not believers. The Qur’an has
mentioned these two categories separately. Anyhow, as we have pointed
out earlier, when in a class-dominated society an ideology based on the
Divine values of justice, self-sacrifice and charity is introduced,
naturally the oppressed form the majority of those who accept it,
because they do not have to face the inhibition existing in the nature
of other classes. But still that does not mean that all believers belong
to the class of the oppressed.

Secondly each of these two verses shows a different mechanism of
history. The verse of the surah al-Qasas describes the course of history
as a class war in which the spirit of the oppressors is always
reactionary and that of the oppressed by its very nature is
revolutionary. This struggle as a rule culminates in the victory of the
oppressed, whether they have or have not the qualities of faith and good
deeds in the Qur’anic sense. For example, the term oppressed covers all
the exploited people including such people as those of Vietnam,
Campochia etc. We may say that this verse defends the rights of all the
oppressed, and indicates the principle of Divine justice: ***"Deem not
that Allah is unaware of what the oppressors do."*** (Surah Ibrahim,
14:42)

All the cases in which the oppressed have been granted or will be
granted leadership and inheritance of land, are manifestations of Divine
justice.

As for the verse relating to *Istikhlaf* (succession, 24:55) and other
similar verses, expound a different mechanism operating in history as a
natural process. The rule that represents this mechanism is broader in
its scope than the rule of Divine justice, although it covers the
principle of Divine justice also.

According to the mechanism to which this and some other verses refer,
side by side with many kinds of struggles motivated by material gains
which go on in this world, there always exists a struggle which is not
motivated by material gains. It is conducted purely for the sake of
Allah, and has always been led by the Prophets and after them by their
faithful followers. It is this struggle alone that has pushed humanity
forward in the field of human culture, and can rightly be called a
struggle between truth and falsehood. It has pushed history forward from
the view-point of humanity and human spirituality. The main motivating
force of this struggle has never been the pressure of a different class.
It is motivated by man's natural tendency towards truth and justice,
towards acquiring the knowledge of the system of existence and towards
building society as it should be.

It is not a sense of deprivation which has pushed man forward, but it is
his natural and instinctive desire to attain perfection that has induced
him to make progress.

Man's animal capabilities have remained unchanged from the beginning of
history. They have neither developed in any way nor can they develop any
further, but his human capabilities have continued to unfold themselves
gradually. In future more than today man is expected to free himself
from his material and economic limits and incline more and more towards
faith and belief. Material, economic and class struggles have not pushed
history forward. It is ideological, doctrinal and godly struggles which
have pushed it. This is the natural mechanism of man's evolution and
this is what is meant by the final victory of those who perform good
deeds, show moral rectitude and fight for the right cause.

The Divine aspect of this victory lies in its being a manifestation of
Allah's mercy and His fostering care which require the evolution of all
existing things, whereas Divine justice simply necessitates
compensation. This Divine aspect has been developing over history and
will reach its final stages at the end of it. In other words, the good
news which has been given in the Qur’an is about the appearance of the
mercy and fostering care of Allah and not merely about the emergence of
the Divine power and of retribution.

Thus, we see that each one of the above mentioned two verses (and
similar other verses) has its own specific logic. One of them speaks of
the class which attains victory and the other of the course which
history must traverse to reach the stage of that victory. One of these
two verses describes the mechanism which moves history, and the other
refers to that Divine aspect of history, which is a manifestation of
Allah's attributes. Each one of these two verses has a special logic of
its own. Nevertheless it also has become clear that the verse 55 of the
Surah an-Nur is more comprehensive as regards to its results than the
verse 5 of the Surah al-Qasas. What man gets according to the latter is
only a part of what he gets according to the former. The Surah al-Qasas
shows only that Allah helps the oppressed, whereas the Surah an-Nur
speaks of several other favours which He bestows on the believers.

**Second Part:** As for the second part of the discussion, it is a fact
that the verse 5 of the Surah al-Qasas does not lay down any universal
rule. Consequently it neither explains the course of history nor does it
refer to any mechanism of it. It does not say that the oppressed will be
victorious just because they are oppressed. The wrong impression that
this verse mentions a universal rule is due to the fact that this verse
which is interconnected with a preceding and a following verse, has been
pulled out of its context. Further, the relative pronoun *'allazina'* in
the verse has been taken to mean 'all those', and thus a rule has been
derived from it. Let us consider all the three verses together:

***"Surely Fir'awn exalted himself in the land and divided its people
into groups. A group among them he oppressed, killing their sons and
sparing their women. He was one of those who created corruption. And We
desired to show favour to those who were oppressed in the land to make
them the leaders and the inheritors; and to establish them in the land,
and to show Fir'awn and Haman and their hosts which they feared from
them."*** (Surah al-Qasas, 28:4-6)

These three verses are interlinked and all of them put together relate
one story. All the three verses are joined by conjunctions, and hence
they cannot be separated from each other. Moreover, as the third verse
describes the fate of Fir'awn, whose arrogance is mentioned in the first
verse, it serves to complete the first verse and cannot be detached from
it.

Had the third verse not existed or had Fir'awn's fate not been mentioned
in it, it would have been possible to separate the second verse from the
first and regard the second verse as an independent statement of a
general rule. But the inseparable link between these three verses
precludes such a possibility. In their present form these verses signify
that Fir'awn exalted himself, divided his subjects and oppressed a
section of them. Allah willed to favour those who were despised,
oppressed and suppressed by him and made them the leaders and the
inheritors. Therefore the relative pronoun in the second verse refers to
only a particular people, not all the people in general.

There is another point. The verse says: ***"We desire to favour them and
to make them the leaders."*** It does not say: "We desire to favour them
with making them the leaders." In other words there are two independent
sentences joined with a conjunction. Hence the meaning of the verse is:
" Our will is to favour the oppressed with sending a Prophet and a
revealed Book to them, with educating them and with inculcating the
belief of monotheism in them. And as a result of that Our will is to
make them the leaders and the inheritors of (their own) land."

As such although this verse deals with a particular case, this case is
one of those cases which are covered by the verse 55 of the Surah
an-Nur. Apart from all that, it does not stand to reason to think that
the verse says that the children of Isra'il would be made leaders simply
because they are the oppressed irrespective of the fact whether a
Prophet is or is not sent to them and whether they accept or do not
accept his teachings.

The supporters of the theory of historical materialism from the
view-point of Islam, may raise another point and say that Islamic
culture in its spirit is either the culture of the oppressed class or
that of the oppressors or of both. If it is the culture of the oppressed
class, it must have the colour of that class, its addresses must be the
oppressed people and its mission and its orientation must revolve round
them. If Islamic culture is the culture of the oppressors, as claimed by
the anti-Islamic elements, not only it must have the character of that
class and must revolve round it, but it must also be reactionary
anti-human and ungodly.

Obviously no Muslim is going to accept such a proposition. Moreover, the
characteristic features of Islamic culture are a witness to the
contrary. To say that Islamic culture is the culture of both the
oppressed and the oppressors amounts to saying that it is an
indifferent, isolated and irresponsible culture, which believes in
leaving Allah's job to Allah and Caesar's job to Caesar - a culture that
does not differentiate between good and bad, the oppressor and the
oppressed, the exploiter and the exploited, and treats all of them
alike. Practically such a culture would be conservative and would work
to the advantage of the oppressors and the exploiters.

If in social conflicts between the aggressors and the aggrieved, some
people adopt the policy of irresponsible neutrality, they practically
give support to the indifferent and neutral, practically it is the
culture of the aggressors. Therefore in view of the fact that Islamic
culture is not neutral and indifferent, nor does it support the
oppressors, it should be regarded as the culture of the oppressed. Its
objectives, its mission and its orientation should all be viewed from
this angle.

Anyhow, this thesis is totally fallacious. In our opinion there are two
main reasons why some Muslim intellectuals are inclined towards
historical materialism. Firstly, they presume Islamic culture to be a
revolutionary culture, hence they think, their inclination towards
historical materialism is inevitable. All other such assertions as to
say that the Qur’an indicates this or that, or that such and such is the
impression gathered from the Ouran or a particular verse of it, are mere
pretexts to justify that idea. It is here that these intellectuals have
fallen away from Islamic way of thinking and have reduced the pure,
human, natural and godly logic of Islam to the level of a materialistic
logic.

These intellectuals are of the view that a culture can be revolutionary
only if it exclusively concerns underprivileged and the oppressed class
rises from this class, is oriented to this class and all its leaders are
from this class. Its relation with other classes can be of hostility,
antagonism and conflict only.

These intellectuals think that the way of a revolutionary culture must
necessarily end at the belly, and that all great revolutions of history,
including those brought about by the Prophets were the revolutions of
the belly and for the belly. They have made the great Abuzar, who was a
sage of the ummah, an earnest worshipper of Allah, an advocate of what
is good and a determined warrior for the sake of Allah, merely an Abuzar
who cared for his belly only and thought it not only proper but also
imperative to fight every body for the sake of it.

Above all his greatest virtue, according to these gentlemen, was that he
knew what suffering hunger caused, for he personally had experienced its
agony. He had developed a hatred against those who were responsible for
creating a situation which caused hunger, and therefore made a
continuous struggle against them. Here ends the personality of this
Luqman of the Muslim ummah, this gnostic confessor of monotheism, this
faithful fighter of Islam and this great man who was the second person
to embrace Islam, is degraded to the level of a materialistic.

These intellectuals think that, as Marx holds, a revolution can be
brought about only by a violent mass movement. (Andse Peter *Marx and
Marxism*)

They are unable to imagine that a culture, a school of thought, an
ideology, the objectives of which are divine, which is addressed to
human nature, whose message is universal and which is oriented towards
justice, equality, purity, spirituality, love, charity and struggle
against tyranny, can create a great movement and cause a deep
revolution - a human revolution full of Divine favour, spiritual
liveliness and human values, although we have witnessed examples of such
a revolution repeatedly over history. The Islamic revolution itself is a
shining example of this kind of revolution.

These intellectuals cannot understand that for a culture to be
responsible and not to be neutral in its outlook, it is not necessary
that it should rise from an oppressed and depressed class. They think
that a comprehensive culture must necessarily be neutral and impartial.
They cannot imagine that it is impossible for a comprehensive school or
a comprehensive culture having a Divine basis and having been addressed
to human nature, to be irresponsible, indifferent and impartial, and
that is an attachment to Allah and human conscience that creates
responsibility and commitment, not an attachment to the oppressed class.
This is one of the main reasons of the misunderstanding of these
gentlemen about the relation between Islam and a revolution.

Another basic reason of their misunderstanding should be looked for in
the relation between Islam and its orientation. These intellectuals have
clearly observed in the Qur’an's interpretation of the sacred movements,
a strong inclination of the Prophets to safeguarding the interests of
the oppressed. At the same time from the view-point of these gentlemen,
the Marxist principle of harmony between the economic conditions of a
people and their orientation, or their social basis on the one hand and
their doctrinal and practical basis on the other, is an indisputable
fact. From these two premises they have concluded that as according to
the Qur’an all sacred and forward movements and consequently from the
point of view of the Qur’an, history must have a materialistic and
economic nature and economy must be the base of the social structure.

From what has so far been said it is clear that the Qur’an believes in
the principle of the true state of human nature, and maintains that
human life is governed by the logic of this state. Diametrically opposed
to this logic is the logic of gain, which is the logic of the man sunk
to the level of animals. Islam does not believe in the theory of harmony
between economic basis and doctrinal basis. It regards this theory as
inhuman, in the sense that it applies only -to the men who have not
reached the level of humanity. The logic of such people alone is that of
gain. As for those who are intellectually and morally trained, their
logic is that of true state of nature.

It is a sort of indulgence that we say that the orientation of Islam is
towards safeguarding the interests of the oppressed class. In fact,
Islam is oriented towards justice and equality, though naturally it is
the oppressed and the exploited who are mainly benefited by this
orientation and it is the oppressors and the exploiters to whom it is
detrimental and destructive.

Even where Islam wants to safeguard the rights and interests of a
particular class, its main aim is the realization of a value and the
foundation of a human principle. It is here that once again the
extraordinary importance of the principle of the true state of human
nature, which is expressly mentioned in the Qur’an and which in Islamic
sciences should be considered to be the most important principle,
becomes clear.

Much has been said about this principle, but scant attention has been
paid to its depth and dimensions. Mostly it is observed that people talk
of human nature, but as they do not pay adequate attention to the vast
dimensions of this principle, in the end they pick up views quite
contrary to it.

A shocking example of this kind of misunderstanding is the mistake about
the origin of the religions. So far we have discussed the nature and
origination of historical phenomena from the view-point of religion
(particularly Islam). Now we would like to consider religion itself as a
socio-historical phenomenon, which has continuously existed from the
dawn of history and throw light on its origin and orientation.

We have repeatedly pointed out that the theory of historical materialism
has introduced the Marxist principle, according to which there must be a
harmony between the conditions which give rise to a culture and the
orientation of that culture.

There is a principle, which, the mystics and the theosophist believers,
applies to all the systems working in the universe. This principle says:
"The ends return to the origins."

And Maulana Rumi has said:

" The parts are forced towards the whole,
Nightingales are in love with the rose's face;
What comes from the sea flows back into it,
And everything returns to its source,
Like the restless waves gushing from mountains-tops,
My soul burning with love, is restless to be free from the body."

The Marxists have enunciated a similar principle in respect of
intellectual, philosophical and religious matters and finally applied it
to cultural and social phenomena also. The Marxists say that every idea
is oriented towards the direction from which it arose. This is almost
the same thing as the idea that the ends return to the origins. The
Marxists say that there exists no idea, religion or culture whether
partial or impartial, which may aim at improving the social position of
a class other than that from which it has originated.

According to this school, every class has a special shade of thinking
and a special taste. That is why in class dominated and socially divided
societies there always exist two kinds of maladies, two philosophical
ways of thinking, two moral systems, two styles of art, two kinds of
literature and poetry, two outlooks on life and sometimes even two types
of knowledge. There being two forms of infrastructure and property
relations, all these things are divided into two forms and two systems.

Marx is personally of the opinion that there are two exceptions to this
two-fold system, namely religion and government. From the point of view
of Marx these two are special inventions of the exploiting class which
provide a special method of exploitation. Naturally these inventions are
oriented towards the advantage of that class which has invented them.
The exploited class because of its position, has neither originated
religion nor government. They have been imposed on it by the opposite
class. That is why there exists no two systems of religion or
government.

Some Muslim intellectuals maintain that contrary to the view of Marx
there actually do exist two systems of religion. According to them, just
as in class dominated societies there are two systems of morals, art,
literature and other cultural matters and each system has its own
origination and orientation, one of them belonging to the ruling class
and the other to the subject class, similarly there always exist two
religious systems in society. One is the ruling religion which is the
religion of the ruling class and the other is the subject religion which
is the religion of the ruled.

The ruling religion is the religion of polytheism and the ruled religion
is that of monotheism. The ruling religion is the religion of
discrimination and the ruled religion is the religion of equality. The
ruling religion is the religion of the justification of the existing
situation and the ruled religion is the religion of revolution and the
condemnation of the existing situation. The ruling religion is the
religion of stagnation, tranquility and silence, and the ruled religion
is the religion of uprising, agitation and protest. The ruling religion
is the opium of society and the ruled religion is the tonic of society.

Therefore Marx's theory that the orientation of religion is always
towards the interests of the ruling class and against those of the ruled
and that religion is the opium of society, is true only in the case of
the religion which is originated by the ruling class, though there was a
time when it was practically the only religion which existed. On the
other hand, this theory is not true in the case of the religion of the
ruled, that is the religion of the true Prophets, though it was not
allowed by the ruling systems to prevail and prosper.

This is the way how these intellectuals have tried to refute the Marxist
theory that the orientation of religion is invariably towards the
interests of the ruling class. These intellectuals think that they have
thus proved the falsity of Marxism, but they do not realize that
although what they have said is contrary to the personal views of Marx,
Engels, Mao and other Marxist leaders, yet it is still a Marxist and a
materialist interpretation of religion.

It is shocking, they have paid no attention to this point. They have
supposed that the ruled religion also has a class origin, and thus have
unconsciously accepted the theory of harmony between the origin of the
cultural phenomenon and its orientation. In other words they have
accepted the theory of the materiality of religion. The only difference
is that contrary to the view of Marx and the Marxists, they have
maintained that there can be a religion originating among the exploited
and underprivileged class and oriented towards their interests. Thus
although they have been able to discover an interesting theory about the
orientation of the ruled religion, yet they believe in the material and
class origin of religion.

What conclusion can be drawn from what these intellectuals have held?
The conclusion is that the ruling religion of polytheism is the only
historical religion, which actually has had a definite role in life, for
the compulsion of history has been at the back of the rulers and the
political and economic power at their disposal. In these circumstances
it was only their religion which could stay and prevail. As for the
religion of monotheism, it was not possible for it to strike root and
take a concrete form. Consequently it could not play any historical role
in society, for a superstructure could not go ahead of the
infrastructure.

As such the monotheistic movements of the Prophets were bound to fail.
The Prophets preached the religion of equality, but before long the
polytheistic religion under a cover of monotheism distorted their
teachings. In contrasts, the polytheistic religion not only continued to
thrive, but became stronger than ever before and more active in
persecuting the underprivileged.

In fact, although the true Prophets tried to arrange some pieces of
bread for the people, virtually they became a tool in the hands of their
opponents for tightening the rope round the neck of the oppressed and
the exploited. What the Prophets desired to accomplish through their
teachings was not accomplished, and what was accomplished, was not
desired by them. In the words of the jurists, what was intended, did not
happen and what happened, was not intended.

The materialists and the anti-religious elements allege that religion is
the opium of society. It is a narcotic and a cause of stagnation and
sluggishness. It justifies tyranny and discrimination and preserves
ignorance. This allegation is true but only to the extent of the ruling
religion, that is the religion of polytheism, which is the religion of
discrimination and which has been dominating over history. But it is
incorrect as far as the true religion, the religion of monotheism, that
is the religion of the oppressed and suppressed is concerned, which has
always been kept out of the scene of life and history.

The only role which the religion of the ruled has been able to play is
that of criticizing and denouncing. Its position has been that of a
minority party in a legislature. The majority party forms its
government, implements its programme and carries out its plans. But a
minority party, howsoever progressive it may be, can do nothing except
criticizing the policy of the majority and raising objection against it.

The majority party pays no attention to these criticisms. It runs
society as it likes, and sometimes uses the criticism of the minority
party for consolidating its own position. Without this criticism it
could collapse under the ever-growing pressure of its opponents, but the
criticism of the opposition serves as a warning to it, and enables it to
take suitable counter measures to make its position stronger.

The above thesis also is not correct in any way, neither with regard to
its analysis of the nature of polytheism and monotheism, nor with regard
to the role of these two creeds as depicted in history. There can be no
doubt, that some sort of religion has always existed in the world
whether it be the religion of monotheism or polytheism. Even both these
religions have existed side by side. As to the question whether the
religion of polytheism is the first to come into existence or the
religion of monotheism, the sociologists have expressed divergent views.
Most of them maintain that in the beginning there existed the religion
of polytheism only. Gradually the religious ideas developed and man
reached the stage of monotheism. But there are some sociologists who
hold a contrary view.

Religious traditions and some religious doctrines also support the
second theory. Anyway, how did the religion of polytheism come into
existence? Was it really invented by the despots of history to justify
their tyrannies and their policy of discrimination, or are there some
other reasons of its coming into being? Most of the authorities have
mentioned some other reasons, for it is not possible to accept that
polytheism is simply an outcome of social discrimination. It is even
more unscientific to describe the religion of monotheism as a pretext of
the underprivileged class against social discrimination and as an
expression of its aspirations for the establishment of equality and
fraternity. In addition, this view is totally inconsistent with Islamic
principles.

The above statement paints the true Prophets of Allah as exonerated
failures. According to the supporters of this theory, the Prophets were
failures because they were defeated by falsehood and could achieve no
success in any period of history. Their religion did not penetrate the
core of society, nor was it able to secure any notable share in the
religious life of the rulers. Its role was confined to criticizing and
raising objections against the ruling religion. The Prophets were
exonerated, because contrary to the allegation of the materialists, they
never joined hands with the exploiters, nor were they a factor of
stagnation and inertia. Their sympathy was not with the exploiting
class. On the other hand they belonged to the underprivileged class, had
sympathy with this class and struggled for the restoration of its lost
rights.

As the true Prophets cannot be blamed with respect to the spirit of
their mission, which is the same as their orientation, they cannot also
be blamed for their failure, for which they are not responsible, because
the compulsion of history arising from private property was at the back
of their opponents. The emergence of the system of private property
compulsively divided society into the exploiters and the exploited.

That part of society which consisted of the exploiters, being the master
of the material products of society, quite naturally became the master
of its spiritual products also. In these circumstances the Prophets
cannot be held responsible for their failure because in view of the
compulsion of history it was not possible for them to resist the
exploiters. Compulsion of history is a material version of fate and
divine decree, though in this case the decree is issued not by Allah in
the heaven, but by, a god on the earth, not by Absolute Allah, but by
the material god, that is the ruling power called economic
infrastructure of society, the main spring of which are the tools of
production.

Although with this analysis of the situation, the true Prophets have
been exonerated, yet the blame is laid on the world system which is
generally described as a right system in which good always prevails over
evil. The Islamic theosophists who have an optimistic view of the world
system, claim that the world is good and sound. Evil and falsehood are
only transient and temporary and their existence is not of essential
character. The world system or for that matter, human social system is
basically good. The Qur’an says: "***As for the foam, it passes away as
scum upon the banks, while, as for that which is of use to mankind, it
remains in the earth."*** (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:17)

The Qur’an says that in a conflict between the right and the wrong, the
right is always victorious.

***"We bring forward the truth to crush and destroy falsehood; it is
doomed to vanish"*** (Surah al-Ambiya', 21:18)

The Qur’an also says that the support of Allah is always at the back of
the true Prophets: ***"We surely do help Our Messengers and those who
believe, in the life of this world and on the Day when the witnesses
arise."*** (Surah al-Ghafir, 40:51 )

The Qur’an also asserts: ***"We decreed that Our servants, the
Messengers will certainly be victorious."*** (Surah as-Saffat, 37:171 )

But what these so called intellectuals say, contradicts this principle.
Though they exonerate the Prophets and other past reformers, what they
say amounts to blaming their Allah.

This is, in fact, a difficult problem. On the one hand the Qur’an views
the world system with a sort of optimism, and insists that the social
life of man revolves round what is right, theosophy also in accordance
with its own principles claims that what is good and right always
prevails over what is bad and false, and that the existence of evil and
falsehood is accidental relative and unreal, without any real and
independent existepce of its own.

On the other hand, a study of the past and present history causes a sort
of pessimism about the prevailing system, and gives support to the view
of those who assert that entire history is a series of tragedies,
tyrannies, injustice and exploitation.

It is rather difficult to say whether we have misunderstood the world
system or the social system of man, or alternatively is it that we
wrongly think that the Qur’an views history and life with optimism? Or
is it that we have not misunderstood anything but there exists an
insoluble contradiction between the actuality and the Qur’an?

As far as the world system is concerned, we have discussed this point in
our book, Divine Justice, and with the grace of Allah resolved the
doubt. As far as the course of history and

man's social life are concerned, we propose to discuss the question in a
later discourse under the heading, *Conflict Between Truth and
Falsehood*, and to express our views on it. We shall be gratified if
other thinkers, also express their views on this question.

[^1]: The Qur’an itself does not call them the mean, but simply quotes
their opponents as calling them as such.

[^2]: The inquisitive may refer to Surah al-Zukhruf, 43:40-50, Surah
al-Mu'min, 40:23-44, Surah Taha, 20:49-71, Surah al-Shu'ara, 26:16-49
and Surah al-Qasas, 28:36-39.


