Chapter 29: Evolution and Change in History
===========================================

What we have said so far concerns one of the two important problems of
history. The question so far dealt with was whether the nature of
history is materialistic or not. Another important question is that of
the evolution of history.

We know that social life is not confined to man alone. There are some
other living beings also, which more or less lead some sort of social
life based on mutual cooperation and division of labour and sharing of
responsibilities under well organized laws and rules.

We all know that the honey-bee is one of such living beings. But there
is one basic difference between the social existence of other living
beings and that of man. The social existence of other living beings
always remains fixed and static. No change or development in the system
of their life or in the words of Morris Metterlink, in their culture -
if that expression is correct ever takes place.

In contrast, the social life of man not only develops and changes, but
it also gradually gathers speed and gains momentum. That is why the
history of the social life of man has been divided from different angles
into distinct periods distinguished from each other.

For example, from the view-point of the means of living, it has been
divided into the periods of hunting, agriculture and industrial
development. From the view-point of economic system it has been divided
into the period of primitive com munism, the period of slavery, the
period of feudalism, the period of capitalism and the period of
socialism. From political point of view it has been divided into the
period of. tribal rule, the period of despotism, the period of
aristocracy, and the period of democracy. From the point of view of sex
it has been divided into the period of matriarchy and the period of
patriarchy. So on and so forth.

Why is this kind of development not found in the social life of other
animals? Which basic factor is the cause of man's shifting from one
social period to another? In other words, what is that which pushes life
forward and is found in man and not found in animals? What is the
mechanism of this progress?

In this connection the philosophers of history usually raise a question.
They ask whether the social life of man has really made any progress
over history, and if it has, by what criterion, we can judge it and be
sure of it.

Some sociologists [^1] doubt that the changes which have taken place may
really be called a progress or an evolution. Some other sociologists
hold that the movement of history is circular. They claim that history
moves from a point, and after passing several stages reaches the same
point again, and then once more begins to move in the same fashion as
previously.

For example, a stiff tribal system is set up by the nomads, possessing
will and courage. The tribal government naturally leads to the
establishment of an aristocracy. The dictatorial actions of the
aristocratic government culminate in a general revolution and the
establishment of a democracy. Some time later the chaos and confusion
caused by too much freedom under a democratic government once again lead
to despotism with a tribal spirit.

At present we do not propose to enter into the discussion of this point
and leave it to some other occasion. As a basis of further study we
assume that on the whole history has marched forward and made progress.

It may be pointed out that those who maintain that history is going
forward admit that the forward movement of history does not mean that
the future of all societies under all circumstances is better than their
past, that societies always and without any interruption move forward,
and that there is no chance of their ever declining and moving
backwards.

There is no doubt that societies come to a halt, decline, retrogress,
turn to the left or the right and finally fade out. Nevertheless on the
whole they move forward.

The question, what the motivating force of history and the factor of the
social development is, has been usually so described in the books of
philosophy that the incorrectness of the description becomes clear after
a little consideration of it. Usually the following views are expressed
about this question:

I. The Racial Theory
--------------------

According to this theory, certain races are mainly responsible for the
advancement of history. It is supposed that some races have the
capability of creating culture and civilization, whereas some others do
not possess such talents. Some races can produce science, philosophy,
ethics, art and technology. Whereas some others are mere consumers of
these commodities, not the producers of them.

Hence, it is concluded that there should be a sort of division of labour
among different races. The races which are fit for politics, education
and the production of culture, art and technology should be exclusively
responsible for human, fine and sublime activities. On the other hand
the races which do not have such a capability should be excused from
these activites and instead should be entrusted with manual and
semi-animal work which does not require high thinking and sublimity of
taste. This was the consideration why Aristotle who held such views,
regarded some races fit for owning slaves and other races unfit for
that.

Some thinkers believe that only particular races are able to lead the
course of history. For example, they say that northern races in this
respect are superior to southern races. It were the northern races which
pushed human culture forward. Count Gobino, the famous French
philosopher, who was for three years French Ambassador to Iran about
hundred years ago, supported this theory.

II. The Geographical Theory
---------------------------

According to this theory it is a particular sort natural environment
that produces culture, education and industry. For example, the
temperate regions produce moderate temperaments; and powerful brains. In
the first part of the *Qanun*, Ibn Sina (Avicenna) has discussed at
length the effects of the natural environment on the mental and
temperamental personality of man.

According to this theory what pushes history forward is not the
hereditary factor of race and blood. It is not that a particular race
pushes history forward in every climate and every region and that
another race wherever it may be living lacks that capacity. The
difference in the capabilities of different races is the result of the
difference in their environment. With the dispersion of races their
capabilities also disperse. As such it is particular areas and regions
which push history forward and cause new developments. The French
sociologist of the 17th century Montesquieu in his celebrated book, *De
Lesprit des lois* (the Spirit of the Law) advocates this theory.

III. Theory of Intellectual Giants
----------------------------------

According to this theory all historical developments, whether
scientific, political, economic, technical or moral, are produced by
extraordinarily intelligent and ingenious persons. Man in this respect
differs from all other living beings. Individual members of other
species have biologically almost similar capabilities. At least there
appears to be no appreciable difference.

In contrast, among the human beings as regards to their capabilities a
great disparity is often observed. Exceptionally genius persons are
found in every society. Whenever these geniuses possessing extraordinary
intellect, taste, will or initiative appear in a society, they push it
forward scientifically, technically, morally, politically or militarily.

According to this theory, most of the human beings lack initiative and
creativity. They only follow and consume the ideas and the products of
the industry of others.

In fact, more or less always, in every society there exists a minority
which possesses a creative bent of mind. It has initiative, possesses
original ideas, and goes ahead of others. It is this minority that
pushes history forward and brings it to a new stage. The well-known
English philosopher Thomas Carlyle believed that history was shaped by
outstanding individuals. In his book *On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the
Heroic in History* he has made the following remarks about the Holy
Prophet of Islam:

*"The history of every nation is a manifestation of one or more than one
outstanding personalities. More properly speaking, the history of every
nation is a manifestation of the personality and the genius of one or
more than one heroes. For instance, the history of Islam is a
manifestation of the personality of the Holy Prophet; the history of
modern France is a manifestation of the personality of Napoleon; and the
Soviet history of the last sixty years is a manifestation of the
personality of Lenin."*

IV. The Economic Theory
-----------------------

According to this theory economy is the motivating force of history. All
social and historical affairs of a nations whether they are cultural,
political, military or social, are a reflection of the production
methods and production relations of that society. It is a change in the
economic basis of a society that transforms its structure and pushes it
forward. The geniuses mentioned above are not more than a manifestation
of the economic, political and social needs of society caused by a
change in the implements of production. Karl Marx, the Marxists on the
whole and sometimes even some non-Marxists support this theory. Perhaps
it is the most popular theory of our time.

V. The Divine Theory
--------------------

According to this theory, whatever appears on the earth, is a heavenly
affair which comes down to the earth in accordance with the profound
wisdom of Allah. All historical changes and developments are a
manifestation of His judicious will and profound wisdom. Therefore it is
Divine will that pushes history forward and brings about changes in it.
History is a scenario of the Divine Will. Bishop Bossuet, a well known
historian and tutor of Louis XV advocated this theory.

These are the theories which have been usually discussed in the books of
philosophy of history in connection with the causes that move history.

From our point of view none of these theories represents the correct
position and they all are the result of some sort of a confusion. We
want to find out the causes that move history, but these theories are
largely irrelevant to what we want. For instance the racial theory is
nothing more than a sociological theory. It is relevant only when the
question is whether different human races have or have not some
hereditary capabilities and whether they all are or not intellectually
of the same level. If they are of the same level, that means that all
races equally take part in the movement of history or at least
theoretically they can. If they are not of the same level, that means
that some races alone are fit to take part in the process of pushing
history forward. So far this theory has been formulated correctly, but
it does not resolve the mystery of the philosophy of history. Suppose we
admit that all historical developments are effected by a certain race.
Still our problem remains unsolved, for we still do not know why human
life or the life of any particular human race develops, whereas animal
life remains stationary. The question whether the factor of progress is
one race or all races, does not unveil the secret of the movement of
history.

The same is the case with the geographical theory. It is a useful theory
and relates to an important sociological question as it shows that
environments play an effective role in the mental, intellectual,
temperamental and physical growth of man. Some environments keep man
within or near the limits of an animal and others further his distance
and distinction from animals. According to this theory, history moves
among the men of certain regions and territories only. In other regions
it is stationary and monotonous. But the main question still remains
where it was. For example honey-bees and other gregarious animals lack
historical movement even in the regions conducive to mental growth. Then
what is the real cause of the difference between these two kinds of
living beings, one kind of which remains stationary, whereas the other
kind always moves from one stage to another?

The divine theory is still more inconsistent than these other theories.
Is history alone a manifestation of the Divine Will? In fact the whole
world from the beginning to the end including all causes and hindrances,
is a manifestation of the Will of Allah.

The Divine Will bears the same relation to all causes of the world. As
the developing and changing life of man is a manifestation of the Divine
Will, similarly the stationary and monotonous life of the bees is also a
manifestation of His Will. The real question is what that system is with
which the Divine Will has endowed the life of man to make it developing
while the life of other animals is stationary because it is devoid of
that system.

The economic theory lacks technical aspect and has not been advanced as
a principle. The economic theory of history, as it has been propounded,
throws light on the nature of history only and shows that it is material
and economic, and that all other affairs are tantamount only to forms or
nonessential characteristics. Consequently, all affairs of society
necessarily change. But all that is a question of 'if'. The real
question still remains unanswered. Even if we admit that economy is the
infrastructure of society and with its change the whole society
undergoes a change, the question is why it is so.

What is that factor or factors which change the whole superstructure
following a change in the infrastructure? Economy may be the
infrastructure of society, but that does not necessarily mean that it is
the motivating force of history also. Of course if the supporters of
this theory instead of describing economy as the infrastructure of
society, had described it as the motivating force of history, considered
materiality of history to be enough for its dynamism, brought out the
question of the inner contradiction of society and said that the real
motivating force is the contradiction between the infrastructure and the
superstructure of society or the contradiction between the two aspects
of the infrastructure (implements of production and production
relations), the theory would have been presented properly.

There is no doubt that the aim of the proponents of the above theory in
its present form is to say that the real cause of all movements of
history is the inner contradiction between the implements of production
and the production relations. But we are concerned with the correct
presentation of the theory, not with what is in the minds of its
proponents.

The theory of the intellectual giants, irrespective of the fact whether
it is correct or incorrect, directly relates to the philosophy of
history or the motivating factor of history.

As such so far we have got only two theories about the force which moves
history. One of them being the theory of the giants, according to which
history is created by the outstanding individuals. In fact, this theory
claims that most members of society or almost all of them lack
initiative, originality and power of leadership. They can bring about no
change in society. But from time to time a very small minority with an
extraordinary imaginative and creative capacity emerges in society. Its
members take initiative, plan things, take decisions and pull the
ordinary people behind them. Thus they bring about a change. These
heroic personalities are the product of extraordinary events, both
natural and hereditary, but not of the social conditions or the material
needs of society.

The second theory is that of the contradiction between the
infrastructure and the superstructure of society. This theory may
properly be called the theory of the motivity of economy. We have
already referred to it, and need not dwell on it again.

There is a third theory also and that is the theory of the inborn
characteristics. Man's nature is such that he has certain inherent
characteristics which make his life evolutionary.

One of these characteristics is his ability of gathering and preserving
experiences. Whatever knowledge and information man acquires through his
experience, he retains it in his mind and uses it as a basis for his
further experiments.

Another characteristic of man is his capacity of learning through speech
and writing. Through these mediums he can transmit his experience to
others. The experience of one generation is preserved for the benefit of
the subsequent generations by means of speech and writing and thus human
experience continues to pile up. That is why the Qur’an has given
special importance to the blessings of speech and pen. The Qur’an says:
***"The Beneficent has made known the Qur’an. He has created man. He has
taught him articulate utterance."*** (Surah ar-Rahman, 55:1-4) At
another place it says: ***"Read: In the name of your Lord Who
created, -- created man from a clot. Read: And your Lord is the Most
Bounteous, who taught by the pen."*** (Surah al-Alaq, 96:1-4)

The third characteristic of man is his being equipped with the power of
reason and initiative. By means of this mysterious power he can
originate things, for he is a manifestation of the creative power of
Allah. His fourth characteristic is his inherent desire to do something
original. In other words man is not only potentially creative, but he
can actually create things whenever necessary. Not only that, but a
creative tendency has been implanted in his nature.

Man's capability of remembering and preserving his experience, his
capacity of communicating it to others and his inherent tendency to be
creative combined together are a force that always pushes man forward.
In other animals there exists neither a capacity of remembering their
experience and communicating it to others [^2] nor originality and
initiative, nor any strong desire of being creative. That is the reason
why the animals are stationary and man marches forward. Now we shall
scrutinize these theories.

The Role of Personality in History
----------------------------------

Some people have asserted that history is a struggle between ingenuity
and normal limits. The common and average people support the situation
to which they have been accustomed while the geniuses want to replace
the existing situation with a better one. Carlyle claims that history
begins with the geniuses and the heroes. This theory is in fact based on
two presumptions:

The first presumption is that society is devoid of nature and
personality. The individuals composing society do not form a real
compound. All individuals are independent of each other.

They act and react upon each other, but they do not form a compound
having its own collective spirit, personality, nature and special laws.
They all have their individual mentality and way of thinking. The
individuals; bear the same relation to society as the trees to a forest.
Social events are nothing but a total of individual events. As such
society is mostly governed by the universal and general causes.

The second presumption is that individual human beings have been so
created that they vastly differ from each other. Although generally
speaking the human beings according to the terminology of the
philosophers are rational animals, yet almost all of them lack
originality and creativity. Most of them are the consumers of culture
and civilization, not the producers of them. In this respect they differ
from the animals only so far that the animals cannot even be the
consumers of culture. The spirit of majority is that of imitation,
unquestioning adoption and hero-worship.

But a very small minority of men consists of heroes, geniuses,
independent thinkers of outstanding calibre, of those who have an
original and creative spirit, and of those who possess a strong will.
They are distinct from the majority. Had there been no scientific,
philosophical, artistic, political, social, ethical and technical
geniuses and heroes, humanity would not have moved a step forward and
would have remained where it was in the beginning.

From our point of view both these presumptions are defective. As for the
first presumption, we have, while discussing society, proved that
society has its own personality, nature, laws and norms and all events
take place in accordance with its established general traditions. These
traditions in themselves are progressive and evolutionary. Therefore we
must set aside this presumption and then see whether, in spite of the
fact that society has its personality, nature and traditions, it is
possible for the personality of the individual to play any role in the
march of events. We will discuss this point later. As for the second
presumption, although it cannot be denied that the human beings have
been so created that they differ from one another,

it is not correct to say that only heroes and geniuses have creative
power and all others are the consumers of culture and civilization. In
fact more or less all human beings have creative capacity, and as such
all individuals or at least most of them can take part in productive and
creative activities, though their share may be insignificant as compared
to that of a genius.

Diametrically opposed to the theory that personalities create history,
there is another theory which asserts that it is history that creates
personalities. In other words, it is actually the existing social needs
that create a personality.

Montesquieu has said: "Great men and important events are the signs and
the results of the longer and greater events." Hegel said: "Great men do
not give birth to history; but act as midwives." The great men are the
symbols, not the agents. According to the thinking of those who like
Durkheim believe that collective spirit is the basic thing, and that the
individuals as such absolutely lack personality and they borrow their
whole personality from society, the individuals including big
personalities are nothing but a manifestation of the collective spirit
of society. In the words of Mahmud Shabistari they are a screen of the
window of collective spirit.

From the view-point of those who like Marx consider individual
consciousness to be a manifestation of the collective material needs,
the personalities are a mere manifestation of the material and economic
needs of society.

[^1]: See: E.H. Carr, What is History?; Will Durant, Studies in History,
The Pleasures of Philosophy, pp. 291-312

[^2]: Some animals can transmit to others what they have learnt, but
only on the level of daily events, not on the level of any scientific
experience. The Qur’an also hints at this fact when it says: "When they
(Sulayman's army) arrived in the valley of ants, one ant said to the
others, 'Enter your dwellings lest you be carelessly crushed by Sulayman
and his army." (Surah an-Naml, 27:18)


