Chapter 31: Imamat - Leadership
===============================

In his papers entitled the *Notes on Leadership and Administration* the
author has described very well the difference between Prophethood and
Imamat. The first is guidance and the second is leadership. As a
religious guide or Prophet is a sort of Divinely appointed guide, the
same case is with a leader or an Imam. The Holy Prophet and some other
Prophets have been both the guides and the leaders. But the end of
Divine guidance does not mean the end of Divine leadership also.

The same notes say that Imamat and Prophethood are two different
assignments and two different states. They are often separable. Many
Prophets only conveyed revelations. They were not the Imams. Similarly
the Imams of the Prophet's House have not been the Prophets. Anyhow,
Ibrahim and Muhammad were the Prophets and the Imams both (Peace be upon
them). The Qur'an says: ***"I am going to Make you Imam for the
people."*** (Surah al Baqarah 2:124 )

Our contention that Prophethood is guidance and Imamat is leadership has
been derived from the Qur’an, which says: ***"The Messenger has only to
convey the message of Allah."*** (Surah al Maidah 5:99)

But we know that the duty of an Imam is to supervise, to lead and to
take care of those who accept his leadership.

According to the Shi'ah belief, as Prophethood is conferred by Allah,
Imamat is also granted by Him. In this respect there is no difference
between Prophethood and Imamat. The distinguished Prophets have been
guides as well as leaders. The end of Prophethood means the end of
Divine guidance in the sense of showing the way and delivering the
message, but Divine leadership or Imamat shall never come to an end.

Difference Between Guidance and Leadership
------------------------------------------

According to one definition the leader is he who makes it easy for his
followers to achieve the required goal. The guide on the other hand not
only shows the way, but also often provides the means of traversing it
and reaching the goal.

As a matter of fact a person may hold simultaneously both the
assignments of a guide and a leader, or may hold only one of them. As we
have already said, Prophethood is a sort of guidance and Imamat is a
sort of leadership. It is possible that one person may be both a guide
and a leader. It is also possible that someone may be only a guide and
not a leader like all our genuine preachers. (Those whose preaching is
not proper are out of question.) They themselves stand aside and show
the pitfalls to others. Their responsibility ends there. In contrast, it
is also possible that someone may be a leader, not a guide. That happens
when the way is known and the goal has already been determined. In this
case a leader is required to awaken the dormant forces, to mobilize them
and to push them forward. Similarly it is also possible that one person
may be a leader and a guide both.

Imamat of the Holy Imams and the Tradition of Thaqalayn
-------------------------------------------------------

The tradition (Hadith) of Thaqalayn is an authentic tradition reported
by numerous authorities both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis. According to it
the Holy Prophet is reported to have said: *"I leave among you two heavy
trusts: the Book of Allah and my chosen descendants."* [^1]

This tradition has been usually used as a prelude to the narration of
the misfortunes of the Holy Prophet's Chosen descendants. The preachers
say: "This was the Holy Prophet's direction, but no sooner than he died.
. . ." This description gives the impression that the members of the
Holy Prophet's House were crushed and made totally ineffective. Though
it is true that their services were not utilized as they should have
been, yet it must be admitted that their presence was extraordinarily
effective in the preservation of Islamic heritage. Of course the then
government as well as Islamic politics deviated from their original
course and the members of the Prophet's House could render no service in
that field, but they so protected and kept alive the spiritual heritage
of Islam and the Holy Prophet, that it remained safe even after the
gradual decline and extinction of the Islamic caliphate.

Islam is a code of life which covers all affairs temporal and spiritual.
It is not like the school of a moral teacher or a philosopher which can
deliver to society nothing more than a few books and a few pupils. Islam
besides being a moral and cultural school and a social and political
system, is a new code of life and a new way of thinking. It practically
brings new arrangements into existence. Islam preserves the spirit in
the matter, the invisible in the visible, the life Hereafter in this
world and finally the kernel in the husk and the husk in the kernel.

The deviation of the government from its original course rendered the
institution of caliphate into mere husk. Outward formalities were kept
intact, but the spirit of piety, truthfulness, justice, sincerity, love,
equality and patronage of science and knowledge did not exist,
especially during the Umayyad period when true knowledge was despised
and discouraged.

The only thing which was encouraged was poetry, pre-Islamic customs and
boasting of one's ancestry. The result was that politics was separated
from religiousness. In other words those who represented spiritual
heritage of Islam were not allowed to take part in political affairs and
those who held political power were alien to the spirit of Islam, and
carried out only its outward formalities such as congregational prayers
and the appointment of the officials to perform Islamic duties.

They were caliphs and the commanders of the faithful only in name. At
last even this duality disappeared and the outward formalities were also
gone. Even the form of government officially became pre-Islamic.
Spirituality and religiousness were totally separated from politics.
From here it can be understood that the biggest blow which was dealt to
Islam began from the day that religion and politics were separated from
each other. Though during the days of Abu Bakr and Umar religion and
politics still to a certain extent went together, the seeds of their
separation were sown during that period. The things so developed that
Umar made repeated mistakes and Imam Ali corrected them. Fortunately
Imam Ali was his regular adviser. The separation of religion and
politics being the greatest threat, the well-wishers of Islam wanted to
keep them together. The relation between these two is that of spirit and
body.

The body and spirit and the husk and kernel should remain united. The
husk is required to protect the kernel from which it draws its strength.
Islam gives importance to politics, government, political laws and jihad
only for the purpose of protecting and preserving its spiritual
heritage, that is monotheism, supremacy of spiritual and moral values,
social justice, equality and regard for human sentiments. If this husk
is separated from its kernel, the latter will be damaged and the former
will become of no use.

The bold action which the Imams took was the protection of the spiritual
heritage of Islam. They separated from Islam the institution of
caliphate as it existed. The first Imam who took this action was Imam
Husayn (AS). His uprising made it clear that Islam meant piety,
recognition of Allah and self-sacrifice for His cause, not the values
introduced by the Umayyad Caliphate.

Now let us see what the spiritual heritage of Islam means and how the
Holy Imams have protected it. The Holy Qur’an says: ***"The Prophet
reads out to them Allah's verses, purifies them and teaches them the
Book and wisdom"*** (Surah Jumu'ah 62:2 )

It also says: ***"So that the people may establish justice."*** (Surah
al Hadid 57:25 )

Again it says: ***"We have sent you as a witness, a bringer of good
tidings, a warner and one who calls to Allah with His permission."***
(Surah al-Ahzab 33: 45)

The Imams first of all urged people to do what is good and abstain from
that which is evil. The most extreme example of this sort of action is
Imam Husayn's uprising. Secondly the Imams paid attention to
disseminating knowledge. An example of this action is Imam Ja'far
Sadiq's school, which produced such eminent scholars as Hisham, Zurarah
and Jabir ibn Hayyan.

The same purpose was served by the Nahjul Balaghah, the Sahifah
Sajjadiyah and the disputations of all Imams, especially those of Imam
Riza. Above all the Imams showed practical piety, asceticism,
selflessness and benevolence. They passed their nights in worshipping
Allah and helped the poor and the weak. They possessed the noble Islamic
qualities of forgiveness, beneficence and humility. Their very sight
reminded the people of the moral and spiritual qualities preached by
Islam and the Holy Prophet. Imam Musa Kazim observed vigils in close
vicinity to Harun's palace. Imam Riza, when he was still the heir
apparent, declared: *"Allah of all the people is the same, their father
is the same and their mother is the same. None is superior to others
except by virtue of piety."* He took meals with the barber and the
door-keeper and mixed freely with them.

The spiritual philosophy of Islam is the preservation of its moral and
spiritual heritage and the retention of its kernel in contradistinction
of its husk. The separation of spirituality from politics amounts to the
separation of the kernel from its husk.

Imamat and Hadith of Thaqalayn
------------------------------

(i) The substance of this tradition is *mutawatir*, which means that it
has been reported by numerous irreproachable authorities. Its wording
may vary, but according to most of the reports it is as under: ***"I am
leaving among you two heavy trusts: The Book of Allah and my chosen
descendants. So long as you adhere to them, you will never go astray.
They will not be separated from each other till they come to me at the
fountain."***

Once in an article published in an issue of the magazine, *Risalatul
Islam*, the organ of the Dar ut-Taqrib Baynal Mazahibul Islamiya this
tradition appeared thus: "I am leaving among you two heavy trusts: the
Book of Allah and my Sunnah." Immediately, at the instance of the late
Ayatullah Burujardi, a scholar of Qum, named Shaykh Qiwamuddin
Wishnawahi wrote a treatise entitled *Hadithuth Thaqalayn* and sent it
to the Darut-Taqrib which published it as a separate treatise.

In that treatise the sources of this tradition have been traced in the
books of traditions, the commentaries of the Qur’an, biographies,
historical books and dictionaries, in which this tradition has been
mentioned for different reasons. For example it is mentioned in the
commentaries of the Qur’an in connection with the verse: ***"We will
dispose of you O you Thaqalayan."*** and in connection with the verses
of *'I'tisam'* (3:103), *'Mawaddat'* (42:23) and *'Tathir'* (33:33). In
dictionaries it is mentioned in connection with the root-word, *thaqal*
etc.

(ii) In the Holy Qur’an the word, *thaqalayn* has been used to signify
the men and the jinn. Let us see what it signifies in this
tradition.[^2]

In connection with the tradition there are a few points worth
mentioning. The first point is: Why have the Chosen descendants of the
Holy Prophet been called thaqal?

The second point is: Why has the Qur’an been called the major thaqal and
the chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet the minor thaqal? Some
reports have these words: "One of them (the thaqals) is greater than the
other."

The Holy Prophet was asked as to what he meant by the *thaqalayn*. He
said: *"The Book of Allah, the one end of which is in Allah's hand and
the other end of which is in your hand, and my descendants who are the
minor thaqal"*.

According to a certain report, he added: *"They are the two ropes which
will not break off till the Day of Resurrection."*

(iii) The third important point in this connection is that the Holy
Prophet has said that these two will not be separated. He did not mean
to say that they will not part company with each other or that they will
not be displeased with each other or that they will not quarrel. What is
meant is that adherence to one of them is inseparable from adherence to
the other. They cannot be separated by saying that the Qur’an is enough
for us as Umar said in the early days of Islam or by saying that what
has been reported to us from the Prophet's House is enough for us as the
Akhbarists say. Incidentally some of the Shi'ah scholars are of this
opinion.

(iv) The fourth point is that the Holy Prophet has guaranteed that those
who really adhere to these two thaqa1s would never go astray and would
not feel miserable.

The decline and deviation of the Muslims began when they tried to thrust
a wedge between these two thaqals.

Now let us discuss why the law-giver has chosen to append something else
to the revealed Book brought by him.

This question is related to the profundity and subtlety of the Qur’an,
the law of which requires an interpreter and commentator. To illustrate
this point it may be said that sometimes we import from a foreign
country such simple goods as cloth, shoes or utensils. In this case we
do not need any persons to come along with the goods to direct us how to
use them. We can sew garments out of cloth, can use the utensils and put
on the shoes. But sometimes we import a complete manufacturing plant. In
that case it is necessary that some experts should come along with it to
install it and operate it for a fairly long time till our own
technicians are ready to operate it independently. Similarly when modern
war equipment is imported, it should definitely be accompanied by
technicians to teach its use.

We have heard that recently France has sold mirage aircraft to Libya,
but it is said that the Libyan pilots will not be in a position to fly
them at least for two years.

Hence the question of leadership in the sense of religious authority, to
which the Holy Prophet has referred in this authentic tradition, is
nothing but a stress on the fact that it is not enough to know Arabic in
the ordinary sense to be able to interpret the Qur'an, to understand its
aims and to explain its injunctions and moral rules. We know how the
literal interpretation of the tradition which says that you will see
your Lord on the Day of Resurrection as you see the moon when it is
full, led to gross deviation and anthropomorphic conceptions.

To say that the Book of Allah is enough for us culminates in either
Ash'arism or Mu'tazilaism, each of which was a heretical school of
thought.

Our twelve Imams are the Qur'anic technicians. Their knowledge does not
belong to the world of senses. It is Divinely inspired or at least
especially acquired knowledge. Imam Ali once addressing Kumayl said:
*"Knowledge with real insight came to them unexpectedly. They
experienced the satisfaction of conviction. They found easy what those
living in luxury considered to be difficult, and they were on intimate
terms with that, of which the ignorant were afraid."* (See Nahjul
Balagha, Saying 146)

Imam Ali says: *"The chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet keep his
trust and abide by his orders. They are a treasure of his knowledge, a
sanctuary of his wisdom, an archive of his Books and a support of his
religion. With their help he straightened his back and gained his
composure. None from among his ummah (followers) can be compared to
them. Those who received their favours cannot be equal to them. They are
the basis of religion and the pivot of faith. To them return those who
go astray and those who lag behind, join them for guidance and
salvation. They are efficiently capable and fit for the status of
leadership; they have been and are even now rightful heirs of the Holy
Prophet who had entrusted them Imamate."* (Nahjul Balagha - Sermon 2)

*"Through us you were guided in the darkness and were able to set your
foot on the highway. With our help you came into the light of the dawn
from the darkness of the late night. Deaf be the ear that does not
listen to the cry (advice) of the guide."* (Nahjul Balagha - Sermon 4)
(This sermon was delivered by Imam Ali after Talhah and Zubayr were
killed).

*"You will not be observing the covenant of the Qur'an unless you know
who violated it and you will not be adhering to it unless you know who
threw it away. Therefore seek this information of those who have it, for
they are the life of knowledge and the death of ignorance. It is they
whose judgement will tell you of their knowledge, whose silence will
tell you of their speech and whose outward appearance will tell you of
their inward feelings. They do not do anything that is against*
*religion nor is their opinion divided about it. Therefore religion is
their true witness and a silent speaker."* (Nahjul Balagha -Sermon 147)

(The words "that they do not do anything against religion", indicate the
infallibility of the Imams and the words, "their opinion is not divided"
show that the Imams possess profound knowledge.)

***"They are life of knowledge and death of ignorance. Their gentleness
speaks of their knowledge and their silence of the wisdom of their
speech. They neither oppose the truth (as they are infallible) nor have
they divided opinion about it, (as their knowledge is sound and
correct). They are pillars of Islam and the place where it is safe.
Through them the truth was restored to its position, the falsehood was
displaced and its tongue was cut off. They understand religion and take
care of it. They do not merely hear it and pass it on. The transmitters
of knowledge are many, but its adherents are very few."*** (See Nahjul
Balagha - Sermon 239).

*"A time will come after me when nothing will be more hidden than truth
and more manifest than falsehood. At that time the Qur’an and the people
of the Qur’an will be the rejected outcasts. The Qur'an and its
guardians (Ahlul Bayt) which are like two companions going together in
the same path, will not be accommodated by anyone. At that time they
will be among the people, but no one will seek guidance from them, and
they will be with the people, but not really with them."* (Nahjul
Balagha - Sermon 147)

[^1]: In this connection a reference may be made to Shaykh Qawam
Wishnawahi's treatise appended to Risalatul Islam and to the Biharul
Anwar, an account of the Prophet's life.

[^2]: Shaykh Qiwamuddin says that this tradition has been reproduced in
Sahih Muslim, Vol. VII, p. 122, Sunan Tirmizi, Vol. II, p. 307, Sunan
Abu Da'ud, Vol. V, pp. 182, 189; Mustadrak Hakim, Vol. III, pp. 14, 17,
26, 59, Vol. VI, pp. 366, 371, Vol. V, pp. 182, 189; Mustadrak Hakim,
Vol. III, p. 109, Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd, Vol. IV, p. 8; Usudul Ghabah,
Vol. II, p.12, Vol. III, p. 147 and Ibn Abil Hadid.


