Chapter 32: Significance of Imamat
==================================

The subject of our present discussion is Imamat. We know that for us,
the Shi'ah though it is a question of extraordinary importance, other
Muslim sects do not attach so much importance to it. The reason is that
the conception of Imamat which we have is different from that conception
of it which other sects have. There is no doubt that there are some
common features too, but those features of Imamat, which have given
extraordinary importance to it, are peculiar to the Shi'ah creed. For
example when we, the Shi'ah want to enumerate the cardinal principles of
religion according to the Shi'ah doctrine, we say that these principles
are Monotheism, Prophethood, Divine Justice, Imamat and the Hereafter.

We regard Imamat as a cardinal principle of religion. In a sense the
Sunnis also do not reject the idea of Imamat totally, but according to
their belief, Imamat is not a cardinal principle of religion. They
regard it only as a collateral matter. In fact there exists a basic
difference of opinion with regard to Imamat. We believe in one sort of
Imamat and the Sunnis believe in another sort of it. The reason why the
Shi'ah regard Imamat as a cardinal principle of religion whereas the
Sunnis regard it as a collateral matters, is that the Shi'ah conception
of Imamat is quite different from the Sunni conception of it.

The Meaning of Imam
-------------------

Imam means a leader or one who goes in front. The word Imam in Arabic
does not imply any sense of sanctity. And Imam is the person who has
some followers irrespective of the fact whether he is virtuous or
depraved. The Qur’an itself has used the word in both the senses. At one
place it says: ***"We appointed them Imams who guide with our
permission."*** (Surah Anbiya, 21:73)

At another place it says: ***"The Imams who invite people to the
Hell."*** (Surah al Qasas, 28:41)

In respect of Fir'awn the Qur’an has used a phrase which conveys a sense
similar to that of an Imam or a leader. It says: ***"On the Day of
Judgement he will lead his people down into the Hell fire."*** (Surah
Hud, 11:98)

Thus Imam literally means simply a leader. But at present we are not
concerned with a bad leader. Let us now discuss the conception of
Imamat.

The word *Imamat* is applied to several cases. Some concepts of it are
acknowledged by the Sunnis also. But they differ with us as to who is an
Imam and what qualities he must possess. They totally disbelieve in
certain concepts of Imamat. It is not that they believe in Imamat in the
sense in which we believe but disagree as to the person who holds this
assignment. The Imamat in which they believe is nothing but social
leadership and this is the sense in which this word has been used in the
books of the old scholastic theologians.

Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi in *at-Tajrid* defines Imamat as general charge
of society. Here it seems necessary to mention another point also:

Various Aspects of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------

The Holy Prophet in his lifetime by virtue of his special position in
Islam had several aspects as is indicated by the Qur'an and his own life
account. At one and the same time he held several assignments. In the
first instance he was a Prophet of Allah and in this capacity he
conveyed, Allah's message and commandments to the people. The Holy
Qur’an says:

"***Whatever the Messenger gives, take it, and whatever he forbids
abstain from it."*** (Surah al Hashr, 59:7)

In other words, whatever instructions and orders the Prophet gives to
the people, he gives them on behalf of Allah.

From this point of view the Prophet communicates only that which has
been revealed to him. Another assignment of the Holy Prophet was that he
held the post of the supreme judge, by virtue of which he administered
justice among the Muslims. According to Islam every Tom, Dick and Harry
cannot be a judge, for from the viewpoint of Islam arbitration is a
Divine affair. Allah has enjoined justice and a Judge is the person who
administers it in cases of disputes and differences. This assignment was
also expressly conferred on the Holy Prophet by the Qur'an, which says:
***"By your Lord, they will not believe in truth until they make you
judge of what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no
dislike of that which you decide and submit to your decision
whole-heartedly."*** (Surah an Nisa, 4:65 )

The Holy Prophet was appointed a judge by Allah and hence this
assignment was not an ordinary one; it was Divine. Practically also he
was the Prophet-judge. The third assignment which he officially held and
which was conferred on him by the Qur’an was that of the head of the
State. He was the head of the State and leader of Muslim society. In
other words in Muslim society he was the policy maker as well as the
administrator. It is believed that it is this aspect of the Holy Prophet
which is visualized by the Qur’anic verse: ***"Believers, obey Allah,
and obey His Messenger and your (qualified) leaders."*** (Surah an Nisa,
4:59)

In fact, the three positions held by the Holy Prophet were not merely
formal or ceremonial. The directions which we have received from him are
basically of three kinds.

(i) The first kind comprises Divine revelations, in regard to which the
Holy Prophet could do nothing of his own accord. His sole function was
to convey to the people what was revealed to him.

(ii) In the field of religious instructions, for example, he told the
people how to offer prayers and keep fast. But when he administered
justice his judgements were not revealed. In the case of a dispute
between two persons, he decided the matter according to the Islamic
standards and judged who was right and who was wrong. In such a case
Jibra'il did not bring any revelation to him. Exceptional cases are a
different matter.

On the whole he decided all judicial cases on the basis of available
evidence in the same way as others do. At the most it may be said that
his judgements were better than those of others. He himself said that he
had orders to pronounce judgement on the basis of what appears to be
specious. Suppose a plaintiff and a respondent appear and the plaintiff
produces two irreproachable witnesses. The Prophet would decide the case
on the basis of their evidence. Evidently this judgement will be the
Prophet's own judgement and not a judgement revealed to him.

(iii) In this third capacity also when the Prophet issued an order as
the leader of society, the nature of this order of his was different
from the nature of what he conveyed as Divine revelation. Allah
appointed the Holy Prophet the leader of society and authorized him to
work as such. In this capacity he sometimes consulted others also. We
see that he consulted his companions on the occasion of the Battles of
Badr and Uhud and on many other occasions. Evidently there can be no
consultation about a Divinely revealed order. The Holy Prophet never
consulted his companions as to how the dusk time (Magrib) prayers should
be offered. There have been occasions when the Holy Prophet said about
certain questions referred to him that Allah had commanded thus and
hence he had to abide by His command.

But on matters in which he had received no Divine injunction, he often
consulted others and asked for their opinion. If in such cases he issued
his own orders, he did so because he was authorized by Allah to do so.
In a few cases connected with social administration also he received
revelation, but those were exceptional cases. Otherwise as a rule he did
not receive any detailed instructions on social and political questions
and he did not work as a mere messenger in respect of these questions.
It is an undisputed fact that the Holy Prophet worked in all these
capacities concurrently.

Imamat in the Sense of Leadership of Society
--------------------------------------------

The first meaning of Imamat as mentioned above is the general charge of
society. One of his assignments which fell vacant on the demise of the
Holy Prophet, was the leadership of society. There is no doubt that
society needs a leader. Who was the leader of society after the Holy
Prophet? Both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis agree that society is in need of
a leader and a supreme commander. It is here that the question of
*Khilafat* arises. The Shi'ah say that the Holy Prophet himself
nominated his successor and announced that after him Imam Ali would take
the reins of the affairs of the Muslims in his hands.

The Sunnis who have a different logic do not accept this view at least
in the form in which the Shi'ah accept it. According to them the Holy
Prophet did not designate any particular person as his successor and it
was the duty of the Muslims themselves to elect their leader. The Sunnis
accept the principle of Imamat when they say that the Muslims need a
leader. All that they say is that the leader was to be chosen by the
Muslims. In contrast, the Shi'ah claim that the Holy Prophet himself
appointed his successor by Divine revelation.

Had the question of Imamat been merely that of political leadership
after the Holy Prophet, we the Shi'ah also should not have regarded it
as a cardinal principle of religion. It would have been fit to include
this question in the collateral matters. We could say that the question
of Imamat in which the Shi'ah believe is confined to declaring that Imam
Ali was one of the companions of the Holy Prophet like Abu Bakr, Umar,
Uthman and so many others or even like Abuzar and Salman, but he was
better, more learned, more pious and more capable than all of them and
that the Prophet designated him to be his successor. But the Shi'ah do
not stop here. They believe in two tenets in which the Sunnis do not
share with them at all. One of these two tenets is Imamat in the sense
of religious authority.

Imamat in the Sense of Religious Authority
------------------------------------------

We have said that the Holy Prophet conveyed the Divine revelations
received by him to the people who were at liberty to ask him whatever
they wanted to know about the teachings of Islam. Similarly they asked
of him what they did not find in the Qur'an. Now the question is whether
what the Qur'an contains and what the Holy Prophet has told the general
people is all that Islam wanted to convey of its instructions; teachings
and knowledge? Evidently the Holy Prophet did not have time enough to
convey all the teachings of Islam.

Therefore, he trained Imam Ali, his successor as an extraordinary
scholar and taught him everything about Islam, at least all the
principles and the general rules of it. Imam Ali was the most
outstanding of his companions. He was infallible like himself, and knew
even that which was not expressly told by Allah.

Introducing him, the Holy Prophet said: *"0' People, after me refer all
religious questions to Ali and ask him and my other successors whatever
you want to know."* In this respect Imamat is a sort of specialization
in Islam, but an extraordinary and Divine specialization, far above the
degree of the specialization which a *mujtahid* (jurist) can acquire.
The Imams are experts in Islam but their special knowledge of it is not
derived from their own thinking and reason which are liable to commit
mistakes.

They receive their knowledge in a mysterious and secret way unknown to
us. Imam Ali received his knowledge of Islamic sciences direct from the
Holy Prophet and the subsequent Imams received it through him. In the
case of each Imam this knowledge was infallible and impeccable. It was
handed down by each Imam to the subsequent Imams.

The Sunnis do not believe that anybody holds such a position. In other
words they do not believe in the existence of any Imam in this sense. It
is not that they do not accept Ali as an Imam but say that Abu Bakr is
an Imam instead of him. In fact they do not admit that any of the
companions of the Holy Prophet, neither Abu Bakr, nor Umar nor Uthman,
holds such a position. That is why they attribute so many mistakes in
religious matters to Abu Bakr and Umar. In contrast the Shi'ah believe
their Imams to be infallible, and will never admit that any of their
Imams has ever committed a mistake. But the Sunnis in their books say
that on such and such occasion Abu Bakr said so, but he was wrong. When
he realized his mistake he said that he had a Satan (Devil) who
overwhelmed him from time to time. Similarly the Sunnis say that once
Umar made a mistake and then referring to certain women declared that
they were more learned than him.

It is said that when Abu Bakr died the women of his family, including
his daughter - the Holy Prophet's wife, 'Ayishah began to weep and cry.
When Umar heard the din of their lamentation, he sent a message to the
women, asking them to be quiet, but they did not comply with his
request. He again sent a message and then threatened to punish them. At
last 'Ayishah was told by some women that Umar was threatening them and
asking them to become quiet. She sent for Umar and when he came to her
asked him what he wanted to say and why he was sending a message after
message. Umar said that he had heard the Holy Prophet saying: "If any
one died and his people wept over him, he would be punished."

'Ayishah said: "You haven't understood. You are mistaken. That's a
different matter. I know what's that. Once a wicked Jew died. His folk
were weeping over him. The Holy Prophet said that they were weeping and
he was being punished. The Holy Prophet did not say that he was being
punished because they were weeping. He said that they were weeping over
him, but didn't know that he was being punished. What connection has it
with this question? Even if weeping be prohibited, why should Allah
punish an innocent person for the sin which we commit?" "Strange! said
Umar. "Was that the case"? "Yes", said 'Ayishah, "that was the case".
Umar said: "Hadn't these women been there, Umar would have been ruined."

The Sunnis themselves say that on seventy (very many) occasions Umar
said: *"Had there not been Ali, Umar would have been ruined."* He
himself confessed on so many occasions that Ali often rectified his
mistakes, and Umar used to confess his mistakes.

In short, the Sunnis do not believe in any Imam in the sense in which we
believe. Anyhow it is an indisputable fact that it was the Holy Prophet
alone who received the celestial revelation. We do not say that
revelation is received by the Imams also. The message of Islam was
delivered to mankind by the Holy Prophet alone and to him alone Allah
revealed all the necessary teachings of Islam. There are no injunctions
of Islam which were not revealed to him.

But the question whether all injunctions of Islam were conveyed to the
people at large, is a different matter. The Sunnis say that the Holy
Prophet conveyed all Islamic injunctions to his companions. But still
the Sunnis find themselves in a fix when they face problems about which
nothing has been reported from the companions of the Holy Prophet. To
resolve this situation they have introduced the law of analogy, by means
of which they claim that they complete what is missing. In this
connection Imam Ali says: *"Do you mean to say that Allah's religion was
incomplete and you have come to complete it?"* (See Nahjul Balagha -
Sermon 18)

The Shi'ah on the other hand say that neither Allah revealed the Islamic
injunctions incompletely to the Holy Prophet, nor did the Holy Prophet
convey them incompletely to the people. He conveyed them completely but
he did not say everything to the general people. In fact many questions
did not arise during his lifetime. Anyhow, he conveyed all injunctions
which he received from Allah to his special disciple, Imam Ali and asked
him to pass them on to the people as and when necessary.

It is here that the question of infallibility arises. The Shi'ah say
that just as the Holy Prophet could be neither intentionally nor
unintentionally wrong in what he said, similarly his special pupil Imam
Ali also could not go wrong, for just as the Holy Prophet was backed by
Divine support in many ways, this special pupil of his also enjoyed
Divine support. This was one more feature of Imamat.

Imamat in the Sense of Wilayat
------------------------------

This is the third sense of Imamat and the highest sense for that matter.
Great stress is laid on this sense in the Shi'ah doctrine In a way
*Wilayat* is a common point between Shi'ism and mysticism *(tasawwuf)*.
But when we say so, we should not be misunderstood, for you may come
across what the orientalists have said in this respects. They say that
Wilayat is a question in which the mystics are greatly interested and
which has been of interest for the Shi'ah also from the early days of
Islam. I remember that some ten years back an orientalist interviewed
Allama Tabatabi. One of the questions he put was whether the Shi'ah had
borrowed the idea of Wilayat from the mystics or the mystics had taken
it from the Shi'ah. The fact is that the doctrine of Wilayat existed
among the Shi'ah even when mysticism had not emerged yet.

If it is supposed that either of these two have borrowed the idea from
the other, it must be said that the mystics have adopted it from the
Shi'ah. The question of Wilayat is analogous to the questions of the
perfect man and the master of the time. The mystics have laid great
stress on this point. Moulavi says that in every age there exists a
*wali*, *qa'im* or the master of the age. In every age there exists a
perfect man possessing all human qualities. There is no age in which, a
perfect wali, often described as *'qutb'* (pole, pivot, authority) is
not present. The mystics believe that a perfect wali is also a perfect
men.

They ascribe to him many positions some of which are unintelligible to
us. One of his positions is his control of the hearts in the sense that
he is the universal spirit transcending all spirits. Moulavi hints at
this position in his story of Ibrahim Adham. This story is no more than
a fictitious tale. But Moulavi narrates tales to make his points clear.
His aim is not to narrate history. He tells a story only to press his
point. Moulavi says that Ibrahim Adham went to the river and threw a
needle into it. Afterwards he recalled the needle. The fish put their
heads out of the river. Each fish had a needle in its mouth. Continuing,
Maulavi says: '0 you having no endowments, take care of your heart in
the presence of those who are gifted with the qualities of heart.'

Continuing further he says: "That Shaykh (spiritual guide) became aware
of that which was in the heart of the other people. The Shaykh could
know that because he was like a lion and the hearts of other people were
his dens."

The Shi'ah generally use the word Wilayat in its most exalted sense.
They believe that the Wali and Imam is the master of the time, and there
has always been and there will always be one perfect man in the world .
In most of the *ziyarats* (homages) which we recite, we acknowledge the
existence of Wilayat and Imamat in this sense, and believe that the Imam
has a universal spirit. In the ziyarats which we all recite and which we
regard as a part of Shi'ah doctrine we say: "I testify that you see
where I stand; you hear what I say and return my salutation." It is to
be noted that we address that to an Imam who is dead. From our point of
view in this respect there is no difference between a dead and a living
Imam. It is not that we say so to a dead Imam only. We say: "Peace be on
you, Ali ibn Musa al-Riza. I admit and testify that you hear my
salutation and return it."

The Sunnis with the exception of the Wahhabis, believe that only the
Holy Prophet is endowed with this quality of knowing and hearing.
According to them nobody else in the world occupies such a high
spiritual status and has such a spiritual comprehension. But we, the
Shiites believe that this position is held by all our Imams. This belief
is a part of our religious principles and we always acknowledge it.

In short the question of Imamat has three degrees and if we do not make
a distinction between these degrees, we may be faced with difficulties
in respect to certain inferences in this connection. Based on these
degrees Shiism has three groups. Some Shiites believe in Imamat only in
the sense of social and political leadership of society. They say that
the Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali to the leadership of society after
him, and that Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman could not claim this position.
These people are Shiites only to this extent.

They either do not believe in the two further degrees or keep quiet
about them. Some others believe in the second degree also but do not
believe in the third one. It is said that the late Sayyid Muhammad Baqir
Durchal who was Ayatullah Burujardi's teacher in Isfahan, disbelieved in
this third degree. Anyhow, the majority of the Shi'ah and the Shi'ah
scholars believe in the third degree also.

If we want to discuss Imamat, we should discuss it in three stages:
Imamat according to the Qur'an, Imamat according to the tradition and
Imamat according to reason. First of all let us see whether the Qur’anic
verses relating to Imamat indicate that sense of Imamat in which the
Shi'ah believe. And if they do so, do they indicate Imamat in the sense
of political and social leadership only, or do they indicate it in the
sense of religious authority and spiritual Wilayat also. After
explaining this we should see what do the Prophetic traditions say about
Imamat.

Finally we should analyse Imamat from the viewpoint of reason and see
what reason says about each stage of it. Is the Sunni point of view that
the Holy Prophet's successor should be elected by the people more
reasonable or is it a fact that the Holy Prophet himself has nominated
his successor? Similarly what is agreeing to reason in regard to the
other two sense of Imamat.

A Tradition about Imamat
------------------------

Before mentioning the verses of the Qur'an in regard to Imamat. We would
like to quote a tradition which has been reported by the Shi'ah as well
as the Sunnis. Normally a tradition upon which both the Shi'ah and the
Sunnis agree cannot be ignored, because this agreement shows that the
tradition is substantially authentic, though its wording may differ in
different reports. We the Shiites usually report this tradition in the
following words: *"He who dies without recognizing the Imam of his time,
would die a pre-Islamic death."* These are very serious words, for in
the pre-Islamic period people neither believed in the unity of Allah
(monotheism) nor in Prophethood. This tradition (hadith) is found in
most of the Shi'ah books of traditions including the Kafi which is
regarded as the most reliable collection of the Shi'ah traditions.

The important fact is that this tradition is found in the Sunni books
also. According to one report they quote the following wording: *"He who
dies without an Imam, will die a pre-Islamic death."* Another wording is
this: *"He who dies and has no bayah (oath of allegiance) in his neck,
will die a pre-Islamic death."* Still another text says: *"He who dies
and has no Imam, will die a pre-Islamic death."* There are several other
versions, and that shows the great importance which the Holy Prophet
attached to the question of Imamat.

Those who take Imamat only in the sense of social leadership say that
the Holy Prophet has attached utmost importance to the question of
leadership because the implementation of the Islamic injunctions depends
on the presence of a virtuous and sound leader and the strong allegiance
of people to him. Islam is not an individualistic religion. Nobody can
say that as he believes in Allah and His Prophet, he has nothing to do
with anybody else. Everybody must know and understand who the Imam of
his time is, and must carry out his activities under his leadership.

Those who take Imamat in the sense of religious authority, say that he
who is interested in his religion, must recognize his religious
authority and must know whom he should follow in religious matters. It
is absolutely un-Islamic to believe in the religion but to acquire it
from a source which is contrary to it.

Those who believe in Imamat in the sense of spiritual Wilayat say that
this tradition shows that a man who is not under the care of a perfect
*wali* (guardian) is just like him who died in pre-Islamic days. As this
tradition is a *mutawatir* hadith (reported by continuity of numerous
authorities) we mentioned it first so that you may keep it in mind while
we discuss the question of Imamat further. Now we look at the verses of
the Qur'an.

Imamat in the Holy Qur'an
-------------------------

Several verses of the Qur'an are cited by the Shi'ah in connection with
Imamat. One of them is the verse which begins with the words, ***"Your
guardian can be only Allah".*** Incidentally in all these cases there
exist Sunni traditions which support the Shi'ah point of view. In the
Qur'an this verse runs as follows: ***"Your guardian can be only Allah
and His messenger and those who believe, who establish prayers, pay the
zakat while bowing."*** (Surah Mai'dah, 5:55)

The word used in this verse is Wali, which means a guardian. Hence
Wilayat means guardianship. According to the teachings of Islam zakat is
not paid while bowing in prayers. Hence the payment of zakat while
bowing cannot be called a general rule applicable to many individuals.
This verse refers to a particular incident, which took place only once
and which has been reported both by the Shi'ah and the Sunnis. Once Imam
Ali was bowing while offering prayers when a beggar appeared and began
to ask for alms. Imam Ali beckoned and called his attention to his
finger. The beggar promptly drew Imam Ali's ring from his finger and
left the place. In other words Imam Ali did not wait till his prayers
were finished.

He was so particular to give alms, that while he was still praying he
told the beggar by gesture that he might pull out his ring, sell it and
spend the money to meet his needs. Both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis agree
that Imam Ali did so, and that this verse was revealed on this occasion.
It may be noted that giving alms while bowing in prayers is not included
in the teachings of Islam. It is neither an obligatory nor a commendable
act. Hence it cannot be said that several persons might have done so.
Therefore (those who do so) is an obvious reference to Imam Ali. The
Qur'an at several places has used the expression, 'they say. . .', while
that thing was said by only one individual. Here also 'those who do so'
means the individual who did so. Therefore by means of this verse Imam
Ali was appointed the guardian of the people. Anyway, this verse needs
further discussion, which we are going to undertake later.

There are other verses which concern the event of Ghadir. This event
itself is a part of the Islamic traditions, but we are going to discuss
it later. One of the verses revealed in connection with the event of
Ghadir says: ***"0 Messenger! Make known that which has been revealed to
you from your Lord, for if you do it not, you will not have conveyed His
message."*** (Surah al-Mai'dah, 5:67)

The tone of this verse is as serious as that of the tradition: *"He who
died and did not recognize the Imam of his time, died a pre-Islamic
death."* Briefly it may be said that the verse itself shows that its
subject is so important that if the Prophet does not make it known, that
would mean that he has not conveyed the message of Allah at all.

The Shi'ah and the Sunnis agree that Surah al-Mai'dah is the last surah
(chapter) revealed to the Holy Prophet, and this verse is one of the
last verses of this surah. In other words it was revealed when the Holy
Prophet had already conveyed all other injunctions and teachings of
Islam during his 13 years' stay in Makkah and 10 years' stay in Medina
as the Prophet. This verse was among the last instructions of Islam. Now
the Shi'ah ask what that instruction could be which was so important
that if it was not conveyed all that the Holy Prophet did in the past
would become void.

You cannot indicate any subject connected with the last years of the
Holy Prophet's life which may be so important. But we say that it is the
question of Imamat, which is so important that if Imamat is lost,
nothing remains. Without Imamat the whole structure of Islam would
crumble down. Moreover, the Shi'ah cite the reports and the traditions
of the Sunnis themselves in support of their claim that this verse was
revealed in connection with the Ghadir Khum event.

In Surah al-Ma'idah itself there is another verse which runs as follows:
***"This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My favour
to you and have chosen Islam for you as religion."*** (Surah al-Ma'idah,
5:3)

This verse shows that on that day something happened, which was so
important that it perfected religion, completed Allah's Favour to
mankind and without which Islam could not be as Allah wanted it to be.
The Shi'ah argue that the stringent tone of the verse shows that the
thing to which it refers is so important that the very existence of
Islam as a true religion depends on it. Now the question is what that
thing can be. The Shi'ah say that they can point out that thing; whereas
others cannot. Furthermore, there are reports which confirm that this
verse was revealed in connection with the question of Imamat. We have
put forward these three verses as the gist of the Shi'ah arguments.


