Chapter 33: Imamat and Expounding of Religion
=============================================

We have already discussed the different aspects of Imamat, in the course
of which we pointed out that in order to be able to discuss the question
of Imamat in its true perspective, it was necessary to understand those
aspects very clearly. One aspect of Imamat, as we have already said, is
the question of government. Following the demise of the Holy Prophet
whose duty was it to choose his successor? Was it the responsibility of
the people themselves to elect their ruler from among themselves or did
the Holy Prophet himself designate his successor? Lately this question
has been put in such a way that at first sight the Sunni point of view
in this respect appears to be more normal and natural.

Usually the question is set forth in this way: We want to see what form
of government has been suggested by Islam. Is it hereditary in which
every ruler designates his successor, and the people have no right to
intervene in the government affairs? Is it that the Holy Prophet
designated a particular person as his successor, that person designated
his successor and that successor again designated his successor, and
thus the constitution of government was to be based on designation and
nomination till the Day of Resurrection?

Naturally this process cannot be applicable exclusively to the Imams,
for according to Shi'ah belief the number of the Imams is confined to
twelve, and this number can neither be increased nor decreased.
According to this view the general rule in respect of the government
will boil down to this procedure. The Holy Prophet, who was the head of
the State also, was to appoint his successor and that successor also in
his turn was to appoint his successor and so on till the Day of
Resurrection. In this case if Islam dominated the whole world as it once
dominated the half of it and it so happened that the injunctions of
Islam were observed in all parts of the world, the same rule would be
operative whether there be one government in the world or several
governments.

According to this view, it was on the basis of the general rule that the
Head of the State should be a designated person, that the Holy Prophet
nominated Imam Ali as his successor. But in the light of this philosophy
it is not necessary at all that the Holy Prophet should have designated
Imam Ali on receiving a commandment from Allah, for only he and the
Imams, inspired and endowed with Divine knowledge through the Holy
Prophet, could receive such a Divine commandment, but that could not be
the case subsequently. Therefore if it is admitted that from the
viewpoint of Islam the government is to be based on the principle of
designation, it was not necessary for the Holy Prophet to nominate Imam
Ali by revelation.

He could appoint him at his personal discretion. The Imams also could
use their discretion similarly. On this basis Imam Ali's designation to
Khilafat was similar to the appointment of a Governor of Makkah or the
appointment of an Amirul Hajj. In such cases nobody says that the Holy
Prophet on receiving revelation appointed such and such person the
Governor of Makkah or, for example, sent Mu'az bin Jabal to Yemen for
the propagation of Islam. In contrast everybody admits that the Holy
Prophet was entrusted by Allah with the charge of the administration of
people, and so he was authorized to act according to his own discretion
in all matters in which he did not receive a revelation. In the case of
Imam Ali's designation to Khilafat also it may be said that this was the
Holy Prophet's personal decision.

If we advance the question of Imamat in such a simple way, it becomes a
question of worldly government and ceases to be the question of Imamat
that we are discussing. If this be the nature of the question, really
there is no need that Divine revelation should intervene in it. At the
most Divine revelation can tell the Prophet that it is his duty to
appoint as his successor whomsoever he deems fit, and that his successor
also has to choose his successor in the same way.

And so on till the Day of Resurrection. If Imamat simply means
government or rulership, then what the Sunnis say appears to be more
attractive than what the Shi'ah say, for the Sunnis hold that a ruler
has no right to choose the next ruler and that his successor should be
chosen in a democratic way by the people, especially by those who have
right to choose. But the question is not so simple. On the whole the
belief of the Shi'ah in the designation of Imam Ali and other Imams to
Khilafat is an offshoot of another question which is more basic.

Here an important question arises. The question is that the number of
the Imams was not more than twelve. As such who was supposed to take
charge of government after these twelve Imams. Let us suppose that Imam
Ali had become the ruler exactly in the manner he was designated by the
Holy Prophet and had been followed by Imam Hasan, then by Imam Husayn
and so on till the twelfth Imam. In this case on the basis of the
philosophy which we, the Shi'ites have, there would have been no reason
for the occultation of the present Imam. He also like his forefathers
would have had a short span of life and then would have passed away.

What would have happened after him. Could the number of the Imams be
increased? Take another question - the question of the normal government
in the present circumstances. Obviously the Imam of the Age cannot
assume the political leadership of the Muslims during his occultation.
Hence the question of political leadership and worldly government still
remains unsolved.

Government is a Branch of Imamat
--------------------------------

When the question of Imamat is discussed from the Shi'ah point of view,
we should not make a mistake of simplifying it and saying that Imamat
means administration of government, for it is such over-simplification
that creates the above-mentioned difficulties. if it is admitted that
Imamat means rulership, the question arises whether it is necessary that
a candidate for becoming the Head of the State should be the best of
all. Is it not enough that he should be the best only relatively. In
other words, is it not enough that he should be a good statesman, a good
administrator and an honest man, though he may be inferior to some
people in some other respects? Is it necessary that a ruler should be
infallible? What is the need of his being so?

Is it necessary that he should be offering night prayers? If so, why? Is
it necessary that he should be well-versed in the rules of Islamic law?
Cannot he consult others whenever necessary? A man who is relatively the
best should be good enough. All these questions arise when we consider
the problem from a narrow angle. It is a big mistake to think that
Imamat and rulership are identical. Some early scholars, especially some
scholastic theologians, made this mistake. Now-a-days again this mistake
has become too common. When one speaks of Imamat, at once rulership
comes to mind, while in fact the question of rulership is a minor part
of the question of Imamat, and these two questions must not be confused.
Then what is Imamat?

Imam is the Successor of the Holy Prophet in Expounding of Religion
-------------------------------------------------------------------

What is most important in connection with the question of Imamat is the
question as to who succeeded the Holy Prophet for the purpose of
explaining and expounding religion. There is no doubt that it was the
Holy Prophet alone who received revelation which was totally
discontinued with his passing away. Now the question is who after the
Holy Prophet was responsible for expounding celestial teachings which
admitted no personal opinion or private judgement.

Did this responsibility devolve on any one particular individual to whom
all queries could be referred as they were referred to the Holy Prophet,
whose answers were always perfectly right and about whom it could not be
suspected that he would even give an answer based on his personal
opinion or would ever make a mistake and rectify it later? About the
Holy Prophet we cannot say that any of his answers was ever wrong or
influenced by his personal whim. Such an allegation would mean not to
acknowledge his Prophethood. Once it is established that a particular
thing was said by the Holy Prophet, we cannot say that it is wrong or
that the Holy Prophet might have made a mistake. In contrast, in the
case of a legislator to whose edicts people adhere, it is possible to
say that in respect of such and such question he made a mistake or that
he did not pay full attention to that particular question or that he was
influenced by extraneous considerations. But it is not possible to say
so in respect of the Holy Prophet, just as we cannot say about any verse
of the Qurâ€™an that there is a mistake in it or that it has been affected
in any way by some selfish motive.

Was there any person after the Holy Prophet who could really be regarded
as a competent authority for all religious matters and who could expound
religious law in the same way as the Holy Prophet used to do? Did there
exist a perfect man with all these characteristics. We say that such a
man did actually exist. The only difference between him and the Holy
Prophet was that what the Holy Prophet said was based on direct
revelation from Allah and what the Imams said was based on what they
learned from the Holy Prophet, not in the sense that they were
instructed by him in the usual manner, but in the sense in which Imam
Ali said that the Holy Prophet had opened to him a door of knowledge
because of which a thousand other doors had been opened to him. We
cannot say how it happened just as we cannot explain revelation and say
how the Holy Prophet used to receive Divine knowledge direct from Allah.

We cannot say what kind of spiritual relationship existed between the
Holy Prophet and Imam Ali, but it is certain that the Holy Prophet
taught Imam Ali all realities fully and completely and that he did not
impart that knowledge to anyone else. Imam Ali says that he was with the
Holy Prophet in the cave of Hira when he heard a piteous sound as if
someone was wailing. He said to the Holy Prophet: *"Messenger of Allah,
I heard the Satan's wailing when revelation was descending on you."* He
said: *"Ali, you hear what I hear and you see what I see, but you are
not a Prophet".* (See Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 192)

Had there been somebody else in that place with Imam All, he would not
have heard that voice, because that hearing was not the catching of
sound waves reverberating in the space so that anybody having ears could
hear it. It was a different sort of perception.

The Tradition of Thaqalayn
--------------------------

In regard to Imamat the basic question is its spiritual aspect. The
Imams are spiritual leaders below the Prophet in ,rank. They know and
acknowledge Islam spiritually. They are infallible like the Prophet
himself. An Imam is an absolute authority on religion. There is no
question of any mistake or any intentional deviation in what he says.
That is what we mean by infallibility. In this connection the Shi'ah
declare that the Holy Prophet has said: *"I leave among you two heavy
trusts: the Book of Allah and my descendants."* (Sahih Muslim, Vol. VII,
p. 122)

In fact, it cannot be denied that the Holy Prophet has actually said so.
This is not a tradition reported by the Shi'ah only. In fact it has been
reported by more Sunni sources than the Shi'ah.

When we were staying at Qum a magazine named *Risalatut Taqrib* was
started by *Darut Taqrib* of Egypt. In one of its issues a Sunni scholar
quoted the tradition of Thaqalayn in these words: "I am leaving among
you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my Sunnah." The late
Ayatullah Burujardi, who was a scholar and divine in the real sense,
dealt with such questions very prudently. One of his pupils was Shaykh
Qawam Wishnawah'i, a nice man, much interested in studying books and
collecting references.

The Late Ayatullah asked him to trace the sources of this tradition in
the Sunni books in which this tradition might be found. Accordingly he
collected such references and cited more than 200 reliable Sunni books,
which had reported that the Holy Prophet had said: *"I am leaving among
you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my descendants."* It is
certain that the Holy Prophet expressed this point in this form on
numerous occasions and at several places.

But we cannot rule out the possibility of his having said on some
occasion that he was leaving two things: the Book of Allah and his
Sunnah. There is no inconsistency between the Holy Prophet's descendants
and his Sunnah, for his Sunnah is explained by his descendants only. It
is not that we can refer our problems either to the Holy Prophet's
descendants or to his Sunnah, for these two do not exist independently
of each other. It is the Holy Prophet's descendants who are the
expounders and custodians of his Sunnah. When the Holy Prophet mentions
his descendants along with the Book of Allah, he means to say that his
Sunnah is to be acquired from his descendants.

Furthermore, even the statement that the Holy Prophet has said: "I am
leaving among you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my
descendants", itself is a Sunnah. As such there is no inconsistency
between the Holy Prophet's Sunnah and his descendants. If at one place
and even that is not certain, the Holy Prophet has said: "I am leaving
among you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my Sunnah", at so many
other places he has used the other expression. If in one book this
tradition is written in one form, in two hundred other books it is
written in the other form.

Anyway, Shaykh Qawam prepared a treatise and sent it to Darut Taqrib of
Egypt. Darut Taqrib too was not unfair. It printed and published it.
Being authentic it could not be turned down. Nobody could raise any
objection against it. Had the late Ayatullah Burujardi done what others
usually do in such cases, he would have raised great hue and cry, would
have called the people of Darut Taqrib dishonest and would have accused
them of intriguing against the Prophet's chosen descendants.

The expounding of religion is the true spirit of Imamat. Islam is a
comprehensive and bright religion. But the question is whether the
teachings of Islam are limited to the principles and the general rules
mentioned in the Qur'an and further elaborated and explained in the Holy
Prophet's sayings. Was Islam only this much? There is no doubt that
Divine revelation ceased with the Holy Prophet's demise. Islam was
completed.

But had every article of Islam been enunciated by that time? Or were
there many questions of law which were in the custody of Imam Ali and
which were still to be made known to the people and explained either
gradually or on some suitable occasions? In the latter case this
tradition proves the infallibility of the Imams, for the Holy Prophet
has directed the Muslims to get their religion from two sources, the
Book of Allah and his descendants. As one of these sources, that is the
Qur'an is infallible and free from all errors, the other source must
also be infallible. It is impossible that the Holy Prophet would ask his
followers to acquire religion from a person who is liable to commit
mistakes.

It is here that the Shi'ah doctrine basically differs from that of the
Sunnis in respect of gathering and expounding religion. The Sunnis say
that just as revelation ceased with the passing away of the Holy
Prophet, similarly the authentic expounding of religion also has come to
an end. Now there is nothing except what is deduced and inferred from
the Qur'an and the Prophetic traditions.

Prohibition of Recording of Traditions
--------------------------------------

The Sunnis themselves have created a situation which has weakened their
case. Umar disallowed the writing of traditions (*Ahadith*). This is a
historical fact, not a story invented by any hostile Shi'ah. It is
admitted by the European Orientalists also who are neither the Shi'ah
nor the Sunnis. Even the most sympathetic Orientalists say that Umar
disallowed the writing of traditions because of his fear that tradition
would divert the attention of the people from the Qur'an, which he
wanted to be the sole source of law.

This is definitely a historical fact and not an allegation of the
Shi'ites. During the days of Umar nobody could venture to write a
Prophetic traditions and show his writing to others. Oral transmission
of traditions was of course allowed. This situation continued till the
time of Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz, who became Caliph in 99 A.H. and died in
101 A.H. He issued instructions that Prophetic traditions should be
collected and put down in writing. Thus he changed Umar's policy. It is
to be noted that immediately following Umar ibn Abdul Aziz's
instructions those who were so far transmitting Prophetic traditions
orally, undertook the work of writing them, but in the meanwhile a part
of them had already been lost.

We know that the rules of Islamic law mentioned in the Qur'an are very
brief. The Qur'an mostly mentions general rules only. For example, the
Qur'an lays great stress on prayers. But still all that it says about
them does not go beyond saying: ***"Establish prayers, prostrate and bow
down."*** Even it has not been explained how prayers are to be offered.
Similarly there are so many rites connected with pilgrimage.

The Holy Prophet personally observed them. Had not the Prophetic
traditions assumed the present practical form, the Muslims could not
know anything about them. But the question is what opportunities the
Holy Prophet had to enunciate all the Islamic injunctions. During his 13
years' stay in Makkah because of stern opposition and very tight
situation there, the number of those who were converted to Islam could
not probably exceed 400. People used to meet the Holy Prophet only
secretly. Some 70 families which constituted half or even more than half
of the total population of the Muslims, had to migrate to Ethiopia.

From this point of view Medina was a better place, but there the Holy
Prophet had so many other commitments. Even if he worked like a
whole-time teacher, during all these 23 years he did not have enough
time at his disposal to impart all the teachings of Islam, especially in
view of the fact that Islam is a complete code of human life
particularly in our present age.

Use of Analogy
--------------

As a result of what they hold in this connection, the Sunnis had to face
many practical difficulties in regard to the rules of Islamic law. They
came across questions about which nothing was mentioned in the Qur'an.
They checked the collections of traditions which they had, but there
also they did not find the answer. What to do then? To solve the problem
they resorted to analogy which means to extend on the basis of some
existing similarity the rule of a text to a case not provided for in the
Qurâ€™an and the Sunnah. For example we say that the law says so in that
case. As this case is some what similar to that, the same rule should
apply to this case also. Possibly, in that case the Holy Prophet gave
that particular order for such and such reason and as that reason exists
in this case also, the same order should apply to it also.

As may be seen, the analogical deduction is based on possibilities only.
The cases where Prophetic traditions were not available, were too many.
The world of Islam greatly extended during the Abbasid period. Many
countries were conquered. Consequently new problems arose everyday, the
solution of which was not found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. The result
was that analogical deduction became a regular practice. The Sunnis were
divided into two groups. The first group which included Ahmad ibn Hambal
and

Malik ibn Anas, looked at analogical deduction with suspicion. It is
said that Malik ibn Anas resorted to this process only in two cases. The
other group which included Abu Hanifah made use of analogy on a too wide
scale. Abu Hanifah used to say that the sayings attributed to the Holy
Prophet were not reliable. He declared that he found only fifteen
Prophetic traditions trustworthy. In all other cases he resorted to
analogical deduction. Shafi'i had a midway position. In some cases he
relied on Prophetic traditions and in others he applied analogy, with
the result that he produced a sort of hotchpotch code of law. It is said
that Abu Hanifah made so much use of analogy because he was of Irani
origin and the Iranians by nature tend to take much interest in mental
exercises, and because he lived in Iraq which was far away from Medina,
the centre of the traditionalists. Anyhow, he indulged too much in
analogy.

A Sunni writer says that one day Abu Hanifah went to a barber. His beard
had a mixture of black and grey hair but the number of the grey hair was
not very large. He asked the barber to pull out the grey hair. The
barber said: "If grey hair is pulled out, it tends to grow more
copiously." Abu Hanifah said: "Then pull out the black hair, for my
analogy says that in case grey hair grows copiously if it is pulled out,
the same thing should happen in the case of black hair also." But the
fact is that if there is any such rule, it applies to grey hair only,
not to black hair. Anyhow, Abu Hanifah made similar deductions in the
case of jurisprudence also.

Analogy From the Shi'ah Point of View
-------------------------------------

When we refer to the Shi'ah traditions we find that according to them
the need of analogy is felt only because of the wrong notion that the
Qur'an and the Sunnah are not enough to provide all the necessary rules
of law. The fact is that this notion is totally wrong. We have received
such a quantity of Prophetic traditions either directly or through the
chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet, that if we refer to the
principles laid down therein, we need not resort to analogical deduction
at all. That is the spirit of Imamat from religious point of view.

Islam is not merely a creed or a doctrine. It cannot be said that after
its ideology has been enunciated by its founder it only requires a
government to implement that ideology. It is a complete code and that
position of it must be kept in mind.

No Question of Election in the Presence of an Infallible Imam
-------------------------------------------------------------

From the viewpoint of leadership and rulership the position is that Imam
Ali the Holy Prophet's successor who is as infallible as the Prophet
himself and who has been designated by him to be his successor, cannot
be placed at par with other people. His position is exceptional like
that of the Prophet himself. Therefore in his case there is no room for
any election, consultation or any other such thing. In the case of the
Prophet nobody ever said that he was only the Messenger of Allah and the
people were at liberty to choose him or anybody else to be their ruler.
Everybody knew that as he was superhuman and had contact with the Divine
world, in his presence there could be no question of any election or
selection.

After the Holy Prophet also there was no room for any such thing, for he
had designated twelve successors to strengthen Islam during the next two
or three centuries and to expound it in a way free from every error. In
the presence of such persons capable of explaining all the injunctions
of Islam, there could be no question of any election etc. Is it
reasonable to choose someone else in the presence of a person absolutely
infallible and extremely competent and learned in every sense of the
word?

Furthermore, when Imam Ali had been appointed an Imam in the sense
mentioned by us, worldly leadership was also naturally due to him. In
fact the Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali to this assignment because
Imam Ali was an Imam and infallible. Anyhow, the case is different
during the occultation of the present Imam, for there exists no
infallible Imam free to exercise his worldly authority.

Similarly the case would have been different if the events of the early
period of Islam had not taken place and. Imam Ali had become Caliph
immediately after the Holy Prophet and had been succeeded by Imam Hasan,
then by Imam Husayn and so on till the times of the last Imam. In this
case there would have been no reason for occultation. After the demise
of the last infallible Imam the question of rulership would have assumed
a different shape. Then it could be asked how this question is to be
solved. Is it or is it not necessary that a jurist fulfilling all the
prerequisite conditions should be the ruler? Can people elect their
ruler?

As such from the very beginning we should not regard the question of
Imamat as a simple question of worldly government. It would be wrong to
ask at this stage whether Islam wants a government based on nomination
or a government based on election, and then to ask why the Shi'ah
advocate a particular form of government. The question is not so simple.
It must be admitted that in the presence of an infallible Imam, nobody
else can have a claim to the rulership in the same way as in the
presence of the Holy Prophet nobody else could be the ruler. The Holy
Prophet had appointed Imam Ali the Imam and as such it was his privilege
to be the ruler also. Besides, on several occasion the Holy Prophet made
it clear that Imam Ali was to succeed him as the ruler of the Muslims.
Anyhow, it is to be remembered that he made this nomination on the basis
that Imam Ali was the Imam after him.

Question of Spiritual Wilayat
-----------------------------

Earlier I mentioned a point in which I believe persona and consider it
to be a basic doctrine, though it might not be a cardinal principle of
Shi'ism. The question is what the special characteristics of the Holy
Prophet's position were? What was revealed to him, did it only confine
to Divine injunctions; and the fundamental principles and collateral
teachings of Islam? Was his knowledge confined to the realities of
Islam, or was any other information also communicated to him by Allah?
Is his excellence in regard to piety confined to his being infallible
and immune from all errors? Almost the same questions arise in respect
of the Imams also. Though they received no revelation from Allah, yet
they received thorough knowledge of Islam, through the Holy Prophet and
their knowledge was as free from the possibility of any error as that of
the Holy Prophet himself. As regards piety, the Imams are also
infallible.

Now the question is whether a Prophet or an Imam has besides these
features some other. special features or qualities also reposed in his
person. Besides religious knowledge what are the other branches of
knowledge with which he is endowed? Is it true that the reports about
the deeds performed by his Ummah (followers) are presented to the Holy
Prophet, and similar reports are also presented to each Imam during his
lifetime. Now the present Imam knows, hears and sees everything that
happens in the world. He watches the deeds not of the Shi'ites only but
of all people. In this respect there is no difference between a living
and a dead Imam. As stated earlier, when you visit the grave of Imam
Riza, and greet him, this action takes place as if you are calling on a
person living in this world. When you greet the Imam, he hears you and
looks at you. That is a manifestation of spiritual *Wilayat*.

We said earlier that the question of Wilayat is the point where
mysticism and Shi'ism meet each other. Their ideas in this respect are
very close. The mystics say that in every age there must exist a perfect
man whom they call the *qutb*. The Shi'ah hold that in every age there
must be an Imam and religious authority, who is a perfect man. As this
question is not a matter of dispute between the Shi'ah and the Sunnis,
we do not propose to dwell on it further at this stage. The disputed
points are two, namely Imamat in the sense of expounding religion and
Imamat in the sense of worldly leadership of the Muslims.

Importance of the Tradition of Thaqalayn
----------------------------------------

In regard to the question of Imamat, you should not ignore the
importance of this tradition. If by chance you have to face a Sunni
scholar or even a non-scholar, you should ask him whether the Holy
Prophet did or did not utter such a sentence. If he says that he did
not, you can put before him so many books of the Sunnis themselves. In
fact the Sunni scholars cannot, and generally do not, deny the existence
and veracity of such a tradition [^1].

Then say to him: "The Holy Prophet has designated the Qur'an as the
authority No. 1 and his 'descendants' as the authority No. 2. Now tell
us who these descendants are."

It may be noted that the Sunnis make no difference between the Holy
Prophet's descendants and others. They narrate Prophetic traditions more
often on the authority of other companions than on the authority of Imam
Ali. Even when they quote Imam Ali, they quote him as a transmitter of a
Prophet's tradition, not as an authority.

The Tradition of Ghadir
-----------------------

As we have said, he who is the authority for a religion must also be the
leader of that religion. Further, as far as leadership is concerned, the
Holy Prophet expressly designated Imam Ali to that. The tradition of
Ghadir is an instance of such a declaration. The Ghadir declaration was
made by the Holy Prophet on the occasion of the farewell pilgrimage at a
place called Ghadir al-Khum. This pilgrimage was the last Hajj performed
by the Holy Prophet. In all probability he did not perform more than one
Hajj after the conquest of Makkah, but he performed one 'Umrah before
his farewell Pilgrimage. On the occasion of the farewell Pilgrimage he
issued a general invitation to all the Muslims to attend that Hajj.

When all of them assembled, he delivered sermons on different occasions
in the Masjidul Haram, at Arafat, at Mina, outside Mina and at Ghadir
al-Khum. After mentioning some other points at Ghadir al-Khum he finally
mentioned a point which he greatly emphasized. In our opinion he made it
the last point because of this verse which he recited there: ***"0
Messenger! Make known that which has been revealed to you from your
Lord, for if you do it not, you will not have conveyed His message."***
(Surah al Ma'idah, 5:67)

The Holy Prophet mentioned many principles of Islam and collateral
matters in his sermons which he delivered at Arafat, Mina and Masjidul
Haram. On all these occasions he dealt with important matters. But at
Ghadir al-Khum he made an announcement about which he said that if he
did not make it, all that he had said would become void. Then he said:
*"Am I not closer to you than your own selves?"* He was referring to a
Qur'anic verse which says: ***"The Prophet is closer to the believers
than their own selves."*** (Surah al Ahzab, 33:6 )

He continued to say *"Do I not have more authority over you than you
yourselves have?"* All those who were present said: "Yes, Messenger of
Allah, you have." Then the Holy Prophet announced: *"This Ali is the
master (Maula) of him, whose master I am."*

A comprehensive summary of the question of Ghadir was published a few
years back at Mashhad in the form of a book by the Society for
Publication of Islamic Truths. I have not yet read this book, but those
friends of mine who have read it, say that it is a very good book, at
least worth reading.

It will require too much space if we attempt to study all the sources of
the tradition of Ghadir which we claim to be a *mutawatir* tradition or
the tradition of Thaqalayn, the sources of which Mir Hamid Husayn, the
author of the 'Abaqatul Anwar has traced in 400 pages of large size.
While dealing with the crux of the problem of Imamat, we would like to
make only a brief mention of the authorities on which the Shi'ah base
their claim in this regard, although the question might need rather a
more elaborate discussion.

[^1]: Some preachers have made a gross misuse of this tradition, for
they invariably use it as a prelude to narrating the misfortunes of the
Prophet's chosen descendants. One may think that when the Holy Prophet
said that he was leaving two things behind him: the Qur'an and his
descendants, what he meant was only that those two things were to be
held in high respect and were not to be insulted at all. In fact what
the Holy Prophet meant was that he was living behind two authorities to
which all religious and social questions were to be referred. In the
concluding part of this tradition the Holy Prophet has said: "So long as
you adhere to them, you will not go astray." So the question is that of
adherence. The Holy Prophet has declared his descendants equal with the
Qurâ€™an. He himself has said that the Qur'an was the major 'thaqal' and
his descendants the minor 'thaqal'.


