Chapter 34: Scholastic Study of Imamat
======================================

With a view to make clear the basis of the arguments which the Shi'ah
scholars advance in support of their conception of Imamat and to show
what others say in this respect, we deem it fit to reproduce with some
explanatory remarks a passage written by Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi. This
passage is very precise and the Shi'ah and the Sunni scholars alike have
been commenting on it since it was written.

You must have heard the name of a book, *Tajrid*, written by Khwaja
Nasiruddin. A part of this book deals with logic and is called the logic
of *Tajrid*. Another part of it deals with scholastic theology and
discusses such questions as Monotheism, Prophethood, Imamat, the
Hereafter etc. The tone of that section which discusses Monotheism is
rather philosophical for in this section Khwaja Nasiruddin has followed
the style of the philosophers. A commentary on both the parts of this
book has been written by Allama Hilli, whose name also must be familiar
to you. He was not only one of the greatest Shi'ah jurists but also one
of the greatest jurists of Islam. In logic, scholastic theology,
philosophy, mathematics etc, he was a pupil of Khwaja Nasiruddin.

He learned jurisprudence from Muhaqqiq Hilli, the author of *Sharaya*,
who was also one of the most distinguished Shi'ah jurists. Allama Hilli
and Khwaja Nasiruddin are counted among the most talented scholars.
Khwaja Nasiruddin is considered to be one of the world class
mathematicians also. Recently newspapers have announced that some parts
of the moon have been named after certain Iranian mathematicians, such
as Umar Khayyam, Ibn Sina and Khwaja Nasiruddin, who centuries ago
advanced some very sound theories about the moon. There is no doubt that
Allama Hilli is a genius in his own field, that is jurisprudence. He is
the author of many books, including one in two volumes named *Tazkiratul
Fuqaha*. When one studies this book, one marvels at the mastery of its
author.

Muhammad Qazwini says that when he was in Tehran he used to attend the
lectures of Mirza Ashtiyani. Later when he went to Europe, and had a
chance to meet several European scholars who were specialists in their
subjects, he felt that Mirza Ashtiyani was a specialist in the real
sense of the word.

The *Tazkiratul Fuqaha* is a book that deals not only with Shi'ah
jurisprudence, but in regard to every rule of law it also mentions the
opinion of the Sunni schools founded by the four Sunni Imams, namely Abu
Hanifah, Shafi'i, Malik and Ahmad bin Hambal, as well as the verdicts of
the most prominent jurists preceding the formation of these four Sunni
schools. Dealing with every question, it says that Abu Hanifah says so,
Shafi'i says so and we the Shi'ites hold such and such opinion.
Sometimes he refutes an opinion. Sometimes, for example, he says that
Shafi'i first said so and then changed his opinion and said so.

Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Qummi used to say that when it was decided to
publish the *Tazkirah*, an expert of every Sunni school was called.
These experts were astonished to find that Allama Hilli knew more than
what they themselves knew about the teachings of their schools. Such an
extraordinary man Allama Hilli was!

He compiled a commentary on the *Tajrid*. That part of it which deals
with logic is known as al *Jawharun Nazid*. It is one of the best books
on logic. The scholastic part of the book is named *Kashful Murad* and
is now known by the name of *Sharhut Tajrid*. Both the parts of Allama
Hilli's commentary on the *Tajrid* are quite brief in expression. That
is why they have again been commented upon subsequently and explanatory
notes written on them. Perhaps no book in the Muslim world ever
attracted so much attention of the scholars as the *Tajrid*. This book
has been refuted by some and supported by others.

No other book has been furnished with so many commentaries and
annotations as this book. The reason is that when Khwaja Nasiruddin
wants to describe a question from the Shi'ah point of view, he touches
it only briefly. In most cases he hurriedly refers to it and then passes
away. In the concluding part of the book he has described the question
of Imamat in a manner that has been approved by all Shi'ah scholars, and
hence from his description of the question it is easy to understand how
the Shi'ah scholars think about this subject.

The book which I have at my disposal at present is Mulla Ali Qushchi's
commentary on the Tajrid. Mulla Ali Qushchi is an eminent Sunni scholar.
Naturally he puts forward the Sunni point of view and in most cases
refutes that of Khwaja Nasiruddin. Thus in this book the Sunni view has
been reflected side by side with the view of Khwaja which of course is
the Shi'ah view.

Definition of Imamat
--------------------

The first thing to be mentioned about Imamat is its definition, about
which there is no difference of opinion. It is said that Imamat is the
general charge of the religious as well as the secular affairs.

Khwaja Nasiruddin uses a scholastic expression and says that the Imam is
a Divine favour (*Lutf*). What he means is that like Prophethood the
question of Imamat is also beyond human control. Hence an Imam cannot be
selected by a human decision. Like a Prophet he is to be appointed by
Divine ordinance. The only difference is that the Prophet has a direct
contact with Allah, whereas an Imam is appointed by the Prophet on
receiving Divine instructions.

Rational Argument of the Shi'ah
-------------------------------

In this connection Khwaja Nasiruddin does not put forward more than one
sentence. Anyhow the basis of the explanation given by the Shi'ah
scholars is the same as mentioned by us earlier. They first advance a
historical argument and say if Imam Ali's Imamat is proved, that of the
other Imams' can be based on the authority of a declaration made by the
preceding Imam. The Shi'ah scholars say that they know that Islam is the
final religion and that it would not be followed by any other religion.

It is the most comprehensive religion and a complete code of human life.
Then they put a question and ask whether the account of the Holy
Prophet's life shows that he got enough opportunity to impart all the
teachings of Islam to the people in general. When we study Islamic
history we find that during the 23 years of his Prophethood he did not
get such an opportunity. Although he did not miss any chance which he
could avail of and taught many things to the people, yet in view of his
special circumstances and his preoccupations in Makkah and Medina, it is
certain that a period of 23 years was not enough for him to pronounce
all the laws of Islam to all the people.

At the same time it was also not possible for him to give in complete
information about such a perfect religion. Therefore there must be one
or more persons among the companions of the Holy Prophet who might have
obtained complete knowledge of Islam from him and be in a position to
explain the teachings of Islam after his demise exactly in the same
manner as he himself would do, with the only difference that he received
Divine revelation direct, whereas they were to acquire this knowledge
through him.

The Shi'ah scholars say that the Sunnis do not acknowledge the existence
of any person to whom all questions regarding Islam could be referred,
which means that they regarded Islam as imperfect. That is the reason
why they had to resort to the theory of analogy, which they have put
forward because they say that in the case of the questions which have
not been provided for in the Sunnah, they have no alternative but to
compare one question with another and to depend on hypothetical
similarities for the purpose of deducing rules of law. The Shi'ah
naturally do not share such a view. Imam Ali in Nahjul Balagha has
denounced such a view and so have all other Imams.

Imam Ali says: *"Has Allah revealed an incomplete religion?"* (Sermon
18). Does it need private judgement to complete? All the Imams have
emphatically said that there is no question of Islam being imperfect and
incomplete, and therefore no rule of law can be based on a personal
opinion, a private judgement or conjecture.

There is a chapter in al-Kafi which is entitled: "There is nothing
Permitted or Forbidden that is not provided in the Qur'an or the
Sunnah". At least the general principles covering every rule of law,
have been provided. All that is to be done is to apply these principles
to the particular cases. That is what is meant by ijtihad from the
Shi'ah point of view. In other words, there is an adequate number of
general laws in Islam, and the mujtahid (jurist) has only to provide
details in their light. In contrast the theory of analogy implies that
the number of the general laws is inadequate and therefore rules of law
must be deduced on a hypothetical basis.

The Shi'ah scholars say that both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis admit that
during the 23 years of his Prophethood the Holy Prophet could not make
known to the people all the rules of Islam even in a general manner. The
Sunnis say that the Holy Prophet left the matter as it was and departed
this life. But the Shi'ah hold that it was not so. In order to complete
his mission he selected certain persons who were inviolable and made
known all the truths of Islam to the first one of them, namely Imam Ali.
All these persons were fully equipped and competent to answer any
question put to them. Imam Ali often said that he would answer any
question put to him regarding Islam.

Imam Means An Expert in Religious Matters
-----------------------------------------

Let us now explain this point in modern language. The Shi'ah scholars
say that those who deny the existence of Imams with all their
characteristics, in reality belittle Islam. An expert invariably
accompanies a technical equipment when it is sent somewhere. When a
country like America or the Soviet Union dispatches a technical
equipment like a phantom or a combat aircraft to a country the people of
which are not conversant with that equipment, it always sends some
experts also along with it.

Of course in the case of such simple arms as the textiles experts are
not required. Now what do you think about Islam which has come from
Allah? Do you consider it to be a simple thing for which no experts are
required or regard it as a complex equipment which when issued, is
always accompanied by technical experts who train people at the
receiving end till they become conversant with it.

An Imam means an expert in religious affairs - a real expert who does
not make a mistake and does not fall into any error. The Holy Prophet
brought Islam to the people. It was necessary that at least for some
time Divine experts should be present among the people to acquaint them
with it. The Holy Prophet appointed a competent person to undertake this
responsibility. The Shi'ah scholars call this appointment a Divine
favour, for it was beneficial for humanity. As humanity must proceed
towards Allah, His benevolence requires that He should show His favour
to it. Just as Prophethood is a Divine favour, similarly Imamat also is
a Divine favour. This may be called a rational proof of Imamat, a
cardinal principle of the Shi'ah creed.

Infallibility
-------------

Here the question of infallibility arises. The Shi'ah believe that an
Imam is the custodian and protector of Islamic law. It is through him
only that people can know Islam.[^1] The Shi'ah believe that an Imam is
as infallible as the Holy Prophet, whose infallibility is beyond all
doubts. If we know for certain that the Holy Prophet has made a
particular statement, we can never doubt its veracity. We can never say
that the Holy Prophet has made a mistake.

It is unimaginable that one sent by Allah for the guidance of the people
needing guidance would ever make a mistake or commit a sin. A Prophet
cannot disobey Allah knowingly and intentionally. For example, if Allah
wants a Prophet to convey a certain message to the people, the Prophet
cannot change it on the plea that it does not suit his personal
interest. To do so would be against the very nature of Prophethood. If
it is admitted that Imamat is something supplementary to Prophethood for
the purpose of expounding religion, then it becomes certain that the
existence of an Imam is a must, and that an Imam is infallible for the
same reason for which a Prophet is infallible. If somebody says that the
infallibility of an Imam is not so essential, because if an Imam makes a
mistake, it is possible that some other person brings the mistakes to
his notice, we would say that in that case that other person would again
require somebody else to keep a watch on him, and so on. At the final
end we would certainly need a protector of Islamic law who may be
infallible. Further, should an Imam do something wrong, it would be the
duty of others to guide him aright, while the people's duty is to follow
him, not to guide him. These two things are not consistent with each
other.

Divine Designation
------------------

The question of infallibility leads us to the question of Divine
designation. The Shi'ah scholars say that Imamat is a favour of Allah,
and as such it must exist. As this favour entails infallibility, an Imam
must necessarily be infallible and for this very reason should be
Divinely designated, for it is beyond the power of the people to
determine who is infallible. As the people cannot choose a Prophet, they
cannot choose an Imam

also. As a Prophet is appointed by Allah, similarly an Imam is also
appointed by Him. The only difference is that a Prophet is recognized by
means of the signs which he shows and the miracles which he works,
whereas an Imam is introduced by the Prophet. That is what we meant by
designation. An Imam is to be designated by the Prophet and not
appointed by the choice of the people. Thus the Shi'ah scholars have
advanced from the question of infallibility to that of designation. Now
the fourth step is the Imamat of Ali.

Khwaja Nasiruddin says that infallibility and designation are the two
characteristics which are applicable to Imam Ali only. There is no
difference of opinion about the fact that the Holy Prophet did not
designate any other person. It is not that we say that the Holy Prophet
designated Imam Ali and others say that he designated someone else. In
fact the question is whether he did or did not designate anybody. If he
did, the designated person can be none but Imam Ali.

All that we say is that the Holy Prophet must have designated someone to
be an Imam after him, and if so, he cannot have designated anyone else,
for no counter claim exists. The Sunnis deny the very designation. Even
the caliphs did not claim to have been designated by the Holy Prophet.
Their followers also make no such claim. Therefore this is not the point
at issue.

The same is true of infallibility. Neither the caliphs claimed to be
infallible, nor do their followers say that they were infallible. In
contrast, the caliphs expressly confessed that they made mistakes. As we
have already pointed out, according to the Sunni point of view the
question of Imamat is exclusively tantamount to that of the
administration of government. As such according to them the question of
infallibility does not arise.

The Sunnis believe that although the caliphs were not infallible and
made many mistakes, they were irreproachable to the humanly possible
extent and were quite fit to lead prayers. The Sunnis do not claim that
the caliphs held any position higher than this. They report, as affirmed
by Mulla Ali Qushchi, that Abu Bakr used to say that he had a Devil
which seized him occasionally. He asked the people to guide him aright
if they found him going astray. Umar on many occasions, some say on 70
occasions, admitted that he would have been ruined if there had not been
Ali. It is not a disputable point between the Shi'ah and the Sunnis that
he said so many a time. On numerous occasions it so happened that he
issued a wrong order and Imam Ali pointed out his mistake which he
admitted. As such neither the caliphs ever claimed that they were
infallible, nor do others claim that they were so.

If the question of Imamat is considered from this high level, that is
the level of Divine favour, infallibility and Divine ordination, nobody
other than Imam Ali can claim to be on this level. This is the
scholastic form of the question, and in this case we begin from the top.
We have said that as Prophethood is indispensable and at the same time a
Divine favour, so should be Imamat also. Now let us see whether in
actual practice also it is so, and whether the Holy Prophet has or has
not designated Imam Ali. For this purpose let us look into the texts.

In this connection there is one more point worth mentioning. The
question is why we should after all adopt a scholastic method and should
begin from the top. Why should we not begin from the bottom, and discuss
the position as it actually exists? The scholastic theologians begin
from the top and then gradually come down to the position as it exists
on the ground. But in this case the question arises what we have to do
with such points as to whether Imamat is a Divine favour, and if so, an
Imam should naturally be infallible and designated. These should
actually amount to prescribing a duty for Allah.

Therefore we should better go after what actually exists. If it is
proved that the Holy Prophet has made a designation, that is enough for
us. It is not necessary to prove rationally that Imamat is a Divine
favour and that an Imam must be infallible and designated. Let us see
what arguments the Shi'ah have in this connection. It may be noted in
this connection that the Sunnis either do not accept that such texts
exist or interpret them differently. In many cases they do not deny the
reports totally, but allege that they are isolated reports, not
continuous or *mutawatir*.

Prophetic Texts Relating to Imamat of Imam Ali
----------------------------------------------

Once the Holy Prophet addressing his companions said: *"Greet Ali and
address him as "Commander of the Faithful".* He said so on the occasion
of Ghadir, but somehow or other this sentence is reported separately
from the event of Ghadir. The Sunnis do not accept this report as
continuous one but the Shi'ah scholars have proved that it is so. The
*Tajrid* does not make any further comment on this tradition which it
describes as reliable though disconnected in its chain of transmission.
Mulla Ali Qushchi says that this tradition cannot be accepted as
continuous, and that it must be an isolated one, for it has been quoted
only by some, not all.

The books like the '*Abaqat* and *al-Ghadir* have concentrated their
efforts on proving that all the reports relating to Imam Ali's Imamat
are continuous and *mutawatir*. In these two books, especially in
*al-Ghadir* the transmitters of the tradition of Ghadir in every
generation till the 14th century have been enumerated. It names more
than 60 companions of the Holy Prophet who have reported this tradition.
It is interesting to note that all these names have been collected from
the Sunni books. Similarly this book mentions the transmitters of this
tradition from among the successors of the companions. All these
approximately belong to the first century. Then in the same way it names
the transmitters of this tradition in every generation and every
century.

A special feature of al-Ghadir is that it has cited literary sources
also in support of this tradition. While *'Abaqat* and other books have
only mentioned the names of those persons who transmitted it in each age
and century. The poets in every age reflect the main ideas current among
the people during that age. Had it been true that the event of Ghadir
was invented in the fourth century, it would not have been mentioned in
the verses composed by the poets of the first, the second and the third
centuries. In every century we find that the question of Ghadir is a
part of the literature of that century.

Then how can we deny this tradition from historical point of view? We
often go after men of letters to ascertain whether a subject existed
over history. If it is found that many men of letters have referred to
it in each century, it becomes certain that the idea has existed during
their times. The author of the *'Abaqat* has devoted a whole book to one
single tradition and has critically examined all its transmitters.
Seeing what a gorgeous bouquet he has arranged, one is filled with
wonder.

There is another tradition which the Holy Prophet is reported to have
pronounced addressing Imam Ali. He is reported to have said: *"You will
be the Caliph after me."*

Besides these two there are several other such traditions too.

*Sirah Ibn Hisham* is a book written in the second century. Ibn Hisham
himself probably belonged to the third century, but this book was
originally written by Ibn Ishaq, who lived in the second century. It was
later summarized by Ibn Hisham in whose authorship it has come down to
us. This book which is considered to be reliable by the Sunnis, recounts
two events which have not been mentioned by the *Tajrid*. Anyhow, the
events are relevant and as such we reproduce them here.

The Event of the Day of Warning
-------------------------------

One of these events relates to the Day of warning, a name taken from the
Qur'anic verse revealed in the early days of Islam: ***"Warn your close
relatives"*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara 26:214).

Till then the Holy Prophet had not begun to propagate Islam openly. As
we know, at that time Imam Ali was still a boy, and lived in the Holy
Prophet's house. That is itself an event. The Holy Prophet asked Imam
Ali to arrange some food and invite the descendants of Hashim and Abdul
Muttalib to it. Imam Ali prepared a meal of meat and arranged some milk
as a dessert. After the guests had taken food, the Holy Prophet said: "I
am a Prophet of Allah, raised by Him as such. If you accept what I say,
you will be happy in this world and the Hereafter." As soon as the Holy
Prophet's uncle, Abu Lahab heard these words, he was enraged, and said:
"Have you invited us to tell us all this nonsense?" Abu Lahab raised so
much hue and cry that the meeting ended in a fiasco.

The Holy Prophet asked Imam Ali to arrange another meeting. Imam Ali
himself says that the number of the persons who attended the second
meeting was more or less forty. The Prophet said to the audience:
*"Whosoever of you accepts my call first, he will be my legatee, vizir
and successor."* He made this announcement several times, but nobody
responded. At last Imam Ali rose from his place and accepted the offer.
The Holy Prophet said: *"You will be my legatee, vizir and caliph after
me."*

Meeting of the Head of a Tribe With the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------------------

This is another event found in the *Sirah Ibn Hisham*. It is still more
significant. The Holy Prophet was still in Makkah. The Quraysh were not
allowing him to propagate Islam. The situation was very tense. Anyhow,
during the sacred months [^2] the Quraysh stopped harassing the Holy
Prophet or at least did not harass him to the extent of inflicting any
bodily injury, although even during these months they did not allow him
to pursue any activity connected with the propagation of Islam. Anyhow
the Holy Prophet always took advantage of this temporary truce. He
called upon various tribes who assembled at the 'Ukaz fair and at
Arafat, (The pre-Islamic Arabs also performed Hajj, although they had
their own style of it.) and invited them to Islam. While the Holy
Prophet went round the tribes, Abu Lahab chased him, and contradicted
and belied him. The head of a tribe was very shrewd.

He talked with the Holy Prophet for a little while and they said to his
people: "Had this man been of my tribe, I would have devoured the Arabs
with his help." What he meant was that the Holy Prophet was so
multi-talented that with his help all the Arabs could be subdued. Then
that man turned to the Holy Prophet and said: "I and my people are ready
to have faith in you provided you give us your word to appoint me or one
of my people to be your successor." The Holy Prophet said: *"It is not
up to me to say who would succeed me. It is with Allah."* This is an
event mentioned in the books of the Sunnis.

The Tradition of Ghadir and Its Continuity
------------------------------------------

Another argument of the Shi'ah is the tradition of Ghadir. Khwaja
Nasiruddin says that the Tradition of Ghadir is *mutawatir*. *Mutawatir*
is a technical term. A tradition may either be *mutawatir* (continuous)
or *khabar wahid* (isolated). An isolated tradition does not mean that
it has been reported only by one person. It is a tradition which has not
been reported in a convincing way. It is immaterial whether it has been
reported by one person or by ten. For example, somebody says that he has
heard such and such report from the radio.

You think that he is right, but you still want to see what others say.
If the report is confirmed by someone else, you are a little more
convinced. When you see that many others say the same thing, you become
sure that there is no chance that all of them may be telling a lie. The
number of the reporters of a continuous tradition must be so large that
there should be no possibility of their conspiring. In the above example
it is possible that ten persons conspire to say that they have heard the
particular report from the radio. Even 200 persons may combine. But
there are cases in which there is no such possibility. For example, you
go to South Africa and find a person saying that the radio has broadcast
such and such report.

Then you go to East Africa and again find some persons reporting the
same thing. Then you go to West Africa and the same story is repeated.
In this case you cannot say that all these persons have conspired to
tell a lie. This is called *tawatur* or continuity. The Shi'ah claim
that the tradition (hadith) of Ghadir has been reported by so many
people that any conspiracy is out of question. For example in the case
of the tradition of Ghadir we cannot say that 40 companions of the Holy
Prophet had conspired to tell a lie, especially when we see that many of
them were hostile to Imam Ali, or at least were not friendly with him.

Had these reporters been of the type of Salman, Abuzar and Miqdad, who
dearly loved and followed Imam Ali, it would have been possible to
suspect that because of their excessive attachment to Imam Ali they
combined to invent a story. The people like Qushchi allege that this
tradition is an isolated report, but the Shi'ah say emphatically that it
is continuous. According to this tradition, the Holy Prophet addressing
the audience, said: *"Do I not have more authority over you than you
yourselves have?"*[^3] All said: "Yes, you have." Then he said: ***"This
Ali is the master of him, whose master I am".*** The Holy Prophet wanted
to affirm that Ali was as superior to others as he himself was.

There is another tradition, which is also continuous according to Khwaja
Nasiruddin, but Mulla Ali Qushchi says that it is isolated, although
even he does not deny its substance. Regarding this tradition also
scholars like Mir Hamid Husayn, the author of the '*Abaqat* and Allama
Amini, the author of al-Ghadir have paid much attention. Mir Hamid
Husayn has devoted one full book to it. This tradition is known as the
tradition of *Manzilat*. The Holy Prophet is reported to have said to
Imam Ali: *"In relation to me you occupy the same position as Harun
occupied in relation to Musa with the exception that there will be on
prophet after me."*

The Holy Prophet said that when he was proceeding for the Tabuk
operation, which was only a campaign, not a battle. It took place after
the Battle of Mu'tah, which was the last battle fought by the Arabs
against the Romans during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet. This battle
took place to the east of Medina. Istambul (Constantinople) was the
capital of the Eastern Roman Empire. Syria was also under the Romans.
Brisk preparations were going on there to launch an attack against
Medina. The Holy Prophet deemed it advisable to take troops up to the
border of the Romans and he successfully accomplished that mission.[^4]

The Holy Prophet, as the politicians put it, wanted to make a show of
his power. The Muslims went up to the Roman border and then came back.
In this expedition the Holy Prophet did not take Imam Ali with him. He
left Ali as his successor in Medina. The Shi'ah scholars say that this
action of the Holy Prophet shows that he knew that fighting was not
going to take place. Naturally Imam Ali did not like the idea of being
left behind. As he felt dejected, he said to the Holy Prophet: "Would
you not take me with you? Do you leave me here with the women and the
children?" The Holy Prophet said: *"Do you not like to occupy the same
position in relation to me as Harun occupied in relation to Musa, except
that there would be no prophet after me?"* The Holy Prophet meant to say
that what ever relationship Harun bore to Musa, Imam Ali bore to him
with the exception of Prophethood. Now let us refer to the Qur'an to
find out what relationship existed between Harun and Musa. We find that
the Qur’an reports that in the beginning of his mission Musa asked
Allah:

***"My Lord! Relieve my mind and ease my task for me; and elaborate my
tongue, so that they may understand my saying. Appoint for me a Vazir
from my folk, Harun, my brother. Strengthen my back with him. And let
him share my task, so that we glorify you much, and much remember
you."*** (Surah TaHa, 20:34)

The word *Vazir* is derived from the root, *Vizr* which means a burden
or a responsibility. A Vazir is the person who relieves the burden of
his master and shares his responsibility. Later this word, came into use
in the sense of the minister of a king.

Hence, Prophet Musa asked Allah to appoint a person to help him and
share his task. For this purpose he suggested the name of Harun.

At another place in the Qur'an we see that Prophet Musa says to Harun:
***"Harun, take my place among my people."*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:142 )

Thus we find that according to the Qur'an Harun was Musa's Vazir, his
chief supporter, his partner in his task and his successor among his
people.

That was the relationship between Prophet Musa and Harun and the same
should be the relationship between the Holy Prophet and Imam Ali. Had
the Holy Prophet not said, *"Except that there would be no prophet after
me"*, We could say that the Holy Prophet had some particular likeness in
mind, but when he excluded Prophethood, it became clear that this
relationship existed in all other fields (of course social, not
physical). It appears as if the Holy Prophet wanted to say to Imam Ali:
You occupy the same position in relation to me as Harun occupied in
relation to Musa in all Divinely appointed fields.

The answer which the Sunnis give to this argument is that they could
accept this tradition, if it had been continuous, but it is an isolated
one. But as we said earlier, the scholars like Mir Hamid Husayn have
proved in their books that this tradition is continuous.

Question and Answer
-------------------

**Question:** The impression which I have gathered from the foregoing
discussion is that there exists to a certain extent a frontier between
Imamat and the administration of government. You have (Ayatullah
Mutahhari) said that Imamat involves certain duties and functions, and
the administration of government is only one of them. I do not know what
the other duties are which do not imply administration in any way.

What so far we know of Islam shows that there is no frontier between
this world and the Hereafter or between this worldly and the next
worldly activities. The deeds relating to the Hereafter have a bearing
on this worldly life and the deeds relating to this world are meant to
improve and perfect social life and to help establishing a just system
of government. We see that the Qur’an puts forward as a model the life
of those whose devotional acts were directed to improving this worldly
life and establishing just administration. It attaches greatest
importance to Jihad.

We find that all the efforts and the life style of the Imams were
directed to regaining their right of rulership and administering the
government. In this respect there was no difference between those who
made open struggle and those who organized their campaign secretly in
their prison or their hiding places. I am not aware of any duties other
than the administration of government which can justify the institution
of Imamat, for it is the administration of government alone which can
justify all the activities relating to Imamat.

**Answer:** The question of frontier has been raised by you only. I
never used this word and I do not think that it is proper to use it. As
I have said the Shi'ah believe that the level of Imamat is higher than
that of the government, which is only one of its functions., Another
function which is of a higher level is the duty of an Imam to expound
and explain Islam. Furthermore, an Imam is the infallible authority on
religious laws.

We say that one of the functions of the Holy Prophet was the
administration of government. But the right to administer government was
not given to him by the people. It was a right given to him by Allah, by
virtue of his being superior to all other men. In other words the Holy
Prophet ruled because he was the expounder of the Divine laws and had a
spiritual contact with the hidden world. I never wanted to say that
there was a frontier between this world and the Hereafter, nor did I
mean to set apart the functions of an Imam and a ruler. I did not say
that an Imam looks after those affairs of the people which relate to the
Hereafter and a ruler looks after those affairs of the people which
relate to this world. If I had said so, your criticism would have been
justified. The Shi'ah have a theory. If it is proved, the question of
rulership, is automatically settled.

We believe that Imamat is next to Prophethood. As in the presence of a
Prophet, the question of the rulership of anybody else does not arise,
similarly in the presence of an Imam also this question does not arise.
The question of the form of government in the modern sense arises only
when we suppose that no Imam exists or when the Imam is in occultation
as the position is during our times. Otherwise in the presence of an
Imam of that level in which the Shi'ah believe, the position is quite
clear.

**Question:** Which of the two reports according to Sunnis is isolated,
the report relating to the Ghadir al-Khum or the report which you have
quoted and according to which the Holy Prophet has said: "Greet Ali; he
is your Amir"?

**Answer:** Perhaps even the Sunnis cannot deny the continuity of that
part of the tradition of Ghadir which says: *"Ali is the master of him
whose master I am"*, although Mulla Ali Qushchi says that even this part
is an isolated report.

Anyhow it has been reported by so many traditionalists that it is not
possible to deny it.[^5] A very large number of persons have even
reported the first part of this tradition, which says: *"Do I not have
more authority over you than you yourselves have."* The Shi'ah believe
this part of the tradition also to be continuous. But as far as the
other tradition: *"Greet Ali and address him as the Commander of the
Faithful"* , is concerned, the Sunnis do not at all admit that it is a
continuous report. Perhaps we also cannot prove that it is continuous.
Anyhow that makes no difference. From our point of view the continuity
of the following tradition, which is of basic importance, is obvious:
The Holy Prophet said: *'Do I not have more authority over you than you
yourselves have?* The people said: "Yes, you have." Then the Holy
Prophet said: *"This Ali is the master of him, whose master I am. My
God! be friendly to him who is friendly to Ali and be hostile to him who
is hostile to Ali."*

Furthermore, the Sunni scholars are not unanimous as to whether this
tradition is continuous or isolated. Some say it is isolated and others
admit that it is continuous, but say that it does not mean what the
Shi'ah claim. The Holy Prophet has only said: "Whoever is my friend, let
him be Ali's friend also." We say that it does not make sense that the
Holy Prophet assembled people at Ghadir al-Khum only to ask them to make
friends with Imam Ali, especially in view of the fact that he also
added: "Do I not have more authority over you than you yourselves have."
It also may be noted that the word *Mawla* is not used in the sense of
friend.

**Question:** Was the verse: ***"This day have I perfected your religion
for you and completed My favour to you, and have chosen Islam for you as
religion"*** revealed after the event of Ghadir al-Khum?

**Answer:** No, it was revealed at Ghadir al-Khum.

[^1]: The Shi'ah attach great importance to the religious aspect of
Imamat. As we said earlier in our times Imamat who mostly considered to
be tantamount to the administration of government, but that was a wrong
notion. Imamat is mostly a religious question and the administration of
government is only a function which it involves. In a sense Imamat and
administration of government are two terms which in certain respects
overlap each other. But basically Imamat is one question and
administration of government, although a part of the functions which an
Imam should discharge, a different question. It is funny that during the
period of occultation we talk about the administration of government,
but keep quiet about the real significance of Imamat, which must not be
considered to be equivalent to the administration of government.
According to the terminology of the Shi'ah scholars an Imam is in charge
of religious as well as secular affairs. Being in charge of religious
affairs, he automatically holds the charge of worldly affairs also, just
like the Holy Prophet, who being the religious head, was the head of the
government too. If we suppose hypothetically that no Imam existed at any
time or if we know that the Imam is in occultation, in both these cases
no religious head would be present. Therefore in these cases the
question would of course arise how should be the head of the government.

[^2]: The months of Zil Qa'dah, Zil Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab are the
sacred months, during which fighting was kept suspended and vengeance
was not sought. Routes were safe during these months and coming and
going of persons and goods normal. An annual fair was also held at a
Place near Makkah named 'Ukaz.

[^3]: The Holy Prophet referred to the following verse, "The Prophet has
more authority over the believers than they themselves have." (Surah al
Ahzab 33:6) Being a Prophet of Allah, the Holy Prophet had authority
over the life, property and everything of the people. He had more
authority over the people than the people themselves had. Of course he
never exercised this authority for his own selfish ends. Allah appointed
him the representative of the whole Muslim society and as such he had
authority over the life and property of the Muslims on behalf of Muslim
society as a whole.

[^4]: Last year we had a chance to go to Khayber. Till then we had no
idea how far Khayber and Tabuk were from Medina by the direct route via
Shusa. The whole distance was found to be exactly 600 kilometers. By the
ancient routes the distance might have been greater. The distance
between Medina and Khayber is 360 kilometers. We were really astonished
by the courage and resolution of the Muslims who traversed this long
distance with the poor means available to them at that time.

[^5]: The reason why it has been reported by a very large number of
transmitters is that at that time the sayings of the Holy Prophet were
only remembered and not written. Naturally the traditions containing
Imam Ali's name could be remembered by more people than any other
traditions.


