Part 8: Eternal Life
====================

Life of the Next World
----------------------

The principle of belief in the eternal life of the next world is one of
the important points of Islamic conception of cosmos and a fundamental
tenet of Islam. A belief in the next world is an essential condition of
being a Muslim and anyone who denies that is not a Muslim.

Next to the confession of monotheism, this is the most important
doctrine preached by all the Prophets without any exception. The
scholastic theologians of Islam call it the doctrine of the
Resurrection.

In the Holy Qur’an we come across hundreds of verses, which in some way
or other deal with the Day of Judgement, the life after death, the
resurrection of the dead, the great account, the deed-sheets, the
heaven, the hell, the eternality of the next world and other questions
relating to the world after death. In 12 verses a belief in the Last Day
has been formally mentioned next to the belief in Allah.

The Holy Qur'an has used different expressions to denote the Day of
Resurrection. Each one of these expressions is full of gnostic
significance. The Last Day is one of them. By using this expression the
Holy Qur’an wants to draw our attention to two points:

i. That human life, and for that matter the entire length of time of the
existence of the world, is divided into two periods, each of which may
be called a day. The First Day (the period of the duration of this
world) will come to an end, but the Last Day (the period of the duration
of the next world) is endless. The Qur'an has called this world life the
first and the next world life the last. (Vide Surah al-Layl, 92:13 and
az-Zuha, 93:4)

ii. That even now when we are passing through the first period and have
not reached the second period and the second day, our success during
this day as well as that day depends on our faith, which draws our
attention to good deeds and their reaction. We must understand that like
us our thoughts, words, deeds and habits also, from the slightest to the
biggest, have the first day and the last day. It is not that our words
and deeds vanish and are obliterated during the first day. They continue
to exist and will have to be accounted for on the Day of Judgement.
Therefore we must do our best to put right ourselves, our actions and
our intentions, and abstain from bad thoughts and evil deeds. Thus we
should always step forward on the way of righteousness and good
behaviour, for on our faith depends our bliss on that day. It is man's
conduct in this world that makes his life happy or miserable in the
next. That is why the Qur'an regards the belief in the next world or the
Last Day absolutely necessary for man's prosperity.

Source of Belief in the Life of the Next World
----------------------------------------------

The chief source of belief in the eternal life of the next world is the
Divine revelation conveyed to mankind through the Prophets.

Following his recognition of Allah, belief in the veracity of the
Prophets and knowing for certain that what the Prophets convey as
revelation has really come from Allah and is therefore true, man comes
to believe in the Day of Resurrection and the eternal life of the next
world. This doctrine has been described by the Prophets as the most
important doctrine next to Monotheism.

As such, the degree of the faith a person has in the life of the next
world depends, on the one hand, on the degree of his faith in
Prophethood and the veracity of the Prophets, and on the other, on the
degree of the correctness and rationality of his conception of the
Hereafter, and its being free from vulgar and absurd ideas.

In addition to the Divine revelation conveyed by the Prophets, there are
some other methods of acquiring belief in the Hereafter. Man through his
intellectual and scientific efforts can get to, at least, some strong
indications which support what the Prophets say about the next world.
These methods are as under:

i. Through knowing Allah;

ii. Through knowing the World;

iii. Through knowing the spirit and mentality of man.

For the present we do not propose to enter into the discussion of these
methods which requires lengthy philosophical and scientific arguments.
We intend to confine our attention to considering the method of
Prophethood and revelation only. But as the Qur'an itself has in some
verses expressly mentioned these methods and in some other verses hinted
at them, we will refer to them in a subsequent section under the
heading, the Arguments of the Qur’an in Respect of the Next world. So
that the question of eternal life in the next world may become clear
from the viewpoint of Islam, it is necessary to consider the following
questions:

i. Nature of death,

ii. Life after death,

iii. Purgatory or Barzakh,

iv. Resurrection,

v. Connection of this worldly life with the life after death, Eternal
existence of human deeds in a corporeal form,

vii. Common and distinguishing features of the life of this world and
the life of the next world, Arguments of the Qur’an in respect of the
next world.

Nature of Death
---------------

What is death? Is it destruction, annihilation, and non-existence or is
it a change, a development and a shifting from one world to another?

This is a question which has always engaged man's attention. Every one
is keen either to find out an answer to it direct or to accept an answer
already given.

By virtue of being Muslims we would like to draw the answer to this
question from the Holy Qur'an and have faith in what the Qur'an has said
in this respect.

The Qur'an has its own explanation regarding the nature of death. It has
used the word, *'tawaffi'* in this connection.

This word means to receive in full. In 14 verses the Qur'an has used
this expression. All these verses, show that from the Qur'anic point of
view death means gathering and receiving into custody. In other words
man at the time of his death gets into the custody of the Divine
authorities, who receive him in full. From this expression the following
points may be inferred:

(i) Death does not mean annihilation and obliteration. It is just a
shifting from one world to another world and from one stage of life to
another stage. Human life continues after death, though in a different
form.

(ii) What actually constitutes man and his self is not his body and his
physical and ancillary systems, which gradually decay and decompose in
this very world. What really constitutes his personality and ego is that
which has been described by the Qur'an as 'self' and occasionally as
soul.

(iii) Man's soul or his 'self' is the real constituent of his
personality. Man is immortal because his soul is immortal. His soul
rests and exists at a horizon above the horizon of matter and material
things. Although it is an outcome of the evolution of the essence of
natural phenomena which is transformed into the soul as the result of
its evolution, its horizon is changed and it becomes a thing of another
world which is extra-natural. With the death the soul shifts to a
different category and class, that is the class of soul. In other words
this extra-material reality is taken back and received into angelic
custody.

The verses which deal with the genesis and are not concerned with the
other worldly life, the Qur'an has advanced the

596

point that man is a reality belonging to an extra-material class. The
Qur’an in respect of Adam, the first man says: ***"I have breathed into
him of My spirit."*** (Surah al-Hijr 15:29).

The question of soul and its survival after death is one of the basic
teachings of Islam. One half of the undeniable teachings of Islam is
based on the doctrine that soul is independent of the body and that it
continues to exist after death. All real human values are based on this
truth, without which they will be nothing more than a figment of
imagination.

All the verses that speak of life immediately after death, a few
examples of which we propose to quote, prove that the soul is a reality
independent of the body and that it continues to exist even when the
body has been annihilated.

Some people think that from the viewpoint of the Qur’an there exists no
soul or spirit. The existence of man comes to an end with his death,
after which he neither possesses consciousness nor has he any feeling of
joy or pain. At the time of Resurrection man will get a new life and it
is at that time alone that he will rediscover himself and the world. But
this theory is totally belied by the verses which mention life
immediately following death.

The exponents of this theory think that those who believe in the
existence of soul or spirit base their claim on the verse: "Say: The
spirit is by command of my Lord." (Surah Bani Israil, 17:55). They say
that although the word, *'ruh'* has been repeatedly mentioned in the
Qur’an, yet it means something different from what is called soul. In
this verse also it signifies the same thing as meant in other verses.

These people do not know that those who believe in the existence of soul
do not base their argument on this verse. There are about 20 other
verses, in which soul has been mentioned either absolutely or in the
form of a possessive case, an adjectival phase etc. such as Our spirit,
My spirit, holy spirit, a spirit by Our Command. Concerning man it has
been said: ***And I breathed into him of My spirit***. This expression
shows that from the viewpoint of the Qur'an there exists a reality
superior to the angels and the men and it is this reality which is
called the spirit. As a blessing of Allah the angels and the men have
this reality described as "by My Command". The verse, I breathed into
him of My spirit along with other verses shows that the spirit of man
has an extraordinary reality.

Not only many verses of the Qur'an confirm the independent existence of
human soul, but this view is also corroborated by numerous reports of
uninterrupted chain of transmission in the books of Ahadith as well as
by many passages in Nahjul Balaghah (See: Peak of Eloquence, I.S.P.
1984) and the supplications of the holy Imams.

The fact is that the denial of the existence of soul is a filthy Western
idea inspired by the materialism of the West. Unfortunately some
well-intentioned followers of the Qur’an have also adopted it.

Now we quote by the way of examples, three out of the four verses in
which the word *'tawaffi'* (to gather or receive in full) has been used
in connection with death. In some of these verses such actions have been
attributed to the people immediately after their death as are performed
by living persons (such as speaking, wishing and demanding).

(i) ***"As for those whom the angels took (in death) while they wronged
themselves, the angels said to them: In what were you engaged? They
said: We were oppressed in the land. The angels said: Was not Allah's
earth spacious so that you would have migrated therein? The dwelling of
such people will be Hell fire, a terrible destination."*** (Surah An
Nisa', 4:97)

This verse is in respect of those people who succumb to the pressure of
their circumstances because they live in an unfavourable environment
controlled by their opponents. Their excuse is that their environment
being unfavourable to them, they cannot do anything. Instead of trying
to bring about a change in their atmosphere and if that was not
possible, shift to a better environment, they continue to live in the
same corrupt environment and submerge themselves in its quagmire. After
extracting their souls the angels of Allah talk to them and say that
their plea was unsatisfactory, for they failed to at least emigrate to
another environment. The angels remind them that they themselves are
responsible for their acts of omission and commision.

The Holy Qur'an tells us in this verse that helplessness in a certain
place cannot be a valid excuse unless the way of emigration from it to
another place is also closed.

As we see, in this verse death, which is apparently annihilation and
termination, has been expressed by the word, *tawaffi* which signifies
receiving into custody. Further, this verse reports of a dialogue
between the angels and a man after his death. Should the reality of man
not continue after his death and should his reality become merely his
insensitive and unconscious body, evidently this dialogue would be
meaningless. This verse makes it clear that man after leaving this world
and this life, can talk with the invisible creatures known as the
angels, although with a different set of eyes, ears and tongue.

(ii) And they say: ***"When we are lost in the earth, how can we then be
recreated? In fact, they have no faith in the Day of Judgement.
Muhammad, say: 'The angel of death who has charge concerning you, will
cause you to die and afterward to your Lord you will be returned."***
(Surah as-Sajdah, 32 : 10)

In this verse the Holy Qur'an removes the doubt of those who denied the
Hereafter. They asked how they could be raised again when following
their death every particle of them would have been totally decomposed
and destroyed.

The Qur'an clearly says that the doubt expressed by them is a mere
pretext to conceal their obstinacy. Anyhow, replying to their question
the Qur'an says that contrary to what they assert, their real
personality and their real 'self' are not the things which, as they
allege, are lost. Actually they with their entire personality are
gathered by the angel of death.

Those who raised this doubt meant by being lost in the earth that when
all the parts of their body would have been scattered and every particle
of their body would have been decomposed, how would it be possible to
recreate and revive it?

The same doubt has been mentioned in some other verses also and there a
different answer has been given to this question. There it has been
pointed out that the dead body is lost from the viewpoint of man only.
No doubt it is impossible for a human being to recollect all its
particles, but for Allah Who is Omnipotent and Omniscient, it is not
difficult to do so.

In the previous verse the argument of those who deny Resurrection was
based on the impossibility of the recollection of the particles of the
dead bodies. But here their argument is different and that is why it has
been answered differently. Here it has been argued that with the loss of
the particles of his body, the real personality of man is also lost and
no question of 'I' or 'We' is left. The Qur'an says that contrary to
what they think, the real personality of man is never lost, and hence
there is no need of finding it again. On the contrary man as well as his
personality are gathered by the angels at the time of his death.

The following verse also expressly mentions the continuation of the real
personality of man (his soul) after his death, although his body ceases
to exist then:

(iii) ***"Allah receives man's souls at the time of their death. Their
souls do not die when they are sleeping. During people's sleep He
withholds those souls which He has decreed to die and releases the
others for an appointed time. In this, in fact, there is an evidence (of
truth) for the thoughtful people."*** (Surah az Zumar, 39 : 42)

This verse describes the similarity of sleep and death, and inter alia
the similarity of waking and resurrection. Sleep is a slight and weak
form of death and death is an intense and strong form of sleep. In both
these cases the human soul shifts from one state of life to another. The
difference is that in the case of sleep man usually does not notice the
change and when he wakes up he does not realize that he has actually
returned from some journey. In contrast in the case of death everything
becomes clear to him.

It may be gathered from all these three verses put together that from
the Qur'anic point of view, the nature of death is not annihilation,
termination and non-existence. It is only shifting from one state of
life to another.

Incidentally the last verse throws light on the viewpoint of the Qur'an
about the nature of sleep also. Although physically sleep is the
suspension of certain natural faculties, from spiritual point of view it
is an escape to the kingdom of heaven. Like the question of death, the
question of sleep is also one of those things the true nature of which
is not fully known. All that is known in this connection is merely a
part of the physical developments that take place in the physical
domain.

After Death
-----------

Does man immediately after death pass direct to the stage of
resurrection and is his case finally decided then and there? Or does he
during the period between death and resurrection pass through a special
world to be resurrected only on the Day of Resurrection? We know that it
is known to Allah only when the Day of Resurrection will arrive. Even
the Prophets have expressed their unawareness in that respect.

It is gathered from the Qur'an and numerous reliable reports which have
come down to us from the Holy Prophet and the Imams, that no one reaches
the stage of Resurrection immediately after death, because that stage
will be accompanied by so many upheavals and revolutionary changes in
everything known to us, such as the mountains, the oceans, the moon, the
sun, the stars and the galaxies. At that time nothing will be left
intact. Further, at the time of Resurrection all men of the past and the
present will be gathered together. But we see that the world is still
intact and probably will remain so for another billions of years.
Meanwhile innumerable human beings are still to be born.

Similarly it is gathered from the foregoing and so many other verses of
the Qur’an that no one during the period between death and Resurrection
shall remain motionless and unconscious. In other words, man shall not
be in a torpid state, feeling neither pleasure or joy nor grief or pain.
Immediately after his death man enters a new stage of life, in which he
feels everything. Certain things give him pleasure and certain other
things give him pain. Anyhow, his pleasure and pain are related to his
conduct in this world only. This stage will continue till the
Resurrection takes place. At that time so many upheavals will overtake
the whole world in a moment that from the farthest stars to our earth
every thing will be revolutionized. With this that world which is the
intermediary stage between this world and the Resurrection will come to
an end.

Thus from the viewpoint of the Qur'an the post-death world has two
stages or, to be more exact, after his death man passes through two
worlds. The world which will come to an end like the present world is
called the *barzakh* or purgatory. The other is the post-resurrection
world which shall never come to an end. Now let us briefly discuss these
two worlds.

Barzakh or Purgatory
--------------------

A thing which lies between two other things as a barrier and separates
them is called barzakh. The Qur'an has used this word to indicate the
life between death and the Resurrection. The Qur'an says:

***"Until, when death comes to one of them, he says: My Lord, send me
back, so that I may do some good I did not do (in the world). But nay!
These are mere words which he utters and behind them is a barzakh until
the day of their Resurrection."*** (Surah al Mu'minun 23:100)

This is the only verse that calls the interval between death and
resurrection the *barzakh*. The Muslim scholars have borrowed this word
from here and named the world between death and resurrection the
barzakh.

About the continuity of life after death this verse says only that men
after their death repent and request their return to the world, but
their request is turned down. This verse shows specifically that man
after his death has a sort of life. That is why he asks for being sent
back to the earthly world, although his request is not accepted.

About the continuity of life after death this verse says only that men
after their death repent and request their return to the world, but
their request is turned down. This verse shows specifically that man
after his death has a sort of life. That is why he asks for being sent
back to the earthly world, although his request is not accepted.

There are many verses which indicate that man during the period, between
his death and Resurrection is endowed with a sort of life in which he
speaks, has feelings of pleasure and pain and can enjoy a sort of happy
life. On the whole, there are about 15 verses in the Qur'an which in
some way or other speak of a life process, from which it may be gathered
that between the period of death and Resurrection man enjoys a
full-fledged life. These verses may be divided into several categories.

(i) There are verses which quote some conversations between the
righteous or the wicked men on the one hand and the angels on the other.
These conversations took place immediately after death. Such verses are
many. We have already cited the verse 97 of the surah an-Nisa' and the
verse 100 of the surah al-Mu'minun. (ii) There are some other verses
according to which the angels talk to the righteous and tell them to
enjoy the bounties of Allah from that time onward. They do not keep them
waiting for the Day of Resurrection. The following two verses contain
this point:

***"They will be received by the angels of mercy with the greetings:
Peace be on you! Enter the Garden as a reward for your good deeds."***
(Surah an-Nahl, 16 : 32)

It was said to him (after his death): Enter paradise. He said: *"Would
that my people knew that my Lord had pardoned me and made me of the
honoured ones."* (Surah Yasin, 36:26 - 27)

In the verses preceding to this verse a conversation of this believer
with his people was quoted. He called upon his people to follow the
Prophets who invited them towards monotheism in Antioch (Antakiyah). He
announced his faith and asked others to listen to him and follow his
example. But his people did not listen to him till he died, and went to
the other world. When he saw that he was pardoned by Allah and honoured
by Him he wished that his people who were still in the mundane world
knew how happy he was in the other world. Evidently all this happened
before Resurrection for after Resurrection none would be left on the
earth.

Incidentally it may be noted that for the righteous after their death
there are several paradises, not one single paradise. In the next world
they vary according to degree of their inmates' proximity to Allah. In
addition to these paradises, there are some other paradises, as reported
by the chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet which relate to the world
of Barzakh, not to the Day of Judgement. Hence the paradise mentioned in
the above quoted two verses should not give the wrong impression that it
relates to the Day of Judgement.

(iii) The third group of verses do not report any conversation between
the angels and the men. They only describe the happy life of the
righteous and the miserable life of the wicked during the period between
death and Resurrection. The following two verses belong to this
category:

(i) ***"Think not of those who have been slain in the way of Allah as
dead. Nay, they are living with their Lord and are being provided with
the means of living. They are jubilant because of that which Allah has
bestowed upon them of His bounty, and wish that those who have been left
behind join them."*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3: 169 - 170)

(ii) ***"A dreadful doom encompassed Firawn's folk. They will be exposed
to the Fire mornings and evenings and on the Day of Resurrection it will
be said: People of Firawn's folk suffer the most awful doom."*** (Surah
al-Mu'nim, 40:45-46)

This verse mentions two kinds of punishment in respect of the Fir'awn's
followers. The first is the pre-Resurrection punishment described as a
dreadful doom. Fir'awn's men are exposed to the Fire two times everyday.
The other punishment is the Post-Resurrection punishment described as
the most awful doom. On the Day of Judgement an order will be given to
throw these people into the Hell. Only in respect of the first
punishment the time of morning and evening has been specified.

Interpreting this verse Imam Ali has said that the first punishment is
meted out in the Barzakh where the same system of morning, evening, year
and month prevails as in this world. In contrast, the second punishment
relates to the post-Resurrection world where there is no morning,
evening, week, month or year.

In the reports which have come down to us from the Holy Prophet, Imam
Ali and other Imams in respect of the Barzakh, much stress has been laid
on the life of the believers and the sinners during their stay in the
Barzakh.

During the Battle of Badr a number of the Prominent leaders of Quraysh
were killed. When fighting was over, the Holy Prophet ordered their
bodies to be thrown into a well near Badr. Then the Holy Prophet himself
went to that well, and putting his head inside the well and addressing
the dead said: *"We have found that what Allah had promised to us has
come true. Have you also got what He had promised to you?"*

Some companions of the Holy Prophet said: "Prophet of Allah, do you talk
with those who have been slain and are dead? Do they hear what you say?"
The Holy Prophet said: "Now they hear better than you."

From this tradition and other similar traditions we can see that in
spite of the separation between the body and the soul with death, the
soul does not totally sever its relation with the body with which it was
united for years.

On the 10th Muharram Imam Husayn offered his morning prayers in
congregation. Then he turned to his companions and delivered a short
speech in which he said: *"Be calm and patient for a little while. Death
is nothing but a bridge by means of which you cross from the bank of
pain and grief to the bank of happiness, honour and vast paradise."*

There is a tradition which says that people are asleep. As soon as they
die, they wake up. That means that the degree of life after death is
higher than that before death. During sleep man's consciousness becomes
weak. It is a state between life and death. When man is awake his life
is more perfect. Similarly his life in the Barzakh is to some extent
more perfect than that in this world.

There are two points worth mentioning here:

(i) According to the reports from the Imams, in the Barzakh man is
interrogated about his faith and belief only. Other questions are left
to the Day of Resurrection.

(ii) The meritorious deeds performed by his relatives with the intention
that their reward should go to the dead person, make the dead person
happy and are to his advantage. If alms and charities whether in the
form of endowments or otherwise, are given with the intention that their
reward should go to one's departed father, mother, friend, teacher or
anyone else, these charities may be regarded as a gift to the deceased
person concerned. They make him blissful. The same is the case with the
invocation, asking for Allah's forgiveness, circumambulation of the
Ka'bah and the pilgrimage to Makkah and other Holy place if performed on
behalf of a dead person. It is possible for the children who have
displeased their parents during their lifetime to do something to please
them after their death. The other way round is also possible.

Resurrection
------------

The second stage of the eternal life is Resurrection which, unlike the
Barzakh, is not an individual affair but shall involve the entire
mankind and the whole world. With Resurrection the whole universe shall
enter a new stage and a new phase of life. The entire system will be
changed.

Where the Qur'an has told us of this great event, it has said that at
the time of the Resurrection the stars shall fade, the sun shall lose
its brilliance, the oceans shall become dry, everything shall go flat,
the mountains shall be obliterated and there shall be screams, yells and
violent convulsions all over the world followed by unprecedented
changes.

What is gathered from the Qur’an is that the whole world shall be
devastated and everything shall be obliterated. Then a new world shall
be born which shall be basically different from the existing world. The
new world shall have absolutely different laws and different systems,
and shall continue to exist for ever.

In the Holy Qur’an Resurrection has been given various names, each name
representing a certain characteristic of it. As it is the day of which
the whole mankind will be gathered together, it is called the Day of
Assemblage, the Day of Gathering and the Day of Meeting. As on that day
all secrets will be disclosed and all realities will be laid bare it is
called the day of unfolding and the day when the hidden thoughts will be
searched out. As it is the day that will last for ever, it is called the
day of eternity. As it is the day when men will be disillusioned and win
be repenting and regretting, it is called the day of grief and the day
of mutual disillusion. And as the Resurrection is the greatest event and
the biggest piece of news, it is called the Great Tidings.

Relation Between This Life and the Next
---------------------------------------

A very basic point to which the revealed Books have drawn our attention
is the relation between the life of these two worlds. The life of the
next world is inseparable from the life of this world. The seed of the
life after death is sown in this world by man himself, who determines in
this life what is going to happen to him in the next life.

Pure faith, correct belief, realistic conception of the world, excellent
human habits free from jealousy, cheating, malice, hatred and fraud, as
well as the good deeds conducive to the development of the individual
and society performed with sincerity of purpose, are the things which
ensure happy eternal life. In contrast, disbelief, wrong conceptions,
dirty habits, selfishness, self-importance, self-conceitedness, tyranny,
oppression, hypocrisy, taking usury, telling lies, calumny, back-biting,
fault-finding, creating rift, abstention from the worship of the Creator
and other similar qualities and habits are the things which make one's
life very miserable in the next world.

There is a beautiful saying of the Holy Prophet. He said: *"This world
is the cultivation field of the next world. As you sow in this world, so
you will reap in the next."*

AS it is not possible for anyone to sow barley and reap wheat, to sow
thorns and pluck flowers, or to sow colocynth and pick dates, similarly
it is also impossible for a man whose conduct is bad in this world, to
be happy and comfortable in the next.

Embodiment and Eternity of Human Deeds
--------------------------------------

It is gathered from the Holy Qur’an and the sayings of the Imams that
not only man continues to exist after his death, but his deeds and works
are also so preserved that they do not disappear. In his
post-Resurrection life man will see all his past deeds depicted and
embodied. Good deeds will have very beautiful, attractive and pleasing
forms. They will be a source of delight and enjoyment. The forms of the
evil deeds will be very ugly, repulsive and horrible. They will be a
source of pain, suffering and torture.

Here we confine ourselves to the mention of three verses of the Qur’an
and two sayings of the Holy Prophet in this connection:

(i) ***"On the Day when every soul will find itself confronted with all
that it has done of good and all that it has done of evil. Every soul
will long that there might be a mighty space between it and that
evil."*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3 : 30)

This verse expressly says that man will find before him the actual good
and bad deeds of his. The good deeds will be presented in pleasing and
attractive forms, but the forms in which bad deeds will appear will be
so repulsive and loathsome, that man would like to remove them from his
sight or to run away from them. But he would not be able to do either,
because in that world man's deeds are almost a part of his existence and
cannot be separated from him.

(ii) ***"They will find before them whatever they did in this world."***
(Surah al-Kahf, 18 : 49)

This verse says exactly the same thing as the previous one.

(iii) ***"That day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be
shown their deeds (in the display centre of the deeds). And whosoever
does an atom's weight of good will see it then, and whosoever does an
atom's weight of evil will see it then."*** (Surah Zilzal, 99:6-8)

Man is immortal and eternal, and so are his deeds and works. In the next
world he will be living with the deeds with which he has lived in this
world. Man's deeds are his good or bad assets. It depends on them
whether his everlasting life in the next world will be happy or
miserable.

Traditions (Ahadith)
--------------------

(i) Some Muslims who came from a distant place were received by the Holy
Prophet. In the course of their conversation with him they asked the
Holy Prophet to prescribe for them some useful rules of conduct. Among
other things the Holy Prophet counselled them to take immediate action
to choose good companions for the next world, where the living
companions of everybody would be the embodiments of his own deeds.

A man who has a belief in the eternal life of the next world is always
very particular about his thoughts, habits and actions, for he knows
that these things should not be looked upon as transient affairs. They
constitute his baggage which he sends to the next world in advance. He
will have to live with it.

Common and Uncommon Points of This Life and the Next
----------------------------------------------------

A point common to the life of this world and to the life of the next is
that both the lives are real and exist actually. In both the lives man
is conscious of himself and whatever

relates to him. In both the lives he feels pain and pleasure and is
happy and miserable. In both the lives his actions are governed by his
instincts, both animal and purely human. In both the lives he lives with
his body and all his limbs and organs. Anyhow, there are some basic
differences also.

In this world there is a system of procreation and reproduction as well
as that of childhood, youth and old age followed by death. These systems
do not exist in the next world. In this world it is necessary to work,
to sow seeds and prepare the ground. In the next world that which was
sown in this world will be reaped. This world is the place of doing work
and the next world is the place of drawing results and giving account.
In this world man can change his destiny by changing the course of his
actions. In the next world there is no such possibility. In this world
life is mixed with death. Every life is entwined with lifeless matter.

In addition to that, the dead comes out of the living and the living
comes out of the dead. The lifeless matter under certain conditions
turns into the living organism and the living organism turns into the
lifeless matter. But in that world pure life prevails. The matter of
that world is also living. The earth and the sky of that world are
living. The gardens and their fruits are living as much as man's own
embodied works. The fire and its chastisement are also living and
conscious. Here everything is governed by its causes and spatial and
temporal conditions. This world is that of motion and development. In
that world there exist only Divine Will and Divine sovereignty.

There man's perception and his consciousness are stronger and his
faculties of sight and hearing sharper than in this world. In other
words, there the curtains will be lifted and man will see the inner
truths far better. The Holy Qur’an says: ***"Now we have removed from
you your covering and piercing is your sight this day."*** (Surah Qaf,
55:22)

Here in this world man always had a feeling of being dejected, tired and
fed up, especially of monotony. It appears as if he has lost something
and is looking for it. Anything he comes across he takes it to be his
lost thing, and feels happy for a while. But soon he realizes that it is
not what he wanted. He again begins to feel dejected and goes after
something else. Man always wants something which he has not and is fed
up with that which he has.

But in the next world, where man will get what he has wanted from the
depth of his heart and what he has really missed, that is eternal life
in the proximity of Allah, there will be no question of being tired, fed
up or dejected. The Qur'an hints at this very point when it says:
***"They have no desire to be removed from there."*** (Surah al-Khaf,
18:108)

Unlike this world, in the next world people will not wish any change. In
spite of abiding in Paradise for ever, its inmates will never be bored.
As everything they may desire will be available to them, they will not
be troubled by any unsatisfied craving.

Arguments of the Qur’an
-----------------------

Although our belief in Resurrection is a corollary of our belief in the
Holy Qur’an and the teachings of the Prophets and hence it is not
necessary to advance any arguments or to produce any scientific evidence
in respect of it, yet in view of the fact that the Qur'an itself in
order to impress the point logically on our minds, has put forward some
arguments, we propose to mention them here briefly.

The arguments of the Qur’an consist of a series of replies to those who
denied Resurrection. Some of these replies have been given to show that
there is nothing wrong with the idea of Resurrection. They have been
given to those who claimed that Resurrection was impossible to take
place. Some other verses go a step further and say that even in this
world there exist certain phenomena resembling Resurrection and hence
there is no reason why it should be regarded as impossible or
improbable. Some verses go even further and declare that Resurrection is
an inevitable and natural result of the judicious scheme of the creation
of the universe. Thus these verses can be arranged into three groups. We
mention them here one by one.

I. The Holy Qur’an says: ***"He has coined for Us a similitude and
forgotten the fact of his creation, saying: 'Who will revive them bones
when they have rotten away.' Say: 'He will revive them who produced them
for the first time. He is the Knower of every creation."*** (Surah Yasin
36 : 78)

This verse is in reply to that disbeliever who came to the Holy Prophet
with a rotten bone in his hand. He pressed the bone and powdered it.
Then he scattered the powder in the air. Thereafter he asked: 'Who will
revive these scattered particles'. The Qur’an answers: 'He who created
the bones at the first. '

Sometimes man judges the things by the standard of his own capacity and
on this basis divides them into those that are possible and those that
are impossible. When he finds a thing to be beyond his power he declares
it to be impossible in itself. The Qur'an says that to accomplish a
thing may be impossible for man, but that cannot be impossible for the
Power that created life in the dead matter for the first time. For that
Power it is possible to revive the dead also.

II. The second group of the verses which mention some instances of the
revival is further divided into two sets of verses.

(i) There are verses which recount a particular event of the past when a
dead body was revived, like the verses which narrate the story of
Prophet Ibrahim, who said to Allah:

***"My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead. He said: 'Do you not
believe? 'Ibrahim said: 'Yes, but I ask in order that my heart be at
ease.' His Lord said: 'Take four of the birds, cut off their heads and
cut their bodies into pieces. Then place a part of them on each hill.
Then call those birds. You will see that the birds will come to life and
will rush to you."*** (Surah al Baqarah 2 : 260)

(ii) There are other verses which are not based on any supernatural
event. They cite the existing system known to everybody. The grass which
withers and dies during autumn and winter, again comes to life during
spring. As it is observed by everybody, the earth after being verdant
and full of life loses its vitality and vigour and dies, and when the
conditions change with the change of season, it once again comes to life
and the plants, the trees and the grass begin to thrive and blossom. A
time will come when the entire system of the world will shrivel and dry
up. The sun and the stars will be blown up. The whole world will die,
but not for ever. Everything will come to life again, though in a
different form and under different conditions.

At present we, human beings live on the earth. We see that in 365 days
the earth passes through a cycle of death and life. Normally we live up
to 50, 60 or 70 and sometime even up to 100 years or more. During this
period we see this cycle of life an death dozens of times. That is why
it causes us no surprise that the earth dies and again comes to life.
Suppose the duration of our life had been only a few months as is the
case with some insects, and suppose we had not known how to read and
were not aware of the annual revolution of the earth, we would not have
believed that the dead earth comes to life again, because we would not
have observed this phenomenon. Naturally for a mosquito that appears in
the spring and dies in the autumn and winter the conception of the
renewal of the life of a garden is unimaginable.

Can a worm living in a tree or a mosquito living in a garden, whose
entire world is that tree or that garden, imagine that that tree or that
garden is a subordinate part of a bigger system called farm, that farm
in its turn is a part of another system called district, that district
is a part of another system called province, that province is apart of
another system called country, that country is a part of another system
called the system of the earth and that the earth is a part of our solar
system?

How can we be sure that our solar system, the stars and the galaxies of
which we know are not a part of an overall bigger system? May be that
millions and billions years of the existence of the universe known to us
are equivalent to just a part or just a day of an overall season. May be
that the present season of life is to be followed by another season of
silence and dullness, and thereafter once again the entire system
including our solar system, the stars and the galaxies will acquire a
new lease of life in some other form.

The Prophets have told us on behalf of Allah of an all round destruction
and silence followed by a new life and the Resurrection of the dead
under a new system. As we are sure of their truthfulness, we believe
what they have said is true, including what they have said about the
universal renewal of life.

The Qur'an has cited an example of the system of life and death on the
face of the earth so that we may regard it as a small specimen of the
universal system of life and may not think that Resurrection is
improbable and inconsistent with the total system of creation.

The Qur'an says that Resurrection is a renewal of life and the renewal
of life is a thing of which a small specimen we see on the face of the
earth. The Holy Prophet has said:

*"When you see the spring, think much of Resurrection."* In other words
the spring is a specimen of Resurrection.

Rumi says:

"Spring time after the falling of leaves from the trees is a proof of
the Resurrection. Fire, air, clouds, water and sun dispel many
illusions. In the spring season many mysteries are unveiled. The earth
springs up what it has absorbed."

There are so many Qur'anic verses which cite the existing system of life
and death as an evidence:

***"Allah it is who sends the winds and they raise a cloud; then We lead
it to a dead land and revive therewith the earth after its death. Such
is the Resurrection."*** (Surah Fatir 35 : 9)

***"You see the earth barren, but when We send down water thereon, it
does thrill and swell and put forth every lovely kind of growth. That is
because only Allah is the Truth. He brings the dead to life. Surely He
is Able to do everything. And surely the Hour will come. There is no
doubt about that. And Allah will surely raise those who are in the
graves."*** (Surah al-Hajj 22:5-7)

There are many other verses which consider Resurrection a part of the
system of life and death prevailing in the universe. We see a small
specimen of Resurrection ourselves on the face of the earth. Here we
confine ourselves to quoting two verses only. These verses differ from
the verses of the first set in as much as these verses do not
exclusively rely on Allah's ability. They also cite a specimen
resembling Resurrection to show that in the perceptible world also
Allah's Power has been manifesting itself on the same pattern.

The third group of verses describe the Resurrection as inevitable.
Should there be no Resurrection, that would amount to something improper
on Allah's part. This point has been elaborated in two ways:

(i) On the Basis of Divine Justice - Allah bestows on every creation of
His what that creation deserves and what is befitting of that creation;

(ii) On the basis of Infinite Divine Wisdom - Allah has created
everything for a purpose. The Divine wisdom requires that everything
should be led to its appropriate perfection and target.

The Qur'an says that it would be a sort of injustice if there were no
Resurrection, eternal life, ever-lasting bliss and Divine retribution,
and injustice cannot be imputed to Allah because that would be contrary
to the principle of Divine justice. It also says that if there was no
eternal life the creation would be futile, and it is wrong to say that
Allah does anything in vain.

There are so many verses in which return to Allah and eternal life have
been described as inevitable and unfailing either because of Divine
justice or because of Divine wisdom.

Here we quote verses from two surahs of the Qur'an in which the argument
has been based either on Divine justice or Divine wisdom or both.

(i) The Holy Qur’an, after declaring that those who deviate from the
right path and forget the Day of Reckoning will be severely punished,
says:

***"We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between
them in vain. That is the opinion of those who disbelieve. And woe unto
those who disbelieve from the Fire. Shall We regard those who believe
and do good works as those who spread corruption in the earth or shall
we treat the pious as the wicked?"*** (Surah Sad, 38:27-28)

As we see, in the first one of these two verses the argument is based on
Divine wisdom and sensibility of the creation and in the second verse it
is based on Divine justice.

III. ***"Do those who commit evil deeds suppose that We shall make them
as those who believe and do good deeds, while their life and death is
just the same? Bad is their judgement! And Allah has created the heavens
and the earth with truth, and that everyone may be repaid what he has
earned. And they will not be wronged."*** (Surah al Jathiyah, 45:21 -
22)

In the first of these two verse a reference has been made to the
principle of justice and in the second to the principle of wisdom. Then
in the second verse also Divine justice has been mentioned once again
and described as the ultimate aim of the Resurrection.

**Explanation:** Here it is necessary to give an explanation as to how
the two principles of Divine justice and Divine wisdom necessitate
eternal life, and how it is that if we presume that the limited life of
this world is not going to be followed by an eternal life, the creation
of man cannot be justified, neither from the angle of Divine justice nor
from that of Divine wisdom. Let us begin with Divine justice.

**Divine Justice:** Justice in its wider sense means to render everyone
his due without any discrimination. As it is against justice not to give
anyone his due, it is also against justice to make a discrimination in
this regard and to give what is their due to some and not to give it to
some others.

It would be injustice if a teacher at the time of examination gives to
the students less marks than they deserve or gives to some of them as
many as they deserve but gives to some other less.

Justice is in a way concomitant with equality, which means to treat all
equally and not to believe in discrimination. Such an equality results
in justice, that is giving everyone as much as is his due. But equality
in giving in disregard of what is due and how much is due is tantamount
to injustice. Similarly equality in withholding is also contrary to
justice. It is also objectionable to deprive all of what is due to them
without any discrimination.

As such Divine justice means that the blessing of Allah is extended to
every existing thing in accordance with the degree of its potential
capacity and ability to receive it.

If any existing thing lacks some quality, that means that under the
existing conditions it has not the capacity of possessing it.

We may further say that it would have been contrary to Divine justice if
favours befitting their potential capacity were permanently withheld
from any existing things. Justice requires that favours appropriate to
and commensurate with their ability and merit should be conferred on all
existing things without any discrimination.

Among existing things man has been furnished with a specially high
degree of capacity and potentiality. Man is not motivated merely by his
animal instincts and propensities. Animals have only those instincts
which are related to their material life. On the other hand, man has, as
we explained earlier, certain higher instincts also, which are of the
level of eternity and not of this world.

Man has moral, scientific, aesthetic and religious motives. He
accomplishes so many things under the impact of these motives, and
sometimes even sacrifices his material and animal life for the sake of
his high human objectives.

It is man who sets up, in the words of the Qur'an, his system of
actions' on the basis of faith and good deeds, and aims at attaining
eternal life and Allah's good pleasure. The idea of eternity and a
desire to achieve it. His instincts push him in that direction.

All this indicates that man is capable of being eternal, and that his
soul is not material. This means that in this world man is like an
embryo. A foetus in the mother's womb is furnished with certain systems
and faculties, such as respiratory system, circulatory system, nervous
system, reproductive system, hearing system and the system of vision.
But all these systems are in keeping only with the requirements of the
post-natal world. They are not consistent with the temporary nine-month
life of the womb.

It is true that in this world also man is benefitted by the system of
faith and good deeds. But this benefit is of secondary importance.
Actually this system is tantamount to a seed which can grow and bear
fruit only in the happy eternal life. In other words, the real
significance of this system is only in relation with the life of the
other world.

Not only in the system of faith and good deeds man soars above nature
and scatters the seeds of supernatural relations but also in the
opposite system called by the Qur’an the system of disbelief and
wickedness his actions go outside the domain of natural calculations and
physical needs, and acquire spiritual and eternal aspect, although in a
devious way. Thus the disbelievers and the wicked also in a way become
fit to attain eternal life, but unfortunately their eternal life brings
to them pain and grief and in religious terms, consigns them to Hell.

If man does not move in the orbit of faith and good deeds, it is not
that he confines himself to the orbit of the animals, but he falls below
zero. In the words of the Qur'an such people are lower in rank and more
erroneous than the animals.

Should there be no eternal life, those who work under the system of
faith and good deeds and those who work under the opposite system will
be like the students some of whom did their duty well and some of whom
wasted their time in joking and gossip, but the teacher treated them all
alike and gave no marks to anyone of them. This whole-sale depriving
obviously is bad and against the principle of justice.

To explain this point in simpler terms it may be said that Allah has
called people to faith and piety. Some people have accepted this call
and modified their conduct, their way of thinking and their moral system
accordingly. Some others have not responded to the call and have taken
to evil-doing and corruption. But in this world we see no such system
wherein all good deeds be rewarded and all wicked men be punished.
Therefore there must be another world where the righteous and the wicked
could be retributed according to their deeds. Otherwise, there can be no
Divine justice.

**Divine Wisdom:** Our acts that is the acts of the human beings are of
two kinds:

(i) Frivolous Acts, which are of no real advantage to us and are
ineffectual in helping us attain the virtues latent in us; and

(ii) Wise and Rational Acts, which produce good results and help us
attain the befitting virtues.

The first kind of acts are futile and meaningless and the second kind of
acts are wise and judicious. As such our wise acts are those which lead
us to a perfection befitting us. Now what about the wise acts of Allah?
Are His wise acts also those which lead Him to perfection and His
frivolous acts those which do not lead Him to perfection? No, that is
not valid in the case of Allah, who is above all needs, wants and
imperfections.

Whatever He does is His favour, blessing and benevolence. He does not do
anything to meet any need of His or to gain anything for Himself. His
wise acts are those which lead any of His creation to a perfection
befitting it. A futile act may be imputed to Him only in the sense that
He may create something And may not lead it to a perfection befitting
it. Thus the conception of wisdom in respect of Allah is different from
that which applies to man.

Wisdom of man consists in his sagacity and his taking steps to advance
towards human perfection. Wisdom of Allah consists in leading His
creation to perfection befitting it or, in other words, creating things
on the basis of pushing them to a goal befitting them.

As wisdom in so far as it concerns man, means his doing things with a
view to achieve his own betterment, it is not necessary that there
should be any real relationship between what he does and the result that
he desires. In other words, it is not necessary that the desired result
should be a natural consequence of his actions or that it should be
regarded as the merit of his actions. For example, man makes so many
useful things of clay, wood, stone, metal, leather, wool, cotton etc.
and obtains sensible results.

For instance, he makes a chair, a house, a motor car or some cloth. But
a chair cannot be considered a merit of wood, nor a house a merit of
stones, bricks and mortar, nor a motor car of a number of different
metals used in its manufacture, for these stuffs themselves do not move
towards their final forms and shapes. Of course, the results which man
obtains from these products such as sitting on the chair, living in the
house, moving in the car or wearing the clothes may be regarded as his
merit or at least something useful to him.

In the case of Allah, on the other hand, there exists a real and natural
relationship between His action and the results which they produce. In
other words, the result of every action of His is really a merit of that
action. As we see, every seed and every grain in this world moves itself
to its goal and its best form.

Now the position is that this world and everything in it is unstable and
liable to a change. Any final shape of anything which we may take into
consideration is not final, and is liable to a change in its turn. In
other words, everything is temporary, transient and will come to an end.
All stages of nature are halting places on the way and none of them is
the final destination.

From here some people have got the idea that the creation has no
definite purpose or plan. The world is a caravan which is always on the
move, going from one stage to another. Obviously a journey can be
meaningful only if it has some destination in view. A journey can have
no meaning if all destinations are no more than halting places and there
is no possibility of finally reaching anywhere. As every existence in
the world is followed by its non-existence and every construction is
followed by its destruction, the whole system governing the world is
nothing but a bewilderment and a repetition of what has already been
repeated. Thus the whole system of life and existence is based on
frivolity.

The Qur'an's reply is that this specious argument would have been
correct if there had been this world alone, all births had ended in
death and the fate of all that grew and bloomed had been to dry up and
vanish. But such a view is short sighted and based on the presumption
that life is confined to this world, while the fact is that life is not
so confined. This world is the First Day. It will be followed by the
Last Day. As Imam Ali has put it, *this world is the abode of passing
and the next world will be the abode of staying.* It is the next world
which gives a meaning to the present world. It is the next world which
is the destination and which gives a meaning to the motion and the
hustle and bustle of this world.

Had not there been the next world, which is eternal, there would have
been no final destination, this world would have been a sort of
labyrinth, and the creation, in the words of the Qur'an, would have been
in vain, futile and a mere pastime. But the Prophets have come to remove
any doubts in this respect and to acquaint us with the truth, the
ignorance of which would have made the entire world meaningless in our
eyes. With the fixation of this idea of frivolity in our minds, our own
existence becomes meaningless and to no purpose. One effect of the
belief in the next world is that it delivers us from thinking that our
existence has no purpose and gives a meaning to ourselves, our thinking
and our life.


