Chapter 6: Sources of Thoughts In Islam
=======================================

The Holy Qur'an which has urged people to think, not only pointed out
the causes of wrong thinking, but has also specified the subjects which
are fit to be pondered on and which can be used as sources of knowledge
and information.

On the whole Islam is opposed to wasting energy on the question which
cannot be investigated or even if they can be, they are not beneficial
to man.

The Prophet of Islam has called vain the knowledge, the achieving of
which is of no use and the lacking of which causes no harm, on the other
hand, Islam has encouraged the knowledge of those subjects which are
useful and open to research.

The Holy Qur'an suggests three subjects for useful and beneficial
thinking: Nature, History, and Human Conscience.

I. Nature
---------

In many verses scattered throughout the Holy Qurâ€™an the natural objects
such as the earth, the sky, the stars, the sun, the moon, the clouds,
the rain, the movement of the wind, the sailing of boats on the sea, the
plants, the animals and every thing that man may perceive in his
surroundings, have been mentioned as subjects fit to think over deeply
and to draw conclusion. As an example we quote here one Qur'anic verse:

***"Say: Behold what is in the heavens and the earth."*** (Surah Yunus,
10:101)

II. History
-----------

There are so many verses in the Holy Qur'an which invite man to the
study of the past peoples and describe such study as a source of
knowledge. From the Holy Qur'an's point of view all developments of
human history take place in accordance with systematic norms and laws.
All historical events involving honour or disgrace, success or failure,
good luck or bad luck have their definite and well-calculated rules. By
knowing these rules and laws current history can be brought under
control and can be turned to the advantage of the present generation.
Here there is one verse as an example:

***"Different traditions existed in the past. So travel across the land
and see the fate of those who denied the revealed truth."*** (Surah Ale
Imran, 3:137)

III. Human Conscience
---------------------

The Holy Qur'an mentions human conscience as a special source of
knowledge. From the Qur'anic point of view the entire creation consists
of Divine signs and is a key to the discovery of truth. The Qur'an
describes the world outside man as 'horizons' and the world inside him
as 'selves', and thus instills in him the special importance of human
conscience. That is why the term 'horizons and selves' has gained
currency in Islamic literature.[^1]

There is a world famous sentence of the German philosopher Kant, which
is inscribed on his tombstone:

"There are two things which greatly excite the admiration of man: one is
the starry sky located over our head and the other is conscience located
within us".

[^1]: The Holy Qur'an says: "We shall (continue to) show Our signs to
them in the horizons of the external world and within themselves, until
it becomes clear to them that the Qur'an is the truth." (Surah Fussilat,
41:53)


