Publisher's Note
================

The Almighty, Allah says:

***“And whoever does evil or wrongs himself and then seeks forgiveness
from Allah, he shall find Allah, All-Forgiving, and All-Merciful.”***
**(Holy Qur’an, 4:110)**

All praise be to Allah, the Most Beneficent, and the Most Merciful.
Peace and blessings be upon the Guide and Saviour of mankind Muhammad,
and his infallible progeny; the lights of guidance and signposts of
piety, and upon the righteous warriors for Truth among his companions.

Allah, the Most High, Who created man, showed him the two ways of
righteousness and evil, by revealing the Divine messages and sending
down the prophets to guide and lead mankind towards obedience, and piety
and to warn them against evil.

The Almighty Allah has bestowed His blessings and favours upon mankind
by leaving the door of repentance open in the case that one is misted or
gone astray or is encircled by sins and crimes. He, Allah, made this
door (of repentance) open for those who repent and seek His forgiveness
and enter it without fear and, in addition, their sins will be forgiven
as if their mothers had newly given birth to them.

Allah, the Exalted, not only accepts their repentance without mediation,
such as through a priest or clergyman, (or introduction papers) but also
promises to change their evil deeds into those that are good.

Allah, the Most High, says:

***“Except him who repents and believes and does good deeds; then these
and they who, Allah changes (their) evil deeds to good ones. And Allah
is Oft-Forgiving, All-Merciful.”*** **(Holy Qur’an, 25:70)**

Thus, repentance is an obvious way to reform man and is considered among
the most successful means of social defence against crimes, because it
confronts, with righteousness, those who commit sins and offences and
constantly creates the hope in them, of attaining righteousness which
leads them towards good and virtue. Repentance, also, creates the strong
will in the sinner's soul to revolt against the many deviations and
offences.

It, also, means a genuine rejection of disobedience; a great uprising
against corruption and mischief; vices which the enemies of Islam used
to spread evil among Muslim nations in order to cause deviation in their
beliefs, destroy their values and, also, to make their glorious
civilization fall.

Al-Balagh Foundation beseeches Allah, the Most High, white presenting to
its dear readers this booklet - “Repentance as Demolition and a
Reconstruction”, to make all of us successful and prosperous on the path
of true repentance in order that we may return towards the true Islamic
Shari'ah.

**Al-Balagh FoundationAl-Balagh Foundation**


