The Psychological and Social Impacts of Repentance
==================================================

Repentance with all its external consequences like giving up sin,
performing what he had missed in the past, and not returning to it
again, all these indicate an eternal psychological behaviour which
starts to grow in man's self and which extends out in the form of
behavioural correctness and upright human manners.

The repentant also finds, in Islamic Shari'ah, the encouragement towards
repentance such as is found in the saying of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.):

“Indeed a man who commits sins enters Paradise, when he repents.”

People asked him: O Messenger of Allah, how that could be?

He (s.a.w.) replied:

“The sin will be before his eyes, and repenting from it, he will run
away till he enters Paradise.”

As the Almighty, Allah says:

***“Surely Allah loves those who turn to Him, and loves those who keep
themselves pure.”*** **(Holy Qur’an, 2:222)**

The Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w.), says:

“Whoever repents is Allah's beloved friend and the repentant from sin,
has no sin.”[^1]

And, also, says:

“The expiation of a sin is regret.” [^2]

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) also says:

“If a man sincerely repents, Allah will love him and then protect
him.”[^3]

These collections of Islamic texts; which are great in their content,
open the doors of hope and return, before the deviated, criminal man,
who inclines towards vices and deviations then commits crimes and sins,
and who becomes accustomed to such kind of life, the life of deviation
and crimes in order not to lose hope in himself or become despaired.

A criminal or a deviated one should realize, even for a while through
conscience, that man who dissents against the tradition of this
existence; a disobedient and mischievous, harmful being, understands
that the society around him dislikes him and looks at him as rubbish of
the society and a secretion of a dangerous sickness which poisons the
life of mankind and which forms a danger against their security and
peace. This concept leaves the sense of deficiency to grow.

Therefore, to open the door of repentance is more helpful for such a man
and more beneficial, which returns confidence to him and which saves him
against feeling that a society has pressure on him and dislikes him.

Certainty, the society has an enormous psychological impact on the
nerves of a criminal and a deviated one. It, also, looks down upon the
one who commits sin or who falls to the abyss of vices; so its
regulations remain as a basis for evaluating and dealing with this
criminal.

Whoever is known as a liar or has an aggressive behaviour: such as
committing adultery, stealing, kidnapping or is famous for treachery and
bribery and blood shedding or is known as a habitual drunkard, the
society looks at such man with this viewpoint and deals with him on the
basis of this evaluation.

If a deviate looks at himself and sees that the law runs after him and
the society around him disrespects and refuses to deal with him, surely
he will be full of vindictive feelings against such a society, and,
thus, continue to exceed the bounds of deviation if he finds no hope to
reform or correct the concept of such a society concerning him.

But, Islam deals with this deviate and disobedient through mercy and
kindness and gives great importance to him and devotes a number of its
laws, regulations and instructions to guide and reform this man.

Allah, the Most High says:

***“And whoever does evil or wrongs himself and then seeks forgiveness
from Allah, he shall find Allah, All-Forgiving, All-Merciful.”***
**(Holy Qur’an, 4:110)**

So, the door of repentance is open and the horizons of mercy are wide
for this man if he is watchful, wakes up, and wishes to return to the
life of purity and righteousness.

As a result of this, Islam has built its position, regarding the
repentant, on an essential foundation and a practical evaluation for the
truth of behaviour and the consequences resulting from it; this attitude
is a deviated one, it is a fact which happened; and man's connection
with it and his responsibility for it still exists, but, Allah, through
His forgiveness, gave man an opportunity to put an end to this vicious
connection and delivered him from its consequences.

Thus, he will not be considered responsible for it as long as his
psychological and mental connection is cut off from it:

“The expiation of a sin is regret.”[^4]

Thus the repentant is innocent before himself; and his society which
surrounds him, from each and every action he commits and then repents
therefrom; because Islamic society recognizes the meaning of repentance
and believes in the consequences resulting from it. If the repentance of
a criminal or a disobedient one is known, he will be forgiven from that
which he is known by because Allah, the Owner, is the One Who can
forgive in this creation. Indeed, for him, the door of returning and
entering, for a righteous and pure life, shall be opened:

“Whoever repents (from his sins) has no sin and is Allah 's beloved
friend.”[^5]

On the basis of this new feeling, new human feelings will be born in
him. He will be changed from a man who felt he was disliked and refused
by society, to a man who feels dignified by Allah and the society in
which he lives; thus, his movement will sincerely be directed towards
doing good and reforming himself after suffering much under the
experience of deviation and the bitterness of being far from Allah and
expelled from His mercy and feeling the pricking of the conscience, and
the criticism of the society to which he belongs.

The Almighty says:

***“Say: O My servants who have been prodigal regarding their souls,
despair not of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives sins
altogether. He is indeed the Forgiving, the Merciful.”*** **(Holy
Qur’an, 39:53)** **(Holy Qur’an, 39:53)**

[^1]: Muhammad Mehdi Al-Naraqi, Jami' al-Sa'adat (The Collector of
Felicities), vol. 3, p. 65

[^2]: Ibid, p.67

[^3]: Ibid, p. 17

[^4]: Al-Naraqi, Jami' Al-Sa'adat, vol. 3, p. 67

[^5]: Muhammad Mehdi Al-Naraqi, Jami' al-Sa'adat (The Collector of
Felicities), vol. 3, p. 65


