The Necessity of Repentance
===========================

Since repentance is a decisive human decision to return from wrongdoing,
to keep away from evil and depravity and to return to the life of
uprightness and obedience, and since its practical consequences are
serious in man's life and his destination, repentance is an obligatory
duty for every disobedient, criminal and deviated one on the basis of
reason and the understanding of the danger of wrongdoing and the harm of
deviation and crime.

Both deviation and wrongdoing are dangerous for the life of mankind and
cause harm to its benefits of social life; the transgression of the
guilty and the criminals against the life system, the exceeding the
principles of morals and right behaviour, the threatening the security
of mankind and their living and exposing its life to danger.

Through deviation and disobedience man exposes himself to Allah's wrath
and, thus, he sells his happiness for pain and torment and ends his life
with a sorrowful and dreadful.

Therefore, the disobedient one not only loses both the present life and
the hereafter but also causes harm both to himself and to others.

No wise man desires such a disastrous result to occur to himself or is
pleased with it, without striving to refuse and change it.

That is why repentance is obligatory for every Muslim and every human on
the basis of reason and the comprehension of human interests.

The judgement of the reason for the necessity of repentance coincides
with the laws of the Divine Religions, altogether. It purifies man from
sins, liberates him from the mazes of deviation and evil and calls him
to a life of purity and righteousness. Starting from the principles,
Islam considers repentance among its main pillars and a decisive step
towards the way of salvation and guidance for the whole of mankind.

Thus, the Holy Qur'an and the Prophet's traditions (Sunnah) focuses on
the necessity of repentance and the return to Allah, opening a new page
in man's record; turning away from the detestable past which is full of
rebellious deeds, and which blackens the clear pages by guilty acts and
corrupted the beautiful life with the stamp of shame.

So the Holy Qur'an has always taken a firm stance against the
disobedient and declared its forgiveness by opening the door of Divine
repentance and forgiveness to them. Thus, the Holy Qur'an addresses
them:

***“... and turn to Allah all of you, O believers, so that you may be
successful.”*** **(Holy Qur’an, 24:31)**

***“... He brought you forth from the earth and made you dwell in it, so
ask forgiveness of Him, then turn to Him. Surely my Lord is Nigh,
Answering.”*** **(Holy Qur’an, 11:61)**

***“O you who believe, turn to Allah with sincere repentance ...”***
**(Holy Qur’an, 66:8)**

**Consequently, it becomes man's duty to respond to this Divine call and
make use of this unique opportunity before the Day of Regret and Remorse
in which man will say:**

**“... O woe is me, that I fell short of my duty to Allah; and surely I
was of those who laughed to scorn.” (Holy Qur’an, 39:56)“... O woe is
me, that I fell short of my duty to Allah; and surely I was of those who
laughed to scorn.” (Holy Qur’an, 39:56)**


