Elements of Repentance
======================

Repentance is a turning point of behaviour, an ideological alternation
and a change which occurs in the life of an individual or a group. Thus
it cannot be achieved in the life of an individual unless other main
elements are obtained. Among them are:

1. Knowledge
------------

Man, in order to distinguish his diverse behavioral positions and
coincide with them, evaluate them and give final decisions upon them and
choose what should be chosen, should know its truth and have full
ideological lucidity through which he can differentiate between what is
right and what is wrong or what is good and what is bad and, also,
differentiate between righteousness and deviation and recognize between
good and evil. The ignorant man cannot achieve this condition as long as
the way is not clear and right to him.

Both knowledge and consciousness are the right ways which lead him
towards the Almighty Allah. They are the ideological means by which man
is directed to the right path and the guide towards the welfare of
humanity and its perfection. They are both two guides which save him
against the pit of collapse and the labyrinths of deviation. As long as
this condition is not achieved, repentance can never occur.

Thus, it becomes obligatory for everyone to bid what is right and forbid
what is wrong and, also, teach the ignorant in order repentance complete
all its necessities and nullify all the excuses, under which the
disobedient or criminals, may hide themselves.

For the same purpose, it is obligatory for man to learn every necessity
of faith and the obligations upon which his guidance and destination
depend; and, also to ensure the relation between faith, guidance and
knowledge.

On the one side, the Holy Qur'an condemns ignorance; on the other, it
praises knowledge and learning. In various places, it makes a connection
between ignorance, misguidance and deviation.

The Almighty Allah says:

***“They said: Have you come to us to turn us away from our gods? Then
bring us that with which you threaten us, if you are truthful. He said:
The knowledge is only with Allah, and I deliver to you that wherewith I
am sent, but I see you are an ignorant people.”*** **(Holy Qur’an,
46:22-23)**

As the above mentioned verse refers to both ignorance and deviation, it,
also, refers to both knowledge and faith.

Allah, the Most High, says:

***“And those who were given the knowledge said: Woe to you! Allah's
reward is better for him who believes and does good, and none is made to
receive this except the patient.”*** **(Holy Qur’an, 28:80)**

***“... those of His servants only who are possessed of knowledge fear
Allah ...”*** **(Holy Qur’an, 35:28)**

Surely knowledge is the source of every psychological and ideological
motivation which man holds in the way of repentance:

• Through knowledge, he realizes how to fear of Allah.

• Through knowledge, it creates in him the feeling of hope and desire to
meet Allah.

• Through knowledge, the light of the loving Allah shines in him.

• Through knowledge, his conscience is awakened and to him returns his
consciousness.

2. Feeling one sinned (caution of conscience)
---------------------------------------------

When the truth of an action is discovered by man and his outer truth is
distinguished before his consciousness and pure inner feelings, he
starts to understand in truth and, thus, a balanced action is to be
found in him between what he owns of good human values and his bitter
and painful reality, and his responsibility of its bad role will be
explained in its truth. Thus, the embers of refusal and disgust will be
gathered in him and the attitude of refusal and protest will grow in
him, thus, transformed into a psychological conflict of bitter conscious
remorse as a first means to impose punishment upon himself.

Then, the fires of consciousness will rise till he puts it under his
control and becomes victorious because, man, in his inborn nature
dislikes deficiency and tries to get rid of it; and always strives for
self-perfection and wishes to reach for it by different ways and means.

Man through his ignorance, yields to various unreal factors in which he
tries to satisfy his psychological inclinations through deviated ways,
but, soon this deviated inclination will be disclosed to him through
consciousness and knowledge. Thus, he regrets his evil deeds and tries
to separate himself from his crimes and get rid of the impacts of his
deviation, for he realizes that what is done by him (of crimes and sins)
does not fit with true human existence.

When this regret begins; he starts to feel pain for his evil deeds and
his desire to remove this deviated existence, which takes its role as a
new force towards change and repentance, moves him to separate from the
disliked past in order to make another existence for himself which suits
his good human form.

3. Strong-Will
--------------

Strong will is an important and active element in the process of
repentance, because it is the power which limits the situation; takes a
decision after achieving the right conclusion and ideological lucidity,
which are provided by knowledge. It is an axis on which one takes action
in the process of a psychological and ideological revolution.

If one ventures towards repentance, particularly when one faces
psychological conflict, and tries to destroy this behavioral
abnormality, taking the direction to Allah; the disobedient and
criminal, while are involved in such odd connections with the motives of
deviation, need a determination and firm will which enables them to cut
off this relation and change their self-direction towards the right
path. Without such a will and sincere determination, it is impossible
for a man to change from disobedience to obedience. Both sincere
determination and firm will are among the psychological starting points
for man to take a decision and specify his behavioral position.

How beautifully Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) describes the role of a firm
will and its importance in man's life:

“A man never gets weak if he is strengthened with a firm intention
(will).”

Consequently, firm will is a power capable of changing a man's route
and, also, correcting his direction in life.Consequently, firm will is a
power capable of changing a man's route and, also, correcting his
direction in life.


