Preface by the Translator
=========================

The contemporary world is a complicated one full of all sorts of
problems. All over the globe, both in the developed and developing
countries, different segments of the people face multi-dimensional
problems: social, economical, ethical and spiritual. In pure statistical
terms, it is particularly the youth strata, in societies everywhere that
is most adversely affected. They compose of the frustrated, badly hit
strata of the world's masses, both in the East and the West.

If the East has its typical socio-economic problems, the West too is
negatively affected by it's own mechanized and industrialized form and
metaphysical values.

Briefly, both the societies of West and East yearn and moan under the
pressures of problems, either material or spiritual in the East,
socialism collapsed under the terrific pressures of social problems
cropping up from its incapable system. Right now, western capitalism too
is showing cracks in its apparently magnificent frame.

At such a critical juncture, the youth of this world stands bewildered,
perplexed and horrified, observing the cracking of this system. The only
question boiling in their inquisitive minds is where the remedy and cure
lie.

And which system answers the burning problems of this age? The youth,
this pitiable creature, has been handed deteriorating and disintegrating
modes and system of life. Western philosophers, thinkers and scientists
like Freud, Russell, Nietzsche, Darwin and scores of others gave their
people all the possible pseudo-liberties under the label of individual
freedom; i.e., the so called liberty of speech, expression, action,
accumulating unlimited and gigantic sources in kind, cash and material
and, last but not least, the values engulfing sexual freedom.

Now, these unlimited and unbounded liberties have backfired and have
created a big impact upon the natural values and systems of life, even
though not religious ones. Humanity has started suffering immensely at
the hands of criminals committing serious crimes. A wave of lawlessness,
immorality and brutality has swept all over the globe.

Thus the young mind is in search of truth.

And the big question raising its head and haunting the youth's innocent
mind is “Where is the truth?” This is very question makes them go round
the world in various forms and shapes, even sometimes as hippies, to
search and investigate.

But a sudden explosion of Islamic revolution emanated the right answer
to their question saving them the toil and labours they were going
through.

Islam has beyond any doubt, established that the solution is here. This
explosion has enlightened the universe with the light of truthful
values, in the pitch dark of this worthless mechanized life.

Dear reader! This book suggests to the youth, solutions to only one of
the burning problems of the day from an Islamic perspective and
viewpoint.

The subject forms the crust of the youths' problems, and is obviously
the most vitally important multi-dimensional problem from biological,
social, and ethical points of view.

It deals with the solution of their socio-economic problems regarding
the execution of marriage; the most interesting topic for the youth.
They have been convinced in it to marry a suitable spouse, at a proper,
genuine and exact time. At least they can soothe their nerves in the
proper company during these turbulent days, when the world is burning in
the flames of wars, famines, diseases and social injustice.

Proper marriage can be a cure to many diseases haunting the youth being
a completing and maturity-creating factor.

Islam has provided the answer to all questions pertaining to human life;
and so it has to this one.

The learned author, Mr. Ali Akbar Mazaheri, has put in a great deal of
hard and sincere endeavour to illustrate Islamic solutions to this
aspect of human life, particularly, the innocent youth of today, who are
being misguided, confused and perverted by the immoral techno-propaganda
of the imperialists, who have their own axe to grind to achieve their
selfish and nasty objectives all around the globe.

We hope that this useful book will be a guide for the perturbed youth
and an answer to a part of their quest.

**Javed Iqbal Qazilbash**
**Seminary of Qum**


