Chapter Seven: Engagement Period
================================

One factor that has a sensitive role to play in a joint life is the
engagement period.

If this duration of time is dealt with elegantly and its peculiar duties
are performed, then it can have a profound and immense effect upon the
later periods of growth, fruitfulness and solidarity.

There is a common saying that 'one day of the engagement period is
better than a year of the post marriage period.' Although this saying is
an exaggeration, it describes an important fact and actually the
engagement period is, from many aspects more important, sweeter,
enjoyable and personality -developing than the post marriage period. In
this period, the pillars and foundations of the future life can be laid.

In chapter 4, it was partially brought under discussion from a
particular angle that engagement is a way of solving way the duration of
education and military training. But hereby, we will consider the
engagement period as an independent and overwhelming entity and subject.

By 'engagement duration’, we mean the time distance between the marriage
contract and the marriage ceremony. That is to say, 'Nikah' or marriage
contract should have taken place, or if they are not prepared for the
permanent marriage contract and they want to conduct it at a particular
leisure or with special celebration, then they can enter into a
'temporary marriage contract' until such time as they decide on the time
of the 'permanent marriage contract'.

The temporary marriage contract has specific laws and conditions that
must be observed. One of them is that it must definitely be conducted
with the permission of the girl's father (just as is the case in
permanent marriage contract.)

So be careful and cautious that here we are not discussing anything
about the engagement without a marriage contract).

The Need of an Engagement Period
--------------------------------

From certain aspects it is essential that there be a distance between
the contract and marriage.

1- The girl who has lived for many years in a family with her family
members, especially her father and mother, has a deep and strong
attachment to them and separation from them is very tough and difficult
for her. So it is not advisable to suddenly detach her from her family,
since this would emotionally be harmful for her. Instead, it is
necessary to bring a gradual readiness in her to face the separation.

2- The boy and the girl whose life responsibilities were, up until now
on the shoulders of the parents, do not have the readiness to shoulder
that at once, therefore a gap is necessary so that they may prepare
themselves to shoulder the weight of joint life responsibilities.

The style of birds' lives is very beautiful and based upon wisdom in
this respect. The mother bird trains her offspring for a long time to
fly and live independently. She prepares them to organise their own
lives and does not let them go away from her until this readiness comes
into existence.

3- It is difficult for the boy and girl who were strangers only sometime
ago to adjust beside each other without any preliminary stages and all
of a sudden start an independent life. It is necessary for them to get
familiar and develop attachment to be ready for their common life
together.

4- It is possible that the girl and the boy, due to certain reason like
those described in chapter four, such as: continuing education or
military training, are not prepared to begin a joint and independent
life, but do have the readiness to get engaged. So they get engaged, and
remain so until such time as the hurdles and restraints are removed and
they can marry.

5- The parents of the girl and the boy also need to get prepared for the
marriage of their dear ones. The duration of the engagement provides
them with the necessary opportunity to be ready for it.

The Benefits of the Engagement Period and the Duties of the Girl and the Boy During It
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In addition to the needs and benefits, which have been described in the
above discussion, i.e. the need of the engagement period', and the
benefits of marriage previously described, the engagement period has
independent benefits and, at the same time, the boy and the girl have
some duties to perform which are described as follows:

### 1- The Enhancement of Mutual Recognition and Understanding

Although the boy and the girl should have gained sufficient mutual
recognition in the phase of selection (described in chapter 6), they
must also develop a much closer and intimate recognition, with more
knowledge of one another's spirits, morality and views. In fact this
familiarity and recognition of the engagement period accomplishes the
recognition developed during the phase of selection. Thereafter, they
prepare themselves for and understanding and homogeneity in their joint
life, in the reflection of this close and complete recognition.

That recognition was meant for selection and this is for understanding
and harmony.

### 2- Improvement and Training

If someone observes a peculiarity in his/her fiancé' which may not be
liked by him/her and he/she may want to remove, rectify, or reform it or
even create another virtue or condition in him/her, then the engagement
period is the best time for such a reformation, change and training.

This is because their mutual relations have not shaped into usual ones
and they believe in a particular mutual love and reverence. As a result,
their mutual accommodation and the ground fro change, reform and
rectification is more positive and level.

### 3-Enhancement of Love

On the basis of the discussion 'love, the pivot of life,' one of the
actual and real conditions of prosperity in marital life is love and its
ground should be levelled before marriage.

Nevertheless, the engagement duration is the best chance and opportunity
for the growth, enhancement, consolidation and strengthening of love.
The conduct, conversation and all the practices of the fiancés are
effective in increasing or decreasing love. Therefore, the boy and the
girl must be very careful and attentive to their practices. And they
must not spare any effort to increase love and avoid the love decreasing
practices.

### 4- Development of Hope Regarding One's Future Life

Hope too has an important role in the prosperity of common life. Fiancés
should not be negligent about strengthening hope in each other's heart
by hopeful words, soberness and confidence of conduct.

### 5- Laying the Foundation Of Independence In Future Life

The boy and girl are usually attached and aligned with the parents'
life; this alignment should change into independence.

The period of engagement is a suitable chance to lay the foundation of
this independence. Fiancés should do the future planning, design the
aims and horizons of their future and the ways to reach them.

### 6- Valuing Each Other's Sentiments and Feelings

Fiancés should be careful about each other's sentiments and emotions and
value and answer them appropriately. Some fiancés do not consider it
necessary to answer the delicate sentiments and feelings of their
fiancés and think this would cause them to become dearer to their
fiancés, whereas, on the contrary, the feelings of their fiancés are
hurt. As a result, they start nursing a grudge against them and may harm
their lives seriously.

The memories of the engagement period linger on in the memory until the
last part of life and affect one's future life (both sweet and bitter
memories).

Therefore, the fiancé must have a perfectly calculated and planned
conduct and refrain from practices that damage one's ego and
personality. Indifference, carelessness, pride and insolence toward the
fiancé harms and hurts the sentiments and personality of the other side
heavily.

The girl must be proud and reticent, but towards strangers and those not
intimate, not toward her legal fiancé.

Regretfully, it is often observed that the youth complain about the
proud and reticent attitude of their fiancés. For instances, they say:
“I bought a gift for her with thousands of hopes and aspirations, but
she showed carelessness and disrespect and did not accept my gift and I
returned with a broken and bleeding heart.”

Religious girls must know that such conduct is not part of faith and
modesty, rather, these are prohibited.

It is meaningless for a girl to hide herself from her fiancé who is her
intimate and husband and to show recklessness.

Yes, we admit that modest girls shy in the former parts of the
engagement and cannot show much intimacy and love toward their fiancé.
Boys too must observe and recognize this fact, but this condition of
shamefulness must soon go and their relation be based upon intimacy and
love, accompanied by mutual respect.

### 7- Gift Presenting

Presents have a strange role in attracting hearts and enhancing and
boosting love; it is essential for the fiancés not to be negligent of
this beautiful and important point.

It is not necessary that the gifts should be very precious, but it is
essential that it must be concordant with the inclination of the other
party. And more importantly, that it is presented in and elegant and
fine way. Presenting a gift requires a particular elegance and style. It
must not be forgotten that presentation of a gift should not be
one-sided. (Not that only boys give gifts.)

Of course, he may present more than the girl.

### 8- Writing Love Letters

Writing letters full of love and purity has a nice effect upon the
enhancement of love a strengthening of mutual relations. Even if the two
fiancés are close to each other and always see each other, writing
letter has a positive effect.

They should write the letters and at the time of visiting and departure,
give them to each other. Of course, in case of travelling and being far
away from each other, the letters should be detailed and more in number.

We have seen many spouses who retain the letters written during the
engagement period even after the passage of many years. They read,
cherish, and enjoy those sweet memories.

### 9- Sincere Visits

Fiancés should have lovely visits in the sweet and memorable time of the
engagement. These visits strengthen the hope, enthusiasm and love of
them both. The visits not only are modest, but also strengthen modesty
for the both of them.

During these visits they should have warm and sincere dialogue and show
love, affection and affiliation towards each other and talk about their
future life and express hope and warmth of feeling for each other. And
they might proceed on journeys, recreation and sightseeing (journeys
during this period have a vital role and place).

### 10- Short Journeys

During this worthy and precious opportunity between the marriage
contract and the marriage, a better co-ordination and understanding may
develop so as to provide a ground for their future life. They can make
use of travels and journeys to reach this aim.

Journeys, even though short, are a suitable ground for the unconscious
manifestation of positive and negative aspects of human morality and
character. Hence it provides a good opportunity for getting know each
other better. Logic for these is that since the formal life has not yet
started, so both parties have the readiness and flexibility to rectify
and reform themselves upon the positive suggestion and criticism of each
other.

These journeys, apart from being beneficial for the enhancement of
mutual recognition on morality and the spirits of each other, are quite
beautiful, lovely and memorable.

Of course, it is evidently understood that these should be done with the
permission of the parents of the girl.

### 11- Participating in Spiritual Aggregations

One of the constructive programmes, which has a positive effect upon the
spiritual and moral progress and maturity, development of mutual
understanding between spouses and increasing the magnificence of this
grand period is joint participation in the aggregations and meetings of
knowledge, religion, and morality.

### 12- Gaining Knowledge and Arts Regarding Organising One's life, caring for a spouse and the study of books in this respect

Matrimony, management of life and training of children needs education
and this education and training must start before marriage and continue
to the end of one's life.

It is necessary for parents to acquaint their children gradually with
the matters and responsibilities of life right from childhood, so as to
make them prepared for their life.

Some of parents, as a love to their offspring, refrain from letting them
work and becoming familiar and conversant with the matters pertaining to
their future lives. This practice of parents is not only not a love and
service to their children, but it also incurs heavy losses upon them.
This is because it is in the childhood and youth that the nature of is
children gets prepared for all types of education and training.

If they do not become familiar and conversant with the problems of life
and the essential readiness does not develop in them, when they
themselves get to shoulder the responsibilities of running a life, they
will be defeated and lost when they lose the help and shelter of their
parents and come to face the facts and hardships and responsibilities,
they will become harassed, disappointed, and hopeless and will develop a
sense of self-depreciation and inferiority.

Many of the youth have ample amount of information about the variant
problems, but they know little or nothing about spouse ship and life
management.

Fortunately, nowadays it is observed that the youth show a great deal of
zeal and enthusiasm and inclination toward gaining various education,
arts and skills, both curricular and extra curricular. This makes one
hopeful about a better and affluent future.

There are classes of different subjects being held, and plenty of books
and teachers are also available, but unfortunately, there is no
organisation, arrangement an inclination concerning subjects and arts
like spouse ship, household affairs, life administration, children
training, understanding and co-ordination between the husband and the
wife. Briefly speaking, the organising and maintaining of the garden of
life, which is the real nucleus in composing society, is not observed,
And this inattentiveness and slackness incurs heavy damages upon the
structure of society, the remedy and compensation for which in most
cases is not possible.

There are many youths in our society (and many other societies) who
achieve degrees in various subjects, including technology, arts, science
and research, but when it comes to compose a marital life, they become
perplexed and do not know the alphabet of the arts and science of the
foundations of life, of erecting the pillars of the centre of life and
the tender plant of life and the gardening of the garden of life. There
are only few who help and assist them and drag them out of this
terrifying and dreadful whirlpool and make them reach the shore.

Then these youths who are untrained and unequipped in the ways of spouse
selection, spouse ship and running the life feel a huge void in
themselves.

Since they greatly need a spouse, they are obliged to somehow marry and
recognise a family and then they face those undesirable results which
include: turmoiled and disturbed families, depressing conflicts and
contentions, shameful and scandalous indecent words, dishonouring
beatings, worn out nerves, sad and depressed souls, withered hearts,
upset and diseased digestive system, ruining and destructive corruption,
lost and wasted talents, destroyed aspirations, depressed hopes, damaged
desires, unreached aims, defeated struggles, agonising problems, sad
deprivations, injured and hurt sentiments and feelings and frozen
hearts.

And the after-fruits of this thorny garden are untrained, manner less,
badly trained, difficult, talentless, weak, mean and naughty children.

Oh Allah, be it that your hidden hand comes to our help and guides us
out of this valley of perplexity and aberration.

So it is essential for boys and girls to equip themselves with the arts,
awareness, and knowledge of the life administration before marriage and
attend the institutions and classes regarding these matters (if there
are any) and to study books on this topic.

The engagement period and the time gap between the marriage contract and
the marriage is a suitable opportunity to achieve this end to be
prepared and ready.

Now we suggest some books about this subject.[^1]

1- Constitution of spouse ship, by Ayatollah Ibrahim Amini.

This is one of the best books written on this topic and has two parts,
One part pertains to 'wife maintaining' and the other is about 'husband
maintaining'. Each one of the two may be studied by the boy and the
girl, or the husband and the wife to learn their duties and practice
them. Of course, there is no harm if each one reads both the parts, But
not that girls and women study the part concerning men, and boys and men
read the part specified for girls ad women so that they understand what
rights they have upon the other; instead, each one should understand and
take in what are his/her duties and responsibilities to be performed.

2- Family's Heaven, two volumes, by late Dr. Sayyid Jawad Mustafawi.

3- Marriage; the man making school, by martyr Dr. Pak Nijad. This book
has three volumes, all in single binding. Volume 2 is related to the
issues concerning the engagement period and the chamber of marriage. The
writer has produced a few beneficial books about marriage , spouse
maintaining and the issues relating to family life.

4- Books of Dr. Ali Qayemi. (He has some good books on the issues and
various phases of family life.)

5- The guide to life for young couples, by Sayyid Hadi Mudarresi.

He has written a number of volumes of useful books on this topic. the
original books are in Arabic and they have many translations with
various names. If you know then name of the writer and the topic, it
would be easy to find the book.

6- Morality in the family, by Sayyid Ali Akbar Hussaini ( the executer
of the TV. program 'morality in the family').

7- The books of the “Association of Parents and Trainers” regarding the
topic of family and marriage.

8- Answers to sexual-marital problems, by Dr. Hana Stone and Dr Abraham
Stone (this book provides useful and essential information to the boy
and the girl). Of course it may have objectionable matters, since the
writers of this book are non-Muslims.

One of the interesting and useful programs in these fields can be that
the bride and bridegroom study a book in the sweet time of their
engagement.

A Worthy Essay in This Connection
---------------------------------

Here it is appropriate that we present a large part of the worthy essay
of Mr. Mohammad Ale-Ishaq, written under the title 'Engage period, a
solution to youth problems' printed and circulated by the 'Centre of
Islamic Research of Qum'.

“It is our suggestion that the tradition of engagement be revived in
society, and its revolutionary and scientific values be explained and
illustrated through modern propagation media, so that it may reach the
status of social consciousness and tradition. the same custom and policy
which is current and customary in pure families of Qum and some parts of
Mashhad and the north should be promoted.

If every youth has the right to pluck a flower from the garden of life,
then let him choose it as long as it is a bud and before its petals have
scattered.

If a man gets full up and fed with lawful bread and cheese, human
nobility and decency stops him from committing excess and aggression
against others' dinner tables.

If we purchase a garden full of grapes for a youth of ours and hand him
over the key, he will never jump over the wall of others' gardens.

How long can one endure thirst?

It is suggested that the religious marriage contract be done( with
simple informal ceremonies). And so the two spouse may receive benefit
through loving relation apart from marriage and fulfil their physical
needs and requirements through legal and lawful means. When their
studies are completed and they get a job and procure income, they can
marry with all the ceremonies.

If one asks what the surety they will not marry is, we reply that if
they marry, there would be no dowry for them and experience has shown
that both the spouses guard their real capital.

In response to the question that they might get fed up with each other
and separate by dissolving the engagement then what must be done, we
reply that, firstly, engagement is the most suitable period in which
they harmonise their common life in the shelter of passionate love and
the difference change into the light and beauty of love. If as an
unlikely case the homogeneity did not take shape, then it would be far
better to separate before bearing children, and the capital has to been
wasted and the future of a child has not been endangered.

Even in the ordinary marriage a few percent end up in separation, so
then should people not marry at all?

### The Value of the Engagement Period

1- From a psychological point of view, instinctual deprivations cause
spiritual problems (complex) and unbalance man spiritually. And sexual
deprivation is of the deepest of them, which, according to some
psychologists (who are extremists), is the root of all the moral
aberrations and deviations and the social crimes.

### Reflection of the difficulty of sexual deprivations

After the period of deprivation ends, one is involved and entangled in
the reflections of it which become the cause of mistrust among wives in
the shape of evil and polygamy and bring about family turmoil and
disturbances. The only remedy to it is timely sexual saturation and
satisfaction.

With these explanations is it suitable to invest in police, judicial and
administrative operations or the promotion and expansion of engagement
and timely sexual saturation? If we say engagement is the guarantee of
human spiritual balance and the factor of preventing moral and social
deviations and aberrations we would not have said anything wrong.

2- The love instinct, which is satisfied in infancy by a mother's kisses
exerts more pressure on the young generation's spirit at the time of
youth.

The young girl and boy have a thing lost and they feel themselves in a
state of unfamiliarity, until such time as they find it. They go around,
searching for a heart full of love and affection. It is better to say
they are after a spiritual shelter so that they may feel self-assured
and at peace beside that, and prepare themselves for the solution of
life's problems and combat against death causing factors. The pressure
of this need is not less than that of the sexual need.

The plan of engagement secures the best shape of spiritual needs and
satisfaction of the young generation.

3- The family is the centre of the conduct and behaviour of two human
being with two different and variant organism, two cultures and two
viewpoints towards life. Most people marry to achieve and lay hand upon
their unrealised aspirations and desires (desires unrealised by their
parents.)

Naturally, such and environment is the centre of differences and
oppositions and the rot of most separations and divorces lies in these
very differences.

The engagement period is most suitable to solve these disputes and
differences, since under the shelter of passionate love the differences
are changed into uniformity and homology and the ground for a stable,
sweet life is gained.

If we estimate the negative effects of these family differences upon
children, we would fairly decide that the engagement period is the
factor of prosperity and felicity.

4- Personal nobility and human personality is the factor, which stops
man from committing indecent works. It is due to the pressure of the
unsatisfied and unfulfilled natural needs that man does not have the
strength to endure them and thus tramples human nobility and decency
under his feet.

If the natural needs of the youth and their difficulties are taken into
consideration and get satiated on time in a legal shape, the ground for
most of the moral and social aberrations and deviations is finished and
the immoral propaganda of the west becomes ineffective.

5- Dispersed and scattered thoughts are dangers which threaten the
brains of youths. If the Islamic revolution requires active, inventive
and delightful brains, it should stop young brains from lusty thoughts.

Put yourself in the place of a pious and revolutionary youth. How many
years can the thirst be endured and remained inattentive and indifferent
towards stimulating and tempting factors? The reckless youth satisfy
themselves through unfair means, but the one who does not want to commit
sin; shall the aberrant thoughts leave him alone?

Experiments and experience of psychology has proved that one hour of
deviational thoughts (particularly lustful ones) drain the mind empty of
all its energies. As a result, the concentration of thought, power,
subtlety, freshness, initiative, inventiveness and creativeness will he
annihilated.

If engagement is the solution to all these problems, would parents
denounce and reject it?

If engagement is the best way to fight and combat the hackneyed western
culture and the satellite, would the executive remain indifferent to it?
All that is important is that slogans alone are not sufficient and all
modern propagation media must be co-ordinated. What happens if the
television telecasts the ceremony of two engaged spouses during their
initial contact, at the time of selection, and in a joint journey?

What if the aggregation of the marriage contract is shown in a simple
way including the moment when the parents hand over the girl's hand into
the boy's and the clergyman prays for their prosperity?[^2]

The Length of the Engagement Period
-----------------------------------

A particular length of time cannot be specified for the engagement
period; rather it depends upon the position and the taste of the
individuals. But it can be said that if any specific conditions are not
there, like continuing education and completing one's military training,
and the boy and the girl have made the necessary preparations for
marriage, then a six to nine-month length of time seems suitable.

We reiterate and stress that a specific time period does not exist for
it. All that is necessary is achieving the required preparation and
readiness, which has already been described, so that special benefits
may be reaped from this duration.

### The Mishaps And Catastrophes During The Engagement Period

There exists a probability that catastrophes will take shape in this
period. These 'probable mishaps' are not alike with respect to all
societies and variant families; instead, n the same way as the habits,
moralities, rituals, customs and beliefs of people are different, the
mishaps of the engagement period and generally the catastrophes of
family life too are different and variant, since these are attached and
related to moralities, circumstances, beliefs and customs of the people.

Here we describe a few of these calamities so that the youth and their
families may put a curb and restraint upon them and if, God forbid, they
take place, they might remove and remedy them.

#### 1- The Heart's Excuses

One of the peculiarities of man is that the power of one's fancy and
imagination flies very high, and if not controlled, curbed and balanced,
does not stop anywhere. It skips over the facts and figures to fly in a
world of dreams, unreal aspirations, and desires. On the other hand,
man's condition of comparison too is quite strong.

He compares what he possesses to what others possess or to things he has
reached in this fancies. And in these comparisons, he usually falls prey
to fault and illusion, and does not see the facts as they are. Instead,
he considers what is possessed by him as contemptible and little, and
the things possessed by others or being imagined as great and beautiful.

The sense of variety-loving too helps in this matter, and as a result,
he is confronted with sorrow, grief, emulation, regret, loss and
hopelessness and develops the desire to change his assets for others.

The third condition which exists in man is such that he does not have
much interest and inclination towards what is legal and lawful for him,
but he is greedy about what is prohibited for him.

For instance, in normal circumstances, he does not have much desire for
a certain type of food. Perhaps that food is present in his house for
days, but he does not consume it. But if he feels ill and the physician
prohibits him from it, he develops a strange tendency and desire for it.

Or, when he is fasting and eating is prohibited for him, he starts to
have a strong wish to eat and drink, but at the time of breakfast, he
does not have much desire for it.

Actually, the power of imagination, discontentment with the present
condition and variety loving nature of man should be discussed in
another discussion, but here we consider it from a special angle:

Man is confronted with faults of opinion and recognition; in this way,
he observes things from a distance and his mind takes a picture of them,
then he flashes it to the interior of his mind and interprets and
analyses it to reach a result, which usually differs from the reality of
those things. Whenever a ground is provided so that he can observe and
evaluated those things in a warm and sensitive manner, he discovers that
they are different from what he has previously seen and evaluated from a
distance.

For instance, the scenes and people which we see in colour films, if we
saw them closely or see them afterwards, we discover that their reality
is quite different from what is seen in the film. Particularly, if the
film and pictures are large and beautiful and seen from a distance.

Another example: If we see the people who perform in a theatre when
light reflectors throw coloured light upon them from distance and we
meet them afterward and have social contacts with them, we discover that
the faces under the reflectors from a distance are quite different from
the face observed closely.

Or if we get something that was not in our means, and we had an
extremely strong inclination towards it, we find that there was nothing
so important about that.

Everyone has certain experiences in his life wherein he has observed
these differences and is aware of this fact.

Now, if man (both ladies and gentlemen) puts on the spectacles of lust
and passion on his eyes and watches lust-evoking, sexy scenes and then
analyses them through his rich and high flying imagination, it is
evident what sort of false pictures would be embedded in his conscience.
Then the trouble starts when he may wish to conform and compare those
false pictures with his wife.

It is quite clear that however much his wife may be beautiful and
attractive; she cannot reach those false pictures. And that is the
moment when hopelessness, dismay and excuse making will start. (Allah's
curse be upon the propagators and promoters of corruption and the films
containing sexy material. Allah knows what troubles and calamities these
have, whether live of picture, bought for the youth and wives, though
they may be aged.)

One of the factors causing the dismay and hopelessness in spouse
relations is comparing one's wife with the girls or wives of others.
Usually this comparison leads to the wrong result that others' spouses
are better. There is a well-known idiom among our people that man sees
the then of the neighbour as a goose. This idiom describes the very
wrong comparison and discontentment, incorrect notions and being greedy
about things prohibited.

If a person wants peace of mind, prosperity and satisfaction, he must
abandon this comparison and be contented with his won spouse. All the
excellence described about contentment do not pertain to economical
contentment. Instead, it includes being contented with one's own spouse
and it is more important than contentment in economical affairs.

One of the family -running negative effects of casting prohibited looks
(both for men and women) is that a person looks at hundreds of girls,
boys, men and women of different colours and races in different dress,
with figures and faces and imprints their picture in his/her heart.

The power of imagination develops and decorates them and when he/she
reaches the spouses and compares him/her to them, thinks him/her to be
below and less than them in beauty and attractiveness. Then he/she is
confronted with perplexity, envy, dismay, and disappointment.

The leaders of Islam have repeatedly forbidden people from casting
prohibited looks. For instance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النظرة سهم من سهام إبليس مسمومة. و كم من نظرة أو نظرة أورثت حسرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A prohibited look is one of the poisoned arrows of Satan. And many
looks have been followed by prolonged remorse (regret).”*

Casting prohibited looks in not specific to men, but includes women as
well. My sister and brother, if you want felicity and fortune, then
refrain and cover up your eyes, minds and thoughts from all women and
men of the world and concentrate upon your own spouse. Do not compare
your spouse with anybody. Be contented with each other. Do not think
others are better than your spouse. No, they are also human beings and
have faults, shortcomings, virtues and peculiarities. If you see faults
in your spouse and do not find him/her perfect and according to your
taste and ideal, know that others too are more or less the same.

Just as you yourself are the same. That is to say, you are not ideal,
complete and superb. As a matter of fact, Allah has created people in
different forms and shapes based upon His wisdom. The training,
environments and genetic factors are different, as are the morality and
spirits of different persons.

Do not have obsessions. You cannot find anyone who is perfect according
to your choice and liking.

'Rivalry and envy' which is considered void and rejected by all people
(although practically they confirm it) is not specific to ceremonial
affairs; rather it covers our discussion as well. Comparing one's spouse
with others is a form of rivalry.

##### Attention

It is not always that a person compares his/her spouse in issues such as
sexual attractiveness and discontented, instead, this false comparison
can also exist in spiritual and moral issues and issues of knowledge.
That is, one says, “my spouse is at a lower grade of faith, knowledge
and morality than the spouse of such and such a person; I wish so and so
perfect and faithful woman was my wife; she is more rational and wise,
faithful, educated, good mannered and skilled than my wife.

This comparison too is false and void and does not have any result,
except frustration, regret, pain, dismay and disappointment. It may also
only be a fancy, like the then of a neighbour, which appears to be a
goose. If you really wish the spiritual progress of your wife, help her
on this way and provide the means for her development. Belittling and
humiliating her is against piety and morality.

We have plenty of specimens in connection with excuses of the heart and
mind, incorrect comparisons, greed and discontentment, but we only cite
the following one:

##### A Noteworthy Specimen

Jawad worked in the female section of and institution and dealt with
tens of girls and women daily.

One day he came to me, saying, “I am displeased with my wife because she
lacks the virtues and perfection that I desire. I am very pained by this
situation and have become disappointed with my wife.”

Then he described and counted her flaws and defects as causes of his
displeasure. I, who was aware of the condition of his life and knew his
wife was a good lady, explained that after thinking and looking into the
problems, his problems could be solved so he would stop feeling this
disappointment and dismay. He could put things into practice so we could
handle the other solutions. My suggestion was that he immediately resign
his post in that unit of the institution and start working in another
one where he did not have to deal with girls and ladies.

Jawad surprisingly asked: *“What connection does that have with my
problem?”*

I said to him: “You are in contact with a lot of girls and ladies
everyday and work with them. You may observe a virtue in each one of
them, whether real of imaginary. Although you are a pure and faithful
person, these pictures influence your personality, mind, and conscience.
You then unconsciously compare your wife with them and since you are
unaware of their faults and shortcomings and only look at their
beauties, you simultaneously are aware of the flaws of your wife and
come to the conclusion that she has shortcomings and lacking compared to
them.

Thus you become disappointed. You may not actually be conscious of this
comparison, but your conscience does its job. Nobody can claim that
he/she does not get affected and influenced by contact with the opposite
sex and the non-intimate ones. Even Yousef (Joseph) (a.s) says to Allah,

***“If You do not save and secure me from the craftiness and cunningness
of them (the women of Egypt) it is possible that I may be inclined
towards them.” (Sura Yusuf, 12: 33)***

So do not consider yourself safe from their effect. And, before your
life has shattered, resign from that unit. On the other hand, your
social contacts with all these ladies and girls has effects upon the
sense of envy ad jealousy of your wife, and it is hard for her to endure
and tolerate that her husband permanently works closely with strange
women and girls. This issue is the cause of her sorrow, agony, distress
and dismay, although she may not utter a word so that her life and yours
is not made bitter.”

At the beginning it was difficult for Jawad to accept this suggestion.
But I brought him round to do it as a test.

Jawad resigned from the job and started working in the male section. He
showed up after nearly two months and cheerfully said, “This test gave a
good result and was very effective in improving the condition of my
life.”

I told him, *“If you want to be prosperous and comfortable in your
family life, do not compare your wife with others.”*

And then we looked into other problems of his life. And now that many
years have passed after this event, he is leading a good felicitous
life.

My sister and brother: Be pious and content and hold your spouse
strongly. Do not exchange her/him for the whole world. She/he is the
same spouse which you desired.

The very one, not another one.

Of course, the grounds of progress, reform and personality construction
is always provisioned. Put efforts in making her progress and mature.
But do not ask anything above her energy. She has a limited capacity.
Just as you have!

This bud has been bestowed upon you from the garden of existence. Secure
her. Do not let her petals be scattered away.

You do not know the faults of others and only look at their virtues from
a distance. Had you been able to look at the other side of the picture,
you would have known that your wife is better than many others whom you
wish were your wife.

Be attached to your heart-comforting mate and shut your eyes from the
rest of the world.

##### Attention

Of course, the husband and the wife are duty-bound to decorate
themselves externally and internally in a way that they may please each
other so that their eyes are filled up with each other's sights and
there remains no room for others. Decoration, cleanliness, apparent
beauty and positive attributes and the internal perfection have a real
role to play in attracting hearts and developing the warmth of love and
aspiration. The apparent decoration, beauty and decent interior
attributes are the primary factors to attract man toward themselves and
the lacking of them is the first cause of rejection and dismay.

#### 2- Undue Expectation

Regretfully, at times it is observed that the girl, the boy or their
families have undue expectations from each others and load each other's
shoulders with heavy burdens and turn this sweet period into a bitter
one.

These undue expectations are usually materialistic, extravagant and
rooted in rites and rituals of ignorance and every common sense
considers them denounced and rejected.

Some parents and elders, who should be the helper of the youth and
support them in organising their lives, pressurize them to the extent of
bending, rather than breaking their backs. Youth with broken and painful
hearts complain about these expectations, and impositions.

Such things are the cause of disappointment and damage to life, so they
must be avoided. And if elders raise such problems, the boy and the girl
should be careful and vigilant about each other. Besides not getting
fixed up with these futile matters, it is a must for them to defend each
other. Each one must not allow the other to be pressurized.

The co-ordination and co-working of the boy, the girl and their families
to organise their future life is an absolute necessity and these
expectations and impositions are against co-working, communion of hearts
and sincerity.

Emulation and races in decoration, ceremonies, rites and customs are
wrong the development and independence of the youth.

##### Attention: One Must Certainly Have A Celebration

Celebration of marriage, besides not being undesirable, is rather
recommended and desired. celebrations in their marriage. This aspiration
must be answered positively. From an Islamic point of view, marriage
celebration was held for the marriage of the commander of believers Ali
(a.s) and Zahra (s.a) by the order of the Prophet (S).

We recommend to the youth that they hold celebrations for their marriage
(marriage contract and marriage or both) and should not marry short of
celebration. What is not required or desired is lavish and extravagant
spending, (unnecessary) decor and undue expectations, not the actual
celebration. Every person who has not deviated from human nature can
understand the ugliness and undesirability of these matters and can
differentiate between the desired celebration and the undesired
celebration.

Man should free himself from the attachment and alignment of the beliefs
and views of others and must not be apprehensive about others' feelings
about himself; instead he must try to judge his own duty, and act
according to it. Thus he will be prosperous.

#### 3- Interference And Temptations Of The Ignorant And The Self-Interested

We have observed many youths whose sweet period of engagement, and the
pure nucleus of their lives and hearts are encountered with bitterness
and coldness due to the interferences and meddling of scorpion-natured
ignorant people (who sting by their nature) or the crafty, self
interested ones (who look for disturbances to add fuel to the fire).
(Allah's curse be upon these enemies of youth prosperity.)

#### 4- Not Observing The Parents' Conditions

Some of the youth, when they get their spouses, forget their parents of
pay less attention to them, and sometimes they are disrespectful to
them.

At times, after bringing a bride or even after engagement and the
marriage contract, the mother feels that their son does not have the
pervious affiliation and attachment to her. And this is a very hard and
serious situation for her, which she cannot endure. Then she starts the
conflict and quarrels.

An intelligent and clever man observes the rights of both sides, that of
the parents, as well as the wife's. Neither he sacrifices the parents
for the wife, nor the other way round.

I have seen the inefficiency and mismanagement of the bridegroom in the
conflicts between the bride and her husband's mother. And I have seen
the inattentiveness, inefficiency, and mismanagement of the bride in the
husband's disputes with his wife's parents.

If the bride and bridegroom are completely focused on all matters and
observed everyone's rights most of the conflicts and tussles between
them and the parents do not take shape.

The bride and the bridegroom must be aware that the parents have taken
all that pain and labour for many years and brought them up with
hardships and now it would not be justice to have a cold attitude
towards them.

Annoying parents is followed by the displeasure of Allah and Allah's
displeasure brings grave and serious results for the life of children
and becomes the cause of chastisement in the hereafter. Parents are the
cause of abundance in their children's lives and this worthy and
precious capital must not be lost. Parents do not want the misery of
their children. They wish their prosperity.

Young brother and sister, appreciate the worth of these heart-burns. It
is not just to forget and push back these benefactors when you have your
beloved. Many youth have been observed who come to appreciate the worth
of parents only after bearing children and enduring some of their
hardships' even though we know that today's facilities are much more
than yesterday's when our parents brought us up with more hardships.

So pay the right of everyone at his own place. It is not fair to be
insolent and disrespectful to any of the two. Do not do anything which
may have future sorrow and regret, and suddenly when you wake up, the
parents are gone. Then there would be nothing much you could do.

#### 5- Excessive visits

During this period, the relation of girls and boys and their families
should be warm and sincere, but must not reach excessive limits.

If the visits, feasts and parties become excessive, both parties become
exhausted. And this exhaustion damages love, particularly if this
duration is prolonged.

Many youth ask how many times a week or after how many days must we
visit during the engagement and marriage. The reply is that is does not
have a specified average or standard, instead it should be seen how much
of the grounds are available and what is the quality of greetings. It
should not be so rare to cause discouragement nor so frequent to be
exhausting. Neither arrogance and indifference nor excessiveness and
humiliating oneself and putting others to inconvenience.

Maintain balance since it is better.

Additionally, there must not be any kind of imposition and formality in
these visits. Neither of the two sides should have the expectations of
detailed formal feasts and colourful dinner tables and precious gifts.
They must observe each other's condition.

Likewise, the bride and bridegroom must observe the etiquette of modesty
and shyness, particularly in families where their are other boys and
girls. Indifference towards modesty becomes the cause of disrespect of
the bride and the bridegroom in the parents' eyes and the deviation of
youngsters of the family.

##### Refreshing The Unpleasant Memories Of The Past

During the period before marriage some offences and shortcomings may
face the two sides.

During the various phase of marriage, including asking for the girl's
hand in marriage, giving the reply setting the conditions of marriage,
invitation, and such affairs, there might have been some words exchanged
between the elders or associated of the two sides, or the boy or the
girl might have said something discouraging or those scorpion-natured
ones might have stung to create displeasure and offence. This offence
must not influence the marriage.

All of these things must be cleared up no sooner the marriage contract
is held, and must not prolong to cover the post marriage time. If
someone has been shown disregard and he thinks he has been disrespected,
he must forgive it for Allah's sake.

Now that these two youths have started their joint life with safety, the
chiefs and elders too should forgive and forget their displeasure and
must never proceed for the compensation and the renewal of grudges.

Discussing these two youths have started their joint life with safety,
the chiefs and elders too should forgive and forget their displeasure
and must never proceed for the compensation and the renewal of grudges.

Discussing these absurd and ignorance-based matters is the sign of
immaturity of the husband and the wife and sometimes incurs heavy and
serious damage upon the life of the two.

#### 7- Talk About Former Lovers

Some brides and bridegrooms and their associates (especially mothers and
grandmothers), to make themselves more respectful and to compensate for
their belittlement, or due to any other ill intention, talk about those
previous ones who came to ask for their hand in marriage and usually
describe their number in quite exaggerated numbers to boast of them. It
not only does not make them respectful and is of no use, but it creates
a grudge and is followed by plenty of harm.

Brides and bridegrooms should not talk about themselves in this regard
and must prevent their associates from doing the same. Similarly, never
tell the spouse about any association or inclination, which one might
have had with anyone. And never talk about any other women, girls, or
men before each other. Negligence of these points may apparently look to
be small, but great harm can follow.

Here we appropriately produce the words of Ayatollah Amini:

“One of the important topic which the boy and the girl are prone to
discover in the period between engagement and marriage is the grade of
the love of their spouse for them. Each husband and wife wants to
understand that his/her spouse has what degree of effect upon the future
life. So it is essential for the wife and the husband to express the
grade of love for each other and they must avoid uttering any
discouraging word or practice, which might reflect their eagerness and
love.

Man must avoid looking at other women and men and must only look at
one's own spouse. Praising other men and women and talking about the
existence of other men or women who asked for their hand in marriage as
well as fault finding and criticism are among the causes of
discouragement and must maintain prestige and seriousness in their
conduct and avoid ugly joke and non-serious and cheap activities. They
must observe each other's regard and respect and no do anything which
may make them so open to each other that t he parameter of respect is
dissolved.”[^3]

#### 8- Undue Ardour Of The Girl's Parents

Some girls' parents have undue and out of place ardour and emulation and
prevent the friendly relation of their daughter with the lawful fiancé.
And this practice becomes the cause of discouragement of them both.

I say to such mothers and fathers: If you have liked this son-in-law and
have confidence in him, accepted him after sufficient recognition and
considered him to be a suitable spouse for your daughter, then there is
no room left for apprehension, restraining, and prohibiting, and
prohibiting their seeing each other. But if you have not acquired the
necessary recognition of him and have not liked him and do not have
confidence in him, then why did you agree that your daughter marry him?

It is not reasonable that a person marries his daughter to someone and
is suspicious about him and does not treat him as a suitable spouse for
his daughter! This boy is now your son-in-law and the lawful and legal
husband of your daughter and she too is the legal and lawful wife of
him. From point of view, the period of engagement does not have any
difference from that of the after marriage.

If you say, if this is his wife, he should take her to his own house,
not that she may be his wife and live in our house, I reply to it: Did
we not discuss only a few pages before (in this book) under the topic
'Need of engagement' that it is essential that there should be a time
distance between the marriage contract and the marriage itself and we
also described the logic of it?

In any case, the girl's parents must observe the condition of these two
youths and not cause their annoyance by observing undue ardour, so that
in the future, relations of the couple with the parents are based upon
sincerity, purity, and respect and they do not have any malice and
displeasure for them in their hearts.

Of course, the son-in-law must also make sure that while the girl is in
her parents' home and the ceremonial marriage has not taken place, the
permission of the parents is sought in connection with going for
recreation, journeys and all other matters. It cannot be expected that
the parents should not hold any opinion and allow the girl and the boy
to go freely in all the matters, since they must conserve and secure the
honour of their family too.

The youth should not trespass their respect and commit excess upon their
honour; instead, they must take their status and position into view. It
is particularly necessary where there are other adult boys and girls in
a family, which observe the conduct of their sister and her husband. In
such a case, if they behave carelessly and do not observe the
restrictions of honour, they can be the cause of aberration of other
youth.

We emphatically recommend to the bride and the bridegroom that they must
observe the honour, reverence, and agreement of parents in all matters.
A recklessness and careless attitude in this connection can inflict
heavy and grave damage.

[^1]: Evidently, the introduction of these books does not approve all of
their matters.

[^2]: Risalat Newspaper, Issue no. 2102 1st of Urdibehesht 1372 SH, P4.

[^3]: Spouse selection. p 227.


