Chapter Five(2/2):Salient 
			Points Of Inco Ordination Of Ismail And Safoora
=============================================================================

### Salient Points Of Inco-Ordination Of Ismail And Safoora

1‑ A cultural and ideological distance (difference of opinion about
ideological, social, and educational problems).

2‑ A spiritual and psychological differences.

3‑ A difference of style and taste in various matters.

4‑ Sexual and physical dissimilarity (one of the two was sexually
strong, having a hot and active temperament, while the other one was
weak, and could not satisfy and saturate the other. One of the real and
important causes of their conflict was this problem. The one who was not
satiated and saturated was shy and too modest to express this matter
clearly, and relieved the pressure at another place and in fact, avenged
it elsewhere.

5‑ A moral difference.

6‑ A beauty problem. One of the two was unhappy with the other’s looks,
figure and beauty, although the other side was satisfied. This factor
too had quite an effect and role in their differences and conflicts.

7- A differences with respect to the families of each other. (None liked
the family and relatives of the other and had difficulties having
relations with them).

### Refuting A Doubt

We, in any case, do not want to establish that a villager is not an
equal and good match for a city inhabitant. And we do not mean to imply
that a city dweller is

superior or vice versa. There are many citizens and villagers who
married and lead good lives. And many times two city dwellers or two
villagers do not have any mutual harmony and co-ordination. Rather, what
we mean to say is that spiritual, ideological, and physical harmony is
important and essential between two life partners. Moreover, what must
be viewed in selecting spouses is equality (balance of the personalities
of the couple).

Piety and divine values are the standards and criteria of superiority,
nobility, and graciousness.

**﴿إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ
خَبِيرٌ﴾**

“Surely, the most honourable of you with Allah is your most pious one”.
(49:13)

### Conditions Of Compatability

Now with the explanations given, the ground for the description of the
cases of equity and harmony between girls and boys have become ready; so
will divide the topic of equity and explain a few of its details.

#### 1‑ Religious Compatability

A religious woman who is committed to the laws, principles, and
derivatives of Islam must marry a man like herself. Of course, a hundred
percent proportionality is not possible, but the closer they are and the
less of a distance, the better.

A man questioned the prophet of Islam (a.s): “Whom must we marry?” He
replied:

**الأكْفاء**

“Those suitable (good matches).”

He asked, “Who are suitable matches?”

The Prophet (a.s) responded:

**المُؤمِنُونَ بَعضُهُم أكْفَاءُ بَعضٍ.**

“Some of the believers are the matches of each other.”

We see that the Prophet (a.s) described faith as the standard and real
foundation of being a match.

Imam Sadiq (a.s) said about Fatima Zahra (a.s):

**لَو لا أنْ اللهَ خَلقَ أميرَ المُؤمِنينَ عَليْه السَّلامُ لَم يَكُن
لِفَاطِمَةَ كُفْؤٌ عَلى وَجْهِ الأرْضِ؛ آدَمُ فَما دُونَه.**

“Had Allah not created Ali (a.s), there would have been no match and
equivalent on the earth for Fatima (a.s), from the age of Adam (a.s) to
the end”.

If a faithful person marries a faithless one and cannot convert the
latter to become religious, either he has to become homogenous with the
spouse and become faithless and be in a permanent state of confrontation
and conflict; both situations being a great loss. The children too, who
are the outcome and production of such a turbulent and disturbed life,
do not reach prosperity and blessing.

### Question And Answer

Q: Can it not be that a faithful and religious person marries an
irreligious spouse and guides her? Has such a case not yet taken shape?

A: (a) If someone finds such energy in himself and is sure that he or
she can make it, then there is no harm to materialise such a marriage.
Even though this is a desired and required practice and has a great
reward, not everyone possesses all that vigour and energy. Attaining
this confidence is also not an easy thing. If such a case
(exceptionally) takes shape, it is not a justification for others to
follow it. And this exception cannot be generalised to cover all people.

(b) It is quite possible that the situation reverses and the irreligious
one makes the other take up his or her colour.

Some of the reasons described by Islam for not marrying an irreligious
one are as follows:

**… لأنَّ المَرْأةَ تَأخُذُ مِن أدَبِ زَوجِهَا وَيقهَرُهَا عَلى
دِينِه.**

“Because the woman is influenced by her husband’s conduct, and he forces
her to accept his belief.”**[1]**

The man, too, accepts the effects of his wife’s belief and morality and
his wife may make him perform irreligious activities. How long can a man
resist and combat the unfair and unlawful wants and desires of his wife?
One cannot fight that all his life and vigorously combat against it. We
know of plenty of cases where the irreligious and careless wife made her
religious spouse miserable.

(c) Of course, there exist some exceptions as well where a religious and
faithful spouse has guided his or her

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Furoo-e Kafi, p 5.

irreligious life partner. So far so good. But exceptions cannot
overwhelm the majority, and rules and regulations cannot be founded upon
them.

#### 2‑ Cultural And Mental Compatability

Cultural and mental understanding and homogeneity has a basic role in
the joint life of a couple. The architects of this centre should be able
to understand each other and their mysteries and intents, for the sake
of bringing into effect a dynamic, fruitful and felicitous life.
Moreover, they should take joint and harmonious decisions in most
problems and practice upon their bases, be mutual helpers in the ups and
downs of life, and train their children on the basis of a harmoniously
designed programme.

Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s) said:

**اَلعَارِفَةُ لا تُوضَعُ إلاّ عِندَ العَارِفِ.**

“An intelligent and wise woman must not be placed except beside a sage
and wise man.”

We have observed the harms and damage caused by the mental and cultural
lack of co‑ordination between the spouses.

Of course, a 100% understanding and concurrence is still not possible,
yet one must endeavour to get as near to it as possible and diminish the
distance.

#### 3‑ Moral Compatability

Moral homogeneity and harmony is of the most important cases of equity
between a husband and wife. It is possible that the wife and husband are
equal and

compatible from a religious aspect, but not from a moral aspect.

#### Attend To This Specimen

Zaid Bin Haresa, the adopted son brought up by the Prophet (a.s),
married Zainab, the cousin of the Prophet (a.s). The husband and wife
held a lofty place from a religious point of view. But they did not have
an understanding from a moral aspect and so conventionally speaking,
their moralities were not harmonious. They had severe differences and
disputes. The Prophet (a.s) admonished them and suggested to them many
times to build up mutual understanding and compatibility. But this young
couple did not have the endurance and energy to put up with each other.
Finally, Allah mediated and separated them through divorce.

There is no doubt that these two, husband and wife, were decent and nice
people. As far as the decency of Zaid is concerned, it is sufficient
that the Prophet (a.s) adopted him and had a great love for him and
sometimes called him by the name of ‘dear and beloved Zaid.’ With regard
to the decency of Zainab, it is sufficient to say that Allah Himself had
her married to His prophet (after being divorced by Zaid).

**﴿وَإِذْ تَقُولُ لِلَّذِي أَنْعَمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَأَنْعَمْتَ
عَلَيْهِ أَمْسِكْ عَلَيْكَ زَوْجَكَ وَاتَّقِ اللَّهَ وَتُخْفِي فِي
نَفْسِكَ مَا اللَّهُ مُبْدِيهِ وَتَخْشَى النَّاسَ وَاللَّهُ أَحَقُّ أَنْ
تَخْشَاهُ فَلَمَّا قَضَى زَيْدٌ مِنْهَا وَطَرًا زَوَّجْنَاكَهَا.﴾**

“And when you said to the one to whom Allah had shown favour and to whom
you had shown a favour Keep your

wife to yourself and be careful to (your duty to) Allah ... But when
Zaid had given up her, we gave her to you as a wife.” (Surah of Ahzab,
verse 37.)

We observed the moral disagreement of Ismail and Safoora too.

As a result, we must not think that the religiousness of the husband and
wife is sufficient for establishing a successful (marital) life; other
aspects must also be taken into consideration.

#### 4‑ Educational Compatability

It is better that a husband and wife should not have much distance and
difference from an educational and informational point of view, so that
they have more understanding in their lives.

Of course, this quality must be considered along with other qualities
and peculiarities. That is, if, for instance the woman is proud and
shallow, her educational qualification should not be higher than that of
her husband, since this would certainly bring about ample difficulties
in their lives. But if she is humble, there is less chance and
probability of this difficulty. As to the husband, this problem exists
in the same shape with a little difference.

### A Lesson‑Giving Specimen From The “Mirror Of Lesson”

These days when I am busy teaching and writing this book, a TV program
named ‘Falling Leaf’ is being broadcast from the serial ‘Mirror of
Lesson.’ Although I do not wish to support the whole of this serial,
there

is an attractive point in it, which is appropriate to this part of our
discussion. That is, Afsana’s higher level of education compared to Ali.
We see how Afsana belittles her husband Ali who has less education than
her. And what painful difficulties have come into existence in their
life. The higher education of Afsana does not have any good or benefit
for their joint life, rather, it is a means of harm. Had Ali married an
equally educated girl and Afsana married a boy of her own level, most of
their agonies and disputes would not have taken shape.

#### 5‑ Physical Compatability

Balance and proportionality of the physique and sex has a great
importance in the life of spouses. Sexual problems are one of the real
and fundamental organs and pillars of marital life. Mutual sexual
saturation and satisfaction of the husband and the wife has a deep and
profound effect upon their lives, just as dissatisfaction and lack of
saturation has destructive and dangerous effects upon the total sum of
marital life. If they satisfy and please each other from this aspect,
they would be thankful to each other and put their duties and
responsibilities into practice and tolerate the odds of life. But if
they are displeased in this regard, they may hate each other and be
disappointed and inert in respect of the performance of the
responsibilities of life. This is a major point, which is regrettably
belittled and overlooked in most of cases, or it is passed by shamefully
and shyly, and consequently causes terrible shocks.

If one of the two spouses is sexually and physically strong, having a
fervent and fiery passion and the other one is weak and frigid, most of
the matters of their life become upset and unbalanced. There is also a
strong probability of corruption and deviation. This lack of balance and
proportionality incurs heavy damages and shocks their nerves and spirit.
If we wish to explain and illustrate it with more explicitness, it would
prolong the book, whereas we have based it upon briefness. But it must
be considered explicitly at its own place.

True, we must not describe such sexual problems in a naked shape,
heedless to modesty, as is customary in some of the non-Islamic
societies, but these must be discussed modestly. Did the prophet of
Islam (a.s) and other leaders of Islam not describe these problems in a
clear-cut and detailed way to teach the people? Can the youth and
spouses be overlooked, not given information, defenceless in the wake of
this important matter and essential need”? Just as we have a specialist
for each and every organ of our body, with referral points and places
for all the partial or total matters and problems of the society, why
should there not exist centres and specialists for such affairs of life,
family and physical, sexual and spiritual difficulties of the youth and
spouses? Is the importance of this problem even less than a tooth for
which we have all these specialists, dentists, and well- equipped
laboratories?

We have seen a number of examples, which by studying their difficulties
and profound and chronic differences of marital life, we reach one
sensitive point

and that is, sexual displeasure and dissatisfaction! Then it is observed
that the real and actual cause of all the discomforts is this very
point. But they feel shame in expressing it vividly and openly. And in
some cases they do not even know themselves what is harming them. When
we observe that married men and women commit sexual corruption, and
develop illicit and illegal relations with strangers and we detect the
roots of this affair, in most cases (though not all), we discover that
the reason for these was sexual dissatisfaction and non-fulfilment.

One of the main reasons for the deviation of Zuleikha and her
inclination towards Yousef (Joseph) (a.s), was the sexual inability of
her husband.

There exist a large number of variant cases, which I have personally
observed that I have avoided and overlooked due to various reservations.

Anyhow, the physical and sexual equivalence and equity of the boy and
the girl must definitely be taken into consideration while selecting
spouses. One of the two should not be strongly built, hot and fervent
and the other a weak, withered, and frigid one. Instead they must be
physically and sexually balanced counterparts, so that they are able to
satisfy and saturate each other.

Moreover, it is necessary for the spouse to acquire the required
information in these matters, to get information from those who are
informed and seek help and advice if confronted with a difficulty.

#### Attention

Nervous and psychological ailments are amongst the basic causes of
sexual weaknesses. The traces of these ailments are definitely present
in all the modes of sexual weakness and inability, such as hasty and
immature discharge, imperfect sexual intercourse and the inability of
satisfying the spouse.

These diseases must be treated by expert psychologists and
psychiatrists. This topic is quite vast and has a broad spectrum and
needs detailed discussion; so at present we will not enter into it.

#### 6‑ Equality Of Beauty

Attention to the harmony in the beauty of the face and figure between
the two spouses is also necessary. If one of the two is beautiful,
handsome and proportionately figured and the other one is ugly and badly
featured and figured, there is a probability of displeasure and
difficulty for both. Spiritual difficulty and a sense of sexual
deprivation, frustration, deviation, immodesty, and depression for the
beautiful one would exist. Please take into what has been described
about the sixth attribute (beauty) previously in this chapter.

#### 7‑ Equality In Age

A balance and equity of ages must also be considered in the selection of
a spouse. The difference in the age of sexual puberty in males and
females is a natural phenomenon. Boys generally attain puberty four
years after the girls.

The equity and matching of the ages of the boy and the girl relates to
the difference of age, not the uniformity of it, since this difference
has been placed in their creation. Of course, observing a difference of
four years in age is not obligatory, instead, it is better if it is
there. This quality should be added to the total sum of attributes for
consideration and contemplation. It is possible that the age of the girl
is not less than the boy (to this extent), but she may have other
peculiarities and distinctions to compensate for the shortage.

#### 8‑ Economical Equality

A common custom could be discussed here which is: It is not advisable
for there to be a large gap and difference in the monetary positions and
status of the two families of the boy and the girl.

We know ourselves pretty well that we become unbalanced and off track by
laying hands on an amount of wealth and material sources. We start to be
proud and boast of favour to others and humiliate and belittle them. Why
must we deceive ourselves then? Commonly, if a poor or an economically
average boy marries a girl from a wealthy family, he must become their
servant, whereas, if a poor girl marries a boy from a rich family, she
must become their maid.

Of course, there are a few exceptions, of which we shall talk at the end
of this chapter.

#### 9‑ Family Equality

Just as has been formerly mentioned, in the discussion of ‘Family
Nobility’, marriage with a person is equivalent to having a relation
with a family and a

race. So the families of the boy and the girl must have proportionality
and be equivalent from religious, social, and moral aspects.

#### 10‑ Political Consistency

For instance, those believing in and adherent to the Islamic revolution
and the system must not marry anti revolutionary and anti system
families, although they may apparently be religious, since they would
definitely come across difficulties. Either they have to quit and
abandon their beliefs and become harmonious with them or they must face,
confront, and have a permanent debate and tussle with them, both of
these being a waste and loss. The Islamic revolution was born from
Islam, and opposing the roots and origins of this, is opposing Islam. Of
course, those who are committed to the origin of the revolution and the
Islamic system and might sympathetically criticize some matters, we do
not consider them to be the opponents of the revolution.

#### 11‑ Social Consistency

The person who is learned, knowledgeable, associated and connected with
research and wants to spend his life in the field of learning and
research, whose family and social life has the same composition and is
fabricated in the same way and who has a profound investigative spirit
must never marry a person of a family whose social spirit is a pompous,
aristocratic, and ceremonious one or to those who are used to luxurious
life, pompous invitations, bizarre night vigils full of passions, and
excessive, extravagant

journeys and programmes of enjoyment and entertainment. We have seen
many persons who made this mistake and were deluded and fell prey to
misery and affliction.

Of course, it is necessary and essential to attend to the entertainment
of life, and the same person who is engaged in study and research should
not remain heedless to this aspect of life.

Ayatollah Jawadi Amoli used to say: “According to Islamic traditions,
determination and extravagant invitations do not exist with each other.”
It is not possible that a student and research scholar and investigator
reaches a place and position through luxurious living.”**[1]**

We know some friends who, mistakes and neglect, married girls who
themselves, or their families, were people with luxurious and
ceremonious modes of life. Conventionally speaking, they were from the
well-off strata and even if they were not from that group, their spirit,
training, and social conduct was not concordant with knowledge, piety,
and contentment. As a result, their lives became entangled in affliction
and painful displeasures, and in some cases, were shattered.

The saying “birds of a feather, flock together” may look to be quite an
ordinary and indelicate expression, but it has a great truth in it.

It is true that the superstitious stratum distinctions are void, but
human societies have variant spirits, training

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** From his ethical reminders, seminary of Qom.

and social or ethical behaviours, which cannot be denied.

#### A Considerable Specimen

Mr ... is a learned and wise researcher and has a probing spirit. Having
lived a joint marital life of a few years with Mrs ... and having a few
children ultimately reached divorce. That man describes the actual cause
of their separation as such:

My job is in a scientific and research role. I work, like any worker,
nearly ten hours a day in connection with my research. My wife did not
have any interest in my work and would always arrange entertainment
programs and wish me to join them. I used to tell her, “Just as a
building labourer, carpenter, blacksmith and grocer go to their work
early in the morning and come back home in the afternoon to offer their
prayers, have lunch and take a rest before going back to their workplace
to hand over the products of their work to society, I too feel myself
committed to putting in the same amount of effort, spending my working
hours in the library, busy with the research assignments and yielding
its production to society. I too spend the same amount of time in
entertainment programmes as they do, not more. My wife did not
appreciate this logic stand, and pledge of mine and insisted on me
joining all her scheduled programmes. But I did not submit to her will,
since I considered my assignments more important than that, until such
time as we could no longer live together.”

The marriage of those spouses who do not have social and mental harmony
is harmful to both of them. You can see in the affair described, that
both have faced loss and neither of the two can be recognised as the
defaulter. Because that researcher and learned person can not be
denounced for not surrendering to his wife’s programs, and neither can
that wife not be rebuked for not becoming a learned research scholar,
withstanding the that man’s life dedicated to research. Even if they
wished, they could not possibly have become homologous, since each one
of the two possessed a specific and particular kind of spirit, training
and objectives. They considered prosperity and felicity and obligation
in what they practiced and could not appreciate the other one’s stand.

But what is indisputable is that both of them had one fault and error,
which is that they should not have married in the first place. If each
of them had married a homogeneous person, they would have been quite
relaxed and comfortable. The man should have married a knowledge loving,
studious lady of research, and the woman should have married a man of
worldly living, entertainments and material enjoyment.

Perhaps at the time of proposal and marriage they were not conscious and
aware of the essentiality of ideological and social harmony and
co‑ordination between a husband and a wife. They married in a state of
indifference and heedlessness.

Ayatollah Ahmadi Mianji used to say: “The religious scholars who were
ascetic men, their wives were

ascetics. But if their wives did not remain contented and pressurised
them and demanded more, those scholars could not have been ascetics.”

The wife of Allama Tabatabai had a major effect on his progress and
success. Allama had a simple and ascetic life and their house was a
rented one; yet his wife, for all her worth and regard was convinced
about Allama’s course of knowledge and research and accompanied him with
utmost forbearance, affection, and fortitude until the end of his life.

#### 12‑ Psychological Consistency

In this section, we benefit from the letter written by a worthy brother
who did not allow us to print his name:

Spiritual and psychological harmony is one condition of equity. In more
elaborate and minute terms, ‘personality harmony’. In ‘personality
psychology’, personalities of various persons have been categorised into
many groups. One of the most prominent of them is the categorisation of
internals and externals. Of course this is a scientific discussion,
which should be given shape by benefiting from the views of experts and
specialists. What can be briefly said is that the two categories are
relative phenomena and, as a matter of fact, it is a spectrum, which can
be graded from I (sheer internal inclination) to 100 (sheer external
inclination). From the other side, sheer interior inclination
(isolation) and exterior inclination (selflessness) are undesired upon
the Islamic standard of values. So we must say: It cannot be said, for a
desired Islamic life, that the internal persons and external persons
should

marry persons from their own category and group. Instead, a balance
should be established. But to constrain future confrontations and a lack
of understanding, there should not be much of a distance. That is to
say, the mutual distance should not be more than 20 or 30 degrees. For
instance, the one whose degree is 20 on one scale shall not have a
comfortable life with someone who is located at 80 degrees on the same
scale (a difference of 60 degrees).

#### 13‑ Future Equality  
 (Future Must Also To A Possible Extent Be Taken In View)

It is possible that a boy and a girl are equivalent and proportionate at
the time of proposal and marriage, and apparently there may not be any
considerable non-co-ordination and heterogeneity between them, but after
a few years of marriage, a change or variation takes place in their life
and consequently, a disharmony and discord brings about difficulty. So
what must be done in these cases? How must future disharmonies be
prevented?

The changes that occur in individuals and lives are of two forms:

#### 1. Unpredictable Variations

Some changes and variations take place in the lives of certain people,
which are unpredictable even though one might be the most foresighted
person. Such kinds of occurrences and happenings need a specific
reaction and a special decision and their suitable solutions should be
sought. Such cases are out of the scope of our discussion.

2. Predictable Changes
----------------------

Man can by pondering, contemplating, counselling, and seeking advice of
alert and knowledgeable persons, considering his capabilities, talents,
and inclinations to foresee many of the problems and events of his
future life.

The youth who finds keenness, vigour and talents in respect of problems
of knowledge and learning, and wishes to lead a life of knowledge and
research must be attentive to this point when starting the search for a
spouse. He or she must select a spouse possessing the capability and
inclination towards these matters, and be fit to stand the limitations
of such a life. The tolerance of these limitations needs recognition,
capability and interest.

A person who loves luxuries and unlimited recreation cannot sacrifice
these upon lofty and sacred aims. How could a person brought up amid the
ceremonious and enjoyable luxuries of life be expected to become
familiar with the gatherings of knowledge, morality, and excellence? The
person whose life is integrated with gold, clothes, fashion worshipping
and passions cannot go along with a pious and meaningful life. How can a
person born and bred in a mean and badly trained family, lacking faith
in spiritual values, and one who has been nourished by the sap of that
unclean tree and whose flesh, skin and soul has grown from that stinking
marsh, breathe and live in a fragrant garden of purity and spiritualism?
(We have nothing to do with the exceptions).

The future of a family can, to a great extent, be foreseen by the
consideration of its form of conduct and morality. A person who intends
to shoulder the big responsibilities of society and his life has to meet
changes, variations, and revolutions and who expects his wife to
accompany and assist him, must choose a witty, sagacious, tolerant and
purposeful spouse. The girl who loves virtues and excellence and wishes
to follow ‘Zeinab‑e Kubra’ (a.s) must marry a man resembling Hussain
(a.s). The boy who wants to have pious and gnostic children must marry a
pious, ascetic and gnostic girl.

#### Discussing The Future Aims And Probable Changes Before Marriage

The boy and the girl should tell each other the aims, ideals, future
designs in their minds and the probable changes to occur in future.
Because, if the spouses know the aims, purpose and plans of the future
before getting married, they either accept those and prepare themselves
for bearing and accompanying or they reject them and the matter does not
occur.

But if they do not know and understand, then they might not accept and
tolerate those things after being confronted with them. Consequently,
they get involved and the matter reaches a point of conflict and
incongruity.

#### Question And Answer

In the preliminary era of Islam, we observe some cases in the histories
of the leaders of Islam and the companions of the Prophet (a.s) where
some marriages

took place in which these standards and cases of match‑making were not
taken into view. For instance, in the marriage of Hazrat Mohammad (a.s)
and Khadija (a.s), the proportionality of age and economical status were
not observed. Hazrat Khadija (a.s) was much older and richer than the
Prophet (a.s). Likewise, in the marriage of Juwaibir and Zalfa the
homogeneity of the family social status and beauty were not viewed.
Zalfa was very beautiful and her family’s social status was much higher
than that of Juwaibir; but this marriage was executed by the command of
the holy Prophet (a.s). Some of the infallible Imams married their slave
maids and there are many more examples. Similarly, in our own age, we
also sometimes see marriages and lives in which some of the above-
mentioned standards and criteria are not observed in connection with the
match‑making of the spouses and they have relatively better lives. Do
these specimens not contradict and undermine the standards of spouse
selection in the above discussion?

#### Answer

1‑ What we discuss in these arguments is based upon the majority of
people. It is possible that the problems discussed may have exceptions
that are reserved in their places. But rules and regulations can never
be set upon the bases of exceptions.

2‑ The strengths and capacities of individuals are different and the
heavy load of responsibility cannot be put equally on all shoulders.
That one who is weak bends his back and perhaps, his back may even
break.

Heavy loads are the responsibility of energetic and powerful men. But as
far as the common folk and the different strata and groups of society
are concerned, the energies and capacities of the majority of them
should be taken into view and the responsibility and law be formulated
according to their conditions.

For instance, Allah framed some authorities and specified duties for the
Prophet (a.s) so that nobody else except him was bound and obliged to
perform them, (such as the obligatory night service, his guardianship
and superiority in all matters over the Muslims and non Muslims, the
number of marriages allowed and many other things).

3‑ If there are people to be found in other times who can practise
exceptional matters, we too would appreciate and encourage them.

Thus the marriages such as that of the Prophet (a.s) with Khadija (a.s)
or that of Zalfa with Juwaibir are not common prescriptions to be
suggested and prescribed to all. Yes, if the likes of Khadija (a.s) and
Mohammad (a.s) appear, they would be the matches of each other and their
marriage would be a blessing and prosperity, although they may be
various in respect of age and wealth.

Whenever a faithful and pious girl like Zalfa comes into existence and
is as submissive to the Prophet (a.s) as she was, and a boy having the
decency and faith of Juwaiber is found and he submits to the Prophet in
the same way, both would be the match and counterpart of each other;
though the boy may be ugly and poor and

the girl be beautiful and wealthy. So we must be careful not to mix
matters up.

Of course, there is nobody and there was nobody like the Prophet and the
infallible Imams, but at least there should be some resemblance to them
so that such marriages are suggested.

The commander of the believers, Ali (a.s) said:

“You can not lead your lives like me. But help me in piety, endeavour,
modesty and honesty (Try to imitate me).”**[1]**

If not like the infallibles, we can become the like of others such as
Zalfa and Juwaibir. We know many girls in our own society who married
the dear soldiers of the sacred war and serve them from the core of
their hearts and take pride in it.\>**[2]**

Important Caution!  
 Carefulness Yes! Obsession, No!
--------------------------------

If one has the knowledge of correct standards and criteria of spouse
selection, one would not face perplexity and fault. But if one does not
lay hand on the correct and exact standards and is unaware what to do,
one would be perplexed and uncertain about it. Sometimes, one is dragged
and pushed into and state of excessiveness and practises unnecessary and
undue obsession. At times, one gets involved in deficiency;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha, Imam Ali's (a.s) letter to Usman bin Hunaif.  
 **[2]** We will discuss this issue in the seventh chapter "sacrificial
marriages."

both ways are damaging and bring repentance.

The balanced, correct, and desirable way is that at first, one should
achieve the standards, which one deems true and fit, then select the
spouse according to those standards, following the ways and manners to
be described in the next chapter.

The minute care I am emphasizing is other than undue obsession.

We must know that a perfect spouse who does not have any shortage and
shortcoming according to the desire and want of a person can never be
found and can never be obtained (except the commander of the faithful,
Hazrat Ali (a.s) and Fatima Zahra(a.s), both of them infallibles and
pure from all faults, shortcomings and sins). We do not know any other
couple, which might be infallibles. Even the spouses of other
infallibles were not infallibles (innocent). Nobody (apart from the
innocent and the infallibles) (both men and women) is pure of faults and
everybody definitely has weak points.

If somebody wishes to have an all round, perfect, and complete spouse
which should be according to his wants and desires, he must firstly look
into himself to see whether he or she is free of all faults and does not
have any weak points. Surely, no one can make such a claim. Therefore he
or she should know that the person who is going to be his or her spouse
is also not devoid and free of all defects and complete. One must not
think so idealistically, or no one will ever reach one’s complete ideal.

Sometimes I tell my friends and acquaintances who practise this
illogical obsession, exceeding the limits of spouse selection, “If you
wish to have a perfect and ideal spouse, who may be, from all aspects,
according to your desire, then inshallah, when you go to heaven, you
will find that, because all those in paradise (both men and women) are
perfect and perfectly liked by each other. But such a person is not
found in this world. Besides, are you yourself so perfect as to demand a
person who is complete?”

Therefore, a thorough and complete check and care must be exercised in
the selection of a proportional and balanced spouse for oneself. But it
should be borne in mind that a hundred percent homogeneity and harmony
is not possible and a certain amount of distance and disharmony would
definitely exist. All that should be endeavoured is to lessen this
distance and disharmony, so that it reaches the lowest possible limit.

The distance and lack of homogeneity might be compensated for and made
good by mutual understanding, love, forbearance and magnanimity.

So: Minute care Yes! Obsession No!

### Question And Answer

Now when the standards and qualities of the spouse have been described,
there is another question to be discussed: Those who lack these
qualities and attributes, what must they do? Should they remain
spouseless for the rest of their lives?

#### Answer

1 - A portion of the answer to this question has been illuminated and
illustrated in the discussion of equality and homogeneity; meaning, if
everyone selects his counterpart and proportional spouse, only very few
will remain spouseless. There are only a few people who may not find
their counterpart and match. For instance, an irreligious,
characterless, and immoral person must not look forward to marrying a
pious and good‑natured one, having decent and moral character; instead,
this person must marry someone like himself or herself; because ‘birds
of a feather, flock together’.

And a person who has a lower grade of knowledge, his or her counterpart
and spouse is a person like himself or herself; and same is true about
other attributes and peculiarities.

The Quran’s just logic in this regard:

**﴿الْخَبِيثَاتُ لِلْخَبِيثِينَ وَالْخَبِيثُونَ لِلْخَبِيثَاتِ
وَالطَّيِّبَاتُ لِلطَّيِّبِينَ وَالطَّيِّبُونَ لِلطَّيِّبَاتِ. ﴾**

“The impure women are for the impure men, and the impure men are for the
impure women, and the pure women are for the pure men, and the pure men
are for the pure women.”

This is the genetic and divine law and legislation made by Allah that
the pure ones attract the pure ones like themselves, and the impure ones
attract their likes.

‘Similarity is the cause of attraction.’

2‑ With reference to what has been described in the section ‘Care yes!
Obsession no!’, another portion of

this question has been answered; since we said it is not necessary that
the spouse be complete and perfectly ideal, but rather an average
fairness and completion is sufficient and enough.

3 - We explained certain virtues and attributes that are the condition
of perfection, not the foundation of it. Consequently, one must not be
very severe and strict about the attributes of completion (i.e., beauty,
education and wealth, etc.)

4‑ There are certain individuals who have the power, tolerance, and
endurance to accept some weaknesses, whereas others do not have it. For
instance, some accept and endure the physical disability of certain
organs of the spouse.**[1]**

5‑ Keeping in view the above four answers and the exceptional cases
which we described before, as well as the points which we will discuss
in the chapter ‘Sacrificial Marriages’, there would only be a few who
might remain spouseless.

But there is a small group in society, which do not have the capability
and capacity of marriage. These people can be categorised as follows:

(A) The patient whose ailments are not curable and can be hazardous and
damaging to the life of the next generation. For instance,
psychologically disturbed individuals and the insane and leprosy
patients, etc.

Of course, if they are treated and the specialist doctors

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We will discuss this in the chapter "sacrificial marriages."

certify that they are healthy and perfect, then marriage with them will
have no hindrance.

(B) Those addicted to dangerous addictions.

Until such time as they abandon their addiction and correct their
morality, conduct, and spirit, they must not marry in any case.

(C) Careless, deviated, corrupt and persons of bad character.

Their remedy is to boycott them. Never must the coming generation be
corrupted by taking pity upon these sharp‑toothed leopards. If they do
not get married, they would have to think about remedying their habits,
making amends, and making up their deficiencies. We, in the section
‘Morality’ of this chapter (the second virtue and attribute), described
a hadith where Imam Reza (a.s) wrote a letter in response to a father
who said: “The person who has come to ask the hand of my daughter in
marriage is ill‑natured. Shall I marry her to him or not?...” Imam (a.s)
distinctly and vividly answered “Do not marry her to him if he is an
ill‑tempered and bad‑natured one.” This word from Imam Reza (a.s) is a
form of boycott. This rejection and refusal is an effective warning to
the corrupt and ill‑natured ones to rectify themselves. If they rectify
and remedy themselves, they are suitable for marriage, otherwise they
must be rejected (whether a boy or a girl). We do not have any right to
drag the next generation toward corruption and destruction just to take
pity on them.

The interest and welfare of society has priority over the interest of
the individual. Both must be protected as far as possible. But if
co‑existence between the two is not possible and it becomes necessary to
sacrifice one of the two over the other, then certainly the individual
must be sacrificed over the society and not the society over the
individual. This is what Islam and intellect commands us to do.

The thought and belief among some people that if such and such a person
is married, he could be set right and corrected is not true always and
for everyone. This is a famous saying with no basis. It is not true that
every corrupt and evil person is corrected and rectified by him
marrying. Yes, certain individuals do. But the exceptions cannot be
extended to all and include everyone.

There is no guarantee that an evil person will be corrected by marriage.
Instead, there is a strong chance and probability that he might even
corrupt his spouse as well: not only does he not conform to her, but he
causes her to conform to himself.

### Avoiding Negligence

At the end of this chapter, it is essential to give a necessary warning;
that is, negligence and carelessness is the source and origin of many
human miseries and troubles. It is harmful in all the matters, but as
for marriage, it is more harmful. A moment of negligence may be followed
by life‑long repentance and sorrow. We see many of the people who say
that their failures in marital life occurred on account of one moment of

negligence in the selection of the spouse.

One of them said: “I was quite aware of the problems of marriage before
I married. I knew the standards of spouse selection and had sufficient
information about the necessity of harmony between the spouses. Even to
the extent that I used to recommend it to others. But I do not know what
happened that I became negligent when I selected a spouse I forgot all
those things which I used to suggest to others and ultimately what I was
afraid of, did occur to me.”

Usually we know many things, but overlook them at the time of
practising.

We must be very cautious in connection with spouse selection and remind
ourselves to avoid becoming careless in this issue.

O Allah! Be the helper and guide of the youth and guide them in this
vitally important issue.

Love;  
 The Pivot Of Life
------------------

Just as the human body needs spirit to continue living and a spiritless
body is cold, frigid, and withered, marital life, too, stands in need of
spirit to become prosperous, fruitful, and dynamic; and that spirit is
love. A life short of love is like a lifeless and spiritless body.

Similarly, as a building needs some binding material (cement, etc) and
the page of a book requires glue to remain organised, the institution of
the family also needs a cement and glue as the binding force to

strengthen and continue its fruitful life; that is to say, love and
affection between the husband and the wife.

Love is an elixir of prosperity, which gives hope to sad and depressed
hearts and turns coldness and frigidity into fervently warm emotions.
Love turns thorns into fragrant flowers.

We turn to professor Martyr Mutahhari’s worthy saying:

“The boy and girl who never thought of anything while single, except
those things which were directly related to their own personalities, had
no sooner attached their hearts to each other and set up the assembly of
a family, that they find themselves, for the first time attached and
associated with the destiny of another being. And when they have a
child, their spirits are completely changed. That lazy, slow moving boy
has now turned into a clever and fast moving one and the girl who would
not leave her bed even by force, no sooner hears the voice of her baby
in the cradle when she jumps up like lightening.

What is that power that took away and removed that looseness, laxity,
and slackness and made the youth so sensitive? It is nothing but love
and attachment. Love awakens the dormant and sleeping organs and frees
the tied up energies just like the breaking up of the atom, freeing the
atomic energy. It is inspiring and a hero maker. Love completes the soul
and brings the amazing and astonishing interior potential talents into
view. It is inspiring from the comprehensive and perceptive point of
view and strengthens the intention and

courage from the emotional aspect.**[1]**

If love governs family life and the wife and husband love each other
from heartily, many difficulties are eased and solved, and are not even
considered and counted to be difficulties, just like the hardships of a
holy war on the way of Allah; for such hardships taste sweeter than
honey for a mujahid. And similar to the odds and hardships that a
researcher bears and endures on the way of knowledge and takes pleasure
from them and enjoys them.

Be merry, oh our sweet love;

Oh the physician of all our ailments.**[2]**

But if love does not exist, then many of life’s matters, even those
which are simple and easy, become hard and tough and appear like the
cumbersome toil of a prison annoying and molesting the soul and the
body.

If love is there, then the husband and the wife put on the spectacles of
beautification and whatever that they see it is good and beautiful to
them. They may even consider each other’s faults as beautiful. But if
this life‑giving element is lacking, then they put on the spectacles of
misconception and view everything as ugly. Even to the extent that they
might view each other’s merits as demerits and dismaying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The attraction and repulsion of Ali (a.s), Sadra publication,
sixth edition, p 48-50.  
 **[2]** Mathnawi Maulavi.

Ali (a.s) the commander of believers said:

**مَن أبْغَضَ شَيئاً أبغَضَ أنْ يَنظُرَ إلَيهِ وَأنْ يُذكَرَ عِندَه.**

“If a person does not like a thing, he does not like to look at it and
hear about it.”

It is part of human nature and instinct that when he dislikes a thing,
even its name, signs and memory is disliked by him. And if he loves a
thing, then everything, which leads to it and reminds him of it is liked
by him. He enjoys everything attached and associated to it.

If one does not like one’s spouse, and instead feels hate and scorn for
him or her, then one would unconsciously and unknowingly wrong him or
her. This would make one find faults and pick a quarrel and enter into
contention and dispute. But if love is there, one never views the
partial faults and even if one views them, one neglects them.

In an atmosphere and environment of purity where a couple has mutual
affection and attraction, all life is beautiful. Even the walls and
doors of the house reflect beauty, charm and freshness, and the
atmosphere of the home is attractive, hopeful and refreshing. The two
hearts of the loving couple are full of sentiment and love, beating for
each other. As if their heart beatings are harmonious and analogous. And
those are not two hearts, but one heart in two chests - like a single
soul in two bodies. They love everything pertinent to each other. They
love each other’s families, relatives, and associates. Everything
belonging to the other one is

lovely, sweet and pretty: the face, conduct, speech, pictures, clothes,
dresses, letters, memories, etc.

If two spouses love each other, they would even get along with each
other’s deficiencies and lapses. The husband and the wife want to live
together for the whole of life. They are supposed to meet hardships,
odds and burdens during this time, as these are the musts of worldly
life. They must have some kind of provision to traverse this lengthy way
of life. And love is the best provision for this journey. If they have
this energy right at the starting point of the journey of life, they
would be able to carry on with it to the end and at each other’s side,
reaching the destination of prosperity. But if this energy is lacking,
then they would fail to combat the odds of life and perform their heavy
duties and carry this trust to the destination.

Frigidity and coolness turns into warmness, and bitterness into
sweetness under the fascinating and charming shade of love. In this
fragrant and enchanting atmosphere decent and trained children evolve.

We again refer to the words of professor Mutahhari, the sagacious
philosopher and martyr of the way of love:

“The support and kindness of man’s heart toward his wife is so worthy
and valuable to the woman that marital life is not endurable for the
woman without it. The woman’s life must take in emotions and sentiments
from the man so as to be able to saturate her children from her full of
tender spring and kind

sentiments and emotions. The man is like a mountain and the woman like a
spring and the children like flowers and plants. The spring should
receive the rain of the mountains and sprout it in the form of pure and
clean water to make the plants, flowers and herbs green, fresh, and
blooming. If rain does not fall upon the mountains or the mountains’
form is such that nothing is absorbed by the soil, the spring will dry
up and the plants and flowers wither. Thus, as the life of landscapes
and deserts is dependent upon the mountain rains, similar is the case of
the man’s sentiments and feelings with regard to the woman. These
sentiments make the lives of the woman and the children pure, sublime
and felicitous.”**[1]**

### Kinds Of Love

#### 1‑ Loves Of Lust And Passion

These are on the basis of sexual attractions, lust, and passionate
desires. Although this kind of love is necessary in spouse selection and
joint life and must definitely exist, it is not sufficient alone.
Moreover it does not have all those benefits, qualities, and
peculiarities, which have been stated about love, and it can not last
forever, because with the passage of time of the couple’s joint life,
lustful desires and passions would subside and the preliminary zest and
fervour of sexual attraction would gradually fade away. Following the
birth of children, the freshness of youth would

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Right of the woman in Islam, Sadra Publications, 8th edition, p
326, p 317.

decrease and the faces and physiques would lose their previous shapes
and forms. After many years pass, the effects of old age would become
apparent in the man and the woman and that would be the time when strong
and powerful incentives and motives to continue a prosperous life would
no more exist.

The combining and adhesive force of life should be so strong that it
persists and lasts through all the stages and phases of life and is able
to make the skeleton of life stand on a firm footing. This (sexual) kind
of love does not alone have such a strength and endurance; its colour
being faded and a shame is brought by it.

#### 2- Lofty Love:

In this kind of love, a person’s inclinations are toward the lofty
values. If this type of love comes to exist in the husband‑wife
relationship, the sexual desires, lusts and passions would also be
placed under its umbrella and would pick up the colours of lofty and
superb values. Both forms of loves are essential in marital life and
each one in itself is not sufficient.

To say that the inclinations and relations of spouses should only rest
upon supreme and lofty values and that sexual love is not necessary
would be a mistake. Rather, both must be present to make each other
perfect. In this problem, too, like all other marital problems, the
middle way should be adopted, not the way of excessiveness or
deficiency. The first type of love, when alone, is subversive and
damaging, but when accompanied by the other form loses its negative and
harmful aspect and having become a part of superb

values, turns into a beneficial one.

Here too professor Martyr Mutahhari opens the vista saying:

“Human sentiments and feelings have forms and grades. Some of them are
from the category of passions, specifically sexual lust, being common
instincts among man and all the animals. It arises from the sexual
origin and is finished right there. Its increasing and decreasing is
mostly related to the physiological functions of the reproductive system
and inevitably is at the time of youth. With the passage of time on one
side and its being greatly saturated and satisfied on the other it is
used up.”

“Man has another form of feelings which are factually and naturally
diverse to sexual lust. We had better name them sentiments, and by the
Quranic interpretation, ‘amiability’ and ‘compassion’.

“Quran interprets the marital relations between men and women by the
words ‘amiability’ and ‘compassion’ and it is an extremely lofty point.
It is an indication of the human aspect and the super‑animal dimension
of marital life. It is indicative of the fact that lust and passions are
not the only linkage in marital life. The real and actual relation is
the purity, truth, communion and unity of the two souls.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Attraction and repulsion of Ali (a.s) p 55-58

### Question And Answer

Q: The first form of love is recognised and known by all, but the second
form is not very clear and vivid. What is the love, which rests upon
lofty values and the marital life should be set up according to it and
the former one should be placed under its umbrella?

A: The facts described in this chapter about the criteria of spouse
selection are a complete and comprehensive response to this question.
The standards and values, which have been described cover both forms of
love.

#### Lasting Love

As already described, the love of a husband and a wife must persist and
continue and must last even after the days of youth are gone.

The husband and wife need such sentiments and kind feelings, which may
hold their family life with all the warmth and fervour even after sexual
attraction, passions, lustful desires and the freshness of youth are
finished.

Allah has placed the source and origin of this love in the spouses: “And
He put between you love and compassion.”

So if their lives are set upon correct foundations and are managed and
administrated in the right way, then that ‘love’ and ‘compassion’ will
continue and will remain life-long.

We have seen a great number of couples where the passing of the youth
period not only did not create any

flaw and weakness in their love, but also with the passing of age and
movement towards old age, their mutual regard and graciousness
increased. As a matter of fact, their conduct became more sober and
gracious and their old age became the phase of their perfection and the
height and ceiling of their joint loves.

### A Magnanimous And Beautiful Specimen:

Aunt Zainab and Hajj Hassan were life partners for the last seventy
years. I can recollect the final 25 years of their lives nearly, in
which they had all the reverence and respect for each other and I do not
know any event that could indicate any mutual disrespect and
disinclination in their lives.

I asked their relatives about the rest of their life together and came
to know that they were always like this. Aunt Zainab was both a wife and
a nurse for Hajj Hassan who was older than her and who became ill in his
last years. She held the old man in such respect, reverence, and
kindness that it amazed and made the one who saw it praise her. In this
part of their old age, sexual phenomenon did not mean anything to them,
since they had surpassed it. But the love, honour and grand respect was
overwhelming their relations even still.

Whenever Hajj Hassan fell ill, the aunt would nurse and look after him
with extreme kindness and respect. Whenever I visited them, Hajj Hassan
said:

“This lady has looked after me so very well. If it was not for her, I
would not have been able to pass my old

age honourably. It is because of her kindness and nursing that I can go
to the mosque and attend to my services and prayers and lead a
honourable life. Her existence is a great boon and beneficence, which
Allah has bestowed upon me. I always pray for her.”

I enjoyed seeing their sincere relations and felt sorry about many
husbands and wives who have cold relations and have scornful and
menacing conduct towards each other. I used to wish all spouses had been
like aunt Zainab and Hajj Hassan.

Hajj Hassan had grown very old and was nearly ninety years of age and
could no longer stand or walk to perform his work. But Allah had saved
and spared his kind spouse for him. She used to look after and nurse her
old husband with respect, love and self-sacrifice, never allowing him to
face humiliation and misery.

The last time I visited Hajj Hassan to enquire after his health, he
said: “Had Allah not given this spouse to me, I could no longer continue
my life”.

The last days of Hajj Hassan’s life approached and he was about to leave
Zainab alone after a lovely joint life of seventy years. Aunt Zainab was
nursing him with all her might, looking after him from all aspects,
revolving around him like a butterfly around a candle. She served him to
all possible extents. Hajj Hassan occasionally opened his eyes and
looked at her. His looks reflected the signs of respect, reverence,
thankfulness and gratitude for her. As if he was saying: “Oh my pure
angel, you were my spouse and faithful friend. You spent your youth and
life beside

me. You put up with my deficiencies and lacking in our lives and did not
complain to anyone. You secured my honour. You were the partner of my
sorrows and joys and my companion amid the odds of life. Now when, I am
leaving this world, I am pleased with you. And I bear witness to Allah
that you were a good wife. I am pleased with you. And I hope Allah may
also be pleased with you, and grant you reward.”

His lips sometimes moved and he prayed for her.

Aunt Zainab’s condition was nearly similar to her husband and she also
uttered the same prayers for her old husband through her conduct,
speech, condition, and looks.

At last the delegate of Allah came to take his soul. As if the death
delegate of Allah too thanked and praised her, since only a few hours
before the angel’s arrival she had bathed and cleaned him up and changed
his clothes; as if she wanted to send a bridegroom toward his wedding
chamber.

Following the passing away of Hajj Hassan, I went to see the aunt. Her
eyes were shedding tears. Her heart was grieved and heavy, but she had a
feeling of pride and exaltation, since she felt she had performed the
divine duties in connection with her husband.

Dear youths, do you not wish to have a prosperous life like that of aunt
Zainab and Hajj Hassan? Of course, you do! So you must observe the
existence of love and affection in the selection of your spouse. You
should marry someone, whom you definitely love and that

person must also love you. Marriage is not only the communion of bodies,
it is also the unity of hearts. And this relation should be so strong
and unbreakable as to persist and last until the end of life. And only a
relation can have such a quality, which is established on two pillars;
that is, the same two forms of love, which have previously been defined.

### Mutual Love

In one way, love alone does not suffice a felicitous life. Instead, both
spouses must love and adorn each other. If one loves the other and the
other does not, then their life would have difficulty. The indifference
and apathy of the other would soon cool down the love and affection of
the spouse. Consequently, hatred and scorn will develop on both sides.
It is two-way love that creates prosperity, not one way love.

### A Net Of Deception

One of the traps into which most of the youth fall and usually can not
escape is that they discover, before the marriage’s execution, that they
do not like each other (or one of them does not like the other) and they
want to avoid the marriage, but the family members and their friends say
“Now you marry and afterwards love will be created!” These inexperienced
youths, having believed in their word, marry and thereafter not only is
love not created, but also with each passing day their mutual scorn and
hatred increases. Miseries surround them. And then those people who
recommended their marriage and promised them the development of love,
all vanish away. All have left them alone to themselves

to pass a cool, frigid, spiritless life with a mountain of difficulties
and agonies. Even if those who promised them that love would develop
wish to help them, they simply cannot.

Youths (both boys and girls) must concentrate upon and be cautious about
this point: that love must be present or should take shape at the
beginning so as to build the foundations of marriage. There is no
guarantee that it may develop at a later stage. I have seen many persons
who married bearing this wrong conception and logic in their minds and
their lives were ruined. We would describe one of these bitter stories
later on. Here take a look at two sorrowful events, which have been
described by Ayatollah Ameeni.

### First Tragic Story:

Mrs ... writes in her letter: “Nearly a year ago, I married a young man
whom I did not know previously. He twice visited our home, but I did not
have the chance to think carefully whether I liked him as my future
husband or not. I told myself that after the marriage contract takes
shape, love would follow. But unfortunately, after the marriage
contract, when he came to our home, I discovered that I really did not
have any inclination towards him.

Thereafter, I discussed the matter with my family, but I was strongly
opposed. They said: “You will start to like him later on”. But now even
after the lapse of one year from the date of our marriage, not only have
I not developed any liking for him, but even I do not love

the sight of him. Really I am exhausted. Many times I thought of
committing suicide, but I was afraid of Allah. My life is like a hell. I
burn inwardly and tolerate it. What must I do?”**[1]**

### Second Tragic Letter

Mr... from... writes: “It is now five years I have been serving in the
Islamic Republic’s armed forces. Four years ago I married my cousin.
During these four years, I did not have any interest in life, nor do I
have it yet, because I married this girl, whose life has been made
bitter by me, upon the insistence of my parents. I did not like this
girl, but upon the insistence of my parents, I moved for the asking of
her hand in marriage and thus destroyed her life and mine. I do
everything possible to forget the past and set my heart and please it
with this life, but it is in vain. Whenever I go home on leave, I become
the cause of the displeasure and pain to my parents as well as my wife.
Now my parents have accepted their fault but to no use. It is very late
now and I do not know what to do. I always pray with weeping eyes at the
end of my service. I feel sorry about why I ruined the life of this girl
whom I can not make happy.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Spouse selection, p 9S, 96, first edition.  
 **[2]** Spouse selection, p 191.

### Important Question And Answers

So far we have come to conclude that love between spouses is the axis
and real pillar of marital life, and should be present before marriage,
and that life be founded upon it.

Now the question arises about the boy and the girl who did not see and
know each other before marriage, or even if they knew one another, there
was no attachment and affiliation between them (as they did not have any
intention to marry) and now they have made up their minds to take steps
regarding proposal and investigation (into each other’s characters etc),
how is it possible that all of a sudden love should be developed in
their hearts? How must they understand whether they like each other or
not? They were not acquainted and friendly towards each other to
discover their love, hatred or any of the two. Briefly speaking what is
the way and criteria of their discovery of each other’s love or hate?

Ans. This is a very important and fundamental question and must be
perfectly attended to and needs much concentration, careful thought, and
contemplation. And now carefully read the explanation in this respect.

The illegal friendships and the street romances, which are practised by
immodest people is against the interest of boys and girls, and can never
end up in a sacred and prosperous marriage. We definitely do not suggest
with reference to the facts described in chapters 5 and 6 that this
problem is well soluble. In

this manner we keep the standards described in chapter 5 in view and
start following the guide plan of chapter 6. The more we move ahead, the
more our recognition of the concerned person increases and the
attraction or disinclination towards him becomes evident. With the
increase in our information pertaining to one’s qualities and traits and
that of his family, our love or scorn for him would be inflated.

We keep moving on this course until we reach a final decision (positive
or negative). If we do not reach a clear-cut conclusion in the initial
phase of the plan (consultation and friendships and mundane loves. And
by love we do not mean such unsuitable and incorrect matters. These
illegal companionships and loves severely damage the honour and
personality of the youth and bring them many miseries. And the girl
suffers more harm than the boy.

The fate of a girl who loses her modesty and honour as a result of
mixing with passionate and lustful men is extremely painful. Never has a
prosperous family been seen to be raised from the effects of these
filthy games. Regretfully, some weak-minded girls are deceived by the
false promises of these glib‑tongued impostors and they lose their
honour and modesty on the hope of finding a felicitous marriage. As a
result, they smoulder in the hearth of repentance and regret. (Of
course, there are girls too who trap boys and make them miserable.)

Anyway, the correct way and answer to the question is as follows: seek
advice, mediation, investigation and

sending a messenger), then we carry on with the final phases (writing a
letter, sending pictures, direct conversation, seeing each other) until
we reach a point of decision.

Do not forget the final point of the sixth chapter; that is “step by
step and with patience and perfect caution”. Do not forget this. If one
works according to what has been described, and the various stages of
spouse selection are crossed with patience and caution and the standards
described in chapter 5 are observed, the situation of love or no love
and attraction or repulsion would become clear.

I strongly emphasize and stress that until such time as the state of
love is not fully clear and evident and it is not known that the girl
and the boy like each other, steps in connection with marriage must not
be taken. Of course, they may not drop the idea also. If there exists a
condition of neither love nor hatred and the fact that whether they love
or hate each other remains ambiguous, then a final decision must not be
taken; rather the plan of chapter 6 should be carried on until
ultimately it is known that they like each other or not.

My brother and sister, be fully cautious and attentive not to be
subjected to any deviational factor. And take your last decision with
great care, caution and patience, and by considering all the dimensions
of the problem. It is possible that some people may pressurize you by
saying “Why are you suspending it? What kind of flaw or demerit does
that person have? Come on, hurry up, give an answer, you do not need to
think so much.

What will people say if they understand that? It will break my heart if
you reject him (or her) and I will curse you! And you will remain
spouseless for the rest of your life. You just say OK and leave the rest
of it to us! Everything will be all right ...”

If this style does not work, they may threaten you, particularly in the
case of the girl, and make the youth yield to an unwanted marriage
through fear, pressure and harassment.

But you do not pay heed to such words and false ultimatums and threats.
And it cannot take place unless you say “Yes” and no one can do a thing
in this regard. If a marriage takes place without the consent of the boy
and the girl and under pressure, it is null and void. And such a
marriage would be illegal. Do not submit to an illegal marriage. Some of
the elders when confronted with a negative reply or suspension of the
reply by the boy or the girl often say “What fault does that person
have, so that you are not accepting or are delaying the marriage?” The
answer to this is that it is not essential that the person must
necessarily have some shortcoming so that the reply be given is negative
or the matter be suspended, but he may be even good and still one does
not accept him as a spouse. And this is the legal right of a person to
accept or reject a proposal.

### An Artificial Life Is Unendurable

If marriage is not accompanied by mutual love and respect, an upset and
disturbed life will come into existence, and no force, law or convention
can settle it down. Let us look into the philosophical and wise words of
martyr professor Mutahhari in this regard:

“Two persons can be made to work together by force and legal compulsion,
so can they be obliged to honour their commitment on the basis of
justice and co‑work for many years, but it is not possible to force two
individuals by law to love and sincerely befriend each other and
practice mutual self sacrifice, with each one regarding the prosperity
of the other as his own.”**[1]**

At the end of this chapter, we again stress and remember that: minute
care, Yes! obsession, No! “Caution! Caution oh listener! Trial, trial oh
unmindful. Nobody informs and awakens you like the wise and
knowledgeable one.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Right of the woman in Islam, p 313, Sadra Publications, fifth
edition.  
 **[2]** Nahjul Balagha, sermon 153, Subhi saleh.
