Chapter Six: Selection
======================

In the previous discussions, especially the 5th chapter, some of the
people for whom these discussions are arranged, would usually ask this
question “How and by what means should one recognise and select a
spouse”?

We gave them a short response, saying, please wait until we reach this
topic and then we will give a detailed answer.

Now is the time for that.

Time To Act
-----------

Now that we have learnt the merits and excellence of marriage, the time
of marriage, the benefits of its early execution and demerits of its
delay, the difficulties, hurdles and restraints on its way and their
solutions and the standards of spouse selection and with the help of
Allah decided to marry, how should we proceed?

Now that we have achieved the knowledge of its criteria, what is the way
of identifying the spouse who may be concordant with these standards?
And how can we ascertain that our standards have been secured?

Briefly, after getting to know the theory, we wish to practice it. So
how must we cross this bridge?

Ans: At a time when the standards and principles are in one’s hand and
one knows what one wants, then moving on the way is not very difficult
(although it is a small thing to do and needs concentration). It is like
a traveller, who has a destination and knows which way he is heading and
what is his object and goal. But such a traveller must have a guide map
to reach his destination, safe and sound.

From the beginning of these discussions up to chapter 5, the aim was
described clearly (thanks to God). In this chapter, the guide map will
inshallah, be illustrated and clarified.

### Selection

Just as different standards are set up for handing over various offices
and posts and individuals are selected according to those standards and
specifications, similarly, for selecting the post of spouse, persons
must be selected according to its criteria (for both a boy and a girl).
This selection has a very important role to play in the lives of both.

Perfect Recognition
-------------------

The girl and boy who want to select someone as their spouse must have a
complete and all out recognition of that person.

The attainment of this recognition is one of the unavoidable
necessities. In any case, it is not advisable for someone who wants to
spend a whole lifetime beside a person and let him share all her
belongings, tie up her fate with him and make him an intimate by making
an eternal commitment, whilst not having sufficient recognition of that
person. Carelessness and indifference in this field is a kind of
suicide, which no clever, sane person can commit.

Following the selection of faith and school of thought, there is no
other selection and decision as great and important as this one. No one
affects our destiny as much as our spouse, following the prophets and
divine leaders. (The impacts of parents relates mostly to pre‑marital
age. Right now we are discussing marriage.)

One wonders with what kind of words and expression one must explain this
importance. I believe the various dimensions and importance of the role
of a spouse in one’s destiny, and the essentiality of minute care in
spouse selection cannot be defined as they should be.

Even spouses themselves may not perceive and weigh their mutual effects
upon each other’s destiny in the practical field (because the effects
are gradual), but the effect does its work in a continued and permanent
way.

The marital world is really a queer and strange world, full of secrets
and signals, quite amazing and based upon wisdom.

Ways of spouse selection {style="margin-top:60.0pt"}
========================

First Way: Seeking Advice
-------------------------

The worth and importance of advice is quite clear and vivid, so it is
not necessary to discuss it. All that is important here is how to get
advice in connection with spouse selection.

### A Sage Guide

It is a must for every one to select a sage and wise guide and seek his
advice in all the important matters of his life, even though he may have
to face a tiresome search to find such a guide. This is because a guide
has determinant effects upon human life.

For the youth, depending upon self-opinion, not seeking counsel can be
dangerous, particularly in the problems of spouse selection. It may even
cause inconceivable regrets.

Allah specifies the faithful as those who seek advice:

**﴿وَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَى بَيْنَهُمْ﴾**

“And their rule is to take counsel among themselves.”

So this sage and wise guide must be consulted and counselled on all the
phases of marriage and setting up of a joint life.

### The Qualities Of An Adviser

One cannot seek the advice of everybody, since if the adviser does not
possess the characteristics of good counselling, he will misguide and
distract the one seeking advice. As a result, the harm and damage will
exceed the benefit (if any).

The adviser’s qualities are as follows:

#### 1‑ Religiousness:

An irreligious man cannot be confided in. A religious one, besides being
worthy of confidence, looks at the matters from an Islamic point of view
and he gives his opinion according to Islamic standards.

#### 2‑ Wits And Intelligence

#### 3‑ Having Sufficient Knowledge And Awareness About The Problems Of Spouse Selection And Marriage.

#### 4‑ Freedom And Independence Of Opinion Expression:

He may express his opinion and belief freely and fearlessly, short of
any wrong consideration. A person who lacks freedom of opinion may take
some incorrect policies into consideration, which may harm the
advice‑seeker.

#### 5‑ Having Goodwill

#### 6‑ Trustworthy

Parents can have an important role in this connection and be sympathetic
and well-wishing advisers to the youths. They may put their views and
experiences at the disposal of their children, not thrusting and
imposing those on them.

### An Important Reminder

The youth, after having taken the views and advice of others, should
make the decisions themselves. The linkage between the advice seeker and
the adviser should be like that of the pilot with the ‘control tower’,
that is to say, he may take the information and guidance, but the
control and the decision must be in his own hand.

Allah says about the Prophet (a.s):

**﴿وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْرِ فَإِذَا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى
اللَّهِ.﴾**

“And take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have decided,
then place your trust in Allah;”

Second Way: Mediator And Introducer
-----------------------------------

A person who introduces the boy and the girl for marriage is an
introducer or mediator. Sometimes after introducing them, he even
extends help and assistance in the process or he does not introduce, but
the youth himself or his family turns to him for help in the search of a
suitable person or for guidance in this regard. The worth and divine
reward of this act has already been described.

This mediation and introduction and referring to the introducer or
mediator can have a great importance in spouse selection. Therefore, one
must be very careful in conducting this affair and must not depend or
trust every Tom, Dick and Harry. Instead, the personality of the
mediator must have some qualities. The boy and the girl also have some
duties in this respect, which must be taken into consideration.

### Kinds Of Mediators

#### 1- An Aware Well-Wisher

They know the standards and are familiar with the ways and means of this
important responsibility and discharge it very well. One can trust and
confide in them.

The standard for recognising and evaluating these ‘mediators’ and
‘introducers’ is the same as has been described in the discussion about
counselling; which means, all those attributes and characteristics
described for an advisor stand true and valid here too.

The advisor and introducer may be one person or two different persons.
That is to say, it is possible that the same man who is being consulted
with becomes a mediator and introducer. He might also perform one job;
i.e., he may have the capability of being an advisor, but may not know
someone to be introduced.

#### 2‑ An Unaware Well‑Wisher

They have good intentions and want to do a good deed and be rewarded,
but they do not know the ways and means. They intend to do good, but
because they are

unaware of the standards and manners of spouse selection, they may bring
damage. The intention is benevolent, but their practice is evil.
Trusting them is harmful and the cause of repentance and agony.

### A Sad Specimen

There was a person who was a well‑wisher, having pure intention and
lofty courage. Well-wishing and doing good to others and helping them
were part of his attributes and he was a success in these deeds. Once,
among the numerous good deeds, which he performed, was introducing girls
and boys to each other to mediate in marriage. Regretfully, he did not
have sufficient experience, knowledge, and vision in this part of his
activities, causing the usual failure of those marriages mediated by
him.

One of the cases dealt by him is as follows:

He introduced a girl named Afsana to a boy named Ghulam, praising her
very much. Ghulam’s brother who was aware of the nature of his brother
and had acquired some information about Afsana as well, said to him,
“This girl is not suitable for my brother. They are not a match and
cannot have a successful life.” But the mediator insisted saying, “Let
them see each other and talk; they may reach an understanding.”

Ghulam’s brother who knew about his brother’s weakness, indecisiveness
and witlessness and had gathered an amount of information about the
cunningness, glibness and evilness of Afsana, told the mediator, “I know
my brother very well. I am aware of

his mental and spiritual conditions; and if he talks to Afsana, he would
lose his heart in love with her and would submit to her will. And then
the conventional agreement will take place, but this will not be a real
harmony and will be followed by serious and grave results.” But the
mediator insisted with good will, since he did not have any negative
intention.

Anyhow, Ghulam reached the stage of action. The brother talked to Ghulam
as well, and told him, “Brother, this girl does not suit you, and she is
not fit for you. She has some peculiarities, which are not at all proper
and proportional to you. If you marry her, your lives will be ruined”.

Regretfully, his endeavours did not bring fruit. At last, Ghulam and
Afsana met each other, resulting in what the brother was afraid of.
Ghulam submitted to her and finally they were married.

As a result of this inauspicious marriage, such turmoil and disturbance
took place that I do not remember any parallel to it. That is, I have
never heard and seen such negative, unfortunate and adverse results in
any marriage like that one.

The brother said to the mediator: “See what you have done!”

He replied: “I had good intentions and never wanted all this.”

The brother reflected: “Yes I know that, but since you do not have the
ability to do this, you happened to bring evil, so never carry on with
these good deeds”.

This mediator and introducer was the same one who introduced Ismail and
Safoora whose story has already been described in the fifth chapter.

#### 3‑ Persons Who Have Bad Intentions And Evil Cause And Promote Their Own Special Benefits And Profits.

These persons have evil intentions and evil practices. They are similar
to conjuror brokers who want to achieve their own benefits and secure
their impure objectives through fraud, glibness, and a crafty character.

Youths and families must remain cautious and very careful that they are
not get deceived by these impostors and hypocrites.

### An Important Warning To The Youth

Although the mediators and introducers of the first group are absolutely
dependable and trustworthy and are a good help to the youth in spouse
selection, this is not to say that whatever they say and introduce must
be accepted by the youth. No! not at all! The youth themselves are the
ones who must take the final decision. That is, the duty of those
introducers is only extending help and guidance, but the final decision
is to be taken by the boy and the girl. This point must never be
forgotten.

Third Way: Investigation
------------------------

Investigation is among the important ways and means of this ‘guide map.’

One day when I was busy writing this chapter, the agent of an
organisation who was making an investigation about a candidate for a job
met me. Following our discussion about the candidate, I said to the
investigator: “Since your job is so important, be very careful in the
selection of individuals.”

He told me: “We investigate a person who wants to join our organisation
for nearly six months. We contact a large number of people who know him
and take a great deal of consideration and investigation about him into
account. If we do not find he meets our standards, we do not accept
him.”

After he left, I thought: If it is necessary to investigate a man for
six months before handing him over an administrative responsibility,
then how long must one investigate for the sake of spouse selection and
handing over the charge of a lifelong responsibility of a joint life and
the duty of bringing into existence a new generation, and selecting a
spouse who plays a fundamental role in the prosperity or adversity of a
person’s world and hereafter? Moreover, if the person employed proves to
be evil, he can easily be replaced, but replacing a spouse, if he or she
does not come up to be homogeneous, will be too much difficult or
impossible!

### Acceptance Or Rejection Needs Logic

### Acceptance Or Rejection Needs Logic

Just as someone must not be accepted as a spouse without sufficient
logic and recognition, similarly, he or she must not be rejected without
enough justification, logic and recognition. We must have logic for both
acceptance and rejection. Some people reject a person just because they
do not have sufficient recognition of the person in question. It is as
wrong as the acceptance short of recognition, because the rejected
person may be a pious and suitable one and after losing him, we may not
get at another one who is equally good.

### The Ways Of Investigation And How To Cross Them

The standard of investigation is not equal for all. The more the person
under investigation is known to you, the less investigation would be
required. The more unknown is a person, the more would it be necessary.

Those who want to marry among their relatives and acquaintances, their
job would become easier and it may even not be necessary to observe all
the problems, which have been mentioned about investigation. However,
they too are not independent and free of investigation, counselling and
seeking advice. In any case, a complete and comprehensive recognition
must be attained. While making an investigation, variant ways should be
moved upon and the minute details of the problems must be considered.
Different information should be gathered and placed in an even order and
considered and contemplated from all aspects to reach a result
gradually.

Any information achieved on the way of investigation is a help and
guidance toward the destination, whether small or large; since the
details of a matter give man access to the principles. But each one of
the details must not be depended upon separately to reach a result.
Instead, a result may be concluded from the aggregation and collection
of them, and a decision taken thereupon.

Now, we consider the ways, means and cases of investigation.

#### 1‑ Consideration Of The Conditions And Qualities Of The Relatives Of The Person

It has been described in chapter five under the topic ’family nobility’
that some of the qualities and attributes spread over a family are
common among the members of that progeny, like the branches which are
nourished by the common roots. This is a good criterion and guide in
investigation. You can, by considering the qualities and conditions of
the relatives, strongly presume that such and such attributes,
qualities, and peculiarities are present in the person in question.

The prophet of Islam (a.s) said in this connection:

“Marry among so and so group (a person from that group) since they are
men of modesty, thus their women too have become modest. And do not
marry among such and such group of people, for their men committed
immodesty, thus their women too became

immodest.”**[1]**

In this hadith of the Prophet (a.s), modesty and immodesty have been
described; so this gives us a good standard for investigating.

#### 2‑ Investigating Through His Relatives

Relatives are aware of the qualities, spirit, morality and character of
a person and one can make an investigation about the person in question
through them.

### Attention

It is possible that the relatives and associates may not state the facts
and may conceal any fault which they are aware of, due to the fear of
the displeasure of the person or his family who might come to know of it
later, or on account of their love for them. Therefore, the views of the
relatives cannot be a proof; instead, it can be a guide for the other
phases of investigation. But if one gets satisfied that the person being
counselled is a just and impartial one who does not hide the facts, he
can be trusted.

### A Safe And Sure Way

If someone has a sincere friend among the relatives of the person he
wishes to select, he has an advantage and a benefit, and a safe canal
and way to reach his object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Marriage in the school of the prophet's progeny, by Najafi
Yazdi, p 88.

#### 3‑ Through His/Her Close Friends

Classmates, co‑workers and close friends who have been in contact and
associated to him for a long time are good for investigation.

All that has been described about the relatives (advisability and
concealment) stands here also.

#### 4‑ Through Teachers, Administrators And Managers

They may know certain points, which even the relatives and close friends
do not know. There is less or no chance of the difficulty concerning
hiding and concealing and advisability, because neither they are his/her
conventional relatives and friends nor do they see any need for
concealing things. Besides, these individuals are usually sagacious and
wise persons.

#### 5‑ Investigation Through His/Her Enemies

Enemies of a person describe his faults more explicitly. Of course, the
view of these people (enemies) is never a proof and must not be
practised as a criterion. It is only useful for the sake of collecting
informative data and pre‑awareness. The faults and flaws of the person
described by them may not be attended to or become the basis of any
practice, unless they are proved by other ways and means too.

Fourth Way: Sending A Messenger
-------------------------------

This is among the best means of the guide map and can be practised as
follows:

The boy, the girl, and their families may choose a number of relatives
and acquaintances and send them to the house of their concerned person.
They may describe the manner and mode of their delegation before
actually sending them for the important mission, so that their
standards, points of view, and perceptions, which must be taken in view
by them, can be explained to them.

### The Peculiarities Of A Messenger

Not everyone can be sent for this fate‑deciding mission; instead they
must have some peculiarities:

1-   Mindful and clever

2-  Well-wishing

3-   Trustworthy

4-   Possessing correct standards and experience

5-   Both young and aged ones should be included in the delegation
(group), since the older ones will have experiences which the young ones
may not, and the younger ones may have standards and insights which may
be lacking by the older ones.

After the return of the delegates from their mission, the boy the girl
and their families may take the information and the views and think,
take advice and contemplate them from all aspects before deciding what
steps should be taken next.

### Attention

The information and views of the delegates are a guide and not a final
authority, and there is always a possibility of their erring in their
opinion.

In this phase too the girl and the boy are the final decision makers,
after having studied all the aspects of the matter.

Fifth Way: Writing A Letter
---------------------------

If the ground is levelled after crossing the previous ways and the boy
and the girl come close to a positive decision, then the next step can
be letter writing. Here we do not mean those dirty, anti‑religious
letters which some people write, instead, we mean they may send letters
based upon modesty and religion through messengers, with the consent of
their families, wherein they can describe: their aims, objectives,
wishes, aspirations and hopes regarding the spouse and their pertaining
standards, future plans and programmes and their spirit about such
matters, short of any misinterpretations, concealment of facts and wrong
presentation. If written truly and honestly, these letters can be a
medium of mutual recognition and can also be effective in making the
final decision.

### Attention

In these letters, passionate and stimulating matters must not be written
in any case, because:

Firstly: these things are anti‑religious and prohibited.

Secondly: these things weaken the power of the mind

with respect to making correct decisions and hand the work over to the
heart (sentiments).

Thirdly: so far it is not known whether marriage will materialise or
not, since they might reach a negative result.

Sixth Way: Photograph
---------------------

Following the previous stages, if there is a positive result in hand and
the girl and the boy have not seen each other, then seeing photographs
can be effective in enhancement of recognition and reaching a decision.

Again, the exchange of photographs does not mean anything against
modesty, instead, they must be sent through trustworthy messengers of
the family and returned after being seen.

This can in no way be a logic and proof, since a photo can not describe
the interior facts of a person, even to the extent that it can not
perfectly exhibit the apparent view, but it is a partial guide toward
recognition and a short step towards the later steps to be taken.

Seventh Way: Direct Talk
------------------------

Direct negotiation is among the most important and effective ways of the
‘guide map’. Following the crossing of the previous ways and achieving a
positive result, the boy and the girl must definitely have direct
dialogue to consider and discuss their problems and views in a
comfortable atmosphere without any fear and pressure from others. This
talk should take place in an emotion free way with preparation and
readiness.

There should be a distance between the decision to talk and its being
conducted, so that both may prepare themselves and note down all that
they intend to discuss. It is better if these talks are held at
interval. As a whole, whatever time is necessary may be put at their
disposal.

One of the important benefits of these talks is that both parties can
discover and understand a great deal of interior mysteries, qualities
and conditions of each other.

The commander of believers Ali (a.s) said:

**مَا أضْمرَ أحَدٌ شَيئاً إلاّ ظَهرَ في فَلَتاتِ لِسانِهِ وَصَفَحاتِ
وَجهِهِ.**

“Whatever a person thinks about, is revealed by the slips of the tongue
and facial expressions.”**[1]**

This is a principle of psychology, which Imam (a.s) described in this
way. It means that the internal conditions and affairs are sometimes
made evident and manifest by the slip of the tongue and the expression
of the face. It is a good doorway to studying the interior of a human
and his conscience.

Mothers and fathers who desire the prosperity and felicity of their
children must help and assist them in this important problem and provide
the grounds and the necessary comfort and peace for them. But it is not
for them to prevent it and exhibit undue prejudice. This talk is
desirable from Islamic and logical points of v\*\*\*iew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha, Subhi Saleh, wisdom 26.

It is not for us to become more severe than Islam and more Muslim than
the Prophet (a.s). Many times the girl’s parents have been observed
preventing this talk in the name of Islam and modesty, whereas Islam and
modesty commands us to provide the means to our children’s felicity.
This talk has a vital role in bringing about the prosperity of the
husband and the wife.

### The Method Of This Meeting

The topics to be discussed in this meeting are different and variant,
since persons, their beliefs, aspirations, ambitions, aims and desires
are variant. Nonetheless, some topics are general and it is essential to
discuss them. Therefore, we describe some of these so that the youth may
use them as the agenda of the meeting.

#### 1‑ Describing The Course Of Future Life

In other words, they should describe on which foundation they wish to
erect the structure of life. For instance, a religious youth wants his
life to be founded upon the basis of Islamic laws and his/her spouse
should also be like that. And both of them should be submissive to Islam
in all of life’s affairs.

#### 2‑ Discussing The Future Aims

They should describe their aims, which they want to achieve in their
future lives, such as their targets and ambitions in the field of
knowledge, morality, social life and job etc.

Also, the probable changes, modifications and transpositions of their
future life, which have been described in chapter 5, and which we said
it was

necessary for the spouses to discuss before marriage, are suitable here
(please refer to chapter 5).

#### 3‑ The True Description Of One’s Attributes, Morality And Other Peculiarities

#### 4‑ Description Of Demands And Expectations From Each Other

#### 5‑ Description Of One’s Views About How To Conduct Relations And Contacts With The Family, Relatives, And Associates Of Each Other

#### 6‑ The Discussion Of The Style And Mode Of Their Children’s Training

#### 7‑ Description Of One’s Ailments, Disabilities And Diseases (If Any)

If the boy and girl have a disease or handicap, they must truthfully
describe them without any exaggeration; because:

Firstly: this work is obligatory, and hiding and concealing the flaws
and shortcomings is reckoned to be a fraud, cheating, and hypocrisy, and
it is prohibited and unlawful.

 Secondly: if the handicap and shortcoming is described at the early
stage, the party accepts him/her along with that defect or rejects it.
If they accept it, then they prepare themselves to endure it and take
that man/woman to be a true, straightforward and daring one and so they,
start loving him/her. In the future, he/she will not consider him/her
self to be cheated. But if it is not made known and the bond takes shape
short of the other party’s knowledge, then after being made

aware of that handicap or shortage, the side not knowing it would
consider him/her self as being cheated, and then plenty of difficulties
and complications would follow. The love of the spouse would finish in
his/her heart and he/she would start to bear a grudge against him/her,
because nobody loves a cheat. If the incapacity or shortage had been
truthfully told earlier, it would possibly have been accommodated. But
after marriage, it is quite different.

When the hidden secret are manifest

The faces with make up are disgraced

Cheating and pompous show is a shame

Bad is it although acted nicely.**[1]**

### Attention

There is no need to describe some of the shortcomings, ailments, and
wrongs of the past, which do not have any relation with the rights of
the spouse and the future life.

If there was, or is a defect and blemish, which you do not know whether
its description pertains to the spouse’s rights and future life, consult
a wise person as has been described before in chapter 6.

### Do Not Accept Any Undue Conditions And Demands

Sometimes, it is observed that the boy or girl present and impose
conditions and demands which are unjust and unfair and deprives the
other party from its legal

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ustad Jawad Mohaddesi.

and established rights, and negates its discretion or liberty.

These demands and conditions must not be accepted in any situation. The
discretion, liberties and rights given by Allah to each man and woman
should not be given up by accepting such conditions. Do not tell
yourself now I accept it, but I will not implement it afterwards,
because the acceptance of a condition brings commitment:

**المُؤمِنونَ عِندَ شُروطِهِم.**

“The believers must practice upon their conditions (commitments)”.

The discretions of men and women are of two kinds; i.e., the established
and obligatory and the non‑obligatory. The non‑obligatory ones can be
omitted, but the obligatory and established rights and discretions
should not be surrendered to anybody. Allah made them obligatory on
account of wisdom, advisability, and expedience. Losing them would be
against wisdom and expedience, damaging life, and diverting it from its
natural course.

In the age of Imam Ali (a.s), a man accepted a condition of his spouse,
which had caused the loss of one of his specific rights. Imam (a.s)
objected to it, saying, “Why do you give away a right, which Allah has
fixed for you, through a condition? This condition is not valid and is
void. And anything which Allah has fixed can not be changed and
transformed by making a

condition.”**[1]**

The obligatory and non‑obligatory rights have been discussed in the
Islamic problems of jurisprudence and law.

Eighth Way: Seeing Each Other
-----------------------------

After all the previous ways have been crossed and a positive result is
achieved and all matters are on the right course with no hurdle on the
way to marriage, before taking the last and final decision, the boy and
girl should see each other, if they have not done so previously.

Seeing the face and appearance is one of the most essential and
necessary problems of the ‘guide map’. Every judicious mind decides that
two spouses who are supposed to live together for a life-time, must,
apart from the homogeneity and harmony in problems described so far,
like each other’s apparent looks too.

And this liking or disliking involves and necessitates seeing each
other.

Howsoever the praise and definition of others may be, it is not
sufficient. Instead, the boy and girl should see each other, since their
tastes are different.**[2]** Seeing a small portion of the face too is
not sufficient, instead, it should be seen completely, openly, and
evidently so

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This subject has been described in the previous chapter under
the title of "beauty".

**[2]** This subject has been described in the previous chapter under
the little of "beauty".

that no ambiguity is left over.

Let it not be said: “We are pleased with everything and since our aims
and criteria are secured, the looks and facial features are not
important.” This is because the liking or disliking of the looks and
features of the intended spouse may affect all the previous results.

As a slogan it can be said: If the spouse has such and such qualities
and attributes, the other things would not be important”; but when one
enters the practical stage or comes to face the facts, it does make a
difference.

### Considering This Topic In The Light Of Traditions

A man named Mughaira bin Shoba asked for the hand of a woman in
marriage, but apparently he had not properly seen her. The prophet of
Islam (a.s) said to him:

**لَو نَظَرتَ إلَيهَا فإنَّهُ أحْرَى أنْ يَدُومَ بَينَكُما.**

“Had you seen her, there would have been more hope of a prolonged and
durable agreement and understanding between you two (during your
life).”**[1]**

Likewise, the Prophet (a.s) said to one of his companions who wanted to
propose a woman:

**اُنْظُر إلى وَجْهِها وَكَفَّيْهَا.**

“Look at her face and hands.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia.

**[2]** Mustadrak al-Wasail.

A man asked Imam Sadiq (a.s): “Can a man who intends to marry a woman
see her hair and beauties? “

The Imam (a.s) said:

“There is no problem if he does not have the intention of enjoying it
(he really wishes and intends to marry her).”**[1]**

We have many traditions in this connection which have described more
sensitive topics. Here we restrain ourselves to these hadiths.

We turn to the word of Ayatollah Ameeni in this respect:

“Boys and girls are advised not to prevent being seen and each one of
them should permit the other to see him or her. It is better than
marrying without seeing and afterwards being unhappy. And, as a
consequence of this, they may reach divorce or be obliged to lead their
lives in a state of displeasure, discomfort, frigidity and
dispute.”**[2]**

### Caution

The problems concerning seeing and approving, like all selection
problems, should not reach the limit of obsession, rather, it should be
an average and accustomed amount.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14, p 60.

**[2]** spouse selection, p 114.


