Crossing the Slippery Road! Complete Caution At Every Step
==========================================================

In this case, too, minute care, yes, but obsession, no!

### Protecting The Girl’s Dignity

Particular minute care and delicateness may be exercised in the problem
of seeing the girl, meaning the dignity and honour of the girl should be
kept in view and not damaged.

It must not be that the girl is shown to whoever comes to ask for her
hand in marriage, prior to investigation, advice seeking and attaining
sufficient recognition of the boy; This is so that afterwards, it is not
discovered that she is unsuitable or the two of them do not match each
other and then he walks out and another one turns up and the process
continues repeatedly. This manner and style of practice damages the
dignity of the girl and has a negative effect upon her morale. The more
modest and chaste is the girl, the more she would be pained and hurt.

The correct style of action in this regard is that whenever someone
comes with a proposal, at first all the prefaces and the ways of
recognition such as investigation, advice seeking, and sending
messengers should be moved upon and when all the dimensions of the
affair are judged and it becomes clear that the boy does not have any
negative intention and they are a match for each other, without any
hurdle and constraint on the way to marriage with a strong probability
of their marriage, only then would the time be appropriate for them to
see each other as a last and final phase of selection.

Approval is limited, confined and specified to a serious intention of
marriage with a specified and fixed person under special conditions and
circumstances. One cannot see everybody on the pretext of marriage.
Islam has given permission only in this case and for the same specified
and fixed matter. And any sighting and seeing outside this framework is
“prohibited.”

Omenation  
 (Looking For Good Augury)
--------------------------

If the laws and ordains of Islam are correctly understood and rightly
practiced, they will bring prosperity. But if they are misunderstood and
wrongly practiced, then not only will they not bring prosperity, rather
they will incur losses.

One of the topics, which has been misunderstood and practiced in an
incorrect way is omenation. Although here is not the place to have an
all dimensional view of the problem of omenation, since omenation has
become connected to the matter of spouse selection, it is necessary to
discuss it briefly and as much as required.

### Kinds Of Omenation

#### 1‑ Asking Beneficence And Guidance From Allah:

The real meaning of ’istekhara’ or omenation is seeking benevolence,
goodness, and guidance from Allah. And this was the very practical
manner and method of the leaders of Islam (a.s). It is in fact a kind of
supplication and seeking Allah’s help and

depending on him in all matters and circumstances, particularly in the
selection of spouse.

Ayatollah Ibrahim Ameeni writes in this connection:

“The commander of believers Ali (a.s) offered two cycles of service for
the sake of omenation, thereafter, he used to repeat a hundred times:

**أَسْتَخِيرُ اللهَ.**

“I ask the beneficence from Allah.”

Then he used to recite this prayer:

**اَللّهُمّ إنّي قَد هَمَمْتُ بِأمْرٍ قَد عَلِمْتَهُ فَإنْ كُنْتَ
تَعْلَمُ أنَّهُ خَيرٌ لِي في دِيني وَدُنيَايَ وَآخِرَتي فَيَسِّرْهُ لي
وَإنْ كُنْتَ تَعْلَمُ أنَّهُ شَرٌّ لي في دِيني وَدُنيايَ وَآخِرَتي
فَاصْرِفْهُ عَنِّي. كَرِهَتْ نَفسِي ذلِكَ أمْ أَحَبَّتْ، فَإنَّكَ
تَعلَمُ وَلا أعْلَمُ وَأنْتَ عَلاَّمُ الغُيُوبِ.**

“O Allah! I want to perform that work which you know. If you consider it
good for my religion, world and hereafter, (then) provide the means for
it. And if you deem it bad for my religion, world, and hereafter, stop
me from doing it, whether I dislike it or love it, since you know (the
actual expedience) and I do not know. And You are the knower of the
unseen.” Then he would take a decision and step into a job.**[1]** The
thirty third supplication of Saheefa Sajjadiia of Imam Sajjad (a.s)
describes this point right from the beginning to its end (i.e. seeking
the beneficence and guidance of Allah). Please refer to the prayer,
which is most attractive and beautiful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Makarimul Akhalq, p 369.

#### 2‑ The Commonly Known And Current Omenation In Our Society

The omenation that is current and customary in our society is practiced
through Quran or beads, and conventionally is a way to discover one’s
duty and religious obligation.

This kind of omenation has its root and origin in Islam, but
regretfully, a distortion has taken place in it. And it has been
mis-shaped and disfigured in many the cases. That is to say, it has
replaced thought, reasoning, investigation, searching and consultation.
Therefore it has not only lost its benefit, but also turned harmful. It
is customary in spouse selection as well, and it sometimes inflicts
serious damage and loss.

#### The Correct Use Of Omenation

Whenever a person wishes to perform a job and its goodness and
advisability is clear to him, he should do it with the help and
dependence upon Allah, asking for His benevolence. There is no room for
omenation. If the evil and non‑advisability of the work is conspicuous,
even then there is no room and need for omenation. But if the goodness
and evil of the work is not clear and evident, and he does not know
whether he should do it or not, then he must ponder, contemplate, study,
investigate and seek advice, taking all the aspects of the problem into
view. If his mind is inclined and prefers one side of it, for instance
one side is 70% and the other 30%, then he should do that which has a
70% weighting (whether doing or not doing it). But if he stays puzzled
and at a loss as to which way to head, even after contemplation,
research

and consultation about all the possible methods and still remains
undecided, that is to say, at a 50% decision and he is not inclined
toward any one aspect of the job and at the same time can not quit that
work then comes the turn of ‘customary omenation.’

Omenation does not fix any religious or intellectual duty but drives man
out of amazement and surprise, indicating one of two ways for him.
Moreover, it does not have any guarantee that the way indicated may be
correct and the other one wrong!

And again it is not the work of everybody to hold a bead in his hand or
open the Quran to understand his obligation or to repeat it a number of
times until he gets his desired result.

Ayatollah Jawadi Amuli, who is one of the greatest exegetes of Quran and
experts of Islam in the contemporary world, said about omenation: “We
have not been encouraged to omenation in Islam.”

#### A Sorrowful Specimen Of Misunderstanding The Omenation

Adel who was a good and faithful student decided to marry. He was very
sensitive about spouse selection and had put in all his best efforts to
select a decent spouse.

To be just, he is a decent boy himself and one can say he has many of
the qualities of a good spouse. He set out many times, but he could not
find the required spouse. Until at last his friends and relatives
introduced a girl.

The search for investigation and recognition of the girl started. One of
the near relatives of the girl was the friend of Adel. So the matter was
discussed with him. He had a positive opinion about the girl and helped
out to the best of his capacities to level the ground for their mutual
recognition. They contacted some other persons who knew the girl (such
as teachers and classmates) and consulted them. The more they
investigated, the more the hope of her being the desired girl
strengthened.

After all the searching and endeavours were made, it became evident that
everything was all right and there was no constraint and hurdle in the
way of their marriage. Then came the turn of direct talks between the
boy and girl, and the proposal.

The date was fixed for the boy to visit the girl’s home, and we were
very hopeful that the marriage would materialise. Suddenly, the news
came from the girl and her family that they had gone for omenation and
it indicated to be bad.

I was greatly displeased by this news, since I was aware of their work
and saw that everything was in a good shape. I was quite hopeful that
the negotiation, visit and proposal would not have any difficulty, since
I knew the girl very well and Adel too.

I wanted to contact the girl’s family, avert them and make them change
their mind. But the acquaintances said: “They have a strong belief in
omenation and think that after the omenation has given a negative
result, it would be perilous for them to act against it,

and this marriage would become a misery.”

In my thoughts, I addressed the girl and her family. “Oh girl! Oh mother
and father! What is it that you did? Alas, why did you reject this boy
without any logic? Do you know that such omenation is anti-Islamic? If
the girl and the boy did not reach an understanding through direct talks
or did not like each other or you had reached a negative result after
making enquiries and had rejected him, there would have been nothing
wrong. And I would not feel sorry. But now you have thrown away your
prosperity and that of a decent orthodox boy, just by one omenation. Ah!
What an ignorance and misconception of religion.”

Many cases have been seen where a boy and a girl matched each other, but
on account of just such kind of an undue omenation, they could not get
married or they were not even suitable for each other and did marry only
to become miserable.

#### Another Specimen

A person proposed a girl. The girl’s father, short of any investigation,
recognition and consultation went to a man to take an omenation for him.
He did it to a positive result and the girl was married to that boy.

After a certain period of time, it was discovered that the boy was not
good and there was no match and proportion between the husband and the
wife. But now it was all over and the marriage had taken place, and the
difficulties and miseries started. The girl’s father would lament and
sorrowfully say: “It is the fault of such and such a person’s omenation
that my girl

became miserable and doomed.”

This father should be told: “It is the fault of extravagant beliefs,
misconceptions and your own ignorance. (Although the person who made
omenation may also have been at fault since he did not inform this
unaware person about the correct use of omenation. Perhaps even he
himself was unaware of it.)

Omenation has a vast discussion. For those who have knotted their fate
and faith with omenation and likewise, those who are inclined to have
more information about it, it is essential for them to carry out further
research and study this topic.

Imam Khomeini (r.a) has an interesting and attractive discussion in this
connection in the book Kashful Asrar, which is worth studying. Hereby we
present a short extract from his worthy words and leave its perfect
study to you:

“The traditions which pertain to omenation have not promised to always
reach the aim without any shortage. But all that has been promised is
that Allah bestows goodness upon the one who asks Him. If it is
advisable in this world, He gives it here, otherwise He stores it for
him.”**[1]**

At the end of this discussion, once again we quote Ayatollah Ameeni who
says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kashful Asrar, p 93, published by Nekukari Faterneeun
Foundation.

“The girl, the boy and the families must make an investigation for
recognition of the spouse. If they still have any doubt, they should
consult and take the advice of one or a number of informed, aware and
confidant persons. If they reach a result, they can take further steps.
Omenation is to be taken only where they do not reach a result through
the way of investigation and consultation, and might yet be in a state
of perplexity. Naturally, investigation and consultation has priority
over omenation. If the result of your search and probe is positive, go
ahead with the practice, and there is no need of taking omenation. There
are certain people who refer to omenation in each and every work,
whereas sometimes, undue, out of place omenation becomes the cause of
perplexity and hinders practice.”**[1]**

And finally, we must always keep the word of Ayatollah Jawadi Amuli in
view who said:

“We have not been encouraged in Islam to take omenation.”

Fate!
-----

There is a false belief and word which is customary among people
regarding the topic of marriage; for instance, “such and such a girl is
the fate of such and such a boy and so and so a boy is not in the fate
of this girl or if luck is there, everything will become all right and
it is not necessary to do anything else. If the fate is not there (to
help), whatever is done will be useless

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Spouse Sellection p 166-168.

and so on.” These ideas are vague and void and do not have any roots in
religion or reason. The problem of divine decree and accident is
something different.

It is my strong recommendation to all boys, girls, and their families
that they should cross the phases of pre-proposal and marriage and what
has been described in this chapter steadily, slowly, patiently, step by
step, with complete caution and carefulness.

When they say a good work must be done quickly and swiftly, it may be
true about the actual marriage, i.e. ”Do not delay the marriage”. But it
is not in any case correct about the premarital phases and the spouse
selection. All the steps of choosing, paying visits, checking and talks
should be carried out with patience, fortitude, cool mindedness and with
proper and necessary time between different phases.

Any kind of haste and rush at this stage is dangerous. Because many
cases have been observed where people became involved and confronted
with repentance and misery as a result of hurrying at this stage and
quickly crossing over the ways and avenues of spouse selection, proposal
and marriage.

This is a slippery way and a clever and reasonable person does not cross
a slippery road hastily. Haste and carelessness and speedy movement at
this point can result in an annihilating fall.

Have you ever seen a man crossing a minefield or a slippery avenue or a
thorny way hastily and hurriedly? A reasonable and clever person never
does that. The traversing of the ways in this phase needs a step-by-step
policy, not a revolutionary policy.

Yes, a revolutionary policy is essential in the actual marriage, when it
should be quickly materialised and not delayed. But as far as the
problem of spouse selection is concerned, it needs slow and cautious
movement.

Sometimes, it is observed that some people cross all the phases of
decision, investigation, consultation, proposal and marriage in a short
time and finish the work. This is not correct in anyway. Of course, it
is possible that in a few cases no difficulty arises and the job gets
done in a good way. But in many cases, difficulties will be confronted
and that will be the cause of repentance and suffering. The nature of
spouse selection and crossing its phases demands patience, subtlety, and
slow movement.

The imagination of a work, then concentrating thought, investigation and
consultation respect to reach a result and final decision as well as
taking steps in that direction needs a lot of time. Any haste in that is
troublesome and dangerous.

Spouse selection more than anything else needs foresight and
multidimensional contemplation. “The sage and wise is the one who thinks
about the end.” Haste and hurrying in this valley means falling from the
frying pan into the fire.

Even if everything seems to be on the right course, one must continue
with complete care and slowness. A foresighted man is a blessed one and
so is a foresighted woman.

Up to this point, by the grace and beneficence of Almighty Allah, the
aim, objective, and manner of reaching it has explicitly become evident.
And now we can, by dependence upon Allah and His help, take steps to
select a suitable and desired spouse with all the subtlety and
satisfaction at our command.

Allah be your guide and helper!

Self-Sacrificial Marriages {style="margin-top:60.0pt"}
==========================

Definition Of This Form Of Marriages
------------------------------------

Self‑sacrificial marriage means a marriage conducted for a lofty aim
(having the most sublime aim which attracts Allah’s pleasure) and for
the sake of kindness, sympathy and any worthy objective or cause with a
person who has a defect or deformity, and to endure the shortage for the
sake of that lofty aim. For example,

a person who marries someone with a physical deformity and bears and
endures that shortage for a worthy aim. Similarly, all other
deficiencies, defects, shortages and differences etc.

This form of marriage is out of the range of the necessity of equity and
matching of spouses described in chapter 5 because in that chapter it
was said that there should not be any eye‑catching differences between
the spouses in any point.

### The Worth And Excellence Of This Kind Of Marriage

There is no doubt that basically these marriages are highly worthy and
excellent from a divine and human values point of view and the one
practising them would be highly rewarded.

Islam has given importance and worth to such marriages and encouraged
them and has practically materialised them such as the marriage of the
Prophet (a.s) with Khadija (a.s) and the marriage of Zalfa with
Juwaiber, which took place on the command of the Prophet (a.s).

Islam has condemned imaginary class differences. In our society too we
have witnessed the grand marriages of self‑sacrificing orthodox girls
with the dear soldiers and crippled and incapacitated youth of the
Islamic revolution.

The number of girls who excelled Zalfa is not small in our society and
Islam and the revolution takes pride in them. And so it does in the
self‑sacrificing boys who,

for the sake of Allah’s pleasure marry girls apparently possessing a
lower status of distinction than them and who also have prosperous
lives. Thus, there is no controversy in the excellence and worth of such
marriages, but they have to be with their own conditions.

### Self‑Sacrificial Marriage Is Not A General Prescription

Everybody does not have the power and capacity for such a marriage and
cannot endure and bear it. Such marriages need a vast capacity of mind
and conscience and energy and strong endurance and a lofty aim as a
stimulant.

For those who lack such assets, it is not in anyway advisable for them
to take steps on account of sympathy and swiftly‑fading sentiments. The
one who intends to marry such persons should take his interior energies
in view and see whether he or she can endure this shortage and defect to
the end of life and not complain or grumble about it. Does he or she
possess all that energy and magnanimity not to boast of a favour to his
or her spouse and not to humiliate and belittle him or her for that
physical deformity, defect or handicap?

It someone marries such a person and thereafter boasts of a favour to
his or her spouse and annoys and displeases him or her, it will not only
have no reward, rather, he/she will have committed a sin as well. If
someone favours a person and later on boasts of that favour, annoying
and hurting him or her, the reward of

the favour will be finished and totally lost and there will also be a
sin committed by him.

The Quran and Islamic traditions indicate many points in this respect.
Let us concentrate upon the following verse of Quran:

**﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا تُبْطِلُوا صَدَقَاتِكُمْ بِالْمَنِّ
وَالأَذَى.﴾**

“O you who believe! do not make your charity worthless by reproach and
injury.” (2:264)

We were talking to one of the officers of the Foundation of Disabled
Soldiers, who was himself a disabled soldier, about a girl who was the
candidate to marry a disabled man. He said to me, “Tell that lady she
must think very carefully and not take that decision due to the turmoil
of youthful sentiments. If you marry a disabled soldier who might have
only lost his fingers (and nothing else), one thing you must do for him
is to button up his clothes for the whole of your life, apart from
hundreds of other things that need to be done. If you possess such a
strength, patience, and sacrificial power to serve him all your life,
not to be rough and rude to him or boast of your favour, then come
along, do it in the name of Allah, the Merciful and Beneficent.”

### Result

Such marriages are very sacred and have a high reward and value to
Allah, and heaven can be achieved through them. There are many people
who discharge its responsibilities well, but not everybody can. One
should not venture into this work simply on the basis

of sympathy and feelings. Instead, one must take one’s energies into
view, and consult those individuals who are aware about the matter,
before taking a decision.

“Wise is the one who meditates about the end.”

Remorse Before Marriage {style="margin-top:60.0pt"}
=======================

One of the problems which may arise is that the boy or the girl or both
of them, after passing through some of the preliminary phases of
marriage, such as negotiations, visits proposal, approval and sometimes
even after the marriage contract and attaining more acquaintance with
respect to the morality, conduct, peculiarities, face and figure, family
and other associates, may become remorseful and penitent. They might
start thinking that he/she was not the life partner they desired and
imagined, or the person turned out contrary to their desire after they
probed. They may also sometimes discover that they do not have any
inclination toward that person or, let us say, they dislike or even hate
him/her and cannot get along together nicely in their coming life.
Whatever may be the logic and reason (sometimes there is no reason) they
just do not like the person as a spouse.

Now when they want to give up the idea and dispense with the matter,
(alas! Woe to these ‘buts’) certain factors put a constraint on them and
stop them from

turning back. For instance, they imagine: “Now it is bad to desist. Our
news has been circulated between the two families. What must we reply to
the people? What would they say if they understand the situation?
Perhaps they think there was a special reason behind it. Now it is not
fair to break the heart of the individual concerned and damage the
reputation of the family in question. If we do it, they would be annoyed
and an enmity would appear. Now everything is over and we must endure
and bear it, etc.”

Others speak to their parents, close relatives and intimate friends, but
they frighten them saying the things described above. They try to
justify their critical questions and even promise them things like “Love
would develop afterwards and things would gradually move on the right
track.”

These factors completely crush their courage, fortitude and intent to
change their mind and explain the facts. Consequently, they keep their
remorse and disinclination in their hearts and apparently manifest their
agreement and tendency and finally submit to an undesired marriage.

Following the marriage, they exert pressure upon themselves to show
their agreeability and love for their new life and spend their time with
an artificial love, whilst there is a turmoil and revolt in their
interior. Gradually, the energy to show artificial love and agreement
subsides, since it is impossible and absurd that one can keep living
together with someone whom she or he detests or at least does not have
any

inclination and attraction to, and whose interior feelings will not
become obvious to the other side.

Then the differences and disputes, excuse findings, impatience, and
ill‑naturedness will start taking shape (God forbid).

### The Cause Of This Remorse

The cause of this remorse is that the standards of spouse selection
described in chapter 5, and the ways of its selection and the ‘guide
map’ of chapter 6, particularly the recommendations and advice of that
chapter, i.e. crossing the way with caution and carefully, step by step,
patience and slow movement, were not observed.

If those criteria and programmes are taken into view and the course of
the ‘guide map’ is traversed as described, it will not result in
remorse, or the chances of it would diminish to the smallest
possibility. This is because by following and implementing that
schedule, if any remorse develops, it is before the proposal and
marriage, not afterwards.

I emphatically and confidently say that if the standards of spouse
selection (chapter 5) and spouse choosing (chapter 6) are observed as
explained, in the same style, step by step, with perfect care and
caution while crossing its slippery course, then the probability of
repentance and remorse after proposal and marriage would be reduced to
less than 10%. But if not observed, there would be a huge number of
chances for such remorse and penitence.

### What Must Be Done In Such Cases?

If the youth (the boy or the girl) have come to confront the remorse and
stumbled into this marsh, what must they do? Should they stay there and
submit to this undesired situation or can they rescue themselves?

### Answer

Breaking a proposition and engagement, particularly when the marriage
contract has taken shape, is not a good thing to do and one should be
cautious not to allow things to reach such a stage. Having said that, it
is even worse for a person to lead his life in repentance, shame,
disinclination and agony.

If the boy and the girl or one of them has developed a sense of remorse
about the relation, then the best way out is to separate before marriage
and discontinue the movement. Although it is displeasing, marrying and
leading a life with repentance, remorse and uneasiness is harder and
more displeasing.

The responsibility of parents and families in this respect is as
follows:

Firstly: they should help and guide the boy and the girl in spouse
selection, so that the matter does not reach the stage of remorse.

Secondly: if such a problem arises, then they should be guided, since it
may be due to undue obsession, and undue expectations.

Thirdly: if repentance develops and they see that they are not willing
to marry, then they must not in any case be reprimanded or rebuked and
not be forced into an

undesired marriage by frightening and threatening them of the
consequences. Instead, they must agree to their separation and level the
ground for the settlement of this problem, short of any annoyance,
conflict, quarrel, menace and enmity. It is in the interest of the boy,
the girl, and their families.

If this marriage takes shape unwanted with remorse and disinclination,
then it would be followed by a lot of difficulties for the wife, the
husband and their families. Although this separation is bitter and
displeasing for the families, particularly the girl’s family, marriage
with displeasure and reluctance is more displeasing and bitter.

### “Clever Is The One Who Takes The End Into View.”

Young sister and brother:

Firstly: Try not to face remorse by observing the factors described in
chapters 5 and 6.

Secondly: If you happen to face it, be cautious that your remorse and
repentance is not due to undue obsession and ‘childlike excuses.’ Know
that a perfectly faultless, flawless, desired person is never found.
Everyone and every family have faults just as you and your own family
does. This is the nature of every fallible.

Thirdly: If you are not pleased with this marriage, do not conceal your
displeasure, rather announce it openly and do not continue with it. Do
not be afraid at all; be dauntless and brave. Although it is not a good
thing and the matter should not have reached this point, when it is so,
there is no alternative and remedy except

to stop and turn back.

Clearly announce that you do not want to continue on this way. A joint
life is not one day, one month or one year, it is endured and tolerated
under pressure and undesirable circumstances. You want to spend the
whole of a long life with your spouse, which is not a simple thing to
do.

Do not allow the problem to get complicated. Do not let the marriage
take shape, so that you must either separate through divorce, or
tolerate and endure it all of your life. A life led with unwillingness
will not be a successful life and will not bear any good fruit.

Do not let the circumstances lead to a divorce after marriage. Do not
let this innocent man and his family face misery and misfortune. Do not
make the life a hell. Do not make the children motherless or fatherless.
Take steps before it is too late and decide the matter. Do not let
affairs reach dangerous points. Look into this lesson‑giving example and
think upon it and do not let yourself meet anguish and tragedy.

### A Considerable And Lesson - Taking Specimen

Hameed was an orthodox and religious youth. He was good‑natured,
intelligent, educated and sensible. But he did not have the necessary
knowledge and experience about spouse selection. He narrated the story
of his spouse selection and the difficulty he met as follows:

“One of my friends, who is the resident of another city, introduced a
girl of his city to me for marriage. I went

with my family to propose to the girl.

There was a long distance between our home and that of the girl, and
this minimised the chances of complete mutual recognition. In addition,
I was not very conversant with the essentiality of spouse recognition.

Briefly speaking, I was negligent, and without seeing whether I was
inclined toward the girl or not, I entered into a marriage contract,
following a brief acquaintance and the preliminary stages. After the
marriage contract (*Nikah)***[1]** the visits became more frequent and I
discovered that I did not have any liking for the girl and so I was
unhappy about the marriage. I discussed the problem with my friend and
my relatives and the girl’s but they held the opinion that after the
marriage took place, the liking would develop. But I was not satisfied
with these words and now, I am extremely remorseful regarding this
relation, though the girl and her family do not have any shortcomings. I
do not have any liking and inclination toward this girl or wish to marry
her and am at a loss about what to do.”

I had many rounds of talks and conversations with Hameed and I suggested
ways and means to remove his disinclination and create a liking. He
practiced all the ways I had suggested, but regretfully, his repentance
did not end and he developed no fondness for the girl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Certain Muslims enter *Nikah* (marriage congract) much before
the marriage ceremony. The actual martial life, sex, child bearing and
family raising starts after the girl’s leaving her parents’ house. But
at time both the ceremonies can be held together.

Following the exercising of all remedies, I came to the conclusion that
this marriage would not have a pleasant future and there was no
alternative except separation.

I told Hameed my view openly, saying that although separation was bitter
and unpleasant, it was the only possible solution and that this marriage
was in the interests of no one.

He said: “I wish it from the core of my heart, but I feel sorry for the
girl and her family whose reputation and honour will be damaged.”

I told him: “It is better to separate right now than to divorce her
after marriage, which will cause even more damage to their status and
honour. Furthermore, it is better to be separated right away than to
marry and lead a miserable life and make the girl and her family more
miserable in that way.”

Hameed said: “If I want to divorce her, I do not have the money to pay
the dowry.”

I replied: “So far you have just made the marriage contract and marriage
has not yet materialised; so you owe them 50% of the dowry sum.
Moreover, the girl and her parents usually, in such cases when she is a
virgin and marriage has not taken place, absolve and spare the half
amount of the dowry sum. Only if marriage takes place, is the girl
entitled to the entire amount and if divorce takes shape in that case,
the total amount should be paid.”

Hameed said: “I am afraid from a religious point of view. I have the
fear that I may be the defaulter in Allah’s view and be taken to account
and punished on the resurrection day.”

I said: “Of course separation and divorce is undesirable and the cause
of Allah’s displeasure, but:

Firstly: Allah has formed this law Himself for the occasion when there
is no alternative left except separation. And your case is such that
there is no way out except separation.

Secondly: Divorce after the marriage is even more disliked by Allah than
the one before marriage. If you marry and divorce, after her losing her
virginity and sometimes bearing a child, it will cause more of the
displeasure of Allah than the present divorce.

Thirdly: Developing a hopeless, unwilling frigid life, which has lots of
painful consequences and becomes the cause of excess over the spouse,
negating their rights, weakening religion, ones nerves and spirit and
producing unhappy, ailing and problematic children will be far worse
than divorce and increase Allah’s wrath and displeasure.”

Anyhow, I convinced Hameed to decide the matter and go ahead with a
resolution, closing the affair. But (woe to these buts) his relatives
and associates pressurised and frightened him about its results and
consequences and he refrained from doing it. Once again, he came to me,
saying:

“I could not finish the matter. Now what must I do? I am still
remorseful and perplexed.”

I said: “I am unable to help you any longer. Whatever I could do, I have
already done.”

He said: “Do you know someone else who may solve my problem?”

I gave him the addresses of a number of clergymen who were conversant
with the family problems. He went to see them.

After a period, he returned and said: “I visited them and explained my
problem. They said: ‘Go and get married and do not care about repentance
and hopelessness. Love and liking develops later on’.”

I do not know how Hameed explained his problem and what were the
policies they took into view before giving such a response to him.

I said to Hameed: “I do not know why those gentlemen expressed the view
that you should marry. Perhaps there was not much time to explain the
problem to them and they were not in the current of this problem for
months, like I was. Otherwise, they would not have suggested your
marriage. Perhaps they took other policies into view. Anyway, their
views are worthy of respect but I still hold the opinion which I
previously held and am against this marriage.”

Hameed left and for a few months there came no news of him. At last I
discovered that he had married and begun his joint life.

I prayed to Allah for their prosperous life, but I was anxious and
worried about them.

After a few months Hameed’s friends brought the news to me that their
joint life had disintegrated and his wife had gone to her parents’ house
in her own city (alas) and Hameed felt too embarrassed and shy to visit
me.

Hameed and his wife’s matter reached the court, which could not do a
thing for them; not because it could not reform their affair, rather,
their life was not repairable. A life based upon unwillingness, hate and
remorse is not repaired or endurable. A dead body cannot be made to move
on a certain course.

I sent a message for Hameed, saying: “The logic was evident to you and
you can not make any excuse and pretext. Now, when this thing has
happened, treat your wife and her family respectfully and with love and
pay the entire dowry amount. And if they mistreated you in the divorce
and court affair, you must endure it and have decent conduct with them.”

Hameed did not have the economical capacity to pay his wife’s dowry sum
wholly, so the court was obliged to fix an amount of monthly instalments
for him to pay for a period of many years.

Now, one year after the divorce, I received a sorrowful letter from him
about that affair. Please have a look at the various parts of it:

“When I sit down to think about the past, I see that I have crossed over
and met a number of incidents and

events in my life. As a matter of fact, I had plenty of difficulties to
cross over. But even in the most critical moment and difficult problems
I never felt myself so tired, fatigued and worn out. I always held that
man can surpass and cross over the difficult obstacles. But this
difficulty (marriage and divorce) has a certain specification of its
own, since it is not an obstacle in the way of the goal, like the rest
of difficulties and results in the misery of a man, which is
incomprehensible. Given this, I have lots of troubles and agonies with
it, so much so that I have met a social set back. I have retarded from
an educational point of view and am even damaged spiritually. Materially
too I have faced loss. But what is impossible to endure and bear, or at
least is very difficult to tolerate, is that I have made a person
miserable and doomed, hindering her movement on the course of progress
and completion. And I have put her to shame and adversity in a society
where there is such a (negative) view about the divorced woman. However,
I am positive that this was the worst, yet the only possible way; since
the continuity of this life cannot have any result apart from
deterioration and ruining of the mental and spiritual organs of both
parties.

“Taking all the above factors in to consideration, I do not know how to
content myself, especially when there are other difficulties as well,
such as:

1 - I feel that I have become abnormally cowardice so that I am even
afraid of carrying out a normal journey. I do not have any stock of
goodness and benevolence and think what would I do with these sins if I
met an

accident? Additionally, I have not paid off the dowry sum, which is her
fundamental right.

2‑ Life has become meaningless to me to a great extent and I think the
passing of days is nothing except the passing and evading of life.
Although this is a fact, I think life is passing with a strange speed
and swiftness. I feel a deep void exists in my life.”

What I wrote in response to his painful letter may inshallah be left
over to a future leisure and the future editions of the book.

### Important Reminder!

Sometimes bitter problems take shape in this regard (separation before
marriage), which are more bitter than the separation itself. That is to
say, when a remorseful person (whether a boy or a girl) sees that he or
she does not have the boldness and courage to describe his/her inner
feelings clearly, honestly and truly and take responsibility on his/her
shoulders due to the pressures exerted by the associates in order to
rescue oneself from this entanglement and to have an excuse and logic
for separation and withdrawal, one invents accusations, faults and
unworthy things and attributes them to the person he or she was supposed
to marry.

This practice is forbidden, very obnoxious and unclean, and causes the
fury and wrath of Allah. It is a very grave sin and may be the cause of
one’s misery in this world and the Hereafter.

At such an occasion when a person wants to incur spiritual and social
damage upon a person and his family by separation, dissolving and
breaking one’s word and arrangements of the engagement, he/she must
console them and ask forgiveness and separate honourably. Not in
addition to giving the first blow, also give them another spiritual and
respect –damaging blow. This is against religion, conscience, manhood,
nobility and freedom.

Imam Hussain (a.s) said,

**إنْ لَم يَكُن لَكُم دِينٌ وَكُنْتُم َلا تَخَافُونَ المَعادَ فَكُونُوا
أحْراراً في دُنياكُم.**

“If you have no religion and you are not afraid of the Resurrection Day,
then at least be free in your world.”**[1]**

At such junctures, even if some faults and demerits have been observed,
they must be concealed and covered up, and not by inventing and
engineering blame and accusations, and dishonouring each other.

At the end of this discussion, it is essential to remember that the
topic ‘excuses of the heart’ in chapter seven (in the part concerning
the calamities of the engagement period) suits this topic (repentance
and remorse before marriage) very much and can be beneficial and a
way‑opener.

Likewise, it is suitable to refer to those two sorrowful letters, which
are presented in the previous chapter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maqtal (by Kharazmi) and Lohuf, cited in "Philosophy of Ethics"
(by Martyr Mutahhari, p 163).

(‘love the axis of life’).

Similarly, the story of Ismail and Safoora, given in the fifth chapter,
is also concordant with this discussion, because, became remorseful
about getting married during the period of engagement.

I recollect the face of Ismail, on his wedding night, which was severely
sullen, sad and sorrowful.

I whispered to him: “Is it your father’s mourning ceremony tonight that
you look so gloomy and withered?”

He said: “Why should I be happy? Nothing new and attractive has taken
shape for me so that I should be pleased!”

And ultimately this undesired marriage had all the displeasure and
regret you observed in chapter 5.

“O Allah! Be a helper and guide to the youth in this important problem.”

Family Marriages {style="margin-top:60.0pt"}
================

In some cases, family marriages such as marriage between cousins may
bring about difficulties concerning the production of children; i.e.
weak or deformed children. This has been proved and there is no chance
of denying it.

We remember a few points in this regard:

1 -This genetic law is not total and common and does not include all
family marriages. All family marriages cannot therefore be discarded and
considered prohibited.

2‑ People desiring such marriages must definitely scrutinize the medical
aspect and let essential tests be carried out until they are satisfied
that there are no difficulties. During this period, they must not marry.

3‑ Medical tests and whatever is necessary must be done before the
marriage creates an attachment between the boy and the girl and they
become hopeful about each other. They should also be done before the
marriage proposal becomes open and revealed to people, so that a noise
is not created.

If it is decided that the marriage must not take place, as under medical
advice, then the matter should be closed as soon as possible. The more
it is delayed, the more difficult would the separation be and the
headache will only increase.

4 Those family marriages which took place among the Prophet’s progeny
(such as the marriage of Ali (a.s) and Fatima (a.s) and did not have any
difficulty, was due to many reasons, one of which was that by virtue of
the divine knowledge bestowed upon them by Allah, they knew that these
marriages would not bring any difficulty for them. So referring to the
practice of those magnanimous personalities, the established genetic and
medical facts should not be overlooked.

Children’s Engagement {style="margin-top:60.0pt"}
=====================

In some families, a very bad habit and custom exists, which is that the
boy and the girl are engaged during childhood. For example, they engage
cousins and conventionally name them with each other, so that when those
nominated grow older, they may marry each other.

This practice is wrong from every aspect, and it can bring about lots of
difficulties.

This problem needs a detailed discussion with descriptions of examples
and specimens, which at present cannot be accommodated here.

For now, what is necessary to point out is as follows:

1 - Families must not do such things, which are not in any way
advisable.

2‑ It is also strongly recommended to girls and boys: that they do not
pay heed to such matters. If they are bent and inclined towards the
person they have been engaged to during childhood, accept and marry
them, otherwise do not.

3‑ The marriage of cousins has not at all been conducted in the heavens.
This belief is a nonsense.

The issue of spouse selection is higher and more important than such
invalid customs, ceremonies and rituals.
