Foreword
========

By His Eminence Professor Jafar Subhani
---------------------------------------

Daughters and sons are considered to be the fruits of the garden of
human life, who do not have any alternative way of continuing their
lives except in joint endeavour, planning and a shared life, since life
in the shape of celibacy is a bitter and badly concluding one, striking
the buds of life in the half way, throws them away.

The hand of the Creator has bestowed a kind of attraction and pull
between these two forms of fruits, so that each one demands and desires
the other’s company after having reached a certain age.

Their anxiety, distress and boiling sentiments are comforted and soothed
through marriage. The Quranic verse says

**﴿** **وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ
فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ .﴾**

**<span style="font-weight: 400">“And one of His signs is that He
created mates for you from yourselves that you may find rest in them,
and He</span>**

put between you love and compassion; most surely there are signs in this
for a people who reflect.”

This saying describes the secret of creation as clear evidence on this
point.

The co-working and co-existence of two people can only be fruitful,
beneficial and persistent when their spirits, instincts, and way of
thinking are in one direction. Otherwise, the rope of unity and
communion becomes weak and soft and finally breaks, shattering the
framework of co-existence.

In our lives, we observe the emergence of bitter and painful situations,
which not only torment and agonise the husband and wife, but also their
families. As such, after a short span of time, the palace of life is
dismantled and the sweet tree of marital relations bears bitter fruit
when the couple approaches the court and is separated. Perhaps they may
be able to choose a suitable partner for themselves again but too many
times, the wronged and oppressed children are forgotten when the parents
walk away.

**<span style="font-weight: 400">One factor is most effective in
elaborating and explaining the reason for this situation, (of course, it
cannot be said that this factor is the only one), but this factor is to
start out with wrong calculations and estimations, (those very wrong,
unweighed and unconsidered ideas from the foundation of life), instead
of a correct and exact study and estimation in the selection of a life
partner. If correct principles were observed in the process of spouse
selection, the major portion of separations, divorces and partings would
not</span>**

have dried up and withered from the tree of life.

In this book, which is now being presented to the respected reader, this
very factor has been pointed out when it teaches the correct way to
select a spouse.

I studied a part of this book and found it very useful and beneficial
for the young generation, particularly now that the book contains a
series of experience - providing narratives, which can make the theories
and inferences definite and positive.

Having congratulated the honourable writer and distinguished scholar
about this precious and valuable book, I request the respectable
publisher chalk out a plan regarding the publishing and distribution of
the book, so that it reaches the hands of our youth, thereby taking a
big and important step to solving our problems and as a consequence,
reducing the number of divorces. The saying of the prophet (a.s) is:

**﴿مَا بُنِيَ بِناءٌ في الإسْلامِ أَحَبُّ إلى اللهِ مِنَ
التَّزْوِيجِ.﴾**

“No palace in Islam more beloved to Allah has ever been built than the
palace of marriage.” (Wasail, vol 14, p 3.)

This saying may become more materialised and shaped into practice.

With compliments

Institution of imam Sadiq (a.s)  
 AYATOLLAH JAFAR SUBHANI  
 1995, 1st of Moharram, 1415, Hijrah


