Chapter One: Excellence of Marriage
===================================

Man And Woman: Enhancements Of Each Other
-----------------------------------------

 Allah created man in a manner in which he is incomplete and imperfect
without a spouse. Man may upgrade his knowledge, faith and qualities,
but he shall never reach the desired perfection while he does not have a
spouse. (Be it man or woman). Nothing can substitute marriage and the
raising of a family. Both the male and female sexes need each other from
a spiritual, as well as physical point of view. And each one of them is
incomplete and imperfect when alone and in solitude. When they are
placed beside each other, they complete each other. This is the law of
creation and it commands the whole universe.

The Quran calls man and woman the dress of each other.

**﴿هُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَهُنَّ﴾**

“They (wives) are as a dress for you (husbands) and you

are as a dress for them.” (Surah Baqara, verse 187.)

That is to say, they are the enhancement, counterpart, and guard of each
other’s honour and secrets, and each one needs the other. Man cannot
live honourably and eminently in society without dress. He feels himself
in a state of imperfection. The lonely person too feels himself
imperfect.

Dress saves and protects a person from the effects of winter and summer.
The spouse too saves one from worries, futility, homelessness,
aimlessness, and solitude. As a dress decorates man, spouses too are the
decoration of each other.

Spouse: A Big Blessing From Allah
---------------------------------

One of the greatest blessings of Allah to man is a nice life‑partner.
The Prophet (a.s) said in this regard:

**ما اسْتَفَادَ امْرُؤٌ مُسْلِمٌ فَائِدَةً بَعْدَ الإسْلامِ أفْضَلَ مِنْ
زَوْجَةٍ مُسْلِمَةٍ (أو صَالِحَةٍ).**

“The Muslim man has not achieved any benefit (from Allah’s blessings)
better than a suitable Muslim wife, after Islam.”**[1]**

Marriage Philosophy
-------------------

It is possible that some people who have not appreciated the depth of
the philosophy of marriage and setting up of a joint life may say: ‘We
satisfy our sexual lust through many other means apart from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia vol 14. p 23.

marriage and fulfil this desire through other ways, so what is the need
of accepting the responsibility of marriage?”

It should be said in response to this creed and question that fulfilment
of sexual desire and lust is not the only achievement and advantage of
marriage. It is only one of its benefits. Instead, apart from soothing
and comforting the sexual instinct, it has many other aspects and
dimensions of excellence, worth and importance, like raising a family.
It gifts man with other factors such as commitment, completion,
progress, maturity, development of personality, comfort and many more
valuable benefits. Commitment to a wife and family brings magnanimity,
splendour and a sense of social responsibility, and makes many of his
capabilities and sleeping talents bloom and bear fruit.

After marriage, the personality of a man changes into a social
personality and he considers himself absolutely responsible for the
security of his wife and children’s future. On this account, he uses the
sum total of his senses, initiatives and abilities.”(Tafseer‑e Nemoone,
vol. 14, p 465.)

There is an enjoyment and progress in raising a family to which nothing
can be the substitute. Martyr Mutahari (RA) says in this regard:

“There are ethical characteristics, which can not be achieved, except in
the school of family raising. The foundation of a family means
developing a kind of interest in the fate of others. The moralists and
ascetics

who have not crossed through this phase have a sort of immaturity and
childhood in their personalities to the end of their lives. And it is
one of the reasons why marriage has been stressed upon as a sacred
matter and a service in Islam. Marriage is the first and preliminary
phase of exit from the (shell of) natural personal self, and the
expansion of human’s personality.”

Similarly, he says about the training mode of marriage: “There is a
maturity, a maturity, which does not take shape except in the shade of
marriage and raising of family. It is not shaped in school, formed in a
crusade against ego, nor is it inculcated and raised through night vigil
and prayers. It does not even come into existence through love and
attachment with pious ones.”**[1]**

What a large number of people have been observed who did not follow any
principles of ethics, religion, and society, and a form of frivolity,
heedlessness, and debauchery overwhelmed their character. But after
getting married, their character, morale, and attitude changed and they
became sober and dignified. And their habits and manners began to show a
kind of graciousness and sagaciousness.

“Spouse”: The Sign Of Allah’s Wisdom And Source Of Man’s Comfort
----------------------------------------------------------------

Allah, who is the Creator of human beings and knows their peculiarities,
characteristics, nature and instincts,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Education and training in Islam, Sadra Publications, p 251 to
252.

described the creation of man and woman and placing them side by side,
as one of His wisdoms and signs, and introduced marriage as the cause of
love, affection, beneficence and comfort of man, saying:

**﴿وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ
فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ.﴾**

 “And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from yourselves
that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and
compassion; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
reflect.”

This peace and comfort is not the common and ordinary conventional
comfort, which psychologists and psychiatrists describe; instead, in
addition to that, it includes dignity, grace, balance of thought, vision
and spirit, the feeling of being worthy and having a serious personality
and the achievement of additional honour, status and so on.

Marriage: The Improver Of The Value Of Man’s Practices
------------------------------------------------------

Marriage and family raising imprints such an effect upon the existence
of man by upgrading the worth of his personality on the way to its
maturity, that even his practices and services become more valued and
worthier before Allah and the angels, so that its value goes up to many
times the previous one. For example, consider this Hadith of Imam Jaafar
(a.s):

**رَكْعَتانِ يُصَلِّيهِما المُتَزَوِّجُ أفْضَلُ مِن سَبْعِينَ رَكعَة
يُصَلِّيهَا العَزِبُ.**

“Two cycles of service offered by a married person is

more excellent and worthier than seventy cycles of service offered by a
bachelor and unmarried person.”**[1]**

The Lovelest Center To Allah
----------------------------

The unit which is formed through marriage is the object of Allah’s love
and kindness, and He views it with tenderness and benevolence. The great
ambassador of Allah (a.s) has put it in this way:

“No construction has been constructed lovelier than marriage to Allah ‑
May He be honoured and glorified.”

What prosperity and beneficence can be loftier than Allah’s love for
one’s family and dwelling (that too in the super way) and viewing it
with love, affection, and kindness?

The Medal Of Honour
-------------------

Ali (a.s), the chief of believers, has described a very worthy fact
about the value of marriage:

**لَمْ يَكُن أحَدٌ مِن أصْحَابِ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَليهِ وَآلهِ
يَتَزَوَّجُ إلاّ قَالَ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيه وَآلهِ: ”كمل
دينه.“**

“There were none of the friends of the Prophet (a.s) who would marry but
the Prophet (a.s) would say his faith (religion) had been
completed.”**[2]**

What a surprise! Marriage has this much worth and value that the Prophet
of Allah (a.s) decorated the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail Al-Shia, vol. 14, p 6.  
 **[2]** Makaremul Akhlaq, p 99.

chests of those who married with medals of honour.

It is evident from these words of the Prophet (a.s) that while a person
does not marry, his faith lies in danger. This is because sexual
instinct, spiritual pressures, sense of solitude and futility, being
devoid of shelter and the lack of a sense of social responsibility, as
well as many other harms of remaining unmarried can damage the roots of
man’s faith and destabilize it.

Marriage and establishing a family and resting beside an excellent,
virtuous, lovely, sympathetic and faithful spouse not only controls
sexual lust, but also a spiritual relaxation and comfort is achieved.

At the same time, man’s dependence and trust upon Allah is increased and
grows. He moves out of the apprehensive condition and homelessness. He
senses and feels security and personality. His eyes and mind are
distracted and detached from other places, and concentrate and focus on
his spouse. Consequently, he achieves more proximity and nearness to
Allah, and Allah’s beneficences cover him up more than ever, and his
faith is strengthened and reaches completion.

Reminder
--------

Of course, we must be attentive to the fact that these glowing and
shining results come to hand when the correct and true standards of
“spouse selection”, family raising and the preparations of marriage are
carefully and correctly observed. In the next chapters, we will
inshallah discuss the topics of correct criterions and standards and the
know how of crossing the preliminaries of marriage.
