Chapter two: When Must We Marry?
================================

One of the important problems in connection with marriage and choosing a
spouse, which must be taken into consideration, is the time and age of
it.

Much has been written and said on this topic. And everybody has
endeavoured to answer this question according to his own taste and
predisposition, understanding, knowledge, and mental ability. We must
say that the answer to the question “when must we marry?” is hidden in
the interior of man’s nature and instinct and does not need an answer,
logic of knowledge, or philosophy.

We should look inside ourselves and ask its answer from our nature,
instincts and inclinations, which do reply in a truthful manner, without
different hurdles, ceremonies, habits, customs and prejudices. It is
much like hunger and thirst, which are not controlled or governed by any
law, which tells when to eat and drink. Instead, a man knows by virtue
of his nature when he is hungry or thirsty and when he is not and when
is a suitable time to eat, and when is not.

Yes! Laws can be formulated for the pertinent matters such as not eating
rotten, prohibited and illegal food, and never drinking contaminated
water. Instead, man should eat licit, lawful and healthy food and must
not eat during fasting etc. But a law cannot be set for the actual and
basic needs of hunger, thirst, eating and drinking.

The need for a spouse and raising a family is a natural and instinctive
need, which Allah has, through His wisdom, placed in the human being. It
is awakened at its particular time and season, and makes its demand. If
it is answered on time and properly and its requirement is fulfilled, it
traverses its natural course and reaches the summit of maturity and
completion and makes man reach that point.

If it is delayed or answered in an incorrect and unnatural mode, it
deviates from its natural course, revolts and rebels, and not only
becomes corrupt itself, but also corrupts the man; just as if the
natural and instinctive needs of man such as hunger and thirst are not
properly answered, they become deviated and drive man towards ailment,
disease, the eating of stale and prohibited food, and occasionally,
stealing and death.

So any law in this connection must pertain to the balancing of this urge
and provisioning of aids and assistance with regard to this difficulty
and the removal of hurdles on the way.

But when must this need be fulfilled and when must the man and woman
marry? This cannot be regulated inside a particular law. It does not
have any specific law and regulation; its law is genetic and the Creator
has gifted it inside human nature. Therefore, ‘should’ and ‘should-not’
in this connection are not correct. But one can study and research to
discover its approaching time so as to be informed in advance and
provide a suitable ground for welcoming it.

The Puberty Age
---------------

After giving all sorts of explanations, young men still ask,
“Nevertheless, when is the proper time and age to marry?” The answer is:
The proper time and age of marrying is when the “sexual and mental
maturity” has reached its desired completion in a person. (Reaching
completion does not mean the climax and apex of the possible completion,
because reaching that stage, particularly in the case of mental puberty,
is much distanced and difficult; but here it means reaching the ordinary
and commonly known limit).

Some say Islam has fixed the marriage age for boys at 15 years and that
of girls at the age of nine years. This is not correct. Islam has not
given any such order. Islam is the religion of nature and gives an order
against nature and human instinct. But Islam commands one to marry when
one reaches puberty and maturity. According to the interpretation of the
Prophet (peace be upon him) it is like a fruit whose ripening is its
maturity and adult age.

Yes! Islam’s divine legislation in this connection stressed the
desirability of marriage (in the previous chapter we discussed some
facts about the merits of marriage). But whenever this need and urge
stirs itself and desires revolt and rebel and make man probe and
practice prohibited acts, then it becomes obligatory and postponing and
delaying it becomes prohibited.

So this divine legislation also reverts back to the law of genetics.
That is to say, when puberty is reached, marriage becomes a desirable
act and whenever it comes to the revolt and rebellion of emotions and
the preludes of sin become obvious then marriage becomes obligatory.

When a person attains maturity and puberty (we have explained puberty)
his time for marriage has arrived and delaying it would not be advisable
in any way, just as its early execution is also not commendable, for
it’s like being an unripe fruit.

When the interior call of a person, which rises from one’s nature and
instinct comes, it is the time for marriage. Everyone can clearly hear
this call from his interior, provided of course, that this power has not
been scarred or become ill by the effect of various factors. Because it
is quite evident that if this power has been scarred or become diseased,
then it cannot give a timely and proper call. Just like a patient who
has lost his appetite and his health deteriorates from its normal
course.

If this need and inner energy gives a call and says, “I have approached,
I want a spouse,” the factors hidden inside the human conscience may
come to face it and argue - I have no house, no money, no dowry, I do
not have my degree yet, I do not have the means to pay for the
celebration, society does not approve of marriage at this age, the
customs, ceremonies and family discipline do not yet approve it, a
person possessing money, a house, and a car has not yet proposed to me,
I have yet to find a rich girl, a wife has her expenses and then there
are children to follow who too, have a lot of expenditure and headache.

What about the parties and invitations? How can I face the ceremonies
and formalities? How can I get the money for the dowry, gold, dress and
for purchasing other items? ...” It is evident that the poor call will
retreat!

Or if that youth has gone astray through masturbation, corruption and
debauchery, and deviated from the course of his nature, then that
interior call of instinct too has been trampled down and there is no
more chance of it raising a correct call.

An exhausted youth said: “For many years I have masturbated and now that
I have married a girl, I do not have any desire for her and can not get
any enjoyment from her. I still masturbate and prefer it to intercourse
with my wife.”

This is known as an ill and diseased nature and instinct. It can no
longer hear the voice of its natural call. As a matter of fact, no more
of a call or voice has been left over and survived.

\*\*\*

Brother and sister! Let us talk a bit about the facts, about the
untouched life and nature and the uncontaminated instincts and those
away from the civilities, ignorance ‑ based customs and ceremonies of
society.

Let us for the time being, throw those (customs) aside so that we may
talk in a free and unbounded atmosphere. Later on, we will talk about
those limitations.

Oh, young sister and brother! You are yourself aware of the noise and
turbulence that is going on inside you. You are aware that you need a
spouse. You know that you are apprehensive and feel a gap, a void and
solitude. You can very well perceive and hear your internal yearning,
which calls you to find a spouse. You know quite well that you are not
that child you used to be a few years ago and a change has developed
inside you.

You fully understand that you have lost something (which you must find
out) and whenever you think about it, there is a big inflammation that
takes shape inside you and motivates you to probe and search for what
you have lost.

Why do you deceive yourself? Why do you put a cover and a lid upon these
sacred and natural wishes and desires? Why do you bring excuses? Why do
you suppress your spirit of independence? Why do you choke up all of
these passions and calls of love? Why do you allow these beautiful
blooming buds to wither away? Are you scared? From what? From poverty?
From ceremonies? From inflation? From responsibility of life? From
having children? You are afraid you would not be able to cope with their
expenses? You fear that you may not be able to continue your education?
You are afraid you would not be able to manage and run your family
expenses?

My dear, do not be afraid and scared. Allah is with you. Have trust in
Him. Do not you believe Allah is all-strong, all-beneficent, and your
helper? Would it not be a pity that you destroy your youth?

Marriage has a season and spring, and if this passes away, you would
face a loss. The fruit that ripens and is not benefited from becomes
spoiled and stale. Is it not a pity that a young one, who has Allah to
support and help him, is afraid of such imaginary and absurd matters?

Be brave! Take steps depending and trusting upon Allah. Be contented and
assured that Allah will help you and Insha’Allah you will succeed.

Allah has promised in the holy Qur’an that he will solve the problems
and difficulties, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَكُونُوا فُقَرَاءَ يُغْنِهِمْ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If they are needy (poor), Allah will make them free from want, out
of His grace.” (24:32)***

Do you not believe in Allah’s promise and commitment?

God forbid such be the case. Allah will definitely materialise His
promise. Come on, enter the field with trust in Allah and get married! I
promise you that if you minutely scrutinize and concentrate on choosing
your spouse and observe and practice all the orders, commandments,
standards and criterions which Islam has set for marriage and which have
been described in this book, you will definitely be prosperous.

Oh brother and sister, do not say: “Perhaps you are unaware what is
going on in this society. Do you not know what number of difficulties
has been created upon the way to marriage? Do you not know what amount
of misfortunes and afflictions are brought into effect by some selfish
and foolish parents for their children in connection with their
marriage?

And what amount of undue and illogical expectations they have from the
sons and daughters?” Yes, I am aware of all these facts more than you
are aware, since, on account of our responsibilities, answerabilities
and nature of work, we are more concerned and in touch with the society.
Many young ones contact us about their problems. I am thoroughly
conversant and aware of the difficulties of the youth, but with all my
knowledge of these problems, I say: “Marry, do not be afraid, take the
step.” We will discuss the difficulties shortly.

Marriage: a medium of reaching Allah
------------------------------------

We have already described that one of the important factors in making
spiritual progress is having a well-bred and suitable spouse.

Young brother and sister, do you desire to start upon a spiritual
journey and reach a place where Allah stamps your heart with His
approval and pleasure, when you are still young and your heart is pure
and the dust of abjectness and sin has not yet contaminated your soul?

By the grace of Allah, move on! But do not move alone, this is a risky
and dangerous way. You need a companion, a helper, a sympathiser. Take
the hand of another young one as your life partner and set off together,
so that you may be the helper, sympathiser, associate and confidante to
each other. You may make each other hopeful and encourage one another.

Think of what the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أحب أن يلقي الله طاهرا مطهرا فليلقه متزوجا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever* *desires* *to meet Allah in a pure condition must marry (take
a spouse).”*[^1]

So now that you have the love, enthusiasm and joy of the youth, move and
select your partner for the life journey, now is the time to commence a
journey. Do not allow this love, enthusiasm and joy change into sadness,
apathy and frigidity.

The marriage that rest upon fresh love and felicity makes the coming
years of life fragrant, pleasant and colourful. Take the hand of your
young, vivacious life partner and fly over the heights of the sky like
two loving pigeons. Make good of this duration. Do not let it go.

See what Ali (a.s) says about his wife Fatima (s.a) and how he recited
verses of love, defining the duration of youth.

*“We were enjoying felicity, health and youth like two pigeons in a
dwelling.”*[^2]

These two spouses lived a pure prosperous life full of love, and met
Allah in a pure condition full of love.

Allah's salutation to them.

The time of sexual and mental maturity
--------------------------------------

In spite of the fact that it has been explained that a person's correct
time of marriage can be visualized from his interior and that the time
of marriage is when a person attains sexual and mental maturity, yet
this same question keeps on being discussed by the elders, parents,
guardians, and those responsible for society, and even by the youth
themselves: 'After all, when is the proper time and age of marriage, and
when do sexual and mental maturity reach their climax and zenith?”

The response is that lands, circumstances, societies, races, tribes,
families, and individuals are not homogenous and harmonious in this
field; instead they are different. For example, in hot areas, sexual
maturity is attained earlier than in cold ones. And in open and mixed up
societies, where men and women have more chance to meet and get in
touch, and where the religious ordains and commandments and the matters
pertaining to veil, Islamic Hijab and intimate and non-intimate
relationships are not observed, sexual puberty is attained at an early
stage.

On the contrary, in the peripheries and environments where people adhere
and are committed to religion, modesty and commandments of religion it
is not so. In the families which are uncultured and untrained and where
sexual matters are not under security or privacy, children having become
aware of the sexual matters of the fathers and mothers become sexually
mature sooner, as in contrast to families where these things are secured
and under restricted conditions. (Sometimes even the children go astray
by observing sexual matters between their parents). At the same time,
the quality and quantity of food is also effective in this regard. Those
who eat more energetic food attain puberty faster.

What can be said about the non-Islamic, immodest and sexually free,
disorderly countries and societies? We may metaphorically say that even
their primary school children are sexually aware. And the statistics and
news make it evident that sexual assaults among children and the youth
have become so customary and ordinary that it has blackened the face of
humanity.

Nevertheless, it can be said that in our various, different countries
and societies the average sexual puberty of boys is 17 and among girls,
it is 14 (not religious puberty). But this age is early for marriage,
because, as well as sexual puberty, mental maturity is also necessary
for marriage. The age of 19 years for boys and 16 years for girls is
more suitable for marriage. Of course, this is an average age, and it is
possible that a boy or a girl has an early need for a spouse, so an
early step may be taken.

We re-emphasise that the signs of this urge are hidden inside a person
and everyone can judge it for himself. If the parents are intelligent
and attentive, they can understand very well when their son or daughter
needs a spouse.

The View of an Expert
---------------------

Sometime age, I went to see Ayatollah Ibrahim Amini (a pious,
discernible scholar conversant with family problems for many years, who
has close contacts with the problems of youth). I had a talk with him on
his viewpoint of the marriage age, which he has discussed in his book
*“The Spouse Selection.”*

Before narrating the detail of the discussion, I hereby exactly cite
what he has written in his book:

“The nature and special creation of man has fixed the age of marriage
and that is the puberty age. When a boy reaches puberty at the age of 16
and a girl at 10 years, they can marry.

But it is better to delay the marriage up to 17 years and 14 or 15 years
in boys and girls respectively. Because boys and girls do not have
sufficient amount of mental and intellectual maturity at the beginning
of puberty, and at this age might have difficulties accompanied with it.
Furthermore, in the initial two or three years after puberty, sexual
instinct is not completely awakened and does not pressurise the youth
too much, and its endurance is not so much difficult.

Therefore, it can be said that the most suitable marriage age for boys
is 17 to 18 years and for girls 14 to 17 years. But it is not advisable
to delay their marriage beyond the above mentioned ages, since it may
cause negative physical, spiritual or social diseases and discrepancies.
The sexual instinct, having completely and absolutely awakened, is
provoked and excited and exerts pressure upon the youth. And there is no
alternative left except fulfilling the desire lawfully. The sexual urge
is just like the urge and need for water and food.

Can you tell a hungry of thirsty person to refrain from eating ad
drinking? Can another activity, even exercise and recreation or games,
divert the attention of a hungry and thirsty one from food or water? The
sexual urge too is like hunger and thirst, rather it is many times
stronger and more powerful. And if it is not soothed and achieved
through lawful means, it may deviate and drag a young one towards going
astray and sin, and controlling it is very difficult. And we must not
remain indifferent and unmindful about the bad consequences of sexual
deviation pertaining to this world and the Hereafter.

Supposedly, even if the youth could, by virtue of his faith, shame and
modesty control the powerful sexual lust and does not indulge in sin,
yet what would be done with its negative physical and spiritual
consequences? Therefore, there is no choice but to get married at a
fixed age, and one must marry as soon as possible.”[^3]

I asked him if he still held the same view and opinion about the time of
marriage, even when many years had passed since the publication of his
book, *“Intekhabe Hamsar”* (The Spouse Selection).

He replied: “yes, this is the sole way of rectification and solution to
the problem of the youth; that is, they marry at the natural time of
marriage, and until such time as this difficulty is not removed, no
other way of solving the youth problems will bear any fruit.”

I said: *“Do you say that, even after taking the social facts and
present difficulties on the way to marriage into consideration?”* He
reflected. “Yes, if all these expenditures and expenses which are
incurred upon subsidiary matters, all these efforts which are
concentrated upon the difficulties of the youth, all the expenses
relating to missionary and cultural activities and the budget which is
allocated to confronting a cultural attack - if all these sources are
spent upon the marriage of the youth, and this way is opened up for
them, only then will the cultural attack and aggression no longer have
any negative and adverse effect.

Let any amount of planning be made and materialised in regard of meeting
and confronting the cultural attack; all that will remain ineffective
whilst the problem of youth marriage at the natural age remains
unsolved. The real and actual combat against cultural aggression is that
the youth marry at the time of their sexual and mental puberty.”

Discussion with a Friend in this Connection
-------------------------------------------

During the compilation of this book I had a discussion with a good,
knowledgeable and informed friend, which I hereby present to you.

The friend said: *“Do you not think the age you have described fit for
marriage is an early one?”*

I said: *“Why early? Do the sexual instinct and natural demand for a
spouse and the mental maturity not reach* the required standard of
completion at this age? Does a healthy person, provided he does not care
for the artificial difficulties and obstacles on the way to marriage,
not require a spouse?”

He said? “Why not, he does require it, but the sexual instinct and urge
for a spouse alone should not be taken into view. Instead, we must also
view the other problems which are present on the scene.”

I replied: *“We have considered those problems and difficulties in
chapter four.”*

He said: *“But one thing which in my view had not been taken into
consideration in chapter 4 and which pertains to chapter 2 is that the
youth the age group you have discussed, do not have the* *readiness,
preparedness and* *vigour* *or energy to manage life. How could you
expect a 19 year old boy and a 16 year old girl to run a family?
Normally, they need the management and guardianship* *of their
parents.”*

I replied: “Allah who has created man is all-wise and has placed
everything in the right position. The same Allah who has placed sexual
instinct and demand for a spouse in man's nature and ordained him to
marry and has so very much stressed on the haste and promptness in
marriage has definitely placed the energy and capability of running his
life in him also.

If there is a flaw or shortcoming, it is in our training. It is our
wrong and inaccurate training which blocks and hinders the way of
development and advancement of that maturity and the outflow of that
energy and ability. The potential energy of running and organising a
life is president in us, and its activation too is at the time of
puberty. But at times, we do not provide the ground for its progress,
and instead, hinder the blooming and development of it by wrong and
inappropriate training.

“When parents do not allow their children to have their works done
independently by themselves and do not permit them any sort of
responsibility during the shape taking period of their personalities, or
belittle and humiliate them and reprimand them with titles such as
inefficient and incapable, it is quite clear that these young people can
not manage themselves in their youth; and can not even do so in their
middle and old ages!”

He said: “Anyway, what can be done now? Now that we observe that the
young do not have the energy and readiness to manage their lives, is it
correct that they marry and fail in managing their lives?”

I said: “The call of the sexual and spouse -demanding instinct must not
remain unanswered. The problem can be solved by certain measures:

1- Teachers, scholars and thinkers of society should inform people about
the training problems and teach them the exact way to train their
children.

2- Parents must gradually acquaint their children with the
responsibilities of life during their childhood and younger years. I
have seen many young people, particularly girls, who can fulfil their
duties towards life management in a nice way. Of course, I am against
exerting pressure upon children and the youth, but at the same time, I
oppose blandishing them. The middle way must be observed.

3- It is unnecessary for us to wait until a young person is completely
ready to manage a life before we propose a marriage for him. Instead,
when a youth feels that life's burden has started exerting upon him, he
has no choice but to shade himself up, gather up his personality with
all its sleeping and potential energies and get prepared to take off on
the flight of life.

Many young people have been observed who did not have the readiness of a
common life, but no sooner had they stepped into the realm of life
management, than they became ready, capable and organised man and women,
who could manage a successful life.

4- The period of engagement is a good opportunity for this purpose. If
this period is prolonged for a few months, the youth can prepare
themselves.(We have discussed this in the last part of this book).

5- The parents and elders of the boy and girl must help both of them,
and must remain in touch with them in the beginning of their married
lives so that they learn the ways, methods and means of life until such
time as they can get going on their own and settle down in their lives.
However, marriage should take place no sooner than the sexual and mental
puberty is achieved and the rest of the matters should be settled
gradually.

The subsidiary matters are subject to the principles. The principle lies
in marriage, protecting one's modesty and promotion and progress of
man's personality. The rest of the maters are all subsidiary ones and
the principle must not be sacrificed for secondary things. But help can
be extended so that the secondary thing reaches and is united to the
principle...”

It Is Wrong To Dash into a Rock
-------------------------------

Some nations and countries have played with the sexual instinct of the
youth and been confronted with large-scale disorder, turmoil and
corruption. After they had their fingers burnt, know that it was unwise
to play with the lion's tail. And now they are gradually turning back
from the way they had mistakenly followed. But it is sad that we are
proceeding upon the same road that they are forsaking at present! Does
it not sound wise that you must not go in the same direction that made
them dash into rocks from which they are now returning from bleeding?
Should we not take a lesson from their broken skulls? Has Islam not
guided us, saying:

*“Prosperous is the one who takes lesson from the experiences of
others.”*

Why are we moving towards a falling spot, with a greed and eager desire,
when we can distinctly and vividly see others fall from there?

Now let us pay attention to two of their important books. Dr Khudakuf
one of the outstanding psychiatrists and psychologists of the ex -USSR
writers:

“It should be known that youth marriages recently are to be seen taking
place all over the world. For instance, in our country (USSR) 50% of
marriage take place among the youth who are no older than 22 years and
there are many husbands who are only 18 or 19 years old. In America, the
average age of girls who marry has decreased to 20 years and fourteen
million girls aged 17 also got engaged.”[^4]

Doctors Hannah and Abraham Stone, two researchers, physicians and out
standings consultants for family problems in America, write in their
book, which is written in a question-answer form between an engaged
couple and their special consultant:- “Dr, should marriage be avoided
when the man is not completely able to procure the family's
expenditure?” “No, absolutely not. In my opinion, marriage should not be
put off until the economic strength of a man reaches its peak. Youth
reach the stage of physiological puberty before such time that they can
completely procure their finances and economic sufficiency.

Hence, there is no need to look forward for economic sufficiency. But it
is better that both the husband and the wife work to secure their family
budget. They must not wait till the husband's income is sufficient to
meet the family's requirements.”[^5]

I invite researchers, those who are sensitive to the fate of society and
the young generation and parents to study the book “Marriage, the school
of human making”, written by Martyr Dr. Paknejad, vol.2, and the
discussion about the marriage age, so that shocking acts in this
connection are revealed to them.

Now that I am writing these lines, there are a number of young boys and
girls in our neighbourhood who are passing through the period between
‘Aqd (religious marriage ceremonies) and the wedding. Some of them are
studying in high school and some in middle school. They not only receive
their education, but also their marital benefits. (Here it does not mean
actual sex relations, which are only established after the ceremonial
marriage).

Of course, it must be kept in mind that as a delay in marriage is
inadvisable, similarly, early, unripe and immature marriage, and
marriage with persons not having capacity or preparedness and readiness
is also reproachful and difficult.

Marriages are of three kinds: Immature, delayed, and timely; and only
the last one is desirable.

[^1]: Bihar ul Anwar, vol. 103, p 220.

[^2]: Philosophy of Ethics, by Murtadha Mutahhari, p. 249.

[^3]: Intekhab al-Hamsar, p31/32 (The spouse selection).

[^4]: “The bond of life” by Khudakuf, translated by Habibian, P.13,
seventh edition.

[^5]: Answers to sexual and marital problems, translated by Dr.
Tarazullah Akhawan, P.14, 19th Edition.


