Chapter Three: The Merits of Timely a Marriage and Demerits of its Delay
========================================================================

In the first chapter, we described the overall merits, excellence and
benefits of marriage, and now by the grace of Almighty Allah we will
consider the merits of marriage at the beginning of youth and demerits
and losses of its delay.

A timely marriage has many benefits, and a delayed marriage has many
losses. Here, we will refer to some benefits of timely marriage:

1- Securing and Strengthening True Faith and Spiritualism
---------------------------------------------------------

'Marriage' is one of the strongest shields against the enemies of faith.
During one's youth, on one side, the attractive forces of spirit and
nature, purity and virtue become more active and invite man towards
himself. On the other hand, the attractive forces of instinct and sexual
lust and desire awaken and call man toward one another.

Each of these two attractive forces is essential and necessary and Allah
has bestowed them on man by virtue of His wisdom and benevolence, for
the sake of man's progress, maturity and completion. The invitation of
each one of them must be answered positively, and the requirements of
each must be fulfilled. If the attractive forces and desires of lust and
sex are not properly, wisely and as Allah has set it, answered and
controlled, they would rebel and overflow and attack the positive forces
of nature and spiritualism and, as they have become bold and wild, they
might well ruin and destroy the positive forces!

Marriage is one of the best defensive means for youth in this battle and
struggle.

Alas, what large numbers of pure and chaste youth who did not have this
defensive means had their faith, piety, and entire existence
annihilated, having been defeated in this battlefield!

### A Sad Specimen

Masood was a chaste and religious young man. He was an example of
purity, modesty, and deliberateness for youth during the phases of his
primary and high school education.

I sometimes envied his goodness and faith, and said to myself. “Masood
has nearly surpassed us all and reached his destination.” He was the
pivot and axis of all the Islamic and training activities at school. And
in his neighbourhood, he was the refuge spot and teacher of the children
and young ones. He was a column -breaker on the fronts, in advancing
against the enemy.

And he was a devotee, a worshiper at the spot of service.

He completed his high school education. I said to his family: “Find a
spouse for Masood.” They said:

*“Oh no! He is still a child. Let him complete his university education
and find himself a job and provide a house and means of life. Then we
will think about him.”*

Masood entered university. I occasionally reminded his family that
Masood needed a spouse and they repeated the same reply.

After some time lapsed, he started losing his “colours” gradually, and
his appearance and dress changed. His eyes, which were innocent and
never caught the prohibited things steadily and gradually became
careless and he got involved in casting wanton glances.

And he continued on until:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم كان عاقبة الذين أساءوا السوءي أن كذبوا بآيات الله و كانوا بها
يستهزئون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected
the communication of Allah and used to mock them.”(30:10)***

Now he has graduated from university, but he is no more the “Masood”
that he once used to be; instead, he has turned into a wretched and
sinister Masood who is the cause of his family and friend's shame.

Oh Allah, you know that these youth are the capital of Islam and Islamic
revolution and the Islamic country of Iran. Be their helper and save
them from sinking into the marshes of corruption, debauchery,
indifference and disbelief.

### An Auspicious and Blessed Specimen

Ja’far was one of Masood's friends. He was also a pure and pious young
man. A girl who was his match became engaged to him during his secondary
school education. He married and joined the university. He was a success
both in his marital life and his studies. He ended the period of his
university studies safely and reached the higher level of education. The
higher he reached in his studies, the more complete became his faith,
piety and morality. Right now, having received his master's degree, he
is busy serving at an important, responsible post.

He has a prosperous life, and is the cause of the eminence and
exaltation of his family, friends, and society. Ja’far and his family's
economic status was lower than that of Masood and his family. (It must
not be thought that Ja’far was of a rich family who could have him
married and Masood's was a poor one, so they could not. Unfortunately,
this devil of 'material thinking' and measuring everything with the
yardstick of money has become quiet strong in our society!)

2- Benefiting and Enjoying a Sweet and Cheerful Youth
-----------------------------------------------------

The spring of marriage is the duration of youth. During this span of
time, man is overwhelmed by a peculiar kind of enthusiasm and
cheerfulness. If this period is not made good of and utilized, then very
soon the autumn of age approaches and the cheerfulness finishes up or is
diminished and declines, and man can no longer completely and thoroughly
enjoy and utilize the benefits of marriage.

It is the lively, young, and happy love, which contributes and grants
enthusiasm and purity to life; while the dead, old and withered love
does not possess any enthusiasm and purity to extend to life!

Look at the bud. How it talks to us about life and freshness and gives
us the message of life, hope, and aspiration. But the old withered
flower talks about depression, hopelessness, ailment, and death. Youth
are like that bud, which must be used positively and benefited in this
period before they are lost. And so they must erect their marital life
upon a solid, strong and even foundation.

The Prophet (S) has a very worthy and valuable saying in this regard
which is an argument and authority for all, leaving back no room for
lame excuses and unnecessary questioning.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيها الناس! إن جبرئيل أتاني عن اللطيف الخبير فقال: إن الأبكار بمنزلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الثمر علي الشجر, إن أدرك ثمارها فلم تجتن أفسدته الشمس و نثرته
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرياح. و كذلك الأبكار إذا أدركن ما تدركن ما تدرك النساء فليس لهن دواء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاالبعولة و إلا لم يؤمن عليهن الفساد لأنهن بشر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh people! Gabriel descended down to me from The All-Kind, All-knowing
Allah and said: 'Virgins are like the fruits of trees. When they become
ripe (mature)*

*(and the season of their plucking arrives), if they do not get picked,
the sun's heat made them sour and the winds of autumn make them
scattered. So are virgin girls that when they reach puberty and attain
that which women attain (i.e. menstruation) then there is no alternative
for them except to be given husbands. And if they do not marry, there
would be no security that they are not pushed towards corruption,
because they are humans.” (Human beings are sexual instinct, which must
definitely be satisfied by a spouse. Boys are also like that.”*[^1]

The Prophet (S) is the total of intellect and reason, proclamations,
commands and decrees, which he declares are from Almighty Allah. No
style, view and opinion can confront Allah's command. Any style,
fashion, custom, habit, excuse and law which is opposite to Allah's law
is invalid, null, void and worthless.

Those who, for whatever reason delay marriage until the end of youth
definitely face loss and damage. If we minutely and thoroughly examine
society, we shall meet many people who faced great loss due to delaying
their marriage; although they themselves may not perceive what made them
face all that loss.

### A Sorrowful Specimen

Nasser was of the opinion that man must not marry till such time as he
has his own personal house, car, and a lot of money. He would not lend
ear even to recommendations and advice. He kept persistently following
his belief and worked to procure a house, automobile and plenty of
money.

Then he decided to marry, but unfortunately, it was late. He was thirty
years old and his body, soul, and nerves had become ailing and lean as
an effect of the severe pressure and strains of work, sexual deviation,
loneliness, etc. His face was wrinkled and old and he had lost some of
his hair. Briefly speaking, he was not the same Nasser that he was ten
years before. All of his enthusiasm, vigour, cheerfulness, and purity of
youth had gone, and depression and impatience had taken the place of
those.

He started the search for a spouse. But no sound, perfect and cheerful
girl was ready to marry him. One by one, he stepped down from the height
of his standards and wishes about wife. He gave up all those ambitions
and high aspirations, which he has with regard to a wife. Finally,
following a lot of searching and headache, he discovered a spouse who
was also like him.

Conventionally speaking, she was out of date. That girl too, on the
pretexts of getting an education, learning skills and crafts and finding
a spouse according to her own wrong standards and taste, had remained
alone. The factors which had made Nasser unhealthy and emaciated had
affected her also, resulting in spiritual and nervous ailments. She was
also around thirty years.

This boy and girl, who can hardly be called boy and girl married
unwillingly. The result is quiet clear. How could a couple which lack
courage and spirit, lead a cheerful and creative life?

Right from the beginning, differences, frigidity and seeking excuses
started taking shape. And now they have a hellish life! The battle of
nerves, confrontations, and struggles creates a noisy scene. They have a
number of children. Such poor children, on one hand, witness the lack of
courage and vigour of their parents to train them and solve their
problems, and on the other, they keep viewing the constant quarrel and
confrontations of their parents. As a matter of fact, such children are
pitiable.

Now the house, car and money can no more help to solve any problem. This
is like a medicine after one's death!

3- Remaining Pure From Corruption and Sexual Deviations
-------------------------------------------------------

There is hardly a factor like corruption and sexual deviation that cause
so much damage to young ones. These corruptions and deviations blacken
the lives of boys and girls, and incur suck damage and loss upon the
youth, that leaves negative effects on them for the rest of their lives.

Sexual deviation - one of which is masturbation, destroys and spoils the
charm, freshness, faith, potential, talents and the existence of a man.
Those who are concerned and have contact with society and the youth
understand the depth of this tragedy. And they know the extent of
irreversible harm and damage that is incurred upon the structure of
society, families and youth by the corruption, deviation, sexual
contamination and illicit relationships of boys and girls.

The condition of girls who are pushed towards destruction on this course
is pitiable, since they have a soft and elegant spirit. They may be
involved in the chastisement of their conscience and the burden of sin
and agony until the end of their lives.

One of the best and worthiest benefits of marriage is the safety of man
from this dirt, corruption and deviation. When I used to read this
hadith of Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s), I would be amazed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من سعادة المرء أن لاتطمث ابنته بيته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One of the prosperous matters that a man may get is that his daughter
does not menstruate in his house”.*

*(i.e. before reaching that stage, she leaves for her husband's house).*

I used to tell myself: How is it possible that she gets married at such
an age? But later on, the more I became informed and conversant with the
problems of society and the deviations and corruption, the more I would
appreciate and discover the wisdom of this hadith.

Of course, this hadith does not say that a girl must definitely marry at
such and age. Rather, it emphasizes the swiftness and quickness of
marriage, so that it is not delayed and the girl does not remain
unmarried after reaching the stage of womanliness.

I do not want to produce the figures on corruption that exist in other
societies and countries, particularly in western societies and
countries, because the pen and tongue become shy in putting that forth.
In addition, it is not advisable to mention all those corruption, which
has blackened the face of humanity, in this book that is meant for the
youth. Having said that, we must remain aware of our society and be
sensitive towards its problems.

We must confess the bitter fact that: our society too has plenty of
difficulties in the field of corruption of the youth. If parents do not
know, they must know. If the official of the cultural affairs, teachers,
principals, and chancellors of universities do not know, they must
become aware (although principally they know it). The difficulty is a
big one and all of us must take steps to rectify and reform these
affairs.

Dear young brother and sister, do try hard to keep yourselves pure and
clean in this sensitive period of age. Do not let the pearl of your
modesty, excellence and purity go out of your hands free. The safety and
security of this valuable and precious pearl is from the obligatory
duties of religion and humanity. Even if your marriage is delayed, this
“obligatory duty” stands valid.

Be sure that losing or blemishing this pearl would bring about
repentance and regret. We have both seen many people who have been
confront with regret, repentance, and the sense of loss, melancholy,
grief and sorrow following the loss of their pearl or its staining;
particularly girls. Because they possess more elegant senses and spirit,
girls' modesty is relatively more than the boys. And the loss or
staining of this pearl is more of a loss for them.

So relatively speaking, they fall into a state of more grief and shock
after its loss. So far so that even after marriage and having children,
they are shocked and pained by the sense of sin and the chastisement of
their conscience, due to a letter written to an illegal friendship (of
course, those who have completely lost their shame and modesty are not
included in our discussion).

My brother and sister, do not you feel shame contaminating the pure
pearl of your modesty and purity in these dirty marshes?

Oh fathers and mothers! Do you approve that your youth, who are the
flowers of the life garden, are pushed into the sewer of corruption and
dirt and become withered and destroyed? Are these children not the
deposit of Allah with you? Why do you delay and put off their marriage
on baseless and meaningless excuses? Why do you put yourselves in
annihilation with your own hands?

Let us regain our senses a bit, and take the facts into consideration.
The vulnerable, sexual strains and pressures of the youth cannot be
fought. A way and solution must be found and the best solution is
marriage with a suitable spouse at the natural marriage age.

4- Safety from Nervous and Spiritual Diseases
---------------------------------------------

If the sexual pressures and strains are not properly channeled through
legal and correct ways, they bring into existence an abundant number of
nervous and spiritual ailment and diseases, which damage those systems
greatly.

These pressures, long with solitude, loneliness and homelessness and on
the other hand, lack of a spouse and the pressure of instinct and
spiritual agony and weakness of faith (may God forbid) drag one towards
sexual deviation and going astray, and there by the difficulty is
multiplies, just as we have pointed out in the pervious discussion that
these deviations (particularly masturbation) incur heavy damage and
shock to human life and the nerves.

From the psychological and psychiatric points of view, sexual deviation,
not having a spouse and sexual strains are of the major causes of
spiritual and moral or nervous problems. Marriage with a suitable spouse
is the best and most effective method of remedy.

Here we present the verse of the Qur’an that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And one of His signs is that he created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them...”(30:21)***

Attention
---------

All the benefits described in this chapter and the topics, matters and
beneficences described in the first chapter, as well as all the
collective achievements, gains, values, worth and brilliant results
which are discussed in the entire length of these discussions, are only
accessible when marriage takes place with a suitable spouse, and the
standards which are going to be put forth in the next chapters are
observed.

Never neglect this point.

[^1]: Wasail al-Shia, vol14, p 39. Tabreerul Waseela (Imam Khomeini)
vol.2, chapter of Nikah (marriage).


