Chapter Four: Difficulties and Hurdles of Marriage
==================================================

Whenever it is said to a youth “Marry”, he instantly presents the
problems, difficulties, and hurdles of marriage and the first difficulty
that he discusses is the economical and financial matters. He then
counts the other problems one by one. It is a fact that there are really
lots of difficulties on the way to marriage, which cannot be neglected.
In this chapter, by the will of Allah, we shall consider these
difficulties, impediments and obstacles and contemplate the solutions to
them.

Difficulties: Real or Artificial?
---------------------------------

Alas, our society still remains a far distance from the true and pure
Mohammadan Islam. Ah! Still its face is hidden behind the curtain of
many problems. And the curtains of ignorance, false habits and customs,
selfishness polytheism and egoism have hindered the radiant sun of
Islam, depriving society of its life-giving glare.

Had Islam been the standard and criterion in marriage and spouse
choosing, most or all of these difficulties would not have existed. But
which Islam? According to Imam Khomeini (r.a) pure Mohammadan Islam, not
American Islam.

Pure Islam is the same as the Prophet (S) originated. Have we not read
and heard about the glorious Prophet (S)? That he executed all the
stages of marriage, i.e .engagement, fixation of dowry, and recitation
of marriage service, in the span of a few minutes, and handed the
husband and wife to each other and sent them to their home?

These are not myths, not even miracles. Still the pure Mohammadan Islam
is the same and has the same strength and quality, but it is we who are
not pure Muslims (all our shortcomings are due to “our” Muslimhood, not
to Islam).

What To Do Now?
---------------

In any case, difficulties and hindrances do exist, and their solutions
and remedies must be found. These remedies and solutions are of two
kinds: one is long term and the other is short term. The long term ones
are mostly related to the intelligentsia, the rulers, reformers, think
tanks and the trainers of the nation and society, who should seek
solutions for the entire society and its welfare. And the short term
ones are mostly connected to the youth and their parents themselves, who
must seek the immediate solution as to what must be done in these
circumstances and conditions.

At the moment, we are not going to talk about the long term solutions.
They may be discussed independently at another time. Our main discussion
pertains to the short term planning, i.e. what might be done right now?
So now we take up the real and actual difficulties.

First Difficulty: Economic and Monetary Difficulty
--------------------------------------------------

The major part of this difficulty is formed from the intricacies created
by society, which is not the actual difficulty of marriage. Had our life
been based upon the foundations of Islam and human nature, these
external difficulties would not have existed, or would have been
extremely minimized, and there would have been no youth who could not
marry due to such things. Anyway, these things presently exist and our
society has brought them into being, and a solution must be sought for
them.

### Solutions:

#### 1. Allah's Supports

Allah and the leaders of Islam have given a lot of good news and hope in
this regard, which can be very hopeful and trusting supports for the
youth. It is obligatory and binding upon us to have complete
satisfaction about these promises and news. Their promises and
commitments are true. There could be no more hope - giving and
enthusiasm - creating thing than this support for the youth who intend
to marry but find the economical difficulties a hurdle and hindrance on
their way. Faith in this support brings about a great courage and valour
in a man. Now we consider a few of those.

Allah promises:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أنكحوا الأيامي منكم والصالحين من عبادكم و إمائكم إن يكونوا فقراء
يغنهم الله من فضله والله واسع عليم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And marry those among you who are single and those*** ***who are fit
among your male slaves and your female slaves; if they are needy, Allah
will make them free from want out of His grace; and Allah is
Ample-giving, knowing. (24:32)”***

This is a clear, distinct and conspicuous promise of Allah; and which
promise can be more trusting than Allah's?

Young brother and sister, be satisfied and absolutely sure about this
promises of Allah, then you will see the definite and bright result of
it, Insha’Allah.

I have personally seen and observed and touched this in many cases among
my friends and acquaintances who did not have a house or wealth at the
time of their marriage, but later on became house owners and wealthy.
Very rarely have I seen people possessing a house and material sources
before marriage.

I know only two of these cases where some people were provided with a
house and money before marriage, but interestingly, they too were
confronted with a cold, spiritless, and purposeless life due to them
putting off and delaying their marriage for the procurement of house and
money; since they wasted the spring of marriage that is the valuable
period of youth till the “autumn of life” appeared.

##### The Good News Given By The Leaders of Islam

The Prophet (S) who is the trustee of Allah's mysteries and secrets
spoke about Allah’s help to the youth as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زوجوا أياماكم فإن الله يحسن لهم في أخلاقهم و يوسع لهم في أرزاقهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و يزيدهم في مرواتهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Give spouse to your single ones, because Allah makes their morality
better (improves it) (under the shadow of marriage)*

*and expands their sustenance and increases their generosity (human
values).”* [^1]

Yet again he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من ترك التزويج مخافة العيلة فقد ساء الظن بالله. إن الله يقول: إن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يكونوا فقراء يغنهم الله من فضله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one who forsakes and drops marriage for fear of poverty and
adversity, indeed he has a bad (negative) opinion and thought about
Allah. Verily Allah said: 'If they are poor, Allah will turn them
needless by His grace.'“* [^2]

Again that magnanimous one says to the youth:

**
**
إتخذوا الأهل فإنه أرزق لكم

**
**
.

*“Get spouses, as that increases your sustenance.”* [^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرزق مع النساء والعيال.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Sustenance is with wives and family.”* [^4]

##### A Beautiful Example

A young man who was extremely poor and penniless came into the presence
of the holy Prophet (S) and complained to him about his poverty and
adversity, and requested his guidance, saying:

*“Oh Prophet of Allah, what must I do to get out of this condition of
extreme poverty and apprehension?”*

The Prophet said: *“Do marry!”*

The young man was surprised and said to himself,

*“How can I, who do not have enough means to run my own life's expenses,
marry and shoulder the responsibility and expenses of wife an myself
together?”*

However, since he was completely sure about the correctness of the
saying of the Muhammad (S) and believed in its truth, did get married
and his life gradually and economically improved. he came out of the
state of poverty and misery.

Deep attention to this good news and true promises projects sureness
about Allah's aid and help in the human heart, so that one marries and
is not afraid of the difficulties, hardships and hindrances.

And it is taken for granted that when a youth marries for the pleasure
of Allah, implementation of His command and remaining safe and secure
from the corruptions and spiritual and physical ailments, and also for
the sake of progress, completion and prosperity, Allah's beneficence and
kindness would overwhelm him, and His help would come to make him reach
his sacred aim.

#### 2. New Horizons

After marriage, new horizons and vistas open up before one, which did
not exist before; since the individual, as a result of marriage, feels
more responsibility and sees oneself responsible to manage the new life,
to procure the livelihood and save the family's honour. Thereby, he
utilizes all his potential capabilities and hidden talents: fresh spring
sprouts up from his interior; talents that he was unaware of rise up and
premarital sleeping energies gush out. He finds a new and energetic
personality inside himself. His dependence and trust upon Allah
increases. And all of a sudden “new broad horizons” open up and are made
apparent before his intellect, mind and soul.

On the other side, under the shadow of marriage and resting beside a
kind, intimate and sympathetic life partner, all the problems,
pressures, agonies of single life, loneliness, feelings of scornfulness
and shortcomings are forgotten, and as a consequences, the human soul
blossoms and the keenness and eagerness towards progress and completion
blooms in him, and man flies up towards the height of completion and
prosperity.

What a large number of people have been seen who, after marrying a
suitable spouse , have found for themselves new personalities, become
new persons, and their journey towards all ends picked up acceleration
and speed.

This progress and development of new horizons contains and consists of
economic affairs as well and the youth explores new ways and means of
livelihood and procuring income. He becomes brave and dauntless in his
economical matters, expansion of his job and business. As a result, his
income is boosted and increases by these activities. Economical problems
and hardships are removed one by one.

Every success has many other successes following it and every new
victory brings other victories.

#### 3. Job Facilities and Allowances

In a lot of organizations, job institutions and offices married
employees are given such facilities, allowances and benefits, which are
not given to the unmarried. For example, when teachers get married, they
are provided with plots, loans and other benefits and allowances that
have a great effect upon the betterment of their economical conditions.

Just as it has been previously stated, 90% of my friend and
acquaintances became house owners and wealthy after being married. Most
of them were teachers and preceptors who, when married, even after their
simple engagement, acquired access to pieces of land and loans,
constructed houses, and even their marriage expenses were met by the
same money. Of course, we must be attentive to the fact that in all
these cases “Allah's help” is effective.

#### 4. Attaining Status and More Reverence

In society, married people are usually more respected and given higher
status than single ones. The banks and financial institutions that
provide loans, and the businessmen and institutions providing
commodities on installments trust and value married people more. This
trust and economical honour has its effect upon removing the financial
hardships of life and improving its elegance and splendour.

#### 5. Special Marriage Loans

Special funds and bank loans for this essential matter must be
established everywhere. This seems to be one of the long-term solutions
we have decided not to discuss. We, at present, do not have any concern
with the long term ones, but the youth themselves and the residents of
each street can perform it, and the mosques are suitable places for this
work. It may not necessarily be a large one; it can be a small unit in
each street and area, and can announce that everyone can bring in any
amount of money and give it as a loan for marriage expenditures and
expenses for Allah's pleasure.

Unfortunately, some of the loan funds, which at the beginning were meant
for meeting the needs of needy people, have now turned into 'business
shops'. Anyone who has more money or works more with the fund gets more
loans! (Glory be to the Creator! Is this the meaning of a loan?!)

We are not concerned with such funds. Of course, there are some funds
concordant with their preliminary aims and objectives and young men can,
by trusting in Allah and with their high morale, courage, fortitude and
the help of sincere and pious men raise and establish special marriage
funds.

#### 6. Decreasing the Ceremonies and Additional Expenses

Most of the ceremonies regarding marriage are against Islam, reason and
human nature.

We must again regret that our society has become so immersed in habits,
rites and customs of ignorance. A lot has been said and is being said
over this topic. Reformers admonish. Writers write. The religious
scholars and clergymen describe the traditions and the mode of life and
morale of the infallibles. But alas, it has a little effect upon
hardened hearts, which are contaminated with the customs of ignorance.

Why have we become so? Why have we, who claim piety ad culture, flung
ourselves far from piety and civilization and the lofty Islamic
culture?
Why do we bind ourselves by such chains of imprisonment? Why is our
society moving fast towards decline, retro gradation and retrogression
and the fall of moral values? Why is it that after the revolution it was
expected that the mean rites of ignorance would go, but actually we see
them on the increase? This is most certainly not the fault of the
revolution, it is ours.

The dower sums and wedding gifts are going up each day. Dowries are
increasing. The expenses and expenditures are swelling. Ceremonies are
boosting up in number. Emulation and rivalry is increasing and avarice
and jealousy is intensifying.

O Allah! What has gone wrong with us?

Oh dear fathers and mothers, be mindful not to sacrifice your children
upon your greed and avarice. Be mindful not to destroy their prosperity.
Do you know that if you hinder the marriage of your son with a suitable
spouse, its harm and loss will reach you before and more than everybody
else? Take lesson from all the corruption that has taken place due to
delays in marriages for the sake of ceremonies and rites.

If your dear daughter becomes corrupt, you will lose your honour, which
will make you bow down your head.

If you receive the news that your daughter has made friends with
indecent boys, and God forbid, she has become immodest and immoral, then
this stain will remain upon your face forever.

If, God forbid, your son becomes immoral, characterless, and corrupt and
involved in feeding his eyes with prohibited sights, sexual deviation,
indulgence, and dirty sexual activities, this would bring a black spot
of eternal disgrace to you.

If your son or daughter is confronted with depression, apprehension or
physical and spiritual disease due to sexual strains, solitude and
loneliness, or masturbation and sexual deviations, their loss,
apprehension and grief will also be shared by you.

Why have we become negligent and heedless to the facts? Did the Muhammad
(S) not say the daughter who id not married in time is like a fruit that
is not plucked in time and becomes rotten and stale? Did Islam not
reveal: “If the marriage of the son is delayed due to the parents ad he
is deviated (with sin), that sin will be shared by the father and the
mother as well”?

Even if we are not Muslims, why must we not take lesson from the
experiences of society?

Oh dear father and mother, oh sisters and brothers, do for sure that
most difficulties are our own creations, and we have ourselves loaded
these problems ad nuisances upon ourselves.

When the parents, and even the boys and girls, are talked to and guided
about decreasing and diminishing the expenditures ad ceremonies, and an
ample number of arguments are given in this connection, they reply:

“All that you say is correct, but, we have honour and prestige It would
be stepping down from the height of honour if we do not take such and
such an amount as dower sum, have simple ceremonies, the girls' dowry
may not containing a colour TV, furniture, freezer and carpet, certain
types of jewellery may not be there, and the right milk price may not be
received. We are honourable and must remain honourable and respectable
and raise our head (with honour) among both families.”[^5]

The answer is: Is our honour and reverence more than that of the
Muhammad (S), Ali (a.s) and Fatima (s.a).

If holding simple marriage ceremonies, short of rites, is a disgrace and
causes dishonour, then how come these great personalities did that? All
of us know that they were the most honourable of humanity in the whole
of the universe. And no one reaches their status in connection with
honour, respect, nobility and position.

Nevertheless, all of us are aware that the marriage of Hazrat Zahra
(s.a) and Hazrat Ali (a.s) was held in the simplest form, and that all
the expenditure of the dower sum, dowry and household effects and
marriage expenses were procured from the sale of Hazrat Ali's armoured
jacket. The total expenses totalled nearly thirty thousand Tomans today
(nearly 60 dollars)!!!

Yes, it is true that we do not have the strength to lead a life similar
to those magnanimous ones. But at least we must resemble them and our
life style should have some resemblance with theirs; otherwise, what
does following and taking example mean? If we claim to be their
followers, but our life conduct ad morality does not have any
resemblance with theirs, then the claim would be a lie and it is a form
of hypocrisy.

And likewise, it is true that the form and pattern of life has changed
and the standards of living have gone up and the age has changed. But
the Islamic and human standards and values have definitely not changed
at all and will never change. That is to say, not spending
extravagantly, simplicity in life, not having rivalry and the invalidity
of fables and ceremonies shall always stand; let the society go to any
height of standards.

“All that Muhammad (S) made lawful shall be lawful to the resurrection
day, and all that Muhammad (S) declared unlawful and illegal shall
remain so to the resurrection day.”

Regretfully, these false ceremonies and wrong rites are a social and
cultural disease, which has affected all of us; and we all are
responsible for it.

O' fathers, mothers, sisters and brothers! We must believe for sure that
the rites and ceremonies are like the spider's web, the more they grow,
the more we would become entangled in them, to the extent that they
suffocate, choke and destroy us. The lesser their number, the more
comfortable and at ease would man be.

##### A Beautiful Specimen of Simple Living

Once in the era of Salman's (r.a) governorship and rule in Madayen, a
flood came and the water gushed into people's house, so they rushed to
the mountains and the height to seek shelter and refuge. Those who had
more luggage to carry were faced with a lot of trouble in taking them up
the height; so that a few even lost their lives carrying their household
effects.

Hazrat Salman's (r.a) personal effects were small, including a volume of
the Qur’an, a sword, a water pot, and a goat skin which was his carpet.
He took them and climbed up the hiss without any difficulty. Then he
said: “Suck is the way that those who are light gain salvation and those
with a heavy load (of sin) are annihilated and perish.”

For the sake of God, what is the difference if you own a rug instead of
a precious and expensive carpet? What difference would it make if your
house does not have decorations? What stops us from having a simple meal
instead of various costly foods? If honour is in these formalities, then
these personalities are artificial, unimpressive and worthless.

Compare the simple mud house of Ali (who is the chief of the believers
and leader of all human beings - a universal personality) and Fatima
(the chief of the free and honourable women of human history). A house
where Hassan (a.s), Hussain (a.s) and Zainab Kubra (s.a) were brought
up, to the green palace of Moawiyah (Allah's curse be upon him). Which
one do you love more?

And compare the various and numerous palaces of the shah of Iran
(Allah's curse be upon him) with the simple, small, rented house of Imam
Khomeini (r.a) (Allah bless him). Which one is dearer, worthier and more
sublime in your view?

*“Refer to your souls and address them.”* [^6]

Economic difficulties are decreasing the formalities and ceremonies,
rites and additional expenditures.

*“Oh Allah, help the youth in this important matter.”*

Second Difficulty: Continuation of Education
--------------------------------------------

It is quite fortunate that the majorities of our youth wish to continue
their studies and do not content themselves with a low level education.
But it should be borne in mind that this positive and lovely practice
may not be followed by negative, disagreeable and displeasing point.

Unfortunately, this nice and pleasing practice has raised disagreeable,
damaging and sometimes tragic problems in our society. This is not due
to the actual matter -that is, continuing education - but it is the
consequence and result of our own faults and wrong styles. It is we
ourselves that have deviated from the useful and sublime phenomenon of
science and education.

### The Real Problem

To reach higher education, it is necessary for boys and girls to seek
education up to the age of 25 or even beyond. Receiving an education is
considered a constraint to marriage and accepting marital responsibility
and thus is impracticable.

### Contemplating This Difficulty

Like most of the other hindrance on the way to marriage, this difficulty
or hurdle is also not a real one, rather, it is artificial and man-
made. And it can very easily be removed by proper planning and working
in a calculated manner. Furthermore, marriage can be turned into stairs
and ladders to reach the aim of getting a higher education and touching
the loftier grades of knowledge.

Just as we described in the preface, men and women are the complements
of each other. There has been a capable woman beside every successful
man, and every prosperous woman has had a talented man beside her.

This principle applies to education as well. Many scholars and wise men
achieved success reaching the higher level of education on account of
the sacrifices, co-operation and co-working of their spouses.

The Muhammad (S) visited the house of Ali (a.s) and Fatima (s.a) after
they were married. He congratulated the bride and the bridegroom. Then
he addressed Ali (a.s) and said:

*“How did you find your wife?” The bridegroom lowered his head and
replied with an innocent modesty:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نعم العون علي طاعة الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My wife is a good companion and helper on the way to Allah's
obedience.”*

Then he (a.s) asked Fatima (s.a) the same question; and she too gave the
same answer, which her husband had given. (Allah's blessing and peace be
upon this noble family).

Getting an education is among the noblest duties and serviced of Allah
in which spouses can help an assist each other and provoke, stimulate
and extend the warmth of hopefulness and can even be, as the student of
theology say, discussion partners of each other!

A peace, tranquillity, spiritual and mental balance is materialized in
the shadow of marriage, which has a positive effect in achieving success
in getting an education.

Some students say: 'Let us be patient till the time we reach somewhere
in our studies and get our degree. Then we can work to become wealthy
and put our life on track before we marry”. They must take into view
this important point - that they may face spiritual and physical
inconveniences, and after crossing over all those phases, may not have
the health, freshness and fortitude to organise and establish a
prosperous life and enjoy it.

The students of Islamic teachings face this difficulty to a lesser
extent. Most students, although their economical condition is usually
lower than other students, marry nearly on time and continue their
studies as well.

The solution to this difficulty, like the economical problem has two
ways: long term and short term. The long-term solution does not concern
us now; thus let's turn to the short term one.

### Solutions to This Problem

#### 1- To Drive The Thought Out Of One's Mind That Education Is Not Harmonious With Marriage.

Thought is followed by practice. Thinking that marriage is not possible
whilst continuing education is our fundamental and basic problem in this
regard; before anything else, this wrong notion must be driven out of
our minds. If we do that, only then would a suitable solution come to
our mind, and the ground for the solution of this problem be provided.

There does not exist any logical reason or argument to support the fact
that getting education is not concordant with marriage. Instead, if a
correct and right marriage takes place and an equal, matching and
suitable spouse is selected, then it would be a good support for the
continuation of studies, which could help one reach one's educational
aims. We have observed and experienced this in the lives of many
students of theology and a few others.

Yes, if the spouse of the student (of both sexes, and in all fields of
knowledge) is not equal and well matched, and mental and spiritual
co-ordination does not exist between them, and they do not go well
together so to speak, undoubtedly, difficulties will come into
existence.

This problem, too, can be solved by minute attentiveness in the
selection of a spouse and observance of its standards and terms, which
shall be described later on.

#### 2- The Religious and Lawful Engagement

Boy and girl student can, through simple preludes, few ceremonies and
less expenditure, lawfully, legally and officially become the spouse of
each other, delaying the ceremonial marriage. They can have mutual
visits and social contacts, and at the same time, continue their studies
and then marry at a suitable time and unite their lives.

In this way, they should remain safe and secure from the deviations and
losses of being single, and also benefit from the peace, comfort amid
merits of marital life.

Some people say that when a boy and a girl get engaged, their minds
become distracted and their attention are diverted from their studies.
This is merely an error.

Instead, if they are engaged, their minds would be more focused, since
the scattered and deviated thoughts would leave their minds. Their minds
and hearts and eyes would be detached and separated from other places
and concentrate and focus upon each other.

On the other side, the enhancement of responsibility about their future
life would make them study better and set up their lives swiftly and
shape and independent life. Of course, we assert and emphasize that the
preliminaries of engagement and marriage must not be very expense
incurring, so as to create a headache. Even if a celebration is to be
held, it must be simple and short of great expense.

Fathers and mothers and elder must be the helpers of the youth, and try
to set the life of the dear ones on track. They should try not to load
their shoulders with any burden and not create hurdles on their way , on
the pretext and with the label of “rites and ceremonies”.

#### 3- Parents Help To the Son and the Daughter

Fathers and mothers can play a major role in the marriage of students.
They should help their sons and daughters not only in getting an
education, but also in getting married and in achieving the merits and
profits of the blessing of marriage, thereby remaining safe and secure
from the demerits, loss, damage and risks and corruption of single life.
In this way, parents must thing sagaciously and put it this way “What
difference does it make if we, who are bearing the expenses of our son
and daughter, also bear the expenditure of their spouses for a few years
more until the time they complete their education , settle down and
start an independent, separate, self sufficient life?

It would be better. So our dear children would not be lonely and
spouseless and become deprived of the spring of youth and marriage or
God forbid, become involved in deviation, corruption and spiritual and
physical diseases.”

If the parents think this way, they would certainly reach the required
result.

Any damage and loss faced by the children would directly affect the
parents who would be responsible for it. And any of their success,
fortune and happiness would be shared by parents. So how nice would it
be for them to help them out in this important matter for the sake of
Allah's pleasure and their children's prosperity and well-being that is
also their own.

Mothers and fathers and elders of the boys and girls should sit and talk
and reach a common decision by mutual agreement and understanding and
provide a simple respectful life for their children, thus helping and
assisting them to live together and simultaneously continue their
education. So great reward does this have, that it cannot be put in
black and white.

#### 4- Birth Control

One of the difficulties of marrying during the age of education is the
bearing of children and looking after them.

It is quite easy to solve this problem. One can put constraints upon
bearing a child until the end of one's educational life with the other's
consent. There are many easy methods within the scope of religion and
law to stop it. So this cannot also be a hindrance in marriage.

#### 5-Contentment

“Contentment is an unending treasure”[^7]and a strong support for all
the people, especially married students.

Students and the learned and educated ones who strive and fight to free
themselves and others from the prison and bonds of ignorance and fables
and receive an education must not themselves be entangled and involved
in fables, rites, ceremonies, and senseless customs of ignorance.

Brother and sister, study the lives of the learned and successful person
and see that most of them have been leading simple, contented, and
unceremonious, informal lives. It is not really possible that one who is
involved in extravagance, overspending and formalities make progress in
the fields of knowledge, science, research and industry. Since, as it
has been already said, formalities and rites are like the spider's web,
which entangles man and restrain his progress and success.

Take it easy.

#### 6- Cooperation

When both the husband and the wife are students, they must perform the
housework together, to allowing it to be a burden on one person's
shoulder. Allah has declared a big prize and reward for the husband and
wife who help each other in life's affairs. The co-working enhances
mutual love and warmth of relations. Of course, the husband and the wife
busy receiving an education and knowledge can even help each other in
that field.

How sweet, enjoyable and progressive it can be when two members of a
common life, two partners who have uniformity of aim, objective and
direction, are discussion partners of each other in their studies as
well.

### A Word with Parents in this Regard

It has become a fashion these days that when there is a talk about
engagement and marriage, the parents (particularly those of the girl)
say: *“Our child is still studying, her time for marriage has not yet
come!”*

Dear parents, this is anti-Islamic and against intellect and even
against the internal desire and wishes of your children. Did you forget
the time of your own youth? Did you not desire and wish for a spouse
when you were their age?

Principally, you should not have forgotten. So, now why do you oppose
the marriage of these young ones?

Are you aware that any damage done to them will directly hurt you?
Beware and bear in mind that our children, particularly the girls, are
shy to say “We want a spouse”.

They might even apparently refuse it and give negative answer, but
inside them is a wild turmoil.

Do not put so many hindrances in their path. Do not make all these
excuses. Do not sacrifices them for your own desires. They hold you in
reverence and may say nothing, but this strictness and excuses annoy
them and cause them to pick up a grudge against you. Help them so that
they can marry when young and can achieve and reap the benefit of the
spring of their age and simultaneously study.

Third Difficulty: Difficulty in Spouse Selection
------------------------------------------------

One of the difficulties on the way of youth marriage is the difficulty
in selecting a spouse. That is to say, the girl and a boy do not know
whom to select and with what kind of standards, virtues, and
peculiarities.

This is a real and actual difficulty and is not an invented and false
one. It is a big problem being faced by the youth, and, as has been said
in the preface, they must be helped in this connection. If minute care
is not exercised in this regard, many difficulties will come into
existence in their future lives, some of which would be irreparable and
without remedy.

### The Solution

Brother and sister, do not worry, do not be apprehensive, since we will
elaborately discuss this topic in the next chapter. Insha’Allah you will
find the solution to it.

Mostly, the aim and objective of these discussions is studying and
seeking solutions to this very difficulty. The real and actual stimulant
of our proposing these discussions is to solve this problem.

Fourth Difficulty: Hurdles and Hindrances of the Elders and Friends
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The respect for parents and obedience to them is obligatory for and
binding upon children. It is one of the biggest obligations of Allah.
Annoying, molesting and showing disrespect or disobeying parents is
prohibited; especially in relation to the big prohibitions.

Parents have ample and plenty of experience and wish and desire the
goodness and betterment of their children. Whatever they say about their
offspring and whichever decision they take or whatever step they take,
it is based on the same well-wishing, discernment, experience and
sympathy. No one is more well-wishing and sympathetic towards children
than parents.

It is obligatory for the young son and daughters to pay attention to the
well-wishing, sympathy, discernment and opinions of the parents and to
take advantage of and benefit from their experience. Possibly, what
sagacious parents see in a brick, young children may not see in a
mirror. This fact stands valid at its place.

In a few cases, there are unfortunately, fathers and mothers and some
friends who due selfishness, egoistic desires or ignorance and
foolishness axe the roots of their young children and create hurdles on
the way. They do this with their inexperience, illogic and untrue
excuses and by exercising wrong views and undue interventions, becoming
the cause of their children's misery and destruction.

Such persons bring about abundant and ample difficulties for the youth
in the matter of “marriage and spouse selection” and sometimes happen to
cause misfortune and misery for a long life to them. For instance, they
impose their own wrong views upon their children and compel them to
marry someone whom they have selected, though the children may not be
pleased or approve it.

They judge and consider marriage candidates according to their own set
of standards and tastes without any attention even to the view and
opinion of their children and so they approve or reject whomever they
please.

When a proper and suitable spouse is proposed, they hinder and stop the
relationship taking shape with excuses, conditions, and undue and
illegal expectations.

### A Gloomy and Sad Example for Your Attention

Sometime back, I went to one of the cities cultural and propagation
matters. I was talking to a family, of whom I was a guest, about their
life style and conditions, problems and difficulties.

When it came to the matters and affairs pertaining to their children, we
talked about each of them one by one.

So then I turned to a daughter of their who was 23, and still unmarried.
I asked them surprisingly:

### “Why Has She Not Married Till Now?”

They said: *“It is the fate which has not yet approve it.”*

I said: *“What do you mean by that? Has someone not yet turned up to ask
for her hand in marriage?”*

They replied: *“Yes that's it! A person whom we can approve has yet to
come.”*

I said: Is it you who did not approve or the girl has not approved and
liked the suitor?

Before they could give the answer, the girl who had heard our
conversation came rushing from the next room, bitterly weeping.

She said: “Sir, it is not as they say, instead, a number of suitable and
good candidates have come so far to ask my hand in marriage. This
father, mother and brother of mine rejected them without even discussing
it with me or even without me being aware of it. I was informed later
on. Then the girl named a number of candidates who had come to ask her
hand.

I personally knew one of them who is a nice young man. I addressed the
parents and the brother, saying “At least I know one of these men, who
is a good and suitable one. On what ground did you reject him? Why did
you not ask your daughter's opinion when you wanted to reject him?”

They lowered their heads and said: 'All that you say is true, but it was
not approved by destiny!”

I was very sorry. But nothing could be done, since that boy had married
another girl.

This girl has now been confronted with problems like depression and
nervous, psychological, and physical disease. She has also lost many of
her youthful characteristics and specifications. No more candidates like
that young man seek her hand in marriage, since not only she much older,
but she is also suffering from certain ailments and has lost her
attraction and peculiarities.

Really, it is those parents and the brother who have exercised that
cruelty upon her. What shall such parents and elders say to Allah? Those
who play with the fate and destiny of the young ones and make them face
such damages and loss, how will they satisfy their own consciences?

O Allah! Such oppressed youth do not have a shelter and refuge except
you. Help them!

### A Curious and Strange Example

I was waiting for a taxi on street, when a beautiful late model car
pulled up nearby and I was invited to get in.

I was amazed, since very rarely do those having such late model cars
pick someone up and drop him at his destination.

Anyhow, I got in the car. The driver was a youth of approximately 27 to
28 years of age.

After greeting him and asking his welfare, he said, “I have a difficulty
which I want to discuss with you.” I said “Carry on.” He said, “As you
can see, I'm not very young, but am still a bachelor. So far, I have
taken into new a number of girls and discussed them, but my family
confronted and opposed my marriage on different pretexts and excuses.
Recently, I have selected a good girl whom I consider suitable for
myself from all aspects. But this time too my family opposed me, making
a very absurd and ugly excuse, which is laughable. what is my religious
obligation in this case?
I have upheld their respect and reverence to this moment and have
obeyed them, but this time I can no more do that, since not only is the
girl good, but the excuse is a bad one.”

I said: *“Explain it, let me see what their excuse is and what are the
distinctions and qualities of the girl.”*

He replied: I have recently completed my education and become an
engineer. I am fully prepared for marriage from each and every aspect,
in fact, I feel a strong urge for it. The girl that I have taken into
consideration for marriage is a very nice and suitable one. She too is
an educated girl and we like each other from all aspects. There is no
real and actual difficulty and hindrance on our way to marriage, except
for a narrow arched street which is the obstacle to the marriage!!”

I said: *“What do you mean? I do not understand.”*

He reflected: “Our house is situated in a beautiful spot and our door
opens onto a big park. (He named the street and the park). but the house
of that girl is located in a narrow and arched street. Our family holds
'It is inadequate and bad for us to be visiting that street. It is
downgrading for us to make our friends, relatives and guests visit that
street and house'.”

I was very surprised and could not make myself believe that such people
can be found in this world.

I said to the young man: *“You mean to say that your family and elders
are such person? Does your* *family wish to purchase the house of the
girl's family that they object to their street? I had never at all seen
or heard such and excuse!”*

He said: *“Yes, that is that. Now that you have seen and heard, what is
my obligation, and what must I do with them?”*

I said: “If it be so and this is their excuse which you say, then never
at all submit to their invalid and irreligious, ridiculous and funny
views. Here it is not obligatory for you to obey your parents in this
case\> As for the other family members and elders, their obedience too
is not obligatory for you. If you are satisfied that the girl is
suitable, good and both of you are equal and harmonious, then do not let
her go at any cost.”

Then other matters wee described which will soon be discussed in the
“solutions to problems” section.

### An Agonistic Letter

Ayatollah Ibrahim Amini presented the letter of a girl in his book
“Spouse Selection” which is being narrated exactly hereby.

The girl wrote: “I am a student and have reached an age where many
chances of marriage came forth for me, but both my mother and father
hindered my marriage in one way or another... Of course, do not think
that the marriage candidates had any fault and shortcoming. On the
contrary, they present such arguments that I think I would never be able
to marry. The boys are faithful, religious and socially good. As a
matter of fact, o sooner do they turn up with a proposal, than they are
given a negative reply, without even being asked any question.

And they (my parents) have made it a routine, and do not even seek my
opinion. I look forward to the time when at least they would ask my view
and permit me to take a decision regarding my future. I must say I am
very annoyed and unhappy with them form the core of my heart, since I
can clearly and distinctly see how they have obscured my future. And
sometimes I feel that I do not like them because I think that some
people who do not have a role in my future life are deciding my future.

You sister.”[^8]

### What to Do Now?

The duties and obligations of sons and daughters towards wise,
sagacious, sympathetic, and expedient parents, of whom we have
Insha’Allah many, are quite clear and explicit. As has been described,
it is obligatory to uphold their regard and respect and attend and yield
to their admonitions and opinions, and benefit from their experiences.
But what is the duty of sons and daughters in connection with fathers,
mothers, elders and friends who are unwise, selfish, excuse makers, and
problem -creating (whose number is high)? How must they act so that both
their marriage is not delayed, and they get married to their wanted and
desired spouse and simultaneously avoid the hurdles and hindrances and
not letting a conflicting situation rise or minimize it?”

### Answer

This difficulty too, just like some other marriage problems, has two
kinds of solutions. One is long term solution and the other a 'short
term' one.

As far as the long term ones are concerned, the Islamic society must be
reformed. The reformers, thinkers, and teachers should reform and
rectify the ideas, thoughts, beliefs and morality of the society, that
everybody learns his duty and responsibility and practice. These
problems should be discussed and researched.

However, at present the discussion is related to the short-term
solutions which are discussed here.

### Solutions

#### 1. Direct Negotiations With The Hurdle-Creators And Fault -Finders

If the youth happen to face such hurdles, excuse-makers and unjustified
interceptors and they are sure that they are incorrect and wrong, they
must firstly talk to the excuse-makers. They must set aside shame and
shyness, and tell them very respectfully and humbly:

“We want to marry and we ask you, who are our elders and seniors, to
help us and not hinder our prosperity. Respect to you is binding and
obligatory for us and we observe that. But simultaneously it is also
obligatory for you to help us out at this sensitive juncture, so that we
can set our lives upon correct and right foundations. Unfortunately and
regretfully, such and such objection that you have raised is not
correct.[^9] These criteria, standards, rites and ceremonies, which you
have put forward are against Islamic and intellectual standards. Please
do not do something that might compel us to act against your opinion and
order.”

Such conversations, if done with respect and reverence to elders, do
positively produce a good result and effect in improving matters.

#### 2- Appointing A Mediator

If direct negotiation does not work (or you were shy and could not talk
face to face with them) and they still wish to impose their incorrect
versions, then the next stage arrives. That is, you appoint someone as a
mediator who has influence upon your elders. you discuss your entire
views with them and request that they talk to those hurdle-raisers so as
to stop them from opposition and stubbornness. This act can have a lot
of effect.

### A Specimen for Your Attention

A girl came to the Muhammad (S) and said: “O, Prophet of Allah (S), my
father wants to compel me to marry his nephew (my cousin) and I am
against it and do not want to marry this person.”

The Muhammad (S) at first admonished the girl to uphold and observe the
respect of her father, and said, *“If you can do it, accept the proposal
presented by your father.”*

The girl replied “O' Prophet of Allah (S), I do not have any inclination
and liking for my cousin and can not select him as my husband.”

The Muhammad (S) said “The discretion (choice) is yours, accept it if
you like, and if you do not like, do not accept.”

Then the girl said, “Oh Muhammad (S), now that this has happened, I am
prepared to marry my cousin. But I wanted my father and others to know,
by this act of mine, that they do not have th right to compel and force
their daughters to marry someone towards whom they are not inclined.”
(Bravo to this brave, intelligent girl!)

You can appoint these mediators from among relatives such as uncles,
grand fathers, mothers, aunts, the clergy, your teachers, and principals
and so on.

### Look at another Example

One of our friends, for whom we have selected the fictitious name of
“Hussain”, was confronted with some obstacles created by his father in
his with to marry. He left no stone unturned to make him give up his
stubbornness and obstinacy, but to no gain.

The son contacted a wise, pious religious jurist who was an expert and
authority in marriage problems and marital and social matters and whom
Hussain's father too held in reverence and love, and whose opinion was
an authority for him He discussed the problems with him.

That jurist summoned and talked to the father. When the father returned
after visiting the jurist, his eyes was tearful; he faced Hussain, who
was waiting outside the room for the result, and said “Oh my son,
forgive me. I now understand ho wring I was about your marriage and how
I nearly put you in a state of misery..”

### Another Interesting Example

An interesting matter was printed in the newspaper 'Risalat', serial No
1991, Saturday, 7th of Azar, 1371 (L.H) under the column entitled 'A
page from the notebook of life' by Mr. Abdullah Parhizgar, which is
presented exactly.

*“A page from the notebook of life”*

This week:

“Cousin!”

The information section of the newspaper informed me that a gentleman
wanted to see me. I went to the ground floor an the information clerk
showed me a man. After introduction and greeting, I guided him to my
room. We were alone in the room. I observed a strange agony on the face
of that man and so I discovered that he had some difficulty.

I said to him, *“I am ready to listen to your problem.”*

He said, *“Look sir, mine is a queer and strange difficulty”. i said,
“What is your problem about?”*

He replied “My father has a brother who is well-off and has only one
daughter who is studying in the fourth year of high school now. My
father and uncle have agreed that I will marry my cousin. And both of
them are of the opinion that the wealth and property of my uncle must
not be transferred to strangers. But I do not like my cousin and cannot
accept her as my wife. Now I am wondering what to do.”

Q: *“What is your qualification and job?”*

A: I have a junior diploma in electronics and work in one of the
governmental organisations. One of my friends who is a reader of your
newspaper organisations. One of my friends who is a reader of your
newspaper advised me to see you. Now I have come to find out what you
can do for me.”

*“Dear friend, thank you for the confidence you have in us. But I would
like to know why you do not like your cousin?”*

“Look, Mr Parhizgar, as a matter of fact, my uncle's family, and to some
extent my father too, measure everything upon monetary and material
standards. But in contrast and contrary to their ideology, I do not
believe in this thing. I do not want to turn my uncle and cousin, and
although I know I would become considerably rich through I know become
considerably rich through this marriage, I am not ready to sacrifice my
beliefs for their illogical and irrational wishes and inclinations.”

The young man was talking about the superb and lofty humane values. He
was not prepared to sell himself out and undergo an imposed marriage. He
wanted to marry a girl based on his own choice and inclination, short of
material provocations, stimulant and attraction. His ideas were
praiseworthy. One could hope that there are still many people to be
found who do not consider their humanity, spiritualism and purity
comparable to any material criteria or standards.

I said to him:

*“Dear friend, I commend and praise you for having such ideas and the
best way to go is that you do not undergo this imposed marriage, under
any circumstances.”*

*“What must I so then about the pressure my father is exerting upon
me?”*

*“You must reveal all the problems and your ideas to your father without
any concealment and conservativeness. You should make your father see
that marriage is optional matter of taste and nobody must be and can be
forced to such a work. Because forced marriage case which are presented
and riled in the courts exhibit and indicate the agonies, catastrophes,
and afflictions faced by the husband, the wife and their relatives.”*

*“Mr. Parhizgar, I feel shy about talking so frankly and openly to my
father!”*

*“There is nothing to be shy about, and besides, you do not have another
way out, since nobody else can explain and make them understand what
goes on in your heart better than you. Moreover, You* *can seek the help
of others, especially the older ones in your family.”*

*“Mr. Parhizgar, I wish to ask you a* *favour!”*

*“Please carry on!'*

'The difficulty which I have is that I do not want this problem to be
propagated among the family and that is the reason I wanted to request
that you talk to my father.”

*'I will be glad to help you out. I can welcome you and your father
right here.*

*'I am very grateful. Now I beg your leave and will return with my
father in a few days.*

The young man gladly departed, saying goodbye.

It is really a matter of sorrow that there are a few families to be
found who overlook and ignore the logical and rightful wishes and
desires of their children. Their stubbornness and persistence can place
their youth in horrible conditions.

The youth left to return with his father. I look forward that he might
be able to contend him and I might no longer be needed. Anyhow, I am
waiting for them to come.

After four weeks, the same newspaper dated 5th of Day, 1371 (L.H)
reported the return of the father and the son, through the same column
and page, as follows:

*“A leaf from the notebook of life”*

This week: *“The father came!”*

The information desk of the newspaper informed that two people had come
to see me. I asked to be connected to one of them on the phone.

*“Mr. Parhizgar!”*

*“Yes!”*

*“I am the same person who was supposed to go and bring my father along,
so that you might have a talk with him.”*

*“Yes I remember, please come along!”*

Finally, the father and his son came. The son was here, so that I may
bring his father round not to compel him to marry his cousin. The
father's coming was an indication that he was still insisting upon his
son's marrying his cousin to prevent the wealth slipping out of the
family.

I was still thinking how to deal with this father when they showed up.
After the usual greetings, we sat across a table to talk.

*“Dear father, you're most welcome. Your coming here makes* *realise*
*that you are interested in your son's future. I hope that this
affiliation of yours will continue, and remain persistent.”*

*“Thank you my son. As I am interested in my son's future, I asked him
to marry his cousin. She is a very good, chaste, pure and educated girl.
My brother's financial position too is quite sound and he does not allow
them (his family) to face any hardship in these times of difficulties.”*

*“Do you think money can be a security of their* *property?”*

*“If they possess wealth, life becomes easier for them. Is it bad that
they own a house, some saving and briefly speaking, all that is
necessary in such expensive, inflationary times?”*

*“But what if they do not like each other and there is no love and
association between them and they live like two enemies, always having
disputed and quarrelling? Would you then not face agony? Do you not feel
sorry as to why you are compelling you son into a forcible and imposed
marriage?”*

*“In my opinion if they are financially comfortable, definitely they
will have less nervous strains and inconveniences so they will have less
argument and conflicts.”*

*“Respected sir! When there is no love, affiliation and deep sentimental
attachment between a man and a woman, then all the wealth and riches of
the world cannot bring about liking. I would like you to be a bit more
logical in your thinking.”*

The father had become helpless, and did not have a word to say. I
inferred from his conversation that his 'logic' was that of money and he
wanted to forcibly make his son marry. When he said,

*“What must I do?”* I understood that he was on the retreat and it was
my turn now.

I addressed him “Dear father! You must think logically and rationally.
Allow your son to marry a girl of his own liking. If you compel him to
undergo an imposed marriage, then definitely they would not have a happy
future. And when they have conflicts and differences due to lack of love
and affiliation, you family as well as that of your brother's will face
agony and anguish. So why do you do such a thing which will bring you
repentance. You must allow your son to take a decision with a peaceful
and comfortable mind and not in an atmosphere of compulsion and
threats.”

*“As a matter of fact, if my son does not marry my niece, my brother
will be annoyed with me and our brotherhood would shatter!”*

It is better that your brotherhood shatters right now that at a time
when they divorce each other and the complication increases. You must
sit together with your brother and talk and you should convince him that
your son and daughter should select their spouses themselves.”

The young man was happily listening to the conversation between his
father and me. I could see the flash of happiness and joy in his eye.
His father was in agreement and was contented and the youth was about to
become free from an imposed marriage.

I addressed his father.

*“Be satisfied, and discuss all the problems with your brother. Explain
the facts of life to him. He too may agree, and a dispute and conflict
may not arise between you. My last word to you is to think about the
future and prosperity of your son. This young man does not hold any
value in the wealth of his uncle. He wants to stand upon his own feet.
He does not even have the need for your wealth. He thinks about his
future and prosperity and you too must help and assist him.”*

The father's eyes were full of tears and the youth was smiling. The
father's face showed contentment. He extended his hand and caught hold
of his son's hands.

The father and the son hugged and embraced each other and started
weeping bitterly. The room was filled with the sound of their fervent
and enthusiastic weeping. It was proof to me that the father had
abandoned his stubbornness and persistence. I poured tea for them and
asked them to relax.

The youth and I sighed with relief. The joy of the youth knew no bounds,
as he saw his future guaranteed...

There exist other solutions and examples as well, but since it is
possible that stating these might become the cause of “misunderstanding”
or “misuse” or “wrong inference, we will avoid describing the. When it
comes to a deadlock, then the youth must refer to “wise and sagacious”
people and ask them to guide them.

### Reminder

We once again assert and stress that the young must be attentive to the
fact that making excuses, creating a hindrance and hurdles by the
elders, we mean the excuses, wishes, and opinions against religion and
reason, not the opinions and views based upon reason, well-wishing and
sympathy.

Just as we have previously described, there are many fathers, mothers
and elders who have more experience than the youth and want the goodness
and beneficence of the youth. They might have a difference of opinion in
a few matters pertaining to marriage and spouse selection, which are
concordant with reason, religion, logic and experience. And in this
case, their experiences be benefited from as well as their admonition be
attended to.

So be careful that problems do not get mixed up and that difficulties
are not enhanced. If a difference of opinion arises in a matter and you
are perplexed and unable to distinguish whether your opinion is correct
or theirs, contact wise, sagacious, intelligent persons and consult
them. In chapter 6, we will discuss consultation, seeking advice and the
specification and qualities of a consultant and adviser. Insha’Allah!

Fifth Difficulty: Military Service
----------------------------------

This difficulty and constraint does not include girls. And it does not
include many of boys as well. For those who continue their studies
following the intermediate level, it is not essential for them to
proceed to it. Instead, they can perform it after completing their
education and joining the service. So no gap is created in their lives.

Furthermore, if someone studies certain specified subjects, for
instance, the students of teacher training centers, and he does not even
intend to continue his education after the intermediate level, then
there is no conventional soldiering for him.[^10]

After these cases, we are left with those young men who must go for the
usual and routine two years performing this scared duty. What is the
solution to their marriage problem?

### Solutions: Long Term Solution

Government officials must arrange and organize the law of military
service in a manner that it does not hinder and bring difficulty for
those who wish to marry. And such an amount of salary should also be
provisioned that it would suffice their expenditure along with that of
their wives.

### Short Term Solution

#### 1- Religious and Legal Engagement

Engagement during military service is very sweet and beautiful. The
engaged couple can correspond throughout and write hope-giving and
inspiring things to each other. During the level periods, they see and
visit each other.

The facts described about 'engagement during education' apply to this
period as well.

#### 2- Staying in the House of One's In-laws

It they have already married, the wife can, during the military service
of her husband, stay at the residence of the parents of the boy, so that
she does not remain alone and the boy can perform his duty
wholeheartedly and peacefully, Whenever he comes back home on lave, they
can be with each other.

#### 3- Parents Help

As to the expenditure of the woman and other matters, the same facts
stand valid here which have been described in the chapter pertaining to
“continuing education” solution no3 (parents' help).

Sixth Difficulty: Presence of Older Brothers and Sisters
--------------------------------------------------------

Sometime ago, I was with some nice brothers, the students of “Lamerd.”
All of them were bachelors.

According to my routine of encouraging the youth to marry, I recommended
them to marry. Mr. Badiyee, who happens to be a good, efficient student
of “Lamerd”, said, “The greatest hindrance an difficulty to my marriage
is the presence of (unmarried) elder brothers, because it is customary
in our region for younger brothers and sisters not to marry before elder
ones!”

I said to him, *“I will discuss this difficulty and constraint, as your
memorial, in my classes and the book, which I'm writing on this topic.”*

### Solution to This Problem

This difficulty and belief does not have any religious or intellectual
basis and foundation. If an elder brother or sister has not yet married,
for any reason, it does not become necessary and essential for the
younger one, who is mature enough for marriage, to delay and postpone
their marriage.

Definitely, no heed should be paid to this difficulty. it is necessary
for the youth to break such wrong traditions and not suffer misery and
misfortune for the sake of wrong customs and traditions.

Seventh Difficulty: Dwelling
----------------------------

Although the problem of residence refers back to financial difficulties,
because of its speciality and peculiarity, we will discuss it
separately.

### Solution

Again, a long term and a short term one.

### Long Term

It is necessary that extensive schemes and plans, which overwhelm and
cover the whole of society, be made so that this major crisis and
problem is solved. We are not at the moment going to discuss it.

### Short Term Solutions

#### 1- Temporarily Staying At the Parents' Home

If it is possible and feasible, the bride and bridegroom may stay for a
period in the house of one of their parents, until they can provide a
house for themselves. But they must be attentive and conscious that if
this becomes the reason of conflict, insults, and belittlement and
disrespect, then it is not, in any way advisable to stay or remain in
that house.

#### 2- Renting a House

Renting house is routine and customary all over the world. In many
societies and foreign countries, tenancy is practiced more than in our
country.

The youth may rent out a cheap house and bear the difficulties of
tenancy until they, Insha’Allah, own a house.

### Attention

All the facts discussed in difficulty no.1 (financial problems) and the
solutions described are true and stand valid here too, particularly in
relation to “divine help”.

Eight Difficulty: Inability of the Youth to Manage and Run Their Life
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Consideration of this difficulty and its solution have discussed in the
second chapter under the heading *“Discussion with a friend”*. Please
refer to it.

Ninth Difficulty: Natural Difficulties
--------------------------------------

Following the consideration and solution to all the problems and
constraints that have been described, again some difficulties remain.
How do we tackle these?

### Answer

It is absurd and impossible that no form of difficulty exists in this
world and in family life and in all the rest of matters pertaining to
society. Some difficulties are the result of a probing and searching
life moving on the way to completion.

The Philosophy of These Difficulties and Hardships
--------------------------------------------------

Natural difficulties, hardships, and odds of life are similar to
dynamite, deriving and expelling the hidden and concealed ores out of
the mines of human life.

There are potential talents, capabilities, sources and energies in man's
interior, which do not show up and emerge until man is confronted with
hardship and difficulties. Man utilizes and organise all his
intellectual, meditational and physical powers and energies while facing
these odds and finds the solution to his problems and opens the ways and
passages. His total existence probes into immense search, struggle,
strife and mortification to reach a goal. As a result, the potential and
sleeping capabilities are awakened and the essence and merits of his
life glaze and become shiny.

If we observe human societies minutely and deeply, we will discover that
those whose affairs are going smoothly and lead comfortable lives and do
not find it necessary to bother and put themselves to inconvenience,
usually become slow moving, lazy, inefficient an irresolute. Very rarely
can such persons become the source of any change, revolution or
completion in a society.

The prophets, reformers, scholars and all those who have had effect upon
society's advancement, progress, and elevation and had a part to play in
accelerating the speed of the human caravan's journey, had been men who
combated and strove against hardships.

It is an inevitable and unfailing law that one must strive and struggle
against hardships and odds, by putting one's life at stake to achieve
big objectives: the bigger the objectives, the more the hardship to
reach it.

The Commander of the believers, Hazrat Ali (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفضل الاعمال أحمزها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The best practices are the most difficult ones.”*

If man accepts the fact that life is accompanied by difficulties and
hardships, and then he prepares himself to face those and does not
become hopeless, dismayed, and upset. In marriage and raising a family,
which is one of the great aims and objectives and has an important role
to play in the achievement of the prosperity of the world and the
Hereafter, one must necessarily bear difficulties and hardships.

We accept that marriage raising a family brings some responsibilities
for man and has its troubles, yet its benefits, progress, advancements,
and completion, which come together with it, must also be taken into
view.

On the other hand, we may compare the difficulties and responsibilities
of marriage with the losses demerits and consequences of living as a
bachelor: whether one should remain single and tolerate and bear all
those hardships, spiritual and physical agonies and strains or, should
we marry and accept its natural responsibilities and consequently, enjoy
all its spiritual, physical and personality benefits?

Admittedly, any sound mind, which is free from bias, prejudices,
superstitions and stubbornness, prefers marriage, besides having the
fruits and benefits that have been described in connection with
accepting the responsibilities and natural difficulties; it also has
very great reward in the hereafter.

Islam considers the man who struggle for the procurement of the
sustenance and management for his family as a mujahid (fighter in war):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكاد علي عياله كالمجاهد قي سبيل الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one endeavoring for his family is like a mujahid (warrior) on
Allah's way.”*

This is a great blessing of which the hardships along the way, if
perceived by us, would become sweeter than honey; just as a crusade in
the way of Allah is sweeter than honey to the real and true crusaders.

Islam holds: 'Services has then parts, and nine parts of it are hidden
in the struggle and endeavour of securing the lawful sustenance for
one's family'.

What problem does it make if a man faces a bit of difficulty for the
sake of Allah's pleasure, remaining pure from contamination, defending
his honour ad personality, enjoying lawful and legal pleasures, and
attaining a spiritual peace and tranquillity and all those rewards of
the hereafter? Is it not that 'heaven is given for its price and not on
excuse?'[^11]

Is it not that 'paradise is surrounded by hardships and the fire (hell)
is encompassed by lustful desires? That is to say, one must cross the
hardships to reach the paradise, prosperity, and honour. And being sunk
into lustful desires, passions, laziness and luxury-seeking drags a man
towards hell.

Dear young sister and brother! Be dauntless and courageous and not be
harassed by difficulties. Do not ever think, “I can not face the
responsibilities of marriage, a spouse and a joint life.” Just wish it
and you can do it.

Hardships are the salt (taste) of life. If there is none, life becomes
tasteless and tiring, and the joys and enjoyment lose their colour and
flavour. If there is no difficulty in one's life, one cannot properly
sense the sweet taste of joys, felicities, comforts and delight. If you
do not travel in night, you will be able to reach anywhere in the
daytime!

One of the interesting results I have reached by studying and evaluating
the lives of many youths, is that youths who have everything for
themselves, whose parents and elders manage all their affairs, arrange a
spouse for them and bear their total expenditures, as well as taking
their responsibilities upon their problems, or not permitting them to
face any kind of difficulty or hardship, usually do not grow up to be
successful men. Rather, they are brought up to become worthless ad good
for nothing. And when they lose their parents' backing, they become
impoverished and run-down.

On the contrary, those who shoulder the responsibilities of their lives
and solve their problems by deliberation and contemplation and
endeavour, usually become successful, capable, talented and energetic,
forceful persons.

Of course, this topic has been discussed among the problems of
psychology, training and ethics. But it is more attractive to be
observed and perceived practically by man himself.

Note
----

The fact described above is different form the assistance and guidance
that is 'logical' and 'necessary' and which parents and elders should
exercise with regard to the youth. they mst definitely help an guide,
but the 'decision making', 'selection' and 'responsibility of
administering matters' and doing the work must be left the sons.

Finally we present the message containing words of the Prophet (S) who
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا معشر الشباب! عليكم بالباه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh youths: You must certainly marry.”*

Do marry, depending upon Allah, short of fear from hardships, odds and
difficulties. Allah be your helper.

A Word With The Elders
----------------------

When the youth talked to about marriage and are being encouraged in
connection with this important issue and the solution to the
difficulties and hindrances and constraints to it, they say: “These
problems can be discussed with our parents and seniors so that they may
help us out and pave the way for the achievement of the solution; but
anyhow, we are ready to marry”.

Therefore, it is necessary to have a word with the parents, elders and
the authorities and all those who can take steps towards the marriage of
youths, and with those who may be effective in materializing this
matter, desirable to Allah.

Taking steps and being a mediator for marriage and providing the
preliminaries and the means of family raising of the youth is one of the
best services and activities which wins Allah's pleasure.

Allah says to the elders, ***“Marry your unmarrieds.”***[^12]
Nevertheless, youths, if there is no obstacle on their way, are ready to
marry.

The Muhammad (S) said:

*“The one who takes a step for the marriage of others, Allah bestows
upon him a reward, for each step he takes or each word he says, equal to
one year's service, in which he might have been fasting during the days
and offering prayers in the nights.”*[^13]

It is interesting that this great reward is for the one who takes steps
in this connection, whether the marriage takes shape or not. This trade
with Allah does not have any loss, it is all profit.

For Allah's sake imagine what a huge reward and prosperity awaits a
person who puts in effort to bring about and arrange the marriage of
others. Usually and normally all of us have the vigour and means to take
part and share in this way of blessing, and to help the youth set up a
simple life.

We can help the marriage financially (although a small help, either in
the form of a loan or freely), through mediation (or talking to the
parents to soften their hearts), or in laying the foundation of a fund,
institution, etc. Or we may endeavour to reform the culture of our
society by cultural programmes, publications and propagation of book on
this topic, arranging and organising meeting, seminars and classes to
talk and admonish on this matter. All this matter. All these activities
are extremely worthy and valuable.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (a.s) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من زوج أعزبا كان ممن ينظر الله إليه يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The person who provides a wife for a bachelor, Allah will look at him
on the justice day*

*(with beneficence and kindness).”*

What beneficence and blessing can be over and above Allah's mercy?

Again the same magnanimous one says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفضل الشفاعات أن تشفع بين اثنين في نكاح حتي يجمع الله بينهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*The best of mediations is to become a mediator between two person for
marriage until Allah unites them together.”*

As a matter of fact, the one who takes a step on this way is the agent
and representative of Allah in this sacred matter.

Imam Musa Kazim (a.s) said: “The one who provides a spouse for a
bachelor (whether a boy or a girl), will stay secure and peaceful in the
shade of Allah's throne on the day of justice.”

A Social Disease
----------------

Yet another social, dogmatic disease on our society, which has
overwhelmed the entire body of it in the name of religion, Islam, Imams,
and progeny of the Prophet (S), is that large amounts of money are spent
on ceremonies and rituals, which do not have ay root ad origin in Islam.
For instance, some parties and strange dinner tables like the table of
'Haft Seen' (containing seven different foods starting with the letter
's').

This is celebrated on the day of Nowruz -the first day of the new year-
with a lot of extravagance and so much waste it is certainly religiously
unlawful. Or some other food distribution like preparing 'Aash' (a kind
of soup) at great expense and with great ceremony are anti-Islamic.

Regarding the 'youth marriage' for which all these Qur’anic verses and
Hadiths have reached us, we take fewer steps, and those benevolent ones
who spend all these amounts are least prepared to spend upon this
important matter. Is it not according to what the Commander of the
believers (a.s) said?

*“Islam has been put on like an inverted goatskin.”* [^14]

Of course, charitable food distributions and rituals, which are
according to the laws of Islam and do not have anything forbidden and
unlawful do bring reward from Allah.

Here it would not be out of place to praise, appreciate, and thank the
'Imam Khomeini's Committee of Help' which is proceeding on this way of
Allah and the Prophet's Sunnah and has arranged and managed the
marriages of thousands of youths.

[^1]: Nawadir al-Rawandi, p 36.

[^2]: Wasail al-Shia, Vol 3,p5.

[^3]: Wasail al-Shia, Vol.3 p7

[^4]: Noor al-Thaqalain, Vol. 3 p 599.

[^5]: Milk price is a certain amount of money taken from the bridegroom
on behalf of the mother's feeding milk to her daughter (bride) during
the bride's infancy.

[^6]: Imam Hussain (a.s).

[^7]: Nahjul Balagha, Sobhi Saleh, Wisdom 57.

[^8]: “Spouse selection”, page 156-157, pub: the Islamic Propagation
Organization, First Edition.

[^9]: We again reiterate and emphasize that the youth must make sure
about wrongfulness of those oppositions.

[^10]: The students are trained for teaching in primary school and cam a
salary to suffice a simple life.

[^11]: A sentence commonly known from martyr Dr.Ayatollah Beheshti.

[^12]: Surah of Noor, verse 32.

[^13]: Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14.p77.

[^14]: Nahjul Balagha; Subhi Saleh, sermon 108 (last sentence of the
sermon.)


