Chapter Four(2/2): 
			Third Difficulty: Difficulty In Spouse Selection
=======================================================================

Third Difficulty:  
 Difficulty In Spouse Selection
-------------------------------

One of the difficulties on the way of youth marriage is the difficulty
in selecting a spouse. That is to say, the girl and boy do not know whom
to select and with what kind of standards, virtues, and peculiarities.

This is a real and actual difficulty and is not an invented and false
one. It is a big problem being faced by the youth, and, as has been said
in the preface, they must be helped in this connection. If minute care
is not exercised in this regard, many difficulties will come into
existence in their future lives, some of which would be irreparable and
without remedy.

### The Solution

Brother and sister, do not worry, do not be apprehensive, since we will
elaborately discuss this topic in the next chapter. Inshallah you will
find the solution to it.

Mostly, the aim and objective of these discussions is studying and
seeking solutions to this very difficulty. The real and actual stimulant
of our proposing these discussions is to solve this problem.

Fourth Difficulty:  
 Hurdles And Hindrances Of The Elders And Friends
-------------------------------------------------

The respect for parents and obedience to them is obligatory for and
binding upon children. It is one of the biggest obligations of Allah.
Annoying, molesting

and showing disrespect or disobeying parents is prohibited; especially
in relation to the big prohibitions.

Parents have ample and plenty of experience and wish and desire the
goodness and betterment of their children. Whatever they say about their
offspring and whichever decision they take or whatever step they take,
it is based upon the same well-wishing, discernment, experience and
sympathy. No one is more well-wishing and sympathetic towards children
than parents.

It is obligatory for the young sons and daughters to pay attention to
the well-wishing, sympathy, discernment and opinions of the parents and
to take advantage of and benefit from their experiences. Possibly, what
sagacious parents see in a brick, young children may not see in a
mirror. This fact stands valid at its place.

In a few cases, there are unfortunately, fathers and mothers and some
friends who due to selfishness, egoistic desires or ignorance and
foolishness axe the roots of their young children and create hurdles on
the way. They do this with their inexperience, illogic and untrue
excuses and by exercising wrong views and undue interventions, becoming
the cause of their children’s misery and destruction.

Such persons bring about abundant and ample difficulties for the youth
in the matter of “marriage and spouse selection” and sometimes happen to
cause misfortune and misery for a long life to them. For instance, they
impose their own wrong views upon

their children and compel them to marry someone whom they have selected,
though the children may not be pleased or approve it.

They judge and consider marriage candidates according to their own set
of standards and tastes without any attention even to the view and
opinion of their children and so they approve or reject whomever they
please.

When a proper and suitable spouse is proposed, they hinder and stop the
relationship taking shape with excuses, conditions, and undue and
illegal expectations.

### A Gloomy And Sad Example For Your Attention

Sometime back, I went to one of the cities for cultural and propagation
matters. I was talking to a family, of whom I was a guest, about their
life style and conditions, problems and difficulties.

When it came to the matters and affairs pertaining to their children, we
talked about each of them one by one.

So then I turned to a daughter of theirs who was 23, and still
unmarried. I asked them surprisingly: “Why has she not married till
now?”

They said: It is the fate which has not yet approved it.”

I said: “What do you mean by that? Has someone not yet turned up to ask
for her hand in marriage?”

They replied: “Yes that’s it! A person whom we can approve has yet to
come.”

I said: Is it you who did not approve or the girl has not approved and
liked the suitor?

Before they could give the answer, the girl who had heard our
conversation came rushing from the next room, bitterly weeping.

She said: “Sir, it is not as they say, instead, a number of suitable and
good candidates have come so far to ask my hand in marriage. This
father, mother and brother of mine rejected them without even discussing
it with me or even without me being aware of it. I was informed later
on. Then the girl named a number of candidates who had come to ask her
hand. I personally knew one of them who is a nice young man. I addressed
the parents and the brother, saying “At least I know one of these men,
who is a good and suitable one. On what ground did you reject him? Why
did you not ask your daughter’s opinion when you wanted to reject him?”

They lowered their heads and said: ‘All that you say is true, but it was
not approved by destiny!”

I was very sorry. But nothing could be done, since that boy had married
another girl.

This girl has now been confronted with problems like depression and
nervous, psychological, and physical diseases. She has also lost many of
her youthful characteristics and specifications. No more candidates like
that young man seek her hand in marriage, since not only she much older,
but she is also suffering from certain ailments and has lost her
attraction and peculiarities.

Really, it is those parents and the brother who have exercised that
cruelty upon her. What shall such parents and elders say to Allah? Those
who play with the fate and destiny of the young ones and make them face
such damages and loss, how will they satisfy their own consciences?

O Allah! Such oppressed youth do not have a shelter and refuge except
you. Help them!

### A Curious And Strange Example

I was waiting for a taxi on the street, when a beautiful late model car
pulled up nearby and I was invited to get in.

I was amazed, since very rarely do those having such late model cars
pick someone up and drop him at his destination.

Anyhow, I got in the car. The driver was a youth of approximately 27 to
28 years of age.

After greeting him and asking his welfare, he said, “I have a difficulty
which I want to discuss with you.” I said “Carry on.” He said, “As you
can see, I’m not very young, but am still a bachelor. So far, I have
taken into view a number of girls and discussed them, but my family
confronted and opposed my marriage on different pretexts and excuses.
Recently, I have selected a good girl whom I consider suitable for
myself from all aspects. But this time too my family opposed me, making
a very absurd and ugly excuse, which is laughable. What is my religious
obligation in this case? I have upheld their respect and reverence to

this moment and have obeyed them, but this time I can no more do that,
since not only is the girl good, but the excuse is a bad one.”

I said: “Explain it, let me see what their excuse is and what are the
distinctions and qualities of the girl.”

He replied: I have recently completed my education and become an
engineer. I am fully prepared for marriage from each and every aspect,
in fact, I feel a strong urge for it. The girl that I have taken into
consideration for marriage is a very nice and suitable one. She too is
an educated girl and we like each other from all aspects. There is no
real and actual difficulty and hindrance on our way to marriage, except
for a narrow arched street which is the obstacle to the marriage!!”

I said: “What do you mean? I do not understand.”

He reflected: “Our house is situated in a beautiful spot and our door
opens onto a big park. (He named the street and the park). But the house
of that girl is located in a narrow and arched street. Our family holds
‘It is inadequate and bad for us to be visiting that street. It is
downgrading for us to make our friends, relatives and guests visit that
street and house’.”

I was very surprised and could not make myself believe that such people
can be found in this world.

I said to the young man: “You mean to say that your family and elders
are such persons? Does your family wish to purchase the house of the
girl’s family that they object to their street? I had never at all seen
or

heard such an excuse!”

He said: “Yes, that is that. Now that you have seen and heard, what is
my obligation, and what must I do with them?”

I said: If it be so and this is their excuse which you say, then never
at all submit to their invalid and irreligious, ridiculous and funny
views. Here it is not obligatory for you to obey your parents in this
case. As for the other family members and elders, their obedience too is
not obligatory for you. If you are satisfied that the girl is suitable,
good and both of you are equal and harmonious, then do not let her go at
any cost.”

Then other matters were described which will soon be discussed in the
“solutions to problems” section.

### An Agonistic Letter

Ayatollah Ibrahim Ameeni presented the letter of a girl in his book
“Spouse Selection” which is being narrated exactly hereby.

The girl wrote: “I am a student and have reached an age where many
chances of marriage came forth for me, but both my mother and father
hindered my marriage in one way or another... Of course, do not think
that the marriage candidates had any fault and shortcoming. On the
contrary, they present such arguments that I think I would never be able
to marry. The boys are faithful, religious and socially good. As a
matter of fact, no sooner do they turn up with a proposal, than they are
given a negative reply, without even being asked any question. And they
(my parents) have made it a

routine, and do not even seek my opinion. I look forward to the time
when at least they would ask my view and permit me to take a decision
regarding my future.

I must say I am very annoyed and unhappy with them from the core of my
heart, since I can clearly and distinctly see how they have obscured my
future. And sometimes I feel that I do not like them because I think
that some people who do not have a role in my future life are deciding
my future.

Your sister.”**[1]**

### What To Do Now?

The duties and obligations of sons and daughters towards wise,
sagacious, sympathetic, and expedient parents, of whom we have inshallah
many, is quite clear and explicit. As has been described, it is
obligatory to uphold their regard and respect and attend and yield to
their admonitions and opinions, and benefit from their experiences. But
what is the duty of sons and daughters in connection with fathers,
mothers, elders and friends who are unwise, selfish, excuse makers, and
problem ‑ creating (whose number is high)? How must they act so that
both their marriage is not delayed, and they get married to their wanted
and desired spouse and simultaneously avoid the hurdles and hindrances
and not letting a conflicting situation rise or minimise it?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** "Spouse selection", page 156-157, pub: the Islamic Propagation
Organisation, First Edition.

### answer

This difficulty too, just like some other marriage problems, has two
kinds of solutions. One is a ‘long term’ solution and the other a ‘short
term’ one.

As far as the long term ones are concerned, the Islamic society must be
reformed. The reformers, thinkers, and teachers should reform and
rectify the ideas, thoughts, beliefs and morality of the society, so
that everybody learns his duty and responsibility and practices. These
problems should be discussed and researched.

However, at present the discussion is related to the short-term
solutions which are discussed here.

Solutions
---------

### 1. Direct Negotiations With The Hurdle‑Creators And Fault ‑Finders

If the youth happen to face such hurdles, excuse-makers and unjustified
interceptors and they are sure that they are incorrect and wrong, they
must firstly talk to the excuse‑makers. They must set aside shame and
shyness, and tell them very respectfully and humbly: “We want to marry
and we ask you, who are our elders and seniors, to help us and not
hinder our prosperity. Respect to you is binding and obligatory for us
and we observe that. But simultaneously it is also obligatory for you to
help us out at this sensitive juncture, so that we can set our lives
upon correct and right foundations. Unfortunately and regretfully, such
and

such objection that you have raised is not correct.**[1]** These
criteria, standards, rites and ceremonies, which you have put forward
are against Islamic and intellectual standards. Please do not do
something that might compel us to act against your opinion and order.”

Such conversations, if done with respect and reverence to elders, do
positively produce a good result and effect in improving matters.

### 2 ‑ Appointing A Mediator

If direct negotiation does not work (or you were shy and could not talk
face to face with them) and they still wish to impose their incorrect
versions, then the next stage arrives. That is, you appoint someone as a
mediator who has influence upon your elders. You discuss your entire
views with them and request that they talk to those hurdle‑raisers so as
to stop them from opposition and stubbornness. This act can have a lot
of effect.

### A Specimen For Your Attention

A girl came to the Prophet (a.s) and said: “O, Prophet of Allah (a.s),
my father wants to compel me to marry his nephew (my cousin) and I am
against it and do not want to marry this person.”

The Prophet (a.s) at first admonished the girl to uphold and observe the
respect of her father, and said, “If you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We again reiterate and emphasize that the youth must make sure
about wrongfulness of those oppositions.

can do it, accept the proposal presented by your father.”

The girl replied “O’ Prophet of Allah (a.s), I do not have any
inclination and liking for my cousin and can not select him as my
husband.”

The Prophet (a.s) said “The discretion (choice) is yours, accept it if
you like, and if you do not like, do not accept.”

Then the girl said, ”Oh Prophet (a.s), now that this has happened, I am
prepared to marry my cousin. But I wanted my father and others to know,
by this act of mine, that they do not have the right to compel and force
their daughters to marry someone towards whom they are not inclined.”
(Bravo to this brave, intelligent girl!)

You can appoint these mediators from among relatives such as uncles,
grand fathers, mothers, aunts, the clergy, your teachers, and principals
and so on.

### Look At Another Example

One of our friends, for whom we have selected the fictitious name of
“Hussain”, was confronted with some obstacles created by his father in
his wish to marry. He left no stone unturned to make him give up his
stubbornness and obstinacy, but to no gain.

The son contacted a wise, pious religious jurist who was an expert and
authority in marriage problems and marital and social matters and whom
Hussain’s father too held in reverence and love, and whose opinion was

an authority for him. He discussed the problems with him.

That jurist summoned and talked to the father. When the father returned
after visiting the jurist, his eyes were tearful. He faced Hussain, who
was waiting outside the room for the result, and said “Oh my son,
forgive me. I now understand how wrong I was about your marriage and how
I nearly put you in a state of misery..”

### Another Interesting Example

An interesting matter was printed in the newspaper ‘Risalat’, serial No
1991, Saturday, 7th of Azar, 1371 (L.H) under the column entitled ‘A
page from the notebook of life’ by Mr. Abdullah Parhizgar, which is
presented exactly.

“A page from the notebook of life”

This week:

“Cousin!”

The information section of the newspaper informed me that a gentleman
wanted to see me. I went to the ground floor and the information clerk
showed me a man. After introduction and greeting, I guided him to my
room. We were alone in the room. I observed a strange agony on the face
of that man and so I discovered that he had some difficulty.

I said to him, “I am ready to listen to your problem.”

He said, “Look sir, mine is a queer and strange difficulty”. I said,
“What is your problem about?”

He replied “My father has a brother who is well‑ off and has only one
daughter who is studying in the fourth year of high school now. My
father and uncle have agreed that I will marry my cousin. And both of
them are of the opinion that the wealth and property of my uncle must
not be transferred to strangers. But I do not like my cousin and cannot
accept her as my wife. Now I am wondering what to do.”

Q: “What is your qualification and job?”

A: I have a junior diploma in electronics and work in one of the
governmental organisations. One of my friends who is a reader of your
newspaper advised me to see you. Now I have come to find out what you
can do for me.”

“Dear friend, thank you for the confidence you have in us. But I would
like to know why you do not like your cousin?”

“Look, Mr Parhizgar, as a matter of fact, my uncle’s family, and to some
extent my father too, measure everything upon monetary and material
standards. But in contrast and contrary to their ideology, I do not
believe in this thing. I do not want to turn myself into a prisoner of
the favour and taunting of my uncle and cousin, and although I know I
would become considerably rich through this marriage, I am not ready to
sacrifice my beliefs for their illogical and irrational wishes and
inclinations.”

The young man was talking about the superb and lofty humane values. He
was not prepared to sell himself

out and undergo an imposed marriage. He wanted to marry a girl based on
his own choice and inclination, short of material provocations,
stimulants and attraction. His ideas were praiseworthy. One could hope
that there are still many people to be found who do not consider their
humanity, spiritualism and purity comparable to any material criteria or
standards.

I said to him:

“Dear friend, I commend and praise you for having such ideas and the
best way to go is that you do not undergo this imposed marriage, under
any circumstances.”

“What must I do then about the pressure my father is exerting upon me?”

“You must reveal all the problems and your ideas to your father without
any concealment and conservativeness. You should make your father see
that marriage is optional matter of taste and nobody must be and can be
forced to such a work. Because forced marriage cases which are presented
and riled in the courts exhibit and indicate the agonies, catastrophes,
and afflictions faced by the husband, the wife and their relatives.”

“Mr. Parhhizgar, I feel shy about talking so frankly and openly to my
father!”

“There is nothing to be shy about, and besides, you do not have another
way out, since nobody else can explain and make them understand what
goes on in your heart better than you. Moreover, you can seek the

help of others, especially the older ones in your family.”

“Mr. Parhizgar, I wish to ask you a favour!”

“Please carry on!’

‘The difficulty which I have is that I do not want this problem to be
propagated among the family and that is the reason I wanted to request
that you talk to my father.”

 ‘I will be glad to help you out. I can welcome you and your father
right here

 ‘I am very grateful. Now I beg your leave and will return with my
father in a few days.

The young man gladly departed, saying goodbye.

It is really a matter of sorrow that there are a few families to be
found who overlook and ignore the logical and rightful wishes and
desires of their children. Their stubbornness and persistence can place
their youth in horrible conditions.

The youth left to return with his father. I look forward that he might
be able to contend him and I might no longer be needed. Anyhow, I am
waiting for them to come.

After four weeks, the same newspaper dated 5th of Dey, 1371 (L.H)
reported the return of the father and the son, through the same column
and page, as follows:

“A leaf from the notebook of life”

This week: “The father came!”

The information desk of the newspaper informed me that two people had
come to see me. I asked to be connected to one of them on the phone.

“Mr. Parhizgar!”

“Yes!”

“I am the same person who was supposed to go and bring my father along,
so that you might have a talk with him.”

“Yes I remember, please come along!”

Finally, the father and his son came. The son was here, so that I may
bring his father round not to compel him to marry his cousin. The
father’s coming was an indication that he was still insisting upon his
son’s marrying his cousin to prevent the wealth slipping out of the
family.

I was still thinking how to deal with this father when they showed up.
After the usual greetings, we sat across a table to talk.

“Dear father, you’re most welcome. Your coming here makes me realise
that you are interested in your son’s future. I hope that this
affiliation of yours will continue, and remain persistent.”

“Thank you my son. As I am interested in my son’s future, I asked him to
marry his cousin. She is a very good, chaste, pure and educated girl. My
brother’s financial position too is quite sound and he does not allow
them (his family) to face any hardship in these times of difficulties.”

 “Do you think money can be a security of their prosperity?”

 “If they possess wealth, life becomes easier for them. Is it bad that
they own a house, some savings and briefly speaking, all that is
necessary in such expensive, inflationary times?”

“But what if they do not like each other and there is no love and
association between them and they live like two enemies, always having
disputes and quarrelling? Would you then not face agony? Do you not feel
sorry as to why you are compelling your son into a forcible and imposed
marriage?”

“In my opinion if they are financially comfortable, definitely they will
have less nervous strains and inconveniences so they will have less
arguments and conflicts.”

“Respected sir! When there is no love, affiliation and deep sentimental
attachment between a man and a woman, then all the wealth and riches of
the world cannot bring about liking. I would like you to be a bit more
logical in your thinking.”

The father had become helpless, and did not have a word to say. I
inferred from his conversation that his ‘logic’ was that of money and he
wanted to forcibly make his son marry. When he said, "What must I do?” I
understood that he was on the retreat and it was my turn now.

I addressed him “Dear father! You must think logically and rationally.
Allow your son to marry a girl of his

own liking. If you compel him to undergo an imposed marriage, then
definitely they would not have a happy future. And when they have
conflicts and differences due to lack of love and affiliation, your
family as well as that of your brother’s will face agony and anguish. So
why do you do such a thing which will bring you repentance. You must
allow your son to take a decision with a peaceful and comfortable mind
and not in an atmosphere of compulsion and threats.”

 “As a matter of fact, if my son does not marry my niece, my brother
will be annoyed with me and our brotherhood would shatter!”

It is better that your brotherhood shatters right now than at a time
when they divorce each other and the complication increases. You must
sit together with your brother and talk and you should convince him that
your son and daughter should select their spouses themselves.”

The young man was happily listening to the conversation between his
father and me. I could see the flash of happiness and joy in his eyes.
His father was in agreement and was contented and the youth was about to
become free from an imposed marriage.

I addressed his father.

“Be satisfied, and discuss all the problems with your brother. Explain
the facts of life to him. He too may agree, and a dispute and conflict
may not arise between you. My last word to you is to think about the
future and prosperity of your son. This young man does not hold any
value in the wealth of his uncle. He wants to

stand upon his own feet. He does not even have the need for your wealth.
He thinks about his future and prosperity and you too must help and
assist him.”

The father’s eyes were full of tears and the youth was smiling. The
father’s face showed contentment. He extended his hand and caught hold
of his son’s hands.

The father and the son hugged and embraced each other and started
weeping bitterly. The room was filled with the sound of their fervent
and enthusiastic weeping. It was proof to me that the father had
abandoned his stubbornness and persistence. I poured tea for them and
asked them to relax.

The youth and I sighed with relief. The joy of the youth knew no bounds,
as he saw his future guaranteed…

There exist other solutions and examples as well, but since it is
possible that stating these might become the cause of “misunderstanding”
or “misuse” or “wrong inference, we will avoid describing them. When it
comes to a deadlock, then the youth must refer to “wise and sagacious”
people and ask them to guide them.

### Reminder

We once again assert and stress that the young must be attentive to the
fact that making excuses, creating a hindrance and hurdles by the
elders, we mean the excuses, wishes, and opinions against religion and
reason, not the opinions and views based upon reason, well-wishing and
sympathy.

Just as we have previously described, there are many fathers, mothers
and elders who have more experience than the youth and want the goodness
and beneficence of the youth. They might have a difference of opinion in
a few matters pertaining to marriage and spouse selection, which are
concordant with reason, religion, logic and experience. And in this
case, their views must certainly be respected and their experiences be
benefited from as well as their admonition be attended to.

So be careful that problems do not get mixed up and that difficulties
are not enhanced. If a difference of opinion arises in a matter and you
are perplexed and unable to distinguish whether your opinion is correct
or theirs, contact wise, sagacious, intelligent persons and consult
them. In chapter 6, we will discuss consultation, seeking advice and the
specifications and qualities of a consultant and adviser. Inshallah!

Fifthdifficulty:  
 Military Service
------------------

This difficulty and constraint does not include girls. And it does not
include many of boys as well. For those who continue their studies
following the intermediate level, it is not essential for them to
proceed to it. Instead, they can perform it after completing their
education and joining the service. So no gap is created in their lives.
Furthermore, if someone studies certain specified subjects, for
instance, the students of teacher

training centres,**[1]** and he does not even intend to continue his
education after the intermediate level, then there is no conventional
soldiering for him.

After these cases, we are left with those young men who must go for the
usual and routine two years performing this sacred duty. What is the
solution to their marriage problem?

### Solutions:  
 Long Term Solution

Government officials must arrange and organise the law of military
service in a manner that it does not hinder and bring difficulty for
those who wish to marry. A certain salary should also be provisioned
that which would suffice their expenditure along with that of their
wives.

### Short Term Solution  
 1‑ Religious And Legal Engagement

Engagement during military service is very sweet and beautiful. The
engaged couple can correspond throughout and write hope‑giving and
inspiring things to each other. During the leave periods, they see and
visit each other.

The facts described about ‘engagement during education’ apply to this
period as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The students are trained for teaching in primary schools and cam
a salary to suffice a simple life.

### 2‑ Staying In The House Of One’s In‑Laws

If they have already married, the wife can, during the military service
of her husband, stay at the residence of the parents of the boy, so that
she does not remain alone and the boy can perform his duty
wholeheartedly and peacefully. Whenever he comes back home on leave,
they can be with each other.

### 3‑Parents’ Help

As to the expenditure of the woman and other matters, the same facts
stand valid here which have been described in the chapter pertaining to
“continuing education” solution no 3 (parents’ help).

Sixth Difficulty:  
 Presence Of Older Brothers And Sisters
---------------------------------------

Sometime ago, I was with some nice brothers, the students of “Lamerd.”
All of them were bachelors.

According to my routine of encouraging the youth to marry, I recommended
them to marry. Mr. Badiyee, who happens to be a good, efficient student
of “Lamerd”, said, “The greatest hindrance and difficulty to my marriage
is the presence of (unmarried) elder brothers, because it is customary
in our region for younger brothers and sisters not to marry before elder
ones!”

I said to him, “I will discuss this difficulty and constraint, as your
memorial, in my classes and the book, which I’m writing on this topic.”

### Solution To This Problem

This difficulty and belief does not have any religious or intellectual
basis and foundation. If an elder brother or sister has not yet married,
for any reason, it does not become necessary and essential for the
younger one, who is mature enough for marriage, to delay and postpone
their marriage.

Definitely, no heed should be paid to this difficulty. It is necessary
for the youth to break such wrong traditions and not suffer misery and
misfortune for the sake of wrong customs and traditions.

Seventh Difficulty:  
 Dwelling
---------------------

Although the problem of residence refers back to financial difficulties,
because of its speciality and peculiarity, we will discuss it
separately.

### Solution

Again, a long term and a short term one.

### Long Term:

It is necessary that extensive schemes and plans, which overwhelm and
cover the whole of society, be made so that this major crisis and
problem is solved. We are not at the moment going to discuss it.

### Short Term Solution:

### 1‑Temporarily Staying At The Parents’ Home

If it is possible and feasible, the bride and bridegroom may stay for a
period in the house of one of their parents, until they can provide a
house for themselves. But they must be attentive and conscious that if
this becomes the reason of conflict, insults, and belittlement and
disrespect, then it is not, in any way advisable to stay or remain in
that house.

### 2‑Renting A House

Renting houses is routine and customary all over the world. In many
societies and foreign countries, tenancy is practiced more than in our
country.

The youth may rent out a cheap house and bear the difficulties of
tenancy until they, inshallah, own a house.

### Attention:

All the facts discussed in difficulty no. 1 (financial problems) and the
solutions described are true and stand valid here too, particularly in
relation to “divine help”.

Eighth Difficulty:  
 Inability Of The Youth To Manage And Run Their Life
----------------------------------------------------

Consideration of this difficulty and its solutions have been discussed
in the second chapter under the heading “Discussion with a friend”.
Please refer to it.

Ninth Difficulty:  
 Natural Difficulties
---------------------

Following the consideration and solution to all the problems and
constraints that have been described, again some difficulties remain.
How do we tackle these?

### Answer

It is absurd and impossible that no form of difficulty exists in this
world and in family life and in all the rest of matters pertaining to
society. Some difficulties are the result of a probing and searching
life moving on the way to completion.

### The Philosophy Of These Difficulties And Hardships

Natural difficulties, hardships, and odds of life are similar to
dynamite, deriving and expelling the hidden and concealed ores out of
the mines of human life.

There are potential talents, capabilities, sources and energies in man’s
interior, which do not show up and emerge until man is confronted with
hardships and difficulties. Man utilizes and organises all his
intellectual, meditational and physical powers and energies while facing
these odds and finds the solution to his problems and opens the ways and
passages. His total existence probes into immense search, struggle,
strife and mortification to reach a goal. As a result, the potential and
sleeping capabilities are awakened and the essence and merits of his
life glaze and become shiny.

If we observe human societies minutely and deeply, we will discover that
those whose affairs are going smoothly and lead comfortable lives and do
not find it necessary to bother and put themselves to inconvenience,
usually become slow moving, lazy, inefficient and irresolute. Very
rarely can such persons become the source of any change, revolution or
completion in a society.

The prophets, reformers, scholars and all those who have had effects
upon society’s advancement, progress, and elevation and had a part to
play in accelerating the speed of the human caravan’s journey, had been
men who combated and strove against hardships.

It is an inevitable and unfailing law that one must strive and struggle
against hardships and odds, by putting one’s life at stake to achieve
big objectives. The bigger the objective, the more the hardship to reach
it.

The Commander of the believers, Hazrat Ali (a.s) said:

**أفْضَلُ الأعْمالِ أحْمَزُها.**

“The best practices are the most difficult ones.”

If man accepts the fact that life is accompanied by difficulties and
hardships, and then he prepares himself to face those and does not
become hopeless, dismayed, and upset. In marriage and raising a family,
which is one of the great aims and objectives and has an important role
to play in the achievement of the prosperity of the world and the
Hereafter, one must necessarily bear difficulties and hardships.

We accept that marriage and raising a family brings some
responsibilities for man and has its troubles, yet its benefits,
progress, advancements, and completion, which come together with it,
must also be taken into view.

On the other hand, we may compare the difficulties and responsibilities
of marriage with the losses demerits and consequences of living as a
bachelor: whether one should remain single and tolerate and bear all
those hardships, spiritual and physical agonies and strains or, should
we marry and accept its natural responsibilities and consequently, enjoy
all its spiritual, physical and personality benefits?

Admittedly, any sound mind, which is free from bias, prejudices,
superstitions and stubbornness, prefers marriage. Besides having the
fruits and benefits that have been described in connection with
accepting the responsibilities and natural difficulties, it also has
very great reward in the hereafter.

Islam considers the man who struggles for the procurement of the
sustenance and management of his family as a mujahid (fighter in war):

**الكَادُّ عَلَى عِيالِهِ كَالمُجَاهِدِ في سَبيلِ اللهِ.**

“The one endeavouring for his family is like a mujahid (warrior) on
Allah’s way.”

This is a great blessing of which the hardships along the way, if
perceived by us, would become sweeter than honey; just as a crusade in
the way of Allah is sweeter than honey to the real and true crusaders.

Islam holds: ‘Service has ten parts, and nine parts of it are hidden in
the struggle and endeavour of securing the lawful sustenance for one’s
family’.

What problem does it make if a man faces a bit of difficulty for the
sake of Allah’s pleasure, remaining pure from contamination, defending
his honour and personality, enjoying lawful and legal pleasures, and
attaining a spiritual peace and tranquillity and all those rewards of
the hereafter? Is it not that ‘heaven is given for its price and not on
excuse?’**[1]**

Is it not that ‘paradise is surrounded by hardships and the fire (hell)
is encompassed by lustful desires?’ That is to say, one must cross the
hardships to reach the paradise, prosperity, and honour. And being sunk
into lustful desires, passions, laziness and luxury‑seeking drags a man
towards hell.

Dear young sister and brother! Be dauntless and courageous and not be
harassed by difficulties. Do not ever think, “I can not face the
responsibilities of marriage, a spouse and a joint life.” Just wish it
and you can do it.

Hardships are the salt (taste) of life. If there is none, life becomes
tasteless and tiring, and the joys and enjoyments lose their colour and
flavour. If there is no difficulty in one’s life, one cannot properly
sense the sweet taste of joys, felicities, comforts and delights. If you
do not travel in the night, you will not be able to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A sentence commonly known from martyr Dr. Ayatollah Beheshti.

reach anywhere in the daytime!

One of the interesting results I have reached by studying and evaluating
the lives of many youths, is that youths who have everything for
themselves, whose parents and elders manage all their affairs, arrange a
spouse for them and bear their total expenditures, as well as taking
their responsibilities upon their own shoulders, including solving all
their problems, or not permitting them to face any kind of difficulty or
hardship, usually do not grow up to be successful men. Rather, they are
brought up to become worthless and good for nothing. And when they lose
their parents’ backing, they become impoverished and run‑down.

On the contrary, those who shoulder the responsibilities of their lives
and solve their problems by deliberation and contemplation and
endeavour, usually become successful, capable, talented and energetic,
forceful persons.

Of course, this topic has been discussed among the problems of
psychology, training and ethics. But it is more attractive to be
observed and perceived practically by man himself.

### Note

The fact described above is different from the assistance and guidance
that is ‘logical’ and ‘necessary’ and which parents and elders should
exercise with regard to the youth. They must definitely help and guide,
but the ‘decision making’, ‘selection’ and ‘responsibility of
administering matters’ and ‘doing

the work’ must be left to the sons.

Finally we present the message containing words of the Prophet (a.s) who
said:

**يَا مَعْشَرَ الشَّبابِ! عَلَيكُم بِالبَاهِ.**

“Oh youths: You must certainly marry.”

Do marry, depending upon Allah, short of fear from hardships, odds and
difficulties. Allah be your helper.

### A Word With The Elders

When the youth are talked to about marriage and are being encouraged in
connection with this important issue and the solutions to the
difficulties and hindrances and constraints to it, they say: “These
problems can be discussed with our parents and seniors so that they may
help us out and pave the way for the achievement of the solution; but
anyhow, we are ready to marry”.

Therefore, it is necessary to have a word with the parents, elders and
the authorities and all those who can take steps towards the marriage of
youths, and with those who may be effective in materializing this
matter, desirable to Allah.

Taking steps and being a mediator for marriage and providing the
preliminaries and the means of family raising of the youth is one of the
best services and activities which wins Allah’s pleasure.

Allah says to the elders, “Marry your unmarrieds.”**[1]**

Nevertheless, youths, if there is no obstacle on their way, are ready to
marry.

The Prophet (a.s) said:

“The one who takes a step for the marriage of others, Allah bestows upon
him a reward, for each step he takes or each word he says, equal to one
year’s service, in which he might have been fasting during the days and
offering prayers in the nights.”**[2]**

It is interesting that this great reward is for the one who takes steps
in this connection, whether the marriage takes shape or not. This trade
with Allah does not have any loss, it is all profit.

For Allah’s sake imagine what a huge reward and prosperity awaits a
person who puts in effort to bring about and arrange the marriage of
others. Usually and normally all of us have the vigour and means to take
part and share in this way of blessing, and to help the youth set up a
simple life. We can help the marriage financially (although a small
help, either in the form of a loan or freely), through mediation (or
talking to the parents to soften their hearts), or in laying the
foundation of a fund, institution, etc. Or we may endeavour to reform
the culture of our society by cultural programmes, publications and
propagation of books on this topic, arranging and organising

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Surah of Noor, verse 32.  
 **[2]** Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14. P 77.

meetings, seminars and classes to talk and admonish on this matter. All
these activities are extremely worthy and valuable.

Imam Jafar Sadiq (a.s) says:

**مَنْ زَوَّجَ أعْزَباً كَانَ مِمَّنْ يَنظُرُ اللهُ إلَيهِ يَومَ
القِيامَةِ.**

“The person who provides a wife for a bachelor, Allah will look at him
on the justice day (with beneficence and kindness).”

What beneficence and blessing can be over and above Allah’s mercy?

Again the same magnanimous one says:

**أفْضَلُ الشَّفَاعاتِ أنْ تَشْفَعَ بَينَ اثْنَينِ في نِكاحٍ حَتّى
يَجْمعَ اللهُ بَينَهما.**

“The best of mediations is to become a mediator between two persons for
marriage until Allah unites them together.”

As a matter of fact, the one who takes a step on this way is the agent
and representative of Allah in this sacred matter.

Imam Musa Kazim (a.s) said: “The one who provides a spouse for a
bachelor (whether a boy or a girl), will stay secure and peaceful in the
shade of Allah’s throne on the day of justice.”

### A Social Disease

Yet another social, dogmatic disease in our society, which has
overwhelmed the entire body of it in the name of religion, Islam, Imams,
and progeny of the Prophet (a.s), is that large amounts of money are
spent

on ceremonies and rituals, which do not have any root and origin in
Islam. For instance, some parties and strange dinner tables like the
table of ‘Haft Seen’ (containing seven different foods starting with the
letter ‘s’). This is celebrated on the day of Nowruz ‑the first day of
the new year‑ with a lot of extravagance and so much waste it is
certainly religiously unlawful. Or some other food distributions like
preparing ‘Aash’ (a kind of soup) at great expense and with great
ceremony are anti‑Islamic.

Regarding the ‘youth marriage’ for which all these Quranic verses and
Hadiths have reached us, we take fewer steps, and those benevolent ones
who spend all these amounts are least prepared to spend upon this
important matter. Is it not according to what the Commander of the
believers (a.s) said?

“Islam has been put on like an inverted goatskin.”**[1]**

Of course, charitable food distributions and rituals, which are
according to the laws of Islam and do not have anything forbidden and
unlawful do bring reward from Allah.

Here it would not be out of place to praise, appreciate, and thank the
‘Imam Khomeini’s Committee of Help’ which is proceeding on this way of
Allah and the Prophet’s Sunnah and has arranged and managed the
marriages of thousands of youths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha; Subhi Saleh, sermon 108 (last sentence of the
sermon.)
