Chapter Five: Criteria of Spouse Selection
==========================================

Whom May We Select As A Spouse?
-------------------------------

Now we have reached the most sensitive and important point of our
discussions! Whatever we have discussed so far was a prelude and prefix
to this chapter. That is to say, whom may we select as a spouse? With
what sort of qualities, peculiarities, standards and criterions, so that
we may lead a prosperous life with each other, and be the cause of each
other’s progress, completion, and comfort? This is the real stimulant
and aim of our discussion. All our pursuits in these topics and
discussions is that the youth (girls and boys) may select spouses in a
way to be equal, well-matched and proportional to each other, and
conventionally speaking they must go together well. If this condition is
procured and secured, and this co-ordination and balance is realised,
then the other matters and difficulties are comfortably solvable. If
they do not slip at this stage crossing and traversing, then the other
phases would be easy.

We can say boldly and daringly that most of the difficulties which
appear in the family life” are due to the fact that the boy and the girl
have made a mistake here and have not selected a spouse well-matched to
themselves. Many spouses have been seen to be pushed into a state of
misery and destruction due to an imbalance and lack of homogeneity. Most
of the difficulties, controversies and conflicts in the common and
shared life have their roots in the selection of the wrong spouse.

### Subtlety!

Brother, sister! As you intend to select someone to be beside you for
the whole of your life, observe minutely whom you are going to select.
No selection, in human life, after the selection and choosing of belief
and school of thought, can reach and match the spouse selection in its
importance and sensitiveness. This selection has a basic and fundamental
role in your success and prosperity or misery and misfortune!!!

Do care, check, examine, and seek advice as much as you can. Be cautious
and careful not to make a mistake. Beware not to take a sentimental
decision. Be careful not to be subjected and affected by digressive
factors. It would be very difficult for you to cope and deal with an
unsuitable, unequal and heterogeneous, and inconsistent spouse. Do not
ever tell yourself: “For now, let us marry! If we cannot live together
in the days to come, we can divorce and separate! “

Drive such an idea totally out of your mind. Divorce is a very difficult
thing and sometimes even impossible,

particularly when there are children.

Encourage and uphold the idea that I want to choose a spouse with whom I
intend to spend a prosperous and happy life.” You must burn your boats
and accumulate and concentrate all your senses to choose a permanent and
life long partner. Exercise extreme care!!!

As far as the recommendations about a quick and swift marriage, are
concerned, which we discussed in the previous chapters, it does not mean
haste, disregard and neglect. Instead, speed must be with precision,
accuracy, and carefulness.

And these two (speed and accuracy) are not contradictions to each other;
instead, it is haste which is in contrast to precision.

### Subtlety In Selection, Smoothness In Marriage

When we consider the collection of laws of Islam with regard to
marriage, we conclude that:

Islam has commanded to be easy, lenient, indulgent and simple most of
the matters pertaining to marriage; such as dowry, wealth, ceremonies,
rituals, and customs, but it has ordered carefulness in ‘spouse
selection’. For example:

“Be lenient ... do not exercise extreme care.”

“The best marriage is the easiest one.”

“The best of wives are those whose dowry sum is small and their
expenditure and upkeep is low.”

“But when it comes to the discussion of ‘spouse

selection’ and ‘its criteria and standards’, Islam says be very careful.

**إيّاكُم وَخَضراءَ الدِّمَنِ.**

“Avoid the greenery (herbs) growing over a sewer (cesspool).”

**إيّاكُم وَتَزويجَ الحَمقاءِ.**

“Avoid marrying stupid and silly (insane) ones.”

**فانْظُر ما تُقَلِّدُه.**

“See what you are putting around your neck.”

And tens of other cautions and warnings.

So be completely mindful and alert that these two kinds of ordains are
not mixed up and taken erroneously. Leniency and easy attitude have
their own place; whereas minuteness, precision, carefulness, and
strictness have their own. Everything is suitable in its own place.”

Criteria Of Spouse Selection
----------------------------

We must have certain standards for the selection of a spouse. That is to
say, girls and boys must have criteria and know what kind of spouse they
wish to have and with what qualities and virtues. This is the actual
work. It is much like someone who wants to travel, so he must fix and
specify his destination and then start the journey. But if he only knows
that he needs to travel but does not have any aim, objective or
destination in his mind, he wanders around and gets lost.

There are two kinds of standards, qualities, and specifications that
should be taken into consideration when selecting a spouse:

(a) Those which are the pillars and foundations and definitely required
for a prosperous life.

(b) Those which are the conditions of attaining completion, and are
necessary for the betterment and welfare of life and are mostly relevant
and dependent upon the taste, style and the status of a person.

Now we consider these standards, criteria and qualities.

First: Religiousness  
 (From The Fundamental And Inevitable Factors)
----------------------------------------------

He who does not have religion does not have anything. Whatever he owns
and possesses, he is considered and evaluated as ‘nothing’. An
irreligious man is actually a ‘moving dead body’. The person who is not
committed and bound to religion, which is the most real matter of life,
there exists no security and guarantee that he would be committed to the
rights of his spouse, and be bound to the norms of a shared life.

A religious and pious person cannot go along with an irreligious spouse
and have a prosperous and blessed common life. A pious person may
possibly tolerate and bear other shortcomings of the spouse, but can
never bear and accommodate the irreverence and recklessness of the
spouse.

Yes, if both of them are without religion and heedless to the laws of
religion, it is possible. But their lives would never be successful.
Prosperity is absolutely impossible to achieve without honesty.
Absolutely impossible!! Yes, they might have accepted something as
prosperity and consider themselves as prosperous, but this consideration
is ‘sheer ignorance.’ That is to say, they are in fact unfortunate and
miserable, but they think they are blessed and successful.

Anyhow, a religious and pious person wants a religious spouse. If one is
religious and the other, irreligious and uncommitted, they will not
become prosperous.

Of course, being religious means being so in the real sense of it.
Meaning being absolutely committed to Islam, accepting it from the core
of one’s heart, and practicing upon it, not the shallow, rootless and
feigned religiousness.

A reflection of the Prophet’s (a.s) sayings:

A man came to the Prophet (a.s) to seek guidance in connection with the
selection of a spouse. He (a.s) said to him:

**عَلَيكَ بِذاتِ الدِّينِ.**

“It is (binding) upon you to have a religious spouse.”**[1]**

On another occasion, he (a.s) ordered all people of all ages:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14, p 30.

“It is binding upon all of you to select a religious spouse.”

And again in another case he (a.s) said:

**مَن تَزَوَّجَ امْرَأةً لِمَالِها وَكلَهُ اللهُ إلَيهِ، وَمَن
تَزَوَّجَها لِجَمالِها رَآى فِيها ما يَكْرَه، وَمَن تَزَوَّجَها
لِدِينِها جَمَعَ اللهُ لَه ذلِك.**

“A man who marries a woman for the sake of her wealth, Allah leaves him
in his own condition, and the one who marries her (only) for her beauty,
he will find in her (things) which he dislikes (displeasing matters) and
the one who marries her for the sake of her faith (religiousness), Allah
will gather up all these things for him.”**[1]**

There is an elegant and subtle point in the tradition; that is, if he
marries her (only) for her beauty, he sees unpleasant things in her.

Perhaps these ‘unpleasant matters’ mean that the beauty of an
irreligious wife would be the cause of a bad name, scandal and disgrace.
The same beauty that was the stimulant of marriage with her becomes the
cause of nuisance and dishonour.

### Question And Observation

At this stage, a question and objection comes forth; that is, if being
religious is the real standard of success, then why do we see many
religious ones who do not lead good lives and their lives are disturbed
and unhappy?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14, p 31.

### Answer

Firstly, religiousness (devoutness) means real religiousness. That is,
we take only such a person as religious whose entire practices,
speeches, morality, and all the rest of his life’s matters are subject
to Islam. Such an individual would really be decent and gentle. Islam is
the law of Allah for the prosperity of man and if followed and
practiced, it does positively bring felicity and blessings. Islam is not
merely a set of a few obvious practices that anybody performing them may
be a real religious one.

Secondly, it is possible that the fault be at another place, which means
they may be really religious, but lacking some qualities and
peculiarities being the condition for prosperity of the shared and
common life. For instance, they might not have ideological, moral and
physical co-ordination, homogeneity and harmony. Because, whilst being
religious is the real standard, there are some other criteria, which
must be observed when selecting spouse. (These will be described soon).

Thirdly, the difficulty and fault may be present at the other end. That
is to say, you may know one of the two spouses as a religious person and
not know the other one and be completely unaware about his or her
spirits. Perhaps he or she is not really religious and the root of the
difficulty lies there.

Fourthly, one or both of them may be suffering from a nervous or
spiritual disease. These diseases cause many difficulties in the joint
life. Religious people too, having been affected by certain factors may
suffer from

ailments and nervous and spiritual complications.

Anyway, being religious and pious is the basic condition and quality of
a suitable spouse and there must be a thorough enquiry and contemplation
about it before marriage takes place.

### The Fruits Of Religiousness

This quality and virtue has many other fruits. That is to say,
religiousness is like a root or origin, which has many branches and
fruits.

(a) Piety: A religious person is positively pious; and if he is not,
then he is not a religious one.

(b) Veil: The veil is from the fruits of the ‘tree of religiousness’.
The Hijab (veil) is not only specified for women and girls, boys and men
too must wear a (spiritual) veil. To sum up, the veil of a woman and a
man has some differences which exist due to women’s physique, being
bodily more attractive, and the physical and sexual differences between
the two sexes.

(c) Nobility.

(d) Modesty:

“The one who does not have modesty lacks religion.” So the one who has
modesty, does have religion as well.

### What Should The Irreligious Youths Do?

All that has been described so far, regarding the standards and the
first virtue (religiousness) was mostly related to the pious ones. So
what should the

irreligious youths do?

### Answer

Firstly: They must also become pious and practise like the pious ones.
Religion and faith are the provision and stock of the world and
prosperity in the hereafter. So it is obligatory for every sane man to
attain this provision. Any amount of research, study, investigation and
consultation taking place on this road is worthwhile. Just as the human
intellect and mind deems it fit that man must search and endeavour for
the sake of earning a livelihood in this material life, so does it
demand to seek the way of eternal bliss.

Secondly: The irreligious youths must also possess some of the qualities
and merits of the religious ones. The man who is not bound to faith and
religion, must take into view some of the merits of the pious ones when
selecting a spouse. For instance, an irreligious spouse must too possess
modesty, nobility, and sexual purity; otherwise their lives would become
full of misery, distress and difficulties. This is because even
irreligious persons cannot tolerate immodesty, impurity, debauchery and
libertinism (unless they may have negated humanity, in which case, they
are out of the scope of our discussion).

The more a person is modest, noble, and clear, the more he is religious,
although he himself may not be aware or disbelieve.

Modesty, nobility, purity and all the virtues and peculiarities, which
are considered positive and

beautiful are a part of religion. In any case, nothing can be a permit
and allowance to marry an immodest, mean, vile, dissolute, and impure
person.

So the irreligious and faithless persons must at least practice the
first part of the standard of religiousness; that is, modesty, nobility
and sexual purity.

We, at the end of this chapter, shall again talk about it.

Second: Morality  
 (A Basic And Positive Specification For Both Parties)
------------------------------------------------------

Morality does not alone mean to be conventionally booming and smiling
and good-natured, since laughing on certain occasions is not only
anti‑morality, but also immoral. Instead, morality means good etiquette
and lovely habits and virtues from an intellectual and religious point
of view.

### Status Of Morality In Spouse Selection

The Prophet (a.s) said about the virtues and qualities of a suitable and
decent spouse:

**إذا جَاءَكُم مَن تَرضَوْنَ خُلُقَه وَدِينَهُ فَزَوِّجُوهُ، وَإنْ لا
تَفعَلوا تَكُن فِتْنَةٌ في الأرْضِ وَفَسادٌ كَبيرٌ.**

“When someone with whose morality and religion you are pleased comes to
you (for marriage), conclude the marriage. If you do not do it, then a
great commotion and disturbance and corruption would take place on
earth.”

Please observe that the prophet of Islam (a.s) described ‘morality’ and
‘religion’ as two real standards and criteria of marriage and spouse
selection. These two are the foundation of prosperous life and the
importance of other standards follows them.

A Muslim, named Hussain Bin Bashar Baseti, wrote a letter with the
following contents about a person who had asked the hand of his daughter
in marriage, to Imam Reza (a.s) and enquired as to what his duty was in
the matter:

“…A person from among my relatives, who is ill natured, has asked the
hand of my daughter in marriage. What must I do now? Shall I marry my
daughter to him or not? What do you say about it?”

Imam wrote in response to his letter:

“If he is ill natured (bad tempered), do not marry your daughter to
him.”

You see that Imam (a.s) responds distinctly, vividly, and negatively due
to this one vice. To live alongside an ill natured and bad tempered
person is similar to a life long vigorous imprisonment. The bad temper
of one of the two spouses affects the other and the children as well.

### Specimens Of Decent And Indecent Behaviour

Now we discuss the meaning of ‘decent attitude’ and morality in detail
and describe two examples of these so that the meaning of morality when
it comes to spouse selection is illustrated and explained explicitly.

#### 1‑Using Decent And Indecent Language

Using foul and dirty language, insolence, and talking disrespectfully,
carelessly, and abusively are specimens and indications of bad
temperament and immorality, whereas sweet language, soft conduct and
talking respectfully are the symbols of morality and good character.

As a matter of fact, ‘the tongue’ is the representative and translator
of one’s ‘internal conditions.’

“The same matter trickles out of a pot which is inside it.”

It is not possible that the interior of a man be sound, healthy, and
pure but his tongue be dirty, foul, abusive and pungent. The tongue is
the window, which exhibits the contents of the interior. Man’s tongue is
the mirror of his heart.

#### 2- Magnanimity And Jealousy

Jealousy is the important indicator of ill nature, and magnanimity and
generosity are the salient specimens of good character and morality.

#### 3- Sweet-Naturedness And Ill-Naturedness

Leading a life with an ill natured and bad tempered person is very
difficult and life with a sweet natured and well-behaved person gives
pleasure, enjoyment and hope. A good nature is one of the signs of faith
and ill-naturedness and impoliteness is the manifestation of a weakness
in faith.

Of course, as has been described in the beginning of this discussion,
good-naturedness or smiling is not

always and everywhere a sign of good conduct. For instance, the
mirthfulness of women and men in the presence of an unfamiliar person
(stranger) is against morality and is highly disagreeable. And
similarly, laughing and making others laugh through backbiting,
slandering, mockery, and describing others’ errors is illegal,
prohibited and against moral values and Islamic ethics.

#### 4‑ Accepting The Truth And Stubbornness

Stubbornness and obstinacy inflicts heavy damages upon family life.

#### 5‑ Wise Humility And Stupid Pride And Arrogance

#### 6‑ Truthfulness And Lying

#### 7‑Grace And Deliberateness And Ungraciousness And Debauchery

#### 8‑ Forbearance And Impatience And Incapaciousness

#### 9‑ Favourable Opinion And Mistrust

#### 10‑ Being Warm And Affectionate And Being Apathetic

#### 11‑ Forgiveness And Hostility

#### 12‑ Respect And Disrespect

#### 13‑ Boldness And Fear

#### 14‑ Politeness And Rough Attitude

#### 15‑ Faithfulness And Disloyalty

#### 16‑ Generosity And Parsimony

#### 17‑ Contentment And Greed

### Answer To A Question

Question: What is the way to discover these virtues? In other words,
what course must we adopt in selecting a spouse so that we choose a
person with the required virtues?

Answer. Refer this discussion to the sixth chapter where you will find
the answer to this question.

Third: Nobility Of The Family  
 (A Fundamental And Unavoidable Condition For Both Sides)
---------------------------------------------------------

Family nobility does not mean fame, wealth, and social status. Rather it
means modesty, purity and religiousness. Marriage with someone is equal
to a bond with a family, tribe, and a race.

It is not logical that in connection with marriage one says: “I desire
to marry this person and have nothing to do with his or her family,
relations, and tribe”, since:

1- This person is part of the same family and tribe and is the branch of
the same tree. This branch has received its nutrition and growth from
the roots of the same tree. It is certain that most of the moral,
spiritual, intellectual and physical qualities and specifications of
that family have been transferred through heritage, training,
environment, habits, etc to this person.

The prophet of Islam (a.s) said in this regard:

**تَزَوَّجوا في الحِجْرِ الصّالِحِ فإنَّ العِرْقَ دَسَّاسٌ.**

“Marry from a decent family, for genealogy affects very much.”

At another place he (a.s) said:

**اُنْظُر في إيِّ شَيْءٍ تَضَعُ وَلَدَكَ فَإنَّ العِرْقَ دَسَّاسُ.**

“Investigate very carefully and minutely as to where you will place your
child, for genealogy affects very much.”

2- Even if you do not have anything to do with them, they would have
something to do with you!

Never can you detach your spouse from them. Neither can you yourself cut
off your link with them. You must be associated and linked to them for a
whole lifetime. If the spouse’s family are a wicked and corrupt people,
they will agonise the person. And one cannot totally refrain and put an
absolute constraint upon their interference in one’s life, and on the
bonds with them.

3- Their good or bad name and reputation remains attached to a person
for the whole of his life and does have effects upon it. It will be much
too difficult for you to endure and withstand their bad name.

4- Their qualities and peculiarities have effects upon the future of the
children.

The Prophet (a.s) said in this connection:

**إخْتَارُوا لِنُطَفِكُم فإنَّ الأبْناءَ تشْبهُ الأخْوالَ.**

“Choose a proper and suitable place for your semen, because children
become similar to their maternal uncles.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jawahir, vol. 29, p 37.

Brother and sister! You must never be subjected to sentiments and
emotions and take decisions in that condition regarding important
matters.

If ‘spouse selection’ is excluded from the influence and hold of
intellect and reason and is placed into the realm of sentiments and
superficial views, it would be followed by misery and misfortune.

Now you are positioned and stationed on the threshold and doorway of a
great change. Minutely think and contemplate what you are doing. Now you
wish to connect your future with a family. The result of this linkage
should be progress, completion and prosperity, not downfall,
retrogression, and misery. See the glorious prophet of Islam (a.s) with
the eyes of your heart, addressing you, and hear his alarming and
warning message with the ears of your soul, as he said:

“The prophet of Islam (a.s) stood to deliver a speech and said, “Oh
people, beware of the greenery (growing) upon a dung hill. He was asked
“Oh prophet of Allah (a.s), what is the greenery on the dung hill?” He
replied, “A beautiful woman raised and brought up in a bad nursery
(family).”**[1]**

We have seen many youths who have been deceived by the apparent and
outward show and have thrown themselves into sewers and marshes from
where the exit has become impossible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14, p 29.

### Question And Answer

Question: We have observed that sometimes decent, nice children come of
bad families and indecent and wicked children come from good families.
Why?

Answer: Yes it is as you say, but this happens only sometimes and is an
exceptional event. Sometimes a flower blooms in a bad place and a thorn
does in a good place. But laws cannot be based upon exceptions. What we
describe is on the basis of majority.

Secondly, these exceptions have common roots with their principle.
Without doubt, the effects of these common roots are there in their
existence, which may not appear in normal situations and circumstances,
but do become apparent in turbulent and abnormal conditions.

Thirdly, if somebody is sure that this branch is different from the main
tree, and similarly he may be able to separate and detach this branch
from the origin, and does not permit that his or her family have any
role to play, interfere in his or her future, and so on, then he or she
can marry. But it is not everyone’s job.

#### Another Question:

So what should the children of corrupt, impure and immoral families do?
Shall they remain unmarried?

#### Answer:

The detailed answer to this question will come at the end of this
chapter.

Fourth: Reason  
 (Basic Condition For Both Parties)
-----------------------------------

A sound and healthy mind is needed for the sake of bringing about a
prosperous life. Intellect is like a flashlight, which illuminates the
avenue of life and projects and shows the ups and downs of it, so that
one can take suitable decisions about them. Intellect is the medium of
distinguishing between goodness, wrong and evil. Spouses must be
equipped with the power of mind and reason for the sake of
administrating and managing a correct life and bringing up and raising
decent children.

The commander of the believers Ali (a.s) staunchly and strongly forbade
marriage with a foolish and insane person.

**إيّاكُم وَتَزويجَ الحَمْقَاءِ! فإنَّ صُحبَتَها بَلاءٌ وَولدَها
ضِياعٌ.**

“Avoid marrying a stupid person, since her company is a woe (calamity or
distress) and her children are also wasted.”**[1]**

Imam described two important points in this Hadith; one is that the
company of a foolish spouse is distress and woe which makes a wise man
miserable, and the other one is that of the waste and loss of her
offspring, since genes affect them by way of heritage and
simultaneously, their training, conduct, and character too are lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail al-Shia, vol. 14, P 56.

### Notice!

It is possible that a person is educated but not wise and sagacious, or
wise but not educated. That is to say, being educated does not
necessarily mean being sage and wise, just as intelligence is not the
same as being educated. Of course, knowledge and mind mutually affect
each other. Many a time, a person may be educated but lacks reason and
insight into life. At the same time, another one may be uneducated but
have the reason and wits to organise and run one’s life. And if these
two (reason and education) get together, it is so much better.
Similarly, some of the craftiness and cunningness must not be taken for
intellect, and the doer of those be named intelligent and sagacious.

#### Meaning Of Reason As Defined By Imam Sadiq (A.S)

He was asked, “What is mind?”

He said:

**مَا عُبِدَ بهِ الرَّحْمنُ وَاكتُسِبَ بهِ الجِنانُ.**

“It is a thing by which Allah is worshiped and paradise is achieved.”

The questioner asked: “So what was it that Moawiyah (Allah’s curse be
upon him) possessed?”

Imam said:

**تِلكَ النَّكراءُ، تِلكَ الشَّيطَنَةُ، وَهِي شَبيهَةٌ بِالعقْلِ
وَلَيسَتْ بِالعَقْلِ.**

“What he had was deception (trickery) and craftiness and that has a
resemblance with reason but is not the

reason itself.”**[1]**

### An Unpleasant Specimen

A girl, who had a weak intellect but apparently was beautiful, was
engaged to Ghulam. Right from the time of engagement, Ghulam became
aware of the weakness of the girl’s mind and wanted to change his mind
and give up the idea of marriage with her, but her beauty and charm had
dazzled his mind.

Anyway, the marriage took shape. After a certain period of time, the
difficulties started, because the pretty girl who had charmed Ghulam
with her beauty, which had filled up all the gaps and shortcomings of
the girl in his opinion, was unable to withstand the continuance of that
condition and could not take the place and responsibilities of a wife.
That woman could not play the role of a sympathiser, companion, and
helper of her husband, as a wife. Their lives became colder with each
day that passed until they had a child.

Usually after a child enters a family, life becomes sweeter and more
hopeful. But not only did it not occur in their lives, but their
difficulties and hardships increased, because the woman did not have the
capability and potential of bearing children and could not be a good
mother for the child.

Ghulam took his wife to a psychiatrist for a check up (whereas he should
have done it before marriage).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool Kafi, vol. 1, Kitabul Aql Wal Jahl, Hadith 3.

The psychiatrist diagnosed that the wits and mind of the girl was low
and equivalent to half her own age and that she was not curable. It is
clear that such a life cannot continue. In the end, Ghulam divorced his
wife and the innocent child became motherless.

#### A More Unpleasant Specimen

Hamida was a religious, sagacious, wise and honourable lady who was
faced with a characterless, cunning, libertine, and witless person. She
was greatly agonised and distressed by the character and conduct of her
husband.

The husband earned money by unfair and illegal means like forgery, fraud
and unfair mediations. Hamida was extremely perturbed and terrified
about his doubtful prohibited earnings. Her husband did not mind having
unlawful and illicit relations with other women, whereas she herself was
a pure, noble woman and was much pained and distressed by the anti‑moral
activities of her husband; yet, she guarded the reputation and honour
(of the family) and kept silent about it.

A few years passed in this manner and for all her endeavours she could
not reform and set her husband aright. On the contrary, the wealthier he
became, the more corrupt and debauched he became. At last, her patience
came to an end, and she could no longer tolerate and stand his bad, evil
character and unwise conduct and finally left him.

But alas! She was no more the same Hamida she used to be before
marriage. Her felicity, sound mind and

joyous spirit were withered and destroyed by that witless devil.

**(فَاعْتَبِرُوا يَا أُولِي الْأَبْصَارِ)**

“O you watchful people, take lesson!”

Fifth: Physical And Mental Health
---------------------------------

Physical and spiritual health has an important role in the success and
prosperity of the joint life of a couple. Some of the ailments do not
have much importance and are not hurdles and hindrances in performing
marital duties and responsibilities. They do not give any shock or blow
to life and one can bear them, or they can be cured and remedied by
treatment and looked after.

Our discussion does not pertain to such diseases. Instead, those which
must be taken into view while selecting a spouse are chronic ailments
and deformities and disabilities, both of a physical and spiritual
nature, which are incurable and accompany a man for the whole of his
life, and where their endurance and bearing is difficult for the spouse.
Moreover, they are constraining factors in playing the perfect role of a
spouse.

A spouse must love his or her mate to have a good life, and some defects
and deformities hinder this love.

Letting this matter go unnoticed and having a sentimental and
unreasonable attitude to may cause heavy loss and damage to life.

#### Consider This Miserable Specimen:

Hadi was a healthy and enthusiastic youth. He married a girl who had a
physical deformity. He was aware about it before the marriage, yet being
overwhelmed by sentiments, and not contemplating the consequences and
the other dimensions of the matter, he, through pity and sympathy,
accepted to perform a good deed by marrying her.

After a certain time, the man started making excuses. The physical
defect of the woman was such that it affected his sexual satisfaction.

Hadi was shy to say distinctly and clearly what troubled him. And so he
made other excuses. The confrontation and disputes increased. These
differences and tussles were on one hand, while on the other, the woman
felt very humiliated due to her deformity. Thus she began to suffer from
spiritual and psychological diseases too. The complications increased
with the passage of time.

Hadi consulted me about the problems in their lives, and believed the
psychological and nervous ailments were the real factor of their
differences and difficulties, not as a disease, but in the form of his
wife’s faults. But I knew where the actual difficulty was.

Psychological treatments were undertaken, but the differences continued,
until Hadi’s energies failed and he could no more tolerate and carry on
with that life. He married another girl.

Now, as I write these lines, that poor girl lives in her father’s house.
She is neither divorced nor does she have a joint life.

Islam has prohibited marriage with certain patients. For instance, those
carrying diseases like leprosy, madness, etc. which are the cause of
spouse misery and the destruction of the future generation.

#### Question And Answer

Q: So what must disabled and deformed patients do? Should they always
remain spouseless?

A: At the end of this chapter, and similarly in the discussion under the
topic of ‘sacrificial marriages’ which is located in ‘chapter 6’ we will
inshallah, answer this question.

Sixth: Beauty
-------------

Beauty is a distinction and has an exceptionally great effect in
sweetening and making marital life prosperous. When two persons, as
spouses and helpers, want to raise a prosperous and felicitous centre
and live together with love, purity, and intimacy for the whole of their
lives, it is necessary that they should like each other from every
aspect and must also like each other’s physiques, faces and apparent
looks.

Beauty does not have a certain standard and fixed scale and lacks a ‘law
of criterion’ so that individuals may be judged by that; instead, to an
extent, it is pertinent to the taste of the individuals themselves. It
is even possible that a person is beautiful from one person’s view and
ugly from that of another. It is said about

Laila and Majoon (two lovers) that Laila was an ugly girl from the point
of view of others, but from Majnoon’s she was pretty. So the quality of
beauty is a relative quality and it must not essentially be at the
loftiest grade. Instead, what is necessary, is the mutual liking and
attraction of the two spouses. If a person does not like the apparent
looks and the face and figure of his spouse, he may unintentionally
commit excess upon her and find faults and criticize her and make her
life bitter.

The beauty of the spouse has effects on protecting and strengthening the
modesty and faith of the spouse. If a spouse is pleased with the beauty
of his spouse, he would not divert his sight, mind and practice towards
others and would not envy others’ beautiful spouses. As a result, he
would not go after strangers and would not commit dishonesty with his
wife (both men and women), unless he comes out of the course of nature
and does not have a share of faith and modesty.

Islam has emphasized and stressed this point. The Prophet (a.s) said:

**إذَا أرادَ أحدُكُم أن يَتَزَوَّجَ المرْأةَ فَلْيَسألْ عَن شَعرِها،
كَما يَسأَلُ عَن وَجهِهَا، فإنَّ الشَّعْرَ أحَدُ الجَمالَينِ.**

“When one of you intends to marry a woman, he should ask about her hair,
just as he asks about her face (beauty), since the hair is one of the
two beauties (of women).”

And similarly, it has been recommended that the spouses beautify and
decorate themselves for each

other and please and satisfy one another to remain safe and sound from
deviations, corruption, and debauchery.

When one of the infallible Imams had coloured his blessed hair with
Henna (dye made from a shrub), someone surprisingly asked him, “Have you
beautified yourself?”

Imam (a.s) said: “Yes! Decorating and beautifying (oneself) increases
the modesty of women.”**[1]**

Indifference and carelessness toward these matters may bring about
miseries and scandals.

It is necessary to discuss love and sexual problems separately, which we
will do in the chapter under the topic ‘Love, the axis of life’.

#### Note

Beauty should be considered beside other qualities and standards, not as
an independent one. That is, beauty devoid of religiousness, modesty and
morality is not only unappreciated as a distinction, but also is a
dangerous calamity. Beauty is taken to be a perfection, worth and
distinction for someone, only when that person is equipped and decorated
with religion, morality, modesty, nobility and reason, otherwise it is a
defaming affliction.

Beauty lacking modesty is greenery growing upon a dung hill. The saying
of the Prophet (a.s), which has been described, is very suitable here:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Biharul Anwar, vol. 103, p 237.

“Avoid the greenery growing over the dunghill (heaps of dirt).”

Similarly, “The one who marries a woman for her beauty (only), he will
see unpleasant things in her.”

‘Beauty’ is not considered one of the basic and independent factors in
marital life, rather it is a ‘quality of perfection’ which if
accompanied by fundamental and basic qualities has worth, otherwise no!

Regrettably, sometimes this quality dazzles the insight of the youth and
they sacrifice most of their values upon it. The apparent attractions
and charms deprive them of farsightedness and make them fascinated and
enchanted, so that having forgotten the real and actual standards, they
neglect those. Thus they raise the structure of life upon a weak and
unstable foundation. As a consequence, after a period, when that
freshness and apparent attractions have a fall and, on the other hand,
the enthusiasm and emotional storm of passions also subside, then dismay
and disagreements evolve on the scene and the displeasing factors and
peculiarities become obvious and evident.

But for the person who establishes his life upon the foundations of
faith, religiousness, modesty and the real and noble values, and
considers beauty as a ‘completing distinction’ the passage of time
cannot wear out and erode that life.

**﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَيَجْعَلُ لَهُمْ
الرَّحْمَانُ وُدًّ﴾**

“Surely (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, for

them will Allah bring about love.”

Allah places such an intense love and immense and profound fondness as a
reward in the hearts of faithful spouses that cannot be wiped out and
annihilated even by the termination of youth’s livelihood.

**﴿مَا عِنْدَكُمْ يَنفَدُ وَمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ﴾**

“What is with you passes away (finishes) and what is with Allah is
enduring.”

The relation that is established on the basis of Allah’s values is an
eternal and everlasting bondage and those contrary to it would be
unsteady and unstable.

Seventh: Knowledge And Education
--------------------------------

Knowledge and education have a great effect on the prosperity and
felicity of man. Being educated and gaining knowledge is obligatory on
every Muslim man and woman.**[1]**

This specification is the focus of attention in spouse selection and a
joint life and is considered to be a distinction for a decent and
suitable spouse. It also has a deep effect on attaining perfection and
the progress of life, performing marital duties and the bringing up and
training of children.

But this peculiarity (like beauty) is the condition of perfection, not
its foundation and should be considered beside real and basic qualities
and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Prophet (a.s), Usool-e Kafi, vol. 1, the chapter on Excellence
of knowledge, Hadith 1.

standards, not independently. All that has been discussed about ‘beauty’
stands valid and is true in this discussion as well.

Knowledge, short of commitment and faith is always harmful, as is beauty
without faith and modesty.

That which is important in this topic is the proportions and equality of
learning between two spouses, which will inshallah, be described in the
next discussion, i.e. ‘equity.’

Eighth: Being Each Other’s Match  
 (Equity And Proportionateness)
----------------------------------

It has been said in the beginning of this chapter that this part,
(standards of spouse selection), is the most important chapter out of
all the discussions. And now we say that the vitally important part of
the discussion is ‘equity and balance between the two spouses.’ This is
the most sensitive matter to concentrate on while selecting a spouse.

Equity between the couple means: a proportion, balance, co-ordination,
concurrence and congeniality between the boy and the girl, and
conventionally, the harmony of a man and woman to get along together.

Marriage is a form of combination between two human beings and two
families. Joint and common life is ‘a compound’ thing, the actual and
basic elements of which are the man and the woman. The more the harmony,
co-ordination and congeniality of thought, spirit, morality and physique
in this compound, the more its strength, enjoyment, fruits, positive

consequences, stability and continuance. The less the ratio of its
consistency, the more life would be unstable, bitter and fruitless.

The main cause of the miseries, turbulence and turmoil of family life is
due to the lack of co‑ordination and proportion between men and women.

Two people who join each other’s company and wish to prolong this
company for the whole of their lives and share all matters, taking joint
decisions, bringing children into existence, training them and making
them reach prosperity must definitely be harmonious, concurrent, and
congenious and have reciprocal equity.

Regrettably, in the wake of the spouse selection problem, conventional
goodness is usually taken as sufficient, and less attention is paid to
the equity and balance between the boy and the girl; whereas this is the
axis and pivot of the standard of spouse selection.

There are only a few people in our society who are completely incapable
of marrying and having a spouse. All boys and girls have the capability
and capacity for marriage, but all that needs to be taken into
consideration is which girl suits which boy.

These problems that we see all around us for e.g., that such and such a
woman has difficulty with her husband and their life is disturbed and in
a bad shape, or that such and such a man has conflict with his wife and
is offended and annoyed with her and they pass an ‘unwanted’ and
‘undesirable’ life, are due to the fact that mutually proper and
suitable spouses were not

chosen. If this had been done, these difficulties, odds, conflicts and
family disturbances would not have existed or at least, been minimised.

“The persons who, before their marriage, endeavour to study their
spouses and find spouses who are suitable and proportional for them and
are conventionally their counterparts, have solved a part of their post
marriage difficulties and problems regarding children training.
Otherwise, they save and secure the difficulties which could be solved
before the post marriage period.”**[1]**

#### Attention

A hundred percent co‑ordination and congeniality is not possible, since
every individual has his own mind, spirit, morality and character,
specific environment and family and has a certain distance and
difference from the other one. But an attempt should be made to lessen
and reduce this distance to a minimum, so that the two spouses are as
close to each other as possible.

### \>A Lesson‑Giving Example

Before arriving at the instances and cases of ‘equity’ and
‘compatibility’, I wish to describe a self‑witnessed example, closely
touched by me. I was present at all its stages, so that the topic will
become clear and conspicuous, and the ground for the later subjects is
levelled.

Ismail and Safoora were both religious, good-natured

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** How to conduct the children, by Dr. Mohammad Reza Sharafi, p 50.

and committed to Islamic values and the Islamic revolution, but their
views about these issues were different.

Ismail had been brought up in a village environment along with its rural
culture, rites, and ceremonial specifications and was committed to the
peculiarities of his social cradle. Safoora had been bred and brought up
in a large city along with its peculiar, typical atmosphere of rites and
rituals. Each of them looked at the world from the window of his and her
personal perception and ideas. No spiritual, moral, educational,
physical, familial or cultural harmony existed between the two. So much
so that their points of view about Islam and the Revolution, to which
both were committed were different and a vast (ideological) gap existed
between them.

A mediator had introduced them for marriage. He did not have any
negative intention and did it as a religious duty and for the pleasure
of Allah. But regrettably, he did not have any information about their
spiritual, physical and social harmony and congeniality. And so he was
unsuccessful in his introduction and mediation and this did not result
in a good life for those two.

Ismail and Safoora married. And right from the beginning of their joint
life differences and conflicts and tussles started taking shape. Ismail
said there were things important to her (Safoora)that did not have any
importance for him, and there were things important to him, which did
not mean anything to her. Safoora too

held the same opinion.

Both of them were highly educated with good academic career, but they
had a vast difference of opinion on various topics and versions of
knowledge. Each one of them had their own particular ideas and styles
regarding family linkages, bonds, relations and the visits of guests,
which were quite distant from each other. Their views and conduct about
the problems pertaining to children’s education and training, too, were
completely diverse and dissimilar and they could never practice in a
common, uniform and co-ordinated style. Neither of them would step down
from the height of his opinion and approach, and conventionally, neither
of the two gave in to the other’s yoke.

Many times their case was presented for the judgement of others, where
they put forward their problems before family consultants, and yet they
never reached any understanding and agreement.

Finally, one of their consultants and advisors who was very cautious and
rarely advised the separation of a wife and a husband expressed that
they should separate, saying, “This life is not sustainable, and there
is no alternative except separation.”

Finally, Ismail and Safoora separated through divorce! And this event
took shape at the expense of a victim that was their child.
