3) Phase Three of the Life Hereafter
====================================

Wahshat al-Qabr: Grave's Loneliness
-----------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحشة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

According to the book titled Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, there are
tremendous horrors in the grave; therefore, when the deceased person is
taken to his burial spot, he must not be entered into it suddenly. He
must be placed near the pit for a while so the dead person may get ready
to enter it. Then one must bring him closer to it and wait a short while
again after which the deceased person is to be placed in the grave.
Al-Majlisi, the father, has explained the wisdom in these steps. He says
that, true, the soul has already left the body, the "animal spirit"
(spiritus animalis in Latin) or the moving soul; as for the "articulate
soul", it is yet to sever its ties with the body:

There is fear about the grave's constriction, the questioning by Munkir
and Nakeer, Ruman who tries to cause the dead to slip away into the
torment, and the barzakh; so, the deceased person has a lot to worry
about. Ar-Rawandi has narrated saying that Jesus Christ (as) once
addressed his mother, Maryam (Mary) (as), after her death saying, "Speak
to me, Mother! Do you wish to return to the abode of the living?" She
said, "Yes, so I may perform the prayers during an extremely cold night,
and so I may fast during a very hot day. O Son! This path [of the dead]
is frightful, horrific." It has also been narrated that Fatima az-Zahra
(peace be with her) said once to her revered husband, Commander of the
Faithful Ali (as), by way of her will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروي : انَّ فاطمة عليها السلام لمّا احتضرت أوصت علياً عليه السلام
فقالت : «اذا أنا مت، فتول أنت غسلي وجهزّني ، وصلّ عليَّ وانزلني قبري
وألحدني ، وسوّ التراب عليّ، واجلس عند رأسي قبالة وجهي ، فأكثر من تلاوة
القرآن والدعاء فانّها ساعة يحتاج الميت فيها الى أُنس الأحياء»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"When I die, wash my body and outfit me [with the shrouds], perform
prayers for me, get me inside the grave, place the grave stone, bury me
in the earth, sit at my head facing me, recite the Book of Allah‎ and
recite many supplications, for it is time when the deceased person needs
the company of those alive." We are told on p. 148, Vol. 1, of Mustadrak
al-Wasa'il that Ibn Tawoos, may Allah‎ have mercy on his soul, has
quoted the Prophet (P) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا يأتي على الميت ساعة أشدّ من أول ليلة فارحموا موتاكم بالصدقة ، فان
لم تجدوا فليصل أحدكم ركعتين يقرا فيهما فاتحة الكتاب مرّة وآية الكرسي
مرّة ، وقل هو الله احد مرّتين ، وفي الثانية فاتحة الكتاب مرّة والهاكم
التكاثر عشر مرّات ويسلم ويقول : اللّهمّ صلّ على محمّد وآل محمّد وابعث
ثوابها الى قبر ذلك الميت فلان بن فلان ، فيبعث الله مِن ساعته الف ملك
الى قبره مع كل ملك ثوب وحلة ويوسع في قبره من الضيق الى يوم ينفخ في
الصور ويعطى المصلي بعدد ما طلعت عليه الشمس حسنات ويرفع له أربعون درجة»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"There is nothing harder for the deceased person than the first night in
the grave; so, send mercy to your dead by offering charity on his
behalf, and if one does not have charity to offer, let him perform two
rek'ats (prostrations) in the first of which he should recite Surat
al-Fatiha, the Verse of the Throne and twice Surat at-Tawhid
(al-Ikhlas). In the second, he should recite Surat al-Fatiha followed by
reciting ten times Surat at-Takathur (Chapter 102 of the Holy Qur'an).
Then he should offer the tasleem [greeting the Prophet of Allah‎ (P)]
and say, "Lord! Bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad, and send the
rewards [of this prayer] to the grave of the deceased person so-and-so."

Allah‎ Almighty will then instantly send a thousand angels to the grave
of that dead person. Each angel will be carrying an outfit. His grave
will be widened till the trumpet is blown. The person who performs this
prayer will be granted good deeds as many as the expanse of what is
under the sun, and he will be raised forty stations." What also helps
lessen the pain of loneliness in the grave is one during his lifelong
perfecting rukoo' (bowing down) very well during the prayers. Imam‎
al-Baqir (as) is quoted as having said: "One who perfects his bowing
down [during the performance of the daily prayers] will not feel lonely
in his grave," according to p. 244, Vol. 6 of Bihar al-Anwar.

Actually, the doers of good do not have to worry about such loneliness,
for angels will keep them company and they will be permitted to visit
their relatives, the living or the dead, escorted by these angels, and
this will be a diversion for them. Another act of munjiyat, acts that
save one from penalty, is repeating a hundred times this beautiful
statement: There is no god save Allah‎, the true and obvious King. Such
act will save one from poverty in his lifetime and from loneliness in
the grave in the Hereafter. He will be wealthy in this life and the
gates of Paradise will be opened for him in the next.

According to p. 217, Vol. 8 of Bihar al-Anwar, one who fasts 12 days
during the month of Sha\`ban will be visited in his grave every day by
seventy thousand angels till the trumpet is blown. Here we must point
out that "every day" means days of our own counting, days of this short
life, for the barzakh period precedes the Judgment Day. Starting with
that Day, time will bear a different dimension.

And one who goes to visit a sick person will be rewarded by Allah‎ Who
will assign an angel to visit him in his grave till the Day of
Gathering, the Assembling Day. Also, it is recorded in Rawandi's
Da\`awat that the Prophet (P) has said that if one recites the following
supplication three times when a deceased person is buried, the torment
from the latter will be lifted till the Trumpet is blown:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(اللّهمَّ إنِّي أسألكَ بحق محمدٍ وآل محمدٍ أن لا تُعَذِبَ هذا
المَيِتَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lord! I plead to You through the status reserved with you for Muhammad
(P) and the Progeny of Muhammad (P) not to torment this deceased person
till the Day when the trumpet is blown."


