4) Stage Four of the Life Hereafter
===================================

Grave's Constriction (pressure)
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

The constriction (pressure) in the grave is a very terrifying stage to
the extent that it is not just difficult for the living to imagine, it
is impossible to imagine. Commander of the Faithful Imam‎ Ali ibn Abu
Talib (ع) has said the following about it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا عِباد الله ما بَعدَ المَوتِ لمَن لا يُغفَر له أشدُّ مِنَ المَوتِ:
القبر، فاحذروا ضيقَةُ وضَنكَهُ وظُلمَتَهُ وَغُربتَهُ ، إنَّ القَبرَ
يقولُ كُلَّ يَومٍ: أنا بَيتُ الغربة! انا بيتُ الوَحشَة!ِ أنا بَيتُ
الدّود!ِ ، وَالقَبرُ روضَةٌ من رياض الجنّة أو حُفرهٌ من حُفرِ
النّار... الى أن قالَ : وَإنَّ مَعيشَةَ الضَّنكِ الَّتي حَذَّرَ اللهُ
مِنها عَدُوَّهُ (هي) عذابُ القبر ، إنَّه يُسلّطُ على الكافرِ في قَبِره
تِسعةً وتسعين تنيناً فَينهشنَ لحَمهُ ويَكسِرنَ عظمهُ، يَتردَّدنَ عليه
كذلك الى يوم يبعث ؛ لَو انَّ تنيناً مِنها نَفَخَ في الأرض لَم تُنبِت
زَرعاً. يا عباد الله: إنَّ انفسَكُمُ الضَّعيفة وأجسادكُمُ الناعمة
الرّقيقة التي يكفيها اليسيرُ تَضعُفُ عن هذا».
  </p>
</blockquote>

 "O servants of Allah‎! There is nothing harder, on those who are not
forgiven, than death save the grave: So, beware of its constriction,
darkness and loneliness. Each day, the grave says: 'I am the abode of
loneliness! I am the abode of worms!' And the grave is either like one
of the gardens of Paradise or one of the pits of Hell… Indeed, the "life
of hardship" about which Allah‎ has warned those who are hostile to Him
is the torment in the grave: The unbeliever is assaulted as he is in his
grave by ninety-nine dragons that tear up his flesh, crush his bones and
keep visiting him thus till the Day of Resurrection. Had one of these
dragons blown on earth, no vegetation would have ever grown in it. O
servants of Allah‎! Your weak selves, tender and soft bodies which are
satisfied with little, are too weak to withstand all of this."

As indicated above, the sins, transgressions and wrongdoings will each
take a form in the hereafter, and the worse one is the worse its form
will be. What will help during this difficult situation? Page 327, Vol.
4 of Usul al-Kafi, tradition No. 13, says that whenever Imam‎ as-Sadiq
(ع) woke up at the end of the night, he would raise his voice so his
family members could hear him saying the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اللّهمّ أَعِنِّي على هول المطلعِ ، و وسع علي ضيق المضجع، اللّهُمَّ
بارِك لِي في الموتِ ، و ارزقني خير ما قبل الموت، و ارزقني خير ما بعد
الموت؛ اللّهُمّ أعِنِّي على سَكراتِ المَوتِ، اللّهُمَّ أَعِنِّي على
غمِّ القَبر ، اللّهُمَّ أَعِنِّي على ضيقِ القَبر،ِ اللَّهُمَّ أعِنِّي
على وَحشَةِ القَبرِ،ِ اللّهُمَّ زَوِّجني مِن الحور العينِ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Lord! Help me with regard to the horror of what is awaiting me [after
death] and expand for me the narrowness of the grave. Lord! Grant me a
blessing at the time of death, and grant me goodness before death, and
grant me goodness after death. Lord! Help me during the time of the
stupors of death. Lord! Help me against the agonies of the grave. Lord!
Help me against the constriction of the grave. Lord! Help me against the
loneliness of the grave. And Lord! Do marry me to the huris with large,
lovely eyes."

Be informed, dear reader, that most torment in the grave is due to one
not paying enough attention and care while using the toilet, taking
lightly the sources of najasa, uncleanness, and also due to committing
calumny and backbiting as well keeping a distance from his family,
according to p. 222, Vol. 6 of Bihar al-Anwar.

From a narration by Sa'eed ibn Jubair, another cause is one having bad
manners with his wife, speaking to her roughly rather than with kindness
and consideration. Whatever the reason may be, we are assured by Imam‎
Ja\`far as-Sadiq (ع) that "No believer is spared the grave's
constriction," according to p. 221, Vol. 6 of the same reference. On p.
221, Vol. 6 of Bihar al-Anwar and on p. 74, Vol. 2 of Safeenat al-Bihar,
Imam‎ as-Sadiq (ع) is quoted as having said: "The grave's constriction
is atonement for a bliss wasted by a believer."

Now let us review what helps in this terrible stage of the afterlife:
Luckily, there are many acts of adoration which one can perform during
his lifetime which will help him in the life to come, and the book
titled Manazil al-Akhira by Abbas al-Qummi counts 15 of them. But we, in
order to be brief, would like to cite the following for you:

1) Commander of the Faithful Imam‎ Ali (ع) has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة النساء من القرآن في كل يوم جمعة أمن من ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who recites Surat an-Nisaa (Chapter 4 of the Holy Qur'an) every
Friday will have security against the grave's constriction," according
to p. 330, Vol. 74 of the same reference.

2) It is recorded on p. 397, Vol. 2 of Safeenat al-Bihar that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من داوم على قراءة سورة الزخرف، آمنه الله تعالى في قبره من حشرات الأرض
و الحيوانات و ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who recites Surat an-Nisaa (Chapter of the Women [Chapter 4] of the
Holy Qur'an) every Friday will be granted security in his grave from the
earth's insects, animals and the grave's constriction."

3) According to the same reference and page, some traditions of the
Prophet (P) indicate that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 من قرأ سورة "ن و القلم" في فريضة الصلاة أو النافلة، آمنه الله من ضغطة
القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one recites Surat Noon (Chapter 68 of the Holy Qur'an which is also
called Surat al-Qalam), during obligatory or optional prayers, Allah‎
will grant him security from the grave's constriction."

4) On pp. 221 and 243, Vol. 6 of Bihar al-Anwar, we are told that Imam‎
ar-Ridha (ع) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات بين زوالي الخميس و الجمعه، آمنه الله من ضغطة القبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who dies between the periods of zawal زوال (midday) of Thursday and
Friday, he will be secured by Allah‎ from the grave's constriction."

5) Imam‎ ar-Ridha (ع) is also quoted as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 عليكم بصلاة الليل، فما من عبد مؤمن قام آخر الليل فصلى ثماني ركعات
صلاة الليل، و ركعتين صلاة الشفع، و ركعة صلاة الوتر، و استغفر في قنوت
الوتر سبعين مرة، الا و آمنه الله من عذاب القبر، و من عذاب النار، و طال
عمره، و توسعت معيشته
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Uphold the Night Prayer; no believing servant of Allah‎ stands at the
end of the night to offer 8 rek'ats (prostrations), two Shaf\` rek'ats,
one Witr Rek\`a, then he seeks forgiveness of Allah‎ in the Qunoot
(invocation) of the Witr seventy times except that Allah‎ will grant him
security against the torment of the grave and against the torture of the
Fire, grants him a longer lifespan and expands his means of livelihood
for him", as we are told on p. 397, Vol. 2 of Safeenat al-Bihar where
the subject of the grave is discussed.


