6) Stage Six of the Life Hereafter
==================================

The Barzakh
-----------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 البرزخ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is the Islamic Barzakh similar to the Catholic Purgatory? Is the God of
the Muslims different from that of the Catholics?! Does He tell the
Christians or Jews or followers of any creed differently from what He
tells the Muslims?! Of course He is not; of course He does not. The
Almighty is One, the truth is one, Paradise is one, Hell is one, the
human family of Adam and Eve is one…

This is the true concept of Tawhid, Brothers and Sisters, so embrace
your non-Muslim brother and do not hurt his feeling or slight his faith;
Allah will judge us all, so let us not judge each other, let us not
think of ourselves as being better than others, let us not distribute
Paradise and Hell and condone or condemn others as kafirs and thus play
“gods”. Please.

The barzakh is one of the phases or stages through which the vast
majority of people will pass; only very, very few will be exempted from
it, and these belong to one of two categories:  
 1) people with whom the Almighty is very pleased, and these go straight
to Paradise, non-stop, not even a single stop on al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem
that separates Paradise from Hell, to mansions, gardens and huris
already prepared and are waiting for them, and

2) people with whom He is very displeased, so He does not want His
angels to waste time with them; these go straight to hell from which
they will never have a respite or a parole, unlike others who may
eventually be released when they end their period of punishment.

Neither of these two groups will go through whatever goes on in the
grave, on earth, at cemeteries that are “residential complexes” for the
dead: Make sure you book your place among them in a nice neighborhood,
Brother, and I am dead serious, through your good deeds; otherwise, you
really will be in deep trouble.

Fortunate are those who are or will be buried near the neighborhood of
the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (ع) where there is peace and
quiet, hope and anticipation, feasts and celebrations, happiness and
wonderful spirituality, where the angels stay busy bringing the
residents, guests of the First Imam (ع), fruits from Paradise; after
all, this is the earthly Paradise, folks, for the lucky few! As for
other “neighborhoods,” there are screams of those who are whipped in
their graves with fiery rods by angry reprimanding angels, where pleas
fall on deaf ears, torment the like of which no human being has ever
heard or seen.

Contrariwise, nobody will be allowed to spoil the “neighborhood” where
the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (ع) is resting with noise or
screams. Instead, he (ع) overwhelms them with his kindness and
affection, showers them with his gifts and boons, spreads his red carpet
for them and permits them to enjoy his hospitality; how great and
wonderful it is to be near the resting place of the Commander of the
Faithful (ع)!

Congratulations, many, many congratulations for those who are and who
will be enjoying such hospitality… Do not grieve if you live far away
from al-Najaf al-Ashraf, Brother, if you may be buried distantly from
his sacred resting place because special angels will move you from there
and lodge you near the Amir (ع) if you love him so much and try your
best to follow his steps. Physical distances vanish in the world of the
spirit, in the hereafter, so smile and thank the Almighty for being a
Shi\`a of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (ع)…!

The barzakh is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an in places such as this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن وَرَائِهِم بَرْزَخٌ إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"(There) is a barrier before them till the Day they are raised up
(from their graves for judgment)" (Qur'an, 23:100).***

This barrier separates this short temporal life as we know it from the
other everlasting one awaiting us, but it is also one of its stages or
stages, a station, if you will. On p. 71, Vol. 1 of Safeenat al-Bihar we
are told that Imam‎ as-Sadiq (as) pointed out to the barzakh once
saying, "By Allah‎, I fear for you the barzakh." He was asked, "What is
the barzakh?" He said, "It is the grave from the moment of death till
the Day of Judgment."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الامام الصادق عليه السلام في حديث: «ولكني والله اتخوف عليكم من
البرزخ. قيل له: وما البرزخ ؟ قال: القبر منذ حين موته الى يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

 It has been cited from ar-Rawandi's book Lubb al-Lubab that those in
the graves go to call upon their families, offspring and relatives and
tearfully plead to them saying:

"O our children! O our families! O our relatives! Have mercy on us and
bestow upon us of the good things with you and the good deeds, and do
remember us, may Allah‎ have mercy on you. We have sat in narrow
prisons, bearing many worries and concerns; so, do not be too miser to
pray for us and to pay alms on our behalf before your fate becomes
similar to ours, perhaps Allah‎ will have mercy on us all. Alas!

We used to be like you, enjoying blessings, but we did not spend in the
way of Allah‎, so our wealth turned into a calamity on our heads while
others benefited from it; so, listen to us and do not forget to do us a
favor with a dirham or a loaf of bread or whatever you wish, for you
shall join us; you shall weep and your tears will not do you any good,
just as we do although we find doing so to be futile. Work hard and
seize the opportunity before it is gone and before your condition will
be similar to ours."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ونقل عن لبّ اللباب للقطب الراوندي قال: وفي الخبر كان الموتى يأتون
فيقفون ، وينادي كلّ واحد منهم بصوت حزين باكياً : يا أهلاه ! يا ولداه !
وياقرابتاه ! اعطفوا علينا بشيء يرحمكم الله ، واذكرونا ولا تنسونا
بالدعاء وارحموا علينا وعلى غربتنا ، فانّا قد بقينا في سجن ضيق ، وغمّ
طويل وشدّة ، فارحمونا ، ولا تبخلوا بالدعاء والصدقة لنا لعل الله يرحمنا
قبل أن تكونوا مثلنا. فواحسرتاه قد كنّا قادرين مثل ما أنتم قادرون فيا
عباد الله : اسمعوا كلامنا ولا تنسونا فانّكم ستعلمون غداً فانّ الفضول
التي في ايديكم كانت في أيدينا فكنّا لاننفق في طاعة الله ، ومنعنا عن
الحقّ ، فصار وبالاً علينا ومنفعةً لغيرنا . اعطفوا علينا بدرهم أو رغيف
أو بكسرة. ثم ينادون ما أسرع ما تبكون على انفسكم ولا ينفعكم كما نحن
نبكي ولا ينفعنا فاجتهدوا قبل أن تكونوا مثلنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is the barzakh similar to the purgatory? Catholics believe that the
purgatory is a place where the souls of the dead are cleansed before
receiving God's grace, and such cleansing includes atonement through
pain. This seems to be close to the Islamic concept because the Almighty
punishes many of His servants in the grave in order to affect justice so
He may not punish them again in hell. This does not apply to everyone,
however, because some sinners are punished in this life, in the grave
and in hell as well. This "purging" in which the Catholics believe may
be close to the "grave's constriction" detailed above.

It is also stated in some traditions that this constriction, or the
torment in the grave, is one of the manifestations of the Almighty Who
does not wish to torment His servants twice; so, the grave is the last
stage where they have to "pay" for some of their sins. But it is better,
of course, to avoid such torment by doing simple things in this life
that will spare you having to go through it, in other words, the
munjiyat, acts bringing salvation, the easiest of which is recitation of
supplications on a regular basis and helping others morally and
financially, that is, those who deserve to be helped as explained in the
Qur'an and Sunnah.

The best way to offer charity, of course, is to give with the right hand
what the left does not know, that is, let it be a secret you keep to
yourself; do not make a show of it and thus lose its rewards. In the
reference Jami\` al-Akhbar, we read the following on p. 197:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذكر صحابي عن الرسول الأعظم (ص) أنه قال: "إبعثوا بهداياكم إلى موتاكم"
فسئل عن هدايا الموتى، فقال: "الصدقه و الدعاء".
  </p>
</blockquote>

A companion of the Greatest Prophet (P) cited the Prophet (P) as saying,
"Send your gifts to your dead." He was asked about what gifts could be
sent to the dead, so he said, "Charity and supplication." If you read
the classic reference written by al-Harrani titled Thawab al-A\`mal, you
will see how rewards for good deeds multiply by many times, starting
from the tenfold promised in the Almighty for a good deed and go up the
ladder till they reach an astronomical figure of one hundred thousand
times.

Who will be rewarded so many times and for what? One who offers charity
on behalf of both his deceased parents will receive them. If his parents
still living, he will receive in the hereafter ten thousand times as
much as he gives away as charity in the life of this world on their
behalf. But if you have no money to pay charity, supplications will do.
A combination of both is the best, though, if you really want to shun
many horrors awaiting us in the hereafter and to live a very happy and
blissful life here and hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 و فيه أيضا عن النبي الكريم (ص) أنه قال: إذا تصدق أحدكم لميت، فإن ملكا
يحملها في طبق من نور، تمتد أشعته حتى تبلغ السماوات، فيقف على حافة
القبر، و ينادي بأعلى صوته: السلام عليكم يا أهل القبور، هذه هدية أهلكم
إليكم! فيتسلمها الميت، و يدخلها قبره، و يتسع بها مضجعه. .... ثم قال
رسول الله (ص): إعلموا أنه من ترحم على ميت بصدقه، فله أجر عند الله مثل
جبل أحد، و هو يوم القيامه تحت ظل عرش الله، إذ لا ظل سواه يومذاك و ينجو
بالصدقه الأموات و الأحياء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the same reference, that is, Jami\` al-Akhbar, we read the following
on the same page: "The Revered Prophet (P) has been quoted as saying,
'If one of you offers charity on behalf of a deceased person, an angel
carries it on a platter of noor (celestial light) the rays of which
extend and reach the heavens. He stands at the edge of the grave and
calls out as loudly as he can, saying: Peace be with you, O people of
the graves! This is a gift sent to you by your family! The deceased
person receives it and takes it with him inside his grave: It expands
his resting place…"

Then the Messenger of Allah‎ (P) added saying, "Be informed that when
someone seeks mercy for a deceased person through offering charity on
his behalf, he will get rewards as large as the Uhud Mountain, and he
will be on the Judgment Day under the shade of Allah‎'s \`Arsh when, on
that Day, there will be no shade other than it, and charity will be the
salvation of the dead and of the living."

Here we must point out that many writers write about the thirst and
hunger of the Judgment Day but do not say much about the darkness which
will engulf the bad ones. There are many references to the noor,
celestial light, that will shine through and for the good ones on that
Day, whereas the bad ones will be terrified because they will have no
noor that will enable them to see what is around them, and they will
most likely suffer from the stench of the pus coming out of the bodies
of many in their company whose bodies will be smitten by the angels of
torture. Contrary to their condition is enjoyed by those whom the
Almighty will bless on that Day:

These will have noor, shade on their heads rather than heat and be
brought drinks and fruits from Paradise as they watch others being
tried, that is, court marshaled! On p. 59, Vol. 74 and on pp. 573-4 of
Zad al-Ma\`ad, we read the following statement by Imam‎ as-Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الامام الصادق (ع) يرد الصوم و الصلاة و الصدقة و الحج و الأدعية و
الخيرات على الميت في قبره، و يكتب ثواب جميع الأعمال للميت و لفاعل
الخير معا
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Fast, prayers, charity, pilgrimage, supplications and good deeds reach
the deceased person inside his grave, and the rewards of all deeds done
on behalf of the deceased person will be recorded as they are for the
doer of these deeds."


