7) Stage Seven of the Life Hereafter
====================================

Qiyama: Judgment Day
--------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القيامه يوم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Belief in the Day of Judgment is one of the basic principles of the
Islamic creed and of almost all other creeds, including primitive
non-divine ones. For example, if you ask an Eskimo in the North Pole
what will happen when one of his folks dies, he will tell you that he
will be placed in his husky dog-pulled chariot with plenty of food and
clothes. The dogs will be told to pull it wherever they want, and he
will be taken to a place reserved for the dead with which the huskies
are familiar.

There, he will return to life and, if he is good, the Eskimo will go on,
the place to which the dogs will take him will be very nice and warm:
The food and clothes will keep recreating themselves indefinitely. And
we know how the ancient Egyptians used to bury their dead with food,
clothes and jewelry due to their belief in the hereafter. Such belief is
innate, natural, instinctive, deeply ingrained in the human nature.

Islam portrays the Judgment Day as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القيامة من منازل الآخره المهوله، بل هولها أشد الأهوال و أعظمها، و
فزعها أكبر فزع، و قد وصفها الله (تبارك و تعالى) في القرآن:
"يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا قُلْ إِنَّمَا
عِلْمُهَا عِندَ رَبِّي لاَ يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ
ثَقُلَتْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ لاَ تَأْتِيكُمْ إِلاَّ بَغْتَةً
يَسْأَلُونَكَ كَأَنَّكَ حَفِيٌّ عَنْهَا قُلْ إِنَّمَا عِلْمُهَا عِندَ
اللَّهِ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They ask you about the Hour (of Resurrection) when its appointed time
will be. Say: 'The knowledge of this is with my Lord (alone): None but
He can reveal when it will occur; its burden will be weighty throughout
the heavens and the earth. It will come but suddenly to you'. They ask
you as if you were solicitous of it; say: 'The knowledge of it is with
Allah‎ (alone), but most men do not know'” (Qur'an, 7:187).***

On p. 312, Vol. 6 of Bihar al-Anwar, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الراوندي عن الصادق من آل محمد (عليهم السلام) إن عيسى بن مريم (عليه
السلام) سأل جبرائيل: متى تقوم القيامة؟ فارتعش جبرائيل حتى سقط على
الأرض مغشيا عليه و أغمي عليه، و لما صحا، قال: يا روح الله، ليس المسؤول
بأعلم من السائل عن أمر القيامة، ثم تلى الآيه التي مر ذكرها
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Ar-Rawandi has quoted Imam‎ as-Sadiq (as) saying that Jesus son of Mary
(peace be with him) asked Gabriel once: "When shall the Judgment Day
be?" Gabriel shook till he fell on the ground conscious, and he lost his
consciousness. When he woke up from it, he said, "O Ruhullah (Spirit of
Allah‎)! The asked person does not know about it more than the
questioner." Then he recited the above verse.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي أنه لما كان النبي (ص) يذكر القيامة، يتغير صوته و يشتد، و يحمر وجهه
الشريف
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated that whenever the Prophet (P) mentioned the
Judgment Day, his voice would change and intensifies, and his holy face
would change color. There are many munjiyat, acts of salvation, that can
help during this terrifying Day about which so many Chapters and verses
of the Holy Qur'an warn. Here are some of them: 1) On p. 293, Vol. 7 of
Bihar al-Anwar, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي أنه من قرأ سورة يوسف (ع) كل يوم أو كل ليلة، يبعث يوم القيامة جميلا
كجمال يوسف (ع)، و لا يستولي عليه فزع يوم القيامة الأكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who recites Surat Yousuf (Chapter 12 of the Holy Qur'an) every day
or every night will be resurrected on the Judgment Day as beautiful as
Yousuf (Joseph) (peace be with him) used to be, and he will not be
overtaken by the greatest fright of the Judgment Day." On p. 295 of the
same reference, Imam‎ al-Baqir (as) is quoted as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة الدخان في فرائضه و نوافله، فإن الله تعالى يبعثه مع الآمنين
المطمئنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who recites Surat al-Dukhan (Smoke, i.e. Chapter 44 of the Holy
Qur'an) in his obligatory as well as voluntary prayers will be
resurrected by Allah‎ in the company of those who will be secure and
contented." And the Imam‎ (as) has also said the following as we read on
p. 298 of the same reference:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة الأحقاف كل ليلة أو كل جمعة، لا يستولي عليه الخوف في
الدنيا، و يجعله الله تعالى في أمان يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever recites Surat al-Ahqaf (Chapter 46 of the Holy Qur'an) every
night or every Friday will not be overtaken by fear in the temporary
life, and Allah‎ Almighty will grant him security on the Judgment Day."
On p. 298, Vol. 7 of the same reference, the Imam‎ (as) is quoted as
having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قرأ سورة "و العصر" في نوافله، يبعث يوم القيامة ناصع الوجه، مشرق
المحيا، قرير العين، تبدو على شفتيه البسمة الى أن يدخل الجنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who recites Surat al-Asr (Chapter 103 of the Holy Qur'an) in his
voluntary prayers will be resurrected on the Judgment Day with a bright
face, shiny forehead, cooled eyes and a smile painted on his lips till
he enters Paradise." 2) On p. 302, Vol. 7 of the same source, al-Kulayni
cites Imam‎ as-Sadiq (as) as having said that the Messenger of Allah‎
(P) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من إحترم الذي بيض شعره في الإسلام، جعله الله في أمان من فزع القيامة
الأكبر، و لا يخاف منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who shows respect to a person who grows grey hair while being
Muslim will be granted by Allah‎ security against the greatest fright of
the Judgment Day and he will not fear that Day." 3) He is also quoted,
as stated in the same reference and on the same page, as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات في طريق مكه في ذهابه إليها أو إيابه عنها، كان آمنا من فزع
القيامة الأكبر، و لا يخاف منه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who dies on his way going to Mecca or returning from it will be
secure against the greatest fright of the Judgment Day, and he will not
fear that Day." And on p. 57 of the same source, as-Saduq‎ quotes him as
having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مات في أحد الحرمين، أي حرم مكة و حرم المدينة، زادهما الله شرفا و
تعظيما، بعثه الله مع الذين لا يخافون، و هم في أمان يوم القيامه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who is buried in the holy precincts of Mecca the Venerable or in
Medina, may the Almighty increase their honor and glory, will be secure
and resurrected by Allah‎ in the company of those who do not fear and
will enjoy security on the Judgment Day." 4) On p. 303, Vol. 7 of Bihar
al-Anwar, it is indicated that as-Saduq‎ has narrated saying that the
Messenger of Allah‎ (P) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من تهيأت له فاحشه أو شهوه، فتخلى عنها و تجنب التورط فيها خوفا من الله
تعالى جل و علا، حرم الله عليه نار جهنم، و جعله في أمان من هول القيامة
و خوفها
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one had the opportunity to commit a sin or satisfy a lustful desire
but he let it pass by and avoided being involved in it out of his fear
of Allah‎, the most Sublime, the most Great, Allah‎ will prevent the
fire of Hell from coming near him and will grant him security against
the horror of the Judgment Day and of its fright." 5) The same source
cites the Prophet (P) as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من عادى نفسه و لم يعاد الناس، جعله الله في أمان من فزع يوم القيامه
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one opposes his desires while not being hostile to people, Allah‎
will grant him security against the greatest fear of the Judgment Day."
6) The great mentor, Sheikh Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi, as we read in Vol.
62 of the same reference, has quoted Imam‎ Muhammad al-Baqir (as) as
having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من كظم غيظه و هو قادر على تنفيذه و تطبيقه، ملأ الله تعالى قلبه
بالإيمان و الأمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If one suppresses his anger while being able to carry its dictates out
and implement them, Allah‎ will fill his heart with conviction and
security." 7) Allah‎ Almighty has said the following in the Holy Qur'an:

***"Whoever does a good deed will be rewarded with better than it, and
these will be secure against the fright of that Day" (Qur'an, 27:89).***

A footnote on p. 117, Vol. 7 of Bihar al-Anwar cites the Commander of
the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) commenting about the “good deed,”
the “hasana”, in this verse by saying:

"The doing of good in this verse is knowing about, accepting the
mastership of and loving us, we Ahl al-Bayt (as) (immediate family of
the Prophet (P)." 8) In the same reference, we are told that as-Saduq‎
has quoted Imam‎ as-Sadiq (as) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أعان أخاه المغموم الضمآن بما في وسعه، و أراحه من همه و غمه، أو
أعانه في قضاء حاجته، فله من الله تعالى إثنتان و سبعون رحمة، يعطيه الله
في الدنيا رحمة واحدة، و بها يصلح الله أمر معاشه، و يدخر له إحدى و
سبعين رحمة الباقيه لأهواله و فزعه يوم القيامة
  </p>
</blockquote>

"One who helps his distressed and thirsty brother as much as he can, or
if he relieves him of his worry and concern, or if he helps him take
care of something, he will receive from Allah‎ Almighty seventy-two
blessings: Allah‎ will grant him in the life of this world one blessing
whereby He repairs his livelihood while saving his remaining seventy-one
blessings for the horrors and fright of the Judgment Day." More
munjiyat, acts of adoration that result in one's salvation, are stated
on the pages of al-Qummi's Manazil al-Akhria to which we refer the
reader.


