Translator’s Introduction
=========================

Orientalists have, from the very beginning, propagated that Islām is a
violent religion that was spread by the sword. This myth is even
promulgated today albeit in a different form and context. At present,
the ‘violence’ of Islām is portrayed by small fanatic groups who kill
innocent civilians. Ironically, these extremist groups like the Tālibān,
kill more Muslims than people following any other creed.

Yet since 9/11, the world has been bombarded with repeated messages
against this ‘violent religion’. As if those who are making these
accusations are themselves any less violent. The USA is the only country
in the world to use the A-bomb and kill a large civilian population
without any remorse or apology. They are the ones who violently invade
and ravage lands belonging to others and yet have the audacity to call
Islām what they have called it. This is the highest form of hypocrisy.

Human beings are dynamic creatures with the ability to be peaceful and
loving in one instance while being hostile and aggressive the next. The
same person may be smiling one minute and fuming with rage just moments
later. Islām recognizes these intrinsic features in human beings and
trains one to mould them and harness them properly, when to be angry and
when to be happy, when to be kind and when to be fierce.

Islām does not condone the idea of humiliation and subjugation by other
human beings. For this reason we find that, after years of persecution
at the hands of the Quraysh, the divine ordinance for battle was
received by the Holy Prophet (S). Initially, some of the weaker Muslims
showed hesitation at the idea of picking up weapons and fighting for
their rights. Some lacked the courage while others were content being in
the camp of the oppressed. However, the Prophet (S) recited to them the
Holy verses wherein the believers were called to arms to protect their
rights and property, and the Muslims complied.

The beauty of the battles that followed was the humanity that was
displayed by the Prophet (S) and his followers. Usually, when one goes
to war, they tend to lose their ability of distinguishing right from
wrong and many atrocities are committed by soldiers because of this. The
adrenaline rush caused by life threatening situations clouds their
judgment and they end up killing innocents and doing all sort of beastly
things. The latest example of this is what the USA did (and continues to
do) in ‘Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo.

The Prophet (S) warned his soldiers not to fight in such a manner that
they end up neglecting the basic principles that make a human being
human. They were not to kill innocent women, children, old people and
the handicapped. They were not permitted to cut down trees or fill up
wells. They were to offer the enemy an opportunity to surrender and not
pursue those who fled from battle. These were just some of the numerous
injunctions that the Holy Prophet (S) laid down for the Muslims at a
time when the norm among the Arabs was to treat the enemy ruthlessly and
without any mercy whatsoever.

The Holy Prophet (S), or the ‘supreme commander’ as the author of this
work refers to him time and again, had no interest in building a large
empire. Rather, he readily made those who were willing to live
peacefully, his allies. The sword was only raised against open enemies
who were out to destroy Islām and the Muslims.

Further, many of the defeated prisoners of war became Muslims when they
saw how the Prophet (S) treated them. Contrary to their expectation of
harsh and brutal treatment, they were treated with kindness and mercy.
Just this was enough to make many of them Muslims. This was how Islām
really spread, not at the tip of the blade as wrongly hypothesized by
Western Orientalists.

Translating this work posed a number of challenges. First, the enormous
amount of transliteration. In Arabic, different dialects pronounce words
differently. We have tried as much as possible to conform with the
standard Arabic transliteration but this has not been a priority and at
times one Arabic name may have been transliterated in two or three
similar ways. Care has been taken, however, that this should in no way
cause any confusion about who or what is being referred to and it should
only be deemed a handicap of the English language, nothing more.

Second, one will notice that this work, which was originally a
dissertation for the author’s PhD, has a string of footnotes as long as
the eye can see! These footnotes only serve to provide a basis for his
statements and refer the reader to where he or she can turn if more
information or detail is required.

Third, I have taken the liberty of adding my own notes wherever I
thought a clarification was required. As the translator of this work,
probably the hardest thing for me was to contend with some conclusions
that are made by the author. Unfortunately, the esteemed author has not
endeavored to carry out any scrutiny of the sources he has referred to
and has taken these reports at face value. As a student of history, the
importance of carefully analyzing reports and looking for possible
loopholes and inconsistencies is well known to me.

However, since my task was to translate this otherwise important work, I
only added very brief notes in areas where I disagreed with the author.
Readers who are interested can of course delve deeper and conduct their
own research in those areas.

Finally, I would like to extend my thanks and gratitude to Dr. Abu Fizza
Haydari for meticulously going through my final draft, editing and
proofreading it. And of course thanks is due to the publishers Heritage
International Inc. for undertaking the task of getting this work
translated and published. All praise, in the end, belongs only to the
Almighty.


