The Department of Intelligence And Security
===========================================

The Intelligence Department
---------------------------

The department of Intelligence is a department which is responsible for
acquiring and collecting all the information in matters pertaining to
the enemy. This information especially covers: intention [of war],
amassing [of forces], land where the enemy will fight, a detailed study
of the acquired information and ensuring its accuracy – and different
methods and tools of intelligence were employed to this end[^1].

The Holy Prophet (S) would, more than anything else before the battle,
try to acquire intelligence [about the enemy] because gaining
intelligence and complete information about the enemy was a requirement
for the issuance of appropriate orders and commands. In order to get
intelligence about the Quraysh, he (S) send numerous Sariya missions[^2]
to different places[^3]. These missions were charged with acquiring
information about the number of enemy tribes[^4], and also [in
preparation for the battles with non-Arabs] the Roman forces[^5]. The
forces who were sent kept an eye on the points of entry into and exit
from Makkah[^6].

The supreme commander made various peace pacts with some of the
tribes[^7] and sought their assistance against the enemy and at the same
time commissioned them to keep watch over the borders of the neighboring
state (i.e. Rome)[^8], just as he had done in the Battle of Dumat
al-Jundal when he sent ‘Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Auf to that area to gain the
friendship of the Bani Kalb – a tribe that lived in on the border area –
and also in the case of the peace treaty with Akeedar and others.

The Prophet (S) would send troops to the sensitive areas[^9] and would
himself meet with the traders and travelers[^10] and would get
information from them and from those who lived there[^11].

Interrogating the prisoners[^12], settling intelligence gathering forces
in enemy territory[^13], studying their movements and transferring them
at the appropriate time, were all other methods for acquiring
intelligence. The Prophet (S) would never be heedless of any means of
obtaining information about the enemy, and at times he would personally
undertake to find out the latest information about them[^14]. The goal
of this was to achieve victory and gain accurate information.

One of the examples of success in the Holy Prophet’s information
gathering was that he (S) would keep all the plans secret[^15] like in
the case with the Sariya of ‘Abdullah bin Jahash[^16] and the Conquest
of Makkah and more than this, even the intelligence officers and those
charged with information gathering were unaware about some of these
plans[^17]. Just as in the Sariya of Abi Qatādah ibn Rabi’ al-Ansāri to
the ‘Batn Adham’ he tried as much as possible to carry out this mission
in total secret[^18], so he made only a few of his topmost commanders
privy to the detailed planning of the mission[^19]. In the Battle of
Uhud, he kept the acquired information hidden from his own uncle ‘Abbās
and he did the same thing during the Conquest of Makkah.

The supreme commander prepared the intelligence outfit and personnel
very well[^20] and chose the most suitable people for such missions[^21]
as in the Battle of Badr where he sent Talha bin ‘Abdillah and Sa’eed
ibn Zayd to gather information from the trading caravan of the Quraysh;
Ibn ‘Amr al-Jahni and ‘Uday bin Abi al-Za’bā’ to gather information from
the heart of the enemy’s camp; ‘Ali bin Abi Tālib (‘a) and Sa’d bin Abi
Waqqās to find out about the number of enemy soldiers and Habbāb ibn
Mundhir to get information about their movements and the number of
reinforcements.

The Prophet (S) was fully aware of all issues pertaining to the
organization and strategies of the enemy, their goal, weapons,
commanders and plans[^22]. He obtained this detailed information by
sending a Sariya mission under the command of ‘Abdullah bin Anees to
assassinate Sufyān bin Khālid al-Hadhali[^23] and other leaders of the
Quraysh in the Battle of Badr and also displayed them (i.e. what he had
acquired from the enemy) in front of Abu Sufyān during the Conquest of
Makkah.

When intelligence information was sent to the Holy Prophet (S), he would
study and scrutinize it very carefully and would coordinate it with the
reality of the current situations in the battle[^24]. He showed this in
the Battles of Badr and Uhud and also in the Battle of Ahzāb when the
Bani Quraydha broke their allegiance and in the Conquest of Makkah when
he gave permission to acquire information about the capabilities of the
enemy, especially [about] their weapons etc.

He made a lot of effort to ensure that the intelligence division was
highly active and dynamic and would always cooperate with the commander
and those in charge[^25]. For example in the Battle of Badr and the
Conquest of Makkah, he used the intelligence to acquire every minor
detail including the number of those animals slaughtered [for food][^26]
and when he sent secret missions, like the Sariya of Hamzah ibn ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, he did the exact same thing.

The Noble Prophet (S) would always give importance to acquiring
information at all times, whether before, during or after battle, like
in the Conquest of Makkah, and in all situations, however difficult they
may be[^27], as in the Battle of Ahzāb where he ordered Hudhayfah bin
al-Yamān to go and gather intelligence [about the enemy] in cold weather
and harsh conditions.

The Prophet (S) insisted that intelligence gathering be done from near
and without keeping a distance from the enemy[^28], like in the Battle
of Uhud when he sent Anas and Munis[^29] to Dhu Hulayfah, the place
where the Quraysh had encamped and ordered them to join the enemy’s camp
and remain with them. Then, when they arrived at Aqd, near Uhud, he sent
Habbāb bin Mundhir and in this way he would use intelligence agents to
transfer intelligence and information about the enemy and order them to
penetrate within the enemy ranks and at the same time he would station
guards and his intelligence agents at the northern borders of the enemy.

The intelligence activities that were carried out by the Holy Prophet
(S) were not only for obtaining information about the enemy, but also to
negate any intelligence they may have acquired about him, and this was
one of the most imperative steps he took which was most necessary and of
the utmost importance[^30]. He (S) would do this in the following ways:

Through ‘covert operations’[^31] while marching through routes that are
filled with vegetation and trees in Madina; namely al-Manqā,
al-Khubayth, Dhi Qasr, al-Kutayb and Dhi Amr, that took place in the
Battle of Dhi Amr (also known as Ghatfān). In the two battles of Dhi
al-‘Asheerah and Dumat al-Jundal the cover of darkness in the night was
also benefitted from[^32]. The Prophet (S) would advise the secret
missions to take advantage of the darkness of night time, so they would
mostly march at night, as is seen in the Sariya of Muhammad bin Maslamah
against the Bani Bakr and that of Zayd ibn Hāritha against the tribe of
Judhām and the mission of ‘Abd al-Rahmān bin ‘Auf against Dumat
al-Jundal.

Speed and swiftness in movement, as was seen in the Battle of Dumat
al-Jundal[^33].

Using shortcuts in order to arrive at the enemy’s camp faster as in the
Battle of Bani Lihyān and the commanders who were sent in the Sariya of
‘Akāshah bin Muhsin to fight against the Bani Asad, and (the mission of)
Qutbah ibn ‘Aāmir against the Khat’am.

Ordering that bells should be removed from around the necks of
camels[^34] so that the forces could move unnoticed as in the example of
the Battle of Muta and the Conquest of Makkah[^35].

Concealing the state of readiness and the initial mobilization of
forces[^36], as was the case in the battles of Bani Saleem, Dhi Amr,
Dhāt al-Ruqā’ and Bani Lihyān, and the Sariya of Abi Qatāda bin Rab’i
al-Ansāri towards the Batn Adham.

Using secret codes and identification[^37] as was employed in the Battle
of Badr and the Sariya of Usāma bin Zayd from the commander of the
group.

Instructions to ensure that no noise was to be made that could alert the
enemy of the approaching army[^38], like in the Battle of Khaybar where
one of the soldiers was prevented from going ahead of the army and
advancing alone.

Preventing the shining of weapons during the march and not passing in
front of the inhabitants of the area[^39], just as he did in the Battle
of Badr, Bani Saleem and the Sariya missions of ‘Abdullah bin Jahash and
‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a) against the Bani Sa’d.

Ordering the army to march through uninhabited areas[^40] like the
desert routes which were taken by the supreme commander in the battles
of Bani Saleem and Bahrān and [the Sariya of] ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās in the fight
against the Bani Qudhā’ah.

Issuing the command that secrets should be safeguarded and information
about the battle-plan should be kept hidden[^41], like in the Conquest
of Makkah and the Sariya missions of ‘Abdullah ibn Jahash, Abi Qatāda
and others.

Diverting the enemy from the targets of attacks. This was carried out in
various ways which would put the enemy in doubt and misguidance until
they would assume that the Holy Prophet (S) is not marching against
them[^42]. This is precisely what happened in the battles of Bani Lihyān
and Dumat al-Jundal and also took the inhabitants on Makkah and their
leaders by surprise in the Conquest of Makkah as they were unsure if
Muhammad (S) was marching towards Najd, Hawāzin or another region,
therefore they were completely baffled and the matter was unclear to
them.

Arresting the spies and intelligence agents of the enemy and preventing
them from sending information[^43] as can be pointed out in the battles
of Badr, Dumat al-Jundal and Bani al-Mustalaq. During the Conquest of
Makkah, one of the spies of the Hawāzin was arrested before entry into
Makkah and in the Battle of Khaybar, one of the bold spies of the enemy
who had acquired a lot of intelligence was captured[^44].

The goals and objectives in terms of what the Holy Prophet (S) sought to
learn about and concentrated on were:

### First: Intention and Objective

He (S) would try to find out the goals and objectives of the enemy
either through his intelligence agents who were always present among the
enemies, like ‘Abbās ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib[^45], or by means of
trickery[^46] and deception[^47]. In the battles of Badr and Bani
Lihyān, he kept the battle-plan, the time and the place secret and in
the Battle of Khaybar, he deceived the tribe of Ghatfān in such a way
that they returned back from whence they had come. In the battles of
Uhud, Dhāt al-Ruqā’ and Khandaq, he learnt of the enemy’s goals by
eavesdropping on the conversations of the [enemy] commanders and
soldiers[^48]. Sometimes information was gotten from the way the enemy
conducted its exercises and the activities that is carried out
openly[^49], or through allied tribes such as the Bani Dhumrah and Bani
Mudlij. In the Battle of Dhāt al-Ruqā’ he got information from members
of the Najd tribe and in the Battle of Tabuk he got information from the
Mudhar tribe.

### Second: Assembly (of enemy troops)

In this matter, the Prophet (S) would acquire his information from
allied tribes[^50] or by means of his intelligence division[^51]. Just
like in the Battle of Uhud, he gave the responsibility to Habbāb ibn
Mundhir to obtain information about the assembly and mobilization of the
forces of the Quraysh. In the Battle of Khandaq, he used Zubayr ibn
‘Awām to get detailed information about the assembly of the
confederates, their headquarters, the places where they were stationed
and their level of intelligence[^52]. In the same way he got information
from the intelligence gathering groups of Habbāb ibn Mundhir in the
Battle of Uhud, Buraydah ibn Haseeb in the Battle of Bani al-Mustalaq
and Busr ibn Sufyān in the Battle of Hudaybiyya.

### Third: Terrain and the points of advancement

The Holy Prophet (S) would use the following ways to gain complete and
detailed information:

Through the vanguard of the army[^53] like the action taken by the
front-line of the contingent of ‘Abbād ibn Basheer in the Battle of
Khaybar and of Khālid bin Walid in the Battle of Hunayn and others.

By using guides[^54] like the employment of Jabbār the guide in the
Battle of Dhi Amr, Abi Khuthaymah al-Hārithi in the Battle of Uhud,
Madhkur from the tribe of Bani Udhrah in the Battle of Dumat al-Jundal
and Haseel bin Mudhirah in the Battle of Hudaybiyya.  
 The supreme commander would instruct the commanders to make use of
guides, especially on routes and in areas that were not well known to
them and also in routes that were outside the regular paths; or to use
the prisoners[^55] who had valuable information as was done in the
battles of Dumat al-Jundal, Bani al-Mustalaq, Khaybar etc. and in the
various Sariya missions.

From the inhabitants of the area[^56]. They would send people to them
and by asking them questions, they would establish the movement patterns
of the enemy and other issues, as was carried out in the battles of Badr
and Khaybar. In the Battle of Tabuk too, they benefitted from the
intelligence that the tribes who lived near the area where the enemy was
marching had to share.

By sending patrols to far off areas to gather information[^57].

### Fourth: Identifying the area of operations

The supreme commander would complete his ‘identification’ using various
intelligence apparatuses[^58] and would also personally get involved in
this[^59] like in the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khaybar and Khandaq. The
most important ways that the Holy Prophet (S) used to obtain this
information was using watchmen and eavesdroppers.

1. Watchmen: The lookout would be appointed in the intelligence
gathering missions[^60]. During this, they would keep watch over the
enemy’s movements inside and outside the points of interest[^61] as well
as possible areas in two tactical and strategic levels. Some of the
sentries[^62] or watchmen would keep an eye on the routes taken by the
enemy’s caravans[^63], just as was the case when one of the troops was
posted at Nakhbār in order to keep an eye over the activities and
movements of the enemy, or in the Sariya of Zayd bin Hāritha where they
performed the duty of a lookout when he was encamped at ‘Ayyis[^64].
These forces would stand in a place from where they could carry out
their duties as watchmen and spies in an effective manner[^65].

In every situation, one sentry or spy was posted in a secret location,
hidden from the eyes of the enemy[^66] and would take advantage of his
senses of sight and hearing[^67]. No amount of hardship, tribulation or
affliction would prevent him from carrying out his duties[^68]. Anees
ibn Abi Murthad al-Ghanawi who was the sentry appointed in the Battle of
Hunayn, remained steadfast despite all the hardships that he had to
face. He also remained firm in the Sariya of Ghālib ibn ‘Abdullah
al-Laythi despite having been shot and injured by an arrow.

2. Eavesdroppers: This was a method that the Holy Prophet (S) used
during the night or in situations where visibility was low or when the
weather was bad. In such cases, the intelligence agents and
eavesdroppers would move in complete secret until they arrived at the
enemy’s camp. They would eavesdrop on their conversations and then
return and inform the Muslim army of what they had heard[^69]. This is
exactly what one of the members of a Sariya mission did for the Bani
al-Maluh. Hudhayfa ibn al-Yamān also used eavesdropping against Abu
Sufyān, the commander of the army of confederates.

What can be seen is that the responsibility of information gathering and
eavesdropping needed to be given to men who had certain attributes and
qualities, from bodily strength and courage to freedom from certain
sicknesses such as coughing, being hard of hearing etc. that could
prevent in their successfully carrying out the missions[^70].

The types of information that the Prophet (S) sought to obtain were:

1. General information, for which he would employ normal troops to
gather the information such as the vanguard[^71], patrols[^72],
guides[^73], locals[^74] etc.

2. Urgent information, for which the special military patrols would be
brought in[^75]. Just as in the battles of Badr, Dumat al-Jundal, Bani
al-Mustalaq and the Conquest of Makkah, and the Sariya of ‘Akashah ibn
Muhsin against the Bani Asad, that of Zayd bin Hāritha and other similar
missions.

Sometimes this action would be carried out by those who were behind
enemy lines as in the Battle of Uhud. The commander would turn to this
when he did not have enough information about the enemy[^76], so he
would capture some prisoners and would obtain the information from
them[^77].

Reconnaissance would be carried out according to the different stages,
meaning the Prophet (S) would conduct reconnaissance at the tactical
level to make preparations for battle and during battle[^78] when the
field of operation for the intelligence agents was limited to the front
lines of the enemy, however reconnaissance at the strategic level was
carried out by his forces deep within the enemy territory and among the
enemies.

Additionally, in order to protect the troops during movement and
encampment, he would post his intelligence patrols for reconnaissance in
front and on the sides of the army[^79], as he had done when marching
from Madina to Badr and from Madina towards Uhud and from Makkah towards
the valley of Hunayn.

In the same way, he (S) would carry out reconnaissance of the
territories and areas where the troops could camp with relative ease and
their surrounding areas[^80], like in the battles of Badr, Uhud and
Khaybar and would select those people to keep watch whose duties among
other things, was to prevent the enemy from finding out their numbers,
to protect their base from the approaching enemy, protecting the
commander and the troops from being taken by surprise and giving warning
about the nearing enemy while at the same time not giving any
opportunity to enemy spies and saboteurs[^81].

This guarding and protection was either stationary[^82], which would
protect in sensitive and dangerous areas, or mobile[^83], which would
offer protection in some areas that were considered to be of special
importance militarily and during battle; and normally the former type
would require fewer numbers of troops.

Operations Personnel
--------------------

Operations personnel were all the units responsible for planning,
command, training, upgrading weapons, equipment and war strategies and
all matters related to these. We shall now proceed to give details about
each one of these:

### First: Department of Operations

The Department of Operations was a division that was responsible for
planning, military command and securing backup from the military and
administrative standpoint[^84].

a) **Orders of operations:** Before or during battle, the Holy Prophet
(who was also the supreme commander) issued orders to the army either
verbally or in writing[^85], as he had done with ‘Abdullah ibn Jahash
and Abi Salamah ibn ‘Abd al-Asad al-Makhzumi when sending them to the
tribes of Bani Asad, or to the commander of the groups during the Battle
of Hunayn and during their entry into Makkah.

These orders included the following:

1. Objective[^86]: In all the orders of all the battles and military
missions, the objective was specified.  
 2. The necessary measures to be taken during war[^87]: as in the Battle
of Badr, digging the trench in the Battle of Ahzāb, or before the start
of the war like in the Battle of Tabuk.  
 3. Choosing the specific location[^88]: For each operation, the area
where the forces would remain and from which they would not cross would
be specified, as in the Sariya of ‘Abdullah ibn Jahash towards Nakhlah
and like the Battle of Dhi Amr towards the place where this tribe had
settled and also in the ‘conquest’, towards Makkah.  
 4. Ways of reaching the goal[^89]: It was necessary for the army to
cross over certain points, lands and known areas, like in the battles of
Badr, Saleem, Hudaybiyya and Khaybar.  
 5. Direction[^90]: The Muslim army would march towards the places where
the enemy had been mobilized or towards the areas where the supreme
commander had specified for them, like in the Sariya of Hamza ibn ‘Abd
al-Muttalib towards the land of the Juhaynah, Abi Qatāda ibn Rab’i
al-Ansāri towards Batn Adham and Kurz ibn Jābir Fahri towards the area
where he could join the group of ‘Ikl and ‘Urayna, and also in the
Battle of Bani Quraydha to the place where the Jews were living.  
 6. Locating the most appropriate place to set camp[^91]: The most
appropriate place for the army to set camp and create a base, where the
required amenities were close by and from where administration and
medical care could be given, was ascertained. Like in the battles of
Badr, Uhud and Khaybar.  
 7. Guarding and protection[^92]: The number of guards, their commander,
their orders, their position and all related issues were specified.  
 8. Secret code and identification[^93]: In order to identify the forces
of the (Muslim) army, secret codes were used, which were changed from
battle to battle and from mission to mission, as was done in the battles
of Badr and Khandaq and the Sariya missions of Abu Bakr against the Bani
Kilāb and of Usāma bin Zayd towards the Abnā.  
 9. Changing the flag-bearer[^94]: The flag-bearer would be appointed by
the supreme commander and would be changed from battle to battle. The
responsibility of carrying the flag was given to one of the soldiers who
was known for his trustworthiness and reliability.  
 10. Commanding the rear[^95]: For the rear of the army, a specific
commander was appointed who was in charge of all the administrative
matters [of that portion of the army]. Some of these commanders would
always be given this responsibility [in every battle].  
 11. Command of Sariya missions[^96]: For separate and independent
intelligence gathering or military missions, a leader was chosen over a
group of forces.  
 12. Special conditions[^97]: These special conditions called for
special measures, like giving an immediate response to the enemy in the
Battle of Dhāt al-Suwayq and other battles, carrying out attacks and
assaults like in the battles of Bahrān and Bani Lihyān, the conducting
of suicide missions by ‘Umayr ibn ‘Uday bin Kharshah in order to
assassinate ‘Asmā’, by Sālim ibn ‘Umayr in order to kill Abi ‘Akf, by
Muhammad ibn Maslamah in order to kill Abi Ashraf and by ‘Abdullah ibn
‘Ateek to assassinate Salām ibn Abi al-Haqeeq.  
 13. Securing different requirements in the battlefield[^98]: like
securing intelligence information and administrative requirements in the
battles of Badr, Khandaq and Tabuk.  
 14. Increasing the zeal[^99]: When the orders would be issued, effort
would be made to ensure that the spirit and zeal of the soldiers should
be lifted while at the same time disheartening the enemy. Like the
orders that were issued in the battles of Badr and Uhud.  
 15. Insisting on the steadfastness of the troops[^100]: This can be
clearly seen from the words of the supreme commander in all the
battles.  
 16. Seek recourse in patience[^101]: Patience is the prerequisite of
victory and many a group consisting of few individuals has been led to
victory over a large army of soldiers through patience.  
 17. Sacrificing one’s wealth and life[^102]: These are the two prime
ingredients of volitional warfare and for this reason, the Holy Prophet
(S) put a lot of importance on these two factors in all his orders to
the troops.

This was the summary of the orders given and we will now proceed to
explain each one in detail:

#### 1. Objective

Every war has ‘objectives’. The objectives of the Holy Prophet (S) in
the battles were:

Acquiring information[^103].

Invading the enemy caravans[^104].

Weakening the economic strength and cutting the lines of
reinforcements[^105] from the west and east for the Quraysh and the Jews
of Khaybar.

Securing freedom for the propagation and spread of Islām[^106] as was
the case in the Sariya of Hamza ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and Khālid ibn
Walid against the Bani Hārith and also that of ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a)
against the Bani Mudhjah.

Displaying the strength and might of the Muslim army[^107] as in the
battles of Hamrā al-Asad, Hudaybiyya and Muta and that which was done
against the Romans.

Instilling fear and terror in the hearts of those who allied themselves
with the enemies of Islām or were preparing to do so[^108].

Enacting peace treaties with neighboring tribes[^109]: like the Bani
Dhumrah, Bani Juhaynah and Bani Mudlij as well as the treaty will Bani
Kalb; meaning those who had come to fight in Dumat al-Jundal, Tabir and
the outskirts of Shām. This was done in order to secure the success of
the military operations.

Concentrating on the points and areas of tactical and strategic
importance[^110] like the areas around the coast and towards the east
after the Battle of Badr against the Bani Saleem who were a threat to
the revolution and also towards the north in order to survey the area of
Dumat al-Jundal and invading upon the enemy who were waiting for
opportunity or had already begun working against the Muslim army[^111],
like the Jews and the Romans.

Assassinating those who had evil intentions against the supreme
commander, the army troops, the caretakers of the towns or the Islāmic
revolution in general[^112].

Punishing the Jews of Bani Qaynuqā’[^113] because they broke their
allegiance and their covenant for their own benefit, and similarly the
Bani Nadhir[^114], Bani Quraydha[^115] and the inhabitants of
Khaybar[^116]. The Prophet (S) destroyed the pact of these four
groups[^117] with each other as well as their pact with the enemy Arab
tribes[^118].

Giving a strong reaction against Abu Sufyān and his forces: this was
when they had the intention to invade Madina and ransack it in the
Battle of Dhāt al-Suwayq[^119].

Dealing with the two tribes of Bani Saleem and Bani Ghatfān because they
had declared their open enmity against Islām[^120].

Preventing other tribes from attacking Madina, such as the tribes of
Bani Tha’labah and Muhārib and others[^121].

Teaching and training the children of the Ummah and purifying their
hearts from filth, doubts and falsehoods.[^122]

Creating fear against Rome and Persia[^123]: The Prophet (S) made it his
general policy in dealing with these two states and preparing for war
with them before they launched an attack on the Muslim lands[^124] or
gain control over the northern borders.

Taking the battle to the enemy territory[^125]: The Prophet (S) would
only fight against the enemy outside Madina and the moment he received
information that the enemy intended to attack Madina, he would launch a
pre-emptive strike on them before they could start marching from their
own lands. This happened in many of the battles like Bani Saleem, Dhi
Amr and Bahrān against the Arab tribes and in Muta and Tabuk against the
Romans.

Taking revenge and punishing those who killed innocents[^126]: As was
the case in the Sariya of Kurz ibn Jābir Fahri in order to teach the
‘Ikl and ‘Urayna a lesson. Or in order to punish those who were acting
against the rules and regulations of the leader and ruler[^127], like
the opposition of the Jews of Bani Quraydha to the agreements and
conditions of the homeland pact.

Realizing peace[^128]: This was another objective. An example of this
was the Battle of Hudaybiyya against the Quraysh and the Sariya of ‘Abd
al-Rahmān ibn ‘Auf against the Bani Kalb.

Coming to the aid of the oppressed[^129]: as was the case in the Battle
of Dumat al-Jundal which took place on the orders and instructions of
the supreme commander.

Belief in oneness and unity[^130]: This was done by destroying the idols
that were adorned and worshipped by the Arabs. An example was the Sariya
of Khālid bin Walid in order to destroy the idol ‘Uzzā’, that of ‘Amr
bin ‘Aās to destroy the idol Siwā’, of Sa’d ibn Zayd al-Ashal to destroy
the idol Manāt, Tufayl ibn ‘Amr to destroy the idol Dhil Kiflayn and
‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a) to destroy the idol al-Filis and all the idols
of the Ka’bah.

Collecting taxes from the tribes that had accepted Islām[^131].

#### 2. Sending military missions and commanding the army in battle

The Holy Prophet (S) arranged a number of military missions[^132] and
battles[^133] or personally took on the responsibility of commanding
them. On the tactical and strategic level he did the planning and
expounded the short and long term goals[^134] and the primary and
secondary objectives[^135], just as the primary objective of the Battle
of Dumat al-Jundal was crushing the tribes of that area who were forcing
the traders and travelers to pay a toll and the secondary objective was
to instill fear in the hearts of the Romans.

The primary objective in the Battle of Khaybar was also to bring down
Khaybar and deal with its inhabitants while the secondary objective was
to prevent the Arab tribes from allying themselves to the Jews and
preparation for war against the Quraysh in Makkah and those enemies who
were deemed more dangerous[^136].

He (S) also planned ‘offensive’ and ‘defensive’ operations[^137] and
would always use assaults and offense in every battle[^138]. He made
this something that was ingrained in the minds and hearts of the
soldiers[^139]. He would specify different stages of battle[^140],
meaning he would not just attack the enemy at one go, rather he would
launch assaults on them at different times. If the enemy did not launch
an all-out attack against him[^141], he would launch successive and
consecutive attacks on them and would fight each one independently while
at the same time preventing others from joining forces with the enemy.

This is precisely what he did in his battle with the Jews. He started
with the Bani Qaynuqā’ and ended with Khaybar. He employed the same
tactic against the Arab tribes of Bani Tha’labah and Ghatfān in the
Battle of Dhi Amr, Bani Saleem in the Battle of Bahrān and Bani
al-Mustalaq in the Battle of Bani al-Mustalaq and others.

The Prophet (S) would command the troops using ‘new techniques’[^142] of
warfare, including centralization of command, organizing the ranks,
laying siege, mobile defense, pre-emptive, offensive and psychological
warfare.

#### 3. Studying what was important and necessary

The Holy Prophet (S) would define the primary and secondary objectives
for his commanders[^143] and would stress on the importance of achieving
the primary objective[^144]. His commanders would also adhere to this
and issues of secondary importance would not deter them from their
priorities. For example, when the supreme commander sent ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb[^145] to fight the ‘Ajz Hawāzin[^146], after doing this he
refrained from invading the other related tribes saying, “The Prophet
(S) only commanded me to fight against the Hawāzin[^147].’

Tufayl ibn ‘Amr[^148] also accomplished his primary objective[^149]
which was to join with the army that was sent towards Tā’if as well as
his secondary objective[^150] which was to break and destroy the idol
Dhil Kiflayn and he never crossed over the limit that was determined for
him. In the same way, he (S) specified the missions during the entry
into Makkah by selecting the commanders of the different groups[^151],
and in defining the priorities, he considered the personality of the
commander, the type of enemy, the ordinances and the route to be taken.

#### 4. Preserving the goal

The goals of the Holy Prophet (S) were numerous and various[^152] and
all of them were geared towards the complete annihilation of the enemy
both materially and spiritually and the spread of the message of Islām,
which he accomplished with complete freedom and total success[^153]. The
Prophet’s enemies would always try to prevent him from attaining his
goals, but they were not successful and he (S) was steadfast in guarding
his goal[^154]. The supreme commander would also require this from his
commanders.

For example, he sent ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a)[^155] to destroy the idol
of the tribe of Tā’i[^156] and also sent him in the second phase to
spread Islām among the tribes of Yemen[^157]. ‘Ali (‘a) arrived in their
land. The tribes rose up in opposition to him, but he fought them and
continued his important mission until he was able to secure his
goal[^158]. However, Khālid bin Walid[^159] did not remain steadfast in
his mission to invite the Bani Judhayma to Islām[^160] and diverted from
his goal. Despite not having been ordered to kill them, he slaughtered
some of the men of the said tribe[^161].

#### 5. Exhortation to fight

The Prophet (S) would exhort the soldiers and fighters towards
dedication and self-sacrifice, to the extent of their ability, and would
try to strengthen their spirits, resolve and readiness before they
entered into battle[^162]. He would call on them to be just and fair in
their dealing with those whom they were fighting. He would also
encourage his soldiers and urge them to be brave[^163] and would recall
the reward of those who were patient in the battlefield[^164].

This yielded many results, because the soldiers would jump into the heat
of battle and in order to combat the enemy, would try to overtake
death[^165]. Many of them came to the battlefield with complete courage.
In one of the battles, a soldier who had a date in his mouth spit it
out[^166], another threw away his armor and fought courageously[^167].
The youth would keenly prepare for battle[^168] and as a result, with a
small force they were able to gain victory over large hoards.

#### 6. The flag and banner

The Liwā’[^169] was one sign that was carried by the most courageous and
strong soldier in the Muslim army under the command of the supreme
commander[^170]. The flag-bearers, who were personally selected by the
Holy Prophet (S)[^171], would be changed in every battle[^172]. The
color of the flag was white[^173] and its shape was quadrangular[^174].

As for the Rāyah[^175], it too was held by the bravest and strongest
soldier of each tribe[^176] and depending on the number of tribes
present at the time of organizing the army, it had various shapes and
colors[^177]. The Rāyah was normally smaller than the Liwā’. The flag
was a means of strengthening the spirits of the forces, and as long as
it was hoisted, the forces would continue fighting[^178]. If the flag
fell, the troops would be faced with defeat[^179], so the commander
would insist on guarding the flag and self-sacrifice until death in
order to safeguard it[^180].

The flag-bearer would strive to keep the flag hoisted even if it meant
having his hand chopped off or giving up his life[^181]. If one of the
brave-hearted soldiers saw in himself the ability to rescue the army
from defeat, he would raise the flag again after it had fallen[^182],
and it would not be long before the dispersed army would again assemble
and prepare to fight.

#### 7. Code words and identification

These were words by which the soldiers would recognize each other when
battling against the enemy. This code word was changed from battle to
battle[^183]. In the Battle of Badr, the code was ‘Ahad… Ahad’ (one…
one). The code word of the Khazraj was ‘O Bani ‘Abdillah’ and the code
word of the Aus was ‘Bani ‘Ubaydillah’. In the Battle of Khandaq, the
code word of the army was ‘Hum La Yunsarun’ and the code of the Muhājirs
was ‘Ya Khaylullah’. In the Conquest of Makkah, Hunayn and Tā’if it was
‘O Bani ‘Abdul-Rahmān’.

The code word was used when the forces would communicate with each other
and was especially necessary during the night, because the clothes were
similar and there was the possibility of mistaking enemy patrols for
friendly patrols[^184]. Even today, code words are still used[^185].
These secret codes are always different in each war, and when they are
found out by the enemy, they are immediately changed. The mentioned
codes were not limited to battles, rather the commander of Sariya
missions would also give his troops different codes when sending them
out on missions[^186]. Just like what happened in the Sariya of Abu Bakr
against the Bani Kilāb and that of Usāma against the Abnā.

#### 8. Being prepared for war

This took the form of giving a quick response to the incursions of the
enemy and not giving them an opportunity to accomplish their intended
goals[^187]. It was required of the soldiers that they should quickly
assemble at the call (of the supreme commander) with their weapons,
armor and means of transport ready to launch counter-attacks[^188]. It
is obvious that the Muslim army was prepared for battle with Kurz ibn
Jābir Fahri when Madina was attacked and the strong response of the army
when the supreme commander declared war against the Bani Quraydha[^189],
therefore they were able to get prepared for battle within a short
period of time.

The preparation included wearing armor, sharpening swords, carrying
spears and getting the means of transport ready. After assembly, all the
columns would move towards the enemy and would in the end come together.
The Holy Prophet (S) was the first person who prepared for battle in
this war (against the Bani Quraydha)[^190].

In the Battle of al-Ghābah[^191], the soldiers quickly became ready with
their battle gear, weapons and mounted their horses and joined ‘Ayniyyah
ibn al-Hisn[^192]. The Muslim army displayed its mobilization and
readiness in the Sariya of Usāma ibn Zayd[^193]. At this time three
thousand troops who were fully equipped[^194] came together on the
orders of mobilization and assembled in one day[^195], something that is
not seen even in today’s armies, because mobilizing such a large force
cannot be done in less than three days. In reality, the zeal for war and
martyrdom, discipline, sufficient training and constant preparedness for
battle were the necessary pre-requisites for this higher level of
readiness.

#### 9. General mobilization

The general mobilization is the creation of a battle-plan and making the
necessary preparations for the armed forces, mobilizing the human,
material, psychological and spiritual resources for battle while at the
same time being economically and materially prepared for it[^196]. The
Noble Prophet (S) would mobilize the people in groups or all
together[^197] depending on the available resources and the type of
enemy.

This is why he conducted a general mobilization[^198] during the battles
of the conquest and Tabuk, while in the Battle of Badr, he only ordered
a partial mobilization[^199]. In most of the wars and battles, this
would take place in secret[^200] but sometimes, as in the case of the
Battle of Tabuk, it was conducted openly.

The armed forces would thus be prepared. When the order of mobilization
reached the other Muslim tribes, they would all be called to prepare for
battle[^201]. Once the troops were organized, they would be ready for a
new mission[^202]; as had happened in the Conquest of Makkah and the
Battle of Hunayn. The battle gear and weapons[^203] were taken on loan
from Safwān ibn Umayya before the battle and some more was bought to
make it more complete, and the people would also assist in the
preparation out of their fervor by contributing what was required, and
they would be encouraged to do so[^204].

The spirit among them would be strengthened[^205] and the faith in the
righteousness of the battle that they are fighting would be ignited in
them[^206], the love for battle and combat[^207] became
intensified[^208], and when it was announced that certain equipment was
required, it would be collected and sent to fight the battle against the
enemy[^209]. It was certain that the people would all answer the call to
mobilize and none of them ever turned away[^210], and they would wear
their battle armor in the quickest time possible[^211]. In some of the
battles, the speed of mobilization and preparation of the army was such
that it was done in less than 24 hours[^212]. The distinguishing feature
of the mobilization of the Muslim army was that the forces would try to
outdo each other in obedience (to the Prophet) and would act with
complete love and devotion[^213].

#### 10. Taking the appropriate counter-measures

The Holy Prophet (S) would retaliate against the enemy in various ways,
among them were:

Preventive counter-measures[^214] which would be taken when information
about an impending enemy attack on Madina was underway. This was seen in
the battles and missions such as Bani Saleem, Dhi Amr, Bahrān, Dhāt
al-Ruqā’, Dumat al-Jundal and Bani al-Mustalaq.

Disciplinary counter-measures[^215]: These operations were conducted as
a result of the breaking of pacts, heedlessness and impudence of the
enemy against the rules and regulations of the Islāmic state. Of course
it was normally the case that first warnings would be given, as in the
case of the battles against the Bani Qaynuqā’, Bani Nadhir, Bani
Quraydha and Khaybar.

Decisive and conclusive counter-measures[^216]: This was a more serious
and firm response to the enemy’s incursions, to such an extent that they
should never again even think of carrying out similar attacks in the
future. Like what was done to the Bani Quraydha after they broke their
pact and mobilized themselves to fight against the Muslims in the Battle
of Ahzāb, and as a result they were all killed, and also what transpired
against Abu Sufyān, the commander of the enemy forces, when he tried to
threaten the Muslims and the response to his threat was much stronger
and more forceful.

Immediate counter-measures[^217]: This would take place immediately and
swiftly after the enemy’s incursion and would be forceful and strong, to
such an extent that it would weaken the enemy’s base and inflict severe
loss and casualties on them; like in the battles of Badr al-Awwal and
al-Ghābah.

#### 11. The routes taken by the forces

The Holy Prophet (S) would study and specify the routes (to be taken)
from Madina to the enemy[^218], just as he had done in the Battle of
Badr, Hudaybiyya and Khaybar, and he would also define the arrangement
in which the forces would march[^219], and would also keep an eye over
the main focal points[^220] like the movement of the forces from Madina
towards Tabuk and from Madina towards Makkah, and would also select the
places where ‘military parades’ would be held in the areas of settlement
and assembly[^221].

In the Battle of Badr, the parade and review of the army in the area
where it was assembled and camped was carried out in al-Buq’a. In the
Battle of Uhud, the Muslim army was reviewed in Shaykhayn and in the
Sariya of Usāma bin Zayd it was carried out in Jaraf. The places of rest
for the forces in the daytime and nighttime[^222] and the places where
the army should concentrate were also considered by him (S) as in the
battles of Badr and Tabuk[^223]. He (S) would select the shortest route
to arrive at the goal and would keep it hidden from the view of the
enemy[^224]. At the same time, he would try as much as possible to
choose routes that had wells and plenty of water supply
throughout[^225].

The supreme commander would give the following instructions to the army
when they set out:

To be careful not to make noise and avoid anything that would draw the
attention of the enemy, like the bells worn around the necks of camels.

Not to use shiny and glittery tools.

Staying behind or moving ahead of the forces[^226].

Moving during the night in order to remain hidden from the enemy[^227].

Taking routes that would not bring them directly face to face with the
enemy[^228], like in the Sariya of ‘Abdullah ibn Jahash and the Conquest
of Makkah.

Moving swiftly[^229] in order to remain one step ahead of the enemy and
arriving at the place of battle at the appropriate time.

At the same time, the movement of the forces would be such that a group
of information gathering patrols would be kept at a distance in order to
keep watch.[^230] During this march, the forces were either on foot or
on riding on camels[^231].

#### 12. The area of assembly and mobilization

This was a place which the Prophet (S) had chosen to conduct the
following matters: assemble the forces[^232], organize them[^233],
review them[^234], carry out a selection of some soldiers and ask others
to return[^235], prepare the battle gear, weapons[^236], conduct a final
check[^237], arrange the necessary food and water provisions[^238],
prepare (the soldiers) physically and mentally[^239], make the
battle-plan by taking all the possibilities and different battle
scenarios into consideration[^240], select and announcing his deputy in
Madina[^241], review the flags and banners and select those who will
carry them[^242], determine the tribes who will participate in the
battle[^243] and review the means of transport to be used by the
forces[^244].

#### 13. The area of encampment and setting up base

This was a place selected by the Prophet (S) for the army to set
camp[^245]. In the Battle of Badr it was in al-‘Adwat al-Dunyā, in the
Battle of Uhud it was in front of the Mountain of Uhud[^246] and in the
Battle of Khandaq it was near the Sala’ Mountain. The camping of the
troops in a suitable place[^247], like an area which is fortified in
three directions and keeps the enemies at bay; as in the Battle of
Khandaq where only the northern area was accessible, and also selecting
suitable places in battle, such that this place is in accordance with
all the required conditions of a base camp. For example in the Battle of
Khaybar, the said places were chosen by the inspection of the
commanders[^248] and the decision was based on the following criteria:

Securing the ease of access and movement for friendly forces while at
the same time making it hard to reach for enemy troops[^249].  
 Facing the direction which would cause the sun to be behind their own
forces[^250]; like in the Battle of Badr and other battles.  
 For the troops to be in front of a mountain or any other natural
fortress[^251]; as in the Battle of Uhud.  
 Keeping the base camp near sources of water and some major
highways[^252].  
 Plentitude of grass and grazing ground in the area[^253].  
 Making sure the area is suitable medically and hygienically[^254].  
 Ensuring the ground is hard and with areas where the battle can be
fought[^255].  
 Being far away from the reach of enemy arrows[^256]; as in the battles
of Bani Nadhir, Bani Quraydha and Khaybar.  
 Having the possibility of moving away in case there are no
reinforcements[^257].  
 The ability to cut off the enemy supply routes and stopping them from
obtaining it (supplies)[^258].  
 The possibility of securing the necessary cover and camouflage[^259].  
 Being able to fully control their own forces[^260].  
 Ease of movement in order to keep watch over the enemy and spy on
them[^261].

In this area, the Prophet (S) placed the command post at an elevated
position, so that it would be possible for him to have complete control
and ability to supervise the war[^262]. He (S) would arrange the forces
in ranks[^263] according to their battle instructions[^264]; like the
cavalry, the infantry, the special forces, the vanguard, the archers,
the rear and others.

The measures that were taken in the area when the base camp was set up
included: review and assessment[^265]; inspection of the troops[^266];
assembling the troops and their accouterments[^267]; organizing the
ranks[^268]; specifying the battle instructions[^269], and the necessary
guarding and protection especially of the command post[^270]; appointing
the commanders of the ranks and contingents[^271] including those
responsible for the command post and its protection; preparing the
troops psychologically and spiritually[^272]; encouraging them to
fight[^273]; specifying the secret code words for identification[^274];
issuing the command to start the war[^275]; the mode of
co-operation[^276] between the forces as was done in the Battle of
Badr - between the units like in the Sariya of Tufayl ibn ‘Amr, between
the commanders who marched towards Tā’if after the Battle of Hunayn and
between the units and contingents, as in the troops who entered Makkah
during the Conquest of Makkah; conducting training exercises on the
principles of archery[^277], attack or the techniques that the soldiers
should use when they come face to face with the enemy[^278]; specifying
the time and place for war[^279] which would be before the enemy was
well prepared and in the hours of twilight. Aside from these issues, in
the command post the battle with the enemy would also be
supervised[^280].

#### 14. Keeping the operations secret and covert

The Holy Prophet (S) would try very hard to conduct the military
operations in a covert and clandestine manner. Therefore he would take
extra measures to attain this goal. For this reason, the mobilization
and preparation for war would take place in secret; like in the Sariya
of ‘Abdullah ibn Jahash and the Conquest of Makkah etc. and aside from a
select few who were known for their trustworthiness and their ability to
keep secrets, nobody was aware what the intention and goal of the Holy
Prophet (S) was[^281].

The Holy Prophet (S) would then issue brief instructions for the
commander of the operations[^282] and would complete his orders to the
commanders either by letter or verbally[^283]. He (S) would also specify
the time it should take for the mission to be conducted[^284] and the
direction and ways by which they should divert the enemy[^285]. He would
keep the missions and preparations for some of the battles hidden and
would not do them openly[^286]. Aside from this, he would give
instructions that the secrets should be kept hidden and the goal should
not be announced until the appropriate time[^287].

He would disperse spies and intelligence agents[^288], arrest enemy
spies in order to prevent them from sending information to the
enemy[^289], blockade the routes used by the enemy spies so that they
could not take information back to the enemy base[^290], and would
actually not permit any of these forces from entering or exiting the
said area[^291]. In order that the intelligence apparatus may function
even better, the Holy Prophet (S) would personally oversee these
operations and would stress on their importance.

#### 15. Specification and assessment of the battle ground

The assessment and specification of the battle grounds was linked to the
military, economic and political prowess of the commanders and
personnel. Strategically, a more prudent and complete, and from the
tactical viewpoint, the enemy, the land and the battle strategy a firm
position was selected[^292].

The Holy Prophet (S) would assess the battle readiness in all the ranks
and would constantly seek information and updates about the enemy and
his own forces in the battlefield[^293] and was completely aware of all
the other military and political conditions[^294]. As a result, his
orders would only be issued after being supported by strong intelligence
and various other means of affirming their prudence and
correctness[^295].

Other matters that were examined and looked into by the Holy Prophet (S)
included:  
 With regards to the enemy: their strength, assembly, preparation and
weaponry[^296].  
 With regards to the friend: Furnishing complete battle gear and
military equipment and making them equally trained and
motivated[^297].  
 With regards to the land: ensuring that it is suitable for setting up
camp and carrying out military operations[^298].

#### 16. Co-operation

The Holy Prophet (S) would encourage his forces to co-operate with each
other when he was readying them for battle[^299]. He asked the soldiers
and all the people to assist the army materially[^300]. In the same way,
he would instruct the commanders to work with those who were under them,
the soldiers to co-operate with each other, the units to collaborate
with one another, the cavalry to support the infantry, the rear to work
with the vanguard and the contingents to work with the army. In the same
way he would himself, as the supreme commander, work with the
soldiers[^301] and in order to strengthen this bond[^302], he instituted
a pact of brotherhood between the Muhājirs and the Ansārs[^303] and
placed all the believers as one entity and one body[^304].

#### 17. Invasion and attack

‘Invasion and attack’ was one of the military strategies of the Holy
Prophet (S) that he would implement against the enemy. He (S) employed a
state of constant offense and would attack the enemy continuously, and
as a result he left them with no choice but to do things that would make
their goals and intentions clear[^305]. The Prophet’s goal in invading
and attacking was displaying the strength and might of the Muslim
army[^306], gaining the upper hand over the enemy[^307] and continuously
encountering them (and countering their intended attacks)[^308].

The Sariya and military missions that he (S) would send was not for
anything but invasion and attack[^309], the Battle of Hamrā’
al-Asad[^310] was only a show of strength and the Battle of Dumat
al-Jundal[^311] was only fought to get information, learn about and test
the strength and capability of the Roman army. The Muslim army fought
Badr al-Aākhar[^312] only in order to gain the upper hand over the enemy
and it was then that Abu Sufyān turned back on his promise of war and
tried to give excuses (for not fighting)[^313]. However, the Prophet (S)
had decided to launch an attack and said: ‘I swear by He in whose hand
my life is, even if nobody accompanies me, I will come out to
fight[^314].’

#### 18. Display of strength and might

One of the manifestations of attack is ‘psychological warfare’ which is
actually an indirect type of warfare[^315] whose goal is instilling fear
in the enemy[^316], weakening his spirits[^317] and preventing him from
many of his aggressive plans[^318]. The Noble Prophet (S) used various
methods to gain information in order to create fear in the enemy[^319].
In the battles of Hamrā’ al-Asad, Khandaq and the Conquest, by burning
the dry date palms and plantations of the enemy[^320], he created a
large fire[^321] and paraded the large number of troops and
weapons[^322] he had in front of the enemy commander i.e. Abu Sufyān,
before entering Makkah.

Before the Battle of Badr, while performing the Hajj al-Tamatu’, he
slaughtered the camel that was linked to Abu Jahl[^323]. During the
Conquest, he performed the Sa’ee between Safā and Marwa quickly[^324],
with his followers carrying sheathed swords[^325], he performed the
circumambulation while riding on a camel[^326]. Then he turned his cloak
on the side and left his right arm open[^327], ordering the whole army
to do just as he had done[^328]. He praised those of them who displayed
their strength to the enemy[^329]. These tactics were quite successful
and assisted in destroying the resistance of the enemy, to such an
extent that he had made them certain that they would by no means be
capable to come face to face with the Muslim army[^330].

#### 19. Forewarning prior to battle

The supreme commander would commence war in the following
manner[^331]:  
 In a direct manner[^332] i.e. he would normally remain in a condition
of continual war with the enemy, and would use it as a preventative
measure[^333].

Giving the enemy an choice between accepting Islām and war[^334]. He
would send this type of warning through a messenger, and if he did not
get a response he would commence the war; like in the Sariya of ‘Abd
al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf and Khālid bin Walid to Dumat al-Jundal and against
the Bani al-Hārith.

Nullification and breaking of pacts[^335]: When the enemies would break
their peace pacts, the Prophet (S) would send some people to warn them
and remind them of their treachery and betrayal; just as he had done in
the ‘four battles’ against the Jews.

The Holy Prophet (S) would fight three types of battles. One was the
battle fought without any warning or notice[^336], like the battles that
he fought against the hostile Arab tribes or the Quraysh and external
foes. In these cases, he would launch surprise attacks on these groups
in their own territories. Another type was preceded by
forewarning[^337], so he would mostly give the enemy an option and try
to reason with them kindly as he wanted all the people to accept Islām.

However, nullifying the pact[^338] was dealt with in a different way
when it came to the Jews who lived in Madina and its outskirts. The
Prophet (S) created a pact of defense with them as ‘citizens’ and had
acknowledged them as fellow compatriots. Despite this they broke their
pact and turned into a center for plotting and ambush (against the
Muslims). He (S) also sent a representative[^339] to the Bani
Qaynuqā’[^340] and the Bani Nadhir[^341] and gave them a notice that
they should leave their lands in ten days[^342], but they did not pay
any attention to the warning reacted with disdain[^343]. The Prophet (S)
was left with no option but to wage war against them.

#### 20. The order to commence the war

The order to start the war was issued by the supreme commander[^344] or
by the commander of any independent unit[^345] and would usually be
marked by the sounding of “Allahu Akbar”[^346] which would be repeated
loudly so that all the soldiers could hear[^347]. In the Battle of
Hunayn, the Holy Prophet (S) took advantage of the loud voice of his
uncle ‘Abbas for this[^348]. The soldiers would be asked to remain
silent (after the battle had begun). No loud sound was heard from any
soldier, except the movement of their lips and whisperings of ‘Takbir’
and ‘Dhikr’[^349].

In the Battle of Badr, during the heat of battle, someone (from among
the enemy) said: Don’t you see them? It is as if they are all mutes;
they don’t say anything but they are alive and are benefitting from
life[^350].

In the new battles, the command to commence the war was issued by sounds
that were made from behind trenches or fortified areas or by fires that
were thrown up in the air or by other means of communication[^351].

The command to begin the battle with Takbir and other similar slogans
would heighten the bravery and courage of the troops and would remove
the fear of battle from their hearts[^352].

#### 21. Combat

Battle and combat between the two sides would start in such a way that
first one or a few brave soldiers from the Muslim army, and from the
enemy’s army, would come forward[^353]. These combatants would use
various weapons including swords. They would either be on foot or
horseback and would be in full armor and would move to fight each other
in single one-on-one combat[^354]. Each one of them would kill one or
more of his opponents[^355]. It is then that the other soldiers rush in
and the full scale battle starts with complete intensity[^356].

In the Battle of Badr, three fighters from the Muslim army stood to face
three soldiers from the polytheists and ended up (successfully) killing
their opponents.[^357] In the Battle of Uhud, one person from the
Muslims went to face one person (from the polytheists) and caused him to
fall to the ground by one strike of the sword[^358]. This (one-on-one)
combat would be observed by the supreme commander and the soldiers of
both sides[^359]. So if they would kill their opponents, the spirit and
courage of the troops would be strengthened while weakness and a sense
of defeat would prevail over the enemy.

#### 22. Organization of the battle

The Assembly of the troops and arrangement of their encampment was done
in spaced out columns which would be organized in one line or more. The
arrangement of the soldiers in form and depth, was dependent on the type
of war, enemy forces, military facilities, the number of forces, battle
gear and equipment available, the type of weapons used and the terrain.
The aim of this organization was creating a readiness for launching the
main strike on the enemy, gaining freedom to maneuver, co-operation and
assistance, preventing the strikes of the enemy and reducing
losses[^360].

The Arabs of the Age of Ignorance would employ the ‘Karr wa Farr’
(strike and flee) tactic in their wars[^361]. But the Holy Prophet (S)
invented a new form of arrangement and organization of the ranks[^362]
with a specific order, and this technique has also been used in more
recent wars and especially in World War II. The arrangement of ranks was
either in the form of a single column or many columns.

In the Battle of Badr, the Holy Prophet (S) arranged the troops in two
columns[^363], in such a way that he placed the archers in the first
column[^364] and in the second column he positioned the spearers and the
infantry[^365], and behind this column he put the rear of the
army[^366].

Later, he changed this arrangement and organization and transferred the
first column to the heart of the army and reorganized the right flank,
the left flank and also the infantry[^367]. When the soldiers would be
arranged into two columns, a section of the cavalry would remain behind
the second column and in the rear i.e. behind the infantry and the
second column.

The women, munitions, preserves, the commander’s camp, the place for
prayer, food and other provisions were placed at the rear of the
army[^368]. The place of the commander was in the heart and the first
column of the army[^369], the lookout post was at an elevation[^370]
from where he could get an overview and control the battle, just as the
Holy Prophet (S) had done in when commanding the battles of Badr and
Uhud.

**Organization and arrangement of the troops in battle**

First scenario  
![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image002.jpg)

Second scenario  
![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image004_0.jpg)

Third scenario  
![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image006.jpg)

Fourth scenario  
![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image008_0.jpg)

**The situation on the ground in the Battle of Uhud** **and its
results**

**KEY**  
**The place where Hamza the uncle of the Prophet** **(S), 'Abdullah ibn
Jahash** **and Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr have been buried.**  
**The place where the martyrs of Uhud** **have been buried.**  
**The area where there Muslim army fought with the army of the
polytheists.**  
**The last borders of the battle in the east and west.**  
**The place where Hamza ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib** **® was martyred.**  
**The place where archers from the Muslim were positioned to guard the
pass on the small Mountain of al-Rummāh.**  
**The place where the Holy Prophet** **(S)** **was hidden after he had
been injured - it was inside a fissure in the side of Mount Uhud.**  
**Masjid al-Fasah.**  
**Masjid al-Mustarāh (where the Holy Prophet** **(S)** **rested with his
army before entering into Uhud).**  
**Masjid al-Dir' (where the Prophet** **(S)** **stopped briefly when
returning from Uhud)**

#### 23. Battles fought in order to capture forts (Harb al-Husun)

The Holy Prophet (S) employed the tactic of ‘siege’ in order to capture
forts[^371] and aside from Khaybar and Tā’if, he never used ‘direct
attack and assault’[^372], because this type of warfare led to many
casualties. Using heavy weaponry on a wide scale as in the Battle of
Tā’if was not common practice for the Muslim army[^373].

Many military operations would be carried out while laying siege on the
fortresses, the most important among which included: completely cutting
off any aid and support to the enemies who were besieged inside the
fortresses[^374], distancing one’s own forces from the reach of the
enemy’s arrows[^375], deceiving the besieged enemy using different
means[^376] in order to get them to come out of their fortress.

The Bani Qaynuqā’ surrendered after fifteen nights of siege[^377] and
the Bani Nadhir had also been besieged for fifteen days after which they
lowered their heads in surrender on the command of the Prophet
(S)[^378]. The Bani Quraydha were also dealt with in the same
manner[^379]. After this, the inhabitants of Khaybar came to the Prophet
(S) and agreed to obey his commands, thus they were exiled to
Syria[^380]. The Holy Prophet (S) also besieged Tā’if and after a while
the caused them to come out of the siege[^381].

The Noble Prophet (S), in his orders, limited the attack on the Fortress
of Khaybar to the eastern direction, just as the present day armies do.
He made the priority of the mission was to gain control over the primary
fortress[^382] and then he gained control over all their forts one after
another[^383]. Once their fall and defeat was complete, he gave the
order for them to attack the secondary fortress[^384]. They gained
control over that too and captured (the forts) one after the other[^385]
until they achieved their goal completely and then proceeded to conquer
the main defense fortress[^386] which was another of the orders the army
had been given.

The Muslim army turned its focus on the first defensive fort[^387], and
especially on the Fort of Nā’im[^388] and once that had fallen, they
moved towards the other forts. Before carrying out any attack on these
forts, he (S) obtained the required information[^389] and surveillance
on them[^390], then he positioned his forces in the area of
al-Rajee’[^391] thereby separating the Ghatfān[^392] (who were allies
and helpers of the enemy) with the inhabitants of Khaybar and through
this tactic he gave the advantage to the Muslim army, because he was
able to prevent these tribes from working with the Jews of Khaybar
thereby making it easy to attack the forts from all sides[^393] and
conquer them[^394] while also being free to maneuver[^395] and divide
the enemy[^396]. The supreme commander started with the Fort of
Nā’im[^397] and conquered it. Then he attacked the other forts[^398] and
in this way he conquered the forts gradually, one by one.

#### 24. Battles with barriers (and impediments)

Using barriers in battle has been an age-old practice that started with
the very first battles[^399]. For example, the Romans and Persians would
use trenches in their battles[^400]. However, we do not have any
evidence that the Arabs used such barriers before the advent of
Islām[^401]. The Holy Prophet (S) ordered that a trench be dug in order
to prevent the army of confederates from gaining access into Madina from
the north and west[^402], and selected the suitable ground for this
purpose[^403], and personally specified its dimensions for the army i.e.
the length of the battlefront which was from Mudhād up to Dhubāb
Rātij[^404] was dug by the Muslim army[^405].

In order to remove the gravel, they used metal tools, pickaxes and large
buckets[^406] and the removed gravel was poured outside to hide the
front-line that would counter the enemy[^407] and the remaining areas
were concealed using rocks that were brought from Mount Sala’[^408].
Then passageways from which their own troops could pass from the trench
were made[^409]. In order to dig through hard ground and rock, water was
first poured over it and then it was struck with the pickaxe
continuously until it eventually broke up[^410].

**The Battle of Bani Qaynuqā'** **(fig. 1)**  
![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image010.gif)

**The Battle of Bani Nadhir** **(fig. 2)**  
![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image012.gif)

**KEY (fig. 1 & 2)**  
**1.** **The route from Basra** **to Damascus**  
**2.** **Mount Uhud**  
**3.** **Volcanic rock**  
**4.** **Route taken by the Muslim army (fig. 1)** **& Mount Sala'**
**(fig. 2)**  
**5.** **The city of Madina**  
**6.** **The Jews** **of Bani Qaynuqā'**  
**7.** **The Jews** **of Bani Quraydha**  
**8.** **The Jews** **of Bani Nadhir**  
**9.** **Mount 'Aseer**

The length of the ditch was five thousand cubits, which is equivalent to
two kilometers and its width was nine cubits, which is equal to four
meters, while its depth was between five and seven cubits which comes up
to about three meters[^411]. Digging the trench took between six to ten
days[^412]. The Muslim army spread out along the border of the trench to
face the enemy. They carried with them the weapons that were required
and stood right behind the trench[^413]. They would remain on constant
watch and guard the areas where there was a possibility that the enemy
could pass through[^414].

When the soldiers of the two armies came face to face, they began
shooting long arrows towards each other[^415]. If the enemy came near
the trench and crossed over it, they would use their swords[^416], and
when this was happening to some of the enemy soldiers, and in the
process ‘Amr ibn ‘Abd Wudd[^417] was killed, the other soldiers
retreated and rejoined their forces behind the trench. In this battle,
the Muslim forces used stones abundantly[^418] and had gathered them
along the line of the trench.

The trench that was dug was quite helpful to the Muslim army and acted
as a barrier between them and the enemy. In the end it must be said that
the Battle of Khandaq is not much different from the present-day
battles, and aside from different weaponry, there is very little else
that is dissimilar.

#### 25. Battles in cities and towns (Harb al-Mudun)

After he had concealed all his might and strength and military prowess
from the inhabitants of Makkah, the Holy Prophet (S) conquered this
city[^419]. In this battle, he also: used psychological warfare[^420];
entered the city from all four directions[^421]; divided the operations
according to the arrangement and formation of the troops[^422];
explained the route, direction, goal, force and other matters[^423];
asked them to be careful to refrain from bloodshed[^424].

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image016.gif)

**The Battle of Bani Quraydha** **(Ref. KEY 2.1)**  
**KEY 2.1: Battle of Bani Quraydha**  
**1.** **The route from Basra** **to Damascus**  
**2.** **Mount Uhud**  
**3.** **Mount Sala'**  
**4.** **The Muslim army**  
**5.** **The city of Madina**  
**6.** **The Jews** **of Bani Quraydha**  
**7.** **The Jews** **of Bani Nadhir**  
**8.** **Mount 'Aseer**

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image018.gif)  
**The Battle of Khaybar** **(Ref. KEY 2.2)**  
**KEY 2.2: Battle of Khaybar**  
**1.** **Khaybar**  
**2.** **Fadak**  
**3.** **The Muslim army**  
**4.** **The route traversed by the army (in eight days)**  
**5.** **The city of Madina**  
**6.** **Mount 'Aseer**  
**7.** **Mount Sala'**  
**8.** **Mount Uhud**  
**9.** **The route to Madā'in**

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image020.gif)  
**The Battle of Khandaq** **(Ref. KEY 2.3)**  
**KEY 2.3: Battle of Khandaq**  
**1.** **Mount Uhud**  
**2.** **Volcanic rocks**  
**3.** **The confederate army (Ahzāb)**  
**4.** **The place where the enemy was blocked**  
**5.** **The defensive trench (2 km long)**  
**6.** **Permanent guard-posts**

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image022.jpg)  
**Current map of Madina** **with the place where the Battle of Khandaq**
**took place and the location of the al-Masājid al-Sab'ah or 'seven
mosques' (Ref. KEY 2.4)**  
**KEY 2.4: Present-day Madina**  
**1.** **The graveyard of al-Baqee'**  
**2.** **Abu Dharr** **al-Ghaffāri Street**  
**3.** **The area of Uhud**  
**4.** **Sayyid al-Shuhadā Street**  
**5.** **Path of the trench (that was dug in the Battle of Khandaq)**  
**6.** **Abu Bakr** **Street**  
**7.** **Mount Sala'**  
**8.** **Masjid al-Fath**  
**9.** **Masjid Salmān al-Fārsi**  
**10. Masjid 'Umar ibn al-Khattāb**  
**11. Masjid Abu Bakr**  
**12. Masjid 'Ali ibn Abi Tālib** **('a)**  
**13. Masjid Dhul Qiblatayn**  
**14. Masjid Fātimah bint Muhammad** **(S)**

![](http://beta.al-islam.org/sites/default/files/image024.jpg)  
**The Conquest of Makkah** **(Ref. KEY 2.5)**  
**KEY 2.5: Conquest of Makkah**  
**1.** **The Muslim army - 10,000 strong**  
**2.** **The forces of Abi 'Ubaydah ibn Jarrāh**  
**3.** **The forces of Qays ibn Sa'd ibn 'Ubādah**  
**4.** **The forces of Zayd ibn 'Awām**  
**5.** **The place where the Muslim army encamped**  
**6.** **The city of Makkah** **al-Mukarramah**  
**7.** **Entrance into Makkah**  
**8.** **The forces of Khālid bin Walid**  
**9.** **Mountainous areas**

He instructed the inhabitants of Makkah to throw down their weapons,
close their door and windows[^425], and show no resistance
whatsoever[^426]. It was after these orders and instructions that he set
up camp for the army in Hajun[^427], and after conquering Makkah, he
again prepared them for the next important mission.

Indeed, the supreme commander was highly capable in carrying out all
these measures. Among other things, he made it clear to the people of
Makkah that they were incapable of resisting the mighty Muslim
army[^428], and in this way he entered Makkah peacefully and enacted a
peace treaty without any bloodshed or war[^429].

#### 26. Daily reports

These reports contained details about the state of the battle, the
munitions, the spirit and zeal of the forces, the requirements and the
objectives, and would usually be compiled and sent to the supreme
commander daily[^430]. The Holy Prophet (S) told all his commanders to
chronicle the objectives and important developments of the battles and
send them to him,[^431] so that he was fully aware of what was going on
at their end. This was something that was not done verbally[^432] and it
was not necessary to send it in the day, as the military do these days,
rather, depending on the need, it would be sent after the mission or
battle was over[^433] by means of a messenger on horseback or on
foot[^434].

The most important issues that were contained in these reports were: the
missions of the units[^435] and especially the sentinels, intelligence
information[^436], the method of attack on the enemy[^437], the results
that were seen from that battle[^438] – especially the losses,
booty[^439] and the measures that needed to be taken to strengthen the
troops[^440].

An analysis of the battles on the various front-lines
-----------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) would simultaneously battle on many front-lines,
against the Quraysh, the Arab tribes, the Jews and the Romans.
Therefore, he would prepare for numerous wars and in the end, he
achieved victory in all of them. These front-lines included:

### a) The front-line against the Quraysh

Before preparing for any war. the Holy Prophet (S) would send Sariya
missions or numerous military missions[^441] to gather intelligence from
the enemy forces and also to dishearten them or he would send them to
attack their trading caravans - in order to display the might of the
Muslim army. In this way, he established a somewhat new base of command
in Madina. When the Quraysh came to learn of this change and technique,
they decided that to destroy this army and were searching for an
opportunity to annihilate the Muslim army before it could grow and
develop into and unstoppable power, and this is why they prepared for
the Battle of Badr[^442].

Badr was the first full-fledged battle where the Muslim army displayed
its readiness and capability for war[^443] especially by choosing the
appropriate place for setting up camp[^444], innovation, organizing the
battle-formation into columns in depth[^445], training[^446],
zeal[^447], faith and a new belief[^448], discipline and following
orders[^449], the necessary organization and hierarchy of command[^450]
and by these military tactics, they strengthened their soldiers.

As for the Quraysh, they were stronger in terms of numbers and battle
gear[^451], and just as we will demonstrate, the victory is for the side
that is better in terms of quality, not quantity; that is why the
Prophet (S) astounded the enemy by his victory in Badr. After their
defeat, the Quraysh became worried about the loss of their profits and
trade and responded with a weak blow to this victory[^452], and this was
when Abu Sufyān launched an incursion into Madina and killed two
civilians and then quickly returned towards Makkah. At this point, the
Holy Prophet (S) sent soldiers to follow him as he was fleeing, but they
did not catch up to him[^453].

The supreme commander of the Muslim army would use economic sanctions
and other means to put pressure on the Quraysh[^454]. For instance, he
sent Zayd ibn Hāritha to al-Qurdah in order to attack the trading
caravan of the Quraysh and he too was successful in overpowering
it[^455]. In order to take revenge and gain freedom from sanctions and
other pressures, the enemy assembled a large army and prepared for the
Battle of Uhud[^456]. In the first phase, the Muslim army was
victorious[^457], but in the second phase[^458], because of the
disobedience of the archers to the orders of the supreme commander and
their abandonment of their positions in order to take the spoils of war,
the result turned in favor of the Quraysh[^459].

In the end, however, the final result was in favor of the Muslim
army[^460] i.e. when the Holy Prophet (S) was able to gather a large
number of troops[^461], and remain steadfast[^462] despite his injuries
and losses, was able to launch a counter-attack in the Battle of Hamrā’
al-Asad[^463]. In this way, by being a prudent[^464], determined and
courageous[^465] commander, and by using psychological warfare[^466]
through which he instilled fear in the hearts of the enemy, he caused
their forces to fall down helplessly.

The string of consecutive victories that were achieved by the Prophet
(S)[^467] against the Quraysh, the Jews and the enemy Arab tribes, made
it evident that there was a serious threat that was forming against
them[^468] and they had no choice but to annihilate this Muslim army.
For this purpose, they came together, joined hands and made covenants
with each other so that they could assemble a united army to fight
against the Muslims. As a result, some Arab tribes and Jews joined with
the Quraysh and launched what was to be known as the Battle of
Confederates (Ahzāb)[^469].

The confederates came into the field with a large force, numbering
almost ten thousand strong[^470], and proceeded towards Madina. However,
they were stopped in their tracks by the large trench[^471] that was dug
by the Muslim army[^472]. Although they made many attempts to cross over
it, but all in vain[^473] and because of the differences that arose
between them, they returned without having realized their military
objective[^474]. From the ingenuity and innovation of a new strategy in
warfare i.e. digging the trench[^475] and also due to the leadership of
a continent[^476], steadfast commander[^477], using deception[^478] and
having high spiritual values[^479], the Muslim army gained victory over
the Quraysh and their allies.

The consequence of this was that the reverence that the Arab tribes felt
for the Quraysh was greatly reduced[^480] and they lost their position
as central political and military figures[^481]. The respect of Abu
Sufyān was lost because of this[^482], he failed as a commander and his
pivotal role was demeaned in the eyes of his allies. This was because
the severe loss he faced was caused by a trench[^483] and by the fleeing
of the tribes of Ghatfān and their partners, the Quraysh were put to
shame[^484] and it became established that they are totally incapable of
gaining a victory over this (Muslim) army[^485].

After this battle, the Jews got worried and became sure that they would
be annihilated because they broke their pledges and pacts with the
Muslims[^486]. The Prophet (S) immediately besieged the Bani Quraydha
and was successful in removing them from Madina[^487]. It must be said
that this battle was the point of change for the Muslim army, from a
defensive state to an offensive one[^488].

News of the pressure and hardships that came upon the Quraysh because of
their loss in this battle reached the Holy Prophet (S), so he sent Zayd
ibn Hāritha[^489] with a mission to cut off their supply routes and
prevent their caravans from travelling outside, and he successfully
carried out this mission[^490].

This victory was followed soon after by the Treaty of Hudaybiyya[^491]
which was to tantamount to another victory for the Muslim army, however
the Quraysh reneged on the agreement[^492], and were looking for an
opportunity to come out of it and stand up against to the Muslim army.
As a result, the Prophet (S) hastened his preparation for the Conquest
(of Makkah)[^493] and marched against their city and homes. In order to
enter Makkah, he made a secret plan[^494] and this plan was to carry out
a surprise invasion[^495]. After he had bewildered the Quraysh and left
them with no choice but to surrender to this army[^496], he entered
Makkah and gained victory over his enemies[^497]. After this victory,
the Quraysh also acknowledged the Holy Prophet (S) as their leader and
accepted the religion of Islām[^498].

### b) The front-line against the other Arab tribes

The Holy Prophet (S) fought many battles against these tribes, either
commanding them personally[^499] or sending contingents and Sariya
missions to fight against them[^500]. Aside from this, he would send
individuals and small groups[^501] to assassinate the leaders of these
tribes and those who were opposed to the Islāmic revolution and had evil
intentions against its leader or had plans to carry out invasions
(against them).

The tribes that were fought by the supreme commander were: Bani
Saleem[^502], Kadar[^503], Bahrān[^504], al-Jumūm[^505], the tribes of
Bani Tha’labah[^506], Ghatfān and Mahārib in Dhi Amr[^507], the tribes
of Sirār[^508], Bani al-Mustalaq[^509] in al-Muraisiya’[^510], the tribe
of Bani Lihyān[^511] in Gharrān[^512], Bani Hawāzin[^513] and the
Thaqeef in Hunayn[^514].

The Holy Prophet (S) also carried out Sariya and other military missions
against the following tribes: Bani Asad[^515] in Qatan[^516],
al-Ghamr[^517] and Bani Bakr ibn Kilāb[^518], Dhiryah[^519], Bani
Tha’labah[^520] and ‘Awāl in Dhi al-Qassah[^521], al-Tarāf[^522] and
Bani Judhām[^523] in Husmā[^524], Bani Fuzārah[^525] in Wādi
al-Qurā[^526], Bani Sa’d[^527] in Fadak[^528], ‘Ajz wa Hawāzin[^529] in
Turbah[^530], Bani Kilāb[^531] in Najd[^532], al-Zajj[^533] and Bani
Murrah[^534] in Fadak[^535], Bani ‘Abd ibn Tha’labah[^536] in
al-Mayfa’ah[^537], Bani Ghatfān[^538] in Yemen and Jabbār[^539],
Khadhrah[^540] and Bani al-Malūh[^541] in al-Kuryah[^542], Bani
Qudhā’ah[^543] in Dhat Ittilā’[^544], Bani Hawāzin[^545] in
al-Sayy[^546], Bani Tamim[^547] in al-Suqyā[^548] and Bani
Khath’am[^549] in Batn Musjā’[^550].

The Holy Prophet (S) would carry out pre-emptive wars[^551] against
these tribes, meaning that he would launch an attack on them first
before they could march towards Madina[^552]. More often than not, the
enemy would flee in fear the moment they heard that the Muslim army was
on its way[^553]; to such an extent that they would also leave their
animals behind as war booty (for the Muslim army to take)[^554].

The number of troops in these military missions would vary from battle
to battle[^555]. In the Battle of Bawāt, the number of soldiers reached
two hundred strong whereas in the Battle of Badr, they numbered three
hundred and a few. Similarly, the numbers would change from Sariya
mission to Sariya mission[^556]. For example, in the Sariya of Muhammad
ibn Maslamah against the Bani Bakr, the soldiers numbered thirty,
whereas in the Sariya of Zayd ibn Hāritha against the tribe of Judhām,
there were fifty. In the Sariya of Usāma bin Zayd to fight against the
Romans, the number of forces reached three thousand. In this way, the
supreme commander would send the appropriate number of forces depending
on the number of enemy soldiers and the type of mission.

Because of the fact that the enemy tribes that have been mentioned were
spread out throughout the Arabian peninsula[^557], from far and near
they were affected by the Muslim army[^558] and were never able to
launch raids, invasions or attacks on Madina[^559]. The attacks of the
Muslim army on these tribes were based on swiftness[^560], surprise
attack[^561], marching at night[^562], secret missions[^563], gathering
new and important intelligence[^564]; and this is why they would always
attain victory.

The priorities in dealing with these tribes and making them submissive
were specified in such a way[^565] that they would first concentrate
their efforts on gaining control over the tribes in the coastal
regions[^566], then they would move on to those in the east (of the Arab
peninsula)[^567] and finally the other tribes would be attacked[^568].
In the same way, they would start with tribes that were nearer and then
proceed towards those that were further[^569]. They were also
precautious of the threat posed by the tribes of Bani Saleem, Ghatfān
and Tamim[^570]...

### c) The front-line against the Jews

After the Holy Prophet’s migration to Madina, he (S) created a ‘civil
pact’ with those who lived in that city[^571]. However, not long after
this pact was created, the Jews of Bani Qaynuqā’[^572] were waiting for
an opportunity to break away from the conditions of the pact they had
made and bring defeat to the Muslim army, which had since developed and
grown after the many battles it had fought. For this reason, they broke
their pact and manifested their enmity for the Muslims, and continued to
do so despite the warning given to them by the Holy Prophet (S)[^573].

In response, the Prophet (S) besieged them in their fortress and gained
victory over them[^574]. From that day, all the Jews were waiting for
the same thing to happen to them that had happened to the other Jews.
Ka’b ibn Ashraf, Salām bin Abi al-Haqiq and other Jewish leaders[^575]
who had gone against and fermented opposition to the supreme commander
and the Muslims[^576], had seen their end and were killed in suicide
missions[^577].

The Jews of Bani Nadhir[^578] also did not hesitate to betray the
Prophet (S) after the Muslims lost the Battle of Uhud, and even made
plans to assassinate him[^579]. This was when the Holy Prophet (S)
sought to take the blood-money for the two Muslims killed by ‘Amr ibn
Umayyah al-Dhumri and had gone to their land for this purpose[^580].
Because of this treachery, the Prophet (S) besieged them and took over
their lands[^581].

The Jews of Bani Quraydha also joined hands with the Quraysh to work
against the Muslim army in the Battle of Khandaq[^582]. Their attempts
and struggles were to no avail and because they broke their allegiance
to the Muslims, they returned back afraid and worried[^583]. That which
they had thought of did not transpire and now they saw themselves under
threat of being besieged.

After the Battle of Khandaq, the Holy Prophet (S) himself led the
army[^584], marching towards the area of the Bani Quraydha[^585]. He
fought a battle with them and put them all to death[^586]. Despite this,
the Jews continued in their enmity with the Muslims and again began
inciting and encouraging the Arab tribes to fight against the army of
the Prophet (S). This is why the Battle of Khaybar took place[^587]. In
this war also, the victory belonged to the Muslim army[^588] and as a
result the greatest opposing force and enemy was done away with, and all
the Jews surrendered[^589].

The battles against the Jews were different from other battles because
they were in fortresses[^590] and secure shelters and were able to store
the needed supplies and weapons for a long period of time[^591]. They
used to construct their buildings in elevated locations so as to prevent
the archers and lookouts, keep the enemies at bay by the strength and
fortification of their fortresses[^592], dig moats just outside the and
filling them with water[^593].

The Jews would store a lot of other weapons and armaments in the
fortress and would use them when needed[^594]. At the same time, they
would be well trained and would possess all the battle gear that was
required[^595]. The number of Jews was many times more than the soldiers
in the Muslim army[^596]. In the Battle of Bani Qaynuqā’ they numbered
seven hundred as opposed to the four hundred in the Muslim army. In the
Battle of Bani Quraydha, three thousand Jews fought against only seven
hundred Muslims and in the Battle of Khaybar, there were ten thousand
strong against an army of 1,500 fighters. Aside from this, they had a
lot of wealth[^597] and wielded a lot of economic, political and
military influence[^598]; but despite all this, they were still
divided[^599] and each group would fight on its own without the help of
the others. In the Battle of Qaynuqā’, nobody joined forces with them
and this was the case with the other battles against the Jews also.

In the battles against the Jews, the Muslim army had the following
distinct characteristics:

Laying siege[^600]: this was a technique where all the aide and military
assistance was completely blocked from reaching the enemy[^601].  
 Remaining far away from the reach of enemy arrows[^602].  
 Carrying out frontal and side attacks on their fortress[^603], as they
did at Khaybar.  
 Using psychological warfare[^604].  
 Heightening the spirits of their own forces[^605].  
 Selecting a suitable place to set camp[^606].  
 Creating a split between the Jewish forces[^607]. This was done using
the superior battle strategy of the Muslims. Once this was achieved, the
Prophet (S) was able to gain separate victories over the Bani
Qaynuqā’[^608], Bani Nadhir[^609], Bani Quraydha[^610] and the residents
of Khaybar[^611]. Aside from this, the Muslim army was distinguished by
its unity of command, concentration, obedience, persistence and
swiftness[^612]; all of which made it possible to attain victory and
overpower the Jews.

### d) The front-line against the Rome

The Holy Prophet (S) fought the first battle at the border with Rome
(Dumat al-Jundal)[^613], and this was because of the importance of this
location[^614], because this place was the gateway for the future
invasions of the Muslim army on Rome[^615] and the base of
security[^616] and also was considered a secure barrier between Rome and
the Muslims[^617]. By sending ‘Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Awf on a Sariya
mission[^618], the supreme commander completed his gathering of
intelligence and information from the tribes who lived near the
area[^619] in order to learn about the Roman forces and how to invade
them[^620].

The Battle of Muta was the first full-fledged battle between the Muslim
army and the Roman troops[^621]. It can be said that the goals of this
battle were to display the might of the Muslim army[^622] and test the
capability of the enemy[^623]. However the vast difference between the
forces of the two sides made this war one-sided[^624].

The supreme commander came face to face with the Romans for a second
time in the Battle of Tabuk[^625]. One of the goals of this battle was
the avenging of the Martyrs of Muta[^626] and launching an attack on the
enemy and their allies[^627]. In this battle, no combat was seen,
however a large part of its objectives were fulfilled. The pressure
against the Romans continued and in the end, an army under the command
of Usāma bin Zayd was send against them[^628]. He attained victory in
this battle and in this way the first victory over the Romans was
established. After this the Muslims continued in their war against
them[^629].

The Romans had become worried from the time when the first battle
against them was fought near their borders[^630] and they turned their
attention towards this growing Muslim army whom they expected to face
again. However, the Holy Prophet (S) dispelled the fear of this enemy
from his forces[^631] and he put the idea in their minds that conquering
the lands of Shām is not difficult or impossible[^632]. He (S) would
train his troops to bear the hardships of travelling the long and
arduous routes, and endure the difficulties and tribulations of the
desert[^633]. Having subjugated some of the neighboring tribes[^634], he
made several pacts with them[^635] so that they could act as a refuge
and a leading force in this army against the Romans and open up the way
for the Battle of Muta[^636].

The Roman soldiers were known for their military outfits and great
adornments[^637]. Their forces, weapons, equipment and armaments were
plenty[^638] for this reason they became heavy and their maneuvers
became sluggish and slow[^639]. The Roman foot-soldiers would use bows
in situations where they had not been trained for battle[^640]. Aside
from this, the Roman forces and the Arabs (who were in their service)
had no co-operation with each other, and because they were all mixed
together[^641], they did not have an opportunity to conduct well planned
maneuvers together. Aside from this, they had a weak system of command
which greatly reduced their efficiency and speed in battle[^642].

As for the Muslim army, it was distinguished by its continuous attacks
on the enemy[^643], psychological warfare[^644], securing of the
northern borders and strategic locations[^645], taking the battle away
from its own land[^646], remaining steadfast against an enemy that was
stronger[^647], and employing the principles of war in different
ways[^648]. This was accompanied by practice, maneuvering[^649] and ease
of movement[^650]. When a soldier would shoot arrows while moving, his
stability and poise would increase. It was as if he was not carrying any
weapon or battle gear such as would impede on his swiftness or cause him
to remain behind and become weary[^651].

### Second: Department of Training

This was the department that was responsible for preparing the armed
forces and their various units in order to carry out battle
operations[^652]. In the Muslim army, training was common to all and
included individuals[^653], communities[^654], groups[^655], large
organizations[^656] and all the armed forces[^657] and would be
conducted in all the situations that arise in battle. This included:
recognition[^658], archery[^659], combat[^660], fighting when being
attacked[^661], running[^662], carrying out surprise attacks[^663],
onslaught[^664], moving covertly and camouflage[^665], conducting
ambushes and patrols[^666], marching at night[^667], covering long
distances on foot[^668], the principle of concentration[^669],
assistance and co-operation[^670], pre-emptive warfare[^671], taking
advantage of the enemy’s negligence[^672], mass attacks[^673],
psychological warfare[^674], remaining patient[^675] and steadfast
against the enemy[^676], bearing all the hardships of securing resources
and reinforcements[^677], battling to overcome fortresses[^678], war
using trenches[^679] and fighting battles in the cities[^680].

The supreme commander paid special attention to training the
cavalry[^681]. That which separated the training of this army from those
of other armies was that training took place in real-life situations and
in the battlefield, during battle[^682]. One of its distinguishing
features was that it gave skills to individuals, groups and contingents,
preparing and polishing them for every different battle scenario and
taught them about all the intricate details. It did away with mistakes
and error or greatly reduced them. It made the troops precautious when
facing the enemy, to the extent of necessity, just as the armed forces
today conduct training exercises so as to gain experience and remain
free from fear, sluggishness or laziness.

Military training in the Muslim army was something that was conducted on
a continuous basis[^683]. Between one Sariya and another or between one
battle and the next there was not a long gap[^684].

For example, after the completion of the Sariya of Hamza ibn ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, a month later the Sariya of ‘Ubaydah ibn Hārith was
conducted. The Battle of Dhi al-‘Asheera took place a month after the
Sariya of ‘Abdullah ibn Jahash and the gap between the battles of Dhi
Amr and Bahrān was no more than two months. The Sariya of Muhammad ibn
Maslamah against the Bani Tha’labah and ‘Awāl took one month and the
Sariya of Abi ‘Ubaydah ibn Jarrāh came immediately after it. During
these short gaps, the forces would prepare to march against the (next)
enemy and some of the units would undergo training before battle[^685];
just as they had done in the Battle of Badr and the Conquest.

The continuous training (of the troops) had the following results:

It would increase in the steadfastness of the individuals[^686], like in
the Sariya of Zayd ibn Hāritha where his later missions were carried out
with more steadfastness than his previous missions. Similarly, the
‘battle of the fortress’ that took place at Khaybar was better than the
battles of Bani Nadhir and Bani Qaynuqā’.

The hesitation and fear of coming face to face with the enemy was
removed[^687]. In the Battle of Badr, the forces were more hopeful of
taking over the caravan of the Quraysh without having to fight a battle
and they were fearful of face to face combat. However, in the Battle of
Uhud, they were competing with each other to go to battle and most of
them gave the view that they should go out of Madina to face the enemy
threat, because at this time fear and trepidation had totally
disappeared from them.

It strengthened the spirits of the forces[^688] and established the
certainty of victory in them[^689]; as in the battles of Hunayn and
Ahzāb.

Swiftness in getting prepared for battle[^690] was maintained with
precision and quality as in the Battle of Dhāt al-Suwayq, the war
against the Bani Mahārib and Tha’labah in the Battle of Dhāt al-Ruqā’,
and in the Battle of Bani Quraydhah. This made them stronger and more
capable to quickly carry out orders, remain swift in the difficult
circumstances of battle and able to change tactics[^691]; in the same
way as was witnessed after the army had dispersed and the forces had
made blunders in the battles of Uhud and Hunayn.

### Third: Department of Armament

This was the department responsible for securing the weaponry and battle
gear, either by producing it, buying it or taking it from the spoils of
war, and then distributing it and the issue of armament was done in
conjunction with the department of munitions and the training of
weapons-use was in co-operation with the department of training; and in
the end the discharge, restore and stockpile the armaments[^692].

The most important weapons that were used by the Muslim army were:

1. Offensive weapons[^693]: these included mainly the sword, spear and
bow.  
 2. Defensive weapons: the most important of which were the armor,
shield, helmet and the mail that was worn under it.

#### a) Offensive weapons

1) The sword was considered the most important weapon for offense and
the Holy Prophet (S) also gave a lot of importance to it. He (S) had
many swords that were either from war booty, gifts or inheritance of his
father, and he had named each of them with specific names[^694].

2) The spear was another of the weapons of offense. The supreme
commander had different types of spears and would use whichever one he
wanted. In total they were of four types[^695].

3) The bow was of various types and each one had a specific name
depending on its attributes, the type of action it would be used for and
how it would be carried[^696]. The most important types were the
hand-held bow and the ‘Hijāzi’ bow. The Holy Prophet (S) had four bows:
i) al-Safrā’ (the Yellow) ii) al-Rawhā’ (the Open) iii) al-Baydhā’ (the
White) and iv) al-Katum (the Secret-keeper)[^697].

#### b) Defensive weapons

Armor was considered one of the most important weapons of defense which
was worn to remain protected from the strikes of swords, spears or
arrows[^698]. Armors were of different shapes and types, each with a
different name[^699]. The supreme commander also had a number of armors,
the most important of which were: Dhāt al-Fudhul, al-Sadriyya and
al-Sird[^700].

Helmets would be made from iron and would be worn to protect the head
from attacks by offensive weapons[^701].  
 ‘Mighfar’ was the armor or mail that a soldier would place under his
helmet and would cover his head and face with it so that he does not get
injured[^702]. The Holy Prophet (S) and the soldiers who fought
alongside him in battle would use this[^703].  
 ‘Minjineeq’ (catapult) was one of the ‘heavy’ weapons which was used to
throw huge boulders or fireballs on the enemy[^704].  
 ‘Dabbābah’ (tank)[^705]: These two weapons (i.e. the catapult and the
tank) were used in the Battle of Tā’if.

In the same way, the Muslim army would give importance to the arming of
the cavalry[^706] and would give it a priority over the other ranks. In
the first battles, the soldiers on horseback were few. For example, in
the Battle of Badr, there were only two soldiers on horseback[^707].
This number reached two hundred in the Battle of Khaybar[^708] and in
the Conquest of Makkah there were more than two thousand soldiers on
horseback[^709].

As for the sources from where weapons could be procured, these
included:  
 1. By way of those who would engage in making them and selling them to
the soldiers[^710] but this small number was not enough for the whole
army.  
 2. From the buyers who would buy from inside the Arabian
Peninsula[^711] and outside it[^712]. The budget for buying the weapons
from this source would be gotten from:  
 a) The personal wealth and possessions of the soldiers[^713]  
 b) Those who were in charge of the army.  
 c) The wealth that would remain after distribution[^714].  
 d) The booty that was taken from the enemy[^715] and especially the
Jews.

The supreme commander would leave behind some of the wealth after making
pacts of alliance with the defeated enemies, however he would never
leave behind any of their weapons; because this was the main source of
weapons and strengthening the army while at the same time weakening the
enemy in order to prevent any future attacks and incursions[^716]. There
was also another source of weapons for the army and that was taking them
on loan and then returning them to their owners after the battle[^717].

Training with weapons was one of the requirements of the Muslim army and
the supreme commander would insist and encourage the fighters to train
on how to carry the weapons[^718], the principles of their usage[^719],
archery and gaining mastery over it[^720], training on the use of the
catapult[^721]. Many of the Muslims such as Talha ibn ‘Abdillah
al-Qarashi and Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqās[^722] were well known for their skill
in archery. At the same time, the Prophet (S) emphasized on training the
riders who would fight on horseback[^723]. He (S) also gave importance
to the creation of weapons and encouraged and promised paradise to those
who would undertake this task[^724]. For this purpose, he sent a group
to Jurash (Yemen) in order to learn how to make new weapons and acquire
them before the siege of Tā’if[^725].

The importance given to making various light weaponry[^726] was another
of the goals of the supreme commander and for this he would give orders
to the weapon makers in the area for different models of spears and
bows[^727]. When the weapons were distributed among the soldiers, those
that were on loan would be taken back and those acquired from war booty
would be kept by them. In this way, each soldier would get to use more
than one type of weapon[^728].

As for supplies of weapons during battle, the situation was not as it is
in the new age. A soldier would bring whatever weapon he had in his
possession, and whatever he needed in the battlefield, he would have to
carry himself. So if he were to lose one of his weapons or it were to
break, he would exchange it and continue to fight[^729]. With regards to
the storing and stockpiling of weapons, each individual would store his
own weapons in his home[^730] and things were not as they are today i.e.
there was no central repository where the weapons would be stockpiled.
In the house of every soldier, a number of swords, spears and bows could
be found, and he would pay due attention to their repair and
maintenance[^731].

In times of ‘peace’, the weapons would be kept in a large warehouse that
was strategically located and would be guarded[^732]. The supreme
commander would order that weapons must be carried at all times, in
every situation, even when the enemies are not (apparently) present. He
would forbid the forces who had returned from battle and were tired and
weary, and intended to remove their weapons[^733], from doing so and he
was always put the thought about the struggle (against the sworn enemy),
whether in times of war or peace, in the present or future, despite the
presence or absence of the enemy in their minds and would strengthen
this idea in them[^734].

[^1]: Harawi, al-Hiyal al-Harbiyya: 79; al-Mawsu’ah al-Askariyya 1:62,
70; Majmu’at al-Ta’leef fi Akādimiyyah Farunzi al-‘Askariyyah –
al-Takteek: 179

[^2]: Wāqidi 1:11; Ibn Hishām 2:45; Ibn Sa’d 2:2; Tabari 2:259

[^3]: Wāqidi 1:9, 197; Ibn Sa’d 2:2, 23, 35

[^4]: Wāqidi 2:534, 550; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 85; Tabari 3:29; Suhayli 4:252;
Kalā’i 1:158

[^5]: Wāqidi 2:560, 755; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Sa’d 2:64, 92; Tabari
3:63; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:108, 153; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:299

[^6]: Wāqidi 1:11, 196, 2:815; Ibn Hishām 3:53; Ibn Sa’d 3:24; Tabari
2:492; Ibn Hazm: 102

[^7]: Ibn Hishām 2:241; Ibn Sa’d 1:2, 38, 86; Tabari 2:408, 3:130-146;
Ibn Hazm: 100; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224, 226; Mu’jam Qabā’il al-‘Arab
1:216, 2:667, 3:1061

[^8]: Wāqidi 1:402; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Sa’d 2:44; Ibn Hazm: 253; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:108; Ibn Katheer 5:17

[^9]: Wāqidi 1:218, 2:457, 461; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Ibn Sa’d 1:207; Tabari
2:436; Kalā’i 1:113; Ibn al-Katheer 4:103

[^10]: Wāqidi 1:395, 3:990; also see Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 119; Ibn Mandhur,
Lisān al-‘Arab 7:344

[^11]: Wāqidi 2:805, 808; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Wāqidi 1:203; Kalā’i 1:139; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:810 onwards

[^14]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Hishām 2:267; Ibn Hazm: 226 onwards

[^15]: Wāqidi 1:11, 13, 2:796; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 4:39; Ibn Sa’d 2:5;
Kalā’i 1:57; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:226; Ibn al-Katheer 2:282, 283; Harawi:
79

[^16]: Wāqidi 1:13-15; Ibn Hishām 1:600-610

[^17]: Wāqidi 2:769; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:161; Ibn Atheer 4:81

[^18]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:535, 3:1123; Ibn Hishām 4:15; Ibn Sa’d 2:56, 65,
136; Harawi: 89; ‘Batn’ was the word used to describe a group that was
smaller than a tribe. (Tr.)

[^19]: Wāqidi 1:203; Ibn Hishām 4:36; Kalā’i 1:138; Ibn al-Katheer 4:82

[^20]: Ibn Hishām 2:268; Ibn Sa’d 2:3, 24, 35; Ibn al-Atheer 4:16; Ibn
Hajar 4:22

[^21]: Wāqidi 1:19, 2:457; Ibn Hishām 2:268, 3:243; Ibn Sa’d 1:207

[^22]: Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 4:64; Ibn Sa’d 2:36; Ibn Hanbal 4:325

[^23]: Wāqidi 2:532

[^24]: Wāqidi 1:207, 2:457, 805; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Ibn Sa’d 2:25
onwards; Ibn Katheer 4:103

[^25]: Wāqidi 1:19 onwards, 2:803; Ibn Hishām 2:268 4:37 onwards; Tabari
2:436; Kalā’i: 87 onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:167

[^26]: Wāqidi 1:11, 194; Ibn Hishām 4:160; Kalā’i 1:151

[^27]: Zuhri: 63; Wāqidi 1:19; Ibn Hishām 2:268, 4:37, 42; Tabari 2:436;
Kalā’i 1:87 onwards

[^28]: Wāqidi 1:207; Ibn Sa’d 2:25; Tabari 3:378; Jawād ‘Ali,
al-Mufassal fi Tārikh al-‘Arab qabl al-Islām 1:590

[^29]: Wāqidi 1:206

[^30]: Wāqidi 2:792, 803; Ibn Atheer 2:241; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:167

[^31]: Wāqidi 2:636, Ibn Sa’d 2:4; Suhayli 2:142; Hamawi, Mu’jam
al-Buldān 1:252, 4:428, 5:215

[^32]: Ibn Hanbal 5:153; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 28); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād
57); Wāqidi 1:403, 2:557

[^33]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:536; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 117; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:103

[^34]: Ibn Hanbal 6:150; Ibn Katheer 3:261

[^35]: Wāqidi 2:755; Ibn Hishām 4:39; Kalā’i 1:138; Ibn Katheer 4:282

[^36]: Wāqidi 2:796; Ibn Sa’d 2:33, 43, 56; Tabari 2:555, 3:38; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:161

[^37]: Wāqidi 1:71, 2:466; Ibn Hishām 2:287, 3:237; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:282

[^38]: Wāqidi 1:56, 2:636; Ibn Katheer 3:216

[^39]: Wāqidi 1:13, 194; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn Hazm: 108; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:109; Ibn Qayyim, Zād al-Ma’ād 2:299

[^40]: Wāqidi 2:771, 1:195; Ibn Sa’d 2:21

[^41]: Wāqidi 1:12, 2:796, 815; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Kalā’i 1:138

[^42]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:536, 2:799-805; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Ibn Sa’d 2:44;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54

[^43]: Wāqidi 1:404, 2:640, 808; Ibn Hishām 3:268; Harawi, al-Hiyal
al-Harbiyya: 77

[^44]: It should be noted that the enumeration of these points in such a
manner has been undertaken by the translator for ease of understanding.
In the original text the points were not numbered. (Tr.)

[^45]: Ibn Sa’d 4:1 onwards; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:810; Ibn Atheer 3:109

[^46]: Trickery here is not used in the negative sense, rather it means
keeping the truth hidden and mentioning something else which is neither
true nor false. (Tr.)

[^47]: Wāqidi 2:536, 651; Ibn Hishām 2:268, 3:292; Ibn Atheer 2:188

[^48]: Ibn Hishām 3:243; Kalā’i 1:113

[^49]: Wāqidi 1:207, 395, 2:464

[^50]: Wāqidi 1:395, 3:1011; Ibn Hishām 2:241; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:226

[^51]: Wāqidi 1:207; 2:457

[^52]: Wāqidi 1:207; Ibn Sa’d 2:45

[^53]: Zuhri: 92; Wāqidi 2:640, 3:996, 1123; Ibn Sa’d 2:69, 109

[^54]: Wāqidi 1:194, 218, 404, 2:639, 3:1117

[^55]: Wāqidi 1:404-406, 550, 640; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 84)

[^56]: Wāqidi 2:666, 3:1011; Ibn Hishām 2: 268

[^57]: Wāqidi 1:19; Ibn Sa’d 2:25

[^58]: Ibn Hishām 2:271, 3:69; Ibn Sa’d 2:9; Tabari 3:9

[^59]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Hishām 2:271; Tabari 2:507; Kalā’i 1:30; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:131

[^60]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2, 56, 63, 85, 95; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224, 2:103-112,
145

[^61]: Wāqidi 1:11, 195, 443; Ibn Sa’d 2:63; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:106

[^62]: Wāqidi 1:217, 2:602

[^63]: Wāqidi 1:19 onward; Ibn Sa’d 2:63; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:106

[^64]: Wāqidi 2:564, 3:894; Ibn Hishām 4:265; Ibn Sa’d 2:65; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:110

[^65]: Wāqidi 1:217, 3:894; Ibn Hishām 2:265; Ibn Sa’d 1:63; Ibn Katheer
4:222

[^66]: Wāqidi 2:750, 3:894; Jawād ‘Ali 5:436

[^67]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:764; Ibn Atheer 3:9

[^68]: Wāqidi 3:751, 894; Ibn Sa’d 2:90; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:150

[^69]: Wāqidi 2:750; Ibn Hishām 3:243; Ibn Sa’d 2:89; Tabari 3:27;
Kalā’i 1:113

[^70]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 1:113, 334; Ibn Atheer 1:390

[^71]: Wāqidi 1:19, 207; Ibn Sa’d 2:25, 45

[^72]: Wāqidi 2:194, 218, 404, 2:639, 3:1117

[^73]: Wāqidi 2:666, 3:1011; Ibn Hishām 2:268

[^74]: Wāqidi 2:406, 550, 805; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 62

[^75]: Wāqidi 1:203; Ibn Sa’d 2:25

[^76]: Wāqidi 1:404, 2:550, 805; Ibn Hishām 2:268

[^77]: Wāqidi 1:19, 194, 404, 2:640, 3:996, 1123; Ibn Sa’d 2:25, 45, 69,
109

[^78]: Wāqidi 1:204 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:25 onwards

[^79]: Zuhri: 92; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 109; Ibn Hazm: 108, 109

[^80]: Ibn Hishām 2:271 onwards, 3:69; Ibn Sa’d 2:9; Tabari 3:9; Kalā’i
1:130; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:232

[^81]: Wāqidi 1:217, 2:602

[^82]: Wāqidi 2:462, 734; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Tabari 2:568; Suhayli 3:270

[^83]: Wāqidi 2:444, 464, 815

[^84]: Wāqidi 1:220, 371; Ibn Sa’d 2:48

[^85]: Wāqidi 1:13; Ibn Sa’d 2:35; Ibn Hazm: 105; Kalā’i 1:144

[^86]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2 onwards

[^87]: Shaybāni, al-Kabir 1:58; Wāqidi 1:67, 3:996; Ibn Hishām 2:278,
3:260, 4:161; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:216

[^88]: Zuhri: 86; Wāqidi 1:13, 193; Ibn Sa’d 2:5, 24; Tabari 3:42; Ibn
Hazm: 105

[^89]: Wāqidi 1:11; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:5, 24; Tabari 3:6;
Kalā’i 1:162

[^90]: Ibn Hishām 3:69; Ibn Sa’d 2:9; Tabari 3:6; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:131

[^91]: Ibid.

[^92]: Wāqidi 2:445, 462, 734, 815

[^93]: Wāqidi 1:72, 2:466, 722; Ibn Hishām 2:287; Ibn Sa’d 2:85; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:146

[^94]: Wāqidi 1:12; Ibn Hishām 2:248; Ibn Khayyāt, al-Tārikh 1:29; Ibn
Hazm: 100

[^95]: Wāqidi 1:26, 300, 378; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Kalā’i 1:144

[^96]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2, 56, 61, 85, 95; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224, 2:103,
145, 150, 162

[^97]: Wāqidi 1:174, 184, 363; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Ibn
Hazm: 155

[^98]: Zuhri: 63; Wāqidi 1:19, 207, 2:245, 450; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Ibn
Sa’d 2:25

[^99]: Zuhri: 87; Wāqidi 1:88, 91; Ibn Hishām 4:64; Ibn Qayyim 2:386

[^100]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 34, al-Maghāzi 29); Muslim (al-Jihād 123);
Nasā’i (al-Jihād 29)

[^101]: Ibn Hanbal 2:340, 4:354; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 32); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 49, 130)

[^102]: Q8:74, Q9:20, 41, 88; Bukhāri (al-Riqāq 34, al-Jihād 2, 31,
al-Adab 1)

[^103]: Wāqidi 2:534, 550; Ibn Sa’d 2:2, 35; Tabari 2:410, 3:36; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:108

[^104]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2-5, 24; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224, 304

[^105]: Wāqidi 1:10-13, 197; Ibn Sa’d 2:2; Tabari 3:126; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:224

[^106]: Wāqidi 1:11; Ibn Hishām 3:249; Ibn Sa’d 2:2; Tabari 3:126; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:224

[^107]: Wāqidi 1:334; Ibn Hishām 3:128, 321; Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Ibn Hazm:
207, 220

[^108]: Wāqidi 2:666, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:245, 344; Ibn Sa’d 2:2; Ibn
Hazm: 100

[^109]: Ibn Sa’d 2:64; Tabari 2:408; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224; Kahālah,
Mu’jam Qabā’il al-‘Arab 3:991

[^110]: Wāqidi 1:182, 403, 3:992; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:2-5; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:304

[^111]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2-5; Tabari 2:564, 3:36, 100

[^112]: Wāqidi 1:173, 184, 191; Ibn Sa’d 2:18-21, 66; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:39

[^113]: Wāqidi 1:76; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27;
Tabari 2:479; Ibn Hazm: 154

[^114]: Zuhri: 71; Wāqidi 1:363; Bukhāri 5:88; Tabari 2:552

[^115]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:53;
Tabari2:71

[^116]: Zuhri: 84; Wāqidi 2:633; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:130

[^117]: Wāqidi 1:76, 2:363, 496, 633

[^118]: Wāqidi 2:651; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Ibn Qayyim 2:292

[^119]: Wāqidi 1:181; Ibn Hishām 3:47; Ibn Sa’d 2:20; Ibn Khayyāt 1:28;
Tabari 2:483

[^120]: Wāqidi 1:182, 193, 2:551, 555; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:21,
24; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27; Ibn Hazm: 152; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:292, 304

[^121]: Wāqidi 1:193, 395, 550; Ibn Hishām 3:213; Ibn Sa’d 2:43, 58, 61,
85; Tabari 2:556; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:52, 79, 146

[^122]: Wāqidi 1:347, 355; Ibn Hishām 3:194; Ibn Sa’d 2:36; Tabari
2:583; Ibn Hazm: 178

[^123]: Wāqidi 1:402, 2:560, 3:992; Ibn Hishām 4:15; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 92,
118; Tabari 3:100; Ibn Hazm: 184; Ibn ‘Asākir, al-Tārikh al-Kabir 1:107;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54

[^124]: Zuhri: 106 onwards; Wāqidi 3:992; Ibn Hishām 3:159; Ibn Sa’d
2:118; Suhayli 4:195; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:215

[^125]: Wāqidi 1:182; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Tabari 3:63, 100; Suhayli 3:163;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:153, 215

[^126]: Wāqidi 2:568; Ibn Hishām 4:290; Muslim 3:1296; Kalā’i 1:162

[^127]: Wāqidi 1:76, 363, 496, 633; Ibn Atheer 2:186

[^128]: Zuhri: 52, 55; Wāqidi 1:347, 2:560, 573; Ibn Sa’d 2:36; Ibn
Hazm: 208; Kalā’i 1:161

[^129]: Ibn Hanbal 3:475; Khabbāri (al-Diyāt 22, al-Madhālim 605); Abu
Dāwud (al-Malāhim 17); Tirmidhi (al-Fitan 8, al-Isti’dhān 30)

[^130]: Ibn Sa’d 2:105, 3:11, 118; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:184, 200, 207

[^131]: Wāqidi 3:973, 980; Ibn Hishām 4:226; Ibn Sa’d 2:115; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:202, 203; Ibn Qayyim 2:471

[^132]: Wāqidi 1:1-8; Ibn Hishām 4:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Tabari 3:155
onwards; Ibn Atheer 2:301; Kalā’i 1:57; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:223

[^133]: Wāqidi 1:11 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:224, 4:15, 279; Ibn Sa’d
2:2-6, 19, 24, 61, 86; Ibn Hazm: 184, 220; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54, 108,
153

[^134]: Wāqidi 1:403; Ibn Hishām 3:342; Ibn Sa’d 2:44; Suhayli 4:56;
Kalā’i 1:130

[^135]: Wāqidi 1:1-8; Ibn Hishām 4:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Tabari 3:152
onwards; Ibn Atheer 2:303; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:223

[^136]: Wāqidi 1:76, 2:363, 496, 633; Ibn Sa’d 2:2, 19, 39, 96

[^137]: Ibn Hishām 2:257, 3:46, 64, 213, 224; Ibn Hanbal 4:262; Bukhāri
(al-Maghāzi 29)

[^138]: Wāqidi 1:324, 2:440; Ibn Hishām 3:192, 224; Ibn Sa’d 2:35-47;
Tabari 2:546, 565

[^139]: Bukhāri (al-‘Itq 13); Muslim 2:1357; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 83);
al-Nasā’i (al-Mawāqeet 26)

[^140]: Tabari 2:408, 604, 3:9-38; Ibn Atheer 1:137, 173, 185, 216

[^141]: Ibid.

[^142]: Wāqidi 1:177, 368; Ibn Hishām 3:46, 50, 231; Ibn Sa’d 2:109;
Dhahabi, Tārikh al-Islām 1:267

[^143]: Wāqidi 2:722, 3:923; Ibn Sa’d 1:85, 113; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:145, 200

[^144]: Wāqidi 1:403; Ibn Hishām 3:342

[^145]: Wāqidi 2:722; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1144; Ibn Atheer 2:226; Ibn
Hajar al-Isābah 3:279

[^146]: For details about the tribe of ‘Ajz Hawāzin see: al-Bakri,
Mu’jam Masta’jam 1:308; Hamawi, Mu’jab al-Buldān 2:21

[^147]: Wāqidi 2:722; Ibn Qayyim 2:358

[^148]: Wāqidi 3:923; Ibn Sa’d 2:133; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:757; Ibn Atheer
3:54; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:200; Ibn Hajar 3:286

[^149]: Ibn Sa’d 2:113

[^150]: Wāqidi 2:923; Ibn Sa’d 2:113

[^151]: Wāqidi 2:822; Ibn Hishām 4:47, 49; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:172, 174

[^152]: Wāqidi 2:534, 550; Ibn Hishām 3:249; Tabari 3:126; Ibn Katheer
3:246

[^153]: Zuhri: 71; Ibn Hanbal 1:49, 87, 207; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 122); Abu
Dāwud (al-Jihād 22); Dārimi (al-Siyar 29)

[^154]: Zuhri: 52; Ibn Hishām 3:107; Tabari 2:326; Ibn Hazm: 175; Kalā’i

[^155]: Wāqidi 3:948; Ibn Sa’d 2:118; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1098; Ibn
Atheer 4:16; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:207; Ibn al-Qayyim 3:948

[^156]: Suhayli 1:107; Yāqut Himyari, Majma’ al-Buldān 4:2273; Jawād
‘Ali 6:278

[^157]: Yāqut Himyari 1:536; Ibn Mandhur, Lisān al-‘Arab 2:278

[^158]: Wāqidi 3:1080

[^159]: Wāqidi 3:875; Ibn Hishām 4:70, 73; Ibn Sa’d 2:196; Tabari 3:66;
Ibn Hazm: 235; Kalā’i 1:143; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:185; Ibn Hajar 2:98

[^160]: Wāqidi 3:875; Ibn Sa’d 2:106

[^161]: This event only affirms the fact that Khālid bin Walid, who
became a Muslim a little while before the Conquest of Makkah, still had
a tendency to act as the Arabs of the Age of Jāhiliyya used to act. His
killing of Mālik ibn Nuwayra and forcefully fornicating with his wife on
the same night is recorded in history (see: Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalāni,
al-Isābah fi Tamyiz al-Sahāba 3:337 and Dhahabi, Tārikh al-Islām 1:353)

[^162]: Q4:84; Q8:65; Ibn Hishām 2:279; Ibn Hanbal 1:117; Tabari 2:448

[^163]: Ibn Hanbal 4:354; Bukhāri (al-Anbiyā’ 54, al-Adab 10); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 24); Nasā’i (al-Zakāh 85, al-Buyu’ 98)

[^164]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 17); Muslim (al-Imārah 117)l Tirmidhi
(al-Zuhd 48)

[^165]: Ibn Hanbal 5:324, 406; Muslim (al-Musāfirun 305); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 22)

[^166]: Ibn Hishām 2:179; Ibn Hanbal 3:137; Ibn Atheer, Usd al-Ghābah
2:143

[^167]: Ibn Hishām 2:208; Suhayli 3:48; Ibn Atheer 2:26; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:257

[^168]: Wāqidi 1:21, 88; Ibn Hishām 3:70; Tabari 2:505; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:6

[^169]: A large flag (Tr.)

[^170]: Wāqidi 1:12; Ibn Hishām 2:251, 3:342; Ibn Hazm: 102, 108; Ibn
Sayyidah, al-Mukhassis 6:204; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:246; Ibn Katheer
3:246, 260

[^171]: Wāqidi 1:388, 408; Ibn Hishām 3:342; Ibn Sa’d 2:45, 48; Ibn
Hazm: 212

[^172]: Wāqidi 1:22, 2:822; Suhayli 4:96; Ibn Katheer 3:245-247

[^173]: Wāqidi 2:649, 824; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 20);
Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 69); Nasā’i (al-Hajj 106).

[^174]: Ibn Hanbal 4:297; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 69); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād
10)

[^175]: A banner (Tr.)

[^176]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812, 819

[^177]: Ibid.

[^178]: Ibn Hishām 3:342; Ibn Hanbal 1:31; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 44, 48;
al-Jihād 10); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 69); Suhayli 3:32

[^179]: Wāqidi 1:239; Ibn Hishām 4:19-21; Ibn Khayyāt, Tārikh 1:29;
Tabari 3:37; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:375

[^180]: Wāqidi 1:220, 2:499; Kalā’i 1:101

[^181]: Wāqidi 1:225; Ibn Hishām 4:19 onwards; Tabari 3:237; Suhayli
4:81

[^182]: Wāqidi 1:203, 2:763; Ibn Hishām 4:21; Tabari 2:513, 3:40; Kalā’i
1:136

[^183]: Wāqidi 1:71, 72, 2:466; Ibn Hishām 3:237, 4:51

[^184]: Wāqidi 1:54, 2:460, 504; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:246; Ibn Katheer
4:121

[^185]: ‘Ammād Talās, al-Rasul al-‘Arabi: 174; al-Lawā Khattāb, al-Rasul
al-Qā’id: 123; Wāqidi 1:8

[^186]: Wāqidi 1:722, 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 4:291; Ibn Sa’d 2:85, 136;
Tabari 3:184; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:146, 281; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:358

[^187]: Zuhri: 79, 151; Wāqidi 2:496, 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 2:251, 3:224,
293, 4:291; Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 53, 58; Ibn Hazm: 103, 191, 201; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:227, 2:68

[^188]: Wāqidi 2:539, 545, 3:1057; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:227

[^189]: Wāqidi 1:512; Ibn Hishām 2:251; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:227

[^190]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:294; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:53; Ibn
Hazm: 191; Tabari 2:181; Suhayli 3:280; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:68

[^191]: Wāqidi 2:489; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Muslim 3:1392

[^192]: Wāqidi 2:357; Ibn Hishām 2:293; Ibn Sa’d 2:58; Tabari 2:601; Ibn
Hazm: 201; Kalā’i 1:123; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:84

[^193]: Wāqidi 2:539; Ibn Sa’ 2:58; Muslim 3:1433; Tabari 2:602; Kalā’i
1:123

[^194]: Zuhri: 151; Wāqidi 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 4:291; Ibn Sa’d 2:136;
Tabari 3:184; Ibn Atheer 2:33; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:281

[^195]: Wāqidi 3:1122

[^196]: Wāqidi 3:1117; Ibn Sa’d 1:136

[^197]: Majmu’ah min al-Mu’allifeen al-‘Askariyyeen, al-Mawsu’ah
al-‘Askariyya 1:286

[^198]: Wāqidi 1:19, 159, 2:780, 3:992; Ibn Hishām 2:257, 3:50, 4:31,
159

[^199]: Zuhri: 86, 106; Wāqidi 2:780, 3:989; Ibn Hishām 4:31, 159; Ibn
Sa’d 2:96; Tabari 3:42, 100; Ibn Hazm: 233, 249; Kalā’i 1:137, 151; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:163, 215; Ibn Qayyim 2:385, 3:3

[^200]: Wāqidi 1:19, 181, 252; Ibn Hishām 2:257, 3:50; 213; Ibn Sa’d
2:9, 24; Ibn Khayyāt, Tārikh 1:16, 28; Tabari 2:267; Ibn Atheer 2:188;
Kalā’i 1:85, 124; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:241, 2:52

[^201]: Wāqidi 1:193, 195; Ibn Hishām 3:302, 4:39; Ibn Sa’d 2:24; Ibn
Hazm: 182; Kalā’i 1:138

[^202]: Wāqidi 3:990

[^203]: Wāqidi 3:1057; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Muslim 3:1391; Ibn Atheer
2:185; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:216

[^204]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812, 819, 823, 3:895, 916; Ibn Hishām 4:42, 46-49;
Ibn Sa’d 2:108; Suhayli 4:96

[^205]: Wāqidi 3:927; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Tabari 3:73; Suhayli 4:163

[^206]: Q8:74; Wāqidi 1:20; Ibn Hishām 2:279, 4:261; Bukhāri (al-Jihād
2, 31)

[^207]: Wāqidi 1:20; Ibn Hishām 2:279; Ibn Sa’d 2:26; Bukhāri
(al-Anbiyā’ 54, al-Jihād 110); Muslim (al-Imārah 117); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 20)

[^208]: Ibn Hanbal 1:117; Tabari 2:448

[^209]: Ibn Hanbal 3:354; Tirmidhi (al-Zuhd 48)

[^210]: Wāqidi 3:990; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Isti’āb
4:1473; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:303

[^211]: Wāqidi 1:335; Ibn Hishām 3:226; Ibn Hazm: 186, 251; Kalā’i
1:105; Ibn Qayyim 3:4, 7, 9, 16; Ibn Katheer 4:12

[^212]: Zuhri: 794; Wāqidi 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:53, 58;
Muslim 3:1433; Ibn Hazm: 191; Suhayli 3:280; Tabari 2:539, 602; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:68

[^213]: Wāqidi 1:181, 2:1117; Ibn Hishām 2:251; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Tabari
2:483; Ibn Hazm: 155; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:296

[^214]: Wāqidi 3:991, 994; Ibn Hishām 4:161; Ibn Katheer 5:4

[^215]: Zuhri: 71, 79, 84; Wāqidi 1:176, 363; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 199, 244,
342; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40, 53, 77; Tabari 2:479, 552; Ibn Hazm: 154, 181,
191, 211; Kalā’i 1:111, 130; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294, 2:48, 68

[^216]: Wāqidi 2:457, 458; Ibn Hishām 3:244, 232; Ibn Atheer 2:186; Ibn
al-Qayyim, Zād al-Ma’ād 2:292; Heiderābādi, Majmu’ah al-Wathā’iq
al-Siyāsiyya lil-‘Ahd al-Nabawi wal-Khilāfah al-Rāshidah: 25, 26

[^217]: Wāqidi 1:12, 2:357; Ibn Hishām 2:251, 3:293; Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 58;
Tabari 2:601; Ibn Hazm: 103, 201; Kalā’i 1:123; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:227

[^218]: Wāqidi 2:616, 640; Ibn Sa’d 2:7, 69; Ibn Hazm: 108 onwards;
Hamawi, Mu’jam al-Buldān 1:480

[^219]: Wāqidi 1:220, 2:642; Ibn Hishām 2:257, 3:323 onwards; Hamawi
3:380

[^220]: Wāqidi 2:800, 802-804; Bakri 1:303; Hamawi 2:14

[^221]: Wāqidi 1:20, 3:1117, 1123; Ibn Hishām 2:57 onwards; Ibn Sa’d
2:25; Ibn Hazm: 156; Hamawi 2:128

[^222]: Wāqidi 2:993, 1006; Ibn Hishām 2:257 onwards; Hamawi 2:14;
Kalā’i 1:85; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:241 onwards

[^223]: Ibn Hishām 3:69; Ibn Sa’d 2:59; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:131

[^224]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:632; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Hamawi 1:214; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:54; Ibn Katheer 3:261

[^225]: Ibn Hishām 2:268 onwards, 3:69, 90; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Bakri 3:742

[^226]: Wāqidi 1:56, 2:535; Ibn Katheer 3:261

[^227]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:534, 557; Ibn Hishām 3:279; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 56;
Kalā’i 1:58; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54, 79

[^228]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:252, 800; Ibn Hishām 2:252; Ibn Hazm: 802

[^229]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:536; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 117; Ibn
Atheer 2:188; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:103

[^230]: Wāqidi 1:217, 2,602

[^231]: Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Sa’d 2:12; Ibn Hazm: 108; Qurtubi,
al-Jāmi’ li Ahkām al-Qur’ān 4:306; Ibn Katheer 3:260, 5:9

[^232]: Wāqidi 1:20, 335, 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:25, 136

[^233]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812, 820, 3:895, 995, 1034; Ibn Hishām 4:24, 49;
Ibn Sa’d 2:108; Ibn Hazm: 231; Ibn ‘Asākir, Tārikh Dimishq 1:111

[^234]: Wāqidi 1:20; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:25, 92; Kalā’i 1:135;
Ibn Katheer 4:240

[^235]: Wāqidi 1:20, 21; Ibn Hishām 3:70; Ibn Hazm: 159

[^236]: Wāqidi 3:927; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Tabari 3:73; Suhayli 4:163

[^237]: Wāqidi 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:25

[^238]: Wāqidi 1:145, 198, 500; Ibn Hishām 2:320; Kalā’i 1:112; Ibn
Katheer 4:282

[^239]: Ibn Hanbal 1:307; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 110); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād
24)

[^240]: Wāqidi 1:13, 56, 217; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn Katheer 3:216

[^241]: Wāqidi 1:12 onwards,2:573, 3:995; Ibn Hishām 2:241, 251, 3:202,
321, 342; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Ibn Khayyāt 1:71; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1023; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:167

[^242]: Wāqidi 1:215, 388, 2:822, 3:995; Ibn Hishām 3:342, 4:42; Ibn
Sa’d2:34, 45; Ibn Khayyāt 1:29; Ibn Hazm: 212; Ibn Atheer 4:16 onwards

[^243]: Wāqidi 1:10-13, 48, 2:800, 819, 820; Ibn Hishām 2:241, 251,
4:42; Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 4; Ibn Hazm: 100; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:226

[^244]: Wāqidi 1:396; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Tabari 3:102; Muslim 3:1429

[^245]: Q8:42; Wāqidi 1:53; 2:445; Ibn Hishām 3:69, 231

[^246]: Mount Uhud is was used like a strong fort that was positioned
behind the Muslim army (Tr.)

[^247]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Hazm: 186, 187; Tabari 3:9; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:231

[^248]: Wāqidi 1:53, 2:643; Ibn Hishām 3:234; Ibn Hazm: 186

[^249]: Wāqidi 1:54; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:251, 2:231

[^250]: Wāqidi 1:56, 220; Harawi, al-Hiyal al-Harbiyya: 97

[^251]: Wāqidi 1:199, 220; Ibn Hishām 1:53

[^252]: Wāqidi 1:56, 220; Harawi: 97

[^253]: Ibn Hishām 3:302; Muslim (al-Imārah 178); Ibn Hanbal 2:327;
Tabari 507; Bakri 2:229, 1220; Hamawi 5:118

[^254]: Wāqidi 2:644, 646

[^255]: Wāqidi 1:54; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:251, 2:131

[^256]: Wāqidi 1:176, 363, 496, 2:633 onward, 992; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 199,
244 onwards 4:121; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40, 53, 114; Ibn Hazm: 181, 191; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:68, 130, 201

[^257]: Wāqidi 1:177, 368, 449; Ibn Hishām 3:199; Kalā’i 1:111

[^258]: Wāqidi 2:651, 652, 804; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:131

[^259]: Wāqidi 1:53, 2:445; Ibn Hishām 3:69; Kalā’i 1:130; ‘Imād Talās,
al-Rasul al-‘Arabi: 310-311

[^260]: Wāqidi 1:53, 54, 220; Tabari 3:9; Kalā’i 1:130

[^261]: Wāqidi 2:462, 464; Ibn Hishām 4:85; Tabari 2:568

[^262]: Wāqidi 1:55, 220, 2:644; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:131; Ibn Katheer
4:199; Harawi: 87

[^263]: Wāqidi 1:56, 224, 2:649; Ibn Hishām 3:231; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:48

[^264]: Wāqidi 1:19, 27, 225, 2:645, 3:1002; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Muslim
3:1430

[^265]: Wāqidi 1:56, 2:445; Ibn Hishām 3:69, 231; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:131

[^266]: Wāqidi 1:56, 219, 2:819-823; Ibn Hishām 3:218, 4:46

[^267]: Zuhri: 86; Wāqidi 1:219 onwards, 405, 2:522, 801, 1122; Ibn
Hishām 3:23

[^268]: Wāqidi 1:56, 219; Tabari 6:573; Ibn Hazm: 239

[^269]: Wāqidi 1:219, 224; Ibn Hishām 3:243, 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:2 onwards;
Suhayli 4:96; Kalā’i 1:113

[^270]: Wāqidi 1:217, 2:504; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Tabari 2:567

[^271]: Wāqidi 1:217, 2:504, 800, 820; Ibn Hishām 4:42, 46-49; Suhayli
4:60

[^272]: Ibn Hishām 2:279; Ibn Hanbal 1:117; Bukhāri (al-Anbiyā’ 54,
al-Jihād 110); Tabari 2:448

[^273]: Wāqidi 1:58 onwards; Ibn Hishām 4:161; Ibn Hanbal 3:137; Bukhāri
(al-Maghāzi 17)

[^274]: Wāqidi 1:71, 2:466, 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 3:237, 4:291; Ibn Sa’d
3:85; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:146

[^275]: Shaybāni 1:58; Wāqidi 1:220, 2:778; Tabari 2:507

[^276]: Wāqidi 1:68, 3:923; Ibn Hishām 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:113; Colonel
Akram, Sayfullah Khālid: 114

[^277]: Shaybāni 1:58; Wāqidi 1:67, 68; Ibn Hishām 2:278; Muslim 3:1362;
Ibn Qutayba ‘Uyun al-Akhbār 2:107

[^278]: Wāqidi 1:343, 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 2:281; Ibn Sa’d 2:35; Tabari
3:184; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:39

[^279]: Wāqidi 1:13, 3:897; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 281

[^280]: Wāqidi 1:177; Ibn Hishām 2:325-327; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn Hazm: 28;
Kalā’i 1:134

[^281]: Wāqidi 1:13, 203, 2:535, 3:1123; Ibn Hishām 4:15, 39; Ibn Sa’d
2:56, 65; Kalā’i 1:138

[^282]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:796; Ibn Hishām 2:252; Ibn Sa’d 2:5, 96; Ibn
Hazm: 104; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:161

[^283]: Wāqidi 1:13, 343; Ibn Sa’d 2:35; Ibn Hazm: 105; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:39; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:358

[^284]: Wāqidi 1:13, 363; Ibn Sa’d 2:40; Suhayli 3:136; Kalā’i 1:121,
122; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:109

[^285]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:636; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn Atheer 2:188; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:54

[^286]: Wāqidi 2:796, 802-805; Ibn Hishām 4:39; Ibn Hanbal 3:456;
Bukhāri (al-Jihād 103, al-Maghāzi 79); Muslim (al-Tawba 254); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 92)

[^287]: Wāqidi 1:195; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 4:39; Ibn Sa’d 2:24, 92; Ibn
Atheer 2:188

[^288]: Wāqidi 1:203, 204; Ibn Hishām 2:268, 4:39; Ibn Sa’d 1:207;
Tabari 2:436; Kalā’i 1:113

[^289]: Wāqidi 1:404, 406; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Suhayli 3:43

[^290]: Wāqidi 1:11, 13, 196, 198, 2:815; Ibn Hishām 3:53; Ibn Sa’d
2:24; Tabari 2:494; Ibn Hazm: 102

[^291]: Wāqidi 2:815

[^292]: al-Mawsu’ah al-‘Askariyya 1:261

[^293]: Wāqidi 1:19, 207, 218; Ibn Hishām 2:268, 4:37, 42; Kalā’i 1:87

[^294]: Shaybāni 1:118; Wāqidi 2:445-452, 449; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn Hazm:
208; Kalā’i 1:144; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:303

[^295]: Wāqidi 1:10, 197, 2:550, 755, 3:1011; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 3:53,
224, 268, 269; Ibn Sa’d 2:2-5, 61, 85, 89, 209; Ibn Hazm: 102, 226, 227;
Ibn Atheer 2:209, 226, 303; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224, 2:39

[^296]: Wāqidi 1:207, 218, 445, 461; Ibn Hishām 3:243; Ibn Sa’d 2:25;
Kalā’i 1:113; Ibn Katheer 4:103

[^297]: Wāqidi 1:207, 218, 3:996; Ibn Hishām 3:232; Ibn Sa’d 2:119

[^298]: Wāqidi 1:54, 220, 2:651, 922; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 69, 264; Ibn Sa’d
2:45; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:68

[^299]: Ibn Hanbal 2:471, 3:487; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 184); ibn Mājah
(al-Jihād 3); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 20)

[^300]: Wāqidi 3:991; Ibn Hishām 4:261; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 2, 31)

[^301]: Wāqidi 1:68 onwards; Ibn Hishām 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:113

[^302]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Sa’d 2:!2; Tabari 2:568

[^303]: Ibn Hishām 2:150; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Suhayli 2:252

[^304]: Q49:10; Bukhāri (al-Adab 27); Muslim (al-Birr 66)

[^305]: Wāqidi 1:334, 384; Ibn Hishām 3:128, 220; Ibn Sa’d 2:34, 42; Ibn
Hazm: 175, 184; Kalā’i 1:104; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:37, 52; Ibn Katheer
4:84, 87

[^306]: Wāqidi 1:324, 384; Ibn Hishām 3:128, 321; Ibn Sa’d 2:34, 42; Ibn
Hazm: 175

[^307]: Wāqidi 1:335, 3:990, 1091; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Suhayli 4:196

[^308]: Wāqidi 1:334; Ibn Hishām 3:220; Ibn Sa’d 2:42, 45; Tabari 2:564

[^309]: Wāqidi 1:11, 13, 340, 550; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 251; Ibn Sa’d 2:56,
61, 65; Ibn Atheer 2:207; Kalā’i 1:58

[^310]: Wāqidi 1:334; Ibn Hishām 3:128; Ibn Sa’d 3:34; Ibn Khayyāt 1:38;
Tabari 3:29; Ibn Hazm: 175; Kalā’i 1:104; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:37; Ibn
Katheer 4:48

[^311]: Wāqidi 1:402; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Sa’d 2:44; Ibn Hazm: 184;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54

[^312]: Wāqidi 1:385, 287

[^313]: Wāqidi 1:387

[^314]: Wāqidi 1:326

[^315]: Wāqidi 1:334, 384, 2:822; Ibn Hishām 4:64, 47; Ibn Sa’d 2:34,
42, 70, 92; Ibn Hazm: 209; Ibn Qayyim 2:306

[^316]: Zuhri: 5; Ibn Hanbal 1:229; Bukhāri (al-Hajj 80); Kalā’i 1:105;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:116

[^317]: Zuhri: 58; Wāqidi 1:338, 3:990, 1124; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Suhayl
4:196

[^318]: Wāqidi 1:338; Ibn Hishām 4:19, 21, 47; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Ibn Atheer
2:236, 246; Kalā’i 1:105

[^319]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 1:337, 338; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:64, 170; Ibn
al-Qayyim 2:390

[^320]: Wāqidi 3:928; Ibn Hishām 4:122; Suhayli 3:250; Kalā’i 1:111; Ibn
Katheer 4:77, 346

[^321]: Ibn Hishām 4:44; Ibn Sa’d 2:97; Tabari 3:52; Ibn Atheer 2:144;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:168

[^322]: Wāqidi 2:819, 820, 822; Ibn Hishām 4:46, 47

[^323]: Wāqidi 2:614; Abu Dāwud (al-Manāsik 12)

[^324]: Wāqidi 2:736; Ibn Hishām 4:13; Tabari 3:24; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:148

[^325]: Wāqidi 2:734, 735; Tabari 3:24

[^326]: Wāqidi 2:735; Abu Dāwud (al-Tawāf 3, al-Raml 1)

[^327]: Wāqidi 2:735; Ibn Hishām 4:13; Tabari 3:24

[^328]: Through this he (S) displayed the strength and might of his army
to the enemy (Tr.)

[^329]: Ibn Hishām 4:13; Ibn Hanbal 1:229; Tirmidhi (al-Hajj 39); Nasā’i
(al-Manāsik 176)

[^330]: Wāqidi 1:821, 195; Ibn Hishām 3:46,213, 292; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 43;
56; Ibn Hazm: 152, 182, 200; Kalā’i 1:122; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294

[^331]: Wāqidi 1:335, 371, 2:799; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Tabari 3:101; Ibn
Hazm: 202; Ibn Katheer 4:12

[^332]: Ibn Sa’d 2:4, 19,24, 43, 56, 108; Ibn Atheer 2:173, 188, 192

[^333]: Wāqidi 1:182, 195; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 24, 35,
43-45, 62, 95; Ibn Hazm: 152; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294

[^334]: Wāqidi 2:560, 3:1125; Ibn Hishām 4:169, 239; Ibn Sa’d 2:64, 119,
122; Ibn Atheer 2:209, 293; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:108, 220; Ibn al-Qayyim
2:299, 3:11

[^335]: Zuhri: 71, 84, 89; Wāqidi 1:176, 363, 2:496, 633; Ibn Hishām
3:50, 199, 244, 342; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40, 53, 77; Ibn Hazm: 154, 181, 191,
211; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294, 2:48, 64, 130

[^336]: Wāqidi 1:182, 193, 195; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 24, 35,
43-45; Ibn Hazm: 152, 182; Ibn Atheer 2:207; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294,
304, 2:52, 54

[^337]: Ibn Sa’d 2:122; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 143); Muslim (al-Jihād 2,
Fadhā’il al-Sahābah 35); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 38); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād
82)

[^338]: Wāqidi 1:176, 363, 2:496; Zuhri: 71, 89; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 199;
Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40; Ibn Hazm: 154, 181; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294, 2:48

[^339]: Wāqidi 1:176, Suhayli 3:137, Ibn Atheer 2:137; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:294

[^340]: Wāqidi 1:365; Ibn Sa’d 2:41; Tabari 2:552; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:49

[^341]: Ibn Sa’d 2:41; Tabari 2:552; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:49; Ibn Katheer
4:75

[^342]: Ibid.

[^343]: Ibn Sa’d 2:41; Ibn Hazm: 182; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:49; Ibn
Katheer 4:75

[^344]: Shaybāni 1:58; Wāqidi 1:67, 2:649; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 130);
Tabari 2:502

[^345]: Zuhri: 151; Wāqidi 2:778; Ibn Hishām 4:291; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:161

[^346]: Wāqidi 2:778; Ibn Hanbal 6:11; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 130); Ibn
Qutaybah, ‘Uyun al-Akhbār 1:108

[^347]: Wāqidi 2:778, 3:1117; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:281

[^348]: Tabari 3:75; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Isti’āb 2:810; Kalā’i 1:144

[^349]: Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 8); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 102); Dārimi
(al-Siyar 6, al-Riqāq 5); Harawi: 98

[^350]: Wāqidi 1:62; Ibn Sa’d 2:10; Ibn Qutaybah 1:108

[^351]: Majmu’at Muhādharāt Alqaytu fi al-Akādimiyya al-‘Askariyya
al-‘Ulyā al-Suriyyah

[^352]: There are many examples of this during the eight years of war
between Iran and ‘Iraq (Tr.)

[^353]: Wāqidi 1:68, 225; Ibn Hishām 2:277, 3:72; Ibn Sa’d 2:10, 27;
Tabari 2:445; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:254, 2:10

[^354]: Wāqidi 1: 68, 225, 2:472; Ibn Hishām 2:277, 3:235; Ibn Sa’d
2:10, 49; Tabari 2:445, 574; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:254, 2:61

[^355]: Ibid.

[^356]: Wāqidi 1:68, 225; Ibn Hishām 2:277, 3:72; Ibn Sa’d 2:10, 27;
Tabari 2:445

[^357]: Zuhri: 63 onwards; Wāqidi 1:68; Ibn Hishām 2:277; Ibn Sa’d 2:10;
Tabari 2:445; Kalā’i 1:88; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:254

[^358]: Wāqidi 1:225; Ibn Hishām 3:72; Ibn Sa’d 2:28; Tabari 2:513; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:10

[^359]: Wāqidi 1:68, 225, 2:471; Ibn Hishām 2:277, 3:72, 335; Ibn Sa’d
2:10, 28, 49; Tabari 2:245, 574; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:254

[^360]: Majmu’ah al-Ta’leef fi Akādimiyya Ferunzi al-‘Askariyya –
Takteek: 376 onwards; Majmu’at Muhādharāt Alqaytu fi al-Akādimiyya
al-‘Askariyya al-‘Ulyā al-Suriyyah

[^361]: Ibn Sayyidah, al-Mukhassis 6:81; Ibn Khaldun, al-Muqaddimah
2:657

[^362]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 31, 37); Muslim (al-Zakāh 136, al-Jihād 42);
Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 107)

[^363]: Muslim (al-Jihād 78); Tabari 2:445 onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:252

[^364]: Shaybāni 1:58; Ibn Hanbal 3:456, 498; Tabari 1:446

[^365]: Shaybāni 1:58; Wāqidi 1:67; Ibn Hishām 2:278; Ibn Hanbal 3:456,
498; Tabari 2:446

[^366]: Wāqidi 1:223; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Hanbal 5:420

[^367]: Wāqidi 1:219 onwards, 2:800, 812, 819; Muslim (al-Zakāh 136);
Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 107)

[^368]: Wāqidi 1:225, 230, 2:645; Ibn Atheer 2:185, 192, 239

[^369]: Wāqidi 2:653; Ibn Hishām 2:344, 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:98

[^370]: Wāqidi 1:55, 225, 2:457; Ibn Hishām 2:272, 3:69; Ibn Sa’d 2:9,
27; Tabari 1:426, 440, 507

[^371]: Wāqidi 1:177, 363, 2:496, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:245, 344, 347; Ibn
Sa’d 2:40; Tabari 2:573; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:295

[^372]: Wāqidi 2:653, 700, 2:927; Ibn Hishām 3:344, 357, 4:129; Tabari
3:9

[^373]: Wāqidi 2:658, 3:927; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:201

[^374]: Wāqidi 1:177 onwards, 363, 371, 2:466, 499; Ibn Hishām 3:200
onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:114; Ibn Qayyim 2:330; Harawi: 103

[^375]: Wāqidi 1:37, 2:496, 643; Ibn Katheer 4:199

[^376]: Wāqidi 2:499, 666, 3:928; Ibn Hishām 3:200, 344, 4:132; Tabari
2:554; Kalā’i 1:111

[^377]: Wāqidi 1:177; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27; Tabari 2:480; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:295

[^378]: Wāqidi 1:363; Ibn Sa’d 2:40; Ibn Hazm: 182; Ibn Katheer 4:76;
Dianna, Muhammad Rasulullah: 278

[^379]: Wāqidi 2:496, 501; Ibn Hishām 3:245; Tabari 2:583; Ibn Hazm: 193

[^380]: Wāqidi 2:666; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Tabari 3:16; Suhayli 4:59; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:143, 145; Ibn Katheer 4:198; Nāsif, al-Tāj 4:422

[^381]: Wāqidi 3:927; Ibn Sa’d 2:114; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:201

[^382]: Wāqidi 2:647 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:132

[^383]: Wāqidi 2:652, 658, 664; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:132, 134

[^384]: Wāqidi 2:677; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:133; Ibn Katheer 4:198

[^385]: Wāqidi 2:667, 669; Ibn Atheer 2:217; Ibn Katheer 4:198

[^386]: Wāqidi 2:680; Tabari 3:10, 14; Ibn Atheer 2:218; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:134

[^387]: Wāqidi 2:652 onwards; Ibn Atheer 2:217

[^388]: Wāqidi 2:652; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 13:9; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:131

[^389]: Wāqidi 2:644; Ibn Hishām 3:347; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Ibn Katheer 4:194

[^390]: Wāqidi 2:640; Tabari 3:17; Suhayli 4:65

[^391]: Wāqidi 2:644; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:131

[^392]: The Ghatfān were a large tribe that was made up of many clans
and lived near Khaybar. Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Suhayli 2:181; Hamawi 2:409

[^393]: Wāqidi 2:652, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Ibn Atheer 2:217

[^394]: Wāqidi 2:671; Tabari 2:16; Suhayli 4:60; Ibn Hazm: 212; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:136, 145

[^395]: Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Atheer 2:216; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:131

[^396]: Wāqidi 2:652 onwards and 667 onwards

[^397]: Wāqidi 2:652; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:131

[^398]: Wāqidi 2:658-662, 668-670

[^399]: Ibn Katheer 4:95; al-‘Umayd al-Shā’ir, al-Malāji wal-Tahsilāt:
22-37

[^400]: Wāqidi 2:445; Tabari 2:566; Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah 2:657
onwards

[^401]: Wāqidi 2:470, 492; Tabari 2:574; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:61

[^402]: Wāqidi 2:445, 446; Tabari 2:570; Ibn Hazm: 186; Hamawi 1:256,
262; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:58

[^403]: Wāqidi 2:446; Ibn Hishām 3:231; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Tabari 2:566

[^404]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Tabari 2:567, 568

[^405]: Wāqidi 2:448; Ibn Hishām 3:226, 227; Ibn Sa’d 2:47, 50; Tabari
2:566; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:55

[^406]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Sa’d 2:48

[^407]: Wāqidi 2:446

[^408]: Ibid.

[^409]: Wāqidi 2:452

[^410]: Wāqidi 2:450; Ibn Hishām 3:260; Tabari 2:569; Kalā’i 1:114; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:57

[^411]: Wāqidi 2:445; Tabari 2:568; Ibn Mandhur, Lisān al-‘Arab 8:93

[^412]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:57

[^413]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Hishām 3:231; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Ibn Hazm: 186

[^414]: Wāqidi 2:464; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Tabari 2:568

[^415]: Wāqidi 2:460; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Suhayli 3:279; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:58

[^416]: Ibn Hishām 3:233; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Tabari 2:572; Ibn Atheer 2:180;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:60

[^417]: Wāqidi 2:471; Ibn Hishām 3:235; Ibn Sa’d 2:49; Tabari 2:574; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:62; ‘Amr ibn ‘Abd Wudd was one of the bravest soldiers
among the Arabs and his strength was legendary. He was among the few who
were successful in crossing over the trench. After crossing over, he
began to recite poems of valor and boast that none from the Muslim army
would be ready to meet him in one-on-one combat. Sure enough, none from
the Muslim army showed any willingness to face him and when the Prophet
(S) asked who would go, only the young ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a) stood up.
As ‘Ali (‘a) walked into battle to face the giant Ibn ‘Abd Wudd, the
Prophet (S) remarked: Today the whole of Eimān is going to fight against
the whole of Kufr (Tr.)

[^418]: Wāqidi 2:446

[^419]: Wāqidi 2:796, 802-805; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn Hazm: 226, 230;
Suhayli 3:28, 29; Kalā’i 1:138; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:161, 167, 170; Ibn
al-Qayyim 2:386; Ibn Katheer 4:280

[^420]: Wāqidi 2:792, 803, 822, 823; Ibn Hishām 4:44; Ibn Sa’d 1:98; Ibn
Hazm: 230; Tabari 3:52, 54; Ibn Atheer 2:241; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:170;
Ibn Qayyim 21:389

[^421]: Wāqidi 2:825, 875; Ibn Hishām 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:98, 101; Tabari
3:56; ibn Atheer 2:226; Kalā’i 1:139; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:172

[^422]: Wāqidi 2:25, 728, 875; Ibn Atheer 2:246; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:173

[^423]: Wāqidi 2:818, 825; Ibn Hishām 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Tabari 3:56;
Ibn Atheer 2:246; Ibn Katheer 4:296

[^424]: Wāqidi 2:825; Ibn Hishām 4:51, 75; Ibn Sa’d 2:98, 99

[^425]: Ibn Hishām 4:46,47; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Tabari 3:56; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:169 onwards

[^426]: Ibn Hishām 4:47; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Tabari 3:56; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:170

[^427]: Wāqidi 2:822, 878; Ibn Hishām 4:53; Tabari 3:57

[^428]: Wāqidi 2:823; Ibn Hishām 4:44; Tabari 3:54; Ibn Atheer 2:246;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:170; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:390

[^429]: The way that the Holy Prophet (S) planned the Conquest of Makkah
was so perfect that the city was taken without any bloodshed or
fighting. Once Makkah was taken, the Prophet (S) proceeded to the Ka’bah
and broke all the idols in it. (Tr.)

[^430]: Majmu’at Muhādharāt Alqaytu fi al-Akādimiyya al-‘Askariyya
al-‘Ulyā al-Suriyyah

[^431]: Wāqidi 1:13, 343, 2:723, 726; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 4:165; Ibn Sa’d
2:56, 61, 64; Suhayli 4:252; Ibn Atheer 2:207; Kalā’i 1:158, 162; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:105; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:297; Ibn Katheer 4:220-223

[^432]: Wāqidi 1:343, 2:723; Ibn Hishām 4:265; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 65;
Suhayli 4:252; Ibn Atheer 2:207

[^433]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:551; Ibn Hishām 2:252; Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:104, 105; Ibn Qayyim 2:197, 297

[^434]: Zuhri: 150; Wāqidi 2:769; Ibn Hishām 4:272;Ibn Sa’d 2:94; Tabari
3:31; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:157

[^435]: Wāqidi 2:391; Ibn Hishām 3:278; Ibn Hazm: 200; Kalā’i 1:121; Ibn
Katheer 4:139

[^436]: Wāqidi 1:11; Ibn Hishām 2:245; Ibn Hazm: 103, 105; Tabari 2:295

[^437]: Wāqidi 2:534, 550, 562; Ibn Sa’d 1:56, 61-65; Ibn Atheer 1:207,
209; Kalā’i 1:158; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:79, 103, 105, 109

[^438]: Wāqidi 2:726; Ibn Hishām 4:265; Ibn Sa’d 2:64; Ibn Atheer 2:207;
Kalā’i 1:158

[^439]: Wāqidi 2:535; Ibn Atheer 2:226; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:105, 206;
Ibn Katheer 4:220

[^440]: Wāqidi 2:770; Ibn Sa’d 2:95; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:157

[^441]: Wāqidi 1:11, 13, 2:769; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 252; Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 95;
Tabari 2:259; Ibn Hazm: 04; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:225; Ibn Katheer 3:248

[^442]: Wāqidi 1:19; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:29; Ibn Khayyāt 1:16;
Tabari 2:267; Ibn Hazm: 107; Kalā’i 1:58; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:241; Ibn
Katheer 2:261

[^443]: Q8:42; Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 2:266, 272

[^444]: Wāqidi 1:56 onwards; Ibn Hishām 2:278; Ibn Hanbal 3:157; Muslim
(al-Jihād 42); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 107)

[^445]: Wāqidi 1:11 onwards; Ibn Hishām 2:254; Ibn Sa’d 2:10 onwards;
Tabari 2:259; Ibn Hazm: 104

[^446]: Wāqidi 1:20, 87, 91; Ibn Hazm: 108

[^447]: Wāqidi 1:20; Suhayli 3:51

[^448]: Wāqidi 1:48 onwards; Ibn Hishām 2:262; Ibn Katheer 3:262, 267

[^449]: Shaybāni 1:118; Wāqidi 1:67; Ibn Hishām 3:69; Ibn Sa’d 2:8;
Tabari 2:426; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:188

[^450]: Q4:84; Ibn Hishām 2:279; Ibn Hanbal 1:307; Bukhāri (al-Jihād
110)

[^451]: Wāqidi 1:23, 27, 39; Ibn Hishām 2:269; Ibn Sa’d 2:7; Tabari
2:423, 431 onwards; Ibn Atheer 2:118; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:244

[^452]: Wāqidi 1:181; Ibn Khayyāt 1:28; Tabari 2:483; Ibn Hazm: 155; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:296

[^453]: Ibn Is’hāq: 310; Wāqidi 1:181; Tabari 2:483; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:296

[^454]: Wāqidi 1:197m 198; Tabari 2:492

[^455]: Wāqidi 1:197; Ibn Hishām 3:53; Ibn Sa’d2:24; Tabari 2:492; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:305

[^456]: Zuhri: 76; ; Wāqidi 1:199; Ibn Hishām 3:64; Ibn Sa’d 2:25;
Khayyāt 1:29; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Hazm: 956; Kalā’i 1:104; Dhahabi, Tārikh
al-Islām 1:183

[^457]: Wāqidi 1:221-229; Ibn Hishām 3:82; Ibn Sa’d 2:28; Tabari 2:517
onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:11

[^458]: Wāqidi 1:229 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:82; Ibn Sa’d 2:29; Tabari
2:515 onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:11

[^459]: Wāqidi 1:249; Ibn Sa’d 2:29; Tabari 2:510; Ibn Atheer 2:54; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:11

[^460]: Wāqidi 1:241; Ibn Hishām 3:89; Tabari 2:518; Ibn Atheer 2:157;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:14 onwards

[^461]: Ibid.

[^462]: Wāqidi 1:241 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:82, 91; Tabari 2:521; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:15

[^463]: Wāqidi 1:334; Ibn Hishām 3:128; Ibn Sa’d 3:34; Ibn Khayyāt 1:38;
Tabari 3:29; Ibn Hazm: 175; Kalā’i 1:104; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:37; Ibn
Katheer 4:48

[^464]: Wāqidi 1:335; Ibn Hishām 3:107; Ibn Sa’d 2:34;Tabari 2:534;
Kalā’i 1:105

[^465]: Wāqidi 1:335 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:107; Ibn Sa’d 2:34; Tabari
2:534; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:37

[^466]: Wāqidi 1:338; Ibn Hishām 3:108; Ibn Sa’d 2:35; Tabari 2:535; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:37

[^467]: Wāqidi 1:340, 362, 391, 404; Ibn Hishām 3:199; Ibn Sa’d 2:75

[^468]: Ibn Hishām 3:226; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Ibn Hazm: 186

[^469]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:440; Ibn Hishām 2:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Tabari
2:565; Ibn Hazm: 185; Suhayli 3:276; Kalā’i 1:114; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:55; Ibn Qayyim 2:288

[^470]: Wāqidi 2:457; Ibn Hishām 3:231; Ibn Sa’d 2:47

[^471]: Wāqidi 2:492; Ibn Hishām 2:230; Ibn Hazm: 186, 187

[^472]: Wāqidi 2:445, 449, 453; Ibn Hishām 3:262

[^473]: Wāqidi 2:462, 464, 471; Ibn Hishām 2:235; Ibn Sa’d 2:48; Tabari
2:586; Suhayli 3:279; Ibn Atheer 2:180; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:61

[^474]: Wāqidi 1:492; Ibn Hishām 3:243; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:65

[^475]: Wāqidi 2:445; Ibn Hishām 2:231; Tabari 2:570; Ibn Hazm: 186; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:58

[^476]: Wāqidi 2:443; Ibn Sa’d 2:48, 48; Ibn Qayyim 2:289; Watt,
Muhammad fi al-Madina: 58

[^477]: Wāqidi 2:443; Ibn Hishām 3:260; Muslim 3:1362; Kalā’i 1:114; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:65

[^478]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:479; Muslim 3:1361; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:64;
Ibn Qayyim 2:192

[^479]: Zuhri: 79; Ibn Hishām 2:232, 262; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Bukhāri
(al-Maghāzi 29)

[^480]: Ibn Hishām 3:241; Ibn Sa’d 2:50; Tabari 2:578; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:65

[^481]: Ibn Hishām 3:243; Ibn Sa’d 2:51; Ibn Atheer 2:184; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:65

[^482]: Ibn Hishām 3:243; Ibn Atheer 2:184; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:65

[^483]: Wāqidi 2:492; Ibn Katheer 4:113

[^484]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:479; Ibn Hishām 3:234, 262; Qurtubi, al-Jāmi
li Ahkām al-Qur’ān 14:133

[^485]: Ibn Sa’d 2:53; Tabari 2:579; Ibn Atheer 2:184

[^486]: Ibn Sa’d 2:54; Ibn Hazm: 188; Ibn Katheer 4:103

[^487]: Wāqidi 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:145; Ibn Sa’d 2:53; Tabari 2:583; Ibn
Hazm: 193

[^488]: Ibn Hishām 3:266; Ibn Hanbal 4:262; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 29)

[^489]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:542; Ibn Atheer 2:224; Ibn Hajar, al-Isābah
3:24

[^490]: Wāqidi 2:553; Ibn Sa’d 2:63; Ibn Atheer 2:207; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:106; Ibn Qayyim 2:297

[^491]: Ibn Hishām 3:325, 327; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn Hazm: 208; Ibn Katheer
4:170

[^492]: Ibn Hishām 3:232; Tabari 2:635; Ibn Atheer 2:204; Kalā’i 1:130,
137

[^493]: Zuhri: 86, 87; Wāqidi 2:780; Ibn Hishām 4:31; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn
Khayyāt 1:56

[^494]: Wāqidi 2:796, 799, 892; Ibn Hishām 4:39; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn
Hazm: 226, 228, 230; Suhayli 4:97; Kalā’i 1:38; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:161,
167; Ibn Qayyim 2:309

[^495]: Wāqidi 2:800, 818, 825; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Kalā’i 1:137; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:172, 174; Ibn Katheer 4:288

[^496]: Wāqidi 2:822, 823; Ibn Hishām 4:47; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Ibn Atheer
2:246

[^497]: Wāqidi 2:825; Ibn Hishām 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Tabari 3:61; Ibn
Atheer 2:246; Kalā’i 1:139

[^498]: Wāqidi 3:873; Ibn Hishām 4:56; Ibn Sa’d 2:105; Ibn Hazm: 235;
Ibn Qayyim 2:398

[^499]: Wāqidi 1:1-8; Ibn Hishām 4:256; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Tabari 3:152; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 3:223

[^500]: Wāqidi 1:1-8; Ibn Hishām 4:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:51; Tabari 3:155;
Kalā’i 1:57; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:223

[^501]: Wāqidi 1:173, 184; Ibn Hishām 3:54, 287; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn
Hazm: 184, 198

[^502]: For more details about this tribe see: Kahālah, Mu’jam Qabā’il
al-‘Arab 2:543

[^503]: Ibn Sa’d 2:21

[^504]: Bahrān was a place between Makkah and Madina; Ibn Sa’d 2:24

[^505]: Ibn Sa’d 2:62; Bakri 2:394

[^506]: Suhayli 3:136; Kahālah 1:144, 3:888

[^507]: Wāqidi 1:193; Hamawi 1:252

[^508]: Ibn Sa’d 2:44, Hamawi 2:398

[^509]: Wāqidi 1:404; Ibn Hishām 3:302; Ibn Sa’d 2:45; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:91

[^510]: Ibn Sa’d 2:45; Bakri 4:1240

[^511]: Kahālah 3:190

[^512]: Ibn Hishām 3:292

[^513]: Bakri 1:77; Kahālah 1:147

[^514]: Ibn Sa’d 2:108; Suhayli 4:138; Bakri 2:471

[^515]: Kahālah 1:21, 22

[^516]: Wāqidi 1:342; Ibn Sa’d 2:35

[^517]: Ibn Sa’d 1:61; Bakri 3:1002

[^518]: Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Zarqāni, Sharh al-Mawāhib 2:166; Kahālah 1:92

[^519]: Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Bakri 1:269, 3:859; Hamawi 3:457

[^520]: Zarqāni 2:178

[^521]: Ibn Sa’d 2:161; Hamawi 4:366

[^522]: Ibn Sa’d 2:36

[^523]: Ibn Sa’d 2:63; Kahālah 1:174

[^524]: Ibn Sa’d 2:63; Bakri 2:446; Hamawi 2:258

[^525]: Hamawi4:338; Kahālah 3:918

[^526]: Hamawi 4:338

[^527]: Kahālah 2:513

[^528]: Ibn Sa’d 2:65; Bakri 3:1015

[^529]: Bakri 1:308, Hamawi 2:21

[^530]: Ibn Sa’d 2:85; Bakri 1:308; Hamawi 2:21; Ibn Katheer 4:221

[^531]: Kahālah 3:918, 990

[^532]: Majma’ al-Buldān 5:261; Kahālah 3:1231

[^533]: Ibn Sa’d 2:117; Hamawi 3:133, 457

[^534]: Kahālah 3:1072

[^535]: Hamawi 4:238

[^536]: Kahālah 1:143

[^537]: Ibn Sa’d 2:186; Bakri 4:1284

[^538]: Kahālah 3:888

[^539]: Ibn Sa’d 2:87; Bakri 2:395, 4:1400; Hamawi 2:98, 164, 5:449

[^540]: Ibn Sa’d 2:95; Hamawi 2:388

[^541]: Kahālah 3:1173

[^542]: Bakri 3:925, 4:1119; Hamawi 4:442

[^543]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1323; Bakri 1:17

[^544]: Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Hamawi 1:218

[^545]: Kahālah 2:1231, 2:708

[^546]: Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Bakri 3:772

[^547]: Wāqidi 1:7; Ibn Sa’d 2:116; Kahālah1:126

[^548]: Suqyā is the name of a well and Masjid near Madina from which
the Holy Prophet (S) drank water or performed ablution when he passed by
it in some of the battles. (Tr.)

[^549]: Wāqidi 2:754; Ibn Sa’d 2:117; Bakri 1:301

[^550]: Wāqidi 3:981; Hamawi 5:125

[^551]: Wāqidi 1:182, 193; Ibn Hishām 3:46, 50; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; 43; Ibn
Hazm: 152, 182

[^552]: Wāqidi 1:182, 193, 404; Ibn Hishām 3:213, 4:272; Ibn Sa’d 2:21,
43; Ibn Hazm: 152

[^553]: Wāqidi 1:183, 535; Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Ibn Atheer 2:226; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:93, 105

[^554]: Wāqidi 1:23, 27; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:226

[^555]: Wāqidi 1:23, 27, 39; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:226

[^556]: Wāqidi 2:534, 552, 3:1022; Ibn Sa’d 2:56

[^557]: Ibn Sa’d 2:12, 35, 45, 56, 63, 108; Bakri 1:17, 301, 308, 3:446,
3:1015, 4:1274, 1400; Hamawi 1:308, 2:21, 3:133, 4:238

[^558]: Wāqidi 1:193, Ibn Hishām 3:302; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 45, 56, 61;
Suhayli 3:136

[^559]: Wāqidi 1:12, 2:537; hi 2:251, 3:293; Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 58; Tabari
2:601; Ibn Hazm: 201; Ibn Atheer 2:188; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:227, 2:84

[^560]: Wāqidi 1:342; Ibn Hishām 3:203; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 35, 43-45, 62,
95; Ibn Hazm: 203; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:39

[^561]: Wāqidi 1:193; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 23; Suhayli 3:136, 142; Ibn Atheer
2:142

[^562]: Wāqidi 1:342, 403; Ibn Sa’d 2:35, 44; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:39;
Ibn Katheer 4:61; Nāsif, al-Tāj 4:347

[^563]: Wāqidi 1:69, 5:563; Ibn Sa’d 2:24; Tabari 3:75; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:304; Ibn Qayyim 2:299

[^564]: Wāqidi 1:182, 194, 395, 406; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 63-65, 85, 89;
Tabari 3:29; Suhayli 4:252; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:39

[^565]: Wāqidi 1:182; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27;
Ibn Hazm: 152

[^566]: Wāqidi 1:10, 12; Ibn Hishām 2:241; Ibn Sa’d 2:1-4; Tabari 2:259;
Ibn Hazm: 100; Suhayli 3:17; Hamawi 1:92, 3:350, 4:136

[^567]: Wāqidi 1:182; Ibn Hishām 3:46, 50; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 24; Ibn Hazm:
152; Hamawi 1:193, 341; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:264, 304

[^568]: Wāqidi 1:404, 2:535, 752; Ibn Hishām 3:302; Ibn Sa’d 2:45, 56,
95; Tabari 3:29; Ibn Hazm: 200; Kalā’i 1:124; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:83,
91, 152; Ibn Qayyim 2:278, 293

[^569]: Wāqidi 1:12, 2:560, 3:1079; Ibn Hishām 3:3:249; Ibn Sa’d 2:64,
122; Tabari 3:131; Bakri 2:564; Hamawi 1:503, 536; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:224, 271; Ibn Mandhur 1:278

[^570]: Wāqidi 1:182, 195, 2:560, 3:1025; Ibn Hishām 3:46, 50; Ibn Sa’d
2:21, 24, 62, 86; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294, 304; Ibn Sa’d 2:83, 95;
Suhayli 3:136

[^571]: Ibn Hishām 2:241; Suhayli 2:252; Haiderābādi: 15-21; this pact
had forty conditions that were to be abided by both the Arab Muslims and
Jews residents of Madina. (Tr.)

[^572]: Wāqidi 1:176; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:294

[^573]: Wāqidi 1:176; Suhayli 3:137; Ibn Atheer 2:137; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:294

[^574]: Wāqidi 1:177; Ibn Hishām 3:45; Ibn Hazm: 193; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:295

[^575]: Wāqidi 1:184, 391; Ibn Hishām 3:54, 286; Ibn Hazm: 154, 198

[^576]: Wāqidi 1:391; Ibn Hishām 3:55; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn Hazm: 154, 198

[^577]: Wāqidi 1:391; Ibn Hishām 3:52, 286; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn ‘Abd
al-Barr 3:946, 1377; Ibn Atheer 3:304, 4:330

[^578]: Zuhri: 71; Wāqidi 1:363; Ibn Hishām 3:199; Bukhāri 5:88

[^579]: Wāqidi 1:365; Ibn Hishām 3:199; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:48

[^580]: Wāqidi 1:363 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:199; Ibn Sa’d 2:40; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:48

[^581]: Zuhri: 71; Wāqidi 1:363; Ibn Hishām 3:200; Ibn Sa’d 2:40; Ibn
Hazm: 181, 182

[^582]: Wāqidi 2:443, 445, 457; Ibn Hishām 3:225, 232; Suhayli 3:278;
Ibn Qayyim 2:289, 292

[^583]: Wāqidi 2:497; Ibn Sa’d 2:54; Ibn Hazm: 188; Ibn Katheer 4:103

[^584]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:53; Tabari
2:181; Ibn Hazm: 191; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:68; Ibn Qayyim 2:292

[^585]: Wāqidi 2:497, 498, 510; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:53; Muslim
2:1391

[^586]: Wāqidi 2:496, 501; Ibn Hishām 3:245; Ibn Qutaybah, ‘Uyun
al-Akhbār 2:114; Tabari 2:583; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:72; It mentioned that
the Prophet (S) gave authority to Sa’d ibn Mu’ādh who was in allegiance
with them to make the decision about their punishment. He (S) also
ensured that their punishment was in accordance to the Jewish holy
scriptures and the command of God. It is then that he ordered that they
be put to death and their families be taken as prisoners. However, there
are many doubts that can be raised about this account: (1) the number of
killed is put at 900 but there could not have been that many fighters of
the Bani Quraydha at the time (2) these reports have been narrated by
persons who had just accepted Islām and it is possible that they wanted
to express a feeling of oppression against the Jews [as even today,
while it is clear that it is they who are the oppressors, they still
portray themselves as the oppressed] (3) it is said that two people were
given the task of killing these men yet the short span of time mentioned
makes it impossible for two men to kill 900; and many other questions
that make this narration suspicious and not easy to accept outright.
(Tr.)

[^587]: Zuhri: 84; Wāqidi 2:633; Ibn Hishām 3:342; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Ibn
Khayyāt 1:50; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Hazm: 211; Ibn Atheer: 216; Kalā’i 1:130;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:130; Ibn Qayyim 2:324

[^588]: Wāqidi 2:666, 685, 700; Ibn Hishām 3:357; Ibn Katheer 4:198, 199

[^589]: Wāqidi 2:706, 709; Tabari 3:106; Hamawi 2:37, 42, 238, 338; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:143, 145

[^590]: Wāqidi 1:176, 2:633; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 342; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 53,
77; Tabari 2:479, 552; Ibn Hazm: 154, 181, 211; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:48,
68, 130

[^591]: Wāqidi 1:368, 2:496, 647, 671 onwards; Ibn Hazm: 192; Suhayli
6:65; Ibn Katheer 4:185, 198

[^592]: Wāqidi 1:368, 2:637, 640, 643

[^593]: Wāqidi 1:368, 2:637, 664, 670; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:134; Ibn
Qayyim 2:330, 331

[^594]: Wāqidi 1:177, 377, 2:510, 667; Ibn Sa’d 2:41; Suhayli 4:65; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 4:72

[^595]: Wāqidi 1:176, 2:640

[^596]: Wāqidi 1:177, 2:454, 510, 574, 642, 650

[^597]: Wāqidi 1:179, 374, 634, Kalā’i 1:130

[^598]: Wāqidi 1:179, 2:634, 637; Ibn Atheer 1:656

[^599]: Wāqidi 1:370; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 199, 244, 342; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40,
53, 77; Tabari 2:479, 552, 3:9

[^600]: Wāqidi 1:177, 363, 2:499, 503; Ibn Hishām 2:245; Ibn Sa’d 2:40;
Tabari 357

[^601]: Wāqidi 1:177 onwards, 363, 2:499, 666; Ibn Hishām 3:200, 344;
Ibn Sa’d 2:114; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr: 181; Ibn Qayyim 2:330

[^602]: Wāqidi 1:371, 2:496; Ibn Katheer 4:199

[^603]: Wāqidi 2:671, 683; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9; Ibn Atheer
2:217

[^604]: Wāqidi 1:378, 2:496, 670; Tabari 2:552; Ibn Hazm: 182

[^605]: Wāqidi 2:496 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:200, 344; Ibn Atheer 2:217;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:295

[^606]: Wāqidi 1:371, 2:501; Tabari 3:9; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:131

[^607]: Wāqidi 1:176, 2:496, 652 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:50, 244; Ibn Sa’d
2:19, 40, 77; Ibn Hazm: 154, 181, 191, 211

[^608]: Wāqidi 1:176; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Ibn Hazm: 59; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:294

[^609]: Wāqidi 1:363; Ibn Hishām 3:199; Ibn Sa’d 2:40; Tabari 2:479; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:48

[^610]: Wāqidi 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Ibn Sa’d 2:53; Tabari 2:552; Ibn
Hazm: 191

[^611]: Wāqidi 2:633; Ibn Hishām 3:342; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Tabari 3:9; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:130

[^612]: Wāqidi 1:177, 2:497, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:200; Tabari 1:116, 117;
Ibn Qayyim 4:330

[^613]: Wāqidi 1:420; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Sa’d 2:44; Ibn Hazm: 184;
Suhayli 3:276; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54; Ibn Katheer 4:92

[^614]: Tabari 3:378; Hamawi 2:487; Jawād ‘Ali 1:590, 611, 624, 3:106

[^615]: Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Atheer 2:395 onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:220

[^616]: Wāqidi 2:560, 3:1025; Ibn Hishām 3:169; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Kahālah
3:991; Watt, Muhammad fi al-Madina: 157

[^617]: Ibn Sa’d 2:64, 119; Bakri 2:564; Hamawi 2:15, 487

[^618]: Wāqidi 2:560; Ibn Sa’d 2:64; Ibn Atheer 2:209; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:108; Ibn Qayyim 299

[^619]: Wāqidi 2:560; Ibn Sa’d 2:64; Ibn Qayyim 2:300

[^620]: Wāqidi 2:560, 561; Ibn Sa’d 2:64; Hamawi 2:487; Jawād ‘Ali
1:590, 592, 624

[^621]: Wāqidi 2:755; Ibn Hishām 4:15; Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Ibn Khayyāt 1:56;
Tabari 2:36; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:92; Ibn Hazm: 220; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:153

[^622]: Ibn Hishām 4:30; Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Ibn Hazm: 220, 221; Kalā’i
1:176; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:154

[^623]: Wāqidi 2:755; Kalā’i 1:136; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:215

[^624]: Wāqidi 2:760, 761; Suhayli 4:81; Ibn Hazm: 220; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:154

[^625]: Zuhri: 106; Ibn Hishām 4:159; Ibn Sa’d 2:118; Ibn Khayyāt 1:64;
Tabari 3:100; Ibn Hazm: 249; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:107; Kalā’i 1:151; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:215

[^626]: Wāqidi 2:765; Ibn Hishām 4:19-21; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Ibn Atheer
2:36; Ibn Qayyim 2:375

[^627]: Wāqidi 2:990; Ibn Sa’d 2:119

[^628]: Zuhri: 151; Wāqidi 3:117; Ibn Hishām 4:291; Ibn Sa’d 2:136;
Tabari 3:184; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 1:75; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:281; Ibn Hajar
1:29

[^629]: Zuhri: 58; Wāqidi 3:1091, 1124; Ibn Khayyāt 1:103; Ibn Katheer
6:316; Watt, Muhammad fi al-Madina: 158, 177; Initially this mission was
delayed because of the objections raised by some companions about the
young age of the appointed commander Usāma bin Zayd. (Tr.)

[^630]: Wāqidi 3:990; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:44, 119

[^631]: Wāqidi 1:2, 4, 2:560, 3:989, 1117; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 64, 119, 136

[^632]: Zuhri: 58; Wāqidi 3:1035; Ibn Hishām 3:244, 4:291; Tabari 3:100;
Ibn Hazm: 253; Bakri 2:538; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:111, 112; Hamawi 1:489

[^633]: Wāqidi 3:1018, 1039; Ibn Sa’d 2:44; Bakri 2:564; Hamawi 2:14;
Ibn Katheer 5:9

[^634]: Wāqidi 1:403; Ibn Hishām 4:169; Ibn Sa’d 2:64, 119; Kahālah
2:991

[^635]: Wāqidi 2:560; Ibn Hishām 4:169; Ibn Sa’d 2:64; Ibn Atheer 2:280;
Ibn Qayyim 3:210

[^636]: Wāqidi 2:769; Ibn Hishām 4:30; Ibn Sa’d 2:293; Ibn Hazm: 222;
Kalā’i 1:136; Watt: 158, 159. 177

[^637]: Wāqidi 2:760, 3:990; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Hindi, al-Jaysh al-‘Arabi
fi ‘Asr al-Futuhāt: 26

[^638]: Wāqidi 2:755, 756, 760; Ibn Hishām 4:16, 19; Ibn Hazm: 22;
Suhayli 4:81; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:153

[^639]: Wāqidi 3:1117, 1123; Ibn Hazm: 220 onwards; Kalā’i 136; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:281

[^640]: Wāqidi 3:117, 1122, 1123; Ibn Hishām 4:291; Ibn Sa’d 2:281;
Kalā’i 1:136; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:153

[^641]: Wāqidi 2:760; Ibn Hishām 4:16, 17; Tabari 3:37; Ibn Atheer
2:235; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:153

[^642]: Wāqidi 2:120, 3:1019, 1124; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 3:220, 383

[^643]: Wāqidi 2:560, 755, 3:990; Ibn Sa’d 2:64, 110; Hamawi 2:487;
Kalā’i 1:136; Jawād ‘Ali 1:529, 611, 2:38

[^644]: Wāqidi 1:404, 3:990, 1091; Ibn Hishām 4:279; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 199;
Suhayli 4:196; Kalā’i 1:136

[^645]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:560; Ibn Hishām 4:169; Ibn Sa’d 2:64, 119; Ibn
Atheer 2:280

[^646]: Wāqidi 1:402; Ibn Hishām 4:15, 191; Kalā’i 1:152; Tabari 3:100;
Ibn Hazm: 184; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:107; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:108

[^647]: Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Ibn Hazm: 220, 221; Suhayli 4:81; Kalā’i 1:136;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:154

[^648]: Wāqidi 3:763; Ibn Hishām 4:19; Ibn Sa’d 2:94; Ibn Hazm: 221; Ibn
‘Abd al-Barr 2:427; Ibn Atheer 2:101; Kalā’i 1:136; Ibn Katheer 4:249

[^649]: Wāqidi 2:764; Ibn Hishām 4:21; Dianna, Muhammad Rasulullah: 296

[^650]: Wāqidi 2:763, 1025; Ibn Sa’d 2:94

[^651]: Wāqidi 2:760; Ibn Hishām 4:17; Suhayli 4:80

[^652]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:535; Ibn Hishām 2:230; Qurtubi 4:306;
al-Mawsu’ah al-‘Askariyya 1:264

[^653]: Wāqidi 1:174; Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1218; Ibn Atheer
2:248

[^654]: Wāqidi 2:534; Ibn Hishām 4:265; Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Ibn Atheer 2:207;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:104; Ibn Qayyim 2:297

[^655]: Wāqidi 2:755; Ibn Sa’d 2:632; Kalā’i 1:158; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:106

[^656]: Wāqidi 2:755; Ibn Sa’d 2:92, 98; Ibn Hishām 4:15, 49

[^657]: Zuhri: 76; Wāqidi 1:199; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Tabari
2:267; Ibn Hazm: 223; Ibn Atheer 2:276

[^658]: Zuhri: 92; Wāqidi 1:207, 2:457; Ibn Hishām 2:245; Ibn Sa’d 2:45;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224

[^659]: Ibn Is’hāq: 307; Shaybāni 2:58; Wāqidi 1:10, 67; Ibn Hishām
2:278

[^660]: Wāqidi 1:68, 225; Ibn Hishām 2:277; Ibn Sa’d 2:10, 28; Tabari
2:445; Ibn Atheer 2:152; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:10; Ibn Katheer 4:15

[^661]: Wāqidi 1:67; Muslim 3:1362; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 102); Ibn
Qutayba, ‘Uyun al-Akhbār

[^662]: Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Muslim 3:1433; Kalā’i 1:123

[^663]: Wāqidi 2:496, 633; Ibn Hishām 3:213, 244, 342; Ibn Hazm: 18,
191, 211; Tabari 2:181, 556

[^664]: Wāqidi 3:1117; Ibn Sa’d 2:56, 61, 85; Ibn Katheer 4:61

[^665]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:636; Ibn Hishām 4:265; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:54; Ibn Katheer3:261

[^666]: Wāqidi 1:19; Ibn Hishām 4:265; Ibn Sa’d 2:63; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:106, 110; Ibn Katheer 4:222

[^667]: Wāqidi 1:403, 2:534; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 28); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 57)

[^668]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:774; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Sa’d 2:12, 108; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:206; Ibn Katheer 5:9

[^669]: Wāqidi 1:53, 2:445; Ibn Hishām 3:69, 231, 344; Tabari 3:9; Ibn
Hazm: 186; Kalā’i 1:130

[^670]: Wāqidi 3:991; Ibn Hishām 4:161; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 38, 184); Ibn
‘Asākir 1:104

[^671]: Wāqidi 1:182, 194; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 35, 43, 62,
95; Ibn Hazm: 203; Ibn Atheer 2:142

[^672]: Wāqidi 1:396; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Tabari 2:268; Suhayli 3:28; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:304

[^673]: Wāqidi 1:20, 88; Muslim (al-Eimān 8); Tabari 2:513

[^674]: Wāqidi 2:562, 729; Tabari 2:554

[^675]: Wāqidi 1:58; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 17); Muslim (al-Imārah 117);
Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 120, 149)

[^676]: Wāqidi 1:81, 240, 3:897; Ibn Hishām 2:279; Ibn Sa’d 2:15, 39,
109; Tabari 3:75, 181; Kalā’i 1:144; Ibn Qayyim 2:440

[^677]: Wāqidi 2:634, 3:1039; Ibn Sa’d 2:120; Suhayli 4:805; Kalā’i
1:131; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:218

[^678]: Wāqidi 1:177, 363, 2:496, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:200, 344; Ibn Sa’d
2:40; Tabari 583; Ibn Hazm: 154

[^679]: Wāqidi 2:446; Ibn Hishām 3:231; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Tabari 2:583

[^680]: Wāqidi 2:796, 825, 875; Ibn Hishām 3:39, 44, 49; Ibn Sa’d 2:96,
101; Ibn Hazm: 226, 230; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:161, 169, 173; Ibn Qayyim
2:386, 390; Ibn Katheer 4:282, 289

[^681]: Bukhāri (al-Salāh 41, al-Jihād 56-58, al-I’tisām 16); Muslim
(al-Imārah 6); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 44); Nasā’i (al-Khayl 2)

[^682]: Wāqidi 1:2-7, 3:1039; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 80, al-Manāqib 4,
al-Maghāzi 10); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 11)

[^683]: Wāqidi 1:10, 193, 2:551; Ibn Sa’d 2:4, 62

[^684]: Ibid.

[^685]: Wāqidi 1:11, 13, 2:769; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 252, 4:272; Ibn Sa’d
2:1, 94; Tabari 2:259; Ibn Hazm: 103; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:157, 161

[^686]: Zuhri: 71, 79, 84; Wāqidi 1:76, 363, 2:496, 553, 564, 633; Ibn
Sa’d 2:19, 40, 53, 77; Tabari 2:479, 553; Suhayli 4:252; Kalā’i 1:158;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:105, 110

[^687]: W8:7; Wāqidi 1:21, 49; Ibn Hishām 3:68; Tabari 2:503; Ibn Qayyim
2:231

[^688]: Wāqidi 1:12 onwards, 200 onwards; Ibn Hishām 2:257 onwards, 3:10
onwards; Kalā’i 1:85, 104; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:241, 2:2

[^689]: Q33:22; Wāqidi 2:444, 3:890; Ibn Katheer 4:104

[^690]: Wāqidi 1:28; Ibn Hishām 3:213; Ibn Sa’d 2:43; Ibn Atheer 2:185;
Kalā’i 1:116; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:296

[^691]: Q3:152, Q9:26; Ibn Hishām 4:85; Ibn Sa’d 2:109; Kalā’i 1:143;
Dhahabi, Tārikh al-Islām 1:267

[^692]: Shaybāni 1:58; Wāqidi 1:378, 2:510; Ibn Hishām 2:278;
al-Mawsu’ah al-‘Askariyya 1:207

[^693]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 22, 56); Muslim (al-Jihād 20, al-Sulh 7,
al-Maghāzi 44)

[^694]: Ibn Sa’d 2:171; Tabari 3:176; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:318

[^695]: Ibn Hanbal 2:50; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 88); Ibn Sayyidah,
al-Mukhassis 6:26 onwards

[^696]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd al-Farid 1:186 onwards; Ibn Sayyidah
6:37 onwards

[^697]: Ibn Hanbal 4:144 onwards; Dārimi (al-Jihād 14); Ibn Mājah
(al-Jihād 18); Abu Dāwud (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 11)

[^698]: Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 18); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 17); Tabari 3:177

[^699]: Ibn Sa’d 2:172; Ibn Hanbal 1:80; Bukhāri (al-Istiqrādh 1); Abu
Dāwud (al-Nikāh 35); Nasā’i (al-Nikāh 76)

[^700]: Ibn Sa’d 2:174; Tabari 2:177; Ibn Atheer 2:316

[^701]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 75); Ibn Sayyidah 6:73

[^702]: Bukhāri (al-Libās 17); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 18); Ibn Mandhur 5:26

[^703]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 169, al-Maghāzi 48, al-Libās 17); Muslim
(al-Hajj 450); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 18); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 117);
Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 18); Nasā’i (al-Manāsik 107)

[^704]: It is reported that the Arabs learnt how to create the catapult
from the Persians and would use it to throw large boulders (and later
fireballs) at the enemy (Tr.)

[^705]: Wāqidi 3:927; Ibn Hishām 3:121; Ibn Sa’d 2:14; Kalā’i 1:146; Ibn
Sayyidah 6:14; The Dabbābah was a primitive version of today’s tanks. It
was a means used to break walls and barriers set up by the enemy. (Tr.)

[^706]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 56, 58; al-Maghāzi 38; al-Adab 80); Muslim
(al-Imārah 65, al-Jihād 132); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 9, 44); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 6, al-Khayl 12)

[^707]: Wāqidi 1:27; Ibn Hishām 2:321; Ibn Sa’d 2:7; Tabari 2:478

[^708]: Ibn Sa’d 2:78; Ibn Atheer 2:216; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:129

[^709]: Wāqidi 2:812, 819

[^710]: Bukhāri (al-Buyu’ 37, Tafseer of Surah 19); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād
12); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 26); Tabari, Tafseer al-Tabari 14:119

[^711]: Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 18); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 23); Tirmidhi
(Fadhā’il al-Jihād 11); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 26, al-Khayl 80)

[^712]: Wāqidi 3:927; Ibn Hishām 4:121; Ibn Sa’d 2:114; Kalā’i 1:146

[^713]: Bukhāri (al-Buyu’ 108, al-Maghāzi 2); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 24,
al-Buyu’ 26); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 20); Nasā’i (al-Khayl 3)

[^714]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 80); Muslim (al-Musāfirun 139, al-Jihād 49);
Abu Dāwud (al-Imārah 19); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 39); Nasā’i (al-Fay’ 1)

[^715]: Wāqidi 1:96, 373, 2:510, 544, 658, 3:987; Ibn Sa’d 2:20, 41, 120

[^716]: Wāqidi 1:178; Ibn Hishām 3:201; Ibn Sa’d 2:80; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:50

[^717]: Ibn Hanbal 3:1; Dārimi (al-Buyu’ 56); Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 88)

[^718]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 24, 56) Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 29, al-Nikāh 50);
Tirmidhi (al-Fitan 39); Nasā’i (al-Khayl 13, 16)

[^719]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 12, 22, 88,156); Muslim (al-Jihād 92); Ibn
Mājah (al-Fitan 10, al-Hudud 34); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 64, 108)

[^720]: Bukhāri (al-Riqāq 17, al-Maghāzi 56, al-Manāqib 4, al-Jihād 38);
Muslim (al-Zuhd 12, Fadā’il al-Sahābah 41); Ibn Mājah (al-Muqaddimah
11); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 23); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 11, al-Sayd
1); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 26, al-Khayl 8)

[^721]: Wāqidi 2:648; Ibn Hishām 4:126; Ibn Sa’d 2:114; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:201

[^722]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 56, al-Jihād 80); Muslim (Fadhā’il
al-Sahābah 41); Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:606, 764

[^723]: Bukhāri (al-Manāqib 28, al-Jihād 192); Muslim (al-Imārah 96,
99); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 14); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 41, 45, 60); Nasā’i
(al-Khayl 8, 12)

[^724]: Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 19); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 23); Tirmidhi
(Fadhā’il al-Jihād 11); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 8, 26)

[^725]: Wāqidi 3:927

[^726]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 12, 88, al-Shurut 15); Muslim (al-Jihād 20,
al-Imārah 146); Abu Dāwud (al-Fitan 1, al-Buyu’ 13, al-jihād 64, 108)

[^727]: Ibn Hanbal 1:88; Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 18)

[^728]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 88); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 18); Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:318

[^729]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 44)

[^730]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 88); Ibn Sa’d 2:171; Tabari 3:176

[^731]: Ibn Hanbal 1:193; Ibn Hishām 3:106; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:24

[^732]: Wāqidi 2:743; Ibn Sa’d 2:87; Bakri 4:1385; Hamawi 5:424

[^733]: Ibn Hanbal 5:86; Muslim (al-Imārah 172, 175, 176); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 33)

[^734]: Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 233); Wāqidi 3:1057; Ibn Sa’d 2:120


