Department Of Supplies And Reinforcements
=========================================

This department was responsible for matters pertaining to
reinforcements, supplies, means of transport, food for the soldiers, the
type of clothes and shelter of the forces, dividing the spoils of war,
medical issues and all related concerns.

A) Department Of Supplies And Reinforcements
--------------------------------------------

The responsibility of this department was to secure the material
resources and assistance to the armed forces in general. This included
personal accessories and other necessities like water, tents, clothes
and moving the residents away from areas where military operations were
taking place[^1].

### The Rear

This comprised of groups whose work was to prepare and supply material
provisions, military equipment and other needed supplies to the
troops[^2]. The most important groups that were present in the rear were
the guards, those responsible for munitions and supplies, the camp of
the commander, and the non-combatants (i.e. womenfolk).

They carried some amount of supplies and munitions[^3] with them and
each one of these groups would be supervised by a commander who would
oversee their work[^4]. The Prophet (S) would emphasize on keeping the
supplies and military equipment well hidden. He (S) would only specify
where the rear of the army began[^5] and would not give importance to
where it ended.

The limits of the rear of the army during encampment was defined as the
last lines of the army[^6], and while marching also, it was the last
group[^7]. The main missions of this department was to secure the
facilities and material resources needed by the army, carry out medical
treatment, assist the injured and handicapped and carry them away from
the battlefield, burying the martyrs and gathering the spoils of
war[^8].

#### 1) Types of supplies and support:

Madina was known as the main center for supplies and munitions, and
reinforcement and support during battle would rarely take place from
there[^9]; because the backing and rear of the army would usually take
the necessary supplies with them, and from the very beginning whatever
wa needed by the army would be put at their disposal. They would go to
the battle and whenever their mission was complete, they would return to
their own lands[^10].

Despite this, in some of the battles, the army had to face severe
hunger[^11], like what happened in the battles of Khaybar and Tabuk, but
they would bear this pressure and difficulty[^12]. This is precisely
what they did in the Sariya of al-Khabt. Sometimes they would also
benefit from the abundant local resources[^13].

The sources of food and supplies for the army in the areas where the
battles were fought included: In the Battle of Badr from the hunting of
deer; in the Battle of Dhāt al-Ruqā’ from cucumbers and ostrich eggs; in
the Battle of Hudaybiyya from cucumbers, the meat of deer, wild donkeys
and other animals whose meat is permissible to eat, and yoghurt; and in
the Battle of Khaybar from a variety of different sources.

Full reinforcements from Madina only came when Sa’d ibn ‘Ubādah had the
responsibility of bringing the reinforcements[^14] in the Battle of
Hamrā al-Asad. At this time he would slaughter two to three animals
(whose meat was permissible to eat) every day. In the battles of Dhi
Qurā and Waddān, he brought reinforcements with dates and meat from
slaughtered animals[^15]. At times, like in the Sariya of ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās,
the supplies were sent by soldiers on foot[^16].

As for the food for horses and camels, it was provided for from the
abundant grazing grounds especially in the areas where the army was
camped[^17]. In the Battle of Uhud, the Quraysh used the grazing grounds
and fields that belonged to the Ansār. In the battles of Badr and Bani
al-Mustalaq, the Muslim army took benefit from the wells of Badr and
Murisiyya’. Muslim soldiers would sometimes use crushed date seeds to
feed their horses and camels[^18] while in the Battle of Khandaq, the
Quraysh carried corn as fodder for their horses[^19].

Relief in its true and complete sense during battle was not done except
through giving drinking water[^20]. This was done by means of water bags
which were carried by soldiers[^21], or through injured and handicapped
soldiers[^22]. The women would also at times participate in this
exercise and would carry the water bags for long distances and exchange
them for empty water bags. These relief operations continued even in the
time when the heat of battle had subsided[^23] and some of the helpers
would take water to the supreme commander and the troops during this
time[^24].

#### 2) The main points of relief support

These points were the very same routes that were used by the troops, and
the rear wound usually not move in one position behind the main ranks of
the army[^25]; like in the battles of Badr and Tabuk. The movement from
these points by the rear of the army would not take place more than
once, because this would cause a split and a cessation of the relief
support operations. For the soldiers, there was more than one central
point for supplies but despite this, they would always use the closest
point like Madina in the Battle of Hudaybiyya and from there (the route)
to Fadak would be used[^26].

Of course the original and primary points of relief supply were Makkah
and Madina which had links with the outside and were considered the main
centers of relief support[^27]. Between Makkah and outside it there were
two roads to the west (coastal) and east (desert), and between Madina
and outside it there was an important road that led towards the land of
Shām (Syria) and there was continuous relief support conducted using
different means between these two routes. Whenever these central points
were cut off for any reason, the army forces would face hardships in
terms of lack of sufficient relief supplies and provisions.

Similarly, in the beginning the Muslim army tried to cut off the supply
routes of the Quraysh and they would be so harsh on them that at times
they would be pushed to the brink of destruction[^28]. When the point of
supply from Madina was partially cut off, the supreme commander would
reopen them by gaining victory of the tribes that were responsible for
closing the route[^29].

#### 3) Places of rest for the army

After marching a specified distance, the Muslim army would stop for a
brief period in a suitable location[^30]. At this time, the troops would
carry out repairs and maintenance on their battle equipment, and would
eat and drink. Then they would refill their vessels with water and
continue their march[^31]. The army would usually stop at a place where
there was a well and plentiful grass for grazing[^32]. The places of
rest for the army would be selected according to the length of their
journey, the army’s size and the suitability of the area for remaining
hidden and concealed[^33].

The time of these rest-stops would be in accordance to the mission given
to the forces, the weather or time of day (and night)[^34]. In the
Battle of Dumat al-Jundal, the rest was taken at night and during the
Conquest of Makkah, because of the speed required, it was only for a
brief period of time. Aside from this, the period of rest would be
determined by the state of the troops and the distance they had covered
and would be short or long accordingly[^35].

And if there was a serious need to reach the enemy (as quick as
possible), the rest-stops would be shortened. If this was not done, like
in the Sariya of Muhammad ibn Maslamah against the Bani Bakr, the
duration would be prolonged. In some of the Sariya missions, the army
would rest the whole day and would march at night in order to carry out
a surprise attack.

#### 4) Modes of transport

The modes of transport were mainly camels and then followed by donkeys.
Camels would be used to traverse long distances of up to eight hundred
kilometers, like in the Battle of Dumat al-Jundal[^36] which was located
at a distance of ‘ten stations of Madina’ and ‘seven stations of the
Damascus’, or the Battle of Muta[^37] near the province of Dir’ā from
the land of Balqā’ in Shām[^38], or the Battle of Tabuk[^39] which was
at a distance of twelve stations from Madina and was close to Shām. The
same was the case of the Battle of Abnā[^40] in the land of al-Sarrāh
near Balqā’ which was a village in Muta between Palestine and Shām.

The camel is known for its ability to bear thirst and hunger and carry
heavy loads in the dry and hard desert[^41]. However, donkeys were
mostly used for non-military purposes[^42] to cover short distances in
and around Madina. A number of troops would bring camels to the
battlefield[^43]. They would carry their battle gear and rations and
also the special fodder for camels on the camels’ backs.

Women would also sit in howdahs on these animals at the rear of the army
and would be taken along[^44]. The army would be divided into sections
depending on the number of soldiers and camels that were used for
transport. Each section had two to four soldiers[^45] who would put the
equipment that could be carried on the backs of camels like one big
caravan[^46]. The length of these sections when marching depended on the
number of camels and soldiers in it[^47].

#### 5) Foods and rations

The most important foodstuffs that were used by the Muslim forces in
battle included: dates[^48], locusts[^49], meat[^50] (mostly from
animals that were halāl[^51]), wheat[^52], raisins, bread[^53], barley
flour[^54] and some of the foods that were prepared from wheat[^55],
flour[^56], cucumbers[^57] and milk[^58]. Among these, dates were the
staple food that the soldiers would be provided with when attacking or
defending, travelling or remaining back, and they would always have with
them a little under three kilos (one Sā’)[^59] of dates and if something
(from the dates produced) would remain, they would store it in their
house and would use it throughout the year.

#### 6) Sources for procuring the food

From the troops[^60], locals and residents of the area[^61], and some of
the wealthy soldiers – who were sometimes responsible for providing the
food – and also through other means[^62] of securing it[^63]. Rations in
the Muslim army were such that each person would eat one portion per day
before marching or prior to the start of battle or when he felt
hungry[^64].

Most of the times, these rations i.e. a few dates[^65] or a slaughtered
animal whose meat was shared among a hundred men, would not be
sufficient[^66] and it was common for the forces to remain hungry due to
lack of sufficient food; that is why in some of the battles it was
necessary for them to economize and forbear[^67]. So much so that in
some situations the troops were left with no option but to eat some of
the grass, leaves[^68], the remainder of the food eaten by others[^69]
and at times they would slaughter the animals that were used for
transport[^70] and use the meat; meaning they would eat the meat of
horses, wild and tame donkeys, deer etc[^71].

At times a day or two would pass before they ate anything[^72] and the
Holy Prophet (S) was forced to take a loan from the rich[^73] and divide
it among the soldiers in order for them to buy food, until things
improved and the financial situation became better, then he would repay
the loan.

#### 7) Water

The most important of all things that were considered in the battles
were: drinking water[^74], washing the injured[^75] and treating some of
the sick[^76]. War between the two opposing sides would take place in a
place that had plenty of water[^77]. Each of the two sides would try to
take advantage of the well and gain the upper hand over the other,
preventing him from coming near it[^78]. For this reason, gaining access
to water was considered an important factor in victory or surrender and
defeat[^79].

In all the battles, the Holy Prophet (S) would choose a land that had
abundance of life-giving water and would take control over it while
keeping the enemy at bay[^80]; just as he had eventually blocked it from
the fortresses of Khaybar etc[^81]. in order to speed up the surrender
of the inhabitants of those fortresses[^82]. He (S) would forbid the
drinking of unhygienic water[^83]. In the end, there were many hardships
faced in securing water while marching through the dry, harsh, scorching
deserts[^84] especially in the long routes.

#### 8) Sources of nourishment

The most important sources of nourishment were foods the animals, edible
plants and the drinking water that were found in the fields in the area
where the military operations were conducted. The most important animals
included: fawns[^85], wild donkeys[^86], rabbits[^87], deer[^88], cows
and camels[^89], sheep[^90], birds (that were permissible to eat)[^91],
cucumbers[^92], fruits of the Miswāk tree[^93] and other types of
edibles[^94].

The above-mentioned foods made up a large portion of the supplies that
were required during battle and through this the Muslim army was saved
from starvation and severe thirst and gave them the ability to carry out
their mission effectively. In the Battle of Khaybar, the Muslim soldiers
suffered a lot of hunger[^95] and in the Battle of Tabuk, the soldiers
were about to collapse out of severe hunger[^96].

#### 9) Shelter, tents and clothes

In Madina there were many tents but in the battles, tents would rarely
be used[^97]. Mattresses and beddings as we see today never
existed[^98]. In those days, tents were made of skin or fur[^99], or
both together[^100]. As for the clothing, it remained the same as it was
before the advent of Islām[^101].

#### 10) Storing foodstuffs

The portion of food that was extra would be stored inside storehouses
and homes to such as extent that it would suffice for the soldiers for
some time[^102]. The storing of food by the Muslim army was done
differently to the way the Jewish army or other armies did it, as it was
done based on the material resources, military mission, type of enemy
and other factors[^103]. The Muslim army did not have many resources.
When the army would prepare for war, they would come under pressure out
of the insufficiency and lack of resources; that is why this army was an
offensive army and did not have much need for storing foodstuffs. Aside
from this, donation and generosity and not hoarding and storing are
matters that were emphasized by the new religion (Islām), and this was
also considered one of the factors.

The supreme commander and his soldiers took to storing the excess
foodstuffs in times when the supplies were abundantly available. This
took place especially after the Battle of Bani Nadhir and after gaining
access to a lot of necessary resources[^104]. However, in the earlier
period and during the start of the first wars there was no thought given
to this type of action[^105].

The Holy Prophet (S) would keep some barley and dates - to the extent
that would suffice for a number of days - in his house[^106]. We have no
other report that suggests that storing foodstuffs was considered a
priority for the Muslim army. Even in the Battle of Khandaq, when they
dug the trench by which Madina was saved, they did not make any efforts
with regards to storing supplies[^107].

The enemy, however, went to great lengths to store foodstuffs,
especially the Jews who store provisions and water inside their
fortresses – to the extent that would suffice them for the duration of a
long war[^108]. The Muslim army had no choice but to completely cut off
the enemy’s relief supplies[^109], besiege them from all sides[^110],
attack their front-line[^111], conduct psychological warfare[^112], and
all those actions that would force the Jews to surrender quickly, before
their stores were empty[^113].

#### 11) Clearing the field of operations

Another one of the responsibilities of the ‘department of supplies (and
relief support)’ was clearing the following from the battlefield:  
 All the people who would cause the military operations to be delayed,
like the womenfolk, the children, the old and those who were unable to
fight[^114]  
 Those considered enemies and those who were not from their
side[^115]  
 The equipment and weapons that were broken or needed repair for use
in the next battle

The first group was transferred to a suitable place where the ‘living
conditions’ were better[^116]. The second group was also taken to far
off places that were outside the domain and control of the Muslim
army[^117]. As for the equipment, it was carried to the appropriate
place where it could undergo repair and maintenance after which it would
be distributed to the soldiers, and sometime a group would carry out
repairs on the weapons right there on the battlefield.

#### 12) Trade and agriculture

After the military missions were completed, the Holy Prophet (S) would
give permission to the soldiers to embark on trade. He (S) had tolerated
their exchange of goods in Badr al-Aākhar[^118], and the forces returned
back to Madina after having made a handsome profit[^119]. In this way,
aside from battle operations, the army would engage in trade also. The
Ansār would also pursue their own agricultural work[^120].

#### 13) Welcoming the soldiers

After achieving victory in battle, the army would send the glad tidings
and news of their return to Madina[^121]. All the people of Madina, men,
women and children, would come out to welcome the victorious
soldiers[^122]. The supreme commander had also come out with a group of
tribesmen to welcome the army that was returning from Muta[^123]. In his
caliphate, Abu Bakr also came out to welcome the army of Usāma[^124].

#### 14) The minimum age for being accepted into the army

Joining the army was something done voluntarily[^125] and was not done
as it is today i.e. joining the armed forces (for training) becomes
mandatory at a certain age. The Holy Prophet (S) had laid down some
conditions for those wishing to join the army. The volunteers had to be
at least fifteen or sixteen years old[^126], strong and of sound body,
and capable of fighting in battle[^127].

For this reason, the young boys who had stepped forward for the Battle
of Uhud, like ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar[^128], Barrā’ ibn ‘Aāzib and others,
were not accepted while ‘Umayr ibn Abi Waqqās got permission to join the
army in the Battle of Badr when he was sixteen years old[^129]. Ibn
‘Umar himself said: The Holy Prophet (S) turned me back on the day of
Uhud when I was fourteen years old and later accepted me in the Battle
of Khandaq when I was fifteen[^130].

Today, the minimum age for recruitment differs from country to country
and most countries have kept the minimum age at eighteen years and have
stipulated that the person should be healthy.

#### 15) Teaching and education

The Holy Prophet (S) gave importance to teaching and education[^131] and
emphasized on its promotion. Due to this emphasis, he instructed Mundhir
ibn ‘Amr al-Sā’idi to go with seventy teachers and educate the Bani
‘Aāmir[^132]. He (S) also sent Ibn Abi Murthid[^133] with ten ‘reciters’
in order to teach the tribes of Adhal and al-Qārrah[^134]. The Prophet
(S) would also employ those prisoners who were not able to pay the
ransom to secure their freedom to teach others[^135].

#### 16) Securing relief support in pre-emptive battle

For securing relief support in this type of battle which was conducted
against the enemy, the Holy Prophet (S) was not in need of a strong
‘rear’[^136] in the army as this would act as a burden and would hold
back the army preventing them from swift movement and battle maneuvers;
rather he would only take the rear when a large army was required[^137].
Single units and small contingents did not usually have a rear[^138] and
would carry the necessary provisions like dates, some foodstuffs and
water, along with them[^139] or would depend on the locally available
resources[^140]. This type of securing of supplies needed quick
transport, but because this was not fully and abundantly available (in
the Muslim army), a clever soldier could make up for this
deficiency[^141] by carrying whatever supplies he needed himself.

#### 17) Securing reinforcements when capturing fortresses

The enemy forces would usually take refuge in forts and would store
provisions that would last for a long time[^142] . In the same way,
supply centers were divided along the line of defense.[^143]In these
situations, more than three supply centers were set up with the needed
supplies[^144] The Muslim army would not fight between the fortresses,
rather they would attack the forts from the front and from different
sides[^145] and besiege it for long periods of time.[^146]During this
time, they would take advantage of the resources available in the
area[^147] or that which was possessed by the enemy[^148]

#### 18) Difficulties in securing supplies

The Muslim army faced numerous difficulties when trying to secure
supplies. These included: Lack of adequate means of transport[^149],
even camels that were used by a number of soldiers[^150] to carry
provisions and water. Food rations were also not enough[^151]. Many of
the soldiers faced severe hunger especially during the final days of the
battles[^152] and had to eat hunted prey[^153] and some of the plants
and herbs[^154].

Similarly, the lack of wells[^155] and sufficient water especially in
the hot months, would cause the soldiers to be overcome[^156] by
thirst[^157]. Lack of weapons and battle equipment[^158], which was
difficult to buy or procure due to poor resources and also the suitable
clothes for fighting against the enemy in the desert were not easy to
come by[^159]. Many of the soldiers came to face the enemy without any
armor[^160] while some did not even have anything to cover
themselves[^161].

These harsh weather conditions in the heart of the dry, scorching desert
with frequent strong sandstorms[^162] effected the strength and ability
of the forces to fight in battle. The rays of the midday sun would be
like arrows attacking the soldiers and the sand would cover their
possessions in dust[^163]. This army, especially in the battles against
the Jews when the duration of the siege was prolonged, faced
difficulties with supplies[^164].

During this time the food supplies that were consumed by the soldiers
depleted very quickly and put the army under threat of starvation. In
the Battle of Khaybar, the field of operations had become polluted with
disease and cholera[^165], to such an extent that it was not possible to
remain in that place for a long period of time and it would cause the
forces to be afflicted by other sicknesses[^166].

In the same way, the Muslim army was always faced with great economic
pressures that had been put against the Muslims by the Jews[^167];
because they had numerous economic centers and interests in the Arabian
peninsula. Another of the hardships related to supplies that the army
faced was the distance between the battlefields and the city of Madina
(which was a center for procurement of supplies)[^168] especially in the
battles of Dumat al-Jundal, Abnā and Tabuk which were towards the north
of the Arabian peninsula and also those that took place in Yemen[^169].

#### 19) The division for training and exercise

Military training would be conducted in the actual battles and wars. The
army would travel long distances[^170] in the desert until they would
reach the enemy, and along the way, the army would undergo training in
the following: bearing hunger[^171] and thirst[^172] on the way[^173],
the harsh conditions of the desert, including its heat, winds and
dryness[^174], staying in prolonged military expeditions[^175], sleeping
in open spaces[^176], economizing on food rations[^177] and being
satisfied with small portions of it, being generous with provisions
despite the hard times[^178], helping other soldiers[^179], how to take
advantage of locally available resources[^180], digging trenches and
pits[^181], hunting animals[^182], how to deal with prisoners[^183],
arrangements that needed to be made when the army stopped at any
place[^184], gathering the war booty and accepting the system of its
distribution[^185], finding clean water[^186], and in the end, how to
bury those who had been killed[^187].  
 These matters gave the Muslim army a special zeal for battle and made
them capable, strong and ready for fighting the enemy.

### B) Department Of War Booty

This was the department that was answerable for collecting the booty,
arranging it and distributing it. All the wealth of the enemy forces
that was taken by overpowering them or winning the battle was considered
as war booty[^188]. The first war booty that was obtained by the Muslims
was in the second year after Hijra which was the year when the fighting
was first ordained. During this time, the Holy Prophet (S) sent
‘Abdullah ibn Jahash, accompanied by seventy men, for a mission. He gave
a letter to the commander of the Sariya and ordered him to open it after
he had travelled for two days and then follow the path directed therein.
This was done in order to protect military secrets. The commander of the
Sariya did as he was instructed and when he opened the letter he found
the order to raid the caravan of the Quraysh at Nakhlah. He did just
that and took the wealth of the caravan as booty[^189].

#### 1) Ways of using the booty on the battlefield

Once the appropriation of the war booty was completed, there would be no
delay in taking advantage of it especially with regards to the
foodstuffs, drinks, fodder for animals, firewood and all the other
requirements; whether those who used it were rich or poor, because even
the rich would have to bear the difficulty of carrying foodstuffs and
fodder from Madina to the battlefield[^190].

#### 2) The rules of distribution of war booty

The Noble Prophet (S) organized the booty and ordered that it be
gathered up in a suitable place[^191]. He appointed certain people to
count and distribute it and would specify the people who would use
it[^192], forbidding anyone to take anything (from it) before its
distribution[^193] while being very strict with those people who
infringed on these instructions[^194].

The booty would be divided into five parts and was distributed as
follows[^195]:

The first part would be given to the following: orphans, needy, those
who were travelers but had no more money (Ibn al-Sabil), and for basic
requirements like buying battle equipment and things that were needed by
the army including foodstuffs, weapons, battle gear, clothes etc.

The four remaining parts would be distributed to the soldiers and every
Muslim who participated in the battle, meaning one who was part of the
army and entered the battlefield with the intention of fighting, whether
he fought or not, would get a share; because frightening the enemy is
akin to participating in the battle.

As for the gauge of merit by which it each person got what they
deserved, it was relative. For example, for the soldiers who were on
horseback three portions were allotted (two portions for the horse and
one for the soldier) while the one who was on foot got one portion. The
reason for this was that a horse had to be specially treated and readied
for battle and this incurred an extra expense. It is obvious that the
expense incurred by a soldier on horseback was more than one who was on
foot. As for the women and young children who were present in the
battle, they would not get a full share, because they were not
considered part of the forces. Rather, they got a small share i.e.
smaller than one full portion, depending on what the supreme commander
decided based on their contribution and participation during the battle.

#### 3) The place where the booty was divided

Division of the booty took place in a secure location or after it had
been carried back to the Muslim lands. The supreme commander could
transfer the army along with the booty to another area if the current
location was not deemed to be safe[^196]. The division would either be
done personally by the commander or by someone who was appointed by him
to carry out this task[^197].

#### 4) Sources of booty

One of the important sources for acquiring booty were the Jews[^198] and
the Muslim army had taken possession of a lot of weapons, wealth and
farming lands from them as war booty[^199]. As for the (enemy) Arab
tribes, they took sheep, camels and some horses from them. This booty
was used to cater for the material needs of the army.

#### 5) Prisoners

Prisoners were enemy combatants and those who were considered part of
the enemy’s army that were captured alive[^200]. Generally, prisoners
would either be killed[^201], or secure their release through the
payment of ransom or by being exchanged for Muslim prisoners[^202], or
they would be forgiven and freed[^203]; and this was decided according
to what was in the best interests (of the Muslims). The Holy Prophet (S)
had ordered the killing of ‘Aqabah ibn Abi Mu’eet and Nadhr bin Hārith
in the Battle of Badr[^204], ‘Amr ibn al-Jamhā, the poet of the Age of
Ignorance, in the Battle of Uhud[^205] and also the Bani Quraydha after
the siege[^206]. A number of prisoners of Badr were freed by
ransom[^207]. Some of them who did not have wealth had to teach ten
youths of Madian (in order to secure their freedom)[^208] and two
prisoners from the Sariya of Abdullah ibn Jahash were also freed by
ransom[^209].

The exchange of prisoners with the Quraysh began after the Treaty of
Hudaybiyya[^210]. A woman from the Bani Kilāb was given as a ransom to
secure the freedom of a prisoner from the Muslims who had been captured
by the Quraysh[^211]. This woman had been taken prisoner in the Sariya
of Abu Bakr against the Bani Kilāb. Abi ‘Uzza al-Jamhā was freed as an
act of kindness because of his poverty[^212]. The same was done with Abi
al-‘Aās ibn Rabee’[^213] and other prisoners of Badr[^214], prisoners of
Bani al-Mustalaq[^215], Tamāmah ibn Athāl al-Hanafi after his
imprisonment in the Sariya of Muhammad ibn Maslamah against the Bani
Bakr[^216], and also a man from Bani Tha’labah who had become a
Muslim[^217] after his imprisonment in the Sariya of Abi ‘Ubaydah ibn
Jarrāh for the revenge against the Bani Tha’labah.

Similarly, a woman who had divulged sensitive information to the enemy
in the Sariya of Zayd ibn Hāritha against the Bani Saleem and was taken
prisoner, was forgiven and set free[^218].

The Holy Prophet (S) would deal mercifully and humanely with the
prisoners[^219] and would urge that they be treated well[^220] and
forgiven when victory had been gained over them[^221]. Whenever he (S)
would hear the cries of any of them he would open their tied
hands[^222]. The result of this kind treatment to the prisoners was that
they would become believers in Islām[^223] and out of their own free
will, accept this new religion. Usually the prisoners would be tied up
and not left free, and they would be kept in a place where hygiene[^224]
was good. They would be imprisoned in the Masjid[^225] or in the house
of the soldiers to whom they had been given[^226] or were imprisoned all
together in the house of one of the soldiers[^227]. This would be done
to prevent any of them from fleeing. These houses were not built as
prisons and if they were not tied, the prisoners could escape at any
time.

The Glorious Qur’ān has encouraged the feeding of prisoners[^228] and
the Holy Prophet (S) would also recommend it[^229]. The troops would
also give precedence to the prisoners when it came to food and would
sacrifice their own food for them[^230].

Like ‘Aziz ibn ‘Umayr who used to eat bread and good foods. The food of
the prisoners was dates[^231]. When the supreme commander was requested
for some food by a prisoner, he replied with kindness and
generosity[^232] and asked the companions to prepare some food for
him[^233]. They immediately gave him milk and delicious food.

At the same time, the prisoners were covered with proper clothes. For
instance, the supreme commander gave a shirt to ‘Abbās ibn ‘Abd
al-Muttalib[^234] and while giving some clothes as a gift to Safānah
bint Hātim Tā’i, the Prophet (S) favored her by setting her free[^235].

He (S) would never force any prisoner to divulge secret military
information[^236], however, if he tried to deceive the Muslim army by
giving them false information, he would be pressurized and would even be
beaten[^237]. If a prisoner did not give up secret information about the
enemy, he would never be beaten or abused. However, if he did give up
any vital information, he would be set free[^238].

### C) Department Of Medical Services

#### 1) Designation and goals of the department of medical services

The goal of this department was the preservation of the health of
soldiers. To this end, offering medical assistance to the injured and
taking them from the battlefield to the medical camps for treatment were
the functions that this department was responsible for. Other functions
included taking preventative measures to stop the spread of different
diseases and epidemics and taking care of the hygiene in the places
where the troops and commanders camped and ensuring the cleanliness and
soundness of these places.[^239]

The supreme commander would also participate in giving medical
assistance[^240], for instance when Qatāda ibn Nu’mān was injured in the
Battle of Uhud and the news reached him, he (S) wrapped Qatāda in his
cloak and gave him treatment, such that he regained his health and
returned to his previous state[^241]. In the same way, he (S) treated
the injury of Sa’d ibn Ma’ādh, who was injured in the Sariya of Muhammad
ibn Maslamah (that was undertaken) to assassinate Ka’b ibn Ashraf[^242].
The Prophet (S) put his own saliva on the eyes of ‘Ali (‘a), who was
suffering from an ailment in his eyes, and he was cured and could
continue fighting the battle[^243].

The support forces would always provide the required medicines to those
who were sick or injured[^244]. General medical services in the Muslim
army were based on the individual[^245], collective[^246] and the
women[^247]. When the supreme commander was attacked and became injured,
Abi ‘Ubaydah ibn Jarrāh would pull out the chains of his helmet from his
cheeks[^248] and Fātima (‘a) also would put a heated mat with palm
leaves on his wounds[^249]. The injured would come as outpatients and
would get their wounds dressed and this would happen after they had
returned to Madina[^250]. Some of the wounds would be given basic
treatment and dressing during the battle.

Another responsibility of this department was evacuating the injured to
a specific location for treatment in Madina. When Sa’d ibn Mu’ādh was
injured in the Battle of Khandaq, he was transferred to a tent in Masjid
al-Nabi (S)[^251]. In the same way, when Muhammad ibn Maslamah[^252] was
injured in battle against the Bani Tha’labah and ‘Awāl, he was taken to
Madina (for treatment). The medications and medical equipment that were
used to treat and cure the injured were very basic and the most
important among these included: water, (heated) mats, fabrics[^253] that
were used by men in their trousers or the turbans[^254] that they wore
on their heads – and this would be used to dress the wounds and cuts.
Honey[^255], oil[^256], a special type of dates[^257], milk, camel
urine[^258], salt with water[^259] and other remedies (were used)[^260].

The Holy Prophet (S) would take it upon himself to find out about the
situation of hygiene in the army. He (S) would send some troops to check
this and give him news about the situation[^261] and to select (hygienic
and) sound locations[^262]. He would choose such (clean and hygienic)
locations for the army to set up camp. He would select clean and
suitable water for drinking[^263] and would only permit the using of
water that had not changed in smell or color for washing hands and
cleaning wounds[^264].

#### 2) Losses

Losses in the battlefield would be suffered because of a number of
reasons, the most important among which were:

Their resources and conditions of warfare and those of the enemy  
 The type of battle (offensive, defensive, siege etc.)  
 The types of weapons used  
 Preparation for war and the type of terrain  
 The time of day (whether day or night)  
 The zeal and morale of the soldiers  
 Ability and precaution[^265]

In the battle of Badr, the resources were equally accessible to both the
sides. The type of war was defensive in Khandaq and offensive in the
Conquest of Makkah. Entering the fortresses, the conditions of terrain
and time of the battle (during the last hours of the night) in Khaybar,
the type of weapons used in the Battle of Tā’if, the preparation in the
Battle of Bani Quraydha and the great care and precaution taken in the
Battle of Dhāt al-Ruqā’ were all important factors. The losses faced by
the Muslim army in the first defensive battles were greater. In the
Battle of Badr fourteen people[^266], in Uhud eighty[^267] and in
Khandaq six people[^268] were martyred. But in the offensive battles,
the numbers were relatively less. In the Battle of Muta nine
people[^269], in the Conquest of Makkah two people[^270], in Hunayn
fourteen people[^271], in conquering the fortresses of Khaybar fifteen
people[^272] and in Tā’if twelve people[^273] were martyred. When
conquering the fortresses of Bani Qaynuqā’, Bani Nadhir and Bani
Quraydha, the Muslim army suffered no losses at all[^274].

As for the losses faced in the Sariya missions, they included: ten
people[^275] were martyred in the Sariya of Muhammad ibn Maslamah
against the Bani Tha’labah, three people[^276] in the Sariya of Bashir
ibn Sa’d al-Ansāri against the Bani Murrah, five people[^277] in the
Sariya of Abi al-‘Awjā al-Sulami against the Bani Saleem and fifteen
people[^278] in the Sariya of Kalā’i’b ibn ‘Umayr al-Ghaffāri against
the Bani Qudhā’ah. In missions where the enemy ambushed the Muslims,
many losses were suffered. Like the event of Bi’r Ma’unah where seventy
people[^279] and Rajee’ where ten people were martyred[^280].

By studying these numbers one can see that the losses in defensive war
were greater than those in offensive war, and this was because after the
Battle of Khandaq, the Muslim army had gained experience and were better
trained[^281]. The losses in some of the Sariya missions[^282] were
higher due to the commanders not having taken all the necessary
precautions, a stronger enemy army, the element of surprise was not
there in their attack, the secretive nature of the military operation
and the inability to assist the injured because of which they would die.

#### 3) The number of martyrs in the battles

The percentage of those who were martyred were as follows: Badr[^283] –
5% of the forces, Uhud[^284] – 10%, Khandaq[^285] – 0.002%,
Khaybar[^286] – 1%, Muta[^287] – 2.5%; Conquest of Makkah[^288] –
0.002%, Hunayn[^289] – 0.003%, Tā’if[^290] – 0.02% and in the Sariya and
other missions put together[^291] - 10%. The highest number of martyrs
was in the Battle of Uhud (70) and the lowest was in the Conquest of
Makkah (2).

#### 4) Burying the Martyrs

The Holy Prophet (S) gave the order that the martyrs should be buried in
the battlefield[^292], just as is done in some of the battles of our
time. He (S) would not give permission to take their bodies back to
Madina and it has been said that some of the heirs had taken the corpses
of their dead back to Madina, but the Prophet (S) ordered that they be
taken back. The announcer of the supreme commander would call out:
‘Return those who have been killed to their place of rest (i.e. the
place where they fell in battle)[^293].

The reason for this was that transferring the dead to another place
would put their families under financial strain and other difficulties
and it was possible that the change in weather conditions could affect
the corpses and cause them to be cut into pieces. Aside from this, the
means of transport were not abundant and could not even cater for all
the soldiers. Most important of all, burying the fallen soldiers in the
battlefield was a secret for keeping their memory alive, heightening
emotions about them and expressing the meaning of courage by their
example.

The Holy Prophet (S) would honor the martyrs[^294], put them on the
pedestal of respect and glory in this world and the hereafter[^295] and
would give the glad tidings about this to the family and relatives of
the martyred[^296]; so their hearts would be filled with happiness. The
Prophet (S) would bury one, two or three martyrs in a single grave[^297]
depending on their closeness with each other or their relationship (to
each other) or the amount of Qur’ān they had memorized in their
lifetimes.

The Prophet (S) forbade the disfigurement and cutting off of parts of
the enemy corpses[^298] and gave the order that once they were
identified, they were to be buried without taking any revenge on their
dead bodies by burning, drowning or decapitating them[^299]. The supreme
commander would also instruct the commanders and leaders of Sariya
missions not to disfigure the corpses of the enemy[^300] and preserve
the respect of their dead[^301]. This was despite the fact that the
Quraysh had disfigured the body of Hamza and others in the Battle of
Uhud, and Hind bint ‘Aqabah, the wife of the commander of the enemy’s
army i.e. Abu Sufyān, had chewed the liver of this martyr (Hamza)[^302].
Despite all this, if the enemies were keen to take their corpses, the
Prophet (S) would allow them to do so[^303].

#### 5) The role of women in securing supplies and relief support

Women had an important role in (securing) supplies and relief support of
the Muslim army. They would prepare food for the soldiers[^304], give
water to the thirsty[^305], carry water-bags on their shoulders and take
them to the troops in the battlefield[^306], treat the injured by
burning medicinal herbs and teas[^307] and putting them on heated mats
which would be placed on the injuries[^308], and assist in evacuating
the injured to specific areas such as Masjids. There role in lifting the
morale and encouraging the soldiers before battle was important[^309].

They would force those fleeing from battle to return[^310], repair
clothes and coverings and stitch water-bags[^311] and assist in medical
evacuations[^312]. The women would share their advice with the supreme
commander[^313] and would, in times of desperation, fight[^314] and
would guard and protect the weapons and military equipment[^315].

By allowing the women to participate in battle, the Prophet (S) raised
their status. In the Battle of Hudaybiyya, he took their advice when
leaving for ‘Umrah[^316] and they had told him to go ahead and do
whatever he saw fit as the Muslims would all follow him. In the Conquest
of Makkah, the women pledged allegiance to him just as the men did[^317]
and when making the Treaty of Hudaybiyya with the Quraysh, even though
the men did not agree to the conditions[^318] and protested them, the
women did not do so[^319]. It was at this point that the verses of the
Qur’ān[^320] were revealed that elevated their status.

The place of the women in the battles[^321] while marching or camping,
was in the rear of the army and in Madina and the fortresses[^322]
during defense[^323], it was behind the men and they would give the
necessary assistance and support to the soldiers[^324]. Whenever they
participated in the battle, they would be behind the male
soldiers[^325].

#### An Analysis of the Military Management

A study of all the battles that were fought by the Muslim army in all
the front-lines establishes the fact that possessing greater forces and
resources was not sufficient for achieving victory. Rather, the
organization of resources and proper utilization of the same at the
right place and right time[^326], even if these resources were few[^327]
or even lacking[^328], was considered the most evident cause of victory.
It is because of this that the Muslim army was able to attain victory
over the Jews who were stronger in terms of resources[^329], the Romans
who had a variety of different types of resources[^330] and even the
enemy tribes who possessed thousands of sheep, mules and horses[^331].

After gaining victory over the enemy, the Muslims added the acquired
resources to what little they had and began organizing it[^332]. The
Prophet (S) would never face the enemy altogether, rather he would face
them separately attacking one after the other[^333]. This was the
strategy that made the forces develop gradually in different fields, to
such a degree that in time, they were able to overcome larger enemy
forces[^334]. In the beginning the army fought against the Bani Qaynuqā’
and took over the few material resources that they had[^335]. The
Prophet (S) fought against the Bani Qaynuqā’ at a time when the
resources of the Muslim army were incomparable[^336] to those that were
used in the Battle of Khaybar that took place a few years later, in
which they overcame the enemy, and in this way each battle would
increase the resources and capability of the Muslim army.

In his battles, the Holy Prophet (S) would use methods that required
fewer material resources, like the pre-emptive battles[^337], surprise
attacks[^338], full scale and revolutionary attacks[^339], because these
methods created a high morale[^340], swiftness in attack[^341], strong
faith and steadfastness[^342], complete general readiness[^343] and fear
in the enemy[^344].

Conclusion
----------

The organization and Islāmic government developed gradually after the
migration of the Holy Prophet (S) to Madina. At this time the Prophet
(S) made this city the capital of the Islāmic government, managed and
supervised the affairs of the Muslims, planned and created a program for
spreading the call of Islām and took steps which put him, in the short
term, in situations of grave hardship. These steps were always taken
with complete wisdom and awareness, and became a stepping stone and a
basis for the expansion of the management and the great foundation of
human reform.

The measures he (S) took made Madina a homeland for its residents and
not a place of continuous disputes between its tribes. It became a
peaceful home for those who upheld its sanctity. Madina welcomed the
Muhājirs, from whatever tribe and group they may have been. Actually,
this was the first time that a homeland in which the people lived as
equals got its true meaning, and in which the people would take up
responsibilities without looking at lineage of status.

The Holy Prophet (S) was successful in making leadership dignified and
honored so that all the people could benefit from his guidance and
leadership and would be ready to submit to and obey him after having
been freed from the yoke of other tyrant rulers[^345]. With the
ingenuity and intelligence that he had been granted, the Prophet (S)
understood that the head and guide who would be responsible for
organizing affairs initially in Madina and later throughout the world
cannot succeed without the strength of the divine call and guardianship
of the Islāmic system, and this strength was found in the arms of the
believers who decided to migrate with him to Madina and were the first
group to form a Muslim army, which the Ansār also joined later.

The role of the Holy Prophet (S) in nurturing the military forces
started when Jihād was made obligatory. During this time, he embarked on
organizing, recruiting and training the army following the battles and
Sariya missions that were aimed at attaining political and military
goals; because in order to establish the government and expand the call
to Islām, there was no other choice. He would give hope to the fighters
and mobilize them to come together under the leadership of the unit
commanders and would strive to increase the awe and eminence of the
Muslims among the enemy.

The supreme commander would always try to prepare the army and train
them in the different arts of warfare, until they were fully prepared
and well trained so that they could show the superiority of their skills
when they came face to face with the enemy in battle.

His goal in these battles was self-defense[^346], safeguarding the call
to Islām and defending it against those people who would act as
hindrances in its way. As we study the progress of the battles that were
commanded by the Holy Prophet (S) – that we have mentioned in detail, we
find the most evident factors that led to victory included:

**First**: the usage of certain methods of warfare by the Prophet (S)
that the enemy did not have any knowledge of, such as ‘siege’,
‘acquiring intelligence’, ‘specifying the goals and objectives’,
‘mobilizing the forces for the primary objective’, ‘surprise attacks’,
‘secret (Sariya) missions’, ‘swiftness’, ‘maneuvers’ and ‘spiritual
force and securing all the military resources’ which are all principles
of present-day warfare[^347].

The types of warfare that were employed by the Holy Prophet (S) in his
battles had a huge impact in victory over the enemy. For instance,
psychological warfare[^348] was an important means of reducing and
weakening the morale of the enemy and in most of the battles, just by
the enemy hearing the thunderous sounds of the Muslim army, it was
enough to gain them victory.

The same was the case of revolutionary and collective war where all the
military and non-military groups were involved where he (S) used special
methods to mobilize all of them together in a spirit of revolution. The
result of this type of leadership was that the forces, having seen his
just attitude and superior goal, accepted all that he gave them and
believed in it. Similarly, the innovations in warfare that the Prophet
(S) had brought led to the perplexity and reduced grandeur of the enemy
and in the end led to their downfall.

More than anything else, the ingenuity of the supreme commander and the
qualities that distinguished him as a leader, and also his uniqueness
and superiority in politics, military management and a complete
awareness of the principles and etiquettes of war both at the tactical
and strategic levels, deserves praise.

**Second**: Islāmic training and nurturing – the Holy Prophet (S) gave
full attention and importance to this. He (S) created a new force among
the Muslim army which had never been witnessed by the Arabs before, and
that was the force of spirituality that Islām put in their hearts and
made them willing to sacrifice their lives and wealth in the way of
spreading the true religion and made them volunteer for death. This was
something that guaranteed their felicity and reward in this world and
the hereafter.

The Muslim army was distinguished for its united leadership, sincerity
and total obedience to them. The fact that Miqdād ibn ‘Amr turned to the
Holy Prophet (S) in the Battle of Badr and said: “If you march towards
Bark al-‘Imād (a remote place in Yemen), we will follow you with
strength until we reach there!” and Sa’d ibn Mu’ādh said: “If you give
us the order to enter this sea, we will enter it with you and none of us
will disobey you in this matter!” proves this point.

The invitation of the Holy Prophet (S) to Islām was a call based on
reformation and peace, and war was not considered except when the
hardheartedness and harsh treatment of the enemy upon the Muslims
increased. In reality it was a defensive response of force against
force. In this way, his battles were based on steadfastness from the
very beginning and the Muslim army was never negligent of this. They
would invite the people to the new religion, enact peace treaties with
them, take Jizya tax or conquer their lands and fight against those who
expressed enmity towards him.

The most important feature of the time of the Prophet (S) was his many
battle and Sariya missions. Despite the fact the Jihād was ordained
after migration to Madina, but in the span of seven years, the number of
battles had reached 27, starting from the Battle of Waddān and ending
with the Battle of Tabuk. The Holy Prophet (S) was present in nine of
the battles. During this time, he (S) organized 47 Sariya missions where
some of them were just to invite others to Islām or come face to face
with those who posed a threat to the security of the Muslims.

A point worth noting here is that this military training and the battles
that have been mentioned gave the Islāmic government eminence and put it
in the category of the largest empires in human history, without this
being the real goal. Accepting the notion that the primary goal of the
Holy Prophet (S) was to establish an Islāmic empire would be contrary to
the ‘historical truth’ because actually this matter was only part of the
overall means of attaining the primary objective which was to destroy
polytheism and spread Islām through peaceful and friendly means.

The way in which this government dealt with its enemies and other
governments opened up a new door, because its principle of encounter and
relationship were based on the rules and principles of justice and
humanity, both in times of peace and war. The fact that after the
supreme commander passed away the Muslim army continued its conquests
and were able to capture the lands of Syria, Egypt and ‘Iraq, and were
able to bring the two largest empires of the time, i.e. the Romans and
Persians, to submission, this was only because they gave importance and
special significance to the fact that the Holy Prophet (S) was the first
conqueror of these lands. Because during his time, he (S) laid the
groundwork for them through his battles and wars and had given the army
glad tidings about the expansion of their domain, and this was the
reason for the increase in their morale and guarantee of gaining
victory.

In reality, the Islāmic conquests during the reign of the Caliphs were
the fruits of the seeds that were sowed by the Holy Prophet (S) in the
battles that he led. There were always two factors that enabled the
Muslim army to close the scrolls of the kings and overthrow them and
overcome all the hardships and these were:

1) The love for Islāmic government and obedience to its leader.  
 2) Considering death to be insignificant.

It was because of these reasons that the domain of Islām reached China
in the east and Andalusia in the west.

The Islāmic government will never achieve its past glory again unless
the organization of its armies are once again based on the principles
that the Holy Prophet (S) laid down, the most important of which were:
Love for the (Islāmic) government, unity, sacrificing of lives and souls
in the quest of achieving security and peace throughout the lands.

[^1]: Zuhri: 93; Ibn Hishām 2:372, 3:264; Faryābi, Dalā’il
al-Nubuwwah:12

[^2]: Wāqidi 3:996; Ibn Hishām 2:264

[^3]: Wāqidi 1:217, 23, 3:996; Ibn Hishām 4:24, 49; Ibn Sa’d 2:48;
Tabari 2:568

[^4]: Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1924; Kalā’i 1:130

[^5]: Wāqidi 3:996; Ibn Hishām 2:264

[^6]: Dārimi (al-Muqaddimah 2); Muslim (3:895); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 107)

[^7]: Wāqidi 3:996

[^8]: Wāqidi 1:25, 230, 2:645; Ibn Hishām 4:170; Tabari 2:568; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:131

[^9]: Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 136; Tabari 2:408, 657, 3:9, 159; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:222, 2:220

[^10]: Wāqidi 1:193, 391; Ibn Khayyāt 1:7; Ibn Hazm: 100

[^11]: Wāqidi 2:444, 658, 664, 3:1038; Ibn Hishām 3:260; Tabari 3:10;
Kalā’i 1:114

[^12]: Wāqidi 2:774 onwards; Ibn Hishām 4:281; Tabari 3:32; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:158

[^13]: Wāqidi 1:26, 398 onwards, 2:575, 658, 668; Ibn Hishām 2:346

[^14]: Wāqidi 1:338

[^15]: Wāqidi 2:546

[^16]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 65); Muslim (al-Sayd 17, 19); Abu Dāwud
(al-At’imah 46); Nasā’i (al-Sayd 35)

[^17]: Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 2:271, 3:302; Ibn Sa’d 2:45; Bakri 4:1220

[^18]: Muslim (al-Salām 34)

[^19]: Wāqidi 2:444

[^20]: Wāqidi 1:53, 2:643; Ibn Hishām 2:276, 3:233

[^21]: Ibn Hishām 3:90; Tabari 2:519; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:15

[^22]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 67, al-Maghāzi 37); Muslim (al-Jihād 135);
Tirmidhi (al-Qiyāmah 18)

[^23]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 65, 67); Muslim (al-Jihād 137, 141); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 32); Tirmidhi (al-Siyar 22)

[^24]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 37); Muslim (al-Jihād 135)

[^25]: Wāqidi 3:966; Ibn Hishām 2:263, 4:170; Tabari 2:433

[^26]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:562, 571, 636; Ibn Sa’d 2:65; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:54

[^27]: al-Fākihi, Akhbāru Makkah 2:3; Tabari 2:427; Hamawi 57, 87, 188

[^28]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2-6, 24; Ibn Atheer 2:113, 116

[^29]: Wāqidi 1:402; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Hazm: 184; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:54

[^30]: Wāqidi 1:403 2:756; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Bakri
4:1172; Hamawi 5:219; Mawri, Ghāyat al-Aāmāl fi Fann al-Harb wal-Qitāl
2:14

[^31]: Ibn Hishām 2:68 onwards; 3:69, 90; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Bakri 3:473

[^32]: Bukhāri (al-Anbiyā’ 9); Muslim (al-Imārah 178); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 55)

[^33]: Wāqidi 1:253, 643; Ibn Hishām 4:234; Bajri 2:1190

[^34]: Zuhri: 86; Ibn Hanbal 3:305; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 57)

[^35]: Wāqidi 2:534; Ibn Hishām 3:244; Muslim 3:1391

[^36]: Ibn Sa’d 2:44; Bakri 2:564; Hamawi 2:487

[^37]: Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Bakri 4:1172; Hamawi 5:219

[^38]: Dir’ā is presently located in the south of Syria while Muta is in
the north of Jordan. (Tr.)

[^39]: Bakri 1:303; Hamawi 2:14

[^40]: Ibn Sa’d 2:92, 136; Bakri 1:101

[^41]: Ibn Hanbal 2:267; Muslim (al-Imārah 178); Abu Dāwud (al-Tibb 24);
al-Nuwayri, Nihāyat al-Adab 10:103

[^42]: Wāqidi 2:511; Abu Dāwud (al-Manāsik 65); Tirmidhi (al-Janā’iz
32); Ibn Sayyidah 6:25

[^43]: Wāqidi 1:17, 338; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Sa’d 2:12

[^44]: Ibn Hishām 3:311; Tabari 2:611; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:96

[^45]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 31); Muslim (al-Jihād 149); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 34)

[^46]: Wāqidi 1:274; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:206

[^47]: Ibn Sa’d 2:7, 13; Mawri, Ghāyat al-Aāmāl fi Fann al-Harb
wal-Qitāl 2:25

[^48]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 17); Muslim (al-Imārah 143

[^49]: Bukhāri (al-Dhabā’ih 13); Muslim (al-Sayd 52); Tirmidhi
(al-Asa’mah 22); Nasā’i (al-Sayd 37)

[^50]: Bukhāri (al-Riqāq 17, al-At’imah 23); Muslim (al-Zuhd 21); Abu
Dāwud (al-Imārah 20)

[^51]: Ibn Hanbal 1:224; Muslim (al-Ashribah 83; Fadhā’il al-Sahābah
132)

[^52]: Bukhāri (al-Hibah 7, al-At’imah 8, 16, al-Maghāzi 38); Muslim
(al-Sayd 46); Abu Dāwud (al-At’imah 28); Nasā’i (al-Sayd 26)

[^53]: Ibn Hanbal 6:456; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 29)

[^54]: Ibn Hanbal 3:488; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 35, 38, al-Jihād 123)

[^55]: Wāqidi 2:796

[^56]: Wāqidi 2:452, 476; Ibn Hishām 3:260

[^57]: Wāqidi 1:398, 2:500,577

[^58]: Wāqidi 2:577

[^59]: Wāqidi 2:24, 338; Kalā’i 2:112

[^60]: Wāqidi 1:24; Muslim (al-Jihād 49)

[^61]: Wāqidi 1:391

[^62]: Wāqidi 1:26, 2:576, 3:1035

[^63]: Wāqidi 1:338; Kalā’i 1:112

[^64]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 38); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 145)

[^65]: Wāqidi 2:775; Ibn Hishām 4:281

[^66]: Wāqidi 1:238; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:159

[^67]: Wāqidi 1:26; Ibn Hishām 3:346; Tabari 3:10

[^68]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 65); Muslim (al-Sayd 17); Abu Dāwud
(al-At’imah 46); Nasā’i (al-Sayd 35)

[^69]: Wāqidi 2:575 onwards, 3:1037; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:123

[^70]: Wāqidi 2:661; Suhayli 4:58; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:123

[^71]: Ibn Hanbal 6:346; Bukhāri (al-Dhabā’ih 28, al-Maghāzi 35);
Tirmidhi (al-At’imah 6)

[^72]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 29, al-Riqāq 17); Muslim (al-Zuhd 12);
Tirmidhi (al-Zuhd 39)

[^73]: Wāqidi 2:863, 882

[^74]: Zuhri: 52; Ibn Sa’d 2:45; Bukhāri (al-Ashribah 16)

[^75]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 85); Muslim (al-Jihād 101)

[^76]: Bukhāri (al-Tibb 28); Muslim (al-Islām 78); Tirmidhi (al-Tibb 25,
33)

[^77]: Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Sa’d 2:9; Mālik, al-Muwatta’ (al-At’imah 83)

[^78]: Ibn Hishām 2:272; Ibn Atheer 2:122; Ibn Qayyim 3:230

[^79]: Ibn Sa’d 2:9; Ibn Qutayba 2:113; Harthami, Mukhtasar Siyāsat
al-Hurub: 65

[^80]: Q8:42; Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 3:234; Ibn Sa’d 2:35, 45; of
course this was not always done. For example, even though the Prophet
(S) had gained control over the wells of Badr, he allowed the enemy to
take some water from it. (Tr.)

[^81]: Wāqidi 1:177, 368, 2:499, 680, 787; Ibn Qayyim, Zād al-Ma’ād
2:330

[^82]: Wāqidi 2:685; Ibn Sa’d 2:114; Tabari 2:582

[^83]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 85); Muslim (al-Jihād 101)

[^84]: Zuhri: 52; Wāqidi 2:587, 661, 3:1039; Ibn Hazm: 251; Kalā’i 1:152

[^85]: Wāqidi 3:1018, 1035

[^86]: Bukhāri (al-Sayd 3); Muslim (al-Sayd 37); Ibn Mājah (al-Dhabā’ih
10); Nasā’i (al-Sayd 32)

[^87]: Bukhāri (al-Hibah 5, al-Dhabā’ih 10); Muslim (al-Sayd 53);
Tirmidhi (al-At’imah 2)

[^88]: Bukhāri (al-At’imah 14); Muslim (al-Sayd 42, 47); Nasā’i (al-Sayd
26)

[^89]: Ibn Hanbal 1:100, 104

[^90]: Ibn Hanbal 1:366; Muslim (al-Zakāh 170); Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 3)

[^91]: Wāqidi 1:338, 2:775; Ibn Hanbal 1:260

[^92]: Bukhāri (al-At’imah 39, 45); Ibn Mājah (al-At’imah 37); Tirmidhi
(al-At’imah 37)

[^93]: Bukhāri (al-At’imah 50, al-Anbiyā’ 29); Muslim (al-Ashriba 165)

[^94]: Wāqidi 2:577, 658, 664-670, 3:1035; Ibn Sa’d 2:95; Tabari 3:10

[^95]: Wāqidi 2:658, 661, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:346; Kalā’i 1:132; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:134

[^96]: Wāqidi 3:1039; Ibn Hishām 4:164, 171; Kalā’i 1:152

[^97]: Q27:80; Wāqidi 1:371, 2:822, 827; Tabari 2:568

[^98]: Majmu’āt Muhādharāt Alqaytu fi al-Akādimiyya al-Askariyya
al-‘Ulyā al-Suriyya

[^99]: Wāqidi 1:371; Ibn Hanbal 6:27; Ibn Mandhur 1:659

[^100]: Bukhāri (al-Salāh 17, al-Libās 42, al-Maghāzi 56); Muslim
(al-Salāh 250); Abu Dāwud (al-Salāh 36)

[^101]: Ibn al-Sikkeet, Mukhtsar Tahdheeb al-Alfādh: 407, 408; Ibn ‘Abd
Rabbih 2:225

[^102]: Bukhāri (al-Nafaqāt 3, al-Jihād 80); Muslim (al-Jihād 49);
Nasā’i (al-Fay’ 1)

[^103]: Q9:41; Wāqidi 3:991, 1019; Ibn Hishām 4:161, 3:226; Tabari 3:100

[^104]: Zuhri: 73; Wāqidi 1:377; Ibn Hishām 3:201; Ibn Sa’d 2:41; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:50

[^105]: Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 39; Tabari 2:408, 493; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224,
2:2, 48

[^106]: Bukhāri (al-Nafaqāt 3, al-Jihād 80, al-Maghāzi 14); Muslim
(al-Jihād 49); Abu Dāwud (al-Imārah 19); Nasā’i (al-Fay’ 1)

[^107]: Wāqidi 2:444; Ibn Hishām 3:260; Kalā’i 1:114

[^108]: Wāqidi 1L368, 496, 2:637; Suhayli 4:65; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:134

[^109]: Wāqidi 1:177, 363, 2:499, 644; Ibn Hishām 2:200, 344; Ibn Sa’d
2:114

[^110]: Ibn Sa’d 2:40; Tabari 2:583

[^111]: Wāqidi 2:671, 673; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9

[^112]: Wāqidi 1:378, 2:496, 662; Tabari 2:554; Ibn Hazm: 182

[^113]: Ibn Hishām 3:245; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40, 77; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27; Ibn
Hazm: 154, 182

[^114]: Wāqidi 1:179, 374, 2:453, 462; Ibn Sa’d 2:20, 41, 83; Tabari
2:481

[^115]: Wāqidi 1:179, 2:671; Ibn Sa’d 2:20, 41, 83; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:50

[^116]: Wāqidi 2:453, 462; Ibn Hishām 3:264; Tabari 2:570

[^117]: Wāqidi 1:179, 374, 2:671; Ibn Atheer 2:138, 173, 221; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:295, 2:50

[^118]: Q3:174; ibn Sa’d 2:42; Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 23)

[^119]: Wāqidi 1:387

[^120]: Bukhāri (al-Harth 18, 20); Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 30, 54); Nasā’i
(al-Eimān 45)

[^121]: Ibn Hanbal 5:45; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 192)

[^122]: Wāqidi 1:116 onwards; Ibn Hishām 2:197; Bayhaqi, al-Sunan
al-Kubrā 9:175

[^123]: Wāqidi 2:765; Ibn Hishām 4:24; Tabari 3:42

[^124]: Wāqidi 3:1124; Ibn Sa’d 2:137; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:282

[^125]: Wāqidi 1:20, 181, 194, 2:445; Ibn Mandhur 1:754

[^126]: Ibn Hanbal 2:17; Abu Dāwud (al-Hudud 18); Bayhaqi 9:21

[^127]: Wāqidi 1:21, 2:453; Bayhaqi 9:21

[^128]: Wāqidi 1:216; Ibn Hishām 3:70; Tabari 2:505

[^129]: Wāqidi 1:21

[^130]: Ibn Hanbal 2:17; Abu Dāwud (al-Hudud 18); Bayhaqi 9:21

[^131]: Bukhāri (al-‘Ilm 1, 23, 26, 34); Ibn Mājah (al-Iqāmah 23);
Tirmidhi (al-‘Ilm 19)

[^132]: Bukhāri (al-Jizyah 8); Kalā’i 1:111; Details about this can be
found in Wāqidi 1:347

[^133]: Murthid ibn Abi Murthid was one of the companions of the Prophet
(S) who went with ten reciters in order to teach the tribes of Adhal and
al-Qārrah but when they arrived at the well of Rajee’, the tribes broke
their pact with them and killed them (Tr.)

[^134]: Wāqidi 1:354; Ibn Sa’d 2:39; Ibn Hishām 3:178; Ibn Khayyāt 1:42

[^135]: Ibn Sa’d 2:14; Bayhaqi 6:322; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:287

[^136]: Wāqidi 1:82; Ibn Hishām 3:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Mishelah, al-Harb
al-Khātifah: 77

[^137]: Wāqidi 3:996; Ibn Hishām 2:264

[^138]: Wāqidi 2:534, 550; Ibn Sa’d 2:56, 61; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:79,
103

[^139]: Ibn Hanbal 4:456; Bukhāri (al-Dhabā’ih 13)

[^140]: Bukhāri (al-Sayd 3); Muslim (al-Sayd 53); Ibn Mājah (al-At’imah
27); Tirmidhi (al-At’imah 2)

[^141]: Muslim 3:1433; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 61)

[^142]: Wāqidi 1:177, 2:644, 685; Ibn Hishām 3:200; Ibn Sa’d 2:141

[^143]: Wāqidi 2:647, 644, 670; Ibn Hishām 3:344

[^144]: Wāqidi 2:647, 644, 670

[^145]: Wāqidi 2:671, 680; Ibn Hishām 3:344; Tabari 3:9

[^146]: Wāqidi 1:177, 363, 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:245; Ibn Sa’d 2:40

[^147]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 130); Muslim (al-Sayd 26)

[^148]: Wāqidi 2:639, 662

[^149]: Wāqidi 1:17; Ibn Hishām 2:264; Ibn Sa’d 2:5; Tabari 2:431

[^150]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 31); Muslim (al-Jihād 149); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 34)

[^151]: Wāqidi 2:755; Ibn Hishām 4:281; Kalā’i 1:112

[^152]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 65); Abu Dāwud (al-At’imah 46)

[^153]: Bukhāri (al-Sayd 3, al-Dhabā’ih 10, al-At’imah 14); Muslim
(al-Sayd 37, 53); Abu Dāwud (al-At’imah 27)

[^154]: Bukhāri (al-At’imah 39, 45, 50, al-Anbiyā’ 29, al-Maghāzi 65);
Muslim (al-Ashribah 165); Abu Dāwud (al-At’imah 26)

[^155]: Zuhri: 52; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 85)

[^156]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 35, 137); Muslim (al-Jihād 131)

[^157]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 79); Muslim (al-Tawba 53)

[^158]: Dārimi (al-Buyu’ 54); Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 88)

[^159]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-‘Iqd al-Fareed 2:225; Mas’udi, Muruj
al-Dhahab 2:233; Lord Monister, Risālah fi Harb ‘ind al-‘Arab: 52;
Farrukh, Tārikh al-Jāhiliyya: 30

[^160]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 97); Muslim (al-Jihād 78)

[^161]: Q9:92; Ibn Hishām 4:161; Tabari 3:102; Qāsimi, Mahāsin al-Ta’wil
8:3233

[^162]: Mas’udi 2:233; Watt: 16,17

[^163]: Ibn Hanbal 4:372; Muslim (al-Sayd 100); Nasā’i (al-Mawāqeet 55)

[^164]: Wāqidi 1:177; Ibn Hishām 3:245; Tabari 2:583; Dianna, Muhammad
Rasulullah: 278

[^165]: Wāqidi 2:644, 667; Ibn Hazm: 212; Ibn Katheer 4:!99

[^166]: Bukhāri (al-Tibb 28); Muslim (al-Islām 78, 81); Tirmidhi
(al-Tibb 25, 33)

[^167]: Wāqidi 2:634; Kalā’i 1:130

[^168]: Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 92, 136; Bakri 1:101, 303, 2:564; Hamawi 1:79,
2:14, 487

[^169]: Wāqidi 3:1079; Ibn Hishām 4:239; Ibn Sa’d 2:122; Tabari 3:126

[^170]: Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 56; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 28)

[^171]: Dārimi (al-Jihād 22); Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 20, al-Riqāq 117)

[^172]: Zuhri: 52; Ibn Hazm: 251; Hamawi 2:350; Kalā’i 1:152

[^173]: Wāqidi 3:1079; Ibn Hishām 3:203; Ibn Sa’d 2:45; Tabari 3:126;,
131; Bakri 1:101, 2:564, 4:1220

[^174]: Kalā’i 1:151; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:218; Watt: 16, 17

[^175]: Wāqidi 3:1015; Ibn Khayyāt 1:17; Ibn Hazm: 253

[^176]: Wāqidi 2:800-806; Ibn Hishām 3:264; Ibn Sa’d 2:45

[^177]: Wāqidi 1:26; Ibn Hishām 3:346; Ibn Sa’d 2:95; Tabari 3:10

[^178]: Wāqidi 3:991, 994; Ibn Hishām 4:161; Ibn Sa’d 2:120

[^179]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 16)

[^180]: Bukhāri (al-Sayd 3, al-At’imah 39, 45, 50); Muslim (al-Sayd 37,
53)

[^181]: Wāqidi 2:445, 448; Ibn Hishām 3:260; Tabari 2:568; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:57

[^182]: Bukhāri (al-Dhabā’ih 10); Abu Dāwud (al-At’imah 27); Nasā’i
(al-Sayd 32)

[^183]: Shaybāni 2:409; Ibn Hanbal 6:276; Muslim (al-Jihād 58); Bayhaqi
9:89

[^184]: Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:96

[^185]: Q8:41; Bukhāri (al-Eimān 40); Muslim (al-Eimān 23); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 134); Tirmidhi (Aseer 14)

[^186]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 8); Muslim (al-Jihād 2); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād
25)

[^187]: Dārimi (al-Muqaddimah 7); Abu Dāwud (al-Janā’iz 32); Tirmidhi
(al-Janā’iz 31)

[^188]: Zuhayli, al-Fiqh al-Islāmiyya wa Adillatih 6:455

[^189]: Suhayli 3:22 onwards

[^190]: Zuhayli 6:458

[^191]: Wāqidi 3:295; Dārimi (al-Siyar 35); Bukhāri (al-‘Umrah 3)

[^192]: Wāqidi 2:544; Ibn Sa’d 2:61

[^193]: Bukhāri (al-Madhālim 20); Muslim (al-Adh’hā 20); Ibn Mājah
(al-Fitan 3); Abu Dāwud (al-Hudud 14)

[^194]: Bukhāri (al-Eimān 3); Muslim (al-Jihād 32)

[^195]: Shāfi’i, al-Umm 4:64 onwards

[^196]: Ibid.

[^197]: Ibn Sa’d 2:46; Suhayli 4:65

[^198]: Wāqidi 1:178, 377, 2:510, 524; Ibn Sa’d 2:41

[^199]: Wāqidi 1:96, 2:535, 944, 3:943; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 95

[^200]: Ibn Qudāmah, al-Mughni 8:372 onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:287;
Zuhayli, Athār al-Harb fi Fiqh al-Islāmi: 429

[^201]: Shaybāni 2:409; Ibn Mājah (al-Diyāt 3); Tirmidhi (al-Siyar 18)

[^202]: Dārimi (al-Siyar 27); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 32); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 124); Tirmidhi (al-Siyar 18)

[^203]: Bukhāri (al-Khums 16); Abu Dāwud (al- Jihād 120); Tirmidhi
(al-Siyar 18); Ibn Qudāmah 8:372

[^204]: Wāqidi 1:138, 148; Ibn Hishām 2:298; Ibn Sa’d 2:11; Tabari 2:459

[^205]: Wāqidi 1:142, 309; Ibn Hishām 3:110; Bayhaqi 6:320

[^206]: Wāqidi 2:513; Ibn Hishām 3:249; Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Tabari3:593

[^207]: Wāqidi 1:138 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:14; Ibn Hanbal 1:353

[^208]: Ibn Hanbal 1:247; Bayhaqi 6:322

[^209]: Wāqidi 1:16; Ibn Hishām 2:255; Ibn Sa’d 2:5; Tabari 2:413

[^210]: Wāqidi 2:602

[^211]: Dārimi (al-Siyar 27); Muslim 3:376; Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 32)

[^212]: Wāqidi 1:142; Ibn Hishām 3:110; Ibn Atheer 2:165

[^213]: Ibn Hanbal 6:276; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 121); This was the husband
of the Prophet’s daughter Zainab (Tr.)

[^214]: Wāqidi 1:138 onwards; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 12)

[^215]: Wāqidi 1:407, 410; Ibn Hishām 3:307 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:46

[^216]: Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Muslim 3:1386; Bayhaqi 6:319

[^217]: Wāqidi 2:552; Ibn Sa’d 2:62; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:105

[^218]: Ibn Sa’d 2:62; Ibn Atheer 2:207; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:105; Ibn
Qayyim 2:297

[^219]: Bukhāri (al-Ahkām 35); Muslim (al-Jihād 58); Tirmidhi (al-Siyar
18); Nasā’i (al-Qudhāt 17)

[^220]: Ibn Hishām 2:199; Tabari 2:46; Ibn Atheer 2:131

[^221]: Wāqidi 1:407, 410; Ibn Salām, al-Amwāl 1:106; Muslim 3:1386

[^222]: Tabari 2:463; Bayhaqi 9:89

[^223]: Wāqidi 2:252; Muslim 3:1368; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:287

[^224]: Ibn Hanbal 3:377; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 144); Abu Dāwud (al-Eimān
31); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 34)

[^225]: Dārimi (al-Farā’idh 43); Bukhāri (al-Salāh 75); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 97, 14); Nasā’i (al-Masājid 20)

[^226]: Ibn Hishām 2:199; Tabari 2:46; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:265

[^227]: Ibn Sa’d 3:116; Bayhaqi 9:89; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:203

[^228]: Q76:8

[^229]: Ibn Hanbal 5:294; Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 3)

[^230]: Ibn Hishām 1:300; Tabari 2:461; Ibn Atheer 2:131

[^231]: Ibid.

[^232]: Bayhaqi 6:230; Zuhayli, Athār al-Harb fi Fiqh al-Islāmi: 412

[^233]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 1:213; Ibn Atheer 1:246; Zuhayli: 412

[^234]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 146); Qurtubi 4:3059

[^235]: Wāqidi 3:989; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 142)

[^236]: Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 97, 116)

[^237]: Wāqidi 1:53, 2:563, 3:986; Ibn Hishām 2:268; Tabari 2:436

[^238]: Wāqidi 2:552; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 84)

[^239]: Zuhri: 93; Ibn Hanbal 5:309; Bukhāri (al-Madina 12); Nasā’i
(al-Ashribah 40)

[^240]: Refer to the books on Tibb including Tibb al-Nabawi and the
chapters on al-Tibb in Bukhāri and Muslim

[^241]: Ibn Is’hāq: 308; Wāqidi 1:241; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:14

[^242]: Wāqidi 1:190; Ibn Hishām 3:60; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:301

[^243]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 38, 121); Muslim (Fadhā’il al-Sahābah 32,
35); The Prophet (S) had initially given the opportunity to his other
companions like Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqās but they were
unable to take down the fort of Khaybar. It is then that the Prophet (S)
gave the command to ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a) who finally gained victory
over the Jews and brought down Khaybar (Ibn Hajar 2:503) (Tr.)

[^244]: Wāqidi 1:350, 2:644

[^245]: Wāqidi 1:87, 250, 334 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:34; Bukhāri
(al-Maghāzi 16)

[^246]: Wāqidi 1:393, 2:551; Ibn Hishām 3:85; Ibn Sa’d 2:117

[^247]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 67, Tibb 2); Muslim (al-Jihād 137, 141); Abu
Dāwud (al-Jihād 32, 141); Tirmidhi (al-Siyar 22)

[^248]: Wāqidi 1:247; Ibn Hishām 3:85; Ibn Atheer 3:78; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:12

[^249]: Ibn Hanbal 3:334; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 80, al-Tibb 27); Tirmidhi
(al-Tibb 34)

[^250]: Wāqidi 1:334; Ibn Hishām 3:107; Ibn Sa’d 2:34; Tabari 2:534
onwards; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:13

[^251]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 30); Muslim (al-Jihād 66); Abu Dāwud
(al-Janā’iz 4); Nasā’i (al-Masājid 18)

[^252]: Wāqidi 2:551; Ibn Sa’d 2:62; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:104

[^253]: Shaybāni 1:127; Ibn Sa’d 2:34

[^254]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 16)

[^255]: Bukhāri (al-Tibb 3, 5, al-Hajj 18); Muslim (al-Islām 18)

[^256]: Bukhāri (al-Tibb 52, 56); Muslim (al-Ashribah 155); Abu Dāwud
(al-Tibb 12)

[^257]: Ibn Hanbal 6:77; Bukhāri (al-At’imah 43, al-Tibb 52); Ibn Mājah
(al-Tibb 3)

[^258]: Wāqidi 2:569; Ibn Hanbal 6:380; Bukhāri (al-Tibb 6, 57); Ibn
Mājah (al-Tibb 30)

[^259]: Ibn Hanbal 6:380; Abu Dāwud (al-Tahārah 120)

[^260]: Ibn Qayyim 3:134, 415; Ibn Katheer 4:195

[^261]: Wāqidi 1:53, 2:644; Ibn Hishām 3:69, 231; Kalā’i 1:130

[^262]: Wāqidi 2:644; Bukhāri (al-Madina 12); Tirmidhi (al-Ru’yā 10)

[^263]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 85, al-Ashribah 16)

[^264]: Bukhāri (al-Anbiyā’ 17); Muslim (al-Jihād 101); Abu Dāwud
(al-Tahārah 33); Nasā’i (al-Tahārah 43)

[^265]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 1:145, 152, 2:700, 825; Ibn Sa’d 2:43, 109;
Ibn Hanbal 2:552; Nasā’i (al-Khawf 16); Kalā’i 1:112, 130; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:52m 131

[^266]: Ibn Is’hāq: 289; Wāqidi 1:145; Ibn Sa’d 2:11; Tabari 2:477; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:285

[^267]: Wāqidi 1:300 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:29; Ibn Hanbal 5:135

[^268]: Wāqidi 2:295; Ibn Hishām 3:263; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:67

[^269]: Wāqidi 2:769; Ibn Hishām 4:30; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:156

[^270]: Ibn Hishām 4:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Durar fi
Ikhtisār al-Maghāzi wal-Siyar: 232; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:173

[^271]: Wāqidi 3:922; Ibn Hishām 4:101; Ibn Sa’d 2:109; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:192, 193

[^272]: Wāqidi 2:750; Ibn Hishām 3:357; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:142

[^273]: Wāqidi 3:938; Ibn Hishām 4:129; Tabari 3:58; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:202

[^274]: Zuhri: 71; Wāqidi 1:176; Ibn Sa’d 2:19, 40; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27;
Kalā’i 1:111

[^275]: Wāqidi 2:551; Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:104; Ibn Qayyim
2:279

[^276]: Wāqidi 2:723; Ibn Sa’d 2:86; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:146; Ibn
Qayyim2:358

[^277]: Wāqidi 2:741; Ibn Sa’d 2:89; Ibn Atheer 5:266; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
5:149

[^278]: Wāqidi 2:752; Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Tabari 3:29; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:152

[^279]: Wāqidi 1:1:347; Ibn Sa’d 2:36; Bukhāri 5:41; Kalā’i 1:111

[^280]: Ibn Sa’d 2:39; Wāqidi 1:355; Ibn Hishām 3:178; Ibn Khayyāt 1:30
(some of whom mention different numbers)

[^281]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 29); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 156); Ibn Hishām
4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:98

[^282]: Wāqidi 2:551, 723, 741; Ibn Sa’d 2:61, 86, 89; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:104, 146, 152

[^283]: Wāqidi 1:45, 152; Ibn Sa’d 2:6, 11; Tabari 2:431, 477; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:245, 285

[^284]: Wāqidi 1:300; Ibn Hishām 3:68, 129; Ibn Sa’d 2:27, 29; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:5, 27

[^285]: Ibn Hishām 3:231, 264; Ibn Sa’d 2:47; Tabari 2:570; Ibn ‘Abd
al-Barr: 194

[^286]: Wāqidi 2:574, 750; Ibn Hishām 3:231, 264; Ibn Sa’d 2:78; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:153

[^287]: Wāqidi 2:756, 769; Ibn Hishām 4:15, 30; Ibn Sa’d 2:97; Tabari
3:36; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:153

[^288]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812; Ibn Hishām 2:42, 50; Ibn Sa’d 2:97; Tabari
3:73, 81; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr: 232

[^289]: Wāqidi 3:889, 992; Ibn Hishām 4:83; Ibn Sa’d 2:108-110; Tabari
3:73, 81; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr: 242

[^290]: Wāqidi 2:889, 923, 938; Ibn Sa’d 2:114

[^291]: Wāqidi 2:551, 723, 741, 752; Ibn Sa’d 2:36, 39, 61, 86, 92;
Bukhāri 5:41; Kalā’i 1:111; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:104, 146, 149, 152

[^292]: Dārimi (al-Muqaddimah 7); Ibn Mājah (al-Janā’iz 28); Abu Dāwud
(al-Janā’iz 23); Tirmidhi (al-Janā’iz 31)

[^293]: Abu Dāwud (al-Janā’iz 38); Tirmidhi (al-Janā’iz 31)

[^294]: Ibn Hanbal 4:185; Dārimi (al-Jihād 19); Ibn Mājah (al-Muqaddimah
110, al-Libās 2); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 25); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād
13); Nasā’i (al-Qisāmah 18)

[^295]: Ibn Hanbal 1:288, 463; Dārimi (al-Jihād 16); Bukhāri (al-Jihād
2); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 26); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 25); Nasā’i
(Fadhā’il al-Jihād 83)

[^296]: Ibn Hanbal 1:386; Dārimi (al-Jihād 18); Muslim (al-Aqdhiya 16);
Abu Dāwud (al-Aqdhiya 13); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 13)

[^297]: Bukhāri (al-Janā’iz 73, 79); Abu Dāwud (al-Janā’iz 27); Tirmidhi
(al-Janā’iz 46); Nasā’i (al-Janā’iz 62)

[^298]: Bukhāri (al-Salāh 109, Manāqib al-Ansār 45, al-Maghāzi 8);
Muslim (al-Janā’iz 26); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 115); Nasā’i (al-Janā’iz
117)

[^299]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 36); Muslim (al-Jihād 2, al-Birr 117, 119);
Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 113); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 14)

[^300]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 36, al-Dhabā’ih 25); Muslim (al-Jihād 2);
Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 82); Tirmidhi (al-Siyar 48, al-Jihād 14)

[^301]: Bukhāri (al-Janā’iz 75); Abu Dāwud (al-Adh’hā 11); Tirmidhi
(al-Diyāt 14); Nasā’i (al-Dhahāyā 22, 26)

[^302]: Bukhāri (al-Janā’iz 34; al-Jihād 20); Muslim (Fadhā’il
al-Sahābah 129); Tirmidhi (al-Janā’iz 31); Nasā’i (al-Janā’iz 12)

[^303]: Ibn Hanbal 1:248, 271; Abu Dāwud 2:279

[^304]: Ibn Hanbal 5:84; Dārimi (al-Jihād 30); Muslim (al-Jihād 141);
Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 37, al-Ahkām 14); Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 89, al-Salāh
70)

[^305]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 67, al-Tibb 2); Abu Dāwud (al-Ashriba 44,
al-Imārah 20, al-Adab 100)

[^306]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 65, Manāqib al-Ansār 18, al-Maghāzi 18);
Muslim (al-Jihād 136)

[^307]: Ibn Hanbal 5:84; Dārimi (al-Jihād 30); Muslim (al-Jihād 141);
Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 37); Bayhaqi 9:22, 30

[^308]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 30); Muslim (al-Jihād 66, 141); Abu Dāwud
(al-Janā’iz 4); Nasā’i (al-Masājid 18)

[^309]: Wāqidi 1:208; Ibn Hishām 3:72; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:9 onwards

[^310]: Wāqidi 2:278, 3:903; Ibn Hishām 4:89; Tabari 3:77; Kalā’i 1:145

[^311]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 66, al-Maghāzi 22); Tirmidhi (al-Libās 38)

[^312]: Ibn Hanbal 6:385; Bukhāri (al-Tibb 2, al-Jihād 67)

[^313]: Bukhāri (al-Hajj 316)

[^314]: Wāqidi 1:269, 3:904; Ibn Hishām 3:87, 88; Tabari 3:77; Kalā’i
1:145; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:11, 13

[^315]: Ibn Hishām 3:106; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:24

[^316]: Wāqidi 2:613; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 4:1939; Ibn Atheer 2:205; Ibn
Qayyim 2:308

[^317]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 66, al-Maghāzi 22); Muslim (al-Imārah 89,
al-Salām 89); Ibn Mājah (al-Jihād 43); Abu Dāwud (al-Zakāh 33)

[^318]: Wāqidi 3:629; Ibn Hishām 3:340; Tabari 2:640; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:122

[^319]: For en example of the important role played by women in these
battles see: Ibn Hishām 3:86

[^320]: Q60:10; Suhayli 1:26; Qāsimi, Mahāsin al-Ta’wil 16:5770

[^321]: Wāqidi 1:223, 3:897; Muslim 3:895; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 107)

[^322]: Wāqidi 2:996; Muslim 3:895; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 107)

[^323]: Wāqidi 2:262, 269; Ibn Hishām 3:262; Ibn Hanbal 1:164; Tabari
2:570

[^324]: Wāqidi 2:460; Ibn Hishām 3:239

[^325]: Wāqidi 1:269, 3:904; Ibn Hishām 3:87, 4:88; Kalā’i 1:145; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:11, 13

[^326]: Wāqidi 2:661, 3:991; Ibn Hishām 4:159; Ibn Sa’d 2:120; Tabari
3:102

[^327]: Wāqidi 2:775; Ibn Hishām 4:281; Tabari 3:10; Kalā’i 1:112

[^328]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 65); Muslim (al-Sayd 17); Abu Dāwud
(al-At’imah 46); Nasā’i (al-Sayd 35)

[^329]: Wāqidi 3:368, 2:637; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:74; Wāqidi 2:644, 670, 680

[^330]: Wāqidi 1:755, 3:990; Ibn Hishām 4:16, 19; Ibn Sa’d 2:119

[^331]: Zuhri: 93; Wāqidi 1:183, 2:535, 3:943; Ibn Sa’d 2:61

[^332]: Ibn Sa’d 2:20, 41, 120; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 80); Muslim (al-Jihād
49)

[^333]: Wāqidi 1:176, 363, 2:496, 633, 267; Ibn Sa’d 2:1, 19, 40; Tabari
2:479, 581, 3:9; Ibn Hazm: 239

[^334]: Zuhri: 86; Ibn Shihāb 3:50 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 44; Tabari
2:9; Kalā’i 1:130

[^335]: Wāqidi 1:187; Ibn Sa’d 2:20; Tabari 2:481; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:296

[^336]: Wāqidi 2:658, 664, 470; Ibn Hishām 3:253; Ibn Sa’d 2:78

[^337]: Wāqidi 1:182, 194; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 35, 43, 62

[^338]: Wāqidi 1:396; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Suhayli 3:28; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
1:304

[^339]: Wāqidi 1:20, 88; Ibn Hishām 3:181; Tabari 2:513

[^340]: Zuhri: 87; Wāqidi 1:182, 2:749, 3:1123; Ibn Hishām 3:46; Ibn
Sa’d 2:21, 28, 49, 97; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:281

[^341]: Wāqidi 1:396; Kalā’i 1:123; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:106

[^342]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 122); Muslim (al-Masājid 3, 5); Tirmidhi
(al-Siyar 5); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 1)

[^343]: Q8:65, Q9:19, 20, 41, 89; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 53, al-Jihād 110)

[^344]: Wāqidi 3:990 onwards, Tabari 3:101; Kalā’i 1:151

[^345]: Hasan, Tārikh al-Islām al-Siyāsi wal-Dini wal-Ijtimā’i 1:85, 150

[^346]: Q2:190, 193

[^347]: Howard, Nadhariyat al-Harb Wāqidi Mumārasatiha: 16, 158

[^348]: Bukhāri (al-Salāh 438)


