Author’s Introduction
=====================

All praise belongs to the Lord of the Worlds. The Most Beneficent, the
most Merciful. Master of the Day of Reckoning. Thee alone do we worship
and Thee alone do we seek help from. Guide us to the straight path; the
path of those whom Thou hast blessed, not those with whom Thou art
angry, nor those who have strayed.[^1]

O Allah send Thy blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad just
as Thou have sent Thy blessings on Ibrahim and the progeny of Ibrahim in
the worlds, indeed Thou art the Owner of Praise, the Owner of Glory. And
bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad just as Thou have blessed
Ibrahim and the progeny of Ibrahim in the worlds, indeed Thou art the
Owner of Praise, the Owner of Glory.

This research and study under the heading: ‘Military Management in the
Battles of the Prophet of Allah, Muhammad (S)’ was presented as a
doctorate thesis in the field of history at the Université Saint-Joseph,
Lebanon, and is now before the respected readers. We have tried to spare
no effort in this work with the hope that we would be successful in
arriving at the truth [about the Prophet (S) as an exemplary military
commander].

The present work has been arranged as follows:

**Preface:** Here the genesis of the techniques and strategies of battle
in Islām and its most salient characteristics have been mentioned.

**Introduction:** I begin by explaining my methodology of choice in this
study based on what I have discussed in the different sections and
precede this by mentioning the narrators and important figures who have
written about the history of the Prophet (S) and those who wrote war
chronicles.

**Section One:** In this section, the characteristics of the Arab
military before Islām have been discussed.

**Section Two:** Here ‘military command’ and that which pertains to it
is, including the qualities of a commander, have been discussed.

**Section Three:** Here the different types of ‘army command centers and
headquarters’ in the Muslim army have been explained.

**Section Four:** In this section the branches of ‘security and
intelligence’ and related issues are mentioned.

**Section Five:** Details about the ‘base of operations’ along with its
arrangement and plans have been outlined.

**Section Six:** Here ‘relief support units’, ‘munitions’, ‘medical
services’, ‘management of booty’ and, in the end, ‘role of women’ in the
Muslim army have been explained.

Conclusion: Finally, the issue of ‘growth and development of the Muslim
army and the causes and factors that led to their victory in battle’ is
discussed; after which I have listed the most important sources and
references that have been used in this study.

Muhammad Dhāhir Watr  
 5 Dhu al-Qa’adah 1405 AH

[^1]: The Glorious Qur’an (Q1:1-7)


