A Chronological Introduction And Description Of The Most Important Sources
==========================================================================

Despite the fact that the wars of the Prophet (S) were fought over a
relatively short period (10 years), his method and style of command and
military leadership lasted for a long time; because Muslims and others,
within the military and without, have discussed, studied and analyzed
this subject from the beginning of the first century A.H. up to this day
and have not neglected it.

The Glorious Qur’ān is the most important source that speaks of these
wars and battles, and we find a lot about this subject in its
commentaries. The most important of these commentaries are: Tabari’s
Commentary, Nayshāburi’s *Asbāb al-Nuzul*, Qurtubi’s *al-Jāmi li Ahkām
al-Qur’ān*, Baydhāwi’s *Anwār al-Tanzil wa Asrār al-Ta’wil* and Suyuti’s
*al-Itqān fi ‘Ulum al-Qur’ān*. Among these, Tabari’s commentary, which
describes the details of what takes place in the battles and also
Nayshāburi’s commentary, which records the occasion of revelation of
specific verses in relation to the battles, are especially important.

Material about these issues can [also] be found in various books of
history and biography, the most important among which include: Ibn
Shihāb al-Zuhri’s *al-Maghāzi al-Nabawiyya*, Ibn Is’hāq’s *al-Siyar wa
al-Maghāzi*, al-Wāqidi’s *al-Maghāzi al-Nabawiyya,* Ibn Hazm
al-Andalusi’s *Jawāmi’ al-Sirah*, al-Kalā’i’s *al-Ihtifā’* and Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās’ *Uyun al-Athar*. Wāqidi was more precise in his
historical recordings of all the wars than the others, and by describing
the affairs of war and its management, he has been able to tackle the
subject better. We cannot find complete references to the organization
of the military except in his treatise. After him, Ibn Sa’d continues
his work in the book *al-Tabaqāt al-Kubrā* and presents a picture of
that which Wāqidi had not recorded.

However, the most important books of history about this subject are:  
*Tārikh Ibn Khayyāt*, Bukhāri’s *Tārikh al-Kabir*, *Tārikh Tabari*,
*Tārikh Ibn ‘Asākir*, Ibn Atheer’s *al-Kāmil fi al-Tārikh*, Ibn
Katheer’s *al-Bidāya wa al-Nihāya*, and also some biographical
commentaries like Suhayli’s *Rawdh al-Unf* have also set out to give
details of such issues.

Books of Hadith and Jurisprudence have also devoted specific chapters
and sections for these matters. The primary ones among these are: *Sahih
Bukhāri* (Chapter 9 – The Book of Battles), *Sahih Muslim* (Chapter 3 –
The Book of Jihād and Expeditions), *Sunan al-Tirmidhi* (Chapter 2 – The
Book of Jihād), *Sunan Ibn Dāwud* (Chapter 2 – The Book of Jihād and
Expeditions), *Sunan al-Nasā’i* (Chapter 6 – The Book of Jihād), *Sunan
al-Dārimi* (Chapter 2 – The Book of Jihād and Expeditions), *Sunan
al-Dārqutni* (The Book of Expeditions), *Musannaf San’āni* (Chapter 5),
Ibn Hanifa’s *al-Maghāzi wa al-Musnad* (The book of Jihād and
Expeditions), Shāfi’i’s *al-Umm* (Chapter 6 – The Book of Willful
Injury), Humaidi’s *al-Musnad* (The Book of Battles and Jihād), Abi
Sulaymān al-Khitābi’s *Ma’ālim al-Sunan* and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzi’s
*al-Tahdhib*.

In this context, *Sahih Bukhāri* is important both historically and
militarily as the author has narrated the accounts chronologically and
recounts the battles in the order in which they took place, starting
from the Battle of al-‘Ashirah to the Battle of Tabuk. Similarly, when
he explains the battles, he takes all the angles into account,
mentioning numerous narratives about it, such that the reader is able to
come to a complete and correct understanding of these battles.

Aside from the books that discuss this subject separately, there are
various books of history and annals of nations that have also been
beneficial in this research. The most important among these are:
Arzaqi’s *Akhbāru Makkah*, Qutb al-Din’s *Tārikh Makkah al-Musharrafah*,
Fāsi’s *al-‘Aqd al-Tamin*, Bakri’s *Mu’jam Mastu’jam* and Yāqut
al-Hamawi’s *Mu’jam al-Buldān*.

The most important feature of these histories and chronicles is that
they mention the economic situation [at the time], military resources
and battle expeditions and similarly give a clear representation of the
economic life, which in this age was considered one of the more
important issues, and for every discussion on the military it is a
necessary factor that needs to be taken into account.

Books about the character of the Prophet (S) also consist of many points
about his ‘military management’ and ‘qualities of leadership’ the most
important among which include: Ibn Sa’d’s *Tabaqāt al-Kubrā* (vol. 1
Chapter 2), Tirmidhi’s *Shamāil*, Faryabi’s *Dalā’il al-Nubuwwah*, Abu
‘Ali Ansāri’s *Sifāt al-Nabi* (S), Qādhi ‘Ayyādh’s *Shifā*, Suyuti’s
*al-Khasā’is al-Kubrā*, Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalāni’s *al-Mawāhib al-Daniyya*,
al-Dhahabi’s *Tārikh al-Islām* (vol. 1), Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzi’s *Zād
al-Ma’ād fi Hudā Khayril ‘Ibād* (vol. 1 & 2) and his *Furusiyyat
al-Muhammadiyyah*.

Books of biography are also not empty of material on this subject,
rather, in many instances provide detailed accounts about the commanders
of battles and wars and about the companions who had the responsibility
of commanding the armies. Some of these (books) are: Ibn Habib’s
*al-Muhbir*, Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr’s *al-Isti’āb fi Ma’rifat al-Ashāb*, Ibn
Atheer al-Jazari’s *Usd al-Ghāba fi Ma’rifat al-Sahābah* and Ibn Hajar
‘Asqalāni’s *al-Isāba fi Tamyiz al-Sahābah*.

The Islāmic conquests at the time of the Prophet (S) and the companions
were studied by those who came later and the various aspects and details
were presented in a well organized fashion by them. Books of geography
and history expound on the conquests within and without the Arabian
subcontinent and also talk of the events after the spread of Islām from
Madina al-Munawwarah to Damascus, Baghdād, Madā’in, and on the east to
India and to Alexandria, Constantinople, Tarablus and Tunis. It could be
said that the most important of these works are Ibn Khardāba’s
*al-Masālik* *wal-Mamālik* [vols. 3,4,5 and 6], Ibn Rusta’s *al-A’lāq
al-Nafsiyya* [Chapter 8] which talks about Madina, Makkah, Haramayn and
the southern lands of Arabia.

Ibn Faqih’s *al-Buldān* [Chapter 10 and 11] talks of Makkah and
Alexandria while Ya’qubi’s *al-Buldān* [Chapter 17 and 18] mentions the
Maghreb, Baghdad and their historical importance. Balkhi’s *Suwar
al-Aqāleem* is the first book on geography written in Islām and
Istakhri’s *al-Masālik wal-Mamālik* is also the first book that
describes the ‘Islāmic World’.

In Ibn Hawqal’s *al-Masālik wal-Mamālik* [Chapter 3, 4 and 24] the maps
of Egypt, Syria, Iraq and the Arabian Peninsula have been drawn and the
economical and social situation of Libya has also been portrayed.
Muqaddasi has also given a description of Palestine and Syria in his
*Ahsanu al-Taqāseem fi Ma’rifatil Aqāleem* [Chapter 32 and 34].

Mas’udi’s *al-Tanbih wal-Ashrāf* [Chapter 37] speaks of the life of the
Prophet (S), battles and expeditions in which he was the commander,
military units, horses and mounts, and all that is related to the
military transport. Mas’udi’s recording of the ‘Historical Geography of
Battles’, is considered an original source whose narrations can be
relied upon, however, unfortunately most of his writings are lost.

Another source is Qazwini’s *Athār al-Bilād wa Akhbār al-‘Ibād* which
discusses geographical history and related issues including the
situations and conditions of different lands and their inhabitants.
After this, we must mention the *Muqaddima* of Ibn Khaldun and
Qalashqandi’s *Subh al-A’shā*. These two books record geographical and
historical information about different kingdoms, especially Egypt and
Syria.

It is noteworthy that more recently books and research works, in both
Arabic and English, have been written about the life of the Prophet (S)
and his battles with the disbelievers. The most important works in
Arabic include: *al-Rasul al-Qā’id* (S. Khattāb), *al-Rasul al-‘Arabi wa
Fann al-Harb* (General Mustafa Talās), *al-‘Abqariyya al-Askariyya fi
Ghazawāt al-Rasul*, ‘*Ali Hāmish al-Sirah* (Tāhā Hussain), *Hayātu
Muhammad* (Muhammad Hasanain Haykal), *al-‘Abqariyyāt al-Islāmiyya*
(‘Aqqād) and *al-Anwār al-Muhammadiyya* (Nabhāni).

The foreign books that have been translated into Arabic and discuss the
same subject, we can mention: *Muhammad in Makkah* *and Madina*
(Montgomery Watt), *Muhammad, the Prophet of Allah* (Dianna), *The
Heroes* (Thomas Carlayle), *The First Hundred* (Michael Hart) and
others.

Many of these works are only limited to military, institutional or
ethical issues that form part of the *seerah.* Because ‘military
management’ encompasses all these issues, it is necessary that we
discuss all these matters together, taking into consideration their
correlation with each other. It is through this that the importance of
this subject and its role in revealing the secret of the success of the
Holy Prophet (S) and those whom he chose as army commanders, becomes
evident.

Now we will take a look at the most important authors and researchers in
history who have written on this subject and have left behind important
works on the battles and expeditions, and since their importance in
relation to this subject varies, we will first study the oldest writings
that are relevant and have practical implications and thereafter we will
mention others according to their chronology and relevance; in this
order: Wāqidi, Ibn Is’hāq, Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhri, Kalā’i and Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās.


