The Most Important Historians
=============================

1. Abu Bakr Muhammad Ibn Muslim Bin ‘Ubaydallah Bin Shihāb al-Zuhri (51-124 A.H.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a difference of opinion about his date of birth and death. He
was a learned scholar, a memorizer of the Qur’an[^1] and an author who
knew how to use the various expressions and idioms and he would use
these in his works[^2]. He was a poet[^3] and a genealogist[^4] who
would look for the chains of narrators in the traditions[^5]. He would
strive in the quest for knowledge and would guard it. He kept aloof from
the events and turmoil of his time[^6]. He believed in the dissemination
of knowledge among the people and used to say: ‘In the spread of
knowledge there is the strengthening of religion and worldly life and in
the path of knowledge all this comes together[^7].’

He studied about the seerah from Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab, ‘Urwa bin
Zubayr and ‘Ubaydallah bin ‘Abdullah bin Utbah, and in his attitude
towards his teachers, he displayed exemplary ethics and morals. He would
accompany them, serve them and show the utmost reverence to them[^8].
Zuhri made efforts to author some works. He would write down what he
heard. When his works became known, people turned to him and benefitted
greatly from his knowledge.

Zuhri started with Hadith, History and Expeditions. He wrote so much
that his writings had to be carried on the backs of animals. When he
died, he was in such a position that there was none more learned than
him in history.[^9] His knowledge was disseminated through his
narrators. The most famous of them who lived in Haramayn and Hijāz
included: ‘Umar bin Dinar, Yahya bin Sa’eed al-Ansāri, Musa bin ‘Uqba
and others. From those who lived in Iraq, the most important ones
included: ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umayr, Ismā’il bin Abi Khālid, ‘Atā ibn Sā’ib;
and from the other places like Syria and Egypt, there were Mansur bin
Sādhān, ‘Abd al-Karim Jazari, Thawr bin Yazid and others.[^10]

The merits of Zuhri’s accounts of the expeditions over other works are
as follows:

They were written with sincerity, honesty, clarity and eloquence. Zuhri
had met some of the companions who participated in battles with the
Prophet (S) and he has narrated from them about the wars and the
strategies of the Holy Prophet (S). The most important of them are:
Abdullah bin ‘Umar, Anas bin Mālik, Suhayl bin Sa’d and others[^11].
Similarly, in *al-Musannaf* (vol. 5, the chapter on expeditions), we
find numerous traditions that Zuhri has narrated from ‘Umar ibn Rāshid.
He too, was truthful in narration and reliable in transmission.

Many of the scholars[^12] have praised and criticized the narrators of
expedition accounts like Ibn Is’hāq and Wāqidi, however Zuhri has been
praised by all[^13] and has been hailed as the most truthful and highly
learned of his time. Therefore, we can rely upon what he has recorded or
narrated about the battles of the Prophet (S).

Zuhri had a longstanding experience in recording expeditions[^14]. He is
the oldest writer to formulate a systematic and clear method in this
field, therefore his recordings are well-grounded, clear and reliable
and have been systematically categorized and are far off from the
politics of authorship and other various discrepancies.

2. Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Is’hāq Bin Yasār al-Mutallabi (85-151 A.H.)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Is’hāq was born in Madina and was buried in Baghdād after his
demise. There is a difference of opinion regarding the date of his
death[^15]. His most important works include: *Kitāb al-Khulafā* and
*al-Siyar wal-Maghāzi wal- Mubtadā*[^16]. He was trustworthy and
knowledgeable about expeditions and history and was also a memorizer of
prophetic traditions[^17]. Great scholars have narrated from him and Ibn
Shihāb al-Zuhri, Ibn Hanbal and others have praised him[^18]. Mālik
called him a Dajjāl[^19] and accused him of following the Qādiriyya
sect[^20] and also deemed him to be one who narrates ahādith with
improper and incomplete chains[^21].

The Seera of Ibn Is’hāq has only come down to us through the recorders
of seera, the most important of whom were: Ibn Hishām, Tabari, Kalā’i,
Ibn Sa’d and Ibn Atheer. All of these [people] have not presented the
seera of Ibn Is’hāq in the same manner as the original, rather they have
mentioned a summary of his statements and recordings. Ibn Hishām has
himself acknowledged this in the introduction of his *al-Seera
al-Nabawiyya*[^22], so it would be correct to say that this work is
actually a summary and a selection of Ibn Is’hāq’s narrations.

He is one of the leaders of those who were involved in recording the
seerah [of the Holy Prophet][^23] and is the first person to collect the
accounts of the expeditions and record them[^24]. His works are a source
of reference for researchers today. The great recorders of expeditions
like ‘Aāsim bin Umar Qatāda who wrote *al-Siyar wal-Maghāzi* gave the
following testimony about him: ‘The knowledge that Ibn Is’hāq placed at
the disposal of the people through his narrations will never
disappear[^25].’ When Zuhri was asked about Ibn Is’hāq’s accounts of
expeditions, he said ‘he is the most learned of all people about the
expeditions[^26]’.

Today, the narrations of Ibn Is’hāq that have been passed on by many
reliable recorders of the seera like ‘Aāsim and Zuhri have reached
us[^27]. It can be said that Ibn Is’hāq is from those scholars who
recorded the accounts of the expeditions based on old methods. One day
this point was raised in front of him, he said: ‘I am only a safe keeper
and recorder of the knowledge of expeditions[^28].’

The Merits of Ibn Is’hāq’s Seera:

He is the only person who has narrated the expeditions of the Holy
Prophet (S) in its totality[^29], because the other Seera recorders have
narrated the expeditions in an incomplete and disjointed fashion. Maybe
their lifetimes were not enough for them to complete the work and their
students did not expound on the details of their expedition accounts and
sufficed with mentioning only a number of battles and wars.

The Seera of Ibn Is’hāq is detailed and contains numerous long
narrations and includes mention of dates[^30]. Shāfi’i says: ‘Anyone who
wishes to gain expertise about the expeditions needs (to study) Ibn
Is’hāq[^31].’ Through lengthy odes, he has highlighted the narratives of
what transpired on the battlefields[^32]. All this points to the
vastness of the Seera of Ibn Is’hāq. These odes have immortalized the
victories and give important information about works, situations and
personalities. Even though it is not possible to give exact details
about what takes place on the battlefield, all the military strategies
and skills employed, some of the particulars about the battles of the
Prophet (S) have been directly reported.

3. Abu Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Umar al-Wāqidi (130-207 A.H.)
----------------------------------------------------------

Wāqidi was born in Madina and died in Baghdād[^33]. He is buried in the
Khayzarān graveyard. He was an author and used to pay special attention
in writing [about] the seerah and expeditions (of the Prophet (S)), to
such an extent that he became one of the foremost authorities in this
field. His most important works are: *al-Maghāzi al-Nabawiyya*, *Fath
Afriqiyya*, *al-Radda*, *Fath al-‘Ajam*, *Fath Misr wa Iskandariyya*,
*Akhbār Makkah*, *Tabaqāt*, *Futuh al-Iraq*, *Seerat Abi Bakr*, The
Battle between the Aus and Khazraj and others[^34]. The merits of
Wāqidi’s works can be outlined as follows:

Precise Information: He has given detailed and precise information about
those who participated in the battles, the route taken by the armies,
the weapons and modes of transport used, provisions, descriptions of
battlefields, the factors that helped in gaining victory or led to them
facing difficulties in battle, the location of the martyrdom of
soldiers, and anything related to warfare.

Extensive Information: He wrote and recorded everything that was related
to the battles[^35], such that through his narrations, we learn many of
the specifics regarding the military, because he has reported all the
different aspects of issues pertaining to warfare and leadership. In
this way, the information provided by Wāqidi in the areas of the
circumstances of war, its location, the type of ground on which it was
fought etc. is of great importance. If his writings about the battles
were collected together, it would in itself have been a source for the
principles of war and battle at the time of the Prophet (S).

Recording of Exact Times[^36]: In military management, for a commander,
time and its determination is of the essence and can make all the
difference in the result of the battle; whether it be victory or loss.

Recording of Exact Locations[^37]: Wāqidi also recorded the exact
locations of the battles and through this he gave value to the
battlefields where the Prophet (S) fought. Many like Ibn Sa’d, Tabari
and Ibn Katheer have narrated from Wāqidi about the birth and
Prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S) and also his battles and
conquests[^38].

Ibn Sa’d’s *Tabaqāt al-Kubrā* stands out in its military reporting
because it has been written according to Wāqidi’s style, meaning he has
similarly paid a great deal of attention to the recording of exact times
and locations and sometimes describes the locations in which the battles
took place and adds on to the narrations of Wāqidi and then, in another
place, he discusses the principles of warfare[^39]. From his writings it
can be deduced that he is truthful and his narrations are
authentic[^40]. Many of the important aspects of Wāqidi’s narrations and
works were revealed and expounded by his student Ibn Sa’d.

4. Abu al-Rabi’ Sulaymān Bin Musā Ibn Sālim al-Kalā’i al-Himyari
----------------------------------------------------------------

Kalā’i was born in Balans and grew up there and he died in enemy
territory (in battle)[^41]. He has narrated from Ibn Qāsim Hubaysh, Ibn
Zarqum, Ibn al-Waleed bin Abi al-Qāsim and others[^42]. He was famous
for his eloquent oratory and writings[^43] and gave great importance to
recording and narrating ahadith. His most well known works are:
*al-Iktifā bimā Tadhammanhu ‘an Maghāzi al-Rasul* *(S)*, *Maghāzi
al-Khulafā* (4 volumes), *al-Musalsalāt ‘an al-Ahādith* and *al-Athār
wal-Ishārāt*.[^44]

When his works were published and his message was spread, people came
towards him and sought to benefit from him and many attended his
teaching sessions. The most famous of these was Abdullah ibn al-Abārid
who has eulogized him after his martyrdom[^45]. With regards to the
importance of his writing ‘al-Iktifā’ it must be said that its chain of
transmission is strong and it describes the battles and their various
aspects in detail, because Kalā’i himself was a military person and had
tasted the hardships of war. So if he has recorded something in the
seera, he has done so truthfully and with total regard of his
responsibility and questionability. Furthermore, in his books one senses
an enlightening spirituality that none of the previous writers
displayed.

Kalā’i al-Balansi was a leader and a courageous commander who was
steadfast in battle and in one of the battles he is said to have
addressed one of the fleeing soldiers thus: ‘Do you flee from
Paradise?[^46]’ He was martyred while he still held the standard in his
hand[^47] and was encouraging and urging the soldiers to go forth
against the enemy. Aside from this, Kalā’i was a great poet who would
compose epics and rouse the emotions of the people[^48].

5. Abu al-Fath Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillah Ibn Sayyid al-Nās152
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

He was popularly known as Ibn Sayyid al-Nās. There is a difference of
opinion regarding his date of birth and death. He died in Cairo. He
studied under his father and a group of scholars, the most famous of
whom was Ibn Daqiq al-‘Eid.[^49] This scholar tutored him in religion,
Arabic grammar and poetry[^50]. He gained precedence over his
contemporaries in the fields of Seera and history. His most important
works include: ‘*Uyun al-Athar fi Funun al-Maghāzi wa al-Shamāil wa
al-Siyar*, *Nur al-‘Uyun*, *Bushrā al-Labib fi Dhikrā al-Habib* and
*Tahsil al-Isāba fi Tafsil al-Sahāba*[^51].

Many scholars like Qādhi ‘Izz al-Deen Sharif, who has mentioned him in
his *Wafayāt* and Ibn Katheer, Ibn Nāsir al-Deen, Suyuti and others have
testified to his great knowledge[^52]. He compiled the seera in two
volumes by narrating what the recorders of the seera before him had
written. That which makes his accounts of the expeditions stand out
includes:

Precision and Depth: He would select authentic narrations and leave
aside the weak ones. He would take this matter very seriously and would
do it very well[^53]. An example of this precision of his can be seen
when he summarized his own book ‘*Uyun al-Athār* and named it *Nur
al-‘Uyun*. In this way it became easy for him to refer to previous works
and to present his writings on the seera in a well-documented manner.
One of the great scholars has said: “Ibn Sayyid wrote, compiled and
corrected a lot in his beautiful handwriting and he created principles
for this [also][^54].”

Following the Method of Zuhri: Ibn Sayyid al-Nās in his book *al-Siyar
wal-Tārikh*, has followed Zuhri’s method and has compiled all that which
relates to the military. His ‘*Uyun al-Athār* is an example of the
*Maghāz*i of Ibn Is’hāq which has shadowed the *Seera* of Ibn Hishām and
is formed of a selection from the *Maghāzi* of Wāqidi and a selection
from scholars of history such as Tabari and Ibn Khayyāt. That which
assisted him in this was his great knowledge of the sources of the
seera. Ibn Sayyid al-Nās was also a specialist in jurisprudence and
would benefit from the scholars of his time and gain knowledge from
them. Ibn Zubayr says: “He gained the permission [to narrate traditions]
from four-hundred scholars or more.”[^55]

Organization, Sequence and Reference: Ibn Katheer has described him
thus: “He occupied himself in the pursuit of knowledge and was better in
this than everyone else. After he learnt the seera and history, he
compiled them in two volumes… grand poetry, well written prose, complete
eloquence and proper writing is what he had and he was attributed with
kindness and good morals. He was loyal to the principles and practices
of the previous scholars that relied on the traditions of the Holy
Prophet (S).”

[^1]: Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffadh 1:108-113; Ibn Khallikān, Wafayāt
al-A’yān wa Anbā’I Abnā’iz Zamān 4:177-178; Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalāni, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib 9:488, 450

[^2]: Abu Na’im al-Isfahāni, Hilyat al-Awliyā wa Tabaqāt al-Asfiyā 3:371

[^3]: Marzbāni, Mu’jam al-Shu’arā: 345

[^4]: Abu Na’im al-Isfahāni 3:272

[^5]: Ibid. 3:365

[^6]: Ibn Khallikān 4:177; Abu Na’im al-Isfahāni 3:364

[^7]: Abu Na’im al-Isfahāni 3:369

[^8]: Ibid. 3:371

[^9]: Ibid. 3:161. Unfortunately all his works and writings are
non-extant. However, his narratives were used by later historians and
thus can be found in these secondary sources. (Tr.)

[^10]: Abu Na’im al-Isfahāni 2:372-373

[^11]: Khateeb Baghdadi, Tarikhu Baghdād 3:13-14; al-Dhahabi, Mizān
al-I’tidāl fi Naqd al-Rijāl 3:470; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:7

[^12]: Abu Na’im al-Isfahāni 3:361 onwards; Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhri: 27

[^13]: Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhri: 30

[^14]: Abu Na’im al- Isfahāni 3:369 onwards

[^15]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:232; Ibn Khallikāk 4:277; Yāqut Humayri,
Mu’jam al-Udabā’ 18:8

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:215, Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalāni, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib
9:43 onwards

[^18]: Al-Dhahabi 3:469

[^19]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:223

[^20]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:225; al-Dhahabi 30:470

[^21]: Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:7

[^22]: Ibn Hishām 1:7

[^23]: Al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffādh 1:173

[^24]: Yāqut Humayri, Mu’jam al-Buldān 5:18; Marghliyuth, Dirāsāt ‘an
al-Muwarrikheen al-‘Arab: 998

[^25]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:220; Yāqut Himayari, Mu’jam al-Udabā’ 6:18;
Ibn Khallikān 4:276

[^26]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:219

[^27]: Yāqut Himyari 6:18, Khateeb Baghdādi 1:225

[^28]: Khateeb Baghdādi 1:223

[^29]: Ibid. 1:214

[^30]: Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalāni 9:46

[^31]: Al-Dhahabi, Mizān al-I’tidāl 3:472; Khateeb Baghdādi 1:219; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:9

[^32]: Al-Jumhi, Tabaqāt Fuhul al-Shu’arā 1:8; Marghliyuth: 73

[^33]: Ibn ‘Asākir 15:395; al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffādh 1:348

[^34]: Yāqut Himyari, Mu’jam al-Udabā’ 8:281; Ibn Khallikān 4:348; Ibn
al-Nadim, al-Firhrist 1:144. Unfortunately most of Wāqidi’s works are
non-extant today. (Tr.)

[^35]: Khateeb Baghdādi 3:6

[^36]: Marghliyuth: 18

[^37]: Ibn Sa’d 5:315

[^38]: Tabari, Tārikh al-Tabari 1:942,980

[^39]: Ibn Sa’d 2:1-137

[^40]: Khateeb Baghdādi 5:321, al-Dhahabi, Mizān al-I’tidāl 3:560. With
regards to Ibn Sa’d’s reliability, there is a difference of opinion
among the various sects of Islām. (Tr.)

[^41]: Ibn ‘Imād Hanbali, Shadharāt al-Dhahab fi Akhbār man Dhahab
5:164; al-Katāni, al-Risāla al-Mustadhrafa: 198

[^42]: Al-Nabāhi, Tārikh Qudhāt Andalus: 119

[^43]: Ibn ‘Imād Hanbali, Ibid.

[^44]: Al-Katāni, Ibid. He also wrote an important work called Futuh
al-Radda (Tr.)

[^45]: Al-Nabāhi: 120

[^46]: Ibid. 119

[^47]: Ibid. Ibn Shākir al-Katbi, Fawāt al-Wafayāt 1:366

[^48]: Kalā’i was one of the great commanders in the war against the
crusaders under Salāh al-Deen Ayyubi. (Tr.)

[^49]: Al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffādh 4:1481

[^50]: Ibn ‘Imād Hanbali 6:108; Ibn Ilyās, Tārikh Misr 1:171

[^51]: Al-Dhahabi 4:1451

[^52]: Ibid. Suyuti: 52

[^53]: Suyuti: 520

[^54]: Ibn ‘Imād Hanbali 6:108

[^55]: Al-Dhahabi 5:1451


