The Arab Military Before Islām
==============================

The methods of war among the Arabs were different from that of all the
other races. In their battles they relied on offence and attack[^1] and
their motivation was limited to: defending their idols,[^2]
bloodlust,[^3] raiding and stealing cattle[^4], and increasing the
status and position of their own tribes[^5]. Their most important weapon
was the sword[^6].

The role of Islām was changing the implements and their employment in
battles and making appropriate use of them. The principles and beliefs
through which Islām was manifested caused an increase in the spiritual
and emotional uplifting of the soldiers and encouraged them to
participate. Previously, an Arab soldier would be motivated by
courage[^7], display of force[^8], a sense of loyalty[^9] and selfish
motives[^10].

The most important mode of transport that were used was the camel[^11],
as it was capable of going for long without water and was able to bear
the dryness and sandstorms of the desert. The most important qualities
of the ‘Arabian wars’ were as follows:

1) The Objectives of War
------------------------

The Arab tribes were naturally linked to and reliant upon the economical
and social status of their individual members. Because their land
consisted of dry deserts lacking sufficient water, their objectives
were:

a) Gaining water and control over the pastures and cattle[^12]: Often
times, wars would be fought in order to gain control over watering holes
or springs and one of the sides would gain control either through a
peace treaty or by force. During times of drought and famine, intense
battles took place. When wars were fought for water, inhabitants of the
dry lands were forced to migrate to other places that had sufficient
water[^13].

When one tribe was envious of the wealth and prosperity of another, they
would engage them in battle in order to loot their wealth and
cattle[^14]. The strong tribe was one that was able to overpower the
weaker tribes and take their wealth. They would take all they wanted as
booty. They would steal away their cattle and then return home
victorious. Some of the Arab tribes even went so far as to march towards
neighboring kingdoms[^15] and cities that had plenty of food
stocks[^16]. During the age of Jāhiliyya, wars and raids were one of the
primary source of sustenance, possession of livestock and booty in times
of drought and famine.

b) Bloodlust and revenge: This was caused by social events like marriage
and divorce[^17], social interactions among the members of a tribe[^18],
jealousy, malice and competition[^19], or because of the establishment
of relations by the allies with other tribes.[^20]

c) Increasing the status and power of the warring tribe: The fundamental
principle was, ‘One who does not kill is killed and one who does not
fight is fought’[^21]. Also, once one tribe loses a battle, their power
will never be regained and they are destined to destruction and
annihilation and become incapable of defending themselves[^22].

d) Increasing the number of forces and soldiers in the army: The sources
have not mentioned the size of the pagan Arab armies but they have noted
that every tribe, with all its warriors, was considered one ‘army
block’[^23], and these were the people who would engage the other tribes
in battle. When the tribes would join forces, a large army would be
formed[^24]. The number of tribes that came together in a battle against
the Greeks numbered 218 and consisted of more than ten thousand
soldiers.

When we refer to the compendiums, lexicons and books of literature, we
find that some Arabs paid much attention to the organization and
creation of armies while some even independently[^25] joined their
tribes and entered the battle. Nu’mān bin Mundhir had formed numerous
organizations including the battalions called *al-Shubhā’*,
*al-Dawwasar*[^26] and *al-Radhā’i’*[^27].  
 The following names indicate the number of forces of the various groups
of fighters and the types of weapons they used:

*Al-Raht* – 3 to 10 people[^28].  
*Al-‘Usbah* – 10 to 40 people[^29].  
*Al-Miqnab* (*al-Minsar*) – 30 or 40 up to 300 on horseback[^30].  
*Al-Jumrah* (*al-Qabilah*) – 300 to 1,000 on horseback.[^31]  
*Al-Sariyah* – 40 to 500[^32] and at the very least 5 to 300
people[^33].  
*Al-Kutayba* – 100 to 1,000 people or from 400 to 10,000 people[^34].  
*Al-Jaysh* (*Faylaq* or *Juhfal*) – 100 to 4,000 people[^35].  
*Al-Khamis* – from 4,000 to 12,000 people[^36].

All these groups or units would be strengthened by the backing of
another group. In this case, it would be called *Kutaybah wa*
*Jarrajah*[^37] or *Jarradah*, *Jayshin Lujab* and *Khamisin
‘Armum*[^38]. The person who commanded a force of more than a thousand
would be known as *Jarrarayn*[^39].

The Kutayba (the group with between 100 and 1,000 people) and Jumrah
(300 to 1,000 riders) were two of the most important groups in the wars
of the Arabs before Islām. However, during the time of the Holy Prophet
(S) the Sariyah (consisting of between 50 and 400 people) became the
only important group in battle and this name can be found in many of the
narrations from the companions[^40] because this number was also
employed before the Hijrah.

The Sariyah was the smallest section of the army[^41] and could be
formed even by only ten people. For this reason, it was also called
‘Asharatu Rahtin (a group of ten)[^42]. The Prophet (S) would also send
these groups with fewer or greater numbers. They have said: the best
companions are four, the best Sirāya (pl. of Sariyah) is made up of four
hundred, the best army consists of four thousand and at the most, not
exceeding twelve thousand soldiers[^43].

e) Weapons: By going through the narratives and poetry of the Age of
Ignorance (Jāhiliyyah) we find that there is frequent mention of
weapons, and especially the ‘sword[^44]’. Other weapons like the arrow,
dagger, spear, spearhead, club, bow and the sling[^45] that were
considered offensive weapons and were used in attacks are also found in
their poetry. As for the defensive weapons, they included the armor,
shield, helmet and the armor that was worn beneath the helmet[^46].
These weapons would come from Syria, Yemen and India and some were also
made locally.

The Arabs would also use some heavy weaponry like the catapult. The
first person to use it was Judhayma al-Abrash[^47]. Another weapon known
as *al-Dabbābah*[^48] was first employed by ‘Abdullah ibn Ju’dah[^49].
Later the Muslim Arabs modified this weapon and used its improved
version in their wars[^50].

At that time, an Arab soldier would either fight on foot or on
horseback. The most important mode of transport at wartime were
horses[^51], and the forces would ride on them. Horses had some distinct
advantages in war, especially speed and agility.

f) The Relationship between the Commander and the Soldiers: Affairs of
war and military leadership of a tribe would be in the hands of the head
of the tribe, a person who would have the qualities of forbearance,
clemency, co-operation, patience, kindness etc[^52]. All the soldiers,
be they freemen or slaves, volunteers or those who have been forced to
participate, hired or otherwise, all have to respond to the call for war
by the commander and none of them are allowed to disobey him, whether
they like it or not, except those who are excused because of being too
young or sick. Of course, at times some of the wealthy would disobey the
command to participate in battle and would in return pay the fine and
penalty for not joining the battle[^53].

One of the commanders would draw up the plans for battle, allot
commanders for each section, define the assignments, identify the goal
and arm the forces. The responsibility for these tasks rested on his
shoulders because of his superiority over the others and in the end he
would take command over the forces[^54]. Many of the Arabs in the age of
Jāhiliyya were known for their training in archery and their expertise
in it. They were able to hit small targets[^55] and would also train
those who did not know archery.

g) Mobilization of forces and Recruitment: It was incumbent and
obligatory [to fight] when the tribe needed to be defended or a general
command had been issued. So in times of danger, all the people were
mobilized. The men, old and young, small children and women too, would
prepare and participate in the battle as much as they were able to[^56].
Here we should mention two groups of fighters: (i) A group that was
hired for an agreed sum. (ii) Another group that consisted of slaves who
had to fight in the battle without any compensation and would have to
stay and serve till the end of the battle. Those who would fight with
all their might in order to defend themselves fought with strong will
and determination whereas those who were forced to fight and were not
paid anything, especially in times of hardship, would flee from the
battle.  
 Conscription was not compulsory and would take place on an individual
basis, not collectively. It would be carried out during attacks or in
order to join the commander.[^57]

h) Dealing with Prisoners: Prisoners (of war) would be dealt with
harshly and with cruelty[^58]. At times they would cut off their noses
or tear out their ears from the roots or sever their limbs[^59].

Because of this torture, some prisoners would die while others would
remain in their service as slaves, or alternatively a ransom could be
given to secure their freedom[^60] or they would be granted a favor for
which they would remain obliged[^61].

They would also use hostages[^62] to exact revenge for the deaths of
those taken as prisoners. Just as the ‘Aus did with the Khazraj – they
killed three of the slaves who had been taken as hostages (in
retaliation for three killed prisoners)[^63].

i) Material Support and Backup: This consisted of the collective
measures that an army would put in place for its troops including
weapons, provisions, food, water etc. The goal behind making these
arrangements and providing munitions that were necessary for long
drawn-out wars was gaining victory over the enemy and this was achieved
by using different means. The most important factors that assisted in
sending support were:

Roads: The roads and paths that the pagan Arabs traversed in times of
war have been not been clearly mentioned in historical records and some
writings after the coming of Islām only give general indications about
them. For example: in Ibn Kharadādibah’s *al-Masālik wal-Mamālik*, Ibn
Hawqal’s *al-Masālik wal-Mamālik*, Mas’udi’s *al-Tanbih wal-Ashrāf*,
Qazwini’s *al-Bilād wa Akhbār al-‘Ibād* and all the other books of
battles and expeditions.

Similarly, the roads that were traversed by the armies of Islām in their
conquests and battles have not been mentioned in detailed except in very
few sources. Most of the paths that were used by the Muslim armies were
the well known main roads and the most important among these were:

(i) Paths near the coasts and borders where water was plentiful and
wells were many.

(ii) Roads that ran parallel to the Euphrates River that flowed from
Iraq to Syria.

(iii) The routes between Yathrib (Madina) and Makkah or between Makkah
and Iraq.

(iv) Roads that linked the cities and villages of the Arabian
Peninsula[^64].

Weapons of War: In the age of Jāhiliyya, weapons of war constituted
the most important part of munitions. In the beginning, a soldier would
get armed before he went out to war, because no help would reach him
during the battle. If, during the heat of battle, his sword broke or his
arrows ran out, if he had extras he would exchange them, otherwise he
would be unable to continue the fight.

Water and Food: The most important foods that were used in sending
support to the fighting soldiers were dates and grapes that were grown
in parts of Yemen and Tā’if. Fruits from the trees of Sidr and Miswāk,
fish, barley bread and other foods were also sent. Dates were the staple
food and Yathrib was known for its plentiful fresh dates. The Arabs were
accustomed to eating less and would make to with a few dates for an
entire day. When they were very hungry, they would eat animal hide,
porcupines, lizards and meat of hunted animals[^65].

However, water was considered of strategic importance, because the
routes chosen and roads taken would be determined by it and efforts
would be made to secure drinking water and prevent the enemy from having
access to it. This liquid of life was of great importance for the army
that wished to set camp in a specific location and they would need to be
near a source of water at all times. For this reason, they would take
all the necessary measures to store as much water as possible. Ten
guards would be posted at wells and springs[^66] and in front of
man-made water storages large boulders would be placed[^67]. These
reservoirs would become even more important in times of war, and
especially defense, when besieged, or in the hot summer months.

Clothes and Military Uniforms: The Arab soldiers of Jāhiliyya wore
different varieties of clothes[^68], so fighters were indistinguishable
for non-combatants, and the soldiers would look alike because of their
similar turbans, armor, swords and other military equipment[^69].
Turbans or caps were worn on the heads and the *Jubba* or a hooded
garment, a shirt or a two-tone robe, trousers, a woolen cloth and
striped Yemeni cloth would be worn and feet would be covered with shoes
or sandals.

Tents: The tents were made of skin, wool, hair and fur[^70]. The Arabs
would only use tents at the start of battles, because their fighting
style was that of ‘charge and attack’ and this was highly disorganized.
For this reason, the army did not need to remain outside its area for
long periods of time. The Muslim armies during the time of the Prophet
(S) also did not use tents frequently for this very same reason[^71].

Modes of Transportation: The most important modes of transport were
the horse and camel[^72]. The horse was used because of its speed and
control at all times and in different situations, be it during attacks,
laying siege, face to face combat, ambush, night raids etc. Mares were
especially used in night raids, attacks, chases, maneuvers and difficult
tasks, and were more effective than stallions[^73]. Khālid bin Walid
used to fight battles while riding on a mare[^74]. Similarly, mules were
used in sieges and ambushes.

Many of those who fought on horseback were well known[^75], and they
would observe the principles of combat to the letter. They did this by
using the horses and concentrating their efforts on the weak points of
the enemy’s defenses or on the weak and timid people[^76]. As a result,
they would be successful in opening up fissures in the line of defense,
penetrating their ranks and creating terror and fright in their
hearts[^77]. Camels were not useful for battle[^78] but they could be
used for transporting soldiers, weapons, munitions and provisions from
place to place. This animal was known for its ability to bear hunger and
thirst, move through the harsh desert and carry heavy loads over long
distances.

Booty: All that was taken over by the army or tribe after it was
victorious over its enemy was known as booty[^79]. War booty became the
property of the overpowering forces who could use it as they
wished[^80]. In the age of Jāhiliyya, one fourth of the booty[^81] was
separated by the commander[^82]. All that was acquired without war
(*al-Nashitah*)[^83] and the booty that could not be divided
(*al-Fudhul*) was reserved for the commander[^84].  
 A poet has described the booty in this verse:

Laka al-Rubā’u wal-Safāya  
 Wa Hukmuka wal-Nashitah wal-Fudhul[^85]

In the same way, the killer would take possession of what the one who
was killed had with him [on the battlefield]. With the advent of Islām,
Khums was prescribed[^86]. The law of *Salab* (that which was taken from
one who was killed in battle) was left as it was.

2) Wars of Arabs against the Sassanids
--------------------------------------

The pagan Arabs fought wars with the great neighboring kingdoms and they
would raid the bordering areas. These kingdoms would also use some
tribes as a barrier against the invaders so that they could hinder them
as much as possible.

During the advent of Islām, the Sassanids had control over some areas at
the edge of the Arabian Peninsula, including the lands of Yemen, Bahrain
and some areas to the east of the peninsula. Because they were neighbors
with the Arabs[^87], they had no option but to deal with each other and
each of them would take necessary measures to prevent the incursions of
the other, whether through peace pacts or war.

Some of the steps taken by the Sassanids to this end included: pleasing
members of some tribes[^88], making pacts[^89] and treaties of
friendship with them, strengthening the borders[^90], building
fortresses, creating forts and protective barriers around the cities,
creating canals from rivers and seas and keeping patrol ships in order
to prevent the incursion of the enemy, creating points of defense along
the border and repelling the threats of attacking tribes. Aside from
this, guard units were formed by the tribes in return for payment and
compensation that was given to the heads of the tribes so that they
would protect the borders. These tribes were used to protect some of the
more remote areas and they would establish their repositories for
storing weapons and food in their land.

It can be said that the Sassanids would utilize the Arabs in their wars.
When the Arabs saw the oppression and cruelty of the Sassanids against
their own people, they would break the pacts. Udhaynah[^91] the king of
Tadmar rose up against the Sassanids (under Shāpur the First), fought a
war against him and was victorious. However, the kings that came after
Shāpur the First were able to gain victory over the Arabs, especially
during the reign of Shāpur Dhul Aktāf[^92] the person who later made a
peace treaty with the Arabs.[^93]

By studying the wars of the Arabs against the Sassanids, we find that
they were not united under the leadership of one commander[^94]; because
every tribe had its own head and it was not possible for him to give up
his leadership. Disagreements among them was the norm and therefore they
were not able to unite with other tribes. As a result, each one of them
would rise up to defend itself without the assistance of another.
Jealousy, malice and hatred was rife among them[^95]; to such an extent
that the Sassanids would incite some of the tribes to fight against
others[^96]. It is obvious that this had a tremendous impact in the wars
that were fought against the enemies.

The Sassanids were always afraid of fighting in the desert, and they
were unable to stand the lack of water and harsh conditions of these
lands. When the Arabs fought against their ally, they would arrange to
transfer water, camels and all that was necessary for war in the desert,
to the army[^97]. The enemy was never able to defeat the Arabs in their
own land, because they were fully aware about the conditions of their
land. The Arabs would sometimes take recourse to guerilla warfare[^98]
and would attack the supply routes, stores and armories.

3) Civil Wars in the North
--------------------------

Intense battles between Arab tribes, and especially the ‘Adnānis[^99] -
who were more inclined to combat and war[^100] - was commonplace;
because they were nomads and were accustomed to the harshness of the
desert and this made them rougher and more intrepid[^101]. Many battles
were fought between the Qahtānis[^102] and the ‘Adnānis[^103], between
the Taghlub and Bani Hakr, and others[^104] and also between the Arabs
and the Iranians[^105]. The most important of these were:

Yawm al-Awārat al-Awwal[^106] that took place between Mundhir ibn
Imra’ al-Qays and Bakr bin Wā’il.

Yawm al-Dahnā[^107] between the tribe of Bani Asad.

Yawm al-Kilāb al-Thāni[^108].

Yawm al-Baydhā’[^109].

And others like Yawm Bi’āth that took place between the Aws and the
Khazraj[^110].

By studying the details of these wars and battles, we find that the
Arabs never used to fight for goals and purposes that were sensible and
that had resulted from careful thought and consideration, rather their
wars would have other motives, including tribal ones[^111]. These types
of war were continuous and never-ending, and as such, they would always
be practicing [and preparing] for war. It was as if they were habituated
to war or that they liked it and were inclined to it. During the advent
of Islām, some of the warriors joined the army that was formed after the
migration [to Madina] with the intention of defeating the enemy, who
were living under harsh conditions and were able to establish themselves
in other places[^112].

The distinguishing factor of the Arabs in their wars against the
external enemies was that they would unite with other tribes in some
battles, like in the battle of Dhi Qār[^113] that took place after the
event of Yawm ‘Ayn Abāgh and in which they were victorious. However,
they would [then] separate and fight internal battles against each other
and this made them weak and led to their defeat[^114].

[^1]: Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimat al-‘Ibar 2:645

[^2]: Kalbi, al-Asnām: 100; Jawād ‘Ali, al-Mufassal fi Tārikh al-‘Arab
qabl al-Islām 1:609

[^3]: Al-Azhari, al-Nafhat al-Mulukiyya: 85

[^4]: Refer to the event of Yawmu ‘Ayni Abāgh in Ibn Atheer, al-Kāmil,
11:540; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, al-Iqd al-Fareed 5:260

[^5]: Tabrizi, Sharh al-Qasā’id al-‘Ashar: 121

[^6]: Ibn al-Shajari, Hamāsat al-Shajariyya 2:793 onwards; Tartusi,
Tabsirat Arbāb al-Albāb: 11

[^7]: Ibn Khaldun 2:286 onwards

[^8]: Ibn Sa’d 2:7; Qalqashandi, Qalā’id al-Jummāl 7:12 & 2

[^9]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 1:244 & 252

[^10]: Ibn Sa’d 1:1-157; Wāqidi 1:41

[^11]: Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyun al-Akhbār 2:161

[^12]: Refer to Yawm al-Baydā in Ibn Habib, al-Muhbir:246 and Yawm
al-Zuwayrin wa Yawm al-Shaytin in Ibn Atheer, al-Kāmil 1:604-654

[^13]: This is due to the fact that most of the Arabian Peninsula is
made up of dry desert and many areas lack sufficient water. (Tr.)

[^14]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:260, Ibn Atheer 11:54

[^15]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih: 244; Ibn Atheer 1:62

[^16]: Jawād ‘Ali 2:602

[^17]: Ibn Atheer 1:544, 566

[^18]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:345; al-Bakri, Mu’jam Mastu’jam 2:496

[^19]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5: 224; Ibn Atheer 1:620

[^20]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:248; Ibn Atheer 1:578, 671

[^21]: Maqrizi: 121

[^22]: Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah 2:451

[^23]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:250 onwards

[^24]: Ibn Atheer 1:482

[^25]: Jawād ‘Ali 1:575 and 2:21

[^26]: Ibn Sayyidah, al-Mukhassis 6:204; Ibn Hishām 2:254, 347; Zubaydi,
Tāj al-Arus 1:327, 3:207

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Al-Sikkeet, Mukhtasar Tahdhib al-Alfādh: 19; Ibn Mandhur, Lisān
al-‘Arab [under Ra Ha Ta] 6:305

[^29]: Al-Sikkeet, Ibid.

[^30]: Ibid. 27-28; Ibn Sayyidah 6:200

[^31]: Zubaydi [under Ja Ma Ra] 3:107

[^32]: Shaybāni 1:69; Tha’ālibi, Fiqh al-Lughah: 229

[^33]: Ibn Sayyidah 6:199; Zubaydi [under Sa Ra Ya] 10:174

[^34]: Al-Sikkeet: 27; Tha’ālibi: 229

[^35]: Tha’ālibi: 40 and 229; Abu Dharr al-Khashni, Sharh Seera Ibn
Hishām 2:273 & 347

[^36]: Al-Sikkeet Ibid. Tha’ālibi: 229

[^37]: Al-Sikkeet: 28

[^38]: Al-Sikkeet: 30; Tha’ālibi: 229; Nuwayri, Nihāyat al-Urub fi Funun
al-Adab 6:190

[^39]: Al-Sikkeet: 27; Ibn Habib: 246-552; Tha’ālibi: 230

[^40]: Bukhāri (al-Adhān, al-Imān, al-Tayammum, al-Ahkām, al-Jihād);
Muslim (al-Jihād, al-Siyar); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād, al-Tahārah); Tirmidhi
(al-Manāqib, al-Jihād, al-Jumu’ah); al-Nasā’i (al-Jihād, al-Bay’ah,
al-Sayd)

[^41]: Abu Dāwud 3:46

[^42]: Bukhāri 5:26

[^43]: Shaybāni 1:67; al-Dārimi 2:215; Abu Dāwud 3:36

[^44]: Al-Bakhtari, al-Hamāsa: 9-42; Ibn Shajari, al-Hamāsa
al-Shajariyya 2:286 & 799; Tartusi, Tabsirat Arbāb al-Albāb: 11

[^45]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 1:179 onwards; Suhayli 1:9 & 2:212; Tartusi: 6-15

[^46]: Ibn Shajari 2:786 onwards; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 1:179 onwards

[^47]: Suhayli 4:162; Tartusi: 16

[^48]: The Dabbābah was something like what is today known as a tank.
All its sides were covered with metal and someone would sit inside and
shoot arrows. (Tr.)

[^49]: Abul Faraj Isfahāni, al-Aghāni 5:24; Tartusi: 18

[^50]: Lord Monister, Risāla fi Fann al-Harb ‘indal ‘Arab: 75,77

[^51]: Mu’ammar bin al-Muthannā, Kitāb al-Khayl: 16 onwards; Ibn ‘Abd
Rabbih: 152 - 178

[^52]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 2:286 & 3:104

[^53]: Zubaydi [under Ja ‘A La] 7:257

[^54]: Ibid. [under Ha Ka Ma and Qa Dha Ma] 8:252, 10:207

[^55]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 1:176 onwards

[^56]: Jawād ‘Ali 5:405. 418

[^57]: ‘Amir bin Tufayl, Deewān, Riwāyat Ambāri: 11, 98, 100

[^58]: Whoever took a prisoner would be consider his owner and would be
able to treat him however he pleased. See Jawād ‘Ali 5:631

[^59]: Abu al-Faraj Isfahāni 11:114 & 15:155

[^60]: Tabari, Tafseer Tabari 6:262; Abu al-Faraj Isfahāni 11:114

[^61]: Abu al-Faraj Isfahāni 11:158 onwards – this meant that they were
set free.

[^62]: Zubaydi [under ‘A Qa La] 8:27 and [Ra Ha Na] 9:229

[^63]: Ibn Atheer 1:675

[^64]: Jawād ‘Ali 7:331-365

[^65]: Zubaydi [under Fa Sa Da] 2:453; [Ba Ja] 2:5; [Ra Ma La] 7:350;
[‘A Qa Da] 2:425; [Ta Fa Fa] 6:260; Jawād ‘Ali 5:58-63

[^66]: Zubaydi [under Qa Ru Ba] 1:423

[^67]: Balādhuri, Futuh al-Buldān: 23-25; Zubaydi [under A Za Ba] 1:147;
[Ba Ra Ka] 7:106; [‘A Dha Ra] 3:441

[^68]: Al-Sikkeet: 407 – 408; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 2:225

[^69]: Tha’ālibi, Thimār al-Qulub: 159; Lord Monister, Risāla fi Fann
al-Harb ‘ind al-‘Arab: 52

[^70]: Zubaydi [under Bat a] 1:529; [Bu Ni Ya] 10:46; [Dha Ra Ba] 1:340;
[Qa Ba Ba] 1:419; [Dha La La] 7:425; [Fa Sa Ta] 5:199

[^71]: Wāqidi 7:825; Tabari 2:568

[^72]: Tim Quraysh, Kitāb al-Khayl: 16 onwards; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih
1:152-178

[^73]: See: Yazbak, Jud al-‘Arabi: 78-81

[^74]: Nuwairi 9:365

[^75]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 1:116; Zubaydi 3:335

[^76]: Jawād ‘Ali 5:460

[^77]: An example of how they did this can be seen in the battle of
Uhud. See: Uhud in History in the Miqātu Hajj Magazine vol. 7

[^78]: Nuwayri 10:103 onwards; Zubaydi [under Ha Ma La] 7:263

[^79]: Zubaydi [under Gha Ni Ma] 9:7

[^80]: Jawād ‘Ali 5:262, 264

[^81]: Zubaydi [under Kha Ma Sa] 4:139

[^82]: Ibid. [under Sa Faa] 10:211

[^83]: Ibid. 5:231

[^84]: Ibid. 8:63

[^85]: Asma’i, al-Asma’iyāt, from the verses of the poet Abdullah ibn
Ghunmah: 37

[^86]: Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzi, Zād al-Ma’ād fi Hudā Khayril ‘Ibād 2:172

[^87]: Ibn Atheer 1:223 onwards; Umar Farukh, Tārikh al-Jāhiliyya: 64,65

[^88]: Jawād ‘Ali 2:626

[^89]: Al-‘Adwi, al-Dawlah al-Islāmiyya wa Imperāturiyyat al-Rum: 14

[^90]: Jawād ‘Ali 2:628

[^91]: Jawād ‘Ali 2:635

[^92]: Mas’udi, Muruj al-Dhahab wa Ma’ādin al-Jawhar 1:215

[^93]: Tabari, Tārikh Tabari 2:69 onwards

[^94]: Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah 2:456

[^95]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 2:319-326

[^96]: Jawād ‘Ali 2:641

[^97]: Ibn Qutaybah, ‘Unwān al-Akhbār 2:161

[^98]: Watt, Muhammad fi Makkah: 16; Sayyid Hanafi, al-Farusiyyat
al-‘Arabiyyah fi al-‘Asr al-Jāhiliyya: 32

[^99]: They were known as the ‘Adnānis because they were descendents of
‘Adnān, the ancestor of the Holy Prophet (S). They were natives of the
Arabian Peninsula and were from the lineage of Prophet Ismā’il (‘a).
They were known traders and merchants and were in charge of the Ka’ba
(Tr.)

[^100]: Ibn Khaldun 2:409-413

[^101]: Ibid. 2:414-418 onwards

[^102]: The Qahtānis are the descendents of Qahtān ibn Ya’rab. They were
one of the native Arab tribes who were not originally from the Arabian
Peninsula, rather they were from Yemen and other Southern areas. The
later migrated to the North and settled in Yathrib and Ghassān. Unlike
the ‘Adnānis, they came from an ancient civilization and were more
inclined to life in cities and villages. (Tr.)

[^103]: Qalqashandi, Subh al-A’shā 1:390 onwards

[^104]: Ibn Is’hāq, Harb Bakr wa Taghlub: 8 onwards; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih
5:213, 249; Nuwayri 15:356, 316

[^105]: Ibn Atheer 1:482; Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:224; Nuwayri 15:407,413

[^106]: Ibn Atheer 1:552

[^107]: Ibn Atheer 1:626

[^108]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:224; Nuwayri 15:407

[^109]: Ibn Habib: 246

[^110]: Abu al-Faraj Isfahāni 3:39,154-156; Ibn Atheer 1:655 onwards;
more about the wars between these two tribes of the Qahtānis can be seen
here: Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqāt 3:604; Ya’qubi, Tārikh 2:27. We find that
because of their internal strife and battles, these two tribes were
never quite able to stand up against the ‘Adnānis. Killings that took
place between the Aus and Khazraj was something so common that it was
like a daily occurrence. With the advent of Islām, the Prophet (S) was
able to bring peace among these tribes and eventually end their bitter
enmity. (Tr.)

[^111]: Ibn Is’hāq, Harb Bakr wa Taghlub: 8 onwards

[^112]: Mas’udi 1:112; ‘Umar Farukh: 30

[^113]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih 5:224

[^114]: Ibn Khaldun 2:453 onwards


