Staff Headquarters
==================

The [Army] Staff Headquarters was responsible for organizing the affairs
pertaining to recruitment of soldiers and encouraging them [to join the
army], as well as personal matters [of the individual soldiers] like
strengthening the spirit of the combatants etc. The following
departments fell under their command:

1. The Department Of Planning And Scheduling:
---------------------------------------------

This is the department that is responsible for:  
 a) Planning the overall policy  
 b) Drawing out maps for war  
 c) Finding out the number of combatants in the army (and)  
 d) Their weaponry  
 e) Instituting regulations and rules of military service  
 f) Preparing the senior commanders  
 g) Establishing the procedure of selection[^1]  
 Now we will explain each of the above in turn.

### a) Planning the policy for the participation of the Ansār in battle

The Ansār were obliged by their agreement in the Pledge of ‘Aqaba to
protect the Holy Prophet (S) inside Madina[^2]. This had made the
Quraysh angry and infuriated them so they began making preparations
quickly to wage war on those who had granted refuge to and helped the
Muhājirin[^3]. In the beginning, the Muhājirin took up the flag of
charge and attack on their shoulders[^4] and carried out the first
military mission without the participation of a single person from the
Ansār, under the command of Hamza ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the Master of
the Martyrs (‘a)[^5], and in this way numerous consecutive missions and
minor battles were fought by the Muhājirin themselves until the Battle
of Badr[^6].

After the Prophet (S) informed the Ansār about the threat that they were
all faced with, he sought their view about participation in war and
assisting him inside and outside Madina. The Ansār were ready to
cooperate and participate in battle and expressed their decision to
fight alongside the Muhājirin with their own volition. In this way, they
diverted from the Pledge of ‘Aqabah and the allegiance of Wādi
Dhafarān[^7] and participated in the Battle of Badr and other battles
alongside the Muhājirin[^8]. From this time onwards, the Muslim army
consisted of these two groups.

### b) Methods of Negotiation

Negotiations with the enemy after the end of battle and the agreement
that was reached between the two parties was, depending on the
circumstances, conducted by the supreme commander (S) who would take
full control[^9]. When the Jews sought negotiations, he (S) dealt
harshly with them, to such an extent that he banished some of them from
their lands[^10] and after disarming them, he let their wives and
children go[^11], however he ordered the killing of some others who has
broken their covenant and had cooperated with the enemy[^12]...

The Prophet (S) displayed forbearance and leniency with the Quraysh in
the Treaty of Hudaybiyya[^13]. He accepted their conditions and even
accepted some of the conditions that his companions and commanders
deemed to be against the interest of the Muslims[^14], and went ahead to
sign the treaty[^15]. In this way and in order to attain the actual
goals, the Prophet (S) would obtain victory through harsh measures at
certain times and through leniency and tolerance in other
situations[^16].

### c) Designing a Program in order to Know the Enemy

The Prophet (S) would, at the outset, study the enemy and ways of
countering them. The Quraysh were people who had forced him to leave his
home and were determined to fight against him uncompromisingly[^17]. The
Prophet (S) also began preparing forces and weapons in order to counter
them[^18] and faced them in a number of battles[^19], and in the end he
eventually gained victory and they submitted to his wishes.

However, with regards to the Jews, when they showed their enmity by
breaking the covenant [they had made with him][^20] and took up arms
against him, he was forced to fight them or banish them from their
lands[^21]. It was at this time [and for this reason] that the first
battle against them took place.

With regards to the other Arab tribes, however, he only entered into
battle against them when they were the instigators[^22] or when they
attempted to wage war against Madina and invade it with their
armies[^23]. Taking this into consideration, he only faced the enemy
tribes and dealt with them the way they deserved to be dealt with[^24].

As for Rome, he (S) saw it as a grave threat in the way of the Islāmic
Revolution, especially since they possessed vast resources and had a lot
of political influence in the Arabian provinces[^25]. Despite this, the
Prophet (S) delayed military action against them until an appropriate
time and enough preparations had been made to come face to face with the
Roman army. For this reason, he did not enter into intense and decisive
battles with them as he had done with his previous enemies [i.e. the
Quraysh and the Jews], rather he launched minor assaults on them[^26]
and, in order to develop the Muslim army and increase their military
might, he embarked on small battles with them.

### d) Creating a Plan to Gain Control of the Most Important Routes and Courses

The most important routes and courses that the Holy Prophet (S) studied
and planned on controlling were the ‘coastal routes’[^27] which would be
a sure means of cutting off the primary reinforcements of the enemy, and
he was successful in doing this[^28]. Then he turned his attention to
the ‘eastern route’[^29] that the Quraysh had begun using after the
first route was blocked, and by taking control of this route also, he
completed his siege of the enemy from all the directions. The Prophet
(S) was victorious in all the battles that were subsequently fought in
order to regain control of these routes[^30].

In the same way, the supreme commander successfully planned and took
control of the ‘northern route’ of Arabian Peninsula – in the border of
Syria[^31] – and of Dumat al-Jundal[^32], because of their strategic
locations militarily, politically and economically, for the war with the
Romans[^33].

### e) Appointing a Deputy in Madina

Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) went for any battle, he would always
appoint a deputy and representative in Madina[^34], and he would change
the appointee from battle to battle[^35]. Sometimes two representatives
would be selected[^36] and each one of them would be given specific
tasks. The functions of the Prophet’s deputy would normally consist of
leading the congregational prayers for those who remained behind and did
not participate in battle for some valid excuse[^37], and protecting and
safeguarding the status and respect of the members of the household of
the Holy Prophet (S)[^38]. After the Conquest of Makkah, the Prophet (S)
also appointed a deputy to manage the important affairs of that
city[^39].

### f) Reviewing of the Supreme Commander of the Army

The supreme commander would review the ‘mobilization and stationing’ of
the army[^40]. He would inspect the army[^41] and arrange it for
marching or battle. He studied their capability for war[^42], sent back
the sick, young and weak[^43], lifted the spirits of those who fought in
battle[^44] and gave the necessary orders and instructions to the
commanders (of the army)[^45]. If he sent them for a Sariya or a
mission, like the Sariya of ‘Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Auf to Dumat al-Jundal,
and his sending of Zayd bin Haritha for war with the Romans [in the
Battle of Muta], he would personally bid them farewell and pray for
their success[^46]. When the army was getting organized, he would join
them and take over the command himself[^47].

The Prophet (S) would organize and arrange the forces for parades and
processions, just as he had done before the Conquest of Makkah and
during their entry into the city. In this organization, the ‘cavaliers’
would be in the fore and were made up of three groups. Then followed the
units of the Muhājirin and Ansār and then came the units of the Ghaffār,
Aslam, Bani ‘Umar, Bani Ka’b, Mazinah, Jahinah and Bani Hamzah. Is was
after this that the Green Column was positioned[^48].

The manner of stationing of the forces was in such a way that the Bani
Saleem were in front, the Jahinah were in the middle and the Green
Column was placed at the back[^49]. The course of the army’s movement
with this arrangement[^50] in front of Abu Sufyān and other observers
and the station of the supreme commander – which was located in the
Green Column – was determined and the soldiers marched in front of them
in this order[^51].

The carrying of flags[^52] was in such a way that in every contingent
and unit, a number of flags were hoisted and the main banner was with
‘Ali bin Abi Tālib (‘a) at the central command post in the last unit.
The parade and procession of the army was conducted in full military
attire[^53] in such a way that from the Green Column, nothing but the
pupil of their eyes could be seen. The vanguard and the cavaliers
marched in front[^54]. The Banu Saleem were in the front-line with one
thousand horsemen and the commander of the paraded columns was selected
by the supreme commander[^55]. Khālid bin Walid was chosen as the
commander of three columns of the vanguard:  
 First: The column under the command of ‘Abbās bin Maradās al-Salami

Second: The column under the command of Khafāf ibn Nudbah

Third: The column under the command of Hajjāj ibn ‘Alāt

Then Zubayr ibn ‘Awām was appointed as the commander of the column of
the Muhājirin and Ansār and Abu Dharr al-Ghaffāri was made in charge of
the column of the tribe of Ghaffār and others.

### g) Placing the Capable Individuals in Appropriate Positions

Military skills and expertise in the Muslim army were numerous and
varied[^56], like intelligence, combat on horseback, fighting on foot,
archery etc. In order to assign posts for every responsibility
conditions were placed that were different for every individual. The
Holy Prophet (S) would assign the task of intelligence operations[^57]
to such an individual in whom the ability of protecting and hiding
secrets was strong, who was well informed, trustworthy, patient and
forbearing in [times of] pain, hunger and thirst, like ‘Abdullah ibn
Jahash, Habbāb ibn Mundhir, Zubayr ibn ‘Awām, Hudhayfa ibn al-Yamān and
others.

In the same way, he would appoint a commander of a contingent[^58] who
was aware about the topography of the land and the enemy that he would
face, like Zayd ibn Hāritha, ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās, Khālid ibn Walid and others.

As for the flag-bearer[^59], a steadfast and courageous person was
chosen such as ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib, Hamza ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and Mus’ab
ibn ‘Umayr. From the archers[^60] also, someone highly skilled like Sa’d
ibn Abi Waqqās was selected. The [head] swordsman[^61] was someone who
used his sword well in the thick of war. The [head] horseman[^62] was
one who fought steadily and unfalteringly on the horse, like Khālid bin
Walid.

These individuals and others would be given charge of these
responsibilities without any regard for their relationship[^63] [to the
Prophet (S)]. The supreme commander chose Zayd ibn Hāritha as the first
commander of the army, whereas he made Ja’far bin Abi Tālib, who was a
close relative of his, second in command. Sometimes the selection was
not based solely on his past [military] record[^64], because the Prophet
(S) appointed Usāma bin Zayd, a young commander, as the leader of the
army that was sent to Abnām and some of the other great commanders were
placed under his command[^65].

Similarly, one’s previous record [with regards to accepting Islām] was
not a consideration[^66]; because ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās was given the charge of
a Sariya mission in which great companions like Abu ‘Ubayda ibn Jarrāh
and other great commanders participated, while it had only been a few
months since ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās had accepted Islām[^67]. Similarly, the rank
and status of a person[^68] was not a criterion for being appointed a
commander. The Holy Prophet (S) made Abu Salama ibn ‘Abd al-Asad
Makhzumi the commander of a Sariya mission wherein others who [according
of their rank and status] were more deserving, were present[^69].

### h) Preserving the Unity and Integration of the Army

The supreme commander forbade disputes and quarrels among the members of
the army. He established friendship and camaraderie among them and made
them like a single body[^70]. The Prophet (S) prevented the killing of
the known hypocrite ‘Abdullah ibn Ubay and instructed that he should be
dealt with kindly[^71]. In this way, he (S) was able to quell the
disturbance that was about to obliterate the unity and harmony of the
Muslim army after the Battle of Bani al-Mustalaq[^72] because of a
verbal confrontation between the Muhājirin and Ansār[^73].

Similarly, the Holy Prophet (S), in another instance, forgave the lapse
of Abu Lubāba when he took the wrong course in consultation with the
Bani Quraydha[^74].

He forgave Hātib bin Abi Balta’ah for his a mistake when sending letters
to the enemy before the Conquest of Makkah[^75] and this was because of
his illustrious track record in the Muslim army. He (S) also ordered Abu
‘Ubayda ibn Jarrāh to cooperate with ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās [who as the commander
of the army in Dhāt al-Salāsil] in order to preserve unity.

The Prophet (S) also took it upon himself to ‘refine and purify the
souls’ of the Ansār, who constituted a large part of the army. He did
this during the distribution of the booty of Hunayn when he saw[^76]
anger and rage on their faces[^77]. In the same way, he instilled
affection and brotherhood in their hearts[^78] and in the end he would
be pleased with all the good qualities and merits of his armed
forces[^79]. It is for this very reason that the politics of ‘wisdom and
planning’, ‘far-sightedness and judging the character of the army
soldiers’, ‘giving greater importance to expediency’, ‘ending quarrels
and arguments that lead to listlessness and defeat, before they spread
through and pervade the army’, were required.

### i) Discipline

‘Discipline’ was the honest and sincere execution of the commands that
were issued by the supreme commander in order to achieve the aimed
objectives[^80]. Discipline in the Muslim army was centered around the
belief in God, the Prophet[^81], his evenhandedness[^82], and
unconditional loyalty to one commander[^83]. Among the most important
foundations of discipline was the complete obedience in difficulty and
ease, war and peace, likes and dislikes[^84].

The most evident signs of this were: ‘absolute obedience’[^85],
‘contentment’[^86], ‘acceptance of responsibility’[^87], ‘the strength
to come face to face with dangers’[^88], ‘acting with one’s own
volition’[^89], ‘innovation by the executors’[^90], ‘the profundity of
the meaning of discipline and its practice by the commander himself (as
well)’ and ‘his method and ability in action’, which he would strive in
for the attainment of the required goal[^91].

Discipline in the Muslim army meant that following the commander and
emulating him was compulsory for the executive officers[^92]. It was
never permitted, under any circumstances, for them to act on their
whims, without thinking, with complete ignorance or rigidity[^93].
Rather they were bound by the spirit of obedience and doing that which
was necessary and what they were able to in order to realize the
goal[^94].

The strength of discipline was clearly seen in the Battle of Hamrā
al-Asad, when the order was given for the enemy to be pursued, before
returning to Madina, [immediately] after the Battle of Uhud. At this
time, despite the fact that the soldiers were tired and wounded as a
result of war, and were mourning their martyrs, they still all obeyed
the order and none of them contravened the command of facing the
enemy[^95]. Similarly, the affection for the commander and belief in him
made the army submit to [what were perceived as] the harsh and
unpalatable conditions of the Treaty of Hudaybiyya[^96].

An example of the belief in the evenhandedness of the commander in his
orders was that he compelled ‘Abdullah ibn Rawāha to enforce discipline
when he gave him instructions during the fight against the Romans in the
Battle of Muta[^97]. The supreme commander would warn against lack of
discipline which would lead to listlessness, defeat and hardship in the
battlefield[^98].

### j) Determining the Number of Soldiers in the Army

In the first Sariya that the Holy Prophet (S) sent to fight against the
enemy, he started by be sending thirty fighters[^99] and in the second
Sariya, he increased the number to eighty[^100]. With the passing of
time and the sending of more groups and missions, this number increased,
until the Battle of Badr where it reached three hundred and
thirteen[^101] and in the last battle that was fought, there were over
thirty thousand [Muslim] soldiers[^102].

In the beginning, the organization of the army was limited to the
Muhājirin[^103], but after some time, the Ansār[^104] and eventually a
number of other Arab tribes joined the army[^105]. The most important of
these were: Muzayna, Aslam, Juhayna, Banu Sulaym, Banu Ghifār, Kināna,
Ashja’ and Banu Layth.

Women also constituted a small part of the armed forces and would help
in the treating the wounded and providing assistance to the
soldiers[^106]. The supreme commander would endeavor to promote the
growth and expansion of this army, and for this very reason, he would
protect the soldiers – meaning that he would not send them towards their
death or destruction - to such an extent that the total number of
martyrs in all the nine years under his command did not exceed three
hundred and seventeen[^107]. This number is divided as follows:

Badr – 14 martyrs, Uhud – 70 martyrs, Bi’r Ma’unah[^108] – 70 martyrs,
al-Rajee’ – 10 martyrs, Khandaq – 6 martyrs, the Sariya of Muhammad ibn
Maslama against the Bani Tha’laba – 10 martyrs, Bani al-Mustalaq – one
martyr, Khaybar – 15 to 19 martyrs, the Sariya of Bashir ibn Sa’d
al-Ansāri towards the Bani Murrah – 30 martyrs, the Sariya of Abi
al-‘Awjā’ al-Sulami towards the Bani Saleem – 50 martyrs, Ka’b ibn
‘Umayr al-Ghifāri to the Bani Qudhā’ah – 15 martyrs, the Battle of Muta
– 8 martyrs, the Conquest of Makkah – 2 martyrs, Hunayn – 4 martyrs and
Tā’if – 12 martyrs.

The people, from the time they accepted Islām, displayed their courage
in joining this army and would try to outdo each other[^109]. The
Prophet (S) would not send the entire army against the enemy, rather he
selected an appropriate number to [send in] each battle depending on the
available resources and the number of soldiers in the enemy’s
army[^110]. For example, he entered the battle against the Bani Saleem
with a section of the forces[^111] and the battle of Dhi Amr with a
larger number of forces[^112]. In the Battle of Tabuk and some other
battles, he brought the entire army to fight[^113]. Based on this, one
of the most fundamental principles of war, meaning ‘economizing with the
forces’, was always taken into consideration by the Prophet (S)[^114].

### k) Organization and arrangement of the troops

Organization included the division of the troops into units [and
contingents], outlining the hierarchy of command, type of battle, where
it will be fought, the army’s military might, the enemy’s strengths and
weaponry, and the modes of transport used by both sides[^115]. The
Prophet’s goal from this organization was facilitating ease of command
and control over the troops during the battle, motivation and
stabilization[^116]...

It was for this reason that he put different units under the command of
one person[^117] and put different types of weapons at their
disposal[^118]. This is precisely what he did in the Conquest of Makkah
where he rearranged the tribes according to the prevailing
conditions[^119].

In the battle of the Conquest, he arranged the Muhājirs into three
columns consisting of two hundred soldiers each, the Aus into six
columns of 350 soldiers and the tribe of Aslam into one column
consisting of two hundred fighters, and he did the same with different
groups and new contingents[^120], just as he had arranged the column of
archers in the Battle of Uhud.

The Prophet (S) would at times arrange the army based on ‘new battle
equipment’[^121], this is why the arrangement of the army in the
Conquest of Makkah was very different from the arrangement of the army
in the Battle of Hunayn. He (S) would bring together various distinct
qualities and talents during the formation of each contingent in order
to make them able to fight independently[^122]; like the groups of four
who entered Makkah. The Prophet organized the troops in pyramidal forms
in a single group and in groups of two, three and four depending on the
number of tribes.

The single pyramidal contingent was led by Abu Wāqid al-Laythi and was
made up from the tribes of Kanānah, Bani Hamzah, Bani Layth and Sa’d bin
Bakr. The group of twos were made up of troops from the tribe of Ashja’
and the groups of three consisted of members from the tribe of Muzaynah
while the groups of four were from the tribe of Juhaynah. This formation
made it easier to attain the best speed and movement during
battle[^123]. In the present day and age also, armed forces are
organized into pyramidal groups of three and four[^124].

The organization for battle was different from the arrangement of troops
who were marched in front of Abu Sufyān before the Conquest of Makkah.
The Holy Prophet (S) would try to give the command of an entire column
to the leader of the tribe whose troops were present in that
column[^125]. Whenever the numbers of the tribe did not match with the
column, he would include other groups in it and would select a commander
from a tribe that was present in that column[^126].

2. The Administrative Council
-----------------------------

The Administrative Council was a body whose responsibility was to advise
the supreme commander about all affairs related to the military. This
council consisted of military commanders from the Muhājirs, the Ansārs
and other tribes[^127]. The Holy Prophet (S) always consulted with this
council about issues related to war and he would take the opinion of its
members about the following matters:

a) Declaring war on the enemy  
 b) Benefitting from the participation of the Ansār (in battle)  
 c) Centralization of the troops like in the Battle of Badr[^128]  
 d) Remaining in Madina or coming out to face the Quraysh in the Battle
of Uhud[^129]  
 e) Digging the ditch in the Battle of Ahzāb  
 f) Creating a peace treaty with the Ghatfān for one third of the dates
of Madina[^130]  
 g) Whether to make peace or war in the expedition of Hudaybiyya[^131]  
 h) The fixity and change of command in the Battle of Khaybar[^132]  
 i) Whether to remain steadfast or move and launch an attack on the
Roman empire  
 j) Return to Madina[^133]  
 k) The battle between the Roman army and the troops of Zayd bin Hāritha
where, when consulted, most of the commanders, and especially ‘Abdullah
bin Rawāhah, the deputy commander, gave the opinion that they should
fight against the Romans[^134]

After studying the progress of the various battles it must be said that
the situation would be different from place to place and in different
military zones, and the study and deliberation about this issue can be
considered clear evidence of the aptitude and soundness of opinion of
the Holy Prophet (S) in these matters[^135].

In this council, the Prophet (S) had one vote just like the other
members and he would listen carefully to the opinions and views of the
other members. For the Battle of Uhud[^136], due to the fact that the
majority had given the opinion that they should come out of Madina, even
though he himself thought it would be more prudent to remain in the
city, he supported the view of the council[^137]. This was the beginning
of ‘democracy’, something that most of the countries in today’s world
are calling for.

The Holy Prophet (S) would refrain from imposing his opinions and
insisting on his views[^138]. Therefore, he would respect the commanders
and sit with them and take their advice on various issues, just as he
accepted the advice of Habāb bin Mundhir, Salmān al-Fārsi, Sa’d bin
Mu’ādh, Sa’d bin ‘Ubādah and ‘Umar bin Khattāb in different situations
in battle[^139]. He would always show tolerance and leniency to those
who offered advice and would respect their views. He would never accuse
them of being ignorant.

With his kind words and clear statements[^140], he would assist them to
remain free of pretence and flattery[^141] and to acquire good
characters and remain truthful[^142]. In the end, after listening to the
advice, he would issue his orders. Because he was determined to carry
out the decision of the council[^143], nobody would dare to oppose the
orders he gave[^144]. Members of the council were attributed with higher
intelligence, prudent judgment and a greater awareness and understanding
of military affairs, and were deemed trustworthy and reliable by the
supreme commander[^145].

One of the most important results of forming an administrative council
was that the experience of war which was the cause of the Muslim army’s
victory were revealed, the morals and characters of the participants
were improved and strong bonds of friendship between them were formed.
At the same time the full responsibility and accountability fell on
their shoulders[^146] and any matter that was put before the
administrative council was discussed and debated by its members, the
pros and cons were highlighted[^147] and an appropriate conclusion was
drawn[^148].

The Holy Prophet (S) would request the views of the council in matters
such as warfare[^149], selecting a representative[^150] and deputy[^151]
and other matters, and he would stress on the important role played by
its members in leadership, because if they were suitable then the
commander would also be good[^152] otherwise the leadership will be
corrupted and they will lead the commander to destruction and will act
as hindrances and impediments in his path. The commanders who came after
the passing away of the Holy Prophet (S) would also seek advice from the
trustworthy leaders of the army[^153]. ‘Umar bin al-Khattāb gave more
importance to this than anyone else[^154], to such an extent that he
would also listen to the advice of children.

3. The Department Of Doctrinal Guidance
---------------------------------------

This department was responsible for ‘the spiritual and doctrinal
development of the troops, its preservation and strengthening and at the
same time, for weakening the morale of the enemy and destroying it’, and
was divided into various sections, each carrying out specific functions
that were different from state to state, but overall it had a common
spiritual goal that it tries to fulfill[^155].

The Prophet (S) would continuously strengthen the morale of the
army[^156] using various means, the most important of which included:
training and continuous guidance of the troops[^157], putting the
supreme commander (i.e. himself) at the same level as the
soldiers[^158], sharing in their sorrows[^159] and happiness[^160],
defending the soldiers, steadfastness in battles[^161], [fair]
distribution of war booty[^162], upgrading the weapons and equipment
used by the troops in battle[^163], caring for the families of those who
were martyred[^164], carrying out training for different battle
strategies[^165] so as to break down the wall of fear among the troops,
and bringing them face to face with the different battle
scenarios[^166].

The Holy Prophet (S) also used various techniques to maintain this
spirit, the most important among which were: expulsion of weak soldiers
and those who have been defeated [spiritually] from among the
troops[^167], wiping out false rumours[^168], hiding information that
could weaken the spirit and resolve of the people[^169], habituating the
forces to adherence to strict discipline at all times[^170] and creating
a bond of mutual trust and friendship between the commander and his
troops[^171].

An example of the strength in spirit was the presence and participation
of some fighters in the army to face the enemy without any weapons
whatsoever[^172], some would come to fight despite being young in
age[^173], and another group would be ready to face hoards of enemy
soldiers despite their few numbers[^174]. Others would pull their horses
behind them and would continue doing so throughout the battle[^175]. Yet
others would make it their mission to assassinate those who had said or
done anything against the supreme commander and who had ill will against
the Islāmic revolution[^176].

He (S) would instill faith and belief in the Muslim army in such a way
that their spirit would never wane and would provide them the energy and
strength to carry out all the missions that required self-sacrifice and
struggle[^177]. The distinguishing feature that impelled the soldiers to
strong spirituality[^178] was the hope in the life hereafter and [the
fact that] they were faced with two options which both led to success,
either victory with honor or martyrdom and entrance into everlasting
bliss[^179]. In this way, the father and son would keep their
relationship aside and would strive to surpass one another in the hope
of paradise[^180].

In the Battle of Uhud, despite the rumour that the Prophet (S) had been
killed, they continued to fight bravely. And this bravery was a
testament to their strong faith and conviction[^181]. Some of the forces
would [try to] outdo each other in fighting for the supreme commander
and would even kill their own relatives in defense of their faith[^182].
Khubayb bin. ‘Uday when forced to return to his previous faith preferred
death[^183]. Therefore the spirit in the Muslim army was aimed at
protecting the faith and it was one of the most important goals of the
Prophet (S) to strengthen this very spirit.

The supreme commander would also, on the other side try to weaken the
spirit and resolve of the enemy, causing them to waver, and instill fear
and terror in their hearts[^184] to such an extent that they were not
capable of coming out to fight against him. The most important ways in
which he accomplished this included: displaying their strength and
might[^185], using intelligence agents, taking precaution in employing
counter-intelligence measures[^186] and scrutinizing them[^187],
arresting enemy spies[^188], carrying out attacks using offensive
strategies[^189] especially in the battles of Bani Quraydha and Khaybar
and some of the Sariya missions like the Sariya of Muhammad bin Maslamah
against the Bani Bakr, and that of ‘Amr bin ‘Aās against the Qudhā’ah,
all of which were missions in which swift attacks were used. This was
similarly the case, the attacks against the tribe of Bani Mahārib and
Bani Tha’labah in the Battle of Shāt al-Ruqā’.

Another way was by propagation of the renown and reputation of the
leadership and bravery of Muslim army[^190], especially in the battle
against the Bani Nadhir which was the cause of the Jews destroying their
homes and strongholds by their own hands. In the battle against the Bani
Lihyān, when the enemy heard that the Holy Prophet (S) had set out [with
his army] to wage war against them, they fled, as did the Banu Sa’d when
they got the information that ‘Ali bin Abi Tālib (‘a) had started
marching towards them. Similarly, being quick in defense and repulsion
of any incursion by enemy forces[^191], especially in the Battle of Badr
al-Kubrā and al-Ghābah, was another of the Prophet’s tactics for
weakening the resolve of the enemy.

The Holy Prophet (S) would awaken and enliven the spirit of the troops
before the commencement of battle in order to attain the highest level
of commitment and zeal[^192] and would always try to preserve this
throughout the war while removing anything that could cause a weakening
in their spirits[^193]. Whenever the soldiers started feeling
disheartened, the Prophet (S) would strive to lift their spirits. This
can be seen in the Battle of Ahzāb when the Bani Quraydha broke their
covenant with the Muslims, where after the siege was taking its toll, he
utilized clever trickery to cause disharmony in the ranks of the enemy’s
army thereby lifting the spirits of his own troops[^194].

The spirit and zeal of the Muslim fighters would increase and decrease
in accordance with the varying situations in every battle, but on the
whole, the Muslim army would be in high spirits until the final stages
of the battles, and in order to achieve victory, they would remain
steadfast and ready to attack[^195], even in situations where they had
faced shocking events, the army would come out with their heads held
high and would carry through till the end. The Battles of Uhud and
Khandaq were two examples of this, because the Prophet (S) lifted the
spirits of the army after the Battle of Uhud by initiating the Battle of
Hamrā al-Asad and during the Battle of Khandaq by causing disharmony and
division in the ranks of the enemy. As a result, the confederates lost
the victory and had to turn back humiliated.

[^1]: Wāqidi 1:98; Ibn Hishām 2:266; Ibn Hazm: 208; Haydarābadi: 15-21

[^2]: Ibn Sa’d 1:1l Tabari 2:255; Because they had made a pact to
protect the Holy Prophet (S) inside Madina, the Ansār did not
participate in the first battle against the disbelievers. (Tr.)

[^3]: Q8:74

[^4]: Wāqidi 1:10, Ibn Hishām 2:241, Ibn Sa’d 2:1-5; Tabari 2:259

[^5]: Ibn Hishām 2:245; Ibn Sa’d 2:2; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224

[^6]: Wāqidi 1:48; Ibn Hishām 2:266; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Durar fi
Ikhtisār al-Maghāzi wal-Siyar: 121 onwards

[^7]: Wāqidi 1:48; Ibn Hishām 2:266; Ibn Sa’d 2:8; Bakri, Mu’jam
Mastu’jam 2:613; Yāqut Hamawi, Mu’jam al-Buldān 3:6

[^8]: Wāqidi 1:23; Ibn Hishām 2:333; Ibn Sa’d 2:13; Tabari 2:552; Kalā’i
1:136

[^9]: Wāqidi 1:177, 2:501; Ibn Hishām 3:201; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Tabari
2:552; Kalā’i 1:134

[^10]: Wāqidi 1:374; Ibn Hishām 3:200; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Ibn Hazm: 154,
182. After the victory over the Bani Nadhir, the Prophet (S) left it to
the Khazraj, who had a covenant with them, to decide what should be done
to them. The Khazraj decided that they should be banished from their
land but their women and children should be released. (Tr.)

[^11]: Wāqidi 1:80; Ibn Hishām 3:210; Ibn Sa’d 2:19

[^12]: Wāqidi 2:517; Ibn Hishām 3:251; Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Tabari 2:588.
After defeating the Bani Quraydha, the Prophet (S) left it upon the Aus,
who had a covenant with them, to decide their punishment. The chief of
the Aus, Sa’d ibn Ma’ādh, decided that their men should be put to death
for their treason and their families and wealth should be taken. (Tr.)

[^13]: Zuhri: 54; Ibn Hishām 3:325; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:116

[^14]: Zuhri: 55; Ibn Sa’d 2:76; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:114. In the Treaty
of Hudaybiyya where Suhayl ibn ‘Amr was appointed as the representative
of the Quraysh, there were many conditions that were made which the
Muslims found to be one-sided and unfair, however, the Prophet (S) gave
in to their demands because he knew that it was in the interest of the
Muslims to do so. (Refer to Bihār al-Anwār 20:335)

[^15]: Zuhri: 52; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Kalā’i 1:130

[^16]: Wāqidi 1:76, 2:496; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Tabari 2:479,
3:9; Kalā’i 1:130; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294

[^17]: Zuhri: 50; Wāqidi 2:571;Ibn Hishām 3:321; Ibn Sa’d 2:69; Ibn
Khayyāt 1:48; Tabari 2:620; Kalā’i 1:127; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:113

[^18]: Ibn Hishām 1:281; Ibn Sa’d 1:134; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:102;
Dhahabi 1:91, 168

[^19]: Zuhri: 76; Tabari 2:259; Ibn Hazm: 104; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:225,
2:106

[^20]: Wāqidi 1:176, 2:510; Ibn Sa’d 2:77; Tabari 2:552; Suhayli 3:137;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:48

[^21]: Wāqidi 1:176; Ibn Hishām 3:50; Ibn Sa’d 2:19; Ibn Khayyāt 1:27;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:294; Atanin Dianna, Muhammad Rasulullah (S): 277

[^22]: Wāqidi 1:404; Ibn Hishām 3:302; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 62, 117; Razqāni,
Sharh al-Mawāhib 2:166

[^23]: Wāqidi 2:562; Ibn Hishām 3:213; Ibn Sa’d 2:65; Kalā’i 1:112; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:109

[^24]: Wāqidi 1:395; Ibn Sa’d 2:43; Tabari 3:27; Kalā’i 1:112; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:83

[^25]: Tabari 2:6 onwards; Mas’udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 1:215; Jawād ‘Ali,
al-Mufassal fi Tārikh al-‘Arab qabl al-Islām 2:635

[^26]: See Wāqidi 1:402, 2:755, 3:989; Ibn Hishām 3:244, 4:15; Ibn Sa’d
2:44, 92, 118, 136; Ibn Hazm: 184

[^27]: Wāqidi 1:11; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 251; Ibn Sa’d 2:1; Tabari 2:259;
Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:226

[^28]: Wāqidi 1:10, 13; Ibn Hishām 2:245; Tabari 2:259; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:225

[^29]: Wāqidi 1:182, 197; Tabari 2:492; Suhayli 3:142; Yāqut Hamawi
4:212; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:305

[^30]: Wāqidi 1:199, 384, 440; Ibn Hishām 3:64, 224; Ibn Khayyāt 1:29;
Tabari 3:9; Kalā’i 1:104, 113; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:2, 55, 53

[^31]: Wāqidi 3:990; Ibn Hishām 4:169; Ibn Sa’d 2:119; Bakri 1:203

[^32]: The Battle of Dumat al-Jundal took place in Rabi’ al-Awal, 5 A.H.
and the reason for this battle was the Christian ruler of the Dumat
al-Jundal (an area near Syria) called Akidar ibn ‘Abd al-Malik Kindi,
who was loyal to the emperor of Rome, Heracleus. Because his land was in
the center of the trade route that ran from Arabia to Syria, he would
create hindrances and obstacles and would harass the Muslim travelers.
When the Holy Prophet (S) heard about this, he sent a large contingent
of a thousand men to Dumat al-Jundal, but by the time they got there,
the people had fled and they returned without fighting. (See: Wāqidi
1:402; Ibn Hishām 3:224; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:54, 108) (Tr.)

[^33]: Wāqidi 1:404, 3:1026; Ibn Sa’d 2:44, 120; Suhayli 4:196, 201

[^34]: Wāqidi 1:12, 2:573, 3:995; Ibn Hishām 2:401, 3:220, 4:32

[^35]: Wāqidi 1:182; Ibn Hishām 3:220; Ibn Sa’d 2:21, 45; Ibn Hazm: 184

[^36]: In the Battle of Tabuk, ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a) was initially
appointed as the deputy of the Prophet (S) in Madina and later Muhammad
ibn Maslamah was also chosen as a representative. (See: Wāqidi 3:1047;
Ibn Hishām 4:162; Ibn Sa’d 4:112) (Tr.)

[^37]: Wāqidi 1:277; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1198

[^38]: Wāqidi 3:1047; Ibn Hishām 4:136; Tabari 3:104

[^39]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1023

[^40]: Wāqidi 1:20, 56, 2:642, 819; Ibn Hishām 2:257, 3:218, 4:46; Ibn
Sa’d 2:25

[^41]: Wāqidi 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 2:257; Ibn Sa’d 2:25; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:121

[^42]: Wāqidi 1:13, 56, 217; Ibn Sa’d 2:96; Tabari 3:75; Ibn Hazm: 239

[^43]: Wāqidi 1:20, 87; Ibn Hishām 2:279; Ibn Sa’d 2:26; Ibn Hanbal
1:117

[^44]: Ibn Hishām 3:70; Ibn Sa’d 2:6, 27; Tabari 2:505; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 1:257

[^45]: Wāqidi 1:13, 2:560, 3:1117; Ibn Hishām 4:49; Ibn Sa’d 2:35, 98;
Kalā’i 1:144

[^46]: Wāqidi 2:560, 755; Ibn Hishām 4:15; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:92; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:108. In some locations in Madina, meaning near the Thaniyāt,
the Prophet (S) would bid farewell to the army, that is why these places
would be known as Thaniyāt al-Wadā’ and the Prophet would come to these
places in order to bid farewell to the army and welcome them back. (Tr.)

[^47]: Zuhri: 86, 92; Ibn Sa’d 2:96, 108; Ibn Khayyāt 1:56

[^48]: Wāqidi 2:819; Ibn Hishām 4:46

[^49]: Wāqidi 2:819; Ibn Hishām 4:46

[^50]: Wāqidi 2:823

[^51]: Wāqidi 2:819; Ibn Hishām 6:46. One of the examples of the
psychological war of the Prophet (S) was that he paraded his troops in
front of Abu Sufyan and when the latter saw the strength of the Muslim
army, he realized that they would not be able to fight them. Thus he was
left with no choice but to submit and it was at this point that he
accepted Islām. (Tr.)

[^52]: Wāqidi 2:819 onwards

[^53]: Wāqidi 2:821; Ibn Hishām 4:46; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Tabari 3:54

[^54]: Wāqidi 2:819

[^55]: Wāqidi 2:819; Ibn Hishām 4:46, 47

[^56]: Wāqidi 1:218, 2:457; Ibn Hishām 2:278; Ibn Sa’d 2:45; Ibn Hanbal
5:420; Tabari 2:446

[^57]: Wāqidi 1:13; Ibn Hishām 2:268, 3:243; Ibn Sa’d 1:207; Ibn ‘Abd
al-Barr 3:878

[^58]: Wāqidi 1:198, 2:553, 564, 769, 3:883; Ibn Hishām 4:15, 272; Ibn
Sa’d 2:24, 63, 92; Tabari 3:108, 126; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:427, 3:1184;
Harawi, al-Hiyal al-Harbiyya: 90

[^59]: Ibn Hishām 2:241; Ibn Khayyāt 1:29; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1090,
4:1473

[^60]: Wāqidi 1:10, 67; Ibn Hishām 2:278; Ibn al-Atheer, Usd al-Ghābah
2:291

[^61]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 54, 82,165); Muslim (al-Fadhā’il 48); Ibn Mājah
(al-Jihād 9); Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 15); Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr: 1644; Kalā’i
1:101

[^62]: Wāqidi 2:541; Ibn Hishām 3:296; Tabari 2:598; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:84; Dhahabi, Tārikh al-Islām 1:267

[^63]: Wāqidi 2:757; Ibn Hishām 4:15; Ibn Sa’d 2:92; Kalā’i 1:135

[^64]: Zuhri: 150; Ibn Hishām 4:291; Ibn Sa’d 2:136; Ibn Atheer 1:65. It
should be noted that Tabarsi has narrated from Imam al-Sādiq (‘a) that
the Prophet (S) first appointed Ja’far ibn Abi Tālib as the commander
and then, if he was martyred, Zayd ibn Hāritha and finally ‘Abdullah ibn
Rawāha (Refer to A’lām al-Warā: 62) (Tr.)

[^65]: In the month of Safar, 11 A.H. (during the last days of the
Prophet’s life), the Holy Prophet (S) prepared an army in order to
avenge the blood of the martyrs of the Battle of Muta and appointed
Usāma bin Zayd, whose father had been killed in the said battle, as the
commander. Usama was a young man of 18 or 19 years and all the older and
more experienced companions, aside from ‘Abbās (the uncle of the
Prophet) and ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib, were placed under his command. When the
army was about to leave, some of the older companions voiced their
discontentment about the fact that their commander was a young lad.
‘Umar ibn Khattāb took this message to the Prophet (S) who in turn
expressed his intense displeasure. Despite his sickness, the Prophet (S)
put one hand on ‘Ali’s shoulder and one hand on the shoulder of ‘Abbās
and came to the Masjid where he delivered a fiery sermon in which he
cursed those who opposed the army of Usāma. The army was stationed
outside Madina when the news of the Prophet’s demise came and when Abu
Bakr took over the Caliphate, he sent the army to fight against the
Romans. (See: Wāqidi 3:1117; Ibn Sa’d 2:190; Ibn Atheer 2:317) (Tr.)

[^66]: Zuhri: 150; Wāqidi 2:769; Ibn Hishām 4:272; Ibn Sa’d 2:94; Ibn
‘Abd al-Barr 3:1184; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:157

[^67]: In the 8th year of Hijra, the Prophet (S) received information
that a group of disbelievers had gathered at Dhāt al-Salāsil behind Wādi
al-Qurā with the intention of launching a night raid on the Muslims. The
Prophet (S) initially sent ‘Amr ibn ‘Aās with an army to fight against
them but he returned unsuccessful and expressed his fear to the Prophet
(S). Immediately, the Prophet (S) sent ‘Ali (‘a) to the same place and
after their rejection of his invitation to accept Islām, he fought
against them and even took some booty back as he returned to Madina
victorious (See: Shaykh Mufid, al-Irshād: 51) (Tr.)

[^68]: Wāqidi 1:34; Ibn Sa’d 2:35; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 4:1682; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:39; Harawi: 99

[^69]: In Muharram of the fourth year of Hijra, the Holy Prophet (S)
sent Abi Salamah ibn ‘Abd al-Asad in order to fight the tribe of Bani
Asad. Great companions like Abi ‘Ubaydah ibn Jarrāh, Arqam ibn Abi Arqam
and Abu Qatāda ibn Nu’mān were present in his army. (Wāqidi 1:343-345)
(Tr.)

[^70]: Bukhāri (al-Adab 27); Muslim (al-Birr 66)

[^71]: Zuhri: 77; Wāqidi 1:219; Ibn Hishām 3:68, 305; Kalā’i 1:24; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:59

[^72]: Wāqidi 2:415; Ibn Hishām 3:303; Ibn Sa’d 2:46; Tabari 2:605; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:95

[^73]: ‘Abdullah ibn Ubay was the leader of the Hypocrites of Yathrib.
When the Prophet (S) migrated there, his plans to take over the
leadership of the city were thwarted, and for this reason he held a deep
rooted hatred for Islām and the Muhājirin, but because he had no other
option, he openly professed his belief in Islām. He was always on the
lookout for opportunities to weaken the Muslims and bring about
differences among them. In the Battle of Uhud, he was instrumental in
turning back three hundred soldiers. He never participated in any
battles and when he did, he would weaken the spirits of the Muslims. In
the Battle of Bani al-Mustalaq, when the Muslims returned victorious, a
misunderstanding came about between a Muhājir and an Ansār. The servant
of ‘Umar ibn Khattāb and a man from the Ansār were quarrelling about who
should take water out of a well. The disagreement was about to turn
violent. ‘Abdullah ibn Ubay took this opportunity to start spreading
hatred for the Muhājirin among the Ansār. When the Prophet (S) heard
about this, he called ‘Abdullah ibn Ubay but the latter denied what he
had done. Some of the companions sought permission from the Prophet (S)
to kill Ibn Ubay for what he had done but the Prophet (S) did not allow
them to do this. (Wāqidi 2:415) (Tr.)

[^74]: Wāqidi 2:506; Ibn Hishām 3:247; Ibn Sa’d 2:54; Tabari 2:546;
Kalā’i 1:117; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:70. In the Battle against the Bani
Quraydha, the Prophet (S) sent a companion called Abu Lubāba to the Jews
in order to get them to surrender, but when Abu Lubāba met the chiefs of
the Jews, he was affected by the sounds of weeping from their women and
children and thus made a sign with his hand towards his neck meaning
that ‘if you surrender you will be killed’. When Abu Lubāba left the
Bani Quraydha, he realized his mistake and felt remorse for his
treachery against the Prophet (S), so he made a vow and tied himself to
one of the pillars of the Masjid of the Prophet (S) and began praying to
Allāh for forgiveness. Early in the morning the Prophet (S) came to Abu
Lubāba and untied him from the pillar saying that Allāh had forgiven
him. Henceforth this pillar was known as the pillar of Abu Lubāba. (Tr.)

[^75]: Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 2:46); Muslim (Fadhā’il al-Sahāba 161). Hatab
bin Abi Balta’ah was one of the Muhājirs who, because the weakness of
his faith, acted treacherously. Before the Conquest of Makkah, he
secretly sent a letter to some of the heads of the Quraysh to inform
them about the intention of the Holy Prophet (S) to conquer Makkah. No
sooner had he sent the letter that Jibra’il descended to the Prophet (S)
and informed him of this. The Prophet (S) sent Imam ‘Ali (‘a) to stop
the messenger and take the letter. Then the Prophet (S) called Hatab and
sought to know his reason for doing this. Ibn Abi Balta’ah said that he
was still a Muslim and had not given up his faith, but it was only
because of his fear for his family who were in Makkah that he did what
he had done. When the companions heard this they sought permission from
the Prophet (S) to kill him but the Prophet refused and spared his life.
(Tr.)

[^76]: Zuhri: 150; Ibn Hishām 4:272; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:104; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:157; Ibn Hajar 5:3

[^77]: The Holy Prophet (S) was sent to guide a people who were living
in the depths of ignorance. People would fight wars in order to gain
booty and gain possession over the other’s property, as well as to show
their valor or secure their ‘honor’. The Prophet (S) came to these
people as an exemplary role model, with perfect morals and an infallible
character. But some people were not able to do away with their old
habits and we see, for example, in the Battle of Uhud, that the archers
who were commanded not to leave their post disobeyed the direct order of
the Prophet (S) just so that they could get a portion of the war booty.
Another example is what took place after the Battle of Hunayn when the
Ansār were given a lesser portion of the booty they began to protest.
When the Prophet (S) got angry and explained the reason for this
allotment, the Ansār began to cry and said that they do not wish for
anything more than the Prophet’s pleasure with them. (Tr.)

[^78]: Bukhāri (Maghāzi 56); Muslim (al-Zakāh 139); Tirmidhi (al-Zakāh
29); Nasā’i (al-Zakāh 79)

[^79]: Zuhri: 77; Wāqidi 2:415; Ibn Hishām 4:47; Tabari 3:61; Ibn Qayyim
2:444

[^80]: Ibn Hanbal 3:67; Bukhāri (al-Ahkām 4); Majmu’ah min
al-Mu’allifeen al-‘Askariyyeen, al-Mawsu’ah al-‘Askariyya 1:131

[^81]: Q4:136; Q24:62; Q48:9,13; Q49:15; Q61:11; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 4);
Abu Dāwud (al-Ashribah 7); Tirmidhi (Fadhā’il al-Jihād 230)

[^82]: Zuhri: 52; Wāqidi 2:760; Kalā’i 1:127

[^83]: Q7:157; Q48:9; Bukhāri (al-Eimān 8, Maghāzi 53); Muslim (al-Eimān
69); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 14)

[^84]: Q2:285; Q3:32, 172; Q4:13, 59, 69, 80; Q5:7; Q8:1; Q24:51, 54;
Q64:16; Bukhāri (al-Ahkām 4, al-Jihād 109); Muslim 3:1391; Nasā’i
(al-Bay’ah 5)

[^85]: Q3:172; Q13:18; Q42:38; Muslim 3:1433

[^86]: Q9:59; Ibn Hanbal 2:310; Muslim (al-Masājid 279, al-Salāh 13,
al-Fadhā’il 63); Ibn Mājah (al-Iqāmah 147); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 118);
Tirmidhi (al-Zuhd 57)

[^87]: Ibn Sa’d 2:2-5, 24, 35, 56, 61

[^88]: Wāqidi 1:347, 355; Ibn Hishām 3:194; Ibn Sa’d 2:36, 39; Ibn ‘Abd
al-Barr 4:1449; Ibn ‘Asākir 1:92; Ibn al-Atheer 4:344

[^89]: See examples of this in Wāqidi 2:552, 506; Ibn Sa’d 2:62, 122;
Tabari 3:126; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:105, 108; Ibn al-Hajar, al-Isābah
1L98, 4:11, 176

[^90]: Wāqidi 1:10, 67; Ibn Hishām 4:21; Tabari 2:512; Kalā’i :136

[^91]: Zuhri: 52; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 82); Muslim 4:1804

[^92]: Q2:153; Q3:31; Q33:21; Shaybāni 1:118; Tabari 3:75

[^93]: See how the army took sensible measures to choose a new commander
after the martyrdom of three commanders in the Battle of Muta in
al-Maghāzi 2:756, 763; Ibn Hishām 4:21; Ibn Sa’d 2:94

[^94]: Zuhri: 150; Wāqidi 2:769; Ibn Hishām 4:272; Ibn Sa’d 2:94; Tabari
3:31

[^95]: Q3:172; Wāqidi 1:335; Ibn Sa’d 2:34; Kalā’i 1:105

[^96]: Zuhri: 55; Ibn Hishām 3:327; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn al-Atheer 2:204.
In the Treaty of Hudaybiyya there were numerous conditions that seemed
unfair to the Muslims and for this reason many companions voiced
protests against the signing of this treaty but at the same time, they
submitted to the will of the supreme commander and had to accept the
treaty in the end. (Tr.)

[^97]: Wāqidi 2:760; Ibn Hishām 4:17; Tabari 3:37

[^98]: Ibn Hishām 3:71; Tabari 2:507; Ibn Hazm: 160; Kalā’i 1:102, 103

[^99]: Wāqidi 1:9; Ibn Hishām 2:245; Ibn Sa’d 2:2; Tabari 2:402; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:224

[^100]: Ibn Hishām 2:241; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:224

[^101]: Wāqidi 1:152; Ibn Sa’d 2:6; Tabari 2:431; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr: 121

[^102]: The first battle was the Battle of Waddān which took place in
the month of Safar, 2 A.H. against the Bani Khumra and Quraysh, after
which a peace treaty was signed. The last battle was the Battle of Tabuk
against the Romans, where the forces numbered thirty thousand and ten
thousand on horseback. (Tr.)

[^103]: Wāqidi 1:10 – 13; Ibn Hishām 2:241, 251; Ibn Sa’d 2:1-5; Tabari:
259

[^104]: Wāqidi 1:48; Ibn Hishām 2:266; Ibn Sa’d 2:8; Tabari 2:434; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 1:247

[^105]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812, 819

[^106]: Wāqidi 1:218, 2:685; Tabari 3:77; Suhayli 4:37; Kalā’i 1:145

[^107]: Wāqidi 1:45, 300, 2:495, 705, 723, 741, 825, 3:922, 938; Ibn
Hishām 3:357, 4:129; Ibn Sa’d 2:36, 61, 89, 92

[^108]: It should be noted that Bi’r Ma’unah and al-Rajee’ were not
battles or military missions, rather they were unarmed missions sent for
propagation of the faith who were attacked and killed by the enemies.
(Tr.)

[^109]: Ibn Hishām 4:205-245; Ibn al-Atheer 2:283 onwards

[^110]: Wāqidi 2:670; Ibn Hishām 3:344, 347; Ibn Sa’d 2:502

[^111]: Ibn Sa’d 2:21

[^112]: Wāqidi 1:194

[^113]: Wāqidi 2:454, 800; Ibn Hishām 3:231, 4:23, 63; Ibn Sa’d 2:47;
Tabari 3:100; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:215

[^114]: The issue of economizing on forces is something that is given
importance and taken into consideration even today (Tr.)

[^115]: Wāqidi 1:220, 2:800 onwards; Dhahabi 1:267

[^116]: Ibn Hishām 4:85; Ibn Sa’d 1:44, 77, 109; Tabari 3:9; Yāqut
Himyari 2:487; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:193

[^117]: Zuhri: 76, 84; Wāqidi 1:199, 2:440, 633; Ibn Hishām 3:64, 224,
342; Ibn Sa’d 2:25, 47, 77; Ibn Khayyāt 1:29; Kalā’i 1:104, 114, 130

[^118]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812, 819; Ibn Hishām 4:42

[^119]: Wāqidi 2:800 onwards; Ibn Hishām 4:42

[^120]: Ibn Hishām 3:96 onwards; Tabari 2:507; Ibn Hazm: 160; Kalā’i
1:102

[^121]: Wāqidi 3:895 onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:108; Suhayli 4:96

[^122]: Wāqidi 2:802; Ibn Hishām 4:94; Ibn Sa’d 2:98; Ibn Hazm: 231

[^123]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812

[^124]: Majmu’ah al-Ta’leef fi Akadimiyya Farunzi al-‘Askariyya –
al-Takteek: 464

[^125]: Wāqidi 2:800, 812 onwards

[^126]: Wāqidi 2:820; Ibn Hishām 4:41

[^127]: Zuhri: 50; Wāqidi 2:643; Ibn Hishām 2:266, 272; Qurtubi 2:1493;
Ibn Katheer 3:262, 267

[^128]: Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 2:272; Ibn Sa’d 2:9; Tabari 2:440; Ibn
‘Abd al-Barr 1:316

[^129]: Wāqidi 1:209 onwards; Ibn Hishām 3:67; Ibn Sa’d 2:26; Tabari
2:503

[^130]: Wāqidi 2:445, 478; Ibn Hishām 3:234; Ibn Sa’d 2:47, 53; Tabari
2:566, 573; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 2:594, 601, 634; Ibn al-Atheer 2:283

[^131]: Wāqidi 2:580; Tirmidhi (al-Jihād 34)

[^132]: Wāqidi 2:644

[^133]: Wāqidi 3:1019

[^134]: Wāqidi 2:760; Ibn Hishām 4:17; Ibn Sa’d 2:93; Tabari 3:37; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:154; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:375

[^135]: Zuhri: 50; Wāqidi 2:580, 643, 3:1019; Tabari 3:37; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:154; Ibn al-Qayyim 2:375

[^136]: Wāqidi 1:209; Ibn Hishām 3:67; Ibn Sa’d 2:26; Tabari 2:503; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2:4

[^137]: Ibn Hishām 2:67; Ibn Sa’d 2:26; Ibn al-Atheer 2:150; The youth
were enthusiastic about leaving Madina and they felt that if they
remained behind and fought defensively, the enemy would become bolder
and would take them as cowards. For this reason they insisted that the
army go out of Madina, and the Prophet (S) agreed to this even though it
was against his own opinion. In the end, the Muslims suffered a defeat
in this battle. (Tr.)

[^138]: Ibn Hanbal 2:231; Muslim (al-Jannah 64); Ibn Mājah (al-At’imah
6, 30); Abu Dāwud (al-At’imah 17); Tirmidhi (al-Jumu’ah 43); al-Nasā’i
(al-Istisqā’ 3)

[^139]: Dārimi (al-Muqaddima 34); Ibn Mājah (al-Fitan 71); Abu Dāwud
(al-Malāhim 17)

[^140]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 1:316; 2:594, 634; Ibn al-Atheer 1:364, 2:283,
338

[^141]: Ibn Hanbal 5:230; Dārimi (al-Ru’yā 13); Bukhāri (al-Munāfiqun
10); Abu Dāwud (al-Aqdhiya 11); Tirmidhi (al-Ahkām 3); al-Nasā’i
(al-Hajj 49)

[^142]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 195); Muslim (al-Fadhā’il 140, al-Salāh 178);
Abu Dāwud (al-Sunnah 12) al-Nasā’i (al-Qudhāt 11)

[^143]: Dārimi (al-Ru’yā 13); Bukhāri (al-I’tisām 28); Abu Dāwud
(al-Jihād 37)

[^144]: Q33:36; Wāqidi 1:53 onwards; Nasā’i (al-Ashriba 36)

[^145]: Q3:159; Ibn Hanbal 1:30, 3:105, 4:10; Bukhāri: 79; Abu Dāwud
(a;-Adab 88); Harawi: 73

[^146]: Ibn Hanbal 3:729; Bukhāri (al-Hudud 71, al-Muhāribun 16); Abu
Dāwud (al-Adab 114); al-Nasā’i (al-Jihād 6)

[^147]: Wāqidi 1:53, 209, 2:445, 478, 760; Ibn Hishām 2:272, 3:67, 4:17;
Abu Dāwud (al-Buyu’ 5); Harawi: 74

[^148]: Ibn Sa’d 2:9, 26, 47, 53, 93; Tabari 2:440, 503, 566, 3:37; Ibn
‘Abd Rabbih 1:63 onwards; Harawi: 74

[^149]: Wāqidi 1:53; Ibn Hishām 3:234; Ibn Sa’d 2:26; Tabari 2:566, 573

[^150]: Q42:38; Ibn Hanbal 1:48; Muslim (al-Masājid 78); Abu Dāwud
(al-Adab 114); Tirmidhi (al-Fitan 78)

[^151]: Tirmidhi (al-Manāqib 37); Bukhāri (al-‘Ilm 2); Muslim (al-Imārah
22)

[^152]: Bukhāri (al-Ahkām 42, al-I’tisām 28); Nasā’i (al-Bay’ah 32); Ibn
‘Abd Rabbih 1:32 onwards

[^153]: Ibn Hanbal 5:274; Bukhāri (al-I’tisām 28); Abu Dāwud (al-Adab
114); Tirmidhi (al-Zuhd 39, al-Adab 57)

[^154]: ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb would constantly seek advice from the close
companions of the Holy Prophet (S) like ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a). In more
than one occasion, the Muslim army achieved victory because of this
advice. (Tr.)

[^155]: Q8:65; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 110); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 30)

[^156]: Q4:84; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 17); Muslim (al-Imārah 117); Nasā’I
(al-Zakāh 85; al-Buyu’ 98)

[^157]: Q6:19, Q17:106, Q18:54, Q73:20, Q96:1; Wāqidi 1:347, 3:1057; Ibn
Hishām 3:178; Ibn Sa’d 2:36, 39

[^158]: Examples of this was when the committee was discussing whether
to leave Madina in the Battle of Uhud and during the digging of the
trench in the Battle of Khandaq (see: Ibn Hishām 2:226)

[^159]: Dārimi (al-Jihād 18); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād 25); Tirmidhi
(Fadhā’il al-Jihād 13); Nasā’i (al-Qisāmah 18)

[^160]: Bukhāri (al-Nikāh 71, 72); Muslim (al-Nikāh 98, 101, al-‘Eid
19); Nasā’i (al-‘Eidān 36)

[^161]: Bukhāri (al-Jihād 82); Muslim 3:1401, 802; Tirmidhi (al-Jihād
15)

[^162]: Q8:41; Zuhri: 93; Wāqidi 1:96, 407, 2:535, 3:943; Ibn Sa’d 2:61,
95, 120

[^163]: Wāqidi 1:78, 377, 2:540, 648; Ibn Hishām 4:122; Ibn Sa’d 2:174;
Tabari 3:73

[^164]: Muslim (al-Imārah 139); Ibn Mājah (al-Nikāh 36, 53); Nasā’i
(al-Jihād 47)

[^165]: Shaybāni 1:58; Ibn Hishām 2:245, 278; Tabari 2:181

[^166]: Ibn Hishām 3:71; Ibn Sa’d 2:61; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 80)

[^167]: Dārimi (al-Siyar 53); Muslim (al-Jihād 150); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād
142)

[^168]: Wāqidi 1:338, 2:729, 803; Ibn Hishām 3:304; Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Ibn
Sayyid al-Nās 2: 167

[^169]: Look at how the Prophet (S) wanted to keep the information about
the breaking of the pact by the Bani Quraydha confidential and also told
Habbāb ibn Mundhir not to let anyone know about the number of enemy
forces in the Battle of Uhud (Wāqidi 1:207)

[^170]: Ibn Hanbal 5:321; Bukhāri (al-Ahkām 4); Nasā’i (al-Bay’ah 5)

[^171]: Bukhāri (al-Eimān 8, al-Maghāzi 53); Muslim (al-Eimān 69);
Nasā’i (al-Jihād 14)

[^172]: Wāqidi 1:258; Ibn Hishām 2:280, 3:39; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 1:257

[^173]: Wāqidi 1:21, 88; Ibn Hishām 3:70; Tabari 2:505; Ibn Sayyid
al-Nās 2:6

[^174]: Wāqidi 1:152, 2:457, 755; Ibn Hishām 3:231; Ibn Sa’d 2:47;
Tabari 2:431

[^175]: Ibn Hishām 4:19-21; Tabari 3:37; Ibn Qayyim 2:375

[^176]: Wāqidi 1:173, 184, 391; Ibn Hishām 3:54, 287; Ibn Sa’d 2:21; Ibn
Hazm: 184, 198

[^177]: Q8:65, Q9:19, 20, 41, 89; Bukhāri (al-Maghāzi 53, al-Jihād 110);
Tirmidhi (al-Eimān 8, Fadhā’il al-Jihād 22); Nasā’i (al-Jihād 18)

[^178]: Q2:154, Q3:169, Q4:73; Bukhāri (Fadhā’il al-Sahābah 5); Nasā’i
(al-Jihād 19, al-Bay’ah 37)

[^179]: Q9:52; Ibn Hanbal 3:483; Nasā’i (al-Jihād 19, al-Buyu’ 98)

[^180]: Wāqidi 1:212

[^181]: Ibn Is’hāq: 309; Wāqidi 1:208; Ibn Hishām 3:88; Tabari: 517; Ibn
‘Abd al-Barr 1:108; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:12; the brother of Anas bin
Mālik would cry out: life after the death of the Holy Prophet (S) has no
value for us (Tr.)

[^182]: Wāqidi 1:69, 112, 257; Ibn Hishām 3:305; Ibn Sa’d 2:10, 46

[^183]: Wāqidi 1:360; Ibn Hishām 3:185; Tabari 2:541; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr
2:440; Khubayb was one of the teachers of the Qur’ān who was martyred in
the tragedy of ‘al-Rajee’. The polytheists tried to force him to turn
away from Islām before killing him when they were unable to do so (Tr.)

[^184]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 2:353, 563, 729; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Tabari
2:554

[^185]: Ibn Hishām 4:13; Ibn Hanbal 1:229; Tirmidhi (al-Hajj 30); Nasā’i
(al-Manāsik 84); in today’s terminology this is known as ‘psychological
warfare’ and it is carried out to weaken the spirits of the enemy’s army
(Tr.)

[^186]: Wāqidi 1:203, 338; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 3:1473

[^187]: Wāqidi 1:99; Ibn Sa’d 2:70; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 4:1473

[^188]: Wāqidi 1:404, 2:550, 640, 802; Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād: Ba’th
al-‘Uyun 84)

[^189]: Wāqidi 1:395, 2:496, 633; Ibn Hishām 3:244, 342; Ibn Sa’d 2:53,
77; Tabari 2:556; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās 2:39, 105 onwards

[^190]: Wāqidi: 535; Ibn Hishām 3:292; Ibn Sa’d 2:56; Ibn Sayyid al-Nās
2:109

[^191]: Wāqidi 1:12, 2:537; Ibn Hishām 2:315, 3:293; Ibn Asad 2:1, 58;
Tabari 2:601; Kalā’i 1:123

[^192]: Ibn Hanbal 4:354; Bukhāri (al-Jihād 110); Abu Dāwud (al-Jihād
24)

[^193]: Shaybāni 1:118; Wāqidi 1:207; Tabari 3:75; Kalā’i 1:144

[^194]: Zuhri: 79; Muslim 3:1361

[^195]: Zuhri: 79; Wāqidi 1:337 onwards and 2:440; Ibn Hishām 3:129
onwards; Ibn Sa’d 2:36, 47; Tabari 3:29, 565; Kala’i 1:104, 114; Watt:
57


