Introduction
============

*‘At last a wolf's whelp will be a wolf*

*Although he may grow up with a man’*

This couplet is a well-known Iranian proverb whose first creator was the
wise famous Iranian poet, Muslih Al Din Saadi Shirazi, who lived in the
seventh lunar century-Hijri Ghamari- 13th century. It was used in the
content of a story which was about a group of bandits who were captured
after hard efforts of the King’s soldiers and the King ordered their
death. Among them was a very young man towards whom the King’s vizier
felt pitiful and asked the King to forgive him because of his juvenility
and requested to be granted his care in order to train him and
familiarize him morals and raise him with worthy behaviour.

At first, the King did not agree however due to the persistence of the
Vizier, the king finally surrendered to his request and forgave that
young person’s sin and left his training and reformation into the
Viziers hand.

The Vizier endeavoured to educate the Young person for a while however
eventually as Saadi says: ‘After two years had elapsed a band of robbers
in the locality joined him, tied the knot of friendship and, when the
opportunity presented itself, he killed the vizier with his son, took
away untold wealth and succeeded to the position of his own father in
the robber-cave where he established himself.’[^1]

This story puts the theory of hereditary determinism forward based upon
which the personage and behaviour of man is recognised through the
restrictive deterministic factor and as a result education is
ineffective before the heredity factor, and has no influential role in
shaping the personage and behaviour of man.

According to the theory of hereditary determinism, man has no freedom of
will and decision against the hereditary factor since what shapes and
directs the will of man is the very hereditary factor which nurtures
certain motivations in man in a deterministic and infrangible way. These
motivations are shaped alongside the hereditary factors and will be the
primitive and deterministic causes of creation of man’s will and
voluntary actions.

If this theory is accepted, the routes to training man will close and
there will be no other choice but for all men to fully surrender to
whatever hereditary factor received from generations before them. This
is because any effort to avoid the influence of the hereditary
deterministic factor, according to the saying of Saadi, would be a
useless and futile effort.

Consequently, in accordance to the example presented in the former tale,
man’s characteristics are preconfigured, which entails invariability of
man’s inherited model of personality and thus resulting in the
fruitlessness of training and education.

There is another theory confronting this theory which considers the will
of man independent of the hereditary factor and believes that although
the hereditary factor can influence the will of man, the choice of
getting influenced by the hereditary factor or any other external factor
is the man’s, and using his free will power, it is him who can choose
his will and voluntary act, and as a result, shape his personage and
destiny.

This other theory has been stated and emphasized in various ways in the
Holy Quran among which are the verses that describe Allah (S.W.T) using
the description:

*‘He brings out the living from the dead, and He brings out the dead
from the living’ (30:19)*

Here the narrations obtained from the pure Imams interpret the word
‘Hayy’ (the living) to mean the faithful and ‘Mayet’ (the dead) to mean
the infidel [^2]

This is the same in Islamic religious sources, in the story of ‘Buddha’
where his father is introduced as a tyrant, anti-religion person who put
his utmost effort on killing pious and religious people. [^3]

Explaining the Islamic view regarding man’s freedom factors like
environment, hereditary and others Martyr Allamah Mutahhari says:

‘Whilst man cannot entirely cut off his relations to hereditary, natural
environment, social environment, history and time he can rebel against
these barriers. Man by his power of wisdom and knowledge on one hand and
his faith and free will on the other hand, can change the received
influences of these factors modifying them according to his desires and
wishes. He could own and control his life and his destiny’[^4]

Therefore the theory of hereditary determinism of moral and behavioural
characters has definitely been rejected in the religious and
philosophical resources originated from Islamic religious sources.

On the other hand, confronting the deterministic hereditary factor, some
of the ancient and modern social philosophies believe in the theory of
‘the determinism of social environment’ as the main factor in shaping
the personage and will and behaviour of man and have strongly defended
it. Based on this way of thinking, the will of man which is the
foundation of his behaviour and personage, is restricted to the ‘social
environment’ deterministic factor.

According to Martyr Allamah Mutahhari:  
 ‘One of the fundamental problems discussed by philosophers,
particularly in the last century, is the problem of determinism and
freedom of individual as against society, or in other words, determinism
and freedom of the individual spirit vis-a-vis the social spirit.’

After the short explanation of four theories regarding the nature of
society, he then concluded:

‘If we accept the idea of the absolute essentiality and primariness of
the society, there will be no place left for the idea of the freedom and
choice of the individual.

Emile Durdkheim, the famous French sociologist, emphasizes the
importance of society to the extent of saying that social matters (in
fact all the human matters, unlike the biological and animal urges and
needs like eating and sleeping) are the products of society, not the
products of individual thought and will, and have three characteristics:
they are external, compulsive, and general.’[^5]

Among the most famous social determinism theories is the historical
materialism theory of Karl Marx who considers the thought and will of
man to be the deterministic product of social production relations and
the social production relations to be a deterministic consequence of
production factor. Based upon historical materialism, the ‘free will of
man’ is a meaningless term since the will of all men is the
deterministic result of a form of production relation that is created
through production factors.

Based upon the determined dialectical process and as a result of the
inner contradiction of production relations, the new production factors
will break apart the old production relations and replace them with
modern social production relations. The thoughts, reflections, the
feelings and affections of man have been derived from the new production
relations.

Since the dialectical progress of production tools is an always active
and definitely unavoidable law, a new contradiction will be emerged
between the new production tools and the old production relations.

The social reflection of this contradiction will be emerged in the
contradiction between the old social class who supports the old
production tools and relations with the new social class who support the
modern production tools and relations. This social contradiction is
followed by struggle and war between the two old and new classes which
will end in a modern social revolution in which the new social class who
supports the modern production tools and relations is the always winning
frontier of this social struggle:

‘When the dialectical method is applied to the study of economic
problems, economic phenomena are not viewed separately from each other,
by bits and pieces, but in their inner connection as an integrated
totality, structured around, and by, a basic predominant mode of
production. This totality is analysed in all its aspects and
manifestations, as determined by certain given laws of motion, which
relate also to its origins and its inevitable disappearance.

These laws of motion of the given production are discovered to be
nothing but the unfolding of the inner contradiction of that structure,
which define its very nature. The given economic structure is seen to be
characterized at one and the same time by the unity of these
contradictions and by their struggle, both of which determine the
constant changes which it undergoes. The (quantitative) changes which
constantly occur in the given mode of production, through adaptation,
integration of reforms and self-defence (evolution), are distinguished
from those (qualitative) changes which, by sudden leaps, produce a
different structure, a new mode of production (revolution).’[^6]

According to the text above the determined production motion laws are
the basic foundation of economic relations and structure, and according
to Marx’s thesis of ‘materialist conception of history’ the economic
relations and its relevant structure are the basic source of social
structure containing all social phenomena such as thought, religion,
art, politics, ethics, etc.

Bertrand Russell says:  
 For Marx, the driving force is really man’s relation to matter, of
which the most important part is his mode of production. In this way
Marx’s materialism, in practice becomes economics.

The politics, religion, philosophy, and art of any epoch in human
history are according to Marx, an outcome of its methods of production,
and, to a lesser extent, of distribution. [^7]

Plekhanov says:  
 ‘The social environment characteristics are formed by the level of
production power in every age which means that when the levels of
production powers are fixed, they subordinate all social environment
characteristics, its relative psychology and mutual relations between
environment on one hand, and ideas, and behaviours on the other
hand.’[^8]

As a result of the materialist conception of history, individual
characteristics are nothing but a reflection of the social structure
which derived from the determined laws of dialectical production
movement.

Consequently, every agent’s action is not a result of an independent
free will created by the agent himself, and separated from social
structure. Rather it is a determined effect, resulted from social
production relations, by the predominant dialectical production motion
laws.

The theory of Hegel about the absolute spirit dominating the history and
the world, must also be counted among the social deterministic theories.
In Hegel’s view:

‘God is managing the world, the plan and form upon which He manages the
world is the history.’ [^9]

According to Hegel’s explanation of the world, the history is nothing
but the provided chain of occurrences determined by the Providence of
God which presides over the events of the world. The essence of the
world and history is the absolute spirit of god, which exists and guides
everything including human actions through the determined law directed
to the determinate goal.

States, societies and individuals are a part of the provided connected
chain of history, then its actions and behaviours are not spontaneous or
accidental, but they are predominated by the Providence of God under
determined law.

Martyr Allamah Mutahhari insisted that the two theories of Hegel and
Marx with respect to philosophical interpretation of history lead to the
same result of historical determinism which absolutely negates the human
free will, he says:

‘There are some who, on the basis of the principle of causation and the
principle of universality, negate freedom and choice. They maintain that
whatever is accepted in the name of freedom is not actually freedom.
Contrarily, there are others who approve the principle of freedom and
negate the view that history follows certain laws.

Many sociologists accept the incompatibility of causality and freedom,
and, therefore, they accept causality and negate freedom.

Hegel, and Marx following him, accepts historical determinism. According
to Hegel and Marx, freedom is nothing but consciousness of historical
necessity. In the book Marx and Marxism, the following passage of Engels
is quoted from his work Anti-Duhring:

Hegel was the first to state correctly the relation between freedom and
necessity. To him freedom is the appreciation of necessity. Necessity is
blind only in so far as it is not understood. Freedom does not consist
in the dream of independence from natural laws, but in the knowledge of
these laws and in the possibility this gives of systematically making
them work towards definite ends. This holds good in relation to the laws
of external nature and those which govern the bodily and mental
existence of man themselves. (Andre Peter, Marx and Marxism, Persian
translation by Shuja al-Din Diya’iyan, p.249)’ [^10]

Also in Psychology, there are various theories that support the
deterministic factors and psychological reasons. One of the most famous
determinist theories in the field of Psychology is the ‘sexual theory’
of Freud.

Freud believed that the will and personage of man originates from
thoughts and affections which are the result of sexual deprivations that
originate from sexual restrictions. The Oedipus complex will cause the
advent of sexual desires following which the feelings and affections and
thought of man will strive and endeavor to compensate for the sexual
deprivation and will shape the structure of personage of man. By the
formation of the psychological personality of man, his requests and
desire will orientate parallel to his psychological personality and will
shape the will and voluntary actions of man.

Edgar Pesch says:  
 It appears that it is necessary to sketch the general lines in the
Oedipus complex, the complex which is not only the foundation of the
child’s sexual desires but is also the creator of the social and sexual
life of mature people. [^11]

Freud states that the scientific inquiries show that the beginning of
religion, the spiritual values, social customs and Art will all join one
another in the ‘Oedipus complex’ point:

‘At the conclusion, then, of this exceedingly condensed inquiry, I
should like to insist that its outcome shows that the beginnings of
religions, morals, society and art in the Oedipus complex.’[^12]

Moreover, the freedom of the will of man constitutes the main base of
laws. The long disputes regarding the basis of law, the meaning and the
source of natural law, common Law, civil law specially the law of
contracts, the criminal law, and other forms and fields of law all are
rooted in the principle of the freedom of the will of man. The
accountability and responsibility of man towards his words and actions
whether in the civil laws or criminal laws all depend on the scale of
freedom of man in decision making and the scale of involvement of the
free will of man in shaping his words, actions, and personality.

‘Modern theorists following Machiavelli suggested that natural law
(rights and principles held to be common to all humankind and derived
from the nature of man rather than from social customs or contracts,
religion, etc.) originated not in the heavens but in man himself. Nature
supplies no pattern for the good state. In fact, in the state of nature
there is no law at all, only individual desire and freedom.’ [^13]

The main field of the civil law is the law of contracts which is founded
on the basis of human freewill. For that the man’s responsibility
towards his words is entirely meaningless, without his own deliberation
and freewill.

With respect to the criminal law, a cardinal principle of criminal law
is embodied in the maxim ‘an act does not make a man guilty of a crime
unless his mind is also guilty’ [^14]and it is obvious that the
guiltiness of mind depends on its deliberation and intention which
derives from the agent’s freewill.

One of the main subjects related to the criminal law and criminal
psychology is education and training in forming the personality of the
convict. The theory that considers the personality of the convict to be
the definite consequence of his education will direct the main
responsibility of the crime of the convict towards his trainer and see
the way to reform the society and reduce or eradicate crime in the
society exclusively in the educational factors and environment of the
society.

The social political crises which cause very vast and deep social
problems rather the criminal political events like global wars,
massacres, transgressions and social violence and etc., stem from human
volition, and its previous prerequisites.

These subjects and all the issues that are related to the voluntary
actions of man which cover a vast area, which is as vast as all of the
social sciences, is related to the subject of the freedom of man’s will
and the connection of this freedom with the causal deterministic law or
the deterministic causality. The connection of the deterministic
causality with the freedom of man and the intellectual justification of
the power of man over free decision making and the scale of involvement
of the free will of man in shaping the actions, the personality and the
destiny of man is the main subject of this research. The prime
foundation of all the discussions is related to social sciences.

This study tries to reflect the problem of compatibility between general
causal law and the free will of human being, and whether or not the
general causal law is compatible with the freedom of man; I will examine
the different theories in contemporary Islamic and Western philosophy
comparing them with each other and criticising them, and finally I will
present my theory of ‘moral obligation’ which I think is able to give a
new solution to this problem.

In the first chapter I will give a short explanation of the background
of this problem in the Islamic philosophy, in chapter two I will reflect
upon the contemporary Islamic perspective. In the third chapter I will
look at the contemporary Western theories regarding the problem and in
the last chapter I’ll present my view with respect to the free will and
its compatibility with the general causal law.

According to my suggested theory, which was called ‘moral preponderant’,
the main source of the free will of the human act stems from
deliberation and reflection. The real meaning of this freedom is that
the act must arise from deliberation and reflection of man; what he is
going to do, what the possibilities of the different choices are, which
one of them is good, which one of them is bad, which one is the best,
and which one is the worst.

To consider the different possibilities and to deliberate upon them, and
the decision-making which arises from this deliberation and reflection,
and then to choose what to do or not to do, is the very foundation and
the mere core of the freewill and is actually the basis of the freedom
of mankind.

The most important result of this theory is that it is impossible to
have free individuals or free societies without having enough
opportunity for reflection and deliberation.

The most important responsibility of education systems, mass media
systems, economic, and political systems is to prepare the adequate
environment for the people to think about their life, and to deliberate
about the different types of life-styles, kinds of actions, lanes of
movement, and consequently choose which one is the best.

[^1]: Sa’adi Shirazi, 1992, pp. 50-54

[^2]: Al-Qommi, 1983, Vol 1, p. 211

[^3]: Al-Sadooq, 1991, pp. 521-579

[^4]: Human Being in Qura’n, 1991, p. 39

[^5]: Mutahhari, 1997, pp. 20-21

[^6]: Karl Marx, 1990, Vol 1, p. 18

[^7]: Bertrand Russell, 1995, p. 750

[^8]: Plekhanov, 1969, p. 42

[^9]: Hegel G.W.F, 1991, p. 36

[^10]: Mutahhari, 1997, p.53

[^11]: Pesch, 1993, p. 64

[^12]: Freud, 2001, p. 182

[^13]: Ezzati A. 2002, p. 26

[^14]: Card R. 2004, p. 2.2


