Part 1: The Background of the Problem in Islamic Philosophy
===========================================================

The philosophical problem between causality and freewill is that there
are two very obvious facts, the first is that we, as mankind, feel that
we are free to choose what we are going to do, and we can do or not do
what we want. The second fact is that every possible thing that exists
needs a determining factor or cause which means that the human free act
is dominated by the determined cause, here the paradoxical conflict
arises between our feeling of free action and the determination of the
factors which influenced us to do what we do.

To have a clear idea of this philosophical debate in the Islamic
thought, we need to know the real meanings of the main terms in this
discussion and to know a brief history about the main sources of this
debate in the history of Islamic thought. In the first part of this
study the main terms of this discussion will be clarified, and the short
story of the source of this philosophical debate in the history of
Islamic thought will be presented.

In the history of Islamic thought, there were several currents and many
thinkers. It was not possible to mention all of them, here my attempt is
to focus upon the main current and the main thinkers who brought about a
new theory or established a new school of thought

One of the earliest problems in philosophy that has occupied minds of
great philosophers and has been debated in different philosophical ages
is the problem of causality and its relation to freedom.

On one side, the depth of philosophical issues related to causality and
freedom and the close relationship between these two issues and the
intellectual and practical systems of man and also the many
philosophical and theological issues that exist has made this issue in
the field of philosophical and theological discussions especially
important.

The fundamental role of this subject in the field of social sciences is
also prominent and noteworthy. On one hand, the field of law and crime
prevention and discernment and determination of the real criminal and
also the determination of the involvement of the will of the criminal in
the accomplishment of crime on the other hand as well as the role of the
society and the inherited factors and the family and educating
environment in the formation of the personality of the criminal and the
shaping of his criminal will, all have a close relationship with the
issue of man’s freedom and its connections with causality.

In the field of sociology, the influence of group spirit in the
formation of the individual character of man and his will and also the
effect of various geographical and historical factors and etc. in the
emergence and shaping of the group spirit and will are all issues that
have a close relationship with the freedom of man’s will.

There are some psychological and sociological theories that regard the
will and personality of man- in both social and individual aspects- the
product of deterministic factors. The theory of Freud on the influence
of sexual instinct in shaping the personality and behaviour of man and
the theory of Karl Marx on the influence of productive forces in shaping
of the group spirit and intellect and then in the thought and
personality of an individual, are among the theories that regard the
personality and will of man to be denounced by factors beyond his
personality and freewill and do not consider the freewill to be able to
determine his destiny clear of these factors.

There are also theories in the field of morals, education and economics
that consider the deterministic forces beyond the will of man to shape
the moral and economical character that direct the moral, educative and
economical behaviours.

It is for this reason that the topic of freedom of man and its
relationship with other causes and with the principle of causal law are
among the most important issues that must be carefully analysed and
discussed.

The problem of ‘Causality’ and its relation to ‘Freedom’ has been
discussed in ancient Greek, Indian, and Persian philosophy before the
Islamic Age.

After the emergence of Islam, one of the main philosophical and
theological cases propounded by the Qur’an and the traditions of the
Prophet and the infallible Imams was the creation of the world and man
by God on one hand, and man’s freedom and responsibility on the other,
which led the Muslim scholars and philosophers to long philosophical
discussions that resulted in various trends of thought and schools.

The argument about the relation between God and the creation led to the
problems of causality and necessity, and the discussion about the
relation between God and man led to the question of man’s responsibility
and freedom.

To clarify the philosophical problem of the outwardly conflict between
causality and necessity on one hand, and freedom on the other hand, we
need to point out the philosophical definition of the three main terms
in our discussion which are: Cause, Necessity, and Freedom.

1. Cause
--------

The term ‘Cause’ when used without any added condition, has two meanings
in the Islamic Philosophical terminology:

1. All elements needed for the existence of effect. This meaning of
cause includes the whole four types of causes which are: agent cause,
material cause, formal cause, and ultimate cause. Imam Fakhr Al Deen Al
Razi (d.1209, 606 AH) says: ‘When we want to define The Cause as
including these four causes we say: The cause is the thing needed for
its reality and existence.’ [^1]

2. The Agent Cause which means the thing that grants the effect its
existence, or in other words; the source of the existence of effect.
Continuing the former expression, Fakhruddeen-al-Razi says: ‘What Sheikh
(Avicenna) mentioned in his book Alhodood (Definitions) is that ‘The
Cause is the thing that occasions the existence of another thing which
its actual being derived from actual existence of the former, but the
actual existence of the former is not derived from the latter’ then –in
fact- it doesn’t mean but the agent cause.’ (Ibid)

The agent cause in this term means an agent with full powers of agency.
Therefore, it includes all implements needed by the agent in the process
of creating the effect. Moreover, it includes the Ultimate Cause as
well, because the agency of cause has not been completed without the
Ultimate Cause.

In his book ‘Ayn-ul-Qwa’ed’ Katibi Qazwini (d. 1276, 675 AH) says:

‘It (The Ultimate Cause) is a cause for the causality of Agent Cause,
and its being is later than the effect in object, but earlier in
subject.’ [^2]

The ultimate cause is a former in respect of the effect in subject, for
it is a cause for the causality of Agent Cause in subject, because the
Agent Cause needs an ultimate to move towards the action that results in
the effect. And it’s being is a latter in respect of the effect in
object, because it is a result of the effect in the reality.

Allamah Hilli in his book ‘Idhah-ul-Maqasid’ describing the above
expression says:

‘The Ultimate Cause has two aspects: The first is in respect of the
agent, the second is in respect of the effect. When it is attributed to
the agent it will be the agent of its attribution of agency, because the
agent doesn’t do his action except by reason of the ultimate, and when
it is attributed to the effect it will be an ultimate in respect of it,
which means that the effect existed due to that ultimate, then it has
been a cause for the effect, because unless the ultimate, the effect has
not been existed.’[^3]

According to Islamic philosophical terminology the term ‘Complete agent’
can be used with two meanings; Sometimes what is meant by the term
complete cause is its former meaning that includes whatever interferes
within the existence of a being (which includes the four types of
causes).

Katibi Qazwini says:  
 ‘Whatever the object needs within its existence is known as the cause,
and this cause is either complete; which consists of whatever the
existence of the object depends upon, or incomplete, which is some of
the elements that the existence of the object depends upon.’ [^4]

In the exegesis of the above Allamah Hilli says:

‘Be aware that the complete cause includes Material, formal, Agent and
Ultimate plus Condition and non-obstacle. Each of these is a part of the
meaning of the complete cause.’[^5]

Some times what we mean by complete cause is its second meaning. This
means that the agent cause is in full agency, in which case although in
some ways it includes the ultimate cause, but it does not include the
material and formal causes. The complete agent cause includes all the
elements which play a role in the agency of the agent, contrary to the
partial cause which means the things that is necessary to create the
effect but it is not sufficient. For this reason it includes all the
tools and facilities which the agent would use for establishing the
effect.

However, it does not include equipments (Mo’iddaat) (i.e. things that
are needed to complete the capacity of effects to be existed by the
agents like the water or sunlight for the growth of a plant that has
been placed by the farmer agent) conditions and non-obstacles. This is
due to the fact that these three elements bear on the capability of the
object (i.e. effect) and not the agency of the agent. Therefore they are
counted as parts of the material cause.

Fakhr Al Deen Al Razi says:  
 ‘But conditions are truly a part of the material cause, because capable
would only become capable if it complies with the conditions. But the
equipments are truly a part of the agent cause, where its agency depends
upon the equipments and it would not be completed without them.
Therefore, if the agency of the agent would have been completed without
equipments, the mediation of the equipments would become impossible.’
[^6]

Finally it is useful to mention that the second meaning of the complete
cause which was the agent cause with the full agency is equal to the
sufficient cause in western philosophy‘s terminology, whilst necessary
cause includes both the complete and partial cause.

2. Necessity Or The Necessity Of Existence
------------------------------------------

Necessity or the necessity of existence is absurdity of absence.
Anything whose non-existence is impossible, its existence is necessary.
The phrase Necessity or the Necessity of Existence has been used in a
variety of different meanings within the philosophical terminology. At
this stage we will discuss two important meanings in accordance to our
discussion:

The necessity simultaneous to the existence of being or conditional upon
its existence, which is interpreted in philosophical terminology as
predicated necessity. This means that whenever we take into account a
being bounded by the state of existence, its existence within this
condition would be necessary. This necessity which describes the
existence is the’ Necessity Simultaneous to Existence’ or the ‘Necessity
by Predicate.’

The necessity prior to existence: what is meant by priority in this type
of necessity is not priority in the sense of time. What is meant is
intellectual priority, which in philosophical terms is known as
gradational priority (priority in terms of rank).

The necessity prior to existence within intellectual perception is
described as: The object necessitated then existed. Here, the word then
does not represent space of time. What it implies is Intellectual
Graduation. This means from the point of view of intellect, the reason
for existence is the necessity of its existence. And without the
necessity of existence the existence of the object would be impossible
and unjustified.

Therefore, the necessity of existence here represents the reason
justifying the existence of the object. So as a result of this, the
existence of the object would be preferred to its non-existence and its
non-existence becomes cancelled and its existence will be necessarily
achieved.

Mulla Sadra Sadrul-mota’alliheen Shirazi (d.1640, 1050 AH) in his book
‘Al-Asfar-al-Aqliyyah al-Arba’ah’, at the end of chapter fifteen, says:

‘And thereby was proved that any contingent nature or any contingent
existence would not achieve existence, unless its existence would become
necessary because of its cause. Therefore it is not conceivable that the
cause is a cause unless it gives necessary preference to the existence
of effect.’ [^7]

After that at the beginning of chapter 16 he says:

‘What we discussed in the previous chapter was the prior necessity for
the contingent, which has arisen from the full preferential cause
(Al-Morajjih-u- taamm) of either existence or non-existence, before its
occurrence, - until where he says: – after it has been occurred - the
existence or non-existence of the object - it would find another
necessity. This necessity at the time that the existence or
non-existence attributed to the nature, with the aspect of describing
the nature to one of the descriptions of existence or non-existence, and
this is the next necessity which named the Necessity by Predicate.’ [^8]

3. Freedom
----------

Freedom has also two meanings:

1. Civil or Social Freedom: Freedom with this meaning is used in
opposition to social limitations. Freedom in its social sense represents
the freedom that the human possesses in the society. The boundaries of
such freedom depends upon the amount of limitation that is exerted by
the rulers of the society or other powerful elements – in a lawful or
unlawful manner- and causes limitation upon the freedom of act and
behaviour of Human. Due to the fact that the boundaries of such freedom
– within lawful societies – is set out by law, and the fact that this
type of law is one of the necessities of a civil society, this type of
freedom is known as civil freedom.

2. Philosophical Freedom: The term Philosophical freedom is used in
contrast to Philosophical constraint. What is meant by freedom here is
the fact that the human being or any other agent commits their act
without any sort of external constraint or pressure or impediment, and
solely by internal power.

The opposite side to this type of Freedom is Fatalism or Determinism
(Jabr). Determinism or Fatalism means that the agent of an action is
acting under the pressure of another agent or is being as a tool of
another operator, and as a result, the superior operator sets out and
determines the nature and the direction of the act which is carried out
by the direct conductor or agent.

In other words conductor and the agent do not possess any power or will
to change the direction and the type of act which is set out by the
superior operator.

John Stuart Mill in the opening chapter of his book ‘on Liberty’
addressing the difference between the two types of freedom says:

‘The subject of this essay is not the so-called liberty of the will, so
unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of philosophical
necessity; but civil, or social liberty: and the nature and limits of
the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the
individual.’[^9]

Robert Kane in his book ‘Free will’ refers to the two types of freedom.
He recognises the Civil or Social Freedom as the apparent surface of
Philosophical Freedom, and the Real Freedom of humans to depend on their
Philosophical Freedom.

He says: ‘Nothing could be more important than freedom to the modern
world. All over the globe, the trend (often against resistance) is
towards societies that are more free. But why do we want freedom? The
simple but not totally adequate, answer is that to be more free is to
have the capacity and opportunity to satisfy more of our desires. In a
free society we can walk into a store and buy almost anything we want.
We can choose what movies to see, what music to listen to, whom to vote
for.

But these are what you call surface freedoms. What is meant by free will
runs deeper than these everyday freedoms. To see how, suppose we had
maximal freedom to make such choices to satisfy our desires and yet the
choices we actually made were manipulated by others, by the powers that
be. In such a world we would have a great deal of everyday freedom to do
whatever we wanted, yet our free will would be severely limited. We
would be free to act or choose what we willed, but would not have the
ultimate say about what it is that we willed. Someone else would be
pulling the strings, not by coercing us against our wishes, but by
manipulating us into having the wishes they want us to have.’ [^10]

From what we said so far it is clear that each of the following phrases:
Causality, Necessity of existence or Necessity (wujoob), and freedom
have all got two meanings and within our discussion the second meaning
for these phrases is the substance of the subsequent discussion.

Cause is Agent cause, Necessity, or the Necessity of existence is the
Necessity prior to existence, and Freedom is Philosophical freedom. The
words will hereafter be used in this sense, unless otherwise stated.

A Brief History of Islamic Philosophical Debates Concerning Causality, Necessity and Freedom
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The main source of the philosophical debate in the relation between
causality and free will in the history of the Islamic thought is the
discussion about the monotheism of God’s action and the relation between
his actions and creations including the act of mankind as part of his
creations. If all God’s creations, including humans, emerged by God’s
decision through the determined causal law it would result in the
negation of both the human’s free will, and also the human’s
responsibility towards his actions, which will then lead to the
exoneration of all criminals in human society.

There are three main schools of Islamic thought which interpret God’s
action to justify the free will of human and his responsibility towards
his action while considering the reasonable monotheism of God’s action:

1. The school of theologians which are divided into two theories:

    • The Ashariete’s ‘Theory of Kasb’

    • The Mo’atazeli and Imamiyyeh theologians’ ‘Theory of priority
Awlawiyyah’

2. The school of Islamic Philosophers’ ‘Theory of necessity’

3. The school of ‘Usooliyyon’, the experts of principles of
jurisprudence which are divided into two theories:

• The theory of Ikhtiyar (to will)

• The theory of Saltanah (Sovereignty)

‘The foremost in religion is His knowledge, the perfection of His
knowledge is to testify Him, the perfection of testifying him is to
believe in His oneness, the perfection of believing in His oneness is to
regard Him pure and the perfection of His purity is to deny Him
attributes, because every attribute is a proof that it is different from
that to which it is attributed and everything to which something is
attributed is different from the attribute.

Thus whoever attaches attribute to Allah recognises His like, and who
recognises His like regards Him two and who regards him two recognises
parts for Him and who recognises parts for Him mistook Him; and who
mistook him pointed at him and who pointed at him admitted limitations
for Him and who admitted limitation for Him numbered Him.

Whoever said in what is He, held that he is contained and whoever said
that on what is He, held He is not on something else. He is being but
not through phenomenon of coming into being. He exists but not from
non-existence. He is with everything but not in physical nearness. He is
different from everything but not in physical separation.’ [^11]

Amongst the philosophical discussions which have been propounded in
Nahjul-balaghah, is the discussion regarding Divine Decree and Destiny.

In the section of short-sayings and advices in Nahjul-balaghah it has
been said:

‘A man enquired from Amirul-Momineen (Imam Ali): ‘was our going to fight
with the Syrians (Shamees) destined by Allah’? Amirul-Momineen gave a
detailed reply a selection of which is hereunder: Woe to you. You take
it as a final and unavoidable destiny (according to which we are bound
to act). If it were so, there would have been no question of reward and
chastisement and there would have been no sense in Allah’s promises or
warnings. (On the other hand) Allah the glorified has ordered his people
to act by free will and has cautioned them and refrained them (from
evil). He has placed easy obligations on them and has not put heavy
obligations.

He gives them much (reward) in return for little (action). He is
disobeyed, not because he is over powered. He is obeyed, but not under
force. He did not send prophets just for fun. He did not send down the
book for people without purpose. He did not create the skies, the earth
and all that is in between for nothing. And he created not the heaven
and the earth in vain. ‘That is the imagination of those who disbelieve;
then woe to those who disbelieve – because of the fire.’ [^12]

These two passages very well reveal the matters regarding Monotheism and
Divine Decree and Destiny which were set forth by the very first
religious leaders of Islam. From these two main issues derived the
philosophical debates in Islamic thought and it gradually spread and
developed amongst Muslims.

The truth is that the arguments concerning divine destiny derive from
Divine Monotheism debates. Divine Monotheism and the questions relating
to it were the starting point of Philosophical and Theological thoughts
in the history of Islam. Difference of opinion in the matters related to
Monotheism brought about different tendencies, and different schools of
philosophy and theology, resulting in different theories about the
relation between causality and freedom.

Islamic thinkers divide the Divine Monotheism into three main stages
outlined as follows.

### 1. Divine Essence Monotheism (Unity In God’s Essence)

This means oneness of the essence of the creator, and negation of
dualism and all kinds of multi cause in the origin of creation.
Monotheism of the Essence was agreed upon by all the Islamic thinkers.
Apart from the difference of opinion which was created later between
mystics (Urafa’a) and other Islamic scholars such as Philosophers and
theologians (Motakallemeen) on the interpretation of Monotheism of the
divine Essence, there was no further difference of opinion between the
Islamic thinkers in this respect. The main roots of this disagreement
refer to the arguments of divine acts Monotheism.

### 2. Divine Attribute Monotheism (Unity In God’s Attributes)

Divine Attribute Monotheism means the unification of Attribute and
Essence, and rejection of complexity in the Essence of God the Almighty,
and to assert the merely simplicity of God the Almighty. Allamah
Tabatabai says: ‘Considering that God’s essence is unlimited, actually
His perfections (i.e. His attributes) are united with his essence,
meaning that His essence is merely simple and one, and His attributes
are alike and its variation is just conceptional’ [^13]

In the subject of Divine Attribute Monotheism of God the Almighty, two
issues were discussed:

1. Unification of Attribute and Essence: Imamiyyah and Mo’tazilah
believed in the unity of attribute and essence. On the other hand
Asha’erah believed in the separation of the Attribute from the essence
of God the almighty. [^14]

2. The Particularity of the Attributes of God the Almighty: In this
respect it was discussed that, what is the meaning of attributes such as
knowledge, power, will, word, and as such which have been mentioned for
God the Almighty in the Holy Qur’an and by the Holy Prophet of Islam?
Does the knowledge of God include every single object and every part of
this world from eternity to forever? Or is it that the divine knowledge
is knowledge of generalities? Some of the Islamic philosophers came to
the belief that the Eternal Knowledge of God is the knowledge of
generalities of the objects and realities. The same question was applied
with regard to the Divine Power; what is the meaning of the Divine
Power? Is the meaning of the Divine power the ability to do or not to
do, as Theologians[^15] have said? Or does it mean ‘If he wanted, he
would act and if he wanted not, he would not act,’ as the
Philosophers[^16] believed in?

And there was set forth other questions concerning the Divine Will and
Divine Word. The disagreement between Asha’erah who believed in the
eternity of Divine Word, and Mo’tazilah who believed in temporality of
the Divine Word, should be accounted as one of the most important
ideological conflicts of the Muslim Society in the second century after
Hijrah (approximately the eighth century).

One of the branches of the discussion related to Divine Power and Will
was the discussion concerning causality and its meaning and the
ascription of the Essence of God the Almighty to causality and the
particularity of Divine eternal Will of God the Almighty.

Causality with the meaning described by the Philosophers - that includes
the prior necessity of effect - was not accepted by the Theologians.
This is due to the fact that they find the causality with such meaning
to be in contradiction with the Power and Free Will of God the Almighty.
For this reason the Islamic Theologians provided a new interpretation of
causality in which cause would not give necessity to the existence of
effect, but as a matter of fact it would give priority to the existence
of effect. From this a new theory was developed known as theory of
priority by the Islamic theologians against the theory of Causal
Necessity.

Sadruddin Shirazi [^17](d.1497, 903 AH) is amongst the distinguished
theologians of the history of Islam. He is one of the most famous people
who very strongly defended the theory of priority. And
Sadrul-muta’alliheen Shirazi, famously known as Mulla Sadra who is the
founder of Islamic transcendent- Philosophy strongly opposes his idea
and rejects this theory based on strong philosophical arguments in his
book Al-Asfarul-arba’ah. [^18]

### 3. Divine Act Monotheism (Unity Of Divine Act)

Divine action monotheism is the most disputed part of the discussion of
monotheism. In Divine Action Monotheism the unity in the source of
actions, movements and wills, and even notions and thoughts is argued.

In accordance with Divine Action Monotheism, all the actions including
actions based on will -such as the act of human- or internal acts such
as thinking, love, anger etc., or actions which are not based on will
such as the movements of planets and stars and the changes in the nature
all arise from one source which is God the Almighty. As a matter of
fact, the only independent agent is the Essence of God the Almighty. All
other agents, including the natural agents and the agents who act on
their will, are dependent to the main independent agent which is God the
almighty. Divine Action Monotheism with such definition has been very
much emphasised in the Holy Qur’an and the traditions narrated from the
Divine Leaders of Islam. God the Almighty in the Holy Qur’an says:

*‘Say (O’Muhammad PBUH) I possess no power over benefit or hurt to
myself except as Allah wills.’* [^19]

He also says in his Holy book:

*‘But you cannot will unless Allah wills.’* [^20]

The Islamic Mystics have gone another step forward by believing not only
in unity of agent but also unity of the Act of God the Almighty by
referring to verses from the Holy Qur’an. Based on this, every act
returns to God[^21] and therefore his Act similar to its Essence is not
but only one, ‘And is not our command but one.’[^22]

The philosophical school of Mulla Sadra which reconciled philosophy with
mysticism has given a philosophical format unity for act and essence of
God the Almighty. He tried to solve the philosophical problems related
to the unity of Act, Essence, and Attribute of God the Almighty based on
the theory of asalat al-wujud ‘ principality or originality of
existence’.

Asha’erah on the base of God’s acts unity believed that the Essence of
God the Almighty is the exclusive agent cause in the living world (i.e.
unity of agent). Based on this they explained the relation between Cause
and Effect in the natural agent or unwilling agent using the theory of
‘Habit’ a’adah, and between the willing agent such as human, using the
theory of ‘Acquirement’ kasb which is defined by Al Baghellani (1947,
pp. 307-8) as follows: ‘to generate an action by a simultaneous power
which makes the act unnecessary’. [^23]

Based on the theory of ‘Habit’ there is not any essential relation
between cause and effect, but any effect which has come from a cause is
due to the fact that the habit of God has over ruled upon it, so that it
would create effect after the creation of cause. Therefore there is no
true agent but the Essence of God the almighty, and the relation between
effect and its natural cause is nothing but the pursuit relation on the
basis of ‘Divine Habit’.

Ghazi Adhododdeen Eyji (d.1355, 756 AH) narrates from Abul-Hasan
Al-Ash’a’ri (The founder of school of Asha’erah in Islamic theology,
(d.935, 324 AH)) that in the explanation of the theory of Habit, he
said:

‘There is no relation between pursuing events under any circumstances,
unless habit has over ruled the fact that one is created after the
other, such as burning after touching the fire or satiety after having
drunk water’[^24]

Asha’erah (i.e. Abul-Hassan Al-Ash’a’ri and his followers) after they
explained the relation of natural Agent with its effect, in order to be
able to explain the responsibility of the human for the acts that have
been committed by him, they explained the relation between human and his
acts or effects on the basis of the theory of ‘Acquirement’ kasb.

In accordance to the theory of Acquirement kasb although whatever is
committed by human based on the theory of Habit is created by God and is
His creature, but human will play an important role in originating the
act. The role of the will of humans, in committing an act is known as
‘Acquirement’ kasb.

The conclusion of what can be understood from the sources of Asha’erah
thought, is that the Acquirement kasb is nothing but human will.
Therefore what Asha’ereah mean by the theory of ‘Acquirement’ kasb is
that whenever a human wills to commit an act, God the Almighty gives
existence to that act.

Shahrestani (d.1149, 548 AH) in the explanation of the Abul-Hassan
Al-Ash’a’ri‘s theory of ‘Acquirement’ kasb writes:

‘God the Almighty has over ruled His tradition upon the fact that; after
He gives a power to His servant, either under or accompanying that power
he creates the act of that servant as the servant puts his will and
prepares for that act. This procedure is known as ‘Acquirement’ kasb.
Therefore the creator of the act is God Almighty, but it is obtained by
the servant and it is under his control’[^25]

If the Asha’erah are criticised for the fact that Human will is not
God’s creation and is not under His power; and if human will is God’s
creation what would be the role of human in originating his act? There
is no clear answer at hand in reply to this criticism from Asha’ereah.

Mo’tazilah and Imamiyyah theologians – opposite to Asha’erah – believed
that the acts committed by the natural agents whether willingly or
unwillingly are all creatures of the agent himself. Therefore there is
an essential relation between causes and effects amongst the objects,
and they interpreted the Divine Agent Monotheism (i.e. unity of agent)
as God the Almighty being the only independent Agent in the living
world, an agent that has not received His being and power from any
superior agent or power above Him. Whereas all the other agents
including willing and unwilling agents have received their existence and
power from God the Almighty who is the origin of the existence, and they
are all dependent in their act and effect to the origin of the world
that is the Essence of God the almighty.

Despite the difference of opinion in interpreting the relation of
causality between Asha’erah from one side and Mo’tazilah and Imamiyyah
theologians from the other, what unifies the three groups (whom
collectively in philosophical terminology are known as theologians) in
direction (i.e. what brings them together) is the negation of the
relation of necessity between cause and effect.

Most of the theologians-including Asha’erah, Mo’tazilah and Imamiyyah-
did not recognise the Agent who gives existence to necessitate the
effect. They usually believed that every contingent effect possesses
priority in existence. Some believed that the effect gets its priority
of existence from its cause. This means that the Agent cause first
provides its effect with priority of existence and then it provide it
with existence. And some believed that the priority of the existence of
effect is within its essence, and every contingent effect possesses
priority of existence by itself.

The mystery behind the insistence of theologians –including Asha’erah,
Mo’tazilah, and Imamiyyah – on rejecting the relation of necessity
between cause and effect, was the conflict which they believe between
the necessity of causal relation on one hand, and the power of God the
Almighty and His free will, as well as human free will and
responsibility –including accountability, blameworthiness,
praiseworthiness and reword in this world and the next - on the other.

Other than this, despite the fact that Mo’tazilah and Imamiyyah in
opposition to Asha’erah shared the same view in the interpretation of
Divine Action Monotheism (Unity of Divine Action), but Imamiyyah and
Mo’tazileh did not share the same view in the way of attribution the
acts to other agents-other than God-, this is because Mo’tazilah
believed that the other agents are dependent to God the Almighty in
their existence, but in their acts they are independent in their agency.
Therefore the unity of act of God the almighty according to Mo’tazilah
means that God the Almighty is the only being that provides the world of
creatures with existence and all the other Agents owe their existence to
the origin of the world God the Almighty, but in their acts they are
independent.[^26]

Due to this, Mo’tazilah are known as Mofawwidhah (indeterminists) in the
history of Islam, Which means that God the Almighty has created the
objects giving them the full authority and power of committing their
acts and having their effects and consequences without any interference
of God and He has provided them with complete liberty (tafweedh or
indeterminism) of causation and agency.

Imamiyyah believed in the theory of ‘Not determinism (fatalism)’ and
‘not indeterminism (absolute liberty)’ but something between the two,
could be described as a moderate indeterminism. This theory was
initially explained by their religious leaders (i.e. infallible Imams).

Kolaini (d.940, 329ah.) one of the great Imamiyyah scholars, in his book
Usul-ul-Kafi, narrates (through the accurate chain of narrators) from
Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq, that they said:

‘Allah is more kind than forcing his servants to commit sins, and then
punish them for those sins. And he is more powerful than wanting
something and it does not take place. After this they- Imam Baqer and
Imam Sadiq- have been asked a question that: is there a third way to
determinism and indeterminism? They replied: yes, wider than whatever
exists between the sky and the earth.’ [^27]

Also he narrates from Imam Sadiq that:  
 ‘Not determinism and not indeterminism but an idea between the two, the
narrator asked: what does something between the two mean? He replied: it
is the example of a man that you find him committing a sin and you try
to caution him and stop him, but that would not be effective and he
would still carry on, so you would leave him by himself so that he would
commit sin, so due to the fact that you prohibited him and it was not
affective and he still committed sin and thereby you left him by
himself, you were not the one who persuaded him into commit sin, in fact
it was himself who got himself involved in sin.’

According to this theory, Imamiyyah opposed both Mo’tazilah and
Asha’erah. And as a result, they rejected the view of Asha’erah, which
stated; that the only agent in the world of being is God, and the acts
and the effects of all willing and unwilling agents are created by Him.
They said this view is a ‘complete determinism and fatalism’ which is in
contradiction with the power of the Almighty and the responsibility of
the human being.

Also they rejected the point of view of Mo’tazilah that; ‘God the
Almighty gives existence to all the agents and has no role in the acts
and affects committed by willing and unwilling agents’. And they found
this to be in contradiction with the theory of Divine Act Monotheism,
and the ultimate power of God and it also opposes His unique worldly
governance.

They believed in a concept between these two ideas, and they called it ‘
a matter between two matters’ which resulted in believing that all the
agents including willing and unwilling agents not only do they owe their
existence to God the Almighty, but also continuously owe their power of
agency and effect to the Lord of the world. And the willing Agent not
only do they continuously owe their existence and power to God but also
they owe Him their power of will. This means that it is Him who has
given them the power of having will, and he has also given them the
ability and authority to be able to be willing, and to bring about
whatever they have willed for.

In contrast with theologians (including Asha’erah, Mo’tazilah, and
Imamiyyah) the Islamic philosophers described the relation of cause and
effect on the base of (necessity).They believed that no any possible
thing or contingent could be existed unless its existence has been
necessitated by the agent, and this relation of necessity not only does
it not contradict the power and the will of God the Almighty, but with
the negation of necessity the power and the will of God the Almighty
will also be negated, and also in the other willing agents such as human
being the necessity given to the effect by the Agent cause is the base
and the essence of the power and the will of the agent upon its effect.

The Islamic philosophers are divided into two groups: Al-Ishraqiyyoon
(Intuitionists) The philosophers who follow the method of Ishraq
Intuition, the most distinguished philosopher of which is Shahabuddeen
Al-Sohrevardi (killed 1191, 587ah) and Al-Mashsha’iyyoon (peripatetics
or argumentationists) the philosophers who follow the method of
Argument, the most distinguished Philosophers of which are Farabi
(d.950, 339 ah) and Abu Ali Sina Avicenna (d.1037, 428 ah).

There is not a major disagreement between the Intuitionist
Al-Ishraqiyyoon and Argumentationist Al-Mashsha’iyyoon (peripatetics) on
the origin of the theory of necessity (the interpretation of the
relation between cause and effect based on the necessity of existence).
But in the way of explaining the essence of the dependence of effects to
the first origin, the philosophers of Mashsha’a have recognised the
existence of effect as an independent existence in respect of cause. But
the philosophers of Ishraq denied any independent existence of effect
and believed that the essence of effect is not but a merely dependence
to the cause and expressed that as an ‘Ishraqi dependence (Emanative
dependence)’.

This theory was later reformed and improved by Sadrul-mota’allheen
through his theory of Asalat-ul-wujud (the reality or principality of
existence) backing it by strong philosophical arguments, that we shall
go into more details, when we would explain the theory of
Asalat-ul-wujud.

After Khajeh Naseeruddeen Tousi (Tousi, ND [d.1274, 672 ah]) the school
of Mashsha’a Philosophy in the Islamic thought became only restricted to
Shi’a academic Seminary, and it was quite active until the time of
Meer-damaad(d.1631, 1040 ah). The Ishraq Philosophy did not have a long
life after Shahabbuddeen Shohrevardi. Whereas theology was quite active
amongst the Islamic thinkers until ninth and tenth Hijry (fifteenth and
sixteenth A.C) century, and theologians such as – in Sunni school of
thought – Fakhruddeen-al- Razi (d.1209, 606 ah), Adhododdeen-al- Eyji
(d.1355, 756 ah), Sa’addudeen-al-Taftazani (d.1390, 792 ah), Mir Syed
Shreef-al-Jorjani (d.1413, 816 ah), and in the shi’a school of thought
theologians such as: Ibn Maytham-al-Bahrani (d.1279, 678 ah),
Al-Allamah-al-Hilli (d.1325, 726 ah), Al-Miqdad-al- See-u-ry (d.1423,
826 ah) and at last Mohammad Baqir-al- Majlesi,(1700, 1110 ah) can be
mentioned as the most prominent theologian thinkers during the last
centuries of the age of Islamic theology.[^28]

The 11th century of Hijry (coincides the 17th century A.C) despite
witnessing the last breaths of the classic Islamic theology, it
accompanied some unique transformation of thoughts in Shi’a school of
thought. On one hand –in the field of rational sciences-with the
manifestation of Sadru-lmota’alliheen Shirazi (d.1640, 1050 ah) and the
establishment of his school of philosophy which called ‘Hikmate
Mota’aaliyeh The Transcendent Wisdom’, the field of Islamic
Philosophical thought became over taken by this philosophical movement,
and philosophical currents of ‘Masha’a’ and ‘Ishraq’ were gradually set
aside. In this new philosophical thought Mysticism and philosophy on one
hand, and the school of Ishraq and Mashsha’a on the other hand
reconciled, and with an innovative philosophical plan of
Sadru-lmota’alliheen the newly born school of ‘Hekmate Mota’aaliyeh
Transcendent Wisdom’ took place. At the recent age the most well-known
philosopher who defended and expended the Sadraian transcendant
philosophy is Allama Mohammad Husain Tabataba’ei (d.1980, 1400 ah).

On the other hand -in the field of narrative sciences- with the
appearance of ‘Al-Akhbariyyoon Traditionist’ movement in the Shi’a
school of thought by its founder Mulla Mohammad Amin Istaraabaadi
(Istaraabadi, 1984 [d.1624, 1033 ah]) which opposed the rationalist
method in the field of religious arguments, a new movement under the
name of ‘Principlists Usooliyyoon’[^29] rose up and stood against
Al-Akhbariyyoon Traditionists very strongly defending the rational
method in religious arguments especially jurisprudence. Eventually the
school of ‘Akhbariyyoon Traditionists was defeated by wahid Behbehani
(Behbehani 1996 [d.1739, 1208 ah]) the leader of the Principlists
Usooliyyoon Movement and the current of principlists Usooliyyoon who was
a defender of rationalism completely took over the Shi’a school of
thought (Al-Sadr, 2000).

With the domination of principlism over the Shi’a school of thought, and
the spread of the science of ‘The Principles of Jurisprudence’ which
resulted in exertion of the rational method, a new rival was appeared
for the Philosophical current of thought in the Shi’a Islamic school.
This new rival which was the science of ‘Modern Principles of
Jurisprudence’ after the decline of Theologian thought was competently
able to challenge the Modern Philosophical thought that had been
manifested in Transcendent wisdom the ‘Philosophy of
‘Sadrul-mota’alliheen’. The new science of ‘Principles of Jurisprudence’
was able to challenge the Modern Philosophical thought in various
philosophical topics and also give a new warmth and mirth to the
intellectual discussions.

One of the most controversial problems among Muslim philosophers and
theologians that led to most heated debates between philosophers and
theologians was causality, determinism, and their compatibility to
freedom. With the decline of Theology, the intellectual discussion
relating to these topics was close to being forgotten, until the
appearance of the new science of ‘Principles of Jurisprudence’ and the
‘Modern Principlists’ which caused a new controversial struggle in
mentioned topics. The Modern Principlists started to criticise the
philosophical views in many topics and suggested new ways to solve the
philosophical problems in challenge to the philosophy of
Sadrul-mota’alliheen ‘The transcendent Wisdom’.

Among the modern usuliyyoon, Akhund Mulla Muhammad Kazim Khurasani
(d.1911, 1329 ah) represents Sadraian Islamic thought. Defending the
principles of ‘‘Sadraian philosophy’’, Akhund greatly supported the
Sadraian view in the interpretation of causality and its relation to
freedom.[^30]

On the other side, his intelligent and insightful pupil, i.e. Mirza
Na’ini (d.1936, 1355 ah) was one of the strong critics of Sadraian view.
In a new way and method, he criticised the Sadraian philosophical
thought and presented a new viewpoint on the relation between causality
and human freedom.[^31]

Na‘ini’s idea was criticised by the great contemporary thinker and
philosopher, the martyr Imam Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr. Sadr established a
new way to solve the problem of causality and freedom, through the
theory of Saltanah, sovereignty (authority).[^32]

On the ground of what I described, I will discuss the problem of
causality and freedom in three parts:

Freewill and causality in the contemporary Islamic philosophy[^33]. In
this part of my discussion, after explaining briefly the philosophical
theory of Sadra on the relation between causality and freedom which I
shall call later the theory of necessity (wujub) and also martyr Sadr’s
theory of sovereignty (saltanah), I will compare these two theories with
each other. I will also criticise and analyse them.

I will cover some viewpoints about the relation between freewill and
causality in contemporary western philosophy compared with the mentioned
theories in Islamic philosophy.

Finally I will develop a further thesis about the solution of the
problem between causality and freedom.

[^1]: Al Razi, 1966, Vol 1, p. 458

[^2]: Katibi Qazwini, 1959, p. 95

[^3]: Al Hilli, 1959, p. 95

[^4]: Ibid p. 94

[^5]: Ibid p. 96

[^6]: Al-Razi, 1966, Vol. 1, p. 458

[^7]: Sadra, (ND), Vol. 1, p. 223

[^8]: Ibid p. 224

[^9]: Mill J.S, 1947, p. 1

[^10]: Kane, 2002, p. 2

[^11]: Ibn Abi Taleb Imam Ali, 1998, Sermon 1

[^12]: Ibn Abi Taleb Imam Ali, 1998, Advice: 78

[^13]: Tabatabai, 1967, pp. 73-74

[^14]: Lahiji, 1892, pp. 172-173

[^15]: Al Malahimi, 1992, p. 184

[^16]: Sadra, (ND), Vol. 6, p. 307

[^17]: Sadruddeen Shirazi (D.1497,903 AH) is amongst the most famous
theologians, and he shares similar title with Sadruddin Mohammad Shirazi
who is a famous philosopher known as Sadra or Sadrul-Muta’alliheen
(D.1640,1050 AH)

[^18]: Sadra, (ND), Vol. 1, p199

[^19]: Verse 188, Chapter 7

[^20]: Verse 30, Chapter 76

[^21]: Modarres, 1986, pp. 124-129

[^22]: Holy Qur’an, Verse 50, Chapter 54

[^23]: Badawi, 1971, Vol.1, p. 616

[^24]: Al Eyji, (ND), Vol. 1, p. 241

[^25]: Al Shahrestani, (ND), Vol. 1, p. 130

[^26]: Al-Hamadani, 1965, p. 323

[^27]: Al Kolaini, 1980, Vol. 1, p. 159

[^28]: Mutahhari, 1991, pp. 467-661

[^29]: The word Usooliyyoon is the plural of the word Usooli which means
the expert in the principles of the Islamic jurisprudence .the knowledge
of principles of jurisprudence discusses the method and principles of
presumption and inference Islamic instructions and laws from its sources
e.g. Qura’nic text and prophetic traditions. The current Usooliyyoon
emerged in contrast with the current Al-Akhbariyyoon who believed that
there is no need of mediating any rational principles or method in the
process of understanding Islamic instructions and laws.

[^30]: Al Khurasani, 1992, pp. 337-8

[^31]: Al Khoei, 1933, Vol. 1, pp. 91-92

[^32]: Al Hashimi, 1997, Vol. 2, pp. 32-37

[^33]: What I mentioned here are not all theories suggested by Muslim
philosophers, but I mentioned only the theories which were adopted and
followed by the recent most well-known Muslim thinkers and philosophers.


