Part 3: Free Will and Causality in Contemporary Western Philosophy
==================================================================

Philosophical theories in contemporary western thought can be
categorised in three main currents:

a. *Libertarianism*, which is described as incompatibilism for its
belief that the determination of causal laws negates the freewill
meaning they are incompatible, and because the free will is a very
obvious fact it cannot be overcome by determined causal laws. There are
many explanations of this type of thought in current western philosophy,
but I have chosen three important theories that I believe they provide
the best clarification and deduction, they are:

• Agent causation or immanent causation that was suggested by Rodrick
Chisholm. This theory can be compared to the theory of sovereignty of
Al-Sadr in contemporary Islamic philosophy.

• Simple indeterminism that was suggested by Carl Ginet, which can be
compared to the theory of Na’ini in Islamic contemporary thought.

• Causal indeterminism, suggested by Robert Kane. It can also be
compared to the mentioned theory of sovereignty.

b. *Hard Determinism,* which agrees with libertarianism in the
incompatibility of freewill with causal laws, but opposes it in freewill
of agents. Hard Determinism believes there is no chance of freewill of
agents because all agents are governed by determined causal factors.
Several thinkers and philosophers adapted this kind of explanation of
relation between causal determined law and human will, among them Paul
Edwards gave a very clear expression of this idea.

c. *Soft Determinism*, that disagrees with both libertarianism and Hard
Determinism, and believes in compatibility of causal determined law and
freewill and alleges that not only there are not any conflicts between
causal law and freewill but rather freewill cannot be emerged without
the comprehensive causal law. Most philosophers in both Islamic
philosophy and western philosophy inclined to this current of thoughts
like Farabi, Avecina, Mulla Sadra, Tabatabai in Islamic Philosophy, and
Thomas Habbes, David Hume, John Stuart Mail and A.J. Ayer in western
philosophy. Here I chose the explanation of Ayer for its demonstrative
clearness to show an example of this tendency of contemporary western
philosophy.

The philosophical problem of the contradiction between freewill and
causation has provided the basis for numerous discussions amongst
contemporary Western philosophers and many efforts to resolve this
problem have been attempted.

The philosophical attempts of Western contemporary philosophers
pertaining to the philosophical form of the contradiction between
causation and freewill can be summed up within the following three
schools:

1. Determinism

2. Soft determinism

3. Indeterminism

The Indeterminists believe that the deterministic causal nexus
(necessitiate causation) between cause and effect entails an absolute
negation of freewill within any free actor – including the human being.
Rejecting the necessity between cause and effect of the free agent
provides the only solution for the alleged contradiction between
causation and freewill. This group espoused the same opinion held by
Muslim thinkers such as the Muslim theologians and the new scientists of
the Principles of Jurisprudence (New Usooliyyoon), such as the late
Sayed Muhammad Baqir Al Sadr.

As this group of contemporary Western philosophers adopted the view of
incompatibility between freewill and necessity, they became known as the
incompatibilists.

From another angle, those who believed in the necessity between cause
and effect, i.e. the determinists, are divided into two groups:

*Hard determinists:* They believe that there is absolute contradiction
between freewill and causal necessity. They therefore share the same
opinion as the first mentioned group, however; they did not reject
causal necessity but rejected the freewill of a free actor. As this
group like the first group (the determinists) believe that the causal
necessity contradicts the absolute freedom of a free actor, they are
considered incompatibilists. When compared to Islamic thought they
resemble the Ash’ariites (Al-Asha'erah), who also believed that causal
necessity negates freewill.

*Soft determinists:* They believe that there is no contradiction between
causal necessity and freewill, so these concepts are compatible. They
believe that, the only reason for the assumption of the contradiction
between the freedom and causal necessity is the misconception of the
freedom in one hand, and the causal necessity in the other hand. This
group of Western philosophers have known as compatibilists.

According to Robert Kane, the first person who used the term ‘hard
determinism’ and ‘soft determinism’ was William James (James, 1956), who
lived at the beginning of the twentieth century. (2002, p. 22)

Western compatibilists who espouse the belief that causal necessity is
compatible with freewill, hold an identical view to the Muslim
philosophers. This view particularly explained and extended in the
teachings of Mulla Sadra, the founder of modern Islamic philosophy. But
the difference is that Mulla Sadra has veraciously attempted to
distinguish between determinism and necessity. He believes that freedom
does not negate the causal necessity but rather negates determinism, and
the causal necessity of free actor entails the necessity of the effect,
but not its determinism. However this does not imply that it would be
the determinist object.

As has been elaborated on in the previous chapter, Mulla Sadra believed
that the non-distinction between the two concepts, i.e. determinism and
necessity as well as the mixture of the two concepts of freedom and
contingency provide the main reasons for the adoption of the
incompatibility between causal necessity and freedom. He emphasised that
one should distinguish technically between determinism and necessity in
one hand, and freedom and contingency in the other hand.

According to Robert Kane, one of the main and most important
disagreements regarding freedom within Western philosophical thought is
the disagreement between the compatibilisists and the incompatibilisists
(Ibid).

We can summarise the main contemporary Western philosophical schools
regarding freedom and causal necessity as follows:

1. Libertarianism: A tendency that believed not in determinism and
causal necessity, and adopted incompatibility between freedom and
determinism. This group are subsumed under the category of the
incompatibilists.

2. Compatible determinism: Also known as soft determinism.

3. Incompatible determinism: Also known as hard determinism

We will now briefly elaborate on and criticise these three tendencies
comparing them with the mentioned comments of Muslim thinkers on this
subject.

1. Libertarianism Incompatibilism
---------------------------------

Those who have adopted this theory have rejected determinism; they are
indeterminists and believe that it contradicts human freewill, i.e.
incompatibilism. They believe that human beings are free from any form
of determinism and causal necessity. One of the most important
inclinations of contemporary (Western) philosophy, based on modern
physics, is the rejection of determinism and causal necessity.

Based on new scientific theories, this inclination holds that no
absolute or general rules govern the universe, because according to what
has been proven by modern physics, the changes and transformations of
the initial elementary particles of the universe, particularly the
radioactive transformations (decay) of atomic nuclei, follow no certain
rules; they are unpredictable.

Considering the fact that the world in which we live consists of these
atoms, and the origin of the transformations and events of the natural
world goes back to (originates from) the very same changes of
radioactive atoms, and in fact these atoms -and their internal actions
and reactions -form the main foundation of the world, it can be
concluded that events in the natural world generally do not comply with
the rule of determinism and no deterministic relationship rules
them.[^1]

The main problem of this theory is that determinism is not a scientific
rule to be refuted by experimental and scientific methods, rather it is
a philosophical and rational rule based on certainties, like
mathematical laws which cannot be questioned or denied. In the previous
chapter it was explained that necessary determinism originates from the
axiom of 'Impossibility of the preponderance without a preponderant’.

Its brief content is that any event or phenomenon by itself, that is,
independent of any other effective or ineffective factors, is not
attributed to a necessity of existence or non-existence, and
consequently is attributed to a contingency of existence or
non-existence.

This contingency of existence or non-existence makes the relation of the
nature of that entity with existence and non-existence equal. Therefore
getting rid of the status of equality between existence and
non-existence is impossible without the necessity of existence or
non-existence arising from an effective external factor. So the
existence or non-existence of each phenomenon or event not necessitated
by a cause external to the entity is not conceivable.

According to the rational rule of impossibility of the preponderance
without a preponderant, which results in the general rule of causal
determinism, the changes and transformations at the atomic level
definitely follow a certain rule that originates from the general rule
(of causal determinism), although modern physics has not obtained that
rule at the present time, or may not in the future.

Inaccessibility to the mystery of the changes inside atoms does not mean
that they haven't been governed by causal determined lows. In addition,
various scientific humanities mainly confirm that the human behaviour is
governed by determined lows.

And according to Robert Kane: ‘While physics of the twentieth century
accepted withdrawal of the rule of necessity of determinism, it seems to
have moved in an opposite direction in other scientific fields such as
physiology, neurology, psychology, psychotherapy, sociology, and
behaviourism. Scientific developments in the above fields have convinced
many people more than ever that human behaviour is governed and
originates/is derived from causes that are unknown and out of our
control.’[^2]

Another group of incompatibilists believe that the real liberty is not
compatible with the determinism, and they are known as libertarians in
the new sources and references of the Western philosophical
thought.’[^3]

Libertarianism is based on the three pillars:

a. Incompatibilism

b. Liberty really exists and the man is free in his behaviour.

c. Negation of the rule of determinism.[^4]

Incompatiblists libertarians are not intellectually homogenous. Amongst
them exist various schools of thought, each of which has propounded a
different theory to comment on the relationship between the liberty of
man and causation, the most important of these are as follows.

### a. The theory of agent or immanent causation

This particular conception of causation is supported by thinkers such as
Professor Roderick Chisholm[^5]. He argues, in an article under the
title of 'Human Freedom and the Self',[^6] and explains his theory that
freedom is fundamentally opposed to both determinism and indeterminism.
Accordingly, it paves a third direction that has been termed as ‘agent
causation’. To explain the concept of agent causation he divided the
causation into two categories.

*First:* Transeunt causation, which indicates that the cause’s causation
is dependent upon a factor other than itself. All involuntary causes
fall into this category because they have received the virtue of
causation from beyond (or from dynamics outside of) themselves. For
example, if fire burns, it is not because fire possesses the inherent
quality of burning, but because it is gained from the cause that brought
the fire into existence.

*Second:* Immanent or agent causation, which denotes that a cause
derives it’s causation from itself and not from a factor that exists
beyond or outside of itself, therefore it is considered independent.
Voluntary causes belong to this class and in particular the human being.
For example, a man who accomplishes a task has brought about (or caused)
the accomplishment of that task by his own causation and not from a
reason beyond him which provides the causation of the tasks
accomplishment to him. And from this emanates the origins of man’s
freedom. Chisholm compares this theory of inherent causation to the
Aristotelian theory of the prime mover unmoved and in his commentary on
liberty he considers the possibility of alternate selection as the main
condition of liberty.

He emphasizes that when the action performed by an agent is the only
choice available and the emanation of another possibility or
non-emanation of the action is impossible, then liberty will be
senseless. He presents a definition of liberty similar to ideas
attributed to theologians in Islamic thought who – as we mentioned
earlier – disagree with the views of philosophers, who consider liberty
to be the truth of a conditional proposition (‘if he wills, he does, and
if he does not will, he will not do’) and do not believe that liberty
contradicts the necessity of an act emanated from the agent. Theologians
assert that liberty absolutely negates the necessity of an action
emanating from the agent. They interpret liberty as the possibility of
both the manifestation and the abandonment of an action.

On the one hand, Chisholm believes that the theory of agent causation
has solved the apparent contradiction between liberty and the principal
of determinism, which is where the causation of an agent of a cause
beyond its nature falls under the ruling of determinism, therefore the
agent is incapable of adopting another choice (either the non-emanation
or emanation of the act). This is because the transeunt cause has made
the manifestation of the action determined and therefore the agent has
no alternative except to carry out the incumbent act. But according to
the theory of agent causation, the agent is independent from the effect
of any transeunt causes; so at the same time of an act emanating from
him, he also has the ability to choose another act or the non-emanation
of the same act. This is the essence of the liberty which we are
discussing.

On the other hand, the indeterminist theory asserts that the emanation
of an act from the agent will occur by random chance, which is
incompatible with the concept of liberty because the act – although the
possibility exists for both its emanation and non-emanation – is not
based upon the free will of the agent to carry it out. For whether the
agent wills it or does not will, the act will occur according to chance.
This problem is also addressed by the theory of agent causation, which
affirms that the act of an agent is not brought about by randomness, but
by his active and conscious decision. Once the preliminaries of the
selection of an act in the agent are provided, the emanation of the act
from the agent cause will be indispensable; however, this
indispensability rises from the agent's internal capacity and has not
been imposed to him from external factors.

Thus, the method Chisholm has chosen in the theory of agent cause, is
neither determinism nor indeterminism, rather, it is a third way between
these two extremes.

From this point of view, it is very similar to the renowned Shiite
theological theory of ‘There is no determinism nor is there absolute
delegation of power (indeterminism), but the real position is between
these two extremes’, the very same theory that was mentioned in the
previous chapter.

This theory involves main difficulties. The first one is the negation
form of indeterminism. As mentioned before, determinism is based on a
very strong rational principle that in no way can be negated and that is
the principle of impossibility of the preponderance without there being
a preponderant. Only the two modes below are conceivable for the act
that is emanated from the voluntary agent:

To be emanated by chance, in this case as Mr. Chisholm holds, liberty
will not exist. Furthermore, emanation of an act from the agent by
chance is incompatible with the principle of causation and the
impossibility of preponderance without there being a preponderant that
is an evident and certain principle.

To be emanated from preponderance of a certain preponderant; in this
case there will no way but determinism.

That the causation of agent cause has two types: the causation arising
from external (transeunt) cause, and the one arising from the nature of
the agent (agent cause); and that the causation in the voluntary agent
is of the second type, solves no problems in this field. Because the
question that arises in that if the causation of the voluntary agent to
perform an act is an essential causation, therefore, the emanation of an
act from the voluntary agent will be non-optional. In fact, this is the
very determinism that according to Chisholm is incompatible with the
liberty of the agent.

Also if the causation of the voluntary agent is not essential, it should
have been given to him from outside (external or transeunt cause) that –
as Chisholm admitted - results in determinism, and –subsequently- will
not be compatible with liberty.

The second problem that weakens the foundation of this theory is that
Chisholm gives no clear reason to prove his theory; rather to prove his
theory he is satisfied that this theory is the best way to justify man's
responsibility and liberty, however it needs definitely logical
justification to treat man's responsibility and liberty as a given.

In case, as mentioned earlier, determinism is proved through
intellectual proof and if we consider it as incompatible with man's
liberty, as Mr. Chisholm does, then there will remain no way save
refutation of liberty and after that, refutation of man's
responsibility.

In spite of the similarity between: libertarianism – as Mr. Chisholm has
propounded in the theory of agent cause – and the theory propounded by
Muslim theologians, and the new experts in the principles of the Islamic
jurisprudence (Usooliyyoon), in particular, Ayatollah Sadr, with his
theory of sovereignty, the main distinction between them lies in Sadr's
attempt through his strong, intellectual reasoning and the justification
he has given to prove his theory.

He has expressed, as mentioned earlier, a particular intellectual
statement by which he has managed to solve both of the aforementioned
problems:

- To solve the first problem, that is the impossibility of the
preponderance without there being a preponderant he has analyzed this
principle intellectually and stated that the preponderant can be one of
two: The necessity of the effect or the sovereignty of agent over the
act which is suitable with the agent's free well.

- He has solved the second problem in another way. He has made it clear
that the liberty of a voluntary agent's act was a conscious matter and
that determinism was not demonstrable.

However there is another explanation of the theory of agent cause that
is propounded by Mr. O'Connor. He, while accepting the basis of the
theory of agent-cause that considers man as the end of the line of his
behaviour, and recognizing not any cause beyond him as being effective
in establishment or determination of human behaviour,[^7] he attempts to
answer the third question that Mr. Chisholm faced in the explanation of
agent-cause.

This is the same question we referred to earlier while raising our first
objection to Mr. Chisholm's theory. In summary this objection is that
causation of the voluntary agent for the act cannot be by chance,
because its being by chance is tantamount to the negation of the free
will from the voluntary agent. Therefore, the question that arises is
‘What is behind the voluntary agent's causation for his behaviour?’

To answer this question Mr. Chisholm considered the internal
propensities and beliefs of the agent arising from his natural
characteristics, to be the cause of the voluntary agent's causation for
his behaviour.

He also held that the voluntary agent was similar to the Essence of God,
the Exalted, in Aristotelian theory of a prime mover unmoved.

But Mr. O'Connor calls this justification into question and interprets
it as unnecessarily heroic. He considers it insufficient to answer this
question of how the agent selects one out of many acts. He considers the
existence of a preponderant that makes the agent select a certain act by
necessity.

To answer this question, he maintains that the cause of the voluntary
agent's causation is formed by the structure of the built-in
propensities and that this structure draws the agent towards a certain
act which corresponds with them. But O'Connor considers this structure
to be an undetermined preponderant and believes that in spite of the
existence of such a structure that results in the agent's behaving in
such a manner as is appropriate to it, the agent is never obliged to
behave that way, and can also behave in another way that is
inappropriate to that propensity structure.

He adds, in spite of that propensity structure, I still have the free
will to behave either according to that structure or opposite it. He
says:

‘What we need is a way to modify the traditional notion of distinctively
personal kind of causal capacity and to see it, not as utterly
unfettered, but as one that comes ‘structured’, in the sense of having
built-in propensities to act (though ones that shift over time in
accordance with the agent's changing preference). But we must do so in
such a way that it remains up to me to act on these tendencies or not,
so that what I do is not simply the consequence of the vagaries of
‘chance-like’ indeterministic activity, as may be true of microphysical
quantum phenomena.’[^8]

Obviously, the justification Mr. O'Connor suggests for the voluntary
agent cannot solve the problem of necessity of preponderance without
there being a preponderant. The legitimate challenge to the theory of
Mr. Chisholm remains. As if the propensity structure is the sufficient
cause of the emanation of the act, then the act is determined and there
will remain no place for free will; if it is not the sufficient cause,
and as Mr. O'Connor explicitly stated, ‘In spite of this propensity
structure, I have the free will to act or not.’ the question remains,
‘What will change a behaviour that can or cannot be (a possibility that
means lack of a preponderant and equality of the two sides) to a
behaviour that must be?’

Here to take Mr. O'Connor's side, it can be said that the structure of
the agent's internal propensities is enough for preponderating, although
this preponderance is an unnecessitative one. This is the same theory of
preponderance propounded by the Muslim theologians, mentioned at the
beginning of this discussion, and it was severely disapproved of by the
Muslim philosophers.

Muslim philosophers have explained that any existing entity that remains
enjoying non-necessity of existence and non-necessity of non-existence
is not conceivable. For the duration of this state, the existence of
every being, including the voluntary agent, requires that a cause change
its non-necessity of existence to necessity of existence. Otherwise, not
only would the discipline of general causation, and, the intellectual
rule of impossibility of preponderance without there being a
preponderant be negated, but also, free will itself will cease to exist
in case free will is a matter of chance.

### b. The Theory of Simple Indeterminism

This theory was explained by Mr. Carl Ginet. In an article under the
title 'Freedom, Responsibility & Agency' he presents another scheme of
agent-causation. In common with Chisholm and O'Connor he holds that just
as determinism is incompatible with man's freedom and responsibility, so
too is indeterminism incompatible with them. Thus, there is no way but
to select a third way in order to explain man's freedom and
responsibility.

While not approving of the scheme explained by Chisholm and O'Connor
under the title of 'agent-cause', Ginet believes that the above scheme
cannot solve the problems to be found in this issue.

He first sets out the main problem in this regard. According to what Mr.
O'Connor has conceived, incompatibility of indeterministic causation
with freedom arises from this point that cannot justify the emanation of
a certain act from the agent, - despite the possibility of other
options. Ginet explained: ‘O'Connor and I agree in rejecting the
indeterministic-causation account of what it is for an agent to her
action. O'Connor's dissatisfaction with this view arises from his belief
that any such account must explain how an agent makes one among the
competing motives she faces the efficacious one, and he doesn't see any
way that this can be done without resorting to agent-causation.[^9]

According to Mr. Ginet, the disagreement of Mr. O'Connor with the theory
of indeterministic causation stems from this belief that any explanation
of the voluntary agent's behaviour should answer the question: ‘How does
the agent make effective a stimulant or a motivation from among
different stimulants and motivations?’

While, as Ginet holds, the problem of indeterministic causation is
elsewhere, the main problem of this theory is that responsibility and
freedom require in principle neither the relation of causation nor
behavioural stimulants; therefore, Mr. Ginet raises two major objections
against Mr. O'Connor's theory:

*Firstly,* if as O'Connor says – a preponderant cause is required to
make the agent select one of the possible ways, in the event that the
preponderant cause is not indeterministic, this question will remain:
‘What is the cause of the agents' causation? And what has given the
agent the power to control and to determine this behaviour?’

To get rid of this difficulty Mr. Ginet does not deem the existence of a
preponderant necessary for the voluntary agent's act, and holds – as
will be explained later on – that the agent has the power to control
himself although there is no preponderant to necessitate a certain act.

*Secondly,* the theory of agent-causation, as depicted by Mr. O'Connor
can be neither grasped nor proved, because in the first place, so long
as the agent has not been influenced in the causation of his act by any
external actor, and at the same time all the factors that are considered
important in emanation of his act, stem from his nature, then the
emanation of his act in a particular time and under certain conditions
remains inexplicable.

What causes the act to come into existence at a certain time and not
other times and under certain conditions and not other ones?

In the second place, now that the voluntary agent's causation in
relation to the act is not the effect of external causes, for what
reason should we treat the agent as the cause of the act itself, and
call him the agent cause of the act?

Why should we not be able to consider the agent as a simple subject for
a state we call act or free will?

It is on the same basis that Mr. Ginet does not accept the concept of
agent causation suggested by Mr. O'Connor, and exerts himself to justify
the voluntary agent's behaviour on the basis of simple determinism in
such a way that enjoys the two elements of freedom and responsibility
without recourse to the principles of general causation or to
behavioural motivations.

According to what is understood from Mr. Carl Ginet's writing under the
title of 'Freedom, Responsibility and Agent' the theory of simple
indeterminism can be summarized as follows:

a. The voluntary agent's act consists of free will which is either a
causally simple mental action, or begins with it.

b. This simple mental action is not the cause of the occurrence of other
events.

c. This simple mental action will be an act only in the state of certain
intrinsic phenomenal quality. This quality is called ‘actish quality’ by
Mr. Ginet. This certain intrinsic phenomenal quality is a condition that
free will or the simple mental action can be an act only when
conditioned to it.

Or according to Ginet: ‘the simple mental action is an act only in the
event that it possesses an intrinsic phenomenal quality, the same
quality that I have entitled an ‘actish quality’, and I use the term
agent-causation in it only by adding ‘as if’’. (Ibid)

To explain the ‘actish quality’ Mr. Ginet adds: ‘When the simple mental
action in my free will employs one of my body organs by exerting the
power, my internal feeling does not judge that this mental event has
suddenly come into existence without any preparations. Rather, a
perceptible internal quality in my interior creates it in the same way
and in the same period of time that it happens.’ (Ibid)

d. This simple mental action (free will) that has such a perceptible
internal quality is sufficient for the existence of an act.

e. The free will that benefits from a perceptible internal quality, does
not meet the standpoint of the incompatibilists that is based on
refutation of any necessitative causation between the act and its
preliminaries. On the contrary, an act is a compound thing that consists
of free will or simple mental action and the necessitative causal
relation numbers among its results. When I open the door, my free will
causes the motion of my hand and arm, and the motion of my hand and arm
causes the door to open. Here opening the door is the necessitated
effect of the motion of hand and arm, and the motion of hand and arm is
the necessitated effect of my free will.

f. Despite the fact that there is a necessitative causal relation
between my free will and its consequences which result in emanation of
the act in the external world (as opening the door in the aforesaid
example), however, there is no causal relation between me and my free
will, and, naturally, the consequences of my free will. It is not true
that I am the cause of my free will, so this question arises: ‘What is
the cause of this causation?’ And then the matter culminates in the
standpoint that a cause beyond my nature becomes the emanation of the
free will from me and subsequently the way to my freedom is barred.
Rather, I am the subject of my free will. Free will is inherent to me,
and it is the inherency of my free will that secures the freedom of the
act that emanates from me.

g. So, the emanation of the act from the voluntary agent does not
require an external cause and for the same reason does not require a
preponderant, although this preponderant is not a necessitative one,
because a voluntary agent's act can emanate from him without there being
any preponderant. Once the agent wills the act, the act will emanate
from him. The agent's free will requires nothing, for it is inherent.

h. Consequently, the relationship between motivations or stimulants and
human free will is not a necessitative causal nexus, or even nexus of
agent-causation, as conceived by Mr. O'Connor. Rather, the relationship
between motivations and stimulants of the behaviour, and the human act
is adjusted by free will or decision. The following is the content of
this free will: ‘This act can meet and satisfy those motivations and
stimulants.’

Once within his knowledge and awareness the agent notices the fact that
this act can meet that motivation or that stimulant, free will comes
into existence, and he decides to perform the act.

So, there is a difference between a proposition that says, ‘S performs A
to satisfy his stimulants and propensities.’

Comparing it with the other proposition that says: ‘S performs A, due to
his awareness that A fulfils all the stimulants and propensities.’

In the first proposition the stimulants and motivations are introduced
as a cause of the act, while in the second proposition there is no
causal nexus between the stimulants and motivations on the one hand, and
the act itself on the other hand. The only available thing is that
within the awareness of the agent these stimulants and propensities can
be satisfied by this act, and, concurrent with this awareness the
intention, free will, and decision of the agent to perform the act
appears.

The theory of simple determinism is very close to the theory of Mirza
Nayeeni. In particular, the explanation that Mr. Ginet presents about
‘actish quality’ is very close to what Mirza Nayeeni expressed as ‘the
attack of the soul’ (The instant movement of the soul toward the act or
the embarking of the soul on the act).

However, as mentioned earlier in relation to Mirza Nayeeni's theory and
other theories from contemporary Western philosophers, the main problem
regarding preponderance without there being a preponderant will not be
solved by these explanations and interpretations. Inherency of free will
– as mentioned by Ginet and insisted upon by Mirza Nayeeni – will not
solve the following problems:

If inherency of free will means that it always exists with man, it is
obviously invalid because the free will of the act is a state that comes
into existence in the agent's self only before the emanation of the act.
If it means that it appears without there being a cause or preponderant,
then it will face the difficulty of preponderance without a preponderant
and the existence of a possible thing without a cause.

The other criticism that can be drawn to Mr Giant’s theory of ‘simple
indeterminism’ is that it is not clear why will is an exception from the
General Law of Causality. If ‘Will’ need not the cause, why then the
Agent’s act itself cannot exist without cause. If it can be said in
response that if the Agent’s act is not caused by a cause it means that
it is out of control and it is incompatible with the freedom, why can we
not say the same for the will and the ‘Actish quality’ accompanied with
it?

The third criticism is that according to the Giant’s there is no causal
nexus between the stimulants and motivations on the one hand and the act
itself on the other hand, and the awareness of the Agent satisfies his
prior stimulants and is sufficient for the existence of will and willed
act. But the question is how this awareness can occur? If in reality
there is no relationship between the act and prior stimulant how this
kind of awareness would be possible, and if there is a relationship
between the act and its prior stimulants dose it not means that the
prior stimulants are the cause of the agent’s will and act?

### c. The theory of Causal Indeterminism

This theory held by Robert Kane in his essay titled ‘Freewill: New
Directions for an Ancient problem’ which can be summarised in the
following paragraphs:

a. The meaning of freedom which should be discussed here is (the power
to be the ultimate creator and sustainer of one’s own ends or purposes)
which is incompatible with the determinism. But we agree with the
compatibilists that there are some other meanings of freedom which are
compatible with the determinism.

b. The contemporary and past philosophical discussions concentrate on
the compatibility between determinism and a possible alternative act.
According to Robert Kane, as there are different interpretations of
freedom, discussion about the possibility of alternative act would make
it impossible to clarify concepts such as possibility of alternative
act, power, ability, and freewill. The truth is that the question of the
compatibility between determinism and freedom would not be solely
answered by the possibility of the alternative act. Thus, in order to
complete this answer, it is necessary to think about it in another way.

c. In solving the problem of compatibility, what is more important than
the possibility of alternative is the concept of ‘ultimate
responsibility of the agent's act’. This concept relies on the condition
that can be defined as ‘The power of agent to be the final creator of
his own purposes via his acts’ .Or, in simpler terms, to be in control
of the facts that produce his act.

d. Although the ultimate responsibility of the agent towards his own
present act does not depend upon the possibility of the present
alternative act, but it depends upon the possibility of the alternative
for the past agent's acts which have taken part in formulating his
character, that are known as self-forming actions. In fact the ultimate
responsibility of the agent for his present act is in need of the
possible alternative in his own past self-forming actions.

e. Therefore, some of past agent's acts which are his self-forming
actions must be free from the nexus of complete causation and completely
influential factors. Otherwise, it entails the negation of possible
alternative of the present agent's acts and the past agent's acts which
were influential on him. And this would result in merely determinism.

f. What is mentioned above is a new way of incompatibility between
determinism and freedom which stimulates two questions:

*First:* how could the self forming acts, which are lake of ‘full causes
and motivations' be free acts, and result in responsibility? (The
intelligibility question)

*Second:* how does this kind of conducts occur in the chain of causes of
human acts?

(Existence question)

g. The reply of the intelligibility question: the problem which the
incampatiblists were faced with since the early times is that as the
freedom is incompatible with determinism it also is incompatible with
indeterminism, because the result of full indeterminism is that the
man’s action pursuing irrelative preliminaries, for example a man
pointing a gun towards a victim and shooting him from a short distance,
but instead of killing him, prolonging his life for another fifty years,
which is indeed a very irrational strange result.

The libertarians and incompatibilists in order to find a way around this
problem and to clarify the fact that freedom does not imply
indeterminism have referred to a very obscure or mysterious forms of
causation; Immanuel Kant has suggested the noumenal self which is
outside space and time, that cannot be studied in scientific terms, and
scientists might think about an indeterminacy or a place for causal gaps
in the brain, but a nonmaterial self or what John Eccles calls a
transempirical power centre which would fill the causal gaps left by
physical causes by intervening in the natural order.[^10] And the most
popular and renown appeal in this regard amongst the contemporary
philosophers is a type of Agent or immanent Causation, based on which
the free and responsible acts are not determined by prior events but
neither do they occur merely by chance.

Robert Kane called these types of theories which believe the free acts
to be caused by the non-ordinary Agents, as the ‘extra factor’
strategies. Because these theories share a common point that since the
indeterminism opens the door for agent to choose whatever he wills, then
it needs a kind of superior causation over the ordinary chain of causes
and effects, to justify the agent's freewill and power between two
choices.

h. But if we want to answer the question on intelligibility of a
freewill (i.e. the questions related to its concept), and the questions
of its existence we have to ignore the extra factor strategies
containing the theory of agent or immanent causation, and find a new way
of resolving the problem.

The first step of this new way is to know not all human acts are
undetermined, rather the only acts which undetermined are the acts which
could be named as self-forming actions. These kinds of acts are formed
when the agent confronts two conflicting perspectives of what he should
do or what can be done. In such time person might be torn between two
kinds of stimulants i.e. ambition or morality, desires or long term
goals.

Robert Kane explains: ‘There is tension and uncertainty in our mind
about what to do at such times, I suggest, that is reflected in
appropriate regions of our brains by movement away from thermodynamic
equilibrium-in short, a kind of ‘stirring up of chaos’ in the brain that
makes it sensitive to microindeterminacies at the neuronal level. The
uncertainty and inner tension we feel at such soul-searching moments of
self-formation is thus reflected in the indeterminacy of our neural
processes themselves’[^11]

In this status Agent has been pulled towards unknown and uncertain
outcomes, and he has been overcome by disorganised motivations in his
mind causing a neuronal level sensitiveness towards uncertain and
unknown movements.

What has been experienced inside of ourselves as an indefinite and
uncertain process and then been reflected on the appropriated physical
conduct opens the window of opportunity for human to avoid the
deterministic influence of past status or events upon the present
human's conducts.

Conversely, whenever we do something which is resulting from the certain
motives and previous formed character, any way except the determinism is
never left over for us. But when we want to decide in the terms of
disorganised motivations, its result will not be deterministic, because
the premises are not deterministic. In fact, the previous wills of the
agent have been divided into two opposed groups, and whenever we choose
one of two opposed groups, what is chosen by our will has prevailed over
the other group, here, we have changed a non-deterministic effort into
one certain choice.

i. Just as the indeterminism is not inconsistent with the freedom, it is
not inconsistent with the agent’s responsibility with regard to his
action too. For example, when a person can overcome the
non-deterministic repressive obstacles with his effort and so he does
his own desire, although there is no any determinism, no anyone except
the agent himself is responsible relative to his action.

Suppose that a person wants to kill somebody, but his shot goes the
wrong way because of a non-deterministic event on his nervous system;
including the muscular contraction or the unwittingly movement of his
hand. However if he could overcome this non-deterministic obstacle and
be succeeded in his own desire, who will be responsible relative to his
action except him?

If he (the murderer) does not encounter with any obstacle while
performing his own desire, his action or behaviour will not be the
self-forming action. The will of the agent may divide between two
contrary motives in relation to the self-forming action such as a
merchant who wants to arrive at his own appointment for his own business
activity, but unfortunately he encounters with a person whose life is
exposed to danger on his way.

Here, if this merchant shall pay no attention to him and his helping
cry, he can arrive at his own appointment and meet his own profit;
otherwise he must disregard his own business income. Here, there are two
contrary flows of the nervous system in relation to this event. Each one
of these two contrary flows is effective in the other and is a result of
the contradicted motivations and desires which reflected on the nervous
system.

These two contracted flows in the nervous system constitute the complex
networks of the nervous connections in our brain. They cause to
circulate the moving force as a rotational flow and in fact, they have
been placed in a level upper than the ordinary nervous process and its
centralized network. Here, in this case, we have two moving forces: that
which is drawing the merchant up on helping that individual who needs
it, and the other force which is drawing him up on his own business
profit.

These two nervous networks are in contact with each other and so they
influence upon each other. Here, the agent encounters with two contrary
calling which each of them will be an obstacle against choosing the
other way.

Whenever the agent decides to do one of the two things, he resolves the
contradiction between two wills and prefers one of them against the
other one; so the agent himself will be responsible in relation to the
performed work. In this case, despite of the full responsibility of the
agent, the action is treated not neither as the chance nor as the
determined action.

j. When the above – mentioned conditions are made available for the
self-forming actions, these actions will control the agent’s future life
and constitute the basic ground of the subsequent character and acts.

On the basis of what was said, the agents will have a numerous choices
and face many parallel ways. In fact, they can choose and establish each
of them by their will and desire without any kind of determined forcing
cause, mistake and random.

The above mentioned conditions can be summarized in this short sentence:
The agents can choose their future wills in that manner which they wish.

On the basis of what we said, the brain is two agents in a parallel with
each other, it can cause to flow two kinds of information (imaginative &
affirmative) through the nervous canals synchronously. This kind of
ability and complexity is necessary for the main self-forming actions
and freedom of the human’s behaviour.

k. Responsibility ‘luck and chance: Does the indeterminism mean chance
or random; i.e. everything happens by chance? Here, we must look that
what relationship is there between the indeterminism and the luck or
chance in order to answer this question. Here, it must be said that the
indeterminism doesn’t mean the negation of the general law of causality.
Rather it is a technical term which solely means the negation of the
indeterministic causality.

So, the indeterminism is compatible with the non-deterministic,
contingent and possible cause.

Of course, there is another root for this mistake; sometimes, it is
thought that since the agent has not been forced by deterministic cause
to prefer one from two choices, then there is a kind of challenge in
relation to choosing one of them inside of him and finally he will
choose one of them by chance. The basis of this mistake is the
imagination that ‘The agent’s effort for preferring one way to another
one’ (for example, that merchant in the above mentioned example) and
‘his or her non-deterministic choice’ are two separated things; so it is
supposed that subsequent to the agent's effort to choose one of the two
ways, suddenly he or she does her or his choice accidentally by chance.

But the fact is that the agent's effort for preferring one way to
another one is directly producing his choice, in other words,
indeterminism is not a case separated from his effort for overcoming the
other reasons or motives.

In fact, indeterminism and the agent's effort for preferring one way to
another one is a single compound, in other words, indeterminism is the
quality of his effort, not a thing which happens before or after it. In
such a case, there is no place for such assumption of the role of chance
or luck. There is a complex recurrent neural network that realizes the
effort in the agent's brain and circulates indeterminate impulses in
feedback loops. The indeterminacy is a quality of this indeterminate
circulation.

However, an effort process for preferring one way to another is merely
an effort of will and it persists right up to the moment when the choice
is made, and there is no any space or medium – as chance or random-
between an effort for preferring one way to another ‘Will’ and making a
choice or decision to act.

There is the same situation in relation to the luck. If the agent
succeeded to do what he wished, it could not be said that his good luck
caused him to reach his own desire and therefore he is not responsible
for what did he act.

What the sentence ‘he was lucky’ or ‘he was prosperous’ means is that,
that success has not been deterministic. In other words, in spite of the
obstacles and the possibility of failure the agent could obtain his own
purpose and do his own desire. But it does not mean that it was happened
by chance, and existed without any cause.

Here, there is another reason to explain the agent's responsibility.
That what the agent was succeeded in doing is the same thing which he
attempted to do and struggled for. Furthermore, he never considers it as
a kind of chance or an accident; rather, he does consider it as an
effect of his own will and himself.

l. Concerning the agent's act or his freewill there is no reason that to
qualify an action as the agent's action or the action by his own free
will, it must be deterministic. In fact, the responsibility of the agent
towards his action is not dependent upon the deterministic quality of
what he has done.

There is no any determinism or compulsion in that example of the
murderer who succeeded in doing his own desire, or the merchant who
attended at his appointment. Because he (the agent) did what he wanted
in spite of the reversal reasons and the numerous obstacles, so he (the
agent) –of course-is responsible for what he performed.

The essence of ‘choice’ is -In fact- to form a decision or an intention
for doing something, that intention or decision which puts an end for
and removes any kind of doubt or hesitancy in the mind of the agent
towards the act. According to this account of ‘choice’ it does not need
causal necessity or determinism.

When the contrary stimulants and opposed motives leads the agent towards
the other choice, but he resists all that contrary stimulants and
opposed motives, and in spite of its pressure he makes his preferred
will and choice overcoming that pressure and finally does his own chosen
act, he actually bears the full responsibility of what he wills and what
he acts, because he is who has done this choice, while there has not
been any determinism or compulsion.

Of course, indeterminism doesn't mean that there is no cause for what
has been done. Although the actions and choices are not deterministic,
however, they are not lacking causes; rather they are due to the agent's
previous effort. But it may be said: Although the indeterminism is not
inconsistent with the principle of choice and any act can be
contemporaneously a simple choice and not deterministic; but the choice
to be the agent's choice it must be deterministic and therefore, it is
not compatible with the indeterminism.

It can be replied: What makes an act or choice an agent's act or choice
is that it results from his efforts and deliberation which in turn are
causally resulted from his previous motives, reasons and images, so it
doesn't need to be influenced by deterministic force.

Therefore, ascribing an act or choice to an agent is due to its
resulting from his own intention and Decision which is a product of his
previous reflective effort, and this reflective effort is a part of the
agent's self-defining motivational system.

Furthermore, the agent confirms that the chosen intention is the same as
what he wants and makes it as a part of his own self - defining
motivational system and operates it as an effective element for his
future life direction and as a self-forming action, which is another
proof affirming that the choice is belonging to the agent and he himself
is responsible towards it.

m. After what is explained that the indeterministic and self - forming
actions are considered as a kind of choice and particularly agent's
choice, now it is a time to discuss another issue that is the extant of
the agent's control over his own chosen act. How much –in fact- control
he has over it?

Certainly, indeterminism entails a diminution of the agent's control
over his choice and action, and results in the problem often noted by
critics of libertarian freedom that the indeterminism, wherever it
occurs, seems to be an obstacle or a hindrance to our realizing our
purposes and hence an obstacle to freedom. But in the self-forming
actions this obstacle or hindrance arises from the agent's will itself,
not from any outside factor or effective agent.

In the previous example, that merchant who was going to attend his own
business appointment suddenly encountered with the helping cry of that
victim, here, it can be said that a kind of self - forming action
occurs. His will for attending his own business appointment causes to
diminish his control over helping the victim. On the other hand, his
will for helping the victim causes to diminish his control over his will
of attending his own business appointment.

Therefore, in both sides the indeterminism acts as an inside obstacle
against the agent's determination and realization of the attainment of
his own aims and intentions. In another words there is a kind of
competition between two conflicting motives which eventually end in that
the agent overcomes one side stimuli.

Although lack of such an inside resistance entails a full control of the
agent over one of the competing choices, but it entails also lack of
competition between different stimuli and motives, and it results in
negation of the freedom of choice and action.

Thus, it can be said that the indeterminism via its result of obstacles
prevents from agent's realization of obtaining his own aims and
intentions. Hence it provides a way to the possibility of obtaining
other aims and intentions that resulted from different choices, so the
free choice and act has been formed.

To be the really free agent of our own self - forming actions we must in
some certain time of our life struggle against such obstacles and
overcome them to realize that we have attained our purpose and done what
we wanted.

n. There is another problem that is since the agent \_ according to the
theory of indeterminism of self-forming actions\_ does not have full
control over the motives and preliminaries of his choice, there is a
kind of chance or arbitrary which constitutes a part of the
preliminaries of the agent's action.

According to Mr. Robert Kane, this question indicates an important fact
in the case of freedom namely the value experiment. What is revealed by
this fact is that every free or indeterministic choice is a beginning
point for the experiment of value; that are the actions and behaviours
which cannot be justified by the reasons past, because its reasons are
hidden in the coming events and it will only be revealed in the future.

In making such a choice the agent says himself:  
 ‘Let me try this. It is not required by my past, but it is consistent
with my past and is one branching pathway my life can now meaningfully
take. Whether it is the right choice, only time will tell. Meanwhile, I
am willing to take responsibility for it one way or the other.’[^12]

This kind of choice is not a result of the previous qualities or
actions, although it is in coordination with them, and it is in fact
branching a past constituted personality and grounding intentionally a
new personality which will-only in future-be known whether it is right
or wrong. Therefore, it can be said that our self-forming actions are
compatible with the previous actions and states and they create a new
part of our life routed in our previous character.

After this quite short explanation of the Robert Kane's theory of Causal
Indeterminism, now we firstly try to compare it with the most important
theories in contemporary Islamic philosophy, and secondly to point out
some critics concerning it.

In comparison with the contemporary Islamic philosophy the theory of
causal indeterminism seems to be very close to the Sadr's theory of
Sovereignty. Because according to Kane's the most important condition
for the agent's ultimate responsibility is ‘the agent's power to be the
ultimate creator and sustainer of his own ends or purposes’[^13] which
is similar to what Sadr called ‘The sovereignty of the agent’.

But in spite of this similarity there is a very important difference
here between what Kane called agent's power and Sadr's sovereignty, that
is -in brief- according to Kane the agent's power-as he described –is
solely concerning to the self-forming actions, whilst the next actions
are necessarily determined by them which means that with the exception
of the self-forming actions the other actions has not been chosen by
free will, and as a result the agent has not had a directly control over
them.

But in Sadr's point of view the agent's sovereignty is not limited to
any part of the willed actions. According to Sadr the agent's
sovereignty is the main source of his control which comprehends all the
willed agent's actions.

The other similarity between these two theories is the philosophical
separation between causality in one hand and causal determinism or
causal necessity in the other hand. The both philosophers believe that
the negation of determinism doesn't mean the negation of causality, and
the affirmation of causality doesn't mean the affirmation of
determinism.

But also in this point there is some difference between them, for the
Sadr's theory of sovereignty attempts to solve the problem of the
impossibility of preference without a preponderant by a given suggestion
of agent's sovereignty as an alternative of the preponderant, but it is
not clear how the theory of causal indeterminism could overcome this
problem.

To criticise the Kane's theory of causal indeterminism we are pointing
out some consideration as following:

1. Grant, that Kane's given explanation of free action which refers it
to the self-forming actions succeeded in showing an acceptable reason
for the indeterminism of the agent's act, but the question that remains
is, in the process of occurrence of undetermined self-forming actions,
at such a difficult time when we are torn between competing visions of
what we should do, what makes the agent choose that specific action and
not the others?

To say that:’ Well, we know that the brain is a parallel processor’ or
‘In cases of self-formation (SFAs), agents are simultaneously trying to
resolve plural and competing cognitive tasks’ is not sufficient to solve
the problem. The question still remains that since the agent's choice is
not a kind of chance, accident or random, what is the real factor that
makes the agent try one way, and not the other.

In reply to this objection Kane explained:’ What makes an act or choice
an agent's act or choice is that it is resulted from his efforts and
deliberation which resulted from its previous motives, reasons and
images, so it doesn't need to be influenced by deterministic force’. But
the question arises again: Since there is more than one flow of previous
motives and reasons with the equal possibilities of choices, what causes
only one flow to be chosen by the agent?

2. In his explanation of the self-forming actions Kane emphasized that
the agent confronts two conflicting perspectives of what he should do or
what can be done. In such time as he said person might be torn between
two kinds of stimulants, and there is uncertainty in his mind about what
to do at such times, which reflects in the indeterminacy of his own
neural processes, which causes agent to be pulled towards unknown and
uncertain outcomes.

This expression contains a premise and a result. The premise is in short
the complexity of motivations in the brain and neural system, and the
result - as this theory tries to affirm – is the free will and the free
act of the agent. But, in fact, there is not any logical relevance
between these two parts of Kane's allegation (the premise and the
result), for that obviously the premise (which is the complexity of
stimulants or motivations in the brain and neural system and ultimately
the uncertainty in the agent's mind about what to do or what to choose)
does not logically entail or result in the freewill nor the free act of
the agent.

We can't understand how the freewill or the power of the agent upon his
action can be resulted from such kind of complexity and uncertainty
which logically entails perplexity, inability and failure. The reality
in such status is that the agent undergoes lack of power to choose, lack
of power to decide, and lack of power to act. There is not any reason –
but the chance- for the agent to be pulled towards any outcome.

3. Finally it seems that the theory of Causal Indeterminism has not
given a clear suggestion to solve the main problem of human freewill
which derived from the incompatibility between general causal law and
freewill. For that the basic question still remains: How can the general
causal law be compatible with free choice and action, whilst the causal
law cannot be segregated from necessity and determinism, and no way to
deny causal law, because it results in chance and random and
consequently negates freewill and free action.

2. Compatible Determinism Soft Determinism
------------------------------------------

Compatibilists believe that there is no contradiction between
determinism and freewill. They maintain that despite of the
comprehensive running general law of causal determinism which governs
all human acts the human possesses a full freewill and bears utter
responsibility towards his acts.

This point of view is close to the philosophical trend of Islamic
thought particularly the transcendent philosophy of Mulla Sadra. As it
explained in part 1 of this study Muslim philosophers particularly Mulla
Sadra persistently believe that not only freewill and responsibility are
consistent with determined causal law, but rather the determined causal
law is a necessary condition for the freewill and its result of
responsibility.

The compatibilists in western philosophy are divided in two groups:

*The Classical compatibilists:* Some very known philosophers like Thomas
Habbes, David Hume, Jan Stuart Mill, A. J. Ayer, Moritz Schilck, G. A.
More, Nielsen, and Skinner can be counted among them. Classical
campatibilism has been an extremely popular view among philosophers and
scientists in the twentieth century.[^14]

*New Compatibilists:* Some famous philosophers such as Daniel Dennet,
Harry Frankfurt, Susan Wolf, and Gary Watson are seen among them.

We can't discuss all opinions which revealed here by these philosophers,
and it has not been necessary in such study which is focusing on general
ideas, but we will be contented with a remarkable explanation of each
one of these two trends of compatibilism. Among the Classical
compatibilists we will choose the explanation of A. J. Ayer, and among
new compatibilists we'll choose Harry Frankfurt.

### A. Classical Compatibilism with the explanation of A. J. Ayer

Alfred Jules Ayer delivered his explanation of compatibilism in his
essay published under the title of ‘Freedom and Necessity’ which can be
summarized as follows:

1. When it is said that the agent acted freely it means that he could
have acted otherwise. If he had more than one choice and he could act
what he wanted to act it means that he has done freely and he bears full
responsibility of what he has acted. In contrast with that when the
agent is fronting just one way and there is no more than one choice to
act, it means that there is no freewill nor freely act and in result the
agent bears not any responsibility of what he does.

Therefore, if we believe that all human conduct are governed by general
causal law then the agent's action wouldn't be counted as free action,
because according to this assumption all human actions are causally
determined then there is no any space remained for agent's choice or
freewill. It seems that there is a very clear contraction between
general causal law and freewill.

2. The clear feeling that exists in the human beings in relation to
freedom has obliged some of the philosophers to not include all human
acts within the general causal law, and to resolve the problem of
contradiction between this internal feeling and the general causal law
by limiting the causal law.

But the truth is that the feeling of freedom doesn't prove that the
reality is so. It may not to be true, and in spite of that feeling the
general causal law may be true. It is probable that the agent influenced
by some previous causes but he is unaware of them.

In addition, the law of universal causation is not a necessary
presupposition of scientific explanation of the agent's action. It is
conceivable that more investigation lead the scientists to discover some
systematic connection between the agent act and some other events, but
it is also conceivable that it leads them to the negation of any
systematic connection between the agent's act and all other events.

3. But the negation of general causal law relative to human acts can
only result in accidental choice or choice by chance. The meaning of the
fact that ‘the human preference of one choice over the other has no
cause’ is that; he has made his choice by accident or by chance, in
which case the human freedom might be reserved. But this kind of freedom
will not result in human being morally responsible for his acts, whereas
the objective p of the discussion of human freedom is to prove his
responsibility in relation to his free acts.

4. It could be said that the preference of one choice by the human has
not been accidental or by chance and has been caused by attributes that
have formed the human character. And due to the fact that these
attributes have come about via human choice, human is responsible for
his choices due to these choices being the result of the attributes of
his character which have been formed by his decision.

But this concept dose not resolve anything as we again question the
choices that have come about via those attributes of the character. And
the question is that: Are these choices caused by determined causes? If
they are so then there will be a problem of determinism, otherwise they
have been caused by chance in which case the moral responsibility is
unjustifiable.

5. This is where we conclude that there are only two solutions to this
problem:

a. We either prove that the moral responsibility does not require the
freedom of act of man, and that man is able to claim moral
responsibility for his acts in which case it is against the freedom, and
is subject to determined cause.  
 b. Or else we try to find a way to reconcile human freewill with
determined cause which would prove that determined cause does not
obstruct human freedom.

The first solution does not seem logical. This is due to moral
responsibility being clearly dependent on human's freedom of act. Human
under any circumstances cannot claim moral responsibility for an act in
which he had no authority in committing and has been inflicted upon him
by a determined cause.

The only solution that remains is that, the idea of contradiction
between determined cause and human freedom to be removed, and to prove
that the law of determined cause has no inconsistency with human
freedom.

6. A number of Philosophers have attempted a specific definition of
freedom in order to solve the problem of contradiction between
determined cause and human freedom. They defined the freedom as:’ The
consciousness of necessity’. In the other word: Freedom means the
awareness of human of the causal determination of the act that has been
committed by him. Based on this definition the agent's awareness of the
necessity of his act is the essence of freedom.

According to this meaning of freedom not only the determined causal law
does not contradict agent's freedom, but further it is a necessary
condition of the agent's free act, and without the determined causal law
the freedom cannot be conceivable.

But giving a new meaning of the word ‘Freedom’ does not mean that the
contradiction between determined cause and freedom is solved, because
the philosophical argument of the problem of compatibility between
determined causality and freedom comes about the ordinary meaning of
freedom which entails the contingency of both to act and not to act, and
negates compulsion and necessity.

When I have compelled by someone to do what I dislike, it is obvious
that I'm not free, despite of my awareness of the compulsion and the
determined causal law which resulted in my action. The fact is that
giving the new definition of freedom as the awareness of the agent
doesn't change what is done in reality whether it's been free or not
free.

Probably the reason that led these philosophers to this kind of solution
is because they suppose that the awareness of determined causal law
enables a man to overcome the determined causes and manage them in the
way that he wants. But it is just an imaginary assumption, because if
the man would be able to manage the causes in his wanted direction and
change them from way to way it means that there is not neither
compulsion nor necessity.

7. Then to solve the problem there is no way but to focus on the
ordinary meaning of freedom. Therefore we need – at first - to clarify
this freedom by pointing out what it is contrasted with. This sense of
the freedom is not obviously contrasted with the causality, but it is
contrasted with constraint. When I have said that I was free to act or
not to act it does not mean that there was not any reason for what I
have done and my action had not been caused by any determined cause, but
it means that there was not any external agent that forced and
constrained me to act.

8. Now, we have to define the word ‘constraint’ and to explain that in
what circumstances the agent can be legitimately described as a
constrained agent?

The basic criterion of the constraint is that the agent's act doesn't
arise from deliberated choice of to act or not to act which can be
called ‘the process of deciding whether to do or not to do’.

The constrained act which is lack of the deliberated choice or the
process of deciding whether to do or not to do, can be derived from the
external factor, like a man who forced by another one to do something.
In this case the actor can avoid doing what he forced to do, but he
believed that if he didn't do so he would face a more disadvantageous
situation. Also the constrained act can be derived from a habitual
ascendancy of the external factor over the agent. In this case again the
agent that induced to act as the other one wanted didn't act by the
deliberated choice or the process of decision then he was not free,
nevertheless his act was not necessary.

Also a kleptomaniac is not a free agent, because he doesn't go through
the process of deciding whether to do or not to do, although his
stealing is not necessary.

9. Here a question arises: That if the free agent's act is dominated by
causal determined law, what is the deference between the agent's free
act and his constrained act, whilst the alternative is impossible for
both of them?

The answer is that the deference between the free act and the
constrained act is not to be an effect of determined cause or not to be
so, but the deference is that what kind of cause is the cause. The
constrained act is which arises from a constraining cause which
obstructs the process of deciding whether to do or not to do, whereas
the free act is which arises from a cause within that process.

10. One may question again: That since all causes equally necessitate
the effects how is it possible for a cause to be different from the
other in its action? How can conceive the difference of consequences
between two determined causes within same circumstances of necessity and
determination? It is a kind of arbitrary to say that an action is free
when it is necessitated in one fashion but not when it is necessitated
in another.

To answer this question we have to point out the precise meaning of the
word 'necessitate' in proposition of 'all causes equally necessitate the
effects'. If it is taken as equivalent to 'cause' it will be a
meaningless tautology, for that it is the same to say that: 'all causes
are causes', but if, as it is suitable to the question, it is taken as
equivalent to 'constrain' or 'compel' then the proposition will not be
true.

For all that needed for one event to be the cause of another is that, in
the given circumstances, the event which is said to be the effect would
not have occurred if it had not been for the occurrence of the event
which is said to be the cause. In one word, there is an invariable
concomitance between two classes of events, but there is no compulsion
or constrain. Consequently, an agent's action to be under the natural
causal law does not follow that it is under constraint.

11. The conclusion is that, for to say that the agent is free in his
action, the criterion is:

*Firstly:* He could act otherwise, whenever he had to choice.  
*Secondly:* His being able to act otherwise is not in the sense of which
the Kleptomaniac is.  
*Thirdly:* No any external force compels him to do so.

With these three conditions the action should be described as free
action, while it isn't a kind of chance, but an explainable act within
the chain of causal nexus.

12. In addition to what we explained, the misleading of words
'determinism' 'necessity' and 'cause' playing a rule in the complication
of this philosophical problem. They seemed to imply that one event is
somehow overcomes by another, whereas the fact is that they are
correlated. The fact is that when an event of one type occurs, an event
of another type occurs also, in a certain temporal relation to the
first. The rest is only metaphor.

13. But the question that still remains is that: If the postulate of
determinism adopted then the future will be predictable, which means
that what will happen in the future is already decided, therefore no any
act can be free and the agent will be a helpless prisoner of fate,
whilst all actions already decided and appointed.

The answer is that, to predict future from the past doesn't mean that
the agent is lack of power upon his action as the prisoner of fate, but
it means that it is possible to deduce the future from the past
according to general laws. In a word: To know what you are going to do,
doesn't entail that it is not your own choice or you are acting under
constraint.

In the end of this summary of Ayer's explanation of Classical
Compatibilism I try at first- as I did for another western theories- to
show a short comparison in two points between it and Mulla Sadra's
theory of Necessity and Sadr's theory of Sovereignty the two most
important theories in contemporary Islamic philosophy. The two points
are:

a. There is a very close similarity between Mulla Sadra's and Ayer's
opinion in the point of compatibility between causality and free act.
They both believe that there is no conflict between general necessary
causal law and the free will or choice of the agent, but the conflict is
between constraint and free will or choice, and the philosophical
problem here arose from the complexity of two concepts: necessity, and
constraint.

Nevertheless there is a minute deference between them. That is the
sadra's opinion focused on the criterion of the free act and suggested
that the criterion of free act is to be derived from the agent's consent
(R. P.20). But the Ayer's focused on the criterion of non-free act and
suggested that it is to be derived from constraint.

b. Whilst both Sadra and Ayer insist on the definition of the word:
Freedom, and it’s definitely importance in this discussion, there is a
fundamental variance between two definitions of Freedom given by each of
them. Sadra emphasizes that freedom doesn't entail the contingency of
the action or the equality of both to act and not to act. The Freedom in
his view is not but the awareness and consent of the agent towards his
act, what and why he is going to do, while Ayer emphasizes on the
ordinary concept of Freedom which contains- as he alleges- the equality
of both to act and not to act.

Confronted with both of them: Sadr in his theory of sovereignty doesn't
believe in the allegation that the problem arises from the complexity of
necessity and constraint, but he insists that there is an essential
confliction between general causal law which entails necessity of the
act, and the freedom which cannot be existed without the contingency of
the action or the equality of both to act or not to act. For that he
believes that there is no way but the exception of general causal law
and the rule of general necessity in case of the freewill and all free
actions.

To criticize the Ayer's explanation of Classical Compatiblism I'm
putting down the following points:

1. The central philosophical problem here is that the base of the
general causal law is that the things- containing the human acts- to be
existed need a given necessary existence from their causes, and given
necessary existence negates the equality of the existence and
non-existence of the act which means its determination. The distinction
between necessity or causality and constraint is not subservient whilst
even in the non-constraint circumstances the cause must be determining
its effect (i.e. human act), otherwise since both to be or not to be are
equally possible the effect absolutely will not be existed.

2. Granted that the criterion of the free action is as Ayer mentioned,
but the question is that, what is then the different between chance and
free act, since the chance has got also all that criterion attributes?

3. Since it is postulated that causes necessitate their effects, it is
not clear how to conceive the difference between two kinds of causes:
constraining causes and non-constraining causes.

To say that the non-constraining causes necessitate their effects in the
sense of correlation doesn’t explain the reason of correlation between
cause and its effect whilst the assumption is that there is no
constraint and no any external forcing agent.

### B. New Compatibilism Harry Frankfurt’s theory

I will summarise the theory of harry Frankfurt explained in his article
entitled ‘free will and the concept of a person’ as follows:

1. Human desires are of two kinds: ‘first-order desire’ and
‘second-order desire’. ‘first-order desires’ are those desires which the
human being is inclined towards but are not necessarily performed.
‘second-order desires’ are those desires which are performed. The
meaning of will is that which is performed; therefore, it is only the
‘second-order desires’ which form the meaning of will.

‘Second-order desire’ has two types, which are desiring and action, and
having the desire for desiring an action; for at times it is possible
that an individual does not desire the action itself, rather he wants
only its desire, and at other times he wants the action itself without
wanting the desire for the action.

2. The second type of ‘second-order desire’, which is the desire which
leads to action, alongside the want for the desire, is the defining
criterion of the concept of person.

It is possible that a person has the first type of ‘second-order
desire’, which means he has the desire to choose one thing from a number
of things, and to perform it, however, this desire and will has not been
shaped by his will and desire, meaning that it is not the second-order
desire or will, such as children or at times mature or old people who
have no control over their desire, for they cannot want what they
desire, and do not know how to want to perform what they desire; hence,
these agents are not persons. The term ‘wanton’ can be used for these
agents. All non-human species and humans who do not have control over
their will and their actions are subject to their ‘first-order desires’,
and their ‘second-order desire’ is not subject to their second-order
will are wantons.

3. Lack of reason and reflection does not lie in the meaning of wanton.
What distinguishes the rational wanton agent from the rational person
agent, is that the wanton agent does not consider which of its
first-order desires is superior to the others.

Although the primary element of a person is based on second-order will
and not reason, what makes second-order will and its formation possible
is rational capacities, and one who does not have rational capacities is
devoid of personality.

4. It is possible for a person who possesses second-order will, reason
and reflection, to be incapable of wanting that which they identify as
good from their first-order desires, and for the person to surrender to
his other first-order desires in his action. However what he has desired
in his action and what he has performed, is a real desire, and that
desire defines his real identity and personality. Whereas the wanton
never evaluates and contemplates between its first-order desires, and
cannot or does not want to think in regards to which one of its
first-order and conflicting desires wins out and will be actualized.
Therefore, for the wanton, victory or defeat between its conflicting of
first-order desires has no meaning.

5. Second-order desire is the criterion of freedom of the will.
Therefore, the individual who can choose between his first-order desires
that which he has identified as the best through reflection and
evaluation, and actualises it by his second-order, will has freedom of
will. However the individual who cannot or does not want to choose the
best amongst his first-order desires, or having found the best cannot
actualise and perform it, does not have freedom of the second-order
will, but rather is dominated by an agent which shapes his second-order
will, contrary to what he knows as better, and therefore does not have
complete freedom of the will, and in reality does not possess a complete
personality.

This definition of person which is an individual who has such freedom of
the will, excludes all wanton beings, be they human or infrahuman which
lack the essential conditions of having freedom of the will; furthermore
it excludes human beings which have determined free will.

6. Now the question is that, what kind of freedom is ‘freedom of the
will’?

In traditional philosophy freedom is defined as such: freedom is ‘to do
what one wants to do’. This definition delivers only a part of the
definition of the ‘free agent’ and does not include another special part
of the definition of ‘free agent’.

Animals do what they want to do, therefore ‘doing what one wants to do’
is not a sufficient condition for the realisation of freedom of the
will, it is not even a necessary condition of freedom of the will; for
in order to deprive an individual of freedom of the will in a specific
behaviour or action it is not necessary to remove freedom from their
will. There is no difference in the degree of freedom between an agent
who knows that there are many things that he is not free to do, and an
agent who is in between same conditions but does not know that he is not
free.

7. The primary issue is how freedom of the will to be acquired. Here the
question is in regard to how will or desire to be formed, and not the
relationship between desire and action.

It must be said that the freedom of the will is when an individual is
free to desire and to will that which he wants; this means that he is
free in willing what he wills.

Therefore, the individual tries out freedom of the will where he is sure
of the conformity of his will and second-order desires, and he tries out
The absence of freewill when he finds discrepancy between his will and
his second-order desires, or when he finds a conformity between them, he
does not regard it as the result of his own attempt, but rather as the
result of a pleasant coincidence.

8. Freedom of the individual in doing what he desires, does not place
the individual in the situation of ‘freedom of the will’. When the
individual above in addition to being free in doing what he wants to do,
is also free in willing what he desires, the desirable freedom or the
conceivable freedom is realised, and it is in this way that he has not
lost anything of freedom.

9. The theories which have been presented in interpreting freedom of the
will have not been able to clarify the following two points; why is
freedom of the will desirable, and why animals (animals other than human
beings) are not considered to possess freedom of the will. For example
according to the theory of Roderick Chisholm which is an interesting
instance of the doctrine that freedom of will entails an absence of
causal determination, whenever a person performs a free action, a
miracle has occurred, because for example when a person moves their
hand, this motion of the hand is a result of a series of physical
causes.

However, some events in this series presumably occur in the part that is
related to the brain that are caused by the agent and are not caused by
the other elements of the series of causes. Therefore, the free agent
has a prerogative which some would attribute only to God: each of us,
when we act, is a prime mover unmoved.

Although by this theory the lack of free will in non-human living beings
is explained, however it is not clear, that why according to this theory
the person who is a free agent must believe in the possibility of
interrupting the chain of causes by himself. Chisholm has not explained
what reasonable difference exists between the person who miraculously
and by interrupting the chain of causes and effect moves his hand, with
the individual who moves his hand as part of the chain of causes and
effects.

10. In addition to the two points that we mentioned about freedom, a
third condition for the reasonable interpretation of free will is that
it has to be capable of presenting an acceptable analysis of ‘moral
responsibility’. It seems that the moral responsibility of the
individual toward his action does not occur only when it is done by free
will. A person can be morally responsible for his actions even though he
does not have any freedom of the will.

Although having freedom in making an alternative choice, or in other
words, the possibility of choosing another option from the first-order
desires is a condition of freedom of the will, it has no relation with
moral responsibility. For the assumption that the individual is
responsible towards the action he has performed, does not require the
person being situated in a condition where he is free in his will and in
performing the action.

When the person has done what he desired, whether he has had another
option or not, he has done his own desire and acting what he wanted.
Therefore, the person cannot claim that he have been forced by an agent
outside his essence and will to perform the action, or to claim that he
has been naught but a mere observer.

Under these conditions it is irrelevant in evaluating the person’s moral
responsibility towards the action they have performed, to inquire about
other options and to see whether they were available to the person or
not.

If person does not exist in the wanton agent such as a child or an adult
whose will is under the hegemony of others, and if in the unwilling
agent, such as an addict who desires to stop his addiction and is
discontent with his addiction, but cannot stop it, will does not exist,
then freedom of the will also does not exist, but in another type of
agent such as the addict who knows that his addiction is damaging to
him, and has numerous options, and knows that he can opt any of the
choices that he desires, there is a person possessing will to act and
intentionally chooses addiction by his own will, but there is no free
will.

Although the situation of this addict is a situation of
over-determination, for the desire to use drugs has become active and
irresistible in him, because he is physiologically addicted, however
despite this irresistible inclination it is his own inclination, for he
has desired it.

Here although the will of this addict has not been controlled by
himself, he has desired by his own second-order desire for this
inclination to be the active and influencing inclination, and has
allowed this inclination to form and influence his will; therefore, he
has made the will for the consumption of drugs his own will. Hence the
willing addict has moral responsibility not only towards the influence
of his addiction in shaping his will towards the consumption of drugs,
but also towards the act of consumption of drugs itself.

11. The meaning that I (Harry Frankfurt) present for ‘freedom of the
will’, seems very natural in relation to determinism; for it is
conceivable that because of causal determinism the individual is free to
want what he wants. Therefore, in this way because of causal determinism
the individual has freedom of the will. Some individuals having freedom
of the will because of causal determination, and others not having
freedom of the will because of the presence of the same causal
determination is nothing more than the appearance of a harmless paradox.

In reality there is no paradox in this proposition, that an agent or
agents other than the person have the moral responsibility of his having
or not having freedom of the will. It is completely possible that an
individual is morally responsible for what he has performed by his own
free will, and that another individual is also morally responsible for
what this person has performed.

It is also rational that an individual accidentally has freedom of the
will (not because of causal determinism). Therefore, it is conceivable
that some individuals accidentally have freedom of the will and others
accidentally do not.

It is likely that there is a third way for the individual having freedom
of the will, without it being accidental or through causal determinism
and natural series of causes, but a third way which also results in
freedom of the will.

The aforementioned is a summary of Harry Frankfurt’s theory in the
explanation and interpretation of freedom of the will. The following can
be said in the comparison of Harry Frankfurt’s theory with the two
Islamic theories of freedom of the will which were previously mentioned:

1. In the comparison of this theory with Mulla Sadra’s theory, the first
similarity is that, they both neither regard freedom of the will and
causal determinism to be contradictory. Another similarity between the
two theories is that neither regards causal determinism and moral
responsibility as contradictory, and do not consider the presence or
lack of presence of another option as the primary condition in the moral
responsibility of the free agent.

2. In the comparison of this theory with the theory of Ayatullah
Muhammad Baqir al-Sader we witness a clear difference between these two
theories in both of the aforementioned points. Ayatullah Muhammad Baqir
al-Sader in his theory of Sovereignty, regards freedom of the will as
completely contradictory to causal determinism; he believes that moral
responsibility completely dependant on the presence of numerous choices
for the agent, and is of the opinion that freedom of the will is fully
related on the one hand with the presence of numerous choices, and on
the other hand with moral responsibility.

The conclusion that was reached in the above comparison is very natural;
for as we mentioned before Mulla Sadra in the theory of causal necessity
like Harry Frankfurt falls under the category of compatibilsts; whereas
Ayatullah Muhammad Baqir al-Sader is of the incompatibilists who are
opposed to the opinion Harry Frankfurt and similar thinkers to him.

The following can be said in a brief critique of Harry Frankfurt’s
theory:

1. Frankfurt’s theory presents an interesting analysis of the concept of
person and its relation to freedom of the will, and has presented
precise points in regards to the nature of freedom of the will; however,
it has not presented a new solution to the problem of the contradiction
between freedom of the will and causal determinism.

Simply by stating that freedom of the will is compatible with causal
determinism and that moral responsibility is not dependant on the
numerousness of choices, without offering a philosophical clarification,
does not solve why it is so.

If the lack of presence of numerous choices is compatible with moral
responsibility, therefore why is it that the rational conscience of
human beings does not hold a person whose free will has been taken by
another human being as morally responsible; for example in the case of a
person who has been forced to commit a crime, or a child who has been
deceived by others to commit a crime, neither is held morally
responsible, and all the moral responsibility is for the agent who has
forced the crime, for he is the real agent of the crime and the primary
and real criminal.

If causal determinism is compatible with freedom of the will, why
doesn’t the rational conscience of human beings hold the person who
because of physiological problems is unable to perform some social
responsibilities, as guilty for not performing them, and does not regard
him as equal with a person who has full physical health but does not
perform his social responsibilities.

2. Mr Frunkfurt correctly does not deem the criterion of Freedom of the
Will as related to the freedom of the will with the action arising from
it or in other words the freedom of the agent in what he desires. Rather
he deems the criterion of freedom of the will to be the freedom of the
will of the agent, or as he puts it he deems it in the freedom of the
agent in desiring what he wants. This issue is what we discussed in the
beginning of our discussion, where we discussed the primary problem of
the contradiction between freedom and causality. We said there that
between the free agent and its introductions there are two relations:

• The relation of freedom with action.

• The relation of will with its introductions. The centre of the primary
philosophical problem is the second type of relation.

The primary problem as we previously stated is that if we consider will
to be subject to causal determination, the formation of will, will be
according to the ‘impossibility of preponderance without preponderant’
and in this case there will be no difference between what we term as the
‘free will’ and as the ‘unfree will’; such as the person who is forced
into performing an act. On the other hand if we do not submit to the law
of ‘causal determination’ we face the problem of violating the ‘general
principle of causality’ and the acceptance of spontaneous and the
accidental phenomena without a cause or ‘preponderance without
preponderant’.

In Mr Frankfurt’s theory a solution to this philosophical dead end
cannot be seen; rather what is seen in this theory is submission to the
problem, and as a result the acceptance of the violation of the ‘general
principle of causality’, and submission to the assumption of mere
accident, spontaneous and preponderance without preponderant, or the
accidental phenomena without a cause.

Here, it is not convenient to argue about the absoluteness of the
general principle of causality. It suffices to say that by refuting the
general principle of causality not only will the foundation of the
sciences fall, but also the foundation of logic and logical reasoning
will fall, and with the fall of the foundations of logic and reasoning
the striving of Frankfurt and those similar to him for clarifying and
reasoning for the correctness of their theory and the incorrectness of
others’ theories will be futile. Thus, as Mr Frankfurt believes in the
correctness of his theory, he proves it through reasoning, and this
shows that he has accepted the ‘general principle of causality’. He has
vanished the accidental phenomena that is without a cause, or the
‘preponderance without preponderant’ from his set of probabilities.
Therefore the philosophical problem of the contradiction between the
general principle of causality and freedom of the will remains
unanswered by Mr Frankfurt.

Here our discussion about Harry Frankfurt’s theory which is an example
of new compatibilists ends. Therefore our discussion about the second
school of the three western philosophical schools about freedom and
causality or free will and determinism also ends.

3. Incompatible Determinism
---------------------------

This school is also known as the school of ‘Hard determinism’; for
contrary to the school of ‘Compatibilist determinists’ which is also
referred to as ‘soft determinists’, for although they believe in the
principle of causal determinism they consider it as compatible with
freedom of the will, and believe in the compatibility of those two with
the free agent, Incompatibilist determinists or Hard determinists do not
believe in the compatibility of freedom of the will with causal
determinism, and deem the human being’s will as subject to the principle
of causal determinism and do not believe in the freedom of the human
being’s will.

One of the most distinguished philosophers who defends this way of
thinking is Professor Paul Edwards from New York University, and the
general editor of the Encyclopaedia of Philosophy (published in 1967).
In a work published under the name ‘Hard and Soft Determinism’ he
explains this theory and defends it. Here we present a summary of this
theory as stated in the mentioned work:

1. Although William James in his essay ‘The Dilemma of Determinism’ has
rejected both the approach of ‘Hard Determinism’ and ‘Soft Determinism’
he still mentions Hard Determinism with respect, whereas he considers
Soft Determinism as a kind of ‘quagmire of evasion’.[^15]

The theory of Moderate Determinism which James calls soft determinism ,
especially the variety of it which is accepted and supported by Hume,
Mill and Schlick has had many supporters in the past 25 years. This is
while in these years very few people have defended Hard Determinism. I
(Paul Edwards) will argue for this theory here, and will strive to speak
on behalf of the supporters of this philosophical school.

2. First it is necessary to clearly explain the main contentions of the
supporters of Soft Determinism. Since the most dominant form of this
school is that which is explained by Hume, Mill and Schlick, I will make
it the axis of my talk. According to this theory there is no
contradiction between Determinism and the proposition that human beings
are sometimes free agents. When we call an action ‘free’ it does not all
mean that it is free from the principle of ‘causality’ and is outside
its rule, and it is because of this that we make moral judgements about
some actions.

Although at times outside causes impose a certain action on the ‘agent’
or the ‘agent’ loses its freedom of action under the influence of some
causes. However, in most circumstances the ‘agent’ acts with complete
freedom and rational desires, in a way that nothing has taken away the
free will of the agent, and the agent has chosen an action by his own
absolute free will.

The rule of the principle of causality on these two types of action,
‘the free act and the unfree act’ is equal. What distinguishes these two
actions from each other is not whether they are subjected or not
subjected to the principle of causality, rather what distinguishes these
two types of act is the ‘type of cause’ in each of these two acts.

3. Secondly there is no antithesis between ‘Determinism’ and ‘Moral
Responsibility’. When we consider a person morally responsible for a
certain act, it means that we have had the presupposition that he is a
‘free agent’. This freedom is in no way contra causal freedom. In this
free act there is nothing by the ability of the agent to do what it
wants or desires. Since Determinism is compatible with freedom in this
meaning, it will also be compatible with moral responsibility.

Mill who can be considered as the greatest moraliser has paid special
attention to one class of human desires. He believes that not only some
lowly desires – such as my desire to have a new car can influence my
actions. But also my desire to virtue can influence my action and push
me towards virtuous behaviour. In order to change my character to the
desired character, I can choose a hard work and actions which are
compatible with the virtuous desire.

Suppose that I am faced with two contradicting desires; on the one hand
an intense desire for fame, and on the other hand an intense desire to
serve people without being known. Furthermore suppose that I have come
to know a therapy that can transform my character to a fame seeking
character or virtuous and fame indifferent character, and all the
necessary conditions and tools for choosing either of these two
characters and creating the necessary transformation is present for me.
In the opinion of Mill choosing either of these two ways is possible for
me.

Therefore, based on the theory of Mill, we can build our personality the
way we desire and not only is determinism in accordance with the moral
obligations but it also concords with moral judgments about the
personality of man despite the restrictions.

3- Nevertheless the saying of Mill when explaining soft determinism as a
kind of ‘quagmire of evasion’ seems exaggerated; it does not seem far
from reality. This is because hard determinists were never influenced by
the desires and did not deny effort and the decision of the agent in the
‘behavioural incident’. Therefore the main conflict between the hard
determinists and the soft determinists has not been the influence of
desire and the decision of agent in formation of the behaviour.

The conflicting issue originates from the human will and desire which
are the source of emergence decision and will and also the supplier. In
response to the description Hume and Mill have given regarding the
‘Voluntary behaviour’ the hard determinists can say: we accept that the
desire and will and the decision of man will shape his voluntary
behaviour, however, the issue is that what is the origin of this
decision and will and desire that are beyond the decision and will?

In any case, the desires, the will and the decisions of the agent as
well as his personal structure are all rooted in the hereditary factors
and originate from there and glaringly man has no role in the
origination and creation of these hereditary factors and his first
growing environment. In his famous quote, schopenhauer says:

‘A man can surely do what he wills to do, but he cannot determine what
he wills.’[^16]

For example, imagine two people who are suffering extreme nervous
breakdown and as a result of this are lacking balance in their
personality and are entangled in involuntary nervous behaviour. There is
a suitable cure for this problem which can change their personality and
turn it into a healthy and balanced one. However, this cure needs
extreme motivations and high levels of energy. One of these two, e.g.
person A, benefits from enough whereas the other, person B, is lacking
that energy and motivation. As a result, the treatment of A will be
successful and he will enjoy suitable behaviour and personality whereas
the second person, B, will remain with the same behaviour and the
unbalanced personality.

Here, although the behaviour and personality of A will be different to
that of B, where this difference is rooted in the decision and will of
each of them, A was able to choose the treatment and B was not able to
opt for it and thus unable to change his behaviour and personality. This
is the consequence of the conditions and factors that were not in
control of either of them and neither had any role in creating those
conditions and factors being the motivation and the necessary energy for
the treatment and somewhat the motivation and the necessary energy for
the treatment resulted in the environment and the dominant hereditary
conditions of the personality of each of them and naturally they did not
have any role in creating that environment or the hereditary factors.

4- The soft determinists do not deny the fact that the personality and
the will and decision of man all originate from external factors and
they do not disregard the external factors that influence the
personality and decision of man when justifying the moral obligations of
human behaviour. In fact there are no disagreements between the hard
determinists and the soft determinists on the objective incidents and
realities related to behaviour and both groups agree that the behaviours
originate from the will and personality of man and man’s personality and
will is influenced by the external factors.

The main difference between these two is in the manner of
interpretations and conclusions from these objective realities. The
conclusion of some of the hard determinists is that therefore, man has
no moral obligation towards whatever behaviour he shows whereas the soft
determinists do not make such a conclusion from these objective
realities and rather consider man morally responsible towards his
behaviour despite the objective realities.

Here we are trying to explicate the conclusion of the hard determinists
and explain its reason and justify and interpret their conclusion from
these objective realities.

5- For this purpose, I shall employ the difference Mr Campbell[^17] has
considered between the two ‘moral obligation concepts’ in his valuable
journal titled ‘is free will a Pseudo Problem?’ He says: two different
groups of people need two different set of conditions to act upon ‘moral
responsibility’ in their behaviour.

The first group are normal people who are unaware and ignorant of
scientific and philosophical and religious thoughts. When such people
see the behaviour of a man accompanied by compulsion and stress, they
will exempt the agent from moral responsibility and once they see a
behaviour in accordance with sane desires and wishes of the agent, they
find this to be from his decision, they will consider him responsible
towards his behaviour and consider his behaviour to benefit from moral
responsibility.

Therefore, based on this view, these people consider the only condition
for moral behavioural responsibility is for the behaviour to originate
from his will and desire and has not been issued by compulsion or any
other factor.

In the view of such people the fact that the agent is not the final
creator and determinative of his personality and characteristics and
features is not an obstacle in moral judgement and bearing the
responsibility of his behaviour.

The second types of people are those who benefit from a comparatively
high level of intellect who consider the world to be dominated by the
comprehensive causality law, scientifically or from philosophical
aspect, they believe in philosophies that consider the world to be
dominated by a superior unified principle or from religious aspect. They
believe that the world has been created and maintained and is under the
control and command and governance of a single being whom benefits from
Absolute power and endless knowledge.

In order to act upon moral responsibility of man for his behaviour, this
group of people need another condition in addition to the previously
mentioned condition- the condition of origination of behaviour from will
and desire of the agent without the compulsion of an external factor-
and consider necessary the benefiting of the agent from other
alternatives in addition to the mentioned condition for his behaviour.

I prefer to interpret this additional condition of the intellectual
individual necessary for moral obligation (apart from what is in Mr
Campbell's statement) in another way. I prefer to say that for moral
behavioural responsibility of man, in addition to the condition of
origination from desire and will of agent and absence of external
compulsive factors, the intellectual individual considers necessary the
personality and behaviour of the agent to have been chosen and shaped by
the will of the agent himself.

Campbell concludes that determinism is in accordance with the
understanding of non intellectuals of the moral responsibility and is in
no contradiction. However, it does not correspond with the understanding
or the second group of people (the intellectuals) and is fully
contradicting.

6- Although I do not agree with the negation of determinism of Mr
Campbell, however, I do agree with the basis of the analysis he has
offered in different terms.

I do not think that the problem is in the difference in the
understanding and usage of the term moral responsibility by the non
intellectual and the intellectual. Whether an individual benefits from
knowledge or not, he will make use of this term in one place on an
occasion to give the first meaning and in another place to give another
meaning.

Irrespective of the level of benefit from scientific and philosophical
or religious resources, all people will use the term moral
responsibility with the first meaning when they are influenced by
extreme feelings such as anger or hatred especially where they suffer
and are hurt, the understanding that as Mr Campbell interprets as being
used by the improvident and non intellectuals. And when they are in
normal and calm situations, they will judge a behaviour with intellect
and thought and in calmness and pay heed to the fact that the agent of
mentioned behaviour has not created and shaped his characteristic and
personality and will use the meaning of moral responsibility that is
used by the wise and intellectuals.

Clarence Darrow in his known defence before the Jury often utilised the
above issue, addressing the Jury: If anyone amongst you, had grown in
the same social and family environment as that of the defendant, he
would be now standing in the same place as the defendant. This assertion
was almost convincing the Jury that the defendant should not be held
responsible towards his behaviour.

7- I must mention a point to prevent any misunderstanding of my purpose.
The fact which I explained that the individual is not the ultimate
creator of his personality and characteristic, results in negation of
one’s moral responsibility towards his behaviour.

My purpose is not to remind people to reduce their sense of vengeance
and to increase their sense of Public spirit, however this result may
occur, but my purpose is that, this sequence will result from that
premise, same as any result which derived from previous premises in any
reasoning deduction.

Comparison and Valuation
------------------------

In comparison between the above theory and the previous theories of
Islamic philosophy in the point of the relation between men’s will and
the determined causal law it can be stated: that hard determinism which
is supported by Paul Edwards, is in correspondence with the Mulla
Sadra’s theory of necessity, and in confliction with the Sadr’s theory
of sovereignty, but in consideration of domination of causal law upon
the agent’s will, which means absolute determinism and negation of men’s
free will according to hard determinism, and consequently negation of
men’s moral responsibility, is in confliction with both the theory of
necessity and the theory of sovereignty.

The main criticism of hard determinism is the incompatibility between
hard determinism and men’s empirical and conscientious feeling of free
will. We feel by our conscience and clearly sense in our practice that
we are free to chose what we want to do, and we are facing variety of
choices without any external force compels us to do a particular given
option.

Based on the mentioned clear sense of men’s power of free will, we see
that the intellect believe in the men’s responsibility towards his
behaviour, and they believe that family circumstances, social
environment, hereditary characteristics and other external factors do
not compel men to act what he does act, and they do not excuse any
criminal agent for his crime due to external compulsion derived from
outside factors like that of heredity, social environment and others.

[^1]: Kane, 2002, p. 22

[^2]: Ibid, p. 8

[^3]: Ibid, p. 17

[^4]: Ibid, p. 17

[^5]: A professor of philosophy in brown university and was the former
chief of philosophical committee of America.

[^6]: Watson, 1982, pp. 24-35 & Kane, 2002, pp. 47-58

[^7]: Kane, 2002, p. 199

[^8]: Ibid, p. 204

[^9]: Kane, 2002, p. 209

[^10]: Eccles, 1970

[^11]: Kane, 2002, p.228

[^12]: Kane, 1996, pp. 145-6

[^13]: Kane, 2002, p. 223

[^14]: Kane, 2002, p. 11

[^15]: James, 1956

[^16]: Kane, 2002, p. 62

[^17]: 1951, Vol. LX, No. 240


