Foreword
========

**In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The MercifulIn The Name Of
Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

To praise Hazrat Adeebe Azam Maulana Sayyid Zafar Hasan Sahab Qibla or
to write something about him is akin to lighting a lamp in front of the
blazing Sun. He has written more than 200 books including some very
voluminous ones like *Manaqib* of Ibn Shahr-e-Aashob, *Majmaul Fazael*
and Four Volumes of *Al-Kafi* running into thousands of pages. After
migrating to Pakistan he continued to bring out the “Noor” magazine.
Apart from this he used to run a religious school, imparting education
in Islamic sciences.

His students are still found engaged in the work of religious
propagation. Keeping in mind the usefulness of his writings we have
decided to publish them in India also. We have already published *Hayat
B'ad al-Maut* (Life after Death). The second in this series,
*Akhlaq-e-Aaimma* (Morals & Manners of the Holy Imams) is in your hands.
If we continue to receive co-operation of the reading public, Insha
Allah, we would endeavor to publish all the writings of this great
scholar.

The enemies have not heard of the virtuous qualities of the Imams, and
neither have they liked it - as for the friends; they listen to the
merits and virtues of Imams and invoke blessings on them and send
Salawat - but what about emulating them? That is why so many ethical
weaknesses have developed among us. May Allah give us the divine
opportunity to study this book and take account of ourselves; and
resolve that by this we would amend whatever deficiencies we have. Amen.

**Servant of Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s)**  
**Izhar Husayn**  
 Proprietor: Haidery Kutub Khana, Mumbai - 3


