The Holy Imams’ affection for fellow creatures
==============================================

The fact is that the affection the Holy Imams (a.s) showed towards the
people is such that its equal is not found anywhere. This affection was
only for the sake of Allah and neither any show-off nor any personal
gain is present in it. Seeing the hardship of every Muslim they felt
greatly hurt and tried their best to remove it. Most of the time they
themselves had to suffer hardships in this regard but they bore it
willingly.

Affection Of Imam Ali (a.s)

Ibn Hanbal writes in his *Musnad* that when the verse:

O you who believe! When you consult the Apostle, then offer something in
charity before your consultation; (Surah Mujadilah 58:12)

was revealed, the Prophet told Ali (a.s), “Go and command those people
to pay alms (Sadaqah).” “How much should I ask them to pay?” asked Ali
(a.s). “One Dinar”, replied the Prophet (S). Ali (a.s) said, “They are
unable to pay this much.” “Half a Dinar”, said the Prophet. “They cannot
even pay this much” said Ali (a.s). The Prophet said, “A grain of gold.”
Ali (a.s) said, “Maybe they cannot even afford this.” The Prophet said,
“O Ali! You are very kind to the people. All right! Tell them to give
only one dirham.” Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) used to say, “The reduction in
this command was due to me.”

It is narrated from Abu Saeed Khudri that when the Messenger of Allah
(S) attended a funeral he never asked about any deed of the deceased but
inquired about his debt position. It that person remained indebted after
death the Prophet did not recite his funeral prayer. One day he attended
a funeral and as was his custom, he asked if the departed one had any
debts. People told him that the person had died indebted by two dinars.
The Prophet moved away from the bier, and told the companions to recite
his funeral prayer. Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) said, “O Messenger of Allah,
those two dinars are my responsibility. The deceased one is free from
the debt.” The Prophet was pleased to hear this, and he recited the
funeral prayer. Then he prayed for the well being of Amir'ul-Mu'minin
(a.s).

During the course of his caliphate, Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) saw an old
and weak woman carrying a load of food grain on her back. She was out of
breath due to her weakness. He moved forward at once and took the load
on his shoulders and carried it to her house.  
 When Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) took the control of Islamic government he
ordered his sons to prepare a list of all the deprived people, the poor,
the destitutes, widow and orphans of Kufa. He also told them to be
accurate and not leave out anyone. Thus he dispatched one son to the
east another to the west and so on. When the lists were prepared, during
the whole tenure of his Caliphate, it was the habit of the Imam that he
used to carry loaves of bread and dates on his shoulder during the night
and distribute them to the needy people. Once the Imam was down with
high temperature. Hasan and Husayn (a.s) offered to fulfill his duty.
The Imam said, “No, the Almighty Allah has entrusted me with the
responsibility of this government. Let me perform my duty.” Thus he went
out in the feverish condition also.

Affection Of Imam Hasan (a.s)

During the tenure of his caliphate it was the ritual of Imam Hasan (a.s)
that till the time people did not assure him that all of the deprived,
orphans and widows in the neighborhood had their meals, the Imam did not
eat himself. Often it so happened that he began to eat and a beggar
appeared at his door. He used to remove the food placed in front of him
and remain hungry.

One day Imam Hasan (a.s) learnt that the son of a widow in the
neighborhood was ill. He went to visit the child. The widow lamented
that there no one who could help her in the illness of her child. The
Imam said, “Do not worry, I am there to render all help.” Thus he
visited them in the morning and the evening and fulfilled all their
needs. He used to sit near the sick boy, massage him and speak to him
words of comfort and assurance. The Imam also provided him with whatever
he desired to eat.

Affection Of Imam Husayn (a.s)

After the battle of Naharwan the troops of Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) took
Shimr as captive. One day Imam Husayn (a.s) passed by the prison and
Shimr said, “O son of Allah's Messenger! Take pity on me and request
your father to release me. I cannot bear the hardships of this captivity
anymore.” The Imam at once came to Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) and began to
petition him for the release of Shimr. Ali (a.s) became very angry and
said, “Son, you don't know who that fellow is. He is you killer. One
day, he would slaughter you in a condition of three days' hunger and
thirst.” Imam Husayn (a.s) said, “All this is correct, but I have
promised him. Do not let me be embarrassed before him.” Amir'ul-Mu'minin
(a.s) ordered his release.

When people laid siege to the house of caliph Uthman and prevented
rations from him, Imam Ali (a.s) ordered Imams Hasan and Husayn (a.s) to
carry water skins and some loaves of bread and deliver them to the
besieged people. Thus when the young men reached there the people
stopped them but with great valour they moved ahead. Someone said,
“These people are not deserving of mercy.” The Imams (a.s) replied, “May
be not in your opinion. But the affection for creatures that Allah has
created in our hearts demands that we help them in their difficulty.”

The fact is that except for the Ahl ul-Bayt it is not possible for
anyone to show affection for people in such circumstances. It was only
their kind-heartedness that they dealt with affection with their most
staunch enemies.

Affection Of Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s)  
 In spite of the financial hardships that Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s)
always had, he regularly, helped the poor people of Medina and loading
leavened bread on his shoulders, he used to distribute it to their
houses. Ibn Ishaq says that many poor people of Medina used to receive
food daily. But they did not know who had brought it. When the Imam
passed away the people realized that the one who used to supply them
food keeping his face covered was Ali Ibnul Hasan (a.s). It is said that
when the funeral bath was being administered to the Imam a dark bruise
was seen on his back. Someone asked what it was and a person from Ahl
ul-Bayt replied that it was due to carrying sacks of flour at night to
the needy people's houses.

During the plunder of Medina, when the Yazidite forces unleashed general
massacre in Medina, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) was taken at a safe place
under orders from Yazid but he used to bitterly lament the destruction
of the people of Medina. Those who escaped the carnage and came to him
seeking refuge were accorded protection by him, and were treated
affectionately by the Imam. Thus many lives were saved by the Imam's
affection.

Affection Of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)

The affection of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) was such that those who
visited him were inquired about the condition of their neighbors. If
someone mentioned the problems of a particular person, the Imam used to
visit him and render whatever help he could. One day while walking
through a by-lane of Medina he saw a man groaning in pain. The Imam came
to him. This fellow belonged to the Bani Umayyah clan and just a few
days ago had bad-mouthed the Imam. The Imam said to him, “O man! If you
have any need, mention it.” He was ashamed and he said, “O son of the
Messenger of Allah (S). I am sick and even a drop of water is prohibited
for me. The physician has prescribed pomegranate juice for me. I was
going to purchase a pomegranate when due to extreme weakness I fell down
here.” The Imam said, “I will get a pomegranate for you.”

Thus he went to the market immediately and brought it to him and fed him
the seeds with his own hands. When the fellow regained his senses the
Imam said, “Come I'll take you to your house.” Then supporting his
shoulders the Imam took him to his house. The fellow was so mesmerized
by this affection that he fell down at the Imam's feet and begged
forgiveness for his past audacity.

Affection Of Imam Ja'far As-Sadiq (a.s)

One day Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) was going somewhere astride his
horse. On the way he saw a person sitting. The person greeted the Imam
and looked at him expectantly. The Imam alighted from the horse and
inquired about his condition. He said, “Son of Allah's Messenger! I am a
traveler. I am exhausted to walk any more. Please allow me to ride on
your mount and convey me to such and such tribe. There are some
relatives of mine there, and I will borrow their steed and go home on
it.” The Imam said, “This steed is at your service, mount it and go
wherever you like.” The person thanked the Imam and said, “I will soon
return it to you.” The Imam said, “No need, I have given it to you.”

Affection Of Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s)  
 During the period Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s) resided in Medina many
trouble-afflicted people visited him and mentioned their woes. The Imam
listened to each of their problems in an affectionate way and rendered
them whatever help he could. One day a person told him that the Governor
of Medina was inimical to him and was finding excuses to harass him.
“Please petition him on my behalf.” In spite of the fact that the
governor was inwardly inimical to the Imam, the Imam went to him and
petitioned him on behalf of that person saying, “I have never approached
you for my personal matters, but when I heard the woes of that person I
became restless, and I have come to you to consider about him.” The
governor was so much affected by the Imam's words that from that day he
became very kind to that person.”

Affection Of Imam Ridha’ (a.s)

During the time Imam Ridha’ (a.s) was the heir-apparent of Mamun, it was
his practice to roam the town on foot every day in search of people in
need and then try to solve their difficulties. When Mamun learnt about
it, he told the Imam one day, “I have heard that you go out sight-seeing
on foot while conveyance is available for you. Why do you take this
trouble?” The Imam replied, “I do not go for sight-seeing, I go to study
the condition of poor Muslims.” Mamun said, “You can go for this also on
a horse back.” Imam (a.s) said, “In that case the downtrodden people
would not meet me freely. Seeing my affluent manner they would be
repelled and would not dare to approach me.” Mamun was shocked on
getting this reply and after some time he said, “It is a fact that
affection towards creatures is truly the job of you Ahl ul-Bayt only.”

Affection Of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)

During the eight years of his stay in Baghdad, Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s)
regularly imparted religious education to the people. On most of the
days people remained in his presence from morning till night. He was
neither fed up with them nor worried. One day he was having high
temperature, when he was informed of some people waiting for him outside
to narrate their problems. The family members of the Imam said that it
was not the time to meet Imam (a.s) and they would tell the people to
come sometime later. The Imam said, “No, maybe someone is having an
urgent need to meet me.” So he came out with the support of a slave and
in that same high fever listened to the people. One of them said, “My
father is on the death bed. He wanted to make some bequest regarding his
property in your presence and also to see you for the last time. But how
can I request you to come while you are in such a severe fever?” The
Imam said, “I will come.” His family protested how he could go out in
such a condition but the Imam said that he would walk slowly. Thus he
went keeping his hands on the shoulders of two slaves, one on each side.
Allaho Akbar! (God is Greatest)! Except for the Ahl ul-Bayt who else can
display such affection?

Affection Of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s)

In spite of leading an impoverished life in Samarrah he was not
neglectful of the poor creatures of God. He himself visited the widows
and orphans and carried food for them while remaining hungry himself
mostly. When an orphan came before him, he used to caress his head
affectionately and if he desired something it was provided to him.

Affection Of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

A major part of the life of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) either passed in
prison or under house arrest. The spies of the caliph Motamid always
kept the Imam under strict surveillance. One day some Shia person sent
him a gift of some pomegranates. The fruits were kept before the Imam
and the caliph's guard was eyeing them in a greedy manner. The Imam gave
him one pomegranate. The fellow took it but did not eat it. When the
Imam asked him the reason he said that he was the father of five
children and he never ate anything without giving it to them also. And
that he was thinking how to distribute one pomegranate between them all.
The Imam gave him all the pomegranates. He said, “Son of Allah's
Messenger! I don't need all of them. Keep some for yourself.” The Imam
said, “It is better for the children to eat them, than me.” Witnessing
such affection of the Holy Imam the royal guard became such an ardent
devotee of his that he always used to remain in the Imam's service. When
Motamid heard about it, he summoned the guard and punished him severely.
He said, “Even if you put me to death, his love cannot leave my heart.”
This reply infuriated Motamid further and he sentenced the man to life
imprisonment.


