Hospitality of the Holy Imams (a.s)
===================================

Hospitality is highly emphasized in Islam. The Holy Prophet (S) said,
“Respect the guest even if he is a disbeliever.” The most excellent
display of this equality was done by the Ahl ul-Bayt (a.s).

Hospitality Of Imam Ali (a.s)

Ibn Hajar Makki has written in Asnial Matalib fi Silatul Aqarib that one
day Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) began to weep. When people asked him about it
he said that seven days have passed but he did not have a guest. “I am
fearful that maybe Allah has considered me degraded.”

Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) used to say, “Three things are most dear to me:
Hospitality, Jihad with the sword and keeping fast on a hot day.”

Whenever he had a guest, the Imam used to be exceeding happy and did not
leave any stone unturned in rendering him all the comforts and
facilities. He asked the guest about his favorite dish and ordered that
only that one be prepared for him. However insignificant a person his
guest may be, he used to seat him next to himself. Himself he ate that
same barley bread softened in water and grains of salt, but he served
his guests the most delicious foods.

Hospital**ity Of Imam Hasan (a.s)**

Imam Hasan (a.s) was the most hospitable person. His dinner cloth was
very vast. The poor, the deprived, travelers and orphans dined on his
food spread. He had the best possible food cooked for the guests, but he
never partook anything from it. His diet consisted of that same barley
bread and salt. One day he had a visitor. He ordered the servant to lay
the food. When the person sat to eat the Imam saw him eating one morsel
and keeping one morsel aside. The Imam said, “It seems that you have
some children. But eat comfortably. By the Grace of Allah there is
sufficient food here. You will be given to take away as much you want.”
The man said, “I am a traveler and wife and children do not accompany me
but I have seen a Dervish in the mosque eating chaff-mixed barley flour.
I am keeping these morsels for him.” Imam Hasan (a.s) began to weep and
said, “Do not consider him a Dervish. He is our respected father, Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s). He has divorced the world.”

Hospitality Of Imam Husayn **(a.s)**

Imam Husayn (a.s) was also of a very hospitable nature. Whenever a
traveler who had lost his way reached Medina he used do to be a guest of
Imam Husayn (a.s). One day some people were discussing in the Prophet's
Mosque about the most hospitable person in Medina. Everyone was
expressing his own opinion. Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari also joined the
group and the people solicited his opinion. He said, “Right now, there
is no one more hospitable than the son of the Messenger, Imam Husayn
(a.s). I have seen that when a person becomes his guests he serves him
so nicely that he forgets his family. If he is in debts, the Imam repays
his debts. If he is on foot, the Imam gives him a mount. If he is sick
the Imam arranges treatment for him. He goes a long way to bid him adieu
and also begs his pardon saying, 'I was not able to do anything for
you.'”

Hospitality Of Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s)

Farazdaq, the poet says that he visited Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) one
day, to find some guests there. The Imam ordered that food be laid for
them. Some bowls containing meat and broth were placed before the guests
and a bowl of roasted grains was also placed there. This was his regular
diet. After the tragedy of Karbala’ he never ate anything delicious. The
Imam was content only with roasted grains. Farazdaq says, “When the Imam
started eating, I began to weep and said: O son of Allah's Messenger.
Why don't you take some of the meat and broth?” The Imam began to weep
and did not reply. When the guests had eaten to satiation he said to
them by way excuse, “I could not serve you the type of food I desired
to. I hope you would forgive me. The tragedy of Karbala’ has made us
living corpses.”

Hospitality Of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)

Faiz Ibn Mazhar narrates: One day I went to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) to
find him aggrieved. I asked the reason and he said, “Last evening a
traveler from Syria arrived and went away after saying that he would
soon return after meeting a relative. I remained awake the whole night
waiting for him from the morning till afternoon but he did not arrive.
In his wait I have not eaten a single morsel. O Faiz! Go and search for
him.” So I came out to search for him in the lanes and by-lanes but he
was not found. I was returning dejected when he saw him walking on the
road. I caught his hand and said, “O man, you are very careless. Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s) has not eaten since two meal times in you
anticipation.” Being greatly ashamed he said, “A relative of mine told
me to stay the night. I didn't know that the Imam was so hospitable. Now
I would go and beg forgiveness of my mistake.” The Syrian came with me
to Imam (a.s). As soon as the Imam saw him, he became very happy.
Embraced him and asked about his well being. The man told him about his
condition and begged forgiveness for his mistake. The Imam said, “If you
want my pleasure, dine with me now.” The person accepted and Imam ate
with him after having missed two meals.

Hospitality Of Imam Ja'far As-Sadiq (a.s)

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) used to display such hospitality that people
were astonished. Never was his dinner spread devoid of travelers and
destitutes. Like Prophet Ibrahim, the Imam never ate without the company
of a guest. He often used to say, “A morsel that a believing brother
eats with me is better for me than emancipating a slave.”

Sulaiman Ibn Khalid says that once a governor of Mansur was a dinner
guest at the Imam's place. Different types of meat dishes and breads
were placed on the food cloth. After the people ate to satiation they
arose to leave. Just then the Imam's servant entered with a dish of
rice. The Imam told them to partake it also but the people said that
they were already full. But the Imam said that those who were his
friends were also more deserving to dine at his place, and he insisted
too much. At the last the people again sat down to eat. The Imam said,
“Once rice was presented on the dinner spread of the Allah's Messenger.
They were gifted by an Ansari (Helper) man. At that time, Salman Farsi,
Miqdad and Abu Zar were also present. They were invited to eat but they
wanted to excuse themselves. The Prophet said: Eat! Our friend is only
that who eats with us properly. Hearing this they all began to dine
happily.”

Abu Hamzah Thumali narrates: One day we were eating at the dinner spread
of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s). Various kinds of delicious foods were
present there. After that fresh and good quality dates arrived. We also
ate those. At last a person said, “On the Day of Judgment you all would
have to give the account of the fine things you have consumed here.” The
Imam said, “Allah is much Greater, Higher and More Self-Sufficient than
this; that He should take account of what you have eaten.” They said,
“But Allah Himself says:

Then on that day you shall most certainly be ques**tioned about the
boons. (Surah Takathur 102:8)**

The Imam said, “The bounty mentioned in this verse denotes love for Ahl
ul-Bayt. That is, you would be questioned on the Judgment day how far
you have valued that bounty and of how you behaved with them. See, the
same bounty is mentioned at another place:

This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My favor
on you…(Surah Maidah 5:3)

This bounty signifies the existence of the Imam.”

Muhammad Ibn Zaid Shakham narrates: One night I was a guest of Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s). In the morning he asked, “What provisions of
journey do you have?” I told him what I had. He said, “May be it would
be insufficient.” After that he gave me two gold coins and twenty
dirhams. I took them and went away. But, by chance I could not commence
my journey that day. The Imam (a.s) learnt that I was still in town. He
sent for me and asked, “Why did you not come back to me? Be my guest,
till the time you stay in Medina. And if you need anything just mention
it.” I said that I was very fond of milk. At once, the Imam gave me a
milk-giving she goat and then he taught me a supplication and told me to
recite it in the month of Rajab.

The Imam used to serve his guests with the best foods, and himself ate
bread and vinegar. He used to say, “This is the diet of the prophets and
we also eat this only.”

Abdullah Ibn Bukair narrates: One day the Holy Imam was having dinner
with his guests and various kinds of delicious dishes were laid on the
dinner spread. Someone remarked that the Imam spent too much on food,
and that one must save for the future. The Imam said, “Sustenance is
upon Allah. When He increases our sustenance, we also feed His creatures
generously and when there is reduction in it, there is decrease here
also.”

The narrator says: The Imam used to spend so generously upon the guests
that sometimes there were financial problems for the family's expenses.
One day the Imam was having his afternoon meal when a person arrived to
him but did not greet him. Those present with the Imam said, “Since he
has purposely not greeted you, why did you invite him to join you?” the
Imam replied, “It is the jurisprudence of Iraq. It smells of
miserliness.”

One day some guests were dining at Imam's place when one of them needed
something and no servant was present. A guest arose to get the required
thing, but the Imam stopped him and himself performed the job. Then he
said, “Our grandfather, the Prophet of Allah, has commanded that it is
incumbent for the host not to take any kind of service from the guest.”

Hospitality Of Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s)

Since a major part of the life of Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s) was spent in
captivity, we don't find in books of history any incident regarding his
hospitality. We present the following couplet so well depicting the
Imam's condition:

*It was the limit of imprisonment*  
*The youth and old age of the Imam passed in prison.*

Hospitality Of Imam Ridha’ (a.s)

A major portion of the pension that the Imam received during the period
of his heir-apparency of Mamun was spent in entertaining guests. People
visited him from far-flung areas. One day Mamun came to meet him. He saw
that the house of Imam (a.s) was teeming with guests and the Imam was
busy in serving them. Mamun inquired who these people were. “They are
all my guests”, replied the Imam. Mamun said, “Being on the honorable
post of heir-apparent it does not befit you that like a commoner you
serve these ordinary people. So many servants are there at you service,
let them take care of these people.” The Imam said, “Being your
heir-apparent, it may not befit me, but being the grandson of the
Messenger, it is my duty that I serve my guests. We Ahl ul-Bayt are very
fond of guests.”

Hospitality Of Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s)

Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s) was also very hospitable. Once a guest arrived
at his place in the middle of the night. The Imam asked him if he would
like to have dinner. The guest said, “O son of Allah's Messenger, though
I am hungry, since it is such an odd hour I don't want to inconvenience
you, I will sleep hungry.” The Imam said, “Guests do no sleep hungry at
our place.” Saying so he went inside and awakened one of his slave-maids
and told her, “I am igniting the oven, you knead the flour.” She said,
“Son of Allah's Messenger, I will ignite it myself.” “No”, said the
Imam, “I also want to take some part in serving the guest.” Thus the
Imam got the food prepared and brought it to the guest himself. Seeing
such affection the man began to weep. When he asked the reason he said,
“I am crying at the thought that how the world has not recognized such
godly people.”

Hospitality Of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s)

During the time Mutawakkil had made life difficult for Imam Ali Naqi
(a.s), the Imam often used to go without food but he never complained to
anyone about it. One day, he managed to get some food after being hungry
for two mealtimes. He was about to commence eating when a guest arrived.
He placed the food before his guest in a cheerful manner and did not at
all let him realize that he had already missed two meals. When the
person finished eating he gave some Khums money to the Imam. The Imam
spent the same on the poor and destitute, and slept hungry.

Hospitality Of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

Ali Ibn Ibrahim relates: I went to meet Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) and
found him in a disturbed state. When I asked the reason he said, “I am
having some guests today but I have nothing to serve them.” I said, “Son
of Allah's Messenger, just mention it, I will get all that is needed.”
The Imam said, “We Ahl ul-Bayt do not serve our guests at the expense of
others.” “All right! Then tell me what I can do?” I said. He told me,
“Go and sell this Yemeni sheet of mine.” I said, “Son of Allah's
Messenger, it is so cold now-a-days and you do not have any other quilt
or sheet. Do not sell it.” The Imam said, “The God Who gave this would
give another.” I did as the Imam had ordered and sold the sheet for ten
dirhams and brought the money to him. Immediately he began to make
arrangement for a dinner. I was much aggrieved at the Imam's condition.
The Imam said, “Why are you looking at me with pity? I would not have
been as much happy by covering myself with the sheet, as I am in
entertaining these guests.”


