The Holy Imams’ kindness to relatives
=====================================

The traditions of the holy infallibles (a.s) greatly emphasize the
important of goodness to relatives. The Messenger of Allah (S) said,
“The Almighty Allah increases the life span of one who is kind to his
relatives.” He also said, “One who is not kind to his relatives, is not
from us.”

Imam Ali’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
--------------------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s) regularly inquired about the well being of all his
relatives and kinsmen and used to try his utmost in fulfilling all their
needs. Ibn Abbas says that he has not seen anyone more excellent than
Ali (a.s) in kindness to relatives. He says, “One day I fell sick and my
illness became prolonged. Every morning and evening, Ali (a.s) visited
me. Sitting near my head used to recite supplications and blow them on
me. He brought to me whatever I desired.” Most of the time he
distributed to others whatever he received as his share of war-booty. So
much so that sometimes Ali (a.s) also spent his bare sustenance on his
relatives. Aqil (the Imam's brother) had many children. One day he
complained to the Imam that the stipend he received from the public
treasury was insufficient for his family, and that Imam give him some
more from it. The Imam said, “O Aqil, the public treasury is the share
of the Muslims and I have no right to spend anything from it. It is
however possible that I give you something for your children from my
share.” From that day it was his practice to first dispatch food to
Aqil's house. If something remained he ate just enough to survive or he
remained hungry.

Imam Hasan’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
----------------------------------------

Imam Hasan (a.s) used to be kind to relatives since childhood. He had
done such favors on all the people of Bani Hashim clan that they were
devotees of his excellent manners. It was his practice to inquire about
his relatives everyday. He used to consider his half-siblings as
full-blood brothers and sisters, and he used to behave with them with
the best of affection and regard. Whenever a relative asked him for
something, he provided it immediately and shared their sorrow. He used
to exhaust all the means for their welfare and success.

Imam Husayn ’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
------------------------------------------

Imam's Husayn 's (a.s) kindness towards his relatives does not have an
equal. This was the reason that the whole clan was submissive to his
commands. And also that is why, they all accompanied him when he
departed for Karbala’ . Brothers, nephews and all were ready to lay down
their lives at his smallest indication. Finally they all sacrificed
themselves on the Imam one after the other.

Imam Zainul Abideen’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
-------------------------------------------------

After the tragedy Karbala’ , Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) was absolutely
broken-hearted, and he betook himself to a life of seclusion and spent
his days either in Allah's worship or in grief of the incident of
Karbala’ . He was so much engrossed in it but he still observed the duty
of kindness to relatives. He used to regularly comfort and assure the
women of Bani Hashim whose relatives were martyred in Karbala’ and he
used to provide them immediately whatever they required. He never told
anyone a word that could have hurt him or her. He never did anything to
displease anyone. He used to perform with perfection all that is
included among the kind behavior.

Imam Muhammad Baqir’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
-------------------------------------------------

Zaid Ibn Ali Ibn Husayn and Zaid Ibn Hasan Muthanna were mostly unhappy
with the family of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) because he often expressed
opposition to their evil plans. Secondly, they also wanted to take over
the public trusts controlled by the Imam, so that people may accept
their spiritual powers like they acknowledged the position of the Imam.
In spite of all this, Imam (a.s) never cut off relations with them. He
continued to act in the best manners of kindness to relatives. One day
Zaid came to the Imam and told him about his intention of insurgency
against the enemies of Ahl ul-Bayt. The Imam opposed it severely. Zaid
became very angry; he got up from there at once and also uttered some
unbecoming things. Imam (a.s) remained quiet. After some days it was
known that Zaid was sick. Imam went to visit him immediately. Zaid was
thinking that the Imam would never come to his place. When he saw that
Imam (a.s) had arrived he was very pleased and begged the Imam to
forgive his past mistakes.

Imam Ja'far As-Sadiq (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
------------------------------------------------

It is narrated in *Al-Kafi* that Abdullah Mahaz spoke some harsh words
to the Imam in the morning. The Imam observed patience and did not reply
to any of his statements. When the Imam met him again in the evening, he
(the Imam) said with utmost humility, “O Abu Muhammad! Do you know
kindness to relatives is a cause for reduction in divine chastisement?”
He said, “You always talk of such things that are not accepted by us.”
The Imam said, “This statement of mine is testified by the saying of
Allah:

And those who join that w**hich Allah has bidden to be joined and have
awe of their Lord and fear the evil reckoning. (Surah Ra'ad 13:21)**

After this Abdullah Mahaz acknowledged his mistake and said, “Now you
will not find me as one who breaks off relations.”

In the last moments of his life Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) summoned all
the relatives who gathered around him and he made monetary bequests to
each of them. He also willed seventy dinars to his cousin Hasan Aftas. A
servant of the Imam said, “You are leaving seventy dinars for Hasan
Aftas, while he is the same person who had come to assassinate you with
a sword.” The Imam became angry at this and said, “Do you want that I
should not accord kindness to relatives and not be included among those
who are described in the following words by Allah:

And those who join that which Allah has bidden to be joined…(Ibid.)

Know that! I am making bequest of money to Hasan Aftas because the
Messenger of Allah (S) has said: The disobedient child and one who
breaks-off relations would not smell the fragrance of Paradise, that
reaches upto a distance of 2000 years' travel.”

Imam Musa Kadhim’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
----------------------------------------------

Ali Ibn Hamzah says: An Alawi Sayyid was hawking some wares placed in a
round tray. I was full of pity at his condition. I came to Imam Musa
Kadhim (a.s). I had not said anything but the Imam told me, “A Sayyid's
son is hawking at such and such place. Give him these eighteen dirhams
and tell him on my behalf to invest them in his trade and profit
thereby. It is sufficient for his whole life.” I said in surprise,
“Master! I had intended to invite your attention to his plight but you
have furnished assistance to him before I could say anything.” Imam
said, “O Ali Ibn Hamzah! We are not ignorant of the condition of our
kinsmen and we consider kindness towards them incumbent.” So I delivered
the money to that young man. Taking the money the youth began to weep.
When I asked the reason he said, “Why shouldn't I weep when I have
received the news of my death in the near future?” I asked him how that
was? He said, “One day Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s) had told me that when he
sends money to me through Ali Ibn Hamzah, I should know that my death is
near.”

Imam Ridha’’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
-----------------------------------------

During the time Imam Ridha’ (a.s) resided in Medina some of his
relatives were antagonistic to him, especially due to the fact that the
spirituality of the Imam was effective on all and people used to respect
him greatly. However, the Imam behaved with all of them in a very kind
and affectionate way and also sent them occasional gifts. The Imam's
family members tried to restrain him from this. He said, “This is the
only difference between Ahl ul-Bayt and others, that we always repay bad
behavior with goodness and we are kind to the relatives.”

Imam Muhammad Taqi’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
------------------------------------------------

Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s) used to behave very nicely and affectionately
with all the people of his clan. Among them were also those who did not
accept him as the son of Imam Ridha’ (a.s). Imam (a.s) used to bear all
the false allegations patiently, but he never broke off relations with
them. He used to share their sorrows and hardships regularly and also
fulfilled their needs.

Imam Ali Naqi’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
-------------------------------------------

During the period Imam Ali Naqi (a.s) resided in Samarrah, he used to
regularly inquire about the conditions of his kinsmen from people coming
from Medina and also sent to them the Khums money he received, and solve
their problems. Once some people from Hasani Sadat visited him in
Samarrah. Through them the Imam sent some gifts to his relatives.

Imam Hasan Askari’s (a.s) Kindness To Relatives
-----------------------------------------------

Like his venerable ancestors, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) also cared greatly
for according kindness to relatives. Often he had to undergo many
hardships due to his kinsmen. However he bore them happily. He used to
say that whatever they may do to him he would continue to be kind
towards his relatives.


