The Holy Imams’ Benevolence to Slaves
=====================================

Fortunate were those slaves who lived under the care of Ahl ul-Bayt. It
was much better for them than freedom. Though Islam allowed slavery, it
laid down such duties on the slave owner that the rights of the slaves
were protected. Along with this Islam also prescribed great rewards for
emancipation of slaves. It prescribed freeing of slaves as penalties for
omitting incumbent and obligatory acts. The kind behavior that the Holy
Imams (a.s) accorded to their slaves is such that to find its equal is
not possible. The following incidents illustrate how our Holy Imams
(a.s) made the slaves and maids happy and how they were always finding
excuses to free bondsmen.

Imam Ali’s Kind Behavior To The Slaves
--------------------------------------

Qambar the slave of Imam Ali (a.s) says: I spent my days under the
slavery of Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) in such a way that he used to feed me
first then eat himself. First he clothed me then he wore himself. One
day the Imam purchased two shirts. He saw that the shirt of Salman Farsi
was patched at many places. So he gave one shirt to him and told me to
put on the second. I said that the Imam's shirt was also quite worn out,
but he said, “You wear it. I will buy another one for myself when it is
possible.” He never awoke me for some errand and never made me work when
I was sick. He never gave me tasks beyond my strength or capacity. The
Imam tried to free me many times but I implored and pleaded the Imam not
to do so.

Imam Hasan’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To The Slaves
----------------------------------------------

Imam Hasan (a.s) used to be very affectionate to the slaves. He freed
many slaves for rendering ordinary services.

One day the Imam was sleeping. A slave began to fan him. The Imam awoke
and freed him.

A slave dropped a bowl of curry and it spilled on the garment of Imam
(a.s). He was so terrified that he began to tremble and recite the
verse:

…and those who restrain (their) anger **and pardon men; and Allah loves
the doers of good (to others). (Surah Aale Imran 3:134)**

The Imam forgave his mistake and told him, “I free you for the sake of
Allah.”

Imam Husayn 's (a.s) had a slave who was very obedient. One day the Imam
was pleased of his good services and he freed him. The slave began to
weep bitterly. The Imam asked the reason. He said, “O son of Allah's
Messenger, I do not want to leave you. This slavery of mine is a
thousand times better than freedom.” The Imam said, “I have freed you.
Now you can live with me happily like a relative.”

One day Imam Husayn (a.s) saw a slave feeding a dog from his food. When
the Imam asked him the reason he said, “O son of Allah's Messenger. I am
a trouble-stricken person, by making this dog happy I expect happiness
from Allah in return.” The Imam asked him what his problem was. He said,
“I am a slave of a Jew and I want freedom from him.” The Imam was moved
at this slave's yearning. He immediately came to the Jew, purchased the
slave for 200 gold coins and freed him.

Imam Zainul Abideen’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
---------------------------------------------------

Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) was extremely kind and affectionate towards
slaves and slave girls. He used to take very less work from them for his
personal needs. One day a slave girl began to weep after hearing about
the incidents of Karbala’ from him. When the Imam saw this devotion of
hers, he said, “Go, I have freed you for the sake of Allah.” She said,
“O son of Allah's Messenger (S), I will continue to remain in your
service. Being at your feet is everlasting happiness for me.”

Tawus Yamani says that he saw Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) surrounded by
his slaves and slave girls. He was telling them, “I have forgive your
mistakes. You all pray to Allah that He forgives the mistakes of Ali
Ibnul Husayn .”

Since it is obvious that no sin was committed by the Holy Imam, these
pleas for forgiveness of sins were for the expression of his servitude
to Allah.

Imam Muhammad Baqir’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
---------------------------------------------------

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) was extremely affectionate towards his
bondsmen. The slaves were always yearning that Imam should take their
services, but the Imam mostly used to do his own work. He first fed the
male and female slaves than ate himself. He gave them better food and
himself ate ordinary things. A slightest excuse was sufficient for him
to free the slaves. He was never harsh with any of his slaves and never
beat anyone of them.

Imam Ja'far As-Sadiq’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
----------------------------------------------------

The Imam was very kind upon the slaves and always overlooked their
mistakes. Once he had sent a slave on some errand, but when he took a
long time to return the Imam went out to search for him and found him
sleeping at one place. Instead of awaking him, the Imam began to fan
him. When the fellow awoke the Imam told him, “You have the habit of
sleeping in the day as well as at night. Allah has made the day for work
and night for rest.”

Once a slave of his fell sick. The Imam visited him and found that he
was groaning due to a severe headache. “What is the problem?” asked the
Imam. He said that he had a terrible headache. The Imam began to press
his head. The slave got up abruptly and said, “Son of Allah's Messenger
more than the headache it is painful for me that you press my head. I
can never accept it.” Another slave was standing there. He tried to
press the sick man's head but the Imam said, “Man! Why do you want to
deprive me from a great reward?”

Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
----------------------------------------------

A slave girl of Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s) fell sick and her illness was
prolonged. Everyone was fed up of her care. But Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s)
continued to be affectionate to her. Every morning and evening asked her
what she felt like eating, and whatever she desired was brought for her.
She used to invoke blessings for the Imam. Finally she passed away in
that illness. The Imam wept profusely at her funeral and performed her
last rites in the same way as he would do for a relative.

Imam Ridha’’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
-------------------------------------------

Abu Bakr Suli says that his grandmother used to narrate: I and three
friends of mine were in the service of Imam Ridha’ (a.s) for many years.
The Imam took very less work from us. One day we said to him, “Mamun has
sent us to serve you and not to live in comfort.” The Imam said, “It is
my service only that you fulfill the obligations of Allah.” The Holy
Imam used to teach us the religious rules everyday. Being in the Imam's
service I memorized nearly 400 traditions, that now I have forgotten.
Most of the time it so happened that the Imam used to fill up a pot of
water for ritual ablution (wuzu), kept it besides us and then awoke us
in a very very gentle way saying, “This is not the time to sleep, it is
time for Allah's remembrance.” We used to be very ashamed of such
affection of the Holy Imam. When he was martyred we were sent back to
Mamun's house. But in spite of all the facilities available there I felt
very lonely and the royal palaces seemed like dark dungeons. I used to
remember the Imam (a.s) and weep day and night.

Imam Muhammad Taqi’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
--------------------------------------------------

Ummul Fadl the daughter of Mamun had brought some slave girls with her
and she used to be very harsh with them and beat them with canes. Imam
Muhammad Taqi (a.s) used to stop her from such harshness and said, “They
are Allah's creatures. If you are not merciful on them, Allah would not
be merciful on you.” The words of the Imam had no effect on Ummul Fadl.
One day she beat a slave girl in such a bad way that she began to bleed.
When the Imam came home and saw her condition he rebuked Ummul Fadl. She
was so angry at this, that she went to her father's home. The Imam began
to treat and serve the slave girl. He himself washed her wounds and
applied ointment. He nursed the slave girl for almost a fortnight till
she recovered. Then the Imam said to her, “Now you go to Ummul Fadl.”
She said, “I prefer to be killed than see the face of such a heartless
mistress.”

Imam Ali Naqi’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves

Like his forefathers, Imam Ali Naqi (a.s) also used to be very kind on
the slaves. One day he was going somewhere when he saw that a master was
beating his slave a lot. The Imam said to him, “Mister, is this weak man
your creature?” “Not my creature, he is my slave,” replied the man. The
Imam said, “You have not created him, you have only purchased him for
some dirhams and you have the right to beat him this much.” The man
said, “Yes, that is why I am beating him. He is my disobedient slave.”
The Imam said, “If according to you a disobedient slave is eligible for
such punishment, for how much punishment would a disobedient creature be
eligible? Do you not disobey the commands of Allah? Are you not the same
person who lied there drunk? If Allah punishes you for that
disobedience, what your condition would be.”

Imam Hasan Askari’s (a.s) Kind Behavior To Slaves
-------------------------------------------------

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) used to be very affectionate to the slaves. One
day a slave, who was a Shia of Ali (a.s) came to the Imam and said, “My
owner troubles me a lot. I want to be freed from him somehow.” The Imam
said, “If he agrees to sell you, I can pay the price.” The slave spoke
to his master and persuaded him to sell him for 200 dirhams. The Imam
paid the money and purchased him. Then he freed him the same day for the
sake of Allah. In the same way the Imam purchased many slaves from other
people and released them. The Imam's slave, Mohlib used to say, “I have
never seen a master as kind as Imam Hasan Askari (a.s).” The Imam used
to be affectionate towards his male and female slaves like a father is
to his children.


