What are Ethics?
================

The meaning of ethics has become so clear to people that it need not be
explained even to the most simple-minded persons. However, the level of
ethics in the view of the masses is such that it needs a lot of
elucidation according to experts of ethical philosophy. It is possible
that limits may overlap with the merits of ethics, but in the view of a
philosopher they are not included in the perfections of the human soul.

A major portion of the detailed discussions in books of philosophy is
beyond the understanding of ordinary people. They are not presented to
guide people on the path of virtues but their intention is to confuse
the people to an extent that they are not even able to do what they
would do in the normal course, thus the dream of the philosophers is
fulfilled.

Maybe a student scholar would spend a lot of precious time in explaining
these things but the result would be nothing. Thinkers have formulated
numerous theories regarding abstract things because they are beyond
perception. Those who intend to falsify them cannot unveil the truth. We
do not desire to delve into such farfetched theories and waste the
precious time of our readers.

Rather than discuss the reality of the soul and its composition in
detail we shall study the effects of ethical values in the practical
life of man, so that readers may gain something useful. In spite of the
elaborate explanations presented by philosophers of ethics it is
necessary for us to say that the true meaning of ethics is least
understood by common people.

If a good-natured person speaks to us with a smile, he is considered
perfect in manners.

If we go to meet someone and he serves us a cup of tea, we take him to
be of exemplary morals.

A person we know takes care of his family and we think he has very good
morals.

If one is sympathetic to us in our difficult times, he is having perfect
morals.

These are some prevalent notions in our society. Though these are some
of the elements of ethics, we intend to explain to our readers true
morals and ethical values that make a perfect human being. However, to
explain such a vast subject is beyond the scope of this book and not its
actual aim.


