Merits of the Fourteen Infallibles
==================================

Just as man is created from four elements, the basics of ethical values
are also four, wisdom, chastity, justice and valour. As if these are the
four walls of a perfect character. Even if one of these walls is absent
or dilapidated the morals are unsafe and the ethical character stained.
These four qualities can be said to be the roots of the tree of morals.
All the moral qualities are related to these four basic values. They are
thus the branches of this ethical tree. Actually a tree is a tree
because of its branches, while a dried barren tree is but used as
firewood. The usefulness and value of a tree is proportionate to its
foliage and shade-giving capability.

In fact, the magic formula of the establishment of the universe lies in
these four words. It is the ladder to the ascension of spirituality.
Success in life and the hereafter depends upon these four qualities.
Innumerable weapons have been produced and are being produced for the
establishment of kingdoms but their purpose is to defeat and conquer
material things but they are not concerned with the reformation of
hearts. This kingdom is beyond the power of those material weapons. If
anything can gain control over it, it is these four weapons. How
powerful these weapons are is beyond description and the extent of their
capability is beyond perception. We can briefly state that they have the
ability to control anything from the earth to the heavens. Every
particle of the universe can kiss the feet. Humanity is raised so high
in status that angels consider it a privilege to serve them. Let us now
see their practical prowess.


