Amazing Appeal of Good Morals
=============================

The aim of sending the Holy Prophet (S) was to perfect the morals. That
is, the mission that did not reach the peak of perfection even after the
arrival of 124000 messengers, it was done in theory and practice to such
a level of perfection that now there was no more any need of a new
prophet or messenger. This required extraordinary capability. That too
in the land of Arabs, which was the cradle of ill manners. As if,
shameless traits had hammered the final nail in the coffin of humanity.
This severe necessity could neither be fulfilled by wealth and money nor
by a military system or by the edge of the sword. This needed another
type of power.

The verse: **“Certainly you are upon the best morals,”** has revealed
this secret and announced to the world that the aspect of Prophet's
behavior is such that it transformed the Arab society completely. It
displayed such a miracle of human intercourse that the world was
spellbound. What actually happened may be understood in the words of
Quran: People entered the fold of Islam in hordes.

The good moral behavior of the Prophet of Islam had the most important
role in this magnificent victory. Though Khadija's wealth served a great
deal in helping the poor and deprived ones among the Muslims and the awe
of Abu Talib afforded some security but the thing that struck the hearts
and minds of the polytheist and disbelieving Arabs was the good moral
behavior of the Messenger of Islam. It was this that left an indelible
mark on the hearts of ignorant Arabs and attracted the wild Arabs to the
Prophet like a magnet pulls a needle.

At that time Prophethood was veiled due to hidden wisdom when the
Prophet started secret propagation and obtained confessions of his
truthfulness from those who were dead enemies of good morals, becoming
well known as “The Truthful” and “The Trustworthy” among the Arabs. The
blood of human perfections had started running in this body known as
Muhammad from the day it breathed its first in the atmosphere of water
and clay.

The teachings of Islamic morals to the people did not consist of mere
oral admonitions, but it was accompanied by practical feats for every
aspect. When those lacking any type of moral embellishments saw the
flawless character of the Holy Prophet (S) they realized the degraded
and shameful position of their own humanity.

And on every occasion their created nature was shook with a deep
yearning. The moral teachings that the Prophet imparted were the
nourishment of the face of Islam and the life of its body. When these
teachings was recorded on the pages of history and reached the different
corners of the earth, and when with the Muslim travelers those teachings
reached the people of other nations they were awakened abruptly from
their slumber like a slow horse is spurred by the crack of the whip. It
was it was an opportunity for the religions to compare that they make
Islamic morals the criterion of comparing their differences. Those who
did this realized very soon what is the difference between genuine and
artificial pearls.


