Perfection of Morals at the Hands of the Holy Prophet (S)?
==========================================================

The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: I was sent to perfect the morals.
This shows that the one hundred and twenty four thousand prophets that
have arrived till now, one of whose duties was to perfect the morals
have not been able to achieve this object. Why is it so? Were they
careless of their job? But this is against the status of prophethood.
Then what is the reason that these teachings could not reach perfection?

Though apparently it is a difficult question, its answer requires a
little explanation. The verse: “We blessed all those prophets, some of
them excel others,” shows that the status of all the prophets was not
equal. There was a difference in their grades and positions, whether it
be in their practical value or by the limited scope of their
propagation, or by way of their divine recognition, but Allah knows best
about all that. Any conjecture in this regard can deviate us. We believe
in the prophethoods of all of them.

“We do not differentiate between any of them.” Though it can be said
that the previous prophets did not get the opportunity to highlight each
and every aspect of perfection of morals. Some prophets were such that
they were sent only for a particular group; some were sent for a
particular country, some were appointed on one area. Some were prophets
only for their families. Followers of certain prophets did not heed
their teachings. Some listened but did not follow the teachings. In any
case, there were many situations when all the moral qualities and their
types could not be taught to the people and all the Islamic morals could
not be explained clearly to them. Or sometimes the teachings of a
particular prophet lasted for limited period and there was no
arrangement to take it further.

It was the reason that the followers of every prophet became deviated
after the passing away of their prophet, and with the passage of time
the actual teachings assumed a completely different shape. Since the
real examples did not exist any more they took the wrong ones as models
and continued to follow them. Till the time that need arose again for
the arrival of a new prophet. There are some prophets in whose
generation prophethood continued in a serial order, but this also came
to an end at some time. Since there was no permanent and everlasting
arrangement, there was no possibility for the perfection of morals.

The best perfection of man is to set an example. There are innumerable
people who display perfection of morals in their own selves but there
are very few who can make others like themselves. Rather most centuries
pass away without they're being any such personality in them.

When people with perfect morals are not able to pass on their traits to
others, perfect morals gradually disappear from the society. Setting an
example is not an easy job; it requires a very effective personality. To
make someone else like ourselves is not possible till the time the
personality of the owner of perfection is not so powerful that it could
pull others towards itself. There are many who can create partial
similarity; there are none who can create total similarity. Continuation
of perfection is impossible till all the partial things, all the habits
and all good traits and morals, all the actions and deeds, all the
spiritual perfections are not transferred to someone else.

The Prophet was on the position of the best of morals. Its perfection
was possible only if there was arrangement of its continuation.
Otherwise it would have been temporary just like the teachings of other
prophets, while creation of examples is impossible without continuity.
Therefore the Prophet, first of all, paid attention to this, and in his
lifetime made four persons (Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husayn , peace be
upon them all) like himself in every aspect.

There was no quality of good morals that was present in the Prophet but
not found in them. Just as the Holy Prophet (S) showed each and every
virtue practically, they also did so. This was an arrangement of the
perfection of good morals from Providence; that it created twelve such
personalities, who had the privilege of the successorship of the Holy
Prophet (S) one after the other.

They continued to present the examples of prophetic morals in every age
and period. And they continued to display all the good morals possessed
by the Prophet himself, without any increase or decrease. Just as the
prophethood of the Holy Prophet (S) is to continue till the Day of
Judgment, in the same way is to continue the examples of his good moral
qualities.


