Explanation of the Four Merits
==============================

All the four meritorious qualities mentioned by us above (wisdom,
chastity, justice and valour) are such that each of them is a very
difficult path, thinner than hair and sharper than a sword. The scholars
of moral science have called this “Siratul Mustaqeem”, the right path.
One who has achieved this path in the world and remained steadfast on it
would easily pass over the Sirat Bridge in the Hereafter, because if he
walks on this Siratul Mustaqeem there would be no defect in his deeds.

Consider this way to be a space between two written words. It is the
smallest but the most upright one. All the writings besides it would be
slanted and longer than it. All these writings would not be included in
the merits; rather they would be called decline and the merit would be
that middle writing alone. All the writings near to this middle one
would be closer in merit and those further away would be further from
merit also. The moral virtue would be only one and the declines
numerous. Not a single word would be steadfast on this middle line.

It is this straight path in whose search remain the wayfarers and
guides, day and night. They practice penance to achieve all this but
first of all its achievement is very difficult. Even if they find it, it
is very difficult to remain steadfast upon it. The feet waver in the
slightest difficulty. What can be said of others, the prophets sometimes
reached the juncture of “omitting the preferred option” (Tark-e-awla).
The correct standard to distinguish this path is the morals of prophets
and most of all the morals of the Holy Prophet (S).

It is this balance of deeds in which the actions of people shall be
weighed. The Almighty Allah says,

***Certainly We sent Our apostles with clear arguments, and sent down
with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct themselves with
equity. ( Surah Hadid, 57:25).***

It is evident that none of the prophets were born with a book or a
balance, then what does it denote? The fact is that 'book' denotes the
book of the existence of the prophet.

Amir'ul-Mu'minin (a.s) says: “O man! You are that magnificent book of
Allah, each letter of which reveals the secrets of providence.”

When the existence of man is the magnificent book of Allah, what can be
said of the existence of the prophets? The special miracle of divine
power is found in each of their organs and powers. Their senses of
hearing, speech and sight are more powerful than those of ordinary
people. Their physical organs are superior to those of ordinary people
in their special qualities. Even the seeds in the loins or wombs heard
the voice of Ibrahim (a.s) when he recited the Call (Azan) for Hajj. His
eyes saw the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Prophet Sulaiman
(a.s) heard the conversation of the ant. In this way other prophets were
endowed with special powers and qualities. Each verse of the book of
their existence is incomparable in its position.

As for the descent of balance, it denotes their good moral behavior. The
morals of all people would be judged in relation to them. The criterion
of each thing is different. Material objects are weighed in a different
kind of balance, and non-perceptible things are weighed differently. The
balance of poetic meter is not an ordinary one, or the one used to weigh
gold or silver; their weights are also completely different. These
weights are also not used in measuring temperature; a thermometer is
required for this. In moral science also this criterion is useless. You
will find a completely different standard there. In common parlance it
is said: The habit of so and so is similar to the habit of so and so. He
is like his father in moral qualities.

Thus we come to know that the morals of the prophets is that balance on
which the morals of all the nations would be weighed on the Day of
Judgment, and the morals of the people would be judged in accordance
with the “best of morals” (of the Holy Prophet). Thus as far removed one
is from the right path; the less would be the weight of his deeds.

One who is nearer to this true measure would be rewarded most. Allah
says, “This weighing would be very accurate.” So that no one gets an
opportunity to complain. “One who has done an iota of good or one who
has done a little bit of evil” all would be accounted for. Actually this
examination would be in relation to this “medium letter”. One who is
nearest to it would have the heaviest pan of deeds, and the further away
one is from the criterion, the lighter his deeds would become. Now
consider how difficult this path is.

If it had been an easy way the divine saints would not have subjected
themselves to severe penance and would not have forgone ease and
comforts. Even those who are considered the patron saints of mysticism
are found helpless and defeated at one time or the other. We can say
without any doubt or fear that except for Muhammad and the Progeny of
Muhammad no one else succeeded in achieving these positions. If this had
not been so, the mystics would not have considered Ali (a.s) as the
first guide. These pathways are so elevated that eyes snared by the
enchantment of materialism cannot even see properly, then how can they
be expected to recognize anything.

Explanation of Every Virtue in the Four Merits
----------------------------------------------

We have already mentioned that every superior quality is rooted in the
four merits. The first is wisdom, secondly chastity, third is valour and
lastly justice. All the remaining moral virtues like patience,
thankfulness, contentment, reliance, generosity, humility, satisfaction,
piety etc; that are around forty-eight qualities, are branches of the
four main qualities. Let us now briefly study each of these four moral
qualities.

### Wisdom

It is of two types, theoretical wisdom and practical wisdom. The first
is related to the thinking and opinions of man. When one has this type
of wisdom one is free from mistakes of judgment and by arranging the
preliminaries he is able to draw a correct conclusion. That is why it is
said: *Those who are given wisdom are given a great good.*

It is under the heading of this wisdom that all religious sciences come.
The philosophies of the world and the divine sciences are also included
in it. Divine recognition, certainty of belief and realization is
related to this. By its help man is able to save himself from sins; and
he can distinguish between right and wrong. The second kind is practical
wisdom, towards which one is led after theoretical wisdom.

If one deviates an inch from this medium line one loses the merit of
wisdom and it is replaced by some decline or degradation. If he reaches
towards the top he learns to fool people with cunning and deceptive
knowledge. He becomes deviated and is not anymore connected to wisdom.
In the same way if he slides below the medium line, it would be
ignorance, and this also has a lot of variations.  
 Ignorance is not a single kind but has a thousand varieties and due to
this, man commits innumerable mistakes in the sphere of actions. Thus in
the terminology of ethics, a wise one is that who walks straight on the
middle line and is not even slightly deviated. You will see many people
who apparently are knowledgeable and wise but their actions are found
above or below the line of the straight path. In mutual dealings they
reach wrong conclusions, while making judgments they are unable to
discover the correct causes and they solve their problems using their
cunning.

### Chastity

This is also the middle line. If one goes above it, it would amount to
jealousy and create extraordinary desires. If one goes below it, one
would even destroy the permissible desires. They broke the ties of
relationships, society and culture and took themselves to the caves of
seclusion and thus gave up their life before time. In other words we can
say that both types of extremisms are dangerous. Both are considered
deviations. A chaste person would only be one who is not afflicted with
jealousy and neither should he be the one who sacrifices natural
inclinations.

### Valour

This is also the middle line. Anything above this is called ferocity or
cruelty and if one falls below the line it is cowardice.

### Justice

The upper portion of this is referred to as injustice and the lower one
is remaining under oppression.  
 To find out these medium lines is beyond the capacity of people. Then
to walk upon them with firm steps, the whole life is much more
difficult. Even our Holy Prophet (S) who was having the highest morals
said on the difficult path that: Surah Hud has made me aged. People
asked what the Prophet meant by this? He replied, “It is commanded
therein: Be upright!” That is, do not deviate even a little bit from the
path of morals. This was such a difficult task that even a personality
like the Holy Prophet (S) aged prematurely. What can be said of other
people?

It is our claim that none of the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) can
say that he/she had all the four qualities with all their variations. It
is possible that their followers may have attributed these qualities to
them because false beliefs can make clay into gold, but till the time it
is proved it cannot be considered true. This superiority was owned only
by the Ahl ul-Bayt of the Holy Prophet (S). The chief of Ahl ul-Bayt,
Ali (a.s) obtained these qualities directly from the Holy Prophet.

### 1. Wisdom

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “I am the abode of knowledge and Ali is its
gate,” and Allah said: And no one knows its interpretation except Allah
and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge. And also said: Say Allah
is sufficient witness between me and you and one who has the knowledge
of the book.

### 2. Valour

The Almighty Allah said:

***…they shall strive hard in Allah's way and shall not fear the censure
of any censurer…(Surah Maidah 5:54)***

And He said,

***…those who fight in His way in ranks as if they were a firm and
compact wall. (*** *Surah Saff 61:4)*

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “One stroke of Ali on the day of the battle
of Trench (Khandaq) was superior to the worship of all men and jinns.
And on the day of the battle of Khyber he said,

“Tomorrow I will give the standard to a man, who is victorious and who
does not flee; who loves Allah and the Prophet and whom Allah and the
Prophet love.”

And seeing the courage of Ali the unseen caller called: “There is no
brave youth except Ali and there is no sword except Zulfiqar.”

### 3. Chastity

The Almighty Allah says, “Allah certainly intends to remove all
impurities from you O, people of the house and to purify you a thorough
purification.” The Holy Prophet (S) said, “O Ali! You are to me as Aaron
was to Moses.” That is you are infallible just as he was and like he was
the successor of Moses, you are my successor.

### 4. Justice

The Almighty Allah says in Surah Araaf:

***And of those whom We have created are a people who guide with the
truth and thereby they do justice. ( Surah Araaf 7:181).***

The Holy Prophet (S) also said, “Ali is the most just among you.”

Others could also have been included with Ahl ul-Bayt in these
specialties. But they did not have any peers. Also no one else proved to
be steadfast on the straight path all ones life, except the Ahl ul-Bayt.

Who could have been a better examiner than the Holy Prophet (S) whether
Ali (a.s) had these merits or not. Even if there had been a slight
deficiency the truthful tongue of the Prophet would not have uttered
Ali's praise. Thus when it is proved that Ahl ul-Bayt had all these
basic four merits then their derivations are automatically proved in
their perfections because the sum total of all perfections are these
four basic qualities.

Now we shall briefly discuss some of the qualities that Ahl ul-Bayt
possessed. The most important of these is knowledge because no virtue is
possible without it. However we would like to mention a few points as
introduction to our discussion.


