7- Ghadir in Islamic Traditions
===============================

According to the consensus of the narrators of the Islamic traditions,
Tabarani and many others have quoted the narration of Zayd Ibn Arqam
that:

"The Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) once delivered a sermon at Ghadir
Khum '0 people! It seems to me that soon I will be called upon and will
respond to the call. I have my responsibility and you have yours. So,
what do you say?" They said: "We bear witness that you have conveyed the
Message, struggled and advised [the nation]; therefore, may Allah reward
you with the best of His rewards".

He asked then,: "Do not you also bear witness that there is no God but
Allah and that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger, that His Paradise
is just and that His Fire is just, that death is just. That the life
after death is just; that the last day will undoubtedly arrive; and that
Allah shall bring the dead to life from their graves?"

They said: "Yes, indeed, we bear witness to all of that".

He said: "O Mighty Lord! Bear witness that they have," Then he added:
"O people! Allah is my Master, and I am the master (Mowla) of the
believers. I have3 more authority over their lives than they themselves
have 1. Therefore, to whomsoever I have been a master (mowla); this
(Ali) is his master (mowla)4; "O Lord! Befriend whoever befriends him,
and be enemy to whoever sets himself as his enemy." Then he said: "0
people! I am to precede you, and you will join me, at the Pool [of
Kawsar]... and I shall ask you when you join me, about the Two Precious
things, how you shall succeed me in faring with them; the Greater
Precious Thing is the Book of Allah, the Omniscient, the Sublime, and
the other are is my Ahlul-Bayt, for the most Gracious and Knowing
(Allah) has informed me that they shall never part from each other till
they join me at the Pool 5 In a section dealing with 'Ali's 3Many have
contemplated upon this sermon, giving it due attention, and they have
come to know that it is a reference to the fact that 'Ali's wiaiyat is a
root of the faith; For the Prophet first put the question: "Do not you
bear witness that there is no God but Allah, and that Muhammad is His
Servant and Messenger?" Then he said:

"The Last Day is approaching; there is no doubt about it, and Allah
shall certainly bring to life those who are in the graves," following
that with a statement in which he mentioned the wilayat so that it would
be understood that the latter bears the same significance like the
matters about which he has asked them and to which they have agreed.
This is obvious to all those who are familiar with the methods and
objectives of speech.

4 His statement: "I am the mawla" is an outspoken testimony to a
significant fact. The meaning of "mawla" is: one who is "awla", "has
superior authority". Thus, the meaning of his statement is: "Allah is
superior to me, and I am superior to the believers, and whoever
considers me to be superior to him, must also consider Ali as such." 5
This wording of the hadith is quoted by Tabrani, Ibn Jarir, Hakim
Tirmithi, from Zayd ibn Arqam. It is transmitted by 1bn Hajar from
Tabrani and others in this exact wording, without questioning its
authenticity; so, refer to page 25 of- Sawaiq al-Muhriqa.

virtues in A1Mustadrak, the author indicates that Zayd ibn Arqam6 is
quoted through two sources both of which are held reliable by both
Shaykhs: Hakim (one of such sources) says that when the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, returned from his Farewell
Pilgrimage, he camped at Ghadir Khum, and ordered the believers to sweep
the area under a few huge trees where a pulpit of camel litters was made
for him. He stood and said: "It seems, as if, I have been called upon
and responded to the call, and I enjoin you to look after both the Book
of Allah and my Progeny; see how you fare with them after me. They will
never part from each other till they join me at the Pool."

Then he added: "Allah, the Dear and Mighty, is my Master, and I am the
master of every believer".

Then he raised the hand of Ali and said: To whomsoever I am a master,
this Ali is his master. 0 Lord! Befriend …..".

The author quotes this lengthy hadith, in its entirety. In his
"Talkhis", al- Thahabi quotes it without commenting on it. Hakim
Tirmazi, too, quotes it as narrated by Zayd ibn Arqam, in his
Al-Mustadtak, admitting its authenticity. In spite of his intolerance
Al- Thahabi admits the same in his Talkhis, to which you may refer.
Ahmed ibn Hanbal has quoted the same hadith as narrated by Zayd ibn
Arqam thus:

"We were in the company of the Messenger of Allah, (peace he upon him
and his progeny), when he camped in a valley called Wadi Khum. He
ordered everyone to gather for prayers in midday heat. He then delivered
a sermon to us under the shade of a robe over a rush tree to protect him
from the heat of the sun. He said: Do you know- or do you believe and
accept- that I have more authority over the believers than themselves?
They answered: "Yes, indeed, you do".

He said: "Whosoever accepts me as his mowla, Ali is his mowla. 0 Lord!
Befriend whosoever befriends' Ali and he the enemy of whomsoever opposes
Ali."

Nisaei quoted Zayd ibn Arqam saying that when the Prophet returned from
the Farewell Pilgrimage and having reached Ghadir Khum he ordered the
ground under a few huge trees to be swept clean. He announced: "It looks
like I have been invited [to my Lords presence] and I have accepted the
invitation. I leave with Y°'! Two Valuable Things; one of them is bigger
than the other:

the Book of Allah and my Progeny, my Household. See how you care both
of them, for they shall never part from each other till they join me at
the Pool." Then he added: "Allah is my Master and I am the Master
(mowla) of every 6 Refer to page 21 of AI-Khasa'is al- 'Alawiyya, where
the Prophet is quoted saying: "To whomsoever I have been the wali, this
(Ali) is his wali.

believer." Taking Ali's hand, he added saying, "To whomsoever I have
been a Master, this Ali is his Master; 0 Lord! Befriend those who
befriend him, and be enemy of all those who are enemy to him".

Abu- Tufail says: "1 asked Zayd: 'Have you heard these words of the
Messenger of Allah, yourself?"7 He answered that all those who were
there under the huge trees saw the Prophet with their own eyes and heard
him with their own ears. This hadith is recorded by Muslim, in a
chapter, on the "virtues of Ali" in his "Sahih" from several different
narrators, ending with Zayd ibn Arqam; but he abridged it, and cut it
short- and so do some people behave.

Ahmed Ibn Hanbal has recorded this hadith from Bora ibn Azib.8 Nisa'i
has quoted, "Ayesha daughter of Sa'd said that she heard her father
saying: "I heard the Messenger of Allah, (peace be upon him and his
progeny), on the Day of Juhfa, he took "Ali's hand arid delivered a
sermon, praised and adored Allah", then said: "0 people! I am your
Leader". They said: "You have said the truth." Then he raised Ali's hand
and said: "This is my Leader unto you, he will discharge the
responsibilities of my religion on my own behalf, and I support whoever
supports him, and I am enemy of whosoever who chooses to be his enemy.

Sa'd is also quoted saying: "We were in the company of the Messenger of
Allah, when he arrived at Ghadir Khum. Those who went ahead of him
returned to join him, while he waited for those who lagged behind, till
all people assembled. Then he said: "0 people! Who is your Master and
Leader?" They answered: "Allah and His Messenger." Then he took "Ali's
hand, made him rise and said: 'Whoever has taken Allah and His Messenger
as his Master, this (Ali) is his Master; O Lord! Befriend whoever be
friends him, and be enemy of whoever chooses to be his enemy."

7Abu- Tufayl's question is obviously indicative of his amazement at
this nation's overlooking this matter regarding 'Ali in spite of the
hadith he narrates from the Prophet in his honor on the day of the
Ghadir. As if suspicious of the accuracy of the narrated hadith, he went
ahead and inquired of Zayd, having heard him narrate the same, "Did you
hear it from the Messenger of Allah?!" His tone is that of someone
amazed, and skeptical. Zayd answered him that all individuals present
under those trees had, indeed, seen the Prophet with their eyes and
heard him with their ears; so, Abul- Tufayl then knew that the matter
was just as Kumait, may Allah be merciful unto his soul, says: .

On the day of the dawh, the dawh of the Ghadir, Caliph.!lte was made
for him manifest and clear, Only if the throngs opted to obey;

Yet I have never seen such a day,

Nor have I seen such right
Trampled upon, discarded outright;
But the men had sold it, and I never saw Such a precious thing to sale
would go...

8This occurs on page 281 of his AI-Khasa'isal- Alawiyya, in a chapter
dealing with Ali's status in the eyes of Allah, the Exalted, the
omni-Scient, and also on page 25 of another chapter enjoining acceptance
of his wilayat and warning against bearing animosity towards him.

The books of traditions recording this incident are numerous and cannot
be all counted here. They all contain explicit texts indicating that Ali
is the Prophet's successor, just as Fazl Ibn Abbi, Abu Lahab has said:9
The one to be recognized as the successor, generation after generation,
After Muhammad, is 'Ali since for he was his companion in every
occasion.


Hamid Famagh (Iran) 9 These are among poetic lines composed as the
answer of Walid ibn 'Uqbah ibn Abu Ma'it, quoted by Mohammad Mahmud
Rafi'i in his Introduction to Sharh al-Hashemiyyat, page 8.


