8- Ghadir As a Feast and Ceremonies (in History, Literature, Jurisprudence)
===========================================================================

The ceremonies of The Ghadir feast.

Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.) says: "When the prophets of BaniEsraeel wanted to
make firm the executor’s hips and leadership for their successors, and
their desire was accomplished, they acknowledged that day as a feast.

And certainly the Ghadir feast is a day that the holy prophet (p. b. u.
h) introduced Imam Ali (p. b. u. h) as the leader of the people; a
divine verse has been inspired about it; the Islam religion was
perfected in that day, and the bounty was completed for the believers.
"

On the 18th day of zil-Hajje 10 A.H., the most important event in the
Islam history happened.

On that day, the holy prophet (S.A) was ordered by the exalted God, to
appoint Ali-Ibn-Abitaleb as his successor and the leader of the Islamic
community. When the holy prophet was returning from the pilgrim of Hajj
across the way Medina, he ordered the caravan to stop, and gather beside
a pool, which was named Ghadir-e-khum. Upon this order, all the Muslims,
whose numbers were about one hundred and twenty thousands, formed a
gathering.

After the prayer and an eloquent lecture, the holy prophet raised Imam
Ali's hand and said:

"Whoever I am his master and guardian, Ali is master and guardian too.
0' God, love whoever loves him, and hate whoever hates him.' Then the
verse of Ekmal (completion) was send from the God."

Then the holy prophet said: "praise to God that completed the religion,
and perfected the gift, and satisfied with my prophecy and the
succession and leadership of Ali-Ibn-abitaleb." (Iqbal-ol-Amal, vol 2,
p. 248).

This important event was celebrated on that day. The Muslims went,
group by group to Imam Ali's presence, for saying congratulations. It is
interesting that Omar-Ibn-khattab was one of first people who came
forward and said, "0 Ali-Ibn-Abitaleb', praise to you! You became my
master and the master of every pious Muslim". (Manaqib ofIbn, Maqazeli,
p. 19)

Hesan-Ibn-Sabet read his poem about Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.). He attended
the audience, 0' the noble of Ghoraish; listen to my speech in the
presence of the messenger of God. Then he recited a long poem.

So, the day of Ghadir, was considered as an important day. The holy
prophet mentioned it, as the important feast of the people. He
recommended to Imam Ali to hold that day as a feast. So all the Muslims
shall celebrate this fateful day every year, and fulfill its acts and
ceremonies.

In this article some of the ceremonies of the Ghadir -feast has been
gathered by using the Islamic reliable sources. Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.)
said: "The practice of the day of Ghadir, - the 18th day of zil-hajjeh-
is equal to the acts in eighty years. "

We hope, with the guardianship of Ali- Ibn -Abitaleb, avoidance from
his enemies, and performing his orders, we receive the benevolence of
the prophet.

**TO CONGRATULATE EACH OTHER**

Imam Reza (p.b.u.h.) said:

'The day of Ghadir, is the day of congratulation. We shall congratulate
to each other on this occasion. So if a person met his believer bother,
he shall say: "praise to God, Who put us among those who hold the
leadership of the commander of the faithful people (Imam Ali) and the
holy Imams. "

TO SHAKE HANDS

Imam Ali said: "When you meet each other in the Ghadir day, shake hands
with greeting".

TO SMILE AND SHOWING YOUR HAPPINESS

Imam Reza said:

"The Ghadir day, is the day of smile to the believers. Whoever smiles
to his believer brother on the day of Ghadir, God will look at him with
mercy in the Last Day, and will accomplish one thousand of his needs,
and will build for him a palace from the white pearl in the paradise,
and will make his face beautiful. "

Imam Ali said:

"Eveal your joy when you meet each other and show your gladness between
yourselves."

TO WEAR COSTY DRESSES AND MAKE DECORATION (MAKE UP)

Imam Reza (p.b.u.h.) said:

"The Ghadir day is the day of wearing costly dress, and take off the
dress of sadness ... and that day is the day of decoration (make up),
whoever decorates himself on that day, God forgives all his sins, and
sends angels toward him to write his good acts, and they increase his
spiritual step until the next Ghadir feast. And if he dies, he would be
a martyr, and if he remains alive, he would live with the prosperity.
"

TO FEED PEOPLE

Imam Reza said:

"Whoever feeds a muslim on the Ghadir day is like a person who has fed
all the prophets and truthful and faithful people. "

TO VISIT EACH OTHER

Imam Reza said:

"Whoever visits areligious man on the Ghadir day, God will enter
seventy lights in to his grave -when he diedand will widen his grave.
Seventy thousand Angels go to pilgrim his grave every day, and they
would give him good news of the paradise. "

TO EXPAND

Imam Reza said:

"One who worships on the Ghadir day, and cares his family and his
Islamic brothers, God will increase his wealth and property. "

TO PRESENT A GIFT

Fayaz -Ibn -Mohammad - Ibn - Omar - Tousi said:

"1 saw Ali - Ibn - Mo usa, Imam Reza (p.b.u.h.) had invited some of his
friends to sup on the Ghadir day. He had also sent food, gifts, and
dresses - even ring and shoes - to their houses, and he had imporoved
their wearing and appearances. On that day, they entertained the guests
by new facilities, and imam Reza expressed importance, and ancient
records of the Ghadir day. " TO PRESENT FOOD TO BREAK ONE'S FAST

"...And the ghadir day is the day of giving food to persons who are on
fast. Whoever gives food to a pious man, who has been on fast, is like a
person who has fed ten "Feam ". Then Imam asked, 'Do you know what Feam
is'?No, The narrator said.

Imam added: It means one hundred thousand persons. " TO HELP

Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.) said:

"Whoever helps his brother without his request for help, and benefit to
him with an open face on the ghadir day, his reward would be like a
person who has observed the fast on that day, and has worshiped the
whole night. "

TO BENEFIT OTHER PEOPLE

Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.) said:

"Be helpful to each other, until God makes firm the friendship between
you ... the beneficence on the Ghadir day, increases wealth and life
time. "

TO PRAISE GOD

"The holy prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "one of the practices is that the
pious man says this sentence one hundred times on the Ghadir day: "all
praises to God, who set the perfection of the religion and the
completion of his bounty in the guardianship of Imam Ali - Ibn –
Abitaleb (A..S) "

PRAY and greetings to the holy prophet

"Hasan -Ibn -Rashed said, I asked Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.): Dear sir is
there another feast to the Muslims except the two feasts of Fetr and
Azha? Imam Sadiq replied: "yes! There is a greater and nobler feast than
those two." I said, which is that feast? Imam said: "the day of
appointment of Imam Ali to the leadership of the people." I said: Dear
sir, which act is good to do on that day? Imam said: "Be on fast, and
send many Pray and greetings to Mohammad, and his family, and keep away
from the oppressors." Imam Reza said: "The Ghadir day is the day of
saying many greeting to Mohammad and his family. "

**TO MAKE A SPIRITUAL CONTRACT OF BROTHERHOOD WITH EACH OTHER
**
The great scholar, Mirza Hussein Nouri (1320 A.H.) narrates from the
book ‘Zad 01 Ferdous’, “makes spiritual brotherhood with each other. Its
procedure is like this; someone puts his right hand in the right hand of
the other, and says, "I became your brother in the way of God. I have
sincerity in brotherhood with you. I shake hand with you in the way of
God. I conclude an agreement with God, His Angels and books, the
prophets and messenger, and innocent Imams, that if I was from those who
would go to Paradise, and get the right to request God to forgive some
people (Shafaat). I will not go to the Paradise, unless you come with
me. 'And the other one would say, "I accepted." Then they say to each
other," I waive all my rights of brotherhood, except "intercession",
"prayer" and visiting.'

THE PRAYER OF THE GHADIR DAY

According to the order of Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.), one who decides to
celebrate the prayer of the Ghadir day may performs ablution half an
hour before noon, and asks his needs from God, then pray two Rakat
prayers. In each Rakat, reads after "Hamd", each of these Chapters 10
times: "Tawhid", "Ayat 01 Korsi (2:254.255)", and "Ghadr".

Imam Sadiq says, 'Whoever reads this prayer, God will grant him all of
his needs in this world and the other world. "

TO GO ON FAST

Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.) said:

"The reward of fasting of the Ghadir day is equal to be on fast all the
life of the world. If a person had the life of the world, and fasts all
the time of his life, his reward is equal to one who fasts a Ghadir day.
To the exalted God, the fasting of this day in every year is equal to
one hundred accepted Hajj. This day is the greatest Divine feast. '
Imam Ali said:

"If a devoted person fasted the Ghadir day for God's sake, that day
would be more valuableto him than any other day in the world. "

Imam Sadiq said:

'The prophets ordered their successors to fast that day in which their
successors were appointed. And they put that day as a feast. Whoever
fasts that day, his act would be higher than the pray of sixty years.
"

**PILGRIMAGE OF IMAM ALl (p.b.u.h.)**

Sayed Ibn Tavous has narrated from Imam Sadiq in "Eghbal 01 Amal", If
you were in the day of Ghadir in Najaf (the city in which the shrine of
Imam Ali is located), pray, and then go near to his grave. If you were
far from Najaf and his shrine, after praying, point to his grave and
read Imam Ali's special prayer, from the distance.


**Ali Akbar Talafi (Iran)**


