10- Ghadir Day, in the Words of Nonmuslim People
================================================

Hajjat-ol-veda (The last pilgrimage of the holy prophet Hazrat Mohammad
(p.b.u.h.)-to Mecca) never vanishes from our wish. I wish farewell -in
its literal meaning didn't exist until twenty more pilgrims; or at least
it existed in the meaning of eagerness for being a longer time with the
prophet and the leader of the truth and guidance, since prophetic
mission would find more firmness, more pure, strong growth in the
people's life, more constancy, and a firmer exercise in their feelings
... .However, the last Hajj fulfilled. It seems that, this Hajj is like
the wishes and dreams in a morning, that its sun has been darkened by
eclipse.

Was Hajjat -01 -Veda more than a tent, that succession was hidden in
it? Alas, that abundant population, who had filled across the road of
caravans - between Mecca and Medina - , were walking yet with the
barefooted of the past!

It is true that the new birth, with the new light, draw collyrium on
the eyes of those people; but that light didn't penetrate to the depth
of those ignorant eyes, and it didn't take place in all aspect of it, to
change it...... I wish this desire had accomplished, and the last Hajj
of the holy prophet would have fulfilled thirty, or forty years after
Hijrat. And the sun of his life didn't set so soon....

I wish it had happened...!!!

But succession in the Ghadir -e - khom appeared like a fine dress, and
as a mystery for the prophetic mission and didn't have a favorite
outcome. Didn't the holy prophet, the great person who was a source for
magnificence and glories, show Ali when he said, "Ali is from me, and I
am from Ali."

"Whoever I am his master, Ali is his master too." "0' God, like whoever
likes him, and hate whoever hates him". "1 leave among you two things,
the Holy Quran, and my family. If you hold them, you never go astray
after me. These two never separate from each other until they arrive to
me at the Kosar pool. " (The name of a pool in the Paradise).

And this was the prophet's last will. Hajjat- 01- Veda was thirsty to
that will. Hajjat- 01- Veda was eager and in search of it. But, those
people who heard this testament in Ghadir Khum, were those who had
sitten in the past, in the mosque, in front of the holy prophet, - one
who descended the Quran verses to him, - saying to each other Jealously;
"How pretty the holy prophet plays with Hussein (his grand son) ... .
"

And today, in Ghadir- Khum, they say to- each other in the same manner:
"The prophet's love to Imam Ali is too much. Does he like him, forever,
more than us?"

Alas! That incomplete consciousnesses need purity, softness and
struggle until people's perception grow up. The acknowledgement of the
last message, didn't need the Hajjat- ol- veda; until the holy prophet
proceeds to it in his last Hajj, in the presence of the merciful God and
hold Imam Ali's hand and show him to people, so that they confirm him!
No, I swear by God, that succession and leadership fitted like a shining
crown to Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.). Succession of the holy prophet was
apparent from his nature and his generous heart. The history is not
blind to disregard it. And, none of the generous men of that time
weren't blind to not read the reality.

But ...alas that the politics of the aged and old people, which was
full of old ignorant opinions, and tribal feelings, was blind to see and
read the succession and leadership of Ali (p.b.u.h.).

The ignorant prejudice which was asleep in the depth of the soul of
Umar - Ibn - khattab didn't let him to accept young man take precedence
to him, and to the people like him, and the nobles of the Island;
especially to the adults and the persons who were in front ranks.

It didn't make any difference to Umar, that this young man was Ali 0'
Osamah - Ibn - Zaid!

The interest and love of Umar - Ibn - Khattab to caliphate and power,
was more than his interest to the value of the prophetic mission. So, he
didn't want to listen to the awardable forecasting that specified the
leadership and caliphate of Imam Ali. Therefore, after the death of the
holy prophet, he did not accept Imam Ali's leadership. For the same
reason, he did not obey the order of the prophet (p.b.u.h) to enter the
army that Osamah - Ibn Zaid was its commander.

This wasn't the only point in Umar criterion (a monster hidden from a
terrible past in his soul) A worm which wanted power. That worm was
tribal prejudice. When the animating prophetic - mission came about,
that worm hid itself in the darkness of hypocrisy. And today, in the
absence of that great prophet it has returned to its first pasture,
ignorance situation. And the divine leadership and succession of Imarn
Ali was the first bout for it that was seized. So we repeat our wishes
that, Hajjat- 01- Veda (The last pilgrimage of the holy prophet to
Mecca) had accomplished thirty or forty years after Hijrat. So that,
that ignorant opinion which was like a worm, would had died and
disappeared.

The people of the Arab Island were groaning from that worm, just as the
green and fresh lawns groan from the groups of locusts because they
change the farm to a dry and burning desert.

In behind of the usurpation of caliphate by Umar- that Abubakr approved
it, there was an explanation. It was the poverty of the Arab Island and
its need to the attributes which Imarn Ali (p.b.u.h.) had possessed
them. His truth raised him to the boundary of the executorship. But
still the waves of active reflection which influenced the others, and
attracted them completely, had not abtained for it, and the society had
not approached to that magnet pole. So exercise and practice are two
important factors to flourish and making the talents active. These
factors lead the society from simplicity and stupidity to activities.
Therefore, we perceive that Imarn' Ali possessed so comprehensive
virtues that the society and people could benefit from them.

When the angle of death (malak- ol-mowt) was taking the prophet's soul
toward the exalted God, his spirit was reflecting only in Imarn Ali's
soul.

While in the society that prophetic mission, work it up from ignorance
and neglect, there was not a pure and aware heart, until his cautious
reality reflect in it.

And this was the reason of hurry of Umar for appointing a governor, who
catches the power in hand, before an aware person comes and points to
Imam Ali and invites him to the seat of government.

From that time till now, the aim of prophetic mission has not
completely been accomplished in the society. Whenever the society walked
one step forward, apostasy put it back two steps, and left it in a deep
ignorance. I repeat that If the role of prophetic mission - just as it
was destined - was accepted in the society, there was not need to
introduce the succession; and it wasn't necessary that Hajj to be
described by the word "AI- Veda". But the word "AI - Vesal"- (union) had
been used. Because, in these circumstances, the society had accepted
true leadership and consequently prophetic mission, existed in the
society constantly. And "executorship" that - like the sun in the
endless sky of prophetic- mission had manifested-, was under taking the
leadership of the society. The miracle of the prophetic mission, in
taking away the roots of ignorance, developing the society, and leading
it toward unity, would have been present. A unity which would have
proved its magnificence over the world.

Oh, Never! There was no need for that great change which had happened
in the Arab Island by the holy prophet, -Islam- to introduce and inform
the "succession" with the words. Since from every step of that great
prophet on the island, a deep and effective sign was created, which was
full of awakening and intelligence. In every hint of his fingers, or his
looking to the people, and in every smile, that appeared like a quiet
wave on his lips, there were important reasons and undeniable signs, for
the succession and leadership of Imam Ali.

Ali did not walk, even one step, except with the prophecy; and did not
say any sentence, unless it was derived from the prophetic mission.
Prophecy was exactly the Imamat and leadership. The prophecy founded the
Islamic state and that was the great task. It gathered those dispersed
people around the pivot of prophecy and leadership. ...yes Imamat and
leadership are the continuation of the prophecy, and is from it.

The holy prophet did not insist on anything except on the Imamat and
leadership. Because, it is the continuation of the prophecy and he did
not permit to anyone to be near to him except Ali, who could carry the
heavy responsibility of the prophetic mission that is the main aim, and
this was the whole of the prophecy.

The understanding and perception of these clear signs and traces, which
are the witnesses for his executorship was difficult for the people of
the island? Should we request that great man, - who has gone toward the
exalted God - , to return, and again and again, talks about his
successor, and explain to us about the letters and the words of the
executorship? To tell us again that who is his successor? Who shall
carry the flag of prophecy in his hand?

Is the successor, the unique personality of Ali - Ibn Abitaleb? Or
Umar - Ibn - Khattab? Who has put on the Abubakr's dress? And has
advocated Osman? I wish that Hajjat-ol-veda had repeated again, so that
Umar could understand that leadership meant to look after prophecy, and
take care of that great responsibilityis particular to Imam Ali- Ibn-
Abitaleb. This is not because he was the prophet's cousin, and his
relative. If it would apply, "Abbas" was the uncle of the prophet, and
nearer to him! And not since he is from Abi â€“ Taleb family, and the
rival of Abu Sofyan. However, this succession belongs to him, since his
unique will and belief, has an eternal greatness. And the prophet, who
irrigated that dry and thirsty island with the rainfall of grace, had
planned a brighter future. A future which was full of friendship, pure
unity, and a wise prudence.

Suleiman Kattani (Christian Writer and management from Lebanon)


