11- Argumentation and References Made To Ghadir Day
===================================================

The consecutive repor of the Ghadir tradition is necessitated by the
natural laws which Allah has created. It is like the great historical
steps undertaken by the most important man of a nation who announces, in
the presence of thousands of his nationals, the undertaking of a major
step, so that they may convey the news to various nations, especially if
such an undertaking enjoys the concern of his own family and their
supporters in all generations to come, so that such an announcement
might receive the widest possible publicity. Can such an announcement,
as significant as it is, be transmitted by, say, just one single person?
Certainly not. Its news would spread.as widely as morning sun rays,
encompassing the plains as well as the oceans; "And you shall never find
any alteration to Allah's order (Qur'an, 33:62). "

The AI-Ghadir tradition has won the divine concern of Allah, Who
inspired to His Messenger, (peace be upon him and his progeny),
including it in His Qur'an which is recited by muslims even during the
late hours of the night or the early hours of the day, in public and in
private, in their supplications and ceremonial prayers, from the top of
their pulpits and the heights of their minarets, stating:

"0 Messenger! Proclaim the Message that has been sent down to you from
your Creator & Nurture. And if you did not, then you would not have
fulfilled your duty as Allah's Messanger. {Know that) Allah will protect
you from {the mischievous) people. Verily, Allah does not guide the
disbelievers." (Qur'an, 5:67)16

When he, conveyed the divine Message (implied in this verse),
appointing"

Ali as the Imam and entrusting him as the caliph, Allah Almighty,
revealed the 16 We do not urge its revelation in "Ali's wiliiyat on
Ghadir Khurn Day, from the sources of the purified progeny of the
Prophet. Suffices you for reference to its narration by others. On page
150 of the book Asbabul Nuzul it is narrated from two respected sources:
'Atiyyah and Abu Sa'id Khudri say that the verse was revealed on Ghadir
Khum Day about 'Ali ibn Abu Talib." The same is narrated by Hafiz Abu
Na'im who interprets it in his book Nuzul al-Quran relying on two
sources. One is Abu Sa'id, and the other is Abu Rafi'. It is also
narrated by Imam Ibrahim ibn Mohammad al-Shafi'i in his book Al-F awaid,
from various sources ending with Abu Hurayrah. It is quoted by Imam Abu
Ishaq al Tha'labi while explaining the meaning of this verse in his
Taftir al-Kabir from two respected sources. What testifies its reference
to Ali is the fact that prayers had already been established, zakat was
enforced; fasting was legislated, the pilgrimage to the House (Mecca)
was conducted. All the forbidden and permissible orders were already
regulated. So, what else required Allah to place so much emphasis other
than on the issue of Leadership.

following verse:

"Today I have perfected your religion for you and completed my favor
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as religion. " (Qur'an, 5:3) So,
congratulations to Ali; this is Allah's favour; He grants it to
whomsoever He pleases. Anyone who looks into these verses will be
profoundly impressed by such divine favours.

The order of Allah, which there will be no change in His creation,
necessitates the consecutive reporting of this hadith in spite of all
obstacles in conveying it. Yet the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt follow their own
wise methods of disseminating it and publicizing for it.

Now let us consider the measure taken by amir ulMomenin Ali (p.b.u.h.),
in gathering people in the serious meeting place, the Radha plain. He
said: "I ask in the' name of Allah, that every muslim who heard what the
Messenger of Allah said on the Ghadir Day to stand and testify to what
he heard. Nobody should stand except those who saw the Prophet with
their own eyes and heard him with their own ears." Thirty Sahabis, 12 of
them had particiated in the Battle of Badr, stood and testified that the
Prophet took' Ali by the hand and asked people: "Do you know that I have
more authority over the believers than the believers themselves?" They
answered in the affirmative. He (p.b.u.h.) then said: "To 'whomsoever I
have been mawla, this (Ali) is his mawla; 0 Lord! Befriend whoever
befriends him, and be enemy of whosoever is his enemy." You know that
accusing 30 Sahabis of being liars is rejected by reason. Therefore, the
achievement of consecutive report through their testimony is an
irrefutable and undeniable proof.

The same hadith was transmitted from those 30 Sahabis, by all those
crowds who were then present at the Rahba, and disseminated it after
their dispersal throughout the land, thus providing it with extremely
wide publicity. Obviously, the Rahba incident took place during the
caliphate of Hazrat Ali (p.b.u.h.), who received the oath of allegiance
in the year 35 A.H. The Ghadir event took place during the Farewell
Pilgrimage, (10 A.H.). The space was 25 years, during which many events
took place such as a devastating plague, wars, conquering of new
countries, and the invasions contemporary to the three righteous
caliphs. During this long period, 1 of a century, with wars and 4
invasions, in addition to a sweeping and devastating plague, many of
those who had witnessed the Ghadir event, especially the old Sahabah as
well as their youths who were eager to makejihad in the way of Allah
died. Some of them were scattered throughout the land, and many of those
were not present at the Rahba, except those who kept company with Imam
Ali in Iraq, and they were only males. In spite of all these, 30
Sahabah, twelve of them were participants in the Battle of Badr, had
heard hadith al-Ghadir from the Messenger of Allah, (peace be upon him
and his progeny).

There may have been others who hated to testify, such as Anas ibn
MaIik17 and others who received their due punishment in lieu of the pray
of Ali (p.b.u.h.) to Allah, to punish those who hid the truth while
knowing it. Had he been able to gather all Sahabis who were alive then,
males and females, and address them in the same way which he employed at
Rahha, several times that many would have testified; so, what if he had
asked people in Hijaz before the passage of such a long time after the
incident of the Ghadir? Contemplate upon this fact and you will find it
a very strong proof testifying to the consecutive reporting ofhadith
al-Ghadir.

The books' of tradition should suffice you in their documentation
ofhadith al-Ghadir.

For example, 1mam Ahmed has quoted on page 370, Vol 4, of his "Musnad"
from Abu Tufayl who said: "Ali gathered people at the Rahba.

Then he said to them: 'I adjure in the name of Allah every Muslim who
heard what the Messenger of Allah, (peace be upon him and his progeny),
had said on the Ghadir Day to state his testimony". Thirty persons stood
up. Abu Na'im said: "Many stood up and testified how the Prophet took
Ali by the hand, and asked people: "Do you know that I have more
authority over the believers than the believers themselves have?" They
answered: "We do, 0 Messenger of Allah!" Then he said: "To whomsoever I
have been a mowla, this Ali is his mowla. 0 Lord! Befriend whoever
befriends him, and be enemy of wl}.oever sets himself as his enemy".
Abul- Tufail continues to say: "I left the place dismayed (disgusted
with many people's ignorance of this hadith), and I met Zayd ibn Arqam,
and said to him: "I have heard Ali say such and such". Zayd said: "Then
do not deny what you have heard, since the Prophet said so about him."

Zayd's testimony stated above, and Ali's statement in this regard, may
be added to the testimony of the 30 Sahabis, thus bringing the number of
narrators of this hadith to thirty-two Sahabis. Imam Ahmed has recorded'
Ali's hadith on page 119, V 01. 1, of his Musnad as transmitted by
AbdulRahman ibn Abu Layla. The latter says: "I saw Ali at the Rahba
abjuring people to testify, emphasizing that only those who had seen and
heard the Prophet 17 Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.), said to him then: "Why don't
you stand with other companions of the Messenger of Allah and testify to
what you heard of him then?" He answered: "0 Commander of the Faithful!
I have grown old, and I have forgotten it". Ali said: "If you are
telling a lie, then may Allah strike you with a white [disease, Le.
leprosy] which your turban cannot conceaL" He hardly left before his
face was filled with the marks of leprosy; so, he used to say: "I have
become the object of a curse invoked by the Righteous Servant" This
incident is quite famous, and a testimony for its authenticity exists
when Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal quotes it at the end of page 119, Vol. 1, of
his Musnad, adding: "They all, except three men, rose to testify; and
those three fell under the effect of his curse."

should stand and testify. Twelve participants in the Battle of Badr,
whom I remember so well as if I am looking at them right now, did so."
Abdul- Rahman quotes the latter testifying that they had heard the
Messenger of Allah, (peace be upon him and his progeny), asking people
on the Ghadir Day: "Do not I have more authority over the believers'
lives than they themselves do?" The audience responded: "Yes, indeed, 0
Messenger of Allah!" Then he said, as Abdul-Rahman quotes, "Then
whosoever takes me as his mowla must take Ali as his mawla; O, Mighty
Lord! Befriend whoever befriends him, and be enemy of whoever bears
enmity towards him!"

Another narration is recorded by Imam Ahmed on the same page. It quotes
the Prophet saying: "O Lord! Befriend whoever takes him as his wali, and
be enemy of whoever antagonizes him; support whoever supports him, and
abandon whoever abandons him." The narrative goes on to state that with
the exception of three men, the witnesses stood to testify. Ali invoked
Allah to curse those who hid the truth, and his invocation was heeded.
If you add Ali and Zayd ibn Arqam to the afore-mentioned 12 participants
in the Battle of Badr, then 14 is the number of witnesses. By tracing
the traditions regarding the Rahba incident, Ali's wisdom in
disseminating hadith al-Ghadir and publicizing it becomes clear.

The Master of Martyrs, Abu Abdullah al-Husain, (peace be upon him), has
left us a legacy of a very memorable stand which he took during the
reign of Mu'awiyah. It was then that truth became apparent. It was
similar to the stand taken by Ali at the Rahba. During the pilgrimage
season, Husain (p. b. u. h), surrounded by throngs of pilgrims, praised
his grandfather, father, mother and brother, and delivered an
unprecedented, wise and eloquent speech that attracted his audience, and
won their hearts and minds. His sermon was inclusive, wherein he gave
notice to the masses, traced and researched history, and paid the Ghadir
incident its fair and just dues. His great stand, therefore, produced
great results, and it became equivalent to hadith Ghadir in its fame and
wide publicity.

His nine descendants, all sinless Imams, applied their own methods to
publicize and propagate the same hadith. Their methods reflect their
wisdoms, which are comprehended by all those who possess sound senses.
They used the eighteenth of Zul-Hijjah as a special annual feast to
congratulate and congratulate one another, merrily and humbly seeking
nearness to Allah, through fasting, prayers and supplications. They go
beyond limits in their deeds of goodness and acts of righteousness,
thanking Allah for the blessings which He bestowed upon them, on that
day, by virtue of the text that nominated Hazrat Ali as Caliph.

For this reason, the eighteenth of Zul-Hijjah of every year is
celebrated as a feast by the Shi'as of all times and climes. It is then
that they rush to their mosques to offer prayers, recite the Glorious
Qur'an, and read the most celebrated supplications thanking Allah
Almighty for perfecting His religion and completing His blessings upon
them by nominating Ali as the Imam. On such a day, they visit and
happily wish each other the best, seeking nearness to Allah through
righteousness and goodness, and through pleasing their kin and
neighbours. On that day, every year, they visit the holy shrine of
Hazrat Ali, where more than one hundred thousand pilgrims come from far
and wide. There, they worship Allah on that day, in the same way their
purified Imams used to worship God: through fasting, prayers, and
remembrance of Allah.

They seek nearness to Him through righteousness and payment of
Sadaqat.

They do not leave there before addressing the sacred shrine with a
highly commended address authored by some of their Imams. It includes
testifying to the glorious stand taken by Hazrat Ali, honouring his
struggle to lay the foundations of the principles of the faith, his
sacrifices for the holy Prophet, his virtues and merits, among which was
the honor he received front the Prophet on the Ghadir day. This is the
custom of the Shia every year. Their orators have always been referring
to hadith al-Ghadir, quoting its tradition or even without reference to
them. Their poets compose poems in its commemoration in old, as well as,
modem times?18 Therefore, there is no way to cast doubts about its
report from the sources of Ahl- alBayt and their Shi'as. Their motives
to memorize it by heart, their efforts to maintain its pristine text,
safeguard its authenticity, publicize and disseminate it.., all have
indeed resulted in the achievement of their most aspired objectives.
Refer to the four major Shia Musnads, as well as other Shia references,
containing welldocumented and supported traditions, and you will find
them with the same meaning, and each tradition supporting the other.
Whoever acquaints himself with these traditions, will find out that this
hadith is mutawatir through their precious sources.

18AI-Kumait ibn Zayd has said:

On the day of the dawh., the Ghadir dawh day, Caliphate was made
manifest for him: were they to obey...

Abu Tammam, in a poetic masterpiece which he includes in his diwa'n,
says
: On the Day of Ghadir, truth looked clear and bright;
Redolently, with no curtains nor bars to hide;
The Messenger of Allah stood there to invite
Them to come close to what is just and right,
Gesturing with his hands, introducing your wali
And mawla; yet see what happened to you and me!
He brings the news to people so eloquently,
While they come with grudge and depart grudgingly,
Yet he made the truth eloquently shine,
While they usurped even your right and mine.
You made its destiny the sharp blades of your sword:

And the grave for whoever wanted the truth to uphold...


There is no doubt about its being consecutively reported through Sunni
sources, according to natural laws, as you have come to know; "Allah's
creation suffers no alteration; this is the Right Guidance, but most
people do not know. " (Qur'an, 30:30) The author of Al-Fatawa
alHamidiyya, in spite of his stubbornness, admits the consecutive
reporting of this hadith in his abridged dissertation titled Al-Salawat
al-Fakhira fil Ahadith alMutawatira."

Sayyuti and other scholars of exegesis all admit the same. Refer to
Mohammad Ibn Jarir Tabari, author of the famous works titled "Tafsir"
and "Tarikh," Ahmed ibn Mohammad ibn Said ibn Aqdah, Mohammad ibn Ahmed
ibn Uthman al- Thahbi, have all written critiques of the sources of this
hadith. Every one of them has written an entire book on this subject.
Ibn Jarir includes in his own book as many as one hundred and five
sources for this hadith alone.19 AI- Thahbi, in spite of his fanaticism,
has confirmed the truth of many of its sources. In chapter 16 of Ghayat
al-Maraim, as many as eighty ahadith transmitted by Sunnis, testify the
authenticity of the Ghadir hadith. Yet he did not quote Tirmithi, Nisai,
Tabrani, Bazzar, Abu Ya'li, or quite a few other reporters, who transmit
this hadith. Sayyuti quotes this hadith while discussing 'Ali in his
book Tarikh al Khulafa transmitted by al- Tirmithi, adding, "This hadlth
is also recorded by Ahmed as transmitted by Ali (a.s.), and also by
Ayyub Ansari, Zayd ibn Arqam, 'mer [inb alKhattab], and Thu Murr. Abu
Ya'li quotes it from Abu Hurayrah, al- Tabrani from Ibn 'Umer and from
Ibn Abbas as transmitted by Malik ibn Huwayrith, Habshi ibn Janadah, and
Jarir, and also by Ammarah and Buraydah." ,

A proof to the fame of this hadith is evident from the fact that Imam
Ahmed records it in his Musnad from Riyah ibn Harish, as transmitted by
two sources.

It states that a group of men once came to Ali (a.s.) and said:
"Assalamu Alaikum, our mowla." Imam asked who they were, and they
answered that they were his subjects. Imam asked them: "How can I be
your mawla, while you are [stranger] bedouin Arabs?" They said: "We have
heard from the Messenger of Allah, on the Ghadir day saying: 'Whoever I
am his mowla, Ali is his mowla. ", Riyah says that when they left, he
followed them and asked them who they were. They said to him: "We are a
group of the Ansar (Medinite Supporters) in the company of Abu Ayyub
al-Ansari." Another proof of its fame is what has been recorded by Abu
Ishaq al- Tha'labi while explaining al-Ma'arij chapter in his book
Tafsir alKabir, relying on two very highly respected sources, and
stating the following: .

19 The author of Ghayat al-Maram says near the conc.lusion of Chapter
16, p. 89, of his book: "Ibn Jarir has quoted the Ghadir \_adith from 95
sources in a book which he dedicated to this subject, calling it Al-
Wilayat, and Ibn Aqdah has quoted it from one hundred and five sources
written down in a book which he also dedicated solely for this subject.
Imam Ahmed ibn Muhanunad ibn al-Siddiq al-Magharibi has stated that both
al- Thahbi and Ibn 'Aqdah have dedicated a special book solely for this
hadith;" so, refer to the sermon in his valuable book. The Messenger of
Allah, ordered people on the Ghadir Day to assemble, then he took Ali's
hand and said: "Whoever accepts me as his mawla, Ali is his mowla." The
news of this announcement spread throughout the land, and Nu'man
al-Fahri came to know about this hadith. Riding his camel, he came to
meet the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.). Having alighted, he said the
following to the Prophet: "Q Moharnmad! You ordered us to bear witness
that there is no deity except Allah and that you are the Messenger of
Allah, and we obeyed;

then you ordered us to offer prayers five times a day, and we agreed;
then you ordered us to pay zakat, and we agreed; then you ordered us to
fast during the month of Ramadan and we agreed; then you ordered us to
perform the pilgrimage and we agreed; It seems that all these are not
sufficient. You favoured your cousin to all of us and said 'Whoever
accepts me as his mowla, Ali is his mawla; is your own orders, or is it
Allah's?" He (peace be upon him and his progeny), answered: "I swear by
the One and only God, that this is the command of Allah, the Exalted,
"whereupon Nu'man left heading towards his animal murmuring softly to
himself: "0 Lord! If what Mohammad says is true, then let it rain
stones, or let a severe torment descend upon us." He hardly reached his
animal before Allah caused a stone to cleave his head, penetrate his
body and come out of his anus, leaving him dead on the spot. With
reference to that incident Allah, the Almighty revealed the following
verse: "A demander demanded Allah to send a chastisement on him. For the
disbelievers there is no repeller against the Divine Chastisement in
this world and in the hereafter. Since it is from Allah the owner of the
ways of ascent of His presence." (Quran 70:1-3)

This is how the tradition, concludes. Its authenticity is accepted by
many Sunni scholars as a common fact, Wassalam.


Hamid Famagh (Iran)


