1- Report of the Ghadir Day
===========================

This Event took place in the Ninth year A.H. and in continuation of the
Hajj rituals in Hajjut-ul- Wida, Last Hajj with Prophet. To the Muslims,
Ghadir-e- Khum is a famous place where the Holy Prophet Mohammed
(p.b.u.h.) completed his final message to mankind with regard to his
succession. "0 you esteemed Messenger, impart the guidance that has been
revealed unto you from your God; if you do not, you has not imparted His
message at all; God will protect you from the evil designs of men.

” (Quran 5:67) The Carvan returning from the Hajjatul-Wida (the last
Pilgrimage) of the Prophet Mohammed, (Peace be upon him and his
Progeny), was unexpectedly halted. The archangel Jibrael (Gibraiel) had
come with the message from Allah. "0 Apostle, Deliver what has been
revealed to you from your God, and if you do not, then you have not
delivered His message; and Allah will protect you from the people".

In the ninth year of Hijrat, the Holy Prophet undertook the Hajj
Pilgrimage to Mecca for teaching its religious customs. He undertook
this journey during the Hajj season (Month of Hajjah). At a mountain
slope, known as Jabal-ur Rahma, in the Arafat desert, he recited an
important sermon overflowing with the recognition of Tauheed (Oneness of
God) .He gathered all the caravans at a place called Ghadir-e-Khum. He
stood at the top of the panels made from placing saddles one above the
other. While effectively speaking about the different bounties and
praising Allah, testifying to the truthfulness of Qiyamat (last day and
judgment) and the life after death, he advised people about the Holy
Quran and Ali (A.S.) again, officially and for all the public to see and
hear, he introduced his rightful successor and said:

"Whomsoever I have been the Master, Ali is his Master too".

And he cleared and threw light on the responsibility and duty of his
friends in the course of history by saying thus:

"O Allah! Befriend him who befriends Ali, and be enemy to him, who is
enemy to Ali; and help him who helps Ali; and desert him who deserts
Ali." The Place where the Muslims had stepped was Ghadir-eKhum. The
Prophet delivered a Sermon and appointed Imam Ali (peace be upon him),
as his successor. His words were: "0 Muslims! Who is more worthy [in the
eyes of] the believers than their own selves"? The audience replied:
"Allah and His Messenger know better". Hearing this, the Prophet
declared: "I am the Master (Mawla) of the faithfuls, and I have rights
over them even more than what they have over themselves.

Therefore, whoever I am his Mawla, (this) Ali is his Mawla (Master/
Chief)".

The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) had already introduced his Ahl-ulBait on several
Occasions as "the ship of Noah", "the strong rope of God", "the door of
forgiveness", "and the purified ones" and made "their love incumbent
upon his followers". He had similarly, on many occasions, pointed out
Ali as "My brother and Successor", "the door of the city of my
knowledge", "the most equitable judge", "the embodiment of faith", and
having the position with regard to him as "Aron was to Moses".

A renowned historian Ibn Khawand Shah (died 1903) on page 173 of the
first volume of his book 'Rawzatus Safa' wrote "When the meeting, held
under the serene and blissful atmosphere of the revelation, ended, the
Holy Prophet made Imam Ali to sit in a special pitched tent, and ordered
the Muslims to proceed, group by group, to congratulate him on his
succession. When the men had finished their greetings, the Apostle of
Allah ordered the wives to go and offer their congratulations".

According to the narration of Zaid Ibn Arqam, a well-known companion of
the Prophet, immediately on receiving the orders of the Prophet the
entire crowd with one voice said, "By all means we shall most willingly
obey the mandate of God Almighty and His Apostle" and moved towards Imam
Ali bin Abi Talib. Omar bin Khattab was the first to Congratulate Hazrat
Ali in the following words. “Bakhin bakhin laka yaibn Abi Taleb asbahta
Maulaayee Wa Maula Kullau Momineen wa mominaatin.”

"Greetings to you, O son of Abu Taleb! You have dawned as my master and
the master of all faithful men and women".

He was followed by Abu Bakr, Osman, Talha and Zubair who were among the
first to clasp, the hands of Ali and Swear allegiance. They were
followed by the Muhajirs (volunteers), and Ansars (helpers), and then
the rest of congregation who swore allegiance to Ali; and congratulated
him on his designation as commander of the faithful people. This grand
Celebration continued for full three days. (Kitabul Wilayah, by Mohammed
bin Jarir Tabari [died 310 A.H.].)

Zaid Ibn Arqam also narrates that after the Prophet's discourse, people
advanced, group by group towards the tent especially erected for this
ceremony, and amidst the applause of greetings and congratulations they
began to swear allegiance to Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.).

This event has established its correctness among various religious and
social groups, and almost every school of thoughts has acknowledged its
authenticity.

Ghadir points as a living truth, which emerged from the horizon of
history, shedding its light, likes the sun, the moon, and the stars in
every age and clime.

The investigations of thirty most prominent commentators of Quran and
Hadith have confirmed this event.


Talat Abedi (India)


