3- the Sermon of Ghadir
=======================

Ghadir is an Arabic word meaning pond or stream of water. There is a
place called Khum between Mecca and Madina and there was a water pond at
that place, which was called Ghadir of Khum or Ghadir-e-Khum. At this
place the Holy Prophet delivered a very famous sermon known as
Khutba-e-Ghadir (Sermon of Ghadir). This sermon originated because of
the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

"0 (our) Prophet (Mohammad) deliver what has been sent down to you from
your Lord, and if you do it not, then (it will be as if) you have not
delivered His Message (at all); and surely Allah will protect you from
(the mischief of) men; surely Allah does not guide the unbelieving
people. " (Quran 5:67)

Eminent commentators of the Holy Qur'an hold that this verse was
revealed on the 18th of Zil- Hijja 10 A.H. when the Holy Prophet was
about to reach the place Khum on his way back from Mecca, after having
performed his Hajj-a-Wida (last Pilgrimage). All the Sunni traditionists
agree that this verse relates to the declaration by the holy Prophet
about Ameerul Mo'mineen Imam 'Ali (a.s.), to be the Successor,
Viceregent and Caliph after him. It is noteworthy that the verse refers
to some very important message which Allah commands the Holy. Prophet to
convey to the people and that message is so important that if not
conveyed it would mean that the function of Prophethood was not carried
out.

The words (what has been sent down to you) give a clear indication that
a particular message had already been communicated to the holy Prophet,
and it was to be conveyed to the people at large.

The action taken by the holy Prophet in compliance to this command
shows that this particular message referred to in this verse related to
the introduction of Imam Ali (a.s.) as the Successor, Guide and Caliph
of the Muslims after the holy Prophet. Upon revelation, the holy Prophet
got down immediately from his camel and ordered the area to be cleared
for people to assemble, and a pulpit to be prepared.

Under his order Bilal, the Muazzin (prayer-caller), called out to the
people in the words, "Hayya ala khairil'amal", meaning "0' people,
collect together for the virtuous act‚Äù. Those who had gone ahead were
required to come back while those who were lagging behind were asked to
quicken their pace and reach the halting place as the holy Prophet was
to address them. When all the people had gathered, the holy Prophet
ascended the pulpit prepared for him for the occasion and delivered a
long lecture during the course of which he said:

"All praise is due to Allah who is the Creator and Lord of the entire
Universe. It is duty of everyone to offer Him thanks in comfort, as well
as, distress, in ease as well as hardship. I acknowledge being His
servant and creature and declaring that He is my Master and Lord. I
convey to the people all that He reveals to me for their guidance. I do
fear that if I do not do so and fail to carry out His behest, I shall
have to face chastisement which no one shall be able to avert from me by
any device whatsoever."

"O' people, what has been revealed to me by Allah just now is so
important that if I do not convey it to you it would mean as if I have
not carried out His Mission at all. While Allah has guaranteed to me
that he would protect me against the evil of the people. Allah has
commanded that whatever has been revealed to me in respect of Ali should
be conveyed to you. Therefore, 0' people bear in mind that Imam Ali is
hereby appointed Imam over you, so that obedience to him is obligatory
on the Migrants (the Muhajireen) and the Helpers (the Ansars), the
countrymen and the citizens, the Arabs and the non- Arabs, the freemen
and the slaves, the young and the old, the whites and the blacks. In
short his authority is to be effective on everyone who believes in the
Unity and Oneness of Allah."

"0' people, this is the last occasion and the last place that I
proclaim Ali as my successor. Listen and obey the Command of Allah.
Allah is your Creator, - your Sustainer, and your Guardian. After Allah,
His Prophet Mohammad is your Guardian and he is standing before you and
addressing you.

After me, by Allah's behest this Ali is your Guardian and your Imam.

Therefore, till the Day of Judgment, when you will be made to present
yourselves before Allah and His Prophet, this Guardianship and Imamate
would remain in my progeny born through Imam Ali (a.s.).

O' people, there is no issue of knowledge which Allah did not entrust
to me and which was not entrusted by me to Imam Ali. I have given him
all the knowledge. He is the Imam-e-Mubeen, the Manifest Guide."

"O' people do not abandon him for following others, and do not dislike
making him your ruler for he alone would strengthen Truth and act on
Truth. No reproach of any person can keep him away from Truth.

O' people, ponder over the Holy Qur'an. Understand its verses. Go deep
into its meanings and comments. By Allah no one would teach you the
implications of its verses with clarity except the person whose hand I
am holding, whom I am drawing close to me, and whose arm is in my arm.
No one will be able to divulge to you its commentary save this Ali.
VERILY FOR WHOMSOEVER I AM THE MASTER, THIS ALl IS HIS MASTER. This Ali
Ibn Abi Talib is my brother, my successor, and bear in mind that his
appointment, as my successor, is by Allah, and Allah has revealed this
fact to me."

"O' people, this Ali and the other infallibles in my progeny,
constitute the Siqlul-Asghar (the junior valuable thing); while the Holy
Qur'an is the Siqlul- Akbar (the senior valuable). And these two would
not get separated from each other, till they join me near the Cistern of
Kausar (Hawz Kausar) on the Day of Judgment.

Beware that I have discharged my duty; beware that I have conveyed what
I was charged by Allah to convey. Take note that I have clarified
everything, and note that whatever Allah revealed to me has been
faithfully conveyed to you. Take note that no one, except my brother Ali
will be the Ameerul Mo'mineen (the Commander of the Faithful people).
After me it is not lawful for anyone, except Imam Ali to wield authority
over the Faithful people."

"0' people I have clearly explained all the matters to you. Now, after
me, this Ali will explain to you these matters. After finishing my
speech, I would call you to pay allegiance (Bay'at) to him, and to
acknowledge him. Beware that I have paid allegiance (Bay'at) to Allah,
while Ali has paid allegiance to me. Now I am taking your allegiance for
Imam Ali, by the Command of Allah. Now you should also proclaim that in
this matter you accept the Command of Allah, and would obey Him, obey
me, and obey Ali, Hasan, !mam Husain, and the other Imams in Husain's
generation as mentioned by me."

"O' people, now say what I have told you to say, and from now on you
should offer salutation to Imam Ali by the title of "Ameerul Mo'mineen".
Now confirm that you have heard and accepted what I have told you, and
also say: All praise is to Allah who gave us guidance; since if He had
not guided us, we would have remained ignorants".

The whole people then cried loudly and confirmed, "Yes, O' Prophet of
Allah, we carefully heard you, and we are prepared to obey every Command
of Allah, and every Command of the Prophet of Allah with heart, tongue
and body." The people then thronged to the Holy Prophet and Imam -Ali
(a.s.) from all sides. The first who held out their pledge to the Holy
Prophet in the matter were Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman. They were followed
by other Migrants (Muhajireen), the helpers (Ansar), and the rest of the
people, so that the evening and night prayers were offered together,
because of the function having extended till it was fairly dark.

Umar is reported to have greeted Imam Ali on this occasion, in the
following words: "Greeting to you Ali son of Abu Talib; you have become
my Master and the master of every believer, man and woman".

The tradition of the Holy Prophet whereby he declared that "to
whomsoever he is the Master, Imam Ali is his Master too", is called the
Hadees-e-Wilayat or the tradition of succession. It has been narrated by
an authentic chain of narrators, and there can be no doubt in its
authenticity, and genuineness. The Tradition has been mentioned by all
eminent Islamic writers from the 2nd century of Hijrat up to now.

These writers, including commentators of the Holy Qur'an, historians,
traditionalists, theologians, litterateurs and others have written
regular books on this single tradition, in order to answer such
questions as the names and life particulars of each of its narrators,
their authenticity and truthfulness in the matter of narration of
traditions, their status among the scholars of Islam and so on.

Even the scholars and writers of the Indian subcontinent have not
lagged behind in this matter. It may be useful to quote from Moulana
Shiblee No'mani's great book "Seeratun Nabi", as he was a widely
acknowledged historian and scholar of Islam, in the Indo-Pak
subcontinent 'in the late generation. Moulana Shiblee writes:

"The Holy Prophet then set off on his return journey towards Madina
along with Muhajireen and Ansar. On the way he came to a place called
Khum, three miles from Juhfa. Here there is a pond. The Arabic word for
a pond is Ghadir. For that reason usually it is mentioned as
Ghadir-e-Khum in narrations. The Prophet collected all his companions
there, and delivered a short sermon: After praising Allah he said, "O'
people, I am also a human being. Maybe the angel of Allah (that is,
death) comes soon and I may have to respond to him. I am leaving among
you two precious things, namely; first the Book of Allah, which is full
of Divine Guidance and Light. You should hold fast to the Book of Allah.
And second, "the People of my House (Ahlul Bait)"; I recall Allah as
witness to you, about my Ahlul Bait."

The Holy Prophet repeated the last sentence thrice. This is as recorded
in the important Sunni reference books such as Saheeh Muslim. However,
Nisaee, Ahmad bin Hambal, Tirmizee, Tibrani and Tabari have related some
further sentences relating to the merits of Imam Ali (a.s.). The most
common sentence is the following, "Whomsoever I am his Master, Ali is
his Master too; may Allah keep friendship with everyone who keeps
friendship with Ali, and bear enmity with everyone who bears enmity with
Ali." Seeratun Nabi, p.165-6

In short, when this great sermon of the Holy Prophet was over, and the
sacred function of declaring Imam Ali (a.s.) as the Master of all the
Faithful had finished, then according to the narration of several
eminent historians and authentic scholars of Islam, the well-known poet
named Hassan bin Sabit sought permission to recite an encomium in praise
of Imam Ali (a.s.).

In that poem Hassan bin Sabit mentioned all salient points of the
Tradition ofWilayat (Vicegerency).

After the Holy Prophet finished this affair, the following verse was
revealed, and it is the last verse of the Holy Qur'an in the order of
revelation: "This day have I perfected for you your religion, and have
completed my favour on you, and chosen for you Islam (to be) the
religion. " (Quran 5:4) The fact that this verse was revealed on the
18th of Zilhijja at Ghadir-e- Khum after he had made the declaration
relating to Imam Ali (a.s.) being his Successor, Imam and Master of the
Faithful people is also recorded by famous historians, commentators and
traditionalists.

For example, Ibne Wazih has written that it is well established through
authentic traditions that soon after the Holy Prophet declared Imam Ali
to be the Master of whom so ever the Holy Prophet himself was the
Master, and had finished his sermon, this verse was revealed as the last
verse of the Holy Qur'an. It is known as the verse of "Perfection of
Religion and Completion of Divine Favour", that is,
"Ayat-e-Takmeele-deen wa Itmam-eNe'mat."


Rukhsana Mushtaq (Pakistan)


