4- the Meaning of Word "mowla"(leader/ Chief) in Ghadir Day
===========================================================

Al-Ghadir is related to a tradition of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.).This
tradition is narrated by many narrators, and is classified as Mutawatir
(widely narrated). Hakim Nishaburi has mentioned a tradition, from his
chain of narrators, from Zaid bin Arqam.

"When the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) was returning from the farewell
Hajj, he reached Ghadir-e-Khum (the pond of Ghadir)". "He camped at
Ghadir and ordered a pulpit to be built with camel saddles and said: "I
have been summoned, and it is the moment for me to answer.

The time has come for me, to depart from you. I leave amongst you, two
precious things. If you cleave to them, you will never go astray. The
Holy Book of God, and my Offspring, the Ahl ul-Bayt. Since they will
never abandon you, until they lead you to me, at the sacred shores of
Heaven! " "I have been summoned, and 1 shall answer the call. I leave
among you two heavy things. One of them is greater than the other, the
Book of Allah and my progeny.

Then be careful how you deal with them. And do not forsake them till
you reach the Pond of Kauser." Then he said, "Indeed Allah, the Almighty
is my Master and I am the master of all the believers." Then he took the
hand if Ali and said, "Of whom so ever I am the master, this Ali is his
master too. 0 Allah befriend to one who be friends Ali and be enemy to
anyone who harbours enmity against him."

"Then whosoever, I am master of, then this man, Ali is his master." "O
God! Befriend him, whosoever befriends him. Oppose him, whosoever
opposes him. Support him, whosoever supports him. Desert him, whosoever
deserts him."

"As God is my Judge! Bear witness for me, that today I surely completed
and fulfilled your religion for you, and have successfully conveyed the
Message that has been bestowed upon me by Allah. (AI Ghadir, Allamah
Amini Vol.l, P. 9-11)

Al Hakim Neshaburi says that this tradition is correct according to the
standards of evaluation of Bukhari1 and Muslim2, but they have not
recorded it. Although Zahabi has mentioned it in his "Talkhis Al
Mustadrak", it has also been mentioned by other reputed Sunni scholars
in their books of traditions. Among them are; Qandoozi in "Yanabiul
Mawaddah", AI-Maqrizi, Ahmed 1,2 They are two very reputable narrators
of the Prophet traditrions, and their collections of traditions called
as "Saheehs", are famous references for Islamic traditions.

ibn Khulafa, Mohib Tabari in Riyaz -01- Nazarah, Ibn Khallakan in .
"Wafayatul Ayaan", Khatib Baghdadi in Tarikh-eBaghdad, Ibne Qutaybah in
"Imamat Wal Siyasah", Ibn Tayimiyyah in his books "Huqooqe Ahlal Bayt",
and "Aqeedatul Wasatiya", AI-Masoodi in "Muruj az-Zahab", Balazari in
"Ansabul Ashraaf', Ibn Kathir in "Tafsirul Quran Azeem", Ibn Hajar
Haithami in "Sawaequl Muhreqa" etc. There are many other scholars and
writers who have quoted the tradition of Ghadir in their writings too.

Another notable fact mentioned in authentic historical books is that
after the declaration of wilayat of Ali (p.b.u.h.) all those who were
present with the holy Prophet proceeded to congratulate Ali. Especially
Umar greeted in the following words: "Congratulations to you, 0' Abul
Hasan, you have become my Master, and the Master of all believing men
and women."

The tradition - "of whomsoever I am the Master, Ali is his Master", is
so authentic and has been related by so many scholars in Islam that it
has not been possible to deny it. So people who do not feel happy with
recognizing the merits of Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.), or to acknowledge his
position as Successor of the holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) have tried to
undermine his position by giving lighter interpretation to the word
"Mowla" used by the holy Prophet. Some of them say that Mowla means
friend, others say it means helper etc. The real significance of the
word Mowla is, however, quite clear from the declaration of the Holy
Prophet that "of whomsoever he was the Mowla, Ali is his Mowla".

Evidently, the Holy Prophet can not be called a mere friend or helper
of the Muslims. He was their Guide, their Master, and the Head of their
state. To say that he was a mere friend or helper is derogatory. Since
the Holy Prophet declared Imam Ali to be Mowla as he himself was, it
follows that Imam Ali would be Mowla in the same sense in which the Holy
Prophet is to be regarded Mowla. Therefore this historic declaration
puts a final seal on appointment of Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.) as his own
Successor, Viceregent and Caliph.

It may be pertinently recalled that, first of all, it was at the close
of the "party of Kinsmen" known as "Dawate Zul- Asheera" in Islamic
history, that, when the Holy Prophet had invited his chief kinsmen to a
feast and disclosed that he was the Prophet of Allah (Rasulullah), and
was commanded to invite them to the Divine Message. Then the holy
Prophet announced, "This Ali is my brother, my Inheritor, my Successor,
and my Deputy over you. You should listen to him and obey him".

Thereafter the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) continued announcing to the
people, the high merits and achievements of Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.), and
reminding them that Ali was to be regarded as the best, and the most
distinguished among the muslim community, after the Holy Prophet, and to
be accepted as his Successor over them, after him.

The tradition of Ghadir namely: "Of whomsoever I am the Master Ali
(a.s.) is his Master" serve as the last link in the whole chain of the
announcements of the virtues and qualifications of Ali (p.b.u.h.).

No such declaration was made about any other person. This day namely
the 18th of Zil-Hijja is accordingly celebrated as a day of rejoicing
among the lovers and adherents of Imam Ali, and is known as
Eid-e-Ghadir.


Rukhsana Mushtaq (Pakistan)


