6- Importance of "ghadir" in Our Islamic Ideology
=================================================

At the very outset we are faced with a stark reality. We are compelled
to ask ourselves two questions. What status did Islam want the Muslims
to achieve?

What status have the Muslims actually achieved? The answer to the first
question is comparatively much easy to digest. Three times does the Holy
Quran repeats: "Allah is the One Who has sent His messenger with
guidance and the religion of truth to over shine all religions by it,
though the polytheists may dislike it." (Quran 9:33, 48:28, 61:9). Also
the Holy Quran enunciates:

"Surely the land is Allah's; He causes His servants to inherit it as He
pleases" (7:128) But the answer to the second question hits the belly -
and indeed hits it hard. Today's Muslim does not stand anywhere near
victory. Success reaches every house but somehow manages to escape the
thresholds of Muslims. The parable of the Muslim is that of a football,
being kicked from one end to another. Some do kick to get material
benefits. Majority are the people who seek pure entertainment by being
the spectators and at times the cheerleaders. This reality slaps, smack,
on our faces.

The somberness of this fact burns our hearts. It persuades us to do the
much needed research in order to comprehend the underlying fundamentals
to this stark variation - What the Quran explicitly mentions to what we
observe in the socio-political transnational personality of the
contemporary Muslim. In this research, to pursue the reality, we promise
ourselves to uphold and follow the genuine research 'wherever it leads
to'.

Pursuit for truth without the sincere intent and the firm resolve has
no meaning. Before we venture out in the realm of sincere research and
quest for truth we take caution and endeavor to improve our resolve with
these words "There are few nudities as objectionable, as the naked truth
Agnes Replier. Further we sincerely pray that we take our faith
seriously, and not to be included in those who have been mentioned with
the words" He wears his faith, but as the fashion of his hat - William
Shakespeare. We take courage in these words "All truths are easy to
understand once they are discovered; the point is to discover them
Galileo Galilei (1564 - 1642). And also "Truth is generally the best
vindication against slander - Abraham Lincoln.

Let us first analyze where the Muslims went wrong in their vast history
presently spread over more than 14 centuries. Where did the first
falsehood creep into the history of the Muslims? We will not leave any-
stone unturned and any page unread, to locate this falsehood and
ultimately eliminate it.

There are two ways to this analysis. First we initiate from the
contemporary to the life of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.). Second is we
initiate from the life of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) to the
contemporary. We know that if there was a false in the past, then it had
been multiplied with time. Therefore, we take the second option,
starting from the life of the Holy Prophet to the present. It would have
been an increasingly ardous affair to analyze the complex form of the
false in the recent times without analyzing the comparatively bare and
raw form of the false in the previous times. When we mention I bare form
of the falsehood' we definitely have taken great pains in comprehending
what a 'falsehood' means and implies. This indicates that there exist
different forms of falsehood. There are 2 kinds of falsehoods. One is in
its bare status, which is in its nascent elementary form, and the other
is the falsehood garbed with truth that is the complicated form. The
Holy Quran says: "Do not mix the truth with the falsehood "(2:42). In
this verse the Holy Quran exhorts the people not to mix truth and
falsehood together. Simply speaking the Holy Quran could have asked us
to leave falsehood. But it is needless to mention here that the Holy
Quran wants to specify here the second form of falsehood that is more
dangerous than simple elementary form of falsehood. This falsehood is
the complex form of falsehood that is mixed with truth and is perceived
as truth at the outset.

Only when a person ponders over the reality of this he comes to
understand that it is, in reality, a falsehood and not truth. But the
more simple minded people and those who do not ponder a lot get hooked
and start considering this falsehood as being the real form of truth.
These people start believing this complex form of false as truth in such
a way that they are more than willing to sacrifice their lives for this
complex false, of course, under the impression that this is truth by
itself. There is another group of people who are impure at heart. They
are quite aware about this complex false and comprehend that this is
false but chooses to stick by this false rather than the truth.

Beginning from the life of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), first, we are
sure that nothing went wrong in the time when the Holy Prophet was
alive. Since we know that the Holy Prophet was at the helm of the
affairs of the Muslims and no mistakes could be attributed to him. It is
sufficient to say that no Muslim believes that the Holy Prophet
committed any mistake that ultimately has caused such tragic oppressions
of the Muslims. Also, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has received a
certificate from Allah (S.W.T.) that he will not err in the affairs of
the Muslims in the following verses of the Holy Quran:

"Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray; nor does he speak
out of desire. It is naught but a revelation that is revealed "(53: 2,
3, & 4). Also the Holy Quran certifies all his actions by asking
everyone to follow each and every action of him without any exception.
This verse has been repeated tens of times in the Holy Quran: “Obey
Allah and obey the Prophet” (3:32, 3:132, 4:59, 8:1, 8:20, 8:46). Our
journey for seeking truth has started from the life of the Holy Prophet
and is supposed to terminate at the contemporary. So the next stage
which should not miss our stringent perusal is the period immediately
after the demise of the Holy Prophet. .

Immediately after the demise of the Holy Prophet, we envisage heavy
differences taking place amongst the Muslims. We can proffer many
examples displaying the terrible differences that had occurred. But
since the scope of this document is highly limited, just to indicate the
extent of differences taking place after the Holy Prophet it is
sufficient to enunciate the following points: 1. Abu Ja'far Baladhuri, a
reliable traditionalist and historian according to the Sunnis, writes in
his "History" that when Abu Bakr called Ali to swear allegiance, Ali
refused. Abu Bakr sent Umar, who went with a torch to set fire to Ali's
house. Fatima came to the door and said: "0 son of Khattab! Have you
come to set my house on fire?" He said: "Yes, this is more effective
than anything your father did."

2. Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume Ill, page 351. Ibn Abi'l-Hadid wrote
that he told his teacher, Abu Ja'far Naqib, that when the Prophet was
told that Hubbar Bin Aswad had attacked his daughter Zainab's litter
with a lance, because of which Zainab suffered a miscarriage, the
Prophet allowed him to be put to death. Abu Ja'far said: “Had the
Prophet of Allah been alive, he would have surely ordered the death
penalty for him also who had frightened Fatima so much that her child,
Muhsin, died in miscarriage.”

Hazrat Hussein (AS.) the grandson of the Holy Prophet was martyred
along with his family members.

3. When Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud learned that, like other copies of the Holy
Quran, his copy had been burnt, he was much aggrieved. In social and
religious gatherings, he narrated the condemnatory tradition that he
knew about Othman. When this news reached Othman, he had Ibn Mas'ud so
severely beaten by his slaves that his teeth were broken, and he was
confined to bed. After three days he succumbed to his injuries. Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid writes in detail about these facts in Volume I, pages 67 and
226 of Sharh Nahju'l- Balagha (printed in Egypt) under "Ta'n VI".

4. Both Shia and Sunni scholars narrate that, when Umayyad oppressions
increased, some companions of the Prophet wrote to Othman, asking him to
relent. They said that if he continued to assist his cruel Umayyad
Governors, he would not only be harming Islam, but he would himself be
subjected to serious consequences. They asked Ammar Yasir to deliver the
petition since Othman himself had acknowledged Ammar's virtue. They had
often heard Othman say that the Prophet said that faith was blended with
the flesh and blood of Ammar. So Ammar took the letter to Othman. When
he arrived, Othman asked him, "Do you have business with me?" He
replied: "I have no business of a personal nature. But a group of the
Prophet's Companions have written in this letter some suggestions and
advice for your welfare. They have sent it to you, through me." After
reading a few lines, Othman threw the letter down. Ammar said: "It was
not good of you. A letter from the companions of the Holy Prophet of
Allah deserves respect. Why did you throw it on the ground? It would be
proper for you to have read it and replied to it?" "You are lying!"
Othman shouted. Then he ordered his slaves to beat him, and Othman
himself kicked him in the stomach.

5. Othman was also cruel to Abu Dharr Ghifari, one of the intimate
companions of the Holy Prophet and a learned man. Great traditionalists
and historians of both sects have reported that this ninety-year-old man
was unjustly exiled from place to place with utmost ignominy - from
Medina to Syria, to Medina again, and then (from Medina to the desert of
Rabza in Lebanon. He rode on a naked camel accompanied by his only
daughter. He died in Rabza in penury and neglect.

Sunni prominent ulema and historians, including, Ibn Sa'd, in his
Tabaqat, Volume IV, page 168; Bukhari in Sahih, Kitab-e-Zakat; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid in his Sharhe Nahju'l-Balagha, Volume I, page 240 and Volume
II, pages 375-87, Yaqubi in his History, Volume II, page 148;
Abu'l-Hasan Ali Bin Husain Mas'udi, the famous traditionalist and
historian of the fourth century in his Muruju'dh-Dhahab, Volume I, page
438, and many others have recorded Uthman's cruelty. It has been widely
reported how he mistreated the pure-hearted Abu Dharr, the loved one of
the Holy Prophet, and also how Abdullah Bin Mas'ud, the hafiz and
recorder of holy Quran, who was given forty lashes because he bid
farewell to Abu Dharr Ghifari. Insulting treatment was likewise shown to
Ali for the same reason. 6. The wife of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) came
out to fight against the Holy Imam Ali (p.b.u.h.).

7. Ayesha went to Basra city. Uthman Bin Honaif, a great companion of
the Prophet and governor of Basra appointed by Ali, was captured there.
His hair and beard were pulled out; he was tortured and driven out. More
than 100 innocent, helpless Muslims were killed. Ibn Athir, Mas'udi,
Muhammad Bin Jarir Tabari, Ibn Abi'lHadid, and others have written in
detail about this event. 8. Abu'l-Faraj Ispahani in his Maqatilu't-
Talibin, Ibn Abdu'l-Ber in his Isti'ab, Mas’udi in his Isbatu'l-Wasiyya,
and many other ulema have reported that Asma Ju'da, by order and promise
of Mu'awiya, gave poison to Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibn Ali. Ibn Abdu'l-Bar
and Muhammad Bin Jarir Tabari have also reported that when Mu'awiya was
informed of the demise of the holy imam, he shouted takbir ("Allah is
Great").

9. When Amr Bin As and Mu'awiya Bin Khadij conquered Egypt; the supply
of water was cut off to Muhammad Bin Abu Bakr. When he had nearly died
of thirst, he was killed. He was then enclosed in the skin of an ass and
the bundle was thrown into a fire. When Mu'awiya learned of this, he was
very pleased.

10. Sunni eminent ulema and historians, including Yusuf Sibt Ibn Jauzi
in his Tazkira Khawasu'l-Umma, p.122; Allama Mas'udi, author of
Muruju'z- Dhahab, in Isbatu'lWasiyya, p.136; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid in
Sharh-e-Nahju'l- Balagha, vol. IV, p.18, reporting from Abu'l-Faraj and
Yahya Bin Hasan, author of Kitabu'n-Nasab; Muhammad Khwawind Shah in his
Rauzatu's-Safa, and many others have written that when the corpse of
Imam Hasan was being transported to Medina, A'yesha, mounted on a mule
and accompanied by a group of the Bani Umayya and their slaves, stopped
the group with Imam Hasan's body. They said that they would not let Imam
Hasan be buried by the side of the Holy Prophet.

According to \_the report of Mas'udi, Ibn Abbas said: "It is strange of
you, A'yesha! Was not the Day of Jamal, that is, your entering the
battlefield mounted on a camel, sufficient for you? Now should the
people also keep in memory the Day of Baghl? 11. Differences in the four
schools of Jurisprudence namely shaafei, Maaliki, Hanbali and hanafi,
which appeared after the Holy Prophet, had been so intense that they
used to go to the extent of calling each other infidels.

The above cases show that there did exist tremendous differences and an
increasingly pathetic state of affairs of the Muslims right after the
demise of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.). It will be absolutely wrong to
endeavor and find out the roots to the causes of the plight of the
contemporary Muslim without actually finding out the roots to the
pathetic status of the Muslims immediately after the Holy Prophet. But
the big question is - How do we find the truth? How do we analyze the
events taking shape after the demise of the Holy Prophet? The Ahle
sunnat people come up with a theory of Ijma (General Approval). They
boldly mention that in spite of the differences among the Muslims, they
were all united on one platform. It is like saying that the pant has
40,000 holes in it but still it is perfect - You can wear it! They were
not united on anyone aspect. Let us not beat behind the bushes.

Let us not follow the words "If the facts don't fit the theory, change
the facts. If we ponder on this, and sincerely endeavor to seek the
truth we will understand that these kinds of disturbances were not
exclusive to the Muslim society. Any community which has so many
resources under it and has huge power will get involved in this kind of
strife, if one single leader is not designated by the previous leader.
If the previous leader leaves the community without designating his
successor for the community and the community, has such resources, it
can be predicted that enormous strife and disturbances will follow in
the community. Hence this ultimately devolves on the Holy Prophet. If
the Holy Prophet had to avoid disturbances after him then he had to
appoint his successor. There was absolutely no chance that the Muslim
community would have remained safe from disturbances and internal
strife, if there was no one single person appointed as the Holy
Prophet's successor and appointed before the demise of the Holy Prophet.
If a person says that the Holy Prophet did not appoint anyone as his
successors throughout his lifetime, then he is most certainly
attributing an error, short sightedness and a shortcoming on the Holy
Prophet. Hence, after all the pains we have taken, we have at least
understood the following:

1. Plight of the present day Muslims are not related purely to the
present day problems, but are inherited from the past that is ultimately
inherited from the problems faced by Muslims immediately after the
demise of the Holy Prophet.

2. The problems of the Muslims immediately after the Holy Prophet was
because they were not united under one single banner of TRUTH.

3. The Muslims after the Holy Prophet were not united 1 under one
banner of truth because the Holy Prophet did not identify this banner of
truth by not appointing 'his successor. Thus the root cause of all the
problems faced by the Muslims throughout so many centuries is the error
of the Holy Prophet - May Allah (S.W.T.) protects us from such wild and
false imaginations. The other possibility is that the Holy Prophet did
appoint his successor and vicegerent, but the majority of the Muslims
disregarded it. Thus all the problems faced by the Muslims throughout so
many centuries whether it be spiritual or material has to be attributed
to this disregard.

If it is true that the Holy Prophet appointed a successor after him but
the majority of the Muslims disregarded it then we should try to find
this appointment by the Holy Prophet. Let us utilize all the latest
tools available to mankind to scan and find out the moment in the life
of the Holy Prophet when he appointed his successor and vicegerent. If
we study the life of the Holy Prophet we will find out that we do not
require any tools to locate where and how did the Holy Prophet appoint
his successor. In fact his life is full of small and big incidents
wherein he has announced his successor. He has not hidden these events
anywhere, and has not made this appointment ambiguous. These kinds of
repeated announcement by the holy Prophet of his successor are abundant
and clear in his life time. The Holy Prophet was too merciful to have
possibly concealed the appointment. The Holy Quran says: " Certainly an
apostle has come to you, from among yourselves; grievous to him is your
falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting you; to the
believers (he is) compassionate, merciful." (9:128)

Amongst all the instances wherein the Holy Prophet has mentioned the
appointment of his successor, the event of Ghadir is the biggest
occasion.

After completion of the last pilgrimage of the Holy Prophet he
collected all the Muslims available at a place called Ghadir-e-khum, and
then vehemently announced the appointment of Ali (p.b.u.h.) as his
successor and vicegerent in clear terms. Since whatever we have
discussed till now is focused on this event of Ghadir, we need to
elaborate this event in a greater detail.


