Geographical Location of Ghadir
===============================

Ghadir literary means small lake or pond. Ghadir is the name of a place
that comes on the way from Mecca to Medina. It is 3 miles further than
Johfa towards Medina. Though geographically it exists on the way to
Medina but this place acted as an exit point for all the people going
out from Mecca for all the other places. When the Holy Prophet halted at
this place after his last pilgrimage to make his all-significant
announcement it was extremely hot at that time, and it was close to
mid-day. There was no shelter present over there at that time. In fact
there existed merely small minor patches of shades provided by a few
acacia trees.

Date:

The date is 18th Zilhajjah of the year 10 AH. (10 March 632) Event
Backdrop:

The Holy Prophet asked his companions to call the Muslims in general to
attend for a pilgrimage to the Holy Kaaba. The Holy Prophet specified
that he himself would also be there to attend for the pilgrimage and
teach the Muslims the rituals of the pilgrimage and convey his
significant messages directly to all. The call for the pilgrimage was
made. On his way to Makkah more than 70,000 Muslims joined him. By the
fourth of Zilhajjah more than 120,000 Muslims had collected for the Haj
with the Holy Prophet.

After the Last pilgrimage:

After completing the last pilgrimage the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) along
with the Muslims set out of Mecca. On their way back the Muslims reached
a place called Ghadir-e-khumm. The following verse was revealed to the
Holy Prophet: "0 Apostle! Deliver what has been sent down to you from
your God; and if you don't do it, you have not delivered His message (at
all); and Allah will protect you from the people... " (Quran 5:67)
Delivery of the sermon:

On receiving the above verse, the Holy Prophet stopped at that very
place called Ghadir-e-khum. He ordered his companions to call back those
of the Muslims who had gone ahead. He waited for those Muslims who had
remained behind to join them. He ordered Salman to prepare for a pulpit
with the help of rocks and camel tooling. It was prime noontime and
Muslims had covered their heads and legs on account of the heat. Muslims
sat near the temporary pulpit. The Holy Prophet was at this place for
about 5 hours. He recited nearly 100 verses of the Holy Quran most of
which were in the praise of Ali. Seventy three times he reminded and
admonished the Muslims about their deeds and future.

The following is a part of the lengthy speech of --the Holy Prophet
which has also been narrated by the Sunni scholars repeatedly:

"It seems the time has approached when I shall be called away (by
Allah) and I shall answer that call. I am leaving for you two precious
things. And if you adhere to them both, you will never go astray after
me. They are the Book of Allah and my Progeny that is my Ahlul Bayt.

These two shall never separate from each other until they come to me by
the Pool (of Paradise)." Then the Holy Prophet in an attempt to remind
Muslims of his own authority over them said: "Do I not have more right
over the believers than what they have over themselves?" Muslims
answered unanimously "Yes, 0' Messenger of God". This served as a
stepping stone for the announcement of his successor and vicegerent. The
Holy Prophet held out the hand of Ali (p.b.u.h.) and said: "For whomever
I am his Leader (mawla), 'Ali is his Leader (mawla)." The Holy Prophet
then continued to say: "0' God, love those who love him, and be hostile
to those who are hostile to him." Revelation of the verse 5:3

Once the Holy Prophet completed his speech this verse of the Holy Quran
was revealed to him: "Today I have peifected your religion and completed
my favour upon you, and I am satisfied that Islam be your religion."
(Quran 5:3). This verse explicitly mentions that only along with this
express announcement of the vicegerancy by the Holy Prophet the religion
of Islam can be considered complete and perfect. Without this
announcement or because of the disregard of this announcement, the
religion of Islam will be merely half truth. As indicated earlier, many
times half truths are more dangerous than full falsehoods. No doubt if
the Muslims disregard this announcement, they will have to endure
oppression and hardship both materially and spiritually.

Hessan Bin Thabit's poetry:

Immediately after completion of the sermon Hessan Bin Thabit sought the
permission of the Holy Prophet to convey to the audience his poetry
which he had instantaneously composed regarding this event of ghadir.
The Holy Prophet told him "Say with the blessings of Allah". He then
conveyed the following poem to the audience:

"He calls them, (on) the day of Ghadir, their Prophet In Khum so hear
(and heed) the Messenger's call, He said: "Who is your guide and leader?
(mawlakum wa waliyyukum )" They said, and there was no apparent
blindness (clearly): “You're God, our guide, and you are our leader And
you won't find from among us, in this, any disobedient,” He said to him:
"Stand up 0' Ali, for I am Pleased to announce you Imam and guide after
me (min ba'di imam wa hadi),

So whomever I was his leader (mawla), then this is his leader (mawla)
So be to him supporters in truth and followers,"

Oath of allegiance:

The Holy Prophet according to his long term merciful nature towards the
people did not get satisfaction only on this announcement. He wanted
this announcement to take the shape of appropriate action from the side
of the Muslims. He ordered the Muslims to meet Ali and give oath of
allegiance to him. Umar Bin Khattab came first to Ali, gave oath of
allegiance to Ali and said "Well done Ibn Abi Talib! Today you became
the Leader (mawla) of all believing men and women." After Umar were Abu
Bakr, Uthman, Talha and then others. The entire process of giving
allegiance to Ali by the present 120,000 people took 3 days.

Revelation of the verse 70:1-3:

The news about the above announcement and the subsequent oath of
allegiance given by the Muslims to Ali (p.b.u.h.) spread across both the
urban and rural areas. This event was so significant that it touched the
Muslims all across the globe. In this process Harith Ibn Nu'man alFahri
(or Nadhr Ibn Harith according to another tradition) came to know about
this. He hurriedly came to Medina and started disputing with the Holy
Prophet on the issue of appointment of Ali (A.S.) as the vicegerant. He
told the Holy Prophet "You commanded us to testify that there is no
deity but Allah and that you are the Messenger of Allah. We obeyed you.
You ordered us to perform the prayers five times a day and we obeyed.
You ordered us to observe fasts during the month of Ramadhan and we
obeyed. Then you commanded us to offer pilgrimage to Makkah and we
obeyed. But you are not satisfied with all these and raised your cousin
upon us as our master by saying 'Ali is the mawla of whom I am mawla.'
Is this imposition from, Allah or from you?"

The Prophet said: "By Allah who is the only deity, this is from Allah,
the Mighty and the Glorious. ".

On hearing this while going back to his camel Harith said "0 Allah! If
what Muhammad said is correct" then fling on me a stone from the sky and
subject me to severe pain and torture." He had not even reached his
camel that Allah flung a stone on him who struck him on his head and
penetrated his entire body and he was instantaneously left dead. At this
the following verse was revealed "A questioner questioned about the
punishment to fall. For the disbelievers there is nothing to avert it,
from Allah the Lord of the Ascent." (Quran 70:1-3).

We have mentioned above the entire episode of the Ghadir. But
unfortunately, even after knowing and understanding the entire truth we
see heads move in rejecting the truth. There are basically 3 excuses
which the opponents offer. Though these excuses are self-evident to be
no more than futile excuses, but we will deal with them in detail so
that the opponents are left with no shelter place.

Excuses:

1., The tradition of Ghadir is not reliable and authentic.

2. The word Mawla used in the tradition does not imply master, but it
means friend. Hence the Holy Prophet actually announced about the
friendship of Ali (AS.) on the day of Ghadir and not about mastership of
him.

3. It does not appeal to our common sense that the Holy Prophet
appointed Ali (AS.) as his successor in clear terms and still the
companions of the Holy Prophet disobeyed him and after his demise
appointed a vicegerent by themselves.

We will deal with the above excuses separately and in such details as
to dispel all doubts and lay bare the mischief of the mischief makers.
Excuse 1: The tradition of Ghadir is not reliable and authentic
Rebuttal:

A. Sunni references for the verse 5:67 revealed in relation and just
before the tradition of Ghadir. Though there are at least 69 chains of
transmitters present for this from Sunni sources, but due to lack of
space we will mention only 9 books:

1. "Yanabi' al-mawaddah" - Khajah Kalan Sulayman bin Ibrahim, al-
Husayni al-Balkhi al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi.

2. "Arbaein fi faza'il Amir al-Mu'minin" - lamal aI-Din 'Ata' Allah b.
Fazl Allah, al-Husayni al-Shirazi.

3. "AI-Durr al-Manthur" - al-Suyuti, lalal aI-Din 'Abd alRahman b.
Kamal aI-Din Abi Bakr, al-Shafiei.

4. "Tafsir Kashf ol-bayan" - AI-Tha'labi, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim,
Abu Ishaq al-Nisaburi.

5. "Asbab al-Nuzul" - Wahidi, Abu al-Hasan 'Ali b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b.
'Ali b. Mattawayh, alNayshaburi.

6. "Dirayah fi Hadith al- Wilayah" (Kitab al-wilayah) Mas'ud b. Nasir
b. 'Abd Allah b. Ahmad, Abu Saeid Sijzi ( al-Sijistani).

7. Shawahid al-tanzil - Ibn Haddad Haskani, 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abd Allah,
Abu al-Qasim al-Hakim alNishaburi al-Hanafi.

8. Mafatih al-Ghayb (Tafsir al-kabir) - Fakhr aI-Din Razi, Muhammad b.
'Umar b. al-Hasan, Abu 'Abd Allah alShafiei.

9. Matalib Osul fi manaqib Ale Rasul - Muhammad b. Talhah, Abu Salim
al-Qarashi al-Nasjbi Shafiei.

B. Sunni references regarding the tradition of Ghadir. Here it is more
than sufficient to mention that Allama Amini has mentioned this
tradition from 110 companions of the Holy Prophet and 84 second
generation (Ta'bei) and 360 Sunni scholars. In fact at other places,
other 200 Sunni ulema references are given which takes the number of
Sunni ulema to have related the tradition of Ghadir to at least 560! Due
to lack of space again here we will mention only 9 references from Sunni
sources who have related the tradition of Ghadir and have specifically
mentioned the words of "For whoever I am his Leader (mawla), 'Ali is his
Leader (mawla).":

1. AI-Bidayah wa'l-Nihayah fi Ta'rikh - Ibn Kathir, 'Imad aI-Din
Isma'il b. 'Umar b. Kathir b. Daw', al-Qarashi alDimashqi.

2. Manaqib 'Ali b. Abi Talib - Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal
b. Hilal b. Asad, Abu 'Abd Allah al-Shaybani al-Marwazi.

3. AI-Musnad - Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal b. Hilal b.
Asad, Abu 'Abd Allah al-Shaybani Marwazi.

4. Kanz al- 'ummal fi sunan al-aqwal wa'l afal - Nur alDin 'Ali b. 'Abd
al- Malik Husam aI-Din al-Muttaqi Hindi.

5. Sunan - Ibn Majah, Muhammad b. Yazid, Abu 'Abd Allah al-Qazwini. 6.
AI-Musannaf - Ibn Abi Shaybah, 'Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim b.
'Uthman, Abu Bakr al-'Absi al-Kufi.

7. al-'Iktifa fi fadl al-'arba'ah al-khulafa' - Ibrahiin b. 'Abd Allah,
al-Wassabi al-Yamani al-Shafi'i. , 8. AI-Khasa'is fi fadl 'Ali b. Abi
Talib - al-Nasa'i, Ahmad b. Shu'ayb b. 'Ali b. Sinan b. Barn, Abu 'Abd
al-Rahman al-Khurasani al-Nasa'i.

9. Miftah al-naja fi manaqib Al al-'aba - Mirza Muhammad b. Mu'tamad
Khan al-Harithi al-Badakhshi (al- Badakhshani).

C. Sunni references about the verse 5:3 being revealed immediately
after the sermon of Ghadir. Again here we can provide at least 35 chains
of transmitters but due to lack of space we will mention only 9 Sunni
books to confirm:

1. Manaqib 'Ali Ibn. Abi Talib - Ibn al-Maghazili, 'Ali b. Muhammad,
Abu al-Hasan al-Tayyib al-Jullabi al-Shafi'i. 2. Miftah al-naja fi
manaqib ab - Mirza Muhammad b. Mu'tamad Khan al-Harithi al-Badakhshi
(al- Badakhshani).

3. Ma nazala min ai-Qur'an fi 'Ali - Abu Nu'aym, Ahmad b. 'Abd Allah,
al 'Isfahani.

4. Manaqib 'Ali b. Abi Talib - Ibn al-Maghazili, 'Ali b. Muhammad, Abu
al Hasan al- Tayyib al-Jullabi al-Shafi'i. 5. al-Khasa'is al-
'Alawiyyah - Muhammad b. 'Ali b. Ibrahim, Abu al-Fath al-Natanzi.

6. Kitab al-Manaqib - Khatib al-Kharazmi, Muwaffaq b. Ahmad, Abu al-
Mu'ayyad al-Makki, known as Akhtab alMuwaffaq.

7. AI-Duff al-Manthur - al-Suyuti, Jalal aI-Din 'Abd alRahman b. Kamal
aIDin Abi Bakr, al-Shafi'i.

8. Fara'id al-samtayn fi fada'il al-Murtada wa al-batul wa al-sibtayn -
al- Juwayni, Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. alMu'ayyad, Sadr aI-Din Abu
al-Majami' al-Hamawayni or al-Hamawi al-Shafi'i.

9. Tafsir aI-Qur'an al-'Azim - Ibn.Kathir, 'Imad aI-Din Isma'il b.
'Umar b. Kathir b. Daw', al-Qarashi alDimashqi.

D. References of Hessan Bin. Thabits poetry:

1. Ma nazala min aI-Qur'an fi 'Ali - Abu Nu'aym, Ahmad b. 'Abd Allah,
aI- 'lsfahani.

2. Fara'id al-samtayn fi faza'iI al-Murtada wa aI-batuI wa aI-sibtayn -
aIJuwayni, Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. aI Mu'ayyad, Sadr aI-Din Abu
al-Majami' al-Hamawayni or al-Hamawi al-Shafi'i.

3. Kashf al-ghamma fi ma'rifat al-A'immah - al-Irbili, 'Ali b. 'Isa b.
Abi al- Fath, Abu al-Hasan al-'Irbili.

4. al-'Azhar fi ma 'aqdahu al-shu'ara' min al-'ash'ar - alSuyuti, lalal
aI-Din 'Abd al-Rahman b. Kamal ai-Din Abi Bakr, al-Shafi'i.

5. Kifayat al-Talib - Muhammad b. Yusufb. Muhammad, Abu 'Abd Allah
al-Kanji al-Shafi'i.

6. al-Khasa'is al- 'Alawiyyah - Muhammad b. 'Ali b. Ibrahim, Abu
al-Fath al-Natanzi. 7. Tazkirat khawass al-'ummah fi ma'rifat al-a'immah
Sibt b. al-lawzi, Shams aI-Din Yusufb. Qizughli, Abu alMuzaffar.

E. References of Oath of allegiance as mentioned above:

1. AI-Bidayah wa'l-Nihayah fi al- Ta'rikh - Ibn Kathir, 'Imad aI-Din
Isma'il b. 'Umar b. Kathir b. Daw', al.: Qarashi al-Dimashqi.

2. Manaqib 'Ali Ibn. Abi Talib - Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad b. Muhammad b.
Hanbal b. Hilal b. Asad, Abu 'Abd Allah al-Shaybani al-Marwazi. 3.
AI-Musannaf - Ibn Abi Shaybah, 'Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim b.
'Uthman, Abu Bakr al- \_Absi al-Kufi.

4. Fada'il 'Ali - 'Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Hanbal, Abu 'Abd al-Rahman al-
Shaybani.

5. al-Fusul al-muhimmah li ma'rifat al-a'immah - Ibn alSabbagh, Nur
aI-Din 'Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad, alGhazzi al-Maliki.

6. Manaqib Al Abi Talib - Ibn Shahrashub, Muhammad b. 'Ali, Abu la'far.
7. Sharaf al-Mustafa - 'Abd al-Malik b. Muhammad, Abu Sa'd al-Wa'iz al-
Nisaburi al-Kharkushi (al-Khargushi).

8. Tafsir Kashf wa'l-bayan - AI-Tha'labi, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim,
Abu Ishaq al-Nisaburi.

9. Riyad al-Nadirah - Muhibb aI-Din Ahmad b. 'Abd Allah, Abu al- 'Abbas
al-Tabari al-Makki al-Shafi'i. Again due to paucity of space we limit to
9 books refferences. There are otherwise at least 76 chains of narrators
mentioned in books for this.

F. The revelation of the verse 70: 1-3 is regarding the event of the
dispute of Harith as mentioned earlier. References for this are:

1. al-'Arba'in fi faza'il Amir al-Mu'minin - Jamal aI-Din 'Ata' Allah
b. Fazl Allah, al-Husayni al-Shirazi.

2. Tafsir Kashf wa'l-bayan - Al-Tha'labi, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ibrahim,
Abu Ishaq al-Nishaburi.

3. Tadhkirat khawass al-'ummah fi ma'rifat al-a'immah Sibt b. al-Jawzi,
Shams aI-Din Yusufb. Qizughli, Abu alMuzaffar.

4. al-'Iktifa fi fadl al-'arba'ah al-khulafa' - Ibrahim b. 'Abd Allah,
al-Wassabi al-Yamani al-Shafi'i.

5. Hidayat al-su'ada' - Shihab aI-Din Ahmad b. Shams alOin 'Vmar, Malik
al- 'Vlama' al-Zawali al-Dawlatabadi. 6. Ma'arij al-wusul - al-Zarandi,
Jamal ai-Din Muhammad b. Yusuf b. al-Hasan al-Madani al-'Ansari
alHanafi. .

7. Wasilat al-ma'al fi 'add manaqib al-'AI - Ba Kathir alMakki, Ahmad
b. al- Fadl b. Muhammad, al-Shafi'i. '

8. Jawahir al'iqdayn fi fadl al-sharafayn sharaf al- 'ilm aljali wa
al-nasab al- 'ali - al-Samhudi, Nur aI-Din 'Ali b. 'Abd Allah b. Ahmad,
al-Hasani al-Shafi'i. 9. al-Fusul al-muhimmah li ma'rifat al-a'immah -
Ibn alSabbagh, Nur aIEssays Din 'Ali b. Muhammad b. Ahmad, alGhazzi
al-Maliki.

Again we are unable to mention other sources due to paucity of space.
There are atleast 31 chains of transmitters for this.

Excuse 2: The word Maula used in the tradition does not imply master
but it means friend. Hence the Holy Prophet actually announced about the
friendship of Ali on the day of Ghadir, and not about mastership of Ali
(p.b.u.h.).

Rebuttal:

Though multitude of reasons could nullify the above excuse we will
mention only 5 of them:

A. The first proof is the Holy Qur'an and the revelation of the verse:
"0 Apostle! Deliver which has been revealed to you from your God; and if
you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah will
protect you from the people." (5.67)

Qazi in "Kashf Ghumma" gives a report from Razi Bin Abdullah: "In the
days of the Holy Prophet we" used to read this verse thus: '0 our
Prophet (Muhammad) deliver what has been sent down to you from your
Lord, that' is, Ali is the master of the believers. If you do not, then
you have not delivered His message." Also Suyuti in his Durru'l-Mansur
from Ibn Mardawiyya, Ibn Asakir and Ibn Abi Hatim from Abu Sa'id
Khadiri, Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud (one of the writers of Divine -
revelations) and Qazi Shukani in Tafsir-e-Fathu'l- Ghadir narrate that
in the day of the Holy Prophet. In short, the warning contained in this
verse says: "If you do it not then (it will be as if) you have not
delivered His message (at all)..." shows that the message which the Holy
Prophet had been ordered to deliver was of great importance. It was in
fact essential to the completion of Prophethood itself. Therefore, the
issue in question was surely the matter of the imamate, the conferring
of authority on one who would guide the people according to the tenets
of Islam after the death of the Holy Prophet. This important issue
cannot be the friendship of someone by any stretch of imagination.

B. Second proof is the revelation of the verse "This day have I
perfected for you your religion and completed my favor on you and chose
for you Islam as a religion."

(5:3). Scholars trusted by sunnis, such as Jalalu'd-din Suyuti in
Durru'l- Mansur, vol. II, p. 256 and Itqan, vol. I, p. 31;
Imamu'l-Mufassirin Tha'labi in Kashfu'l-Bayan; Hafiz Abu Nu'aim Ispahani
in Ma Nusala Mina'l-Qur'an Fi Ali; Abu'l-Fatha Nazari in
Khasa'isu'l-Alawi; Ibn Kathir Shami in Tafsir, vol. II, p. 41, following
Hafiz Ibn Mardawiyya: Muhammad Bin Jarir Tabari, scholar, commentator
and historian of the 3rd century A.H. in Tafsir-e- Kitabu'l- Wilaya;
Hafiz Abu'l-Qasim Haskani in Shawahid-ut- Tanzil; Sibt Ibn Jauzi. in
Tadhkira-eKhawasu'l-Umma, p. 18; Abu Ishaq Hamwaini in Fara'idus-
Simtain, ch. XII; Abu Sa'id Sijistani in Kitabu'lWilaya; AI-Khatib-e-
Baghdadi in Ta'rikh-e-Baghdad, vol. VIII, p. 290; Ibn Maghazili Faqih
Shafi'i in Manaqib, ch. XIV and Maqtalu'l-Husain, ch. IV, all have
written that on the day of Ghadir-e-Khurn the Holy Prophet appointed Ali
by divine order to the rank of wilaya (Vicegerent). He told the people
whatever he was ordained to say about Ali and raised his hands so high
that the white of both his armpits was visible. He addressed the people
thus: "Salute Ali because he is the amir (master) of the believers. The
whole Community complied with his order. They had not yet departed from
one another when the aforesaid verse was revealed." The Holy Prophet was
highly pleased with the revelation of this verse. So, addressing the
people, he said: "Allah is Great, He Who has perfected for them their
religion and has completed His favor on them, and is satisfied with my
Prophethood and Ali's vicegerency after me." C. In that hot desert,
where there was no protection for the travelers, the Holy Prophet
gathered the whole nation (umma). People sat in the shade of the camels,
with their feet covered, in the scorching heat of the sun. In these
conditions, the Prophet delivered a long address, which Kharizmi and Ibn
Mardawiyya in their Manaqib and Tabari in his Kitabu'l- Wilaya and
others have narrated.

Does it make sense to think that the Prophet would require thousands of
his followers to spend three days in the blazing desert to swear
allegiance to Ali merely to indicate that Ali was their friend? It is
reasonable to conclude therefore, that these arrangements were made not
merely to indicate that people should befriend Ali. The event, in fact,
marked the completion of the Prophet's message; the establishment of the
Imamate, the source of the umma's guidance after the death of the
Prophet.

D. Some of Sunni reputable ulema have acknowledged that the primary
meaning of "maula" is "master." Among them is Sibt Ibn Jauzi, who after
giving ten meanings of the word in his Tadhkira-e-Khawas, ch. 11, p. 20,
says that none of them except the tenth one corresponds with what the
Holy Prophet meant to say. He says: "The hadith specifically means
obedience; so the tenth meaning is correct, and it means 'mastery over
others.' Hence, the hadith means 'of whoever I am the 'maula' (master)
Ali is also his 'maula' (master)." In the book Maraju'l-Bahrain Hafiz
Abdu'l-Faraj Yahya Bin Sa'id Saqafi interprets it in the same way. He
narrates this hadith with his own sources from his leaders, who said
that the Holy Prophet, holding Ali by the hand, said: "Of whomsoever I
am 'wali' or master over him, Ali is also his 'wali' or master." Sibt
Ibn Jauzi says, "The saying of the Holy Prophet that Ali has authority
or is the master over all the believers clearly proves the Imamate or
vicegerency of Ali, and that obedience to him is obligatory."

E. Ali (p.b.u.h.) himself has referred to the tradition of Ghadir to
mean master and has emphasized that he was clearly appointed as the
vicegerant at Ghadir. Also others have referred to this event in form of
reasoning protest or Munashadah (adjuration). Some places where Ali has
reminded the event of Ghadir vis-a-vis his appointment as vicegerent
are:

(a.) On the day of shura (counsel after Umar's death). (b.) During the
days of Uthman’s rule.

(c.) The Day of Rahbah (year 35 AH) when many Companions stood up and
bore witness that they attended and heard the tradition of the Prophet
directly, twelve of whom were the participants of the Battle of Badr.

(d.) The Battle of al-Jamal, year 36 AH where he reminded T alhah.

(e.) The Day of the Rukban (riders) where several witnesses
testified.

(f.) The Day of Battle of Siffin (year 37 AH).

Other members of the Household reminded people: (a.)Ihtejaj by Fatimah
al-Zahra'(S.A.)

(b.) Munashadah by Imam Husein(AS.) (c.)Munashadah by Imam
Husayn(AS.).

Other munashadahs and ihtejaj: munashadah of youth with Abu Hurayrah;
Ihtijaj of Abd Allah b. Ja'far with Mu'awiyah; Ihtijaj in refutation of
Amr b. al- 'Asi; Ihtijaj of Amr b. al-'Asi with Mu'awiyah; Ihtijaj of
Ammar b. Yasir on day of Siffin; Ihitjaj of Asbagh b. Nubata in a
sitting with Mu'awiyah; Munashadah of a man with Zayd b. Arqam;
Munashadah of an Iraqi man with Jabir b. Abd Allah al-Ansari; Ihtijaj of
Qays al-Ansari with Mu'awiyah in Madinah; Ihtijaj Darmiyyah
al-Hajwaniyyah with Mu'awiyah; Ihtijaj of Amr al-Awdi; Ihtijaj of Umar
b. Abd al-aziz, the Umayyad caliph; ihtijaj of Ma'mun, the Abbasid
caliph, with jurists.

The above clearly refutes the second excuse and renders it baseless.
Excuse 3: It does not appeal to our common sense that the Holy Prophet
appointed Ali as his successor in clear terms and still the companions
of the Holy Prophet disobeyed him and after his demise appointed a
caliph by themselves.

Rebuttal:

A. This excuse may be common but it is not sense. Common sense does
actually accept it very easily that if any leader identifies a
vicegerent, and the followers are not entirely sincere, then they will
not abide by this appointment.

B. Both sects accept that the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) had said to Ali
that "You are to me as Aaron was to Moses except that there shall be no
prophet after me."

Now let us analyze the similarities between Aaron and Ali so that we
come to understand that how it is possible for the companions of a
Prophet to disobey and disregard the clear appointment of the
vicegerant. The Holy Qur'an states that when Moses appointed Aaron as
his successor, he gathered round him the Bani Isra'il (according to some
reports, 70,000 people).

Moses emphasized that in his absence they should obey Aaron, his
successor. Moses then went up the mountain to be alone with Allah.
Samiri incited dissension among the Isra'ilis. He fashioned a golden
calf and Bani Isra'il, having left Aaron, gathered round the treacherous
Samiri in large numbers. It was a short time before this that the Bani
Isra'il had heard Moses say that during his absence Aaron was to be his
Caliph and those they should obey him.

Nevertheless, 70,000 people followed Samiri. The Prophet Aaron loudly
protested this action and forbade them from indulging in such sinful
acts, but no one listened to him. The verse of Chapter A'raf states that
when Moses came back, Aaron said to him: "Son of my mother! The people
reckoned me weak and had well-nigh slain me..." (7:150). The Bani
Isra'il themselves heard the clear instruction from Moses, but when
Moses went up to the mountain, Samiri seized his opportunity. He
fashioned a golden calf and misguided the Bani Isra'il. Similarly, after
the death of the Prophet, some people who had heard him say that Ali was
his successor, turned against Ali. Imam Ghazali referred to this fact in
the beginning of his fourth treatise in Sirru'l-'Alamin.

He states that some people returned to the state of their former
ignorance. In this respect, there is great similarity between the
situation of Aaron and that of Ali. Like many of renowned Sunni scholars
and historians, Ibn Qutayba Dinawari, the well-known Qazi of Dinawar, in
his "AI-Imama Wa Siyasa", (Vol I, P.14) narrates in detail the events of
Saqifa. He says that they threatened to burn down Ali's house.

They took him to the mosque by force, and threatened to kill him unless
he swore allegiance to them. Ali went to the sacred grave of the Prophet
and repeated the same words of the Holy Qur'an which Aaron spoke to
Moses: "He (Aaron) said: Son of my mother! Surely the people reckoned me
weak and had well-nigh slain me..." (7:150). C. Not all those 120,000
Muslims who were at Ghadir stayed at Madineh. Only a few thousand stayed
at Madinah. Out of these, many were bedouins or slaves or poor men. Only
a maximum of 100 influential people had gathered at Saqifa. So it will
be wrong to say that all 120,000 people presented at the day of Ghadir,
conspired and disobeyed the Holy Prophet It should not astonish us that
around 100 people went against the verdict of the Holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.).

D. Communication system and circulation of information was not strong
in those days. By the time everyone came to know of the selection of Abu
Bakr against the verdict of the Holy Prophet it was too late. Abu Bakr
had already become too powerful in material terms. Even if someone tried
to oppose the ruling caliph he was silenced either through temptation or
through intimidation. The episode of Malik Ibn Nuwayrah is a glaring
example in this respect.

E. All the companions were not obedient. There are so many instances to
prove the disobedience of the companions.

(a.) During the last days of his blessed life, the Messenger of God
prepared an army to do battle with the Byzantines, and he appointed
Usamah b. Zayd as its commander. This appointment of a young man,
despite the availability of older men, proved displeasing to some of the
Companions, and led to an argument among them. Those who strongly
opposed to Usamah b. Zayd asked the Prophet to change him, but he paid
no attention to their request and commanded Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman
to join the Muslim army as it departed from Madinah. However, they not
only disregarded military discipline but also disobeyed the categorical
command of the Prophet. Instead of proceeding to the front with the
army, they split off and returned to Madinah - Ibn Hisham, (alSirah,
Vol. IV p. 338), Ya'qubi, "al-Tarikh", (Vol. II, p.92); Ibn Athir,
"al-Kamil", (Vol. II, PP. 120-21).

(b.) Some of Sunni historians and hadith scholars have written that
when the Prophet decided to write a document that would prevent the
Muslims from going astray, 'Umar said: "The Messenger of God has become
delirious." Others, however, in order to soften the offensiveness of his
words, maintain that he said: "Sickness has overcome the Prophet;
you\>have the Book of God at your disposal, which is enough for us."
(Muslem, 'al-Sahih', Vol. Ill, P.

1259); "al-Bukhari, alSahih, (Vol. IV, P.5); Ahmad b. Hanbal,
"al-Musnad", hadith no. 2992.), when companions could disobey the Holy
Prophet in his presence, they can very easily disobey in his absence
after demise. But here it is worth mentioning that there were
respectable and independent minded companions, who did not change their
position after the death of the Prophet.

They obeyed the appointment of Ali (A.S.) as the vicegerent that took
place at Ghadir. Although they were more or less compelled to remain
silent, they remained loyal to 'Ali b. Abi Talib, as leader. Among the
outstanding personalities belonging to this group were Salman al-Farisi,
Abu Dharr al- Ghifari, Abu Ayyub Ansari, Khuzaymah b. Thabit, Miqdad bin
Aswad, al- Kindi, 'Ammar b. yasir, Ubayy b. Ka'b, Khalid b. Sa'id,
Bilal, Qays b. Sa'd, Aban, Buraydah Ashami, Abu 'l-Haytham b. al-
Tayyihan, as well as many others whose names are recorded in Islamic
history. Some scholars have listed two hundred and fifty Companions of
the Prophet, complete with names and descriptions, as belonging to this
class.


