Ghadir in the Words of Non-muslim
=================================

We have enunciated sufficient reasons to dispel all possibilities for
excuses.

Here we would also like to quote an orientalist for sake of reference.
Vaglieri has said in the Encyclopedia of Islam about Ghadir Khum: It is
certain that Muhammad did speak in this place and utter the famous
sentence, for the account of this event has been preserved, either in a
concise form or in detail, not only by Ya'kubi, whose sympathy for Ali
is well known, but also in the collection of traditions which are
considered canonical, especially in the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal; and the
hadiths are so numerous and so well attested by the different
attributions that it does not seem possible to reject them.

Vaglieri continues, "Several of these hadiths are cited in the
bibliography, but it does not include the hadith which, although
reporting the sentence, omit to name Ghadir Khum, or those which state
that the sentence was pronounced at al-Hudaybiya. The complete
documentation will be facilitated when the Concordance of Wensinck have
been completely published. In order to have an idea of how numerous
these narrations are, it is enough to glance at the pages in which Ibn
Kathir has collected a great number of them with their refrences."

**Books related to Ghadir:**

There are at least 185 Sunni books which have mentioned the event of
Ghadir. It is not possible to mention all of them here but we mention
just a few:

1. The well known commentator and historian of the fourth century
hijri, Abu Ja'far Muharnmad Bin Jarir Tabari (died 310 A.H.), gives
complete details of the hadith of Ghadir in his book Kitabu'l- Wilaya
and has narrated it through seventy-five chains of transmission.

2. Hafiz Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad Bin Sa'id Abdu'r-Rahman Al-Kufi, popularly
known as Ibn Iqda (died 333 A.H.), narrated this holy hadith in his book
Kitabu'l- Wilaya through 125 chains on the authority of 125 companions
of the Holy Prophet.

3. Ibn Haddad Hafiz Abu'l-Qasim Haskani (died 492 A.H.), in his
Kitabu'l- Wilaya, has narrated in detail the event of Ghadir along with
the revelation of the verses of the Qur'an.

Similarly some of the many books of Shia authors who have shown the
event of Ghadir by providing extensive sunm sources are:

1. Al-Ghadir by Allama Amini - This is apparently the most magnanimous
work on the event of Ghadir. This book is in 11 Volumes.

2. Abaqatul Anwar by Mir Hamid Husein - Out of total of 11 Volumes it
has 3 bulky volumes dedicated to the subject of ghadir using Sunni
references.

3. N afahatul Azhaar by syed Ali Milaani - This is basically
explanation of the book Abaqatul Anwar. In this 4 volumes have been
dedicated to the event of Ghadir.

4. Ihkaakul Haq by shaheed-e-thalis Qazi Noorullah Shustri - this book
has dealt the subject of Ghadir in some of its parts out of a total of
30 huge volumes.

We end our article by quoting the verse of the Holy Quran "And say: The
truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely falsehood is a
vanishing (thing)." (17:81)


Zulfiqar Ali (Pakistan)


