Introduction
============

In the name of God, the Beneficent the Merciful, praise be to Allah the
Lord of the worlds, peace and prayers be upon the most dignified of
messengers, Muhammad and his purified household.

The subject matter we would like to discuss here is of dire importance
and graveness. We would not be exaggerating if we said that it is one of
the most important matters since it touches our daily lives and relates
to the core of our actions.

It also constitutes a major part of the tests and trials/fetna of Allah
(SWT) to us in this life, the result of which determines God’s pleasure
or anger upon us. Our guidance or misguidance thereby depends on that
which further determines our salvations from this lives and whether we
achieve a safe and victorious exit to our hereafter, God-willing!

It is not a simple and easy matter at all as these tests and trials are
difficult and the mischief is at a high degree. The self is pushing us
towards evil and the devil will not leave us alone; our desires misguide
us and the misguiders around us make the forbidden as permissible and
they prohibit us from that which is permissible. They (self + devil +
desires) will not leave us until they lead us to destruction. It is as
if there is a sacred alliance which they swore not to allow us pass the
test of this life. It would be erroneous for anybody to think that he is
saved, and the moment he does so, he would be very close to failure
without realizing it. We should never feel safe as long as we are in
this life and it is only when we depart it that we may feel rest and joy
if we indeed achieve salvation.

Our subject of interest is about Allah’s judgment (Hokm) versus the
human judgment and the difference between them. How does that affect our
lives? And why should we pay attention to this sensitive and complex
matter!

We hope to be able to deliver our thoughts to you in the best and
easiest manner and to clarify to you the graveness and the importance of
this topic. Allah (SWT) is our helper and guider.


