Conclusion
==========

In conclusion, everything in this life must proceed under the governance
of the divine judgment and verdict in order for justice to prevail on
earth, whether it is political, social, economical, judicial, or
religious matters. Even the personal matters such marriage, divorce,
inheritance, and family relations with each other must fall under the
umbrella of divine judgment.

We can refer back to the Treatise of Rights (رسالة الحقوق) by Imam
Zainul Abideen (AS) to have a better understanding in terms of your
relationship with your land, country, society, neighbor, blood
relations, studies, activities, work, property, education, and
everything which must be ruled by Allah’s law and judgment and not by
the human desire, etc.

Indeed, the return of the Caliphate to the Imam of our Time (may Allah
hasten his reappearance) symbolizes the true return of abidance to the
divine judgment. At that time, the human judgment will be nullified.
Once that happens, the earth and world will be filled with justice and
equity and this is exactly the meaning of the Prophet’s words when he
said:

*“He will fill the earth with equity and justice* (because his judgment
will be aligned with Allah’s judgment)*after it was filled with
injustice and oppression* (due to human judgment which deviates from the
divine judgment).

May we be granted the ability and success to align our human judgments
with the divine judgments, and to observe justice and equity in all our
matters. May Allah (SWT) reward Muhammad (SA) and his purified
household, and praise be to Him for guiding us for we would not have
been guided if He (SWT) did not guide us.


