Receiving Divine Judgment
=========================

*Who from God’s creation really knows Allah’s judgment (hokm)?*

*And how will we know what that judgment is?*

*And who will be the one to apply that judgment?*

As for those who very well know the divine judgment in this life, they
are the prophets and messengers who receive direct inspiration from
Allah (SWT) and via heavenly books and divine teachings. This is clear
as shown in the following verse:

***"Surely We have revealed the Book to you with the truth that you may
judge between people by means of that which Allah has taught you; and be
not an advocate on behalf of the treacherous". [4:105]***

And in the following verses:

***"(All) people were a single nation; then Allah (SWT) sent prophets as
bearers of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book
with truth, that it might judge between people in that in which they
differed".*** **[2:213]**

***"So be patient in carrying the command of your Lord, and obey not
from among them a sinner or an ungrateful one".*** **[76:24]**

In other words, be patient in judging according to Allah’s rules and
laws.

Also as cited in this verse:

***“And when he had attained his maturity, We gave him judgment and
knowledge: and thus do We reward those who do good.”*** **[12:22]**

In other words, when he reached the age which would make him responsible
enough, we taught him the divine judgment and bestowed him the knowledge
of the laws.

Similar to this are Allah’s words in reference to His prophets Lut,
Dawood, Sulaiman, Musa, and Yayha (May Allah bless them) in similar
verses.

Thus, it is clear that the knowledge of Allah’s judgment is present with
the prophets and the messengers via the heavenly Books and the direct
divine inspirations and teachings. From that, it is clear that the holy
Books cannot be separated from the messenger because the knowledge and
judgment is distributed with both of them. Thus, we can better
understand this verse when Allah (SWT) said:

**“** ***And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger that he may
judge between them, a party of them turns aside.”*** **[24:48]**

And the following verse:

***But no! By your Lord! They do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them,*** **[4:65]**


