Human Judgment Coincides with Divine Judgment
=============================================

Without the Book and direct divine inspiration and teachings from Allah
(SWT), a prophet can not possess knowledge of the divine judgment. So he
refrains from making any judgment until he receives appropriate divine
knowledge.

For example, this is what happened in the “Argument” which took place as
was revealed in Surat Al Mujadala (\#58). When the Holy Prophet (SA) did
not know Allah’s judgment in the case of Dhihaar (separation) between
the woman and her husband, he expressed that to her and he did not
proceed to make a judgment. So the lady raised her complaint to Allah
(SWT), and thereafter He (SWT) inspired His judgment to the Prophet
(SA). Only then did the Prophet (SA) issue a judgment and the case was
resolved.

The same thing happened also in the story of Prophets Dawood and
Sulaiman (AS) when they had to give judgment concerning the field when
the people's sheep pastured therein by night. Allah (SWT) did not reveal
the correct judgment to Prophet David (AS) - the father. So he refrained
from issuing any judgment. Instead Allah (SWT) revealed that judgment to
his son Sulaiman (SA) and so he conveyed the divine judgment.

The divine judgment (Hokmullah) is the same as the divine law
(Shari’ah), and it is the same as the boundaries (Hodood) of Allah
(SWT), and it is the same as the religion in Allah’s eyes. In this
context, it means to establish and apply Allah’s laws and to make sound
judgments in the different cases, based on these laws.

After the prophets and messengers, there are the Awsiyaa (guardians) and
Imams (divinely-appointed leaders) who also possess knowledge of the
divine judgment which is directly passed on to them from the prophets
and messengers themselves. So they completely abide by the laws
presented by the prophets and they know their boundaries and how to
apply them. They possess complete recognition and awareness of what was
revealed to the prophets.

In addition, their infallibility (‘Ismah) serves as an asset to assist
them in performing their roles. Those are “Al-Rasikhoon fil Ilm” (those
versed in knowledge) whom Allah (SWT) mentioned in the Quran. And they
are also those whom Allah (SWT) said about them:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَىٰ أُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنْبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ.
</p>

***“ And if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in
authority among them, those among them who can search out the knowledge
of it would have known it.” (the ones who can draw correct conclusions
among them). [4:83]***

We have a good example in the judgments of our Master Ameerul Momineen
Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) in the different tough cases which the scholars
of jurisprudence and the Caliphs failed to make these judgments on their
own. He always used to know the divine hokm in every case and issue.
Same was the case with all our infallible Imams (AS).

Besides the prophets, messengers, Awsiyaa and Imams, it is almost rare
that the vast population of the people make a judgment that coincides
with the divine judgment. They may very well deviate from it due to
personal

desires, lack of knowledge, oppression , arrogance , benefits ,
stupidity , ignorance , foolishness , laziness , hypocrisy, Miraaa
(showing off), stubbornness , deception , forgery , hastiness , negative
thinking or due to presence of doubt or apostasy and polytheism.


