Our Divine Obligation
=====================

Therefore, the general divine guidance to people is to make a just and a
fair judgment, which is the divine judgment. In other words, they must
make all efforts to deduce Allah’s judgment so that they rule with it
and then we can understand Allah’s words in these verses:

***“And if you judge, judge between them with equity; surely Allah loves
those who judge equitably.” [5:42]***

***“And that when you judge between people you judge with justice.”
[4:58]***

Those who abide only by Allah’s judgment when it comes to issuing
judgments whether the judge or the one being judged, they are the true
believers as depicted in this Quranic verse:

***“The response of the believers, when they are invited to Allah and
His Messenger that he may judge between them is only to say: We hear and
we obey; and these it is that are the successful.”*** **[24:51]**

The divine judgment is most beloved to true believers than their own
personal desires or benefits, than their own parents and children, than
their lives itself and that is the real test of faith.

For that reason, the Prophet (SA) said about those who have committed
adultery then they confessed and insisted on having the divine judgment
be executed on them so that they be purified with the divine judgment,
he said concerning them after they were stoned to death,*“They have
repented a true repentance; if it was distributed among the people of
the earth it would have sufficed them!”*

Certainly, they are true believers even if they disobeyed or committed
sin, so long as they repented and preferred the divine judgment to be
implemented on them.

On the contrary, those who refuse to obey and apply Allah’s judgment,
they are the disbelievers, the hypocrites, the oppressors, the corrupt
people, and that is depicted in the following verses:

***“And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger that he may
judge between them, lo! A party of them turns aside.” [24:48]***

And also in the following verse:

***“Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has
been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire to
summon one another to the judgment of the Satan, though they were
commanded to deny him, and the Satan desires to lead them astray into a
remote error.”*** **[4:60]**

And Allah (SWT) stated in these three verses in Surat Al Ma’eda:

***“And whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the unbelievers.”*** **[5:44]**

***“And whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the unjust.”*** **[5:45]**

***“And whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the transgressors.”*** **[5:47]**

Allah’s order that we make judgments based on His code of laws alone and
to accept His judgment, was made clear in these verses:

***“And in whatever thing you disagree, the judgment thereof is (in)
Allah's (hand); that is Allah, my Lord, on Him do I rely and to Him do I
turn time after time.”*** **[42:10]**

***"Shall I seek for judge other than Allah? - when He is the One Who
has sent unto you the Book, explained in detail.”*** **[6:114]**

So, if the people implemented the judgment of Allah (SWT), then glad
tidings to them as this would be the establishment of justice since
Allah (SWT) is the absolute Justice and the absolute Truth. Therefore,
whoever judges by His judgment would be a just ruler who issues a just
ruling. Any other judgment that is not in line with the divine judgment
is oppression in itself. It will be human judgment and human judgment in
general may be just and it may be unjust, and it is more likely to be
unfair. This is what Allah (SWT) confirms in His words revealed in
reference to man:

***“Indeed, man is unjust and ignorant.” [33:72]***

And if man is unjust even to himself in most cases, then how can he be
just with the others?!


