Judgment and Justice
====================

When we speak about divine judgment and justice, we must distinguish
here between two important matters:

1) The proceedings of justice

2) The judgment itself (the sentence, or the ruling).

Both of these components are the wings of justice, and both are part of
Allah’s judgment and cannot be separated. It is very important for us to
recognize that, as there is no justice ever without having fair court
proceedings, and there is no justice without a final court judgment.
Both components are like twins who cannot be separated and if one of
them became disturbed or corrupted, the other one also becomes invalid
even if it is correct.

In other words, if a just ruling was made on a person but with deficient
or unjust or incorrect court proceedings, then that ruling is not the
divine judgment even though that ruling coincides with the divine
judgment.

And the opposite is true; if the court proceedings were fair but the
court ruling is not fair, then it is not the judgment of Allah (SWT). It
is necessary that both wings be sound and fair in order that the bird of
divine justice fly and shadow everyone with its justice, and that is one
of the differences between fairness or equity (قسط) and justice (‘Adl).
One aspect of قسط relates to the court proceedings while the justice
(عدل) is the court ruling itself. Their opposite is injustice and
oppression as injustice relates to a part of it with inadequate and
unjust court proceedings. Just as oppression equals the corruption of
the final court ruling which contradicts the divine judgment.

On the other hand, court proceedings includes: proper selection of a
fair judge, ample opportunity for a fair trial in everything,
appropriate interrogation, questioning of witnesses, and the right to
object during a court trial, the necessity of having a lawyer to speak
on behalf of the defendant if he is not able to defend himself, and the
authenticity and accuracy of the evidence presented, proper cross
examinations of witnesses and evidences by both the plaintiff and the
defendant, appropriate confrontation of witnesses and other proceedings
which are necessary for the trial which the Islamic law has defined.

By that, we now understand why the*Hujjatullah* (Proof of Allah) will
fill the earth with justice and equity (fairness) once he reappears [may
Allah hasten his reappearance].

So, in our lives today there is the divine judgment which is the pure
justice.**A human judgment is only fair and just IF it agrees with the
divine judgment in terms of the court proceedings and court ruling** .
Otherwise, it is considered to be injustice!

It is not necessarily the case that if a person or group of individuals
are judged in a conflict or matter with a verdict that it is the divine
judgment. It may or may not coincide with it. As a matter of fact, it is
more common that these human verdicts do not agree with the divine
judgment since the judge in these cases is not a prophet or Imam or a
divinely-appointed Wasi or a

wise and just scholar who has fulfilled all the requirements to assume
his position according to Shari'aa (God laws).

A human judgment may be issued and executed in this life while it
contradicts the divine judgment in the heavens and on earths, and as a
result, injustice is committed. That is why injustice and oppression is
unfortunately an integral part of our lives.

If the human judgment contradicts the divine judgment, then it becomes
invalid and its consequences become invalid too, both in this life and
in the next world. Even if the sentence of this verdict is carried out,
it is corrupt, invalid, and unjust.


