Justice Prevails
================

Since Allah (SWT) is the absolute Justice and He has established His
kingdom based on absolute Justice, then it is inevitable that the scale
of justice should become balanced after it has become unbalanced on
earth due to human injustice and deviation. So when will the balance of
this scale of justice take place?!

It will become balanced on the Day of Resurrection when the only
Judgment will be for Allah (SWT) alone, and injustice which the people
committed will be invalidated and people will come to know that Day the
real divine judgment in every case, conflict, dispute, argument, and
matter. They will discover their injustices and Allah (SWT) will
invalidate the injustices they have committed in this world and the
oppressors will be punished while the oppressed will receive their
confiscated rights.

Hence we can understand Allah’s words in these verses:

***“And most surely your Lord will judge between them on the
resurrection day concerning that about which they differed.” [16:124]***

***“All sovereignty that day is for Allah; He will judge between them.”
[22:56]***

***“Then to Me shall be your return, so l will judge between you
concerning that in which you differed.” [3:55]***

***“Then wait patiently until Allah judges between us; and He is the
best of the Judges.” [7:87]***

As the abovementioned verses indicate, the final verdict will not belong
to anyone except Allah (SWT) alone since He is the Owner of the Day of
Judgment and the Day where truth is separated from falsehood.

We present here an example of an event which took place during the
prophetic life which clearly confirms this fact. After the conclusion of
the Battle of Al Ahzab (The Allies), the Muslims encircled the Jews of
Bani Quraydha as a punishment to their deception and betrayal of the
pact with the Muslims and their alliance with the polytheists against
the Muslims. When the duration of encirclement became long, the Jews
decided to surrender so they requested for a judgment to be made on
them.

The Prophet (SA) asked them who they would like to judge them, so they
chose Sa’d ibn Mu’adh, the Chief of Al-Aws tribe since he was their ally
long ago at the Time of Ignorance. Sa'd has been severely injured in the
Battle of Al-Khandaq (Al Ahzab) and he became ill afterwards. So, the
Prophet (SA) brought forth Sa'd and asked the Jews again whether they
would be pleased with the judgment of Sa'd in their regards?!

They answered yes in consensus, so the Prophet (SA) said to Sa'd: "Issue
your verdict on them Oh Sa'd!" Sa'd was, at that time, very ill and in
pain and he said, "I sentence that their fighters be executed, their
women and progeny be taken as captives, and their properties be
distributed among the Muslims. The Jews were stunned and the Prophet
(SA) said to Sa'd, "God is Great! By Allah, you have judged them with
what Allah (SWT) has judged from above the seven heavens, Oh Sa'd!"

From this statement of the Holy Prophet (SA), it is clear that the
verdict of Sa'd in this case coincides with Allah's verdict. It may not
have coincided if Sa'd ruled otherwise! Therefore, human verdict may
agree or disagree

with the divine. So, any ruling, verdict, judgment, sentence, or
decision in this life may coincide with that of Allah (SWT), and that is
very rare. And it may not, and that is most common.

It is only what coincides with Allah’s judgment that incorrect and valid
in the heavens and on earth. As for those which do not, it is then
invalid in the heavens even if it has been passed and carried out on
earth.

If Allah’s judgment is applied on earth then justice has been
established. If that is due to faith in Allah (SWT) and obedience to His
commands, then that is justice and true faith (Iman) and the parties
involved (whether the judge or the one is being judged) will be rewarded
in this life and the Hereafter.

And if the verdict accidentally coincides with Allah’s judgment or is
made simply due to conviction to that appropriate judgment or mere human
justice and righteousness, then that is also justice, but it is not
considered to be true faith and the parties involved will not be
rewarded in the Hereafter, although they may receive the reward of the
justice in this life. We have to clearly distinguish between the two
cases.

Another example demonstrating this is when the Muslims nation finally
gave their pledge of allegiance to Imam Ali (AS) for the caliphate. Was
that in obedience to the command of Allah (SWT)? No, it was only due to
special circumstances and instability caused after the assassination of
Uthman, the previous Caliph. Therefore, even though the intentions were
merely according to the principles of this world, it was not due to
heavenly and spiritual faith.


