Ijtihad and Justice
===================

*Ijtihad* (intellectual diligence) is the attempt to recognize and
deduce the divine judgment in a matter or issue or case. So whoever
does*Ijtihad* and has done so correctly by agreeing with the divine
verdict, then he is fair and just and has achieved self-salvation. And
whoever does*Ijtihad* and has reached an erroneous verdict which
contradicts the divine verdict, he has done injustice and became
misguided. Indeed, this is a grave responsibility which we must pay
attention to.

Thus, if we have a doubt or hesitation during the process of*Ijtihad* ,
then we must pause and exert more effort in*Ijtihad* by doing more
consultation, thorough research and analysis. It is better a million
times to postpone the establishment of justice than falling into the
grave mistake of committing injustice and contradicting the divine
verdict.

It is also from the ورع (God-fearing) and piety to pause when we
experience a doubt or suspicion. The principle of acquitting in the
presence of reasonable doubt and assuming innocence and avoiding
injustice or preventing it, is one of the most important and main
cornerstones of life and has the most priority. In the end, every
criminal, oppressor, transgressor and unjust person will not escape the
justice of Allah (SWT) in this life and the Hereafter, even if he
escaped the human justice in this life, whether that oppressor is a
judge, a plaintiff, or a defendant! As we know, the law dictates that
committing injustice to an innocent person is much more grave and worst
than exonerating a criminal.

We must observe this principle on the personal level with “good
thinking” towards others. Some of the things we can observe is:

1-Finding a good excuse and explanation for others’ behavior, and
exercising patience when experiencing harm from others

2- Abiding by good manners and righteous behavior even towards the one
who wronged us

3- Forgiving and observing “كظم الغيظ” (controlling your anger), and
clemency

4- Refraining from spying or following the personal lives of others

5- Avoiding backbiting and tale-bearing

6- Being honest, humble, speaking the truth even if it is bitter, and
testifying truthfully, not to ever commit perjury or issue a verdict
without knowledge

7- Abiding by Allah’s commands and the Sunnah of the Prophet (SA) and
the Infallible Imams from the purified AhlulBayt (AS).


