Examples from History
=====================

When Prophet Dawood (AS) issued an opinion without waiting to receive
the divine verdict regarding the two individuals who presented their
dispute to him after they climbed to his niche, he then realized that he
committed**ترك الأولى** (abandoning the better mode of action) and was
tested. She bowed down in genuflection and repented to his Lord.

Same was the case with Prophet Yunis (AS) when he left disappointed and
he acted contrary to the divine judgment. Then he called to his
Lord,*“Oh Lord, I have done injustice to my self"* because he didn’t
follow the divine judgment and instead followed his own verdict.

When Prophet Dawood (AS) – the father – did not possess the divine
verdict when some lambs entered in the farm of another person and ate
from it, he refrained from making any judgment. But his son Prophet
Sulaiman (AS) was taught the divine verdict so he issued it, as we
previously mentioned.

In all of the above cases, the consequences of the human verdict becomes
invalid if it does not agree with the divine verdict, even if it was
issued by a Prophet. That is an example for those who contemplate.

The confiscation of the Caliphate after the demise of the Holy Prophet
(SA) is one of the worst cases of deviating from the divine verdict in
the heavens and earths, and following the human desires. It is a clear
example of the oppression and the danger which takes place when the
human judgment and verdict contradicts the divine judgment, which then
results in corruption on earth. The Caliphate was seized by those who
usurped it against Allah’s judgment for years and centuries. But does
that mean that it is legitimate?! And does that mean it is accepted by
Allah (SWT)? Of course not!


