Introduction
============

All humans in this world are temporal beings whose lives have a
beginning and end. Their past reaches oblivion and so does their future.
The span between the beginning and end, which is the repository of one’s
life, is surrounded by nihility. We experience life and existence but we
have not experienced oblivion and never shall.

Our experiences are restricted to our existence. Thus, we learn from
experience that, “No human life is permanent and it has a finish just as
it has a start”. Even though we have not reached the end of our lives
(i.e. death), we realize from the deaths of our fellow humans that there
is no escape from this unavoidable juncture. The two points of start and
finish draw our attention; two disparate and sensitive phases or
rather—two extremities.

People see their inception as a transferal from inexistence to existence
and the opposite point as a transferal from existence to inexistence.
However, in becoming existent, we traverse an eternally long path—what
distance is longer than the gap between nullity and reality?

This apparently impassable distance brings up various questions. Such
as, how is our genesis possible? Where have we come from? Who is our
originator? We cannot find the efficient cause for our existence and
continuity either in ourselves or in the beings around us. The intellect
drives us to seek the entity that has invited us into existence—an
entity to which the whole world is indebted for their existence; an
entity who is sufficient of all others and who is untainted by any
restrictions and conditions.

Endeavoring to understand and contemplate our end makes the question of
our origination more sensitive and important, and it suffuses every
moment of our lives. The Master of the World has made all beings in
existence His guests; He maintains this feast, and has made humans
exempt from facing oblivion. This end has confronted us with oblivion
and the span between existence and inexistence. It has made us aware
that not only are we needy in our genesis, we are also needy in our
continuation. We humans believe that the gap between existence and
nonexistence is miniscule. However, coming into existence out of the
void is a miracle that has removed humanity’s genesis from the
restrictions of nature.

On the other hand, the eventide of our existence, as opposed to our
dawning, is a terrifying and macabre juncture. We humans live and relish
our lives and existences. We have tasted of the exotic drink of
existence and thus, all our endeavors are based on preserving it. We
guard our existence against anything that will bring about our ends. Our
aspiration is to eradicate exterminative factors and their symptoms
(such as weakness and frailty). We dream of finding the elixir of life.
We aim at the ideal of freedom from the constricted and impenetrable
prison of time. We wish that our past and future sorrows would not hurt
us. We abhor this final juncture, thus, we ask ourselves:

Is there a way to cheat death? Will I continue to exist after death?
Moreover, if I am not obliterated after death, where shall I be and
where shall I go from there?

These questions confront the human identity. Hence, thoughtful people
cannot disregard such questions and cannot delude themselves into
believing that they are exaggerated. This essential quality has released
these questions from historic and geographic boundaries. Archeological
and anthropological studies have attested to the fact that understanding
our beginning and end has always been a universal issue. For instance,
the relics of ancient graves and primitive customs regarding the method
of interment of the dead are telltales of their particular beliefs about
life after death and the state of the dead.[^1] Modern humans also seek
answers to these questions in both their personal lives and scientific
and philosophic studies.

Whenever a question agitates the sea of our intellect, our mind’s
ambition is to reach the truth even though in this context the obscure
truth of creation is not easily discerned. The deeper a question
penetrates into the profundity of existence, the harder it is to
determine its answer. Existence is profound, complex, involute,
exquisite, and tenacious. Thus, even discovering all facets of its most
apparent layer has no end. We must have perceptive eyes and acute ears
and think straight. All fantasies regarding existence will be repelled
some day. Even though it may be hard, we must understand the language of
existence. The world is not mute. It speaks and does not allow any
utterance to be forced upon it.

Due to various mental-spiritual reasons, in order to answer their
complex questions, many people seek refuge in delusive thoughts and
fabricate beliefs by fantasizing and making groundless suppositions.
Sometimes these superstitious beliefs turn into incontrovertible and
dogmatic beliefs in future generations due to the predominance of
followership mentalities. Thus, these beliefs dominate the minds and
souls of a people for centuries. Doubtless, many weak and superstitious
beliefs about death and the afterlife are thus originated.

In Quest for an Answer
----------------------

Two repositories of knowledge open the path for human understanding:

### 1. The Results of Scientific Research and Investigation

In modern day, we divide this repository into science and philosophy.
Science comprises empirical knowledge or knowledge based on inductive
syllogism and philosophy comprises non-empirical knowledge or knowledge
based on intellective syllogism. The common attribute of these two
divisions is that the scientist or philosopher endeavors to arrange and
prove a hypothesis according to logical principles. Whether its
accordance with actuality is proven or its fallaciousness is revealed,
both have a great part in human knowledge. The caravan of human
knowledge has traversed many treacherous and unpredictable paths in
order to reach its contemporary state while accelerating every moment.
However, our lack of knowledge is indubitably incomparable with our
knowledge.

Obviously, in order to attain stable and trustworthy knowledge regarding
life after death, we cannot utilize empirical knowledge. Even if science
can successfully present a natural explanation of life and death, it
cannot reveal knowledge of the state of death and the dead. This is
because, empirical knowledge relates to perceptible and repeatable
phenomena and it is mute regarding other phenomena. Those who have gone
are silent and those extant are unaware of these tidings.

Various thinkers have attempted to answer questions regarding our finale
using their intellectual findings and rational contemplation of humanity
and the cosmos. Varieties of philosophical schools have presented
diverse theories on this issue. However, these theories are typically
general and can at most prove the continuation of individuals. The
intellect cannot depict postmortal spiritual incidents or even the
experience of death. In order to advance in this field the intellect has
fixed its eyes upon a different source. This source must present the
intellect with conceptual and factual intuitional elements so it can
begin its progress in this field.

### 2. Revelation

Revelation is knowledge that has been given to humanity freely and that
is not a result of human toil. Thus, it does not have the limitations
and flaws of human knowledge. This cascading fount of knowledge has set
forth the main lines for all exterior and interior discoveries regarding
existence and has presented a solid image of the whole truth or, in
other words, the big picture. Without this knowledge, humans can neither
truly understand their current state nor their continued existence.
Divine prophets and messengers have bestowed this vital knowledge upon
humanity. They are the first to whisper the song of eternality in our
ears. They have reminded us that the thirst for everlastingness is a
true thirst and can only be quenched with the elixir of eternal life.

The prophets have illustrated our beginning and end, and our fall and
ascension. They have engraved absolute perpetuity and immortality in our
minds. Knowledge of our origin and destination is an element of guidance
that may only be found in the teachings of divine prophets. The result
of this knowledge is true self-awareness; it is never falling astray in
the world; it is precise awareness of one’s path and destination.
Prophets are experienced voyagers who warn travelers of the dangers and
deviations of the path and guide them to the depths of existence. We
humans may learn endless knowledge and wisdom from the prophets. With
the aid of these immaculate souls, we may purify all aspects of our
existence and attain perfection.

In exchange for these blessings, all they ask for is faith. The
messengers of God (‘a) bestow something upon humans that they can never
attain on their own and all they ask for in return is what logically
entails from their enjoinment. Faith [īmān] is a process in which all
human systems—such as the system of knowledge or emotions—participate.
Faith in our origin is faith in prophethood, and faith in our
destination is faith in returning to our origin. Faith in the Prophet
(S) is faith in God and faith in God and the prophet is faith in life in
the Hereafter.

Denying the Resurrection and life after death is denying our origin,
both of which are denying prophethood. By disseminating divine messages,
the prophets show us our true station and shed us of the stain of
negligence towards God and ourselves. By aiding our intellect, they
purify our worldly lives. They increase our passion for righteousness
and free us of despair, fear, and anxiety; thus, they swiftly guide us
to the harborage of tranquility.

They present us with the past and future of existence and from within
nature, they make us a guest of the supernatural. These experienced
voyagers reveal the essence of natural phenomena through their divine
identities. In other words, prophets tear the veils between nature and
the extramundane. Thus, the paths between the heavens and earth are
opened and earthly humans can perceive the supernatural just as they see
nature.

The teachers of logic and certitude and the deniers of blind advocacy
present their enjoinment such that it leaves no intellectual
justification for doubt or refutation, unless mental states or
psychological conditions interfere to simulate inner doubt.

Revelation has specific attributes that differentiate it from the first
source of knowledge (human knowledge):

Freedom from all errors and faults

Benefiting from the divine fountainhead of absolute knowledge and the
prophets’ needlessness of methods of knowledge acquisition that have the
possibility of fault

Dependency of these teachings upon objective scientific arguments
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The Noble Qur’an and the compendium of the teachings of the Prophet (S)
and the Immaculate Imams (‘a) have provided us with a valuable treasury
of truths regarding death and life in the Hereafter. Researchers must
have the same attitude towards revelational and religious statements as
they have towards all other aspects of existence. These descriptive
revelational statements explain reality and accurately report the past,
present, and future of existence. Thus, any researcher who knows the
laws of apprehending and discovering truths can theorize regarding
religious statements, including statements about death and immortality,
and attempt to prove their theories. Interpretation and elucidation of
religious propositions and concepts is a scientific endeavor. In
scientific research, we must prevent influence of personal and
psychological conditions that separate us from the path of truth. This
is not easy, but it is possible. We must not forget that we humans are
subject to errors and the probability of these errors is high. However,
we must not let this discourage us; rather, we must increase our resolve
and precision. Therefore, even though this second source is complete and
infallible, our scientific knowledge is progressive (not absolute) and
sometimes erroneous. Our cognitive system acknowledges its limitations;
however, it does not tolerate a standstill.

Reliance upon revelation does not mean that the intellect is faulty and
must be put aside; rather, correct understanding of revelational
concepts requires reason. We mean to say that without the aid of
revelation and by utilizing only reason, one cannot fathom life in the
Hereafter. Even with the guidance of religion, reason cannot answer all
its questions at once. Thus, many illuminated philosophers—while they
have been successful in philosophical research about various issues
regarding death and life in the Hereafter—have found themselves at an
impasse regarding other philosophic issues on this subject. As a result,
they have sufficed themselves with faith in the concepts and teachings
in the Qur’an and Hadith[^2] or have organized their philosophic
theories with inspiration from divine revelation.[^3] It must be
reminded that the path of discovery of truth, like all human affairs, is
progressive.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عـقل، چـون جبريل گويد احمدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گـر يكـي گـامي نـهم سوزد مرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تو مرا بگذار زين پـس پيشـران
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدّ من اين بـود اي سـلطان جـان
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As Gabriel says O Ahmad, reason;*

*Burns me if I (revelation) take a step.*

*Hence, set me as the navigator;*

*This is my station O leader of hearts (reason).* [^4]

*Eschatology and Anthropology*

Since death and life in the Hereafter deal with human states,
understanding humans and humanity has a direct effect in eschatological
discussions. To state the matter differently, we must first harmonize
our opinions on immortality with our views regarding the nature of
humankind. Therefore, anthropology is an important prerequisite of
eschatology. Accordingly, it is befitting that we first take a glance at
several important anthropological principles that have a close link with
immortality. Then, we shall commence the discussion on death and
eternality.

[^1]: - In their findings from primitive peoples, researchers have
encountered issues that reveal various types of beliefs in life after
death; regardless of whether these beliefs are superstitious or not. For
example, they state that primitive humans have devised plans in order to
ease the transportation of the dead that have various forms all over the
world. For instance, they would cover the dead with heaps of stones, or
they would tie their dead with strong ropes. In some places, they would
even impale their dead into the ground with sharp poles through their
chests. Moreover, mummifying the dead; placing pictures, icons, and food
in graves; burying the friends and family of the deceased in its grave;
etc. were various ancient customs that reveal early humans beliefs. For
more information, see: Will Durant, The Story of Civilization, vol. 1,
pp. 49, 155, 180, 283, 429, 851, 925; vol. 2, p. 18; vol. 3, p. 9; and
Nass, John B., The Comprehensive History of Religions.

[^2]: - Ibn-e Sīnā (Avicenna), Ilāhiyāt-e Shifā’ (Healing, Theology),
disquisition 9, chap. 7.

[^3]: - Mullāsadrā, Asfār (Journeys), vol. 9, p. 179.

[^4]: - Jalal ad-Din Maūlavī, Mathnavī-e Ma‘navī (Spiritual Couplets),
Book I, verses 1069-1070.


