Section One: The Human Essence
==============================

As far as the history of human knowledge shows, we humans have
continuously endeavored to discover our station in the world and our
relationship with other creatures. These endeavors were obstructed at
the very beginning of history and today, this obstruction has not been
relieved even in advanced scientific communities. Humanity’s existence
is not analogous to the existence of other natural entities.

It seems that among the discovered creatures in nature, we humans are
unique and that our existence is not in concord with the image of the
natural world. The existence of humans in this collection has made it
difficult to explain and elucidate this structure overall. Experts in
natural science tell us that the world is made up of chaotic and
mindless physical particles.

However, we perceive ourselves as purposeful and intellectual creatures.
How can a creature with awareness come about in a world full of mindless
particles? How can the mechanical world produce an entity that can
present itself unto the world? How can we conceive of an essentially
purposeless world that nurtures beings with transcendent purposes? How
can a being with free will emerge from a world that according to
determinism has foreshadowed its elements? Yea, human qualities and
attributes have resulted in these questions and have made the
coordination of humans and other natural beings challenging.

According to common belief, human qualities reside in two general
vessels: body and soul. Languages attest to the existence of this common
belief. There are two types of concepts in all languages. Consequently,
we are faced with two classes of statements that possess a common
subject (humans) with the variation of the predicate. For instance,
regard these two statements:

Mary is 90 pounds.

Mary hopes to attend college.

One class of statements, like the first, describes the states and
conditions of the human body. Even though the predicate of this type of
statement relates to the human body, it is usually common with other
corporeal beings, such as predicates that indicate weight, shape, or
size. In contrast, other statements, such as the second sentence,
sometimes mostly and sometimes absolutely pertain to humans and do not
indicate bodily statuses. These predicates encompass thought, reasoning,
deduction, love, intimacy, faith, etc. As a result, in studying humans,
we are faced with two sets of qualities:

Material or corporeal attributes such as heat, size, color, weight, etc.

Incorporeal or spiritual attributes such as fear, love, courage,
aspiration, hope, etc.

These two classes are essentially different. For example, the attributes
in the first class are obvious and can be perceived with the senses.
However, the attributes of the second class, such as sorrow, belief,
fear, impatience, etc. are not such. The first type of states can be
perceived by everyone; yet, the second type can only be cognized by the
person experiencing them. Each individual’s intentions are clear to
themselves but obscure to others. No one can hide their height or width,
nevertheless intentions, sorrow, and happiness can be concealed.

Additionally, the manner in which an individual realizes each of these
qualities is not the same. For example, we can feel pain without any
intermediates. Therefore, if someone asks us, “How do you know you have
pain?”, we would deem the question irrational. However, becoming aware
of a physical disorder such as a gastric ulcer requires reasoning.
Consequently, if someone asks, “How do you know that you have an
ulcer?”, we would have to present our reasons, which may be the
physician’s diagnosis. Therefore, at least the three factors of
spatiality, general exposure, and indirect accessibility dissociate
corporeal qualities from spiritual qualities.

The public, scientists, and philosophers all agree on this matter.
Everyone concurs with the duality of all languages regarding humans,
which indicates duality in humanity’s attributes and characteristics.
Here, the question exists: Are these two classes based on one essential
aspect or two disparate essential aspects that, while linked, are
independent of one other and can be intellectually separated? Advocates
of the first theory are called monists and supporters of the second
theory are called dichotomists or dualists.[^1]

The first view states that the first-class attributes—that describe the
human body—are fundamental human attributes and each of the second-class
attributes depend upon the quality of the first class.

Consequently, second-class attributes cannot exist without first-class
attributes. For example, “hope” is a function of specific states within
the human body, especially the brain and the nervous system. Thus, we do
not possess two distinct and independent aspects; rather, humans are
similar to machines comprised of cellular blocks and have two distinct
classes of attributes. However, they both, directly or indirectly,
pertain to the human body such that visualizing a person without a
standard body is visualizing the inexistence of that person.

Advocates of the second view however, have discovered these attributes
so inherently different that they have attributed the first class to the
body and the second class to another entity called soul. Some have even
stressed that the soul equates with the human identity. Even though
these two entities are linked in a mysterious and mystical manner and
they create a single human identity in this world, one can imagine them
existing apart from each other. It is worthy of note that the issue of
the intercommunication of the body and soul—according to this view—or
mental states—according to the first view—has been problematic
throughout history.

Duality of Humans and Our Rationale
-----------------------------------

Advocates of the second view maintain that our introversive
contemplations attest to this duality. Each of us discovers a truth
within ourselves separate of our body, which we call “self”. This “self”
signifies our essence as opposed to our bodies; it is not identifiable
with our bodies. This averment includes various rationales some of which
are enumerated below.

In every person, there exist actions and manifestations that cannot be
rendered as pertaining to the body. The body cannot manage these
phenomena; however, they must have an originator. Since the body cannot
be considered the author of these occurrences, they must be predicated
by another entity. We call this entity the soul. Intuitive perception,
thought, analysis, judgment, religious experience, emotions, and
sentiments are a number of phenomena that signify the existence of the
soul.

Contrary to other creatures in existence, human actions do not occur
according to a standard routine. Human actions are not similar in
identical situations. This makes it almost impossible to predict human
behavior. Discovering the laws governing human behavior is not like
discovering the laws governing natural objects. This rationale is
indicative of the element of free will. Explaining and interpreting free
will based on mechanical determinist laws of nature is not possible.

We relate all our internal and external actions to our “self”. We say,
“I walk”, “I see”, “I think”, etc. Since there in no organ in the body
to which we may attribute all our actions, it is revealed that there is
a distinct aspect to humans that is transcendent to the body and that
holds the status of originator of all actions. In addition, we can say
regarding the body and its parts, “my hand=hand belonging to the self”,
“my heart=heart belonging to the self”, etc. We can clearly perceive an
“otherness” between the noun (i.e. hand, heart, etc.) and the pronoun
(i.e. my). Because this apprehension is intuitive and thus infallible,
it is conclusive evidence that we have a dual constitution.[^2]

Moreover, in differentiation of natural sciences, humanities, and social
sciences, scientific philosophers stress issues that indicate the
duality of the human constitution. The following issues have resulted in
the natural sciences overshadowing the liberal arts:

Existence of free will in humans and the superfluity of causality and
determinism in virtue of this factor

The purposefulness of humanity

The significance of human actions

Incorporeality of the Soul
--------------------------

Our previous rationales indicate that those who advocate the existence
of the soul both stress the identification of self with the soul and its
incorporeality. An incorporeal entity is an entity that transcends
material attributes such as volume, mass, direction, shape, size,
location, time, etc. After proving the disparity of the body and soul,
Islamic researchers have brought various arguments for the
incorporeality of the soul. Here, we shall briefly discuss these
arguments.

One of the properties of corporeal entities is their divisibility.
Scientifically, all material objects can be divided into smaller parts,
even though this may be unfeasible in practice. On the other hand, we
distinctly realize that dividing “self” into two or more constituents in
meaningless and impossible. Thus, the human soul is not a material and
divisible object.

Moreover, human capacities, such as our capacity for knowledge, are
inexhaustible, but unlimited affairs cannot be explained in terms of the
human body.

The modern science of parapsychology speaks of mental phenomena that
support existence of the soul. These phenomena are divided into two
groups:

Phenomena that do not necessitate life after death, but are credible
evidence of the incorporeality of humans: These include psychokinesis
(PK) and extrasensory perception (ESP) in its various forms, such as
telepathy and clairvoyance.

Phenomena that are related to life after death: These include
communication with the dead by means of mediums, revival of the dead,
and out-of-body experiences.

In telepathy, the thoughts in one person’s mind are transferred to the
mind of another without using normal channels of communication under
conditions that cannot be regarded as chance, such as mental
communication over vast distances through steel shields. Clairvoyance is
the knowledge of objects and affairs without the intermediacy of sensory
organs and without physical contact of the clairvoyant with the
perceived object. Psychokinesis is the ability to move objects by mental
effort without using physical devices.[^3]

In short, these affairs, which are called paranormal phenomena,
attribute abilities to humans that cannot be explained in terms of the
physical framework, from subatomic and submolecular approaches to
neurological and physiological approaches.

Below is a summary of the theories about the human nature as regards the
issue of immortality:

The human being is an indissoluble unity and its entire existence is
limited to its corporeal frame. The monotheist advocates of this theory
believe in the existence and perpetuity of humans after death in a
future age.

Humans have a dual constitution with disparate and heterogeneous
qualities. Most supporters of human immortality advocate this theory,
although, they are divided into two groups:

Those who believe in the duality of the human nature, however, because
they identify humans with their souls, they understand that only the
spiritual aspect is immortal.

Those who regard the identity of humans as the sum of their body and
soul; therefore, they regard humans as a spiritual-corporeal entity in
all aspects of existence.

Aspects of Human Existence in the Qur’an
----------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ثم جعلناه نطفة في قرار مكين. ثم خلقنا النطفة علقة فخلقنا العلقة مضغة
فخلقنا المضغة عظاما فكسونا العظام لحما ثم انشأناه خلقا اخر فتبارك الله
احسن الخالقين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then We made it a sperm in a secure receptacle (womb). Then of the
sperm We created blood-clot, next of the blood-clot We created tissue,
and then of the tissue We created bones, afterwards We covered the bones
with flesh, and then We originated within it a different existence.
Glory be to Allah, the fairest of creators.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ثمّ سوّاه و نَفَخَ فيه من روحِهِ و جعل لكم السمع و الابصار و الافئدة﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then He shaped it and breathed in it of His spirit and He appointed
for you ears, eyes, and hearts.”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و يسئلونك عن الروح قل الروح من امر ربي و ما اوتيتم من العلم إلا
قليلاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they ask you about the soul; say, ‘The soul is my Lord’s Command
and you have not been given knowledge save a little.’”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ألا له الخلق و الامر﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know that Creation and Command solely belong to Him.”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿انّما امره اذا اراد شيئاً ان يقول له كن فيكون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“His Command is such, when He wants something, the moment He says to
it, ‘be’ it immediately is.”***[^8]

Commentary and Interpretation
-----------------------------

As can be seen, the first verse previously mentioned contains terms that
signify the corporeal structure of humans and its origination. The
stages of development of the body are distributed through a determined
time span. In each stage, the simpler form slowly evolves into a more
complex anatomy. The stages of embryo and fetus growth are identified as
sperm/zygote [nuṭfah], blood-clot [‘alaqah], tissue [muḍghah], bone
[‘iẓām], and flesh/muscle [lahm]. These stages encompass the
introduction of the sperm into the uterus throughout the emergence of
the human limbs. From beginning to end, this body feeds from nature,
develops within it, and ultimately returns to it.

The term “سوّاه” [sawwāhu] in the second verse indicates the period of
anatomical formation. At the end of this period, as it is also indicated
at the conclusion of the first verse, something occurs that is
essentially different from the previous stages. Here the Qur’an speaks
of a “different existence” in contrast to the previous gradual stages.
In order to describe this stage, the verb “انشأ” [ansha’a] was used.
According to the second verse, the “originated” being is the soul [rūh]
that is firmly established in the body by the “divine breath”. We cannot
say that the soul is breathed into the body from the outside; however,
it is evident that the origination of the soul is inherently different
from preceding occurrences. Henceforth, the body is charged with an
abode of the soul. Prior to the establishment of the soul, this body had
eyes, but did not see; it had ears, but did not hear; it had a form but
no content. The body was matter therefore possessed the qualities of
matter. Yet now, this matter has been transferred to a different level,
that is, adorned with qualities such as awareness, life, knowledge,
volition, etc.

We can only see the body; therefore, the question is, “What kind of
creature is this esoteric and imperceptible entity?” This question is
answered by the third verse, which identifies the soul as the Lord’s
Command [amr].

The second verse, in a manner, attributes the soul to God; while the
third verse clarifies that this attribution means that the soul is God’s
Command. However, what does “Command” mean? The fourth verse provides
the answer. God identifies some of His creatures as “Creation” and some
as “Command”. Thus, in a manner of speaking, there are two extant
worlds: the world of Creation and the world of Command. Usually, the
Qur’an identifies these worlds as the Manifest world and the Invisible
world. The Invisible world is the world that cannot be perceived by the
senses and is considered the spiritual or inner world [ālam al-baṭin],
whereas the Manifest world is discernible and apparent. Humans partake
of both worlds; they are the conjunction of the natural and supernatural
or the Manifest and Invisible planes. The human soul is an entity of
Command and has no kinship with the corporeal world, while the human
body has developed in the context of nature.

Yea, humans have both form [ẓāhir] and essence [bāṭin], both eyes and
perception, both brain and mind since they have both body and soul. The
human body is discernible to all; however, its soul is hidden to all but
itself. The soul is the individual’s sanctum. It is so profound that at
times, its depths are obscure even to the self and thus must be
discovered. The body is alive, energetic, and animated as long as its
soul is its confidant. When the soul, which was established within the
body by the Divine Breath, is recalled by the draw and summons of the
Lord, the body submits to silence.

The fifth verse reveals that entities of Command—such as the
soul—transcend time, space, and gradual conditions, and that they occur
at the behest of the Divine.[^9]

In short, we explained that:

According to the Qur’an, humans are the integration of body and soul

The soul is incorporeal since it belongs to the world of Command

[^1]: - These are the major theories regarding the human constitution.
However, there are minority theories regarding the nature of the person,
such as trichotomism, which states that humans are made up of three
distinct components: body, soul, and spirit. [trans.]

[^2]: - One might say that in normal speech we use terms such as “my
essence=essence belonging to the self” or “myself=self belonging to the
self”. We must bear in mind that in these cases, we do not intuitively
apprehend discord or otherness between the possessive and noun; and with
little thought, we realize that these two are in fact, one and the same.

[^3]: - For more information, see: John Hick, Philosophy of Religion.

[^4]: - Sūrah Mu’minūn 23:13-14.

[^5]: - Sūrah Sajdah 32:9.

[^6]: - Sūrah Isrā’ 17:85.

[^7]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:54.

[^8]: - Sūrah Yāsīn 36:82.

[^9]: - For more information refer to Allāmah Ṭabāṭabāī, Tafsīr-e
Al-Mīzān (Al-Mīzān Exegesis), vol. 13, pp. 196-198; and Allāmah
Ṭabāṭabāī, Rasā’il-e Tawḥīdī (Monotheistic Disquisitions), Disquisition
of Humans before this World, pp. 169-170.


