Section Two: Death
==================

Humans are death-aware creatures; we know in advance that our current
lives are unstable and ephemeral. We realize that terminating factors
numerous and our lives are so fragile that it is miraculous that we
linger in existence. While we observe life with the depths of our being,
a small part of us also looks ahead to death. Our lives are worthwhile
only if our deaths are worthwhile. We are immortality-loving creatures;
however, we cannot attain unity and tranquility except through death.
Yea, life and death must coexist in order for them both to have
significance.

We realize that life and death are not under our control. Before we can
take full advantage of the buffet that life has set before us, we are
faced with the heralds of death—weakness and frailty. This infirmity
increases every moment and saps our strength and vitality, but it does
not decrease our thirst for life. Our dream is neither life with a
finale nor life intermingled with death; we desire eternal life. There
is no death in eternal life and an eternal human is one whose life
surges from within and who is not shadowed by the notion of death. This
is not possible save with the promise of life. Death guides us to the
Life-provider, and true eternality can only be realized through this
union.

Nature of Death
---------------

The issue of death can be studied through philosophical, psychological,
and biological approaches. Due to the variety of these approaches, there
are numerous interpretations of death. Whatever the nature of death may
be, that which is certain is that it is contingent upon on the nature of
life. If human life is interpreted in terms of biology, its death must
also be interpreted through biology. If we regard life philosophically,
such that life is predicated on the supernatural, so also is death.
There is no contradiction between these various perspectives since each
deals with the means, causes, and purposes of its respective field, and
assesses and interprets phenomena within this framework.

As a consequence of these varying perspectives regarding human nature,
our philosophic endeavors have resulted in varied expositions of death.
The following are several of these views:

Those that identify humans with the material body and regard the human
individual equatable and restricted to the corporeal frame view death as
the termination of life. This is because humans have no other reality
that can protect them from deterioration and extermination. Death of the
body equates with extinguishment of the individual. Death of the body
truly severs off the thread of the person’s existence. The question of
whether or not the person shall later return to life is a separate issue
that will be discussed later. In short, this perspective states that
death is the termination of the human existence.

Some dualists believe that the body does not consist of the essence of
the individual and that the human consciousness pertains to the soul.
According to this viewpoint, death is not the end of the individual’s
life. Some advocates of this view believe that the soul is trapped
within the body and that death is nothing but freedom from corporeal
restrictions. During every moment of the soul’s captivity, the body
presents it with additional troubles. It continuously demands food,
water, and other necessities and exploits the abilities of the self to
satisfy its needs. Natural death ends this incarceration and returns the
soul to its true station.[^1]

Those who believe that the individual is a synthesis of body and soul
regard death as the separation of the soul’s intellectual link with its
natural body and the world. Thereafter, it persists in union with a
different body free of material qualities.

The common factors of the two prior theories are that human life is not
discontinued at the time of death and that death is regarded as a
transition from one existential state to another. Some advocates of the
third view interpret death as follows:

Contingent beings are divided into incorporeal beings and material
beings or rather, perfect entities and imperfect entities. Incorporeal
entities are not characterized with movement and change, and they
perpetuate exclusively through the maintenance of their efficient cause.
However, material beings or beings that are linked with materiality
essentially evolve, change, and strive towards their purpose. Because we
are a part of the natural world, we too are evolving beings. Our
development has an end and by arriving at it, we reach our deaths. Our
end is not a place external to ourselves that we can reach by making
effort; rather, it is like maturity for an adolescent. Maturity is not
external to the adolescent’s being; the adolescent gradually develops
towards maturity. In other worlds, the human aim is evolution from
absolute materiality towards incorporeality and the supernatural plane.
Our life in the natural world is the span of this evolution. When we
humans adequately develop our capacities through worldly life, we are
ready to elevate to a higher plane where our material bodies are not
necessary. Thus, we end our journey in this world by leaving behind our
corporeal form.

An example that can better formulate this perspective in the mind is
that for the duration that humans exist as a fetus, they continually
evolve from faultiness towards perfection and the course and distance of
this evolution is the time spent in the womb. During this transition,
the fetus needs and belongs to the uterus; such that if for any reason
its evolution terminates before reaching its perfection, it remains
premature and faulty. However, when its course is fully traversed, it
must be delivered outside the abdomen and birth is vital. At this point,
the existence of the former fetus is so altered that it no longer
requires its embryonic receptacle.[^2]

Consequently, it must be understood that death is not the annihilation
and extinction of human individuals; rather, it is a transition from one
existential plane to the next or in other words, it is the evolution of
human beings from faultiness to a certain level of perfection.

This interpretation of the nature of death reveals it as a part of
humanity’s existence. In fact, death is an upholder of our existence not
its eliminator. More precisely, we humans die and come to life every
moment, in the sense that we cross over from our previous states to
reach new ones. The condition for reaching the next state is traversing
our previous more flawed state. Hence, death shall expire in the world
of perfection and perpetuity where our actions shall become manifest.

Jalāl ad-Dīn Mawlavī has versified this interpretation using a beautiful
analogy:

*This world is like a tree, O Bountiful;*

*And we, like green fruit.*

*The unripe hold fast to the branch*

*For in their immaturity, they not suitable for a palace.*

*When they ripen and become lip-stingingly sweet;*

*Their hold on the branch weakens.*

*When a mouth is sweetened by its fate;*

*To the person, the world becomes cold.*[^3]

Death as stated by the Qur’an and Hadith
----------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الله يتوفى الانفس حين موتها و التي لم تمت في منامها فيمسك التي قضى
عليها الموت و يرسل الاخرى الى اجل مسمى﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah completely retracts souls at the time of their deaths and also
retracts those that have not died, while they sleep. So, He holds souls
upon which He has decreed death and returns the rest until an appointed
end.”***[^4]

In this verse, death is represented with the term tawaffa an-nafs
(complete retraction of the soul). Tawaffā happens at death and in
sleep. During each phenomenon the soul’s connection with the body—and
thus the natural world—is severed is some way. During each phenomenon,
the soul is withdrawn; however, one is temporary and partial and the
other is permanent and complete. At the moment of death, our essence or
soul, which is the body’s sustaining agent, is completely retracted.

Thus, the soul completely abandons the natural world and enters an
invisible quarter of existence. Sleep provides us with a muted
perception of the experience of death. As long as the soul is linked to
the corporeal body, it may remain asleep; but if this link is severed,
death occurs. As a result, death is not annihilation; rather, it is the
launch of a new state of human existence, different from life in this
world. Consequently, the soul discards its corporeal body, which belongs
to the natural world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الى ربّك يومئذ المساق﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is the day of propelling towards your Lord.”***[^5]

This type of verse indicates a deeper facet of death. The day of death
is the day of return to God. God is the master of existence and whatever
enters His presence is protected from inexistence. At the Lord’s
command, the soul leaves the natural world at the time of death and
enters an alternate world, which is its original residence and exempt
from time and space. Death shreds all veils and reveals to us the
reality of existence. Even though we might not have volitionally
observed this reality in life, in death we are compelled to notice all
truths.

Accordingly, death is a passageway on which we travel from one facet of
existence (the Manifest) to the other (the Invisible). On one side it is
an exit and on the other it is an entrance. Imām ‘Alī (‘a) has stated:

“So, surely the world has not been created for you as a place of
permanent stay; rather, it has been created for you as a passageway so
that you send forth your actions as provisions for the abode of
permanence.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ما كان لنفس ان تموت الا باذن الله كتابا مؤجلا...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No soul dies save by the leave of Allah, at an appointed
time.”***[^7]

Death, like life, occurs by the hand of God. No person comes to life by
their own efforts and no one retrieves their own soul. The agent that
gives and takes life is not the self because life and death are not
volitional phenomena.

The soul cannot pass into the next world until an appointed time, just
as it could not enter this world at will.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿كل نفس ذائقة الموت﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All souls shall taste death.”***[^8]

The general law of death has no exceptions. Immortality in this world is
nothing but a dream—nature cannot endlessly sustain the human
individual. In order to overcome a law of nature one must make use of an
alternate natural law. There is no law in nature that can prevail
against the law of death. Humanity cannot violate the laws of nature.
All we can do is to resort to a different natural law through scientific
endeavors. However, there is no law in nature that can free us of death.
This is because death is one of our existential conditions—it is not
exterior to our nature. Therefore, we cannot create in an impregnable
fortress against death in which to hide. Death is a reality that
emanates from our beings; thus, escape from death can only result in a
checkmate.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اينما تكونوا يدرككم الموت و لو كنتم في بروج مشيّدة﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Wherever you may be, death will find you; though you be in secure
towers.”***[^9]

Fear of Death
-------------

Fear is one of the most common feelings that dominate us. It is an
experience that no person enjoys; one that everyone attempts to
circumvent. Due to its variable sources, the nature of this phenomenon
is not constant, even though we indicate it with a single term. Fear of
poverty, fear of disease, fear of loosing one’s reputation, fear of
other people, fear of disasters and natural phenomena, etc. each have
their own conditions and effects. However, among the various factors
that cause terror and dread, none is more dreadful than death. The
mention of death quivers hearts and turns pleasure to mourning.
Nowadays, many intellectuals have abandoned study of the reality of
death due to inability to gather empirical data and have therefore
inclined towards study of the psychological and physiological aspects of
death instead. They endeavor to present us with methods of delaying or
prevailing over death. Some common ideas regarding fear of death
include:

Death alters life into oblivion.

Even though death is inevitable, its time is unspecified. Thus, we are
continually fearful and distraught regarding death.

Death is an unidentified phenomenon and we have no experience regarding
it. In fact, it seems that death is the end of experiences. Thus, we do
not know what happens to us at that moment, and if we have continuity,
what will happen after it.

Each person has to face death alone. If we could experience it with
others, it would not be so fearsome and horrendous.

By reaching death, all our hopes and wishes are lost and thus, we are
severed from all our desires.

There is a great gap between those who support individual immortality to
overcome their fear of death and those who seek to alleviate this fear
by regarding humans mortally perishable and introducing death as the
finale of the individual’s existence. Socrates is of the first group:

“A man who has grown grey in the love of wisdom must be cheerful at the
approach of death, because he can promise himself the greatest happiness
after it… If this is the case, what an absurdity would it be if he, who
points all his efforts here on earth at one single object, were to feel
affliction, when the long-wished-for aim was at last accomplished.”[^10]

However, materialists such as Epicurus attempt to banish fear of death
by denying life after death and introducing death as the termination of
awareness and absolute painlessness. These ideologists neglect the fact
that our fear of death is not because we regard it painful; rather, it
is love for life that makes the taste of death bitter to our tongues.
How can one soothe people by declaring that death is the end of their
lives? Regarding fear of death, Spinoza states:

“A free man thinks of death least of all things; and his wisdom is a
meditation not of death but of life.”[^11]

This statement signifies that humans can alleviate fear of death merely
by not thinking about it. Spinoza neglects that remembrance and fear of
death is not a volitional feeling that one can evade. To say, “do not
think of death” is not enough. It has to be explained how one can not
think of death and whether not thinking about death is truly wise or
ideal.

Religion and Fear of Death
--------------------------

One of the ethical aims of religion is purifying our being of all
internal conflicts and saving us from bitter and costly psychological
experiences such as grief, fear, and anxiety. Religious education
evolves us existentially by propelling us, and all our aspects and
states, toward our Creator whereby transforming all our interactive
states. For example, a believer in God fears Him. However, this fear is
essentially different from fear of beings other than God. God is an
entity that the faithful are fearful of in their hearts; even so, they
still seek refuge with Him. Besides God, nothing can simultaneously be
an agent of fear and an agent of security and trust. If fear of anything
except God penetrates into one’s soul, it will continuously grow and
ultimately imbue one’s being. However, fear of God sears the roots of
all fears within one’s being. Hence, fear of God is a human perfection
and fear of created things is a fault. Courageous persons are those who
fear nothing besides God while the memory of God imbues their hearts
with humility, modesty, and fear—a fear that suffuses them with felicity
and joy.

Lā takhāfū[^12] is the offering of the fearful;

It is worthy of those who are fearful of Him.

Whoever fears is made safe and secure;

Thus, all quaking hearts are made calm.

Those who shed their fear when it is said: ‘Fear not!’

Whether you teach them or not, they need no lesson.[^13]

Therefore, the only solution for fear is based on the main pillar of
Islam, which is Tawhīd or belief in the One God. No one can escape the
fear of death, nor can they convey themselves from a state of unrest to
the harborage of tranquility, save by having faith in God and
surrendering to Him. This is why religion does not ask that we forget
death; rather, it constantly asks us to contemplate death and remember
always the boundaries of our current lives. It does not tolerate neglect
of this fact and regards this negligence a cause of squandering the
opportunities of life. Islam teaches us to live objectively. It
describes the stages of life and encourages us to recognize them all.
Ultimately, Islam fashions humans into loving beings, not fearful ones
because it interprets death as the point of acceleration towards our
Creator and the encounter of the limited with the Infinite.

The main lines that divine religions present for confronting fear of
death are briefly described below:

1. Divine religions introduce humans as immortal and eternal beings and
regard the desire for eternality rational and with cause. Fear of death
cannot be eradicated by regarding death as complete annihilation and
nihility of the self because our love of perpetuance is incompatible
with this approach. It causes internal conflict within the human soul
and adds to our pain instead of relieving it. While revering life,
divine religions remind us that this world is transitory and that a
person who regards death as the end becomes dominated by intense
attachment to this world and fear of death. This sort of person unduly
lauds this ephemeral life. Religious teachings emphasize the
negligibility of this life compared with otherworldly life. These
teachings consider it unbefitting for humans to lower themselves by
sufficing themselves with this world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُل مَتاعُ الدُّنيا قَليلٌ و الأَخِرَةُ خَيرٌ لِّمَنِ اتَّقىٰ و لا
تُظلَمونَ فَتيلاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘The goods and chattels of this world is little and the
Hereafter is better for those who fear Allah and you shall not be
wronged [even as much as] a single date-fiber.’”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ ما هٰذِهِ الحَياةَ الدُّنيآ إِلّا لَهوٌ و لَعِبٌ و إِنَّ الدّارَ
الأَخِرَةَ لَهىَ الحَيَوانُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And this worldly life is naught but diversion and sport but surely
the abode of the Hereafter is true life.”***[^15]

This sort of worldview mitigates our pains and hardships, and because of
it, recalling death is a consolation.

2. If the first factor of fear regarding death is eliminated,
unawareness of the time of one’s death will become insignificant. In
fact, it is not clear whether knowing the time of death would truly
comfort us or not. Not knowing the time of death helps us utilize every
moment of our lives in the best possible manner. It is important to
remember death so that we may sustain a correct course in every moment
of our lives and so that our lives do not fall into a monotone.
Forgetting death results in forgetting eternal life and also causes
self-neglect. Noble ‘Alī (‘a) advised his followers thus:

“May God pardon your sins. Provide for the journey as you have been
ordered insistently to march and regard your stay in this world as
brief.”[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرا در منزل جانان چه امن عیش چون هر دم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جرس فرياد مى دارد كه بربنديد محمل‌ها
  </p>
</blockquote>

How can I live securely in the abode of the living while every moment;

The bell continually cries, ‘Hitch your supplies!’

3. The third factor causing fear is averted by those whose knowledge
surpasses the boundaries of the limited—that is, the wellsprings of
eternal knowledge. Divine legates and prophets have made us aware of
this hidden abode and have revealed unto us the invisible countenance of
existence. It was asked of Imam Jawād (‘a), “Why does death distress
some Moslems?” He replied, “It distresses them because they do not
understand it. If they understood it and were friends of God, they would
love death and they would know that the Hereafter is better for them
than this world.”[^17]

4. Death is a stage in human existence and it is an upholder of our
existence. Like all our existential aspects, death is a constituent of
our self. We cannot make others partner in our experiences of sorrow and
happiness, adolescence and maturity, sickness and health, or even our
sleep and wakefulness. These affairs are not within the domain of common
experience. People’s death, like their birth, is unique to each person.

5. The mentioned states in the fifth fear factor of death are the
conditions of the world of separation and schism [between humans and
God]. It is not evident whether these states will endure with the
continuance of our existence. Everything in this world is subject to
change and vicissitude. There are no stable states in this world. Divine
religions expound and explicate the circumstances of the natural world.
They interpret them objectively and factually and thus free humanity
from fallacious interpretations.

The trials and tribulations of the natural world induce the founts of
perfections within humans to gush forth and they make our virtues shine.
That which belongs to us will not be taken away and we shall enter the
next world with all the true wealth that each of us has amassed in the
course of this life.

Moreover, another fear factor for death is fear of the reckoning. The
faithful believe in the reckoning and do not fear death in spite of it.
However, the unfaithful fear death because of the reckoning. The divine
religion guides humans by showing the way to prepare for their future
and it frees humanity of this deadlock.

[^1]: - See: Plato: Complete Works, Phaedrus (Phaedon).

[^2]: - Mullāṣadrā, Asfār (Journeys), vol. 8, pp. 105, 106.

[^3]: - Jalal ad-Din Mawlavī, Mathnavī-e Ma‘navī (Spititual Couplets),
Book III, verses 1293-1296.

[^4]: - Sūrah Zumar 39:42.

[^5]: - Sūrah Qiyāmah 75:30.

[^6]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, Sermon 132.

[^7]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:145.

[^8]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:185.

[^9]: - Sūrah Nisā’ 4:78.

[^10]: - Plato: Complete Works, Phaedrus (Phaedon).

[^11]: - Spinoza, Ethics, prop. LXVII.

[^12]: - Lā takhāfū, which means ‘fear not’, is a phrase from the
Qur’an. [trans.]

[^13]: - Jalal ad-Din Mawlavī, Mathavī-e Ma‘navī, Book I, verses
1432-1434.

[^14]: - Sūrah Nisā’ 4:77.

[^15]: - Sūrah ‘Ankabūt 29:64.

[^16]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, Sermon 28. From the translation of Fayz
ul-Islam.

[^17]: - Sadūq, Ma‘ānī ul-Akhbār (Meanings of Narrations), p. 290.


