Foreword
========

We are thankful towards God, the Beneficent, that merely two terms after
the first publication of the “Islamic Thought” textbook, the second
edition of this book has been completed and thus we present it to our
esteemed professors and students.

During this time, various gatherings of experts and professors of the
Islamic sciences were formed in order to critique, analyze, and receive
corrective and complementary opinions on the concepts and curriculum of
the book. Additionally, opinion forms were given out to professors to
gather their views and make necessary corrections.

Below is a summary of the proposed changes regarding the first edition:

Correction of the structure of the introduction and coordination of the
introduction with the curriculum

Balancing the proportions of the first and second book

Consolidation of the proofs of monotheism (tawhīd) in Book One

Addition of various contemporary Kalām[^1] discussions related to the
curriculum and the subjective concerns of students

Broadening the topic of religious administration and religious
vicegerency [wilāyah]

In due regard to those who have graced us with their opinions, the
Department of Research and Compilation of Textbooks of the
Administration of Professors has made practical corrections to this
series. Some of these corrections include:

Publication of the book in two separate volumes: The first volume,
entitled “Islamic Thought: Book One”, consists of topics concerning God,
humanity, the world, and the afterworld. The second collection, entitled
“Islamic Thought: Book Two”, is comprised of the subjects of prophethood
[nubuwah], Imamate, religious authority [marja’īah], and religious
vicegerency [wilāyah]. The proportions of these books have been adapted
to two study units each.

The structure of the introduction has been adapted to conform to the
curriculum suggested by the Administration. This modified chapter has
been named “Religion in the Modern World” which investigates the crises
of modern humanity and related causes and factors and explains the
function of religion in resolving these crises.

In the discussion concerning theology, while elucidating the methods of
realizing God, the “Kalām Cosmological Argument” has been discussed in
detail in the section entitled “The Way of Intellect”.

The policy of the Administration regarding introduction of contemporary
Kalām discussions into the book was to do so gradually while
simultaneously observing the necessary symmetry of the topics.
Therefore, issues such as religious experience, benefits of religion,
science and religion, and polytheism [kithrat girā’ī] have been
introduced and existing materials have been enhanced in the second
edition.

In this edition, the discussions concerning eschatology [ma’ād] and
Imamate have been revised and the discussions on Imamate have been
broadened. Additionally, discussions on religious authority [marja’īah]
and religious vicegerency [wilāyah] have been revised in order to
increase content accuracy and adjust the volume of this discussion.
Furthermore, we have endeavored to answer all questions concerning these
topics.

In spite of all these changes, we believe that not everything required
in a study book has been compiled within this series. Although addition
of details such as context questions, explanation of important terms,
and research topics and references for students was kept in mind, due to
timetable issues we have deferred greater detail to a later date.

We hope that, with the help of God, we may soon rewrite this book with
improved content and also include current academic debates and better
align this book with the characteristics of standard textbooks.
Forwarding the opinions of professors, students, and experts will
greatly help in quickly and easily creating a more favorable and
exemplary book.

Finally, we wish to thank the esteemed authors of this book, Hujjat
ul-Islām wa l-Muslimīn Alī Riḍā Amīnī, Doctor Muhsin Javādī, Hujjat
ul-Islām wa al-Muslimīn Amīr Dīvānī, and Doctor Muhammad Sa’īdī-Mihr. We
also wish to express our thanks to the respected editor Mr. Riḍā Bābā’ī
and all those who helped type, correct, and prepare this compilation.

Textbook Writing and Research Unit

Islamic Studies Professors and Courses Affairs Department

Office of the Supreme Leader in the Universities

[^1]: - Kalam is one of the religious sciences of Islam similar to
dialectic theology. [trans.]


