Introduction: Religion in the Modern World
==========================================

At the threshold of the third millennium, does modern humanity need
religiousness and religious research any longer?[^1] With the ascension
of humankind to the heights of empirical knowledge, has the era of
religious faith truly passed? Does the endless horizon of empirical
research leave any room for religion? In the modern world, is
religiousness a thing of superstition and religious research an obsolete
and futile activity? In light of amazing scientific developments and
through utilization of our collective intellect, has humanity truly been
able to create their promised Paradise on this mundane globe and thus no
longer needs to endeavor to gain access to a heavenly Paradise?
Ultimately, has contemporary humankind been successful in attaining true
beatitude and happiness through its accomplishments?

These and many similar questions are among the basic quandaries that
face modern humanity. Particularly, religious people, who believe that
religion affects their lives, seriously need to illuminate their
positions regarding such questions.

There is no doubt that the modern era lures religious people into
uncertainty with its colorful and deceptive appearance. Many of those
who have been seduced by the charm of materialistic civilization
consider religion an ebbing current and eagerly await its sunset and
finale. They regard religion as a phenomenon linked to the outdated
traditions and bygone history of humanity, which like cuneiform and the
Ptolemaic system, has reached its expiration date. According to this
notion, religion does not have (or should not have) an important or
irreplaceable role in the life of modern humanity and thus in modern
times, religiousness is a thing of superstition and foolishness.

Correspondingly, religious research (theoretical research concerning
religion)—assuming that its usefulness and necessity is endorsed—must be
limited to research in the context of psychology, sociology, history,
and similar fields. In these studies, researchers must regard religion
from an external perspective. For example, they must study the mental or
social effects of religion or its historical evolution, without
concerning themselves with examining the truths behind its claims or
trying to understand and benefit from its teachings.

A superficial examination of the exterior appearance of modern human
life and the astonishing results of modern technologies and industries,
confirms the above notion or at least seems compatible with it.
Nonetheless, more comprehensive, penetrating, and critical analyses of
the condition of the world and the modern human[^2] reveal the flagrant
dramatization of the allegation that the era of faith has come to a
conclusion and that modern humanity no longer requires religion. Even
though many modern humans verbally deny need of religion, their
condition states otherwise.

Despite modern humanity’s astounding developments in science and
technology, it is faced with massive crises[^3] that either possess
completely new identities, or hold much more terrible and horrific
features compared to their historic parallels. A thorough and chronicled
explanation and clarification of these crises would be too long a
narrative to cover in the limited pages of this introductory chapter.
What can be covered in this synopsis is an overview and brief
explanation of several aspects of this discussion.

Doubtless various cognitional, social, economic, etc. factors have been
influential in creating and intensifying what we call modern crises.
Correctly understanding these factors can be effective in more
accurately comprehending these crises and their historic origins. Here
we will suffice it to mention several of the most important factors that
have caused the outbreak of modern crises and brought about an overall
transformation of the ideas of modern humans about themselves and the
world around them.

Rationalism
-----------

The modern form of rationalism emerged in seventeenth century Europe
through the contemplations of the famous French philosopher and
mathematician, René Descartes (1596 – 1650) and was later advocated in
the works of philosophers such as Baruch Spinoza (1632 – 1677) and
Gottfried Leibniz (1646 – 1716). Immanuel Kant (1724 – 1804) set to
critiquing pure reason and finally concluded that pure reason cannot
prove the existence of God. He then endeavored to secure the foundations
of intellectual belief in God based on ethics and practical reason.

Additionally, he maintained that empirical truths (or objects per se),
cannot be understood as they truly are, rather, we understand objects
though previous concepts and categories within our minds. Although
rationalist philosophers have presented differing philosophical systems,
the common feature of modern day rationalism is that discursive or
deductive reason is considered the most basic tool for understanding.
Moreover, according to some of the more extremist narratives, reason can
comprehend all fathomable things and nothing that reason cannot fathom
is comprehensible.

The rationalist approach to religion, especially in the West and within
Christianity, gradually deprived revelational theology [ilāhīāt
al-wahyānī] (theology based on divine texts) of its credibility. In this
way, the seemingly unmatched rival of revelational theology—i.e.
rational theology—was consolidated.

Even so, sole reliance upon deductive reason and also the discovery of
several limitations of reason as an instrument of cognition have caused
new complications for rationalist theologians. For example, today, many
western philosophers and theologians believe that religious teachings,
including the existence of God, cannot be proven by reason. That being
the case, they endeavor at least to demonstrate that accepting these
teachings is not unreasonable.[^4]

Empiricism
----------

Empiricism is an ideological movement that developed parallel to
rationalism following the western Renaissance. Even though rationalism
had a long record in the history of philosophy, empiricism ultimately
surpassed rationalism. This neo-rationalist movement emerged through the
innovative assertions of Francis Bacon (1561 – 1626) regarding the
necessity of utilizing induction instead of deductive reasoning.
Subsequently, distinctive forms of this school appeared in the
philosophies of John Locke (1632 – 1704), George Berkeley (1685 – 1753),
and David Hume (1711 – 1776). Positivism is also a form of twentieth
century extremist rationalism.

The common element in the various narratives of extremist rationalism is
that they all regard sensory experience as the only method of cognition
and consider exterior senses the source of all human knowledge.
Generally, rationalists have difficulty accepting the metaphysical
teachings of religions because according to them the verity of these
teachings cannot be established through sensory experience.

The most severe opposition of contemporary rationalism with religion
manifests in the criterion logical positivists propose regarding
identification of meaningful statements. They allege that a meaningful
statement is a statement that can be empirically analyzed. According to
one description of the principle of empirical analysis, an empirically
analyzable statement is a statement whose verity or falsehood can be
demonstrated using specific practical conditions that can occur in the
real world.

According to this criterion, religious statements (and metaphysical and
moral statements) essentially lack any cognitive meaning. Therefore, it
is a waste of time to investigate the truth of these statements! Even
though serious criticism of positivism in the first few decades of the
twentieth century resulted in the loss of its original authority, there
are still residues of positivist thought in some western
philosophers.[^5]

The two doctrines of rationalism and empiricism, despite their
fundamental differences, are identical in one issue: they both view with
skepticism all knowledge that is beyond the reason or the senses.
Furthermore, they regard no credibility for the revelation sciences or
intuition.

Scienticism
-----------

Another one of the instigators of modern crises is the prevalence of
scienticism upon the minds of many empiric scientists. According to this
doctrine, which is an offshoot of empiricism in the domain of empirical
knowledge, empirical knowledge is humanity’s only reliable guide to the
truth. Scienticism itself is without doubt a philosophical and
epistemological belief that cannot be scientifically proven because no
scientific experiment can be orchestrated showing that science is the
only reliable method of attaining the truth.

It has been quite some time that science and scienticism have become one
within the minds of many empirical scientists (physicists, biologists,
psychologists, etc.). This unacceptable union has developed grounds for
the encroachment of empirical science upon the territory of philosophy,
metaphysics, and religion.

Humanism
--------

Another aspect of the modern era is the dominance of humanist views.
According to traditional thought, even though humans have an elevated
standing in the world, they are still creations of God. Therefore, they
must carry out their divine obligations. The traditional humans sought
their truth and identity through their connection with God and realized
perfection through servitude and intimacy with God.

Whereas according to humanism, humanity is the center and basis of all
truths and goodness; everything, even God and religion must be justified
and interpreted through humanity; humans are egoistic and have no
responsibilities towards anyone but themselves; and in order to gain
profit they are permitted to use anything in every way possible.
Influenced by humanism, modern humanity measures everything by human
quantities and standards and thus, they have desecrated all things holy.
According to René Guénon:

“In the era of the Renaissance, one term has been subject to much
reverence and credence and has beforehand epitomized the complete plan
of modern civilization. This term is Humanism—a philosophy that
considers humanity to be the criterion for the evaluation of all things.
In truth, the intention for which this term is used is to limit all
things according to human standards and measurements, and to make
abstract all principles and doctrines containing spiritual and sublime
characteristics. Indeed, it could be said as an exemplum that the
intention was to turn our backs on the heavens with the excuse of having
mastery over the world.”[^6]

The aforementioned factors along with several additional factors such as
liberalism and individualism—which are too comprehensive to discuss
here—have united together to present humanity with a world full of
crises, tension, and turmoil, albeit they do have some positive aspects.
Crises and troubles in the modern world are so severe, abysmal, and
extensive that we not only cannot consider modern humankind more happy
and prosperous than traditional humans, in fact we find the situation to
be exactly the opposite.

Here we must emphasize the fact that we do not deny the positive results
of modern civilization—such as advancement in empirical science and
technology or establishment of more complex (and sometimes more
efficient) social systems—yet we believe that these developments have
not helped modern humankind appreciably in its advance on the path of
perfection and human bliss.

Modern humankind, as opposed to traditional humankind, has become more
knowledgeable (meaning they possess more information) and more powerful
(meaning they have the capability to utilize nature and machines without
limit), although this fact does not necessarily mean that they have
become more human. In order to verify this assertion, we must make a
brief inquiry into several crises that confront modern humanity.

Cognition Crisis
----------------

Despite the awesome and rapid development of information[^7], regarding
knowledge, modern humanity is in a state that can be defined as modern
cognitional bewilderment. The initial roots of this confusion in the
modern era go back to the contemplations of Kant regarding the limits of
human knowledge. Kant’s philosophy and epistemology brought about a deep
and frightening gap between the external world, the cognitive world, and
human knowledge: humanity does not have direct access to the external
world (empirical reality) and it is inevitable that everything we
perceive from the world is understood through previous concepts and
categories within our minds. In other words, we constantly see the world
through the glasses of our minds. Therefore, humanity has no
understanding of external objects, as they are in themselves.

Many of the philosophical doctrines and theories that appeared in the
West after Kant’s philosophy were influenced by the Kantian
epistemology. Additionally, many of them had much influence in
intensifying the knowledge confusion of modern humanity.

For example, recent studies in hermeneutics (the science of
interpretation) showed that there can never be a complete understanding
of the words or writings of others. As an additional example,
contemporary developments in logic and epistemology brought about the
appearance of new theories regarding the meaning and verity of a
statement—thus further increasing confusion.

In contrast to the traditional view that regarded any statement that
conformed to reality true, in contemporary theories, “truth” has a
completely different meaning. For instance, according to the coherence
theory of truth, the truth of a statement depends on its congruity and
accord with the rest of ones’ beliefs; or according to the pragmatic
theory of truth, essentially, a true statement is a statement whose
merit becomes clear only through practical experience.

Furthermore, nowadays, the traditional theories about knowledge, which
were mostly foundationalist, have gained powerful adversaries. According
to several traditional foundationalist narratives, all statements are
divided into two groups: axiomatic and theoretic. The credibility of
theoretic statements is clarified with reference to axioms—which form
the foundations of our knowledge—while axioms are regarded inherently
true.

Today, we are witness to the appearance of substitutive theories such as
the coherence theory of truth. According to this theory, there are no
basic statements in our knowledge structure which are the foundation of
other statements; rather, the validity of our belief regarding a
statement is based on its consistency with our other beliefs.

After encountering apparently impassable knowledge barriers in the
domain of philosophy and metaphysics, modern humanity recovered their
peace and tranquility in the empirical sciences. Yet not much time
passed before it became apparent that what was considered with certainty
to be an oasis was in fact a mirage. The escalating development in
scientific knowledge resulted in swift substitution of rival theories.

On the other hand, several scientific philosophers preformed in depth
analysis of the nature of scientific theories and the role of mental and
intellectual characteristics of scientists in the formation of these
theories. It was soon revealed that empirical science is not the place
of solace that the inquisitive minds of modern humans desired and for
which they thoughtlessly refuted all metempirical cognition.

Today, the appearance of all manners of contradictory theories,
especially in the humanities, has created a kind of confusion that can
be called the “Crisis of Trust”. Modern humans are rapidly loosing trust
and confidence in empirical knowledge, for which, in the past few
centuries following the development of scienticism, they substituted
trust in religion and divine texts.

In any event, rationalism and empiricism in the modern world were not as
successful in guiding modern humans towards trustworthy substitute
sciences as they were in estranging them to the revelational sciences
[ma‘ārif al-wahyānī].

Moral Crises
------------

Considering the fundamental connection of humanity and morality, the
definition of humankind as a “moral animal” is not an exaggeration. From
ancient times, human philosophers have contemplated and speculated about
morals and morality. Throughout history, there existed people of virtue,
who purified and improved their inner beings, and afterwards endeavored
to reform the human world and instruct people in ethics.

In the modern era, especially since the beginning of the twentieth
century, the philosophical contemplations of various western thinkers
regarding ethics and its foundations have formed original discussions in
the domain of moral philosophy, which are hypothetically valuable and
noteworthy. Even so, this great scientific outcome not only had little
effect on the growth and development of ethics—especially individual
ethics—rather, to some extent, it brought about the instability of the
principles and foundations of human ethics. Moral relativism,
utilitarianism, and hedonism—at least in some narratives—have had a
great share in the spread of moral degeneration.

Moreover, the humanist and individualist views of various freethinkers
have befouled the realm of moral thought to such an extent that history
can find no parallel. In this realm, talk of exalted human virtues and
merits, and encouraging humans to oppose their abject self—which has
always been the basic principle of all moral teachings of divine
religions and traditional moral doctrines—is considered completely
meaningless. It is thus that some moral theorists have acquired the
audacity to devise so-called moral principles for heinous acts such as
homosexuality and child molestation.

The moral degradation of contemporary man is not specific to the
uneducated masses; rather it has even afflicted many educated
individuals. As an example, nowadays in many universities and
institutions of higher education in western industrialized nations,
there are official student homosexual clubs and despite the fact that
they have not had much success in attracting students, they have much
more promotional resources than other societies. In some of these
countries, marriage of homosexuals is sanctioned by law, and the mass
media and propaganda networks endeavor with all their might to justify
and naturalize this issue. Widespread use of narcotics, hallucinatory
drugs, and alcoholic drinks is another aspect of the moral decline of
modern men, women and children, even in view of the fact that the
destructive social and economic results of these substances are hidden
to no one.[^8]

The role of modern technology in the moral degradation of industrial
societies cannot be overlooked. Nowadays a vast amount of the
audiovisual products that are at the disposal of the public through
telecast, satellite television, international computer networks (such as
the Internet) are essentially immoral and desecrate even the holiest of
moral principles. Many powerful world tycoons support the production and
distribution of these programs in order to gain more wealth.

In the modern age, moral degradation has not only resulted in the
decline of the spiritual aptitude of modern humans, it has greatly
thrown their social existence into disarray. For example, today, in
industrial societies the very foundations of family, which is the most
primary social institution, are faltering. This is happening such that
the number of people who live their entire lives or most of their lives
as singles increases every day; a large number of children live with
only one parent and many juveniles abandon their families and live their
lives far from their homes.

Moreover, modern and intelligent instruments have given modern humanity
the ability to recreate the inhuman catastrophes of history in a much
more large-scale and severe manner and facilitate the justification of
its actions with unprecedented skill.

For instance, the production of advanced military armaments and modern
weapons of mass destruction has given the axes of power the ability to
take the lives of hundreds of thousands of innocent people in the blink
of an eye without even suffering the least physical or financial harm.

Additionally, slavery (which after centuries of struggle by the black
peoples of the West was recently abolished in its traditional and
undisguised form) continues in a new and obscure form. Every year,
thousands of women and children who live in poor and underdeveloped
countries are taken away from their homelands by human trafficking
mafias and sold to the western rich and wealthy for their
self-indulgence.

Mental Crises
-------------

In recent times, there have been important advancements in psychiatry,
psychology, and especially psychoanalysis. The experts of these sciences
have analyzed the uncharted dimensions of the human mind and have thus
uncovered some elements of the complex synergy between the human mind,
environmental and genetic factors, and physiological characteristics.
Nevertheless, the indisputable truth is that parallel to the development
of human knowledge in this area, mental illnesses and abnormalities have
also increased in industrial societies.

Currently, many of the members of these societies are plagued by various
forms of anxiety and mental pressure. Moreover, depression, in all its
forms, has become an unsolvable problem. In order to treat these
illnesses, many people have turned to synthetic medicine. Even when
these drugs are successful in curing illness—because of their
incompatibility with the natural structure of the human mind and
body—they tend to cause new illnesses and abnormalities. In contemporary
times, people suffer severely from a feeling of futility and lack of
identity. The increase of the number of suicides, especially in
industrial countries, is an obvious sign of the fact that a large
portion of the society has despaired of their future, as a result, their
feeling of unhappiness and defeat has left suicide as their only
discernible alternative.

Even though communication among people has become much easier due to the
growth of the communications industries, many people discover themselves
completely alone and alienated, and can find no alternative to enduring
the heavy weight of loneliness and estrangement.[^9]

Why have the accomplishments of human knowledge regarding the human mind
had little success in preventing or curing mental illnesses? We believe
that the underlying problem is that essentially these sciences do not
possess a realistic projection of the depths of humanity’s being, their
fundamental needs, or their wondrous abilities; and they mostly analyze
the surface of human identity.

Though jinn seem obscure,

Humanity is even more obscure than they

The wise know, though jinn are obscure,

Humans are a hundredfold more unknown

Pitiable humans have not fathomed themselves;

They came in abundance and left in poverty

Humans sell themselves cheap;

They are satin, but stitch themselves on coarse robes[^10]

On the other hand, the absence of mental abnormalities in people who
live away from the turmoil of modern civilization and live in
comparatively simple social structures, shows that technological
advancement and the social complexities and problems caused by this
advancement have resulted in the emergence and expansion of mental
crises in advanced industrial societies. Unfortunately, these crises are
not limited to adults and teenagers; rather, nowadays, many children
suffer from various mental abnormalities.[^11]

Technology
----------

There is a seemingly endless history of humans using their scientific
knowledge to build tools and utilize them. However, in recent centuries,
parallel to the furtherance of practical sciences, a phenomenon called
“technology” has appeared in industrial societies.[^12]

Doubtless, modern technology has increased the material provisions of
human livelihood and it has even brought about relative welfare and
comfort in some areas. It also serves cultural and humanitarian aims.
However, this is just one side of the coin. The other side reveals the
destructive results and unfortunate effects of technology in various
aspects of human life, such as culture, ethics, health, environment,
etc.[^13]

Modern technology forces its own culture and moralities upon advanced
societies. Unlimited freedom in utilizing machines has shriveled the
mentality of contentment and avoiding waste—which have been considered
moral virtues for centuries. It has roused the fire of lust for lordship
over nature in the hearts of modern human and thus has sown the seeds of
the delusion of self-sufficiency from Allah, which is one of the most
terrible plagues of ethics existent in the minds of humanity.[^14]  
 Colorful products, which are launched into the market every day by
manufacturers and are placed at the disposal of consumers, enthrall and
spellbind people to such an extent that they have forgotten issues that
are more important. In the western societies, luxury products have
caused the prevalence of the desire for diversity and vogue; all kinds
of plagues and calamities have befallen humanity because of the
development of these mentalities! The unbelievably vast amounts of
information, which are at the disposal of humankind because of the
development of the media industries, have confused and perplexed their
cognitive systems to such an extent that nowadays reaching unity in
thought is wistful thinking.

In recent decades, modern technology has instigated fundamental and
far-reaching crises such as the energy crisis and the environmental
crisis. The avarice of modern humans has caused unprecedented
extravagance in the use of the limited energies of the Earth. Thus, the
question has been brought up that in a world whose energy resources are
not sufficient for its inhabitants, who has the right to live? Now that
modern humans have mindlessly and wastefully exhausted so many of the
gifts that God through nature has freely given them, it has suddenly
come to their minds that perhaps future generations may also have a
right in using these gifts!

It has been a while that the environmental problems caused by modern
technology are being considered seriously. Even so, in industrial
countries, many critics of technology severely doubt that humanity can
save themselves from this menace.

The destruction of vast forests and grasslands, the pollution of
extensive quantities of water resources of the Earth due to industrial
drainage and oil wastes, the thinning of the ozone layer as a result of
chemical contaminants, and the deadly air pollution in many megacities
are some scenes from the tragic drama that humankind has written with
its own hand and is in the process of performing!

On the other hand, the advancements in various branches of medicine and
the development of pharmaceutical and hygiene industries have made
diagnosis, prevention, and curing many illnesses simple. Nevertheless,
the fact is that in this era, new and unidentified illnesses have spread
whose dangers are no less than the dangers of illnesses whose cures have
been found.

In any event, the beautiful snake of technology that modern man has
nourished for some time has turned into a horrific fire-breathing dragon
that is burning away blissful human life on Earth; furthermore, the
insubordinate demon of industry is determined to crush all human values.
Today, a question that has been reinforced in many minds is: Are
machines the servants of humanity or its master? With the marvelous
advancement of robot industries, a fear has risen in the hearts of many
people that some day human-made robots may become completely independent
and make them their slaves and subordinates![^15]

The Role of Religion in Solving Crises
--------------------------------------

That which we have discussed in complete brevity is only a small aspect
of the problems and dead ends that modern humanity faces. Now, let us
look anew upon the questions we posed at the beginning of this chapter
and ponder their answers. In our opinion, the only correct answer to all
these questions is a negative one.

During the last few centuries, modern humanity has taken quick and hasty
steps to insure the elimination of religion, humanization of all divine
aspects of their being, and desecration of all things holy. Then they
drunkenly bellowed throughout the world of their independence and
self-sufficiency from religiousness and belief in God and arrogantly
declared the end to the era of religion and religious spirituality.

Now, at the periphery of the twenty-first century, it has come time to
awaken from the deep sleep of negligence that has embraced us for
centuries; discern the oasis from the mirage; stop endeavoring towards
our doom; stop driving through the byways of aberration; open an
aperture towards the light; and clear the visions of our eyes and
hearts.

A comprehensive account of all that religiousness can do to solve the
crises of modern humanity necessitates extensive research and a lengthy
volume. Nevertheless, what we can say in brief is that, even if we
cannot say all, at least a large portion of these crises will be
eliminated through humanity’s return to the bosom of religion and their
connection with religious spirituality.

Religion and the Knowledge Crisis
---------------------------------

According to religious teachings, the methods that humans use to obtain
knowledge are not limited to sensory input and experience; rather,
divine revelation, and reason (especially universal reason that can
cognize metaphysical issues) are also complementary sources for human
understanding. By relying on these complementary sources, humanity can
realize a more solid and complete set of truths. By disclosing unerring
truths about God, humanity, and the world, religions based upon
revelation provide us with a secure pillar of understanding and wider
horizons for thought.

Many truths—such as metaphysical issues or truths about the past and
future of the world—can never be realized through sensory experience.
Our need for knowledge about these issues can only be fulfilled through
divine revelation. In the thought process of a religious person,
religion and reason attain a blessed and productive union; reason
reinforces the theoretical principals of religious beliefs and religion,
by breaking the barriers of metaphysics, reminds us of the limits of
reason and prepares the way for humanity’s ascent to higher apexes.
Intuition of divine truths—that has various forms and arises through
one’s deep connection with religious spirituality—establishes a secure
foundation for humanity’s beliefs and frees them from the clutches of
absolute skepticism and cognitional bewilderment.

In brief, it is always possible for religious people to harbor the
windswept ship of their thoughts, which has been caught in the maelstrom
of bewilderment and skepticism, at the calm shores of faith [‘īmān].
Naturally, by this assertion we do not mean that religious persons are
instantly freed from bewilderment.

This is because the domain of metaphysics at least, is a confusing
domain—the highest forms of bewilderment pertain to the miracles of
prophets and Gnostics. Actually, we mean that persons who open
themselves to religious guidance never feel absolute bewilderment in
such a way that they become bereft of all reliable intellectual
footholds. Religious wonderment is harmonious with faith and absolute
certitude towards God, as opposed to modern cognitional bewilderment
that negates all certainty and trust.

Religion and Moral Crises
-------------------------

Religion has always been a strong supporter of ethics and thus a
significant amount of religious teachings are related to ethics. The
link between religion and ethics is so deep that some essentially regard
religion and ethics one and the same. The foundations for religious
ethics cannot be found in social conventions, utilitarianism, or
hedonism; however, by perfectly defining the connection between humans
and their Creator and between humans and perfection and true beatitude,
religion shapes the divine foundations of moral norms.

Of course, the role of religion in ethics is not limited to providing
religious teachings based upon divine principles regarding the essence
of humankind. The teachings concerning the absolute knowledge of God and
His ceaseless and everlasting supervision upon the thoughts and actions
of humans establish the most secure executive guaranty for moral
regulations, in both personal and social aspects of ethics.

Religion and Mental Crises
--------------------------

Doubtless, portions of the theoretic principles of modern mental crises
have resulted from humanity’s inverted ideology towards their essence,
faculties, abilities, and ultimate destination (telos). According to
modernist thought, humans are creatures that, like all other creatures,
have risen out of the heart of nature and have reached their current
state through biological evolution; moreover, their only conceivable
destination is material advancement and further domination over the
natural world, whereas the religious ideology towards humanity is
completely incompatible with this perspective.

Religion draws a different picture of humanity’s genesis and journey’s
end. The human race, which is God’s chosen and special creation, has
unlimited capacity and the ultimate purpose of its creation is
advancement in spirituality and intimacy with the divine Oneness. It is
clear that such an ideology can result in a completely different
confrontation with crisis—including spiritual and mental
crises—producing elements.

For example, by virtue of this ideology, humans can endure even the most
difficult troubles in life because they regard them as preparatory
measures for reaching their ultimate destination. Such persons, while
battling their problems and endeavoring to reach their goals, feel
satisfaction and contentment in the depths of their soul concerning the
outcome—whatever it may be—because they regard it as divine decree.

One’s faith towards religious teachings about God, humanity, his genesis
and destination (eschatology) has an important role in preventing and
curing mental abnormalities. Moreover, many psychologists and
psychoanalysts have confirmed this role. For instance, Carl Jung (1875 –
1961), the prestigious Swiss psychoanalyst, has declared:

“Among all my middle-aged patients…there was not even one whose problem
was not the problem of finding a religious ideology towards life. Surely
the reason for all of their illnesses was that they lacked that which
living religions of all ages present to their followers; none of them
was truly able to recover without recovering their religious
beliefs.”[^16]

Yea, persons who have faith in the divine destination of their souls
never feel meaningless or causeless. Those who believe in the existence
of the Sublime God and His divine qualities—Power, Mercy, Absolver of
Sins, etc.—and trust in Him, never despair. Those who calm their heart
through remembrance of their Beloved God are less troubled by anxiety
and stress. The loving connection of humanity and God never leaves much
room for feeling loneliness and isolation; rather, whenever the sorrow
of worldly isolation overcomes such people, they relieve it with
fellowship with their Beloved.

Religion and the Technology Crisis
----------------------------------

The technology crisis originates not from its essence, but from its
ungovernability. Even though the fact that humans have the ability to
build machines and utilize them is inherently a type of perfection and
virtue, the true plague of technology is in the construction of anything
that can possibly be constructed and utilization of these constructs in
any way conceivable without establishing reasonable restrictions.

As we have indicated, the report card of modern humans—who do as they
please—shows that they have uncontrollable avidity and unending voracity
towards building and utilizing machines, such that social conventions
and political commitments cannot limit this urge. Consequently, there is
need of an alternative restrictive factor.

We believe that religious teachings—provided that they become the
governing factor in people’s actions—can easily restrain the ‘demon’ of
technology. By displaying the true status of humanity within the
universe, its strengths and weaknesses and its rights and obligations,
religion sets the conditions and limits for utilizing machines.

Religious individuals do not consider their perfection to be in absolute
utilization of technology; therefore, they acquiesce to a set of limits
and rules. For example, according to religious ideology, exercising
restraint in consumption of energy is obligatory, even where there are
seemingly unlimited energy resources and, in contrast to several
modernist views, energy usage in itself cannot be considered a sign of
advancement or an indicator of development.

Basically, according to religious ideology, domination over nature is
not a value as such; rather, it is a tool for bringing out humanity’s
divine potentials and this purpose must establish the manner of machine
utilization and draw the limits for technology. When in religious texts
it is said that the world is the dominion of humanity, this does not
mean that individuals are able to act without restriction; on the
contrary, they are limited to the conditions and specifications defined
in religious teachings. Religion regards the world as a divine proof and
blessing; therefore, it deems the world worthy of respect and
veneration. In various religious teachings, observing the rights of
plants and animals is ardently advised.

In short, for religious humans, spiritual values have first priority and
thus, while they regard technology advancement as an ideal, they
endeavor to utilize it for moral and humane objectives, and if at any
time they realize that this “preliminary” does not serve their purpose,
they sacrifice the preliminary for divine purposes. Religious humans, as
opposed to modern humans, never foster the motive of godhood over the
Earth; rather, they regard themselves as the vicegerent of God on Earth
and therefore consider themselves responsible for the preservation and
maintenance of their natural surroundings.

Thus far, we have presented a short narrative of the lengthy adventures
of the human race in the modern era. We believe that modern crises and
fundamental problems, some of which we have described in short, shall
sooner or later reveal unto humanity the mirage-like truth of modernism
and result in their endeavoring to return to religion and religious
spirituality.

As might be expected, in the meantime, religious people have a great
responsibility. Two of the most basic duties of all religious
intellectuals and those who are sympathetic towards their religion are:

Analytic examination of religious references in order to deepen and
extend religious knowledge

Presentation of life-giving religious teachings in a modern form, albeit
preserving their originality, in a manner that can answer the diverse
needs of modern society

[^1]: - In the current discussion, by religion we mean divine monotheist
religions that God has presented to humanity through His prophets
throughout history. By religiousness, we signify devotion to religion
and endorsing and having faith in its theoretical teachings and acting
upon its practical teachings. Also by religious research, we mean
theoretical research concerning religions and their teachings.

[^2]: By modern human, we mean men and women who consider the
characteristics of the new lifestyle established in the West in the last
few centuries desirable, and align their lifestyle and culture with this
"modern" way of life. Several of these characteristics are Humanism,
Empiricism, Rationalism, escape from tradition and aversion to worship,
Secularism, Liberalism, and modern technologies. Because Europe is the
source of modernism, today many modernists live in the West, but this
does not mean that all westerners are modernists or that no easterners
are such.

[^3]: - By crisis, we mean fundamental and widespread problems whose
escalation and prolongation can critically harm life and civilization in
general.

[^4]: - For more information, see Michael Peterson et al, Reason and
Religious Belief, Chapters three and seven.

[^5]: - For information on the positivist approach to theology, see
ibid, pp. 260-269.

[^6]: - René Guénon, The Crisis of the Modern World.

[^7]: - Presently, the information available to humanity doubles every
year. This accelerating process of data increase induced specialists to
seek out new ways to store this unbelievable capacity of data.

[^8]: - According to the report of the American National Commission on
Marijuana and Drug Abuse half of those who are arrested are intoxicated
with alcohol. One third of all homicides and one fourth of all suicides
have been reported to be accompanied by consumption of alcohol. Sixty
seven percent of all instances of child molestation and thirty nine
percent of all instances of rape are accompanied by alcohol consumption…
The use of alcohol causes the death of at least twelve thousand
Spaniards every year… Experts claim that more than half of deaths in
driving accidents are caused by alcohol… (Ja'far Sakhāvat, Sociology of
Social Deviations (Jāmi'ah Shanāsī-i Inḥirāf-i Ijtimā'ī), pp. 113, 130.)

[^9]: - According to a public poll in America in 1968, fifty-two percent
of participants declared that they feel lonely and depressed. (see:
Honolulu Advertiser, Nov. 20, 1968, p. A3)

[^10]: - گر چه به ظاهر آن پري پنهان بود آدمی پنهان‌تر از پريان بود نزد
عاقل زان پري كه مضمر است آدمی صدبار خود پنهان‌تر است خویشتن نشناخت مسكين
آدمی از فزوني آمد و شد در كمي خویشتن را آدمی ارزان فروخت بود اطلس، خويش‌
را بر دلق ‌دوخت

[^11]: - According to recent information, about six million American
children suffer from depression. (Donald Mcnew, Psychology of Stress)

[^12]: - Technology is the implementation of applied sciences—which have
practical and industrial value—in the industries and arts.

[^13]: - British philosopher and mathematician, Bertrand Russell, while
indicating the plagues of technology, states: "Unlike religion, it
[technology] is ethically neutral: it assures men that they can perform
wonders, but does not tell them what wonders to perform. In this way it
is incomplete. In practice, the purposes to which scientific skill will
be devoted depend largely on chance. The men at the head of the vast
organizations which it necessitates can, within limits, turn it this way
or that as they please. The power impulse thus has a scope which it
never had before… Ends are no longer considered; only the skillfulness
of the process is valued. This also is a form of madness. It is, in our
day, the most dangerous form, and the one against which a sane
philosophy should provide an antidote…" (Bertrand Russell, The History
of Western Philosophy, p. 494.)

[^14]: - As stated by the Holy Qur’an, the feeling of independence and
self-sufficiency from God is the agent of insurrection and
insubordination of humans toward Him: ﴿انَّ الإِنسانَ ليطْغىٰ. اَنْ رآه
ﭐستغنىٰ﴾ “Surely humans are rebellious; for they see themselves
self-sufficient.” (Sūrah ‘Alaq, 96:6-7)

[^15]: - This fear is so extensive that is has become the subject of
many acclaimed science fiction movies.

[^16]: - Carl G. Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul, p. 284.


