Section Two:The Path to “Him”
=============================

In the previous section, we discussed the superiority and perfection of
Islamic theology and afterwards we briefly discussed the methods of
realizing God, which is the first stage in understanding Him. Now we
shall examine the second stage, which involves identifying divine
attributes and actions. We call this step “Understanding God” as opposed
to “Realizing God”.

We all know very well that each religion and ideology including Islam
attributes certain characteristics to their God and ascribes certain
actions to Him. As we have previously mentioned, the difference of
opinion between various theists regarding the attributes and actions of
God have resulted in contrasting theologies and diverse portrayals of
their object of devotion. Indeed, the most significant method of
understanding God is by understanding His attributes and actions. A more
comprehensive and in-depth insight into these issues results in a more
perfect theology. Therefore, it is morally and intellectually imperative
that all believers increase the depth and caliber of their understanding
of God through correct and penetrating studies of God’s attributes.

All of us may have seen believers who do not have an accurate
understanding of God’s attributes and have sufficed themselves with
superficial and fallacious knowledge. It may even be true that we too
are such believers. We may have seen many people who albeit unwittingly
tend toward “corporealization of God” [jism ingārī]. For example, they
may visualize God as a great being who lives in the skies. Many of us
are also affected by a kind of “anthropomorphism of God” [insānvār
ingārī]; in other words, we regard God—at least with respect to some
attributes—similar to humans, or we consider the source of divine acts
as humanlike feelings and emotions!

We must also bear in mind that superficial or fallacious understanding
of divine attributes and actions is not merely an intellectual problem
without any effect on our daily lives; the truth is the complete
opposite. Persons who believe in God and His power and sovereignty but
do not correctly understand the boundlessness of His mercy and clemency
may completely lose all hope in attaining paradise after committing a
great sin and may regard themselves eternally damned and suffer from
mental anguish throughout their lives because they believe that God will
never forgive them. In addition, when faced with apparently unsolvable
problems in their lives, those who incorrectly understand the power and
generosity of God easily give up and instead of practicing patience,
perseverance, and trust in God, become debilitated and weak.

In short, the endeavors of believers to continually correct and perfect
their theology is not simply a struggle to attain a worthy set of
beliefs and knowledge; rather, these efforts have phenomenal, practical
and sometimes decisive effects upon one’s life. This is why Islam has a
special regard for theological issues and has presented comprehensive
teachings about divine attributes and acts. Throughout the centuries,
the detailed teachings of Islam have presented mutakalimūn,
philosophers, mystics and other Moslem thinkers with an invaluable
legacy, which, through interpretation and development, has brought order
to Islamic theology. In the following discussions, we shall attempt to
illuminate briefly some of the most important Islamic theological
beliefs.

Understanding the Nature of God and His Attributes
--------------------------------------------------

One of the basics of Islamic theology is recognition and differentiation
between the nature of God and His attributes and actions. Understanding
Divine Nature is not possible for any being other than God, including
humanity. A short and clear proof of this claim is that the nature of
God is illimitable and infinite while all other beings are limited and
finite and, self-evidently, a limited being cannot understand the
unlimited nature of God.[^1]

The intellect can understand the depth of His nature,

If a whirligig can reach the depth of the sea.[^2]

This fact can also be extracted from various Qur’anic verses such as
this:

**﴿يَعلَمُ مَا بَينَ أَيديهِم وَ مَا خَلفَهُم وَ لايُحيطُونَ بِهِ
عِلماً**﴾

***“He knows that which they have before them, and that which they have
left behind, while they do not comprehend Him in knowledge.”***[^3]

According to a tradition, as an interpretation of this verse Imam ‘Alī
(‘a) stated:

**لايُحيطُ الخَلائقُ باللهِ عزّوجلّ عِلماً**.

***“Creations cannot comprehend God in knowledge.”***[^4]

The impossibility of understanding Divine Nature does not mean that we
are deprived of any knowledge of God whatsoever; rather, humanity has
been given access to a different sort of knowledge that comes through
appreciation of divine attributes and actions. Therefore, humanity’s
desire for understanding their Lord is not out of proportion. On the
contrary, comprehension of God—in the way we have explained—is not only
possible but also ideal. Divine prophets have also endeavored to
familiarize humans with divine attributes and reveal unto them their
mistakes and obstacles in the path of understanding God.

The Holy Qur’an has mentioned the attributes of God in many verses. For
example, regard the following verse:

***“He is Allah besides Whom there is no god. He is the King, the
All-holy, the All-salutary, the Granter of security, the Guardian over
all, the Almighty, the All-dominating, the All-sublime. Allah is pure of
those they associate with Him. He is Allah the Creator, the Maker, the
Shaper.*** ***To Him belong the Names [and attributes] Most Beautiful
[asmā’ ul-husnā]. All that is in the Heavens and earth glorify Him. He
is the Almighty, the All-wise.”***[^5]

The Methods of Understanding God
--------------------------------

Many methods of understanding the attributes and acts of God have been
placed before humankind. The following are the most important methods of
understanding God:

### 1. Intellect

Just as the human intellect is useful in proving the existence of God,
so also can it be useful in understanding God’s attributes. Initially,
through the illuminations of their minds, humans concisely realize that
God must contain all attributes of perfection; meaning that God
possesses all qualities—in an absolute manner without any defects or
faults—that in any way express the perfection of their modified noun.

Subsequently, through in-depth analysis of those attributes of God that
are revealed in the course of proving His existence, one may attain
comprehensive understanding of other divine attributes and their
respective definitions and characteristics. For example, through
intellectual reasoning regarding the existence of God, we proved His
existence as a necessary being and thus by contemplating the meaning of
the necessity of existence, we realize that God is not compound
[murakkab] and is indivisible or monad [basīṭ]. This is because any
compound requires the existence of its constituents and having need of
something else to exist is incompatible with necessity of being. Thus,
the intellect proves the attribute of indivisibility of God.

### 2. Nature

As we shall elucidate later in the discussion of divine Unity, at least
several stages of belief in monotheism are amalgamated in the nature of
humanity. In other words, the human nature regards God as One and Unique
and does not tolerate polytheism. As a result, humans can realize and
understand several of God’s attributes—such as Unity—through their
nature.

### 3. Investigation of the Natural World

Another means of understanding God is contemplation about the state and
characteristics of the world around us. For example, considering the
general order of existence and the finality [hadafmandī / ghāyatmandī]
of natural phenomena reveals the attributes of God’s omniscience and
divine wisdom.

### 4. Mystical Revelation

Mystical revelation is also a method of understanding God. Through
spiritual and mystical perfection, humans can attain such rank that they
can spiritually perceive the beauty and majesty of God and observe the
manifestations of His perfect attributes.

### 5. Referral to the Qur’an and Traditions

Yet another method of understanding the attributes and actions of God is
studying Qur’anic verses and the teachings of the leaders of Islam. The
perpetually flowing and inspiring fountainhead that is the Qur’an and
Traditions of the Immaculates presents us with profound and extensive
teachings concerning theology—teachings that the intellect cannot
possibly unravel by itself or that can be comprehend only with great
difficulty.[^6]

Understanding Divine Attributes
-------------------------------

The intellect and divine revelation both agree that God possesses all
attributes of perfection; God is Omniscient, Omnipotent, Benevolent,
Living, Creator, Benefactor, and, in addition to these attributes, many
other qualities can be accredited to Him. On the other hand, many of
God’s attributes—such as knowledge, power, and life—are used in common
with both God and His creations. Are the meanings of each of these
attributes identical in both usages? Or, does each usage have a
different meaning? For example, does the word “knowledgeable” have the
same meaning in these two statements: “God is knowledgeable” and “Humans
are knowledgeable”? There are three main perspectives concerning these
questions:

### The First Perspective

Some believe that not only is the meaning different in each of these
usages, in fact humankind cannot fully understand the meaning of divine
attributes. They believe that we may only accept and have faith in the
existence of the attributes of God that are expressed in the Qur’an and
Traditions but we cannot understand the full truth of these attributes.

The main grounds they offer for their belief is that humans perceive the
meaning of attributes such as knowledge, power, and will through
perceptions of our surroundings internal to ourselves, whereas
associating these perceptions with God is not proper because God is in
no way similar to His creations. He is an absolute and necessary being,
while all other beings are contingent, limited, and imperfect.
Therefore, we have no right to generalize our own attributes to God and
because we do not have access to worthier concepts—and those concepts we
do possess are based upon contingent beings—we have no choice but to
remain silent regarding divine attributes and content ourselves with
that which is discussed in the Qur’an and Traditions.

### The Second Perspective

This group believes that there is no significant difference between the
meanings of divine attributes and the attributes of created things and
those attributes that are ascribed to both God and His creations have a
somewhat similar meaning.

### The Third Perspective

Alongside the aforementioned views, there is a third perspective that is
more compatible with the general ambience of the Qur’an and Traditions.
According to this view, even though there is a difference between the
definitions of God’s attributes and those of His creations, this does
not mean that God’s attributes are unfathomable. By taking inspiration
from Qur’anic and Traditional concepts, the advocates of this
perspective endeavor to offer an analysis of divine attributes that
preserves the purity and sublimity of God in respect to the faults and
limits of His creations while confirming the comprehensibility of His
attributes. Following is a concise example of such an analysis:

First, we must contemplate the essence of an attribute of perfection
when used in respect to ourselves and the beings around us, and identify
all the conditions that in some way limit this attribute. Next, we must
distill the attribute of these limiting conditions. In other words, we
must prune and isolate the essential meaning of the attribute from all
limiting factors. Thus we reach a concept that is worthy of God since it
describes a sort of existential perfection and is abstracted from all
faults and deficiencies.

For instance, through our internal perception and contemplation of
external objects, we arrive at an understanding of “knowledge” which is
a type of awareness. However, this awareness is limited by several
factors: it is temporal because at first it does not exist and later
comes into existence. It is also affected by deterioration and
forgetfulness. Additionally, in order to gain knowledge—in many
cases—tools and instruments are needed. Also, in gaining knowledge there
is a possibility of error. These factors—temporality, possibility of
deterioration and errors, and necessity of instruments—are such that
they cause limits or faults in our knowledge and awareness. Therefore,
when using this attribute regarding God, we must abstract it of all
these factors while preserving its essential meaning—awareness. Thus we
arrive at a description of a knowledge that is past and future eternal
(non-temporal), infallible, and needless of instruments. Such a
description makes the Knowledge of God understandable and at the same
time compatible with the Holiness and Sublimity of God.

Purity and Understandability of Divine Attributes in the Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------------------

As we have previously mentioned, this third perspective is more
compatible with the Qur’an and Traditions. The Qur’an has mentioned
God’s attributes in hundreds of verses and in some cases it has
described and analyzed these attributes. The Qur’an continually invites
us to contemplate upon its verses.[^7] How can one contemplate a verse
containing God’s attributes without understanding those attributes? Can
one truly accept that our duty is merely to read Qur’anic verses without
understanding? Hence, continual reference to the attributes of God in
the Qur’an proves the fallaciousness of the first perspective.
Additionally, the Qur’an regards “worship” and “servitude” toward God as
the ultimate purpose of our creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ ما خلقتُ الجنّ و الإنس إِلا لِيَعبدون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and humankind but that they worship
Me.”*** [^8]

It also obvious that worship of a being whose essence and attributes are
completely unknown is meaningless and futile. From a logical standpoint,
neither communicative relations nor spiritual proximity is possible with
an unintelligible being. As an example, if we do not believe in the
unlimited power, authority and ability of a being to act how can we
beseech help from and have faith in that being?

Additionally, many verses in the Qur’an emphasize the sublimity and
purity of God high above the attributes of His creations. God does not
tolerate the assimilative descriptions some humans associate with Him.
For example, after mentioning the unworthy beliefs of polytheists about
God, the Qur’an regards their descriptions as unfitting of the status of
Divine Holiness:

**﴿و جعلوا لله شُركاءَ الجنَّ و خَلَقَهم و خَرَقوا له بَنينَ و بناتِ
بغَير علمٍ، سبحانه و تعالی عمّا يصفون**﴾

***“And they ascribe the jinn as associates to Allah, though He has
created them. And without any knowledge, they impute to Him sons and
daughters. He is pure of and highly exalted above what they
describe.”***[^9]

The purity the Qur’an describes, which both disagrees with the
incomprehensibility of divine attributes and comparison of God with His
creations, has been affirmed in several Traditions. Imam ‘Alī (‘a) has
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَم يُطلِع العقُولَ عَلی تَحديدِ صِفَتِهِ وَ لَم يَحجبها عَن واجِبِ
مَعرِفَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has not informed the intellect of the limits of His attributes;
however He has not made it blind to necessary knowledge of Himself.”***
[^10]

Thus, it can be said that improving one’s understanding of God can only
come about through understanding His attributes. Therefore, we shall
endeavor to elucidate concisely several of the most important divine
attributes. According to Islamic belief, one of the most important
divine attributes is Divine Unity. Because of the importance of Divine
Unity [tawhīd], we will start our succinct discussion regarding divine
attributes with Unity.

### 1. Unity

Islam is a monotheist religion. The importance of Unity is such that,
along with acceptance of the prophethood of Muhammad (S), it is the
first condition for entering the life-giving religion of Islam and
eternal salvation and bliss. Knowing that God is Unique and worshiping
none but Him not only has a fundamental part in Islamic beliefs, it also
has a key role in other areas of Islamic teachings, such as ethics
[akhlāq] and Islamic jurisprudence [fiqh]. The essence of the Islamic
moral system is based upon Divine Unity and many Islamic laws and rites
originate from the monotheistic essence of Islam. Belief in Divine Unity
reshapes the lives of humans—in both intellectual and ideological areas,
and in deed and action—and colors our whole existence.

In short, Divine Unity is the root of the tree of Islam, and
ideological, moral, and applied teachings are its branches, leaves, and
fruit.

The doctrine of Divine Unity is not limited to Islam. In fact, all
divine prophets enjoined humans to monotheism and all divine religions
were monotheistic:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و ما أرسلنا مِن قبلك مِن رَسولٍ إلّا نُوحي إليهِ أَنَّهُ لا إلهَ
إِلّا أَنا فاعبُدُون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And before thee, we have never sent a messenger but that we revealed
unto him, saying: ‘There is no Allah but I, so serve Me.’”***[^11]

In perpetuation of the call of previous prophets, the Holy Qur’an pays
special attention to the principle of Divine Unity. The maxim of
monotheism has been repeated many times in different forms throughout
the Qur’an, including statements such as, “There is no god but
Allah[^12]”, “There is no god but He[^13]”, and “There is no god but
I[^14]”. Also by divine decree, the messenger of Islam (S) declares that
the epitome of his message (risālah) is enjoining people to monotheism:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُل إِنَّما أُمِرتُ أَن أَعبدَ اللهَ و لا أُشرِك به، إِليهِ أَدعُوا و
إِليهِ مَأَب﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: ‘I have been commanded to serve Allah and to associate naught
with Him. To Him I invite [you], and to Him I return.’”***[^15]

#### Theoretical and Applied Monotheism

Monotheism is divided into two major branches: theoretical and applied.
Theoretical monotheism is unconditional belief in the Unity of God in
essence, attributes, and acts. When this belief becomes fused into the
heart and soul, a person’s actions and endeavors gain a certain tenor
and their deeds become monotheistic. Thus, applied monotheism is the
condition where a person’s monotheistic beliefs control his actions so
that he acts in accordance with his monotheistic thought.[^16]

Theoretical monotheism is categorized into three groups: unity of divine
essence [tawhīd al-ẓātī], unity of divine attributes [tawhīd al-sifātī],
and unity of divine acts [tawhīd al-af‘ālī]. Applied monotheism is also
divided into several groups.[^17]

### 2. Divine Knowledge

According to Islamic doctrine, God is knowledgeable of all creation and
is aware of everything. As we have stated earlier, “knowledge” has a
specific meaning which each of us experiences within ourselves.
Nonetheless, in order to ascribe this definition to God we must strip it
of all of the philosophical limits and conditions that are unbefitting
of the divine status of God. Thus, we may define the knowledge of God as
such: Divine knowledge is absolute, limitless, past and future eternal,
infallible; it needs no instruments, preparation, or intermediates; and
does not require external influence on the Divine Essence.

The most important fact regarding God’s knowledge is the issue of the
boundlessness of His awareness. God is absolutely knowledgeable of His
Essence and is aware of all of His creations, both before and after
their creation.

#### God’s Prior Knowledge and Humanity’s Free Will

The knowledge of God is boundless and infinite and includes all
incidents throughout the past, present and future. Thus, from the
beginning of time, God has been aware of everything throughout eternity.
This includes knowledge of what people will do and refrain from doing in
the future. From long ago, God’s awareness of the future of all people
has been regarded by some as a negation of our free will. They have the
misunderstanding that God’s prior knowledge of our future deeds is
incompatible with free will. This dispute and its resolution will be
explored in the discussion entitled Compulsion [jabr] or Free Will
[ikhtīyār].

#### The Perspective of Qur’an and Traditions regarding Divine Knowledge

Many Qur’anic verses speak of the knowledge and awareness of God. The
conjugates of the infinitive ‘ilm (knowledge), such as ‘alima (he knew)
and ya’lamu (he knows), and the qualifier ‘alīm (very
knowledgeable/omniscient) and its various offshoots such as samī’ (able
to hear/all-hearing) and basīr (able to see/all-seeing) are used many
times to describe God. Additionally, in several verses there are more
specific qualities of knowledge attributed to God such as ‘ālim ul-ghaīb
(Knower of the Invisible) and ‘allām ul-ghuyūb (Knower of All Things
Hidden). Because of the vast number of these verses, we will suffice
with the explanation of two key points:

#### Proof of the Knowledge of God

It seems that the Holy Qur’an considers God’s knowledge and awareness
needless of proof. Even so, the following interpretation in various
verses indicates a sort of rationale regarding God’s omniscience:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ألا يعلم مَن خَلَقَ و هو اللَّطيفُ الخبيرُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Does not He who created know, while He is the All-exact (Knower of
subtleties), the All-aware?”***[^18]

By rhetorical questioning[^19], this verse asks if it is possible that
God, who is the Creator, not be knowledgeable while the act of creation
necessitates knowledge of all conditions and qualities of the creature.
Thus according to the Holy Qur’an, there is a correlation between the
act of creation and knowledge of the creature. Accordingly, one who
considers God the Creator of all beings cannot refute His infinite
knowledge of all the intricacies of Creation.

#### The Absolute and Infinite Knowledge of God

While describing God as knowledgeable and aware, the Holy Qur’an
emphasizes the boundlessness of His knowledge. A reason for this
emphasis may be that in addition to revealing a fundamental fact
regarding divine attributes and perfecting and augmenting our theology
and understanding of God, the principle of God’s infinite knowledge has
valuable ethical and spiritual effects. Faith in the infinite knowledge
of God and His awareness of all things has a profound role in fortifying
our trust in God and stimulates us to engage in sincere worship of God.
Furthermore, belief in the fact that God is aware of the public and
private deeds of all people, including their motives and intents, has a
positive effect upon our abstinence from sin and wrongdoing. In various
places, the Qur’an explicitly declares the boundlessness of Divine
Knowledge:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و الله بكلّ شىء عليم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah is knowledgeable of all things.”***[^20]

Moreover, in other instances, it elucidates various aspects of divine
knowledge and thus puts emphasizes on its comprehensiveness:

***“He knows what penetrates into the earth, and what comes forth from
it, and what descends from the heavens and what ascends into it. He is
with you no matter where you are; and Allah sees all you do.”***[^21]

The descriptions in this verse pertain to many things, and in sum, this
verse depicts the various aspects of God’s awareness of His creation.
These descriptions include seeds, raindrops, tree roots, mines and
treasures hidden within the earth, subterranean animals, seething
springs, ascending and descending angels, clouds, birds, comets, and
inestimable other things.

Yet other verses speak of God’s knowledge of the secrets hidden within
the hearts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قل إِن تُخفوا ما فى صُدورِكم أو تُبدوه يَعلَمهُ اللهُ و يَعلمُ ما فى
السّماوات و ما فى الأَرض﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: ‘Whether you hide what is in your breasts or reveal it, Allah
knows it and He also knows all that is in the heavens and the
earth.’”***[^22]

The extensiveness and infiniteness of Divine Knowledge is also reflected
in the teachings of Traditions (Hadith).

The Leader of the Faithful, ‘Alī (‘a), explains the broadness of Divine
Knowledge as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعلَم عَجيجَ الوُحُوشِ فى الفَلَواتِ و مَعاصِى العِبادِ فى الخَلَواتِ
و اختِلافَ النّينانِ فى البِحار الغامِراتِ و تَلاطُمَ الماءِ
بِالرّياحِ العاصِفاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God is aware of the cries of wild animals in the mountains and
deserts, and the private transgressions of His servants, and the
movements of fish in deep seas, and also the formation of turbulence and
waves by strong winds.”***[^23]

Additionally, it has been quoted about Imam Ṣādiq (‘a) that in response
to one of his disciples who said, “I thank God to the extent of His
knowledge[^24]”, he replied, “Do not say that because there is no extent
to His knowledge.”[^25]

### 3. Divine Power

Another of God’s attributes is power (omnipotence). Power is also one of
the attributes that humans possess in a limited and deficient manner.
Consequently, the meaning of power and impotence are, to a large extent,
clear to us. Even so, we must bear in mind that at times the word power
is used in religious teachings with a different meaning intended. For
instance, in physics and the natural sciences, power may be used
synonymously with energy or force. For better understanding of the
difference of meanings and avoiding confusion, it can be said that in
this discussion, ‘powerful beings’ are beings that can perform an act if
they will to do so and can refrain from performing it if they do not
will to do so.

In other words, we can only say that one has the power to perform a
certain act if performing the act or refraining from performing it
depends on his own explicit volition and will. Therefore, the meaning of
the statement “Jane has the power to write” is that if Jane wants to
write, she may and if she does not want to, she may refrain from
writing. Accordingly, omnipotence means that if God wills an act, He can
carry it out, and if He wills not, He can refrain from performing the
act.

Naturally, as previously mentioned, here too we must contemplate what we
regard as “power” in the creatures of God, identify all limiting
factors, and proclaim omnipotence to be pure of these limits. For
example, when we scrutinize the truth of our power, we find that
performing or foregoing an action is usually a function of external
influences. Obviously, this is not true with reference to God because it
necessitates that God be influenced by others and be controlled by
something other than Himself, while this is contrary to the necessity of
being and self-sufficiency of God.

#### Illimitability of God’s Power and the Omnipotence Paradox

Is God’s power unlimited, absolute, and all-encompassing? Alternatively,
is His power finite with some things being outside His power? According
to the majority of Islamic scholars, omnipotence, like all other divine
attributes of perfection, is unlimited, boundless, and without
restrictions. A range of Qur’anic verses also attest to this fact.

Throughout time, belief in the Absolute Power of God has met with
various doubts and challenges. Here we shall explain and answer one of
the most important challenges which is sometimes called the “omnipotence
paradox”.

The omnipotence paradox has diverse forms, all of which are based upon a
single foundation. The most complex form of this paradox is delineation
of a question in which at first glance, both negative and positive
answers result in direct repudiation of omnipotence. For instance, it
may be asked: Is God able to create a stone that He cannot lift? Or, one
may enquire: Can God create a being that He is not able to annihilate?
Upon contemplation of these questions, it seems that both a positive and
a negative answer will result in refutation of the absoluteness of God’s
power. We see that a positive answer to the first question signifies the
possibility of the existence of a stone that God cannot lift and a
negative answer to the same question would mean that God is powerless to
create a specific stone!

Before presenting a solution to the omnipotence paradox, we must first
explain types of “impossibilities” which are divided into three groups:

Essential Impossibility: That which is impossible per se with no other
factor being involved. A contradiction is one of the most obvious forms
of essential impossibility.

Accidental Impossibility: That which is not impossible per se, but whose
occurrence necessitates realization of an essential impossibility. For
example, the existence of an effect without a cause is an accidental
impossibility because its realization necessitates a contradiction.[^26]
Essential and accidental impossibilities are also called logical
impossibilities.

Normal Impossibility: That the occurrence of which seems impossible with
respect to known natural laws, but whose realization is neither
essentially impossible nor necessitates an essential impossibility.
Transformation of a wooden staff into a snake, curing the sick without
medicine, and speech of inanimate beings are several examples of normal
impossibilities.[^27]

Bearing in mind the above explanations, God’s power does not encompass
essential and accidental impossibilities, and all questions that are
asked within the omnipotence paradox regarding the power of God in
performing various acts are accidental impossibilities. For example, if
we thoroughly contemplate the true nature of creation—which is called
causality in philosophy—we realize that the Creator—i.e. the
existence-giving cause—transcends all aspects of the creature—i.e. the
effect. More specifically, the existence and all qualities and
characteristics of creatures are dependant upon their Creator. Thus,
supposing a creature whose creator cannot alter or destroy, necessitates
supposing a situation in which the “creator” simultaneously be and not
be the creator which is clearly a contradiction. Accordingly, creation
of a stone that the creator cannot lift or creation of a being that the
creator cannot destroy is an accidental impossibility and as we have
already stated, Divine Power does not encompass accidental
impossibilities.

It could be stated thus that the result of the above analysis is nothing
but the acceptance of the finitude of God’s power, but it is essential
to keep in mind that the exclusion of essential and accidental
impossibilities from the realm of God’s power is in no way a limiting
factor for divine power because essentially these things are not capable
of being originated and therefore are beyond the encompassment of any
type of power. Consequently, it is stated that, in essence, the
definition of shay’ (thing) does not include logical impossibilities,
and thus Qur’anic phrases such as “God is capable of all things” are not
subject to these impossibilities.[^28] In other words, the deficiency
and limitation pertains to the “acceptant” not the “subject”.[^29]

As a summary of our answer to the “omnipotence paradox”, we could state
that these paradoxes are logical impossibilities and thus cannot be
associated with power. However, this non-association is not a
fundamental flaw of divine power; on the contrary, the limitation is
embedded in the nature of these things.

It is significant to note that in Islamic Traditions, the answers to
various forms of the omnipotence paradox are indicative of the same
answer that we have proposed. According to a Hadith, in reply to someone
who asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَل يَقدرُ رَبّكَ أَن يُدخِلَ الدُّنيا في بَيضةٍ مِن غَيرِ أن تَصغُرَ
الدّنيا و تكبرَ البيضَة؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Can your Lord place the world into an egg without shrinking the world
or enlarging the egg?”

Imam ‘Alī (‘a) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ تباركَ و تَعالی لايُنسبُ إِلی العجزِ و الّذي سَأَلتني
لايَكُونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, God, the Blessed, the Sublime, cannot be attributed with
weakness; rather, what you have asked me cannot come to pass.”[^30]

According to the answer of Imam ‘Alī (‘a), the objective of the question
itself is an impossibility. However, he explains that this does not
entail weakness and impotence in God; rather, it rises from the fact
that the goal in question is logically impossible and thus, in essence,
not capable of coming into being.

#### Divine Power in the Qur’an and Traditions

The Holy Qur’an emphasizes the power of God through repetition of
qualities such as qādir (able) and qadīr (all-powerful), and thus it
regards God as omnipotent. In addition, the phrase “God is capable of
all things”[^31] and similar phrases have been used many times over in
the Qur’an—all of which inform of the generality and illimitability of
divine power.

In various Qur’anic verses, we encounter a type of reasoning regarding
the boundlessness of God’s power. As an example, the Qur’an regards the
creation of the heavens and earth as a sign of God’s ability to
resurrect the dead:

***“Have they not seen that Allah, who created the heavens and earth and
has not been wearied by creating them, is able to resurrect the dead?
Yes indeed, He is capable of all things.”***[^32]

In addition, the generality of God’s power is emphasized in many
Hadiths. According to one Hadith, Imam Ṣādiq (‘a) declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحيطٌ بِما خَلَقَ عِلماً وَ قُدرَةً... وَ الأشياءُ لَهُ سِواءٌ عِلماً
و قُدرَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is All-encompassing in knowledge and power with respect to His
creations… All things are equal for Him in His knowledge and
power.”***[^33]

### 4. Divine Life

God is living. Like knowledge and power, this attribute can also be
ascribed to both God and some of His creations. Through contemplation of
the uses of this attribute, we realize that a living being is a being
that possesses active volition and awareness.

Thus, in definition we can say: “Life is a type of existential
perfection which manifests such that the creature possessing it engages
in volitional actions, and has knowledge and awareness.” According to
this definition, activity and awareness are signs of life, and lack of
these qualities in an object shows that object to be lifeless.

With regard to this explanation, the fact that God has life means that
the Divine Essence possesses a specific perfection that affirms His
knowledge and actions. Naturally, in order to uphold the holiness and
sublimity of God, we must purify this attribute of all limits and
restrictions perceived in the life of created things.

For instance, in natural creatures such as humans and animals, life is
accompanied by growth, consumption of food, reproduction, and movement
such that these things signify life in these creatures. However, we must
not regard these qualities as necessary to life and we must not assume
that life is absolutely linked with these qualities; rather, these
qualities are only necessary in natural beings. In fact, divine life is
pure of all limiting properties, which are not befitting of the divinity
of God. Divine life is inherent, past eternal (azalī), future eternal
(abadī), and immutable without it being associated with the necessities
of natural life such as growth, consumption of food, etc.

#### Divine Life according to the Qur’an and Traditions

There are many Qur’anic verses wherein God is accredited with the
quality of life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الله لا إله الّا هو الحي القيوم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is Allah; there is no god but Him, the Living, the
Everlasting.”***[^34]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿هو الحيّ لا إِله الّا هو فادعوه مخلصين له الدين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the Living; there is no Allah but Him, so call upon Him
purifying your religion for Him, wholeheartedly.”***[^35]

The phrase, “هو الحيّ” (He is the Living)—according to Arabic
grammar[^36]—indicates the exclusivity of life for God and holds that
true life is unique to God. Bearing in mind the fact that inferior
degrees of life exist in other beings and that essentially, the Qur’an
introduces God as the life-giver of all beings,[^37] it seems that the
signification of this exclusiveness is that only divine life is
inherent, and past and future eternal, while lives of all creatures are
temporary and ‘on loan’ from God.

The inexhaustibility and eternality of divine life has been stressed in
various Qur’anic verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و توكّل علی الحيِّ الّذي لايموت﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And put thy trust in the Ever-living who dies not.”***[^38]

In various Hadiths, the truth of divine life and its differences with
the lives of creations are enumerated. The following is a profound and
precise Hadith from Imam Kāẓim (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كان اللهُ حَيّاً بِلاحَياة حادِثَةٍ و لاكَونٍ مُوصوفٍ و لاكَيفٍ
محدودٍ و لا أينٍ مَوقُوفٍ و لاسكانٍ ساكِن بَل حَيٌّ لِنَفسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And God is living but not a life that has come into being; His life
does not have an [independent] existence with which to be qualified; it
does not possess limitative conditions or a location in which to remain
or a place in which to abide; rather, His life is inherent.”*[^39]

This valuable Hadith reveals that in contrast to the lives of His
creations, divine life has not come into being; on the contrary, in
adherence with the past eternality of the Divine Essence, His life is
also past eternal. Life is not accidental and separate from His essence;
rather, it is one with His essence. Thus, in accordance with His
essence, it is illimitable and boundless.

### 5. Past and Future Eternality

God is past and future eternal.[^40] Most monotheists believe that God
is a past eternal being, meaning that He has always existed and, in the
past, there was no time in which He has not existed. Furthermore, God is
future eternal—meaning that no time will come when He does not exist.

With regard to the opinions of Moslem scholars, there are evidently two
perspectives in the interpretation of past and future eternality.
According to the first exposition, God exists in all times; He has
existed in the past, He exists now, and He will exist in the future.
This explanation necessitates that God be a temporal being, restricted
to the confines of time, and subject to the passage of time. In
contrast, the second interpretation states past and future eternality.
Basically, this means that the essence of God transcends the framework
of time while being immanent throughout time and all temporal
beings.[^41] According to this perspective, saying that God has always
existed or will perpetually exist in the future, is a careless and
negligent statement.

Even though the general meaning of past and future eternality is
compatible with the first interpretation, it would appear that the
second interpretation presents a more precise and in-depth perspective
because the absoluteness of the Divine Essence signifies that His
essence is not restricted to any limits or conditions—even time. To
state this differently, time—with regard to the prevailing definition—is
considered a quality of mobile and material creatures while the Divine
Essence is pure of materiality and motion.

Accordingly, when speaking of the past and future eternality of God, we
must bear in mind that the exact and acceptable meaning is that Divine
Essence transcends time and that He surpasses all temporal beings.
Naturally, we do not deny the fact that as long as we are restricted to
the natural and physical world and have a temporal existence similar to
all other natural creatures, it is difficult to imagine an
ultra-temporal entity—for whom the past, present, and future are the
same.[^42]

#### Past and Future Eternality of God in the Qur’an and Traditions

The terms “azalī” (past eternal) and “abadī” (future eternal) are not
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an; the Qur’an has used other terms to
indicate the past and future eternality of God. For example, the Qur’an
introduces God as the “First” [awwal] and “Last” [ākhir]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿هو الاوّل و الآخِر و الظّاهِرُ و الباطِنُ و هو بكلِّ شيءٍ عليمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the First and the Last, and the manifest and invisible; and He
is aware of all things.”***[^43]

Although exegetes have interpreted the two terms “awwal” and “ākhir”
dissimilarly, it appears that the meaning behind these terms equates to
past and future eternality and this interpretation has been endorsed by
several Traditions. In a sermon entitled “Apparitions” [Ashbāh] Imam
‘Alī (‘a) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاوّلُ الّذي لم يكن له قبل فيكون شيء قبله و الآخِر الّذي ليس له بعد
فيكون شيء بعده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[God] is the First who has no before in order that there be
something before Him, and He is the Last who has no after in order for
there to be something after Him.”***[^44]

In another Hadith, Imam Ṣādiq has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاوّلُ لاعَن اوّلٍ قَبلَهُ و لا عَن بَدءٍ سَبَقَهُ و الآخِرُ لا عَن
نِهايَةٍ... لَم يَزَل و لايَزُولُ بِلا بَدءٍ و لانِهايَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He is the First without there being anything before Him or a beginning
preceding Him, and He is the Last without having an end Himself… He has
always been and always will be, without having a beginning or
end.”*[^45]

These statements show that “First” and “Last” mean that with regard to
God no before or after can be imagined, He has no beginning nor end, and
nihility neither precedes nor follows Him.

Several Qur’anic verses also emphasize the eternality and
indestructibility of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿كلُّ شيءٍ هالكٌ إِلّا وَجهَه﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All things perish except His Face.”***[^46]

Many exegetes believe the intent of “God’s Face” is the Divine Essence.
Accordingly, this verse implies the perpetuity and eternality of God.

### 6. Divine Wisdom

God is wise. Wisdom [hikmat] has several meanings and identifying them
is necessary in order to understand this discourse better:

1. One definition of wisdom is “knowing and understanding the truth of
objects”. With respect to the boundless knowledge of God, this
definition is correct regarding God, the Exalted; however, it ultimately
refers to the knowledge of God. In other words, according to this
definition, wisdom is one of the branches of divine knowledge.

2. The second meaning of wisdom is that the acts of an agent are
consistent and perfect to the extremity, and far from any faults.
According to this definition also, God is wise; meaning that all His
actions are realized in the most unimpeachable and perfect manner and
are free of any defects or flaws.

As a concise reasoning for the wisdom of God—regarding this
definition—we can declare that doubtless, there is a type of congruency
and general resemblance between an agent and its action because an
action is, in truth, a manifestation of the fundamental nature of the
agent and a display of the perfections of its essence. Thus, the action
of an agent whose essence is perfect in all aspects, must be perfect in
all aspects. In definition of divine wisdom the Commander of the
Faithful [Amīr al-Mu’minīn] (‘a) has made the following statements:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدَّرَ ما خَلَقَ فَأَحكَمَ تَقديرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God measured all He created and then secured and stabilized
creation.”***[^47]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُبتدِع الخَلائِقِ بِعلمهِ و مُنشِئهِم بِحُكمهِ بلا اقتِداءٍ لاتَعليمٍ
و لااحتذاءٍ لِمِثالِ صانعٍ حَكيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Through His knowledge He originates His creations and through His
wisdom He creates them; without copying or learning from someone or
utilizing a sample from a wise creator.”[^48]

An important result of divine wisdom—according to this definition—is
deeming this world the best of all possible worlds, because the world,
with all its immeasurable expanses, is an act of God and divine wisdom
behooves that His actions be as perfect as possible.

3. The third definition of wisdom is eschewal of unrighteous and
abhorrent actions. According to this definition, a wise being never
commits indecent and evil acts. This definition is also true of God.
According to Islamic belief, even though God is able to commit evil
acts, His perfect and illimitable essence requires that He be solely a
source of good acts. Belief in this type of divine wisdom entails
believing that God is pure of committing any act the general intellect
of humankind deems evil.

By contemplating this definition, it becomes evident that justice is a
branch of this type of wisdom; because, it means that God does not
commit any evil act including lying, deceit, perfidy, or injustice.

4. The fourth definition of wisdom is that an agent performs actions
according to rational ends and reasonable motives, and refrains from
performing useless and futile acts. Therefore, this type of wisdom is
the same as finality in deeds, meaning that God is pure of committing
useless and purposeless acts and all His deeds are supported by rational
intentions.

We humans also perform many of our actions with specific aims, but we
must not overlook the fact that there is a fundamental difference
between the finality of our deeds and the sagacity of divine acts.
Through our volitional and meaningful actions, we generally endeavor to
resolve one of our needs or deficiencies and by performing an action, we
reach a level of perfection. Thus, the aim of our deeds is resolving
needs and attaining perfection. For instance, persons who endeavor to
gain knowledge by learning from a master or reading a book are in fact
attempting to resolve their need of acquiring knowledge and replace
ignorance with understanding to attain an ideal perfection. However, the
purpose of divine acts is not attaining perfection. This is because God
is absolute perfection and possesses no faults for which to attempt to
compensate by carrying out various actions. In fact, the purpose of
divine actions is guiding creations to an ideal perfection and the
usefulness of these actions is resolving the needs of creatures.

The definition of divine wisdom under discussion is outlined in many
Qur’anic verses. For example, regarding the finality of the creation of
humans, it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَفحسِبتم أَنّما خَلَقناكم عَبثاً و أَنّكُم إِلينا لاتُرجَعون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did you [truly] think that We have created you in vain and that you
would not be returned to Us?”***[^49]

In this verse, the Qur’an regards the creation of humans as a divine act
and states that this act is not futile; rather, it has a sagacious aim.
The second part of this verse may be a subtle indication of this aim,
meaning that God has created us in order that we utilize our facilities
for attaining perfection and bliss and ultimately achieve the results of
our actions in the next life.

In another verse, the Qur’an speaks of the sagacity of the creation of
the heavens and earth and the creatures in between—which is probably an
allusion to the creation of the universe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و ما خلقنا السّماواتِ و الأَرضَ و ما بينَهُما لاعبين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we have not created the heavens and earth and all that is
between for sport.”***[^50]

Also, according to a Hadith from Imam Ṣādiq (‘a), in answer to someone
who asked “Why has God created His servants?” he stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الله تَبارَكَ و تَعالی لَم يخلُق خَلقَهُ عَبَثاً و لَم يَترُكهُم
سُدیً... و ما خَلَقَهُم لِيَجلِبُ منهُم مَنفِعَةً و لا لِيَدفِعُ بِهِم
مَضِرَّةً بَل خَلَقَهُم لَيَنفَعَهم و يوصِلَهُم إلی نَعيمِ الأَبَدِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily, God, the Blessed, the Exalted, has not created His creatures
in vain and has not forsaken them… and He has not created them for
profit or to draw off harm through them; rather, He has created them to
bring them profit and to adjoin them with eternal blessings.”***[^51]

#### Divine Wisdom and Evil

Up to this point, it has become clear that in Islamic thought all divine
acts are sagacious and have rational purposes, and naturally these
purposes pertain to His creations. On the other hand, it cannot be
denied that in the world around us, there are affairs which we consider
evil; all people are to some extent entangled in calamities and
misfortunes caused by natural phenomena such as floods, earthquakes,
epidemics, physical pains, mental illnesses, etc. which form an
extensive share of evils. However, is the existence of various evils
consistent with divine wisdom and the finality of Creation? If the
purpose of the creation of humanity is securing their benefits, how can
the existence of evil, which is contrary to human good and the purpose
of humankind’s creation, be justified?

First, we must realize that the existence of calamities, misfortunes,
pain, suffering, and hardships in the world is not void of rational
purposes. In fact, these affairs aim to provide the true personal and
general good of humanity. It is evident that presenting an in-depth
exposition of the philosophy or wisdom behind the existence of evil
would require a detailed discussion; however, here we shall concisely
enumerate several advantages of the existence of evil in the personal
and social lives of humankind.

##### a) Fulfillment of the Potential of Humanity

Humanity’s nature and the general circumstances of the natural world are
such that much of our material and spiritual potential can only be
realized through confrontation with hardships and struggling with
problems. Just as the muscles of an athlete develop through exhausting
and onerous exercise, so also some of humanity’s spiritual and mental
abilities emerge only in order to overcome the difficulties of life when
faced with trials and tribulations. For instance, many discoveries and
scientific inventions have been made in response to the fundamental
needs of humankind and in order to solve individual or collective
problems.

The Qur’an emphasizes the fact that facility and ease is latent in every
hardship and affliction:

﴿فانّ مع العسر يُسراً. إِنَّ مع العُسر يُسراً﴾

“So [know that] truly with hardship there is ease. Yes, verily, with
hardship comes ease.”[^52]

In addition, using beautiful analogies Imam ‘Alī (‘a) describes the
effects of hardships in developing humanity’s hidden abilities:

ألا و إِن الشَّجرة البريّه أصلب عوداً و الرواتع الخضرة أَرقُّ جلوداً و
النّباتات البدويّة اقوی وقواً و أَبطا خموداً.

“Know that the branches of a tree that grows in the desert are tougher,
[while] the membrane of pleasant grass is thinner, and the fires [made]
of desert plants are more radiant and they burn longer.”[^53]

##### b) Divine Trials

One of the general traditions (sunnat) of God is ibtilā’ or trialing.
Based on the purposes of our creation and existential characteristics,
God tests us in the various contexts of our lives. Of course, it must be
kept in mind that divine trials are not carried out by God with the
purpose of discovering an unknown; on the contrary, the purpose of this
divine act—trialing—refers to His creations—humanity, and the purpose is
the development of our innate abilities and emergence of our inner
treasures. Humanity, in the process of divine trials, is like an ore
that is placed in a fiery furnace in order to separate its impurities
and reveal its precious essence. Even so, sometimes divine trials are
accomplished through ease and welfare.[^54] Several Qur’anic verses
indicate trialing humans through hardships and affliction, such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و لَنبلونّكم بِشيءٍ مِنَ الخوفِ و الجُوعِ و نَقصٍ مِن الأَموالِ و
الأَنفُسِ و الثَّمَراتِ و بَشِّر الصّابرين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And surely we shall try you with something of fear and hunger, and
reduction of assets, lives, and produce; and give thou good tidings unto
the patient.”***[^55]

Regarding God’s purpose in testing His servants through hardships, Imam
‘Alī (‘a) declares:

*“As punishment of indecent behavior, God afflicts His servants with
reduction of the fruits of trees, withholding rain, and closing off the
cascade of blessings so that a repenter repents, and a sinner renounces
his sins and a self-edifier becomes edified…”*[^56]

##### c) Awakening

One of the most important consequences of trials and tribulations is
that they awaken humans from the slumber of negligence due to our
immersion in worldly luxuries; they remind us of our important
responsibilities regarding our Lord and transform our arrogance into
humility and modesty. As an indication of this fact, the Holy Qur’an
declares that the peoples of the prophets have always been confronted
with difficulties so that they might renounce their disobedience and
surrender to righteousness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و ما أَرسلنا في قريَةٍ من نبيٍّ إِلّا أَخذنا أَهلَها بِالبَأساءِ و
الضَّرّاءِ لَعَلَّهُم يَضَّرّعون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have sent no prophet to any city but that We burdened its
people with hardship and affliction that haply they might weep [before
Allah and be humble].”***[^57]

In addition, the Qur’an states that the calamities and hardships
afflicted upon Pharaoh’s nation were admonitions to remind them of the
truths they had neglected:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و لقد أَخذنا آل فرعونَ بِالسِّنينَ و نَقصٍ مِن الثَّمراتِ لَعَلَّهُم
يَذَّكّرونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And verily, we afflicted the people of the Pharaoh with drought and
diminution of produce that haply they might be edified.”***[^58]

##### d) Appreciation of Divine Blessings

Another advantage of the existence of evils is that people realize the
significance of divine blessings and are thankful for them because,
“Only one who has been afflicted can appreciate health and ease”[^59].
Imam Ṣādiq has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّ هذِه الآفاتِ و إِن كانَت تَنالُ الصّالِحُ و الطّالِحُ جَميعاً
فَإِنَّ اللهَ جَعَلَ ذلِكَ صَلاحاً لِلصِّنفَينِ كليهما أَمّا
الصّالِحُونَ فإِنَّ الّذي يُصيبُهُم مِن هذا يَرُدُّهُم نِعَمَ رَبِّهم
عِندَهُم في سالِفِ أَيّامِهِم فَيحُدّوهُم ذلك عَلَی الشُّكرِ و
الصَّبرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“While both the righteous and the wicked are plagued with these
blights, God has instituted them as reformation for both. The blights
and calamities which befall the righteous cause them to appreciate the
past blessings of their Lord and this leads them to thankfulness and
patience.”***[^60]

So far, we have indicated several advantages and positive results of
evil in the lives of humans. Here we shall discuss several general
principles whose consideration will facilitate reaching the conclusions
of this discourse.

1. Doubtless, the proportion of the knowledge of humanity before their
ignorance is similar to the proportion of a raindrop before an endless
ocean. Not only in the external world but also in the depths of our own
beings there are still many untold secrets that we have yet to discover.
Bearing in mind the limits of our knowledge, we cannot claim that we are
aware of all the secrets and mysteries of what we call evil. Evils may
have many advantages that we do not understand and evidently, not
finding something is not a sure sign that it does not exist.
Accordingly, wisdom dictates that we be more careful in our judgments
because it is possible that what we deem evil is in fact good. The
Qur’an reveals this truth beautifully by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و عَسَی أَن تَكرَهوا شيأً و هو خيرٌ لكم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And much it happens that you abhor something which is best for
you.”***[^61]

While rendering this enameled circle full of patterns,

No one knows what He did in the revolution of the compass.[^62]

2. The ultimate purpose of the creation of humanity is not that we
occupy ourselves with indolence and leisure; rather, our main and
ultimate purpose is attaining true bliss, which is not possible except
through worship of God and achieving divine proximity. Therefore, one
must not deem anything that is in conflict with one’s welfare and ease,
contrary to wisdom and the purpose of creation because our eternal bliss
and salvation habitually depends on enduring hardships and harshness.
Therefore, consideration of the true purpose of the creation of humanity
is a fundamental factor in analyzing the relationship of evils with
divine wisdom. Consideration of this purpose results in a more
comprehensive and realistic picture of reality.

3. Another important point that must not be neglected is the influence
of the actions of people themselves in originating various evils. Humans
are volitive creatures, and according to the law of causality, some of
their volitional actions resulting from incorrect choices may cause or
intensify various calamities and tragedies. Consequently, sometimes
people bring about evil for themselves and others; however, due to
unawareness of the relationship between their own actions and the
results, they use the results of their actions as an excuse to challenge
divine wisdom. Alas, “A self-inflictor cannot complain”.[^63]

The Qur’an also warns of the effects of human actions in creating
unpleasant incidents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ظَهَرَ الفَسادُ في البرّ و البحرِ بما كَسَبَت أَيدي النَّاس﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Corruption has appeared in land and sea for that which humans have
done by their own hands.”***[^64]

4. A final point is that it may be that not all the advantages of the
existence of evils can be found in every evil. However, despite the fact
that this may be due to our lack of understanding, it does not harm our
claim because, even if one advantage can be found for each unpleasant
phenomenon, the challenge of incompatibility of evil and divine wisdom
would become void.

### 7. Divine Justice

The justness of God is one of the important pillars of Islamic theology
and is also one of God’s attributes. Because of its unique prominence
and importance, divine justice has a special position in Islamic belief.
This importance is so great that divine justice is regarded as one of
the five main tenets of Shi’ism. Justice is intricately related to the
genetic [takwīnī] order of existence and divine legislation. The
acceptance or negation of divine justice results in a fundamental
difference in one’s ideology. Furthermore, belief in the justness of God
is one of the bases of proving the resurrection, and recompense and
retribution in the afterlife. Additionally, belief in the justice of God
strengthens humanity’s resolve to establish a just social system and
confront manifestations of evil and oppression.

The Definition of Justice
-------------------------

Justice has been defined in many ways including “observance of equality
and avoidance of discrimination” or “observing the rights of others”.
However, sometimes justice has a more general meaning that is inclusive
of these definitions: “placing people and objects in suitable
positions”. This definition can be extracted from the following Hadith
of Imam ‘Alī (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العدل يَضَع الامورَ مواضعها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Justice sets everything in its place”.***[^65]

The basis of this statement is that everything in the world has a proper
station and justice is the observance of this proportion and the
positioning of everything in its appropriate place.

Therefore, divine justice is such that God deals with all of His
creations as they merit, sets them in their worthy station, and provides
them as they deserve.

### General Categorization of Divine Justice

To explain the range of divine justice and facilitate understanding of
this discourse, we shall divide divine justice into three main branches:

#### 1. Genetic Justice [‘adl al-takwīnī]

God blesses every being with favors according to its eligibility and
does not waste any talents or abilities. In other words, the genetic
justice of God requires that He impart upon each of His creations to the
extent of their capacities and bestow perfections upon them according to
their abilities and aptitude.

#### 2. Legislative Justice [‘adl al-tashrī‘ī]:

God does not neglect ordaining laws and duties that are essential to the
eternal bliss of humankind. Additionally, He does not give any person an
obligation beyond their abilities and tolerance. Thus, divine
legislation is just in relation to both these facts.

#### 3. Compensational Justice [‘adl al-jaza’i]

God ordains the recompense of each person in proportion with his or her
deeds. Thus, God rewards the righteous and punishes the wicked. The
compensational justice of God requires that no one be penalized for a
duty that was not imparted. Some divine rewards and punishments are
realized in this world and the rest are realized in the afterworld.[^66]

### Divine Justice in the Holy Qur’an

The Qur’an indicates divine justice through negation of cruelty and
oppression; God does not oppress any person:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الله لا يظلِمُ النّاسَ شيئاً و لكنَّ النّاسَ أَنفُسَهم يظلمون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, Allah in no way wrongs people; yet humans wrong
themselves.”***[^67]

At times, the Qur’an speaks of Justice in a more general manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و ما اللهُ يريدُ ظلماً للعالمين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah wishes no wrong upon the inhabitants of the
world.”***[^68]

Also, some Qur’anic verses speak of the legislative justice of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و لانُكلِّفُ نَفساً إِلّا وُسعَها و لَدينا كِتابٌ يَنطقُ بالحقِّ، و
هُم لا يُظلمونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We charge not any soul, save to its capacity and with Us is a
Book speaking truth; and they shall not be wronged.”***[^69]

And some verses testify to the compensational justice of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و نَضَعُ الموازينَ القِسطَ لِيومِ القِيامَةِ فلا تُظلَمُ نفسٌ شيئاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we shall set up the scales of justice for the Day of Judgment so
that no soul will be wronged in any way.”***[^70]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و ما كنّا مُعذّبينَ حتّی نبعثَ رسولاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We shall not chastise before We send forth a messenger.”***[^71]

Several Questions and Answers regarding Theodicy
------------------------------------------------

Several Questions and Answers regarding Theodicy[^72]

Various questions have been proposed regarding divine justice and
reaching rational answers to these may fortify one’s belief in the
justness of God. Here, we shall elucidate several of the major questions
and answers:

### a) Difference or Discrimination?

Is the existence of differences between beings compatible with divine
justice? Why has God created some as humans and others as plants or
animals? Moreover, why has He deprived plants, animals, and inanimate
beings of the blessing of being human? Why are some people sighted and
others blind? Why are some beautiful and others ugly? Why are some
intelligent and others obtuse? Are these differences not types of
discriminations or unjustness regarding some of God’s creatures?

In order to arrive at a succinct answer to these questions one must
study the world of creation and its characteristics. As a result of such
study, it is easily realized that there are unalterable laws and perfect
order governing the world that cannot be dissociated from it. To state
matters differently, a world cannot exist with different general laws
just as there cannot be non-sweet sugar or non-liquid water. On the
other hand, we observe that incommutable laws require differences
between entities. For instance, let us consider the general law of
causality: according to this law, every effect is deficient when
compared with its cause; in other words, cause and effect are
necessarily dissimilar regarding their existential perfections and the
existence of an effect that is completely similar to its cause or more
perfect than its cause is not possible. Additionally, the principle of
consistency and congruency between cause and effect requires that if the
cause of emergence of a plant or birth of a malformed child comes to
pass, the effect corresponding to the cause must surely come about (i.e.
the plant or malformed child). Moreover, one must not expect for
instance, that a human being emerge from a seed planted in the earth or
that the cause of a malformed child result in a healthy child.

In short, the existence of various types of differences—typical, racial,
individual, characteristic, etc.—between the creations of God is an
inseparable condition of laws that cannot be altered or removed from the
world. In addition, as we have stated about the second definition of
divine wisdom, this world—with all its characteristics and laws—is the
best of all possible worlds.

It is clear from the discussion that genetic [takwīnī] dissimilarities
between creations are in no way discriminations. Discrimination occurs
when two objects have an equal capacity to receive benefit, but this
benefit is only bestowed upon one of the two; however, the fact that
some beings do not receive various perfections is due to the laws
governing existence; basically, they do not have the capacity to attain
such perfections. To state the matter differently, God is infinitely
gracious, but the capacity and abilities of His creatures are limited.
This restriction is an impartible quality of the world.

Consequently, divine justice tolerates the genetic [takwīnī] differences
of creatures because these differences do not result in evil or
discrimination.

### b) Death and Nonexistence

Another question regarding divine justice involves death: Why must we
become nonexistent and deprived of life after tasting the pleasures of
life and longing for immortality? Is this situation consistent with
God’s justice?

In short, we can answer: Death is an inextricable requirement of life in
the natural world and a being that prospers in nature cannot stay in it
indefinitely. That is to say, the term “perpetuity in nature” is
self-contradictory. In addition, death is not the end of our existence;
rather, it is a transition from one world to the next. Death is the end
of a part of our lives and the start of another. Therefore, there is no
unjust aspect to death.

### c) Commensurability of Sins with Retribution

The previous questions concern the genetic justice [‘adl al-takwīnī] of
God; however, this question relates to His compensational justice. The
basis of this question is that rationally, the commensurability between
a crime and its punishment must be observed. Accordingly, it is not fair
for instance that a person who has committed a driving infraction be
treated in the same way as a murderer. However, God has ordained heavy
punishments in the afterlife for various sins. For example, according to
the Qur’an, the punishment of a person who intentionally kills a
believer is eternal damnation. Here it can be asked: Are punishments in
the afterlife—that are not consistent with the sins and transgressions
of God’s servants either temporally or qualitatively—compatible with
divine justice?

The answer to this question requires contemplation of the nature of
punishments in the afterlife. The truth is that afterworld retribution
is fundamentally different from the conventional punishments in this
world. The quality and quantity of conventional punishments are
determined by legislations and conventions; this is why various
juridical systems assign differing punishments for identical crimes. For
instance, in one juridical system, the punishment of murder may be
execution, while another juridical system may at most sentence a
murderer to life imprisonment. However, afterworld retribution is not a
conventional affair. It is the genetic [takwīnī] and necessary result of
the deeds of criminals. More precisely, it is the manifestation of the
true nature of sins—the embodiment of one’s deeds. Therefore, speaking
of incommensurability or unjust severity is irrelevant. Accordingly, in
the same manner that the apparently simple and quick act of drinking
poison has serious and long term consequences,—such as long-term illness
or eternal deprivation of worldly life—in addition to their negative
worldly consequences, our sins have inescapable results that will
manifest in the afterlife. More accurately, the truths regarding sins
are revealed in the next world, which is the place of manifestation of
truths and expulsion of veils.

### d) Divine Justice and Human Suffering

Another question about divine justice is concerned with the pain and
suffering of humans. Is the pain and suffering that result from
calamities, hardships, illnesses, etc. congruous with God’s justice?

In order to answer this question concisely, we will first divide the
pain and suffering of humanity into two groups:

1. Some suffering and hardships rise from wicked deeds and are the
inevitable result of our own mistakes. Due to the sagacious purpose of
our genesis, humankind has been created with volition. People make
mistakes through misuse of their free will and thus they become trapped
within the consequences. It is evident that this sort of pain and
suffering that is a product of our own deeds, in no way contradicts
divine justice. As we have stated in the discussion on wisdom, the
Qur’an also regards many of humanity’s problems as the fruit of their
own deeds.

2. Some of humankind’s tribulations are not the results of their own
deeds and are not worldly retributions for their sins, such as the
suffering of innocent children or the atrocities that befall innocents
on account of wars imposed by others. We Muslims believe that divine
justice requires that reparations be made for these sufferings in some
way—whether in this world or the next. In other words, in this world or
in the afterlife, God will bestow upon those who were afflicted
blessings greater than their suffering and in this way, He will more
than compensate for humanity’s misery and adversity. Thus, it is clear
that humankind’s worldly suffering does not damage the countenance of
divine justice.

Apophatic Attributes [sifat al-salbi]
-------------------------------------

Thus far, we have reviewed the cataphatic attributes [sifat al-thubūtī]
of God. Now it is time to consider God’s apophatic attributes. In order
to keep this discussion short, we must inevitably suffice with several
of the more important attributes.

### 1. Negation of Corporeality

One of the most important apophatic attributes of God is His
incorporeality. The Divine Essence is pure of being material and
corporeal. This is because all of corporeality possesses dimensions such
as length, breadth, and height and thus they have a combination of
qualitative components. Consequently, all corporeal creatures are
compound, whereas in the discussion of divine unity we explained that
God is monad and indivisible and that basically it is not possible for
the Divine Essence to be compound. As a result, the corporeality of God
is impossible.

### 2. Transcendence of Space and Direction

God cannot be situated in a specific position and is not a spatial
entity occupying space or location. A more evident reason for this claim
is that occupying space and being placed in a certain locality are
material qualities, whereas God is immaterial. The Holy Qur’an indicates
this apophatic attribute in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و للهِ المشرقُ و المغربُ، فأَينما تُولّوا فَثمَّ وجهُ الله﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And to Allah belong the east and west; whithersoever you turn is
facing Allah.”***[^73]

It seems that the purport of east and west in this verse are not the two
popular geographical directions; instead, this phrase is an allusion to
all directions and the phrase “whithersoever you turn is facing God”
indicates that God is present in all places and directions. The Divine
Essence is not compound and has no components; therefore, His presence
in all places cannot mean that He occupies all space and directions
because material and sensorial occupation of direction and space
requires that He be compound. Thus, His being everywhere means that He
transcends direction and space.

The purport of this verse also suggests the negation of God’s
materiality: Since two objects cannot occupy the same space, the
presence of God throughout the material and corporeal world, which is
full of a variety of objects, is true only if God is an immaterial
entity.

### 3. Negation of Incarnation

God cannot be embodied in any physical form. Therefore, according to
Islamic belief, all perspectives that regard God as a type of
incarnation in natural beings or as various humans are invalid and
untrue. A short reasoning for the verity of this apophatic attribute for
God is that—bearing in mind the reasoning for divine Unity—the
incarnation of God in others requires that the Divine Essence become
restricted and it necessitates His need of the assumed space. However,
God has an illimitable existence, He is All-sufficient, and no need can
be conceived for Him.

### 4. Negation of Unity with Others

God does not unite with other beings. A reason for this claim is that if
the figurative sense of unity is intended—signifying combination of two
objects or alteration of an object’s form—this requires reaction,
transformation, and the state of being compound whereas the Sacred
Divine Essence is pure of these affairs because these conditions
necessitate imperfection and need. However, if the true meaning of unity
is intended—meaning synthesis of two essences to form a single
essence—this is impossible not only for God but for any two beings.

### 5. Negation of Visual Perception

Visual perception of God is impossible in both this world and the next.
Seeing an object with one’s eyes requires that the object be situated
before our eyes—while maintaining special physical conditions. Such an
encounter would involve the positioning of the object in a specific
location. Thus, the visibility of an object necessitates possession of
locality, while God, the Divine, is pure of orientation.

Yea, sensory perception of God is impossible by optical perception;
however, spiritual perception, meaning intuition of the beauty and
majesty of God is possible and attainable.

Your countenance may only be seen by spiritual eyes;

Which are not comparable to my worldly eyes.[^74]

The Qur’an explicitly stresses the impossibility of optical perception
of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا تُدركه الأَبصارُ و هو يُدركُ الأَبصار﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Eyes realize Him not, but He realizes all eyes.”***[^75]

[^1]: - The philosophical basis of this reasoning is that knowledge and
understanding require a type of encompassment of knowledge by the
scholar and because a limited being cannot encompass an unlimited
essence, no limited being can gain knowledge of an unlimited essence.

[^2]: - به كنه ذاتش خرد برد پي اگر رسد خس به قعر دريا

[^3]: - Sūrah Ṭāhā 20:110. This interpretation is based upon the
assumption that the Arabic pronoun “ه” (him/it) in the compound “بِهِ”
(about him) refers to God.

[^4]: - Alḥuwaīzī, Tafsīr-e Nūr u-Thaqalaīn, vol. 3, p. 394, Tradition
117.

[^5]: - Sūrah Ḥashr 59:23-24.

[^6]: - Utilization of the Qur’an in order to understand the attributes
of God necessitates basic acceptance of several issues including the
prophethood of Muḥammad (ṣ), his being chosen by God, and proof of
several attributes of God, including truthfulness—upon which the
veracity if the Qur’an is based.

[^7]: - For examples see: Sūrah Nisā’ 4:82; Sūrah Muḥammad 47:24; and
Sūrah Ṣād 38:29.

[^8]: - Sūrah Dhārīyāt 51:56.

[^9]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:100.

[^10]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 49.

[^11]: - Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:25.

[^12]: - “لا إِله إِلّا الله” (Sūrah Ṣāfāt 37:35; and Sūrah Muḥammad
47:19)

[^13]: - “لا إِله إِلّا هو” (Sūrah Baqarah 2:163 and 2:255; and Sūrah
Āli ‘Imrān 3:2, 3:6, 3:18)

[^14]: - “لا إِله إِلّا انا” (Sūrah Naḥl 16:2; and Sūrah Anbīyā’ 21:25)

[^15]: - Sūrah Ra‘d 13:36.

[^16]: - It must be said that by deeds and actions we intend a more
general meaning than external actions. This meaning also includes
internal states and behaviors such as love and faith.

[^17]: - In favor of brevity, we shall refrain from further elucidation
in this book.

[^18]: - Sūrah Mulk 67:14.

[^19]: - Rhetorical questioning is a sort of questioning in which the
speaker propounds a question in such a way that its answer is in the
negative.

[^20]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:282.

[^21]: - Sūrah Ḥadīd 57:4.

[^22]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:29.

[^23]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 198.

[^24]: - “الحَمدلله مُنتَهى عِلمِهِ” This statement presupposes that
there is an extent or boundry for God’s Knowledge whereas in fact there
is no limit to His Knowledge [editor].

[^25]: - “لا تَقُل ذلِكَ فَإِنَّه لَيسَ لِعِلمِهِ مُنتَهى” (Shaīkh
Ṣadūq, At-Tawḥīd, chap. 10, Tradition 1).

[^26]: - Contradiction is the contemporaneous existence and nonexistence
of an object—with the preservation of conditions that are set in logic
and philosophy. According to many thinkers, the impossibility of a
contradiction is the most axiomatic intellectual principle, whose
refutation would cause the collapse of all human knowledge.

[^27]: - The miracles of divine prophets are considered normal
impossibilities. Through contemplation of the nature of these events, it
can be realized that these occurrences oppose the normal workings of
nature and the causal system of the world, but they are realized through
unknown specific supernatural causes. Thus, it may be stated that normal
impossibilities are not truly impossible; rather, our lack of knowledge
regarding their specific causes, result in them being considered as a
division of impossibilities.

[^28]: - ﴿اِنَّ اللهَ على كُلِّ شىءٍ قَديرٌ﴾

[^29]: - According to philosophers, the ability of the subject—i.e.
God—in performing the act is absolute, whereas the acceptant—i.e.
logical impossibility—is not capable of undergoing the act. هر چه هست از
قامت ناساز بي‌اندام ما است ورنه تشريف تو بر بالاي كس كوتاه نيست All
problems arise from our lack of understanding; You are All-powerful and
All-encompassing. For further elucidation, contemplate this example:
Consider a master of potter who can fashion the most beautiful of pots
from clay. Instead of clay, some water is given to him and he is asked
to make a pot. It is self-evident that the potter will not be successful
in the least in making a pot. Clearly, this cannot be attributed to his
inability or inexperience and his status as master cannot be doubted
because, essentially, what he has been provided with does not have the
capability of being altered into a pot. Naturally, we admit that this
example and similar examples are inherently different from the issue of
our discussion—the power and ability of God. Nonetheless, because of its
similarity, it can be considered as an analogy in order to understand
better the subject under discussion.

[^30]: Shaīkh Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, chap. 9, Tradition 6.

[^31]: - ﴿إِنَّ اللهَ على كُلِّ شىءٍ قَديرٌ﴾ (For examples see: Sūrah
Baqarah 2:109, 2:148, 2:259, etc.)

[^32]: - Sūrah Aḥqāf 46:33.

[^33]: - Shaīkh Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, chap. 9, Tradition 15.

[^34]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:255, and Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:2.

[^35]: - Sūrah Ghāfir 40:65.

[^36]: - According to Arabic grammar, if the predicate of a substantive
sentence is definite it demonstrates the exclusivity of the predicate
for the subject.

[^37]: - For example, see: Sūrah Rūm 30:19, and Sūrah Ḥajj 22:66.

[^38]: - Sūrah Furqān 25:58.

[^39]: - Shaīkh Ṣadūq, Al-Tawḥīd, chap. 11, Tradition 6.

[^40]: - Of course, this attribute can also be designated as an
apophatic attribute [ṣifat-e salbī] and thus we can declare that God is
a ‘non-temporal’ entity.

[^41]: - This issue will be explained in further detail in the discourse
on cosmology.

[^42]: - For a more comprehensive analysis of this discussion, issues
that are more complex must be brought up, which would exceed the brevity
of the current discourse.

[^43]: - Sūrah Ḥadīd 57:3.

[^44]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 91.

[^45]: - Kulaīnī, Uṣūl-e Kāfī, Chapter of Definition of Names [Ma‘ānī
ul-Asmā‘], vol. 1, Tradition 6.

[^46]: - Sūrah Qaṣaṣ 28:88.

[^47]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 91, p. 76.

[^48]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 191, p. 208.

[^49]: - Sūrah Mu’minūn 23:115.

[^50]: - Sūrah Dukhān 44:38.

[^51]: - Allāmah Majlisī, Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 5, p. 313.

[^52]: - Sūrah Sharḥ 94:5-6.

[^53]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, letter 45, p. 318.

[^54]: - For more information, see: Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:35.

[^55]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:155.

[^56]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 143, p. 138.

[^57]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:94.

[^58]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:130.

[^59]: - This is a Farsi proverb: “قدر عافيت كسي داند كه به مصيبتي دچار
آيد”.

[^60]: - Allāmah Majlisī, Biḥār al-Anwār, vol. 3, p. 139.

[^61]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:216.

[^62]: - آنكه پر نقش زد اين دايره مينايي كس ندانست كه در گردش پرگار چه
كرد

[^63]: - This is a Farsi proverb: “خودكرده را تدبير نيست”.

[^64]: - Sūrah Rūm 30:41.

[^65]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, wise saying 437.

[^66]: - It is worthy of note that divine legislative and compensational
justice do not solely pertain to humans; rather, they include all
responsible beings. Even so, usually the main stress of this discussion
is the justness of God regarding humanity. Additionally, according to
the genetic relationship of retribution in the afterlife with
humankind’s deeds, it can be declared that, ultimately, the
compensational justice of God is a subdivision of His genetic justice.

[^67]: - Sūrah Yūnus 10:44.

[^68]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:108.

[^69]: - Sūrah Mu’minūn 23:62.

[^70]: - Sūrah Anbīyā’ 21:47.

[^71]: - Sūrah Isrā’ 17:15.

[^72]: - Theodicy is the philosophic science of vindication of divine
justice in view of the existence of evil. [Trans.]

[^73]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:115.

[^74]: - ديدن روي تو را ديدة جان‌بين بايد وين كجا مرتبة چشم جهان‌بين من
است

[^75]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:103, also see: Sūrah A‘rāf 7:143.


