Section Three: Anthropology
===========================

The human race is mysterious and mystifying. The various aspects of
existence are more profound than can be understood. Despite constant
endeavor throughout history to solve the riddle of humanity’s existence,
there are still incalculable unrevealed mysteries. Even now that we
stand upon the heights of a multitude of anthropological studies and
research, we are still faced with a number of ambiguities. It is
astonishing that with the development of these studies still more
unconsidered perplexities unfold.

Appreciation of the importance of anthropology does not require much
explanation or emphasis. The major difference between anthropology and
other fields of research is that in anthropology the problem is not
understanding it, but understanding me. Thus, any results from
anthropological research can be greatly effective in our interpretation
of the philosophy of life, our own status in existence, and our
relationship with other elements of existence. In this way,
anthropological research can give our lives special meaning.

From this perspective, there is an irrefutable difference between
understanding humankind and understanding a type of plant or animal or
faraway star. In addition, many current theories and debates regarding
various branches of science are based on specific anthropological
hypotheses. For example, the many theories in education are established
on a particular portrayal of the human race and its abilities and
potentials.

Various Branches of Anthropology
--------------------------------

Despite their astonishing variety, the different discussions in
anthropology may be classified into the four spheres of scientific,
philosophical, theosophical, and theological anthropology. These four
branches may also differ in their principles and methods of
research.[^1]

Nonetheless, it seems that comprehensive understanding of humanity
cannot come about without considering the findings of all these
divisions. In this treatise, our object of debate is mostly Islamic
anthropology. In view of the remarkable comprehensiveness of the Islamic
principles and teachings that are related to understanding humanity, we
shall endeavor to present a short representation of Islam’s view of
humankind by selecting a few major issues.

The Importance of Anthropology
------------------------------

In addition to the general aspects of the importance of understanding
human nature, anthropology is especially significant from the religious
perspective. The understanding of humanity and the mysteries of its
being open up new doorways to understanding God. Humans are the only
creation that can be the manifestation and absolute mirror of the
Supreme Truth. Thus, similar to the exterior world, our inner being is
also a focus of divine signs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿سَنُريهم آياتِنا في الآفاقِ و في أَنفسِهم حتّی يَتبيّن لهم أَنَّه
الحقّ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We shall soon reveal unto them Our signs in the horizons and in
themselves, till it is clear to them that He is the Supreme Truth (that
it is the truth).”***[^2]

Moreover, the Qur’an considers neglecting oneself concomitant with
neglecting God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿نَسُوا اللهَ فَأَنساهُم أَنفسَهم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They forgot Allah so He caused them to forget themselves.”***[^3]

Various Hadiths also emphasize this concomitance.[^4] Additionally,
anthropology has an intricate relationship with other Islamic
ideological—like prophethood and resurrection—, moral and
jurisprudential [fiqhī] teachings such that correct understanding of
these teachings cannot be realized without understanding humanity.

The Creation of the Human Race
------------------------------

According to Islamic belief, all humans that have ever existed,
regardless of their racial, cultural, lingual, and other differences
have arisen from a single and common origin. In the beginning, God
created a single man and woman and the rest of humankind were born of
their filiation. Thus, through consecutive generations, the number of
humans slowly increased:

“O People! Be pious towards your Lord, who created you from a single
soul (person), and from it created its mate, and scattered from them
many men and women.”[^5]

Accordingly, some Qur’anic verses call humans the children of Adam and
in this way the Qur’an stresses their relationship with the first link
in humanity’s history.[^6] Also, in several verses it is emphasized that
Adam (‘a), who was the first human to lay foot on earth, has been
created differently than the creation of his children because, in
contrast to his descendants, he has not been born through the coupling
of a man and woman. Like many other truths in existence, the manner of
genesis of the first human is hidden from us. We know nothing more than
the fact that the original substance from which the human race was
created is what the Qur’an terms dust (turāb) or clay (ṭīn):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِذ قالَ ربّك للملائكةِ إِني خالقٌ بشراً من طينٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When thy Lord said unto the angels: Verily, I shall create a human
from clay.”***[^7]

According to this, we can say that the Qur’an denounces theories that
regard humanity as an evolved product of animals or humanoid beings.[^8]

God’s unique genesis of the first human shows an aspect of humanity’s
intrinsic greatness and their supremacy over all other creatures in
existence.

Aspects of Humanity’s Being
---------------------------

According to the Islamic perspective, humankind is not a completely
material and natural creature. In fact, humanity’s existence consists of
a material aspect—the body—and an incorporeal aspect—the spirit or soul.
Regarding the inception of humans, the Holy Qur’an declares that after
the completion of several stages in the formation of the fetus, a new
stage begins that is related to their incorporeal aspect:

***“Then of the sperm We created a blood-clot, next of the blood-clot We
created tissue, and then of the tissue We created bones, afterwards We
covered the bones with flesh, and then We originated within it a
different existence.”***[^9]

Even though the qualities of this new existence are not revealed, the
difference in phrasing and the use of the verb “انشأنا” (we originated)
instead of “خلقنا” (we created) is a subtle indication of the
fundamental difference between the respective stage and the previous
stages—which were all concerned with humanity’s material aspect.
Therefore, many exegetes consider this verse to be a testimony of the
creation of the human spiritual gem.

Also in several Qur’anic verses, the creation of the spiritual and
immaterial aspect of humanity is termed breath of spirit:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ثمّ سوّاه و نَفَخَ فيه من روحِهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then He shaped it and breathed in it of His spirit.”***[^10]

According to this verse, after God brings order to the creation of the
fetus, and makes its body well proportioned and balanced, He breathes
spirit[^11] into its body.

The nature of humanity’s spirit is a complex and controversial
issue.[^12] According to several Qur’anic verses, it seems that after
death the soul continues its life independent of its corporeal
body.[^13] Since the endurance of the spirit after the body’s extinction
entails the continuity of one’s existence, it is clear that between the
two aspects of humanity’s being, their spiritual gem has authenticity;
this gem forms the essence of each human and it is usually interpreted
as “me”.

Of course, the existential independence of the spirit from the body
after death does not mean that there is no true relationship between
these two. In fact, as long as persons live in the natural world their
body and soul are correlated and are affected by each other. Based on
this correlation, religious teachings obligate us to protect the
sanctity of both aspects. Thus, we must be utterly protective of our
body and utilize it in the best possible manner on the path of attaining
salvation and bliss.[^14]

The advantages of humanity’s nature, especially those that originate
from the spiritual aspect, have provided them with an elite status in
the expansive world of existence. Humans, in the core of their essence,
are superior not only superior to animals, but also to all of God’s
creations.

Humans and Animals
------------------

The material aspect of humankind has many similarities to animals.
However, our spiritual aspect has profound differences that affect our
beliefs and propensities.

Humans are both superior to animals in their understanding and in the
instruments and sources of their understanding. In addition, our
cognitive system, regarding its qualities and applications, is far more
complex than the faculties of animal cognitive systems. Animal cognition
is restricted to a collection of sensory data which humans share but to
which they are not restricted. In addition to the senses, humankind is
also equipped with the intellect—something that animals do not
enjoy.[^15] Through deliberation, humans are able to understand more
general concepts and laws of nature; they can discern the depth and core
of a thing by studying its exterior; and can discover the relationships
of apparently unassociated and scattered phenomena. Logic, philosophy,
and even the disparate branches of empirical science would never have
been conceived without the employment of intellect.

Moreover, humans possess various spiritual (non-material) aspirations
that animals do no have. These are as follows:

### 1. The Aspiration for Knowledge

Humans are naturally scholarly and inquisitive and the propensity to
know is fused deep within their souls. Amazingly, human curiosity is not
restricted to sciences that directly concern their daily lives. In fact,
discovering new truths is always fascinating to humans. Knowledge and
awareness is always appealing and desirable to the human race. In short,
due to their inner calling, humans flee from ignorance and tend towards
knowledge and awareness.

### 2. The Aspiration for Beauty

Another of humanity’s spiritual inclinations is fondness of beauty and
aesthetics. All humans prefer beauty to ugliness. Our beauty and the
beauty of our living environment and the objects with which we relate
are important to us. In contrast, animals only endeavor to resolve their
instinctive needs. Gorgeous features, attractive scenery, beautiful
homes, etc. are meaningless to them. Throughout history, aesthetical
tendencies have been the source of timeless masterpieces and various
spiritual disciplines.

### 3. Moral Aspiration

One of humanity’s most elevated spiritual features is their ethics.
Humans organize many of their deeds within the framework of moral
standards and principles. Ethics has a decisive effect upon one’s
motives and behavior. Good and evil, and obligation and constraint have
no meaning to an animal, whereas moral good and evil, and duties and
restrictions are the criterion for assessment and evaluation of a
person’s deeds.

According to Islamic belief, understanding good and evil, and
understanding the system of morals is amalgamated in humanity’s
being:[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و نَفسٍ و ما سَوّاها. فَألْهَمَها فجورها و تقواها﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the soul and He who shaped it and then inspired it [with the
understanding of] its lewdnesses and pieties.”***[^17]

Also due to their nature, humans tend toward engaging in good and are
inclined against committing evils:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ لـٰكِنَّ اللهَ حَبَّبَ إِليكم الايمانَ و زيَّنَه في قلوبكم و
كَرَّه إِليكم الكفرَ و الفسوقَ و العصيان﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But Allah has endeared to you faith and has beautified it within
your hearts, and He has made repulsive to you unbelief and transgression
and disobedience.”***[^18]

Thus, disposition toward moral virtues is another quality that has made
humankind superior to animals.

### 4. Aspiration to Worship

Propensity towards worship and veneration of a divine being is another
of humanity’s spiritual features. Historical investigations show that
from long ago, humans have been familiar with worship and adulation. The
unique feeling of this disposition is so powerful and extensive that
even deniers who boast of irreligion are not free of some type of
exaltation and worship. Thus, prophets were not the initiators of
worship and veneration. In fact, their duty was to show the correct
method of worship and present humanity’s religious feeling with a worthy
orientation.

The Elect of Creation
---------------------

Not only is the human race superior to animals, but in light of their
various attributes and distinctions, humans possess a lofty and
privileged status in contrast to the whole of creation. Here we shall
enumerate several of these distinctions:

### 1. God’s Vicegerent [Khalifah] upon the Earth

Humans are the only beings who—because of their impressive existential
capacities—hold the status of divine vicegerency. While quoting a
discussion between God and the angels, the Holy Qur’an reminisces of the
creation of humans, which was carried out in order for them to be His
representative upon the earth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و إِذ قال ربّك للملائكةِ إِنّي جاعلٌ في الأَرض خليفةً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Verily, I shall set a
viceroy upon the earth.”***[^19]

Various indications within this verse show that divine vicegerency is
not specific to Adam (‘a) and includes all human beings.[^20]
Additionally, when contemplating the meaning of khalīfah we realize that
the humans are the only beings that can become the best possible
manifestation of divine attributes of perfection and a symbol of His
absolute good and beauty throughout the entire Creation. This is because
khalīfahs or vicegerents are, in all aspects, representative of the
office that appointed them. Therefore, the selection of humanity for
this office indicates their genetic [takwīnī] potential and immense
capacity for reaching perfection.

### 2. The Highest Capacity for Knowledge

The Qur’an states that God taught Adam a special knowledge of which the
angels were ignorant. After they professed their ignorance, God ordered
Adam (‘a) to teach the angles some of this unique knowledge:

***“And He taught Adam [the knowledge of] the Names, all of them, then
He presented them upon the angels and said: ‘Explain to Me these names,
if thou speak truly.’ They said: ‘Glory be unto Thee! We have no
knowledge save what Thou hast taught us. Surely Thou art the
All-knowing, the All-wise.’ He said: ‘O Adam! Explain unto them their
names.’”***[^21]

We do not completely know the truth of what it means to know “the
Names”. Even so, it seems that knowing the Names does not merely mean
understanding various words, but awareness of general truths in which
all of humanity’s knowledge is rooted and which is attainable by God’s
creations.

In any case, this verse indicates the awesome capacity for knowledge
that humans possess. This potential makes humans worthy of the
vicegerency of God on earth, and elevates them to the status of educator
of angels.

### 3. Divine Trusteeship

Humans are the only creatures who accepted the heavy burden of the
divine trust:

***“Surely We offered the Trust to the heavens and the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it, but
humans carried it; surely they are foolish wrongdoers.”***[^22]

Many exegetes consider this trust [amānah] a type of volition, duty, or
perfection that is realized through the volitional choices of humans. No
other creature carries the responsibility of its choices and its
perfection; but humans are free in choosing between good and evil.
Therefore, they hold responsibility for their own volitive actions.

In any event, humans—like their Creator—have free will and through
righteous use of their volition, they can attain perfections that the
rest of God’s creations cannot enjoy; and this is another feature of
humanity’s intrinsic superiority.

### 4. The World as Humankind’s Instrument

Another point that reveals the lofty status of humans in the world is
that God has made the universe their instrument and has given control of
other things in nature to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَلم تروا أَنّ اللهَ سَخّر لكم ما في السّماوات و ما في الأَرض و
أَسبَغَ عليكم نِعَمَهُ ظاهرةً و باطنةً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you all that is in the
heavens and earth, and has lavished upon you His blessings, both
manifest and hidden?”***[^23]

Yea, the philosophy of the world’s existence is to bring about a
foundation in which humans can ascend towards worthy perfections and
volitional intimacy with God. The whole world belongs to humans, so that
they live for God and remember Him.

The clouds, winds, sun, and sky exist;

that you earn some bread and eat it not in neglect.

For you all are bewildered and obedient;

it would not be fair that you be not dutiful.[^24]

### 5. Obeisance of the Angels

After creating Adam (‘a), God ordered the angels to bow before him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و إِذ قلنا للملائكةِ اسجُدوا لآدم فسجدوا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We said unto the angels: ‘Bow to Adam’, so they
bowed.”***[^25]

Because Adam (‘a) is the manifestation of all of humanity’s existential
potentials and abilities, obeisance of the angels reveals that, due to
its unlimited capacities, humankind is superior even to the angels.

### 6. Humanity’s Inherent Honor

The intrinsic abilities of humankind, some of which we indicated
earlier, have caused them to be honored by God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و لقد كرّمنا بني آدم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And truly We honored the children of Adam.”***[^26]

Doubtless, by this all-embracing honor, a sort of inherent honor was
intended. Because of humanity’s unique abilities, this honor embraces
all humans.[^27] Accordingly, humankind is a lofty and elevated creature
before God.

The Other Side of the Coin
--------------------------

Up to this point, humanity’s distinctions and merits have been
discussed. However, the Holy Qur’an also has many critical verses
regarding humanity and the enumeration of their faults and deficiencies:
various Qur’anic verses introduce humans as foolish wrongdoers,[^28]
very ungrateful,[^29] insubordinate and rebellious,[^30] niggardly[^31]
and avaricious,[^32] hasty and rash,[^33] and the most disputatious of
God’s creations. How is it that on one side, the Qur’an elevates humans
to the highest of ranks and on the other side, it dispraises them with
the strongest of admonishments?

The truth is that there is no contradiction in the Qur’an’s laudations
and criticisms of humans. This is because each of these laudations and
criticisms addresses a specific aspect of humanity’s being. Humans are
unique creatures that possess an existential comprehensiveness, because
both celestial [malakūtī] and animalistic aspects exist within them.
This richness originating from the essence and nature of humankind sets
them in the highest echelon of Creation. This is because they have the
capacity to attain the ultimate status of perfection by strengthening
their celestial and empyrean aspects and harnessing their animalistic
and ignoble facets. According to the religious perspective, because of
this existential wealth, humankind is worthy of praise and are
thoughtful and noble creatures. In contrast, if we only consider the
base aspects of humankind and focus on their instinctive and natural
necessities, we shall discover a being that deserves criticism and
reproach. Persons who relinquish control to their instincts and
carnality [shahwat] and whose intellects serve their animalistic
instincts and tendencies would soon become avaricious, niggardly,
ungrateful, rebellious, evildoers, etc. Sometimes, such humans advance
so far on the path of animality that, according to the Qur’an, they
become viler than beasts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اولئك كالأَنعام بل هم أَضلّ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They are like beasts; nay, rather, they are further astray.”***[^34]

Additionally, in various narrations [riwāyāt] after comparing humans
with angels and animals, it is declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن غلب عقلهُ علی شهوتهِ فهو أَعلىٰ مِن الملائكةِ و مَن غلبَت شهوتُه
على عقلِه فهو أَدنی مِن البَهائمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So whoever’s intellect prevails over their carnality is better than
angels, and whoever’s carnality prevails over their intellect is lower
than animals.”***

Mawlānā versified the substance of this narration in his Mathnavī
al-Ma‘navī (Spiritual Couplets):

*Word has come that the Holy Creator;*

*Has created the creations of the world in three types.*

*One group’s existence is all intellect and knowledge;*

*These are the angels who know naught but worship.*

*In their essence, there is no want or passion;*

*They are pure light and live by the love of Allah.*

*Another type is void of knowledge;*

*It is called animal and is satiated by forage.*

*It sees naught but the stable and fodder;*

*It is unaware of wickedness and of honor.*

*And the third is humankind;*

*It is half angel and half donkey.*

*Its donkey half tends towards baseness;*

*The other half tends towards greatness.*

*And which will prevail in the battle of morality;*

*Of this pair which will win the backgammon?*[^35]

Compulsion or Free Will
-----------------------

So far, we made it clear that God has established great potentials and
abilities within humanity’s being. Additionally, through use of their
free will and correct choices, humans can realize their genetic
[takwīnī] and inherent potentials and attain lofty ranks of perfection.
However, do we humans truly possess this instrument of volition or is
everything we do compulsory and enforced? In order to answer this
question we must present a brief discussion on compulsion and volition,
especially since various religious teachings sometimes reinforce belief
in compulsion or determinism [jabr ingārī].

An Ancient Question
-------------------

The issue of compulsion and volition is a very timeworn issue that has
continually called humans to contemplation. The fundamental question is
this: Do humans have free will in some of their deeds or do they have no
volition whatsoever, making their actions compulsory? Volition means
that a person’s behavior is based on their awareness, power, and will in
such a way that they are able to abandon the said behavior. In other
words, a volitional act is one which is founded upon the choice and
selection of the agent and happens through one’s intention and decision.
Of course, the fact that an action is volitional does not mean that it
is committed with desire and relish because it often happens that an
action is selected while contrary to the primary tendency of the agent
but due to knowledge of its advantage, such as the sick who drink bitter
medicine against their initial desire.

In any case, there have always been two general perspectives regarding
the answer to this question: some advocate determinism [jabr ingārī] and
believe that humans cannot commit true volitional actions and others
favor free will or libertarianism [ikhtīyār] and believe that humans
have volition in some of their deeds.[^36]

Islamic Theology and Free Will
------------------------------

The issue of compulsion and volition can be analyzed from various
aspects and approaches. Since this treatise does not have the capacity
for an extensive discussion regarding this issue, we will merely
investigate in short several religious teachings regarding the
relationship of divine attributes with determinism.[^37]

Some people assume that various fundamentals of Islamic belief are
incompatible with belief in free will and therefore by accepting these
beliefs one must also believe in compulsion. In short, these
fundamentals consist of (a) creational unity, (b) the past eternal
knowledge of Allah, and (c) the generality of Allah’s will.

### a. Unity in Creation

In favor of determinism, it is stated that creational unity means that
the sole Creator of all things is God. Thus, because human actions are
also phenomena of the world of creation, the generality of the attribute
of God’s creation includes human actions. Therefore, only God is the
Creator of humanity’s deeds. That is, humans have no role in generating
their own actions. In effect, there is no place for free will within
humans.

In contrast, the correct meaning of creational unity is that the only
independent creator that creates without the permission of a separate
entity is God. Thus, creational unity does not negate the fact that
other beings may be the origin of creation and fabrication through
divine will and according to the general laws that He has ordained.
Additionally, as we have previously stated, the Holy Qur’an has
attributed origination and influence to God’s creations. Consequently,
creational unity—according to its correct interpretation—is compatible
with humanity’s role in their own deeds and does not result in
determinism.

### b. God’s Past Eternal Knowledge

Presented here is an abstract of the determinist rationale based on the
past eternal knowledge of God: God knows beforehand what people will and
will not do in the future. Additionally, the nonconformity of divine
knowledge with external truths necessitates the alteration of divine
knowledge to ignorance.

To state matters differently, if God knows that a specific person will
perform a specific action at a specific time, but that person abandons
that action at that time, God’s knowledge would become ignorance because
according to the assumption, that which was within God’s knowledge did
not conform to actuality. However, the absolute knowledge of God
requires that He know all events and phenomena as they truly are.

Thus, performing an action that God knows will happen is necessary, and
carrying out any action that God knows will not occur is impossible. As
a result, human deeds are either necessary or impossible. Which means
that none of our deeds is volitional; because the occurrence of the
actions that we perform is necessary and not accomplishing them is
impossible; also, the actions that we do not perform are impossible to
execute and abandoning them is necessary.

In response to this rationale, we can declare, there is no doubt that
God has foreknowledge of our actions, yet that which is recorded in
divine knowledge is human actions complete with all their
characteristics and conditions. Some of these characteristics include
space and time elements and some pertain to the agent. One of the
characteristics of volitional actions is that they emerge though
volition and free choices.

Therefore, the fact that God has foreknowledge of our volitional actions
means that God knows that a specific person, utilizing their free
will—not under compulsion—shall perform a specific action in a specific
time and place. To state matters differently, if God knows that an
individual shall perform an action at time A and location B, then
performing that action becomes necessary at time A and location B and
its occurrence at time B or location C would be impossible. Similarly,
if God knows that a definite action shall be performed with volition,
then that action must surely occur through volition.

Therefore, it is clear that the necessity for the occurrence of
volitional actions—according to God’s foreknowledge—is not only not
contradictory to it being volitional, but it confirms it. Because God’s
foreknowledge means that, the compulsory and involuntary occurrence of
these actions is impossible.[^38]

The conundrum [shubhah] of divine knowledge and free will, in addition
to having complex expositions such as the one we presented, has simple
and more general forms that are usually expressed using terms such as
destiny or fate.

It is clear from the response we gave for this conundrum that terms such
as destiny or fate do not mean that humans have no volition; rather that
a person’s destiny is nothing more than the fact that the person shall
perform their volitional actions with free will and their involuntary
actions, involuntarily. In other words, destiny has two areas:

The domain outside volition: In this case, the duty of the believer is
submission and contentment.

The domain of volitional actions: In this area, fate is not in conflict
with our free will and choices. Thus, in this domain, humans are
responsible for their actions.

### c. Generality of the Divine Will

Another of the Islamic principles of faith, which may seem to
necessitate compulsion, is the Divine Will predominance principle:
according to religious teachings and various Qur’anic verses,[^39]
nothing happens outside the all-encompassing sphere of the Divine Will.
As a requirement of this principle, all actions and even feelings adhere
to God’s will. In this case, is there any room left for free will?

The answer to this claim can be extracted from our previous discussion
regarding the divine knowledge and human volition incompatibility
conundrum. Here, God’s will does not involve the occurrence of actions
in an absolute manner and free of conditions. In fact, His will requires
that every effect be originated by an immediate cause while preserving
all the conditions of the effect. Hence, in the same way that the Divine
Will requires involuntary emanation of heat from fire, His will also
requires that our volitional actions be accompanied by human knowledge,
will, and volition. Therefore, realization of the Divine Will not only
does not negate free will, it guaranties it.

These discussions reveal that if the religious teachings regarding
divine attributes are correctly understood, they will not contradict the
principle of free will.

Not only is the doctrine of free will able to answer all determinist
conundrums, there are many verifications to its validity. These
verifications are moral or intuitional in nature and are more or less
available to everyone. On the whole, these proofs provide a secure
foundation for free will: inner feeling and intuition of free will;
indecision; legislating social laws, prohibitions, and ordinances;
existence of instructive systems and penal codes and rewards; and regret
for performing acts of evil are several of these proofs.[^40] The
consequential and extensive existence of these affairs in our individual
and social lives has made even hard fatalists unable to refute free will
in practice.

Qur’an and Free Will
--------------------

There are many verses in the Holy Qur’an that directly or obliquely
speak of humanity’s free will and its role in one’s deeds. For instance,
the Qur’an has stressed the voluntariness of faith and disbelief—both of
which are innate acts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و قل الحقُّ من ربّكم فَمن شاءَ فَليؤمن و مَن شاءَ فَليَكفر﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And say: ‘The truth is from your Lord, so let whoever wills believe
and whoever wills disbelieve.’”***[^41]

Additionally, verses that speak of testing and trialing humanity in
their worldly life indicate their free will, since testing an agent
without volition is futile.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و نَبلوكم بالشَّر و الخَير فتنةً و إِلينا تُرجَعون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We shall try you with evil and goodness and surely, you shall
return to Us.”***[^42]

Moreover, various Qur’anic verses inform of our responsibility towards
our actions. Needless to say, only volitive agents may be held
answerable.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وقِفُوهم إِنّهم مَسئُولون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And stop them for surely they are responsible.”*** [^43]

Furthermore, all Qur’anic verses that pertain to recompense and
retribution for the actions of humans either praise the righteous and
criticize the wicked, speak of humankind’s injustice towards their
souls, inform of appointing prophets or the establishment of religions,
or include edicts and proscriptions. All these issues validate free will
in some way because if there were no free will these Qur’anic verses
would have no acceptable or coherent meaning.

In addition to the verses we have indicated, various verses speak of the
generality of the Divine Will and its precedence over the will of
humankind or the generality of divine knowledge. However, as we have
previously stated, if the intent of these verses are correctly
understood, there will be no inconsistency with the voluntariness of
some of our deeds.

Human Perfection (Teleology)
----------------------------

Theological anthropology is not limited to the origin of humanity, the
structure of its being, and its natural potentials. In fact, it includes
a long eulogy regarding the purposes of humanity’s creation, the levels
of its perfection, and the methods of attaining these perfections. It
would not be an exaggeration to claim that all the scientific teachings
of Islam, both in the spheres of religion and ethics, have been
presented in order to guide humanity toward their highest state of
perfection.

The perfection of an object gains meaning through the purposes of its
existence. The closer a being comes to the purposes of its creation, the
more complete it is. The purpose of the creation of humans, contrary to
many other creations, can only be realized through conscious choices.
This is why humanity’s perfection is volitive and must be obtained. In
addition, because the ultimate objective of humanity’s existence has no
limits, humans can attain unlimited levels of perfection. As a result,
one can always speak of a more perfect person and thus the path of
perfection has no journey’s end.

Of course, phrases such as walking the path of perfection do not mean
that there is a path external to humanity’s being that brings them
closer to the purpose of their creation; rather, here, the
traveler—mystic—and path are one. In other words, humans’ path of
perfection is “themselves”. Thus, transitive and immanent acts can only
help one attain perfection if they affect one’s soul and cause it to
transcend its respective status. Therefore, any external or unrelated
affair to the human essence, such as fame, riches, and titles cannot
bring about humanity’s true perfection. The Qur’an indicates this truth
in a very subtle manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿هم درجات عند الله﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They [have] ranks before Allah.”***[^44]

This assertion both indicates humanity’s various levels of perfection
and also signifies that the source of this difference is not external to
their own essence but it is they themselves that are the ranks and
statuses. In other words, spiritual ranks are not like worldly
conventional ranks to which one can be appointed or discharged; rather,
each person is a rank and level of perfection.

The Qur’an regards the ultimate purpose or telos of humanity’s creation
and the terminus of their perfection the attaining of the rank of God’s
servant:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و ما خلقتُ الجنَ و الإِنسَ إِلّا ليعبدون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and humans except that they serve
Me.”***[^45]

Thus, by increasing our servility towards God we become more complete.
Servility towards God begins with outward humility and performing the
sacred rites of religion. It progresses in synchrony with love of God,
understanding Him, and sincerity [ikhlās] in one’s actions. Gradually,
humans reach a position in which all their states, from their motives
and thoughts, to their speech and deeds, become divine and their
carnality [hawāye nafs] and materialism are altogether extinguished. In
this state, our truth-discerning eyes are opened and we see the degrees
of divine Unity through our hearts and discover the entire world as a
manifestation of the names and attributes of the Supreme Truth. It has
been narrated from Amir al-Mu’minīn, ‘Alī (‘a) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما رأيتُ شيئاً إِلّا و رأيتُ الله قبلَه و معَه و بعدَه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have never seen anything but that I saw God before it, with it, and
after it.”*[^46]

As we have previously indicated, people are multidimensional beings.
Therefore, their perfection requires that all of their existential
aspects grow simultaneously and that all of their physical and spiritual
potentials and capacities be employed in the best possible manner. In
portraying the perfect human, the mundane doctrines only emphasize
several specific aspects: some philosophers regard the perfection of
humankind in the perfection of their intellect, and some mystics seek it
in seclusion and ascesis [riyāẓat]. Others perceive furthering the
conquest and exploitation of nature as a standard for human perfection.
According to Islam, human perfection cannot be realized but through
coordinated and simultaneous development of all human abilities, such
that all talents are utilized on the path of servitude and intimacy with
God.

Islam’s perfect human does not become attached to the world or bewitched
by it. In fact, perfect humans regard the phenomena of the natural world
as divine signs and blessings and consider the world a plantation for
reaping for the next world. According to their perspective, their
material bodies are not cages but one of the gifts of their creation
that must be utilized in the best possible manner. In addition, such
persons do not retreat from society. Indeed, they regard being with
people and helping their fellow humans a type of servitude and worship
of God, which results in closer intimacy with God. They are also
distressed and troubled at the pain and suffering of others. This is why
the divine prophets and saints [awliyā’ ilāhī]—which are exalted
examples of human perfection—have lived within the society and worried
about the spiritual and material problems of their peoples and became
heartsick at the transgressions that caused their peoples to go astray
and the persecution and privation that troubled them. The Qur’an
declares of our holy prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لقد جاءكم رسولٌ من أَنفسكم عزيزٌ عليه ما عَنِتّم حريصٌ عليكم و
بالمؤمنينَ رءوفٌ رحيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves;
grievous to him is your suffering, anxious he is over your [guidance],
to the believers [he is] gentle and compassionate.”***[^47]

Another manifestation of human perfection in Islam is contemplation. In
many verses, the Qur’an enjoins us to contemplate and think. Doubtless,
here the intended faculty for contemplation is not ‘instrumental’
reason, which is the foundation of industry and technology. This is
because history clearly shows that there is no interdependence between
industrial development and the exploitation of nature and humanity’s
perfection in either their material or spiritual aspects. The
contemplation that Islam regards as a precondition to perfection is the
reflection upon the fundamental truths of the world that bring about a
more complete state of self-knowledge and understanding of God. For
example, we must contemplate the inherent nature of humankind and the
world, its origin and final destination, the status of humanity in the
world, and our rights and obligations. Additionally, this contemplation
must result in a foundation for conscious servitude towards God that is
suffused with love and understanding. It must also strip the rust of
ignorance and negligence from humanity’s heart and soul. According to
various Hadith, such contemplation is greater than [heedless] worship,
and is in fact the essence of meritorious worship:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تفكّر ساعة أَفضلُ من عبادة سبعين سنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A moment’s thought is superior to seventy years of worship.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و العقل ما عُبِد به الرحمن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the intellect is that which is used to worship the
Beneficent.”[^48]

The intellect of faith is like a righteous person;

It is the guardian and ruler of the city of the heart.

That marvelous messenger said very beautifully;

A grain of your intellect is better than fasting and prayer.

This is because your intellect is essential and these two are
incidental;

These two obligations complete that.[^49]

There are many discussions about the attributes and manifestations of
human perfection in Islam and the portrayal of the countenance of a
perfect human is like the drawing of an exquisite painting that cannot
be created without the use of hundreds of marvelous colors and
unparalleled patterns. Here are several of the most notable qualities of
a perfect human in one sentence. Perfect humans are self-knowing,
god-knowing, contemplative, self-analyzing, faithful, pious, righteous,
monotheist in thought and practice, adorned with all virtues and
divested of all ethical evils, suffused with love of God, possessed of
love and compassion for all of God’s creatures, vigilant and heedful of
the rights of the oppressed and deprived, true servants of God, nightly
worshipers and daily toilers, predominant over their carnalities
[shahawāt al-nafsānī], and utilizers of nature for divine purposes.

Of course, as we have previously stated, human perfection has unlimited
stages. Therefore, the more extensive and deep-rooted a person can make
these qualities within themselves, the higher the degree of perfection.

Worship and the Complete Human
------------------------------

One of the subtle and precious expressions of the human soul is
worshiping a divine being, confiding in Him, and confessing one’s needs
to Him [rāz wa nīyāz]. As we have stated earlier, humanity’s need and
propensity for worship is one of the characteristics that make them
superior to animals. One of the achievements of divine religions is that
they respond to this need in the best possible manner by enjoining
people to worship the true Deity and preventing worship of false gods.

Confiding one’s secrets and professing one’s needs to his Lord is one of
the most beautiful expressions of worship. This is because in this state
a person perceives their Lord more intimately than a person perceives
any other; they regard Him worthy of their confidence; and with faith in
His power, benevolence, and grace they profess their needs to Him.
Praying to God, if done with love and purity of heart, and with the help
of divine attraction [jazabah-ye ilāhī], can promote a person to such
heights that even the angels cannot attain and can bless a person with
unrivaled ecstasy and bliss.

The Qur’an enjoins humans to call upon God at all times. Also, it
regards the true enlightened [Ulul-Albāb] to be those who do not forget
God no matter what circumstances they have in their lives:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الّذين يذكرونَ الله قياماً و قُعوداً و على جنوبهم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who remember Allah while standing and sitting and lying on
their sides.”***[^50]

Additionally, many Qur’anic verses enjoin people to ask for succor
sincerely:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿هو الحيُّ لا إِله إِلّا هو فادعوه مخلصينَ له الدّين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the Living; there is no Allah but Him. So call upon Him,
making your religion His sincerely.”***[^51]

Various Qur’anic verses advise worshiping God in private. It seems that
in private, our soul is better prepared for spiritual connection with
God and soaring towards the Heavens:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ادعوا ربّكم تضرُّعاً و خفيةً، إِنّه لا يُحبُّ المُعتدين﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Call upon your Lord, humbly and secretly; Surely, He loves not
transgressors.”***[^52]

In addition to enjoining humankind to worshiping the One God, Islam sets
specific standards for worship. Besides various Qur’anic verses that are
themselves supplications or prayers,[^53] we have inherited a legacy of
valuable prayers [du‘ā] from the Infallibles (‘a). These prayers display
the most beautiful features of worship, sincerity, love, and devotion.
Even so, the most important Islamic worship is Ṣalāt (Farsi: Namāz)—the
Muslim daily ritual prayer.

Ṣalāt, the Most Beautiful Aspect of Worshiping the Divine
---------------------------------------------------------

Although the form of Ṣalāt is no more than a set of specific gestures
and utterances, the reality of Ṣalāt is much more profound. In other
words, like humans, Ṣalāt also has a dual reality. Thus, we may speak of
the ‘perfection of Ṣalāt’ and the ‘perfect Ṣalāt’. The form of Ṣalāt
consists of precise actions and vocables, which must be preceded by
specific preliminaries and special conditions. Religious jurisprudence
[fiqh] discusses in detail the preliminaries, conditions, pillars
[arkān], and elements of Ṣalāt. Observing the jurisprudential [fiqhī]
edicts of Ṣalāt is the first condition to benefiting from its spiritual
effects and blessings. However, transcending all these forms are hidden
secrets and truths. These inner secrets have caused Ṣalāt to be one of
the pillars of the Islamic religion[^54] and have made it the ‘ascension
[mi‘rāj] of the faithful [mu’min]’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصلاة معراج المؤمن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ṣalāt is the ascension of the faithful.”***

The more a person understands the secrets of the ritual prayer and
reaches its depths, their Ṣalāt becomes more complete and perfect. Not
only is the perfection of one’s Ṣalāt a sign of one’s perfection, it is
in fact the practical manifestation of one’s perfection. During Ṣalāt,
perfect humans lose all indications of egocentricity and selfishness and
they become completely captivated by the beauty of the Deity.

While performing Ṣalāt I recalled the curve of your eyebrows;[^55]

I attained a state in which I heard the shrine glorifying You.[^56]

The depth and comprehensiveness of the ritual prayer is such that it can
be regarded from many perspectives where its different effects and
blessings can be analyzed. For example, academic specialists study the
educative and moral effects of Ṣalāt, while psychoanalysts analyze its
mental effects. One may also research the role of Ṣalāt in the Islamic
society from a social perspective. However, mystics have a different
frame of mind. The Gnostics of Truth and travelers on the path of the
Beloved observe Ṣalāt with penetrating eyes and an intuition that tears
the veils of materiality, and thus expose spiritual and mystical
secrets. Herein, we shall briefly explain various inner secrets of some
preliminaries and elements of Ṣalāt.[^57] May it guide us to deeper
wisdom and understanding of worship.

Secrets of Ṣalāt
----------------

As we have indicated, Ṣalāt has various aspects, which begin with the
most manifest of facets (uttering various words and performing assorted
gestures) and develops endlessly in accordance with the spiritual status
of the worshiper. What we shall indicate herein is a drop from the
boundless ocean of Ṣalāt and a whisper of its unlimited degrees and
untold secrets.

### 1. Wuḍū

The outward appearance of Wuḍū[^58] is washing and wiping [mash] various
members of one’s body with clean and pure [pāk/muṭahar] water through
which our external dirtiness is purged. The essence of Wuḍū, however, is
cleansing of the heart and soul of the worshiper with the water of
divine manifestations [tajalliyāt al-ilāhī]. Just as the water that
descends from the sky can clean one’s body, the water of divine
manifestations descends upon the hearts of worshipers and cleanses their
heart and soul. By washing their face—i.e. manifest
countenance—worshipers purify their hearts—i.e. spiritual countenance—of
all thoughts but God. By washing their hands and arms, they wash
themselves of worldliness. By wiping their head and feet, they prevent
themselves from pondering the mundane world and walking the path of
secularism.

### 2. Call to Prayer [Adhān wa Iqāmah]

“Adhān” is an Arabic word meaning to announce and make aware and its
outward aspect consists of announcing the time of Ṣalāt and inviting
Moslems to gather for performing this divine ritual. Moreover, “Iqāmah”
means to set up or perform and its apparent facet is getting ready to
perform Ṣalāt and inviting to the divine worship.

As for the spiritual meaning of Adhān, it is summoning all of existence
to prepare to attend the presence of the Divine and announcing the good
news of the time to appear before the presence of the Divine Oneness.
Moreover, according to the illuminated [ahl al-ma‘rifat], Iqāmah is a
call for all beings to present themselves before God and stand before
Him. Adhān begins with four Takbīr (i.e. Allahu Akbar)[^59] whose
conspicuous meaning is professing the greatness and magnificence of God.
Its inner meaning is professing our inability to properly understand and
describe the truth of the Most Divine.[^60] By saying Takbīr four times,
the worshiper regards all the creatures of the external, internal, and
ethereal worlds nothing compared to the magnificence of God.

After making Wuḍū from the fount of love;

I said four Takbīr and thus professed the triviality of all but
Allah.[^61]

After Takbīr—the demonstration of God’s greatness—is uttered, by
declaring the holy invocation “ashhadu allā ilāha illallāh”[^62],
worshipers bear witness to the fact that their Lord is united, and that
godhead is exclusive to Allah. In order to emphasize this fact,
worshipers repeat this avowal. Then worshipers enter the sanctum of the
divine intercessors (the Prophet (S) and Amīr al-Mu’minīn (‘a)) and by
saying “ashhadu anna muhammad ar-rasūl ul-lāh”[^63] and “ashhadu anna
‘alīyya-wwaliyyul-lāh”[^64] they attest to the prophethood of Muhammad
(S) and the apostleship and vicegerency of ‘Alī (‘a). Again, in order to
emphasize and establish this fact within their soul, they repeat each
avowal. Then they address their entire being and call upon it to hasten
towards Ṣalāt by saying: “hayya ‘alas-salāh”[^65]. In order to prepare
their mind and body further for attending the celebration of divine
intimacy and to intensify the fires of their enthusiasm, they repeat
this command.

Then, the worshipers announce the epitome of Ṣalāt—which is attaining
salvation and bliss—and its superiority over all other deeds. Thus, they
call to their perfectionist and liberal nature: “hayya ‘alal falāh”[^66]
and “hayya ‘ala khayril ‘amal”[^67]. After awakening their nature, they
again attest to the greatness of God and then twice declare the holy
adage of monotheism: “lā ilāha illal-lāh”[^68] in order to solidify
their admission of inability to describe God and avowal of God’s unity
within their heart.

In Iqāmah, worshipers repeat their previously declared truths and thus
renew their covenant with these truths. After recourse to the
prophethood and vicegerency and intensifying the fires of enthusiasm for
intimacy with the Beloved, by declaring “qad qāmatis-salāt”[^69]
worshipers proclaim their presence before the Magnificent.

### 3. Standing Motionless [qīyām]

The outer appearance of qīyām is standing upright and straight, free of
all distortion and perversity, before God. The spirit of qīyām is
initiating one’s heart into the status of servitude [‘ubūdīyat] and
establishing oneself upon the path of humane righteousness [sirāṭ
al-mustaqīm] and refraining from all immoderations and deviations.
Standing in a balanced posture is a symbol of the spiritual and moral
balance of worshipers and the equilibrium of fear [khaūf] (regarding
God) and hope [rajā’] (of salvation) within their being, such that
neither their fear of God surpasses their hope for salvation, nor their
hope for salvation surpasses their fear of God.

One of the etiquettes of qīyām is that worshipers must remember that
they are standing in the presence of a God who knows them, manifest,
secrets and all, and according to a Hadith, is closer to them than their
jugular vein. It is befitting that in this state, worshipers bow their
heads—which is the noblest part of the body—in humility and as a symbol
of modesty and humbleness. They must be shameful of their shortcomings
and offences and look at the place where they set their forehead in
prostration [sajdah], and thus remember their abjectness compared to the
grandeur and glory of their Lord.

### 4. Intention [nīyyat]

“Nīyyat” is the decision and resolution to perform an action. In Ṣalāt,
nīyyat has various degrees that compare with the spiritual statuses of
worshipers.

Ordinary people regard nīyyat as the intention to obey God in performing
Ṣalāt in covetousness for rewards or fear of divine retribution.
According to the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يدعون ربهم خوفاً و طمعاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They call upon their Lord in fear and hope.”***[^70]

According to the illuminated, the intention is to obey God as well as to
magnify His Lordship. As stated by the adherents to the path of divine
love and rapture [ahl al-dil], the intention is to obey God due to
enthusiasm and love of the Deity.[^71] Finally, according to divine
saints [awliyā’ ilāhī] the intention is the resolution to obey while the
worshipper has attained the status of annihilation in God [fanā].

One of the important etiquettes of nīyyat, which encompasses all
worship, is sincerity [ikhlās]. Ikhlās is purging one’s actions of all
ungodly elements. Ikhlās, like human perfection, has various degrees:
For ordinary people, ikhlās means to purify their worship of hidden and
manifest polytheism [shirk al-āshkār wa pinhān], such as hypocrisy and
vanity. In the worship of the elect [khawās], it is purging deeds of
avarice (for blessings) and fear (of retribution). According to the
advocates of divine love [ahl al-dil], ikhlās is cleansing one’s worship
of all egocentricity, selfishness, and narcissist elements.

### 5. Recitation [qirā’at]

In the spiritual journey and divine ascension of Ṣalāt, recitation also
has various degrees and ranks in accordance with the spiritual rank of
the worshiper. For ordinary people, recitation means uttering the words
of Ṣalāt correctly and worthily. The perfection of their recitation is
that they deliberate the apparent meaning of the words they are
reciting. However, the recitation of the elect is recalling the truths
and subtleties of the divine words—as much as they are able to
understand—within their hearts and souls. The deeper degrees of
recitation are specific to the illuminated [ahl al-ma‘rifat] and the
advocates of divine love [ahl al-dil]. For them, after they have gained
knowledge of the truths behind God’s words and have realized the higher
degrees of the interpretation of the Qur’an within their souls,
recitation is the interpreter of their religious ecstasies and spiritual
intuition in Ṣalāt.

There are secrets in the recitation of the holy Sūrah Ḥamd and Sūrah
Tawhīd (and other Qur’anic Sūrahs that the worshiper recites in Ṣalāt)
that for the sake of brevity, we cannot even mention within this
treatise.[^72]

### 6. Bowing [rukū‘]

It is proper that the worshiper say a Takbīr after recitation and before
rukū‘. The etiquette of Takbīr is that worshipers keep in mind the
greatness and glory of the Divine and remember their own weakness,
inability, destitution, and abjectness compared to God. In this state,
they must raise their hands beside their ears with their empty palms
toward the Qiblah[^73] and empty-handedly with a heart brimming with
fear and hope, regard God superior to all descriptions, and declare His
Takbīr, then they must go to rukū‘.

The heart of rukū‘ is that worshipers enter a state of humility and
wretchedness before their Lord and observe His glory. Rukū‘ includes
glorification [tasbīh], magnification [ta‘ẓīm], and praise [tahmīd] of
God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبحانَ رَبّيَ العَظيمِ و بِحَمدهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Glory be to my Lord, the Magnificent, and praise be to Him.”***

The truth of “tasbīh” is elevating God over all descriptions and
definitions and the truth of “ta‘ẓīm” and “tahmīd” is extricating the
worshiper from the confines of comparison [tashbīh] and agnosticism
[ta‘ṭīl].[^74] In rukū‘ the worshiper sees through his heart all objects
as a manifestation of the names and attributes of the Divine Truth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين همه عكس مي و رنگ مخالف كه نمود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يك فروغ رخ ساقي است كه در جام افتاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن روي تو به يك جلوه كه در آينه كرد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين همه نقش در آينة اوهام افتاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All these contrasting colors and images of wine that appear;*

*Are the reflection of the brilliance of the cupbearer’s visage.*

*With one materialization of your beautiful countenance in the looking
glass;*

*All these images were cast into the mirror of apprehensions.*

### 7. Prostration [sajdah]

According to the illuminated, sajdah is the apex of Ṣalāt and the
ultimate position of intimacy with the Beloved. The heart and soul of
sajdah is rejecting all but God and ascending from all multiplicities
[kithrat] to the height of Unity. In the state of sajdah, which is the
state of annihilation in God, the worshiper observes that all objects
are transitory and perishable and the truth of their essence is nothing
but destitution and neediness towards the Divine Oneness.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عرضه كردم دو جهان بر دل كار افتاده
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
به جز از عشق تو باقي همه فاني دانست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I presented both worlds unto my weary heart;*

*Except for your love, it regarded all as transitory.*

### 8. Testimony [tashahud]

The essence of tashahud is return of worshipers from the state of
annihilation and absolute Unity to the world of multiplicities [‘ālam
al-kithrat] while the world of Unity has been unveiled to them. Thus,
they testify to God’s unity, and append their testimony with praise and
veneration of the Divine and repudiation of polytheism. Then they bear
witness to the prophethood of the Seal of the Prophets[^75] (S) and
focus on his status of God’s servant.

### 9. Salaam

After returning from this spiritual journey and departing the spiritual
world—that is, the place of divine prophets and angels—worshipers first
say Salaam[^76] to the holder of the rank of Seal of the Prophets and
due to his divine holiness, they specifically address the Prophet (S) by
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ اَيُّهَا النَّبيُّ وَ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَ بَرَكاتُه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Salaam to you, O Prophet and Allah’s mercy and blessings upon
you.”***

Then they center their attention on the divine angels and the rest of
the prophets—who were their companions in this spiritual journey—and
because the worshipers too were their companions in this spiritual
journey, they include themselves in their Salaam by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلامُ عَلَيْنا و عَلىٰ عِبادِ اللهِ الصّالِحينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Salaam upon us and upon the righteous servants of Allah.”***

Finally, they address them all and say Salaam to them. By retiring from
this status, the ascension of Ṣalāt ends.

[^1]: - The main methods in scientific, philosophical, and theosophical
anthropology are respectively empirical, theoretical, and intuitional.
Theological anthropology is based on referral to original texts of
religion. Additionally, in general, scientific anthropology mostly
endeavors to answer specific and detailed questions, while in the other
approaches we are faced with questions that are more fundamental.

[^2]: - Sūrah Fuṣṣilat (Ḥā Mīm) 41:53.

[^3]: - Sūrah Ḥashr 59:19.

[^4]: - See: ‘Allāmah Majlisī, Baḥār al-Anwār, vol. 2, p. 32.

[^5]: - Sūrah Nisā’ 4:1.

[^6]: - For examples of these Qur’anic verses, see: Sūrah A‘rāf 7:26,
27; Sūrah Isrā’ 17:70; and Sūrah Yāsīn 36:60.

[^7]: - Sūrah Ṣād 38:71. For further examples, see: Sūrah Sajdah 32:7;
and Sūrah A‘rāf 7:12. Various Qur’anic verses speak of “dirt” (such as
Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:59) or “water” (such as Sūrah Furqān 25:54) or
similar terms (Sūrah Ḥijr 15:28, 15:33).

[^8]: - On occasion, it is thought that religious teachings regarding
the creation of the first human contradicts Charles Darwin’s (1809-1882)
theory of evolution through natural selection. Discussing the
relationship of these two viewpoints requires an independent discussion.
Here we shall suffice with three points: a. Even though the theory of
evolution, which is based upon natural selection, reveals truths
regarding the evolution of various types of plants and animals, there
are no consistent scientific rationales in favor of extending this
theory to include humankind. In fact, with regard to the special
distinctions of humans compared to advanced types of animals—such as
simians—, numerous attestations repudiate this extension and render it
unscientific and illegitimate. b. The existence of fossils and other
millions-of-year-old relics from humanoids cannot confirm the
application of Darwin’s theory to humans. This is because the extreme
probability has been proposed that humanoids have existed and become
extinct before the introduction of humans—who have had an entirely
different and independent genesis. c. We cannot disregard a religious
standpoint that is clearly based upon Qur’anic verses that speak of the
unique genesis of Adam and humanity’s link to him on account of a
scientific theory that has many critics even within the biologists’
society.

[^9]: - Sūrah Mu’minūn 23:14.

[^10]: - Sūrah Sajdah 32:9.

[^11]: - The compound structure “روحه” (His spirit) is not a possessive
compound but a “reverence compound”. In this type of compound, in order
to show reverence and the lofty rank of an object, the object is
attributed to one of great standing and honor. Thus, the attribution of
spirit to God—like similar cases such as “بيت الله” (the House of
God—the holy Kaaba) or “ثار الله” (the Blood of God—attributed to Imam
Hussaīn (‘a))— states the reverence and greatness of the spirit among
the creations of God.

[^12]: - Many Moslem thinkers regard the spirit as incorporeal and
immaterial and others believe it is a type of “subtle body” that is
different in several qualities from the material body.

[^13]: - This includes verses that term human death tawaffā “توفّی”
(such as Sūrah Sajdah 32:11; Sūrah An‘ām 6:61; Sūrah Naḥl 16:70; etc.)

[^14]: - Many profound matters may be discussed on the relationship of
the body and soul, their qualities, the genetic antecedence of the soul
over the body, and the materiality or spirituality of the ego. These
discussions have been omitted for the sake of brevity.

[^15]: - In truth, we have no direct or firsthand knowledge of the
perceptions of animals. All our judgments regarding this issue are
solely based on observation of various signs and effects. Based on these
observations, there is no doubt that animals do not enjoy intellectual
thought in the manner that humans do.

[^16]: - Understanding good and evil and moral prerequisites and
stipulations is in fact a part of humanity’s unique percipience;
something that does not exist in animals. Even so, we mentioned this
issue because of its close rapport with the discussion at hand.

[^17]: - Sūrah Shams 91:7-8.

[^18]: - Sūrah Ḥujurāt 49:7.

[^19]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:30.

[^20]: - The use of a substantive sentence, “إِنّي جاعلٌ...”, which
indicates continuity, and also the objections of the angels regarding
the immorality and bloodshed of humans upon the earth show that the
topic of the debate between God and the angels involved the
establishment of the human species.

[^21]: Sūrah Baqarah 2:31-33.

[^22]: Sūrah Aḥzāb 33:72.

[^23]: Sūrah Luqmān 31:20.

[^24]: - ابر و باد و مه و خورشيد و فلك در كارند تا تو ناني به كف آري و
به غفلت نخوري همه از بهر تو سرگشته و فرمانبردار شرط انصاف نباشد كه تو
فرمان نبري

[^25]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:34.

[^26]: - Sūrah Isrā’ 17:70.

[^27]: - In contrast, obtainable honor is a kind of honor that can only
come about through faith and virtuous deeds. The highest ranks of this
type of honor are specific to the truly pious.

[^28]: - Sūrah Aḥzāb 33:72.

[^29]: - Sūrah Ḥajj 22:66.

[^30]: - Sūrah ‘Alaq 96:6.

[^31]: - Sūrah Isrā’ 17:100.

[^32]: - Sūrah Ma‘ārij 70:18.

[^33]: - Sūrah Isrā’ 17:11

[^34]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:179.

[^35]: - در حديث آمد كه خلّاق مجيد خلق عالم را سه گونه آفريد يك گُرُه را
جمله عقل و علم وجود آن فرشته است و نداند جز سجود نيست اندر عنصرش حرص و
هوا نور مطلق زنده از عشق خدا يك گروه ديگر از دانش تهي همچو حيوان از علف
در فربهي او نبيند جز كه اصطبل و علف از شقاوت غافل است و از شرف و آن سوم
هست آدميزاد و بشر از فرشته نيمي و نيمي ز خر نيم خر خود مايل سفلي بود نيم
ديگر مايل عِلوي شود تا كدامين غالب آيد در نبرد زين دوگانه تا كدامين بُرد
نرد

[^36]: - The existence of various involuntary actions in humans does not
validate determinism and refute belief in free will and libertarianism.
In fact, finding even one volitional action in humans can prove free
will.

[^37]: - It is worthy of note that various rationales have been
presented in verification of determinism. Some of these rationales are
philosophical and others are based on psychological and sociological
provisions. By referring to the physical characteristics of the human
body, various determinists have claimed that no human action is truly
volitional and free of physiological determinative factors. Thus, one
may speak of the various approaches to determinism; such as the
philosophic approach, the sociologic approach, etc. In this discourse,
we shall discuss the Kalam approach that addresses the relationship of
free will with various religious beliefs regarding the attributes of
God.

[^38]: - In philosophical terms, the necessity for occurrence of a
volitional action is of the same type of the necessity for occurrence of
an effect whose sufficient cause is realized. In other words, when the
sufficient cause for the occurrence of a volitional action is
realized—including the external and internal conditions of the agent
such as selection, choice, and will—its occurrence becomes necessary.

[^39]: - For examples see: Sūrah Yūnus 10:100; and Sūrah Takwīr 81:29.

[^40]: - In various parts of the Mathnavī-e Ma‘navī (Spiritual
Couplets), Maulānā has utilized these evidences and has regarded them as
proofs of free will. Some of these verses include: a. Intuition of Free
will: Doubtless, we have free will; feeling cannot refute it. Free will
is hidden within us; when faced with a dilemma it is revealed. Intuition
shows the same as feeling does; O brother, they both are of the same
tier. (Book V) b. Indecision: That you ask yourself tomorrow, should I
do this or that; this itself is proof of free will, O Idol! We are
caught in indecision between two things; how can this indecision be
involuntary? How can ‘should I do this or that’ happen, if one’s hands
and feet are tied? (Book V) c. Ordering and Forbidding Others: No one
tells a stone to come; and who would seek loyalty from a piece of clod?
No one tells a stone that it has come late; or that O stick! Why have
you struck me? Orders, forbiddance, wrath, respect, and retribution; go
with nothing but free will, O true of heart! (Book V) d. System of
Reward and Punishment: Teachers beat their pupils; would they ever
punish a black stone? Would you ever tell a stone to come; and if not, I
will punish the naughty? (Book V) e. Regretting Evil Deeds: Our weeping
is a reason of free will; our embarrassment has become a reason for
compulsion. If there is no free will, what is this shame; what are pity,
humiliation, and modesty? If all was compulsion, who would be
embarrassed; if all was injustice who would be guardian? (Book I)

[^41]: - Sūrah Kahf 18:29.

[^42]: - Sūrah Anbīyā’ 21:35.

[^43]: - Sūrah Sāffāt 37:24.

[^44]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:163.

[^45]: - Sūrah Dhārīyāt 51:56.

[^46]: - ‘Ilm ul-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 49. Also according to Sa‘dī : رسد
آدمي به جايي كه به جز خدا نبيند بنگر كه تا چه حد است مكان آدميت Humans
can reach the status that they see naught but God; Behold the greatness
of humanity’s position. And Shaīkh Maḥmūd Shabastarī said in his book
Gulshan-e Rāz: به نزد آنكه جانش در تجلّيٰ است همه عالم كتاب حقْ تعاليٰ
است According to one whose whole being is infused with revelation; The
whole world is the book of Divine Truth (God).

[^47]: - Sūrah Tawbah 9:128.

[^48]: - Uṣūl-e Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 11.

[^49]: - عقل ايماني چو شخص عادل است پاسبان و حاكم شهر دل است بس نكو گفت
آن رسول دلنواز ذره‌اي عقلت به از صوم و نماز زانكه عقلت جوهر است اين دو
عرض اين دو تكميل آن شد مفترض

[^50]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:191.

[^51]: - Sūrah Ghāfir 40:65.

[^52]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:55.

[^53]: - These verses generally begin with the term “ربّنا” (Our Lord!)
and relate the substance of the supplications of prophets, saints, and
the faithful [mu’minūn]. For examples, see: Sūrah Baqarah 2:201, 2:250;
and Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:8-9, 3:16.

[^54]: - In many Hadiths, Salāt is enumerated as one of the five pillars
of Islam.

[^55]: - The curve of the eyebrows is symbolic of God’s characteristics.

[^56]: - در نمازم خم ابروي تو در ياد آمد حالتي رفت كه محراب به فرياد آمد

[^57]: - Comprehensive exposition of the spiritual and mystical secrets
of Ṣalāt may be found in the two books Sirr uṣ-Ṣalāt (The Secrets of
Ṣalāt) and Ādāb uṣ-Ṣalāt (The Disciplines of the Prayer, The Institute
for Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, Intrnational
Affairs Department, Publisher,1996) of the perfect mystic Imam Khomeini
(r) and also Shahīd-e Thānī’s Ādāb uṣ-Ṣalāt. In light of the fact that
Islamic theosophy [‘irfān] has a very technical language and contains
esoteric theosophical terms, we shall endeavor to elucidate the secrets
of Ṣalāt in simple terms as much as possible.

[^58]: - Wuḍu is a type of ritual partial ablution that is a
prerequisite to Ṣalāt. [trans.]

[^59]: - Takbīr is the name of the invocation “اللهُ اكبر” [Allāhu
Akbar] meaning God is the Greatest. [trans.]

[^60]: - It has been narrated of Imam Ṣādiq (‘a) that he asked the
opinion of one of his followers about “الله اكبر” [Allāhu Akbar]. The
follower replied, “God is greater than all objects.” The Imam (‘a)
declared, “Is there any object next to God to which He may be greater?”
He then interpreted Allahu Akbar thus: الله اكبرُ مِنْ اَنْ يُوصَفَ “God
is greater than can be described.” (Baḥār al-Anwār, vol. 84, p. 257)

[^61]: - من از آن دم كه وضو ساختم از چشمه عشق چار تكبير زدم يك سره بر هر
چه كه هست

[^62]: That is, I attest that there is no god but Allah (the One God):
“اَشْهَدُ اَنَّ لا اِله الّا الله”. [trans.]

[^63]: - This means, I attest that Muḥammad is God’s messenger:
“اَشْهَدُ اَنَّ مُحَمَّداً رسولُ الله”. [trans.]

[^64]: - The translation of which is, I attest that ‘Alī is God’s
vicegerent: “اَشْهَدُ اَنَّ علياً وليُّ الله”. [trans.] It is worthy of
note that this term is not part of Adhān or Iqāmah, even so, saying it
is desirable and recommended [mustaḥabb].

[^65]: - Which means, hasten towards Salāt: “حَيَّ عَلَى الصَّلوة”
[trans.]

[^66]: - This means, hasten towards salvation: “حَيَّ عَلَى الفَلاح”.
[trans.]

[^67]: - That is, hasten towards the best of deeds: “حَيَّ عَلَىٰ خَيْرِ
العَمَلِ”. [trans.]

[^68]: - There is no god but Allah: “لا اله الا الله”. [trans.]

[^69]: - Verily, Salāt has commenced: “قَدْ قٰامَتِ الصلوٰة”.

[^70]: - Sūrah Sajdah 32:16.

[^71]: - The holy prophet (ṣ) has stated: “The best of people is one who
loves worship, embraces it, and likes it with one’s whole heart…”
(Uṣūl-e Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 131)

[^72]: - For information regarding these issues, see exegeses of the
Qur’an, especially mystical exegeses such as Imam Khomeinī’s
interpretation of Sūrah Ḥamd.

[^73]: - This is the direction of the Ka‘bah in Mecca towards which
Muslims turn to pray in Ṣalāt. [trans.]

[^74]: - Refer to the discussion “Understanding Divine Attributes” in
section two of current chapter.

[^75]: - According to the Qur’an (Sūrah Aḥzāb 33:40), prophet Muḥammad
(ṣ) is the Seal of the Prophets. This means that he is the final prophet
or the Seal in the line of divine prophets, which are said to number
124,000. Hence, the teachings of Islam are God’s final revelation unto
humanity. [trans.]

[^76]: - This is the Islamic salutation wishing health and peace.
[trans.]


