Section Four: Cosmology [jahān shināsī]
=======================================

In addition to endeavoring to understand our Lord and ourselves, our
human curiosity and inquisitiveness provokes us to attempt to understand
the world by studying the phenomena around us and the laws governing
them. Basically, we can regard the inception and development of many
human sciences an effect of the innate human need to understand the
universe. In other words, the sphere of our awareness is not restricted
to Allah-awareness and self-awareness. In fact, the perfection of
humanity’s knowledge depends on understanding the third side of the
triangle of knowledge, that is, world-awareness.[^1]

In previous sections, we briefly explained the Islamic perspective about
theology and anthropology. Herein, the question discussed is whether
Islam has presented information regarding understanding the world in
addition to these two subjects. In other words, essentially, can one
speak of an issue called Islamic cosmology?

A glance at Islam’s revelational knowledge (i.e. the Holy Qur’an and
authentic narrations [riwāyāt al-mu’tabar]) presents us with an
affirmative answer. Yea, Islam has presented many truths regarding the
origin of the universe, natural and metaphysical phenomena, and the laws
governing them. There are innumerable Qur’anic verses and Hadith that
speak of cosmological matters. Due to the infallibility of divine
revelation, the intellect requires that all Moslems have faith in the
eternal verity of these teachings and consider them the absolute truth.

Religious and Scientific Cosmology
----------------------------------

The existence of cosmological truths in the Qur’an does not make it a
cosmogonical, geological, or biological textbook; rather, there are
differences that completely differentiate the Qur’an from texts on
natural sciences. Even disregarding the infallibility of Qur’anic
teachings, one of the fundamental differences is in its objectives. The
ultimate mission and aim of the Qur’an is guiding humans toward true
perfection, salvation, and bliss.

Therefore, everything that the Qur’an states about the world is related
to and serves this purpose. Even though the cosmological verses of the
Qur’an present us with truths about world phenomena, understanding these
truths is not the ultimate purpose, but a passageway to better
understanding God, His attributes, humanity’s status in existence, and
the telos of human creation. In other words, cosmology is in the service
of religious anthropology and theology.

Consequently, the general method of the Qur’an is to introduce natural
phenomena according to their connection and relation with God and
humanity. However, understanding phenomena and the laws governing them
is the final purpose in the natural sciences. If there is any other
purpose in natural sciences, it is nothing but human domination and
exploitation of nature.

This difference is the basis for various additional differences. For
example, because the purpose of natural sciences is understanding the
world, scientists regard themselves obligated to research all phenomena
in connection with their field of study.[^2]

However, since the Qur’an’s ultimate purpose is guiding humanity towards
salvation and bliss, it is selective of natural phenomena and only
stresses phenomena that are related to the telos of the Qur’an.
Accordingly, it has only presented cosmological issues that are
effective in attaining this purpose. This distinction has an important
consequence; the expectation that the Qur’an should answer all
conceivable questions regarding all the diverse natural sciences (such
as physics, chemistry, biology, cosmogony, etc.) is completely
irrelevant.[^3]

Doubtless, presenting a somewhat comprehensive discussion on Islamic
cosmology would require the composition of many books and articles.
Here, we shall suffice with several general trends in religious
cosmology. Afterwards, we shall present a short account of Islam’s view
regarding several natural and metaphysical phenomena.

The Invisible [ghayb] and the Manifest [shahādat]
-------------------------------------------------

An important principle in Islamic cosmology is differentiating between
the Invisible world [‘ālam al-ghayb] and the Manifest world [‘ālam
al-shahādat]. The words “ghayb” and “shahādat” respectively mean
“invisible” and “manifest”. The definition of “ghayb” is that which is
outside the sphere of our perception and awareness; as opposed to
“shahādat” which is that which is perceivable. According to these
definitions, it is clear that “ghayb” and “shahādat” are relative. That
is, it is possible for a specific object be “ghayb” with respect to a
particular person with distinct sensory faculties and be “shahādat” for
a different person with dissimilar sensory faculties.[^4]

With regard to this explanation, in Islamic cosmology, the Invisible
world [‘ālam al-ghayb] is the part of existence that is imperceptible by
human senses and is indiscernible with normal sensory experience.
According to Islamic belief, part of existence is invisible to us humans
and thus, we cannot perceive all truths about the world and external
entities using sensory faculties. The Islamic teaching that segregates
“ghayb” from “shahādat” situates Islam in opposition to materialist and
secularist schools—which refute all nonmaterial and imperceptible facts.
According to this doctrine, there are truths that human senses can never
understand. The Holy Essence of God, angels, and revelational phenomena
are examples of the Invisible World. The Holy Qur’an regards faith in
the Invisible the first characteristic of the pious and the prerequisite
for human guidance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ذلكَ الكتابُ لا رَيْبَ فيهِ هدیً لِلمُتَّقينَ. الّذينَ يُؤمِنونَ
بالغَيبِ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is the book wherein there is no doubt [and it is] a guidance to
the pious. They who have faith in the Invisible…”***[^5]

Obviously, the invisible part of existence only pertains to beings with
limited knowledge and awareness. This segregation is meaningless
regarding God—who is omniscient. This is why the glorious Qur’an
introduces God as the “‘ālim ul-ghaībi wa ash-shahadah”[^6] (Knower of
the Invisible and the Manifest) and “‘allām ul-qhuyūb”[^7] (Knower of
All Things Hidden).

This distinction signifies that existence is not restricted to the
natural world; rather, the world of perceptions is merely one of the
worlds in existence. It is, in fact, the lowliest of worlds. More
elevated worlds exist that cannot be perceived by the senses.[^8] The
Qur’an swears by both these worlds in order to emphasize the existence
of an unseen world beyond the natural world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فلا أُقسمُ بما تُبْصِرون. و ما لا تُبْصِرون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“No [it is not so]! I swear by what you see; and by what you see
not.”**[^9]

Even though there are fundamental differences between the Invisible and
Manifest Worlds, there is a deep and unbreakable bond between them.
Everything in the Manifest World is rooted in the Invisible. The Qur’an
reveals the profound fact that the source of all things is in God’s
possession and that all natural entities are in fact, a relegated form
of a truth that resides in the metaphysical world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ إِنْ مِن شيءٍ إِلّا عندنا خزآئِنُهُ و ما نُنَزِّله إلّا بقدرٍ
مَّعلوم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“And there is naught but that its treasuries are with Us, and We send
it down not save in specific amounts.”**[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
چرخ با اين اختران نغز و خوش و زيباستي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صورتي در زير دارد آنچه در بالاستي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The heavens full of stars are wonderful, delightful, beautiful;*

*What is above has an appearance below.*

The Justness [haqq madārī] of the World
---------------------------------------

Another prominent principle in Islamic cosmology is that the world has
been founded upon justice and it revolves in the orbit of equity. The
Noble Qur’an speaks of the justness of the world in various verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ما خَلَقَ الله السّماوات وَ الأَرض و ما بينهمآ إِلّا بالحقِّ و أَجَلٍ
مسمّىً و إِنَّ كَثيراً مِنَ النّاسِ بِلِقآئِ رَبِّهِم لَكٰفِرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has not created the heavens and earth and all in between save
in justice and an appointed end, yet surely many people deny the
encounter with their Lord.”***[^11]

Additionally, the Qur’an retells the state of people of God who after
contemplating Creation call upon their Lord in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ربنّا ما خلقتَ هذا باطلاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Lord! You have not created this [world] in vain!”***[^12]

Due to the extensiveness of the word “justice” [haqq], the justness of
the world of creation has a comprehensive definition with various
aspects. One facet of this truth is that the world is ordered and based
on divine laws and traditions. Islamic cosmology verifies that natural
and metaphysical laws govern worldly phenomena and introduces these laws
as divine traditions. In other words, divine fate [taqdīr] requires that
the world be organized by specific laws and that worldly phenomena work
under set restrictions. In representation of this truth, the Qur’an
declares that the ordered movement of celestial bodies is divine fate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و الشّمس تَجرى لمستقرّ لّهآ، ذلك تقديرُ العزيزِ الْعَليم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the sun moves within a set orbit; that is the destiny (or
decree) of the Omnipotent, the Omniscient.”*** [^13]

There is an aspect of God’s providence regarding the governing laws of
the universe that has a significant effect on the Islamic worldview: God
who has made these governing laws can also violate them. His will and
providence is transcendent to all laws. In other words, God is the
“rule-maker” and “rule-breaker”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
از سبب سازيش من سوداييم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وز سبب‌سوزيش سوفسطاييم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I am lovesick due to His rule-making;*

*And I am sophist due to His rule-breaking.*

God’s hands are not tied by traditions and laws that He Himself has
ordained. In fact, whenever divine wisdom requires, nature’s course is
altered and something occurs contrary to the normal order of the world.
Accepting that the Divine Will is not restricted to the framework of
natural laws opens the foundation to understanding and accepting other
tenets of faith, such as the concept of miracles.

Finality of Creation
--------------------

The justness of the world also manifests in the purposefulness or
finality [hadafmandī /ghāyatmandī] of the world of creation. According
to Islamic cosmology, the caravan of existence neither travels in a
confused and bewildered way towards an unknown objective nor walks
randomly and accidentally towards some obscure future. In actuality, the
Creator guides the world towards a predetermined end. The term “Ajal
im-musammā”[^14], which has been mentioned earlier, reveals the fact
that existence is advancing towards a determined and set terminus.

It must be said that a person’s belief in the principle of existential
finality and non-futility of Creation serves an important role in one’s
life. One who believes in this principle has no room for nihilist
thoughts and does not perceive life and the world as vain and futile.
Such persons continually endeavor to harmonize the music of their lives
with the general rhythm of creation synchronizing their life objectives
with their ultimate telos.

Best Possible System
--------------------

In Islamic cosmology, the pervading order in the world is considered the
best of all possible systems. As we have stated in the discussion on
divine wisdom, the sagacity of God requires that He create the best and
most perfect world among all illimitably possible worlds. It seems that
the Qur’an indicates this fact where it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الّذي أحسنَ كلَّ شيءٍ خَلَقَهُ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[He is] who has created all things perfect.”***[^15]

Naturally, it may seem that because this world contains evils, and a
world free of evils is better than one soiled by them, this world is
therefore not the best of all possible worlds. However, by briefly
referring to our concise discussion on the philosophy of evil, the
fallaciousness of this idea is revealed because within each evil various
wisdoms are embedded that justify their existence and make them
beneficial to the ideal perfection of the world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جهان چون چشم و خال و خط و ابروست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كه هر چيزي به جاي خويش نيكوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The world is like eyes and moles and hair and brows;*

*Everything is beautiful in its appropriate place.*

In short, according to Islam, all of creation is virtuous, beautiful,
and perfect, and what our superficial eyes perceive as ugly is, in
actuality, a part of the beautiful masterpiece of creation and a
building block in the balanced structure of the cosmos.

Belief in the virtuosity and beauty of the world has a great impact on
one’s happiness and bliss. This is because, believing in essential
wickedness of existence and ugliness and imbalance of creation traps
humanity in the snare of pessimistic philosophies and results in nothing
but cynicism and despair. Divine saints always see the world as a
manifestation of the absolute beauty of God. They love the world because
they deem it a symbol and display of the perfections of their Beloved;
they cry out that, “By the world I swear, I am exuberant that the world
is made exuberant by Him.”[^16]

Intrinsic Consciousness and Universal Praise [tasbīh al-‘umūmī]
---------------------------------------------------------------

According to materialist schools, material objects do not enjoy
consciousness and awareness. However, Islamic cosmology states that all
elements of existence even the lifeless phenomena of the natural world
possess a type of intrinsic consciousness [shu‘ūr al-bāṭinī] relating to
their Creator. By virtue of this consciousness they praise, glorify, and
thank their Lord:

***“The seven heavens and the earth and all within them extol Him, and
there is nothing that does not proclaim His praise, and yet you do not
realize their exaltation.”***[^17]

This verse clearly states that all of God’s creations are engaged in
veneration and exaltation of the Divine. Since these actions cannot be
executed without awareness and understanding, this verse reveals a
universal consciousness in all components of the world.

Nonetheless, various exegetes believe that this universal praise means
nothing more than the fact that each creation is a symbol of the
existence of the Creator and His attributes of beauty and greatness.
Allegorically, it is similar to a work of art that conveys the artistry
and proficiency of its creator, and in a way, praises the perfection of
its designer and glorifies Him of fault and inadequacy. However, this
interpretation is incompatible with various evidences regarding this
verse. In explanation, this definition of praise and exaltation is not
something we cannot understand because the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿... و لكن لّا تفقهونَ تسبيحَهُم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and yet, you do not realize their exaltation.”*** [^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كوه و دريا و درختان، همه در تسبيح‌اند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نه همه مستمعي فهم كند اين اسرار
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The mountains, seas, and trees are all praising Him;*

*Not all listeners can perceive these secrets.*[^19]

Thus, according to Islamic belief, even though we cannot perceive this
general consciousness and universal praise with our superficial senses,
all constituents of existence are engaged in praising their Lord.[^20]

God and the Universe
--------------------

As we have stated at the outset of this section, one of the qualities of
Islamic cosmology is that world phenomena are not regarded separate from
their Creator. Islam always considers the relation of the world with
regard to its originating agent and recognizes all beings in light of
their connection with God. All schools that believe in some manner in
God as the First Cause depict the connection between God and the world.

Sometimes He is regarded by other schools as the Prime Mover, who gave
the caravan of existence its initial momentum in the eternal past. At
other times, the relationship of God and the universe is reduced to the
relationship of a watchmaker and a watch—a watchmaker who created and
refined the world in the eternal past, after which the inner workings of
the watch automatically caused the continuation of existence![^21]

However, according to the Islamic perspective, the connection of God and
His creation is much more profound. Not only is God the Creator and
Originator of all creatures, He is their Contriver and Preserver. To
state matters differently, in every moment of existence, the entire
universe and its constituents are dependent upon and sustained by God
such that if divine grace were to be interrupted for even a moment,
their existence would instantaneously become void. In philosophical
terms, the world not only needs God for its inception, it also needs Him
for its perpetuation. Therefore, Islam teaches that God does not sit by
and merely watch the events and incidents occurring in the world;
rather, the Divine Essence, despite being exalted and magnificent,
accompanies even the lowliest elements of existence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و هو معكم أَينَ ما كُنتُم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He is with you wherever you may be.”***[^22]

Obviously, this is not spatial accompaniment because God transcends
space. This accompaniment signifies that God is the absolute preserver
and upholder of all of existence.[^23] Therefore, God is the closest
being to His creations—while this proximity does not cause His
limitation or incarnation in mundane objects—and also He is the apogee
of sublimity and ascendancy—while this culmination does not result in
His neglect of or remoteness from His creations. In our religious texts,
there are profound interpretations of the relationship of God and His
creations. Imam ‘Alī (‘a) has elucidated this connection in various
erudite sermons using varied terms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مع كل شيء لا بمقارنة و غير كلّ شيء لا بمزايلة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[God] is with all things without being their partner and is apart
from all things without being distant from them.”***[^24]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عالٍ في دُنوّهُ و دانٍ في علوّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[God] is close in His sublimity, and is Sublime in His
closeness.”***[^25]

Thus, in Islamic cosmology, the transcendence and immanence of God
coexist in an appropriate manner, whereas most other creeds only
emphasize one of these two issues and have refrained from converging
them.[^26]

Unity in Action
---------------

One of the tenets of Islam, which facilitates understanding the
relationship between God and the world, is the principle of unity in
action [Tawhīd al-af‘ālī]. Correct understanding of unity in action can
help us understand the depth of God’s link with creation and the
critical presence of the Divine Will on the stage of existence.

Unity in action means, the only independent agent—whose agency does not
rely on any other entity—is God. Consequently, the agency of all other
entities is a token of His agency and cannot be realized without His
explicit permission and providence. Thus, all occurrences in existence
are acts of God and under His influence and will.

Belief in unity in action opens new portals to understanding the world.
A person who believes in unity in action perceives the Divine Will in
all places and discerns the effects of His agency in all phenomena and
incidents. The world, in all its vastness and immensity, and with all
its colorfulness and diversity, is the manifestation of a united will.
Moreover, all alterations and transformations originate from a
changeless and exclusive fountainhead:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا حولَ و لا قوّةَ الّا بالله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no force or power but Allah.”***

Heeding the cosmological tenets of Islam assists us in sketching the
general lines of Islamic cosmology. Additionally, in light of these
precepts, we may better understand the theological and anthropological
teachings of Islam. Here, it is appropriate that we explain, in short,
various religious standpoints about world phenomena. As we have already
stated, Islamic cosmology is not restricted to deciphering natural and
material phenomena—it also includes supernatural creatures. Accordingly,
we shall divide our discussion into two chief parts: Natural phenomena
(the natural world) and paranormal entities (the supernatural world).

The Natural World
-----------------

The Qur’an speaks of natural phenomena in many verses. The variety of
natural phenomena, the multitude of Qur’anic verses on this issue, and
the limitation of this treatise all compel us to condense the material
and shorten our discussion.

### Creation of the Natural World

Various Qur’anic verses state that the world was created in six days.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ ربّكم اللهُ الّذي خلق السّماوات و الأَرض في سِتَّةِ أَيّامٍ
ثُمَّ استوى على العرش﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and earth in six
days, then established Himself atop the Throne.”***[^27]

Keeping in mind the fact that in the Qur’an, the term ﴿السّماوات و
الأَرض﴾ (the heavens and earth) usually indicates the entire natural
world,[^28] this verse signifies that the process of the natural world’s
creation took six days. However, what does day signify here? Due to the
two following facts, we can state that in this verse, “day” [yaūm]
indicates a specific time interval whose exact span is unknown to us.
First, before the formation of our solar system in its current form,
there was no such thing as day and night (according to the common usage
of these words). Second, the Qur’an also uses the word “day” [yaūm] to
indicate a specific time span.[^29] Therefore, we can only accurately
state that the creation of the natural world occurred during six time
spans or eras. Other verses indicate that the skies were created in two
eras;[^30] the earth was created in two eras,[^31] and finally, the
reserves and provisions of the earth were also created in two eras.[^32]

#### 1. The Heavens and the Earth

Many verses speak of the seven heavens:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اللهُ الّذي خلق سبعَ سماواتٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is Allah who created the seven heavens.”***[^33]

Additionally, various verses state that in the beginning, there was a
homogeneous universe consisted of a smoky or vaporous substance or
aerosol [dukhān], which God later formed into seven skies:

***“Next, He proceeded with the sky, which was as aerosol. Then He said
to the sky and the earth, ‘Come thou in obedience or by force!’ They
said, ‘We come in obedience!’ He subsequently ordained them as seven
skies in two days.”***[^34]

In truth, we know very little of the seven skies. What we do know has
been extracted from the Qur’an.

These skies are arranged above one another:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿الّذي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَماواتٍ طِبَاقاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[Allah is] who created the seven heavens in layers.”***[^35]

Additionally, the stars that shine at night exist in the lowest of the
seven skies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنّا زيّنّا السّمآءَ الدُّنيا بزينةِ الكواكِب﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, We have adorned the sky of the world with the ornamentation
of stars.”***[^36]

In contrast to sky, the Qur’an speaks of the earth as a singular
noun.[^37] In describing the earth, the Qur’an mostly emphasizes
qualities that illustrate the benefits of this telluric haven for
humanity and naturally, it reminds of God’s characteristic of Creativity
in all places.[^38]

According to the Qur’an, God has ordained the world for humans as an
expansive bed,[^39] a docile mount,[^40] a place of lodging[^41] and
tranquility,[^42] and a reserve for sustenance.[^43] Moreover, in
various verses, after indicating that God brought new life to the earth
by sending down rain, the Qur’an states that this phenomenon is an
example of resurrection:

“And of His signs is that you see the earth lifeless, and then when We
send down water upon it, it quivers and flourishes. Surely, He who
revives it is also reviver of the dead.”[^44]

#### 2. Celestial Bodies

The Qur’an regards celestial bodies submissive to God. It stresses that
the movements and effects of these bodies are according to a plan that
the Creator of the World has set for them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ الشَّمسَ وَ القَمَرَ و النُّجُومَ مُسَخَّراتٍ بِأَمرِه﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And [He created] the sun and moon and stars, subservient to His
command.”***[^45]

Of the benefits of stars, other than that they are the adornments of the
sky and make it beautiful,[^46] is that we can use them to find our way
on land and sea.[^47] Furthermore, various Qur’anic verses reveal the
fact that celestial bodies move in determined orbits such that they do
not collide in normal circumstances. In Sūrah Yāsīn, after speaking of
the movements of the earth and moon, it is stated that these two
celestial bodies never collide, because they float in set orbits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ كلٌّ في فَلَكٍ يَسبَحون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And each drifts in an orbit.”***[^48]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ماه و خورشيد به منزل، چو امر تو رسند
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يار مه‌روي مرا نيز به من باز رسان
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The sun and moon attain their places at your command;*

*So also, return to me my pale-faced sweetheart.*

#### 3. Terrestrial Phenomena

Many Qur’anic verses speak of natural earthly phenomena. Mountains have
been identified as anchorages [rawāsī] or nails [aūtād] that cause the
steadiness and solidification of the earth and prevent earthquakes[^49]
and they are also convenient refuges for humans.[^50] Various verses
also indicate that even though mountains seem tenacious and immobile,
they move like clouds.[^51] Moreover, various verses indicate the effect
of rain in generating stationary waters (seas),[^52] free-flowing
springs,[^53] and plant growth.[^54]

Additionally, the Qur’an states that God has made the seas obedient to
humanity, so that they may both sail upon it[^55] and utilize its food
reserves and hidden jewels[^56]—such as pearls. Other verses illuminate
the functions of wind and clouds and their advantages to humans.[^57]

#### 4. Plants and Animals

The Qur’an indicates the gendered system (the state of being female or
male) of plants and emphasizes their balance and beauty.[^58] According
to the Qur’an, God causes the germination of seeds and fruiting of trees
by sending down rain and thus provides the sustenance of humans, and
wild and domestic animals.[^59] Furthermore, the diversity and range of
plants are considered signs of God.[^60]

The Qur’an regards the soaring of birds an act of God and thus
enumerates this phenomenon as one of His signs.[^61] Additionally,
several uses of domestic animals are specified in various verses,
including transportation of loads, source of food and clothing,
etc.[^62] The Qur’an also declares that the milk-making process in
animal bodies is a lesson.[^63]

The Qur’an especially favors various specific animals such as the
honeybee and regards the structure of their hives and their honey making
industry a sign for the thoughtful.[^64]

Again, we must stress the fact that due to their function of guidance
our religious texts regard phenomena of the natural world from a
specific point of view and pursue explicit objectives by presenting
cosmological issues. Some of these objectives are:

Laying the foundation for human contemplation of the order of the world

Familiarity with divine attributes; such as knowledge, wisdom, and power

Presentation of evidence for divine unity, especially unity in action
and its various branches such as unity in lordship and world
administration [tadbīr al-‘ālam]

Preparing humans so they may rise above the appearances of the world and
realize the truths that lay beyond worldly veneers and perceive God’s
hand above all natural causes

Cultivation of love, passion, and affection towards God

Arousing the feeling of gratitude through enumeration of divine
blessings

The Supernatural World
----------------------

We previously stated that in Islamic cosmology, portions of the world of
creation pertain to supernatural creatures. Here we shall take a glance
at Islam’s perspective on immaterial entities.

### 1. Angels

One of the definite tenets of Islamic cosmology is the existence of
entities called angels [malak]. Many Qur’anic verses and Hadith speak of
angels and their qualities, attributes, and actions. Here, we shall
succinctly indicate some of Islam’s teachings regarding these divine
creations:

#### a. The Nature of Angels

The Holy Qur’an does not clearly speak of the nature and essence of
angels. It is evident that angels have a different nature than humans
and other intelligent creations, such as jinn.[^65] However, the reality
of their essence is a controversial issue. Some Muslim scholars believe
they are immaterial and incorporeal entities. Others believe that they
have subtle bodies, which are different from non-subtle bodies, that
have three dimensions, weight, and mass and can be perceived by normal
senses. Nevertheless, all agree that angels cannot be perceived by the
outward senses of humans.[^66]

#### b. The Immaculacy and Worship of Angels

The essence of angels is completely intellectual and has no taint of
carnality or hedonistic desires. Thus, they continuously worship and
glorify their Lord and never defy or rebel against God. The Qur’an
describes angels thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿بَلْ عِبادٌ مُكْرَمون. لايَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالقَولِ وَ هُم بِأَمْرِهِ
يَعْمَلُون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Rather, [angels] are noble servants. They do not overtake Him in
speech, and they perform as He commands.”***[^67]

In addition, of the angels that guard hell it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا يَعْصُونَ اللهَ مآ أَمَرَهُم وَ يَفْعَلُونَ ما يُؤْمَرُون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They disobey not Allah in what He commands and perform what they are
commanded.”***[^68]

#### c. Divine Mission [risālat al-ilāhī]

Angels have been appointed by God with divine missions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿اللهُ يَصْطَفِي مِنَ الملائِكَةِ رُسُلاً...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah appoints of the angels, messengers …”***[^69]

With regard to the role of angels in world administration [tadbīr
al-‘ālam], we can state that their mission encompasses two functions.
That is, their genetic mission [risālat al-takwīnī], which is
administration of world affairs and performing divine commands, and
their legislative mission [risālat al-tashrī‘ī], which is intermediacy
in divine revelation unto prophets.

#### d. The Occupations of Angels

The Noble Qur’an has enumerated many deeds for angels.[^70] Transmitting
divine revelation to the prophets,[^71] administration of world affairs
and mediation in imparting divine blessings upon God’s creatures,[^72]
repentance and intercession on behalf of the faithful,[^73] aiding the
faithful[^74], damning unbelievers,[^75] recording people’s deeds,[^76]
and taking souls at the time of death[^77] are several divine
commissions that angels undertake. Angels are also present in the world
of Barzakh[^78] and the afterlife; some reside in heaven,[^79] and
others are the keepers of Gehenna/Hell [jahannam] and its
inhabitants.[^80]

In addition, Angels continuously worship, revere, and praise God. They
never stop and never do anything else. According to the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿و مَنْ عندهُ لا يَستَكبِرُونَ عَن عِبادَتِهِ و لا يَستَحْسِرُون.
يُسَبِّحُون اللَّيلَ و النّهارَ لا يَفتُرُون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who are with Him never wax too proud to serve Him and
never grow weary. They glorify Him night and day without remit.”***[^81]

#### e. The Hierarchy and Order of Angels:

According to the previous discussions, angels are divided into various
echelons based on their various commissions. The fact whether various
orders of angels are typically and essentially different or not is
obscure to us. This much can be derived from the Qur’an and traditions
that angels do possess various ranks and echelons and some are
subordinate to others. The Qur’an declares that each angel possesses a
determined station and rank:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ ما مِنّآ إِلّا لَهُ مَقامٌ مَعلومٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there are none of us (angels) save who has a determined
rank.”***[^82]

Moreover, various Qur’anic verses reveal that the Angel of Revelation
(i.e. Gabriel) has various aides that are subordinate to him.[^83] The
Angel of Death (i.e. Azrael) also has agents among the angels.[^84]
Various traditions indicate that Gabriel [jibrā’īl], Michael [mīkā’īl],
Israfel [isrāfīl], and Azrael [‘izrā’īl] possess uniquely lofty ranks.

#### f. Incarnation of Angels

Even though angels are intangible, they can be incarnated in human form.
The Qur’an verifies this fact by relating various historic occurrences.
For example, various visits by angles to Abraham (‘a) and Lot (‘a) and
the embodiment of a divine angel as a human to bestow Jesus (‘a) upon
Mary (‘a) were some occurrences of the incarnation of angels in human
form.

### 2. Jinn

The jinn are another of God’s creations that cannot be experienced with
the senses under normal circumstances. The existence of jinn is an
unequivocal concept in Islamic cosmology since various Qur’anic verses
and Hadith clearly confirm this truth. The seventy-second Sūrah of the
Qur’an is named Jinn in which a conversation of a group of jinn who had
become Muslim has been recorded.

#### a. The Essence of Jinn:

In contrast to the angels, the Qur’an explicitly speaks of the essence
of the jinn’s creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ خَلَقَ الجآنَّ مِن مارِجٍ مِن نار﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He created the jinn of a smokeless fire.”***[^85]

However, it is not clear whether the fire that is the essence of the
jinn is the result of combustion or if it is essentially different.[^86]
What is clear is that the fiery nature of the jinn permits them to
traverse vast distances at staggering speeds and perform miraculous
deeds that normal humans cannot accomplish without special tools.[^87]

#### b. The Creational Antecedence of Jinn over Humans

Another item extracted from the Qur’an is that the jinn have been
created before humans. In Sūrah Ḥijr it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ الجآنَّ خَلَقْناهُ مِن قَبلُ مِن نارِ السَّمُوم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We created the jinn before [humans] of a blazing fire.”***[^88]

#### c. Reason, Free Will, and Responsibility

Jinn possess reason and free will; therefore, they are responsible
[mukallaf] just like humans. Some are believers, righteous, and the
elect of God and others shall be condemned to Hell due to their
deviation from the path of righteousness:

“***And surely among us, some have submitted [to Allah] and others have
deviated. Those who have submitted seek rectitude. But as for those who
have deviated, they shall be firewood for Hell.”***[^89]

Various Qur’anic verses also suggest that God has appointed prophets
from among the jinn as well so as to impart divine signs upon them.[^90]
Another point of correspondence among humans and jinn is that the
purpose of both races is servitude and worship of the One Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ ما خَلَقْتُ الجِنَّ و الإِنسَ إِلّا لِيَعبُدُون﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and humans but that they worship
Me***.”[^91]

#### d. Communal Life

Various Hadith and Qur’anic verses indicate that like humans, the jinn
live in communities. The Qur’an states the fact that nations of jinn
existed in the past. The word “ummah” (nation) is an explicit indicator
of the social lives of jinn. Furthermore, the system of marriage and
reproduction exists among the jinn as well.

#### e. The Relationship of Jinn and Humans

Even though the jinn are normally intangible, sometimes a unique liaison
is created between various jinn and humans. According to the Qur’an,
various jinn were among the subordinates and soldiers of Solomon
(‘a).[^92] On the other hand, at various points in time, groups of
humans worshiped jinn and on occasion, some became subservient minions
to jinn.[^93]

### 3. Satan [shaytān]

A third intangible entity who has been named in our religious texts is
Satan [shaytān] or Iblis. Shaytān is sometimes used as a
qualifier—meaning wicked and evil. This usage pertains to both humans
and jinn:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ كَذٰلِكَ جَعَلنا لِكُلِّ نَبيٍّ عَدُوّاً شَياطينَ الإِنسِ وَ
الجنِّ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thus We appointed for each prophet an enemy—satans of human and
jinn.”***[^94]

In addition, sometimes it is used referring to the object of our
discussion.[^95] However, the name Iblis is a proper noun and thus, it
is not used for other entities except metaphorically, allegorically, or
innuendo.

#### a. The Nature of Satan

The Qur’an explicitly states that Satan is of the jinn:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَسَجَدُوا إَلّآ إِبليسَ كانَ مِنَ الجِنِّ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then they [all] bowed save for Iblis who was of the jinn.”***[^96]

As a rationale for his transgression against the divine order to bow
before Adam (‘a), Satan emphasized the fact that he was created from
fire whereas Adam (‘a) was created from clay. As we have previously
stated, the Qur’an attests to the fact that the essence of jinn is fire.

Nevertheless, religious texts about Satan reveal the fact that before
his insurrection, he worshiped God for a very long time. Due to the
exuberance of his worship, he entered the order of angels and as a
result, God’s command to the angels to bow before Adam (‘a) included
Satan as well.

#### b. The History of Satan

Satan has a singularly amazing and edifying history that is indicated in
various sections of the Qur’an. Here is a short version of the Qur’anic
story of Satan: At the beginning, due to the profuseness of his worship,
Satan was affiliated with the order of angels. After creating Adam (‘a),
God commanded the angels—including Satan—to prostrate themselves before
Adam (‘a). However, Satan was too proud to prostrate himself and
refused.[^97]

In order to vindicate himself of this defiance, Satan resorted to a
fallacious argument. Due to his fiery essence, Satan considered himself
superior to Adam (‘a) who was created of clay.[^98] This was a great
test and Satan failed it in disgrace. Because of this blatant rebellion,
Satan fell from his lofty station and he was cast out of the divine
court.[^99]

Thus, Satan was cursed by God until the Day of Judgment.[^100]
Thereupon, Satan professed his enmity with Adam (‘a) and in order to
seduce and corrupt Adam (‘a) and his children, he asked God to respite
him until the Resurrection.[^101] Consequently, in His divine wisdom,
God gave Satan amnesty for a fixed period—the duration of which is
unclear to us.[^102]

#### c. Satan’s Campaign

Satan employs various methods to corrupt humans. One of these methods is
instigating evil whispers [waswasah] or suggestions within humans. The
Qur’an attests that by evil whispers [waswasah], Satan tempted Adam (‘a)
and Eve (‘a) to eat from the forbidden tree and deceived them through
perjury.[^103] Another of his methods is beautifying and glamorizing
evil deeds.[^104] Satan illustrates the pleasures of sins more ardently
than they truly are so as to trap humans in the snare of vices.

Additionally, Satan makes promises to his followers; promises that shall
never be realized.[^105] In order to prevent benevolence or charity
[infāq] he discourages people with the threat of poverty and
destitution.[^106] He induces humans to forget God.[^107] In précis,
Satan is humanity’s most significant external motivator of evil and
wicked deeds.[^108]

It must be noted that none of the seductive and deceptive methods of
Satan can overrule free will. In fact, ultimately, humans themselves
consent to Satan’s dominance over them. They themselves put on the
collar of Satan’s discipleship and say labbayk [^109] to his call. The
Qur’an depicts a scene from the Hereafter in which Satan addresses the
souls of the damned and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ ما كانَ ليَ عَلَيكُم مِن سُلطانٍ إِلّآ أَن دَعَوْتُكُم
فَاستَجَبتُمْ لي، فَلا تَلُومُوني و لُومُوۤا أَنفُسَكُم﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I had no dominance over you except that I called to you and you
answered me; so do not reproach me but reproach yourselves.”***[^110]

Hence, the existence of Satan and his schemes and tricks do not
contradict our free will or responsibilities toward ourselves. We are
ultimately accountable for our own actions in the end—no excuses
whatsoever.

[^1]: - We must note that by world-awareness or cosmology in the present
discourse, especially when used in contrast to understanding God and
humanity, we mean the study of all beings in existence except God and
humans. Thus, from this perspective, cosmology is more specific in
meaning than worldview. Naturally, due to the close rapport between God,
humanity, and the world, sometimes cosmology is interwoven with
theological and anthropological issues such that accurately
distinguishing between them would be difficult.

[^2]: - One of the positive points of cosmogony—i.e. scientific
cosmology—is its unique precision and fastidiousness which is applied
throughout various experiments and calculations. On the other hand, due
to its reliance on physical perceptions, it is unable to explain
metaphysical phenomena. Therefore, it is befitting that these sciences
remain reticent regarding these phenomena and refrain from attempts to
deny or refute them.

[^3]: - Some scholars believe that all sciences, technology, and
knowledge have been expressed in the Holy Qur’an, but we have yet to
find the necessary tools to extract them. Naturally, proving this theory
would be extremely difficult and as long as it is not proven, it shall
remain a hypothesis.

[^4]: - For instance, a truth may be “shahādat” for our intellect and be
“ghayb” regarding our senses.

[^5]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:2-3.

[^6]: - Sūrah Tawbah 9:94.

[^7]: - Sūrah Tawbah 9:78.

[^8]: - Islamic thinkers have uniquely depicted the various aspects of
existence. According to philosophers, after the essence of God is the
world of pure intelligents [‘ālam-e ‘uqūl], and inferior to that is the
world of ideas [‘ālam-e mithāl]. Finally, there is the natural world
which is the lowliest world regarding its existential status. In
addition, Sufis divide the main worlds into five planes: realm of the
divinity [lāhūt], realm of omnipotence [jabarūt], angelic realm
[malakūt], the realm of sovereignty [mūlk], and the realm of humanity
[nāsūt]. The three first planes are invisible and the other two are
manifest.

[^9]: - Sūrah Ḥāqqah 69:38-39.

[^10]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:21.

[^11]: - Sūrah Rūm 30:8.

[^12]: - Sūrah Āl ‘Imrān 3:191. The Qur’an introduces justness in the
world in various manners. Sometimes it talks of the creation of the
heavens and earth based on justice (such as Sūrah An‘ām 6:73; Sūrah
Ibrāhīm 14:19; Sūrah Ḥijr 15:85; etc.). At other times it emphasizes
that, the creation of the world is not in vain (such as Sūrah Ṣād
38:27). In addition, in some verses it states that God has not created
the world for sport (Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:16): ﴿و ما خلقنا السّماواتِ و
الأَرضَ و ما بينَهُما لاعبين﴾ “And we have not created the heavens and
earth and all that is in between for sport.” We must note that in the
Qur’an, the term “heavens and earth” especially when accompanied by the
term “ما بينهما” (all in between) is generally an allusion to the entire
natural world.

[^13]: - Sūrah Yāsīn 36:38.

[^14]: - Sūrah Rūm 30:8; ﴿أَجَلٍ مُّسَمّىٰ﴾ means appointed end.
[trans.]

[^15]: - Sūrah Sajdah 32:7.

[^16]: - That is, “به جهان خرم از آنم كه جهان خرم از اوست”.

[^17]: - Sūrah Isrā’ 17:44.

[^18]: - Ibid.

[^19]: - This verse is from Sa‘dī. The second hemistich is a poetic
interpretation of ﴿... لا تفقهونَ تسبيحَهُم ﴾.

[^20]: - Due to this fact, it has been stated of some illuminated
mystics that in some of their transcendental spiritual and mystical
states, they have heard the entrancing exaltation of various creations.
It is also said of the prophet of Islam (ṣ) that one of his miracles was
that he could hear the praise and glorification of grains of sand.

[^21]: - In divine philosophy and theosophy, the relationship of God and
the world is rendered in unique manners. Philosophers mostly explain it
in the form of a causal relationship, whereas mystics mostly emphasize
theophany [tajallī] and manifestation [ẓuhūr], and regard the universe a
manifestation and symbol of divine names and attributes.

[^22]: - Sūrah Ḥadīd 57:4.

[^23]: - Islamic philosophers term this accompaniment, “sustainment
simultaneity” [ma‘iyat-e qayyūmī]; that is, the togetherness of a
sustainer entity and beings whose preservation depend on that entity.

[^24]: - Nahj ul-Balāghah, sermon 1.

[^25]: - ‘Allāmah Majlisī, Baḥār al-Anwār, vol. 9, p. 189.

[^26]: - For instance, in Hinduism, God’s transcendency is emphasized to
such degree that His existence is totally severed from the world. In
contemporary Christianity, even though the principle of Jesus (‘a) as
the incarnation of God depicts a close relationship between God and the
World, God’s purity and transcendence is thoroughly impaired.

[^27]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:54.

[^28]: - Sometimes, in the Qur’an, the word ﴿سماء﴾ [samā’] is used with
another meaning disparate from material skies; it seems rather that it
means the metaphysical planes. For examples, see: Sūrah Mā’idah 5:112,
5:114.

[^29]: - Sūrah Ḥajj 22:47; and Sūrah Ma‘ārij 70:4.

[^30]: - Sūrah Fuṣṣilat 41:12.

[^31]: - Ibid 41:9.

[^32]: - Ibid 41:10.

[^33]: - Sūrah Ṭalāq 65:12. Some scholars believe that the literal
meaning of the number “seven” is not intended in this verse. They
believe it signifies the copiousness of its noun (heavens). However,
this belief is not compatible with the semblance of such verses,
especially verses that employ the number seven without a noun: ﴿و بنينا
فوقكم سبعاً شداداً﴾ “And We have built above you seven robust
[heavens].” Sūrah Naba’ 78:12.

[^34]: - Sūrah Fuṣṣilat 41:11-12.

[^35]: - Sūrah Mulk 67:3. Also, see: Sūrah Nūḥ 71:15.

[^36]: - Sūrah Ṣāffāt 37:6. Also, see: Sūrah Fuṣṣilat 41:12.

[^37]: - The term “Seven Terras” is used in a small number of Hadith.
This may be an indication of the large pieces of land on the earth. This
is because the word terra or earth [arḍ] is also used to mean pieces of
land.

[^38]: - These verses are interesting examples of the synthesis of
cosmology, theology, and anthropology in the Qur’an.

[^39]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:22.

[^40]: - Sūrah Mulk 67:15.

[^41]: - Sūrah Ghāfir 40:64.

[^42]: - Sūrah Zukhruf 43:10; and Sūrah Naba’ 78:6.

[^43]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:10.

[^44]: - Sūrah Fuṣṣilat 41:39.

[^45]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:54.

[^46]: - Sūrah Ṣāffāt 37:6.

[^47]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:97.

[^48]: - Sūrah Yāsīn 36:40. This verse shows that at the time that the
Ptolemaic system was prevalent in scientific circles, the Qur’an
rejected this theory. This is because this verse states that celestial
bodies drift in space; whereas, according to the Ptolemaic system, the
skies cannot be lacerated and mended and that heavenly bodies move with
the skies not within them.

[^49]: - Sūrah Ra‘d 13:3; Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:31; and Sūrah Naba’ 78:7.

[^50]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:81.

[^51]: - Sūrah Naml 27:88. This may be an indication of the axial spin
or the orbital revolution of the earth.

[^52]: - Sūrah Mu’minūn 23:18.

[^53]: - Sūrah Zumar 39:21.

[^54]: - Sūrah ‘Abas 80:25-32; and Sūrah A‘rāf 7:57.

[^55]: - Sūrah Jāthīyah 45:12.

[^56]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:14.

[^57]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:57; Sūrah Rūm 30:48; and Sūrah Fāṭir 35:9.

[^58]: - Sūrah Ra‘d 13:3; Sūrah Qāf 50:7; Sūrah Shu‘arā’ 26:7; and Sūrah
Ḥijr 15:19.

[^59]: - Sūrah ‘Abas 80:25-32.

[^60]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:99.

[^61]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:79; and Sūrah Mulk 67:19.

[^62]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:5-8.

[^63]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:66.

[^64]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:68-69.

[^65]: - In differentiation between humans and angels, Imam ‘Alī (‘a)
has stated: لَم يَسْكُنوا الأصلابَ وَ لَم يَغتَنِموا الأرحامَ وَ لَم
يُخْلَقوا مِنْ ماءٍ معينٍ “Angels do not reside in loins [of fathers]
and are not born of wombs [of mothers] and have not been created from
ignoble water.”

[^66]: - Muslim philosophers regard angels as incorporeal entities, some
of whom possess absolute intellectual incorporeality while others enjoy
transitive incorporeality and therefore can hold various material
qualities such as shape.

[^67]: - Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:26-27.

[^68]: - Sūrah Taḥrīm 66:6.

[^69]: - Sūrah Ḥajj 22:75. Additionally, see: Sūrah Fāṭir 35:1.

[^70]: - It must be noted that some of these affairs are specifically
stated in Qur’anic verses while others are inferred from various signs
and indications in the Qur’an.

[^71]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:2, 16:102; and Sūrah ‘Abas 80:16.

[^72]: - Sūrah Nāzi‘āt 79:5; and Sūrah Ma‘ārij 70:4.

[^73]: - Sūrah Ghāfir 40:7; Sūrah Anbiyā’ 21:28.

[^74]: - Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:124-125.

[^75]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:141; and Sūrah Āli ‘Imrān 3:87.

[^76]: - Sūrah Yūnus 10:21; Sūrah Zukhruf 43:80; and Sūrah Infiṭār
82:11.

[^77]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:61; Sūrah Nisā’ 4:97.

[^78]: - Sūrah Naḥl 16:28, 16:32. Barzakh literally means the barrier
between two things. It is an intermediate state between death and
resurrection. The Hebrew equivalent to Barzakh is Sheol. In Catholic
doctrine a close equivalent is purgatory. [trans.]

[^79]: - Sūrah Zumar 39:73; and Sūrah Anbīyā’ 21:103.

[^80]: - Sūrah Muddaththir 74:31.

[^81]: - Sūrah Anbīyā’ 21:19-20.

[^82]: - Sūrah Ṣāffāt 37:164.

[^83]: - Sūrah Takwīr 81:21.

[^84]: - Sūrah Sajdah 32:11; and Sūrah An‘ām 6:61.

[^85]: - Sūrah Raḥmān 55:15.

[^86]: - It has been surmised that fire signifies a type of energy that
cannot be evaluated using contemporary instruments and that can
transmute into matter by concentration. Through this speculation, the
fact that the jinn have been seen on occasion can be rationalized.

[^87]: - In the story of the conjuration of the throne of the Queen of
Sheba [saba’], the Qur’an attests to the fact that one of the jinn, an
afreet [ifrīt], in the service of Solomon (‘a) declared that he could
present her throne, before Solomon (‘a) could rise from his seat. (See:
Sūrah Naml 27:38-39)

[^88]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:27.

[^89]: - Sūrah Jinn 72:14-15.

[^90]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:130.

[^91]: - Sūrah Ḍārīāt 51:56.

[^92]: - Sūrah Naml 27:17, 27:39; and Sūrah Saba’ 34:14.

[^93]: - Sūrah Saba’ 34:41; and Sūrah An‘ām 6:100, 6:128.

[^94]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:112.

[^95]: - In the Qur’an, Shaytān is used both with the definite article
“ال”, indicating it as a proper noun and without the definite article,
denoting it as a qualifier.

[^96]: - Sūrah Kahf 18:50.

[^97]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:28-31.

[^98]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:12; and Sūrah Ḥijr 15:33.

[^99]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:34.

[^100]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:35.

[^101]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:14; and Sūrah Ḥijr 15:36.

[^102]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:37-38. It is self-evident that Satan’s amnesty
and means for temptation is a part of God’s tradition of trialing
humans. The existential philosophy of Satan is indicated in Sūrah Saba’:
﴿وَ ما كانَ لَهُ عَلَيهِم مِن سلطانٍ إِلّا لَنَعلَمَ مَن يُؤمِنُ
بالأَخِرَةِ مِمَّن هُوَ مِنها فِي شَکٍّ﴾ “And he [Satan] had no
sovereignty over them save that We might differentiate those who believe
in the Hereafter from those who doubt it.” (Sūrah Saba’ 34:21)

[^103]: - Sūrah A‘rāf 7:20-22.

[^104]: - Sūrah Ḥijr 15:39.

[^105]: - Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:22.

[^106]: - Sūrah Baqarah 2:268.

[^107]: - Sūrah An‘ām 6:68.

[^108]: - Sūrah Nūr 24:21.

[^109]: - This means, at your service. [trans.]

[^110]: - Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:22.


