Foreword
========

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

The Book in hand is the compilation of the series of lectures that were
delivered to a select group of young men over a long period of time by
Professor Mohsin Qara'ati. It is the substance of his speeches that he
made from time to time. The novel style together with his insight and
vast knowledge of the teachings of Islam has brought fame to Prof.
Qara'ati.

It was about fifteen years ago that when Prof. Qara'ati rose as a
scholar from the religious centre of learning and teaching in Qum, he
selected for himself a different mode of imparting religious knowledge
to the younger people of his hometown.

One day while Prof. Qara'ati was on a visit to his hometown, Kashan, a
novel idea suddenly struck him. He saw some young men at the corner of
the street; approaching them he said: "O my dear young men! Can I have
the favor of winning your friendship so that we could give to one
another a good company in a ***masjid*** and have small discussions on
religious matters and arrive at a solution of problems confronting us".

Thus he started a program of giving lectures in a small ***masjid*** in
Kashan during the Holy month of Ramazan. At the end of the month, Prof.
Qara'ati suggested to his students to continue this program on weekly
basis. He used to come to Kashan every Friday and deliver lectures. This
routine continued for four years and the number of his people gradually
increased as they were greatly attracted by Prof. Qara'ati's talks.

When his fellow-students in Qum learnt about his activity in Kashan,
they became curious about it and wanted to have a close view of the
small gathering there. They liked the idea of imparting education on
religion in an exceptionally unique style of delivering brief talks with
audio-visual aids. Prof.

Qara'ati used a black-board for the purpose of demonstrations.
Gradually, they expanded the area of their activity on a countrywide
basis and an annual gathering was held in Qum. This program continued
for six years. This was the time when the last of the monarchs of the
Pahlavi dynasty ruled over the people of Iran in the most abominably
despotic manner.

He got very much scared of the activities of these devoted followers of
Islam and ultimately by the order of the Shah such meetings and seminars
on religious teachings were banned. Despite this Prof.

Mohsin Qara'ati stood as a sentinel, and his guidance and training of
his dedicated students which swelled in large numbers proved very
successful, as after the Islamic Revolution in Iran these classes were
given official recognition, so much so that his lectures are broadcast
by radio and telecast on television.

Now a few words about the book in itself. One thing is certain that
whatever you happen to read in this book it is the same which was taught
to his pupils by Prof. Qara'ati in his talks in the classroom through
audio-visual system.

But it is not necessary to explain here as to how these talks were
reproduced in the form of written lessons. It is just like an art of
chiseling statues out of stones. Just as chiseling itself cannot be
produced in writing so also the delivery of speech cannot be reproduced
in black and white.

Therefore, lecturing is like an art where words are chiseled out in
order to give a correct form and shape in the mind like mental pictures.
Here, the lecturing or delivering sermons is an art which the pupils
learn by watching and listening to an experienced teacher, who is the
master of his craft and who applies his own experience and vision. That
kind of acquiring knowledge is not as simple as studying books.

The series of lectures contained in this book have been based on
Qur'anic verses and the sayings of the Holy Prophet and his Chosen
descendants (peace be on them) with logical conclusions and connotations
of the subject-matter being dealt with therein.

Unfamiliar terms and unnecessary details have been avoided. Another
noteworthy point worth-mentioning is that these lessons were primarily
addressed to and meant for the pupils who were about 18 years of age.

Besides, the problems that have been discussed in these lessons were
solved by citing examples and quoting proverbs. Hence, the problems
appear to be interesting and the solution obtained by logic and
reasoning are easily understood.

It was a novel method that Prof. Qara'ati used on the pattern of
Qur'anic teachings. If one cares to scrutinize these lessons carefully
it will soon become evident that the Holy Qur'an too has used parables
and cited metaphors and similes.

In a nutshell one should take into consideration the following points;

**(i)** After completing the preliminary education one should decide to
teach the ideology and the principles of faith to the people or one
should hand over this responsibility to the one who is expert in this
field.

**(ii)** One should try to find out the dire necessity of the society
and one's inclinations to discover the Right Path so as to lead oneself
to that path.

**(iii)** Religious scholars, teachers and speakers should specialize in
more than one branch of knowledge e.g. Islamic history, Islamic
ideology, fundamentals of faith, exegeses and the art of teaching
children and young people.

**(iv)** The lecture classes in ***masjid*** should include the
imparting of religious knowledge to young girls, housewives, workers and
laborers and even educated male persons.

**(v)** The system of imparting knowledge should be adapted to the
present day conditions and demands, and the ***masjid***s should be
treated as the citadel of Islam as well as the seat of learning.

**(vi)** According to Imam Ja'far Sadiq, (peace is on him) a teacher
besides imparting lessons of fundamental knowledge, should also
enlighten his pupils on the subject in whom they are interested

**(vii)** Special care should be taken in teaching children and younger
people and this should be done by one who is expert in child psychology.

The large number of books which have been written for children and young
people in simple and easy-to-understand style are not sufficient enough
and, therefore, it is necessary that this work should be expanded on the
country-wide basis.

In conclusion, this book deals with all the vital problems that confront
our younger generation. We hope that this comprehensive book will also
help those who are engaged in teaching and learning the principles of
Islam. We pray to Almighty Allah to grant us enough strength to acquaint
the people in large numbers with the teachings of Islam.

***The Publishers***


