Monotheism
==========

We all have heard the word "Outlook on Universe" which means a complete
enunciation of life.

Some people who observe this Universe find it a meaningful creation
which has come into existence through purposeful intention with a
definite purpose, discipline and order. This is called "Divine Outlook
on Universe".

Some people say that neither there is any pre-arranged plan for the
existence of the Universe, nor is there any creator of it. Neither it
has any aim nor has it any purpose. This school of thought belongs to
"Materialistic Outlook on Universe". These are the two schools of
thought which we shall discuss below.

Hence, our view-point about the Universe and life is the basis of the
"Outlook on Universe".

Advantage of Discussion about the Outlook on Universe
-----------------------------------------------------

There is no ambiguity on the benefits and results of the two angles of
thought. If we think that this big house, that is the Universe, has
someone as its owner or master and it has some aims and purposes, it
will become incumbent upon us to mould ourselves with the purpose of
receiving favor of the master of this house, the Lord and the Creator,
to the path which He has set for us by His revelations through His
Prophets. But if this Universe happened to come into existence without
any aim and purpose, then obviously there will be no necessity of
accepting any discipline or regulatory restrictions.

Nowadays, the term "the duties of a responsible person" is much talked
about. We can be dutiful only when we are supposed to be responsible to
somebody for our actions and become accountable to him for commission
and omission of duties. Under such circumstances we can only be made to
feel our responsibility through Divine Outlook on Universe.

But according to materialistic Outlook on Universe, the Universe is
supposed to have come into existence without any pre-arranged plan and
it has assumed its present form and shape with the passage of time only.
All men are mortals.

They have to die one day or the other, and death will wipe them out
altogether. Therefore, the sole purpose of life is to make the best of
it by indulging in luxuries and revelries. That is to say the very
purpose of life is "eat, drink and be merry" and thereafter is
mortality.

According to this line of thinking we can pose a question to ourselves
as to why one should remain alive and why one should not commit suicide.
That is after several years of hardships and difficulties why should one
not come out of life's entanglement. Thus, if life has its purpose it
can only be viewed through the Divine Outlook on Universe.

We do not open our doors when a person knocks it in the dead hours of
night unless we know him fully well.

We cannot decide to take the kind of clothes to a place where we want to
go unless we first determine what type of weather is prevailing there.
We cannot decide to wear the kind of dress where we have been invited
unless we know beforehand the gathering is for a marriage ceremony or it
is a condolence meeting.

Thus it is necessary that we should first recognize our duties and
obligations. In other words, our dependence on the mode of thinking and
recognition of facts becomes the basis of our "Outlook on Universe" or
the outlook on life.

Selection of Outlook on Universe
--------------------------------

We have said it before that there are two view-points with regard to
Outlook on Universe and life, namely:

**1.** Divine Outlook according to which the Universe has its master,
aim and purpose.

**2.** Materialistic Outlook which does not admit any master, aim and
purpose for the Universe, that is, the Universe is without its master or
controller, aim and purpose, and is retrogressive.

Man however, has to choose any of the two methods of approach as said
earlier. The recognition of the best possible view-point is dependent on
the following factors:

**1.** That method of approach which is related to intellect, reasoning
and evidence.

**2.** That view-point and its elaboration which is compatible with our
natural disposition.

**3.** That method of approach which makes man feels his responsibility
and obligations, and which fills him with hope and happiness.

In the light of the foregoing, we ponder over it now.

Monotheism the First Principle of Divine Outlook on Universe
------------------------------------------------------------

Intellect guides us that there is a cause of every effect and this thing
is so crystal clear that if a new-born baby is subjected to a slight
blow of breath on his body, he opens up his eyes and glances around him
as he is conscious of the cause of that blow. In fact, the detection of
the cause of an effect has been the major problem of our day-to-day
life.

It is only by probing the causes and the indications that in the courts
of law the advocates and the judges arrive at a decision of a case. As
for example how can it be admitted that a picture of a cock or a peacock
needs a photographer but the very existence of a cock or a peacock came
into being without its creator?

How can one convince or satisfy the human intellect that, while there is
an inventor of the camera, there is no inventor or creator of the human
eye, though the photography of the human eye is more intricate than that
of the camera for as and when the camera takes a picture, the film is
changed, but our eye keeps on taking pictures incessantly without any
break?

The camera can take either a black and white or a color picture
according to the type of the films loaded in it, but the human eye can
take the pictures, plain and colored, as well and at a distance, or at a
close range, or in shade or in sunlight.

Similarly, human intelligence admits that somebody constructed an oil
refinery but how can it deny that there is also the Creator of the
digestive system. Again when it is an admitted fact that the working
system of the human body indicates the presence of a conscious mind, how
can we say that there is no Supreme Being which controls the entire
system of the Universe!

How have the various components, which can neither see nor hear and
which constitute the Universe, have set for themselves working
principles and cycles that a researcher spends his entire life for
detecting any of such laws governing it?

In short, if the principle of an "Outlook on Universe" is based on
factors which human intellect accepts, then looking at its very delicate
and minute system of operation, it confirms the existence of a perfect
Being, and through this very intellect we will, by the Grace of Allah,
provide answers to doubts and suspicions in this regard.

The study of this life which has such a strict discipline and
impeccability leads us towards Divine Approach to Universe. This is the
first basic indication of the correctness of the viewpoint and the line
of thinking to the Divine Approach. The second indication of this
approach is its compatibility with natural disposition.

Let us clarify the meaning of natural disposition because when we say
that Divine cognition is a natural process then we should be able to
profit by it.

What is Natural Disposition?
----------------------------

The term "Natural disposition" is akin to "instinct" and it gives the
same meaning. In man any type of feeling which is independent of
training, guidance, teacher or patron is inherent and permanent and it
is present in all people of all times and places. This feeling is
sometimes called a natural disposition or an instinct, though instinct
is a broad-based feeling which is present equally in man and animals.

A certain natural tendency is a general characteristic or trait as for
example the mother's love for her child. It is a kind of feeling or
emotion which is inherent in mother and it is not imparted by any
teacher, patron or preacher. It is universal. Wherever one goes, one
will find this instinct at every time in every type of social group,
though it may be possible that it is of lesser or greater degree in
certain mothers. It is also possible that one instinct can overrun
another one.

Let us admit that every man loves wealth as well as happiness and
security, but this love is not found equally in all men. Some sacrifice
wealth on life and some sacrifice life on wealth.

Similarly at times for the sake of personal honor and dignity the father
withdraws his love and affection from his daughter and buries her live,
as daughters in Arabia before the advent of Islam were considered the
cause of dishonor and disgrace. Therefore, anything which is inherent in
man may not necessarily compel him to act accordingly, because one
dominating urge suppresses another dominating feeling.

One of the signs of instinctive behaviors is the sense of pride. Anyone
who acts according to his natural tendency feels within himself a sense
of calmness. A mother who holds her child in her arms feels proud of it,
rather she condemns the mother who ill-treats her child. That sense of
pride and that disposition of criticism are instinctive things.

Let us now see whether recognition of Allah is inherent or not.

We ask from everyone belonging to every creed or faith at every place
and every time as to what are his feelings regarding the Universe. Does
he consider himself to be self-contented or does he feel dependent?
There is no one who can claim to be self-contented as all of them have a
sense of deprivation; and this feeling is satisfied by the following two
ways:

**1.** True sense of feeling with true satisfaction.

**2.** True sense of feeling with false satisfaction.

Take an example of an infant who is hungry. This feeling of the infant
gets satisfied when he is suckled. And sometimes this very feeling is
satisfied by means of sucking a false soother. However, in man the sense
of deprivation is inherent and a reality but the question is deprivation
of what? Of Divine Power or of natural strength?

The nature itself is dependent on several conditions and therefore we
should depend on that Power which itself is not dependent and
subservient like us to any other power.

Prophets' Mission
-----------------

The function of the Prophets is to prevent man from receiving false
satisfaction of his true feelings. In this regard we have before us the
example of a mother who does not allow her child to take all types of
food. A passing glance over the history tells us how without the
guidance of the Prophets, people had to face untold miseries and
hardships.

Is Obedience a Negation of Man's Freedom?
-----------------------------------------

Sometimes it is thought that inviting people to the worship of Allah by
the Prophets and Divine religions is to deprive man of his freedom. But
one has to ponder over the fact that man has been so created that
without love and affection, devotion, mutual cooperation and hoping for
the best, he cannot continue his life.

The feeling or urge of love and devotion is inherent in his nature. If
through the intermediary of the Prophets, this tendency of man had not
been properly bridled, he would have started worshipping idols, stars,
heavenly bodies, heroes and despots. Therefore, man's obedience and
devotion to Allah is not against his freedom but it is a means of
satiating man's inherent devotion to Allah and consequently preventing
him from going astray.

Crux of the Problem
-------------------

Now we revert to the crux of the problem. The Divine Outlook on the
Universe and the implicit faith in Allah has an instinctive base. That
is to say the awareness of dependence on the Supreme Being is inherently
present in man though at times he thinks whether this Supreme Being is
Allah, the Creator or it is Nature itself.

However, the main problem is the man's awareness of his dependence. The
Divine Approach to the Universe is compatible with man's disposition,
for it considers the entire set-up of the Universe under the control of
a super-natural power and this goes to prove the correct stand of the
Divine Outlook by man.

The third important factor which supports the Divine Outlook is that man
has been endowed with a feeling of love and hope as well as a sense of
responsibility. If a student of a school realizes that his efforts would
not go waste and that even the one hundredth part of the marks he has
gained would be counted and his reasonable explanation would be
considered, he would continue his studies with perfect zeal and
enthusiasm.

In the Divine Outlook on Universe man believes that he is under the
constant surveillance and guidance of Allah, that his explanation for
his lapses is acceptable, that not even an iota of his good or bad deeds
could be overlooked, that all his noble deeds are to be rewarded by
Allah and that he would be compensated in Paradise for the sacrifice of
his life and property.

Thus on the one hand the invisible great support of Divine Power and on
the other the prevention from doubts, suspicions, lapses, acts of
commission or omission repose in man's heart an ever-glowing hope.

The Holy Qur'an has condemned the following forms of faith and
inclinations:

Doubtful and Temporary Tendency
-------------------------------

**1.** Whenever one finds himself in a grave danger and foresees
annihilation, he starts remembering Allah by imploring: "O Allah!", and
as soon as that danger is over, he forgets all about it, and starts
associating Allah with others and thus falls in the ditch of polytheism.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***When they sail in a boat, they sincerely pray to Allah with pure
faith. But when We bring them safely on land, they start considering
things equal to Allah!*** (29:65)

**2.** Sometimes their faith which is adopted without any reasoning, or
considering the Divine signs, they follow the faith of their ancestors
just like idolaters who used to tell the Prophets that they had adopted
their faith in obedience to their ancestors. The Holy Qur'an condemns
their blind faith and says:

***They said, we found our fathers doing so.*** (26:74)

**3.** Sometimes their faith is not true but is meant for outward show.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***The Bedouin Arabs say, 'We are Believers'. Tell them, 'you are not
believers, but you should say that you are Muslims. In fact belief has
not entered your hearts '.*** (49:14)

**4.** Sometimes their faith is without action and deeds. Although these
sort of people believe but they are slack in their actions. The Holy
Qur'an has condemned such people at several places.

Which Faith is true?
--------------------

From the point of view of the Holy Qur'an only that faith which is based
on reasoning and correct mode of thinking is true and commendable. The
Holy Qur'an says:

***Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting, or resting on their
sides, and who think about the creation of the heavens and the earth and
say, 'Lord, You have not created all this without reason'*** (3:191)

Signs of Faith in Allah
-----------------------

**1.** **Hope and Feeling of Love**: Anyone who knows that all his deeds
are accounted for, and that his efforts do not go in waste, and also
that Allah rewards him for his actions and deeds with Paradise, though
He by His benign Mercy sometimes bestows upon him rewards for his good
intentions too, he then leads his life with his love for Allah in a
state of cheerful hopefulness.

**2.** **Abstains from Corruption**: Such a man abstains from treachery,
meanness, and hypocrisy. Anyone who considers himself to be ever-present
before Allah and considers Allah as Omniscient, can never practice
deceit and hypocrisy.

**3.** **Preserves His Self-respect**: He, who has submitted himself to
the Will of Allah and truthfully obeys His commands, can never bow down
before anyone in authority, status and power. He considers everybody as
he himself is.

**4.** **He is Never in Loss**: Since the man of faith benefits by his
timely deed and receives an everlasting reward from Allah and pins his
hopes only on Allah, he never sustains any loss at all.

**5.** **Tranquility**: If we look into the following causes of fear and
restlessness, we find that faith in Allah provides a complete peace,
satisfaction and a state of tranquility **Causes of Fear and Worries**

**(a)** Sometimes past lapses and bad deeds are the causes of one's
fears and worries but the remembrance of Allah changes this state of
mind into that of peace and tranquility because Allah is Merciful and
Benevolent and He forgives sins and accepts one's repentance.

**(b)** Sometimes loneliness and the very thought of helplessness leads
to fears and worries but the faith that Allah is Omnipresent and
Omniscient changes this state of mind into that of peace and
tranquility. The man believes that Allah is not only our Companion and
Compassionate but He hears us, sees our deeds and bestows His blessings
on us.

**(c)** Sometimes the aimless life and the sense of lethargy make one's
mind restless but the faith in Allah removes all such fears and worries
as Allah has created everything in this world with a purpose by His
Wisdom in a definite quantity and number within a specific sphere.

**(d)** Sometimes a man gets worried that he has not been able to please
everybody, and he broods over the thought that he annoyed or provided
the cause of displeasure to a particular person or a group of persons,
but the faith in Allah that one should only try to please Allah as honor
and disgrace only come from Him removes that state of restlessness. And
it is confirmed by the Holy Qur'an which says:

***Remembrance of Allah certainly brings comfort to all hearts.***
(13:28)

Signs of Dishonesty
-------------------

He who does not have faith in the real cause of the Creation, that is
Almighty and All-Wise Allah, is a person, who finds himself shaky,
aimless and lonesome and concerns himself like animals and birds with
the enjoyment of the comforts of worldly life only; who acts only under
the pressure of the society; who considers death the last thing in life,
and does not have the belief in the life after death as he does not
believe in the immortality of soul; who surrenders his life to be
dominated by external powers and his personal desires; who is beset with
vague ideas and notions, deprivation, faults and lapses as his article
of faith has not been guided by the infallible Prophets and Divine
revelations, who is completely unaware of the very purpose of life.

He does not know as to why he has come to this world and why he is
departing from this world. His only line of thinking is as to how his
life should be spent? He does not realize the very purpose of life. He
is devoid of the Divine Approach to Universe and Islamic faith.

In short, one can detect faith from the face of those who have belief in
Allah and of those who have no belief in Allah.

Baseless Reasoning against Religion
-----------------------------------

Now when we have established intellect and instinct as the base of the
Belief in Allah, intellect indicates that there must be someone who
reveals the vast spectacle of the Universe as wherever we have seen a
system of set principles it indicates its controller or regulator.

Instinct tells us that every man finds within himself dependence to a
being more powerful than himself. But despite this some people have
completely ignored both the factors, that is intellect and instinct and
have found a weak reason for the belief in Allah. Briefly, we discuss
some of these false reasoning:

Defeat of Communistic Dogmas
----------------------------

As the life under communism passes by, day after day, its one or the
other dogma becomes defeated. As for example the Islamic Revolution in
Iran revealed upon the people the failure of all communistic dogmas and
put it in disgrace.

Communism says that religion is a dope for the nations. Religion makes
the people lethargic, apathetic, and subservient; but we see that in
Iran, religion has enthused the people with action and has not made them
lethargic.

Communism claims that if anyone is morally degraded it is due to his
financial weakness. Hence, if a man commits theft, the reason is that he
is forced to do so because of penury. But we have seen that in Iran the
dishonest government was not pauper.

According to communism the cause of revolution lies in the restlessness
of the downtrodden and the hungry people and their revolting against
their exploitation by the people in power. But the revolution in Iran
was brought about for the restoration of human freedom, stability and
for enforcing the sovereignty of Allah and not for bread and butter or
for high or low prices.

If revolution had been due to the revolt of poverty-stricken people, it
would have started from Kurdistan and Sistan, because these areas were
more deprived. But the revolution which starts from Qum the centre of
religious learning under the spiritual leadership of Imam Khumayni and
with the shouts of "***Allah O Akbar***" (Allah is Great) reaches its
peak on the Day of ***'Ashura***(the tenth of Muharram) to the fortieth
day of the commemoration of the Martyrdom of Imam Husayn indicates the
fact that the root cause of the revolution lies in the seat of religious
learning and establishing Divine justice and not in the belly.

The preference of Divine laws over the laws of secular despots is not
the result of deprivation of the poor and the needy. We do not ignore
altogether the poverty factor but we ask as to what was the real cause
of the revolution? Revolution for abolishing poverty or establishing
Islam? What a great number of people were there who were enjoying all
the comforts of life but they decided to give up their comforts for the
success of the Islamic revolution.

The fourth disgraceful thing about the materialistic Outlook on
Universe, which is the topic of our discussion, is the ineffective and
ridiculous allegation of anomalies of religion and faith which Communism
has expounded by saying that the capitalists through their vested
interest and reactionary agents have lured the people to remain calm
under the shield of religion, for they ask the deprived people to remain
patient as Allah befriends the patient people.

They say: "If some people have usurped your rights, you should keep
quiet because the world itself is short-lived. The main thing is the
life in the Hereafter". They ask the people not to rise in revolt but to
wait for the Awaited Imam Mahdi because he himself would reform the
society; or they ask the people to practice dissimulation
(***taqiyya***) and not narrate what they see with their eyes.

In short, the capitalists implants such things in the minds of people
through their stooges in the name of religion and thus by such methods
prevent the people from trying to struggle for their rights.

From the foregoing you can judge yourself that all such things are
ridiculous and far from logical reasoning. We thank Allah that we are in
such an age that our younger people have become mature enough in their
thinking to disprove the false claims and dogmas of Communism because by
quickly pondering over it the Muslim youngsters ask the communists: "If
the capitalists have invented religion for calming down the people, why
are there certain laws in religion which empty their purse by
confiscating their wealth?

Islam takes back from the capitalists everything, which they amass from
wrongful means, that is exploitation, tyranny, bribery, black-marketing,
high pricing, undercutting, usury, hoarding, adulteration etc. and
through the sales of under-developed and deserted agricultural land.
Would the capitalists invent the religion so that it could deprive them
of their assets?"

Theirs is a fallacious argument because it is religion which gives a
correct and effective interpretation to the various terms from which
wrong conclusions are deduced and which they have changed altogether. As
for instance waiting (***intizar***) for the appearance of the Imam of
the Age does not mean that one should become silent.

Waiting for the sun to rise does not mean that we should keep sitting in
the stark darkness of the night and should not light a lamp. Waiting for
the summer does not mean that we should not wear woolen clothes during
winter or should not protect ourselves from the inclemency of weather.
Similarly waiting for the Awaited Imam does not mean that we should give
up our struggles and instead keep mum and bear hardships and cruelties.

The meaning of patience also does not mean that we should count
hardships and cruelties but it means that we should remain steadfast in
our struggle against the oppressors for the restoration of our rights,
because Islam has ordained that anyone who gets himself killed in his
struggle for the protection and restoration of his monetary rights is a
martyr.

That is to say for the preservation and restoration of one's rights one
should be steadfast in attaining martyrdom. It is narrated in a
tradition that like the oppressor the oppressed one will also be pushed
into the Hell if he had not resisted the oppressor and instead accepted
oppression.

Similarly, taking the world to be insignificant does not mean that we
should abandon it altogether, but it means that the value and importance
of man, who is the vicegerent of Allah, is more than the world itself
and, therefore, the aim and purpose of man's life should not be
attaining worldly gains only.

Dr Allama Iqbal has said: "You are not for the earth nor for the
heavens; the world is for you, not that you are for the world".

In short in Islam patience, perseverance and expectation do not mean
that one should remain passive against the exploiters. Apart from
snatching the unlawful wealth of the capitalists Islam asks the deprived
as follows:

**1.** It is forbidden to behave towards capitalists submissively, and
anyone who bows down before a wealthy person loses one third of his
faith.

**2.** Imam Ali Riza has said that anyone who gives a warm welcome to a
rich person (because of his wealth) will face Allah's wrath on the Day
of Resurrection.

**3.** One should not respect a person because of his wealth.

**4.** Never par take meals at a table where only the rich and affluent
people are eating their food.

**5.** Imam Ali Riza himself used to sit beside his slaves at the same
table-cloth. Prophet Sulayman despite his exalted position used to mix
up with the poor people. The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali used to
sit with the poor on the ground, and the Prophets used to tend the
cattle and put themselves to hard labor.

The prayer and supplication of a jobless and work shirking man is never
accepted and the Holy Imam has cursed that person who lives on another
person like a parasite. Hence it can be deduced that Islam has neither
been sponsored by the rich people nor by those who are lazy and vagrant.
This is a brief comment on the baseless reasoning of communism regarding
the birth of religion, and brings disgrace on it.

Another Groundless Reasoning
----------------------------

Some materialists, who have no conception of the Divine Approach to the
Universe which originates from inherent tendency and intellect, and
incidentally consider themselves as intellectuals, offer another
groundless reason for the faith of the believers whose hearts are
kindled with the Divine light.

They say: "The basis of the belief in Allah is fear. Just as during
infancy and childhood man is dependent on his parents in the same way he
makes Allah his refuge when he grows up. People of the ancient times who
were beset with dangerous happenings like earthquake, thunder-storm, and
attacks by wild beasts etc. had invented for their mental satisfaction
an imaginative shelter. Whenever they got frightened with such mishaps
they used to put their restless soul at rest through such beliefs. Hence
the belief in Allah was the outcome of fear".

Answer to Such a Reasoning
--------------------------

If the reason of the belief in Allah is fear the one who fears most
should have more firm belief in Allah; hence those who were the first to
have fears should be the first believers. But on occasions where man is
not affected by fear he will naturally not be inclined towards Allah,
though one can turn to Allah without any fear also.

We do revert to Allah because of fear but it does not mean that fear is
the only cause of the belief in Allah. Very often man does not have any
fear at all but he does believe in Allah. His intellect sees through the
signs which are very minute, delicate and immaculate and which lead him
to an ultimate belief in Allah.

He feels within himself to be attached with a great power and soon he
realizes that as he was not created all by himself and if it had been so
he would have most certainly made some improvement on himself in being
more beautiful or would have made certain innovations and, besides,
other beings also, like him, were not created without any set patterns
Each and every individual cells and organs, which he is made of, have
been fashioned with a set pattern. Therefore, there certainly is an
All-Powerful Allah who has created him.

On the basis of this line of thinking and method of deducing conclusion,
man does not need to harbor any fear or undergo a state of uncertainty
and restlessness. His intellect and natural instinct guides him to
Allah. Thus, the theory that the belief in Allah rests on fear is
baseless.

As a matter of fact such baseless reasoning reminds us of a person who
had found out the reason for the hot climate of Kashan when he said: "Do
you want to know why the climate of Kashan is hot? In the word "Kashan"
the letters "sh" are present and in the word "Shimr" these very letters
are present. And the day when Shimr was in Karbala, its climate was hot
and, therefore, the climate of Kashan is hot".

The psychological analysis of this reasoning of belief has been done by
an expert psychologist. Indeed these so called experts can also commit
errors. It is like that the higher a mountain is the deeper its tavern
will be. We should, therefore, not be simply overawed by mere knowledge
and if a scholar has some deep convictions in certain matters we should
not blindly follow his views.

One among such scholars is Betrand Russell. He says: "Formerly I had a
belief in one God but later on I thought over that when everything was
created by God who created God? When I did not arrive at a definite
conclusion I gave up my belief in God" To a question as to whom he
believed in, he replied, "Now my belief is that the Creator of the
Universe is not God but matter".

At this point we can ask him to find out for himself, from where did
matter come into being? He says that matter exists from the very
beginning. Similarly we also say that Allah exists from the very
beginning. Then the question arises as to why Russell did not accept the
existence of the First Cause and the Omniscient Being who is Allah? Why
did he believe in innumerable old and unconscious beings contained in
matter?

Another example
---------------

The communists argue that unless something is perceived and comes under
observation it cannot be accepted as being present, and as such Allah,
angels, revelations and similar other things cannot be believed in
because according to them they only recognize senses and observation as
identifying media.

Now we ask as to why in historical analysis and explanation they say
that several hundred thousand years ago men used to live together, hunt
animals together and eat their flesh together when the foundation of
government was not yet laid nor was there any sense of individual
ownership.

Thereafter, an era of slavery came and long afterwards the feudal system
came into existence. To our question as to whether they can touch upon
or analyze that period of centuries when people led a gregarious life,
they say 'no', but by historical remains one can trace those periods.
Similarly we tell them that as they can trace out the history of the
past events through relics and ancient monuments in the same way we
recognize Allah through His creation and signs.

Thus if the principle of accepting a thing on the basis of signs and
symbols is correct it will be immaterial if we trace the ancient history
through historical ruins or relics or recognize the existence of Allah
through signs.

The question therefore arises whether our senses and our observations
are the only means of confirming a certain thing or problem or can we
trace the root of the problem through signs'? If we just ponder over it
a bit carefully we shall notice that most of our recognitions and
confirmations are based on signs or identifying factors.

Another Baseless Argument
-------------------------

Some people who do not admit intellect and instinct as means of the
recognition of Allah have given a different meaning to belief and
reality. They say that the basis of belief in Allah is ignorance and
further that whenever man is unable to trace causes of his problems he
has supposed a Supreme Being for himself so that whenever they are
unable to give explanation to a certain problem they just attribute it
an act of that Being and hence such problems have been associated with
Allah. But the time for this is now the thing of the past, and in fact
nobody ever gave any credence to it, because:

**(a)** If the belief in Allah was based on ignorance then it would
become necessary that the one who is more ignorant should have more
belief in Allah.

**(b)** If the belief in Allah was based on ignorance then Divine Books
should have encouraged people towards ignorance.

**(c)** If the belief in Allah was based on ignorance then he, whose
knowledge exceeds and whose ignorance is reduced, would be the most
faithless person, and then as and when man would keep on making
discoveries and knowing the causes of incidents would keep on losing his
faith gradually.

Is it possible that Abu Ali Sina, Galelio and Einstein who were
discovers of many scientific phenomena and who had faith in Allah also,
and their scientific expositions and discoveries would distract us from
that Being, that is Allah, Who is the Creator of the laws of nature?

Suppose you have discovered a certain law governing a natural
phenomenon, would it then prevent you from having a belief in the
Creator of such law? If you have found a lost coin on the road-side
should you not inquire about the owner of that coin? Or would it suffice
that you have just found the coin?

Why Some People Ignore Allah and Religion?
------------------------------------------

The answer to this is as follows.

**1.** When we say that man can recognize Allah through the construction
of a cell or an atom it is only meant for those who really want to
believe in Allah but not for those who do **not have the intention** of
doing so at all. To illustrate this point the following examples can be
cited:

**(i)** Look at a man who roasts and broils meat on a gridiron and who
cuts several livers in a day into slices for roasting but does not know
the various veins and arteries embedded in it because he had nothing to
do with knowing those blood vessels.

**(ii)** Look at a man who is busy from morning to evening in selling
mirrors to his customers and who has disheveled hair and who never cares
to groom it despite looking at the mirror several times in the day as he
is only concerned in selling the mirrors and not grooming his hair.

**(iii)** When a man is busy cleansing with his handkerchief the glass
of his watch and we ask him the time, he sees his watch again, because
he was busy cleansing the watch and had not noted the time.

**(iv)** Look at a carpenter who makes a ladder but never does he
himself mount it but for the sake of demonstration he does so several
times in order to satisfy his customers.

From the foregoing examples we can conclude only one result that unless
man wishes to know a thing or to draw benefit from it, he would not know
it nor would he draw any benefit from it. Similarly, people do see the
signs of Allah closely and minutely yet they do not have belief in
Allah, because just by merely looking at the signs their intention is
not to recognize Allah.

**2.** We all know that when from the very beginning we are favored with
a **blessing we do not realize** its true significance and hence it
loses its freshness. Similarly, when we see the signs of Allah
everywhere we do not care to think about it or to realize its import
because from the very start we had become used to them and as such they
seemed to have lost their novelty.

Take an example of the thumb of your hand about which you have never
been thankful to Allah because it has been there since your birth. But
suppose this thumb is bandaged for a while or is completely detached
from your body, you will see that without it you cannot even button your
shirt! (You can yourself imagine it while reading this instance).

Since the continuity of bounties leads to the forgetfulness of Allah
misfortunes come to us as a warning. The Holy Qur'an says that sometime
Allah inflicts hardship upon man so that he may return to Allah and ask
Him for His forgiveness.

The Holy Qur'an repeatedly reminds mankind to remember Allah's blessings
and bounties and we often find in the supplications of leaders of
religion that they enumerate one by one Allah's bounties and
benevolence, for example they say: ' It is You, O Allah Who has elevated
us from lower position to a higher status, from ignorance to knowledge,
from small quantity to a larger quantity, from poverty and indigence to
richness and wealth and from illness to health".

**3.** People **ignore** religion because many innovations have been
introduced into it by ignorant friends and wise enemies.

As for example if we offer a glass of water to a thirsty person and a
fly falls down in it, that person instead of drinking water throws it
away. Hence, just a man shuns water because of the fly; similarly he
shuns religion because of the presence of a few unreasonable and
irrational things in religion. Therefore, we should not be unmindful of
those whose actions distract the people from religion.

**4.** **Environmental Influence**: The cause of man's deviation from
religion and religious commands is the problem of the environmental
influence. Man by his very nature and instinct dislikes the act of
stealing and considers misappropriation as a bad thing, but when he is
in an environment which is dominated by thieves and usurpers, he too
adopts their habits.

**5.** Sometimes **indifference** to religion is due to shirking
responsibility, because accepting religion means binding oneself to
accept various religious restrictions and obligations. Hence some people
shun religion since they want to be free from all restrictions.

They do not realize that to be so free as to abstain from following
Divine commands means that they have accepted all other restrictions and
all sorts of servitude. He who does not accept to be the servant of
Allah is a slave of everybody else, and he who does not obey His
commands must obey the commands of everyone else.

He who leaves Allah and turns to others is as if it were like one who
falls from the sky to the earth. He becomes a prey to the vultures
before whom he falls down.

**6.** **Enmity**: There is a certain group of people which harbors
grudge and indulges in prejudice and selfishness. Such people oppose and
criticize things for the sake of opposition and thereby disregard the
Divine commands altogether.

**7.** **Lack of Proper Preaching**: It is also lack of proper preaching
or preaching in a wrong way which makes people indifferent to religion.

**8.** **Necessity of Religion**: Man does not live without a code of
conduct but the question is how he can achieve his object in life for
his success, prosperity and progress? He has, therefore, three following
alternatives before him:

**(i)** To chalk out his line of action according to his own inclination
and adaptability.

**(ii)** To fashion his conduct in accordance with the wishes of the
other people.

**(iii)** To submit himself to the obeisance of Allah and seek only from
Him his code of life.

**(iv)** The first course of action is defective because human
intelligence has its own limitations and man himself is well aware of
his lapses and failings. The instinctive passion drags man towards
disaster and calamity at every moment.

Under such a situation will it be possible that man can still be guided
by his defective thinking and limited knowledge which can one way or the
other lead him to prosperity or misfortunes? The second course of action
like the first one is not less faulty because the wishes of other people
are too many and they have a wide range of interests and inclinations.

Apart from this, as there is a possibility of their committing errors
and of becoming victim of forgetfulness and lapses, it is necessary that
man should not give up his line of action and ignore his requirements
and personal freedom and individuality and follow those who do not know
him properly or appreciate his aspirations for long standing happiness
and prosperity, and over and above when he does not know whether they
are his well-wishers or not.

The third course of action is the only correct course because just as we
hand over our automobile to a mechanic or ourselves to a physician we
should submit our ways and means of life to Almighty Allah; our Creator
Who knows everything better than we know.

The Function of Religion
------------------------

In a nutshell we can define religion according to one of the scholars in
the following way:

Just as we construct an automobile in the same way religion builds a
man. To illustrate it with an example we have to perform the following
things for the purpose of manufacturing a motor car:

**(i)** We find out the availability of iron ores from a mine.

**(ii)** We extract iron from its ores.

**(iii)** We make the parts of machine from iron.

**(iv)** We assemble these parts into a motor car.

**(v)** Then an expert who knows driving drives this car. These five
things are also applicable to religion.

**Man's Discovery**: A man who forgets all about himself loses his aim
of life, guidance and ultimate destination, and becomes like an animal
as he considers that the sole purpose of his materialistic life is
sensual gratification.

By this he becomes just like a dead body as truth has no effect on him.
He is wild like a wolf, cunning like a fox, thief like a mouse and
stonehearted like a tyrant. It is, therefore, necessary that this type
of lost man should try to discover his ownself and find out all about
himself.

**1.** One of the functions of religion is to state what man is and what
are his characteristics? When we study the Holy Qur'an we find how Islam
defines man. It says:

***When your Lord said to the angels, 'I am appointing someone as my
deputy on earth'.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:30)

***Haven't you seen that Allah has made all that is in the heavens and
the earth, subservient to you?*** (Surah Luqman, 31:20)

***We offered Our Trust (Our Deputation) to the heavens, to the earth
and the mountains, but they could not bear this burden and were afraid
to accept it. Man was able to accept this offer but he was unjust to
himself and ignorant of the significance of this Trust.*** (Surah
al-Ahzab, 33:72)

***. . . and I have infused my spirit into it.*** (Surah al-Hijr, 15:
29)

***We have honored the children of Adam, carried them on the land and
the sea, given them pure sustenance and exalted them above most of My
creatures.*** (Surah Bani Israil, 17:70)

The Holy Qur'an warns man lest he should forget himself and be a loser;
damage his own interest; lose his profits in his dealings and be bought
by false customers at a cheaper price. Then it cites examples of
victorious and defeated people and determines their types and specimens,
so that man can recognize his personality, capability and disposition.

He then ponders over that if he has only been created to lead a material
life and to. Satisfy his animal instinct by enjoying the comforts and
pleasures of life then why has he been endowed with superb intellect and
knowledge and an urge to progress and development?

**2.** The second function of religion is to refine the discovered ores
(of human character). Man should be purified of harmful thought of
oppression, follies, ignorance and polytheism. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Allah is the patron and supporter of those who have embraced the
belief and He leads them from ignorance and waywardness to the path of
guidance.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:25)

**3.** The third function of religion is to make an individual perfect
in character. That is, to create in him the qualities of worship of
Allah, and make him abstain from evils, so that he may possess perfect
human attributes.

The individual guidance and character building of people are the same
which the Holy Prophet had done during the troubled days of his stay in
Makkah. All those commands which do not have any social bearing come
under this preview so as to reform man in all aspects with full
attention.

**4.** The fourth function of religion is to organize the reformed
individuals and to knit them into one complete pattern and to establish
the universal Sovereignty of Allah in which clear-cut and perfect
commands are followed This was the mission which the Holy Prophet
accomplished in Madina and thereafter he deputed learned and capable
people to organize various fields of activity, to acquire strength for
the defense, and to make budget.

Over and above this their aim was to establish a perfect socio-political
system and to define the objectives of the Islamic State so as to
distinguish it from non-Islamic societies.

**5.** The fifth function of religion is to hand over the affairs of the
Islamic society in the hands of a capable and infallible leader. Strict
warnings have been given in religion against encouraging oppression,
despotism and ignorance and against patronizing oppressors, despots and
tyrants or groups of such people. Therefore, the handing over of
leadership and power of the whole nation to a non-infallible person
amounts to tyrannizing the mankind.

This is what we call a complete lay-out of religion and a true
reflection of its school of thought. If we wish to condense all what is
said above into one single sentence, we would then say: "Religion is a
social code of life which determines, according to Divine principles of
a set standard, an ideology, efforts and conduct of life".

The Reality of Monotheism and its Various Aspects
-------------------------------------------------

In Islamic terminology "Oneness of Allah" has very pleasant, exalted and
vast meaning. Our scholars have classified it into monotheism i.e.
Oneness of Being, Oneness of worship, Oneness of attributes and Oneness
of deeds.

Leaving aside various terminological expressions, we first deal with
Oneness of Allah. We ask our revered readers to ponder over the matter
and find out for themselves at what stage of monotheism they happen to
be.

Monotheism i.e. Oneness of Allah is the belief that Allah is the Lord of
the mankind, He is One, He has no partner and that He is Unique in all
respects and everything depends on His Absolute Being.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which denies all temporal desires.
Anyone who is lustful is out of the bounds of monotheism. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***Have you seen the one who has chosen his desires as his Lord?***
(Surah Jathiya, 45:23)

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which rejects despotic tyrants. Imam
Ali Riza after accepting Ma'mun's condition of becoming his
heir-apparent announced to a public gathering that he had laid down his
condition for being an heir-apparent that he would not interfere in all
those State affairs which involved appointments to and dismissals from
public offices.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which denounces geographical barriers
and the differentiation between the East and the West, and rejects all
alien creed, dogmas and systems which originate from the mind of selfish
people.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which severs all affiliations and
connections which cause the Muslims to be dominated by others.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which forbids us to obey that person
whose order is contrary to the commands of Allah.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which directs us to obey those people
whose guidance has been approved by Allah.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which directs one to worship Allah and
obey His commands.

In short, monotheism means to discard and crush all types and kinds of
idols i.e. the idol of internal and external egotism, the idol of line
of thinking, the idol of status, the idol of temperament and the idol of
wealth in the sense that all of these will not distract a monotheist
from the right path and prevent him from pursuing the Truth.

Monotheism is the belief in Allah which means that no attachment and
affiliation other than Allah can lay down correct course of conduct for
us and that all our actions, rising, sitting etc. are for the sake of
Allah.

Economics based on monotheism, the sources of production, method of
distribution of produce and wealth, rights of appropriation and all
other codes of conduct should be in conformity with the commands of
Allah.

The army based on monotheism, that is from the point of the position of
learning, skill and a good background, preparation, invasion, war
strategy, offensive measures, etc. should be in accordance with the
commands of Allah and under Divine obligations and not even the
slightest thought of jealousy, selfishness, revenge, expropriation of
territories and usurpation should trouble our mind but it should be done
in the true spirit of asserting the Truth and of establishing the
Kingdom of Allah as well as enforcing the Divine commands.

Our routing the oppressors, delivering the oppressed from the clutches
of tyrants and persecutors, and defending their life, property and honor
should be according to the commands of Allah. Above all the main
objective should be to defend and safeguard the frontiers from outside
aggression.

Undoubtedly, the commander-in-chief of the Islamic army should be one,
who is the follower and deputy of the infallible Imam. His article of
faith is the Truth. His soldiers willingly and gladly accept martyrdom.
To be one of his (Imam's) soldiers is worship of Allah.

These are the characteristics of the army of monotheism. By giving
reference to the past services, experience and skill one should not take
any wrong advantage of the situation or violate the orders of one's
superiors.

The social environment in monotheism is that one where the leader is
elected not on the basis of power and strength, tribal or group
affiliations, but on the principles of Divine commandments, that is
knowledge and learning, piety, spirit of Jihad and martyrdom,
accomplishments, trustworthiness, skill and administrative abilities.

The society in monotheism is that institution where the Supreme Ruler is
Allah and in which all the people are treated equally according to the
commands of Allah, and all are equal in the eyes of law, and where
personal prejudices, self-aggrandizement and mutual discord and
disensions are eradicated. Hence, the meaning of monotheism that has
been elaborated above is correct in its completeness and vastness.

Taking this as a standard, we should now see as to which one amongst us,
or which form of society, is truly based on monotheism and in what
manner and by what means we can reach our goal.

The Holy Prophet said, "***qulu, la ila ha il lal lah tuflihu***'' (Say,
there is no god but Allah, you will attain prosperity and salvation). We
should not take this saying lightly, because in this hadith of the Holy
Prophet the ultimate result of the belief in monotheism is prosperity
and salvation. The Holy Qur'an tells us that our final objective is
prosperity, and we see that according to the Holy Qur'an the essence of
our worship of Allah is piety. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Men, worship Your Lord who created you and those, who lived before
you, so that you may become pious.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:21)

Piety is not the ultimate goal but it is the means to success and
prosperity. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Men of reason, have fear of Allah so that you may attain eternal
happiness.*** (Surah al-Ma'ida, 5:100)

Please give your good attention to the following wordings: According to
Qur'anic words "***sakhkhara lakum***" and "***khalaqa lakum***" which
mean that the entire Universe has been created for us and we have been
created for the worship of Allah, so that we tread on the path of Allah.
Worship of Allah is meant for piety and piety is the starting point of
eternal happiness.

And according to ***Mufradatul Qur'an*** by Raghib Isfahani happiness
means success and triumph. Therefore, our life is for us and we are for
the worship of Allah. Worship is for piety and piety is for eternal
happiness. Hence, the subtle meaning of happiness can be well
understood. In other words it means victory over restrictions,
restraints and overpowering the internal as well as external enemies.

In the days when I was explaining the meaning of ***La ilaha il lal
lah*** ( there is no god but Allah) I made on the black-board a sketch
of a seed which after being embedded in the soil germinates and becomes
a green seedling. There I had said that in order to get rid of the soil,
that seed performs the following three functions in its germination.

**(i)** Spreading its root in the soil.

**(ii)** Deriving nourishment from the soil.

**(iii)** Separating itself from the sand particles.

After illustrating this example, I had said that if man wishes to
achieve freedom, he should also adopt the following three functions:

**(i)** He should possess such belief and ideology which is based on
reason.

**(ii)** He should achieve maturity of thought from all possible sources
for his betterment.

**(iii)** He should eliminate all possible hurdles and obstructions so
as to embrace the belief in Allah.

If anyone ignores any of these three functions he will ever remain in a
condition of misfortune. If his beliefs are not firm and are not based
on knowledge and if he does not take advantage of his abilities, he will
not be able to dispel his opponents and ultimately will be perished like
that seed which is embedded in the soil and is not capable of performing
its three functions and gets disintegrated in the dust.

Factors Which Distract Man from the Belief in Allah
---------------------------------------------------

The following are the reasons which distract man from the belief in
Allah:

**(i) Despotism and Tyranny**: One of the reasons of going astray is the
fear of the people who are in power. The Holy Qur'an narrates about
Fir'aun thus:

***Fir'aun said: If you will take a god beside me, I will most certainly
make you one of the imprisoned.*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara 26:29)

Therefore, out of sheer fear, people started worshipping and bowing
before him.

**(ii) Love and Faith**: Sometimes the love of a certain thing causes
man to forget Allah and he pins all his hopes on that thing or person.
He considers him to be all in all. The Holy Qur'an says:

***They obeyed the rabbis and the monks and worshipped the Messiah, son
of Maryam, as they should have worshipped Allah.*** (Surah Tawbah, 9:31)

These self-appointed scholars used to declare things permissible by
Allah as prohibitive and the prohibitive ones as permissible and because
of their faith in them people used to obey them.

**(iii) Forlorn Hopes**: Sometimes people in the hope of receiving help
and honor believed in gods besides Allah. Thus the Holy Qur'an says:

***They chose idols besides Allah in the hope of receiving help from
them.*** (Surah Ya Sin, 36:74)

***They have sought honor from other gods instead of Allah!***(Surah
Maryam, 19:81)

***In order to distract the people from the straight path of monotheism
they used to lure them with their pleasant and enchanting talks, forlorn
hopes and tall promises and sometimes they used to frighten them
also.***

The Holy Qur'an says:

***What you worship, instead of Allah, are no more than empty names that
you and your fathers have given to certain things***. (Surah Yusuf,
12:40)

In our time also for the purpose of distracting people from Islam many
pleasant and high-sounding political slogans have been coined, for
instance, freedom, democracy, peasants, laborers, patrons, international
laws, council etc. as uttering of these names are nothing but a mere
pastime.

Proofs of Monotheism
--------------------

**Harmony Exists Between All Creations**: The best and the most simple
proof of monotheism is the system of combination which exists between
various creations.

The arrangement of various portions of a building or of the articles of
a book or of the lines of a letter is a proof of the fact that their
creator is one single person. If three artists sit separately in a
corner and get busy in making a sketch of a bird and each one of them
makes the sketch of different parts of the body i.e. the first one
sketches the head, the second one the body and the third one the feet
and if all the three sketches are joined together there will not be any
harmony between them.

Thus harmony, moderation and proportional balance between all creations
is the best evidence of the Oneness of Allah. Weakness with strength,
offence with defense and rudeness with gentleness are so inter-related
that man is simply wonder-struck. All of them are so closely harmonized
that they have established a well-knit system.

Just see how the strength of the parents helps the newborn baby to
overcome his weakness, how the vast expanse of heavenly bodies in the
various layers of the space have held the earth so firmly; how the
carbon-dioxide gas which is exhaled by man during respiration is
balanced by the liberation of oxygen by plants which absorb
carbon-dioxide and expel oxygen; how the structure of a camera is
identical with that of a human eye and how the pupil of an eye
accommodates itself to admit light inside it; how it contracts in bright
light and expands in insufficient light; and how when it is necessary
the eye-brows help in making light proportionate; how the saline water
in the eye and the saliva in the mouth are closely related with each
other and the two different tastes are so compatible with the structure
of the mouth and the eye; how the aggressive nature of man is balanced
by the docile nature of the woman in order to bring about a harmony
between them.

If one ponders over the natural and temperamental harmony that exists
between creatures, one will notice a complete compatibility.

The Creator of a newborn baby and of the breast milk is one and the same
Being, because as a consequence of the birth of a newborn baby, the
mother's breast starts lactating.

Similarly the sun passes its rays down to the earth, the oceans and seas
send off the water vapors up in the atmosphere, the gravitational force
of the earth brings back these vapors down to earth and the roots of the
plants absorb nourishment from the earth and push them upward. Are these
compatibilities not indicating the presence of an infinitely Superb and
Supreme Power?

The organs of every animal and its morphological structure are in
accordance with its individual needs and environmental conditions.

In all animals the severance of physical attachment of the offspring
from its mother is a natural consequence of its (offspring's) needs.

The difference between our knowledge and ignorance is like the
difference between a drop of water and the ocean because there are
innumerable minute secrets of nature and their mutual relationships that
human mind has not yet been able to trace out.

An Incident: One day a young man, who after learning a few words of his
lesson had become proud, asked me a question: "Why are there two
***rak'ats*** (units) in the morning prayers?" I replied, "I don't know
but I am quite sure there must be some reason for it, though it may not
be necessary that the reasons or explanation of all the Divine
commandments are made evident to us and that too on one single day.
Since sometimes the Divine commandments have a basic importance of
worship and obedience to Allah, it becomes necessary for us to obey
Allah.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Would that you really knew what Hell is! It leaves and spares no one
and nothing. It scorches men's skin and it has nineteen angelic keepers
...Our informing you of the numbers of these angels is a trial for the
disbelievers ...***(Surah Mudaththir, 74:27-31)

At another place the Holy Qur'an says:

***The qibla the direction which you had been facing during your prayers
was only made in order that we would know who would follow the Messenger
and who would turn away.***(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:143)

Besides, has it not been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an that Prophet
Ibrahim was ordered by Allah to sacrifice his son, Ismail so that Allah
might know how steadfast he was on the path of Allah. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***We called to him, 'Ibrahim, you have fulfilled what you were
commanded to do in your dream '. Thus do We reward the righteous
ones.*** (Surah Saffat, 37:105)

During the conversation I told this young friend that just as in this
temporal world there are certain set rules and principles and without
understanding them no tangible result can be achieved, similarly in the
spiritual world also there are commandments of which we should take
proper notice, otherwise we cannot attain intellectual maturity and
ever-lasting happiness.

An Example. Suppose somebody says to you that at a distance of hundred
steps there is a treasure. If you walk a distance of one hundred and ten
steps and start digging the ground, you will not be able to find it.

Therefore we have to keep in view the exact quantity or number which has
been told us. This minute point is established by a telephone set in the
sense that even if one digit is wrongly dialed one cannot have the
desired person on the telephone line to talk with.

Let me give one more example to illustrate this point. If we want to
open a door with a key or to switch on a machine we cannot do so if
anyone of the grooves or notches on the key do not coincide with those
in the lock or machine.

Despite furnishing him with several examples I found that he had become
so arrogant after reading books and acquiring education that in the
matter of worship he refused to accept this principle.

Besides he also did not believe that one cannot reach perfection without
the guidance of Divine revelation nor did he understand that with our
limited knowledge and intelligence we have no alternative but to fall a
prey to superstition and uncertainty.

Is There any Deity Besides Allah?
---------------------------------

One thing about which the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali has drawn
our attention is that if there existed any other deity other than Allah,
he too must have sent his prophets, or he must have revealed some signs
in proof of his divinity. Apart from that if there exists two gods and
both have divine power both of them will be having limitations and if
any god exists at all with limitations then he cannot be a true god,
because limited power is that which at one stage reached its ultimate
end and we know it quite well that limited power cannot be god itself.

Or alternatively both powers can be limitless. But if both powers happen
to be limitless, both of them cannot be termed as limitless powers. In
this regard I can cite an example quoted by a scholar. "If you ask an
architect to construct a building which has an unlimited area, he cannot
obviously make more than one building with unlimited area because for
the other one there will remain no space at all".

Polytheism
----------

Polytheism, that is to depend upon someone other than Allah and to
consider Allah's creature as god and to believe in another power in
contrast to Allah.

Polytheism, that is to obey any god other than Allah unconditionally.

Polytheism, that is to say any type and manner of worship which is not
meant for Allah.

In the narrations made in the Holy Qur'an the following two things have
been generally mentioned:

**(i)** Strengthening one's faith with the firm belief in Allah's Power,
believing in Divine help and blessings and fearing Allah's Wrath.

**(ii)** To shake off one's belief in receiving help from any power
other than Allah, to belie all false standards and to abolish all bases
and traces of polytheism.

We read in the Holy Qur'an that Prophet Nuh had warned his deviated son
that all the infidels of his time would be perished in the Deluge
because of Allah's wrath. The son replied that as long the wrath of his
father's Allah persisted he would perch himself safely on the top of the
mountain. Just imagine the logic of the son of Prophet Nuh.

He had thought the mountain and its protection as counter to Allah's
wrath. This is the glaring example of polytheism. Thus if we also, like
the son of Prophet Nuh, take anybody else man or any other thing as
equal to Allah, we are polytheists.

Examples of Polytheism
----------------------

A person says there is no necessity of offering Salatul Istisqa (prayers
for rains) as water can be stored now in dams and lakes for our needs.
Another person says that it is not the time now that Allah sends down
His wrath so that people are struck with famine because ship-loads of
food-grains can now be had from abroad.

Still another one argues that he admits the sanctities of the religious
laws but by this it does not mean that we should violate the
international laws, or he says that on the face of the commands of Allah
he should also take into consideration the consent of the people and as
such sometimes he obeys the commands of Allah and sometimes of the
people also. Such a kind of notion or view-point is in contravention to
the belief in the Oneness of Allah.

In the Holy Qur'an about 200 times the words, "***dunillahi***" or
"***dunihi***" have been repeated in connection with polytheism. It
refers to a god other than Allah. If we want to pinpoint the true sign
of a polytheist's belief, which should be correct and be according to
the Holy Qur'an, the word "***dunillahi***" i.e. beside Allah will be
more appropriate.

Hence, those who go after others and expect their honor and success from
non-Divine beings and establish the laws of others instead of Allah;
those who have pinned their hopes on others besides Allah and their
article of faith depends on pleasing others besides Allah; and those who
fear beings other than Allah and work for them have undoubtedly excluded
themselves from the bounds of monotheism.

**The Number of Polytheists**: In the above mentioned sense the number
of devout people, who have not considered any other being besides Allah
as their centre of attention or have not pinned any hope on them and who
are not hypocrites but honor the commands of Allah and who only enforce
the commands of Allah, is very small. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Most of them do not believe in Allah, they are but pagans***. (Surah
Yusuf, 12:106)

Anxiety, the Sign of Polytheism
-------------------------------

A big problem of psychology is anxiety and to check worries is its main
object. But in my opinion anyone who has entered the fold of monotheism
and his thought and deeds are only for Allah there is no chance of his
suffering from nervous exhaustion and depression.

But when the thoughts and deeds of man are not for the sake of Allah
only, he is likely to suffer from neurosis. In other words as soon as a
man sets his foot on the path of Allah, Allah rewards him for his deeds.
Allah hears his implorations and watches his deeds and that man is the
one who does not pin his hopes on anyone except Allah.

All that we discuss in our daily talks about problems that such and such
person's work was hampered or not hampered, or he achieved success or
was doomed to failure, or he prospered or got ruined, and besides all
that psychology deals with them by saying that such and such failure was
the cause of anxiety, are outside the pale of monotheism because in the
belief of monotheism there is no such thing as failure.

It was immaterial for the Holy Prophet and it made no difference with
him when he used to tend sheep or migrated to Madina, or took refuge in
the Cave of Thaur, or was in the battlefield, or delivered a sermon from
the pulpit of the ***Masjid***, or performed circumambulation of the
Holy Ka'bah or carried bricks for the construction of the ***masjid***,
or wore martial dress or ordinary civilian dress. True, responsibilities
do change, but wishes do not have any effect.

On the other hand we are such that if someone in authority deprives us
of our position, dress, pulpit, office or residential place we go to the
extremes of grieving or on the point of committing suicide, because
these things have become so loving to us or in other words these have
become our part and parcel and an idol of worship for us.

In some countries the government in power put pressure on religious
leaders to invoke Allah's blessings for the ruler in the***masjid*** and
sometime lure them with bribe or intimidate them to do so. Just as we
have learnt from the hadith that when crimes are given appreciation the
domination of the despot is strengthened and as a natural consequence it
invites the wrath of Allah. As a despot becomes more powerful the
commands of Allah become weakened.

Under this situation if a religious leader instead of submitting to the
pressure of such despots abandons his seat, or gives up the job of
sermonizing and leading the people in congregational prayers, he can
relieve himself from that pressure and thereby save himself from sins.
But when residential place, professional security, dress and status
become the centre of attraction for him, they make him their captives.

May Allah save us, for the sake of sincere believers, from those
captivities and gods (temptations) which have entered our hearts?

Signs of Polytheism
-------------------

Associating anyone with Allah is the worst sign of evil and we deal here
with one aspect of it:

**1.** **Practical Effect of Polytheism** Polytheism is the cause of
nullifying the good deeds. According to the Holy Qur'an, man's total
deeds go in waste because of polytheism. Sometimes a small deed defeats
all our efforts. Following are some examples:

**(i)** A student studies throughout the year but he does not appear in
his examinations. His lessons remain unchecked, and though they happen
to be intact, yet he loses social status.

**(ii)** A man who has been very particular about keeping his health but
if he takes a small quantity of poison all his life long precautions
become useless.

**(iii)** If a student kills a son of his teacher he nullifies all his
good deeds despite his lifelong efforts, services and the affection of
his teacher.

Thus associating someone with Allah is like taking a poison or killing a
teacher's son. The Holy Qur'an says:

***If people worship idols, their deeds will be turned devoid of all
virtues.*** (Surah Anam, 6:89)

**2. Psychological Effect of Polytheism** It is abundantly clear that
the root cause of man's anxiety is that he cannot please all people
because people are in good number and each one of them expects one or
the other thing from him. As he cannot possibly please everybody he
becomes worried because in order to please one person or a group of
persons, one will have to displease another person or group of persons.

Here the question of monotheism comes under discussion. The monotheist
only knows to please one Being and that Being is Allah. It is of no
concern to him as to what other people want or expect from him. By this
he is naturally wellcontented. In this context the Holy Qur'an cites two
examples:

**(i)** ***Can many different lords be considered better than One
All-Dominant Allah?*** (Surah Yusuf, 12:39)

It means whether man can be happy in pleasing One Allah or he can be so
in pleasing so many with varying kinds.

**(ii)** ***Allah advances the example of a man who is owned (as a slave
in common) by a number of men at loggerheads, and another man who is
owned by only one. Are these two alike in attribute?*** (Surah Zumar,
39:29)

Hence, a man who is subservient to only one person remains in peace but
the one who is under the domination of many people of bad habits and
temper, cannot be in peace.

It is too difficult to please others but it is Allah Who becomes pleased
with His servants. In the Supplication of Kumayl we come across the
following words: ***Ya sari'ar riza*** (He whose pleasure is quickly
achieved!)

However if others get pleased with us at all they never forget our
shortcomings. It is only Allah Who is so kind as to overlook our
mistakes and shortcomings, as we recite in the Supplication of Kumayl:
"O Allah! You reveal our merits and cover our faults". (See: ***The
Supplication of Kumayl***, ISP 1985)

In principle if people do not act within the sphere of monotheism or the
bounds of Allah and are pleased with me, it will have no value at all.
What will they do for me? They can just clap their hands or name the
street after me or do similar other useless things for encouraging me.
What else can they do?

Apart from this was there anyone else except Allah Who took care of me
while I was still in my mother's womb? Am I not still under His care?
Will I have no concern with Him on the Day of Judgement? Are all the
virtues and merits not from Him? Are not the hearts of the people under
His control? Then why should I forsake Him and run after frivolous
things?

In short, instead of trying to please others who have varying tastes
when their pleasure does not affect my past and future, it is better to
please only Allah the One, Whose pleasure is quickly achieved and Who
can change the people's mind for me, and with whom rest my past and
future. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Do not consider anything equal to Allah lest you should become
despised and neglected.*** (Surah Bani Israil, 17:22)

We ran after people for receiving their attention throughout our life
and ultimately came to the conclusion that people liked us only because
of their selfish motives. It is only Allah who likes us for our own
sake. Our friends make new friends and then desert us to let us remain
in perpetual misery. As mentioned in the following verse of the Holy
Qur'an:

***Believers some of your wives may prove to be your enemies, so beware
of them.*** (Surah Taghabun, 64:14)30

If it is told that some of our wives and children are our enemies it is
in this very sense that some of our wives and children want us only for
the sake of their own comforts no matter if we are recompensed with
misfortune and ruination.

**3. Collective Effect of Polytheism**

In a society based on monotheism personal interests, governing laws and
collective thinking are on one and the same plane. Authority, commands,
laws and the path are the same and it is the path of Allah and the
command of Allah and Allah is the Patron and Guardian of everybody.

But in a polytheistic society instead of one law and one direction there
are several laws and directions and everyone defends his own line of
direction which he has adopted for himself. The Holy Qur'an says:

In that case each god would have taken away his creatures and claimed
superiority over the others. (Surah al-Mu'minun, 23:91)

That is to say in this society the lawyers defend their clients and not
the truth. In this society the aim of life is not to worship Allah but
to flatter the people.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Lord, when we obeyed our chiefs and elders they led us astray.***
(Surah al-Ahzab, 33:67)

According to the Holy Qur'an:

***People are envious of each other***. (Surah al-Mu 'minun, 23:91)

Hence, everyone adopts the way of his liking and seeks pleasure in it,
wants to please himself without caring for the truth and falsehood. He
is concerned only with his own interest, his well-wishers, and his
social standing, but he does not respect his opponents even though they
have reasons to be on the right side. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Who have divided themselves into various religious sects, each one
happy with their own belief.*** (Surah al-Rum, 30:32)

Domination, suppression, false propaganda and opposition are the
collective signs of polytheism. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Do not associate yourselves with the pagans who have divided
themselves into various religious sects, each one happy with their own
belief.*** (Surah al-Rum, 30:31-32) Do not think that only the idolater
is the polytheist, but it means that you should not join the school and
path of that person who sows the seeds of discord and thrusts his
personal opinion, likes and dislikes on some school and deprives it from
its reality and piety, otherwise you too will become a polytheist
because side by side with Allah's command you introduce your own views
in which you are interested.

The Effect of Polytheism in the Next Life
-----------------------------------------

To enter the Hell with disgrace in the Hereafter is included in the
effects of polytheism. We read in the Holy-Qur'an at several places that
on the Day of Judgment the polytheists will be addressed that they
followed the gods besides Allah and worshipped the deities in the hope
that they would remove their sufferings. On that Day they will be told
to call those deities to come to their rescue! The Holy Qur'an says:

***Do not consider anything equal to Allah lest you be thrown into Hell,
despised and driven away from Allah's Mercy.***(Surah Bani Isra'il,
17:39)

Grandeur of Monotheism
----------------------

It is the style of the Holy Qur'an that apart from chalking out a mode
of action of doing good and abstaining from evil, it teaches us in
parables and uses analogies which by themselves are interesting. The
Holy Qur'an says that for the believers the example of Fir'aun's wife
(Asiya) is so good and interesting, for despite being under alluring
atmosphere she did not swerve from the right path.

She was so truthful and steadfast in her belief that all the pomp and
glamour of the court of Fir'aun could not shake her faith and she
achieved greater success in her belief so much so that she prayed to
Allah for her salvation in the Hereafter. The Holy Qur'an says:

***To the Believers, as a parable, Allah has advanced the event of the
wife o f Fir'aun who said, 'Lord, establish for me a house in Paradise.
Rescue me from Fir'aun and his deeds and save me from the unjust
people'.*** (Surah Tahrim, 66:11)

We also read in the Holy Qur'an that there is a clear example of the
infidel wife of Prophet Nuh. She was prevented from the right path by
her lust and obstinate nature to the extent that despite being lodged in
the House of revelation and being in the proximity of Prophet Nuh she
went astray. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Allah has reminded the disbelievers about the event of the wives of
Nuh and Lut by advancing a parable.*** (Surah Tahrim, 66:9)

Progenitor of Monotheism
------------------------

The Holy Qur'an says about Prophet Ibrahim:

***Say: Allah has spoken the truth. Follow the upright rites of Ibrahim
who was not an idolater.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:95)

Now we proceed with the historical events that took place in the time of
Prophet Ibrahim so that we may prepare a list of his achievements by
which it becomes evident that he was the loyal and noble hero of the
school of monotheism.

Prophet Ibrahim was obedient to Allah in the discharge of his
obligations and no power on earth could distract him or prevent him from
the right path. He came out with flying colours from the trials and
tribulations. The Holy Qur'an says:

***When his Lord tested Ibrahim 's faith and he satisfied the test, He
said, "I am appointing you as the leader of mankind"*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:124)

Merits of Prophet Ibrahim
-------------------------

Desecrated the Idol of Temporal Desires: Prophet Ibrahim was ordained by
Allah to slaughter his beloved son, Prophet Isma'il. When he was born
his father's age was hundred years. Without advancing any excuse Prophet
Ibrahim obeyed the command of Allah to which he gave priority over his
paternal love.

He broke the idol of personal desires and wishes. When he suppressed his
sentiments and emotions and laid down his son and started slaughtering
him with a knife, there came the following Divine command:

***O' Ibrahim! you have fulfilled what you were commanded to do in your
dream. Thus do We reward the righteous ones. It was certainly an open
trial.*** (Surah Saffat, 37: 105)

**Crushed the Tyrant Ruler of His Time**: Prophet Ibrahim disagreed
Namrud by shattering his vanity through logic and reasoning The Holy
Qur'an says:

***O Muhammad, have you heard about the one who argued with Ibrahim
about his Lord for His granting him the kingdom? Ibrahim said, "It is
only my Lord who gives life and causes things to die" He replied: "I am
the giver of life and death". Ibrahim said, "Allah causes the sun to
rise in the East. Can you make it rise in the West?" Thus the unbeliever
was confounded. Allah does not guide the unjust people***. (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:258)

Destroyed the Idolatry of Heavenly Bodies: The Holy Qur'an says:

***When it became dark at night he (Ibrahim) saw a star and said: "Is
this my Lord?" But when it disappeared, he said: "I don't adore those
who fade away" When Ibrahim saw the rising moon, he said: "Is this my
Lord?" But when it faded away, he said: "If my Lord had not guided me, I
should have certainly gone astray.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6: 77-78)

**Severed Relations with his Relatives**: Prophet Ibrahim severed
relations with his relatives for the sake of Allah. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***Lord! the idols have misled the people. Whoever follows me is my
friend, as for those who disobey, you are certainly All-Forgiving and
All-Merciful.*** (Surah Ibrahim, 14:36)

**Abandoned his Wife and Suckling son**: Prophet Ibrahim abandoned his
wife and the suckling son for the sake of Allah. The Holy Qur'an says:

***O Lord! I have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley near
your Sacred House so that they could be steadfast in prayers. Lord! fill
the hearts of the people with love for them and produce fruits for their
sustenance so that they may glorify You.*** (Surah Ibrahim, 14: 37)

**Never Cared for His Life**: Prophet Ibrahim cheerfully obeyed Allah
when he was thrown in the fire. The Holy Qur'an says:

***O We said, O fire! be a comfort and peace to Ibrahim.***(Surah
Anbiya, 21:69)

The Holy Qur'an has dealt with this subject in detail but we have quoted
some relevant verses only for the sake of brevity.

Deceit is Polytheism
--------------------

We read in the hadith that every sort of false pretence is polytheism.
Of course polytheism is of varying degrees. Sometimes it is very
apparent as for instance worship of the idols, the sun, the moon and the
stars, and sometimes it is so hidden that man himself is unable to
detect it.

We have read in the hadith that the problem of this type of polytheism
and monotheism is as difficult as perceiving the movement of an ant on a
slab of stone in the dead of the night. Therefore, without the
ever-present guidance of Allah and of one's own deepest consideration
and quest for searching truth one cannot prevent himself from falling
into the trap of polytheism.

Signs of Sincere Believer
-------------------------

**1. Does not Wait for Any Return**: The Holy Qur'an considers those
people as the embodiment of virtue and sincerity who offered their food
which they needed most at the time of breaking their fast to the needy
ones for three consecutive days, and simply said that they did not do it
in the hope of any reward, or praise or thanks. (Vide: Surah Dahr, 76:
7-9).

Therefore, anyone who expects something in return of the favor done to a
third person by way of a word of appreciation is void of sincere
devotion and purpose. Such a person finding no appreciation of his deed
feels sorry for it. Such a person should make an appraisal of his true
intentions.

**2.** **Controls the Fury of Inherent Tendencies**: The second kind of
sincerity is that one is not swayed away by his inborn passions. We all
have heard that when Imam Ali overpowered his enemy and laid him on the
ground for severing his head from his body, the wretched fellow spat on
his face out of his deepest rancor and disrespect and the Holy Imam got
infuriated.

For a while Imam Ali paused till he composed himself and then he
proceeded to behead the enemy. Afterwards, he explained that the reason
of his making a pause was that he did not want to be swayed away by the
dictates of his personal desire as the enemy had made him infuriated,
hence he did not want to mar the noble spirit of Jihad as otherwise it
would have appeared as an act of retaliation.

**3.** **A Sincere Person is Never Sorry and Unsuccessful**: A sincere
person performs his action for the sake of Allah only and his reward
remains preserved before Allah and thus he is not affected by
consideration of victory or defeat, happiness or grief. As we have
already said before such a man never has any anxiety or worry as these
originate from unbridled desires, failures and frustrations. The object
of such a man is to attain Allah's pleasure only and thus leads a happy
life.

How One Can Avoid Polytheism and False Hopes?
---------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an has severely warned against polytheism and in fact if we
come out of the clutches of the Satan and on the one hand suppress our
inwardly dominant temporal desires and on the other hand eradicate the
external power of ruthless despots, then there will remain no question
of polytheism and hypocrisy.

The causes of all our misfortunes and difficulties are polytheism,
intemperate desires and despotic domination, and getting rid of all
these things is the prerequisite of monotheism. It is because unless we
cleanse a utensil from bad food we cannot put fresh food in it.

Thus, in the realm of monotheism the declaration of the words ***La
ilaha*** (There is no god) come prior to ***Illallah***(except Allah).
In this regard the Holy Qur'an points out the following causes of
polytheism:

***The belief considering other things as one’s guardians besides Allah
is as feeble as a spider's web.*** (Surah Ankabut, 29:41)

***Why then have you taken guardians other than Allah when such
guardians cannot benefit or harm themselves.*** (Surah ar-Ra'd,
13**.**16)

***Those whom you worship instead of Allah do not have the power to
create even a fly, even though all of them would come together for the
task.*** (Surah al-Hajj, 22:73)

***Do those who establish friendship with disbelievers instead of the
believers seek honour? Let them know that all honor belongs to Allah.***
(Surah an-Nisa, 4:139)

The Holy Qur'an further teaches in parables how the notorious despots
like Qarun, Fir'aun and Namrud and their coteries failed to avoid the
wrath of Allah. In short the Holy Qur'an has advanced the following
guidelines for the abolition of polytheism:

**(i) Unraveling the Reality**: By exposing the weakness and the
vulnerability of polytheism it is sufficient to know that all those
guardians who have no power to benefit or harm or to create or bestow
honor can become the center of our hopes and aspirations!

**(ii) Teaching in Parables**: By teaching in parables as to how people
depended on all their guardians, idols etc. and could not get any
benefit from them, but Allah protected Prophet Ibrahim from the blazing
fire, Prophet Yusuf from the well, Prophet Yunus from the belly of the
fish and Prophet Muhammad from his sworn enemies who had surrounded his
house.

**(iii) Drawing Comparison**: To root out polytheism the Holy Qur'an
uses the method of drawing a comparison between polytheism and
monotheism and warning how man falls into the ditch of total disgrace by
accepting one thing for the other in place of the right and correct
thing. To illustrate the point a few verses of the Holy Qur'an can be
quoted below:

***Is the One who can create, equal to those (idols), who cannot create
anything? Why then do you not understand?***(Surah an-Nahl, 16:17)

***Those whom you (pagans) worship besides Allah, are themselves
servants just like yourselves.*** (Surah al-Araf, 7:194)

In fact these are as helpless, feeble and wanting as you are. After all
why have you so simply sold your honour and dignity and why are you so
submissive to those who are just like you!

However, if you lose your faith in Allah you will lose your sense of
honour and self-respect. On this occasion it is pertinent to mention
what Allama Iqbal says.

"If a man out of his sheer blind foldedness adopted the servitude
(worship) of another person, he will be like the one who possessed a
grain of self-respect and freedom, handed it over to qayhobad and
jamshed "

"In the servile attitude he is worse than a dog. I have never come
across an instance in which one dog may have lowered his head before
another dog". The Holy Qur'an says:

***Can any of your idols guide you to the Truth***? (Surah Yunus, 10:35)

**4. Prayers, Invocation and Remembrance of Allah**

The fourth important weapons for demolishing polytheism are the offering
of prayers, glorifying of Allah, invocation, and the remembrance of
Allah, for if each word and each sentence of it is uttered with rapt
attention, it will fill the human heart with the belief of monotheism.
To take an example if we ponder for a while over the following recitals:

***Allah u Akbar*** (Allah is Great), ***bihawlillahi*** (With Allah's
Power) and "***iyyaka na'budu***" (You alone do we worship), we shall
come to know that the meaning of ***Allah u Akbar*** by any measure and
standard is greater than man's power of conception worthy of looking at,
hearing, saying and writing, far superior to all, and mightier than the
might of all temporal powers and despots and their tricky contrivances.

***bihawlillahi wa quwwatihi qqumo wa aq'ud***, (I lie and rise only by
the Might of Allah).

***iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in*** (We worship only Allah). Neither
we owe allegiance to the East nor to the West. We seek help only from
Allah. He is All-Powerful and His Might is infinite. Whatever is on
earth is His Kingdom.

He helps man with air, sand, clouds, moon and water. He has helped
mankind through His angels. He has frightened His enemies and has
destroyed them by hailstones on their heads and has helped the believers
by pacifying them. We seek help from Allah in Whose hands is our life's
existence.

In short every word of our supplication enlivens the spirit of the
belief in monotheism and does away with our attachment with everything
except Allah. But it does not mean that we should give up efforts and
quest for learning and that we should refuse to take personal benefits
from the world resources.

This is almost certain that in this book our discussions are not
exhaustive, for if we have described four cardinal points for
elaborating the inspiring effect of monotheism and rooting out
polytheism, it does not mean that there is not the fifth point.

While teaching the fundamentals of belief these are the cardinal points
which Allah has instilled in my brain. Perhaps there may be other
methods of approach on this subject.

Signs of Idolatrous Nations
---------------------------

The Holy Qur'an says:

***When Allah, the One is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not
believe in the Day of Judgment begin to shrink but when the idols are
mentioned, they rejoice.*** (Surah az-Zumar, 39:45)

For example when we say that according to the commands of Allah we
should oppose such an idea or person or group of persons, they become
annoyed, and when we say that according to such and such international
law they become joyful. This is the sign of polytheism of these people.

When we say that Allah wills they become unhappy but when we say that
according to the people's will they become happy. In all matters these
people have pinned their hopes on the East and the West instead of the
Divine revelations.

They are attracted in things and persons other than Allah and are only
interested in submitting to their passions and temptations instead of
Divine commands! This is the sign of the downfall and of a nation's
going astray.

When Obedience to Parents is Forbidden?
---------------------------------------

In the Holy Qur'an at five different places obedience to one's parents
is greatly stressed and at four other places respect and reverence to
parents have been dealt with side by side with belief in monotheism and
obedience to Allah. It is so because the very existence of man is in the
first instance due to Allah and at the second stage it is concerned with
the parents.

This is one aspect of this issue but on the other aspect of being kind
to one's parents is another important issue which has been mentioned
side by side with monotheism, belief, worship, and obedience to Allah.
In the ***ahadith*** (traditions) respect and reverence to parents have
been so emphasized that looking at them with love and affection
constitutes a kind of worship to Allah.

But in spite of all these recommendations if the parents try to distract
their off-springs from the path of Allah, their obedience is forbidden
and it will be incumbent on the off-springs to disobey their parents.
Such disobedience has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an in following two
verses. The meaning and explanation of both are one and the same:

***We have enjoined man, to be kind to his parents; but if they try to
make you associate with Me that o f which you have no knowledge then do
not obey them.*** (Surah al-Ankabut, 29:8)

***If they try to compel you to associate Me with that of which you have
no knowledge, do not obey them.*** (Surah Luqman, 31:15)

Such sort of direction from the parents' side is sometimes manifest in
the shape of sympathy when they say, "O my son! If we do not obey such
and such despot, we shall be deprived of our means of sustenance. Our
property, status and honour will be safe by acting as their yes man".

Sometimes they castigate their sons by saying that their forefathers too
were following the similar path as they themselves had obeyed the
despots of their times with respect and veneration and had passed a
fully satisfied life. "It is the tradition of our forefathers", they
say, "to adopt such and such methods and to reject such and such
procedure".

With such notions, according to the Holy Qur'an, the parents with all
their dominating influence wish to put their offsprings on the wrong
track of polytheism.

Thus under the circumstances when the question of belief in gods other
than Allah arises, the parents should not be obeyed.

Polytheism - an Unpardonable Sin
--------------------------------

Polytheism is an unpardonable sin. The Holy Qur'an declares in the
following two verses:

***Allah does not forgive the sin of associating others with Him but He
may forgive other sins. Whoever believes in other gods besides Him has
indulged in a great sin.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:48)

***Allah does not forgive the sin of associating others with Him but He
may forgive the other sins of whomever He wants. One who considers
anything equal to Allah has certainly gone far away from the right
path***. (Surah an-Nisa, 4:116)

Thus the benevolent will of Allah is for those whom He wants to pardon
and the will of All-Wise Allah is related to man's piety and virtuous
deeds.

Counter-measures against Polytheists
------------------------------------

It is imperative that we should not be unaware of those whose focus of
attention is on gods other than Allah and whose endeavors are directed
towards defeating the purpose of the obedience to Allah. Their main
objective is to raise themselves and to strengthen the position of their
followers.

It is because if we do not follow the path of Allah, we shall attract
the attention of all such groups of people. We shall be like blind
creatures, and shall fall into their trap and they will devour us like
cannibals, who after fulfilling their mission will leave us in the lurch
and will go after chasing other victims like us.

The revered teacher martyr Murtaza Mutahhary used to advise us to recite
often the following piece of supplication: "O Allah! Whosoever abandoned
the righteous path of Yours and entered into a different fold, got
defeated and whosoever went after other gods besides Allah suffered a
terrible loss".

The esteemed readers should please pay their attention towards the
under-mentioned established facts:

Man should choose one of the following three alternatives:

**(i)** That path which man determines by his own free will.

**(ii)** That path which others fix for him.

**(iii)** That path which Allah chooses for him.

The first path is not correct because we decide to act on one day and on
the second day we think that our decision was wrong. Actually, it is
certain that owing to lack of proper knowledge and under the influence
of inborn tendencies we cannot select a right path from amongst the
hundreds of paths.

The second path is also not correct because according to the Commander
of the Faithful, Imam Ali: "Since my mother gave birth to me as a free
man why should I become the slave of anything whatsoever?" and therefore
blind following is in itself a form of polytheism. The Holy Qur'an says:

***If you obey them, you shall most surely be polytheist.*** (Surah
al-Anam, 6:122)

Now remains only the third path which is the path of Allah
(***sabilillah***). The Holy Qur'an says:

***This is My path and it is straight; follow it and do not follow other
paths which will lead you far away from the path of Allah. Thus, does
Allah guide you so that you may become pious.*** (Surah al-Anam, 6:153)

***He has sent the Book to His servant and has made it a flawless guide
for mankind.*** (Surah al-Kahf, 18:1)

***Muhammad, you are a Messenger and you follow the right path.***
(Surah Ya Sin, 36:3-4)

***O Lord! Keep us on the right path*** ***the path of those upon whom
you have bestowed favors, not (the path) of those upon whom your wrath
is brought down, nor of those who go astray,*** (Surah al-Fatiha, 1:6,
7)

***And we would certainly have guided them in the right path. And
whoever obeys Allah and the Prophet is with those upon whom Allah has
bestowed favors. From among the Prophets and*** ***the truthful and the
martyrs and the good, and how an excellent company are they!*** (Surah
an-Nisa, 4:68, 69)

In short this path is the path of obedience to Allah and this path is
the path which has come down to us from the Infinite Knowledge of Allah
through the medium of Divine revelations which have been conveyed to us
by infallible Prophets, the Holy Imams and just and upright jurists.

Now that the path of Allah has been fully defined, we should show our
reaction to the other paths and schools, otherwise people would take
wrong advantage of our lethargy and would try to distract us from the
path of monotheism.

Allah orders the Holy Prophet to keep aloof from the pagans. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***The pagans do not have any right to establish the Mosque of Allah***.
(Surah Tawba, 9:17)

***After it was made clear that the pagans are to be the dwellers of
Hell, the Prophet and the believers should not have sought forgiveness
from Allah for them even if they may have been relatives.*** (Surah
Tawba, 9:113)

***Prophet Ibrahim and those with him are the best examples for you to
follow. They told the people, 'We have nothing to do with you and with
those whom you worship besides Allah. We have rejected you. Enmity and
hatred will separate us forever unless you believe in One Allah'.***
(Surah al-Mumtahinah, 60:4)


