Justice
=======

In the first chapter we have dealt with world-view, monotheism and
polytheism. Now we deal with justice which is the second fundamental
principle of belief.

It is through the wisdom and intelligence with which we have been
endowed by Allah that we differentiate between a good and a bad thing
and we understand that oppression is a bad thing and justice is a good
thing.

It is our belief that Allah does not do any harm to us nor does He
oppress us.

The Causes of Injustice
-----------------------

**(i)** **Ignorance**: Sometimes ignorance becomes the cause of
oppression as for example man does not know that there is no difference
between a white race and the Negroes and hence a white man under his
feeling of superiority oppresses the people belonging to the black race.

Thus by his ignorance and defective thinking a man starts doing things
which result in oppression and persecution. But how the Almighty Allah
Who is above all defects such as ignorance and Whose Knowledge is
infinite, can do an act of oppression!

**(ii)** **Fear**: Sometimes it is fear which is the cause of oppression
as for example one strong power is scared of another strong power which
is its enemy and knowing that if it does attack the other power, the
same would attack it and therefore in order to forestall this possible
danger it commits oppression by making an attack on the other power.

Similarly a despotic ruler in order to be in a formidable position
persecutes the people who want freedom from his oppression. But the
Almighty Allah has no one as His rival so as to indulge in an act of
oppression'

**(iii)** **Wants**: Sometimes the cause of oppression is based on one's
sense of deprivation and thus from the psychological point of view one
is obliged to an act of oppression for fulfilling his wants.

**(iv)** **Meanness**: Sometimes it is the inner meanness that some
people oppress others or when they see the deprived and oppressed
people, they derive pleasure in seeing them so.

After knowing the various causes of oppression you can decide as to
which one of these can be attributed to Allah? In this context, the Holy
Qur'an says:

***Allah does not wish injustice for any of His creatures.***(Surah Ale
Imran, 3:108)

How could it be that Allah Who commands us for doing justice can Himself
be an oppressor? The Holy Qur'an says:

***Allah commands people to maintain justice, kindness, and proper
relations with their relatives.*** (Surah an-Nahl, 16:90)

How is it possible that Allah Who commands man who is weak and who leads
his life under the dictates of his unruly passions, not to become the
cause of injustices if he receives injustice at the hands of his nation,
may Himself Who possesses unlimited power and Who is not under the
domination of any instinct, perpetrate injustice?

The Attributes of Allah
-----------------------

The acquiring of knowledge about the Attributes of Allah is closely
related to our knowledge of recognition of Allah. As for example just as
we trace the writer from his writing as well as from his style of
writing and identify him by particular words and phrases which he uses
as his style and which indicate his mental attitude also, in the same
way every creation performs the following two main functions.

**(i)** Identifying its creator

**(ii)** Projecting the attributes of its creator and explaining the
objective of its creation.

Justice-One of the Principles of Religion
-----------------------------------------

When Almighty Allah possesses innumerable attributes, e.g. Wisdom,
Knowledge and Power of creation why is it said that justice is one of
the principles of religion? Why is it not said that first the Belief in
monotheism and then existence, or first the Belief in monotheism and
then Knowledge? But on the contrary it is said first the belief in
monotheism and then justice!

The answer to this question is as follows:

A small section of the Muslims known as Ash'ari sect do not consider
that Allah is Just. They think that whatever Allah has done is correct
no matter it may be wrong or cruel. Further, the Ash'arite say that if
Allah sends Imam Ali to Hell and his assassin the accursed Ibn Muljam to
Paradise, nothing can stop Him, He can do so.

But we do not accept this logic as we consider Allah's Justice as one of
the cardinal principles of our faith and according to Qur'anic reasoning
and our own commonsense we say that all the acts of Allah are based on
Justice and Wisdom and that Allah does not commit any act of cruelty or
does anything wrong.

Moreover the belief that Allah is Just plays the following important
role in building man's personality:

Advantages of Believing in the Justice of Allah
-----------------------------------------------

**Self-restraint**: From the point of view of self-control and
abstaining from sins especially when man knows that his words and deeds
are in the knowledge of Allah and not even a fraction of his deed
however small it may be ignored from being taken into account, and that
he will be paid back for his noble and evil deeds, he will then not
consider himself independent in this world (Many Qur'anic verses can be
cited in this behalf).

**Cheerful Outlook**: Anyone who has belief in the Justice of Allah in
all worldly affairs possesses a cheerful outlook of life and as such
when he considers Allah to be just he has cogent reason and a
satisfactory answer of the unpleasant things. He accepts the unpleasant
things without hesitation. Such a person never suffers from
disappointments and despair.

**Justice Plays its Role in Individual and Collective Life**: The faith
in the Justice of Allah helps to lay the foundation of justice in
individual and collective life. Such a person prepares himself to accept
justice in his personal and social life.

The Meaning of Justice
----------------------

In the discussions on justice the basic problem is to give satisfactory
answer to its criticism. We would present some explanation in the light
of Qur'anic verses and the traditions.

**(i)** The first point is that Allah is Just and Allah never deprives
anyone of his rights and according to the rationality of the laws, Allah
bestows His Kindness on all His creatures and never does Allah oppress
anybody.

Now we can see whether there exists somebody's right on Allah or whether
there is any right of the creatures from the very beginnings so that
cruelty has arisen out of the suppression of this right?

Were we present beforehand or did we have something beforehand which has
been taken away from us? True, there is some differentiation between the
creatures. Some are minerals, some are plants, some are animals and some
are human beings, but none of these creatures possessed any existence or
right before its birth and which is supposed to have been usurped.

Take for example a big carpet which we cut into small pieces. It will
then be said that this carpet which originally was big has lost its
originality of being big by having been cut into pieces. But in the case
of a carpet which was already made small it cannot be complained as to
why it has been made small because before that it had no existence at
all and when it was brought into existence it was made small already.

Thus this small carpet from the beginning had no quality of being big so
that it was deprived of something which it possessed.

Allah, the All-Wise, has created all his creatures with difference when
none of them had existed beforehand or had any claim or right. Allah
established a system of lifecycle with cause and effect and set a
particular line of action for every creature.

He never makes any discrimination between His two creatures or two
nations in as far as His expectations from them are concerned in regard
to their obligations and responsibilities. Similarly His reward or
punishment is also based on justice for all.

He has taken into consideration the respective capabilities and
capacities of each creature in His commands and accordingly He has fixed
proportionate punishment for each so that there is no partiality or
injustice done to anyone of his creatures.

Again take an example of a factory which manufactures spare parts of
small machine and tires of big motor cars also. Would you brand the
factory owner tyrant because he manufactures small parts and big tires?
Or can the small machine parts themselves complain of the
differentiation? The answer to this is certainly in negative.

It is so because in this Machine Age we need machine parts as well as
tires. But there was a time when none of them existed before and the
factory owner made them or brought them into existence according to the
need of the time for two different functions. Here the kind of cruelty
exists only when the machine parts would bear the burden of tires.

Now that when each one of them were brought into existence for its
specific purpose and functions and no extra burden was put on it beyond
its capacity the question of cruelty does not arise at all.

At this stage when the meaning of justice and cruelty has been
abundantly clarified it is necessary to ponder over the following
important point:

At every place and every occasion the concept of justice is not
equality. For example, if a teacher without taking into consideration
the abilities and the hard work of each student gives equal marks to all
of them, he actually commits cruelty.

Similarly if a physician gives the same medicine to all of his patients
without considering the nature of their diseases and conditions he does
the same cruelty. In both these examples the demand of justice is that
the teacher and the physician should treat his pupils and the patients
differently according to their merits and ailments respectively.

It should not admit any consideration, recommendation, favourtism etc,
but this different attitude of treatment in different cases is according
to the demand of the occasion. It does not come under the definition of
cruelty.

**(ii)** The second point is that the objections to the Justice of Allah
are only motivated by hasty decisions. Some of the examples are given
below:

Suppose an Islamic Government out of necessity and in consideration of
public welfare takes a decision to build a forty-five kilometer long
road as every road has its utility for providing a means of
communication for the smooth flow of traffic and for the convenience of
pedestrians, but by laying down each and every road people have to
undergo some sort of hardship until the time compensation for the
demolition of houses and the construction of new houses at alternate
places is affected.

Thus for the sake of avoiding hardship of a handful of people the
overall interest of the people and the program for the public welfare
cannot be ignored. In Islam despite the importance of individual rights
and ownership of the people the overall rights of the society have been
greatly emphasized.

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali said to Malik Ashtar. "Call
those people who have hoarded the things of public utility and remind
them of doing good and abstaining from evil and if they still do not pay
heed to your advice, bring them to task". He further said: "Hoarding is
useful to a hoarder only, but it is harmful to the good of the society".

At yet another place, the Holy Imam said: "In the matter of
administration your attention should be towards the comforts and benefit
of the common people irrespective of the annoyance and displeasure of a
selected few". (See: Letter 53, ***Peak of Eloquence***, ISP, 1985)

An Incident: A man had a pet dog. He went out to fetch something from
the bazaar leaving his infant child in the care of his dog. When he
returned to his house his dog welcomed him outside the house with
blood-stained mouth.

He thought for a moment that the dog had devoured his child and under
the heat of passion he fired his gun and killed the dog there and then
and went inside hurriedly. There he found his child hale and hearty.

In fact a wolf used to visit the town and since the door of his house
was wide open it went inside and wanted to devour the child. The dog
jumped upon the wolf and in a grim battle he overpowered it and tore it
into pieces and thereby saved the child from the wolf's clutches. But
the man in his extreme haste fired at his faithful dog which had saved
the life of his child.

The man repented of his action and came to rescue his dog but it had
already died. The man said that he looked into the eyes of his dog which
were lamenting over his wisdom and saying: "O man! How hasty you happen
to be? You make a hasty decision.

You should have first entered the house and seen for yourself the true
situation. Why have you killed me? ' After this tragic event the man
wrote an article captioned "O man! How hasty you are in taking a
decision!"

There may be some people who may have prayed for something and it was
not granted, but afterwards they thought that it was better that their
prayers were not granted.

The Dangers of Hasty Decision
-----------------------------

The Holy Qur'an warns man against taking a hasty decision as often man's
action is based on baseless thoughts and speculations. There are many
things which appear to be harmful but actually they are of benefit to
man and similarly many things appear to be very good but actually they
are harmful to man.

As for example the Holy Qur'an says about Jihad that man apparently
considers it to be not good but actually it brings good to him.

***Fighting is made obligatory on you but you dislike it. You may
dislike a thing yet it may be good for you; or a thing may haply please
you but may be bad for you. Only Allah has knowledge, and you do not
know.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:216)

Fighting for the sake of Allah perfects man's abilities and brightens
his capabilities. Those who put on airs and those who are men of action
are distinguished in the battlefield. Fighting unites the scattered
forces which are dedicated to the common cause and confers upon man
honor and dignity. Basically fighting is the purpose of life for the
people who have been oppressed and tyrannized.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***It may be that you dislike a thing though Allah has placed abundant
good in it***. (Surah an-Nisa, 4:19)

If we look into the meaning of the word "***husban***" and collect its
derivatives we learn that the Holy Qur'an warns that we should not think
such and such thing, guess such and such thing, and conjure such and
such thing. It tells us about things which contradict the decisions
cursorily and hastily taken.

We read in the Holy Qur'an about the angels that, as they did not
possess thorough knowledge about man, they pleaded to Allah that as they
already worshipped Allah why He was creating man. But since Allah had
willed to appoint His vicegerent on earth he bestowed upon man knowledge
and brought out a stunning spectacle and established that their (the
angels) decision about man was a hasty one.

In short, if we doubt about the Justice of Allah and say that if Allah
is Just why and how such and such thing happened, then we should keep in
mind that our speculations and decisions are mostly false and wrong
because in most of the cases the causes and the effects of problems
remain hidden from us as our knowledge and experience are very limited.

It is for over several centuries that we have been considering the
existence of forests as useless, but with the passage of time we have
now realized that we obtain a number of useful things from these very
forests.

Had not the people been saying for a long time that the glands in our
body are quite useless? But now they say that these glands produce in
the blood useful cells technically called phagocytes which devour the
invading microbes in our body.

For years people thought that vermiform appendix, the blind pouch at the
junction of the small and the large intestine was a useless thing but
nowadays it is claimed that this appendix plays an important role in the
prevention of cancer.

If we are reading a book which deals with highly important subjects and
we come across a difficult word whose meaning is not known to us, we
should not arrive at a hasty decision about the book and should not
blame its author, but on the contrary we should review our understanding
of the meaning of that word.

Now that we have comprehended the true meaning of justice and that our
criticism of it is based on our superficial and hasty decision, we deal
with the third point, that is, why we should try to know the causes of
our troubles.

**(iii)** The third point is that while counting our troubles we
altogether ignore our own doings and blame Allah for all that. We
complain to Allah and say, "O Allah! if you are Just why am I faced with
these troubles?"

Obviously many of the troubles and hardships are due to our own faults
as for example if we do not take care of our health by hygienic methods
we are sure to fall sick. Similarly according to the principle of doing
good and preventing others from doing evil and if we do not prevent the
evils the evil doers will overpower us and in that case our
supplications, implorations and invocations would be of no use. On this
subject too we take the guideline from the following verses of the Holy
Qur'an:

***Whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own
deeds.*** (Surah ash-Shura, 42:30)

***When We let the people taste mercy, they rejoice in it, but when some
misfortune befalls them because of their own doings they at once become
desperate.*** (Surah Rum, 30:36)

***As for man, whenever his Lord tests him by bestowing favour on him
and blesses him, he says, 'My Lord is kind to me'. But when He tests him
by stinting his means of living, he says my Lord has disgraced me***.
(Surah al-Fajr, 89:15-16)

As a matter of fact we should try to find out the cause and reason of
our misfortunes and afflictions within ourselves and in the latter part
of the preceding verse as we read, "Since wealth does not necessarily
guarantee everlasting happiness then why do you not honour the orphans,
or urge one another to feed the destitute?" Thus your carelessness
resulted in the wrath of Allah. This verse too tells us about our deeds
being the cause of our misfortune and deprivation of Allah's Mercy. The
Holy Qur'an says:

***Eat of the lawful and good things which Allah has provided for you
and give thanks for His favours if it is He Whom you worship*** (Surah
an-Nahl, 16:114)

In this verse Allah tells of a place where Allah's blessings and
bounties were in abundance but its inhabitants became ungrateful to
Allah and thus became guilty of infidelity. And Allah plunged them into
hunger, poverty and terrible fear. This verse also establishes that
ungratefulness to Allah becomes the cause of afflictions.

We have already mentioned before that the misdeed of the people is the
cause of their troubles and afflictions and consequently Allah's wrath
befalls them. Here the following two questions arise.

**(i)** We see that those who indulge in all sorts of misdeeds,
cruelties and oppression are leading a very prosperous life! Why is it
so?

**(ii)** We say that it is due to our misdeeds that misfortune and
afflictions befall us but those people whose misdeeds are even worse
than ours are not subjected to any afflictions! Why is it so?

In the eyes of Allah, all the people are not accounted for in the same
way, because:

**(i)** Allah punishes some people or a nation at once.

**(ii)** Allah gives a time to some people or a nation.

**(iii)** Allah does not punish a certain group of people or a nation at
all and despite their misdeeds they lead a comfortable life until the
Doomsday as according to the Divine Outlook on the Universe and life
this world is not separated from the Hereafter.

It is possible that a teacher may be having different standards of
reprimanding his pupils. He may punish some at once as a result of his
anger, but he may leave some alone for a certain period of time; and
against some who are the worst he may take no action at all, and leave
them to themselves until the end of the session for the purpose of
awarding the marks.

This sort of categorization is based on wisdom endowed by Allah because
all the guilty ones are not equally responsible nor the nature of their
deeds and mentality is similar so that we may deal with them equally
from the point of view of punishment.

Sometimes the teacher reacts violently on the negligence of one of his
best pupils because he did not expect such negligence from his best
pupil while in the case of his unworthy pupils he does not crack down on
them severely.

We read in the Holy Qur'an that Allah on certain occasions reprimanded
his Prophets and Messengers for their actions though these were not
under the commitment of sins because He would not have expected of so
august a personage an unexpected action, but we read about the common
people differently. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We destroyed the inhabitants of certain towns only when they
transgressed and did not repent before our deadline.***(Surah al-Kahf,
18 59)

It is explained that Allah does not hasten the punishment for those who
commit the sins by putting them into misfortune but from the side of
Allah there remains a deadline within which they can repent of their
misdeeds. The Holy Qur'an says:

***They want you to bring upon them their punishment without delay.
Allah never disregards His promise. One day for Allah is equal to a
thousand years for you. To how many unjust towns have we given respite
and then seized with torment.*** (Surah al-Hajj, 22:48)

***I granted temporary respite to the unbelievers (so that they would
repent, but they did not). At last I seized them with a terrible
retribution.*** (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:32)

However, Allah gives the following reasons for His giving respite to the
unbelievers:

***The unbelievers must not think that our respite is for their good. We
only give them time to let them indulge in their sins, and suffer an
ignominious doom. For them there will be a humiliating torment***.
(Surah Ale Imran, 3 :178)

After the martyrdom of the Chief of the Martyrs, Imam Husayn, when the
accursed Yazid thought himself victorious and successful, the revered
sister of the Holy Imam, Lady Zaynab recited this very verse of the Holy
Qur'an and pointed out to him that his seeming victory, freedom, comfort
and power were only increasing the burden of his sins so that these
should become the source of terrible torment for him as the Holy Qur'an
says that Allah provides the people greater comfort so that they should
become used to it and then He strikes them suddenly with a painful
torment. The Holy Qur'an says.

***When they neglected what we exhorted them, We opened to them the
gates to all the worldly gains so much so that they became immensely
rejoiced with that and then we caught them suddenly and they became
utterly surprised and dejected.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:44-45)

Such sort of people are like those who climb a tree higher and higher
and think that they are getting more successful but when they fall down
from it they realize that their going up was the beginning of their
torment. Thus Allah treats some people in the similar way save those who
have the capability of reforming themselves. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Evil has spread over the land and the sea because of corruption and
hence, Allah will cause some people to suffer so that perhaps they will
return to Him.*** (Surah ar-Rum, 30:41)

In answer to the question as to why people are in comfort despite their
flouting the Divine commands and why some receive punishment on that
account, the above-mentioned verses from the Holy Qur'an will suffice.

In this context we would take the opportunity of referring to some
***ahadith*** (traditions) which warn the people to fear Allah if
despite their sins they have not been faced with Allah's wrath so that
the matter may not go too far away and they may lose a golden chance of
retrieving and the punishment is meted out to them in the Hereafter by
their being thrown into the Fire of Hell.

It is like that sometime a patient reaches such a stage of his disease
that the physician gives up his efforts by losing all hopes and he then
issues no instructions to the patient and allows him to eat whatever he
likes whether it is harmful to him or not. Thus there are people who
have committed many sins and to whom Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

***Act as you wish; Allah is Well Aware of whatever you do.***(Surah Ha
Mim as-Sajdah, 41:40)

The Holy Prophet also when became disappointed with the people used to
say:

***My people, do as you wish and I will do what I believe.***(Surah Hud,
11:93)

From the supplications of the Holy Imams we often read the following
words. "O Allah! Do not leave me on my own".

In short Allah's wrath befalls the transgressors whom worldly comfort
and pleasure prevented from getting warned and the punishment of the
Doomsday awaits them eagerly.

**(iv)** The fourth point is that sometimes man despite the fact that he
had not committed any sin or fault becomes afflicted with troubles. What
is the analytical approach of the Holy Qur'an about the Justice of
Allah?

Explanation: Allah's putting people on trial has been mentioned about
twenty times in the Holy Qur'an. Thus one of the methods of Allah
putting man on trial and hardships have been described above are just
the means of that trial. Similarly, happiness and pleasure are also one
of the means of trial. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We shall test you through fear, hunger, and loss of life, property
and crops. Muhammad, give glad tidings to the people who have
patience.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:155-156)

Here the following points should be given due consideration:

**(i)** Does Allah not know the type and kind of man that He puts him on
trial?

**(ii)** What is the means of trial?

**(iii)** People's reaction to unpleasant incidents!

**(iv)** Method of overcoming the difficulties.

The First Question: Obviously our trial is not for the purpose of His
knowing our state of mind, mentality and reactive tendency because Allah
already knows all this. He knows how we think and how we react but the
purpose of the trial is to make us react by counteraction so that
according to our deeds the question of recompense with reward or
punishment is determined, because Allah never rewards or punishes a
person on the basis of His Knowledge about his being good or bad, but He
bases His decision on the deeds performed by that person.

The Second question: We said earlier that pleasant and unpleasant
happenings are the source of man's trial. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We test you with both misfortune and blessings.*** (Surah Anbiya,
21:35)

***You (believers) will certainly be tested by the loss of your property
and lives.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:186)

The Third Question: A friend of ours says that the people who face
ordeals and misfortune can be divided into the following four groups:

**1.** Those when confronted with unpleasant incidents start complaining
and finds fault with Allah's Justice, His Grace, Wisdom and His method
of working things in this Universe. The Holy Qur'an tells of such a
group of people as follows: ***When misfortune befalls him, he is
perturbed.*** (Surah al-Ma'arij, 70:20) It means that when misfortune
befalls such people they start grumbling and crying.

**2.** Those who bear hardship with patience and forbearance and they
only declare: ***We are the servants of Allah and to Him we shall
return.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:l56)

**3.** Those who exceed the second group in this respect as these people
not only remain patient and steadfast but they also thank Allah about
what befalls them . We recite in ***Ziyarat 'ashura*** as follows: "O
Allah! I thank you in the same way as the companions of the Holy Imam
Husayn had done".

Indeed, there are people whose main ambition is to bear hardships and
martyrdom in the path of Allah and when they achieve their goal, they
offer their sincere gratitude to Allah.

**4.** Those who are on a still higher plane than those of the third
group and who not only do not complain or show patience and
steadfastness but they also yearn for bearing hardships and misfortune.

We read in the Holy Qur'an that when the companions of the Holy Prophet
asked him to provide them with means and materials (horses, swords etc.)
for Jihad and the Holy Prophet said that he had no such means available
with him, they returned crying that they had not been able to lay their
lives for the cause of Islam. The Holy Qur'an says.

***Those who come to you (Muhammad) asking to be taken to the battle,
but you cannot find the necessary means for them, are exempt from the
duty of fighting for the cause of Allah and they go away in tears
grieving that they are not being able to keep the cause of Allah.***
(Surah al-Tawbah, 9:92)

People generally react to unexpected incidents very violently. If you
hand over a peeled onion to a child, he shouts as soon as he puts it in
his mouth and throws it away because he feels uneasiness in his eyes,
but the father of the child goes out in the market and buys the onions
for the kitchen use. The hardships in life are like that. One runs away
from them while the other welcomes them.

The Fourth Question: We have said that Allah is Just, and our
misfortunes and sufferings are sometimes for our trial, so that our
inner faculties become perfect. Now let us find out what we should do in
order to come out successful in our misfortunes. Here also we have to
seek guidance from the Holy Qur'an.

Methods of Solving the Misfortunes
----------------------------------

**(i)** **To Have a Divine Outlook of the Universe** The Holy Qur'an has
praised the people who show patience. Since they consider the worldly
affairs subservient to Divine control, and when they were in
difficulties they say that they are for Allah, and they are only
short-lived; they do not demand anything from Him; their coming in this
world and all the bounties are from Him alone. They are only His
trustees.

This world is not their permanent abode; it is a passage for the next
world (the Hereafter). On arrival of death they shall return to Him, and
shall not be perished. They exist in this world but there will be no
change in their existence after death; only a place of their abode will
be changed.

This type of outlook on Universe prepares the man to face the hardships
and difficulties in an appropriate manner. This outlook is reflected by
the following Qur'anic verse:

***We are the servants of Allah and to Him we shall all return.***(Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:156)

**(ii)** **Familiarity with the Ways of Allah** The Holy Qur'an asks us
whether we should like to attain Paradise bearing hardships and making
efforts like the other former nations who exercised patience in the
extreme state of unpleasantness! Would we think that without
experiencing all these things we would attain Paradise though like the
people of the former nations, we have not yet experienced the ordeals
like hunger, poverty, sickness, earthquakes, etc.!

The Prophets as well as the believers only awaited Allah's Mercy to
rescue them from all their troubles. The Holy Qur'an assured them of
Allah's help to come to them ultimately and says:

***Do you think that you will find your way to Paradise without
experiencing the kind of suffering others have experienced before you?
Distress and afflictions battered them until the Messenger and the
believers sadly said, 'When will Allah send help?' Certainly Allah's
help is near.***(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:214)

This verse of the Holy Qur'an points out to the fact that in the long
period of history believers in Allah had to undergo great sufferings.
Now that it is our turn to suffer as it is evident that the grinding
wheel of time has to repeat its cycle anyway. It is the normal way of
history that it has to repeat the events.

The Holy Qur'an at a number of places says to the Holy Prophet to look
into the condition of such and such groups of people so that they may
not get the impression that they are not the only persons to be
afflicted by sufferings.

Indeed, if man understands that the afflictions and sufferings are the
result of a process of a general rule; he will be in a better position
to accept them and exercise patience. You observe fast during the month
of Ramazan without any difficulty because it is commonly done by
everybody during that month. But if in other months you have to observe
fast, you will find it difficult to do so.

The Holy Qur'an which gives command for observing fasts says that other
nations before you also observed fasts.

The knowledge of the past events of history helps man to bear things
with patience and similarly the knowledge of the future happenings too
helps to strengthen one's capacity of exercising patience. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***Prophet Khizr said to Prophet Musa: How can you remain patient with
that which you do not fully understand.*** (Surah al-Kahf, 18:68)

Thus the thing that enhances man's power of exercising patience is the
knowledge about the patient people and their method of exercising
patience. Knowledge about the patience and steadfastness of the previous
people is an effective means to face misfortunes and afflictions. The
Holy Qur'an has mentioned number of such things and has cited the
examples of patience of the people of former nations. The Prophets of
Allah used to say to their adversaries as follows:

***We shall bear with patience the hardships you inflict upon us***.
(Surah Ibrahim, 14:12)

When the magicians, who were called by Fir'aun to humiliate Prophet
Musa, realized his righteousness they embraced his faith and despite
Fir'aun's threats and intimidations replied as follows:

***We cannot choose you in the face of the clear testimony we have
received, and over Him who created us. So do what you are determined to
do. All that you would do will only be confined to our short-lived life
on earth***. (Surah Ta Ha, 20 72)

Hence, they meant to tell Fir'aun to do whatever he wanted. They would
endure all the misfortunes that he inflicted upon them as they had
discovered the right course leading to Paradise and were determined not
to give up their stand.

**(iii)** **Depending only on Allah** The remembrance of Allah and the
belief that He hears our implorations, watches our deeds and solves our
problems by rescuing us from afflictions is like looking only at Allah.
Allah in the Holy Qur'an says to Prophet Musa and Prophet Harun as
follows:

***Be not afraid; I am verily with you all the time and I hear and
see.*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20:46)102

***Allah commanded Prophet Nuh: To build the Ark under the supervision
and guidance of hisLord.*** (Surah Hud, 11:37)

As soon as Prophet Nuh started building the Ark, the crowd of the
infidels which passed by him made a fun of him and passed sarcastic
remarks by saying that the Prophet had turned a carpenter but Prophet
Nuh paid no heed to their taunts which became the means of his
steadfastness, and reminded him that he was present before Allah and
that Allah was supervising his work. Such firm determination and spirit
of steadfastness instils a new life in man.

**(iv)** **Concept of Reward and Punishment** The fourth thing that
inculcates in man the spirit of steadfastness is the concept of reward
and punishment because forbearing the hardships in this world ensures a
big reward in the Hereafter. The Holy Qur'an gives frequent examples in
this regard.

**(v)** **To Seek Help Through Prayers and Patience** The fifth thing
which makes a man steadfast is to seek help by Prayers, supplications
and patience. The following verses of the Holy Qur'an asks us to take
the support of prayers and patience:

***Help yourselves (in your affairs) with patience and prayers.***(Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:45)

***Believers, help yourselves through patience and prayers. Allah is
with those who have patience.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:153)

In Surah al-A'raf, 7:128, also it is said that we should seek help from
Allah.

Besides, the traditions too indicate that in the face of difficulties
Imam Ali used to get himself busy in prayers. Prayers bring the small
one nearer to the great one and makes the. weakest one the strongest,
and creates serenity and satisfaction. The following verse says that
remembrance of Allah creates serenity of the heart:

***Remembrance of Allah certainly brings comfort to all hearts.***
(Surah ar-Ra'd, 13: 28)

The gist of this discussion is that Allah is Just and whatever hardships
befall us are from Allah; and they are for the purpose of putting us on
trial and as already mentioned before, the people who face hardships are
divided into four different categories. The course of action which leads
us to success has also been stated.

**(v)** The fifth point is that the doubt about the Justness of Allah
arises out of our misgiving and wrong conclusions as without pondering
over the thing in its right perceptive we attribute our objections to
Allah. As for example we know that death is the ultimate end of man's
life and yet we object to Allah as to why such and such man died?

Sometimes we assume that this world is an everlasting abode and yet we
complain as to why people die of floods, earthquakes, diseases etc.?
Then we assume that this world is the place of comfort and we complain
as to why we are afflicted with hardships and difficulties.

We are like a man who enters a lecture hall and starts questioning as to
why tea and snacks are not available because of one particular thinking,
which is a wrong one, it was thought that the hall was meant for a
reception function. If we tell him that the hall was meant for
delivering lectures he will withdraw his objections and will feel sorry
for that.

Therefore, we should consider this world as it is. We should know the
purpose of our existence and in that case all our objections will be
nullified. We must be certain of the fact that this world is not a place
of our permanent abode but it is a passage of our life.

If we adhere to this conviction then all our objections such as with
regard to the dying of people on account of disease, floods, and
earthquake etc. will be removed because we have come over here not to
live for ever but for departing from here. It is a different matter by
what means we happen to depart from here, either through disease, floods
or earthquakes etc.

Example: A customer entered a glassware shop where the glasses were
arranged in an upside-down position. He looked at them minutely and said
the mouth of the glass was closed. He picked up a glass in that
condition and remarked that it had not even its bottom.

The shopkeeper laughed at this and took the glass from his hand and put
it into upright position and said, "Sir, the glass has its bottom as
well as the mouth".

In the same way our objections are due to our wrong thinking and
defective approach of things. So to say we see all things with coloured
glasses. If we put on red glasses on our eyes we will take turnips as
beets.

In short, all our objections originate from wrong thinking and incorrect
interpretations. First we think that the world is a place of comfort and
then we start making objections when we are faced with disappointments.
As a matter of fact this world is a place of development and progress.
This is a place where we sow the seeds. Obviously such a process
involves hard work, hardships and difficulties.

Differences Develop the Society
-------------------------------

If we accept some principles we shall realize that our basic differences
play an important role in our life. First of all8 man's life is a social
life, that is, we are not like self-growing grass which perishes all by
itself. We are not born all by ourselves and do not perish all by
ourselves without having any relation with somebody else.

Another point is the social life cannot function without mutual
cooperation and cooperation only comes in the face of differences. It is
because a certain man is perfect in a certain profession or field of
activity and is weak in another.

The difference of capabilities, courage and perfection necessitates the
improvement of the society so that one set of people or individuals
should help to fulfil the wants and deficiencies of others. It is for
that reason that differences give rise to necessities which develop the
society.

Difficulties Build up Personalities
-----------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an says that unpleasant events and accidents in life are
the danger signs for man. A life without difficulties and hardship makes
man lethargic and pleasure-loving. It is said that if the road is smooth
and straight, the driver falls asleep. We have read in the Islamic
narrations that Allah afflicts His noble servants with difficulties and
hardships.

The Holy Prophets have been subjected to the most trying and severest
types of difficulties and their devout followers with hardships of a
lesser degree. We read in the tradition that Allah nurtures His servants
by afflicting them with difficulties in the same manner in which a
mother nurtures her child by suckling. Difficulties not only help to
build up man's personality but the experience of the past difficulties
also does the same.

We read in the following verses of the Holy Qur'an.

***Did He not find you as an orphan and take care of you? Did He not
find you perplexed and show you the way? And did He not find you in need
and enrich you? So do not oppress the orphans, and do not drive the
beggars away, and proclaim the bounties of your Lord.*** (Surah az-Zuha,
93:6)

Allah considers it good to revive the memory of past difficulties and
hardships. The Holy Qur'an stresses that difficulties and hardships are
meant for offering supplications and purifying the soul as is evident
from the following verses.

***We had sent Our guidance to the nations who lived before you and
afflicted them with distress and adversity so that they might submit
themselves to Allah.*** ( Surah al-An'am, 6:42 )

***In every town in which We sent a Prophet, We tested its inhabitants
through distress and adversity so that perhaps they would submit
themselves to Us.*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:94)

The traditions say that had there been no poverty, diseases and death,
no power on earth could subdue man and he would have been proud of his
transgression. Really, comfort and luxuries make man without having any
purpose and aim of life. Imam Ali says: "The wood obtained from the
trees of the forest is comparatively strong". (See: Letter 45, ***Peak
of Eloquence***, ISP, 1985)

Imam Hasan Askari says that in a way there is some goodness in
misfortunes (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. 78, p. 374) in the sense that
these misfortunes establish a link between Allah and us on the one hand
and on the other divert our attention to doing something good.

Hardships affect our bodies with the result that our soul is
strengthened. As for example the host has to undergo some sort of
hardship in treating his guest with genero. sity but by this his
personality is developed in attaining the quality of being generous and
kind.

There is a tradition which says that hardships and adversities are
warning signals to the cruel people. And for the believers they are a
means of their trial and their betterment. For the pious and the saints
they are a source of their attaining dignity and perfection. (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. LXXXI, p. 108)1ll

An Example: The following are the three ways of prompting a soldier to
work:

**(i)** When a soldier commits any irregularity he is ordered to do a
difficult job by way of punishment.

**(ii)** Sometimes he is reformed by giving him a strenuous training so
as to improve his abilities.

**(iii)** Sometimes when his rank and status are to be elevated he is
sent on leave or is assigned a difficult job so as to justify his
promotion to the higher rank.

Hence, suffering is a trial for the believer and on this basis the
bounties of Allah are not the proof of one's honour, nobility and
virtue, for sometimes the best of pious and devout people are afflicted
with misfortunes and adversities so that these people should derive
strength to make themselves perfect, because unless sandal-wood is not
burnt its scented smell will not be felt.

Undergoing such sort of ups and downs in life is the means of gaining
perfection for unless metals are not put into a furnace, they are not
purified. Unless the soil is turned up with a plough it cannot be worthy
of cultivation. Unless the grass is chewed by the teeth of a goat it
does not get converted into flesh. Unless mutton is cooked on fire it is
not fit to be eaten by human beings so as to become human protoplasm.

Similarly, unless man also suffers hardships and adversities and endures
them bravely he cannot attain his spiritual purity and perfection. Our
existence is not for the sake of eating and relaxing, for this thing is
also common among the animals. What distinguishes us from the animals is
the qualities of human attributes that we possess, e.g. the remembrance
of Allah by way of worship, fraternity, and the spirit of sacrifice.
Obviously we cannot achieve these qualities without undergoing
hardships.

Hardships Lead to Inventions
----------------------------

If you are not faced with any difficulty you will not be able to make
something new or invent anything. If we had not happened to fall sick,
the science of medicine would not have been so developed. If we had not
experienced cold and hot weather we would have not been able to invent
means to protect ourselves from cold and heat.

In some branches of science and technology such as medicine, military
science, and industries, etc. we have become so advanced because we had
to face enormous difficulties. This is such an established fact that one
need not to go into details.

**(vi)** The sixth point is that man should not always keep an eye on
the negative aspect of things only. There is a wise saying that if you
lay hand on a lemon do not throw it away because it is sour but instead
prepare a lemonade out of it. It is wise to see the positive aspect also
and benefit from it.

Prophet Yusuf was thrown into a well by his brothers. Thereafter, he was
rescued by some people of a passing caravan and was sold by them as a
slave. He was accused of an ugly charge in Egypt and was sent to the
prison. After all after these calamitous happenings he became the king
of Egypt.

After a long time when he met his father, the latter asked him what
treatment was meted out to him by his brothers? Prophet Yusuf replied to
his father: "Do not ask me of the treatment of my brothers but only ask
me of the Kindness and Benevolence that Allah had showered on me, how He
took me out of the difficulties, that is conspiracies, serfdom, slander
and the prison cell, and how He freed me from the baseless charge that
had been levelled against me".

This is one way of thinking that man does not always think on the
negative aspect of things, but he looks into the positive aspect of the
things too.

We do not forget the tradition which has come to us from Imam Hasan
Askari. He said: "There is no misfortune which does not have with it
some goodness which overpowers it. (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. LXXVIII, p
374)

However the objections of some people against the Justice of Allah are
based on the fact that they always look into the problem from one aspect
only.

Here I quote an example narrated by a scholar: "The sun shines on the
ocean and raises the water vapours, which are converted into clouds,
laden with rain drops. The earth's gravitational force attracts these
rain drops downward.

These rain drops together flood the small drains which turn into rivers.
Man builds dam on these rivers and generates electricity which helps the
irrigation of agricultural lands. Now? if anyone out of sheer laziness
or stupidity touches the live-wire and is electrocuted or if while
ploughing the fields an ant-hill is destroyed, will somebody allow that
man or the ants to blame Benjamin Franklin who discovered electricity
and put it to useful purposes.

Will the ants be justified in cursing the sun, the clouds, the rains,
the man and the cultivation of lands because its home was destroyed in
the process. Is it not that these objections are based on selfishness?

Do such objections not indicate that we look into a problem from one
aspect only and are motivated by selfish desires only as if the whole
Universe should work for our own personal interest and that too for the
temporary gain? Sometimes the difficulties that we face today turn to
our benefit tomorrow, but we do not feel satisfied unless they give us
fruitful result only today".

Another Explanation: In regard to Allah's Justice about unpleasant
happenings is that we should accept one of the two concepts regarding
the Universe. That is, we should either accept the well-balanced system
of the working of the Universe or we should treat that system as
defective. If in the Universe things are working on a set pattern and
system, then there must be some unpleasant incidents also, or else one
should try to find out any irregularities in it.

To understand this if we think over some unpleasant happening we shall
come to know that they are governed by such fixed rules and harmonies
that to accept them will amount to accepting those unpleasant happenings
too. Take an example of a house which collapses over the heads of its
inmates. Let us try to find out the reasons of such a mishap in the
following manner:

**(a)** The ball with which the children were playing in the street
falls down on the roof of a house.

**(b)** The ball after rolling down on the roof of the house reaches the
mouth of a drain and blocks the flow of rain water.

**(c)** When it rained, the rain water did not pass through the mouth of
the drain and instead got accumulated on the roof and the inmates of the
house remained quite unaware of this.

**(d)** The rain water was soaked through the roof and the bricks also
became wet and weak.

**(e)** The roof of bricks which had become heavy with water gave way
and collapsed. Some of the inmates of the house died because of the
falling down of the roof.

The ball, its rolling, the slope of the roof, the narrowness of the hole
on the roof, the weight of the accumulated water, the weakening of the
bricks, the heaviness of the roof, the distance above the heads of the
inmates who were sleeping under the roof, their bone structure and such
other things are regulated by a fixed system.

If one accepts the general principle of a fixed system one will have to
accept the happenings of the mishap as a result of falling down of the
roof over the inmates of the house. But if one wished that such an
unpleasant accident should have not occurred, then it will amount to
accepting a disruption and irregularity in the set system; as for
example:

**(a)** The ball should have been so heavy as to not fall on the roof,
or

**(b)** the arms of the children should have not been strong enough to
handle the ball, or

**(c)** the mouth of the hole on the roof had been so wide as to let the
ball pass through it, or

**(d)** the rains should have not occurred, or

**(e)** the water should have lost its property of getting absorbed into
the bricks, or

**(f)** the bricks would have been hard enough in not absorbing the
water inside them, or

**(g)** the gravitational force of earth would have ceased to function
on that particular night so as to avoid the falling down of the roof
over the inmates of the house, or

**(h)** the bones of the inmates of the house should have been as hard
as steel, so that the falling down of the roof would have not crushed
them, or

**(i)** the heavy roof should have been as light as feather, so that by
falling down over the inmates it would not have hurt them. From this it
is proved that if we accept a definite system of cause and effect and
order of working, we shall have to accept the happenings of accidents
and mishaps as a natural consequence, and to defy the happenings of such
mishaps would amount to breaking the natural laws and physical phenomena
which have been established by Divine Wisdom.

In short, if this Universe has certain set principles and rules it
envisages mishaps and accidents also. If it is decided that there should
occur no mishaps or accidents, then there would be no definite
principles and set rules of working of everything. One should remember
that if there are irregularities and disorders the chaos thus caused
would lead to manifold evils and mishaps.

Great Caution: In our discussion about the Justice of Allah and the
variation found in the human faculties, we should also give attention to
the fact that some people who consider themselves lacking in one or the
other faculties may be having capabilities in other spheres of
activities.

There are people who for the sake of personal benefit or greed or enmity
adopt a certain profession or vocation in which they do not succeed, and
bring frustration, they blame the Universe and consequently are
embittered by failures and anxieties. On the other hand other people
despise them and consider them as useless though such people show
exemplary success in other departments.

It is said that the father of Charles Darwin was a physician and he
wanted his son to adopt the same profession but Darwin could not make
any progress in that field. His father got very much dejected and he
forced him to acquire religious learning so that he could have become a
good priest but he proved a failure there too.

After failing in these two different fields, he chose natural sciences
and became the pioneer in propounding a theory known as 'The Theory of
Evolution".

We read in the tradition that if a man faces failure in a certain field
or profession he should change it; possibly in the other field he may
attain distinction.

There is some hidden defect in every perfection, and in every defect
there is a hidden perfection.

Imam Ali says: "Often physical characteristics and features do not
respond to mental capacities. Many a time it is seen that very handsome
persons are slow-witted and dull. Many tall and well-built persons are
found to be cowards and un-aspiring while one often comes across very
ugly and sinister-looking people who are good tempered, honest and
pious.

Similarly, short and stumpy men may be very intelligent and foresighted.
It is often found that men of good character have accidentally addicted
themselves to bad habits". (See: Sermon 238, ***Peak of Eloquence***,
ISP, 1985)

Therefore, every successful man is not successful in all the fields, nor
he who is unsuccessful in one sphere of activity is necessarily
unsuccessful in all his activities.

There are some people who join a particular field of activity on account
of sheer jealousy, despite the fact that they have no aptitude or
interest in it, but when they prove to be a failure they blame the
Justice of Allah by saying: "O Allah! Why such and such man was
successful and I met with failure?"

If such a man had adopted a profession in which he had some interest and
which was in keeping with his inborn faculties he would have met with
sure success. Thus it can be said that a man can be unsuccessful if he
had been unable to recognize his own talents and mental disposition in a
certain field of activity which he chooses for himself and if we give a
careful thought to the success achieved by a person we can discover
certain weaknesses, failures, and defects along with that success.

There are other questions which come to our mind in regard to our
discussions on the Justice of Allah.

The First Question: Is the creation of Satan in line with the Wisdom and
Justice of Allah? Was the creation of man not for the purpose of
worshipping Allah, and accordingly was the creation of Satan the
negation of this purpose? Apart from that man performs a certain deed
after undergoing great efforts but errors and false notions on his part
nullify such a deed in three different ways.

Firstly, such a deed loses its real image as envisaged by Divine Will
from the very beginning because of its showy character. Secondly, in the
course of performing such a deed an element of pride defeats the very
purpose of its accomplishment; and thirdly, because of the sins
committed after its accomplishment the very deed is brought to naught.
Can in such a case the creation of Satan be in consonance with the
Wisdom and Justice of Allah?

Answer to the Question: The existence and the qualities that Allah gave
to Satan were all good, and for a long long time he had been worshipping
Allah. Satan's wickedness lay in his disobedience to the command of
Allah and even worse than that his disobedience became his sin as he did
not feel sorry for his misbehaviour and did not repent of his sin.

Not only that he became arrogant and moreover he objected to the command
of Allah by saying that His command was unjust because he was made of
fire and Adam was made of earth, and hence he was superior to Adam.
Accordingly Satan's flouting the Divine command was due to his
arrogance.

In the case of man, however, his unfounded fears are not such that he
may become forced to commit sins. The strength of these unfounded
notions leads to inclinations only. That is all. It does not kill our
intention. And also there is a useful aspect of these fears, because our
training and firmness of character lies in our fighting against our
wicked desires and devilish notions.

If a dumb man does not commit backbiting, it does not give him any
credit. We give a man title of a strong man because he lifts a heavy
weight from the ground against the greater force of earth's gravity.
Indeed the sign of strength lies in opposing or counteracting the
gravitational force.

The Holy Prophet said, "If anger draws a man towards doing an evil thing
and he controls himself, he actually is as strong as a wrestler".

Apart from that if a man-falls a prey to the evil thoughts there is a
door of repentance open to him up to the last hour and he can repent of
his sins. On the other hand if we had been left alone with Satanic
thoughts, it would have been a difficult thing, but as against the evil
temptations induced by Satan we are blessed with wisdom and the guidance
of the Holy Prophets which lead us to tread the straight path.

But for distracting us from this path we are followed by Satanic
temptations. It is not that Satan draws us towards him but the fact is
that we too attract him towards us. It is for this reason that the Holy
Qur'an narrates the following incident of a depraved scholar:

***Muhammad, relate to them the plight of the person whom We inspired
with Our guidance, but he passed them by, so that Satan came after him
and he went astray.*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:175)

From this verse it is established that Satan reaches the people who by
their own deed show their inclinations towards Satan. The man referred
to in this verse was Bal'am a scholar, who belonged to the tribe of Bani
Isra'il.

Allah had endowed him with some kinds of knowledge by virtue of which
his supplications used to be granted by Allah, but he established his
contacts with the court of Fir'aun and thus for the sake of attaining
worldly gain and power he was detached from knowledge and the signs of
Allah and fell into the trap of Satan.

We learn from the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

***Satan has certainly no control over the Believers who have trust in
their Lord. The only authority he has is over his followers and those
who consider things equal to Allah.***(Surah an-Nahl, 16:99-100)

The fact that Satan has no power over the believers does not mean that
he does not tempt them into wrong ways, but the fact is that those, who
know the Satan quite well, are the true believers. They do not fall a
prey to his temptations but resist them with full force and they are
never influenced by him in any way. The Holy Qur'an describes the
believers' resistance against the Satan in the following verses:

***Those who are pious remember Allah when assailed by the instigations
of Satan, and certainly they begin to understand, even though their
(devilish) brothers would like them to continue in error and would not
desist***. (Surah al-A'raf, 7: 201-202)

Therefore, the believers are the antagonists of Satan and the
transgressors are his friends and patrons. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We shall make Satan the companion of whoever ignores the remembrance
of the Beneficent Allah.*** (Surah az-Zukhruf, 43:36)

In short, Satan is such a creation of Allah that he could make the best
use of his abilities but owing to his pride and obduracy he ruined
himself for nothing. His ruination concerns him alone. The Satanic
thoughts cannot, therefore, compel us to transgress and abandon the
right path.

Thus for those, who fall under his trap, the door of repentance is open
and the Satanic influences only come through our own doing. From all
that has been stated now it cannot be said that the creation of Satan
was against the Justice of Allah.

The Second Question: Another thing which is often asked in respect of
the Justice of Allah is the problem of those unfortunate individuals who
pass their lives under agony and hardship, and are subjected to
humiliation by the people. They ask as to why such individuals have been
created at all?

The answer to the second question can be found from the foregoing
discussions as we have already stated before that the very cause of our
unpleasant happenings is our own doing. The less fortunate people are
also the product of our indifferent and lethargic attitude. It is the
parents who should abide by the hygienic and psychological principles.

It is by their ignoring them that abnormal and retarded children are
born. Fortunately, instructions on these principles have been laid down
in the narrations of our infallible Imams. Cohabitation in the state of
intoxication, menstruation, or food poisoning can have an adverse effect
on the fetus.

It is necessary that for the purpose of enlightening the young men and
women in the family planning centers, sex education, in line with
Islamic teachings, be imparted so as to produce healthy children, and
bring them up properly according to Islamic standard.

What is the Fault of a New-born Child?
--------------------------------------

The question arises: "What is the fault of the new-born child?" Our
answer is: "What is the fault of Allah?" Here both, the new-born child
and the Beneficent Allah are faultless. Those who are at fault are the
parents, but the new-born child is the sufferer.

This is not so only in the case of a new-born child, but in all cases of
oppressions and cruelties the fault is of the oppressors and the
oppressed have to suffer.

If I throw a stone at you and you are wounded, then neither you nor
Allah are at fault, but the fault is only mine and you suffer. Similarly
when the question is raised as to why the offspring should suffer on
account of the faults of the parents, the same question can be raised in
case of the oppressors, who have committed oppression but the oppressed
suffer.

If you brought a saltish or bitter yeast to a baker to make the bread
for you, would you blame the baker who gave you the saltish or bitter
bread?

If you sowed the seed of a watermelon and you got a watermelon will
anybody raise an objection to it?

Would you expect to reach your destination in the north if you happen to
travel southward?

Every food and every disposition has its natural effect and to save
oneself from those effects one will have to defeat all the natural laws
(which is impossible). To expect something else from the seed of a fruit
or from the sperm is contrary to reason.

Again the question that the parents' fault was a temporary error but the
damage done to a deformed baby was a permanent one has no concern with
Allah. You cap blind yourself in a moment with a knife and you remain
blind for the lifetime. The fault was for a fraction of a moment but you
suffered the agony for the whole life.

You smash a glass in a moment but the glass is broken forever. Similar
are the psychological problems. If you abuse a man, he severs his
connections with you for the whole of his life, and an apology made for
a moment annul the lifelong rancor and enmity.

I had cited an example of a man who was very careful about his health
but when he took a spoon of poison he nullified all his efforts of
maintaining his good health.

Here arises another point to consider that the parents did not know that
their action according to the Divine laws would have an adverse effect
on the new-born baby. The answer to this is that the parents’ awareness
or unawareness does not affect the natural consequences.

It is immaterial whether or not we know that a certain wire is a
live-wire and if we touch it we are sure to be electrocuted. Electricity
would not stop its function if we are unaware of its existence, and
would not leave us alive.

If by mistake we drink wine taking it to be water, we shall certainly be
intoxicated because it is the effect of the wine to make one
intoxicated. Hence the innocence of the parents is in the sense that
they did not commit a mistake intentionally, but after all the natural
effect of a certain action must follow its own course.

The second question that arises is with regard to humiliation of the
physically-handicapped persons who are born as such. The matter of their
humiliation by the people is not connected with Allah or anybody else
but it is a matter of their own way of thinking.

We should not look down upon the people born with congenital physical
defects. The sacred teachings of Islam have given many instructions in
this regard.

In fact, it is the responsibility of the Government in power that it
should take care of them with due respect and solemnity and provides
them suitable work according to their individual capacity and ability so
as to provide reasonable means for their livelihood and also ensure that
their efforts are rightly rewarded by giving them maximum return. We
wish to conclude this topic but not without making a request to our
readers.

A Request: We should not entertain any doubt about the fundamentals of
our beliefs and ideology. Whenever a problem regarding faith and
ideology crops up and we cannot answer it we should better refer the
matter to a religious scholar. We should note down the telephone numbers
of a few religious scholars so that we may seek their guidance on even
small objections.

Just as sometimes a small nail pierces our foot and makes us unable to
walk, a small objection disturbs our mind and makes us skeptical about
our faith and makes our life miserable although apparently it looks like
a very trifle thing. Our youngsters who are often confronted with some
such objections and criticisms raised by some vested interest should in
particular be in touch with a well-informed, virtuous and pious scholar
so that he may give them proper advice and guidance.

A Reminiscence: Once I happened to come across a few friends of mine who
told me that the Islamic laws do not fall in line with the true spirit
of culture and civilization because according to Islamic jurisprudence
the four fingers of a thief are to be chopped off while communism says
that if we change our financial system and satisfy everybody's wants,
there would be no possibility of thefts.

When I inquired of them how they have formed such an opinion they told
me that one of their teachers who were a supporter of socialism had told
them such a theory which appealed to them and which they took to their
heart.

However, I replied to them that Islam does not allow chopping off the
hands of every thief; on the contrary in Islam there are twenty
conditions before a thief's hand can be chopped off. I asked them who
amongst them knew those conditions.

All of them said that they did not know those twenty conditions. I told
them that had they acquired some knowledge about Islamic laws they would
have questioned their teacher in the classroom and told him that if he
did not know the true facts about that matter he should have not poked
his nose without having acquired proper knowledge about it.

I told my friends that they should have invited their teacher to, a
frank discussion on the point or they should have consulted an Islamic
scholar. After I told them a few of those conditions they started
pondering over it and then we parted company.

I invite the attention of my esteemed readers on the statement that the
Holy Qur'an claims that in the long run Islam would be triumphant
against evil forces and the people of the entire world would ultimately
embrace Islam, and Imam Mahdi, the Imam of the Age will rule over the
whole world. But there are some certain conditions with this claim as
follows:

**(i)** People's attention towards Islam.

**(ii)** Identification of Islam.

**(iii)** Mental preparedness to understand Islam.

Indeed, the martyrs of the Islamic Revolution in Iran have turned the
attention of the people towards Islam and in that way they have
initiated a major step towards that direction. It is our duty now that
we move forward to acquaint the people with the true spirit of Islam and
then it is the duty of the other people who have been disappointed with
different faiths and ideologies and are inclined towards Islam.

Therefore, it is necessary that we read at least one good book every
week so that we keep ourselves abreast with the Islamic learning.

Imam Ali Riza said: "If people become familiar with Islamic guidance
they would be easily inclined towards it".

In the study of books priority should be given to those books which deal
with faith and general outlook on the Universe, because our deeds are
based on our thinking, and therefore considering other schools of
thought we should choose for ourselves a proper line based on solid
arguments.

In concluding our discussions on the Justice of Allah we should like to
invite the attention of the reader to the following important points:

Categorization-The Means of Recognizing Allah
---------------------------------------------

Just as undue preference is cruelty, in the same way rational
categorization is real justice besides being a source of recognition of
Allah. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Among other signs of His existence is the creation of the heavens and
the earth, and the differences of languages and complexions.*** (Surah
ar-Rum, 30:22)

Thus if a draftsman makes the same type of lay-outs and blueprints, an
architect the same type of buildings, and the poet writes the verses of
the same style, it will show his weakness and lack of knowledge, but if
all these people show some originality in style and crafts it will speak
of their creative faculty.


