Prophethood
===========

The Divine outlook on the Universe and what we know of man and the world
lead us to believe in the necessity of the Prophets for if there is any
purpose of the creation of the Universe and if it is running on set
principles, then there must be a set course of action also for man who
is a part of this world and that course should be free from all defects
and errors and it is that of the Prophets. If man's path is not like
that he will be an irregular patch on face of the earth.

If there is any real purpose of man's coming into existence it becomes
necessary that he should determine his destination and achieve an
everlasting prosperity. But without the proper guidance of the true path
this cannot be achieved and it is the Prophets only who can guide us to
that path. Since man is apt to err and forget, he needs somebody who can
warn him and guide him at every stage. Therefore, the Prophets give
warnings to the society about the dangers that lie ahead of it.

If man is held responsible for his actions and his deeds will be
accounted for before Allah, then he should be reminded by someone of his
responsibilities, duties and obligations. And in this regard there can
be no one but the Holy Prophets of Allah.

If man is supposed to build his character he must have before him a
perfect example whom he should follow. In this regard there can be none
except the Holy Prophets of Allah to guide him.

If a man is supposed to think of his future, then he must have someone
who should explain to him of his future. In this respect also nobody but
the Holy Prophets can set an example for the people.

On the contrary in the materialistic outlook on the Universe there is no
such concept of Prophethood because in this form of approach there is no
such program as prearranged course of action or purpose of man's
creation.

According to it man has come into existence without any definite purpose
or program of action and as such he will ultimately have to perish like
other matter.

It is due to the Divine outlook on the Universe that the institution of
Prophethood is deeply rooted in the lives of the Muslims. That is to say
the Divine outlook of the Universe is the only means through which we
can reach the human and Islamic goal without any doubt and sense of
uncertainty and that is the path which is the source of Allah's
revelation and Infinite Knowledge, and Allah is Well-Aware of the causes
of our prosperity and misfortunes.

The path which attracts mankind to itself and which is free from selfish
motives and self-aggrandizement is the path of the Prophets.

We are living in this modern age of advancement of science and
technology and we witness various types of crimes, corruptions and
transgressions of various nations because they have abandoned the path
which the Holy Prophets had directed them to follow. They have by their
inventions and discoveries set up a sort of blazing fire in which they
thrust the people.

In the meetings that they hold for protecting the mankind from poverty
and tyrannies they exercise their right of veto. Despite the fact that
there are millions of starving people in the world they spend their
money in the armament race. Although there are available means of
comfort and luxuries there seems to be no real comfort and peace of
mind, and in order to find a relief from the agonies the people are
resorting to suicide, drinking, tranquillizers, and other narcotics.

Looking at this sad and sordid state of affairs, can anybody fail to
realize that this troubled world needs a straight path of salvation and
an infallible guide and leader to lead the people to their ultimate
destiny.

Sign of Inability to Recognize Allah
------------------------------------

Under the guidance of our intellect we have selected the Divine outlook
on the Universe and have accepted that there is a purpose of the
creation. It is moving on a fixed path. All the creations are within the
reach of mankind under Allah's supervision because they have been
created for their benefits.

Under such a circumstance how can one believe that man who is the
vicegerent of Allah on this earth and who is the most superior creature
of Allah will be left in the lurch without any set principles of
guidance and a straight path shown by a guide and a leader? Does this
sort of wrong thinking conform to the Divine Wisdom? We can only find an
answer to this from the Holy Qur'an which says:

***But they failed to make the just estimation of Allah when they said:
'He did not reveal to any man anything'***. (Surah al-An am, 6:91)

Really how is it possible that Allah who has created all his creations
for man can leave him alone without any proper guidance? If that be so
it will be contrary to the Wisdom of Allah and if anybody thinks so he
has not recognized Allah.

The importance of the Prophets and their teachings becomes clear to us
when we compare the Divine ideology with the human ideology, we become
aware of the defects of human ideology and introduce those ideal people,
who have been guided by the teachings of the Holy Prophets, to others.

The Role of Knowledge and Intellect
-----------------------------------

Islam lays a great emphasis on knowledge and intellect so much so that
it considers intellect as an inner Prophet and as such has determined
rewards and punishments on the basis of intellect. The Holy Qur'an often
exhorts us to use our wisdom. In many of the verses, the Holy Qur'an has
addressed those who possess wisdom and power of reasoning.

Islam has given best instances for defining wisdom. It says that it is
through wisdom that worship of Allah is best accomplished. In the
traditions of our infallible Imams knowledge and intellect have been
given more importance than anything else. Thus whenever somebody says
about a man's profuse worship the Holy Imams only ask as to how that man
thinks?

In all the reliable books of traditions (***ahadith***) the first
chapter is about intellect and knowledge and their importance. No other
school of thought except Islam has considered it worthwhile or
compulsory for people to acquire knowledge and wisdom.

The extent to which Islam has given importance to know-ledge and
intellect during the days of the Age of Ignorance has no parallel until
the present age.

Even if we find a man who spends his life in the acquisition of
knowledge from the cradle to the grave, expands knowledge of all kinds
from animals to heavens, to friends and adversaries and conquers the
space and the heavenly bodies we shall be in need of the knowledge and
wisdom of the Holy Prophets.

Necessity of Prophets' Guidance
-------------------------------

**(i)** **Limitation of Knowledge**:

Man has a limited knowledge. The number of schools and sciences and arts
is increasing day by day. Man is continuously making inventions and
discoveries. To leave man on his knowledge and intellect is to leave him
alone unguided because men's intellect, knowledge and thinking differ.
Many serious and dangerous differences start from the learned and wise
people. How then can they resolve the differences and disputes among the
people?

One man considers one thing proper while the other one considers it
improper according to his knowledge and mode of thinking. The fact is
that man's knowledge is limited. He has no sufficient knowledge of the
past nor of the future; nor is he aware of the immediate or gradual
reaction to what he aims at.

How wise it is to say that as compared to man's ignorance his knowledge
is so infinitesimal as a drop in the ocean or for reaching the celestial
heights his knowledge is only like a small stair-case. The everyday
changes and amendments made in the laws by various nations and their
ficklemindedness are the positive proof of man's imperfect and limited
knowledge.

**(ii)** **Hurdles in the Way of Recognition**:

On the subject of recognition there is a discussion about the hurdles
that come in its way. Though man possesses intelligence and power of
reasoning, he is so entangled in the whirlpool of his innate weaknesses
that he loses the tendency of knowing the truth.

The Holy Qur'an and the traditions have paid great attention to these
hurdles. Anger, sexual inclinations, personal considerations,
partialities and other such things are a stumbling-block in the way of
one's knowing the truth.

Example: For travelling by train, bus or plane tickets are issued for
the purpose of maintaining discipline and this can only be achieved if
the ticket issuing person exercises impartiality, but if somebody pays
more and obtains the ticket, or the ticket issuing person is influenced
by personal consideration of friendship or regional or social
affiliations, the issuing of tickets will not be done in a just manner.

Thus how can we entrust the job of making legislation for the society to
those whose affiliations and inclinations influence their decision?

In short, man does not have the right to legislate and enact laws for
the people, because he is a slave of his wishes and is not capable of
recognizing the truth. The Holy Qur'an says:

***The final judgement is in the Hands of Allah. He reveals the Truth
and He is the best judge.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:57)

When we talk of the Islamic legislative assembly making the legislations
and enacting laws we do not mean actually enacting of laws but we mean
that we bring the legislations and the laws in conformity with the
Divine commandments.

**(iii)** **Knowledge Becomes Perfect After Centuries**:

It is with the passage of time, that is as when time passes and the
knowledge increases man understands some realities. But whom shall we
hold responsible for the delay of centuries of years in knowing these
realities?

For instance, it is more than half a century now that it was established
that eating of pork causes the growth of pin worms in the intestines and
man has come to know of this truth after a passage of several hundreds
of years, but only those who became aware of the fact by Divine
revelations that eating of pork is forbidden have been safe from its
injurious effects for centuries.

In Islam there are dozens of other commands whose justification has been
discovered after the passage of time and with the advancement of
knowledge, but the followers of the ways of the Holy Prophets adopted
from the very beginning the right path. But those who depended upon
their researches and experiments discovered those hidden facts after
centuries.

**(iv)** **Divine Revelations and the Prophets**:

Man is only able to solve his materialistic problems by virtue of his
knowledge, wisdom and power of reasoning but he cannot discover the
right path of eternal prosperity and spiritual enlightenment without
adopting the path shown by the Holy Prophets.

**(v) Conscience is Not the Only Criterion**:

In answer to those people who think that man's conscience is the only
guide which directs him to the right course of action and hence, it is
not necessary to follow any Prophets, we should like to say that our
conscience is subservient to our will and it is influenced by
environment, social customs and rites, it does not lead us to the right
path.

In this context the example of smoking can be cited. In the beginning
smoking leaves a bad taste in the mouth of smoker but gradually he
becomes used to it and starts liking it, but a right thinking man will
from the very beginning reject it altogether. We also know of people who
could not bear the sight of slaughtering the cattle as their conscience
did not approve of this act but after the repeated slaughtering of the
cattle, their conscience do experience a change.

Under these circumstances man's conscience cannot be relied upon as
every man's conscience is guided by individual experience and knowledge
of things. For instance if we have not seen a person committing any sin
or a serious crime and we find that he is shot before a firing squad, a
queer feeling is roused in our mind but a man who was in the know of
this man's unpardonable deed will not be moved by emotional feelings.

But despite all this we do not altogether reject the natural and moral
impact of a man's conscious. Imam says: "Prophets came to enliven man's
disposition and tendencies".

However, our discussion centres upon whether can we depend only on the
dictates of our conscience? The answer to this is certainly in negative.

**(vi)** **Feeling of Uncertainty**:

Another thing, which makes man feel the necessity of the Prophets and
lose confidence in manmade laws and regulations is the natural doubt
which a man entertains in his mind. As for example man feels that he has
made laws only after depending on his own knowledge and intellect and
thus doubts arise on the following points:

**(i)** How could they then be able to fully comprehend all aspects of
human nature and how could they conceive the total requirements of human
beings?

**(ii)** How could they inculcate in themselves the spirit of human
welfare?

**(iii)** How could they be immune from errors and forgetfulness while
enacting laws and code of human conduct?

**(iv)** How could they ignore the interest of individual or group of
individuals and how could they not have deviated from personal
considerations of family or economical affiliations?

**(v)** How could the individuals or the society have not reacted
against the laws made by them?

These are a few examples of uncertainty and doubts. These doubts have
now turned into beliefs about the fallibility of those who profess to be
the champions of the cause of human rights and welfare of the society.

Thus as a result of the sad experience of imperfect laws hardly anyone
would appear to be satisfied and if at all in some areas these laws made
by political upstarts and demagogues are being followed, it is simply
for materialistic way of life or it is just because of the fear of
punishment or harsh treatment by the government in power. Such people
unlike the followers of the Prophets do not feel an internal love, a
spirit of virtue and purity in themselves.

In fact, why should a man, who is born as a free subject, behave like a
vassal? True, such considerations weaken the spirit of obeying man-made
laws. This lack of confidence and disinterestedness becomes apparent
when man does not find any encouragement about following these laws,
because when he finds that in the event of violation he is severely
punished by the court of law or other law-enforcing agencies, but he is
never rewarded for following these man-made laws in his whole life.

Such a thing is in contrast with the Divine laws which have laid down
severe punishments for the sinners and incorrigible defaulters on the
one hand and has assured of a good reward in the Hereafter for the pious
and the devout Muslims. In the Divine religion the human efforts have
been so much appreciated that even if a man walks a step for a noble
cause he will be rewarded for that. This characteristic only belongs to
the code of conduct prescribed by the Holy Prophets.

An Example: Just imagine a host who has invited to dinner some guests
but they do not know the way to the host's house and the path that they
have followed has lanes and streets, and besides there are people to
misguide them and also there are wild animals and the dark and horrible
night! Under such a situation there will be two following alternatives
left for the host:

**(i)** Either he should abandon the idea of giving the feast or if the
meals have been prepared already, he should throw them away.

**(ii)** Or he should send a trusted guide with a lantern and arms to
bring the guests to his home otherwise the very purpose of inviting them
would be defeated. After giving this vivid example we revert to the
subject matter of our discussion.

If Allah, the Lord of the worlds, Who has created the Universe for the
benefit of mankind and Who has invited us to worship Him and to attain
eternal prosperity, had not sent a messenger like the Holy Prophet of
Islam for the guidance of mankind with all his miracles glowing like a
lantern, and in one hand with the Holy Qur'an serving as a complete
guide to the right path and in another the strength and the sword, the
Divine invitation to us would have become meaningless, because we did
not know the right path because of doubts, diabolical inclinations, the
following of the transgressors and despotic rulers, and because we were
apt to fall into the ditch of polytheism, ignorance, corruptions and
dissentions.

The purpose of sending the Prophets to mankind was to prepare man for
his journey towards his real evolution. And for every journey there is
the necessity of a guide who can show him, the direction, the beginning,
the path and the destination. Of all the necessities of human life the
necessity of a guide is of paramount importance, as without him man
would adopt wrong means and would go astray.

Hence the very purpose of the teachings of the Prophets is to show that
the Universe is created for the benefit of mankind and man is created to
journey towards Allah. And this evolutionary process and journey cannot
be accomplished without the teachings of the Holy Prophets, based on
Divine revelations.

Difference Between Man's Knowledge And Prophets' Teachings
----------------------------------------------------------

We have already stated that human knowledge stands no comparison with
the knowledge of the Holy Prophets. We should like to recapitulate all
those things briefly as under:

Knowledge controls natural phenomena while the Prophets control man
himself. Knowledge provides with ways and means while the Prophets
furnish with the purpose of life. Knowledge sharpens our wits, while the
Prophets guide us.

Knowledge brings about an outward change, while the Prophets bring about
inner changes also. Knowledge broadens the mental outlook, while the
Prophets cultivate dignity and exaltation.

Knowledge is a lantern, while religion is both the lantern and the path.

The scholars have difference of opinion among themselves, but the path
of the Prophets is the same. Sometimes knowledge is based on
conjectures, that is man thinks that he has understood a certain thing
but later he knows that he had not understood anything, but the Divine
revelation has nothing to do with conjectures.

We see that knowledge is expanding day by day, and yet we find that
there is no decrease in corruptions and crimes.

Today when you fall sick you surrender yourself to a physician, and when
your car is out of order, you hand it over to a motor mechanic.

Obviously the physician knows much more about your body ailments, and
the mechanic knows more than you about the car, though he does not
concern himself about it as much as you do. Therefore, it is imperative
that we should submit ourselves to Allah and the teachings of His
Prophets, because Allah knows more about us than we do, and is more Kind
to us. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Do they seek judgment of the Days of Ignorance? But who could be a
better judge than Allah for those who are firm in their belief?***
(Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:50)

Allah knows better about us because He created us, and the Creator knows
all about His creations. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Doesn 't the One, who is Subtle, All-Aware and who created all
things, know all about them?*** (Surah al-Mulk, 67:14)

We quote here a fine narration from the Martyr Nawab Safawi. He said:
"If you buy a thing from a factory it is necessary that the engineer who
manufactured it should tell you how to use it, and nobody else has any
right to give you instructions about it.

Similarly, man's position is not short of the position of manufactured
articles. Hence, it is necessary that only Allah enacts laws for him as
He is his Creator and, it is He who is Well-Aware of his temporal and
spiritual needs and requirements and also of his future course of action
and destiny in this world and the Hereafter".

Thus it is necessary that man should select for himself a path but the
question arises as to how he should know that path?

**(i)** Should he determine it according to his own inclinations?

**(ii)** Or should he adopt the path others have chosen?

**(iii)** Or should he follow the path which the Holy Prophets have
brought from Allah?

If we ponder over this matter a little carefully we shall approve only
the third course, because our experience tells us that many a time we
adopted a course of action but ultimately we had to abandon it after
discovering our mistakes. You cannot give an example of any man who had
not repented hundreds of times of what he had done in his life.

Our intellect and sense of proportion are affected by our lack of
knowledge, personal weakness and sentiments, environmental influences
and natural disposition and therefore we should not depend upon our own
judgment in selecting the first course of action as pointed out above.

The second course of action is also not sound as the same things apply
on the judgment of others like that of ours.

Thus the only course of action that remains for us to follow is the path
of Allah which emanates from the Infinite Knowledge of Allah and which
is shown to us through the Divine revelations by the infallible Holy
Prophets of Allah and as such we cannot afford to remain indifferent to
it.

The Necessity of Following the Guidance of the Prophets
-------------------------------------------------------

There are many arguments which lead us to follow the teachings of the
Holy Prophets. We give below a few examples.

**(i)** The Holy Prophets brought about in their times great
revolutions, which are preserved in the annals of history and they moved
on towards the stage of martyrdom. Their achievements were acknowledged
by all including friends and foes.

They possessed high qualities of personal behavior so much so that even
their enemies could not accuse them of any fault. The Prophets in
support of their teachings and view-points put forward clear proofs and
evidences showed miracles and created a large number of their followers.

If we consider that the Prophets' sense of duty and their fear of Allah
were the motivating factors for the propagation of the Divine Message,
it will be sufficient reason for us to change our course and follow
their course because according to the scholars we should avoid all
possible risks of loss.

It cannot be said that the possibility of loss is less, because in the
opinion of even a stubborn person howsoever less the possibility of loss
may be since it entails hard and eternal torment, it turns our intellect
towards the search of the path of those great personalities and makes us
change our own path.

**(ii)** People have always been saying that we should try to learn
morals from the insolent people by not doing things which they do. Here
if we look to the enemies of the Prophets, we shall find that men like
Abu Lahab, Abu Jahl and Abu Sufyan were the arch-enemies of the Holy
Prophet, and nowadays big powers are bitterly opposed to the ways of the
Holy Prophets. We can now trace the truth of the course of action of the
Prophets from the opposition of these Satanic powers.

**(iii)** The third thing which prompts us to follow the teachings of
the Prophets is that there is a tendency of appreciating and adopting a
good and noble thing present in man. If man tries to look at the
innumerable Blessings of Allah and realizes that he has really
discovered the worldly and spiritual Blessings he will at once decide to
follow the path which the Creator of all these Blessings has set for us
especially when we keep this truth in view that in opposition to any
law-making man Allah has never kept in view His personal interest or the
interest of any particular community or group of people.

He did not want anything except our welfare and prosperity. In the Holy
Qur'an Allah directs us to be truthful in acknowledging the favor of His
Blessings:

***Quraysh should worship the Lord of this House (Ka'bah). It is He Who
fed them when they were hungry and has made them secure from fear.***
(Surah Quraysh, 106:3-4)

Prophets' Path-Mankind's Long-standing Desire
---------------------------------------------

By his very nature man likes that law which is based on justice. He
admires that type of government which is not established by a particular
class or group of people. He adores only that leader who is free from
selfishness and sense of superiority and who leads a simple life.
Equality, freedom, simplicity, truthfulness piety, and justice are man's
inherent desires.

History bears testimony that such an ideal form of government based on
justice was found with only those people who had before them the
teachings of the Prophets, as the inherent desires and aspirations of
mankind can only be fulfilled by following the teachings of the
Prophets.

This fact is proved by the glaring example of the present day forms of
government which are totally void of the teachings of the Prophets and
the rulers have been exploiting and sucking the blood of the poor masses
in every part of the world for over centuries. They are so deeply
engrossed in racial discriminations, idolatry, oppressions and similar
other inhuman activities.

The Prophets in the Mirror of the Holy Qur'an
---------------------------------------------

Now that through wisdom we have realized the necessity of the Prophets,
we should refer to some verses of the Holy Qur'an:

***A Messenger is appointed for all people. When the Messenger for them
came he judged among them fairly and they were not wronged.*** (Surah
Yunus, 10:47)

***We have sent you in all Truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a
warner.*** (Surah Fatir, 35:24)

***Surely, in Our Hands is the guidance.*** (Surah al-Layl, 92:12)

***Who is a better judge for the people whose belief is based on
certainty, than Allah.*** (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:50)

***Say, final authority only belongs to Allah. Had He wanted He would
have given you all guidance.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:150)

It means that after Allah made it clear about His argument, there
remains no excuse on the part of the people that they could not
distinguish between the right and wrong path as guided by Allah's
infallible Prophets and it is Allah who will bring those people to task
as they showed indifference to the teachings of the Holy Prophets.

***(That day) when you were at one end of the valley and they (the
unbelievers) at the other, and the caravan below you (on the low land by
the coast) you would surely have declined to fight if the Makkans had
offered you battle. But the battle did take place that Allah may end the
matter which had been accomplished, so that he who had to die may perish
after a clear demonstration, and he who had to live may survive in the
light of positive proof, for Allah hears all and knows everything.***
(Surah al-Anfal, 8:42)

Indeed, there should be a clear difference between a straight path and a
ditch so that we may select the right path with full freedom. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***The Messenger were sent to give people the glad tidings (of Allah's
Mercy) and warn them (of His punishment) so that mankind would not have
any argument against Allah.***(Surah al-Nisa, 4:165)

The underlying idea behind this verse is that people would have put
forward an excuse of their ignorance, and for every censure or criticism
against them they would have said that none had warned them. In this way
the people's argument would have been justified. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Had We destroyed them with a torment before the coming of Muhammad
they would have said, 'Lord, would that you had sent us a messenger so
that we could have followed Your revelations before being disgraced.***
(Surah Ta Ha, 20:134)

The above verse also carries the same idea as conveyed in the previous
verse.

A Review of Other Forms of Thinking
-----------------------------------

Those people who consider themselves unconcerned about the Divine
revelations approved of the following types of laws:

**(i)** The laws made by one single individual, which are based on
self-interest, personal aggrandizement, and have every kind of weakness,
defect, injustice, foolishness, narrow-mindedness and scattered ideas.

**(ii)** The unjust laws which are made by a particular class or group
of people, e.g. the capitalists or the laborers, to suit their
individual requirements.

**(iii)** The laws which are made by the national assembly no matter
whether they happen to be useful or not for the nation. Such types of
laws are considered by the people as progressive.

From this we have understood as to who through what source has a right
to make laws. We have also known that the law maker should possess the
following qualifications:

**(i)** He should have a complete and thorough knowledge of the subject
and should be fully aware of man's carnal and spiritual needs and
problems.

**(ii)** He should be compassionate and magnanimous.

**(iii)** He should be honest and just and should not favor one or the
other individual or group of individuals out of expediency.

**(iv)** He should be an honest judge and should not have in view the
expediency or the interest of a particular individual or a group
ignoring reality and justice of the cause.

Obviously, such a law-maker can be none except Allah whose messages,
instructions and laws reach us through His revelations to the Holy
Prophets. Thus the Prophets are the medium of receiving Divine messages,
which they transmit to the people.

Why People Obey the Laws?
-------------------------

Every law becomes prevalent in a particular way. We should like to state
two such ways:

**(i) Ignorance and Stupidity**:

People sometimes obey the laws because of their ignorance and stupidity.
Allama Iqbal said very aptly: "Man has become a slave of a man like
himself because of ignorance. He had within himself the ego of
self-respect but he threw that precious pearl under the feet of despots
like Qubad and Jamshed. He then after acquiring the slavish mentality
became a creature worse than a dog for I have never seen any dog bowing
down before another dog".

Islam does not approve of blind following. Many of the Qur'anic verses
severely criticized the ways and means of the idolaters, who justified
their action on the ground that their ancestors did the same thing.
Their only plea was that their elders did the same thing. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***When (the faithless) commit indecent acts they say, 'We found our
ancestors used to do so, and Allah has commanded us to do the same!***
(Surah al-A'raf, 7:28)

**(ii)** **Fear and Greed**:

The tyrants make people obey their laws and unjust commands through
threat and intimidation. TheHoly Qur'an says:

***(Fir'aun) said, 'If you take another god besides me, I will most
certainly make you one of the imprisoned.*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara, 26:29)

The despotic rulers used to attract the people through allurements just
as Fir'aun gathered the magicians of his kingdom and promised them a
good reward for humiliating Prophet Musa. The Holy Qur'an says:

***When the magicians came they asked Fir'aun: 'Will there be any reward
for us if we win'. He replied, 'You will be then my closest associates
'.*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara, 26:41-42)

It is obvious that threat and temptation are the two strong means
through which people can be made to follow the laws, and these means
weaken the faculty of independent and careful action. Islam has declared
about the torment of Hell and the reward of Paradise but these are not
meant for the present world as the people consider them as a thing of
distant future which will happen after their death.

Hence they select their path and obey the order with perfect calmness
and peace of mind. There is a great difference between the two persons
one of whom has to pay his debt the following day and the other has to
do that after a few years. The former becomes restless and worried about
his liability while the latter appears to be free from care as if he has
no debt at all.

The fear of chastisement or hope of the reward on the Day of Judgement
does not compel a man to perform a certain command. This is proved from
the fact that despite his being aware of the promises made by Allah, man
remains indifferent to his obligations.

**(iii)** **Need and Competition**: The third thing which prompts a man
to obey laws is his requirements as well as his competition with other
people.

**(iv)** **Reason and Intellect**: Sometimes reason and intellect play
an important part in making the people obey the laws. If for instance, a
policeman closes a certain route for the drivers and they know its
reason they will obey his order without any grudge, but if they are not
told any reason and suspect the policeman's order to be arbitrary they
will definitely refuse to follow his instructions.

Islam too adopts the course of reason and intellect for making the
people obey its laws. That is why sometimes it says very briefly that we
should do a certain thing in order that we may imbibe the spirit of
piety. As for example regarding the command of observing fast, the Holy
Qur'an says:

***Believers, fasting has been made obligatory on you as it was made
obligatory on the people be fore you, so that you may become pious.***
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:183)

This command in fact is for man's spiritual advantage. Similarly, in
this very context the Holy Qur'an says about charity:

***The example of those who spend their wealth to please Allah with firm
and sincere intention is like the garden on a fertile land which after a
heavy rainfall or even a drizzle, it yields its fruits twice as much.***
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:265)

In many of the traditions of our infallible Holy Imams reasons and
arguments for following the commands of Islam have been told, and a
number of books have been written on this subject like ***Ilalush
Shariya'***. Fortunately in these days of development and progress new
realities and the philosophy of commands come to light.

**(v)** **Love and Affection**: The fifth reason by which one follows
the commands of the other is due to love and regards he has for him even
if that attachment of love and regard is false not to speak of the love
which is based on knowledge and spiritual enlightenment besides reason.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***But the love of the faithful for Allah is more intense.*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:165)

These are the various ways which cause the people to obey the laws.
Needless to emphasize that the best and the most rational way is the
fourth and the fifth way which we have elaborated about.

In short, the best way in Islam which we should adopt is the one which
is based on knowledge, wisdom, love and affec-tion. The Holy Qur'an
says:***Call (the pagans) to the path of your Lord with wisdom and good
advice, and reason with them in the best possible manner.*** (Surah
an-Nahl, 16:125)

Force should be applied only in the last resort. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Quraysh should worship the Lord of this House (Ka'bah), Who provided
them with sustenance when they were hungry and gave them security
against fear.*** (Surah Quraysh, 106:3-4)

Feeding and maintenance of peace are the first steps towards worship of
Allah. By that means the people would become conscious of Allah's
Benevolence and Mercy.

Who is Responsible for the Enforcement of Laws?
-----------------------------------------------

We have discussed previously that ignorance, stupidity, threat;
temptation, competition etc. are not the real factors which can enforce
laws. The best means are to develop one's wisdom, intellect and sense of
love and respect for the one who enforces the laws.

Now we deal with the characteristics of those who are responsible for
the enforcement of laws:

**(i)** **Intellectual Maturity**: No religion other than Islam
encourages its followers to acquire knowledge and apply reason. That is
why in Islam associating with pious scholars or touring around from
country to country and to consult with one another is to broaden one's
mental horizon.

In the Holy Qur'an we learn of the past history of the ancient nations,
their downfall and the lives of the Prophets and the secret of their
success. Ignorance, apathy and obstinacy are found in those people who
have given up their power of thinking and faculty of applying their
reason. According to the Holy Qur'an, the philosophy of obeying the
commands and the ruination of the past stubborn nations are good lessons
for ensuring the enforcement of laws.

**(ii)** **Stirring the Sentiments**: To stir up the people the law
enforcing authority may take the help of their sentiments. The matter of
encouragement has been presented in the Holy Qur'an to the extent that
it says to the Holy Prophet in the following verses:

***Collect religious tax (Zakat) from them. You would purify and cleanse
them thereby and pray for them. Your prayers give them peace.*** (Surah
at-Tauba, 9:103)

***Then he is of those who believe and urge upon one another to be
patient, and urge upon one another to be kind.*** (Surah al-Balad,
90:17)

***Man is certainly in loss, except those who believe, and do good deeds
and enjoin truth on one another and enjoin upon one another to bear with
patience.*** (Surah al-Asr, 103:2-3)

***Why do you not fight for the cause of Allah or save the helpless men,
women and children who cry out, 'Lord, set us free from this town of
wrong doers and send us a guardian and a helper?*** (Surah an-Nisa,
4:75)

In this verse the Almighty Allah in order to persuade them to take part
in jihad has referred to the sad plight of those people and children who
have got into the clutches of the tyrants, and has stirred the moral
sense of the people.

***Yet he has not entered into 'aqaba'. Would that you knew what 'aqaba'
is? It is the setting free of a slave or the feeding of an orphan
relative and downtrodden destitute person in a day of famine.*** (Surah
al-Balad, 90:13-16)

Thus it should be borne in mind that these revelations had the real aim
of rousing the people to action.

**(iii)** **Belief in Allah and the Day of Judgment**: The most
important and viable factor which plays a vital role in making people
abide by the laws is the Belief in Allah and the Day of Judgment. That
means the emphasis is on the belief that man is the creature and servant
of Allah and as such he has to be obedient to Him as he is under the
surveillance of his Creator and being Allah's creature, he will have to
return one day to Him and will have to account for his deeds.

This belief also means Allah will compensate him by rewarding him ten
times greater than what is due to him against his noble deeds and that
He will pardon his shortcomings and errors, and that his deeds and
misdeeds even so small as of the size of an atom will be taken into
account. Indeed such a perfect faith and belief plays an effective role
in obeying the Divine commands.

**(iv)** **Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil**: When the people in a
certain nation give up doing evil acts, then all the individuals of the
society start enjoining good and forbidding evil. When a motor car
driver goes to a wrong direction, the drivers of other cars blow the
horns and kindle the lights to remind the driver of the traffic rules
that he is violating and n1ake the defaulter drive his car in a proper
way. By this it is meant that the people can enforce the laws
themselves.

**(v)** **Government and Punishment**: In the above-mentioned example if
the driver does not pay heed to the warning of other drivers, then he
will be prosecuted by police and fined. Of course sometimes punishment
and a harsh treatment become necessary. But this is in no way related to
the following Quranic verse:

***There is no compulsion in religion.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2: 256)

Because this verse means negation of compulsion in faith and beliefs. It
does not mean that we can do whatever we like otherwise hoarders,
thieves and usurers can use this verse as an excuse for their misdeeds,
and can say that there is no compulsion in religion and so they can do
whatever they like.

Signs of the Prophets
---------------------

There are three ways of recognizing the Prophets:

**(i)** **Miracles**: Whenever a man claims that he has a link with the
Creator of the Universe Who possesses Infinite Knowledge and Absolute
Power, he should perform such deeds and say such things as others cannot
do. To prove the truth of his claim he should cause such events to
happen as are beyond human power, and this will show that he has his
link with the other world. Such deeds are called miracles.

A Question: How do the miracles of the Prophets differ from the skill
and feats of the inventors, magicians, devout worshippers, wrestlers,
and why are these people not recognized as Prophets?

Answer: The answer to this question is that the feats of these people
are the result of their constant practice and exercise of a long period
of time just as in the beginning an athlete lifts a small weight that an
ordinary man can do but gradually by virtue of regular practice and
exercise he is able to lift a heavy weight of a dumbbell which can only
be lifted by several men combined.

But in the case of Prophet Saleh when the people asked him to perform a
miracle by bringing a she-camel of a particular characteristic out of a
mountain, he did not tell them to wait until he could practice
performing that sort of deed because such extraordinary supernatural
feats cannot be done even after lifelong efforts and practice.

**(ii)** **Divine Guidance**: The ways and manners of the Prophets are
the result of Divine teachings and guidance. Every devotee or inventor
is dependent on the guidance of a teacher or a helper but Prophets do
not need any such teacher or guide.

**(iii)** **Supernatural Powers**: An expert or genius specializes in
one or the other branches of science and his work is dependent upon some
restricted possibilities. On the other hand the Prophets perform all
kinds of supernatural acts as they derive their strength and power from
Divine sources and the Divine Power is not limited so as to show one or
two miracles only.

**(iv)** **Purpose**: The main objective of the experts in various
fields is to entertain or please the people by their feats but the
miracles of the Prophets aim at elevating the mankind making the society
an excellent model, and guiding the people towards the real Power
(Allah).

**(v)** **Infallibility**: The experts are apt to fall in error but the
Prophets are infallible and we never find any flaw in their character.
We shall deal with this topic in detail afterwards.

**(vi)** **Miracles are Unmatchable:** Magicians and other skilled
persons know that their feats can be performed or repeated by others
like them but the Prophets know that their miracles are performed by
them owing to Divine Power and as such they openly declare and challenge
that nobody can match them in such miracles.

However, there are many other differences between the Prophets' miracles
and the mesmerizing skill of magicians and other such enchanters from
the point of view of the nature of performance, the object of performing
as well as the personality of the performer. If we ponder over this
matter we will at once distinguish the Prophets from these tricksters.

Miracle is Not a Joke: The answer to the question whether the Prophets
performed a certain type of miracle according to the wishes of the
people is certainly a blunder. It is because in the Qur'anic verses we
learn that sometimes the people expected the performance of impossible,
irrelevant or damaging things from the Holy Prophets, who never paid any
attention to it. We give below some examples of their irrational demands

***Or bring Allah and the angels face to face with us.*** (Surah Bani
Isra'il, 17: 92 )

Here since Allah does not possess any form, this demand could not be
fulfilled.

***Or cause the sky to fall into pieces on us.*** (Surah Bani Isra'il,
17:92)

***Or show us that you have a well-adorned house of gold.***(Surah Bani
Isra'il, 17:93)

***Or show us that you have your own garden of palm trees and vines.***
(Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:91)

Is being the owner of a garden of vines or the house of gold the proof
of having link with Allah? Were Firaun, Namrud and Qarun who possessed
abundant wealth and property nearer to Allah? Were the Prophets showmen
who organized public entertainments and gave demonstration of their
miracles to fulfill the wishes of the people? Was the showing of
miracles not meant to prove only Prophethood?(See Sermon 197, ***Peak of
Eloquence***, ISP, 1984)

If a constructor builds a few houses or a script writer inscribes a few
pages in order to prove his skill in construction or penmanship, is it
not enough to prove his skill? Should he build the houses for everybody
or write for everybody?

Apart from all these, did these people not say after witnessing the
miracle performed by the Prophets that they had performed magic only?
Thus, if someone is not prepared to accept truth at any cost, he will
not do it despite hundreds of proofs and signs?

Are not all cells particles, leaves of trees not sufficient to prove the
existence of Allah? But there is no remedy for those who stubbornly
refuse to accept truth. So the purpose behind the miracles is to show
the link of the Prophets with Allah to the pious and clean hearted
people. However, it is not necessary that the Prophets should show their
miracles every day, every hour, and in all matters according to the
wishes of the people.

We see ourselves that the lives of the Prophets were full of trials and
tribulations and they surmounted all their troubles with perseverance
and forbearance but they never used miracles as a means of removing the
difficulties that they and their followers suffered.

The Philosophy of Miracles
--------------------------

Normally if a miracle is to be performed to a certain group of people
such as carpenters, tailors, gold smiths etc. it should be concerned
with their own field of interest. Thus in the times of Prophet Musa
since witchcraft was at its height, there was the miracle of his staff
as it turned into a serpent after being thrown on the ground.

Similarly in the days of Prophet Isa people were much interested in the
science of medicine and treatment of diseases. Thus, the miracle of
Prophet Isa was that by Divine Will he used to bring the dead back to
life.

In the same way in the times of our Holy Prophet rhetorical language and
eloquence were considered to be the mark of distinction and therefore
one of the miracles of the Holy Prophet was the Holy Qur'an the like of
which could not and cannot be produced by human skill. Thus the Holy
Qur'an is the long lasting miracle of the Holy Prophet.

Salient Features of the Holy Qur'an
-----------------------------------

We have said before that for a Prophet it is necessary that he should
perform one miracle or the other so as to establish the fact before the
people that he possesses some supernatural power and further that the
miracle should be of the kind which should be relevant to the interest
of the people of the time. We now deal with some characteristic features
of the miracles of the Holy Prophet of Islam:

**(a)** The Holy Qur'an is the greatest miracle of the Holy Prophet and
it is always present in the hands of the people. On the contrary the
staff of Prophet Musa or the restoring the dead to life by Prophet Isa
cannot be witnessed by the people of other places or ages.

**(b)** The components of the miracle of the Holy Qur'an are those words
by the help of which all people converse daily.

**(c)** The Holy Qur'an is the miracle as well as the guidance of Allah
while the miracles of other Prophets were not like that.

**(d)** The miracles of other Prophets were miracles in one way while
the Holy Qur'an according to Allama Majlisi is a miracle in fifteen ways
and according to Allama Tabatabai in eleven ways and it is just possible
that in future some more aspects may be discovered about it as for
instance some interpretations of ***al-Huruful Muqatta'at*** (the
abbreviated forms) used in the Holy Qur'an have been made.

In this sacred Divine Book there are 114 chapters (Surahs), more than
6000 verses and 78000 words. The Almighty Allah in His book has warned
the disbelievers against obstinacy, destructive activities, improper use
of wealth, fighting, making the children orphans, spreading rumors,
intimidating, and slandering etc. He has challenged them to produce a
Book like the Holy Qur'an. He says:

***Say, if the whole mankind and jinn were to come together to bring the
equivalent of this Qur'an, they could not do so, even if they all were
to help each other.*** (Surah Bani Israil, 17:88)

***Do the unbelievers say that Muhammad has falsely ascribed the Qur'an
to Allah? Ask them, 'Compose ten chapters like those of the Qur'an and
call on whomever you can for help besides Allah if you are true in your
claim.*** (Surah Hud, 11:13)

***Do they say that Muhammad has invented it? (Muhammad) tell them, 'If
your claim is true, compose only one chapter like it and call on anyone
besides Allah for help.*** (Surah Yunus, 12:38)

***Do they say, 'He has falsely invented it? In fact they themselves
have no faith. Let them produce a discourse like it if they are true in
their claim.*** (Surah at-Tur, 52:3)

If you look at these four verses of the Holy Qur an that have been
quoted above and ponder over them a little, you will note that Allah has
many times challenged the unbelievers to produce something like the Holy
Qur'an.

In the beginning the Prophet of Islam challenges the unbelievers to
produce ten chapters like those of the Holy Qur an.

Then, they have been asked to produce even one single chapter like that
of the Holy Qur'an.

At last the Prophet of Islam challenges the unbelievers that it is not
necessary that they produce one single chapter like that of the Holy
Qur'an but let them bring one single discourse like that of the Holy
Qur'an.

The Unbeaten Challenge for 14 Centuries
---------------------------------------

Despite the open challenge thrown out to the enemies of Islam nobody has
as yet come forward to accept it. Arabic is not our mother tongue and we
cannot therefore produce anything like the Holy Qur'an, but why are
those people whose mother tongue is Arabic keeping mum? We are the
followers of Islam but why do the enemies of Islam not come forward?

Still today there are many Arabic speaking people who have socialist and
anti-Islamic views in Arab and non-Arab countries and they spend huge
sums of money in the budget of their countries for the propagation of
their ideologies and in conspiring against the noble ideals of Islam and
these very people can at last gather funds to convene Seminar in which
all their brains trust and intellectual giants can take part in
producing something like the Holy Qur'an but they are unable to do that.

Imam Ali is reputed to be the most eloquent personality whose eloquence
in Arabic language is second to none and who right from the tender age
of 10 years was acquainted with the Holy Qur'an with unabated
enthusiasm, zeal and vigor, whenever in his sermons in ***Nahjul
Balaghah*** even a small verse of the Holy Qur'an is quoted it becomes
singularly unique in its merit and overshadows everything.

Even in the traditions of the Holy Prophet the quotations from the Holy
Qur'an become singularly unique as compared to the saying of the Holy
Prophet. This is the beauty of the eloquence of the verses of the Holy
Qur'an that the words and phrases are the same as spoken by others who
have the mastery over the language and yet the blending of its words and
phrases is such that it is beyond the power of any human being to
produce its equal even after fourteen hundred years.

Apart from that another astonishing thing is that the Holy Qur'an was
given by an unlettered man, and the more the scientific knowledge is
advancing day by day the more are the merits of the Qur'an being
discovered. It is in itself an everlasting miracle.

Wherever there appears to be some difference between Divine revelations
and the human knowledge the actual position is that knowledge is not
real knowledge but it is a theory or an ideology and has no connection
with revelation, because a true knowledge is never opposed to the Divine
revelation.

There are verses in the Holy Qur'an which at the time of their
revelation were prophecies and predicted the future events and it was
not long time that they proved to be true.

At the time when some people were thinking that since the Prophet of
Islam had no son of his own Islam would be outdated after his passing
away and he would only be remembered by the name of his son who had
expired during his lifetime. At this the following verse of Holy Qur'an
was revealed.

***Muhammad, We have granted you abundant virtue. So worship your Lord
and make sacrificial offerings. Whoever hates you will himself remain
childless.*** (Surah al-Kausar, 108:1-3)

That is in this surah, Almighty Allah assured His beloved Prophet that
He had been bestowed infinite bounties that is his Holy Progeny will
expand from his most beloved and exalted and infallible daughter, Lady
Fatimatuz Zahra while his enemies would perish despite their living
sons. Everybody then saw that this Qur'anic verse proved to be hundred
per cent true.

***We shall help you against those who mock you.*** (Surah Hijr, 15:95)

The above verse meant that Allah would defeat all conspiracies and
intrigues and destroy the scoffers. We see that the Holy Prophet came
out of all these conspiracies and mockeries successfully and how his
teachings and guidance changed the destinies of mankind and people
swarmed round him.

Could anybody believe that after the terrible defeat of the Romans they
would again become victorious. The Qur'anic verse was revealed saying
that within a period of ten years the Romans' defeat would turn into a
victory. The Holy Qur'an says:

***The Romans have been defeated in a nearby land and after this defeat,
(within a few years) they will be victorious.***(Surah ar-Rum, 30:2-4)

These verses were prophecies at the time of their revelation and were
signs of the miraculous Holy Qur'an. Its details are found in all
authentic books.

There is another noteworthy thing. When a man begins some work he has a
little knowledge and experience about it and gradually these increase
and he becomes perfect in his work. But in the case of the Qur'anic
revelations such a thing is not there.

That is the Qur'anic verses which were revealed in the early period of
Prophethood when the Holy Prophet was of 40 years of age do not differ
in meaning and purpose with those which were revealed at a later period
when the Holy Prophet was of 63 years of age. All the verses are of the
same tempo and style and not that some improvement was made in them
gradually. All these features are the proof of the Holy Qur'an being a
miracle. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Had it come from someone except Allah, they would have found therein
many contradictions.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:82)

The mental condition of man in general does not always remain the same
in war and peace, in poverty and affluence, in honor and disgrace, in
the beginning and the end of a work, etc. but the meanings of the Holy
Qur'an always remain the same and there is no contradiction or
discrepancy in them and that is the proof of the fact that the Holy
Qur'an is a Book of Allah and not a creation of human mind.

Since it was our intention to give a brief account of the signs of the
Prophets, we have avoided to dwell upon the miracles of the Holy Qur'an
from the scholarly point of view. There have been startling revelations
made in this Book on such subjects as the earth's rotation, earth's
gravitational force, earth's spherical nature, blowing of winds and
formation of clouds, movements of planets in fixed orbits, life and
vegetation in other planets which human mind could not have been able to
conceive for fourteen hundred years up to the last four centuries.

We have also not dealt with them because a number of books have been
written and research work has been done on them, nor have tried to
answer some of the questions which have been raised as for example the
doubt in regard to alteration in the Holy Qur'an about which the Holy
Qur'an itself has answered in several of its verses. We simply quote two
of such verses:

***We have revealed the Qur'an and We are its Protector.***(Surah
al-Hijr, 15:9)

***Falsehood cannot reach it from any direction.*** (Surah Ha Mim
Sajdah, 41:42)

On the strength of clear-cut statements in the Holy Qur'an we do not
give any cognizance to unreliable and unauthentic narrations regarding
the alteration of the Holy Qur'an because according to our school of
thought anything which is against the version of the Holy Qur'an should
be rejected outright, for it comes from ignorant friends or wise enemies
who have falsely ascribed them to the Holy Imams.

Apart from that when we refer to certain narrations regarding the
alteration in the Holy Qur'an we find that these narrations pertain to
the difference in the recitation or to the background of the revelation
of the Qur'anic verses or to those explanations and elaborations which
our infallible Imams have derived from them but they do not relate to
the question of the alteration in the Holy Qur'an.

Towards Understanding the Holy Qur'an
-------------------------------------

Contrary to the opinion of the people who consider the Holy Qur'an to be
confined to worship, prayers, and morals, we should point out that
one-twelfth part of it, (about 500 verses) relates to problems of
jurisprudence, while the larger part of it deals with matters pertaining
to social, political, administrative, historical, and cultural, faith
and other matters.

In no other book you will find so much stress being laid on defending
our rights, fighting against social evils, and bringing about peace and
tranquility in the society.

The Holy Qur'an is a Book, which has laid down the code of instructions
for the guidance of mankind in its most lucid style and has depicted the
life of the Prophet of Islam, Prophet Ibrahim, and Asiya, wife of
Firaun, as models to follow.

***The Messenger of Allah is certainly the best example for those who
have hope in Allah and in the Day of Judgment and who always remember
Allah.*** (Surah Ahzab, 33:21)

***O Prophet Ibrahim and those with him are the best examples for you to
follow.*** (Surah al-Muntahanah, 60:4)

The Holy Qur'an is not the Book like any other book in the sense that it
does not concern only with the mind but it is a code of moral values
also. The narrations mentioned in it are not meant for pastime but are
for taking lessons from them. Its historical account of the past nations
is not just a history but it envisages the philosophy of the rise and
fall of nations.

The Holy Qur'an is a Book which in its place is simple and
easy-to-understand on the one hand and forceful and effective on the
other. The Holy Qur'an is a guide which makes man reach from dust to
Allah, and elevates him from corporal to spiritual heights.

The Holy Qur'an is a Book which by cogent reasoning bestows insight upon
man. It shows the right path to man by giving the accounts of the
Prophets and the nations and motivates him through parables,
exhortations and admonitions.

This Book also deals with the middle course between man and Allah
through worship as well as different aspects of relation between man and
the created beings, charity, sacrifice, and mutual cooperation.

It also shows the mutual relationship between man and nature, that is,
how man conquers nature, how natural principles are kept alive, how
natural tendencies are developed, how best they can be utilized, and how
further researches can be continued, so that all the phenomena may be
proved to be the signs of Allah and His Might.

This Book also speaks of the dealings of men with the opponents and the
hypocrites. It deals with the invitation to the right path, wisdom,
preaching, and reasonable arguments.

It shows how to get rid of the destructive elements including those who
are stumbling-blocks in the way of acceptance of truth. It also tells us
of the hard fight against the rebels and hypocrites and its reactions,
and above all of the fifth columnist activities.

In the Holy Qur'an, the importance of acquiring of knowledge, character
building, social structure, qualities of the guardian, code of conduct,
the way of teaching and many other problems have been dealt with for
instance.

• What should we learn?

• From where should we learn?

• For what should we learn?

In this Divine Book many subjects such as moral code and behavior,
campaign against superstitious ideas, social, political and economical
problems, military pacts, rights of family members, husbands and wives,
parents and children, respect of parents etc. have been elaborately
discussed.

It contains clear-cut commands about taking punitive actions against
criminals and those evil-doers, who disrupt the society's peace, who
create dissension among the people, who play with the life and honor of
the people, and who usurp the people's properties.

The Divine Book creates such a confidence and insight in good and noble
people that they feel themselves always under the benign protection of
the All-Powerful, All-Knowing Allah. But these days owing to our callous
indifference the position of this Holy Book has reached the extent that
it is merely remembered on ceremonial occasions only as its verses are
recited at inaugural ceremonies or used in calligraphic art, in
architectural designs, on tombstones and domes.

Sometime the Holy Book is presented to the bride as a sign of good omen
to become an essential item of her dowry. We borrowed our system of
working from our colonial masters and as such we have fallen into a
ditch of moral degradation and disgrace. If our young man had learnt in
his school the following Qur'anic verse, the colonial powers would not
have subjugated us.

If in the morning parade of armed forces the following Qur'anic verses
were to be recited as a morning prayer, the Muslim armies would never
have been left to the tender mercies of the colonial powers for
centuries:

***Believers, do not consider the Jews and Christians as your allies.
They are allies of one another.*** (Surah al-Maidah, 5:51)

***Believers do not expose your privacy to the unbelievers.***(Surah Ale
Imran, 3:118)

If the following Divine Commandment against usury is enforced all
centres of interest would have been closed down:

***Those who take unlawful interest will stand before Allah (on the
Doomsday) as those who suffer from a mental imbalance because of Satan's
touch.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:275)

If the following Qur'anic verse had been acted upon, all the Muslim
countries would have strengthened their military power to defeat their
enemies and the Islamic world which constitutes one-third of the world's
population would have attained its lost glory and honor:

***If one party rebels against the other, fight against the rebellious
one until he surrenders to the Command of Allah.***(Surah al-Hujurat,
49:9)

If all the Muslims of the whole world had paid heed to the following
Qur'anic verse:

***They disobeyed their Messenger and followed the orders of every
transgressing tyrant.*** (Surah Hud, 11:59)

They could have removed with their own hands those tyrants whom the
colonial powers thrusted on them, and would have welcomed the Qur'anic
verses which exhort us not to obey the following persons:

***The evil-doers*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:142)

***The transgressors*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara, 42:151)

***The sinful or disbelieving person*** (Surah ad-Dahr, 76:24)

***The ignorant*** (Surah al-Jashiya, 45:18) and

***The mean swearer*** (Surah al-Qalam, 68:10)

Unfortunately, the Muslims did not respond to the true spirit of the
Holy Qur'an and from Prophet Ibrahim up to the Commander of the
Faithful, Imam Ali the invitation to the right path has been ignored and
their commands have not been followed by us in right earnest and as a
consequence of that we have been passing a life of disgrace by
supporting the tyrants and we lagged behind even in material and
spiritual advancement and made ourselves undeserving of the Divine
Justice, and above all on the Day of Judgment the Holy Prophet will
protest in a complaint against us as per the Qur'anic verse:

***Lord, my people had abandoned this Qur'an.*** (Surah Furqan, 25:30)

At this moment we seize this opportunity to refer to Imam Ali who said:
"The Holy Qur'an is the safest refuge from sin and vice. It is the
harbinger of peace for mankind. It honors those who accept it, guides
those who follow it, protects those who act according to its dictates
and it acts as a sound argument for those who speak through it.

It testifies those who claim its testimony. It supports those who
support it. It brings success to those who embrace it. It is the
quickest and the shortest way to salvation for those who formulate their
lives according to its tenets". (Sermon 203, p. 485, ***Peak of
Eloquence***)

At another place the Holy Imam says. "Fear Allah as far as the Holy
Qur'an is concerned lest non-Muslims should surpass you in following its
teachings". And actually it did happen.

It is this very Holy Qur'an which exhorts the Muslims to take stock of
the world happenings, to travel around the world and to see things for
themselves, to take lessons from the events of the past and to exchange
views with people of other nations and to find out ways and means for
solving the social and individual problems.

We have however seen how the Muslims because of their ignoring the
teachings of the Holy Qur'an, deprived themselves of so many benefits,
while others went forward winning in the race for advancement. They
visited the Muslim countries and examined the causes of the weaknesses
and strengths of the Muslim nations and thus became conversant with all
the natural resources.

They discovered our mineral wealth and sold them out to us. This is the
sort of punishment for us who have forsaken the Holy Book, ignored the
teachings of our infallible Imams and became ungrateful to them.

Prophet Musa liberated his people (Bani Isra'il) from the serfdom of
Fir'aun and appointed his brother, Prophet Harun in his place, during
his absence, as a guide, but the people of Bani Isra'il turned
ungrateful and deviated from the path of Allah that Prophet Musa had
shown them and started worshipping the calf of Samri again.

When Prophet Musa returned he became much perturbed after having seen
his people going back to their original creed of polytheism and became
annoyed with his brother, Prophet Harun who could not do much about it
than said: "O my Brother! This nation did not accept my authority.

They were slaves the other day, but today they have become arrogant
after attaining freedom, and not only did they disobey me, but they were
about to kill me also. They gave up their stand and adopted the ways of
recklessness and revelries instead of faith, fraternity, mutual
cooperation and guidance".

Since these are the factors which rob the nations of their freedom and
plunge them into alien domination, we should be aware of the colonial
intentions and arm ourselves with faith, fraternity and discipline.

The Holy Qur'an narrates this incident with the purpose of giving us a
warning that if we adopt the ways of the people of Bani Isra'il, we too
would go astray. Thus all sensible people should take lessons from such
happenings, as faced by the people of Prophet Musa. What we have said is
not even a fraction of what the Holy Qur'an has said.

To be brief, we will remain content with giving whatever appreciation of
the Holy Qur an that we could possibly do to give an inexhaustible
account of the Holy Qur'an in a few pages of this book. The Holy Qur'an
is undoubtedly the word of Allah and He has referred this Holy Book as:

• ***The Light*** (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:15)

• ***The Healer*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:82)

• ***The Clear Proof*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:104)

• ***The Guide*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:2)

• ***The Criterion*** (Surah al-Furqan, 25:1)

• ***The Truth*** (Surah Fatir, 35:31)

• ***The Reminder*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20:3)

Therefore, with these few lines we conclude this topic (the Holy Qur'an)
and give below certain rules that the Holy Qur'an itself has made for
its recitation.

Rules for Recitation of the Holy Qur'an
---------------------------------------

**(i)** According to the Holy Qur'an only the purified ones shall touch
it:

***None shall touch it save the purified ones***. (Surah al-Waqi'a,
56:79)

Hence, one should perform ablution before the recitation of this Divine
Book.

**(ii)** Before reciting the Holy Qur'an we should invoke Allah's
protection from the mischief of the Satan, Satan's diabolic whisperings,
devilish activities and dispositions which prevent man to fill his soul
with the impact of the Holy Qur'an:

***When you recite the Qur'an, seek refuge in Allah from the mischiefs
of Satan.*** (Surah al-Nahl, 16:98)

**(iii)** While reciting the Holy Qur'an, we should think as if Allah is
directly addressing Himself to us. But it should not be so for
memorizing it or quoting it in our speeches to arouse passion.

**(iv)** We should recite the Holy Qur'an in a way as it ought to be
recited that is with clear pronunciation of words, in distinct manner,
in good voice, with proper care of pauses and not in a hurriedly and
unintelligible manner. As the Holy Qur'an says:

***Recite the Qur'an distinctly.*** (Surah Muzzammil, 73 4)

**(v)** After reciting the Holy Qur'an one should ponder over the
meaning also as the Holy Qur'an has objected to those who recite it as a
formality just by hurriedly moving their lips without knowing the
meaning. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Do they not ponder over the Qur'an?*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:82)

**(vi)** While reciting the Holy Qur'an, we should bear in mind the
narrations of our infallible Imams about relevant verses of the Holy
Qur'an as well as the background of the revelation of those particular
verses as to the specific occasions so that we are not distracted from
its true meaning and we do not deviate from our basic faith. We should
not derive the incorrect meaning of the verse howsoever conservative or
progressive it may be in outlook .

Reverting to Main Discussion: Our discussion was about the method of
recognizing the signs of Prophethood and we have elaborately discussed
the first method which was by means of the miracles of the Holy
Prophets. Now we deal with second and third methods one by one.

The Second Method:
------------------

We can recognize the Prophets by their life, sayings, miracles and
approaches. In this regard, we give an example:

When the two parties quarrel, the police takes them away to lock up and
start questioning them in detail as an investigation and ask them:

1. Who are you?

2. Where did the quarrel take place?

3. When did the quarrel happen?

4. What happened then?

5. What did you say?

6. What did you do?

The investigator after making thorough inquiries knows the real facts.

Similarly we can recognize our Holy Prophet from the following
inquiries:

1. Who was he?

2. Where did he live?

3. What sort of people visited him?

4. Who were the parties which opposed him?

5. How did he prove his point of view?

6. What was the basic thing he said?

7. Who were the people whom he trained?

The life history of our Holy Prophet appropriately answers the
above-mentioned questions:

1. He was unlettered and trustworthy.

2. He was in the midst of the society which was the seat of idolatry,
polytheism and dissension and where under the unfavorable and hostile
atmosphere of illiteracy, superstitions and savagery he started his
mission of inviting people to Allah.

3. He had with him such people as Lady Khadija, his beloved wife and Ali
Ibn Abi Talib, his cousin brother, the two being the model of piety and
devotion and who before the advent of Islam possessed high qualities of
mind and soul.

4. His opponents were powerful, selfish, cruel and haughty.

5. He never deviated from his mission and remained steadfast despite
tortures and deceit of the people. He carried out his mission with
undaunted courage. He never promised for worldly things to the people in
support of his message. Nor did he make any false claims.

6. He proved his point in the light of Divine revelations and preached
the Divine commands as revealed by the Holy Qur'an.

7. He trained men like Salman, Abuzar and Miqdad to carry on his
message.

Indeed, even if the Holy Prophet had not been endowed with miracles, his
life, achievements and sincerity of purpose would have been enough to
testify his truthfulness and the righteous cause he stood for.

The Third Method:
-----------------

We can accept the sayings of the earlier Prophets as the third method of
the recognition of the Holy Prophets. We can cite an example as follows:

Suppose I come to your house and claim that your house is actually my
house and I am its owner and that the documents mention my name as the
owner. The natural course against such a claim should be that you should
take out the document and show to the people that nowhere in that
document any claim is proved.

If on the contrary you become excited, start quarrelling with me, spend
money and are not prepared to disprove the claim of my ownership; what
decision would the people give in this case? Is your failing to give the
proof and quarrelling and suffering not the proof of my claim?

The Holy Prophet came and he claimed that he was the same Prophet whose
name was mentioned in Taurat and Injil. The Jews fought the battles and
the Christians sustained losses. If this thing had not been mentioned in
Taurat and Injil, they would have defamed the Holy Prophet by claiming
that his name was not mentioned in their Scriptures.

But the enemies of Islam fought the battles against Islam and sustained
heavy losses which proved that the name of Prophet of Islam was
mentioned in the Scriptures but those people expunged that portion of
the text from the Scriptures which contained the name of the Prophet of
Islam.

Attributes of the Prophets and the Life of the Last Prophet
-----------------------------------------------------------

We will discuss briefly the qualities and the attributes of the Prophets
with special reference to the life of the Holy Prophet of Islam for
these have a direct bearing on our basic faith as well as on our moral
conduct, deeds and general behavior.

The thing that influences man's progress and training is knowledge of
history and its philosophical approach. What would be better than that
we become acquainted with those who are history's most successful and
infallible personages.

The knowledge of history and the life and characteristic attributes of
the Holy Prophets not only leave a good effect on us but it also has a
similar effects on the Prophets; because we find that whenever the Holy
Prophet was confronted with some serious difficulties by way of people's
oppositions, intrigues, threats and intimidations, the Almighty Allah
narrated to him the similar circumstances which the earlier Prophets had
passed through in their lifetime so as to console him in his anxieties.

When the Holy Prophet happened to be surrounded by the scoffers, the
following verse was revealed:

***They mocked the Messengers who were sent before you; thus the torment
which they had ridiculed encompassed them all.*** (Surah Anbiya, 21:41)

This verse indicates that the Holy Prophet too should remain steadfast
like his predecessors.

Furthermore against the hardships that the Holy Prophet suffered at the
hands of the infidels of Makkah, the Almighty Allah revealed the
following verse:

***We shall exercise patience against the troubles with which you
afflict us.*** (Surah Ibrahim, 14:12)

In short by knowing the life history of the Prophets and their
attributes we are to be greatly benefited. Now we deal with this subject
in some detail.

Social Life of the Prophets
---------------------------

Since the best way of preaching is through action the Prophets should
share the hardships and the difficulties with the people so as to set a
practical example before them. That is why the Holy Prophets led a
simple life like other people and shared all their difficulties. Like
other people they also underwent troubles.

They would also experience captivity at the hands of their enemies, the
agony as a result of the disobedience of their sons, opposition from the
side of their wives, illness, penury, scoffing, taunts and several other
unpleasant things. In this connection we quote below some relevant
Qur'anic verses:

***We sent the Messengers before you (Muhammad) and gave them wives and
offspring*** (Surah Ra'd, 13:38)

***All Messengers whom We sent before, certainly ate food and walked
through the streets.*** (Surah Furqan, 25:20)

***We sent Nuh to his people who said, 'My people worship Allah for He
is your only Lord. Will you then not have fear of Him'. The chiefs of
the unbelievers said to the others, he is a mere mortal like you***.
(Surah Mu'minun, 23:23-24)

***He is a mere mortal like you. He eats and drinks as you do.***(Surah
Mu'minun, 23:33)

We read in the life history of the Holy Prophet that whenever he sat
amongst his companions he made the sitting arrangement in a circular
order so as not to make anyone occupy a seat of distinction.

And his way of sitting, putting on clothes and behavior was such that
whenever a visitor happened to visit him in the Masjid he would glance
over everybody sitting there but would not know who amongst them was the
Holy Prophet. This was the life of a true leader of the Islamic State.

From the point of view of vocational occupation most of the Prophets
used to possess cattle, plough the fields and tend the sheep. Whenever
the Holy Prophet was on a journey he would take for himself the job of
collecting the fire woods for cooking meals.

Not only the Prophets but their loyal followers and disciples also used
to follow their footsteps in these matters. When Imam Sajjad proceeded
to perform ***Hajj*** he settled with the chief of the caravan of
pilgrims that he would willingly take upon himself the task of doing
their work himself.

Similarly once a man comes to a public bath and sees Imam Ali Riza
there, but he does not recognize him. He then asks the Holy Imam to
scrub his back and shoulders before his taking the bath and the Holy
Imam willingly accepts to do that job. But when the man knows that he is
Imam Riza he becomes extremely sorry and offers apologies to the Holy
Imam. But the Holy Imam says that he would not stop until he finishes
the job of scrubbing his body.

Imam Ali says: "Whenever in the battlefield we faced difficulties the
Holy Prophet used to become our shelter".

Imam Ali often assisted Lady Fatimatuz Zahra, his worthy wife, in her
household work.

This in brief is our mode of thinking and conduct of life, and this is
how our Holy Imams behaved. We are proud to put these examples to the
world at large so that those, who are posing as the champions of
equality, justice and moral values, may know that they have not given a
new gift to the people nor can they produce a worthy example of their
leaders to follow.

Cautioning the Prophets
-----------------------

If the Prophets had so much love for Allah and they were so close to
Allah they were also not spared of Allah's cautioning so much so that if
even for a single moment they had deviated from the Will and command of
Allah, afflictions would befall them. We quote a few Qur'anic verses as
follows:

***It has been revealed to you and to those who lived before you that if
you consider other things equal to Allah, your deeds will be made devoid
of all virtue and you will certainly be lost.*** (Surah az-Zumar, 39:65
)

***O Messenger! Preach what is revealed to you from your Lord. If you
will not preach, it would be as though you have not conveyed the
message***. (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:67)

***O Had he (Muhammad) invented some words against Us, We would have
caught hold of him by his right hand and cut-off his main artery.***
(Surah al-Haqqah, 69:44-46)

There are many such verses in the Holy Qur'an which admonish the
Prophets, and on some occasions their tone is very severe so as to
prevent them from erring.

Conduct of the Prophets
-----------------------

When Allah told Prophet Musa that he was His Prophet and the leader of
his people, the first thing he desired from Allah was that he should be
endowed with a generous heart, high-spirited soul, patience,
steadfastness and courage. The Holy Qur'an says:

***O He said, 'O my Lord! Enlarge my breast, and make my mission
easy.*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20:25)

What strength is that which can withstand scoffing, taunts, disgrace,
subversion and unreasonable demands without the gift of courage and
Divine Help bestowed by Allah? Yes, the only thing which can withstand
the burden of all these hardships is patience. Allah says:

***No Messenger came to them at whom they did not scoff.***(Surah Hijr,
15:11)

***O Similarly no Messenger came to those before them but they said: 'He
is a sorcerer or a mad man'.*** (Surah Zariyat, 51:52)

But as to our most exalted of the Prophets, the Holy Prophet of Islam
the pagans called him by various names such as poet, or sorcerer, but
according to the Holy Qur'an as he was the model of high morals,
compassion and mercy he bore all these things with patience and
perseverance, for had it not been so, the very mission of his
Prophethood would have not been brought to a successful completion. The
Holy Qur'an says:

***O Only through Divine Mercy have you (Muhammad) been able to deal
with your followers so gently. If you had been stern and hard-hearted
they would all have deserted you a long time ago.*** (Surah Ale Imran,
3:159)

Whenever any of the wives of the Holy Prophet misbehaved towards him,
his companions would suggest her being turned out of the house, but he
would say that he ignored the shortcomings of his wives after taking
into account their good qualities also.

The Holy Prophet used to pray for the salvation of his people. He used
to consult the people on certain matters, too. He treated them with
compassion and he used to care for giving them proper guidance and
training. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We have not sent the Qur'an on you so that you should be burdened,
but it is an admonition for him who fears.*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20: 2)

***Perhaps you will grieve to death if they disbelieve this Book!***
(Sura al-Kahf, 18:6)

As knowledge increases the importance of its value is also increased.
The Holy Prophet was above all social and family prejudices as he only
acknowledged reality and he made no distinction between the poor and the
rich; also he was not daunted by fear and intimidation.

The Holy Prophet was sometimes found worshipping Allah in the Cave of
Hira; inviting people to Allah on the top of Mount of Safa; drawing his
sword against the enemies; carrying bricks and mortar for building the
Masjid at Quba. At long last he conquered the city of Makkah.

But all these multifarious activities of the Holy Prophet did not bring
about any change in his mode of thinking, doing, and saying. He was
always guided by the realities which he had himself discovered within
himself and thus devoted himself to his dedicated mission.

Selfless Devotion:
------------------

One of the attributes of the Prophets is their selfless devotion to the
cause of Divine mission. These chosen servants of Allah did not pin
their hope on anybody except Allah. In the 26th Surah (ash-Shura) from
verses 109 to 180 of the Holy Qur'an a gist of the messages of Prophets
Nuh, Hud, Salih, Lut and Shu'ayb is given that all of them said one and
the same thing that their reward was only in the Hands of Allah.

The Holy Prophet also would always declare that he would not expect any
return from his followers except that they should follow the path of
Allah. This is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an as follows:

***Tell them, 'I ask no recompense for preaching to you, except that
whoever wants should choose the way of Allah'***. (Surah Furqan, 25:57)

This is the kind of recompense which benefits the people themselves and
not their benefactor. It is like a teacher who tells his pupils that his
recompense lies in their memorizing the lessons or each one of them
should collect firewood for the fireplace so as to warm the class room.
Here again this kind of recompense benefits the pupils themselves in
return. But when the Holy Qur'an says:

***(Muhammad), say, 'I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching
to you except the love of my kindred*** (Surah ash-Shura, 42:23)

It means that the love of the infallible leaders is the guarantee for
keeping oneself on the path of Allah and His chosen Prophets.

Here again when we see that the recompense of the Prophethood of the
Holy Prophet is linked with the love of the Holy descendants of the Holy
Prophet it is also linked with the following of the path of Allah.

This means that the path of the infallible Imams is not different from
the path of Allah and both are linked together as the Book of Allah and
the Holy Progeny of the Holy Prophet are inseparable from each other.

In short, the Prophets never demanded anything from their people in
return for their accepting and following their (the Prophets') message.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***Say, whatever reward I ask you (for my preaching) will be for your
own good. No one can reward me except Allah.***(Surah Saba, 34 47)

As we read in history the Prophets not only did not expect anything of
material benefit from their people but they also did not promise their
people any such material gains.

Some people came to the Holy Prophet and said to him: "If we accept you
as Prophet of Allah and profess Islam, would you then give your status
and authority to us after you?"

The Holy Prophet replied: "We talk about Prophethood and the worship of
Allah which concerns only Allah and not me".

According to Imam Ali they are different people who want to allocate the
share of the milk and who consider appointments, dismissals, sharing of
profits as the main purpose of worldly gains and to rule over the people
by force.

But it is only the personality of the Holy Prophet who against all the
promises of worldly gains says to the infidels: "By Allah! Even if you
place the sun on my right hand and the moon on my left hand or make me
the master of the entire Universe, I shall never deviate from my path".
(***Sirah Ibn Hisham***, vol. I, p. 265 )

In fact, speaking things in such clear-cut words is the special trait of
the Prophets.

Infallibility
-------------

One of the special characteristics and personal distinctions of the Holy
Prophets is their infallibility. This attribute of "Infallibility" is
that quality by which man by virtue of his belief, knowledge and faith
reaches such an exalted height of human perfection that with full
freedom he keeps aloof from every sin, so much so that he does not even
think of committing any sin.

Some people wonder that a man may not even conceive at committing any
sin. We can very easily solve this problem. The explanation is that even
like an ordinary man you yourself are immune from committing any error
or sin that is you have not thought of committing them either. If you do
not agree to this, then you should answer the following question:

**(i)** Have you ever gone before the people completely nude?

**(ii)** Have you ever set yourself on fire?

**(iii)** Have you ever thrown yourself down from the top of a tower?

**(iv)** Have you ever killed a person who was a worshipper of Allah?

The answers to all these questions will be in the negative. It is
because we have already presupposed the dangerous consequences of these
actions and have made ourselves certain about that in our mind as well
as in our heart and we have actually convinced ourselves about it.

Hence, if we really know from the depth of our heart that the backbiting
that we are doing today will assume such a horrible form on the Day of
Judgment, we will never think of backbiting. The only fault with us is
that our knowledge does not go deep down to our heart and though we are
mentally aware of it yet we are not certain about it. That is why
knowing that doing a certain thing is bad, we do it.

Let us consider the following example:

We know that a dead body cannot bite us nor can it move its limbs but
still we are frightened to pass the night beside it in the same room
where it is lying, knowledge has not reached our heart. Our knowledge
has not as yet reached a state of certainty. But on the contrary we note
that the person, whose profession is to bathe the dead bodies would pass
his night with that dead body without any fear or fright.

Here lies the difference. We only know but we are not sure but the other
person knows as well as believes that the dead person cannot do any harm
to anybody.

From this example, it is proved that the reason why we can protect
ourselves from committing any sin is our faith, perfect knowledge and
conviction.

Signs of Conviction
-------------------

Once the Holy Prophet after the morning prayers attended the people, he
saw a young man in a sad plight. He was pale, his eyes sunk in their
sockets, and hair disheveled. The Holy Prophet enquired of him about his
condition. The man replied: "At this moment when I am before you, I am
in a state of conviction".

The Holy Prophet became surprised with this remark as the young man had
not said that he had knowledge or that he knew, but had said that he had
conviction. The Holy Prophet asked the young man the sign of his
conviction.

He said: "I have become sure of the Day of Judgment to that extent that
it has robbed me of my sleep and I visualize Hell with its blazing fire
on one side and on the other Paradise with all its benevolent things,
the justice of Allah and the crowd of people and in the midst I find
myself also present there for the account of my deeds".

The Holy Prophet accepted the young man-s argument. The young man then
requested the Holy Prophet to pray for him that he might die a martyr in
the path of Allah. His request was accepted by the Holy Prophet. After
sometime that young man participated in a battle in which he attained
martyrdom.

Proof of Infallibility for a Divine Leader
------------------------------------------

We give below a Persian proverb as a proof of infallibility: "Salt
preserves things from getting decayed, but what will happen on that day
when salt itself gets decayed".

We need a leader to guide us because we are apt to err and commit wrong.
But what will become of us when our leader will also err and commit
wrong! Under such a situation that leader himself will need a leader who
should be infallible.

It is also necessary that Allah should make the people know His commands
so that they should not have any excuse for their faults. This thing
cannot be done without the guidance of an infallible leader.

Thus the responsibility of an infallible leader cannot be entrusted to
one who himself is liable to commit wrong and who is not safe from
committing sins. It will, therefore, be a great injustice to the people
if they are allowed to follow a leader who is not safe from committing
wrong. Moreover, is it not man's disgrace, if he is put under the
leadership of a sinner?

In this context, the Holy Qur'an narrates the following invocation of
Prophet Ibrahim:

***When his Lord tested Ibrahim's faith and he satisfied the test, He
said, 'I am appointing you as the leader of men.' Ibrahim asked, 'Will
this leadership also continue through my descendants?' The Lord replied,
'The unjust do not have the right to exercise My authority'.*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:124)

In the Holy Qur'an we have been told at a number of places that we must
obey the Holy Prophet. Therefore, this Divine commandment is the proof
of the infallibility of the Holy Prophet because if the Prophets were
also liable to err like other human beings then the Divine commandment
on the obedience of the Holy Prophet would have been a conditional one
just as in the case of the Divine commandment on the obedience of the
parents have been made conditional despite its being obligatory. There
are certain occasions when the off-springs are asked not to obey their
parents at all. The Holy Qur'an says:

***If they (the parents) try to force you to associate with Me that of
which you have no knowledge, do not obey them.***(Surah Luqman, 31:15)

By comparison you will realize that the conditional obedience of the
parents is one thing and the unconditional obedience of the Holy Prophet
is another, because the Prophet is at such a stage of infallibility that
his obedience is not subject to any condition. The Holy Qur'an says
about the Holy Prophet:

***Your companion is not in error nor has he gone astray. He does not
speak out of his own desire. It is a revelation which has been revealed
to him.*** (Surah an-Najm, 53:3-4)

Points to Ponder
----------------

**(i)** Some people take certain Qur'anic verses as an excuse for
doubting the infallibility of the Prophets. But according to the
Qur'anic verses and the narrations as well as logical reasoning which we
have with us, the infallibility of the Prophets is not at all affected
by cautioning and instructions which are mentioned in the Holy Qur'an
about the Prophets as these things by themselves can open the way for
the infallibility of the Prophets as well as for putting a check on
treating the Prophets as extraordinary supernatural beings.

**(ii)** Lest the enemies should get a chance of finding fault with the
Prophets and shake the belief of the believers, it is necessary that the
Prophets should be innocent and infallible not only in matter of
conducting their mission but also in all their beliefs and deeds. They
should be absolutely free from any possibility of doing any wrong or
committing any major or minor sin knowingly or inadvertently. They
should not even fall into forgetfulness. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Say: 'To Allah belongs the consummate argument. Had He willed He
would surely have guided all of you aright'***. (Surah al-An'am, 6:150)

Naturally, if the Prophets and the Imams had not been infallible, people
would have found contradictions and variations in their words and
actions and under such a situation would it be correct to say that Allah
fulfilled His covenant for the people so as not to give them a plea
against Allah? Thus the Prophets as well as the Imams must be
infallible.

**(iii)** Infallibility of the Prophets does not come into conflict with
the invocation and repentance of the Prophets but these are done only
because the Prophets know that Allah is All-Aware and He knows their
thoughts and intentions and thus they feel embarrassed with even all
those actions which actually do not come under the definition of wrong
or sin.

It is like this that if I cough in my house I do not feel any
embarrassment, but if I am facing a television camera for delivering a
lecture on Qur'anic lesson I shall become embarrassed even if I start
coughing for once only, although coughing is not a sin. The feeling of
embarrassment is because I find myself coughing before the people.

The saints consider themselves always before Allah and they unlike
others are very much conscious of even a minute action of theirs and
that is one reason why Prophets and the infallible Imams are always
afraid of Allah and they always beseech Allah for His forgiveness.

Some Special Merits of the Prophets
-----------------------------------

• From the Qur'anic verses and the narrations we can enumerate some
special merits of a Prophet of Allah:

• He should be the most learned man of his time.

• He should not suffer from any loathsome disease.

• He should be a personification of personal strength, capability,
forbearance, moral conduct and noble attributes to the extent that
nobody should surpass him in these qualities.

• He should not enjoin anything which is contrary to reason.

• The preceding Prophets had already prophesied of his Prophethood.

• He should understand people properly and thoroughly.

• He should be well-aware of human psychology, inclinations, weaknesses,
passions, and should know how to guide them. He should know the social
conditions, the causes of rise and fall of the society, and for the
welfare of individuals and the society he should adopt effective
measures with wisdom.

• His teachings should comply the natural demands and should be
compatible with the teachings of preceding Prophets.

• He should come from noble parents.

• He should not be erratic and forgetful. He should be very submissive
in offering his prayers. He should be bold and brave.

We can find the specimens of all these qualities and virtues of the
Prophets in innumerable verses of the Holy Qur'an and in the traditions
and narrations.

Submission to Allah
-------------------

Contrary to all those people whose mode of thinking, action and deeds
are influenced by even ordinary social status, the Holy Prophet despite
being on the most exalted position of Prophethood was very submissive in
obeying the commands of Allah as well as very humble in his behavior
towards the believers.

It is a well-known fact that the Holy Prophet used to take the lead in
greeting the children and doing his personal work with his own hands
whether in home or on journey. In the battlefield he used to be nearer
to the enemies than anybody else. The Holy Prophet often used to say:

***I am only a human being like you.*** (Surah al-Kahf, 18:110)

The Holy Prophet never exerted pressure on anybody because of his
superior authority. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Allah would never give the Book and authority of Prophethood to any
man who would tell others to be his servants instead of being the
servants of Allah. He would rather tell them to worship Allah for they
had been teaching and studying the Book.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:80)

The Prophets also do not have the right for interceding for their sons
just as we know of Prophet Nuh whose intercession was rejected by Allah.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***Nuh prayed to his Lord saying, 'Lord, my son is a member of my
family. Your promise is always true and you are the best judge'. His
Lord replied, 'He is not one of your family. He is a man of unrighteous
deeds. Do not ask Me for that which you have no knowledge of. I advise
you not to become an ignorant person.*** (Surah Hud, 11:45-46)

Knowledge of the Unseen:
------------------------

One of the special traits of the Prophets is their knowledge of the
unseen. In this behalf the Holy Qur'an says:

***O He knows the unseen and He does not allow anyone to know His
secrets except those of His Messengers whom He chooses***. (Surah Jinn,
72:26-27)

A Question: We read in the Holy Qur'an that nobody but Allah knows the
unseen:

***He has with Him the keys to the unseen which no one knows besides
Him.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:59)

Hence, how one can attribute the knowledge of the unseen to the Prophets
and the Imams?

Answer: Basically the knowledge of the unseen rests only with Allah and
if a Prophet or an Imam knows anything of the unseen, this knowledge
comes only from Allah. It is not like that a Prophet or an Imam like
Allah is himself the knower of the unseen.

In connection with an incidence when one of the wives of the Holy
Prophet asked him as to how he knew about it, the Holy Prophet said as
per Qur'anic verse:

***The Prophet told a secret to one of his wives telling her not to
mention it to anyone else. When she divulged it, Allah informed His
Prophet about this. The Prophet told his wife part of the information
which he had received from Allah and ignored the rest. Then she asked,
'Who informed you about this '. He replied, 'The All-Aware and
All-Knowing One has told me'***. (Surah at-Tahrim, 66:3)

Furthermore, the knowledge of the unseen is of two kinds

**(i)** Those things about which only Allah has the Knowledge and He has
not passed on this Knowledge to anyone else as we often recite in our
supplications: "O Allah! For the sake of the Knowledge of the unseen
which is known to You only . . .".

**(ii)** There are some other matters which are concerned with knowledge
of the unseen and the saints are endowed by Allah with their knowledge.

This knowledge of the unseen, obedience of Allah, infallibility,
miracle, perfection, devotion, weeping, implorations, etc. are the
things which distinguishes the Prophets from ordinary human beings and
puts them on an exalted position.

We have heard of reformers whose sole aim in life was to carve out a
social environment in which all and sundry should be dutiful and should
perform noble deeds. But it is the Prophets only who with their special
attributes and the knowledge of the unseen are distinct from all such
reformers.

After elaborating the special traits and attributes of the Prophets in
general, it seems appropriate now that we should talk about the life and
the attributes of the Holy Prophet of Islam. It is hoped that his
followers will draw inspiration from his life.

A Glance at the Life of the Holy Prophet
----------------------------------------

Among all the Prophets, the Holy Prophet is the only Prophet about whose
life even ordinary matters have been recorded in history and this is a
great accomplishment of the Muslim nation because the biographical
sketches of other Prophets have been written after a lapse of
considerable time with alterations and incorrect accounts by some of
their followers.

However on the life and attributes of the Holy Prophets many books were
written in Arabic language some details of which have been mentioned in
our discussions on the signs of the Prophets. Thus it seems pertinent to
give a brief account of the conduct and character of our Holy Prophet.

It would be profitable for all the Muslims to know the details of the
Prophet's character, morals, and private life. Whatever is written in
the following pages has been derived from ***Biharul*** ***Anwar***,
vol. XVI; ***Sirah-i Ibn Hisham***, ***Kuhlul Basar***, ***Tafsir
al-Mizan***, vol. VI and other authentic books.

**His Compassion and Sympathy:** Before the advent of Islam, it so
happened that people were worried about the apalling conditions of
famine. Abu Talib, the uncle of the Holy Prophet was also equally
perturbed because he had a large family to support and his resources
were limited.

The Holy Prophet decided with his uncle Abbas to go to Abu Talib and in
order to lessen the burden of his daily expenses, each one of them
should take one son of Abu Talib. Thus Abbas took Ja'far and the Holy
Prophet brought Imam Ali to his house and became his guardian from his
very childhood. This was one example of the compassionate nature of the
Prophet of Islam.

His Morals
----------

The Holy Prophet used to sleep on the floor on a simple mat. He cobbled
his shoes and patched his clothes himself. He smiled away any
disgraceful remark. He would go to buy things for himself.

Anas bin Malik says, "For years I was in the service of the Holy Prophet
but never even for once did he reprimand me on my fault. The Holy
Prophet milked the she-goat himself, greeted the children first and
accepted the invitation of his slaves. He would never make a disparaging
remark about the food which was not of his liking.

He was particular about cleansing his teeth with Miswak, applying
perfume and taking bath on Fridays. While going out of the house he put
on white dress. While taking his food, he would never lean upon anything
so that there might not be any sign of pride when he was sitting before
Allah's bounties.

His Family Life
---------------

Despite the fact that most of the wives of the Holy Prophet were of
advanced age, mothers of orphaned children, and were of varying nature
and disposition, he treated them nicely as is mentioned in the Holy
Qur'an: ***Treat them kindly*** ... (Surah an-Nisa, 4:19).

Though some of his wives treated him so badly that his companions used
to advise him to leave them for the good. But he used to say that the
shortcomings of a woman should be weighed with some of her good
qualities also. One should not divorce one's wife on her minor fault or
slight unpleasant behavior because women possess some good qualities and
noble attributes also.

The Holy Prophet said: "Anyone who is affluent with regard to wealth and
property but still remains stingy with his wife and children is not
amongst us". (***Mustadrak***, vol. II, p. 643)

After the passing away of his beloved wife, Lady Khadija the Holy
Prophet treated all those ladies who were her intimate friends with high
esteem and favour.

The Holy Prophet used to say: "I treat my family members better than
anyone else". (***Wasa'il***, vol. XIV, p. 122) 285

The Holy Prophet observed justice with his wives so strictly that even
during his serious illness his bed was made each night by regular turns
in every wife's chamber.

His Feelings For the New-born
-----------------------------

A newborn baby was brought to the Holy Prophet for blessings or for
giving him a name. The new-born passed urine in the lap of the Holy
Prophet and the parents as well as the people standing around became
very much embarrassed. At this the Holy Prophet said: "Don't mind. The
little one is getting frightened of your making a noise. I shall have my
clothes washed". (***Kuhlul Basar***)

His Initiative in Greeting the Children: The Holy Prophet used to call
the name of the boys and girls with respect. He gave special
instructions about respecting the girls. In his code of conduct the
injunction for giving respect to the females is present. This is the
view of the Holy Prophet. But once when on the birth of a female child
the father of the child became so furious that his face turned black.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***When the glad news of the birth of their daughter is announced to
them, their faces turn gloomy and black with anger.*** (Surah an-Nahl,
16:58)

Under such ghastly condition of the society, respect for the sons and
daughters particularly of the daughter was a conspicuous thing. The Holy
Prophet said: "The best of your offsprings are the daughters, and the
sign of a woman's auspiciousness is that her first-born is a daughter".
(***Mustadrak***, vol. II, p. 614-615)

A companion of the Holy Prophet was sitting with him. When he heard the
news of the birth of his daughter he became displeased. The Holy Prophet
then said to him: "When earth is her abode, the sky is her shelter and
her livelihood is secure with Allah, why have you become so unhappy? She
is like a flower spreading its fragrance and she will stand you in good
stead". (***Wasa'il***, vol. XV, p. 101)

A man told the Holy Prophet that he had never kissed his child. The Holy
Prophet said: "This is the sign of your cold bloodedness".

In the matter of giving equal treatment to all the children, the Holy
Prophet said: "If you kiss a child before another, you should kiss the
other one also".

He Was Not an Opportunist
-------------------------

One of the sons of the Holy Prophet was Ibrahim who expired early in his
infancy. When after his death there happened to be a solar eclipse,
people thought it was as a consequence of the demise of the son of the
Holy Prophet. At this the Holy Prophet assembled the people and said:
"The occultation of the sun was not due to the sad demise of my son,
Ibrahim".

Thus the Holy Prophet got the people saved from falling into ignorance,
superstition and undue love. On such an occasion if there had been a
politician in place of the Holy Prophet he would have given a wrong
interpretation of this incident and would have aroused the people to
maintain undue love.

He Was Always on the Lead
-------------------------

In the Battle of Ahzab all the enemies of Islam, including the infidels,
idolaters and hypocrites decided to wipe out Islam altogether and for
this purpose they prepared to make a heavy attack on Madina.

The Holy Prophet decided to fight against the enemies and with the
consultation of his companions it was decided that a trench might be dug
around the city of Madina as a first measure of defense. On this
occasion the Holy Prophet took the lead in digging the trench and he
engaged himself in this task until the trench was ready while some of
the Muslims had taken leave and some others had gone away without taking
permission.

His Hospitality
---------------

Salman Farsi, the loyal companion of the Holy Prophet said: "I happened
to visit the Holy Prophet at his house. He offered me the same pillow
which was the only one in his own use". Such a treatment of his visitors
was not particularly shown to Salman Farsi but it was for every Muslim.

One day each of the foster brothers and sisters of the Holy Prophet
separately came to the Holy Prophet. He treated the sister with greater
respect than the brothers. When the people inquired about this
distinction, the Holy Prophet replied: "As this sister used to respect
her parents, I have greater regard and love for her". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. XVI, p. 281)

Sometimes the guests of the Holy Prophet overstayed their welcome even
after finishing with their meals and got themselves busy in conversation
but still he tolerated it. At last a Qur'anic verse was revealed saying:

***If you are invited, you may enter, but be punctual (so that you will
not be waiting while the meal is being prepared). When you have finished
eating, leave his home, and do not sit around chatting among yourselves.
This will annoy the Prophet and he will feel embarrassed to tell you.***
(Surah al-Ahzab, 33 53 )

His Extreme Dedication
----------------------

The Holy Prophet used to wake up from his sleep after midnight. After
prostrating himself before Allah, brushing his teeth with Miswak, and
reciting a few verses of the Holy Qur'an, he got himself busy with the
worship of Allah. Some of his wives used to say to him: "You are
innocent and infallible and yet you do a lot of imploration!" The Holy
Prophet would answer them by saying: "Should I not try to be a grateful
servant of Allah".

During the month of Ramazan, the Holy Prophet used to free his slaves.
While offering prayers he trembled with fear. When he offered his
prayers alone he prolonged his bowing and prostration but in
congregation he shortened them. One of his companions who was appointed
to lead the congregational prayers was instructed by him to recite a
short Surah after Surah ***al-Hamd*** so as not to prolong the duration
of the prayers in congregation.

His Insight and Sagacity
------------------------

While solving any problem, the Holy Prophet used to apply his foresight,
and sense of justice.

When the different tribes of Arabia rebuilt the Holy Ka'ba, the dispute
arose as to which tribe should install the sacred Black Stone (***Hajar
ul aswad***) at its original place. This dispute was going to create an
ugly situation. A man suggested that whoever came to the Masjidul Haram
first of all in the early morning should be made to arbitrate between
them.

The following morning the Holy Prophet was the first to come to the Holy
Ka'ba and hence he was accepted as an arbiter in this dispute. The Holy
Prophet then ordered them to bring a sheet of cloth.

When the cloth was brought he placed the sacred Black Stone in the
middle of the sheet of cloth and asked every chief of the tribes to lift
it from each corner and carry it near the Holy Ka'ba. Thereafter, the
Holy Prophet picked up the sacred Black Stone and placed it at its
original place. It was because of the Holy Prophet's insight as well as
the sense of justice that the dispute was settled amicably.

The Holy Prophet in the Battlefield
-----------------------------------

Imam Ali says: "The Holy Prophet used to be always on the forefront in
the battlefield to face the enemy. And in the Battle of Trench when it
was decided to dig a trench around the city of Madina, the Holy Prophet
was the first to pick up the pickaxe for digging the earth and he
continued digging the trench along with his followers until the trench
was completely ready".

The Holy Imam further says: "In the battlefields whenever we Muslims
were faced with some difficulty, we took shelter of the Holy Prophet and
sought his help and protection".

His Decisiveness
----------------

The Holy Prophet was never prepared to ignore his ideological program or
any of its principles for the sake of increasing the number of his
followers. Some people from Ta'if came to the Holy Prophet and said: "We
can profess Islam provided that you give us permission for idol-worship
and exempt us from offering prayers".

The Holy Prophet rejected their conditions straightaway. He did not care
to increase the numerical strength of his followers at the cost of the
fundamental principles of Islam. The Holy Prophet was not like those who
would compromise on principles.

His Piety and Devotion
----------------------

Once the Holy Prophet gave twelve Dirhams to Imam Ali to buy a dress for
him (the Prophet). The Holy Imam went to the bazaar and brought a dress
costing the same amount of money. The Holy Prophet seeing the dress
said: "If the dress had been more simple, it would have been better. If
the shopkeeper agrees to take back the dress and return it to him". The
Holy Imam returned the dress and brought back twelve dirhams to the Holy
Prophet.

This time the Holy Prophet went along with Imam Ali to the bazaar. On
the way he saw a slave-girl who was crying. The Holy Prophet asked her
the cause of her trouble. She said: "My master gave me four dirhams to
buy things from the bazaar but I lost that amount of money. I am afraid
of going back home because of my master".

The Holy Prophet gave that girl four dirhams and bought a dress for
himself for four dirhams. On his way back home he saw a man who was
without proper clothes. The Holy Prophet gave his dress to this man and
came back to the bazaar to buy another dress for the remaining four
dirhams left with him.

On his way back again the Holy Prophet saw the same slave-girl still
standing there. She lamented that since she was already late for home
she was scared of her master who would beat her for this.

The Holy Prophet accompanied the slave-girl to her master's house. In
deference to the Holy Prophet's coming to his house the master not only
excused the slave-girl but also freed her. The Holy Prophet then said:
"Those twelve dirhams were so auspicious that they enabled two needy
ones to clothe themselves and a slave-girl to become free". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. XVI. p. 215)

Indeed if we care to cut down our personal expenditure we can help the
needy to procure some of their basic needs.

The Holy Prophet owed a few dirhams to a Jew. One day he came to the
Holy Prophet and demanded his money but the Holy Prophet had no money
with him to pay off his debt. The Jew said: "I will not leave this place
until you give me my money back". He stayed there till it was the Zohr
(midday prayers) time. People offered their Zohr prayers.

Then the time for evening, dusk and night prayers came and the Jew was
still there to pester the Holy Prophet. At last the people became
annoyed. But the Holy Prophet said: "We are not supposed to be unjust to
him".

Consequently the Jew who shadowed the Holy Prophet until the following
day embraced Islam, and distributed his money in charity in the name of
Allah. He said: 'I was not actually meaning to harm the Holy Prophet,
for my intention was to test the Holy Prophet's high qualities of
character ".

His Loyalty
-----------

Ammar Yasir, one of the celebrated companions of the Holy Prophet
narrates: "Before the announcement of the Prophethood of the Holy
Prophet, he and I together used to tend the cattle. One day I suggested
to the Holy Prophet that a certain place was most suited for tending our
cattle and we should go over to that pasture. The Holy Prophet agreed.

On the following day I found that the Holy Prophet had already reached
there but he was holding his sheep off and was not allowing them to
graze. On my asking the reason for this the Holy Prophet said: "There
was an agreement between us that both of us together would graze our
sheep and thus it was not proper on my part to graze my sheep without
you doing the same at the same time".

His Method of Teaching
----------------------

While teaching the people Islamic faith and moral conduct or answering
questions, the Holy Prophet used to repeat his instructions three times
so as to drive the idea home.

His Sheltering the Enemy
------------------------

In the eight year of the migration, when the Holy Prophet left Madina at
the head of an army and conquered Makkah? he entered the Holy Ka'ba and
smashed up all the idols in it. Safwan, one of the chiefs of the
idolaters, who belonged to the tribe of Umayya fled away to Jeddah which
was at a distance of a few miles from Makkah. Some people interceded
with the Holy Prophet for his pardon.

The Holy Prophet then sent his head-gear to him so that he should be
under protection while entering Makkah. Safwan returned from Jeddah and
asked for a grace time of two months until he could think of embracing
Islam. But the Holy Prophet gave him the grace period of four months
instead of two months.

Safwan remained with the Holy Prophet on his many travels and after
finding himself enchanted by the personality of the Holy Prophet and
move by the powerful force of his preachings, voluntarily professed
Islam as his religion. The Holy Qur'an says:

***If the pagans ask you to give them refuge, give them asylum so that
they may hear the words of Allah. Then let them return to their towns
for they are ignorant people.***(Surah at-Taubah, 9:6)

According to Islamic jurisprudence in Jihad (the Holy War against the
infidels) the giving of shelter and asylum to infidels have been
stressed.

His Behavior with the Enemies
-----------------------------

On the occasion of the conquest of Makkah, the Holy Prophet pardoned
even his blood-thirsty enemies and not only that he even pardoned the
unbelieving woman who had conspired to kill him by cooking for him a
poisoned meal.

Once an enemy of Islam happened to come to the Holy Prophet and instead
of greeting him with the celebrated Islamic Greeting "***Assalam u
Alayka"*** (Peace be in you) he said "***Assamu Alayka"*** (Death be on
you) and insolently repeated these words several times, but despite
possessing the means for revenge, the Holy Prophet replied back by
saying "***Wa Alayka***" (Same be to you).

Some of those who were present there became very furiousat the insolent
behavior of the enemy. They said to the Holy Prophet: "Why did you not
retaliate upon your enemy?" The Holy Prophet replied: "I reciprocated
his greeting in his own words that is, "The same on you" which he had
wished for me".

Affectionate Treatment of His Friends
-------------------------------------

While on a journey people used to divide work among themselves and the
Holy Prophet, too, had his work to do himself. He used to collect the
firewood for cooking food. Despite his worthy companions desire not to
let him work, the Holy Prophet would not agree to it.

Once when the Holy Prophet alighted from the camel's back and went to
tether the animal to a tree, some companions rushed forward to do that
little job but the Holy Prophet did not accept the help of the
companions and instead said" "You too should not throw yourself upon the
help of other".

Some Special Traits of the Holy Prophet
---------------------------------------

• The Holy Prophet readily accepted the invitation of the slaves and he
considered it necessary to hold them in high regard like other notables
of the tribes. However he would entrust their leadership to those who
were held in respect by them.

• The Holy Prophet was not mindless of good or bad behavior. He used to
encourage as well as admonish people as the occasion demanded. He was
always much concerned about the proper guidance of the people In this
context the following Qura'nic verse was revealed to him:

***We have not revealed the Qur'an on you that you should be burdened,
but as admonition for whom who fear***. (Sura Ta Ha, 20:2)

• In a gathering the Holy Prophet gave so much individual attention to
each other and every person that he thought that he was the only
favorite of the Holy Prophet.

• Sometimes the companions suggested to the Holy Prophet to curse the
enemies but he never agreed and instead prayed to Allah to show them
guidance.

• Whenever he shook hands with somebody he would not withdraw until the
other person withdrew his hand first.

• Whenever he went on riding he never allowed anybody to follow him on
foot and instead he asked the people to go separately until he met them
on the appointed place.

• The Holy Prophet never disappointed a beggar. A woman sent his son to
the Holy Prophet and asked for his dress. When the son came to the Holy
Prophet he gave him his dress. On this occasion the following Qur'anic
verse was revealed to him.

***Do not be niggardly nor extravagant that you may later feel
reprehensive and constrained.*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:29)

• Whenever he happened to attend a gathering he always seated himself at
a lower place. He would readily accept a present howsoever humble it
was. Whenever he found any Muslim or a companion missing in a meeting,
he would immediately inquire after him. If he happened to be on a
journey, he would pray for his safe return and if he happened to be sick
he would pray for his speedy recovery.

• He would ask the people to sit in a circular seating arrangement so as
not to give any distinction to anyone over the other.

• In matters of enforcing laws, he never showed special favour to
anybody. Once one of his companions interceded with him for a woman of a
famous tribe to excuse her punishment. At this the Holy Prophet said:
"By Allah! I am not the one to relax the punishment ordained by Divine
commandment in favour of anybody. If my own daughter Fatima had
committed a theft, I would have not spared her even from the
punishment".

• The Holy Prophet paid particular attention to the captives and the
slaves and he himself married a captive woman and thus by this action of
his the Muslims started showing regard to the captives and they freed
many of them. The Holy Prophet asked the people to be kind to the
captives and to feed them and clothe them like themselves and to call
them by their names so as not to give them a feeling of inferiority.

• The Holy Prophet treated the poor and the rich alike and during the
conversation he never allowed irrelevant or controversial things to be
discussed, besides he never found fault with anybody nor did he indulge
in laughter.

His Concern of the Common Man
-----------------------------

Unlike those leaders who fled away from the scene of trouble and
hardship or those who left their friends in the lurch and migrated from
their town or country, the Holy Prophet stayed in Makkah all the time
and instead sent his followers to migrate to Abyssinia (Ethiopia). While
migrating to Madina, the Holy Prophet first sent a batch of the loyal
followers to Madina.

His Consulting the People
-------------------------

In all those matters where there was no special command from Allah and
they were left to the people's discretion, the Holy Prophet very often
used to consult them before taking any decision. As for example on the
occasion of the Battle of Uhud, the Holy Prophet set up an advisory
council and consulted the people as to whether the believers should
fight the battle outside Madina or they should remain within the city of
Madina.

The Holy Prophet himself and a few of his companions were of the opinion
that the battle should be fought in Madina and accordingly defense
should be built up there, but most of the young people gave their
opinion for fighting the battle outside Madina.

Here we see that the Holy Prophet gave preference to the opinion of
young and zealous fighters over that of others including his own, and as
such they all marched forward towards Uhud to face the enemy. What is
more interesting is that the verse 159 of Surah Ale Imran was revealed
after the set-back of the Muslims in the Battle of Uhud. (***Tafsir-i
Namuna***, vol. III, p. 142)

The above-mentioned verse was revealed despite the fact that after
accepting the opinion of the companions, Muslims had to suffer defeat.
Allah says in the same verse as follows:

***Forgive them and ask Allah to forgive (their sins) and consult with
them in certain matters. But when you reach a decision trust Allah.
Allah loves those who trust Him.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:159)

His Behavior with His Opponents
-------------------------------

The treatment of the Holy Prophet with his opponents was based on the
following Qur'anic injunction:

***If they (the unbelievers) propose peace, accept it, and trust in
Allah***. (Surah al-Anfal, 8:61)

Of course, in another verse we read that if the doubts arise the
agreement should be revoked. The Holy Qur'an says:

***If you are afraid of treachery of some of your allies, you may
disregard your treaty with them. Allah does not love the treacherous
ones.*** (Surah al-Anfal, 8:58 )

The Holy Qur'an says about the Jews and the Christians as follows:

***Muhammad, say to the followers of the Bible, 'We must come to a
common term. Let us worship no one except Allah nor consider anything
equal to Allah, nor regard any of us as our lord besides Allah***.
(Surah Ale Imran, 3:64 )

***A group among the followers of the Bible would love to mislead you
but they mislead no one save themselves***. (Surah Ale Imran, 3:68)

***Some of them speak ill of the Prophet saying, 'He listens to
everything and believes what he hears'. Muhammad, tell them, 'He only
listens to what is good for you, believes in Allah and has trust in the
believers. He is Mercy for the believers among you. Those who speak ill
of the Messenger of Allah will face a painful punishment'***. (Su rah
at-Tauba, 9:61)

The Holy Prophet considered military preparations for fighting against
the enemies of Islam, the necessity of coaching of youngster for the art
and skill of archery and similar other skill of paramount importance. He
used to say that in exchange for one single arrow that was shot at the
enemy of Allah, its maker, its buyer who handed it over to the soldiers
of Islam and the one who shot it at the enemy were ensured of Paradise.

In the case of hypocrites, we see that the Holy Prophet ordered the
demolition of a Masjid that was built by the hypocrites. On the occasion
of the Battle of Tabuk some hypocrites were conspiring against Islam in
a room of a public inn.

When the Holy Prophet learnt of such a conspiracy he ordered the
storming of the room where the plot was being hatched and accordingly
the believers stormed the room over the heads of the hypocrites, (and
those who survived were treated harshly).

The Holy Prophet did not offer the funeral prayers for these hypocrites.
However, he was lenient towards the infidels when they wanted some more
time to take a decision about their embracing Islam.

Family affiliations had no influence on his taking ideological
decisions. It was the uncle of the Holy Prophet for whose condemnation a
strongly worded Qur'anic verse was revealed. The Holy Qur'an says:

***May the hands of Abu Lahab perish! May he too perish! His property
and worldly gains will be of no help to him. He will suffer in a blazing
fire and so too will his wife (who threw thorns and firewood in the
Prophet's way). Around her neck will be a rope of palm tree.*** (Surah
Lahab, 111:1-5)

Indeed the disruptionist's hands should be cut off no matter even if he
happens to be the uncle of the Holy Prophet. In this connection there is
clear injunction in the Holy Qur'an that believers cannot ask for the
forgiveness of the infidels and polytheists. The Holy Qur'an says;

***After it was made clear that the pagans are to be the dwellers of
Hell, the Prophet and the believers should not have sought forgiveness
from Allah for them even if they may have been relatives.*** (Surah
at-Tauba, 9:113)

In the following verse Allah encourages the Holy Prophet lest the
enemy's plot might shake his decision.

***Do not yield to the disbelievers or the hypocrites, ignore their
annoying you and trust in Allah. Allah is your all-Sufficient
Protector.*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:48)

***Exercise patience and let it be only for the cause of Allah. Do not
be grieved about them nor be disappointed at their evil plans.*** (Surah
an-Nahl, 16:127)

***But they (the idols) will not be able to help them. Instead the
disbelievers as the troops of the idols will be brought before Allah.***
(Surah Ya Sin, 36:75)

***Muhammad, exercise patience against what they say, glorify your Lord
with His praise before sunrise and sunset.***(Surah Qaf, 50 39)

An Apology To the Holy Prophet
------------------------------

While writing on the merits of the Holy Prophet I am feeling helpless
because of my limited knowledge. As a matter of fact an appreciation on
the life and attributes of the Holy Prophet can only be undertaken by a
person of the caliber of Imam Ali as it is the Holy Prophet whose praise
has been done by Allah Himself, whom Allah takes him through the heavens
and by whose auspicious presence the angels' abode becomes blessed.

It is the Holy Prophet whom the Divine carrier takes away from the Holy
Masjid (the Ka'ba) in Makkah to Baytul Muqaddas (the Masjid in
Jerusalem). The Holy Qur'an says:

***Glory to Him who carried His servant during the night for a visit
from the Holy Mosque (at Makkah) to the Aqsa Mosque (at Jerusalem).
Whose precincts We have blessed, that We may show him some of Our
signs.*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:1)

On the one hand these exalted destinations are the proof of the exalted
personality of the Holy Prophet. On the other hand we find his
attributes and personal qualities of love and affection and refined
thoughts and sympathetic behavior towards all. "Once a thirsty cat keeps
an eye on the water container meant for the Prophet's ablution.

The Holy Prophet instead of using that water for ablution places it
before the cat. The Holy Prophet is harder than the rock against the
enemies and is softer than snow toward his friends. He foregoes his
personal rights against his enemies also but in the implementation of
the laws he is very strict, so much so that he swears that he would not
forgive even his own daughter, if she ever committed any wrong".
(***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XVI)

How dare we talk about the attributes of the Holy Prophet? We read in
***Nahjul Balaghah*** (***Peak of Eloquence***, ISP 1984) that when
nobody could read or write, the Holy Prophet stressed the acquiring of
knowledge by saying that it was obligatory for all the Muslims. Now
after the passage of fourteen centuries we see that everybody is
clamoring for acquiring knowledge.

At the time when on the murder of one person the entire tribe used to
rise for taking revenge upon the murderer's people and several of their
innocent people were put to death, the Holy Prophet stopped this heinous
custom.

That was the time when savagery was at its peak. The Holy Prophet said
that if anyone would drive his animal even on his journey to Makkah too
fast, his testimony would not be considered reliable because the one who
cruelly fatigues his animal is hard-hearted. The example of compassion
and mercy that the Holy Prophet set before the people in those days
became the sign of the success and grace of the nation. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***Believers, listen to Allah and the Messenger when they call you to
that which gives you life.*** (Surah al-Anfal, 8.24)

The command of Allah is not without meaning when He says about the Holy
Prophet of Islam as follows:

***He who obeys the Messenger obeys Allah.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:80)

***He does not speak out of his own desire.*** (Surah an-Najm, 53.3)

***You are certainly on the right path***. (Surah az-Zukruf, 43:43)

***He will grant you a majestic triumph***. (Surah al-Fath, 48:23)

How can one attempt to write something in praise of the Holy Prophet
when Allah Himself has exalted his name and his mission in the following
words?

***(Muhammad), haven 't We comforted your heart and relieved you of the
burden which had been a heavy weight upon your back, and exalted your
fame? Surely with hardship there is ease. With hardship indeed there is
ease. So when you are free, work diligently and turn to your Lord with
all your love.*** (Surah al-Inshira, 94:1-7)

It is not possible that in these few pages we may throw light on the
high morals of the Holy Prophet about whom Allah Himself says in the
following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

***You have attained a high moral standard.*** (Surah al-Qalam, 68:4)

The Holy Qur'an which describes this world a poor and insignificant
thing makes the position of the Holy Prophet exalted. There can be no
better appreciation of the Holy Prophet than the one given in the Holy
Qur'an as follows:

***(Muhammad), We have granted you abundant virtue. So worship your Lord
with full dedication and sacrifice. It is surely your opponents whose
line will come to end.*** (Surah al-Kauthar, 108:1-3)

And in the Hereafter too, Allah dignified the position of the Holy
Prophet as an interceder.

What can I write about the highly exalted attributes of the Holy Prophet
whose birth extinguished the leaping flames of the Fireplace of Persia,
and who’s being installed as Prophet removed all disturbances and
chaotic conditions from the land.

When he was born the foundation of the palace of Kisra, the ancient
monarchs of Persia (Iran), were shaken. When he was assigned to
Prophethood the entire humanity got wonder-struck. It was he, whom the
Holy Qur'an declared the "Mercy for the whole Universe". Who can write
and how can we write about such a unique personality?

What can I say about him, who reaches such a lofty place of honour that
he becomes the guest of Allah on the night of***Ma'raj*** (ascension);
and yet who, in his humbleness, declares that he would not turn down the
invitation of a slave and would travel a far off distance in order to
share a simple food with him?

For his journey to the heavens, ***Buraq***, a Divine carrier, was
provided to him, while at his own, he never hesitated to ride on a mule.
The Archangel Jibra'il who brings the Divine revelation to him conveys
him the greetings of Allah, and he himself is so humble in disposition
that he first greets the children.

In the state of prostrating himself before Allah he submits his forehead
and heart before Allah and when his two grandsons (Imam Hasan and Imam
Husayn) find him under that position and ride on his back, he prolongs
his prostration so that their feeling might not be hurt.

How to speak of him, who at one and the same time is dedicated to the
worship and remembrance of Allah and is also mindful of the feelings of
the two children! The people should take lesson from this in the matter
of upholding the rights of children, men, women and the labourers and
they should be ashamed of raising empty slogans.

The Holy Prophet remains cheerful with the people while he is in their
company He sheds tears also at the demise of his son, Ibrahim. But in
either case he does not exceed the limit and does not do anything
against the Will of Allah.

In the morning he offers his prayers, passes the time in the midst of
his companions during the day, and lets the companions with one another
in useful pursuits, not for fun and pleasure, including riding and
archery which can stand them in good stead in times of self-defense
against the oppressors. And the prize that is awarded is the date-palm
tree, the leaves of which provide pleasant shade, the wood as fuel, and
the fruit as food.

False Accusations
-----------------

Is it correct to make false allegations against Islam whose Prophet
gives a grace period of four months instead of the two asked for, on the
day of the conquest of Makkah; makes the house of his arch-enemy as
sanctuary of peace; announces general amnesty and pardons to all his
opponents and bears with patience hardships for fifteen years at the
halls of the infidels of Makkah, and if he takes his sword in hand to
protect himself and his faith and to defeat the nefarious designs of his
enemies and asks the believers to wage Jihad (Holy War) against them so
as to emancipate mankind from treachery, savagery, oppression, and to
liberate man from all kinds of domination and subjugation? Certainly
not.

Sometimes the opponents say that Islam was spread at the point of the
sword and this is not correct because from historical facts and evidence
the total number of those killed was not more than 1700 from both sides
in all the battles of Islam against enemies.

Sometimes the opponents find fault with the Holy Prophet that he married
too many wives and mislead the people by insinuating, God forbid, that
he was lustful, although the fact is that the Holy Prophet passed the
youthful years of his marital life with only wife, the revered Lady of
Islam, Khadija-tul Kubra up to the age of fifty years, and his wedding
with her was solemnized at the initiation of Lady Khadija when she was
forty and the Holy Prophet was twenty five years old.

Lady Khadija had already rejected the offer for marriage of several
other men who wanted to marry her because of her financial standing. But
Lady Khadija proposed to the Holy Prophet because he was found to be a
trustworthy, truthful and righteous person enjoying high reputation in
the whole of the Arabian Peninsula and besides, she had already heard
from her uncle Warqa bin Nawfal the prophecies of the preceding Prophets
about the appearance of the Holy Prophet as the Prophet of Allah and of
her marriage with him.

The Holy Prophet spent 25 years of his married life with Lady Khadija
and spent her wealth in the preaching of Islam and to relieve mankind
from ignorance and tyrannies although there were some of the choicest
girls wanted to marry him, but he always refused their offer.

The other wives of the Holy Prophet were married to him only after the
demise of his first wife Lady Khadija and that too when he had passed
the age of fifty. These women were of elderly age and were widows and
had orphaned children and hence he had to lead a hard and strenuous life
with them instead of life of ease, comfort, and indulgence.

These wives of the Holy Prophet were of varying temperament and
dispositions and as such it was not easy to get along with them. The
husbands of some of these wives were martyred while fighting against the
infidels and as such they needed protection for themselves and the
orphans. If they had not been married to the Holy Prophet they would
have reverted to infidelity.

One among them was Sauda whose husband died after he had migrated to
Abyssinia and she was left without any patron and supporter. Umm Salama
was another such wife who was of old age and was mother of orphaned
children.

Zaynab was also another wife of the Holy Prophet who was the daughter of
his aunt from the father's side. She was first married to Zayd bin
Harith, the slave and adoptive son of the Holy Prophet. Her marriage
with Zayd did not last long and she was divorced by him. Then she
married the Holy Prophet.

The Holy Prophet married Zaynab at Allah's command so that the very root
and basis of a wrong custom might be abolished. According to this custom
of the Age of Ignorance nobody was allowed to marry the wife of his
adopted son and in this case since Zayd was the adopted son of the Holy
Prophet, the latter could not marry Zaynab, the divorced wife of the
former. But Allah ordered this marriage in order to abolish this custom
at the hands of the Holy Prophet himself.

Juwayria, another wife of the Holy Prophet was a captive. Her marriage
with the Holy Prophet motivated the Muslims to treat the captives with
great regards and kindness so much so that they freed many of them.

Besides, with a view to maintain cordial relations among various
influential tribes, to prevent disruption among them, and to promote
internal stability, the Holy Prophet married such women as Ayesha,
Hafsa, Umm Habiba, Safiya and Maymuna.

Safiya of course was the daughter of the tribal chief of a big Jewish
tribe of Bani Nuzayr. When she was taken prisoner, the Holy Prophet
married her and established relationship with a big tribe.

In short, many of the wives of the Holy Prophet were those who had
passed the age of youth and personal charm, and most of them had been
married once or twice before, and had orphaned children with them, and
whom the Holy Prophet married when he was past fifty, an age which by no
means can be regarded as an age of youthful and lustful desires and by
that time he had attained great reputation already, and that many a
beautiful girl aspired to marry him.

This is the proof of the fact that the purpose of the Holy Prophet in
contracting various marriages was based on pious and noble cause only
and as such no sane person can dare attack his personal character.

Besides keeping these wives, the Holy Prophet most often passed his
nights in offering prayers and remembering Allah as he did in his youth
also. The Holy Qur'an says about his dedication and worship of Allah as
follows.

***You, who have enwrapped in a mantle, worship (Allah) for only a few
hours at night.*** (Surah Muzzammil, 73:1-3)

It is only we who even for the sake of one wife forsake Allah. If the
number of wives does not prevent anyone from getting right guidance,
spiritual enlightenment, performing religious duties of offering
prayers, attending jihad, uplifting the society and doing justice to
wives themselves and instead it becomes the source of their support and
protection, there cannot be any reason for criticism.

If somebody feels the prick of conscience at the number of wives a man
has then it may be due to any of the following reasons:

**(i)** If the husband is not giving just treatment to his wives.

**(ii)** If the idea of having many wives is aimed at satisfying ones
lustful desires.

**(iii)** If the husband gets himself involved in investing his energies
and talents in pampering his wives.

If none of the above conditions is present then keeping of wives cannot
be prevented from any moral or social standpoint.

Answer to Some Questions. We have so far dealt with the necessity of the
Prophets' mission, ways and means of recognizing them and their
attributes and personal qualities. Now we deal with the answers to some
of the doubts created in the minds of the people.

**(i)** **Have the Prophets Founded an Ideal Society?** Answer: For
teaching and guidance, the sending of the Prophets as well the Divine
commandments are necessary and their obedience by the people is another
necessity. Both are distinctly separate. It was not the Divine Will to
guide the people by force only. Had it been so everybody would have
received the right guidance. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Had Allah wanted He could have guided all to the right path.***
(Surah Nahl, 16:9)

Thus, the Prophets were also not supposed to force their teachings on
the people. The Holy Qur'an says:

***(Muhammad), remind them; you are surely a reminder. You are not a
warden over them.*** (Surah al-Ghashiya, 88:22)

Allah provides the means for guidance. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Surely, in Our Hands is the guidance.*** (Surahal-Layl,92:12)

However the people should also accept the guidance. If some people
refuse to accept the Divine guidance they should not become an
obstruction in its way, just as a gardener does not abstain from
watering the land in the presence of weeds, while there are also good
trees. The Holy Qur'an says:

***When your Lord said to the angels, I am appointing someone as My
deputy on earth, they said (almost protesting), 'Are You going to
appoint one who will commit corruption and bloodshed therein, even
though we (are the ones who) commemorate Your name and glorify You?' The
Lord said, 'I know that which you do not know'.***(Surah al-Baqarah,
2;30)

In order to prove a new concept it is sufficient to train the people and
to set examples. If a mason or a painter shows some specimens of his
craft and skill, it will be sufficient to establish his efficiency or
proficiency in that particular field.

I remember that some years ago, a pupil got up after my lecture and
asked: "If Islam is a good religion then why has it not spread widely?"
My instant retort was: "If Muhammad Ali clay is a good boxer, then why
has he not boxed our chest?" There was a chuckle of laughter.

A good mason, a painter, a boxer or an orator is not the one who works
for everybody or shows his skill to everybody. If he has not done
anything for you, the reason is that you have not asked him to do
something for you.

If the voice of a speaker or an orator does not reach us, the reason is
that we are far from him. If Muhammad Ali clay has not boxed us as yet,
the reason is that we have not gone to the ring to face him. If the
Prophets have not shaped a good society or the message of Islam has not
gone far and wide, the fault lies with us only.

According to a poet: "If one turns into a beggar his people are not to
blame for his lethargic nature". The same applies here. That is to say
if the people themselves have become indifferent to the spirit of Islam,
Islam itself cannot be blamed.

The Prophets lay the foundation of a society free from flaws strictly in
line with Divine commandments and they themselves act upon them in order
to give a lead to the people. They in fact present a model of a social
environment and invite the people to fashion their social life on the
same pattern.

Our blessed Holy Prophet molded a nation comprising the black and white
and people of different kinds and types drawn from various tribes and
laid its foundation on the belief in Allah and on the war against
polytheism and transgressions perpetrated by feudal lords and despotic
chiefs.

He eliminated all differences of cast and creed among men as well as
superstitious ideas, whims and fancies of the people and established
moral values, discipline, unity, equality, justice, freedom,
righteousness, sincerity, grace, honor obeisance to Divine commandments
and remembrance of Allah He trained such great men as Imam Ali, Abuzar,
Salman, Miqdad and Maytham.

He brought out the laws which were compatible with reason and natural
instinct and in order to establish and enforce the supremacy of the
Divine laws he never hesitated to offer his and as well as his
followers' lives to achieve that objective.

Now when we see that the people have not as yet adopted the Prophets'
concept of life and their school of thought, we should trace out the
reasons for such apathy instead of criticizing that school of thought or
blaming its progenitors.

The sun shines on everything. When it shines on a glass it reflects its
light and when its rays fall on a brick it does not reflect but despite
this we do not doubt about the sun and its light. It is because if we
throw several hundred thousand airtight sealed cylinders into an ocean
we shall note that water does not enter those sealed containers.

If they are not sealed water will certainly enter them. Similarly, there
are people whose eyes, ears and hearts are sealed. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We have destined most of the men and jinns for Hell. They have hearts
but do not understand, eyes but do not see. They have ears but do not
hear. They are worst than lost cattle. These are the heedless ones.***
(Surah al-A'raf, 7:179)

Anyone who has the faculty of discerning the truth, of hearing and of
seeing but does not apply it, is worse than animals.

That man whose sole purpose of life is to eat, drink and be merry is
definitely not better than animals. Those different schools of thought
and ideologies which clamor for food, clothes and shelter for the people
confine man's talents and intellectual activities to the limited sphere
of corporeal needs only and thus these doctrines reduce man's position
of being a vicegerent of Allah to a ridiculously shameful status.

In short, it is the man who should give the society a good shape. The
Prophets are the leaders and guides and the people should follow their
guidance. The Prophets are the healers and the sick should follow their
treatment.

We now seek support of our arguments from the following verses of the
Holy Qur'an:

***Allah does not guide the unjust.*** (Surah al-Qasas, 28:50)

***Allah does not guide the evil-doers.*** (Surah al-Munafiqun, 63:6)

***Allah does not guide a transgressing liar.*** (Surah Mu'min, 40:28)

From the foregoing Qur'anic verses it becomes abundantly clear that
there are people who because of their polytheism, unjustness,
oppression, evil deeds and falsehood have become indifferent to
obtaining guidance given by the Prophets and to carve out for themselves
a good social order.

There is on the very first page of the Holy Qur'an a declaration which
says-

***There is no doubt that this Book is a guide for the pious.***(Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:2)

The Holy Qur'an was revealed for the entire mankind but it is the pious
people who preserve themselves from evil things and follow the straight
path, have in right earnest accepted it as the source of guidance and
thus have abstained from haughtiness, pride, high-handedness, enmity,
transgression and greed in the search for truth.

And those who do not give up their stubbornness fanaticism, envy,
prejudice and other evils which are a hindrance in the way of truth
cannot receive any benefit from the teachings of the Prophets.

**(ii)** **Is Divine Revelation a Sort of Intelligence?** Some people,
who do not believe in man's connection with the Hereafter, try to invent
the reason which necessitated the Divine revelation as for example they
say that unemployment, social inequalities, deprivation and love and
affection are the things which compel man to endeavor to solve them and
as such they sharpen man's intelligence.

In the Prophets also these were the factors of the growth of their
talents and there is no harm, they say, if we consider the Prophets as
one of such geniuses.

If you care to give a second thought to what we have dealt with in the
preceding chapter on "The Attributes and Personal Qualities of the
Prophets" you will make out at once that there is a world of difference
between a genius and a Prophet.

Infallibility, forgetfulness, refraining from committing any sin,
sincerity, knowledge of the unseen through Divine guidance, selfless
devotion and worship of Allah, supplications and resigning to the Will
of Allah are some of the traits which are not found at all in a genius
or a talented person as he is always skeptical, is not free from sins,
has no knowledge of the unseen, is far away from Allah's cognition and
worship and has no concern with Allah.

And perhaps there is not one in this world who could be called a genius
as the so-called genius persons have not been able to produce anything
like the Holy Qur'an! The comparison between a genius and a Prophet is
like the one which exists between a limited and a limitless, because
what a genius person possesses is limited while what a Prophet can do is
due to the infinite Knowledge and Wisdom of Allah and that is why
Prophets' achievements and accomplishments are not confined to one or
two specimens only.

**(iii)** **Why Did All the Prophets Appear in the East Only?** We have
no definite proof that all the Prophets came to the East. According to
the following Qur'anic verse a Prophet was sent to every nation.

***For every people there is a Messenger.*** (Surah Yunus,10:47)

Just as we put a lamp in the center of a room, it is possible that Allah
sent His distinguished Prophets to the areas which are neither in the
East nor in the West.

**(iv)** **Why is it Necessary to Believe in All the Prophets?** In the
Holy Qur'an the names of twenty five Prophets have been mentioned. The
Holy Qur'an says.

***We have told you the stories of some of Our Messengers whom we had
sent before you and we have not told you the stories o f some others.***
(Surah Mu'min, 40: 78)

From this verse we know that the number of the Prophets is not
restricted to those twenty five Prophets whose names are mentioned in
the Holy Qur'an. But if we refer to various narrations we come across
various versions but one of such narrations is famous which is quoted as
Hadith of the Holy Prophet from his companion, Abuzar who says: "I asked
the number of the Prophets from the Holy Prophet. The Holy Prophet
replied "Hundred and twenty four thousand! " (***Majma'ul Bayan***, vol.
X, p. 476; ***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XI, p. 30)

The answer to the question whether belief in all the Prophets is
necessary the answer is definitely "yes", because the Holy Qur'an says:

***(Muslims) say, 'We believe in Allah and what He has revealed to us
and to Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq, Ya'qub and their descendants, and what
was revealed to Musa, Isa and the Prophets from their Lord.*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:136)

***Those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers try to create
differences between Allah and His Messengers, by rejecting their
message. They say, we believe in some but not in others.*** (Surah
an-Nisa, 4: 150)

Thus from the above quoted Qur'anic verse it is not only clear that the
belief in the Prophets has been made obligatory, but it also means that
the Prophethood of the Prophets has not been a merely accidental thing
but it was a fact which was in accordance with the command of Allah. The
Divine command that we should believe in the Prophets and follow their
teachings is the proof of Allah's Mercy on all His creatures. It shows
the Wisdom of Allah that is the eternal necessity of following an
infallible guidance of the Prophets.

And besides, it reveals the fact that in the long period of history men
have been supporting the truth on the one hand, and fighting against the
evil forces of transgressors, oppressors and despots on the other, and
ultimately the righteous were triumphant and the evil-doers had to
suffer disgrace. This knowledge, and belief in Allah's method is the
cause of man's progress, steadfastness, and eminence in history.

**(v)** **Why are Revelations not made On Us?** Undoubtedly a radio-set
cannot catch all the waves and sounds. It can catch only those sounds
which are transmitted on particular wave-lengths. Similarly, every man
cannot have -revelations. Truthfulness, righteousness, piety and several
other qualities are required in a man for receiving Divine revelations
and inspirations. Revelation has its own merit. It is only the pious and
believing people who can discern the truth. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Have fear of Allah and believe in His Messenger. Allah will grant you
twice as much of His Bounty, a light by which you can walk, and forgive
your sins.*** (Surah al-Hadid, 57:28)

You can see that, light of the inward eye is not bestowed on everyone
except those who fear Allah. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Believers, if you fear Allah, He will give you guidance, will expiate
your bad deeds and forgive you. Allah's favors are the greatest.***
(Surah al-Anfal, 8.29)

Man needs to distinguish between the right and the wrong, good and evil,
friend and enemy and blessings and misfortunes and his intellect helps
him do so, but greed, passions, pride, jealousies, love of wealth, wife
and children and many other temporal considerations prevent his
intellect and wisdom from discerning good from bad. But in that case
piety can make him discover his real wisdom and understand the
realities.

A poet has says. "Reality is a sort of a well-decorated and
well-elevated house which is surrounded by heavy dust of temptations and
ambitions which cannot be seen by naked eyes".

Another poet says: "One has to remove the polluted atmosphere before
looking at the beauty of his beloved".

But in a society where newspapers, television and radio centers are
transmitting news which are based on consideration of worldly gains,
people cannot recognize the truth and reality and if these media stop
propagating prejudiced views, the society can to a great extent
distinguish between good and bad, and right and wrong. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***Be careful of (your duty) to Allah, Allah gives you knowledge, and
Allah knows all things.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:282)

Indeed man's heart is like a mirror and if the dust is wiped out of it,
it will glow with the Divine light. For realizing the truth one needs to
have a clean heart and right thinking. The Holy Qur'an regarding the
Holy Prophet says:

***Had he (Muhammad) invented some words against Us, We would have
caught hold of him by his right hand and cut off his main artery.***
(Surah al-Haqqah, 69:44-46)

**(vi)** **Why was Prophethood terminated After the Holy Prophet?** When
water in a reservoir gets turbid it is drained out and fresh water is
poured into it. When a road, a house or a car is damaged we repair them.
Similarly, the necessity of a new Prophet is felt when the teachings of
the previous Prophets are tampered with or they are forgotten.

Hence, when not a single word of the Holy Qur'an has been altered, there
should be no necessity of a new Prophet. But it is different with other
Divine Books. If one looks into the Taurat and the Injil, one will find
many wrong things which are contrary to reason, and after reading them
one would feel much ashamed.

The reason of the coming of the Holy Prophet as the last of the Prophets
is the tampering with .the Divine Books which have been revealed on
earlier Prophets and the suppressing of the truth. Such a tampering has
not been made possible in the Holy Qur'an.

Example: If an illiterate person wants to travel to a distant place, he
goes around from place to place to find out the location of his ultimate
destination and he enquires about it from people around him but in case
such a person happens to be learned he would be given a road map by
which he can himself find his way to his ultimate destination.

Similar is the case with the man who has obtained a complete guidance of
the code of life from the Holy Prophet. He does not need to look for any
other Prophet.

Second Example: When a child falls sick, the parents point out to him
things one by one which he should abstain from as for instance, vinegar,
sour grapes, lemon juice, etc. But when one would give the same sort of
instruction to a grown up man, he will only say, "Avoid eating sour
things".

In the olden times the people needed to be told of each and every lanes
and by-lanes because they were mentally not fully-developed but now when
the time has gone much advanced a man can find his a way out by means of
a guide-map or other given indications.

Thus in the present day civilization one need not have any new Prophet
but for the preservation of Islam, the Imams and the religious jurists
would suffice them. Besides, during the time of the former Prophets only
a few of them brought with them the Divine Books and the rest of them
were only devoted to their missionary work of preaching only as they had
not brought with them any new commandments.

Similarly, when in our time this responsibility of preaching and
carrying on the mission of the Holy Prophet can be shouldered by the
infallible Imams and the pious and devout scholars there remains no
necessity of any new Prophet.

Indeed there is always the necessity of the Divine religion and its
teachings, but it is not necessary always to reorient religion. We
should not, however be oblivious of the necessity of '***Ijtihad***'
because the just and pious jurists have the answer of all relevant
matters by virtue of which they can interpret the meaning of all Divine
commands.

These were a few examples of the questions which are raised from time to
time but to be brief here we cannot discuss more of them.

Prophets' Achievements
----------------------

In the preceding pages, we have dealt with briefly about the
indispensability of the Prophets, the signs of their identification,
their merits, attributes, virtues etc. Under the current discussions we
shall mention the. Prophets' achievements and their pious goals. In all
such discussions, it has been our method to rely on the authority of
Divine revelations and the narrations of the Infallible Imams.

First of all let us look into the Holy Qur'an and find out as to how
Almighty Allah traces the duties of the Prophets.

The Duties of the Prophets
--------------------------

**1.** Allah addresses Prophet Musa saying:

***Go to Fir'aun as he has become exceedingly rebellious.***(Surah Ta
Ha, 20:24)

Indeed it was the Prophets who fought against the tyrants and the
rebels. It is not like the people of our time who raise slogans against
the despots and imperialistic powers but do not go a step ahead of
slogan-mongering.

To eliminate these despots and proud transgressors paves the way for
monotheism because unless all the false gods and demigods are destroyed,
we cannot reach the true Lord. The phrase: ***La ila ha illal lah***
(There is no god save Allah) is a part and parcel of our faith
(monotheism), we begin with "There is no god" in order to emphasize our
faith in Oneness of Allah and to assert our determination against all
false gods. Thereafter, we genuinely become aware of Allah. In fact,
unless we clean our hearts of all other things except Allah we cannot
make it a seat of Allah, the One.

**2.** **The Holy Qur'an says about Allah's directive to Prophet Musa to
go to Fir'aun as follows:**

***So go you both to him and say, 'Surely we are two messengers of your
Lord, therefore send the children of Isra'il with us and do not oppress
them! Indeed we have brought to you a token from your Lord, and peace is
on him who follows the guidance '.*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20:47)

Indeed one of the other important duties of the Prophets is to liberate
their people from the oppressive domination of the despotic rulers. But
this action of the Prophets is obviously different from that of our
present day political leaders of various governments as they only
indulge in slogan-mongering and tall talks. We see that Prophet Musa not
only liberated the people of Bani Isra'il but also destroyed Fir'aun.

On the other hand the present-day champions of the so-called human
rights do not defray even their one month's income of their lifelong
earning of colossal amount of money and wealth for liberating the
downtrodden and enslaved people.

In fact they have not done anything tangible for the cause of uplifting
the rights and benefits of the poor and the oppressed people. Rather in
the name of human rights they have preserved their own rights! Has the
time not come now that people should dissociate themselves from these
showy organizations of human rights and start following the teachings of
the Prophets?

**3.** **The Holy Qur'an says about Prophet Ibrahim's determination when
he said to himself:**

***By Allah! I will devise a plan against their idols when they are
away.*** (Surah al-Anbiya, 21:57)

The third important duty that vested in the Prophets was to fight
against polytheism and superstitions and to root out the cult of
idol-worship of all kinds, worship of gods and demigods among men, etc.
They carried on relentless war against power, authority, temporal
desires, wealth and other kinds of polytheism.

And this was the goal before Prophet Ibrahim. After trying all possible
means by persuading his uncle with softspoken words, arguing with Namrud
with logic and reasoning and convincing the worshippers of sun and moon
by his strong arguments, he found that his efforts had gone in vain.

He then decided to declare to the pagans at the top of his voice that he
was going to destroy their idols very soon and he actually did it,
because when admonition, preaching, and arguments have no effect on the
people, then a decisive and revolutionary action is necessary to arouse
the moral sense of the people.

Thus we see that on a day when the city had become void of people,
Prophet Ibrahim went to the temple with his pickaxe and demolished all
the idols kept there except the chief of them, a big giant-sized idol,
in whose neck he hung his pick-axe and came back. The Holy Qur'an says
about this as follows:

***He broke all the idols into pieces, except the biggest among them so
that perhaps people would refer to it.*** (Surah al-Anbiya, 21:58)

When the people returned to the city and visited their temple, they
asked one another as to who was so cruel as to break their gods in such
a manner, but soon they started thinking of Prophet Ibrahim and said to
themselves that this sort of action must have been done by him only as
he had always been objecting to their worshipping their idols. They
said. "Ibrahim should be brought before the people so that he should
confess his guilt, and we should punish him accordingly".

When the people caught hold of Prophet Ibrahim they asked him, "Why have
you broken our idols?" Prophet Ibrahim replied, "You should better put
this question to the chief of your idols. He will answer your query".
People started looking to one another and then said: "But this idol does
not speak".

Prophet Ibrahim who was waiting for this reply, saw that the people had
become non-plussed and had bowed their heads down. Then he spoke in a
loud authoritative tone: "You worship those idols who do not have any
control on your loss or gain! Can you not realize this simple thing?"

This story which starts from verse 58 of Surah Anbiya of the Holy Qur'an
actually depicts one of the miracles of the Prophets, who dauntlessly
stood alone against polytheism and superstitions and face all dangers in
order to stir the sleeping conscience of the people. It shows how
Prophet Ibrahim plunges himself into the fire of the world in order to
save the people from disaster of the blazing fire of Hell.

We know how the cruel enemies burnt the fire and threw this champion of
monotheism into it. They did not know that their device would prove
futile and Prophet Ibrahim would come out of the fire safe and unharmed.

**4.** **The Holy Qur'an says:**

***O Dawud! We have appointed you as Our deputy on earth so judge among
the people with Truth. Do not follow (worldly) desires lest you should
go astray from the way of Allah. Those who go astray from the way of
Allah will suffer severe torment for forgetting the Day of
Judgment.***(Surah Sad, 38:26)

This verse also points out yet another important aspect of the Prophets'
achievements and their duties and obligations, that is to say their
responsibility of deciding things based on truth and justice. The Holy
Qur'an says.

***A Messenger is appointed for all people. When the Messenger for them
came he judged among them fairly, and they were not wronged.*** (Surah
Yunus, 10:47)

**5.** **The Holy Qur'an says:**

***The Messenger enjoins them to do good and forbids them to do all that
is unlawful; makes lawful for them all that is pure, and unlawful all
that is filthy; removes their burdens and the entanglements in which
they are involved.*** (Surah A'raf, 7:157)

The Prophets brought about a cultural revolution in the society and
brought the people from savagery to compassion from idols to Allah; from
dissension to unity; from plundering and murdering to brotherhood; from
domination to moderation; from ignorance to knowledge; from oppression
to justice; from racial discrimination to equality; from pride to
humbleness and humility; and from polytheism to monotheism.

**6.** **The Holy Prophet of Islam like all other Prophets used to
forbid people to do all that is unlawful.**

Before the advent of the Holy Prophet, the life of the people of Arabia
was in a miserable state from the point of view of philosophical,
cultural, social, economical, corporeal and spiritual conditions. Imam
Ali says:

"From the point of view of intellect, the light for receiving guidance
was affected by bewilderment, uncertainty and narrow sightedness.

From the point of view of culture, there was nobody who could read a
book.

From the point of view of faith and belief they had, installed idols
made of wood and stone for worshipping them and they used to swarm round
them like moth swarming round a candle flame.

From the point of view of hygienic, those people drank turbid water and
used to eat carcass.

From economic point of view they were in such a miserable condition of
poverty that mostly people ate dried crust of bread or starved.

From the point of view of peace and tranquility, people were scared of
the sword which was hanging on their heads and it was the sword which
ruled them actually.

From the social point of view, they were divided in tribes and factions
and had differences and disputes over trifles so much so that they never
hesitated to kill one another.

There was no consideration of family bonds, the righteous was weak and
the devilish was strong and everyone was in tears". (***Peak of
Eloquence***)

On the one hand everybody was scared of the swords of another, but
apparently they used to pose themselves as brave and powerful people in
order to intimidate others.

In the words of Imam Ali the sad state of affairs at that time was as
follows: "They shed your blood with excessive cruelty".

In short those people of the Age of Ignorance were leading miserable
lives in superstitions, abject poverty, oppression, rivalries and
polytheism.

When the Holy Prophet came, he rooted out oppression and domination and
dispelled the dark clouds of ignorance, injustice and infidelity which
were hovering over the society.

Indeed the Prophets' great function is to forbid people to do unlawful
things and to fight against all evils, whether it be manslaughter,
burying the newborn female child alive or prostrating themselves before
the despotic monarch as it was done in Iran or before the idols as was
done in Arabia or wine-drinking and usury which were common everywhere.

What greater service can it be to the humanity than to liberate mankind
from these unlawful evil deeds?

Had we been aware of the lives of these Divine leaders and real
reformers we would not have given importance to these people who claim
to be the leaders of poor laborers, and themselves live in palatial
houses.

These are the so-called philosophers, thinkers, leaders and emancipators
who got hundreds and thousands of people destroyed for nothing in the
name of knowledge and philosophical dogmas. Would that we continued to
follow in the footsteps of the Prophets as their teachings and guidance
were true and invigorating, and they were righteous and truthful leaders
while others are neither sincere nor truthful.

When we go back into the past few years, we can find the devastating
defects in the ideological concepts of the present day leaders. Even
those reformers who said something about the good of the society, we can
find that the teachings of the Prophets were far superior to that of
theirs. As a matter of fact any leader or reformer who is not blessed by
Divine insight cannot see things beyond death but the path that is shown
by the Prophets for the life is everlasting.

Secondly the path of life which other leaders show only deals with one
aspect of life and as such other aspects become neglected. As for
instance sometimes for the sake of freedom and liberty other values,
moral as well as social, are neglected altogether.

Sometimes stress is laid on economical factors so that economics becomes
the basis of social, political, religious and military aspects while
other factors are ignored altogether. But the Prophets without
undermining the importance of one aspect or the other of life presents
the line of action which is conspicuously attached with the Prophets.

It is only Islam, which even in the battlefield considers offering of
prayers, moral values and reformation as fundamentally important and in
this the offering of prayers in congregation is not only considered an
obligatory worship but it envisages in itself political and social
consideration also.

Now we deal with the **7**th important duty of the Prophets.

**7.** **Prophets Purify and Train the People**

One of the aims of the Prophets is to impart knowledge and to let the
people practice self-denial for unless man frees himself from
undesirable things like selfishness, ignorance, arrogance etc. he cannot
develop his personality. We should like to narrate the following story
at this point:

A man riding on a horse came to the bank of a river with shallow water.
His horse instead of crossing the river stopped near the water.

The rider got down from his horse and taking the bridle in his hand
started leading the horse into the river but the horse did not move at
all. At this the rider went behind the horse and started lashing the
animal but it also proved to be of no avail. An old man who was standing
by was observing all this.

He advised the rider to beat the river water with his whip and then
asked the rider to pass through the water. He acted upon the advice of
the old man and the horse came into motion. After crossing the river,
the horseman thanked the old man and inquired about the wisdom of
turning the water turbid by beating the water with the whip.

The old man replied, "When the water was still, the horse was looking
its reflection in the water and did not want to walk over its own image
which was reflecting on the surface of water '.

Similarly, man suffers from self-esteem, self-conceit and pride. He
cannot trample upon his own image of ego and desires. Thus anyone who
cannot subdue himself and give up his egoistic tendencies cannot reach a
path leading him to Allah.

Self-denial means that man should not be a slave to his passions.
Instead he should purify his soul from polytheism, jealousy,
temptations, fear, disgrace, cruelty and self-indulgence. He should get
himself rid of ignorance, skepticism and apathy, and should protect the
society from suffocating environment, conceit, fraud, transgressions,
high-handedness and from the domination of transgressors and despotic
rulers.

The world of today as of the past is facing untold sufferings despite
progress and development. It is all due to lack of self-denial. Scholars
are increasing day by day but the crimes are not decreasing. The more
the number of supporters of human rights is increasing the more the
human rights of underdeveloped and weaker nations are being violated.
Why is it so? It is because they have poured milk in a dirty utensil.
That is to say education is being imparted to the present-day man who
has not been purified himself of carnal desires.

Thus after gathering facts and figures it becomes crystal clear that
there exists a marked difference between those who have been educated
and trained according to the teachings of the Prophets and those who
have been trained and educated under the teachings of secular and
ungodly schools of thought.

Therefore, we cannot call every such man the follower of the teachings
of the Prophets as has labeled himself a Muslim. Indeed education and
training have been the main aim of the Prophets' mission and in a
broader perspective this very education and training is the sole factor
which distinguishes man from animals.

We see that in the so-called advanced countries who are considered as
civilized and cultured nations the people indulge in false propaganda,
conspiracies and tall promises in order to catch the votes of their
electors in their favor and as such this speaks of their spiritual
bankruptcy, which have blemished their reputation. Self-denial, piety
and nobility keep man steadfast and firm in weal and woe alike. And it
never allows him (according to Imam Ali) to do injustice even to an ant
for the purpose of securing power and authority of ruling over the
entire world.

**8.** **To Maintain Justice**

The Holy Qur'an says:

***We sent Our Messengers with clear evidence to support their
truthfulness and sent them with the Book and the Balance so that people
would maintain justice.*** (Surah al-Hadid, 57:25)

Prophets were sent for the purpose of reforming the society to the
extent that people should do justice among themselves,. They came to
mould the society in such a way that people should neither exert
pressure on others nor should they yield to pressure, that is according
to the Holy Qur'an the people should neither oppress others nor should
they bear oppression.

Their aim was to bring about such a nation as according to the Holy
Qur'an was moderate and tolerant and did not sacrifice one principle for
the sake of other. If it valued the individual freedom it also valued
the sanctity of the society as a whole.

If it talked of the benefit of this world it also talked of the good of
the other world. Prophets came to reform the nation, whose slogans
should not be hollow but meaningful and who weeps but also raises an
inspiring slogan, and whose prayers should be accompanied by ***Zakat***
(religious tax).

In short, the aim of the Prophets was to establish such a society which
had the complexion of Divine influence. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We have taken the colouring of Allah; and whose shade is better than
Allah 's? Him alone do we worship.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:138)

Any man or society having a Divine outlook will never be influenced by
any big power, bloc or any despot or environment with racial bias. To
adopt a Divine outlook is to dissociate oneself from Western or Eastern
influence.

The reason why our society is not as yet established on justice is that
it is still subjected to oppression and cruelties and has not adopted
the Divine outlook and we have not as yet prepared ourselves to follow
in the footsteps of our Divine guides.

**9.** **Elimination of Unwanted Customs and Dogmas**

The Holy Qur'an about the Messenger of Allah says:

***He enjoins them to do good and forbid, them to do all that is
unlawful; make, lawful for them all that is pure, and unlawful all that
is filthy; removes their burdens and the entanglements in which they are
involved.*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:157)

The important thing that we find in the Prophets is that they were sent
to do away with all the evil practices and customs which were rampant
among the people. The above-quoted verse shows that Prophets' obligation
was to remove the burdens and restrictions in which the people were
deeply entangled.

Thus the Holy Prophet removed all those burdens which prevented the
people from performing their essential duties. Now that 1400 years have
elapsed since the Holy Qur'an was revealed we find that many people are
still bound by many formalities though they do have the Holy Qur'an
dearest to their hearts and their notions and formalities prevent them
from achieving success and progress, as for example owing to the absence
of a particular type of dress people abstain from attending religious
functions and seminars or for completing the formalities after the
performance of ***Hajj*** they absent themselves from attending Islamic
conferences.

For the sake of saving themselves from the trouble of undergoing certain
formalities they forego their rights and refuse to get the culprit
brought to task or for unusual formalities and customs in respect of
marriage ceremonies they postpone the very important matter of the
solemnization of marriage.

But when the great personality like the Holy Prophet came, he relieved
the people from the burden of inhuman dogmas, customs and restrictions.
His building a Masjid made of clay and water got such a unique position
that it became the centre of attraction and its importance became
greater than huge conference halls and impressive buildings, housing the
universities etc.

We should ponder over these things calmly. If we enlarge our visual
horizon and look to the world at large we shall find that if unnecessary
expenditure is curtailed by various countries which are lavishly
spending money on formal ceremonies and protocol restrictions and invest
this colossal amount of money in financially deficit projects or
developmental schemes, the condition of many under-developed countries
can be changed and people can be appreciably improved and they can be
got rid of many of their hardships.

This can explain the meaning of the phrase "removes their burdens" in
its truest sense that is, how the Holy Prophet by his directives saved
his followers from difficult responsibilities and similarly the latter
phrase "the entanglements in which they are involved" explains the fact
that the Holy Prophet removed the shackles of the people one by one and
brought about the freedom of thought, speech and action.

It is often seen that the people wish to express their free opinion and
want to give vent to their pent-up feelings but they cannot express
themselves or put them into writing, and sometimes people do not know
the truth of the matter as hirelings hold information from them on
account of vested interests. Under such a situation a bold and daring
leader appears and starts unfolding the truth, and then freedom of
speech is established.

Similarly he makes a statement, which appears in writing. He attacks the
tyrants and the people are then relieved of the prevailing fear and then
he does the thing which were hitherto considered as impossible.

Prophets-the Warners and Bearers of Glad Tidings
------------------------------------------------

Another achievement of the Prophets is to bring the glad tidings to the
people, to cheer them up and to predict the bright future. Indeed man
lives on hopes and those schools of thought which have no belief in
future and consider their future a nonentity and also consider death as
a trifling affair just like the death of an animal.

They consider life to be restricted to an affair of a few years of
activity only and the sweetness and joys of life are intercepted with
many unpleasant and sour experiences. That is why the number of people
suffering from mental depression and spiritual maladies is increasing
day by day to the extent that they are resorting to tranquilize their
mind by taking intoxicants, liquors and sleeping-pills.

The cult of non-conformist young people characterized by unusual dress
and behavior known as hippies and the trampling down of the human values
and natural disposition are the result of such a thinking, which is
hovering over the society as a canopy of hopelessness and depression.
Really, if man is not inspired by good hope and better expectation to
live his life or if he thinks of getting destroyed by his death, why
does he not try to kill himself sooner than later?

That is to say if we are going to be perished even after sustaining
lifelong troubles and grief why should we not try to end our life before
that. Suppose if we are spared to live for some more years and we happen
to eat about 1000 kilo of foodstuff more or drink a few thousand liters
of water more, what will then happen afterwards?

That is a sort of thinking of the materialistic outlook of the Universe
and the belief of the people who do not consider themselves to be
present before Allah and in whose thought and belief the will of Allah
and the concept of eternity, eternal life and Paradise have no meaning.

But in the Divine outlook of Universe its cogent reasoning establishes
that man is not a perishable creature, that his future is full of bright
prospects and that he is compensated for his deeds, small or big, and
further that it does not restrict man's life to a few years of living in
this world in which the trials and tribulations are underlined with
Allah's Blessings like a silver lining in the dark clouds and it becomes
the source of man's progress and development.

Since the Divine outlook of the Universe looks at life with a different
angle, the life, therefore, has its own pleasure and thus on the one
hand there is a hope for the best, expectations of Divine Blessings and
several other benevolent rewards and on the other hand the prospect of
attaining the eternity of life along with the blessings of having the
proximity of Allah and the eternal abode in Paradise with the pious and
devout leaders gives a soul-stirring inspiration and makes us cheerful
and contented.

For such a life which man leads there is no fraud and frustration nor is
his endeavor for bettering his life a wasteful exercise. Now that we
have fully comprehended the real meaning and purpose of life the task of
giving glad tidings to the people rests only with the Prophets and it is
one of their achievements.

Similarly one of the duties of the Prophets is to warn the people not to
do evil deeds. Fear is the main factor which prevents man from many evil
things but it is also necessary that he should be aware of the dangers
of the future so that he remains cautious of them.

A child who does not know the dangerous nature of a snake catches it as
if it is a cord. It is the duty of the parents, therefore, to tell the
child about the venom in the snakes so that he may be aware of the
danger.

The Prophets by narrating the stories of the preceding nations warn the
people as to how those nations received the wrath of Allah because of
their cruelty, polytheism, pride, fraud, apathy, dissension,
intimidation, ungratefulness, hopelessness, manslaughter,
self-projection, sins and breach of trust.

They warn the people that the wrath of Allah like His Blessings is also
a part of Divine law and thus any nation who adopts the path of truth or
falsehood will accordingly be paid back in the same coin.

There is no partiality, no favoritism in the treatment of the nations.
The deterrent effect that is produced as a result of narration of the
stories of the past nations serves as a signal for the people concerns
the overall well-being of the nation. Another kind of deterrent effect
relates to the person of man about which the Prophets forewarn us.

They warn of the Fire of Hell and give an account of the treatment that
will be done to the transgressors before the justice of Allah in
presence of the angels. The record of man's deeds will be presented
before him in which he will find all the details of his big or small
deeds and he will wonder as to what type of record it was which had
recorded all his deeds and actions.

The Prophets warn us of the day when we shall have to face the scrutiny
of our actions and deeds. On that day man will be prepared to forego
everything even his wife and children and all of his possessions in
order to escape the Fire of Hell.

Is it not a fact that the fear of Allah's wrath, Fire of Hell, agony and
disgrace on the Day of Judgment deter man from committing various crimes
and sins? We see that in the Holy Qur'an there are more than 1000 verses
about the Day of Judgment as well as innumerable verses about the
destruction of the nations of the past.

These verses in fact indicate that man should become cautious of the
dangerous consequences that he may suffer on account of his deeds. Hence
the society should be fearful of Allah's wrath and save himself from
ruination.

Thus the main objective of the Prophets besides bearing the glad tidings
of Allah's Mercy and Benevolence and rewards is to warn man of the
severe punishment on the Day of the Judgment where he may face torment,
disgrace and wrath of Allah.

### 11. Leading to Light

The Holy Qur'an says:

***It is He Who forgives you and His angels pray for you so that He will
take you out of darkness into light. Allah is AllMerciful to the
Believers.*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:43)

The Prophets were sent to the people so that they might lead the people
out of darkness to light, out of ignorance to the light of knowledge,
out of dissension to the purity of heart, out of polytheism to
monotheism, out of disunity to unity, out of fear to peace and
tranquility, out of high-handedness to tolerance, out of blind following
to rational following, and out of passionate desires to righteous
guidance.

These are the perfect lines which show the duties of the Prophets, but
their activities were not confined to these spheres only. Their special
duties included their call to the people towards monotheism; battling
against various forms of polytheism; delivering the oppressed people to
freedom; fighting against superstitions; and above all their inviting
the people to do well and forbidding them to do evil.

They warned them of the wrath of Allah and cheered them with His Mercy
and Benevolence. These were the achievements of the Prophets. But if we
wish to have more information about them we shall have to take the
support of the Holy Qur'an and study the facts about them one by one
very closely and minutely.

### 12. Invitation to People

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Believers! Listen to Allah and the Messenger when they call you to
that which gives you life.*** (Surah al-Anfal, 8:24

In this verse the commands of the Prophets are referred to as life
giving for the individuals and the society. From this it can be made out
that before the coming of the Prophets the society was dead. The society
had nothing but the following of idolatrous priests; it had nothing but
the bearing of hardships; it did not struggle to break the shackles of
domination of the oppressors and despots; it indulged in infanticide and
considered the birth of a female child as disgraceful and it was lost in
superstitions.

To those people who live in a society which is devoid of all moral or
civic sense, which has no freedom of thought and which is in fact a dead
society a Prophet is sent so that he should call the people towards
Allah, should consider an act of right thinking as worship, should make
acquiring of knowledge obligatory for every man and woman, should
consider the crushing of the tyrants and the redressing of the
grievances of the oppressed ones as every man's bounden duty, and should
enlighten the people on health care and hygienic principles in respect
of hair, teeth, body and dress and should forbid favoritism, nepotism,
partiality, chiefdom, feudalism, undue preferences and discretions,
hero-worship, undue sympathy, and dependence on oppressors.

Besides that a Prophet inculcates among his people good habits, piety,
unity, tolerance, mutual cooperation, right thinking and worship of
Allah in place of disunity, misgivings and idol-worship and above all
brings about a cultural revolution in conformity with the Divine
commands that are revealed upon him, and they are the commands which are
free from selfishness, errors, ambiguity and omission.

This revolution which gives life to a dead society cannot be
over-estimated. We note that the Holy Qur'an has described the deeds of
the Prophets as life-giving and the relevant verse has already been
quoted above.

This thing can best be comprehended if we exclude the world of the
Prophets and revelations take stock of the dishonesty, crimes,
restlessness, misgivings and defects in our society despite the
advancement of science and technology.

Telephone was invented but lies are told on it. Airplane was invented
but bombs are dropped on cities from it and thousands of houses and
human lives are destroyed. If side by side with this progress, faith and
piety are not there, it can be nothing but destruction. According to our
heritage which we have drawn from the Holy Qur'an, the progress and
development that have been made in this world, without the teachings and
guidance of the Prophets, will destroy the world itself one day as we
see the indications now.

The international organizations, heads of the States, and Super-Powers
have not done anything except for their own benefits. They use the power
of veto by virtue of which they strengthen colonialism and suppress the
down-trodden people of the under-developed countries.

A time will come at last when the deprived and oppressed people will
break their connections with them and the world will once again be
prepared to accept the Divine leader and Divine commandments. According
to our insight the difficult knot of tyranny and injustice will be
untied by Imam Mahdi the existing Imam of the Age, whose advent we have
been waiting since long and we should accordingly strive hard to lighten
our dark nights with sustained efforts.

If we want to acquaint ourselves with the work of a gardener, we should
consider the quantity of fruits that the garden yields and the income
that is accrued from its sales so that we can estimate the hard toil
that has been invested by the gardener.

Similarly we can look to the people who have been trained according to
the teachings of the Prophets and assess the value and benefits of their
work. This in itself is a long discussion which depends upon the study
of the lives of those who have been the true followers of the Prophets.

Nowadays Islam has become the focal point of the entire world and
therefore, we should acquaint the world, the East and the West, with
ardent and dedicated followers of the Prophets and prepare films on
their lives, to be shown to the people through our embassies abroad,
symposia should be organized and brochures and pamphlets carrying the
salient features of our faith and beliefs should be widely circulated.

Imam Ali Riza said: "If the people get acquainted with our words they
will ultimately become our followers".

In another narration we learn that the Holy Imam said to two persons who
were present before him: "Whether you go to the East or to the West, you
will nowhere find as pure and flawless teachings as are available with
our school of learning and thought". (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. I)

To illustrate it we quote some verses which tell us how we have
forgotten the teachings of the Holy Qur'an and how we have been
enchanted by alien slogans:

***Whatever Allah grants to His Messenger out of the property of the
people of the towns, belongs to Allah, the Messenger, the kinsfolk, the
orphans, the destitute and wayfarers, so that it does not concentrate in
the hands of those who are rich among you. Accept what the Messenger
gives you, and refrain from what he forbids you. Have fear of Allah.
Allah is severe in His retribution.*** (Surah al-Hashr, 59 7)

***If you do not give up usury which you demand, know that you are in
the state of war with Allah and His Messenger. But if you repent, you
will have your capital. Oppress none and no one will oppress you.***
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:279)

***Those who obey the commands of their Lord and are steadfast in
prayers, and whose affairs are settled by mutual consultation.*** (Surah
ash-Shura, 42 :38)

***Whichever place you come from, turn towards the Holy Mosque (Ka'ba)
and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it so that people may have
no cause of argument against you, except the wicked. But do not fear
them, fear Me that you may find the right guidance perchance.*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:150)

***In retribution there is life (and preservation). O men of sense! You
may haply take heed for yourselves.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:179)

***The hypocrites wait and see. If Allah grants you victory, they say,
'Didn't we help you?' If the unbelievers are victorious, they say,
'Didn't we encourage you not to surrender to the believers and didn't we
protect you from them?' Allah will judge among them on the Day of
Judgement. He will never help the unbelievers against the believers.***
(Surah an-Nisa, 4:141)

Do not give the budget of your country and of your possessions in hands
of wicked and low persons and to those who in words of the Holy Imam are
lustful, drinkers, and gamblers. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Do not let the immature waste their possessions. Allah has made you
their guardian, so provide them with whatever they need from their
property and deal with them in a reasonable way.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:5)

Islam enjoins its followers to remain self-sufficient and to meet their
expenses themselves. The Holy Qur'an gives the example of a seedling. It
says as follows:

***Their likeness in the Taurat and the Injil, is like a seed that sends
out stalk, then makes it firm, and it becomes strong and rises straight
upon its stem, gladdening the cultivators heart, in order to fill the
unbelievers with dismay. Allah has promised, those who believe and do
the right, forgiveness and a great reward.*** (Surah al-Fath, 48:29)

Imam Ja'far Sadiq says: "If you earn your livelihood yourself you will
become independent of the stingy wealthy people".

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Whoever intercedes for a good purpose will receive his share of the
reward but the intercession for an evil purpose only adds more to one's
burden. Allah has control over all things.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:85)

Imam Ali says: "O people! From amongst you only he deserves to be the
ruler, who possesses moral strength to maintain peace and to carry on a
government based on equity and justice; and who has best understood the
commandments of Allah". (Sermon 178, ***Peak of Eloquence***)

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Mobilize your (defensive) force as much as you can to frighten the
enemies of Allah and your own enemies. This also will frighten those,
who are behind them whom you do not know, but Allah knows well. For
whatever you spend for the cause of Allah, He will give you sufficient
recompense with due justice.*** (Surah al-Anfal, 8:60)

***Believers, anyone of you who turns back on his faith should know that
Allah will soon raise a people, whom He loves and who love Him, who are
humble towards the believers, mighty*** ***against the unbelievers, who
strive hard for the cause of Allah, and who have no fear o f anyone 's
accusations. Such is the favour of Allah which He bestows on whomever He
wants. Allah is Munificent and All-Knowing.*** (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:54)

One should be aware of enemy's opinion about oneself as he happens to
have his desires. The Holy Qur'an says:

***They only want that you relent so that they may come to terms.***
(Surah al-Qalam, 68: 9)

***(Muhammad), if you are among them (your followers during a battle)
and you call them for prayers, let a group o f them carry their arms
during prayers. After they have made their prostrations let them go back
to watch the enemy and let the other group who has not yet prayed join
you, carrying their arms with due precaution.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4: 102)

***The unbelievers wish to find you neglectful of your arms and
provisions to attack you unawares.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3:118)

The Islamic society should remain very vigilant so as not to fall in the
trap of its enemies. The Holy Qur'an says:

***When a satanic thought starts to bother the pious ones, they
understand and see the light while their devilish brothers would like
them to continue in error and would not desist.***(Surah al-A'raf,
7:201-202)

The Muslim Ummah should not employ such advisers and experts from
amongst the aliens (unbelievers) on national affairs as become aware of
the State secrets. The Holy Qur'an aptly says:

***Believers, do not make the unbelievers your confidants.***(Surah Ale
Imran, 3:118)

Do not speak out things which may warn your enemies about you. That is
why underground treasures, documentary evidences, past records, military
codes etc. are treated as guarded secrets.

When Prophet Yusuf narrated his meaningful dream to his father, Prophet
Ya'qub, he advised his son to keep the dream secret lest his brothers
should harm him. The Holy Qur'an says:

***He said, 'My son, do not tell your dream to your brothers lest they
plot against you. Satan is the sworn enemy of man.***(Surah Yusuf, 12:5)

When the dream can be given such an importance then matters relating to
knowledge and technology are obviously more important and must not be
disclosed.

In the Holy Qur'an there are inherent lessons underlined in the verses
which have a great import. That is why one of the Prime Ministers of
England understood the Holy Qur'an better than we did because he is
quoted to have said, "As long as this Qur'an remains with the Muslims,
we cannot rule over then)

O dear Brothers and Sisters! Has the time not come yet we should revert
to the sacred teachings of the Holy Qur'an?

Have you not been able to recite even one page from the Holy Qur'an
still? Do you still not want to know the secrets of its hidden treasure?
Have we chalked out our program of life by learning one verse of the
Holy Qur'an for every year of our life we have passed?

It would be suffice to mention so much about the performance of the
duties and achievements of the Prophets as I am afraid I tried to be as
brief as possible.

Friends and Foes of Prophets
----------------------------

It is but natural that anyone who has his high ideals and principles,
has his followers as well as opponents. It is not important to have
friends or foes but it is important to find out the reasons behind
friendship and enmity. Some of the verses of the Holy Qur'an narrate the
history of Prophets' supporters and opponents and since acquaintance
with these accounts will help to guide our budding generation, we have
already discussed this matter in the subject regarding the Prophets'
achievements.

The Opponents of the Prophets
-----------------------------

**(i)** **The Devils**: In the Holy Qur'an the word denoting the Devil
has been mentioned eight times. It means the false gods, tyrants and
transgressors. This word is used for an individual as well as for group
of such persons as transgressors, oppressors etc. One of the main
objectives of the Prophets is to fight against these devils. In the Holy
Qur'an Allah says to Prophet Musa:

***Go to Fir'aun, surely he has become exceedingly rebellious.***(Surah
Ta Ha, 20:24)

The modern day slogan against colonialism is an incomplete version of
this Qur'anic verse. But Prophet Musa in his simple dress goes to
Fir'aun and by his forceful speech frightens his courtiers, asks him to
liberate the children of Isra'il and stop oppressing them. (Vide: Surah
Ta Ha, 20:47)

The most important thing the Prophet said to Fir'aun is that he had no
special privileges and merits over others and thus all of them should
prostrate themselves before one Allah. But Fir'aun's position was
strengthened by his false claim of being the deity, and by oppressing
the poor and helpless people with strict monarchial system of
administration.

And on the other hand there was Prophet Musa who stood like a rock in
his simple and unimpressive dress before Fir'aun's impressive court and
in a fearless voice demands the freedom of the children of Isra'il from
the bonds of slavery. Naturally Fir'aun and his minions could not remain
passive and thus they made a device to crush the Divine leader.

We see that Fir'aun arranged a public meeting and decreed that the
magicians from all over the country should assemble at a particular
place. He set a reward for that magician who could defeat Prophet Musa.

On a particular day the people of the town came to witness the miracle
of Musa and the magical feats of the magicians. First of all the
magicians showed their skill by converting the ropes into snakes.

Thereafter, Prophet Musa threw his staff on the ground which turned into
a huge snake which devoured the magicians' snakes. The magicians after
looking at this spectacle changed their mind and rejected the false
godhood of Fir'aun and believed in the true Lord.

Fir'aun after realizing the defeat of his plan, started intimidating and
levelling charges against Prophet Musa. Addressing the magicians he
said, Musa has been the tutor of you, magicians! Therefore, I cut the
hands and feet of all of you. But Fir'aun was oblivious of the fact that
a miraculous change had occurred in the mind and soul of these
magicians.

Those magicians were now a different people altogether, and no more
aspired to receive rewards from Fir'aun. These people were openly
ridiculing the high-handedness of Fir'aun.

They were boldly telling him: "O Fir'aun! Whatever oppression and
torture we are subjected to, only applies to this world alone. But now
we have no temptation of a few coins of yours but we have embarked upon
a new world of spiritual enlightenment. We have now embraced the faith
in Allah and have now come out of the influence of a small creature like
you.

Now we will not prostrate ourselves before you because we have
discovered the truth within ourselves. We have now chosen the righteous
path, our leader and our Lord". (Vide: Surah Ta Ha, 20:61-73)

This indeed is the revolutionizing spiritual and mental change that we
have observed.

In short the devils have always been in the forefront to oppose the
teachings of the Prophets and they never spared any effort to commit
abominable acts and the throwing of Prophet Ibrahim into the fire was
one of such heinous crimes.

**(ii)** **The Affluent People**: There was another group of the
affluent people who were scared of the teachings and preachings of the
Prophets for the sake of retaining their domination and hegemony and
they became the enemies of the Prophets. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Why were there no men of understanding among the people of the
destroyed towns of the past (except for a few, whom we saved from
destruction) to prevent people from committing evil in the land ? The
unjust among them indulged in worldly pleasures and so became guilty.***
(Surah Hud, 11 :116)

***They asked him, Shu'ayb! Do your piety tell you that we must abandon
the worship of what our fathers had worshipped and that we must not deal
with our properties as we like? We still believe that you are a man of
forbearance and understanding.*** (Surah Hud, 11:87)

***Every time we sent a warner to a town, the rich ones therein said to
our Messenger: 'We have no faith in what you have brought to us. We are
the ones who have more wealth and children and we shall suffer no
punishment '.***(Surah Saba, 34:34)

When we read the stories about the Prophets as to how the poor people
used to come round them and how the wealthy and debauched people used to
oppose them and then we look at the communists who say that Islam is
supporter of the well-to-do ones, we are simply amazed.

**(iii)** **Scholars and Intellectuals**: Scholars and intellectuals
were also in opposition to the Prophets. The Jews and the Christians
were among them. The Holy Qur'an says.

***Those to whom We have given the Bible, know you (Muhammad) just as
well as they know their sons. Yet some of them deliberately conceal the
truth.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:146)

The Jews and the Christians knew quite well the truth about the
Prophethood of the Prophet of Islam in their heart of hearts as they
knew that the prophecy about the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet was
made in their sacred Book, the Taur,at but they were afraid of revealing
the truth because they thou.ght that they would lose all their interest
and would be in a disadvantageous position, and their loss would be
irreparable Thus they concealed the truth and committed unpardonable
sins. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Those who conceal the signs and the guidance that we have revealed,
after it has been made clear to everyone in the Bible, will be condemned
by Allah and those who have the right to condemn.*** (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:159)

In fact, if in the time of the Holy Prophet, the Jews and the Christians
had not concealed the truth about the Prophethood of the Holy Prophet,
today they would not have been fighting against Islam.

Why People Opposed the Prophets?
--------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an tells many basic things in connection with the
opposition of the Prophets. We mention below some causes of their
opposition:

**(i)** **Contemporaneous Prejudice**: Sometimes man does not agree with
another man and argues in support of his non-acceptance of the latter's
views, because that man does not give credibility to what another man
says as both of them are contemporary and have personal jealousies. But
had the same man happened to be in a time about two centuries or so ago
people would have accepted his statement as a gospel truth.

Normally the importance of the scholars is not recognized and people do
not know them either. If a Pakistani citizen happens to present a scheme
or plan for the welfare of the society and if he is not famous among the
people, his scheme would not be accepted by anyone.

On the contrary if the same thing is presented by any foreign expert,
people will accept it as a very important thing. Similarly some of our
teachers or authors quote something of a person who is not very
well-known and is alive also they will avoid to mention his name but if
a man belonged to the time some centuries ago they will easily mention
his name.

When we look into the past history, we note that when Allah made Talut,
the commander of an army, people disobeyed him and said, "This man whose
position has been very ordinary cannot be deemed fit for leading the
troops".

Despite the protest of the Prophet of the time that Talut was pious and
possessed all abilities, people ignored him because Talut was just a man
among the ordinary persons.

We also note the similar thing in the time of our Holy Prophet. When
during his last days he deputed Usama, an eighteen-year-old young man to
lead the command of an army, he declared that Allah would curse that
person who refused to accept the command of Usama and join his army.

But despite the pronouncement of the Holy Prophet the elderly people who
were enjoying good reputation did not agree to accept the command of
Usama. This was the pride and rivalry that speaks volumes for
contemporaneous rivalry.

A Word to the Readers: Since I do not know you, there is no offence as
far as you are concerned. Suppose at this point you set aside the book
and for a moment just ponder over that if a contemporary man or anyone
who is younger in age or is not well-to-do or is not famous or basically
belongs to a different taste or opinion has said a truthful thing or has
presented a good proposal, would you accept it easily or with
reluctance, or would reject it right away?

In principle, the greatness of a man does not lie in his personality but
it lies in his truthfulness. A man's value is recognized only when he
places the truth above his personal interest and desires the pleasure of
Allah and upholding the truth.

There are many men whom we consider very good and they consider
themselves good also but when the time of trial comes and he notices
another person as his rival and fears that his popularity and personal
interest will be at stake or he becomes the target of people's
opposition he becomes unhappy and indulges in destructive activity or
feels happy by seeing the disruptive activities against his rival. All
this is due to personal rivalry which is natural between contemporary
people.

When we look into the Holy Qur'an, we note how this factor of
contemporaneous rivalry was the cause of obstruction in the preachings
of the Prophets. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Are the people astonished that a man who is one of them was commanded
by Us to warn them and to bring glad tidings to those who believe?***
(Surah Yunus, 10:2)

***When they see you they take you only in jest: 'Is this the one whom
Allah has sent as Messenger?'*** (Surah Furqan, 25 :4)

From both these verses it becomes abundantly clear that people's
opposition to the Holy Prophet was simply-because he happened to be one
among the common people.

**(ii)** **Pride and Pretension**: In the Holy Qur'an there are several
verses which mention the various excuses that the people made in
opposing the Prophets and we quote a few of them below:

***Bring a different Qur'an or make amendments to this one. Say: 'It is
not for me to change it of my will. I follow only what is revealed to
me'*** (Surah Yunus, 10:15)

***The unbelievers say: 'Why was the whole Qur'an not revealed at once
to him'***. (Surah Furqan, 25 :32)

The infidels did not know the real import of this as the Holy Qur'an was
revealed in gradual steps in order to strengthen the hearts and provide
explanations as it is mentioned in the following verse:

***Why has not a treasure been given to him or a garden from which he
could eat?*** (Surah Furqan, 25:8)

They were quite unaware of the fact that to have a treasure is one thing
and to be in the good books of Allah is another thing. The Holy Qur'an
in many verses of Surah Tur questions the deniers of the Holy Prophets
and frustrates all their excuses in the heart-stirring manner. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***Does their minds prompt them to say this or is it because they are a
rebellious people.*** (Surah at-Tur, 52:32)

***Do they say, 'He has fabricated the Qur'an? In fact, they will never
believe. So let them bring a discourse like it if they are true in their
claim.*** (Surah at-Tur, 52:33-34)

***Have they been created from nothing or are they themselves their own
creators? Have they created the heavens and the earth? In fact, they are
certain of nothing***(Surah at-Tur 52:35-36)

***Do you (Muhammad) demand any wages from them (for your preaching)
which they cannot afford ?*** (Surah at-Tur, 52:40)

***Do they have another god besides Allah? He is too exalted for what
they associate with Him!*** (Surah at-Tur, 52:43)

In short, these Qur'anic verses frustrated the excuses of the Prophets'
opponents by marking their conscience prick them.

**(iii)** **Unusual Demands**: In the Holy Qur'an we read that people
used to place impossible demands on their Prophets and that they
expected from them the unusual things to happen. The Holy Qur'an says:

***These people say, 'After we die, we shall never be raised to life
again. Bring back to life our ancestors if you are truthful'.*** (Surah
ad-Dukhan, 44:35-36))

Suppose if these dead were brought back to life then they too would have
demanded him to bring back their fathers to life and in that case the
Prophets would have to reverse the cycle of Allah's creation. Under the
circumstances when one is not unreasonable, a few arguments of the
Prophets and a couple of their miracles would suffice to convince them
and then they would give up their unreasonable demands.

In some of the verses of the Holy Qur'an we read that a certain group of
the Jews and the Christians expressed their desire to the Holy Prophet
that the Divine revelation should also come upon them as it was with
him. The Holy Qur'an says:

***(Muhammad), the people of the Scripture demand of you to make a Book
descend on them from the heavens!*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:153)

This is a sort of thing as if a patient says that he is not prepared to
go to a physician as he wants to be a physician himself no matter even
if he may have to die of his ailment.

They had no sense to realize that revelation was not an ordinary thing
that could descend on ordinary soul.

The most astonishing thing is that the people had asked Prophet Musa to
show Allah in person. The Holy Qur'an says:

***However, they asked Musa for things much harder than this by saying,
'Show us Allah in person'.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:153)

The Holy Qur'an says about such unreasonable demands as follows:

Even if We had sent you a transcript on paper which they could feel with
their hands, the unbelievers would have said: 'This is nothing but clear
sorcery '. (Surah al-An'am, 6:7)

***Some of them listen to you but We have veiled their hearts so that
they cannot understand, and made them deaf. They disbelieve all the
evidence (of Our existence) that they may have seen. They only come to
you for the sake of argument and the unbelievers say: 'This is nothing
but fables of antiquity'.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:25)

**(iv)** **Opposition Due to Indulgence**: Sometimes the unbelievers had
no excuse to deny the Prophethood of Prophets but they simply opposed
them because of their own inordinate desires as the teachings of the
Prophets did not approve of such desires. the Holy Qur'an says:

***Whenever a Messenger came to them with a message which did not suit
their desires, they called some of them imposters and killed others***.
(Surah al-Ma idah, 5: 70)

Apart from the many reasons of the disbelievers' opposition to the
Prophets there was another reason, which was their following the ways of
their ancestors. However, after we have known the various reasons for
opposition we would now deal with the attitude and behavior of the
opponents.

Prophet Musa delivered the people of Bani Isra'il from the oppression
and domination of Fir'aun and himself bore the brunt of his attacks and
when he deputed Prophet Harun, his brother for a few days to lead them
and himself went to Mount Sina (Tur) the people reverted to polytheism
and infidelitv, and started worshipping the Calf again.

Prophet Harun who was the brother of Prophet Musa, and himself being the
Prophet, was his vicegerant. He pleaded with his people very strongly
and yet they turned a deaf ear to his preaching. When Prophet Musa
returned and saw his followers worshipping the Calf again, he became
very furious and got annoyed with his brother, too

Prophet Harun in his defenee said to his brother, Prophet Musa: "These
newly liberated slaves of Fir'aun flouted my instructions and instead of
remaining steadfast they weakened me. When I decided to dissuade them
from this ignoble act of worshipping the Calf they were about to kill
me".

It is true that in every period of history there were people who
followed the preachings of the Prophets and the Divine leaders and
attained freedom, self-respect and salvation, but after a time for one
excuse or another they became violently opposed to their benefactors and
started intimidating them and they invented a different line of approach
of their own.

Indeed these verses of the Holy Qur'an serve a good lesson for the
leaders and reformers as well as for their followers.

The intimidation of the Prophets by these renegades is also found in the
lifetime of our Holy Prophet. When at the last moment of his life the
Holy Prophet asked for a pen and paper so that he could indite something
for the salvation of Muslim Ummah, but his instructions were insolently
flouted!

The wish of the Holy Prophet in respect of appointing his successor as
the leader of the Muslim Ummah, on the occasion of Ghadir, was so
blatantly disregarded that another man was made his successor. These
violations were made in the time of the Holy Prophet himself when Islam
had reached the zenith of its fame, glory and power.

If we start enumerating these violations which were against the
teachings of the Holy Prophet we shall find that these cannot be counted
on finger tips but for them a voluminous book is required.

The Prophets were almost surrounded by their opponents who tried to
defeat their mission through indecent acts, inordinate desires, insolent
remarks and derisions. By studying the hardships that the Prophets
suffered and the struggle that they made, we learn two important lessons
as follows.

**(i)** Man realizes how greatly the Prophets suffered for conveying to
us the Divine message and as such they are held in man's highest esteem
for their sincerity and dedication to their obligation of Prophethood.

**(ii)** The followers of the Prophets realize that for the sake of
Ummah, the Prophets had to undergo all sorts of troubles and hardships
at the hands of the unbelievers and for that patience, steadfastness and
determination are needed.

Now whatever has been referred to in the Holy Qur'an is partly
reproduced for the benefit of our readers.

***We sent Nuh to his people to give them the clear warning that they
should not worship anyone besides Allah. Nuh warned them. 'I am afraid
that you will suffer the most painful torment'. The disbelievers among
his people said, 'We do not believe that you are any better than the
rest of us; we see that only the worthless hasty ones, the lowliest
among us follow you. Thus, we do not think that you are superior to us,
rather you are all liars.*** (Surah Hud, 11-25-27)

***Nuh started to build the Ark but whenever some of his people passed
by they would mock him. He in turn would reply, 'Mock us, but just as
you mock us we too will mock you.*** (Surah Hud, 11:38)

***They said, 'Shu'ayb, we do not understand much of what you say about,
but we know that you are weak among us. Had it not been for our respect
of your tribe, we would have stoned you to death; you are not very dear
to us.***(Surah Hud, 11:91)

***We sent Hud to his brethren, the tribe of 'Ad. He told them, 'Worship
Allah for He is your only Lord. Will you not become pious?' A group of
the unbelievers among his people said, 'You look to us like a fool and
we think that you are a liar' He replied, 'My people! I am not a fool
but a Messenger of the Lord of the Universe'*** (Surah A'raf, 7:65-67)

Similar thing was said to Prophet Nuh by his people.

***The chiefs of his people said, 'We see you in clear error' He said,
'O my people! There is no error in me, but I am a Messenger from the
Lord of the worlds '.*** (Surah A'raf, 7:60-61)

Similarly, the Holy Qur'an mentions the conspiracies hatched by the
unbelievers of Makkah against our Holy Prophet.

***The unbelievers planned to imprison, murder or expel you (Muhammad)
from your city. They make evil plans but Allah too plans and Allah's
plans are the best.*** (Surah al-Anfal. 8:30)

Indeed the infidels of Makkah had meted out such a disgustful treatment
to the Holy Prophet that some of his own relations had turned against
him. It was his blasted uncle, Abu Lahab who was so conspicuous for his
evil intentions that wherever the Holy Prophet went, he followed him and
disrupted his programmes of inviting the people to Allah.

In the early preaching sessions Abu Lahab used to attend them and
created trouble so as to distract people from their listening to the
teachings of the Holy Prophet. A usual blame that was put on the
Prophets was that of their being a poet, a magician, a lunatic or a
sorcerer. The Holy Qur'an says:

**We sent Messengers to the past people who lived before you. Every
Messenger who came to them was mocked by them. (Surah Hijr, 15:10-11)**

We have seen how Fir'aun used his tactics to arouse the feelings of the
people against Prophet Musa by impugning his teachings. Sometimes he
used to say that Prophet Musa and Prophet Harun wanted to turn the
people out of the city and to dispossess them of their land, and
sometimes by showing his false glory he used to say that Prophet Musa
and Prophet Harun were leading the people to the wrong path by
distracting them from their right path.

Sometimes the opposition to the Prophets assumed such a proportion that
the people used to plug their ears by inserting their fingers and cover
their heads with their garments. The Holy Qur'an says about Prophet Nuh
as follows.

***Every time I invite them to Your guidance so that You can forgive
them, they put their fingers into their ears, cover their heads with
their garments, persist in their disbelief and display extreme
arrogance.*** (Surah Nuh, 71: 7)

It was the most disgraceful thing when the opposition to the Prophets
was offered by the inmates of their own house. The wives of Prophet Lut
and Prophet Nuh who were treacherously disloyal, particularly the wife
of Prophet Lut, who used to sneak out information to the unbelievers.
The Holy Qur'an has termed these two wretched women as the model of
infidelity and treachery and says

***Allah has told the disbelievers the incident of the wives of Nuh and
Lut as a parable. They were married to two of Our righteous servants but
were unfaithful to them. Nothing could protect them from the wrath of
Allah and they were told to enter the Fire of Hell with the others.***
(Surah at-Tahrim, 66:10)

This narration of the Holy Qur'an defeats the ideological concept of
some schools of thought who believe that man's mode of thinking and
selection of the course of life is influenced by economic factors
because we have seen that these two women who were the wives of the
Prophets and lived with them and who were maintained by them, chose a
different course for themselves and they sided with polytheism.

On the contrary it was the wife of that rebellious Fir'aun who lived in
a palace but her anxiety was for the well-being of the hut-dwellers. She
was born and brought up in an environment of transgression and despotism
but she was strongly opposed to the form of government in power. She was
maintained by Fir'aun but she was the supporter of Prophet Musa.

From these instances it is established that despite the fact that
economics plays a great part in one's life, it is not the solitary
factor which can influence man's course of life. Some people say that if
one wants to know as to how a man thinks he should better find out from
where he is fed, or they say that the people living in palatial house
cannot think of the poor and downtrodden people. These are the slogans
which in the light of historical evidence have collapsed and that the
cult of ideologies which has given these slogans is doomed to oblivion.

These were some of the details of the disruptive activities of the
opponents but it is more regretful that there are some who under the
garb of friends do much damage and harm.

Islam has termed those people as hypocrites who never relaxed their
efforts in stabbing Islam in the back.

Sufferings of the Followers of the Prophets
-------------------------------------------

We should also not be oblivious of the tortures that were borne by the
followers of the Prophets, too. The opponents of the Prophets used to
dig big ditches in which they threw the believers and then set them on
fire. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Accursed are the people who tortured the Believers in ditches by a
burning fire while they themselves set around it witnessing what they
had done to the believers. The only reason for which they tormented the
believers was the latter's belief in Allah, the Majestic and
Praiseworthy.***(Surah Buruj, 85:4-8)

***The sinners indeed laughed at the Believers. When passing by them
they would wink at one another. And returning to their people, boast
about what they had done. On seeing the believers, they would say,
'These people have gone astray '.***(Surah al-Mutaffifin, 83 29-32)

The above-quoted verses describe the mode of thinking as well as the
strange behavior of the people of the ancient past. But in the modern
times this very attitude can be used to dissuade the believers from the
righteous path and to stifle their true belief, but those who have
really identified themselves with the righteous people believing in
Allah, and who have acknowledged the truthfulness of the Divine
commandments and accepted the Divine leaders, and have kept themselves
aloof from sins, cannot be daunted by such silly remarks of taunt and
scoffing, and cannot in any event forego the right path they have chosen
for themselves, because the Holy Qur'an has promised them that a day of
Reckoning would soon be coming when the believers would laugh at them.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***On the Day of Judgement, the believers will laugh at the disbelievers
while reclining on couches and reviewing (the bounties given to
them).*** (Surah al-Mutaffifin, 83:34-35)

Thus, even today if the transgressors and the violaters of Divine
commands laugh at the believers surely they will be laughed at by the
believers while enjoying the bliss of eternal life in Paradise and
sitting in reclining couches.

Destructive Activities of the Hypocrites
----------------------------------------

We have already pointed out that the Prophets not only suffered at the
hands of their enemies but they were also subjected to hardships and
troubles at the hands of the hypocrites almost to the same degree. The
hypocrites were the same people who had built a Masjid in comparison
with the Masjid built by the Holy Prophet with a view to making it a
hotbed of vice and conspiracy where they could hatch the plans to
disunite the Muslims.

You may perhaps have heard that these people had invited the Holy
Prophet to perform its inaugural ceremony but the Holy Prophet acceding
to their request got that Masjid demolished and burnt to ashes. It was
Allah who had informed the Holy Prophet of the evil intentions of the
hypocrites, as the Masjid was built with a view to bringing about
disunity among the Muslims and of spying on their activities. The Holy
Qur'an says about this as follows:

***The Masjid which some of the hypocrites have established is only to
harm people, to spread disbelief, to create discord among the Believers,
to wait for (Abu 'Amir) the one who fought against Allah and His
Messenger, and to make others believe that it has been established with
their good intentions. But Allah is witness that they are liars.***
(Surah at-Tauba, 9: 107)

***Had they (the hypocrites) wanted to join your army they would have
prepared themselves, but Allah did not wish to motivate them, so He
caused them to linger behind with those whose joining you in the battle
would be of no use. Had they joined you, they would have been of no help
to you but would have just caused confusion and trouble among you by
sneaking through the ranks where some of you would be ready to listen to
them. Allah knows best the unjust. Even prior to this, they tried to
cause trouble and to turn your affairs upside-down until the truth came
and the cause of Allah triumphed against their desires.*** (Surah
at-Tauba, 9:46-48)

***What prevents their offerings from being accepted is their disbelief
in Allah and His Messenger, their lack of interest in prayers and their
spending for the cause of Allah reluctantly.*** (Surah at-Tauba, 9:54)
395

They Raised Objections
----------------------

These hypocrites used to criticize the Holy Prophet for his decisions on
financial matters such as distribution of Zakat and taxes. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***They blame you about the distribution of the welfare funds. They are
pleased when you give them something from it, but if they receive
nothing, they become angry with you.***(Surah at-Tauba, 9:58)

Now we wind up our discussion on the disruptive activities of the
enemies of the Prophets and deal with the sacrifices and dedicated
spirit of the followers of the distinguished Prophets because knowledge
about their dedication and devotion is going to help us in our approach
to religion.

Why the Followers of the Prophets Were Sincere?
-----------------------------------------------

Quite contrary to the opinion of those who think that the main reason of
the believers' inclination towards the Prophets was due to their poor
economic conditions and since the Prophets used to fight against
oppression, poverty, deprivation and violation of human rights, these
believers supported the Prophets and became their ardent followers.

But this notion is far from the truth. Such an explanation is only given
by those who want to conceal the truth as well as to suppress the man's
feelings of searching the truth. But from historical evidence we note
that there were many people who were not at all financially weak and who
were not subjected to any oppression or unexpected happenings, and yet
they willingly answered the call of the Prophets, followed their
teachings, and adopted the righteous path as guided by them.

Not only that, they even sacrificed their life and property for the
cause of the path the Prophets showed to them. We have the instance of
Asia, the wife of Fir'aun and Lady Khadija the illustrious wife of our
Holy Prophet. Therefore, if anybody says that the embracing of the
belief of the Prophets was only for the sake of bread, clothes and
personal freedom he is like the one who considers the existence of a
nose on his face only for the purpose of the eyeglasses to rest on.

The followers of the Prophets can be divided into two categories:

**(i)** Those who are unsteady.

**(ii)** Those who are steadfast.

Unsteady Followers
------------------

In Surah al-Baqarah of the Holy Qur'an an event about the children of
Isra'il, who were the followers of a Prophet, is narrated. We summarize
it below:

After Prophet Musa some people of Bani Isra'il who were subjected to
tyrannies and disgrace at the hands of the autocrats and despots,
decided to rise in revolt. Therefore, they went to their Prophet Shamuel
and asked him for help to have an able ruler.

The Prophet replied, "It is possible that if you are asked to wage Jihad
(the Holy War) and to kill the transgressors, you may disobey". At this
they assured him of their steadfastness and said, "How can it be
possible that we do not take action against those who have driven us
from our land, and in whose hands our women and children are in a state
of insecurity? We shall fight them and we request you to appoint an able
ruler for us".

The Prophet invoked Allah to appoint an able ruler for the nation. His
invocation was granted and a man called Talut was referred to the
Prophet. He was suitable from the point of view of strength and
knowledge and the Prophet introduced him to the people and appointed him
their ruler.

But the people who had imperfect wisdom objected to it and said, "This
man who has no good mien, and who is not famous either, cannot deserve
to be our ruler. And if it is decided that he should be our ruler, we
consider ourselves more suitable because we are wealthier than him".

The Prophet pleaded with the people that the appointment of Talut as a
ruler had been decided by Allah and that too was because of his physical
strength and superior wisdom. But those people did not agree with the
Prophet and dissociated themselves from the rest of the people and by
this the strength of the fighting people was reduced. It was just a
trial which condemned those people who had disobeyed the Prophet.

The second trial was that the ruler told those people who had accepted
him as a ruler and leader that they would be given as trial with an
ordinary restriction in fighting the tyrant of the time. He said, "You
are now approaching a canal and you should not drink water from it, and
anyone who drinks it will not be from amongst us.

The greedy glutton cannot be a front line soldier of my army. Of course
if at all you drink water, then it should not be more than a handful of
water". All those revolutionaries who were fighting against tyrannies,
accepted the condition, but when the time for trial came, and they
reached the canal, all of them with the exception of a few drank their
fill from the canal water.

Here we see again how a group of people again got themselves condemned
by violating a small restriction and how the false revolutionaries
suffered defeat.

The third trial came at the time when the revolutionaries faced the
great army of the opponents, the soldiers got so much frightened that
they started shouting that they were not their enemies and they ran away
from the army.

Thus another group of people got themselves condemned. But those of the
people who had faith in their destinies and had followed the path of
Allah and the Prophets did not object to the appointment of the ruler
nor did they drink water from the canal, and as they had their firm
determination and were not frightened, they fell upon the enemy's forces
and a young man, among them, named Dawud defeated the enemy's forces.

Whatever we have narrated above teaches us a great lesson which the Holy
Qur'an has mentioned in Surah al-Baqarah 2:247-253. This story
distinguishes the true from the false followers, the slogan-mongers from
the practical people, and it as well warns that it is not difficult to
be revolutionary in name only but to prove it practically is a difficult
thing. We have seen that all of those who clamored for victory
ultimately failed at the hours of trial.

At Ghadir al-Khum about 100,000 people congratulated the Commander of
the Faithful, Imam Ali on his becoming the leader of the Muslims but two
months after, they conveniently forgot all about that. After the
assassination of Uthman, the third caliph, people of all tribes and
shades of opinion swarmed round Imam Ali and accepted him as their
leader, but before long they were divided in different groups against
Imam Ali and the Battles of Jamal, Siffin and Naharwan were fought.

The people involved Imam Hasan in a battle against Mu awiya but when the
time came they defected from him and joined Mu'awiya's army.

The people of Kufa invited Imam Husayn to help them overthrow the
despotic Umayyad dynasty but before he reached there he was martyred at
the plains of Karbala.

Even when the Holy Prophet was delivering his Friday Sermon, people left
their positions in the congregation after hearing the beating of the
drum of the sellers of imported goods.

We also read in the narrations that at the time of the advent of our
existing Imam, Imam Mahdi, a group of people will come out from the
Masjids to fight against him!

It is an undeniable fact that after the mischief of his jealous
brothers, when Prophet Yusuf came out of the well, and after passing
hard time in prison he achieved success and honour, he invoked Allah
thus: "O Allah! Let me die as a Muslim".

When the merit of a thing is judged by the result then it is not without
reason that when Imam Ali heard the prophecy about his martyrdom he did
not ask as to who would martyr him, and when he would be martyred? He
only asked the Holy Prophet as to whether he would remain steadfast in
his faith and religion at the time of receiving the fatal wound from his
assassin's sword?

In short, there is a lot of difference between profession and
performance, promise and its fulfillment, and claim and its proof.

It is mentioned about twenty times in the Holy Qur'an that unless the
people are given a trial their qualities and abilities are never known.
From the early period of Islamic history men like Abuzar, Bilal and
Maytham underwent untold sufferings and tortures, but they never forsook
their faith.

As against them there were people who gave up Islam altogether for fear
of oppression and tortures. Dr Muhammad Ibrahim Ayati has enumerated the
names of such people in his book ***The Biography of the Prophet of
Islam***.

As we have dealt with the disloyal followers of the Prophets, we should
better say something about their true followers.

The Loyal Followers of the Prophets
-----------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an makes mention of the loyal followers of the Prophets and
we quote some of its verses below:

***The Believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, who
do not change their belief into doubt, and who struggle for the cause of
Allah with their property and souls. They are the truthful ones.***
(Surah Hujurat, 49:15)

Once some Bedouin Arabs came to the Holy Prophet and said: "We have
embraced Islam". But Allah in reply sent His revelation as follows:

***The Bedouin Arabs have said, 'We are Believers'. Tell them, 'You are
not believers, but you should say that you are Muslims. In fact, belief
has not entered your hearts'***. (Surah al-Hujuratt 49:14)

***When the believers are called to Allah and His A1essenger to be
judged, their only words are, 'We have listened and obeyed'. They will
have everlasting happiness.*** (Surah an-Nur, 24:51)

In the Battle of Trench when the Holy Prophet with other Muslims was
busy in digging the trench some of them left him without his permission
but there were some who asked permission from the Holy Prophet. The Holy
Qur'an praises such Muslims and says:

***The true believers are those who have faith in Allah and His
Messenger, and when they are dealing with the Messenger in important
matters, they do not go away without his permission. (Muhammad) those
who ask your permission believe in Allah and His Messenger. When they
ask your leave to attend to their affairs, you may give permission to
anyone of them you choose and ask forgiveness for them from Allah. Allah
is All-Forgiving and All-Merciful.*** (Surah an-Nur, 24:62)

***(Muhammad), tell them, 'If you love Allah, follow me. Allah will love
you and forgive your sins '. Allah is All-Forgiving and All-Merciful.***
(Surah Ale Imran, 3:31)

***Of all men the nearest people to Ibrahim are those who followed him,
and then this Prophet (Muhammad) and the true believers. Allah is the
guardian o f the true believers.***(Surah Ale Imran, 3:68)

***Believers, obey Allah, His Messenger and your (qualified) leaders. If
you have faith in Allah and the Day of Judgment, refer to Allah and His
Messenger about the matters in which you differ. This would be more
virtuous and a better way of settling differences.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:
59)

***(Muhammad), have you not seen those who think that they have faith in
what is revealed to you and to others before you, yet choose to take
their affairs to Satan (the despots) for judgment even though they are
commanded to deny him. Satan only wishes to lead them astray.*** (Surah
an-Nisa, 4:60)

A dispute arose between two companions of the Holy Prophet on a matter
of irrigating the land and they came to him for judgment. The Holy
Prophet gave them his decision. The one against whom the decision was
pronounced misbehaved shamefully towards the Holy Prophet and questioned
the justice of the Prophet in giving the decision in favour of the other
party. At this moment the following verse revealed:

***Indeed, by your Lord, they will not be considered believers until
they let you judge their disputes and find no constraint in their minds
about your decisions, and accept them with full acquiescence.*** (Surah
an-Nisa, 4:65)

***No believing men and women have any choice in a matter after Allah
and His Messenger have decided it. Whoever disobeys Allah and His
Messenger is in plain error.*** (Surah al-Ahzab,33:36)

Another sign of the true belief in the Prophets is that besides
religious matters we take guidance from the Divine revelations and the
Prophets in matters of politics, economics and military affairs. The
Holy Qur'an has severely criticized that group of Muslims who spread
rumors without consulting the Prophets after receiving any information.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***When they receive any news of peace or war, they announce it in
public. Had they told it to the Messenger or to their (qualified)
leaders, they could have used that information more properly.*** (Surah
an-Nisa, 4:83)

This verse is applicable for all times, present and future, as it is a
standing order for all Muslims to follow the Holy Prophet, his Holy
Progeny, and the qualified religious leaders and guides on matters
pertaining to political and military affairs besides religious matters,
otherwise people with vested interest would put them on the wrong track.

About the sincere and loyal followers of the Prophets, the Holy Qur'an
says again:

***The righteous and pious of those who obeyed the call of Allah and His
Messenger even after they were wounded (at Uhud) shall indeed have an
ample reward.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3: 172)

The interesting thing is that despite their self-sacrificing spirit,
Allah praises them with a condition that righteousness and piety should
be their prerequisite qualifications.

Indeed, in the teachings of Islam if the end does not come in the state
of righteousness and piety then all other things such as sacrifice,
privilege of being a companion of the Holy Prophet, sufferings,
hardships, captivity etc. will be of no avail. These warriors supported
the Holy Prophet in a state of piety. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Many godly men fought to help the Prophets in the cause of Allah.
They did not lose courage, show weakness or give in when facing
hardships in their fight for the cause of Allah. Allah loves those who
are steadfast.*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3: 146)

The narrations of the nations of the past and their selfless devotion to
the Prophets serves as a beacon light for the coming generations of the
Muslims so as to keep them on the right path and to give them
consolation in the thought that the narrating of the hardships of the
past Prophets to the Holy Prophet was with the purpose of providing
consolation to him too. We implore Almighty Allah to count us among the
loyal and obedient followers of the Holy Prophet of Islam.


