Imamate
=======

Is Imamate Included in the Fundamentals of Faith?
-------------------------------------------------

Raghib Isfahani in his book ***Mufradatul Qur'an*** has given the
meaning of Imam as leader, that is the one who should be followed and
obeyed. That one may be a book or a man, whether it or he is right or
wrong.

Now that we have understood the meaning of the word Imam we venture to
answer the above quoted question. It will be better to quote the verses
of the Holy Qur'an as well as the traditions of the Holy Prophet and
leave the matter to the readers to decide for themselves.

On the occasion of Ghadir-i Khum the Holy Qur'an addresses the Holy
Prophet and says:

***O Messenger, declare what is revealed to you from your Lord. If you
will not declare, it would be as though you have not conveyed My
Message. Allah protects you from men. He does not guide the unbelieving
people.*** (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:67)

This should be borne in mind that al-Ma'idah is the last surah that was
revealed upon the Holy Prophet in his last days. It should also be borne
in mind that the Holy Prophet had been preaching monotheism,
prophethood, Day of Judgment, prayers and matters relating to
polytheism, iconoclasm, etc.

For a long time and further that the injunctions regarding Jihad,
Fasting, ***khums*** and ***zakat*** were enforced in 2 A.H. and at the
time when Surah al-Ma'idah was revealed it was 10 A.H. in which this
particular verse was revealed with so much emphasis.

It should again be remembered that the Holy Prophet was not a person who
could be daunted or intimidated, else he would have become scared during
the early days of his prophethood, when he was all by himself, and not
in the last days of his life when he had hundreds and thousands of his
followers. This Qur'anic verse tells the Holy Prophet, "Do not be
frightened! Allah Protects you ! "

We should also bear in mind that the place where this verse was revealed
was the place where the caravans were going to be dispersed towards
their respective destinations in different directions. The wind was hot.
Those were last days of the life of the Holy Prophet. From this it is
proved that the message that he was going to give to the people related
to a very important matter and that the Holy Prophet had become aware of
the disruptive activities of the hypocrites.

However, from all canons of justice we are constrained to believe that
the 67th verse of the Surah al-Ma'idah bore a message of utmost
importance and that was regarding the succession of the Holy Prophet and
the leadership of an infallible Imam for guiding the Muslim Ummah. Many
such notable companions of the Holy Prophet who are held in very high
esteem of all the Muslims and are popular among them have narrated this
event of Ghadir-i Khum which pertains to the succession of the Holy
Prophet.

Imamate is One of the Fundamentals of Faith
-------------------------------------------

**1**. In the verse of the Holy Qur'an quoted above Allah reminds the
Holy Prophet that if he did not make an announcement regarding the
appointment of his successor for the security of the society from the
evils of the hypocrites and disruptionists, he would not fully justify
his mission of conveying to the people the message of Allah. In view of
the strong wording of the relevant verse of Surah al-Ma'idah and his
lifelong teachings, we consider the appointment of the successor as an
integral factor of religion.

**2.** There are 29 hadith in ***Wassa'ilush Shi'ah***, vol. I and 17
hadith in ***Mustadrakul Wasa'il*** which establish that the basis of
Islam rests an a few principles, and the most important among them is
that of ***Wilayat*** (the succession of the Holy Prophet). We should
like to explain this principle.

Imam Muhammad Baqir says: "The basis of Islam depends on Prayers,
***zakat***, ***hajj***, fasting and ***wilayat***". Zurarah, a devoted
follower and companion of the Holy Imam asked him, "Out of these
fundamental principles which one is most important".

The Holy Imam replied, "***Wilayat*** is the most important of all".
Thereafter, he elaborated, "Since succession or mastership is the key to
prayers, fasting and ***hajj***, the successor or the vicegerent is
supposed to be the leader and guide".

Thus by succession it is meant that the infallible Imam or the
vicegerent and successor to the Holy Prophet must be followed and
obeyed. In certain narrations ***Walayat*** or succession means
obedience of the infallible Imam. It is interesting to note that in case
of prayers, fasting, ***hajj*** and ***zakat*** each one is affected by
physical or financial reasons but the principle of accepting the
authority of the Imam remains intact in all circumstances.

Besides, it can be further explained that the Holy Prophet never before
assembled the people at one place nor did he proclaim his message about
prayers, ***hajj***, ***zakat*** etc. at the top of his voice, but for
the purpose of introducing his successor to the people he had to do it
at Ghadir-i Khum and had to wait for the people to assemble there on
that deserted place, and when all the people had assembled there, he
declared the appointment of Imam Ali as his vicegerent and successor.

Leaving aside the fact that the people have forgotten the basic matter,
I fully recollect that while performing circumambulation of the Holy
Ka'bah I was lost in the thought that the House of Allah served as a
maternity home to the esteemed mother of Imam Ali and a cradle to him
who demolished the idols at the ceiling of the Holy Ka'bah by mounting
on its walls, and threw them down.

Besides, I was also looking at the people who were busy in
circumambulating the Holy Ka'bah but what a travesty of fact it was that
these people had dislodged the inmate of this cradle and by disowning
him were indulging in the formal rite of performing circumambulation.

**3.** The third argument that can be put forward in support of the
importance of Imamate is the famous hadith of the Holy Prophet: "If
someone dies without knowing the Imam of his time he dies the death of
an ignorant man of the Days of Ignorance prior to Islam".

**4.** It is stated in the third volume of ***al-Kafi*** that if people
take the trouble of performing all their obligations without
acknowledging the Imam of their time as their guide, their deeds will
not be accepted by Allah.

It is just like a man, who without having the representative position of
an organization, and without informing it or taking its sanction makes
certain purchases for it. In that case he will not deserve any sympathy
from the management. Thus in Islam the question of motivation,
objectives, course of direction and leadership occupies an extra.
ordinary position.

**Conclusion**: After carefully viewing the four arguments given above
the readers can easily make out whether in Islam Imamate is the primary
thing or it is secondary. In short, the belief in monotheism will not
flourish if the leader of the society is not the infallible guide
because monotheism will be taken over by evil forces of the devils and
transgressors.

The principles and the teachings of the Prophets and the institution of
prophethood will be secure as long as it is protected and safeguarded by
the infallible Imam otherwise the Divine laws and commandments will lose
their sanctity and innovations, alterations and personal whims and
fancies will take their roots and the Divine revelations will lose their
credibility.

Besides, the matters relating to the Day of Judgment and its spiritual
implications cannot be fully comprehended without the guidance of the
Imam. If we apply our commonsense we shall realize that the society
without an Imam, will be nothing short of a jungle as it cannot be
properly run without a leader, discipline, rules, and regulations.

Thus the leader and the laws are inseparable in any given society. Hence
the importance of the role of the Imam as a guide and protector of the
social system and its laws cannot be denied.

Direct Link of Imamate with Monotheism
--------------------------------------

Once when Imam Ali Riza was passing by the city of Nishapur, his
followers surrounded him and requested him to narrate a hadith. The Holy
Imam narrated the following hadith which he had heard from his father
and his father from his grandfather and he from his father in a regular
order of son hearing from his father up to the first Imam who heard it
from the Holy Prophet and he from the archangel Jibra'il and he from the
Almighty Allah"Monotheism is My fortress.

Whoever enters it will be saved from My wrath". The Holy Imam moved
forward and then paused and said, "That is, Monotheism with its
prerequisites is the Divine fortress and I myself am one of its
pre-requisites". (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. III)

Thus the Holy Imam established an inseparable link between Monotheism
and Imamate just as it exists between a motor car and its wheels or
between Prayers and ablutions. In other words without the support of
Imamate the concept of Monotheism will not be complete. As long as
Monotheism is discussed, Imamate will also be referred to in the
discussions, and that Imamate will ever remain viable and effective.

Example: If a physician has asked his patient to take either an
injection or a capsule, the patient will understand that the injection
and the capsule contain the same ingredients and that s why both would
be effective in curing the disease. The following hadith has also been
quoted in the books of ahadith:

"The Imamate of Ali is a fortress and whoever enters it will be in
safety". (***Tafsir Nuruth Thaqalayn***; ***Safinatul Bihar***)

Now it is worth considering that Monotheism means a fortress and Imamate
of Imam Ali also means the same that is; he protection from the wrath of
Allah. This is one explanation of the close link between Monotheism and
the Imamate.

Thus if we accept the Imamate of Imam Ali it is evident that he will
lead us to Allah or if we seek the guidance of Allah, He will direct us
to Imam Ali for guidance.

The Need of an Imam
-------------------

From the same argument, from which we realize the need of a Prophet we
also need an Imam. If man had been self-sufficient in seeking the right
path, he would never have felt the necessity of the Prophets. We have
already dealt with the necessity of the Prophets in our discussions on
Prophethood.

Is the Holy Qur'an Not Sufficient?
----------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an is such a Book that all Muslims of every sect and belief
consider it authentic and everybody selects a few verses of the Holy
Qur'an and for the sake of his interest deduces their meanings. Then how
can it be said that the Holy Qur'an can be sufficient to lead us to the
right path without the Imam? Can a book on medicine help cure the
patient without the presence of a physician? Can a certain law be just
enough without an authority on it or without the existence of its maker
and interpreter?

Can there be any ideology without its preceptor?
------------------------------------------------

Can it be accepted that the purpose of man's creation is to worship
Allah and to follow the Divine path, but there will be no necessity of
any guide in that respect?

Can it be accepted that in principle man desires to attain the position
of higher human qualities but he does not happen to have any ideal
before him to follow?

Is it not a fact that for one's inherent desires and aspirations there
must exist an external source for their fulfillment?

As for example when we feel thirsty we have an answer in water which is
an external source to extinguish our thirst. Similarly, we have the
answers of all our internal feelings from external sources. Thus we
cannot concede that man has the feeling and desire to attain progress
and virtue but there is no external thing in existence which can answer
that feeling or satisfy that desire.

How can this be possible that a host invites some people to his home and
he does not give them his address or does not send somebody to guide
particularly when there are people to mislead him. Thus the host should
send a guide with the sign of identification so that he may lead them to
the correct destination, and, if the occasion warrants, fight against
the mischief-makers, who try to misguide them.

How then can we accept that in matters of world affairs man is dependent
on someone to guide him but for spiritual guidance and crossing the
Divine path and real progress he may not need a guide especially when
his knowledge is limited and he is surrounded by Satanic influences?

Have you ever heard about a society in which its individuals do not have
the need of a leader?

Have the bees not appointed one amongst them as their chief called the
Queen Bee?

Have you ever heard of any instance in government or in politics, in
peace or in war that success was achieved without the existence of a
leader or commander? Thus who will accept a wayward society without the
guidance of an Imam?

Imam Ali says, "It is a must for a nation to have a guide, whether he is
good or bad".

In other words for the eradication of evils the existence of a leader is
necessary. We need not go too far into discussing the necessity of
having an Imam, because it will amount to trying to prove the existence
of the sun or some other thing like that, which is self-evident and does
not need proving. Instead we should ponder over the attributes and
merits of the Imam and discuss the standard and criterion as basis of
the appointment of the Imam.

We should also discuss the question of his appointment or dismissal. We
should distinguish a true leader from the false leader. Therefore, we
now conclude the discussion on the necessity of the Imam because there
is still a lot more to be said on this subject. In short, the question
of the necessity of having an Imam is not in dispute as everybody knows
that without a leader a healthy society cannot be established.

Everybody knows that for the enforcement of Divine laws and commandments
and for their protection, authority and power are needed and to achieve
that purpose there must be an able leader. Thus under the circumstances
when everybody cannot reach the Holy Prophet and when one has accepted
the Holy Prophet as the last Prophet of Islam, the necessity of having
an Imam after him cannot be denied.

Can it be possible that Almighty Allah sends His Prophet who through his
sincere efforts enforces the Divine commandments in the society and then
leaves it without delegating his authority to some capable man to guide
the Ummah? It will indeed not be a wise thing. Can the action of the
Prophet leaving the Ummah without a guide be compatible with his great
concern and devotion to his mission about which we all know?

In fact those who think that the Prophets despite bearing hardships and
difficulties for the sake of establishing the religion and law and order
among their people left this world without appointing a successor to
lead them are in manifest error. They will have to account for their
conduct before Allah as they doubted the wisdom of Allah and the sincere
devotion of the Prophets to accomplish the task of Prophethood.

In principle, Islam and its teachings should either be compatible with
the inner feelings and external conditions and progressive, or
alternatively should be left alone in the books so as to be forgotten
with the passage of time.

Thus if any school of religious thought possesses a leader with the
special attributes of an Imam that will be of the first kind described
above that is, viable and progressive otherwise it will be of the second
kind that is listless, static and ineffective.

Based on this reasoning Imam Ali Riza said: "By correct leadership
religion and its teachings are strengthened and the Islamic society
founded by the Imam gives an impetus to Islam in its expansion and
development so much so that he fulfils all the individual and collective
needs, material as well spiritual of the people". (***Safinatul
Bihar***)

From this narration we note that the Holy Imam has explained to us that
without the guidance of an Imam, Islam cannot progress and becomes
lifeless and degenerate.

It is a fact that mankind is faced with one or the other problem every
day, and if the Islamic society does not seek the help of Allah's
commandments, the revelations and the true Imam, people will lose their
peace of mind and each one of them will follow his own course and the
Islamic society will be in a state of chaos and confusion. Hence the
presence of a guide is necessary side by side with the code of
teachings.

Is it not necessary to learn swimming from an expert for swimming across
the river? Does a man not need a boat to transport him from one bank of
the river to the other? Similarly in every walk of life a guide or a
leader is needed. Is it not correct that according to the Holy Imams
this world is like a deep ocean or a river in spate?

Are not the ***ahlul bayt*** and the infallible Imams the Ark of
Salvation? Therefore, how can it be possible that Allah creates this
world like a stormy river and sees the people drowning in it when there
are dangerous animals in it, and does nothing for them? As this is
contrary to the Wisdom of Allah, the necessity of an infallible Imam
becomes imperative.

How can it be possible that Allah gave the control of human body to the
mind so that an eye or an ear or any other organ may not err, and yet
for the guidance of a great human society Allah leaves it alone without
the guidance of the infallible Imam to solve the people's problems and
to lead them to the right path?

The purpose of creating the Universe is that mankind may take benefit.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***It is He Who created everything on earth for you.*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:29)

***Allah has made the day and the night, the sun and the moon and all
the stars subservient to you by His command.*** (Surah an-Nahl, 16:12)

Thus man is a superior being among all the creations and the purpose of
creation of man is that he should worship Allah, look toward Allah and
work for the cause of Allah.

In short, for every material or spiritual function a few things are
needed some of which are as follows: The Path, the Means, the Objective
and the Guide.

In this context the role of the guide or a leader is the most important
one because without the guide we shall forget our path and all our means
and objectives will become meaningless. From this it is proved that the
Universe is created for us and we have been created to worship Allah and
to return to Allah. For journeying towards Allah we need a guide and the
guide of that journey is the Imam.

The Conduct of the Imam
-----------------------

Man needs an illustration so that he should know where he is heading to,
what actually he is, and what he should be like. Imam is that kind of
man like whom every man should be. Imam is an ideal, a specimen or a
living example. Without the guidance of an ideal, man will lose his way.
If this ideal is not there to lead him to Allah the temporal desires and
the Devils will create models for him.

If we do not talk of good and noble things, do not remember our real
models, do not keep them in our vision all the time, and do not look to
them with highest esteem and love by practically following them, the
Devils will distract us and introduce others to us, with false
propaganda, so that we may be inclined towards them.

The Holy Qur'an mentions only those things of the personalities which
are worthy of being followed by others just as the iconoclasm of Prophet
Ibrahim but it does not mention the name of his wife, the number of his
children, and their birth and demise.

Imam is not only a guide, he is an Imam. He is not only a guardian, he
is an Imam . That is to say, his every action including worship, eating,
drinking, struggling, talking and remaining silent, is a lesson and
model for us.

Imam gives practical shape to the standing instructions. Imam stresses
that Islam is not a whim but it is a reality; it is not a speculation
but it is a truth; it is not a name only but it is a practical code of
life. Imam with all his special attributes and human qualities is the
Imam everywhere, at every place and at every time. Thus we recognize
Prophet Ibrahim as an Imam, though not of our time.

**Under Imam's Protection**: The Holy Qur'an says that on the Day of
Judgement each group will be called with its Imam:

***On the day when We call every nation with their leaders***. (Surah
Bani Isra'il, 17:71)

**Punishment Doubly Awarded**: The Holy Qur'an addressed the wives of
the Holy Prophet saying that if anyone of them committed any wrong she
would be awarded a double punishment. It says:

***Wives of the Prophet! If anyone among you commits indecency, her
torment will be double.*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:30)

In fact, the wife of the Holy Prophet is supposed to be a model for the
people and as such she should prove herself to be a guide to others, not
to speak of committing sin herself.

A tradition says that before the remission of one sin of a scholar
seventy sins of an ignorant person will be remitted. (***Usul Kafi***;
Kitab: ***fazlul 'ilm***)

Since a scholar is supposed to set an example to others by his deeds,
his minor shortcoming is considered to be great.

Some of our scholars say that if a scholar or a wise man commits even a
minor sin, it is regarded as a major sin because his deeds have a direct
influence on others. Accordingly the sin or the innovation made by those
who are supposed to be the leader of the society is several times
greater than that of an ordinary person. This is due to the fact that
people start following a corrupt Imam.

**An Interesting Narration**: Some people asked Imam Ali Naqi as to why
Imam Ali used to spare the wounded ones in the Battle of Jamal but in
the Battle of Siffin he used to kill even the wounded ones? The Holy
Imam explained that in Siffin its leader or commander was alive. The
wounded ones used to flock round him.

The enemy reinforced the army, encouraged the weaker ones and attended
upon the wounded with consoling words, and above all the root of the
discord was still in their minds to gain strength and thus in order to
wipe out the total menace it was better to kill all of them.

But in case of the Battle of Jamal, Talha and Zubayr had been killed
already, and after the camel of Ayesha had sat down, those who were
fleeing were not pursued, and since they had no refuge they were spared
their lives. (***Tuhaful 'Uqul***, p. 508)

From this example it can be fully understood that what a great role a
leader has to play against the forces of evil and how differently he
acts in varying circumstances.

**The Remembrance of the Imam**: The great influence of the
expansionists lies in their attempt to distract our people from our
ideal Imams and to mislead our younger generation through brain-washing
and talking merits of other people. It is for this reason that the
***ziyarat*** (homage) to the Imam is necessary so that by presenting
oneself before him one may be able to discover his faults and
deficiencies.

The reason for organizing the mourning ceremonies on the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn is the same so that one may be able to revive in his memory
the great sacrifice the Holy Imam made for keeping Islam alive and hear
the facts about the Holy Imam's patience and steadfastness in his hour
of trial, and finally to apply himself to follow the Imam in his day to
day life and adopt better way of life and die an honorable death.

The Stress on the Meaning of Imam
---------------------------------

The word "Imam" has very interesting meanings. It is so splendid and
heartening that no other word such as 'teacher', 'patron', 'leader',
'preacher' and 'sermonizer' has such a wide meaning as the word 'Imam'
has, as all these words connote teaching and training but not carrying a
movement. But an Imam is one who moves himself with his deed and action
and makes others follow him.

**An Example of Imam's Conduct**: It is narrated of a battle that Caliph
Umar wanted to go to the battlefield himself but the Commander of the
Faithful, Imam Ali advised him not to do so. The Holy Imam explained
that as he was the Caliph the enemy would be justified to think that the
Muslim army had lost strength and that was why the Caliph himself had to
come to the battlefield and thus whatever force or strength was left
with them had been brought there in the person of their Caliph.

In that way the feeling of awe that they had of their army would be
diminished.

On the Day of the Judgement the sceptics would say to their leaders that
if they had been left to themselves they would have not come to that
pass and by natural inclinations would certainly have turned believers.
The Holy Qur'an says:

***The oppressed among them will say to their oppressors, had it not
been for you we would certainly have been believers.***(Surah as-Saba,
34:31)

The Holy Qur'an calls upon the Muslims to make the leaders and
commanders of the infidels their target in battle and Jihad, that is to
fight against the leaders of the infidels; it says:

***Fight against the leaders of the unbelievers if they violate their
pledge and revile your faith, to force them to stop their aggression
against you.*** (Surah at-Tawba, 9:12)

We read similar pronouncements of our Imams that people do not become as
much influenced by their parents as they do by their leaders.

Imam Ali said: "People are as much influenced by their rulers as they
are by their parents".

Similarly, we read another well-known saying: "People follow the
religion of their kings".

The Holy Prophet said: "When two groups of my followers go astray the
whole Ummah will go astray, and when they become virtuous and noble they
would influence all others and then all will become noble and virtuous".
The two groups referred to in this tradition are the rulers and the
jurists. (***Bihar Anwar***)

Hence, the importance of the conduct of a leader and its influencing
force becomes quite evident.

The Role of Imam in Hadith
--------------------------

Imam Muhammad Baqir says: "Any group of people who accepts a tyrant
ruler will face the wrath of Allah even if it happens to be pious. On
the contrary those, who accept a just Imam appointed by Allah, deserve
His forgiveness and mercy even if they happen to be of bad conduct".
(***al-Kafi***, vol. I.)

From this important tradition it is proved that the thing which is more
important than deeds is the method and the path. Suppose a driver who is
experienced, wise, and healthy will drive his bus safely to its
destination irrespective of the fact that some of the passengers have
thrown peels of oranges and bits of cigarettes in the bus and are in
dirty clothes with torn shoes etc.

If the bus driver happens to be a blind or insane person then the
passengers of the bus despite wearing good clothes and shoes will be
heading towards disaster. Thus in any journey the importance is of the
leader who leads one to the destination. The Holy Qur'an says:

***Who strays more than one who follows his lust without guidance from
Allah.*** (Surah al-Qasas, 28:50)

In the context of this verse we come across a tradition which says:
"Whoever adopts his religion according to his own inclination and
opinion and does not follow a true Imam, according to this verse is a
misguided person". (***al-Mizan***, vol. XVI, p. 56)

Another tradition says: "One, who worships much, but does not follow a
true Imam, is certainly a misguided person, and Allah does not accept
his worship". (***al-Kafi***, vol. I.)

The Purpose of Imamate and Leadership
-------------------------------------

In the eyes of Islam, world, wealth, status, authority and the
government are the means and not the end. That is the reason why the
devotees of Allah, who assume some authority do not give up leading a
simple life nor do they become self-conceited, arrogant and proud. The
Holy Qur'an says:

***It is the life of Hereafter which We have prepared for those who do
not want to be haughty in the land nor do they spread corruption.***
(Surah al-Qasas, 28:83)

Ibn Abbas says: "Once when I visited Imam Ali, he was mending his shoes.
The Holy Imam asked me, 'What do you think will be the price of this
shoe?' I said, 'It has no value at all'. The Holy Imam then said, 'By
Allah! To my mind this torn shoe is more valuable than my ruling over
the people provided I enforce truthfulness and eradicate the untruth".

Indeed, Imamate and leadership are not for comfort and luxuries but they
are meant for delivering the people from polytheism, tyrannies,
ignorance and dissensions and not for enabling the leader to lead a life
of comfort and selfishness. The purpose of acquiring authority by the
infallible Imams was to enforce the Divine commandments.

In Islam Imamate is not a secondary thing but it is an important
responsibility. It is not a bed of roses but it carries a heavy burden
of responsibilities. Thus the Imams used to lead a very simple life. At
times of need they used to go to the court like ordinary citizens. They
used to earn their own livelihood and never accepted any favor or
concessions.

Imam Ali in one of his letters wrote to Ibn Abbas: "Do not amass wealth
because of the authority of ruling the people that you have got. It is
not fair for you to take wrong advantage of the position you are holding
and oppress your enemies and the opponents. Your article of faith should
be to institute truth and keep it alive and eradicate the evil".
(***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XL, p. 328)

When Imam Ali after assuming the authority of ruling over the people
visited a city, he said, "I have come down to your city in my old dress,
with this asset and this horse. If after a few days you find that I
depart from your city in different clothes you should conclude that I
misappropriated the public property". (***Biharul Anwar***, vol IX, p.
500)

On another occasion Imam Ali said: "I swear by the Creator of this
Universe that had they not sworn unconditional allegiance to me; had
they not manifested profound gratitude for my accepting their rulership;
had not the presence of helpers and supporters made it incumbent upon me
to defend the faith; and had Allah, the Almighty not taken a promise
from the learned to put a check upon the luxurious and vicious lives of
Oppressors and tyrants as well as to try to reduce the pangs of poverty
and starvation of the oppressed and downtrodden, and had He not made it
incumbent upon them to secure back the usurped rights of the weak from
the mighty and powerful oppressors, I would even now have left the
rulership of this State as I did earlier and would have allowed it to
sink into anarchy and chaos. Then you would have seen that in my view
the glamour of a vicious life of your world is no better than the
sneezing of a goat". (Sermon 7, ***Peak of Eloquence***)

Imam Ali further says: "Almighty Allah by entrusting your affairs to me
has given me right over you. And as I have a right over you, so you too
have a right over me. This incumbency between us is mutual". (Sermon
221, ***Peak of Eloquence***)

From this we have now understood that the aim of rulership is not
comfort and luxuries otherwise Imam Ali for passing his day to day life
would not have been constrained to sell his sword and say, "By Allah!
Had I some money to spend over buying simple clothes for me I would have
not sold my sword".

Similarly, when Imam Ali Riza was the heir-apparent in Mamun's time he
used to sleep on a jute mat and sit with his slaves par taking the meals
together. And Prophet Sulayman despite his exalted position of being the
Prophet of Allah lived with the poor and loved them too".
(***al-Hayat***)

The Signs and the Attributes of the Imam
----------------------------------------

Since the leadership of the Ummah, i.e. the Imamate is of paramount
importance and since the people are likely to fall under the trap of
false leaders, the Holy Qur'an and the Holy Prophet have shown the signs
of an Imam who can guide mankind to distinguish between a straight path
and a ditch. Here we enumerate such signs very briefly:

**1.** A beggar entered the Masjid of the Holy Prophet and asked the
people for alms, but the people paid no attention to him. After all the
beggar said, "O Allah! Be a witness to this. These people have
disappointed me". Imam Ali was offering his prayers and was in the
bowing posture. He stretched his hand and the beggar came forward in
front of him. The Holy Imam gave away the ring to the beggar. At this
moment the following Qur'anic verse was revealed:

***Only Allah, His Messenger and the true believers who are steadfast in
prayers and pay alms while they kneel down during prayers, are your
guardians.*** (Surah Ma'idah, 5:55)

That was the sign by which the people fully understood that the guardian
who is referred to in the revelation besides Allah and His Holy Prophet
was none except Imam Ali. There is no doubt about it that before this
incident, the exalted position of Imam Ali had already been fully shown
to all concerned, but the reference with regard to the incident of
giving away alms in prayers was pointedly a sign of Imam Ali's Imamate
and guardianship that after Allah and His Holy Prophet he had the
exalted position of the guardianship and patronage of the entire Ummah,
otherwise mere giving away of the ring in bowing posture during prayers
cannot be a sign of Imamate and guardianship without a direct reference
being made through Divine revelation.

**Example**: If you send somebody to your home to fetch the key of the
store from your wife, and for the satisfaction of your wife you tell him
a sign that he should tell her that you have decided the previous night
to give some money to such and such person so that your wife could take
it as a sign of genuineness of the message.

Just think it over that fetching a key from one's wife through a
messenger, and message regarding the decision of helping somebody by
money, has no relevancy. The giving away of the ring in prayer is also
like this as it was used to serve as a sign of the Imam because only
giving away something in alms does not ordinarily make anyone exalted in
the eyes of Allah.

The Imamate of Imam Ali had already been established but this incident
was only to emphasize it as a sign from Allah.

**2.** The Holy Prophet got himself busy for 23 years in his mission of
Prophethood. Each year has 365 days and the total number of days
involved in preaching comes out at 8395.

The following revelation was made in the Holy Qur'an:

***Today the unbelievers have lost all hope about your religion. On this
day I have perfected your religion. Completed My favours to you. And
have chosen Islam as your religion.*** (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:3)

You just glance over these thousands of days of the Holy Prophet's
mission and find out only one single day to which the above-mentioned
revelation aptly applies. It is certain that all days were not alike but
of course one out of such days will be the special day of utmost
importance. We, therefore, review the days so as to mark that special
day.

**(i)** Was this day the first day of the Prophethood of the Holy
Prophet? No, because on that day neither the unbelievers had become
disappointed nor the religion was completed. Therefore, it cannot be
that special day.

**(ii)** Was that the day when the Holy Prophet was asked to preach
openly after three years of preaching in secrecy? No, this cannot be
that special day because that day was the beginning of preaching of
Islam and it had not reached the stage of completion.

**(iii)** Was that the day of migration of the Holy Prophet from Makkah
to Madina or was it a day of the birth of Fatima the beloved daughter of
the Holy Prophet or the day of victory at Badr? No, because after the
migration and the birth of Lady Fatimatuz Zahra and the victory of the
Battle of Badr the Qur'anic revelation were made on the Holy Prophet for
several years and therefore none of these days can be regarded as a day
when religion was completed.

**(iv)** Was that the day about which Allah has specified four special
distinctions i.e. the day of the Conquest of Makkah in 8 A.H. or the day
of granting concessions to the unbelieving pilgrims? No, it is not so,
because on the day of the conquest of Makkah only the unbelievers of
Makkah had become disappointed and not all the unbelievers, and further
that from 8 A.H. to 10 A.H. until the demise of the Holy Prophet (in
these two years) several verses were revealed and commandments were made
and, therefore, no day of the year of 8 A.H. can be considered as the
day of the completion of religion or favors.

**(v)** Is it possible that that day was the day of 'Arafa' (the day
preceding the day of performing ***hajj***) when the Holy Prophet was
busy in performing the rites of pilgrimage? No, it is not so, because
the performance of the rites of pilgrimage by the Holy Prophet was a
part of religion and not the entire religion but the Holy Qur'an says on
that day when the religion was completed.

In short if we continue our search to know that day we find that that
was the Day of Ghadir-i Khum which falls on the 18th of Zilhajja. That
year was the last year of the life of the Holy Prophet when he with
thousands of Muslims performed the rites of ***hajj*** and before
returning to Madina when he arrived at a point from where people were to
disperse to different directions to their respective destinations
(Yemen, Madina, Iraq and Abyssinia etc.).

That was the place of Ghadir, where the commandment regarding the
appointment of Imam Ali as the Imam and the successor to the Holy
Prophet came from Allah. Then the Holy Prophet with special attention
and arrangement according to the command of Allah, appointed Imam Ali as
the Imam for the guidance of the Ummah.

**1.** On that day the unbelievers lost all hope as on that day their
allegations against the Holy Prophet (being the poet, the magician or
the insane) were falsified. The Battles of Badr, Khaybar, and Trench
etc. had all been finished and all conspiracies and intrigues had been
nullified.

But the unbelievers only hope rested on the day of the demise of the
Holy Prophet because they had calculated at their own that since the
Holy Prophet had grown old and had no son to succeed him either, nor had
he appointed a successor, the forceful impact of Islam would diminish
but when they saw on the day of Ghadir that a person by the name of Ali
who was ablest of all had been appointed as a successor to the Holy
Prophet, it frustrated all their hopes. Thus on that day the unbelievers
had become disappointed.

**2.** It was the day when religion was brought to completion, when with
the laws and commandments, the appointment of the ruler was settled when
with the laws its enforcer had been appointed; when with the plan the
model was also introduced; and when the leader for expanding the Islamic
movement had been appointed. The Holy Qur'an says:

***On this day I have perfected your religion.*** (Surah al-Ma'idah,
5:3)

Hence the above-mentioned verse means the religion cannot be considered
to be complete without the appointment of the leader.

**3.** On that day when Allah said: ***I have completed My favours to
you***. But in truth all the favours will be of no avail if the favour
of having the leadership of the Imam is denied by the people because it
is the Imam who by his guidance and teaching enables the people to make
use of the Divine favours. It means that refusing to accept the
leadership of Imam nullifies all other favours.

In clear terms it means today when you have got an able ruler and guide
who will enforce the Divine commandments and when in all respects Islam
has been perfected, I have chosen Islam as your religion.

We have seen that how the Holy Qur'an in its unique style has described
the thing which people read every day about the importance of the day
which is applied only on one particular day of the entire period of the
Prophethood of the Holy Prophet.

Since we are writing it in brief we conclude this topic here. We should
now like to trace the circumstances pertaining to the endeavors of the
Holy Prophet to indicate the importance of the leadership and Imamate.

The Holy Prophet's Endeavours
-----------------------------

The Holy Prophet right from the beginning of his Prophethood had
introduced his successor. When on the first day of the preaching the
following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

***Warn your nearest relations.*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara, 26:214)

When this verse was revealed and Allah commanded him to warn his near
relations, the Holy Prophet arranged a feast and invited all his
relatives he said to them, "I do not know of any person who may have
brought for his nation anything better than what I have brought for you.
Allah has commanded me to invite you to Him. Who amongst you is there to
help me in my mission and be my brother, successor, and vicegerent?"
(***Tarikh Abul Fida***, vol. I, p. 116)

It was Imam Ali who stood up every time to support the Holy Prophet
while all others remained defiant.

The Holy Prophet time and again spoke about Imam Ali. On the occasion of
the Battle of Tabuk, he deputed him as his successor and said to him, "O
Ali! You are to me as Prophet Musa was to Harun". (***Sahih Bukhari***
and ***Tafsir Namuna***, vol. VI)

The Holy Prophet urged the people how they should treat his beloved
daughter, Lady Fatima after him and said: "The support of Fatima of a
man is the proof of his truthfulness".

Sometimes the Holy Prophet made Abuzar a standard and said: "His tongue
is pious and his words are truthful. It means, "O People! Find out with
whom Abuzar sides in the matter of guardianship and Imamate".

Sometimes he said to Ammar Yasir, "O Ammar! Those, who persecute and
kill you, will belong to the group of rebels". This remark was a direct
hit on Mu'awiya because when in the Battle of Siffin Ammar Yasir was
martyred at the hands of Mu'awiya's troops, the people at once
recollected the prophecy of the Holy Prophet which he made about Ammar
Yasir and realized that his killers were oppressors and rebels and
believed that Mu'awiya's claim was false and thus they dissociated
themselves from Mu'awiya's forces.

Therefore, Mu'awiya on the advice of Amr bin 'As cleverly started giving
a different interpretation to the Holy Prophet's prophecy about Ammar
Yasir and adopted means to counteract the indiscipline and chaos
prevailing in his army.

Sometimes the Holy Prophet through figures of speech drew the attention
of the people to the guidance of the infallible ***ahlul bayt*** as for
example likening the ***ahlul bayt*** to the Ark of Prophet Nuh, he
said, "My ***ahlul bayt*** are like the Ark of Prophet Nuh; whoever
boarded it were saved and the infidels who did not embrace the faith and
did not board the Ark were drowned". (***al-Ghadir***, vol. II, p. 301)

Sometimes the Holy Prophet spoke of the infallibility and high virtues
of the infallible Imams and reminded the people about their wisdom and
leadership by saying, "I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate".
(***Tafsir Burhan***, vol. I, p. 191)

Even up to the last days of his life the Holy Prophet did not give up
his endeavors as he asked for the pen and paper so that he might write
something for the Ummah but alas! he was given such a reply which was
against all manner of etiquette, religion, and the Holy Qur'an, and the
very people who thought they deserved the reins of caliphate prevented
the Holy Prophet from writing down something on a piece of paper as they
put an excuse that the "man" was in a state of delirium because of his
acute illness and said, "***innar rajula la yahjur***" (The man is
talking nonsense) Allah forbid! Would that these people had known that
the Almighty Allah said about His Prophet that he never spoke anything
out of his desire. The Holy Qur'an says:

***He does not speak out of his own desires. It is a revelation which
has been revealed to him.*** (Surah an-Najm, 53:3, 4)

Well, it was our intention to emphasize that the Holy Prophet made every
endeavor to guide his followers and to make arrangement for Imamate. On
the first day also he invited the people to realize that anyone who
helped him in his mission of Prophethood would become his vicegerent and
Imam and on the last days of his life also he asked for pen and paper,
and on the day of Ghadir Khum also by giving the signs that to whom his
loving daughter Lady Fatima Zahra, great men like Abuzar and Ammar Yasir
approved would be the Imam.

In short the Holy Prophet spared no effort from his side but it is an
irony of fate that the very wishes of the Holy Prophet were flagrantly
flouted. Let Allah, Almighty punish those who from the very beginning
sabotaged the interest of the Imamate and the guidance of the Ummah.

**A Question**: Why despite all the high virtues, abilities and
attributes and support of the Holy Prophet, the people overlooked Imam
Ali for a long period?

**Answer**: The flouting of the Divine commands is not a new thing. The
Holy Qur'an has taught us to be pious and trustworthy and yet piety and
trustworthiness are very rare. And why did Satan not prostrate himself
before Adam? Did not the followers of Prophet Musa after he went out of
sight and lost contact with them, go astray?

Forgetfulness and indifference are human weaknesses. Of course only
those who build up their own character and by self-discipline make
themselves deserving of Allah's kindness are the exceptions. Besides,
old feuds and enmity which the people were harboring against Imam Ali
became the cause of people's refusal to accept him as their Imam.

Those of the people who got killed in the Battles of Badr, Uhud, Khayber
and Hunayn belonged to one or the other tribes so how could their
relatives be prepared to accept him as their Imam, who had killed their
people. Another reason of people's refusal to accept Imam Ali as the
Imam or renouncing after once accepting him as the Imam was the question
of the Holy Imam's justice and concept of good conduct.

This fact becomes quite clear when we see the people, who had severed
their allegiance to him but after the assassination of Uthman had
gathered round the Holy Imam, and those very people again broke their
allegiance to the Imam and triggered off the Battle of Jamal against
him. These people had great hopes of receiving extraordinary benefits,
financial and social, but when they saw that the Holy Imam was not
partial to anybody in any matter, they got disappointed.

Besides, when some selfish and notable people suggested to the Holy Imam
that they should be consulted by him in the State affairs, he replied
that in any matter in which he would not find any express command of
Allah and His Prophet, he would no doubt consult the people, and they
would be included among them.

In short, these people had their own interest before them and they found
that the Holy Imam was very strict in safeguarding the property of the
poor people so much so that he was not going to spill even a drop of
milk to go waste and was not prepared to pay any heed to their
unreasonable demand; hence they turned hostile to him.

One another reason of the people's turning against Imam Ali was his
strict justice and acute observation. Of course, an Imam who does not
spare a single public property to be misused or usurped by anyone and
instead would retrieve it back to public treasury, would not be popular
among the people, who are mostly evil-minded and hence they would go
against him.

However, the people did not abide by the wish of the Holy Prophet,
overlooked the Divine appointment of the Imam and altered for themselves
the method of guidance and rulership.

These people, of course will be answerable before Allah as they fall
under the category of the people within the meaning of the following
Qur'anic revelation:

***And as for those who speak ill of the Messenger of Allah will face a
painful punishment.*** (Surah at-Tauba, 9:61)

What would be a greater sin than to ignore the bequest of the Holy
Prophet?

Expression of Truth and Endeavors for it
----------------------------------------

Besides the expression of the Holy Qur'an and the Holy Prophet Imam Ali
himself on several occasions made a clear statement of his truthfulness,
abilities and qualities as for example it is in his sermon in ***Nahjul
Balaghah*** that when a fellow asked the Holy Imam as to how much
ambitions he had of ruling the people, he replied that he only demanded
that much of his right which was only his. He says: "By Allah, that man
snatched the caliphate as if it was an insignia, which could be put on
by him; though he knew very well that I was as indispensable to the
caliphate as the pivot to the grindstone (upon which its revolving
depend).

The eminence of my position among those men was such that I was like a
fountainhead from which wisdom flowed and nobody could aspire to rise to
the heights of my knowledge. But I was forced to bear this usurpation
and turn my face away from the calamity; I was in serious straits.

There were two alternatives before me: either to fight for my rights
without the help of supporters, or to patiently endure the bereavement;
the endurance was going to be of such a sad and long duration that
during this period young men would become old, the old would lose their
vitalities and the faithful would end their days unsuccessfully trying
to improve the situation". (Sermon 7,***Peak of Eloquence***)

In that way the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali explains to the
people about the position of the Imam and the Divine guidance.

Some Attributes of the Imam
---------------------------

I fail to understand from where I should begin and what I should write
on this important subject. After having gone through the narrations
about the attributes of the Imam I am simply wonder struck. Apart from
this my esteemed readers also would not bear it, if I may dwell upon the
subject in detail. But it is the wish of everybody to get himself
acquainted with some of the attributes of the Imam and I too have
decided to describe some of the attributes of Imam.

**(i) Imam Must be Infallible**: Infallibility does not mean that one
does not commit any sin but it means that one should not even conceive
of committing a sin.

We are saved from committing many sins and in other words we are in a
state of infallibility, that is neither we have committed any sin nor
have we conceived of committing it, e.g. the sin of going nude in the
streets, the sin of committing suicide, the sin of killing somebody etc.
Therefore, we do have knowledge of many sins but we never think of
committing them. Similarly, Imam because of his immense knowledge and
faith has the knowledge of all sins but their attitude not towards one
or a few but towards all of them is such that they do not even think of
them.

**(ii) Large-heartedness**: Strong soul and large-heartedness are the
means of rulership. Narrow-mindedness, irritable temperament and
hastiness are not good for running the administration of a society or a
State or for leading and guiding the people to progress and prosperity.

When Allah selected Prophet Musa for the guidance of the people, he
asked for a few things from Him, the first one among them was high
courage, self-control and magnanimity. The Holy Qur'an says:

***He said, O my Lord! Enlarge my breast for me. And make my mission
easy to me.*** (Surah Ta Ha, 20:25-26)

And it is about our Holy Prophet that when the believers wanted to
avenge tortures given by the unbelievers, he did not give them
permission and instead said, "Today is the day of mercy not of revenge".

And it is about Imam Hasan who after hearing the highly insolent and
despicable remark of a syrian about him said: "Why have you become so
angry with me? If you need money I will make you happy with enormous
money. If you need a house, I will provide you a house". The Holy Imam
treated him so politely that the fellow became ashamed of his behaviour
and finally confessed by saying, "It is Allah's secret as to whom He
makes the Imam and the leader".

**(iii) Justice**: When all the people expect justice, Imam should be
the emblem of justice. Let us go back to the life of Imam Ali for a
while, and have a glimpse of his justice. We have already mentioned many
interesting incidents in our discussions on social justice. However, we
will simply mention one or two examples of the words and deeds of the
Holy Imam:

• Imam Ali in a letter to one of his officials warned him thus: "If I
heard that you misappropriated the public treasury, by Allah I will deal
with you severely". (Letter 20, ***Peak of Eloquence***, ISP, 1 984)

• Regarding the policy matter of the State, Imam Ali wrote to Malik
Ashtar: "The share for the far-flung areas should be the same as for the
nearby ones". (Letter 53, ***Peak of Eloquence***)

• About his assassin, Ibn Muljam, Imam Ali said, 'Do not kill anyone
other than my assassin". He further went on to say, "And that you should
do it by one stroke only as he did in my case and thus do not exceed the
limit of justice". (Letter 47,***Peak of Eloquence***)

• In the case of flogging a culprit when Qambar awarded him three extra
lashes in addition to the prescribed number of lashes, Imam Ali whipped
Qambar with three lashes as in this case he did not show any leniency or
favour because of Qambar being very much attached to the Holy Imam in
devotion, service and regards. (***Qisarul Jumal***, vol. II, p. 21)

• Imam Ali said, "By Allah, if all the seven continents with all that
they contain are offered to me as a remuneration or bribe for depriving
an ant of the husk of a grain of barley carried by it, I will never do
it". (Sermon 228, ***Peak of Eloquence***)

• In another incident when the Holy Imam heard that non Muslim woman was
unjustly deprived of her ornaments and no usual protection was given to
her, he became so annoyed that he said that for this shameless act if a
Muslim dies he would not mind it.

**An Incident**: Once the people asked a preacher to say something on
the attributes of Imam Ali. He mounted the pulpit and said, "Imam Ali
was a man of knowledge and wisdom". He paused and then heaved a sigh and
said, "Ali was pious". He sighed again and said. 'He was brave and
worshipped Allah".

He again sighed, and came down from the pulpit. People asked him, "It
was not a speech at all" He replied, "The position of Imam Ali is highly
exalted. I do not possess enough knowledge and time, and, therefore, I
thought that there was nothing better than that I should heave a sigh,
give the hints, and then retire". We are also giving passing reference
only.

**Imam Should Subdue His Passions**: Imam Ali says: "What a bad thing it
would be if my passions overcome me and distract me from the path of
truthfulness and justice!" (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XXV, p. 164)

Imam Ja'far Sadiq narrates from the authority of Imam Ali: "There are
many conditions for Imamate and one out of them is that temporal and
worldly affairs do not engage the Imam's attention".

Imam Should be Brave: Imam Ali says: "No battle has ever frightened me
nor has it influenced me". (***Peak of Eloquence***)

Imam Ja'far Sadiq narrates from the authority of Imam Ali. "The Imam
should be the bravest of the brave". (***Biharul Anwar***)

Another narration says: ''Imam should not be timid". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. XXV, p. 172)

The question of death and martyrdom should be quite apparent to the
Imam. Imam Ali says: "By Allah! I have such fondness for death as an
infant has for its mother's breast".448

**Imam Should be Perfect Par Excellence**: Imam Ali in his letter to
Mu'awiya writes, "O Mu'awiya! Were you ever entrusted with the noble
status of administering justice to, and ruling over mankind? Have you
the necessary knowledge for that work? Do you really know the canons of
equity and justice as laid down by Islam. May Allah protect and withhold
me from behaving towards mankind the way you have behaved and from
tyranny, exploitation, and murders that you commit". (Letter10, ***Peak
of Eloquence***)

**Some Other Attributes of the Imam**

**(i) Acts According to the Holy Qur'an**: The Imam should act and pass
judgements according to the Holy Qur'an. Imam Ali says: "I swear by my
soul that the Imam of the people can be the one who gives orders
according to the Holy Book of Allah and should have his belief in the
true faith and he should restrain his desires". (***al-Irshad*** by
Shaykh Mufid)

**(ii) Imam's Kindness**: About the merits of the Imam, Imam Ali Riza
says: "The Imam is more kind to his people than their parents". He
further says, "The Imam should possess political acumen so that he may
organize the society with correct plans and schemes. He should be in a
position to discharge his Divine obligations. The Imam should be so
learned that he can speak to the people in their various languages and
dialects". (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XXV)

**(iii) Devotion**: One of the attributes of the Imam is his piety, and
his indifference towards worldly things. Imam Ali about the patches
stitched on his dress says, "Look at me, I have got so many patches on
my dress that I feel ashamed to hand it over to somebody for putting any
more patches on it". (Sermon 163,***Peak of Eloquence***)

At another place he says, "By Allah! I have no yearning and desire for
the caliphate". (Sermon 200, ***Peak of Eloquence***)

About devotion, simplicity and living like a poor man we hear from Imam
Ali: "Indeed Allah has made it obligatory that the true and just Imams
should lead their lives in a simple way and keep their souls under check
so that they go side by side with the poor people, who may not suffer
from a feeling of deprivation". (Sermon 204, ***Peak of Eloquence***,
ISP 1984)

**(iv) Imam Never Doubts**: Imam Ali says: "Since Truth dawned upon me I
never entertained any doubt". (Letter 183,***Peak of Eloquence***, ISP
1984)

And he further said: "I never lied and the thing revealed to me was not
false. I never misled anybody nor was I misled". (Letter 184, ***Peak of
Eloquence***, ISP 1984)

**(v) The Imam Remains Unaffected by Aspersions**: The Imam remains
unaffected by aspersions or abuses. Imam Ali says, "I belong to that
group on which aspersions and bad remarks have no effect at all".
(***Peak of Eloquence***)

**(vi) Imam Should Take the Lead**: Anyone who considers himself to be
the Imam of the people should before teaching the people and leading
them should take the lead himself by educating his soul and before
training others by speech should train himself by his deeds. (***Peak of
Eloquence***)

**(vii) Imam should be Frank and Above Formalities**: Almighty Allah
says to Prophet Muhammad:

***Tell then: 'I do not seek any reward for my preaching you for I am
not a pre tender. It (the Qur 'an) is nothing but a reminder to you from
the Lord of the Universe. You will certainly know its truthfulness after
a certain time.*** (Surah Sad, 38:86-88)

There are several signs of being formal, for instance, man is not
prepared to accept the invitation of unknown people; he does not
apologize for his wrong doing; he does not ask people about things he
does not know and he does not consult people whenever occasion arises.
Anyone who indulges in formalities oppresses the inferior one and
remains overawed by his superiors. All these things are the signs of
formality, affectation, deceit and wrong methods. The Imam is
hospitable, kind and affectionate to all the people.

That is why when people ran along with the mount of Imam Ali out of love
and respect for him, the Holy Imam forbade them to do that and said:
"That is not the correct thing". Similarly, when the people did the same
thing with the Holy Prophet he also did not allow them to do it. In the
life of the Prophets and the infallible Imams we come across many such
incidents of their simplicity and sincerity.

**(viii) The Imam is Tolerant But Not Sycophant**: A Divine leader
should for the sake of educating the people be tolerant but should not
placate them by overlooking their crimes because tolerance is for
correcting the people's affairs and to ignore the importance of his own
exalted position but placating will amount to ignoring the commands of
religion and for safeguarding one's position or attaining some higher
rank.

Tolerance means that one should make allowances for the people's lapses
and condone their shortcomings and waywardness so that they may be drawn
towards religion. Placating means that we have no set principles, and
maintain liaison with good and bad people as a matter of expediency and
diplomacy for the sake of our personal interest. Tolerance emanates from
one's broad-mindedness, while flattery comes from personal greed and
weakness.

Thus by differentiating the meanings of tolerance and flattery we have
to say that the Imam should be tolerant, broadminded, large-hearted and
forgiving, so that the unguided people, who have gone astray because of
personal weakness and fault, should not be disappointed, but should be
attracted to and follow the Imam's teachings. Prophet Yusuf had told his
brothers that they would not be questioned about their past misdeeds as
the Holy Qur'an says:

***He said, 'There shall be no reproof against you this day Allah may
forgive you and He is the most Merciful of the merciful'*** (Surah
Yusuf, 12:92)

Of course the Imam and the Guide should be tolerant and enduring as the
Holy Prophet said, "I have been made Prophet so that I may be tolerant".
(***Nahjul Fasahat***, hadith, No. 1093)

In another tradition, the Holy Prophet said, "Allah has commanded me to
continue being tolerant just as I go on performing my obligatory
functions of offering five daily prayers. (***Nahjul Fasahat***, hadith
No. 677)

In a famous tradition we read that the Holy Prophet used to talk to the
people according to their mental level. In many other traditions the
religious scholars have been told not to speak out all that they know
but while doing that they should consider the overall nature, mental
horizon and the intelligence of their listeners.

In short tolerance is necessary for all, but for the Imam it is an
obligatory condition.

**(ix) Imam is Well-conversant with the Philosophical Approach of
History**. Imam Ali says to his son, Imam Hasan: "My dear son! Though
the span of my life is not as large as that of some other people, who
have passed away before me, yet I took great care to study their lives
assiduously; I went through their activities I contemplated over their
deliberations and; I studied their remains, relics and ruins; I pondered
over their lives so deeply that I felt as if I have lived and worked
with them from early ages of history down to our times, and I know what
did them good and what brought harm to them". (Letter 31,***Peak of
Eloquence***, ISP, 1984)

**(x) Imam Does Not Take Undue Advantage of His Position**: In this
context the Holy Qur'an says about the Holy Prophet:

***Allah would never give the Book, authority or prophethood to any man
who would tell others to be his servants instead of being the servants
of Allah. He would rather tell them to worship Allah for they had been
teaching and studying the Book .*** (Surah Ale Imran, 3: 79)

**(xi) Attending the Complaints**: Imam Ali used to arrange the
complaints in written order and the person against whom the complaint
was lodged was summoned to the court of law and was questioned about the
complaint and his financial assets were put to scrutiny. The Holy Imam
often used to instruct his governors to send him their report on their
activities and financial statement of account.

**(xii) Patience and Conviction**: One of the attributes of the Imam is
his patience and conviction. The chief characteristics of Imam include
his observation, conviction and faith.

The Holy Qur'an says about the people of Bani Isra'il:

***We gave the Book to Musa (Do not have any doubt about the Day of
Judgement) and made it a guide for the children of Isra'il. We appointed
some of the Isra'ilites as leaders for their exercising patience to
guide the others to Our commands. They had firm belief in Our
revelations***. (Surah as-Sajdah, 32:23, 24)

**(xiii) Free from Prejudices**: The Imam should be free from all
prejudices and attachments of worldly nature, as for instance
consideration of tribal, racial and parochial affiliations and all such
matters as leave a bad influence on man.

**(xiv) Sincerity of Purpose and Indifference to Worldly Gains**: Imam
Ali wrote to one of his governors in Azarbaijan: "You have not been
entrusted with the governorship so that you amass wealth; nor is it a
tasty and juicy morsel to be swallowed up". (Letter 5, ***Peak of
Eloquence***, ISP, 1984)

The Holy Qur'an also says about the Prophets that they do not expect any
gains from anyone. It records the statement of2, Prophets Nuh, Hud,
Saleh, Lut and Shuayb. The Holy Qur'an says about these Prophets as
follows:

***And I do not ask you any reward for it, my reward is only with the
Lord of the Worlds.*** (Surah ash-Shu'ara, 26: 109, 127, 145, 164, &
180)

Some More Attributes of Imam
----------------------------

• The Imam is the proof of Allah and he tells us what we should be like.

• The Imam is the light which reveals truth and realities, and banishes
oppression, polytheism and ignorance.

• The Imam is trustworthy. He does not absorb man's potentialities
within himself but invites the people towards Allah.

• The Imam possesses all kinds of knowledge, perfections and ancestral
characteristics.

• The Imam is the vicegerant of Allah on earth. He is like a sacred and
pious blood in the life of the society that is to say it serves as
life-blood for rejuvenating the insipid society.

Imam Ali says, "Actually for the Imamate and guidance of the people the
most suitable is he, who is the ablest of all the people and who has the
greatest knowledge of the Divine Commandments". (***Peak of
Eloquence***)

Thus the Imam should possess knowledge, ability, and capacity for
everything. Imam Ali further says, "The standard of Imam can be borne
only by that person who is fully conversant with all matters pertaining
to truth, knowledge and wisdom and who possesses patience of the highest
degree.

**Imam and Equality of Rights**: Imam Ali says, "I am one amongst you
and a human being like you. Whatever is for you is for me also. The
command of Allah is as much applicable to you as it is to me. The
hardships in the mortal world are for you and me alike and above all,
all of us have equal rights".(***Commentary on Nahjul Balagha*** by Ibn
Abil Hadid)

**Safeguarding the Interest of Islam**: Imam Ali was deprived of his due
rights but he remained patient. He used to say that if the affairs of
the Muslims were going to be managed satisfactorily he would not mind
and instead would bear the injustice done to him.

Imam Ali says, "By Allah ! If I had not been afraid of dissensions among
Muslims, I would certainly have adopted a different line of approach and
would have retrieved my rights by force". (***An Approach to Nahjul
Balagha*** by Murtaza Mutahhery)

Ibn Abbas suggested to Imam Ali that he should not join the advisory
council set up by Umar because the plan had been such that he would be
deprived of his rights. The Holy Imam said, "Since I have been invited I
will definitely go. I do not wish that because of me the meeting should
be ineffectual ".

The Method of Appointing the Imam
---------------------------------

In today's society the best way of selecting a leader or a man to an
important position is by election. Though election may be the solution
of this problem, yet this method cannot be correct in every situation,
because election cannot alter the reality; it cannot make right as wrong
or wrong as right. If the truth is truth it can never be untruth despite
the limited number of people supporting it. Nobody can say that a thing
selected by 51 persons can be better than the one selected by 49
persons.

True, for practical purposes the opinion of the majority can be
considered but can majority opinion points towards truth or realities?
No, in principle the Islamic government is established on Divine
principles and the majority or the minority opinion has no value because
this government in fact is the government of Allah.

Would it not be better that Allah Who is Omniscient and most Merciful of
the merciful should Himself appoint the Imam for the guidance of
mankind.

If you care to know you will find that in the Holy Qur'an at about
eighty places the opinion of the majority has been condemned. It says:

***If you obey most of the people in the land they will lead you astray
from Allah's path for they only follow their own conjectures and preach
falsehood***. (Surah al-An'am, 6:117)

Thus it follows that majority of the immature and untrained people
should not be accepted and in Islam the mutual consultation does not
apply to the making of laws and the appointment of the Imam, but it only
concerns the enforcement of the social laws. In fact, can there be any
room for consultation in respect of number of rak'ats in prayers? Can a
pebble turn into a pearl if the people gather round it? Can a piece of
gold turn into a brick if people ignore it?

Apart from it the Qur'anic verses about consultation or counseling are
not the proof of acceptance of the opinion of the majority, but on the
contrary we take counseling as a means of arriving at a correct decision
and not what the majority of people hold as their opinion. Consultation
or counseling is meant for finding the opinion of the people and to sort
out the correct opinion.

About counseling, the Holy Qur'an presents a triangle, one angle of
which pertains to obtaining opinion, the other one to man's own
inclination, and the third one dependence upon Allah. Suppose if the
majority of people secure power would that be content with its rights or
would start oppression Is the majority of people generally honest? Does
the majority look to its interest and that of the other people with the
same angle?

It is a fact that wise and sensible people have accepted this reality
that the opinion of the majority of people in a given society is most
often wrong but they are compelled to accept it because in other methods
there are comparatively more flaws than in the method of selection by
election.

But those who have firm belief in Allah do not consider it necessary, in
the light of distinct commandments of Allah, revelations and clear-cut
narrations, except in case of their enforcement, to follow the majority,
and as such they have accepted the Commands of Allah and without fear
and doubt are following them with perfect satisfaction.

I would repeat it here again that the opinion of the majority can be a
solution of a problem but this method cannot be correct at every place
and in every situation. We shall discuss matters about election
afterwards.

Unpleasant Experiences
----------------------

History has revealed that people got themselves elected by vote of
majority but sooner or later its defects began to dawn upon them. We had
considered those elected people as the best ones, and had prepared
ourselves to lay our lives for their sake, and they on their part acted
in such a manner by deceit, fraud and diplomacy, that we could not
become aware of our wrong decision, and the later events established
that they were other than what we had supposed them to be, as their
position and status had changed them altogether.

Actually we do not possess the knowledge of the unseen and thus as we
are unaware of the coming events and the nature of the people's
disposition we cannot form a definite opinion about them.

Are man's circumstances not apt to change? Is it not a fact that
certainty changes into doubt and vice versa? Does fear not change into
faith, and does faith sometimes not change into atheism? We have before
us many instances of people about whom we had great hopes but they
disappointed us.

We also know of instances of people about whom we could not imagine that
they would become so virtuous and pious, but all of a sudden they
changed and became the source of virtues and blessings. Did the paid
magicians of Fir'aun not come out to disgrace Prophet Musa and did they
not all of a sudden become the followers of Prophet Musa?

Was Bal'am Ba'ur not a wise man who for the love of worldly things lost
all his merits?

By citing these instances it is not our intention to denounce altogether
the method of election or the verdict of the people, but our aim is to
prove that election can be a means of solving a certain problem but it
cannot be a correct, sure and Divine means.

Therefore, the best means to solve all problems is the means of Islam.
Perhaps we can liken the means of election to the process of drawing the
lots but this too can be on some occasions a source of solving a problem
but it can not always a practical and sensible means.

To elaborate the above-mentioned discussion we reproduce below an
interesting narration of Imam Zaynul Abidin:

The Holy Imam says, "If you come across a man who is courteous, appears
to be of good character, possesses the signs of devotion and worship,
and is quite humble and modest, you should wait for some time, so that
he may not deceive you".

The Holy Imam giving the reasons for patience says: "There are many
people who are unable to gain worldly benefits not because of their
faith and piety, but because of their physical infirmity, mental
incapability, lack of personality, or fear.

Thus that person who is incapable, timid and characterless uses religion
as a shield to gain the world and he always deceives the people by his
pretensions and affectation, and, if circumstances permit he would
plunge himself into corruption and immorality".

In the latter part of this narration the Holy Imam says, "If you see
that a person is also away from unlawful property, even then you should
wait, and not make a hasty decision about his being a good person
because a man has varying desires. There are many people who avoid
unlawful property but they become inclined to other undesirable and
unlawful deeds".

Would that we were able to comprehend the true meaning of the Imam's
saying.

The Holy Imam continues to say, "When you see that a man abstains from
all evil deeds and does not deceive you also, you should watch his
intelligence, because there are many people who are away from evils and
yet they do not have commonsense and intelligence, as a result of which
they become inclined towards evil instead of good".

In the last portion of his narration Imam Zaynal Abidin continues to
say, "If you see that a person possesses good intelligence and does not
deceive you also, even then you should wait and see whether he lets his
desires overpower his intelligence or with the help of his intelligence
he is dominated by his desires, and how much ambitious he is of
acquiring false leadership, because there are persons who are losers in
this world and also in the Hereafter.

They do not forsake the world for the love of Allah but for the sake of
achieving the false power and authority. To them the pleasure of having
the authority is more important than the pleasure of the world and its
bounties.

The Holy Imam at last says: "In fact a noble man is he, who considers
disgrace with truth better than honour coming through evil". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. LXXIV, p. 184)472

The gist of this long narration is that the question of selecting a
leader of the Ummah by means of election cannot be settled when all the
influencing factors of deceiving the people and of the people being
deceived are predominant.

I again repeat that election can be a means of solving a problem to a
certain extent but it cannot be effective at all places and in all
circumstances.

Imam Ja'far Sadiq says, "If a friend of yours has reached a high
position or status and he still has one-tenth of his attachment and love
that he had for you before, he is not a bad friend". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. LXXIV, p. 157)

Just imagine how power changes man's attitude. Therefore many
good-natured and sincere people become changed in their attitude and
behaviour after attaining a position of authority. That is why we say
that the appointment of the leader should come through Divine authority
as Allah is All-Knowing and He knows the unseen. Allah alone knows
better as to who should be endowed with Prophethood. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***Allah knows best where to direct His Message.*** (Surah al-An'am,
6:125)

People's Decision is Not Always Correct
---------------------------------------

Imam Muhammad Baqir said to Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari: ' O Jabir! You
cannot be a friend of ours until you make yourself such that if all the
people of the town say about you that you are a bad man and you do not
grieve and gumble or if they say that you are a good man and you do not
feel happy about it and that to know your own-self and submit yourself
to the scrutiny of the Holy Book". (***Buzurg Salan***, vol. I, p. 431)

From this narration it becomes evidently clear that the common opinion
or decision of the people is not always correct.

After it has been proved that Imamate is an important principle of the
belief and is the source of guidance and development of the social order
and that without following the Imam worship is not accepted despite
one's day and night worshipping of Allah.

The Holy Imam says: "By Allah! If some one engages himself in prayers
during the night, and fasts during the day, but does not accept our
leadership, will, on the Day of Judgement, either face a great torment
of Allah or at-east Allah will not be pleased with him". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol.XXVI, p. 190)

We read in history that the question of Imamate has greatly influenced
the people. It left a particular effect on their destiny and thereafter
they were involved in threats, intimidation, temptation, and suspicions
by which they for themselves installed fictitious leaders and Imams and
thus brought various sections of the population on the brink of
disaster.

Now it is appropriate that after all these discussions we should trace
the means and method of appointment of the Imam from the Holy Qur'an and
traditions. Before that it is better that we review the various
prevailing methods in vogue and then compare them with that of the
Islamic method and know the Islamic values.

Various Methods of Appointing the Leader
----------------------------------------

In this world people acquire leadership through revolt, force, power and
oppression or through a committee or a parliament. It is also through
general elections or through inheritance that a leader is appointed.

Obviously, armed revolt is a transgression and for practical purposes it
thrusts the authority of a minority ignoring the views of the majority.
This method thrusts one person on the people. The system of election is
also not without defects as it also comes under the definition of force
or compulsion. The only flawless means therefore is the Divine method by
which only flawless means therefore is the infallible Imam is appointed.

The Imam is Appointed by Allah
------------------------------

After Almighty Allah tested Prophet Ibrahim's endurance in life, loss of
property and separation from wife etc. and he came out successful in all
of them He appointed him to the position of Imamate and leadership. The
wordings of the Divine command according to the Holy Qur'an are,
"***inni ja 'iluka linnasi imama***". The Holy Qur'an says:

***When his Lord tested Ibrahim's faith and he satisfied the test, He
said, 'I am appointing you as the leader of men'***. (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:124)

From the wordings "I am appointing you" it is indicated that the
appointment of the Imam is in the Hands of Allah and thus Imam should
know all the laws and commandments which are applicable to man and the
world.

The Imam should be aware of the ultimate result of the course of action
which he adopts. Imam should not look for his self-interest and should
not be influenced by internal and external factors. The Imam should
possess the human qualities and virtues of the highest order. Obviously,
such prerequisites are not found in ordinary men and the people too are
unaware of these qualities.

The weak, ignorant and misguided people should seek the guidance of the
Imam. But when the Imam himself happens to be ignorant, misguided, and
uncertain, haughty, timid or miserly what would become of the nation?

It is for this reason that the handing over of the people to a fallible
Imam is cruelty and insult to humanity and entrusting the responsibility
of Imamate to those who are ignorant who do not know of the unforeseen,
who do not possess intelligence and insight but are only guided by their
apparent eyesight only, is cruelty to them also.

Let us not go too far; even in the present day progressive society if
anyone says that such and such person, who is not very well-known, is
more capable and experienced than the known politicians and experienced
ones, possesses the ability of leading the society to progress and
development, no one will accept it, because man is the slave of his own
inclination and there are extremely few people who are completely just
and justice-loving and it is also not possible that a leader or a ruler
should be above favouritism, nepotism and the feeling of partiality.

We read in the Holy Qur'an that the people used to ask as to why the
Holy Qur'an was not revealed to the two famous persons of Makkah and
Ta'if. The Holy Qur'an says:

***And they say: 'Why was not this Qur'an revealed to a man of
importance in two towns?'*** (Surah az-Zukhruf, 43:31)

Those people thought that since such and such person was well-known,
wealthy and man of means, the revelation should also have been made to
them. This is the example of the thinking of the majority people. When
Talut was appointed by Divine Will as Commander of the Army, many people
refused to accept his authority because of his poverty. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***And when their Prophet said to them: 'Allah has appointed Talut as a
king for you '. They replied, 'How can he rule over us when we deserve
more to be king than he; besides he does not have abundant wealth'.***
(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:247)

Is it not a fact that, when the Holy Prophet was busy in delivering the
Friday prayer's sermon, the sound of the beating of the drum rose high
after the arrival of the merchandise and people left listening to the
sermon, rushed to the market and got themselves busy in making
purchases, and hardly a few people had remained in the Masjid? This too
is an example of the thinking of the majority.

In short after such bitter experiences how can we leave the question of
the appointment of the Imam in the hands of the people? This is one
argument in favour of our belief regarding the Imamate that like the
Prophet the Imam is also appointed by Allah.

In this context we quote a statement of Martyr, Ayatullah Sayyid
Muhammad Baqir Sadr. After dealing with a few preliminary things he
deduces that the method of the appointment of the Imam should be the
nomination made by Allah and His Prophet. And its early stages are
these:

**(i)** On the one hand the Holy Prophet was responsible for bringing
about a radical change and an everlasting religious, intellectual, and
political revolution and to convert the system of ignorance to the
Islamic system of human affairs.

**(ii)** On the other hand, the period of 23 years of the Prophethood
was such that the Muslims were under hardships and torture, fear and
deprivation in Makkah, and in Madina too they were facing hardships and
were busy in waging wars against the enemies of Islam. Still, these 23
years were very small as compared to the big revolution that these years
brought about.

**(iii)** Another important point that one should not lose sight of is
that the Holy Prophet did not depart from this world all of a sudden so
that we may say that for the guidance of the Ummah he had very little
time at his disposal.

In short, since the duration of 23 years for changing the social
structure according to Islamic standard is very small, it was necessary
that this process of Islamization of the social order should have
continued after the passing away of the Holy Prophet. Here we discuss a
few aspects of this process.

**(i)** One point of view may be that (Allah forbid!) the Holy Prophet
was not careful to arrange the continued guidance and the stability of
the radically viable religion and left us in the lurch.

This view is quite unacceptable because when even an ordinary person
cannot think of leaving his whatever little accomplishment he has
achieved without being taken care of by somebody who is responsible to
maintain it, then how could the Holy Prophet in view of his extreme
concern for Islam and devotion and sincerity of purpose, have left his
achievements unattended? About the Prophet's extreme concern and great
worry for Islam the Holy Qur'an says:

***A Messenger from your own people has come to you. Your distress and
suffering is extremely grevious to him. He really cares about you and is
very compassionate and merciful to the believers***. (Surah at-Tauba,
9:128)

***Perhaps you will kill yourself out of grief because they disbelieve
this Book.*** (Surah al-Kahf, 18:6)

The Holy Prophet who was so much concerned about the people and the
consolidation of Islamic order could not leave the people to themselves.
Did the Holy Prophet not during the course of the Battle of Tabuk which
lasted for 80 days leave his deputy in Madina? Was Abu Bakr prepared to
leave the people to themselves and not to entrust them to Umar? Can this
be accepted that Abu Bakr was concerned about the people after him but
the Holy Prophet was not? Thus this point of view cannot be accepted.

**(ii)** In this context there is another point of view. Suppose we say
that the Holy Prophet at the time of his departure from this world left
the matter of the guidance and the leadership of the Ummah to the people
themselves for mutual consultation and adopting the method of election.

On this point of view an objection can be raised as to why Abu Bakr,
like the Holy Prophet did not leave the question of his succession to
the advisory council and instead nominated Umar. And then why did Umar
not seek the people's verdict by means of their votes and instead set up
an advisory council comprising six persons and that council in fact was
a dictatorial body as he had laid down the condition that anyone who was
selected as a caliph by this council must be supported by Abdur Rahman
bin 'Awf?

What kind of an advisory council it was that only one of its members was
given the right of veto and the decision would be acceptable of that
group, to which the member with the power of veto belonged? Was this
anything other than dictatorship and despotism?

Another question regarding this point of view is about the explanation
of the event of Ghadir-i Khum.

Now that since both the first and the second points of view are not
acceptable, the only course that is left open is that the Holy Prophet
who was so much concerned about his people should select an able person
to lead and guide the Ummah and introduce him to the people as the most
capable of all persons in matter of his understanding of the religion.

And accordingly he introduced Imam Ali, who had the capability of
performing his deeds, had strength of character in leading and guiding
the people, could work for the welfare and progress of the society and
above all had to his credit the merits of knowledge, wisdom and
foresight as well as remarkable achievements.

**An Interesting Point**: A very important point worth noting is that in
the matter of Imamate the Holy Qur'an has mentioned with one word
"right" or the "covenant" as when Prophet Ibrahim asked for the
leadership of his offspring the Almighty Allah replied as is mentioned
in the Holy Qur'an:

***Ibrahim asked, 'Will this leadership also continue through my
descendants'. The Lord replied, 'The unjust do not have the right to
exercise My authority.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:124)

Thus since Imamate is the covenant of Allah we should not decide it by
consultation or by counseling, because it does not relate to the
covenant of Allah but it pertains to the affairs of the people.

Therefore, in the Holy Qur'an at two different verses where this word
"Consultation" or "Counseling" has been mentioned it relates only to the
affairs of the people or to the command to the Holy Prophet or when
Allah commands the Holy Prophet to consult the people in their own
affairs. It can well be noted that counseling is only related to the
affairs of the people in the society and not to the question of
appointing the Imam, which is only related to the covenant of Allah. The
two verses of the Holy Qur'an indicated above are as follows:

***Only through the Divine Mercy have you (Muhammad) been able to deal
with your followers so gently. If you had been stern and heard-hearted
they would all have deserted you a long time ago. Forgive them and ask
Allah to forgive (their sins) and consult with them in certain matters.
But when you reach a decision trust Allah. Allah loves those who trust
Him.*** (Surah Ale-Imran, 3:159)

***Those who are steadfast in prayers, conduct their affairs with
consultation among themselves.*** (Surah ash-Shura, 42:38)

**Some More Unpleasant Experiences**: Prophet Musa selected 70 men from
Bani Isra'il and took them to Mt Sinai, but, for one silly question of
theirs, all of them became the target of Allah's wrath, and thus the
choice of such a distinguished Prophet was brought to naught. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***Musa selected seventy men from his people to attend Our appointment.
(In Our Presence) when an earthquake jolted them to death, Musa said,
'Lord, had you wanted to destroy them, why did you not destroy them and
me before? Are you destroying us for what the fools among us have done?
This (destruction) is only a trial through which you cause some to go
astray and guide others. You are our Guardian. Forgive us and have mercy
on us; You are the best of those who forgive'.*** (Surah al-A'raf,
7:155)

It is because of such unpleasant happenings that we do not feel
satisfaction at the method of selection by election and therefore it is
better that we should entrust the system of election to that Being Who
knows better than all of us the realities, mysteries, and unseen events,
that is, Almighty Allah, the Lord of the worlds All-Knowing, All-Seeing,
All-Hearing.

Natural Flaws of Election System
--------------------------------

Election that is, taking the opinion of everybody serves a good purpose
for solving a certain problem on certain occasions but basically it
entails such defects and flaws as one cannot help to ignore. These flaws
are of the following kinds:

**(i)** Every man selects one person of his choice but it gives rise to
rancour and jealousy with the result that bad blood, animosity and
feeling of revolt are created between the people and the man who is
elected.

**(ii)** Every elected person naturally takes sides with the people who
got him elected and only they become important in his eyes. The elected
person takes into consideration the wishes of his electors and tries to
please them by being partial, contrary to the truth, and this sort of
attitude in itself would be like polytheism, because man will be
forsaking Allah and will be trying to please others.

**(iii)** As a result of the selection of a leader by election,
uncertainty, errors, forgetfulness and desires may lead us to the wrong
path and detract us from truth.

**(iv)** There is no guarantee that the elected persons would not change
their mind and adopt a new course of action out of expediency.

Hence, all these possibilities should be given consideration while
supporting the system of election for selection of a leader.

The Right Method For Selecting the Imam
---------------------------------------

The only right path for selecting the Imam is the same one which the
Holy Qur'an tells us as we consider and believe the Imamate to be like
Prophethood; we believe the Imam to be like the Prophet and we feel the
necessity of the Imam as we feel the necessity of the Prophet. The
Imam's function is also like the Prophet's in the matter of guiding the
human society to the right path. Therefore, we quote the same Qur'anic
verse here which we quoted in our discussion on Prophethood. The Holy
Qur'an says:

***Surely, in Our Hands is the guidance***. (Surah al-Layl, 92:12)

Thus just as the Prophet is appointed from Allah, the Qur'anic verses
point to the fact that appointment of the Imam also is from Allah as the
Imam's appointment is primarily concerned with the covenant of Allah as
well as with the function of guiding the people to the right path.

In this context Abu Ali Sina says: "The Imam should be infallible and
highly virtuous. Since it is not possible for an ordinary person to know
such spiritual and intellectual characteristics in man and even if he
knows something of it, he knows it in a defective way or through the aid
of signs. Thus it is evident that the appointment of the Imam should
come from Allah as He alone knows all the secrets of human beings and
the unseen matters as well as things which are of good value to us".

Election is Forbidden
---------------------

The Holy Qur'an says:

**No believing men and women have any choice in a matter after Allah and
His Prophet have decided it. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Prophet has
clearly lost the way and gone astray. (Surah al-Ahzab, 33.36)**

**Your Lord creates and chooses whom He pleases. The good is not for
them to choose, Glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above wha t they
associate with Him. (Surah al-Qasas, 28:68)**

In ***Tafsir al-Safi*** there are many narrations which say that when
Allah has chosen somebody for leadership the people should not follow
anybody except him. In another narration we read that because of the
possibility of error and wrong judgement, the very worth of election
goes. Thus the real value lies in the selection, which comes from Allah
as it is He alone Who knows the man's secrets and the unseen matters.

Nomination is the Only Correct Method
-------------------------------------

We have already mentioned that the correct method of choosing is the one
which comes from Allah only as it has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an
and the traditions and its example is found in the event of the Ghadir-i
Khum. The year of 10 A.H. was the final year of the life of the Holy
Prophet. In this year it was decided that the Holy Prophet should
proceed from Madina to Makkah for performing the ***hajj***. As soon as
the Muslims came to know of it, they prepared themselves to perform the
***hajj*** in company with the Holy Prophet.

Therefore, in the journey to Makkah, a large caravan accompanied the
Holy Prophet. When these people were returning to Madina after
performing the pilgrimage, they arrived at the cross-road, from where
they were to disperse and move to their respective destinations.

From here a road led to Madina in the North, to Iraq in the East, to
Egypt in the West and to Yemen in the South. At this point of journey,
the Holy Prophet ordered the Muslims to stop. The name of this place was
Ghadir-i Khum. That day was Thursday and it was the eighth day after
Idul Azha i.e. 18th of Zil Hijjah.

At the command of the Holy Prophet all the people stayed there and those
who had already gone ahead were asked to return and wait so that those
who were coming from behind could also arrive. It was a congregation of
about 100,000 people.

The day was very hot and the people's feet were burning in the scorching
sand. All of them offered the afternoon prayers in company with the Holy
Prophet and thereafter an important announcement began. The litters from
the camels' back were placed one above the other for the purpose of
erecting a raised platform. The Holy Prophet then went up to the pulpit
and said, "Can you hear my voice?" All replied, "Yes, O Holy Prophet!"

The Holy Prophet then glorified Allah and reaffirmed the belief in
Monotheism, Prophethood and the Resurrection Day, and told the people
about his mission. Everybody praised him for his mission. Thereafter, he
said: "Death is busy in its function. Very soon I may be recalled. I do
submit myself to the call of Allah. I am also accountable and you are
also accountable".

After this he took the fresh affirmation of people on Monotheism,
Prophethood and the Resurrection Day and then said "I am leaving amongst
you two most precious things, one the lloly Qur'an and the other my
***ahlul bayt***. Both these things shall never get separated from each
other. You should endeavour hard not to go ahead of them nor lag behind
them"

Then the Holy Prophet looked all around himself and after spotting Imam
Ali he beckoned him to come to the Pulpit. He then raised Imam Ali's
hand so high that everybody recognized Imam Ali, and then the Holy
Prophet in a loud voice asked: "Who is the ablest of all among the
Muslims?"

All in one voice replied, "Only Allah and His Prophet know it better".
The Holy Prophet said, "Ali is the master and leader of those whose
master and leader I am". The Holy Prophet repeated this and blessed
those who took Imam Ali as their friend and condemned those who took him
as their enemy.

I had decided that since the event of Ghadir-i Khum is absolutely clear
I should better not repeat it here but I thought it worthwhile to
mention it briefly.

To elaborate the event of Ghadir-i Khum is like saying something about
the sun and its light, because it is an event which has been quoted by
hundreds of both Shi'ah and Sunni traditionalists and dozens of books
have been written on it in proof of its authenticity. That is one reason
why we have given a brief account of it.

The Nomination of the Best Person
---------------------------------

The nomination of Imam Ali was not without reason and wisdom, because
his devotion, bravery, virtues, moral attributes, piety, dedication to
Allah and his sincerity were evident to everyone so much so that even
his enemies were not able to point out even the slightest weakness in
him. It was only he who never prostrated himself before false gods but
right from his very childhood he believed in Allah.

It was Imam Ali who, when on the night of the migration of the Holy
Prophet his enemies had planned to kill him during his sleep, slept in
the bed of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Prophet then safely migrated to
Madina.

It was Imam Ali who carried with him the Divine decree contained in the
first six verses of Surah at-Tauba forbidding the idolaters of Makkah to
join the ceremonies of ***hajj***, and boldly announced to the
polytheists at the top of his voice that from then onward no infidel
would ever enter the precincts of the Holy Ka'bah.

It was Imam Ali about whom the Holy Prophet has narrated hundreds of his
supreme merits. There are several books of Shi'ah and Ahlus Sunnah in
which the merits of Imam Ali have been recorded.We would quote some of
them afterwards.

Some of the Attributes of Imam Ali and ahlul bayt
-------------------------------------------------

There are many attributes of Imam Ali and ***ahlul bayt*** but for the
purpose of establishing the identity of the Imam we reproduce a few of
them below.

Ibn Abbas narrates that Imam Ali on the advice of the Holy Prophet made
a vow to observe fast for three days with Lady Fatimatuz Zahra and Fizza
(her maid-servant) after the recovery of his two beloved sons, Imam
Hasan and Imam Husayn from illness.

When both the sons returned to their normal health there was nothing to
eat in the house while fulfilling the vow. Imam Ali borrowed three Sa'
(about 9 kilos) of barley from a Jew, Sham'un by name. Lady Fatimatuz
Zahra grinded 3 kilos of barley into flour and baked them in fine breads
for breaking fast on the first day.

But as soon as the time of breaking fast approached a beggar appeared
and said, "Peace be on you, O***ahlul bayt*** of the Holy Prophet! I am
an indigent Muslim, give me some food, Allah will reward you with the
dishes of food in Paradise". Hearing this all the inmates of the house
handed over to the beggar their respective breads and instead broke
their fast with water only.

On the second day they observed their fast again, and when the time
after sunset prayers came for breaking the fast, an orphan came and
asked for food. Everybody in the house again handed over their share of
bread to the orphan and broke their fast with water only. Likewise on
the third day of fasting at the time of breaking fast a captive asked
for food and they did the same and gave him their breads and instead
broke fast with water only.

On the fourth day the Holy Imam took both of his sons to the Holy
Prophet. The Holy Prophet observed that the faces of his grandsons were
pale with weakness. He enquired about the reason of this and proceeded
to the House of Lady Fatima. There the Holy Prophet saw his beloved
daughter in the worship of Allah and noticed that her eyes were sunken
on account of weakness. When the Holy Prophet after seeing their
condition became very unhappy.

The Archangel Jibra'il came with Allah's revelation of glad news and
said to the Holy Prophet. "O Prophet of Allah! Congratulations. Allah
for paying compliments to these people has revealed a surah for them.

These people despite intense hunger have given their food to a beggar,
an orphan, and a captive for the love of Allah only and they had no
desire in their heart of hearts save their gratitude to Allah. They
never wanted to take any advantage by this extraordinary noble deed.
Their only aim was to please Allah". The Holy Qur'an says:

***And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and
the captive. They say: 'We only feed you for Allah's sake; we desire
from you neither reward nor thanks'.*** (Surah ad-Dahr, 76:8-9)

This narration has been quoted by all the Shi'ah scholars. Late Allama
Amini has drawn references from twenty-four Sunni scholars also. (See:
***al-Ghadir***, vol. III, p. 111; ***Tafsir Kashshaf***, vol. III, p.
239, Egypt Publication; ***Tafsir Bayzawi***etc.)

**Another Incident**: Once when Imam Ali passed by Shiba and Abbas he
heard Shiba saying, "I am the architect and the key bearer of the Holy
Ka'bah" and Abbas saying, "My function was to provide the drinking water
to the pilgrims". By this each one of them were bragging about their
superiority. Imam Ali said, "Though I feel abashed to say, but still I
will have to say that despite my tender age the superiority that I
possess is not possessed by you that is, after I took my sword and made
a jihad you people embraced belief in Allah and His Holy Prophet". This
remark however, did not please them.

Abbas after becoming annoyed went to the Holy Prophet and complained.
The Holy Prophet asked Imam Ali, "Why did you say such thing to your
uncle Abbas?". Imam Ali answered, "O Holy Prophet! My remark was not
wrong". At this moment the Archangel came with the following Divine
revelation.

***Do you think that giving a drink of water to the pilgrims and the
guarding of the sacred Masjid, is the same as one who believes in Allah
and the Day of Judgement and strives hard in Allah's way?*** (Surah
at-Tauba, 9:19) (***Tafsir Namuna***)

Even the Angel Could Not Do
---------------------------

When the Holy Prophet decided to migrate to Madina, he entrusted Imam
Ali in Makkah to pay off his debts and to return the entrusted
properties to their rightful owners and said to him, "Tonight the
enemies have planned to besiege my house and to kill me. Go and sleep in
my bed". Thus on that fateful night Imam Ali slept in the bed of the
Holy Prophet.

Allah asked Jibra'il and Mika'il, "I have prolonged the life of one of
yours. Who is prepared to give priority to life of another over that of
his life? ' None of them consented. Then they were told to see how Imam
Ali got himself prepared to lay his life for the sake of saving the life
of the Holy Prophet. This famous fateful night is called "***laylatul
mabit***" And the revelation that came down is as follows.

***Among men there is one who gives his life to seek Allah' pleasure.
Allah is affectionate to His creatures.*** (Surah al-Baqarah 2:207)

Imam's House is the Place of Angels' Visits
-------------------------------------------

At this time of writing these lines it is the night of 21st of Ramazan
1404 A.H. It will not be out of order if I mention a few things which I
have understood from the traditions:

"***The laylatul Qadr***" (the night of Destiny) comes not for once in
several years but every year. According to Qur'anic verse the angels
descend down on earth on this night In the time of the Holy Prophet the
angels used to visit him in this night. Whom after the Holy Prophet did
the angels visit? Did they come to every ordinary man or to him, who was
nearest to Allah and the Holy Prophet?

From the narration of Imam Ja'far Sadiq it is proved that in all times
the presence of a living Imam is necessary and as he is the centre of
attraction of the angels it is one of the very highly exalted attributes
of the Imam. (Vide: ***al-Kafi***, vol. I)

Some Other Attributes of Imam Ali
---------------------------------

The Holy Prophet on several occasions addressed Imam Ali as his brother.
(Vide. ***al-Ghadir***, vol. III, p. 115, 124)

In the Battle of Trench one single stroke of Imam Ali inflicted on the
enemy was far greater in value than the entire worshipping of all the
people and geni'i.

Imam Ali was the first to declare his faith in the Holy Prophet.

In Islam the first thanks-giving prostration was that which Imam Ali
performed and that was when he was offered a Divine opportunity to sleep
in the bed of the Holy Prophet who safely came out of his house besieged
by his enemies and migrated to Madina.

In many of the narrations of the Holy Prophet Imam Ali has been
introduced as a model of a perfect man. He never got himself separated
from truth nor the Holy Qur'an. He is the chief of the world and the
Hereafter. To look at his face is an act of worship, and his followers
are the best specimens of human beings.

Mutual Rights of the Imam and His Followers
-------------------------------------------

From the narrations mentioned in ***Biharul Anwar***, we reproduce a few
of them which throw light on the rights of the Imam on the people and
the people's rights on the Imam.

Imam Ali said to the people, "You and I have rights on each other. My
rights on you are:

**(i)** You should stick to your oath of allegiance to me.

**(ii)** You should remain my well-wisher both in my presence.

**(iii)** You should answer me as soon as I summon you, and your rights
on me are:

**(i)** Sympathy with and wishing well to you

**(ii)** Security of the Public treasury

**(iii)** Education and training". (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XXVII)

In another tradition Imam Ali said, "You have as much rights on me as I
have on you". Elaborating this point the Holy Imam continued: "The
greatest of all the rights that Allah has made obligatory on mankind are
the same mutual rights which are incumbent upon the Imam and the
people".

Imam Sajjad in his treatise on the rights, considers the right of the
Imam as the most important.

Imam Ali said to the people, "You should not talk with me as you talk
with the despots and the tyrants. Also do not indulge in false modesty
by placating me or ignoring me. Do not consider that your reminding me
of things will be unpalatable to me. When you feel the truth and wish to
give some advice, do not hesitate to tell me that. If Allah had not
protected me I too would not have been free from errors". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. XXVII, p. 253)

Islam has taken great care and precautions about the qualifications and
attributes of the Imam, but after the appointment and installation of
the Imam and after identifying the Imam it has made it obligatory to
follow and abide by his orders. (***al-Kafi*** has quoted several
narrations on this subject).

Imam Ja'far Sadiq in the matter of court decision recommends the people
to refer to the jurists and in the end of the narration says, "Anyone
who refuses to accept the decision and decrees of the jurists
(***fuqaha***) is like the one, who has rejected us, and whoever rejects
us is like the one, who professes polytheism".(***al-Kafi***, chapter:
***ikhtalaf al-hadith***)

A tradition says: "Anyone who offers prayers during the night, observes
fast during the day, performs ***hajj*** every year, and distributes his
wealth in the cause of Allah but does not identify the vicegerant of
Allah and does not perform his deeds under his guidance, has no right on
Allah". (***Safinatul Bihar***)

Obligations of the Ummah
------------------------

It is narrated in the traditions that the people have three obligations
towards their infallible Imam.

(i) Identifying the Imam and that too with clear-cut signs, reasonings
and high merits which are present in an infallible Imam.

(ii) To follow the commands of the Imam by heart and soul, that is by
speech and conduct.

(iii) To refer to the Imam in matters of disputes and to make them the
judge and arbiter. (***al-Kafi***, vol. II)

The Last Purpose of the hajj
----------------------------

We read in one of the narrations of Imam Baqir that he saw some people
who were circumambulating the Holy Ka'bah. He said to them,
"Circumambulation was being done in the days of the Age of Ignorance
also. When Islam came, it defined the rules and rituals of
circumambulation as well as the ***hajj***, so that people performing
the ***hajj*** should gather round us and profess their allegiance to us
in matter of love, regard and guardianship". Thereafter, the Holy Imam
recited the following verse from the Holy Qur'an:

***Lord, I have settled some of my off-springs in a barren valley near
Your Sacred House so that they could be steadfast in prayers. Lord, fill
the hearts of the people with love for them and provide fruits for their
sustenance so that they may give thanks.*** (Surah Ibrahim, 14:37)

Prophet Ibrahim had not entreated Allah to turn the hearts of the people
toward the Holy Ka'ba but he entreated Him to turn the people's heart
towards the love of his infallible offsprings. (***al-Kafi***)

Thus one of the purposes of the ***hajj*** is to turn the people towards
the Imam.

There are however some signs, which go to show how the mutual
obligations of the Imam and the people are fulfilled. Imam Ali describes
these signs as follows:

**(i)** Establishment of love and affection.

**(ii)** Protection of religion from changes, innovations being made in
it, apathy of the people, and dangers of all kinds.

**(iii)** The untruth is expelled from all spheres of activity and
because of the people's attachment and love for the Imam the foundation
of truth becomes firm and sound.

**(iv)** The paths of religion become bright and clear.

**(v)** Justice is firmly rooted.

**(vi)** Everything goes on functioning smoothly.

**(vii)** The consideration of mutual rights from both the sides (of the
Imam and his followers) consolidates the government, frustrates the
designs of the enemies, and accordingly the Imam and the people act
according to set rules, laws and regulations. The possibility of enemy's
influence is eliminated and the evil-doers do not get chance to cause
any damage. (***Biharul Anwar***)

These however are some of the results of the mutual faith between the
Imam and his followers.

The Zealous Shi'ah
------------------

A man from Khorasan suggested to Imam Ja'far Sadiq to initiate an armed
campaign as the Holy Imam had with him about 100,000 followers. In order
to test the fidelity of that man the Holy Imam said: "Just get down into
this burning oven". He became hesitant to obey the command of the Holy
Imam. Meanwhile, a person came and greeted the Imam and the Holy Imam
said to him, "Will you get down into this burning oven!"

That man without any reluctance and with pleasure got into the burning
oven. The Holy Imam then said to that Khorasanian man, "We have with us
a few of those men, who can get into the burning oven on our command.
Others are not real Shi'ahs. There is a lot of difference between one's
words and deeds". (***Biharul Anwar***, vol. XI, p. 139)

It is to be noted that the man who got into the burning fire of the oven
remained unaffected and was hale and hearty like Prophet Ibrahim when he
was thrown into the burning fire.

False Shi'ah
------------

We read in the narrations that anyone, who claims to be a true Shi'ah
and follower of Imam Ali, but attaches himself to others, in fact, tells
lies.

How the Imamate of the Infallible Imams Got Weakened?
-----------------------------------------------------

There is a narration of Imam Ja'far Sadiq who says. "If Bani Umayya had
not produced men who wrote what they were ordered to do, amass war
booty, and fought for their sake, Bani Umayya would not have usurped our
rights. The Imamate got weakened for lack of confidence and will-power
of our so-called allies, who easily accept defeat". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. XLVII, p. 383)

There are many people who are with the Imam but because of fear and
greed they become the lackeys of others.

Sufferings of the True Believers
--------------------------------

The true believers in Imamate and the teachings of the Holy Imams were
subjected to such atrocities that I am at a loss to understand from
where I should begin and where I should end them. But since our purpose
is to refer to them, we should like to content ourselves with mentioning
some of them.

**(i) Social Injustice**: By taking the Fadak, which yielded sufficient
income in those days, from Imam Ali his financial condition was
purposely weakened.

**(ii) Slandering**: Our oppressed Imams were subjected to slanders of
the worst kind so much so that when the people of Syria heard of the
martyrdom of Imam Ali in the Kufa mosque they started asking for what
purpose he happened to go to the Masjid? Was he amongst those who went
there to offer prayers?

**(iii) Patronizing the Imams' Enemies**: In order to weaken the
position of the Imams, their enemies were given full support and
encouragement.

**(iv) Injustice to Thinking and Understanding**: By raising the slogan
"Qur'an is enough for us" the people were prevented from listening to
the traditions of the Holy Prophet. The infallible Imam were forced to
remain tight-lipped. By this the very source of knowledge and wisdom was
cut off from the people.

**(v) Deprivation of the Well-wishers**: The kinsmen and the***ahlul
bayt*** of the Holy Prophet were deprived of their due share from the
Public Treasury.

**(vi) Fictitious Traditions**: Through man like Abu Hurayra the
traditions from the Holy Prophet were concocted and fictitious
traditions were produced for the purpose of extolling Bani Umayyah and
disparaging Bani Hashim. Fictitious traditions were concocted in such a
large number that it became difficult to sort out the authentic and
genuine traditions.

**(vii) Tampering with the Facts**: The narrations about Imamate and
guidance were so tampered with and misinterpreted that the people failed
to realize their importance.

**(viii) Distorted Concept of Imamate**: The institution of Imamate
which was established according to the covenant of Allah, was degraded
to such an extent that it was brought to the level of Yazid's barbaric
rulership.

**(ix) The Ignorant Substituted for the Learned**: All the Divine values
and standards were brought to naught. Everyone by dint of power and
authority changed the course of society according to his own whims and
wishes. Instead of following the leader who used to say, 'Ask me what
you want, I will answer you' they followed the leader who used to say,
'Don't ask me; I don't know, leave me alone'. The people instead of
going towards Imam Ali, the 'gate of knowledge' followed the caliph
Umar, who after facing difficulties in all types of problems used to
seek the advice of Imam Ali and used say, "If Ali had not come to my
rescue, I would have been ruined".

**(x) Excuses and Animosity**: One excuse that was put forward was that
Imam Ali was younger in age and of lively nature. Many Muslims had a
grudge against Imam Ali because in the Battles of Khaybar, Badr, Uhud
and Hunayn he had put the disbelieving ancestors of the converted
Muslims to death. That deep-seated rancour and animosity had forced Imam
Ali to go into seclusion so much so that he said that he was subjected
to oppression from the very first day.

The fact remains that the high attributes and virtues of Imam Ali have
been so expressively and widely narrated that no other companion of the
Holy Prophet can equal him in these attributes but despite this highly
exalted position, he was ignored! Truly speaking, can a person of lively
nature not be an able man?

Did the Holy Prophet in his last days not depute Usama, an eighteen year
old young man, as the Commander of the Army to lead the expedition to
Syria despite the presence of Abu Bakr and Umar? Is the old age a
eondition for becoming a leader? Has not the Holy Qur'an made knowledge,
piety, jihad, migration, dedicated services, sincerity and honesty the
criteria of human values and virtues? Then for what other reasons did we
go against Divine principles of judging the merits and adopted a
different standard altogether?

**(xi) Imam Himself Remained Aloof**: The most important thing is that
the people say that Imam Ali had contented himself with the religious
and spiritual leadership of the people only and left the political and
military leadership to others. It is difficult to understand that the
exhortations of the Holy Imam in ***Nahjul Balaghah*** (***Peak of
Eloquence***, ISP, 1984) were only for the people coming to him for the
solution of religious problems only.

Does anyone need to owe allegiance for seeking an advice on religious
matter? The Holy Imam several times complained of the violation of his
political rights. He never complained that the people did not consult
him on religious matters, for the people were compelled to ask him about
religious problems.

**(xii) Reason behind Forsaking the Imam**: It is highly painful to note
that the people say how it was possible that all the people were in the
wrong by forsaking the Imam and owing allegiance to others? They say
that in fact when the people forsook the Imam there must have been some
good reason behind it.

The answer to this is that first of all not all the people forsook Imam
Ali and secondly the majority is not the proof of truth. Should the
clear-cut injunctions and commandments of the Holy Qur'an be abandoned
and people's conduct should be viewed only?

It seems that these people have totally forgotten the last verses of
Surah Jumu'a which say that while the Holy Prophet was busy in
delivering his Friday sermon a party of merchants arrived and on the
beating of the drum, many of the people detached themselves from the
congregation and swarmed round the merchants and only a few of the
people remained there to listen to the Holy Prophet. Was leaving the
Holy Prophet under such circumstances a correct thing?

Novel Forms of Tyrannies and Oppression
---------------------------------------

Imam Ali was subjected to continuous oppressions. From the time the Holy
Prophet asked for the pen and paper and was insolently rebuffed the Holy
Imam after the Prophet's demise, had been treated with excessive tyranny
up to his last days. Let me be allowed to say that even up to the
present time the position of Imam Ali has not been recognized and he
remains still as the oppressed one. His words compiled in ***Nahjul
Balaghah*** has also not been truly understood. Therefore, oppression to
him was not confined to his lifetime only but it spreads round the
entire period of history.

The persecutions that our infallible Imams had to suffer were from
external sources as well as from their own unworthy people. The
oppressions that were done to Imam Ali were not worth complaining
because by that the very foundation of the Islamic government would have
been demolished and, therefore, he kept patient like one who had a thorn
in his eyes or whose throat was choked with a bone.

The oppression that was done to the Holy Imam was not by heart, speech,
action, or pen alone, but it was of all types which are beyond
description. The oppression that was done to our Holy Imam was done in
the name of religion and for the purpose of securing the proximity with
Allah, so much so that the people in their sermons, on the pulpit,
publicly and privately, and even in prayers used to abuse him.

The oppression that was done to our Holy Imams was from the same source
which they had obtained from them (the Imams) as they obtained strength,
knowledge and position from them and used the same on them. The
oppression to the Holy Imams was done by unwise friends as well as by
wise enemies. On the one hand there were timid, ignorant and foolish
friends and on the other there were clever and hypocritical enemies.

Oppression by Pen
-----------------

It is not known as to why many famous scholars from Ahlus Sunnah who
were contemporaries of Imam Musa Kazim never cared to quote any
tradition of the Holy Prophet from his source. Was Imam Musa Kazim not
better than an ordinary narrator?

I also cannot understand that why an important book like Sahih Bukhari
of Ahlus Sunnah which also includes many traditions originating from the
Kharijites, and which contains traditions from over a hundred anonymous
writers, and which gives them the stamp of authenticity does not quote
any tradition of the Holy Prophet from Imam Ja'far Sadiq and the Holy
Imams who followed him? Do all people not know that the Holy Prophet
introduced to the people his ***ahlul bayt*** together with the Holy
Qur'an?

Leaving aside these differences which are too many, we should overlook
them and become united against our common enemy. There are differences
of opinion on religious matters among Ahlus Sunnah also, and so they are
among the Shi'ah scholars, but these differences should not become the
bone of contention and the seed of discord as the flame of disunity and
discord may engulf the Ummah in a devastating inferno.

Allegations Against the Shi'ah
------------------------------

It is also not understood why the people do not restrain themselves from
impugning the Shi'ah and levelling false allegations against them. In
reply to these innumerable allegations and calumnies that have been
levelled against the Shi'ah we have defended our faith in the pages of
thousands of books and in the Masjids and this humble writer, who is
just a mere student, has also defended our faith on the Iran Radio and
television and which I still repeat. I mean:

**(i)** That the Shi'ah do not believe that the Holy Qur'an has been
tampered with.

**(ii)** That the Shi'ah do not consider their infallible Holy Imams as
deities.

**(iii)** That the Shi'ah do not consider Bahais and Babis (followers of
Bahaullah and Muhammad Ali Bab) as Shi'ah.

**(iv)** That the Shi'ah do not consider it obligatory to act upon the
four books (***al-Kafi***, ***Man la yahzaruhul Faqih***, ***Tahzib***
and***Istabsar***) though they consider them good among the good books
but they do not believe that whatever is written in them is irrefutable.

**(v)** That the Shi'ah do not consider all the companions of the Holy
Prophet as renegades and apostate but they believe that just as during
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet there were true Muslims and the
hypocrites also in the same way they also existed after the passing away
of the Holy Prophet. The passing away of the Holy Prophet cannot make
the hypocrites as true believers. Thus, those, who claim that all the
companions of the Holy Prophet were true believers and just, should tell
us as to where the hypocrites of the time of the Holy Prophet
disappeared.

Is It Possible For People to Give up Truth?
-------------------------------------------

Those who have the understanding of the letter and spirit of the Holy
Qur'an know it quite well that the people abandoned Prophet Harun, the
brother of Prophet Musa and an accredited Prophet as well, and started
worshipping the Calf.

In fact, as long as greed, desires, Devil and Satanic whisperings exist,
there will be danger and disruption.

Why People are Distracted From Truth Despite Their Good Deeds?
--------------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an has answered this question because it does not want
simply ritual worship, but it requires obedience and submission to Allah
.Iblis (Lucifer, the rebel angel) worshipped Allah for thousands of
years, but when the stage of affirming obedience to Allah came he became
a rebel. The Holy Qur'an mentions the nullification of virtuous deeds.
Is it not a fact that Bal'am Ba'aur was deprived of Allah's Mercy and
became the target of Allah's wrath?

The consequence of bad deeds is a terrific affair and it frightens
everybody. We know that Prophet Yusuf was thrown into a well, was made a
slave and was imprisoned, but he never felt any danger, and when he
reached the high position of rulership, he implored Allah to let him die
as a Muslim and never to let him go astray. Hence the consequence of any
action is the main thing. Prophet Isa said, "In my view the basis of a
work is not the first but the last thing which gives us wages".

Conformity Between the Shi'ah and Ahlus Sunnah
----------------------------------------------

If you happen to study a large number of books of the Shi'ah and Ahlus
Sunnah, you will note that practically all the attributes and virtues of
Imam Ali that the Shi'ah speak of are narrated by the scholars of Ahlus
Sunnah, and if the Shi'ah have criticized some companions of the Holy
Prophet the same criticisms are found in the books of Ahlus Sunnah also.

Lawful and Unlawful Guardianship
--------------------------------

**The Unlawful Guardianship**: The Holy Qur'an has laid great emphasis
on the subject of leadership, including its good as well as bad aspects.
In regard to the good aspect of leadership the Holy Qur'an has made the
obeying of the Holy Prophet and the men of lawful authority obligatory
side by side with the obeying of Allah.

It has also recommended the obedience to the jurists with the obedience
of Allah, His Holy Prophet and the men authorized by them. That is to
say, "If someone flouts the decrees of the qualified jurists he has
actually flouted the commands of the Holy Prophet and the Imam, and has
committed polytheism". (***Wasa'ilush Shi'ah***, vol. XVIII, p. 99)

It will not be out of place to list the type of the people who should
not be the leader of various groups and Imam of the people, and the
people should not obey them. In fact any sensible man with an ordinary
intelligence free from any pressure or influence, will naturally
understand that such people do not have the qualities of leadership.

But since the Holy Qur'an is the Book of Warning it puts mankind on the
alert against all dangers. Thus we reproduce below some of the verses
which are pertinent to the subject under discussion:

***Do not follow him whose heart We have made oblivious to Our
remembrance, who follows his own lust and exceeds the bound.*** (Surah
al-Kahf, 18.28)

***Do not comply with those who deny the truth. Do not heed a
contemptible swearer. Or backbiter, calumniator, Slanderer. Who hinders
men from doing good, the transgressor, the iniquitous. Crude, and above
all, mean and infamous.*** (Surah al-Qalam, 68:8-13)

***And do not follow any sinner or disbeliever among them.***(Surah
ad-Dahr, 76:24)

***Do not follow those who are extravagant.*** (Surah ash-Shuara,
26.151)

***And do not follow the way of mischief-makers***. (Surah al-A'raf,
7:142)

***And do not follow the wishes of the ignorant.*** (Surah al-Jathiya,
45:18)

***And follow not the wishes of a people who had erred before, and led
many others astray, and wandered away from the right path***. (Surah
al-Mai'dah, 5:77)

From the above-quoted verses of the Holy Qur'an, it becomes crystal
clear that how certain people and the group of people are excluded from
leadership on account of their sins, extravagance, quarrelsomeness,
ignorance, transgression, infidelity, meanness and debased nature. Thus
we understand that an Imam should be free from all these ills.

Similarly, in other verses of the Holy Qur'an the rulership of the Jews
and the Christians over the Muslims has been made unlawful and similar
is the case with the enemies of Allah, the hypocrites, and those who
exercise unlawful authority in the name of religion. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***You will see among them many who rush into sin and wickedness, and
devour unlawful gain. How evil are the things they do!*** (Surah
al-Ma'idah, 5:62)

Who is the Qualified Leader and Guardian?
-----------------------------------------

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Believers, obey Allah, His Messenger and your qualified leaders***.
(Surah an-Nisa, 4:59)

Can the work of the qualified leaders not be in conformity with the
commands of Allah and His Messenger according to this verse of the Holy
Qur'an? Can it be possible that in one strain we are told to obey Allah
and His Messenger and not to oppose them, and in another it is suggested
that we should follow the leaders who, day in and day out, are flouting
the instructions of Allah and the Holy Prophet? Is such a discrepancy in
the same verse be reconciled?

Indeed, the qualified leaders should only be the infallible Imams whose
obedience is the obedience of Allah and the Holy Prophet and in whose
knowledge and actions there are no contradictions whatsoever. If the
leader happens to be the one other than the infallible Imam then in fact
it will not be incumbent on us to follow that person but it will be
conditional as it is in the case of obedience to parents on certain
conditions.

The explanation of this is that the people are enjoined to obey their
parents and to treat them nicely but not in all conditions. That is if
the parents want to distract their children from the belief in
monotheism, in that case they should not obey their parents. The Holy
Qur'an says.

***We have enjoined on man to be kind to his parents; but if they try to
make you associate with Me that of which you have no knowledge, do not
obey them.*** (Surah al-Ankabut, 29:8)

***If they try to force you to associate with Me that of which you have
no knowledge, do not obey them*** (Surah Luqman, 31:15)

Hence, it becomes clear that obedience to parents is not necessary on
every occasion; it is necessary on occasions where they do not force
their children to oppose the commands of Allah. But obedience to the
qualified leader is incumbent at every place and on every occasion.

From the point of view of the Holy Qur'an, obedience to the qualified
leaders is unconditional because these are the persons who do not err
nor do they misguide or mislead their followers.

Thus according to the Holy Qur'an the qualified leaders are those
infallible Imams whose number according to 300 traditions narrated by
both Shi'ah and the Ahlus Sunnah scholars is twelve.

Guardianship of the Jurists (fuqaha)
------------------------------------

The guardianship of the Jurists is the process of continuity of Imamate.
In this context according to several hundred traditions of the Holy
Prophet which have been narrated by accredited companions of the Holy
Prophet the number of infallible Imams is twelve.

Eleven of the twelve exalted personages have been martyred after him
through poisoning or with swords because they fought against the despots
of their times. Our twelfth Imam, Imam Mahdi is in occultation and
according to hundreds of reliable traditions he will reappear by Allah's
command to establish a just government. Since people have not been able
to accept his leadership, Allah has kept him in His Protection until an
opportune time.

As for example when a certain government lights eleven lamps and the
people extinguish them it will preserve the last lamp at a safe place
and will not light it until people become so much mature and enlightened
that they understand the utility of light.

Similarly when Allah sent eleven infallible Imams and the people
tortured them, made them captives and martyred them, Allah has kept the
twelfth Imam in His safe custody until the opportune time. On the other
hand Allah has not left us to ourselves without guidance during the
period of occultation of the twelfth Imam Mahdi but He has entrusted us
to just, pious and virtuous jurists so that we may faithfully follow
them.

Therefore, it is incumbent on all Muslims to protect the Islamic system
and obey the commands of Allah which the just jurists issue.

Islam has such rules and regulations in different fields of activities,
financial, economic, punitive, administrative and judicial that these
cannot remain suspended, nor can they be controlled by ignorant and
selfish people.

Islam does not allow that a particular group of persons may start ruling
the other. Thus Islam has entrusted the job of enforcing the rules and
regulations to the jurists and pious people only so that they may issue
decrees in accordance with the Divine Commandments. The obedience to
these jurists by the people is as obligatory as it is to the Holy
Prophet and the Infallible Imam.

The Role of the Jurist
----------------------

Now a number of questions arise here. Do the Muslims need some system of
Government? Should an Islamic State be protected and defended or not?
Should the lands be safeguarded? Should laws be promulgated in an
Islamic State?

Should the right of the oppressed be restored to him? Should or should
not the voice of Islam reach every nook and corner of the world? Were
the teachings of the Prophets and the Imams confined to their time only
or were they applicable to all places and all times?

If the answer to these questions is in the affirmative and Islam has its
own system of social structure and laws and regulations, and the rights
should be honoured, and the land should be safeguarded then the form of
government must be Islamic, because without a system based on just and
correct lines, especially when the enemies of Islam have a big
farcically alluring system with them, we cannot protect our religion,
laws, country, life, property and honour.

If the government is necessary then the ruler is also necessary, because
the government cannot be run without a ruler. Therefore, since Islam
needs a government for enforcing its laws, we should find out the
qualifications of the ruler and know whether he has a deep understanding
of the Divine commandments, is just and competent, and can appreciate
and face difficulties.

If it is necessary that the ruler should be a true Muslim,
well-informed, pious, virtuous and statesman, then that person must be a
jurist, and his government will be called the government of the jurist.

Those, who do not believe in the concept of the guardianship of a jurist
should study the following view-points and accept anyone of them.

**(i)** Islam is confined only to prayers, fasting, individual worship,
moral values only and it does not envisage the solution of social
problems, justice, political and economic problems.

**(ii)** Islam was only meant for the duration of the lifetime of the
Holy Prophet only, and it was abandoned after him and now its important
social problems are confined only in books.

**(iii)** Important social laws should be enforced by the ignorant and
wicked persons only.

If none of the above-quoted view-points is acceptable or appeals to
reason, then we must accept the guardianship of the jurist, which means
that the enforcement of Islamic laws and solution of difficult problems
should be solved by eminent Muslim scholars and thus we must not think
that the guardianship of the jurist is unjustifiable.

Is it not narrated from Imam Ja'far Sadiq that "in the Holy Qur'an all
the individual and collective needs of the society have been described".
(***al-Kafi***, vol. I, p. 59)

Hence, are the government, ruler, administration and various fields of
human activities not included among the important needs of the society?

The Holy Prophet said, "I am grateful to Allah that I have described all
the requirements of the Ummah before my death".

Is there not the need of a ruler and the government during the
occultation period of Imam Mahdi in the Islamic society?

Imam Ali Riza while dealing with the problem of guardianship says,
"There is no nation which is without its leader and the social structure
of a society is directly concerned with the leader and that people
should manage the public treasury by keeping an account of its income
and expenditure, organize the society, fight against the enemies and
protect the society from internal dissensions and disunity. If there is
not going to be any such leader, then the nation will break up into
pieces and the Divine commandments and the teachings of the Holy Prophet
will be tampered with at the command of despotic ruler". (***Biharul
Anwar***, vol. VI, p. 60)

You will note that the question of leadership and the government has
been stated to be the most important problem by Imam Ali Riza. It is
obvious that for the benefit of the poor masses management of the public
treasury, equitable distribution of wealth, struggle against enemies,
administration of social institutions are not such that they are only
concerned with the time of the previous infallible Imams and that the
Ummah should be left to itself during the occultation of our living Imam
Mahdi that is to say, there should be no need of a government or a ruler
during the period of occultation.

Thus Islam acknowledges the existence of the society and the necessity
of the government and its ruler, but what is important is that we should
know the conditions and qualifications of the ruler, and what type of
the government it should be and how it should carry on the
administration.

According to common sense and keeping in view the various Islamic
narrations, the responsibility of the government should be laid on the
shoulders of the just jurist. We reproduce here excerpts from some
narrations:

**(i)** The Holy Prophet considered the jurists as his caliph. 506

**(ii)** The living Imam Mahdi with his own hand wrote in reply to a
letter: "You should refer to our narrators about your problems and
difficulties for they are our argument and proof on you just as we are
the argument and proof of Allah".

**(iii)** When Imam Ja'far Sadiq was asked about the problems which are
referred to despotic administration for decision he said, "Referring to
these departments is very bad because it is referring to the despot and
if someone gets back his right from these despotic departments it
becomes unlawful.

On such occasions however, it is your duty to refer to those people who
know our teachings and narrations fully well, because I declare them as
the ***qazi*** (Judge) for you. Thus you should remember that if this
jurist has given you his decision and you consider it worthless it is as
if you have considered the Divine command as worthless. If anyone
disobeys these jurists, it is as if he has disobeyed us, and whosoever
disobeys us, has in fact disobeyed Allah and this action amounts to
polytheism".

**(iv)** The Holy Prophet said, "Scholars are the successors of the
Prophets". (***Wasa'il***, vol. XVIII, chapter 11)

**(v)** Imam Kazim said "Jurists are the fortresses of Islam".
(***Kitabal Bai'***, Ayatullah Khumayni)

**(vi)** Allah has taken an assurance from the scholars that they would
not pass over the gluttony and oppression of the despots in silence and
would not ignore the hunger of the poor. (Sermon 7, ***Peak of
Eloquence***, ISP, 1984)

Naturally in a society supporting the oppressed and crushing the tyrant
do need a government or its operative agency.

**(vii)** In the Holy Qur'an we have been taught that in a society we
should stick to justice. Can justice in a society be maintained without
the existence of a government or a ruler?

**(viii)** Imam Husayn says, "Discharging of the duties and the
enforcement of laws should be in the hands of the scholars, God-fearing
and pious persons. These are the people who do not make any changes in
the Divine commands pertaining to lawful and unlawful things, and who
are the custodians of trusts". (***Tuhaful 'Uqul***, p. 242)

**(ix)** Imam Ali says, "Scholars are the rulers of the people".
(***Ghurarul Hikam***, quoted from ***al-Hayat***, vol. II, p. 293)

Thus it is deduced that in an Islamic society the head of the government
should be a just jurist with all the prescribed qualifications. These
very jurists are the authorized representatives of the infallible Imams
during the period of the occultation of our living Imam Mahdi. If the
authority and guardianship of the jurist is terminated, the despots
would raise their heads and the Divine commandments will be altered.

It is not known as to what is the objective of those people who oppose
the jurist?

• Do they say that for Muslims no government and no administration is
necessary?

• Do they say that some system is necessary but there is no necessity of
an administrator, ruler or guardian?

• Do they say that guardians and the rulers of the people should be
those who have no concern with Islam?

• Do they say that the ruler should be a jurist and Muslim but it is not
necessary that he should be just and pious?

• Do they consider that guardianship of the jurist is some sort of a
dominating force? Is the jurist a representative of a particular group
or class of people?

• Does the selfishness of the jurist not nullify his sense of justice
and fair-play by which his guardianship in the society will
automatically cease to exist?

Is the acceptance of the jurist's guardianship tantamount to setting up
various centres of authority and domination?

When it is meant that the laws and commandments which have passed
through the channel of a just jurist may not be diverted to divergent
and un-Islamic directions, their representatives are delegated all the
powers to exercise their authority on their behalf. Hence there is no
question of setting up independent centres of authority and power, as
actually the authority and power only emanate from the Divine commands
which are enforced by the just jurist only.

We would ask those who oppose the guardianship of the jurist as to whom
they want to entrust the affairs of the Ummah? We ask whether the
Muslims should not follow someone in their affairs or is their following
restricted to worship of Allah only? Is there not the possibility of a
lawful or an unlawful thing in matters of social problems such as
strikes, rehabilitation, travels, disputes, agreements, pacts,
appointments, dismissal etc.?

Should we not follow some jurist in all those matters where there is a
question of lawfulness and unlawfulness? Should the leadership of the
Muslims be entrusted to an un-Islamic leader? Will it not be like
handing over the administration of a medical college to a man who is not
a physician himself?

Is the handing over of the Ummah to an unjust ruler not a great
injustice to humanity?

Has the time not come when we should protect ourselves from false
leadership, unscrupulous politicians and professional opportunists, we
should come under the Islamic protection, and accept only that
leadership, which is compatible with the standard laid down by Qur'anic
revelations.

However, the topic of Imamate has become a little lengthy but it would
have been an injustice if we had not dealt with the leadership of the
people and its way and means during the occultation period of our
present Imam Mahdi.


