Translator's Foreword
=====================

Family life and related issues such as marriage, divorce, parenthood,
underage pregnancy and abortion are areas of great discussion and
dispute in the western' world today. The facts emanating from various
societies in the developed' world show that the current state of affairs
is unsustainable and illogical and will inevitably result in the decline
and self-destruction of these societies.

A prime and oft-quoted [^1] example of this is Italy where, being a
Catholic country, one would expect the birth rate to be high. However
with a reproduction rate of only 1.3 children per couple it is clear
that the population is not being sustained or replaced and is dwindling.
It requires a live reproduction rate of at least 2.0 children per couple
to maintain population levels each generation.

This story is repeated throughout the European Union where the Republic
of Ireland despite also experiencing a sharp drop in the fertility' rate
is the only country where rates are at generation replacement level'.
[^2] At these rates, Italy's abortion statistics at around 150,000 per
year [^3] seem an unaffordable luxury as they do in the other countries
of the EU.

The use of the term fertility rate' according to these statistics also
appears to be a little disingenuous, as it does not take into account
the number of terminations each year. The number of live births per
woman is not a valid reflection of true fertility, because a conception
subsequently terminated can also be regarded as a statistic of
fertility.

The killing of children is deemed wrong in the Qur'an and hence in
Islam :

And kill not your children for fear of want, We will sustain them and
you. Indeed, the killing of your children is a great sin.' [^4]

In many places in the Qur'an also, evidence is brought that previous
nations and generations were brought down by their sinning :

Do they not travel through the earth and see what was the End of those
before them? They were even superior to them in strength and in the
traces (they have left) in the land: but Allah did call them to account
for their sins, and none had they to defend them against Allah. [^5]

Hence we can see that the concept of sin is not just an abstraction
with no relevance or effect in the real world but it is a way to the
downfall of human society.

One man who has witnessed such a downfall in his own beloved society is
Ayatollah Muhammad Al-Shirazi, a prolific Iraqi religious scholar and
authority now living in Iran. In his book Our Life of Half a Century Ago
written in Arabic and yet to be translated, he describes the ease,
simplicity and purity of Islamic life in Iraq particularly the cities of
Najaf and Karbala 50 years ago.

He then tells of a gradual decline and erosion of basic Islamic tenets
on a societal level and the adoption of eastern and western
secularisation.

This experience has lead to the main theme which runs through virtually
all of Ayatollah Al-Shirazi's books namely a call for the gradual
reinstitution of Islamic tenets, laws, principles, and commandments in
all areas of life legal, economic, political, social, and spiritual.

The Family in Islam is one such book of Ayatollah Al-Shirazi's. In it
he highlights the problems he sees primarily in Islamic societies today
from the phenomenon of unmarried young men and women through to birth
control and contraception. He calls for a return to the simplicity he
experienced in his youth and draws our attention to the Islamic
teachings and laws in this vital area of life.

As well as being a call to the Muslim world to revert to the true
teachings of the Qur'an and the Prophet and Imams, this book can also be
of use as an introduction to others who seek some answers to the social
problems of today.

Islam has detailed teachings which promise success in every area of
human life on individual and societal levels and what's more their
practicality has been historically proven despite being under constant
attack from the outset until the present day.

It was not so long ago that Islam was berated for allowing divorce,
which is religiously permitted and spoken about in great detail in the
Qur'an, yet now it has been adopted by the very societies that formerly
forbade it. However picking and choosing Islamic teachings to suit
fashion or whims is not the key to success. Rather the key to success is
to implement the Islamic ideology in all areas of life by following
God's guidance for mankind.

They follow guidance from their Lord and they are the ones who will
prosper.' [^6]

**Author's Introduction**

The family in Islam' is the name of this short book, which I have
written as a basic guide to an important aspect of life, which the laws
of the West in Islamic countries have worked at destroying and continue
to do so. I have witnessed from beginning to end a half-century of
family matters and what I see latterly bears little or no resemblance to
what I saw formerly.

With the adoption by Muslims of Western laws, both their religion and
their worldly life have disappeared, as Allah says in His book the
Qur'an: They lose both this world and the next: That is indeed the
manifest loss.' 1

Many Muslims, and not least their governments, have welcomed the West
and lapped up its laws thinking that this was a path to liberation from
the tyranny of the Ottoman and Qajar empires whose flawed Islam and
complete isolation after the fall of their governments towards the West
have been witnessed. They bring to mind the words of the poet :

He who seeks refuge in Amr on being tortured is like one seeking refuge
in fire from the burning sun'.

Or the words of another :

I complained about Amr and when I left him and found other neighbours I
wept for Amr'. There is no doubt that the Ottoman and Qajar empires
acted out with the range of Islam and for this reason, the countries of
Islam fell under the control of the West and the East. But there is also
no doubt that the parable for Muslims in this respect became the example
of the Ummayads and the Abbasids, as the poet also says :

Ah would that the tyranny of the sons of Marwan 2 return to us,And
would that the justice of the sons of Abbas 3 never was'.

Muslims had thus become an embodiment of one who has forgotten both the
paths'. For they were, under the Ummayads and the Abbasids, diminished
in matters of religion and of earthly life, but under the auspices of
the West and the East, they were, except in a very few circumstances,
completely bereft of both spheres.

Allah alone knows how much we can bear of oppression and repression and
deviation from His laws until the correct Islamic situation returns to
us. However, we should realise that this return is not possible without
awareness.

By awareness we mean awareness of the laws of Islam, from the notion of
a single community without geographical borders', through to fraternity
whereby every Muslim in any province of Islam is treated in all his
affairs as if he is from that province, and freedom, whereby every thing
is free except that which is prescribed as illegal, through to all the
other vital Islamic laws so profusive in number.

Each law in Islam is a vital entity promoting life, as the Qur'anic
verse says: 'Respond to Allah and His messenger when He calls you to
that which will enliven you'. 4

This awareness, however, will only occur when Muslims have come
together in organisations and political parties and groups whereby they
will be in a state of utmost realism and direction, integrity and moral
rectitude. Thus Allah may surround Muslims with His kindness and salvage
them from this abyss the like of which they have not fallen into from
the first light of Islam until this century.

This is because Allah only conducts affairs by providing the ways and
means to them. As He says in His book in the story of Dhu Al-Qarnain 5',
repeatedly: Then he followed a way' 6, or as happened to the people of
Israel when they went against His commands, He made them wander in the
wilderness for forty years.

This matter requires continuous effort and enduring patience. Do we not
perceive the Khums tax in accordance with its importance, it being
mentioned in the Qur'an once 7, while the word perseverance' and its
derivatives are mentioned seventy times. In the hadith or tradition of
the prophet it is said: As a part of faith, patience has the station of
the head in relation to the body. Just as there is no good in a body
without a head, there is no good in a faith that is not accompanied by
patience'.

If then we work towards this and call upon Allah night and day, then it
is hoped that the greatness of Muslims will be returned to them along
with their independence and autonomy. Allah alone grants success and is
the sole refuge.


The holy city of Qum
Muhammad Shirazi
8th Jamada II 1415 Hijra. (1995)

**Section One : The Law of Matrimony In Creation, In Civilisations and
In Religions**

God 8 has said in his masterful book: 'And of everything we have
created pairs so that you might take notice'. 9 The law of pairs is so
deeply intrinsic to created objects that one does not find any atom or
galaxy or anything smaller or larger than these that is not subject to
this law. If one looks to creation in all its vastness and what it
holds, from stars and planets, air and water, trees and rocks,

to animals and humans, one cannot but concede as to the integrated
perfection of this system in so far as each one complements and perfects
the other. Each proceeds according a precise and balanced system which
is only violated and traversed by humankind who were given by God the
responsibility of administering themselves after having been sent
messengers and having had the limits of behaviour laid out and the laws
made clear.

Mankind then took up this responsibility but did not carry it out, as
it should be - excepting God's faithful servants - at times falling into
oppressiveness, at other times into ignorance. In the Qur'an Allah
states: 'We did indeed offer trusteeship to the heavens and the earth
and the mountains but they refused to take it being afraid thereof. But
man undertook it, though he is unjust and ignorant'. 10

If one leafs through the pages of human history, over and above the
instructions of religion, one realises that the family system,
procreation, the avoidance of inbreeding, the avoidance of marital
infidelity, instability and abuse are matters of human nature and psyche
('The fitra (intrinsic nature) of Allah upon which He has created the
people.' 11).

Even amongst primitives and pagans and those who did not observe any
law, from time to time their inherent nature would shudder and would
manifest itself in some form of law or in the form of customs and
traditions. It is no delusion that we turn to custom and tradition to
prove this, nor indeed to divine law which corresponds to inherent human
nature, for all that the divine law rules necessary so does the
intellect, and vice versa.

The concordance and mutual agreement of humanity over a certain matter,
despite their diverse nations, civilisations and religions, points to
the deep-rootedness of that matter in the human psyche. In this section,
we will review in brief the findings of naturalists and anthropologists
as well as the religious view in this field.

**The Law of Matrimony in Creation**

This vast creation from the smallest atom to the largest galaxy
comprises of tribes and peoples based upon the system of pairs. Every
element is formed from atoms, and every atom is composed of negative
electron and positive proton. The occurrence of any imbalance in the
ratios and equilibrium of these charges will result in the instability
of the atom, and the atom will then try to return to a stable state by
discharging a formidable energy known as atomic energy.

Likewise in creation there are two complementing forces - magnetism and
electricity - neither of which can exist without the other. Then
magnetism is composed of two polarities - north and south - and
electricity of two charges - positive and negative - according to
scientists.

**In the Vegetable World**

Allah has said in the Qur'an: 'All praise to He who has created all the
pairs, of which grow in the earth, and of yourselves, and of that which
you have no knowledge.

' 12 Every plant contains a masculine and feminine member, which upon
their maturity pollination occurs and then fruition. Granted there are
types of plants and trees which do not need this depth and complexity
but they are like humans who have two independent members, which
co-operate mutually in order to produce fruition, as is the case with
the palm tree and papaya tree and others.

**In the Animal World**

Animals whether quadrupeds, bipeds or reptiles, amphibians, fish or
birds, are subject to the law of pairs. He (Allah) has said: 'Originator
of the heavens and the earth has made out of yourselves pairs and of the
beasts pairs ... ' 13 So they strive, because of the forces placed
within them, to procreate and multiply and to preserve their species.

Mothers extend affection to their offspring after birth or hatching and
prepare the appropriate environment for their growth and development and
defend them with their lives against the dangers which surround them.

**The Law of Pairs in Human Civilisations**

There is no doubt that there are differences between humans and other
creatures. Humans have a certain freedom of choice and will whereas
animals are driven and determined. There is also no doubt that there is
a difference among peoples with regards to systems and laws to an extent
which at times is contradictory and incompatible.

However it is not right that we take this difference as being the most
fitting expression of the matrimonial system. Indeed, this synopsis does
not hold true for all areas of the nature of the family, so we will
concern ourselves to the areas upon which peoples have been in agreement
from the earliest times as civilisations and peoples.

This will no doubt fulfil our purpose. Particularly regarding marriage
and childbearing, libertinism, and the system of rights. In the
following pages, we will deal with matrimonial laws from the earliest
times until the present day.

**1. The Civilisation of the Valley of the Euphrates and the Tigris
(Mesopotamia)

** Matrimony was deemed to be greatly important in the Sumerian
civilisation where they promoted marriage and repudiated celibacy.
Marital infidelity was regarded by them as a crime punishable in
detailed laws by death. The two adulterers if there were witnesses to
the crime would be bound and thrown into water to drown, and if there
were no witnesses then the woman could exonerate herself by an oath.

Amongst the Assyrians, the matter was much the same where marital
fidelity was compulsory and infidelity was punishable either by death to
both parties by drowning, or by them being whipped, or by their hair
being torn out, or by the amputation of the ears.

The Assyrians also called for a high birth rate in moral laws in which
they considered abortion a serious crime punishable by execution. They
considered a beating, which led to abortion as a crime punishable by
fifty lashes, forced labour and in some cases execution. The Babylonians
specified more than sixty rules regarding the preservation of the family
and stressed the seriousness of adultery and the implementation of
punishment by drowning for the perpetrator. 14

**2. Ancient Egyptian Civilisation**

Ancient Egyptian texts afforded marriage a high importance. Adultery
was forbidden and its perpetrator was threatened with the most violent
punishments, according to historians. The unfaithful husband would be
subjected to flogging and the unfaithful wife would be subjected to the
amputation of the nose. Adultery was one of the pretexts for divorce
among them without distinction between the man and the woman.

In the civilisation of Osiris, dead persons used to bear with them to
their graves a document testifying to their probity and fidelity in
order to obtain mercy in the afterlife.

**3. European Civilisations**

In Sparta, celibacy was a crime in which the bachelor forfeited the
right to vote and to watch public spectacles and so on.

In Rome, celibacy was forbidden and considered a state in contravention
of their religion punishable by beating or flogging with regard to the
age of the individual 15, and by increasing taxes and forbidding them
from inheritance unless they married within 100 days of the death of the
legator. 16

They regarded adultery as a grave offence punishable by death or by
banishment from the country for life.

The punishment for one who caused the abortion of a pregnant woman was
banishment or the confiscation of his property.

They laid down the so called Julian 17 law specifically for marriage
aimed at making marriage common and calling for a high birth rate and a
reduction in taxes in relation to the number of offspring up to the
number of three children, when taxes would be lifted completely just as
bonds would be lifted from any woman who had given birth to three
children.

Constantine made adultery punishable by death, and any such dishonour
during the age of Augustinian was punishable by execution or
confiscation of possessions.

**4. The Civilisation of the American Continent**

In the Aztec civilisation, in Central America adultery was a sin whose
punishment was death by strangulation and then stoning without
distinction between man and woman.

In the civilisation of the Incas in the Andes, marriage was compulsory
and celibacy was forbidden and there used to be an observer from the
Incas who would roam the villages and the countryside to make sure that
celibates would marry.

**5. The Civilisation of Ancient Japan**

In Ancient Japan, women were known for marital fidelity or faced death.
If a husband came upon his wife in flagrante delicto, it was his right
to kill her and her lover on the spot. Certain of their leaders have
added that if a husband has killed his wife in these circumstances and
let the other man go free then he himself deserves the punishment of
death.

Even the sect of the Samurai who insisted upon remaining without
marrying until the age of thirty made it incumbent upon themselves to
marry and produce at least two children. Chastity was a great virtue
among the Japanese so that some women would even kill themselves when
their virtue was exposed to danger.

**6. Among Pre-Islamic Arabs**

The Arabs concerned themselves with lineage and descent, and this
interest drove them to such depths and precision in the organisation of
the family and the tribes and peoples that it became to them an art and
a science. 18

They used to encourage early marriage beginning with age sixteen for
men and twelve or less for girls so if a girl reached eighteen or twenty
without marriage, she would be viewed with concern.

The veil was widespread in the various Arab lands in many forms just as
the custom of circumcision was widespread even for girls.

They used to forbid marriage to close relatives and fornication was
regarded as a sin, which if they were able to punish it, did so with
severe punishments. 19 In certain circumstances, the adulteress would be
separated and isolated in the house and would remain in this way
un-married until death.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
[^1] Mentioned by the same biologist on BBC Television's Heart of the
Matter, Sunday 28/11/1999, 11.25 p.m. and on Night Waves, BBC Radio 3,
26/11/1999, 9.30 p.m.
[^2] See Europe in Figures, Chapter 18 Fertility.
[^3] See United Nations Demographic Yearbook 1999, Chapter 9.
[^4] The Holy Qur'an: The Tribe of Israel (17): 31.
[^5] The Holy Qur'an: The Forgiver (40): 21.
[^6] The Holy Qur'an: The Heifer (2): 5.

1 The Holy Qur'an: The Hajj Pilgrimage (22): 11.
2 The son's of Marwan refers to the Umayyad Caliphate in the early days
of Islam. (Translator's note)
3 A reference to the 'Abbasid Caliphate. (Translator's note)
4 The Holy Qur'an: Public Estates (8): 24.
5 A major book on Qur'anic commentary mentions three possibilities for
the identity of 'Dhul-Qarnain' : Alexander of Macedonia, One of the
Yemenite Kings, Koroush one of the kings of Iran. The author of the book
favours the third possibility because the description fits best Koroush.
However the main thing is that he was a 'righteous servant of Allah.'
(Tafsiri-Nimoune, vol 12, page 542, Nasir Makarim). (Translator's)

6 The Holy Qur'an: The Cave (18): 89.
7 The Holy Qur'an: Public Estates (8): 41 ('Know that whatever you
acquire, a fifth of it is for Allah').

8 The word God is used here for translation purposes more or less
interchangeably with the Arabic word Allah (The God, The Deity, The
Unseen). However the Islamic conception of God as elucidated in the
Qur'an differs from other conceptions in its strict adherence to the
belief in monotheism - the oneness of God who has no partner in creation
and no sire. He is The One, The Eternal, He does not beget, nor was He
begotten and there is nothing like unto Him. (Translator's note)

9 The Holy Qur'an: The Winnowing Winds (51): 49.

10 The Holy Qur'an: The Coalitions (33): 72.

11 The Holy Qur'an: The Romans (30): 30.

12 The Holy Qur'an: (the letters) Y.S. (36): 36.

13 The Holy Qur'an: Consultation (42): 11.

14 See Laws of Hammurabi, Articles 130 - 158.

15 This was after the age of 25 for men and 20 for women during the
reign of Augustus.

16 They were forfeit certain types of inheritance.

17 This was during the age of Augustus 30-14 BC.

18 Al-Hurani has collected lineages and organised them into levels
according to the size of each level and he gives them thirteen
classifications.

19 Like monetary fine or banishment or death by stoning, and this
appears in the writings of certain of their historians like Akthum bin
Saifi.


