Marital Relationships in the Major Religions
============================================

Allah says in the Qur'an in prohibition of adultery: Verily it is a
vulgarity and a vileness and an evil path to follow'. 20

The use of the expression vulgarity, together with the particular past
tense verb in Arabic (Kaana) gives the command an eternal and static
quality with reference to God's abstraction from time and the
singularity of his law in creation, a notion which is not confined
solely to Islam but is present in the remainder of the religions,
because religion is one in the realm of God, just as the inherent nature
of creation is one.

So when we examine the sayings of many religions, we do so with the
premise that they support that, which preceded and succeeded them in the
field of rational knowledge and traditions and inherent nature and not
with the premise that they are a proof and an original source. 21

**1. The Jewish Religion**

Jewish texts affirm the impropriety of bachelorhood considering it a
sin and making marriage necessary after the age of twenty. Abortion and
infanticide and methods of contraception are also considered a crime and
acts of unbelief.

Any woman or wife perpetrating adultery would warrant stoning and the
rapist of any married woman would be killed. The rapist of a virgin girl
would have to pay a monetary fine and take her as a wife for life for
his ill act towards her and those caught in the act of adultery would be
killed together.

Anyone slandering a married person without proof would be subject to a
fine and punishment.

**2. The Christian Religion**

In this matter, the Christian religion does not differ from the Jewish
religion because Christ came confirming what was in the Torah. 22 Hence
Christianity prohibited abortion and placed it on a level with
premeditated murder. In the same way, homosexuality was prohibited in
the strongest possible terms.

The revolution of morals, which Jesus instigated, was in reality a war
against the distortion (of religious texts), dissolution, and degeneracy
among the people of Israel.

In the Gospels it says: 'You have heard it said: do not commit
adultery. But I say whosoever looks to a woman he desires has committed
adultery in his heart, and when your right eye calls you to sin, then
pluck it out and throw it from you. For it is better for you to destroy
one of your organs than for all of your body to go to Hell' 23. 'It is
said that whosoever divorces a woman; let him give her a document of
divorce. But I say that whosoever divorces a woman other than in the
case of fornication has exposed her to the possibility of adultery'.
24

**3. In the Religion of Zoroaster**

This religion encouraged marriage and building a family and bearing
children. In one of its texts it says that 'the married man is greatly
preferable to the bachelor and he who supports a family is much more
favoured than he who has no family, and he who has children is even more
favourable than that.' 25

Elsewhere it says that 'every time the number of children of a man
increases, his closeness to his Lord increases.' 26

Parents used to organise the marital affairs of those of their children
who had reached the age of adolescence, it not being acceptable for a
man to remain unmarried. Also any occupation or work which would
distance the individual from the family was unacceptable. Among them,
divorce was not approved of except in the case of barrenness, or
adultery, or infidelity to the state of married life.

Amongst their laws was the prohibition of masturbation, which could be
punished by flogging. The consequences for one who committed adultery,
or homosexuality, or lesbianism, was death. Likewise, the punishment for
abortion among them was execution.

**4. Buddhism**

In Buddhism, the punishment for an adulteress was to be publicly thrown
as prey to the dogs. As for her partner in the crime, he would be
roasted alive on a red-hot bed of steel. Looking at a woman with desire
decreased ones vows and the lustful glance stripped one of one's
intellect.

**5. Confucianism**

The ancient Chinese considered the holding back of a man from marriage
to be a character deficit and a crime against the ancestors and the
state which could not be excused, even for religious men.

They used to delegate a special official whose work was to make sure
that every man of age thirty was married and that every woman was
married before the age of twenty.

One of the sayings of Confucius says 'if a house stands on a firm
foundation then the world is safe and sound'.


**Conclusion**

After that brief summary of the family system among various
civilisations and religions, it is clear that all of humanity agrees
upon the call for marriage and procreation as an extension of the human
species, and upon the impropriety of the unmarried state and the
unlawfulness of fornication and infidelity etc. This concord from the
peoples of humanity shows its truthfulness and intrinsic naturalness.
Islam, obviously, does not accept a great number of the rules and
punishments of these ways of life and civilisations, but our concern is
the whole picture and the points of concord only.

**Marriage in Materialistic Societies**

Despite the obvious harmony of human nature regarding the establishment
of the family and married life, and that there is no structure to the
human species without this establishment and the fortification of its
elements, one can observe certain voices calling for that which goes
against the current of intrinsic human nature, and denies this law of
the existence,

and so just as disrespect towards and neglect of the law of the atom
has occurred, so mockery is made of the existence of the family. Whilst
the system of the universe has its own direct and natural reaction
through radioactivity, the family and society despite its not having a
direct and instantaneous natural reaction 27, has a greater and more
severe effect after the passage and elapse of time.

Among the most important of the slogans, which have gone outside the
law of nature, are those said by Marx, Freud, and Durkheim. Freud made
the sexual impulse the basic factor in the development of mankind, while
Marx considered it to be Economics, and Durkheim went for the social
factor.

The proof of the invalidity of these philosophies is first and foremost
that they are mutually contradicting in addition to the fact that the
pressures which surrounded society helped to create them. The severe
pressure which society faced from those who called themselves religion,
and the grave contradiction that appeared between the words and deeds of
the religious authorities is but one example.

Another example is the imposition of legal codes which go against human
nature like the church's prohibition of divorce, and the inquisition and
extreme quelling of any opposition together with the social gulf between
the elite and nobility and the poor and miserable. All these matters
have fuelled these philosophies. 28


**Section Two : The Call of Nature 29**

**Marriage as a Necessity**

Marriage is a vital necessity. The survival of the species depends upon
it and the survival of any organism is an intellectual necessity. Hence
the world's intelligentsia try to prevent the extinction of a particular
organism. So what of humanity? The Qur'an states: 'But when he turns his
back, his aim everywhere is to spread mischief in the land and to
destroy crops and progeny, but Allah loves not mischief'. 30

In the matter of destroying progeny there is no difference between
active destruction and passive destruction. Qur'anic verses and
prophetic traditions stress marriage as being mandatory for the common
good and recommended for the individual good.

This is from one angle. From another, were it not for marriage,
humanity would suffer from some extremely harmful diseases, as medical
science has proven, and the avoidance of any possible harm is mandatory
both from a religious and an intellectual point of view.

From another angle again, a person to deny himself, in moderation, of
the good things in life is also intellectually and religiously wrong as
the story of Ala shows in 'Nahj al-Balagha'.

31 In a well-known case, the Prophet himself stopped a man who had
vowed to abstain (from all the good things in life including marriage)
by the saying There is to be no monasticism in Islam'. 32

It may be argued that the Qur'anic verse: 'The monasticism which they
innovated was not prescribed by Us for them, (We commanded them) only to
seek the good pleasure of Allah' 33, contradicts this. However it should
be pointed out that the rule was temporary in the face of an overflow of
Jews in the world, and therefore Islam abrogated the rule. As for
bringing together they innovated it' and we did not make it incumbent
upon them', it is clear that they innovated it firstly, and then Allah
ratified it.

**Early Marriage**

The custom of early marriage is upheld by the intellect and the
religion. It was the norm amongst Muslims from the dawn of Islam up to
and before the cultural, economic, and military assault by the laws of
the West and East upon their lands. If this (early marriage) had not
been the case, then it would have led either to depravity, the least
form of which is masturbation, or to illness as physicians have shown.

It was the custom of Muslims to marry off girls from the age of ten to
fifteen or thereabouts, and boys from attaining maturity up to age
eighteen. Early marriage was a vital necessity for them because of its
simplicity. There was no condition of completing studies or military
service. Marriage was like food and drink and clothing to them. A
certain man would need a certain woman and vice versa, and nothing would
prevent them from coming together in lawful matrimony.

The West, in placing obstacles and hurdles in the way of marriage, has
laid itself open to public and private licentiousness as well as various
other perversions. Its own figures show that most youngsters are
sexually active from age ten for girls and from reaching physical
maturity for boys,

with all the dangerous consequences of that such as abortion and the
profusion of illegitimate children found on the streets and in the
slums, as well as various sexually transmitted diseases, and adulterous
acts together with marital and family infidelity and incest and suicide,
the appearance of homosexuality, and the trade in buying and selling
children and so on.

Knowing that Islam is the religion of human nature, it is clear that
sexual purity and cleanliness necessitates that we return to the
teachings of Islam in this important area of life.

It should not be argued however: Why did the Messenger of God not marry
until the age of twenty-five and for that matter Ali, because it can be
said that one reason may be that the Prophet was poor, his family
suffering great hardship as is seen in the story of the dividing up of
the sons of Abu Talib. As for Ali, he was at the most serious stage in
facilitating mankind's transition from darkness to light. It is clear
that in this state, a man sacrifices everything for the sake of his
goal. 37

This is common sense more than tradition, for it is the needs of the
young men and women which lead them towards marriage and the dowry is no
more than symbolic. There should be nothing to prevent two souls from
coming together in a legal way no matter whether their conditions are
poor or rich, especially as we see now certain nations making the dowry
incumbent upon the man and others making it upon the woman and others
still leaving it out altogether.

Islam sanctions the dowry out of honour and respect for the wife but it
is not to be over done, rather it stresses the simplicity of the dowry
so that it is enough for the husband to teach the wife a chapter from
the Qur'an or a simple craft, or even give her a plain iron ring.

Then on, it is clear that after the marriage, the two will be motivated
towards working and earning, because the person who knows that he has a
responsibility will run towards life as opposed to one who does not feel
any responsibility.

Simplicity of dowry made for the best women of the nation according to
the Prophet because it makes this vital element of life easier and
quicker. God wants for you ease and he does not want difficulty.' 38 It
is related that the Prophet said: Make things easy upon yourselves and
do not make things difficult.' 39 Ease in anything promotes the absence
of stress on the person physically and mentally.

As for the 'most radiant of face', perhaps this stems from good moral
behaviour which promotes the radiance of the face and skin. 40

In this way, it was the custom amongst Muslims, before the age of
Western materialism, for the dowry to be small and simple, except in a
very few cases, for the Umayyad and Abbasid caliphs diverged from the
traditions of Islam to the traditions of the Persian kings and the
Caesars in every domain and especially in the matter of dowries. Because
of this, the impeccable Imams used to emphasise and insist upon the
dowry of the sunna - that practised by the Prophet.

**The Parents' House**

Muslim society, before the attack of materialism, used to marry off its
sons and daughters, and both parties - the parents and the children -
were satisfied and content with the parents house as an abode for the
newly-weds, without distinguishing between whether the house belonged to
the parents of the bride or of the groom.

The couple would live in one of the rooms of the house and everyone
would contribute to the income, work and affairs of the household. 41
Because of this, marriage was simple and easy regarding housing and
furniture and assistance, and the new couple would learn from the older
ones various aspects of life. Others would live in a new house whose
land was free according to the law the land belongs to Allah and whoever
lives upon it' 42.

The methods of construction were simple and humble, and there were no
governmental difficulties such as taxes or planning permission or the
like.

I still recall that the people at the Holy city of Karbala were almost
one hundred thousand in number and upon analysis; we would not find more
than four unmarried men among them. Today however, the situation is
quite the opposite. Society has collaborated with the state, which lays
down false laws in this respect. But wherever there is no steadfastness
and no organisation in exercising sexual capacity, it becomes distorted
and perverse.

It is necessary - if we desire happiness - to re-balance society, and
to return to the Qur'anic verse: ' He releases them from their heavy
burdens and the yokes that were upon them'. 43 So that there will no
longer exist any social burdens or legal fetters, and therein lies the
happiness of Muslims in this world and the next 44 includes all
possessions.

If the custom present in certain countries now and as was usual among
the earlier Muslims, of the couple being satisfied with their belongings
before the wedding then this would doubtless be an important factor in
decreasing the level of non-marriage and corruption.

My father told me that they used to live in Samarra in a single house,
and when his sister got married, the gift was very humble, not exceeding
a new dress, which her husband bought for her. On the night of the
marriage the bride moved to the room of the groom and the matter was
concluded.

I actually saw them myself. Theirs was the happiest of households and
they produced fine children and grandchildren.

Contentment is a treasure which never runs out, and contentment with
reality, without the vain excesses and exaggerations, which usually
surround things, causes mental and physical comfort.

History records the dowry of Fatima al-Zahra 45 and the circumstances
of her marriage. The dowry was the sum of thirty dirhams according to
various versions. The furnishings of her marriage were basic in the
extreme so that even the carpet of the room was of sand, as is reported.
Despite this it was the happiest of houses not only in the history of
Islam but also in the history of humanity.

The messenger of God made this dowry sunna and made it the dowry of all
his daughters so it came to be known as the dowry of the sunna. However,
stealth and bravery are required from educationalists and in Islamic
circles, and from parents so that they can do away with these man-made
laws and detrimental customs. 46.

This criterion that the prophet has mentioned is the criterion of
common sense also. Naturally the person must be able to provide for his
family if the wife so needs, just as he should not be an invalid
particularly with a venereal disease or that, which incapacitates him
from fulfilling the sexual needs of the wife.

If the behaviour of either of the married couple is not good, the house
becomes like a hell, and if one or other of them does not have a code of
conduct, which keeps them from wrongdoing then the man, might even be
prepared for his wife to become a prostitute. Religion and morals can be
judged from previous behaviour, and as to whether he or she is capable
of bearing children can be known from the relatives 47 and from certain
medical checks.

As for beauty, wealth, position, and social status and so on, they are
not in the least bit essential (impossible as not everyone is beautiful
and wealthy).

As for age, for if the balance of Islam in marrying every widow and
widower is looked at then no fault could be found in either comparing
age or neglecting to do so although it is probably better to pay
attention to this element also. Hence the Qur'anic reference to the
People of Heaven as 'equal in age'. 48

Hence we still see, even in this age, that this is the custom of many
Muslims although it was more prevalent in the past when it was
Islamic.

The wearing of the veil for women is also part of the religion as is
restraint by men from practising forbidden acts, particularly in this
material age with its voracious appetite for lust and seduction. 49

This is correct one hundred percent. This is because the unmarried man
does not have the motivation to earn money in the same way that the man
who feels a responsibility does. This in addition to the fact that it is
a matter from the unseen world as is everything we see in this world; it
has its apparent cause and its real cause which is the will of Allah.

However, despite this, a means of subsistence should be acquired
including place of abode and other needs. Islam has laid down laws in
this respect like the land belongs to Allah and whoever develops it' 50,
or whoever attains something which no other Muslim has first attained
then he has the greater right to it'. 51

Therefore it is possible that a charitable organisation could build
simple homes on land with wells or the like for general water and
rainwater tanks for drinking water, with an orchard for fruits and
vegetables and rearing animals. Then they could be leased which would
make things very simple for housing and food and also clothing which
could be made from the wool of the animals reared in the house.

If there were someone in the house who could sew or perform another
task for the family then that would be enough to cover half the
expenses. The other half could be obtained by work, which also promotes
physical and mental health, self-satisfaction and independence from
others.

So if God blesses us with manufacture and agriculture and we have water
and earth and willing hands, we will have become independent from
others. As Ali said: Become independent from whoever you wish and you
will become his equal'. 52 53

There is no doubt that complexity however small and minor causes delays
and in any number add up to a greater delay. Therefore if these matters
were abolished along with all the other officialities of which there are
an abundance these days, marriage would become easy and would be popular
among young men and women as well as divorcees and so on.

54 The West has progressed and flourished relative to the extent it has
practised it. Muslims have regressed whenever they have neglected and
ignored it.

This principle must be applied to the married couple. They are,
together, free in the choices they make in everything that God has
permitted. The only exception which many scholars have noted is in the
rights of the virgin girl if her father or paternal grandfather are
living, in which case she is subject to their opinion and requires their
permission to marry. When the giving of permission is feasible and no
other secondary principle applies, then her wishes should be satisfied
and permission given.

Similarly, it is not at all conceivable that the young man or woman
should be compelled to marry a certain person. Not only is this against
the sacred law and common sense, it very often causes problems, the
least of which are separation, estrangement and divorce, and in some
cases can reach the level of murder and suicide as is common today.

What place is there for compulsion in the relationship of marriage the
meaning of which is the intimate companionship of husband and wife by
day and by night at home or abroad, and throughout all the circumstances
and mental states of each party?

Therefore the marriage of the two must arise out of mutual agreement
and no one should have the right to force them to marry.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
20 The Holy Qur'an: Women (4): 22.

21 This is because those who fabricate lies against God do not bring
forward any book or any traditions but that they have been played around
with.
Had it not been for God's protection of the Qur'an from corruption and
substitution then talking about it today would be like talking about the
books of the other religions. God though has made sure that his light is
complete and his word protected whether the unbelievers like it or
not.

22 Even the Gospels that exist today confirm this fact. In one of them
appear the words: 'Do not think that I am here to nullify the words of
the divine law and the prophets. I have not come to cancel but to
perfect. I tell you the truth: Not one iota nor one full stop will
disappear from the divine law.

23 The Bible: Mark 9:43 and Matthew 5:27-30.

24 Barnabas. It is well known that the Christians, for about 22 years
after Christ (Peace be upon him), continued to observe all the
prohibitions found in the Torah. Subsequently however, they limited them
to four namely adultery, the eating of animals killed by strangling, the
eating of blood, and the eating of animals slaughtered in the name of
idols.

25 The Story of Civilisation. Del Durant p.41.

26 ibid. p.42.

27 This is for a number of reasons, the most important of which is that
animals are subject entirely to the system whereas human beings are
partly responsible for administering and organising themselves.

28 Some people have strived to prove these theories with case loads of
evidence some of which raises doubts and others are dubious and
obscurantist and with no proof but illusion, conjecture and fabrication.
The author has discussed the three philosophies in several books some of
which are: 'A Critique of Freud', and 'Marx Defeated' and 'Comparative
Economics.'

29 What is meant here is not nature as in the natural world or
surroundings but rather the intrinsic nature inside human beings known
by the Arabic term Fitrah. (Translator's note)

30 The Holy Qur'an: The Cow (2): 205.

31 Ala had denied himself all the good things in life. Imam 'Ali told
him: '; Do you think that Allah has made lawful for you the good things
then disdains that you partake of them? You are less important to Allah
than this. (Translator's note)

32 Supplement to the Shi'a guide to Islamic law; Volume 1; Page 540.
There are other benefits to marriage which have been discussed by the
author in 'The Encyclopaedia of Fiqh'; Volume 62;'The Book of
Marriage.

33 The Holy Qur'an: Iron (57): 27.

37 Shi'a Guide; Volume 15; Page 1.

38 The Holy Qur'an: The Cow (2): 185

39 Ghawali Al-Li'ali;Volume1;Page 381. There are many traditions
referring to the desirability of a small dowry which have been dealt
with by the author in The Encyclopaedia of Fiqh; Volume 62-68;The Book
of Wedlock.

40 The author has dealt with similar such traditions in The Book of
Fiqh, Etiquette, and Practice. Volumes 94 -97.

41 The author refers to practises in countries where the state does not
provide any support for housing etc. In such cases the newly wed couples
would continue to live with the parents. This may not be applicable in
countries where state support is provided for housing. (Editor's
note).

42 The Complete Branches of Religion; Volume 5; Page 279.
43 The Holy Qur'an: The Heights (7): 157.
44 Shi'a Guide; volume 15; Page 1.
45 One of the daughters of the Prophet. Fatima married 'Ali.
(Translator's note)
46 Seas of Lights: Volume 100, p 373.
47 This is often neglected.
48 The Holy Qur'an: The Inevitable Event (56): 37.
49 The Holy Qur'an: Light (24): 32.
50 The Complete Branches of Religion; Volume 5; Page 279.
51 Shi'a Guide; Volume 17; Page 238.
52 Seas of Lights; Volume 72; Page 107.
53 Sometimes the family would give some sugar to the notary although
many of them did not even accept this.
54 Seas of Lights; Volume 2; Page 272.


