Section Five : Challenges Facing the Family and Society
=======================================================

**Divorce Yesterday and Today**

It was usual in Islamic countries for marriages to take place in a
context of common sense and compatibility. It was the family who would
find the appropriate partner with regard to religion, moral behaviour,
financial status and physical character. For this reason, marriages on
the whole were successful.

The family's choosing for their offspring did not negate the choice and
contentment of the prospective couple but rather confirmed it and
steered it in the required direction, because of the families knowledge
and links to other family circles was more than that of the young man or
woman.

Further more, the family by possessing a means of exerting pressure on
those who wished to divorce could act to prevent splits taking place.
Hence the families acted in truth as a kind of safety valve against the
recklessness and haste of youth as in the Qur'anic verse :

'Then appoint two arbiters, one from his family, one from hers; if they
seek to set things to rights then Allah will cause their reconciliation'
80.

This God granted success as with everything else that He causes in this
world must be preceded by human action, for God has disdained to run
affairs other than through their causes.

I have been told by one of the persons responsible for marriage and
divorce in the city of Karbala forty years ago that he only presided
over the divorce of one person a year.

Today however, now that society has taken up with Western values or has
plunged into Westernisation and the misplaced imitation of its laws and
customs, it is the youngsters who choose their partners in isolation and
without consulting their parents. It is evident now that the criteria
for marriage is a mixture of emotion, sexual fervour, inexperience, and
immaturity.

This is fuelled by the pressure of such values and their false notions
of freedom and its attack on authentic customs which it describes as
being reactionary or backward and senile. Hence a large proportion of
marriages now end in separation and divorce.

For those that fall into these traps the calamities are great.

For these reasons it is imperative that we return to the Islamic
lifestyle of happiness which our forefathers lived in the lands of Islam
until half a century ago.

**Conciliation is Best**

The prevalence of divorce in the latter half of this century 81 is
attributable to a number of reasons including :

1. A short sighted and arbitrary way of choosing a partner for life
because of emotions and the like.
2. A tendency towards over expectation by one partner of the other and
an excess of idealising.
3. The pressure of man made laws limiting real freedoms, opportunities
for work, travel and obtaining free goods and so on.
4. The spread of exhibitionism, social mingling, licence and
dissipation, whereby a man can find someone apparently more beautiful
than his wife and a woman can find a man more preferable than her
husband.
5. The decline of the restraint promoted by religion and morals and a
moving away from the Islamic way.

However, this notwithstanding, it is imperative that marital problems
be solved without resort to divorce, for divorce is described as being
the most detestable of all that God has made lawful.

The emissary of God has said: 'There is no permissible thing more
beloved in the sight of God than marriage, nor is there any permissible
thing more detestable in the sight of God than divorce' 82.

Imam Al-Sadiq has said: 'God loves the house in which there is
matrimony and hates the house in which there is divorce for there is
nothing more detestable in the sight of God than divorce' 83.

In another tradition from Imam Al-Sadiq he commands: 'Marry and do not
divorce for the heavenly throne verily shakes as a consequence of
divorce' 84.

**Why then has God not outlawed divorce altogether?**

The answer is that the home may have become an unbearable hell on
earth. Alternatively, many things may add up to make reconciliation
impossible.

In the case of the Christian church when it forbade divorce, millions
of men and women remained partner less, after finding their natures
incompatible. Hence corruption and licence and perversity flourished as
each partner found, in the air of poisonous freedoms promulgated by the
West, all manner of means to prostitution and adultery put in front of
them while the media and advertising egg them on.

There is no doubt that if there were present in society institutions
dedicated to conciliation and trained conciliators together with
charitable bodies, these problems which cause damage to the family, harm
the children and come between relatives and at times end up in murder
and suicide would certainly reduce.

Certain divorce lawyers who do not heed God and do not experience any
barrier from government or society can exploit the will of one of the
partners to separate. He then fills his coffers at the expense of
religion, conscience and morals. If he were to heed God however he would
make haste to resolve matters between them, as in the Qur'anic verse:
'Conciliation is best' 86.

**Polygamy - A Spurious Crisis**

The law of the universe runs according to the perfect balance of pairs,
as in the Qur'anic verse: 'We have created of everything in pairs so
that perhaps you may take heed'. 87

However, this does not necessarily mean equality in terms of numbers
but rather compatibility in terms of type, whereby each pair is ensured
of fulfilling its natural role in life. For example in the world of ants
and bees, the queen capable of procreation is one only, whereas the
males which compete with each other for the prize of fertilising her are
many. This is true of most of the animal kingdom.

Human beings by virtue of being alive like the remainder of living
things in this existence are no exception to this rule. Granted, they
have their own particularities but so does every other living thing, and
just as the divine will has ensured for human beings perfect
compatibility in terms of type, as with the rest of existents, it has
also defined and shaped humanity in a way particular to itself whereby
fulfilment, concord and continuance are ensured, each having its own
proof and wisdom.

Among the teachings of Imam Sadiq to Al-Mafdal Ibn 'Amr are his words:
Humanity was not created masculine and feminine except in order to be
able to reproduce ... Had an organism given birth to males only or
females only then reproduction would cease and the species would become
extinct. Therefore some of the offspring came as males and others as
females so that reproduction would continue and not be cut off'. 88

Imam Al-Rida, speaking about the prohibition of adultery and of
violating the law of nature which was created by God to harmonise with
the human species and his needs, said: 'God has prohibited adultery
because of the corruption it can cause, from murder to loss of lineage
and neglect to the children's upbringing and corruption of inheritances
and other forms of corruption'. 89

It is possible to posit no more than the following four different
marital systems between the two sexes :

1. Complete sexual freedom.
2. Polyandry.
3. Monogamy.
4. Polygamy.

There is no doubt that the first two are both invalid from an
intellectual and religious point of view as the preceding report from
Imam Rida points out. There only remains the latter two.

Statistics and surveys show that women outnumber men, particularly
around the ages of puberty and sexual maturity despite the fact that
some statistics in some countries show a relative parity between the
sexes.

As to why women should outnumber men, that is one of the secrets of
nature. However, its wisdom should not be lost on anyone who reflects
upon it. This phenomenon also gives rise to the fact that women are more
long lived in comparison to men, perhaps as men are generally occupied
with heavy work which can shorten their lives. Men are more often
affected by wars and imprisonment or long absences; which necessitates
the right of divorce by their wives in religious law, or by the men if
they know that they will not be able to maintain the relationship
because of imprisonment or the like.

Furthermore, those who are marrying a second, third or fourth wife are
obviously not marrying a woman who is already married but one who is
free of a husband.

**What then is the intellectual problem with polygamy?**

If we do not solve this problem through polygamy, then we will either
see women without husbands or we will see them taking lovers both of
which are in opposition to the balances of rationale and of nature.

Since the beginning of Islam, and for a long time there was no barrier
to polygamy. It was in fact totally normal. Disputes amongst wives were
as seldom as disputes amongst sisters or between mother and daughter.

Then however, the matter became corrupted; by men through their
oppression towards women in the context of polygamy, and by women
because of their desire for favouritism and being singled out for
benefits. Then the majority of women began to detest the concept of
polygamy in many Islamic countries, even though polygamy was practised
without mishap in countries like Chad and other African countries.

It is then necessary to adjust this situation so that so many women are
no longer condemned to spinster hood which is one of the greatest forms
of oppression against women.

If the man were to die, then society should take care to facilitate her
marriage to someone else or, in the case of divorce, to try to bring
about her return to her former husband where possible as is prevalent in
countries practising polygamy.

The Prophet married the greater number of his wives after their
divorces from former husbands or after the death of their first husbands
as was practised from the beginning of Islam and for centuries onward
and is still practised now in certain countries.

Is it not a kind of injustice that a young woman, or one who has lost
her husband through divorce or by some accident, should remain single
when she is a human being with emotions relating to sex, abode, children
and so on. In the main though, the corrupted customs of some people deny
her all of this. Customs though if transcended will fall. All that is
needed is an agent - a powerful current in society, and an authentic
culture - to transcend this situation.

**The Crisis of Celibacy**

Today in Islamic countries, women are suffering from social oppression
since these countries have adopted corrupt foreign traditions in this
vital area of life. Society oppresses them by delaying their marriage
90, by preventing their re-marriage after the death of their husbands,
or when the numbers of unmarried women are great, or for many other
reasons.

All of this needs to be transcended and overcome with the return to the
land of Islamic tradition which conforms to nature and the intellect. It
is also imperative that society be educated in harmonising the
characters of the married couple as a precaution against marital
breakdown, separation and divorce.

This problem of the abundance of celibates or single women may be
solved by charitable organisations and social institutions which
specialise in the demands of this crisis and the numerous financial,
medical and psychological problems associated with it. A woman who is
celibate or unmarried is subject to being exposed to physical and mental
illness as medical science has shown. In many cases she may not have any
means of subsistence 91 and turns to prostitution or other activities
like thieving.

**Is it right that a large section of the community remain in this
state?

** Simplifying marriage together with the practise of polygamy and the
application of public funds in solving financial problems and the
aforementioned laws of precedence 92 and land 93 adds up to an Islamic
solution to this problem. However because of the absence of vital
Islamic law there is no alternative to charitable organisations and
communal weddings as a way towards solving these problems as much as
possible. From drops of water and grains of sand oceans and deserts are
formed.

A group of friends of mine in Teheran saw to the marriage of 1000 young
couples at the one time. The same thing happened with another group in
the Eastern province of the Hijaz when they organised the marriage of
300 people.

It is clear that: 'The complexity of a task should not prevent the
attempt of achievable tasks' 94 and 'What is not totally realisable as a
whole should not be discarded as a whole.' 95 , these being among the
best principles with regard to these matters.

**Birth Control; Who is behind it?**

The emissary of Allah has said: 'Marry, procreate and proliferate!' 96
He also said: 'Marry, procreate and proliferate so that I may be proud
of you as a nation on the day of judgement even if the child is
stillborn'. 97

These two traditions contain laws albeit in the form of recommendations
which like all recommendations should only be neglected in the case of
strict necessity. The night prayer for example is a recommended act
which does not lose its status as such except through necessity. The
same goes for proliferation of offspring.

What is taking place today however, goes against this completely. The
idea of proliferation has become foreign amongst Muslims whilst the
notion of birth control, previously abominable to Muslims, has taken its
place. Even in the most desperate periods of Islamic history 98, no
promoter of these ideas which go against the intellect and nature was
ever witnessed.

It is true that certain rulers used to perpetrate gross acts but the
law of Islam was in force - generally - throughout society where the
economy was Islamic as was the rest of society. Today however, after the
appearance of Western colonialism in our lands everything has been
overturned. Forbidden things have become permissible. Gambling is
commonplace.

Taxes and duties, geographical borders, confiscation of freedoms,
oppression and terrorism and prevention from fulfilling the Hajj
pilgrimage have become permissible. In this atmosphere of opposition to
Islam comes a call from the West for Muslims to practice birth control
99 using the argument of the dwindling economic level of the family and
the fall in GNP of the countries concerned which are unable to fulfil
their commitments to provide enough schools and hospitals and other
social services.

At the same time they themselves in the West are encouraging their
children to marry early and propagate. 100 This call for marriage and
childbearing begins with the instruction of children at primary level
upwards. There exists amongst Western leaders a great fear that the
European nations are on their way to extinction if the negative trend in
population growth continues.

They also know that the most important cause of this trend lies in the
promotion of birth control which swept through Europe during the 1960's
and sowed in the European mindset the notion that having children is an
erroneous act. Europeans have continued to carry this notion with them
until their birth rate has dwindled.

Today they have rediscovered that the error does not lie in the act of
bearing children but in the promotion of birth control. 101
Unfortunately they have exported this call to us after having
experienced the tragedy of it themselves. They have come to the Islamic
world to call Muslims to birth control.

Let us examine the goals of the West in their call for birth control.
The goal is to drive Muslims to decline. In this they have found a most
effective and devastating weapon capable of weakening Muslims after the
failure of all their other weapons. We wonder why the West does not
demand the Jews in Palestine to practise birth control.

Why do we not see the Jews paying the slightest heed to this call? Why
is the state of Israel strongly encouraging childbirth so that it has
become commonplace according to visiting journalists to see pregnant
women walking the streets or working in shops or teaching or working as
policewomen? Why does the state of Israel prohibit birth control while
we Muslims allow it and some of us think that it is compulsory like
fasting and prayer.

The case of birth control is political propaganda aimed at weakening
Muslims. It has no connection whatsoever with economics despite what is
said.

We wonder: why birth control? Is it that the laws of Allah have changed
in the universe? Have nature and Allah's creation been replaced? Or is
it that the laws of Allah apply only to one particular epoch rather than
another? Is it because we lack lands or water or resources or
opportunities?

The Islamic world comprises vast lands suitable for farming and
developing. 102 It also has a great store of water and is furnished with
unquantifiable resources and potentials.

It is therefore wrong to bang the drums of birth control when there is
no need for it. 103

Iraq for example, which used to be called 'The Fertile Land' supported
40 million people during the 'Abbasid period according to some
historians. Nowadays, Iraq's population is no more than half that
figure. A country like Sudan would probably be able to feed the entire
African continent from the arable land and water resources it has 104.
The same could be said of the rest of the Islamic lands which own a
tremendous amount of agricultural, mineral and oil wealth.

Where are these resources going to? Why are these riches stagnating?
These are the questions which require answers. This is the problem which
needs to be solved. All other problems arise from this problem.

The population explosion, the economic crisis, underdevelopment, and
the lack of political vision all stem from the tyranny, oppression,
dictatorship, and despotism of the rulers, their control over Muslims,
and their running of the affairs of the land according to their vain
desires and not according to sound planning and the interests of the
people.

One such ruler in an Islamic land - Saddam - has, according to some
statistics, stolen 300 billion dollars from the people, not to mention
the wealth he has destroyed in internecine wars. If we add to that the
embezzlements of other rulers across history in Islamic lands then how
much of the wealth of Muslims has been squandered on the desires and
whims of these rulers?

Where there is someone stealing the people's sustenance he must be
called to account and confronted with the problem and told he is a thief
and demands made for the return of the peoples wealth to them. We should
not demand that the people suffer hunger to tell them to restrain from
marriage and having children because there is not enough food to go
round.

A large portion of the wealth of Islamic lands has gone to the
countries of the West. Statistics show that one-fifth of humanity (those
living in the industrialised nations) consume four-fifths of the world's
wealth. The remaining four-fifths of humanity - the poor living in what
is known as the third world - only consume a mere one-fifth of the
world's resources.

**Herein lies the catastrophe.**

The lack of justice in the world and the neglect of Islamic laws of
development like the aforementioned two laws of precedence 105 and
ownership of land. 106 The stranglehold of governments and their control
over affairs. The excess of bureaucrats who deny people's freedoms. Poor
distribution of wealth. The lack of a vociferous opposition.

The poor peoples are battered and their nobility destroyed. We are
denied a voice, then we are denied food and now today we are told to
stop having children. The problem of progeny can be solved within the
context of an Islamic system based on justice and pluralism. Through
justice, Islam ends poverty and closes the gap between rich and poor,
ruler and ruled. Through pluralism, the people are given a strong voice
with which to speak freely.

The Islamic view of mankind differs to that of other systems. Some
systems see man as a heavy burden and views every newborn child as an
unwelcome guest and yet another mouth to feed.

Islam however, views man as a vital and active force. The Qur'an sees
man as the most powerful creation upon the face of the earth and sees
within him the secret of advancement in the world: '...Man can have
nothing but what he strives for; and that his striving will be in sight;
then he will be rewarded with a reward complete'. 108

Islam sees in each new child as a form of progress and advancement. In
the words attributed to Imam 'Ali :

'Do you think that you are a mere germ? While within you is concealed
the greater realm.' 109

The prophet sees in every birth a new reason to be proud before the
other nations of the world. Even if this child was stillborn and had no
life. Was it not he who said: 'Marry, procreate and proliferate so that
I may be proud of you as a nation on the day of judgement even if the
child is stillborn'. 110

The newborn may become a scholar or an inventor or an engineer or
anything else. He will add to life his potential for work and add a new
value and genius to history. Life is not built by tools and machines but
by the efforts of men. Life is not run by computers and satellites but
by the intelligence of mankind and every new infant is a new intellect,
a new arm and a new step forward. Why then all this fear? Has not Allah
promised us and His promise is good and true: 'We shall provide
sustenance for them and for you'. 111

He has also said: 'Marry those among you who are single, and the
virtuous ones among your slaves, male or female: If they are in poverty,
Allah will give them means out of his grace'. 112

Marriage then eradicates poverty and children are a cause of increased
wealth. This is the logic of the Qur'an and the Sacred Law. As for those
who believe the opposite of this, believing that marriage and children
diminish wealth, then they are far from Allah and the Qur'an and from
the logic of the intellect and wisdom.


