Chapter 39: Those who denied the Qaim (a.s.)
============================================

1 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Muhammad bin Isa from Safwan bin Yahya from Ibne Muskan from Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“One who denies the one who is alive is like one who has denied those
who are dead.”

2 - And narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.):
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan al-Saffar and Hasan bin Matteel Daqqaq
and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them said: Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Husain bin Abil Khattab and Yaqoob bin Yazid and Ibrahim
bin Hashim, all of them from Muhammad bin Abi Umair and Safwan bin
Yahya, all of them from Abdullah bin Muskan from Abi Abdullah (a.s.)
that he said:

“One who denies the one who is alive is like one who has denied those
who are dead.”

3 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Muhammad bin Isa from Ismail bin Mehran from Muhammad bin Saeed
from Aban bin Taghlib that he said: I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.):

“Is he a believer, that has cognition of the previous Imams but does not
have cognition of the Imam of his time? He replied: No. I asked: Is he
is a Muslim? He replied: Yes.”

4 - Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Muhammad (r.a.): Narrated to us
Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi: Narrated to us Sahl bin Ziyad Adami:
Narrated to us Hasan bin Mahboob from Abdul Aziz Abdi from Ibne Abi
Yafur that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said:

“One who has faith in the Imams from my forefathers and my descendants,
but denies the Mahdi from my progeny, is like one who believes in all
the prophets but rejects Muhammad (S). I said: My chief, who is the
Mahdi from your progeny? He replied: The fifth descendant of the seventh
Imam, whose person will remain hidden from your view and uttering his
name is unlawful for you.”

5 - Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad bin Idrees (r.a.): Narrated to us my
father Ayyub bin Nuh from Muhammad bin Sinan from Safwan [bin Mehran]
from As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) that he said:

“One who has faith all the Imams but denies the Mahdi, is like one who
believes in all the prophets but rejects the prophethood of Muhammad
(S). He was asked: O son of Allah’s Messenger, who is the Mahdi from
your progeny? He replied: The fifth descendant of the seventh Imam,
whose person will remain hidden from your view and uttering his name
will be unlawful for you.”

6 - Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Muhammad bin Ubdus Nishapuri al-Attar
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad bin Qutaibah Nishapuri from
Hamadan bin Sulaiman: Narrated to me Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far
Hamadani from Abdullah bin Fadl Hashimi from Hisham bin Saalim from
As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father from his grandfather (a.s.)
that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The Qaim is from my descendents. His name is same as mine and
patronymic is same as mine. His appearance is like my appearance and his
practice like my practice. He will establish the people on my religion
and my law and call them to the Book of my Lord, the Mighty and the
sublime. One who obeys him has obeyed me and one who disobeys him has
disobeyed me.

And one who denies his occultation has denied me. And one who falsifies
him has falsified me. And one who testifies for him has testified for
me. I would complain to Allah about those who falsify me in my affair
and those who mislead the people. And the oppressors would soon realize
where they would be returned when they are sent back (to Hell).”

7 - Narrated to us my father (r.a.): Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah
from Ahmad bin Abi Abdullah from his father from Ibne Abi Umair from
Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laili from his father from Abi
Abdullah as-Sadiq (a.s.) – in a lengthy tradition – at the end of which
he said:

“How can be guided one who has no insight? And how can one have insight
without having the fear (of Allah)? Follow the statement of the
Messenger of Allah (S) and confess to that which is revealed upon him by
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. And follow the signs of guidance. Indeed
it is a sign of trustworthiness and piety. You should know that if
someone denies the Messengership of Isa (a.s.) and believes in the
Prophethood of all other messengers he is not a believer. Seek the path
of Allah with the help of the minarets of guidance. Remain attached to
that which is behind the veil so that the affairs of your religion
become perfect and believe in Allah, your Lord.”

8 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani (r.a.): Narrated
to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim from his father from Muhammad bin Abi
Umair from Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.)
from his father from his ancestors that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Whoever denied the Qaim from my progeny has in fact denied me.”

9 - Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yahya al-Attar (r.a.):
Narrated to us my father from Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan
bin Musa Khashshab from more than one person from Marwan bin Muslim that
he said: As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad (a.s.) said:

“The Imam is a sign between Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and His
creatures, thus one who recognizes him is a believer and one who denies
him is an infidel.”

10 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah from
Muhammad bin Isa and Ubaid from Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from Thalaba
bin Maimoon from Muhammad bin Marwan from Fudhail bin Yasar from Abi
Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“One who dies without having an Imam dies the death of a pagan and the
people shall not be excused from having cognition of their Imam.”

11 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan and Muhammad bin
Musa bin Mutawakkil - May Allah be pleased with them – they said:
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of
them from Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan bin Mahboob from Abi Saeed Mukari
from Ammar from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he heard him say:

“One who dies without having an Imam dies the death of paganhood,
infidelity, polytheism and deviation.”

12 - Narrated to us Ali bin Abdullah Warraq: Narrated to us Abul Husain
Muhammad bin Ja’far Asadi (r.a.): Narrated to us Musa bin Imran Nakhai
from his uncle Husain bin Yazid Naufali from Ghiyath bin Ibrahim from
As-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father from his ancestors that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Whoever denies the Qaim from my progeny during his occultation, dies
the death of paganhood.”

13 - Narrated to us Muzaffar bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Samarqandi
(r.a.): Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father
from Ali bin Muhammad: Narrated to me Imran bin Muhammad Ibne Abdul
Hameed from Muhammad bin Fudhail from Ali bin Musa ar-Reza from his
father Musa bin Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from his
father Muhammad bin Ali from his father Ali bin Husain from his father
Husain bin Ali from his father Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“O Ali, after me, you and the Imams from your progeny are the proofs of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime upon His creatures. And they are His signs
for His creation. One who denies (even) one of you, he has denied me.
And one who disobeys one of you, he has disobeyed me. One who oppresses
anyone of you, he has oppressed me. One who has aligned with you, has
aligned with me. One who has obeyed you, has obeyed me. One who has
loved you, has love me. One has been inimical to you, has been inimical
to me, because you are from me, you are created from my essence and I am
from you.”

14 - Narrated to us Ali bin Muhammad (r.a.): Narrated to us Hamza bin
Qasim Alawi (r.a.): Narrated to us Hasan bin Muhammad Farisi: Narrated
to us Abdullah bin Qudama Tarmudhi from Abul Hasan [Musa bin Ja’far
Kazim] (a.s.) that he said:

“One who doubts in any of the four things is a believer in all the
affairs the Almighty Allah has sent; one of them is the recognition of
the Imam in every period of time, with regard to his identity and
characteristics.”

15 - Narrated to us my father and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be
pleased with them – they said: Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah and
Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari, all of them from Muhammad bin Isa and
Yaqoob bin Yazid and Ibrahim bin Hashim, all of them from Hammad bin Isa
from Imran bin Uzaina from Aban bin Abi Ayyash from Sulaym bin Qais
Hilali that he heard from Salman, Abi Zar and Miqdad a tradition of the
Messenger of Allah (S) that he said:

“One who dies without having an Imam, dies the death of paganhood. Then
he mentioned this tradition to Jabir and Ibne Abbas who said: They have
said the truth and they are doers of good. We also testify that we heard
the Messenger of Allah (S) say thus. At the end of that Salman said: O
Messenger of Allah (S), you said: One who dies without having an Imam,
dies the death of paganhood.

Who is that Imam? The Messenger of Allah (S) said: From my successors, O
Salman. Thus if anyone from my Ummah dies without having an Imam from
them that he recognizes, his death is of paganhood. One who is ignorant
of him and is inimical to him, is a polytheist. And if he is ignorant
but is neither inimical nor friendly with his enemies, he is ignorant
and not a polytheist.”


